
      
         
            
            
            The Jesuites Antepast,
CONTEINING,
A Reply against a pretensed aun
               swere
to the DOWNE-FALL OF POPERIE,
lately published by a masked Iesuite
Robert Parsons by name, though he hide himselfe
couertly vnder the letters of S. R. which may
fitly be interpreted (A SAWCY
REBELL.)
            Esay 38, verse 1.
            Put thine house in order, for thou shalt die and
not liue.
            AT LONDON
Printed by William Iaggard dwelling
in Barbican. 1608.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honorable, my very good
Lord, Thomas Earle of Dorset, Lord high Treasurer
of England, and one of his Maiesties most Honourable
priuy Counsell.
(⁂)
            
               IT is a constant and vndoubted truth, approoued by all
Canonicall Scriptures, ancient Councels, holy Fathers,
Ecclesiasticall Histories,Ephe. 4. 5 and Right reason it selfe;
that as there is but one onely GOD, so but one Faith,
and one Religion. Hence commeth it (Right Honorable)
that the Pope and his Iesuites with other his Popish Vassals,
employ their whole wits, learning, study, care, industry, and diligence,
to instill into the cares and harts of the multitude and common people,
that the Religion which this day they professe, is the old Roman Religion,
which Saint Peter and S. Paule first planted in the Church
of Rome. And for this end they indeau
                  •
               ur with might and maine,
yea, euen with fire and Fagot, to perswade, or rather to enforce all
Christians to call it the Old Religion,
               The Chu
                     ••
                   of England defendeth old Rom
                     •
                   religion. and to professe and beleeue it
to bee the Catholique and Apostolique Faith; whereas the truth is
farre otherwise, as (God willing) shortly will appeare. Which if the
Vulgar sort did once vnderstand, they would no doubt stand at defiance
with the Pope, and from their hearts detest his late start-vppe
Romish Doctrine. There is a Sect of Fryers at Rome,
               The late R
                     ••
                  mish faith the new re
                     •••••
                  on. called the
Franciscanes, who haue by little and little swarued from their first
institution, and become so licentious and dissolute, that another sort of
Fryers commonly called the Capucheues, haue accused them to
haue departed from their Ancient and Primitiue order; and therefore
do the Capucheues tearme themselues, the reformed and true
Franciscanes indeede. This is this day our case in the Church of
Noble England, and in many other Churches within the Christian
World. The Capucheues hold fast, keep still, and constanty defend,
all the Ancient Orders of the first Franciscanes, they onely reiect
and abandon that, which by litle and little crept into their Order,
(viz:) superstition, abuses, and neglect of Discipline. Euen so is it
this day with our Church of England, she holdeth-fast, keepeth still,
and constantly defendeth all and euery iote of the old Romane Religion,
reuerencing it, as Catholique and Apopostolique Doctrine,



she onely reiecteth and abandoneth Heresies,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   this point w
                     •
                  ll 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Errours, superstition,
and intollerable abuses, by little and little brought into the Church.
For neither did most Noble Queene Elizabeth in her time, neyther
doth our most gratious Soueraigne King IAMES (who this day most
happily raigneth ouer vs) set vp or bring into the Church any new Religion;
but onely reformeth the Church, by the example of King Iosaphat,
King Ezechias,
               Par. 19. Reg. 18. Par. 29. 30, 1. 34. King Iosias, and other godly Kinges in
their dayes, and reduceth it to the Primitiue order and purity of the
old Romaine Religion. This to be so, none can in conscience deny,
that will with a single and vpright eye this day behold,Reg. 2. 4. 8. 
                     •
                  ee defend 
                     〈◊〉
                   old Romā 
                  
                     ••
                  ligion. the godly setled
Canons of this Church of England. For, the late Bishops of Rome
haue in many points of great importance, swarued and departed from
the Doctrine of their Ancestors; whereof no doubt many Papists, euen at
& about Rome it selfe,
                  
                     •
                  n: Dom:—1498. would this day (if they durst for fear of fire and
Fagot) accuse the Pope himself. What shall I say of Hieronymus Sauonarola,
that famous Preacher and Dominican Fryer? Was not be burnt
with Fire and Fagot, because he preached openly in the famous Citty of
Florence, against the licencious liues of the Pope and his Clergy, and against
superstition and abuses crept into the Church? I wote it was so, it
cannot be denyed. What?
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . Did not Iohannes Geilerius a famous Popish
Preacher at Argentorate, oftentimes complain to his trusty friends,
(not daring to acquaint otheres therewith) that the Thomists and Scotists
had brought auricular confession to such a miserable point, as none
possibly could performe the same? He did so, their owne good friend Beatus
Rhenanus doth contest the same with me. What? Did not Franciscus
à Victoria,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   annot. in 
                     〈…〉
                  . de potest. 
                     〈…〉
                   & 
                     •
                  onc. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 4. p. 139 that 
                  •
               amous Popish Schoole-doctor, complaine grieuously
in his time, of Popish intollerable dispensations? Did he not publish
to the view of the world, that the Church was brought to such a miserable
state, as none were able to endure the same? Did hee not cry out against
the late Bishops of Rome, and desire Clements, Lines, & Siluesters?
His own Book is extant in print, the world knoweth it to be so. What shall
I say of the Popes errors in Faith and Doctrine? Was not Pope Liberius
an Arrian Heretike? Was not Pope Anastasius a Silestorian Hereretique?
Was not Pope Celestine condemned for erronious doctrin?
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Iohns esie con
                  
                     •
                  nned with sound of 
                     ••••
                  pets. did
not Pope Iohn the 22. of that name, teach publikely a most notorious heresie?
Did he not commaund the vniuersity of Paris, that none should be
admitted to any degree in Theologie, but such as would sweare to defend
that heresie perpetually? Did not the King of France with the aduise &



consent of the whole vniuersity, for that end, cause his dānable opinion to be
cōdemned with the sound of Trumpets?Adrianus. 
               Adrianus (who was B of Rome
himselfe) Alphonsus à Castro, Melchior Canus, and Viguerius,
all foure being very learned and famous Papists, are constant witnesses
of this truth.Lyr. in 16. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Mat. Doth not Nicholaus de Lyra, a famous and learned
Popish Writer, boldly and constantly affirme in his learned Commentaries,
that many Popes haue swarued from the Faith, and become fl
                  •
               t Aposta
                     •
                  aes
in their Romish seates? He doth so, it cannot bee gaine-said.
What shall I say of the Popes liues & conuersation? Was not Pope Iohn
the eight of that name, belying her sexe, and clad in Mans attire, with
great admiration of her sharpe wit and singuler learning, chosen to bee the
Bishop or Pope of Rome? Did she not shortly after by the familiar helpe
of her beloued Companion, bring forth the homely and shamefull fruites of
her Popedome? Is this true? Is it possible? Then farewell Popish Succession,
the chiefe Bulwarke of Romish Faith and Religion. For seeing no
Woman is, or can be made capable of holy orders; that succession which is
deryued frō our holy Mistris Iohn Pope,
               The Pope with child. 1. Tim. 2. 12. cannot possibly be of force. Yet
is this story confirmed to be true, by the vniforme assent of many Papistes
of great esteeme, euen in the Church of Rome, (viz:) of Sigebertus
Gemblacensis,
               Seauen Pop witnesses, 
                     〈◊〉
                   pope Iohn was a wo
                     ••
                  
                
               Marianus Scotus, Matheus Palmerius, Martinus
Polonus, Philippus Bergoniensis, Baptista Platina,
Bartholomeus Carranza, and others. Was not Pope Iohn the
twelft, made Pope by violent meanes? Did not his Father Albericus
being a man of great power and might, enforce the Nobles to take an oth,
that after the death of Pope Agapitus, they would promote his Son Octauianus
to the Popedome? Was not the oth accomplished, and bee named
Iohn? Was he not a great hunter, and a man of licencious life? Did
he not keepe women openly, to the notorious scandall of the Church? Did
not some of the Cardinals write to Otto,
               Behold Po
                     •
                   Iohn the vi gin. King of the Saxons, to come &
besiedge Rome so to afflict him for his sins? Did not the Pope perceiuing
it, cause the Cardinals nose to be cut off that gaue the counsel, & his hand
that wrote the letter? Martinus Polonus a Popish Arch-Bishop, &
sometime the Popes owne Penitentiary, affirmeth this to bee a constant
truth? Did not Pope Siluester the second, a French-man borne, Gilbertus
by name, promise homage to the Deuill, so long as he should accomplish
his desire? Did he not so often expresse his de
                  •
               ire to the Deuill,
as he made homage vnto him? And was he not first made Archbishop
of Rhemes, then of Rauennas, at the last Pope of Rome? Did not



the Deuill knowing his ambitious mind, bring him to honor by degrees?
When he was made Pope, was hee not desirous to know of the Deuill,
how long he should liue in his pontificall glory? Did not the Deuill answere
him,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  : Dom:—
                     •
                  07. so long as he said no Masse in Hierusalem? The story is long,
he that can read and desireth to know it at large, may find it in Martino
Polono, aboue named? Did not Pope Benedict the eyght, appear
corporally after his death, as it were riding on a blacke Horse (the Deuill?)
Did he not desire the Bishop that saw him, to cause some Mony
to be giuen to the poore, because all that he gaue afore time, was gotten
by robbe
                  •
               y and extortion? Petrus Damascenus affirmeth it. Was
not Pope Formosus, a periured person? Did not Pope Iohn degrade
him,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   is now 
                     〈◊〉
                   indeleble Character? after he had been Bishop of Portua? Did he not take him sworn,
that he neither should be Bishop, nor euer returne to the city of Rome?
Did not Pope Martine absolue him of his oath? Came hee not to
Rome, and shortly after was made Pope? Did not Pope Stephanus
the sixt, persecute Pope Formosus? Did hee not cause his dead body
to be brought forth into his consistory, the papall ornamentes to bee taken
away & a laical habit to be put on the dead corps, two fingers of his
right hand to be cut off, and so his body to bee put into the graue? Did
not Sergius the third, cause Pope Formosus, (who now had beene
dead almost ten yeares) to be taken out of his Tombe, and to bee set in a
Chaire with pontificall attire vpon his backe,most bru
                  
                     ••
                   cruelty! and then his head to bee
cut off and cast into Tyber? Platina, Carranza, and Polonus affirme
it for a constant and knowne truth? Did not Pope Vrbanus the
second absolue subiects, from their fidelity and alleageance which was
dew vnto their Soueraigne, so that whosoeuer obeyed the King, was reputed
excommunicated, and they that took part against the King, were
resolued from the 
                  ••
               ime of periury and Iniustice? Did not Pope Boniface
the eight, challenge the right of both Swordes? Did hee not depriue
Phillip the French King, and giue his Kingdome to him that could get
it?
                  
                     ••
                  uclerus. 
               Sigebertus and Nauclerus proclaime it to the World. If I should
enter into the full discourse of these Mysteries, time would sooner faile me,
then matter whereof to speake. Let it suffice for the present, to call to mind
the ladder of eight steppes, by whch the late Bishop of Rome did climbe
vp to their tyrannicall primacy; the killing of Christ in the Popish Masse;
the pluralities of bodies ascribed vnto him; the sensible touching, breaking,
and chewing of Christs Reall and naturall bodie without teeth; the absurdities,
impossiblities, and contradictions, which necessarily insue vpon



their falsely and fondly imagined reall presence; their intollerable and
blasphemous dispensations; the Brother licenced to marry his owne naturall
Sister; persons ioyned in wedlocke by God himselfe, and dissolued by
the Pope; Saint Pauls flat doctrin of Concupiscence to bereiected; Condigne
merits of Mans workes established; damnable sinnes to be made
Veniall;
               Bishops must sweare to be true to the Pope. Bishops not to haue voyces in Counsels, vntill they first sweare
to de
                  •
               end the Pope and his damnable decrees; that Papistes can keepe the
Commandements, and adde thereunto works of supererogation. These and
many like execrable assertions, the Gentle Reader shall finde in this small
Volume, to be truely iustified against the Pope and his Iesuited Popelings.
Many years are expired since I first wrote against the Papists. They haue
desperately a
                  •
               firmed, that my Bookes were answered many yeares agoe,
yet this is the first answere indeede, that euer was published against any
of my Books;Our holy Iesuite must needs haue a fore-runner. which was pretended to be such a worthy thing, that it must
needs haue a fore-runner to come before it, to exhort Men to prepare themselues
worthily to receiue it; as if forsooth, this saucy Rebell S. R. were
Christ himselfe, and his fore-ru
                  •
               ner Saint Iohn the Baptist. VVhat
hee hath performed in his supposed aunswere, and my selfe in this
my Reply;The truth 
                     〈◊〉
                   preuaile in time, and Po
                     ••
                  pery wholly ouerthrowne I refer it to the iudgement and censure of the indifferent Reader.
The worke such as it is, I haue Dedicated vnto your Honour; as an
externall signe of thankefulnesse, for the Honourable fauours receiued at
your Lordships hand. The Almighty increase your Christian zeale towardes
his Gospell; and so blesse your faithfull seruice to your Prince and
Countrey, as your most Honorable place and calling doth require.
            
               Your Honors Seruant in Christ Iesus,
Thomas Bell.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The first Article.
            Of the Popes falsly supposed
SOVERAIGNTY.
            
               Chapter first.
               Of certaine Aphorismes, for the better instruction
of the Reader.
               
                  Aphorisme 1.
                  
                     MAny reasons might be alledged,
why so many at this day, doe so
greedily, (though foolishly and
vndiscreetly) embrace the late
Romish religion; but these few
to giue a tast, shall suffice for the
present. The first reason is, because
they expect a day as prophane
Esau did,
                        Gen
                              •
                           , 27, 41 See my Anathomy of Popish tyranny. Hest, 7, 10. when they may
kill their true and naturall Soueraigne,
Gods sacred and annointed Lieutenant (as I haue
proued elsewhere at large) and so aspire and be aduaunced
to great wealth & dignitie: But let them remember proud
Hammons end, least they be hanged on the gallowes, which
they intend and prepare for others. The second, because
our gratious Soueraigne, (as did his noble predecessors K.
Edward and Queene Elizabeth of famous memory) laboureth
to win Papists with lenity and long sufferance, and by
reading & preaching, to bring them to the light of Christes
Gospell: whereas the Pope neuer ceaseth, to burne



burne with fire and fagot, whosoeuer holdeth and defendeth,
any one article, contrary to his late hatched Religion:
yea, if one passe by an Image, or their house of Inquisition
(which they terme the Holy-house) and do not reuerence
thereunto, it is enough to cast that man into the
sayde disholy prison: Which kind of punishment, if it were
vpon iust cause, executed within his Maiesties Dominions,
shortly, few or no disloyall subiects would be found within
his kingdomes.August, epist 48, Tom 2 3 Cap, quicunque de haeret, lib 6 Which is not my bare opinion onely,
but euen Saint Austens in the like subiect; as it doeth and
may appeare to the indifferent Reader, in his learned Epistle
to Vincentius the third, because for the better successe
and more free passage of the late Romish Religion, the laicall
people are commanded by Popish Canon-law, vnder
paine of Excommunication, not to reason at all, in matters
of Faith and Religion; and the learned semblably, not to
examine or discusse, how farre the Popes power doeth extend,
whatsoeuer or howsoeuer he command them to beleeue.
For the Popes law hath made it Sacriledge, to dispute
of his power, or to call it into question; so writeth
their owne deare Doctor and popish Fryer, Franciscus à
Victoria, the first man that brought the Popish School-doctrine
into Spaine: yea the Popes owne decrees are consonant
to the same, these are the expresse wordes:Relect, 4, de potest, papae & conc, propos, 16, caus, 17, q, 4, cap, ne
                           •
                        ini. 
                     Similiter
de iudicio summi pontificis alicui disputare non licet. In like maner,
no man may dispute of the iudgment of the Pope, or
high-priest. The fourth, because neyther any of the layty,
nor yet of the Cleargy, can vnder paine of Excommunication,
read eyther the olde or the new Testament translated
into the vulgar tongue, or any other booke of Controuersie
or Diuinity, set forth by any not professed Vassall vnto
the Pope; vnlesse such person or persons be especially licenced
of the pope so to doe.
               
               
                  Aphorisme second.
                  The multitude of the vulgar and rude people, become
Papists, vpon this false and sandy foundation, supposed of
them to be a receiued Theologicall Maxime, viz: that the



late start vp Romish Doctrine, is the auncient Catholike
faith, and the olde Roman religion: And therefore, when
soeucr they speake of any Papist, meaning to expresse his
sect and profession; they tell vs, he is one of the old Relion:
but they are grossely deceiued herein; they may haue
zeale, I grant with the Apostle,Rom, 10, 2 but not acording to knowledge.
For, the doctrine this day taught and defended by
the Pope, his Iesuites, and Iesuited Papists, is indeed the
new Religion, and farre different from the true, catholick,
and olde Roman religion. Would to God all simply seduced
Papists, would deepely ponder this point, and seriously
meditate vpon the same. I doe with all my heart reuerently
receiue and admit, the old Roman religion preached
by Saint Paule and S. Peter, in their daies at Rome;
but withall, I vtterly abhorre and detest, that Doctrine,
which the late Popes and Byshops of Rome deliuer for the
same. In regard hereof, I neuer in any one of my Bookes,
oppugne simply and absolutely the Roman faith and religion,
but the late Romish faith and doctrine. Where I
wish the Reader to obserue and marke attentiuely,Marke well this word (Late.) this
word (Late) for it doth significantly declare a cleere difference
betweene that doctrine which is novv taught in the
church of Rome, and that which S. Paule and S. Peter, deliuered
to the Romans in their life time. Which, because
the common vulgar sort of people cannot distinguish (such
is their ignorance) they are perforce carried away with the
sway of the time. Marke the next Aphorisme.
               
               
                  Aphorisme third.
                  We know, and the Papists knowe, that theyr reformed
Franciscans (now commonly called Capuchenes) can tel right
well, that their other dissolute Franciscans haue swarued
from their auncient order, albeit they can neither tel whē,
where, nor by whom, that dissolution first began; yet they
proue it à posteriori, by their auncient rules euidently. And
euen so do we proue, by the holy scriptures (the true touch
stone of truth) that the Papistes haue swarued from Apostolicall
doctrine, albeit we could not (as yet we can) assigne



the time, place, and persons; when, where, and by
whom, such Antechristian alteration first began. Let the
Reader marke this point well, that, that Sect of Papistes
which is called Franciscans, doe boast of their succession &
continuance, and by reason of their antiquity, will needes
be the true Franciscans, but the Capuchens (which are nothing
but reformed Franciscans) tell them, that they are
the true Franciscans, who haue 
                        •
                     ely put away and abolished
all superstition and dissolution, which by little and litle
crept into their order. Euen so say we, that we are the
olde and true Catholickes or Romans, who keepe stil that
saith and doctrine which saint Paule preached to the Romans;
and haue only put away and abolished, that superstition,
Idolatry, and erroneous doctrine, which by little
and little, crept into the Church. They will needes be the
true and olde Catholicks, as is said of the dissolute Franciscans;
but we tell them, as their Capuchens tel their disordered
Franciscans, that they are the deformed & bastard
Catholicks, vnworthy of the name of Catholicks.
                  And that we are the reformed and legitimate Catholicks,
who keep still and hold fast all Apostolicall doctrin,
and haue onely abolished out of the church of God, al Superstition,
Idolatry, and errors, contrary to the scriptures
and the Gospell, which the Apostles preached, and left in
vvriting to all posterities. Obserue diligently the next
Aphorisme.
               
               
                  Aphorisme fourth.
                  First, Popish primacie began, in the yeare 607. Secondly,
Priestes mariage was neuer prohibited, till the yeare
385. Thirdly, Popes pardons were neuer heard of, till the
yeare 1300. Fourthly, popish Purgatorie tooke no root
in the Romish Church, till the yeare 250. Fiftly, inuocation
of Saintes, & adoration of Reliques, was not known,
till the yeare 370. Sixtly, Popish pilgrimage began in the
yeare 420. Seuenthly, the merite of Workes de condigno,
was disputeable about the yeare 1081. Eightly, the communion
vnder both kindes, was neuer thought vnlawfull,



till the yeare 1414. Ninthly, the Popes Bulles were not
authenticall, till the yeare 772. Tenthly, Auricular confession
was not established, till the yeare 1215. Eleuenthly,
Generall Councels, were euer summoned by the Emperours.
That all these heads of Popish doctrine, crept into
the Church, by little and little in the yeares aboue named,
I haue proued at large ten yeares agoe, in my Booke of the
Suruey of Popery, as also partly in my Booke of Motiues, to
which bookes I referre the Reader, for better satisfaction
therein.
                  This creeping of late Romish religion into the Church
by little & little, Victoria a Popish fryer & famous school-Doctor,
witnesseth in these wordes;Victor: de potest. papae & conc. rel. 4. pag. 151 
                     Paulatim ad hanc, &c.
By little and little we are brought to these inordinate dispensations,
and to this miserable state, where we are neyther
able to endure our owne griefes, nor remedies assigned
for the same: and therefore must wee perforce inuent
some other way, for conseruation of the Lawes. Giue me
Clements, Lines, Siluester, and I will commit all thinges to
theyr charge. But to speake nothing grieuously against
these latter Popes, they are doubtlesse inferiours to Popes
of old time, by many degrees: Thus writeth this learned
Popish Fryer; who if he durst haue spoken plainly, would
haue told vs mirabilia. But it sufficeth that Popes were
worse and worse, and that errors by little and little crept
into the Church.
               
               
                  Aphorisme fift.
                  The vsuall practise of Papists in their Commentaries,
Bookes and Glosses, haue beene such, and so intollerable,
in wresting the holy scriptures, that their owne deere brethren
and great Doctors, cannot for shame deny or conceale
the same. Polydorus virgilius, a famous Papist, hath
these wordes; Non secus isti, &c.
                     Polid. Virg. lib. 4. cap. 9, pag. 39 These (Popish) Legists,
and Canonists, doe now and then so wrest and wrieth the
holy Scriptures, to that sence which themselues like best;
euen as Coblers doe gnaw with theyr teeth, and stretch



out their filthy skinnes. This is that, which the famous
Papist Doctor Fisher, the late bishop of Rochester, did freely
confesse, in his answere to the Articles of maist. Luther,
which he could not in truth withstand or gain-say; These
are his expresse wordes: Contendentibus itaque nobiscum haereticis,
nos alio subsidio nostram oportet tu
                           •
                        re causam, quam scriptura
sacra.
                     Roffensis art. 37. adu. Luth. pag. 11 Therefore when hereticks contend with vs, we
must defend our cause by other meanes then by the holy
Scripture. These are the expresse wordes, (I neyther adde
any thing, nor take any thing away) of their famous popish
Byshop; of their holy saint; of their glorious martyr;
a learned man indeed, who laboured with might & maine
for the Popes vsurped soueraignty, and defended the same
in the best manner he was able, and to the vttermost of his
skill; and yet for all that, he hath bolted out vnawares, &
against his will (such is the force of truth) so much in plain
tearmes, as is enough to ouerthrow all Poperie for euer,
and to cause all people that haue any care of their saluation,
to renounce the Pope and his abhominable Doctrine,
to their liues end.
                  For our learned Popish bishoppe being put to his best
Trurmpe, telleth vs very plainely, and without all dissimulation
(his mouth being now opaned by him whoe caused
Balaams Asse to speake,) that they must not (because forsooth
they cannot) defend and maintaine their popery by
the authority of the Scripture, but by some other way and
meanes (viz:) by mans forged inuentions, and popish vnwritten
vanities, which they terme the Churches Traditions.
                  Now (gentle Reader) how can any Papist (who is not
giuen vppe in reprobum sensu, for his former sinnes and iust
deserts) read sueh testimonies against Popery, freely confessed,
and plainly published to the world, and that by the
pennes of most learned and renowned Papists, euen while
they bestir themselues busily, to defend their Pope and his
popish doctrine, and for all that continue Papists still, and



carryed away headlong into perdition, beleeuing and obeying
that doctrine, which (as themselues confesse) can
not be defended by the holy Scripture? Methinkes they
should be ashamed, to hold and beleeue that doctrine, in
defence whereof, they can yeeld no better reason.
                  
                     Covorruvius a famous Canonist,Couar: Tom. 1 part 2. cap. 7 par. 4. 
                           •
                        . 14. in medio. and reuerend Popishe
Byshop, hath these wordes: Nec me latet, &c. Neither am
I ignorant, that Saint Thomas affirmeth, after great deliberation,
that the byshop of Rome cannot with his dispensation,
take away from Monkes their solemne vow of chastity:
this notwithstanding, we must defend the first opinion,
least those things which are practised euerie where,
be vtterly ouerthrowne.
                  Behold here (gentle Reader) that howsoeuer the popes
opinion be, the same we must defend of necessity: and the
reason is added, because otherwise, popery cannot consist.
Fie vpon that Religion, which must haue such poore
and beggerly shiftes for the maintenance thereof. Much
like stuffe I might recount of Popish pardons and Purgatorie,
&c. but for those matters, I referre the Reader to
my Booke, Intituled, The wofull cry of Rome.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. 2.
               ¶ Conteining a sound confutation of the Iesuites answere, framed
to my argumentes against the Popes primacy.
               
                  THe Iesuite S. R. in the first Chapter against
my first Article, is so troubled to answer
my reasons, grounds, and authorities,
that one while hee affirmeth,In the first Article. otherwhiles
denyeth the selfe-same thing, so mightily
confounding both himselfe and his Reader. In the down-fall
of Popery, I proued euidently, that the Pope taketh
vpon him to depose Kings and Emperours from their royall
thrones, and to translate their Empires and regalities
at his good will and pleasure. To which S. R. answeareth,



that I belie the Pope: but let vs heare his owne
wordes.
               
                  S. R.
                  I must needes tell him,Page 4 that he vntruly auoucheth vs to
say, that the Pope is spiritually aboue all powers and Potentates
on earth.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I must needes tell you (Maist. Iesuite) that you vntruly
charge me with vntruth: yea, that you roundly controule
your selfe, and giue your selfe the lye. I proue it; first, because
 your selfe confesse the wordes, which I alledged out
of Bellarmine,
                     Page 7 that Popish and Iesuiticall Cardinall, to be
truly fathered vpon him (viz:) that when any Prince, of a
sheepe is made an hereticke, or swarueth from the Romish
religion, which is all one with you Papists; then the pope
may driue him away by excommunication, and withal cō
                     maund
the people not to obey him, and therefore depriue
him of his dominion ouer his Subiects.
                  
                      Secondly, because you M. Iesuite) confesse freely, that
Pope Zachary did iustly depose Childrick King of Fraunce.
                     Page 55
                  
                  
                      Thirdly, because ye likewise grant freely, that the Pope
deposed king Henry the eight,Page 75 and Queene Elizabeth, and
for better assurance hereof,Page 26 you tell vs the same tale in another
place.Page 17 But let all indifferent Readers hearken seriously,
what the Popes owne deare Fryer telleth vs, his
wordes are set downe in the Down-fall of Popery, but S. R.
could not see them, because he knewe not what to say to
them:Sigebert. An. 1088. thus doth he write. Vt pace omnium, &c. To speake
by the fauour of all good men, this sole nouelty. I will not
say heresie, was not yet knowne in the worlde, that his
priests who maketh an hypocrit to raigne for the sinnes of
the people, should teach the people, that they owe no subiection
to wicked Kinges; and that although they haue
taken the Oath of fealty, yet do they owe them no allegiance,
neyther are periured that thinke ill against the king:
yea, he that obeyeth the king, is this day reputed an excommunicate
person: and he that taketh part against the



king, is absolued from the crime of Iniustice and periury.
Thus writeth Sigebertus a Learned popish Fryer,Sigebert, i
                           •
                         Chron. An. 1088. so liuely
painting out our very case this day in England, as if hee
were liuing euen now amongst vs. Where we see, that the
popes own Monks & friers haue thought as il of the popes
dealings in former times, as we think of his proceedings in
these latter daies; as also, that to absolue Subiectes from
their allegeance, is not onely a Nouelty, but euen a flat
Heresie. Let all popish Recusants marke this point well,See my Anathomy
and defie the Pope and all his absolutions from their allegeance:
for as the secular popish Priests haue truely written,
Popery is this day inseparably linked with Treason.
But what saith S. R. Let vs heare him againe.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  And much lesse did we euer tell you, that the pope hath
temporall superiority ouer all Princes on earth,Page 5 but teach
the quite contrary.Page 6 Againe, if Bell reply, that some Cannonists
haue affirmed the pope to be Lord temporall ouer
the world, let him challenge them, & not like a wise man
strike his next fellowes the English papists, who maintaine
no such opinion.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I proued first out of the Popes owne decrees,dist. 22. can. omner. that pope
Nicholas affirmed Christ to haue committed to S. Peter, &
consequently to himselfe, the right both of earthly and
heauenly Empire.
                  Secondly, out of the popes glosse, that the Popes hath
both the Spirituall and Temporall sworde, and by right
thereof, did translate the Empire. Thirdly out of the popes
decretals, that pope Boniface challenged the Royall right
and Authority of both swords, and made a flat decree for
the confirmation thereof. Fourthly, out of Appendix fuldensis,
that the same pope Boniface the 8. affirmed himselfe
both Spirituall and Temporall Lord of the whole world,
and thereupon he required of Phillip king of France, that
he would acknowledge his Kingdome from him, which
thing the King scorned to do. All this notwithstanding,



our Iesuite S. R. aunswereth roundly, that I must challenge
them, and not strike their fellowes. Marry sir, this is
a short answere indeede; but as much to the matter, as if
you should say, your heart doth pant and bleede: But let
vs be content with this answere, seeing the silly Iesuiticall
Fryer, was not able to afford vs any better.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  English Papists attribute to the pope,Page 6 no other authority
ouer Kings then spirituall, but do with tongue & heart,
and with the popes good liking confesse, that our Soueraigne
Lord King Iames hath no superiour on earth, in
Temporall matters.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  What a Masked, lying, and Trayterous Iesuite is this?
We haue heard already, that the Pope deposed both King
Henry the 8. and most Noble Queene Elizabeth, and yet
heere the ly
                        •
                     ng impudent Iesuite telleth vs boldly without
blushing, (for his face is of brasse) that King Iames hath
no superiour on earth. It is true indeede, but not in his
sence. For I pray you Traiterous Iesuites, are not earthly
Kingdomes and Dominions, Temporall matters? It cannot
bee denied. Had not King Henry the 8. and Queene
Elizabeth of famous memory, the same superiority in their
Kingdomes and temporall affayrs, which our gratious soueraigne
King Iames hath? His Maiesty will not denie it.
But so it is, that your Pope deposing them, (as you haue
told vs,) was their superiour as you holde and teach. For
doubtlesse, no inferiour can depose his superiour, and consequently,
your Pope by your profession, is superiour
to our King. This is but your Hypocritical Cozenage;
your cogging and lying, your Diabolicall Equiuocation.
If your power were correspondent to your wil, his Maiesty
might speedily loose his Crowne and dignity. GOD
saue our Noble King, and confound your Antichristian
Pope.
               
               
                  
                  S. R.
                  Because Bellarmine teacheth, that the Pope may excommunicate
and depose Princes for heresie;Page 7 
                     Bell sayth, hee
may depose them at his pleasure: As if matters of Heresie,
were the Popes pleasure.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Here we haue freely granted once againe, that the pope
by Popish doctrine, may depose Princes for heresie: only
this is denied, that he deposeth them at his pleasure. To
which, I thus reply; First, that euery heresie is voluntary,
and consequently, seeing many popes haue been heretiks,
(as Pope Adrian himselfe, Alphonsus de Castro, Melchior
Canus, Vignerius, Nicolaus de Lyra, and many others freely
grant) it followeth of necessity, that heresie is the Popes
pleasure. Secondly, that when I say, the pope taketh vpon
him to depose Princes at his pleasure; I meane nothing
else, but that the pope will depose Princes, whensoeuer
they refuse to embrace and beleeue, his late start vp Romish
religion; that is to say, that doctrine, which is added
to the olde Roman religion at his pleasure. For all that
which the Church of England this day reiecteth of the Romish
religion, is added, to the old Romish religion at the
Popes pleasure. This subiect is proued at large in my Motiues
and Suruey.
                     Page 8 But our Iesuite vrgeth further, that Bell
disproueth himselfe in these wordes: Secular Priests (saith
Bell) write plainly and resolutely,In my Anathomy, in the Caueat to the Reader. and libr. 2. cap. 4. & cap. 9. that the pope hath no
power to depriue Kings of their royall sceptars and regalities,
nor to giue away their kingdomes to another: in
which opinion likewise the French Papists concurre and
iumpe with them. Item, the Seculars, although they acknowledge
the popes power supereminent in Spiritualibus,
yet doe they disclaime from it in Temporalibus, when he taketh
vpon him to depose Kinges from their Empires, and
to translate their kingdomes. And least we should thinke
these few priests who write so, were no Papists, Bell himselfe
testifieth, that they are the Popes deare vassals, and



professe the same Religion with other Papistes.
                        
                           ••
                        pist. to the King. By these
words, our masked Iesuit, (as we see) wold gladly impose
vpon me, that I haue slandered them and their Pope. First,
because the secular priests deny the Popes power in deposing
Kings. Secondly, because I graunt those seculars to
be papists, but this slander is easily returned to the Iesuite
himselfe. For first, our Iesuites holde, that the Pope may
depose Kinges from their Dominions and regalities. Againe,
the secular priests are of a contrary opinion. Neyther
for all that doth it follow, that they are not papistes:
For it is very vsuall and common to Papists, to dissent one
from another in matters of Religion. This is prooued in
my Motiues. Our masked Iesuit spendeth the whole chapters
following; (viz) the second, third, and fourth, not in
answering me and my proofes, but in meere impertinent
matters; of the opinion of Knox and his fellow-ministers
in Scotland, and such like stuffe: wherefore omitting his
impertinent verosity in the saide three Chapters, I come
vnto the fift next following the same.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 3.
               ¶ Conteining a confutation of S. R. his answere to the proofes
of my assumption.
               
                  S. R.
                  POpe Gregory saith Bell,
                     Page 27 writing to the Emperor Mauritius,
calleth him soueraign Lord, and professeth himselfe
subiect to his command, and to owe him obedience.
Wherupon Bell inferreth, that for 600. years after Christ,
popes liued in dutifull obedience vnder Emperors.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I proued out of Pope Gregories wordes, these three speciall
points; (viz) that Pope Gregory freely and willingly
acknowledged the Emperour to be his soueraigne Lorde.
That he confesseth himselfe to be the Emperours subiect.
That he yeelded loyall obedience to the Emperor, and for
that respect, thought himselfe bound in conscience to publish



the Emperours law, although in some part it seemed
to disagree with Gods Law; and that forsooth, least hee
should be found guilty of disloyalty toward his prince.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  As for the place which Bell citeth,Page 28 he speaketh not there
of the subiection, duety, or obedience of a subiect to his
prince, but of a seruant to his maister, (as he had bene to
Mauritius whiles they were both pruiate men) which
himselfe plainely professeth in the beginning of his Letter
in these wordes; In this suggestion I speake not as Byshop, nor as
subiect, by reason of the common-wealth, but by priuate right of
my owne, because you haue beene my Lord since that time when as
yet you were not Lord of all. And therefore by the foresayde
words he meaneth no otherwise, then a louing seruant doeth,
when vpon curtesie to his old maister, though he haue
left him, yet he still calleth him maister, and offereth himselfe
and his seruice at his command.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  My reply standeth thus. First, that Pope Gregory or Gregory
then Byshop of Rome, spake of that obedience which
a subiect oweth to his prince. I proue it; first, because hee
saith, he rendred his obedience to the Emperor, and concealed
not what he thought on Gods behalfe. Secondly,
because a few lines afore, hee telleth the Emperour vvhat
preferment Christ had bestovved on him, and what honor
he had done vnto him; among which this was one, that he
had committed his priestes to his charge, Sacerdotes meos
t
                           •
                        aemanui commisi, & tu à meo seruitio milites tuos subtrahis?
Christ will say vnto you, saith Gregory; I haue committed
my priests vnto your hands, and do you vvithdrawe your
souldiors from my seruice? By vvhich words it is apparant,
that Gregory yeelded his obedience, as he vvas a Byshop or
priest; and it skilleth not, that he saith in the beginning of
the Epistle, I speake not as Byshoppe, but in mine ovvne
priuate right: the reason is euident, because the publishing
of a vvicked Lavv, did not pertaine to him as hee vvas a



Byshop (whose office is to preach Gods word, and to administer
his Sacraments) but as a priuate man subiect vnto
his prince: And therefore he answered in his ovvn priuate
right, that it was not agreeable to Gods vvill, yet did hee
publish the same, to shevv his allegeance to his soueraign.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  Moreouer,Page 30 
                     Bell writeth that Barbarians possessed all Italy
from the yeere 471. vntill Charles the great 801. how then
saith he heere, that Popes liued vnder Emperors vntill the
yeare 603.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  First, our Popes liue not alwaies at Rome, for they haue
many times beene driuen from thence, & liued els where:
and shall we thereupon conclude, that therefore they ceased
to be Popes? no papist will admit it.
                  Secondly, though the Aliens and Barbarians did a long
time possesse all Italy, yet did the Byshops of Rome euer
acknowledge their duety and allegeance vnto the Emperour.
                  Thirdly, when the Pope is deade, in the Interim while
another is chosen, doe not the papistes acknowledge the
Popes supremacy? I weene they do. If S. R. shall denie
it, I vvill vse another argument against him. Euen so, when
the Emperors were not at Rome; yea, when there was no
Christian Emperour at all, the Byshops acknowledged the
right of his soueraignty.
                  Fourthly, vvhen I say, that Popes or Byshops of Rome
liued in duetifull subiection, to the Emperours of Rome,
more then six hundred yeares after Christs sacred incarnation,
euery childe knovveth the meaning; viz. that no Bishop
during that time, denyed the Emperours supereminent
power ouer him.
                  Lastly, the Iesuite to further his lying, hath falsifyed
both my words and my meaning. Now, where I cited S.
Ambrose, Euthymius, Hugo Cardinalis, Lyra, Aquinas, and
the popish glosse; our masked Iesuite ansvvereth roundly,



though impudently and vnclerkly, that all the said writers
speake of superiority in Temporall matters; but hee can
bring for himselfe, neither Scripture, Counsell, Father,
nor reason. We must accept and be content with his bare
word: For to the Pope and his Iesuites, no man may say,
Curitafacis? Why dost thou so? The Popes owne decrees
tell vs plainly, that though the Pope be neuer so vvicked,
though he carry thousands of soules with himselfe head-long
into hell; yet for all that may no man take vpon him
to iudge the Pope, vnlesse he be an Hereticke: the reason
is yeelded by their own deare Doctor Gerson,
                     dist. 40. cap. si papa. Gers. de pot. eccle. cons. 12. part. 3. Hugo Cardin. ps. 50. because forsooth
Christ hath written in his thing, (the King of Kinges
and Lorde of Lords) to whom no man may say, why dooest
thou so. Of whose power it is sacrilege to reasō or dispute.
To thee alone (saieth Cardinall Hugo) haue I sinned, beecause
there is not any aboue mee, but thy selfe alone, that
hath power to punish me. For I am a King, and so besides
thee (O God) there is none aboue me. Al the aforenamed
writers teach the felfesame Doctrine, viz. that the Pope
or Byshop of Rome, is so farre from hauing power to depose
Kings and Emperors, that hee himselfe ought to bee
subiect to them, & hath no authority at al to punish them.
                  What can be more plainely spoken? What Testimonies
can be more manifest? What Doctrine can be clearer? for
if none but God be superior to the king;See my profes in the downe-fall of popery. if none but God
can iudge the King; if none but GOD can punnish the
King, all which, both Auncient Fathers and the Popes
owne deere Doctors affirme, as I haue often proued at
large in the Downfall of Popery; then doubtles can not the
Pope depose the king; then can he not absolue his subiects
from their allegeance; then can hee not translate Empires
and Kingdomes, and bestowe the same at his owne pleasure.
This notwithstanding, the popes parasites to his good
liking, tell vs another tale in these wordes.G
                           •
                        rs. de potest eccles. consid. 12. part. 3 
                     Sicut non est potestas
nisi à Deo, sic nec aliqua temporalis vel ecclesiastica, imperialis
vel regalis, nisi à papa. As there is no power but of God,



so is there neither any temporall, nor Ecclesiasticall, neyther
imperiall nor Regal, but of the Pope.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  ONly I say,Page 33 that Iosue was no king, nor the Scripture
affordeth any colour of saying, that any High-priest
was deposed by any of the saide Kinges, except Abiath
                           •
                        r
by Salomon: and yet as it is gathered out of the fourth ch.3. Reg, 2, vers. 35, 27 3 Reg. 4, 4 Cap. 2, 35
(where he is accounted priest in Salomons raigne) Salomon
deposed him not, but only for a time confined him to his
house, for his conspiracy with Adonias, and so debarred
him for executing his priestly function: And though hee
had deposed him, he had not done it as King, but as Prophet,
fulfilling (as the scripture testifieth) the prophesie against
the house of Hely, from whence Abiathar discended.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  AFter I had proued at large by many authorities, that
Kinges haue supereminent power ouer Byshops, not
Byshops ouer Kinges; I added for a confirmation thereof,
that the good Kinges, Iosue, Dauid, Salomon, Iehosophat,
Ezechias and Iosias, knew 
                        •
                     ight well, that they had authority
aboue all the priestes; and therefore they tooke vpon
them, not only to command and controll the priestes, but
also to depose them from theyr places and functions: yea,
euen the High-priests themselues, when their desertes did
so require. Which point I auouched to be proued at large,
in my Golden ballance of tryall.
                  
                  To this discourse S. R. answereth foure thinges.
                  First, that Iosue was no king.
                  Secondly, that no High-priest was deposed by any of
the saide Kinges.
                  Thirdly, that Abiathar the High-priest, was not deposed
by king Salomon, but onely confined to his house.
                  Fourthly, that if king Salomon had deposed Abiathar,
yet had he not done it as king, but as Prophet.
                  
                     My reply is this. First, that to deny Iosue to be king, is
a vaine cauill, and argueth lacke of matter in our Iesuites


                     
answere: for Iosue had the thing, though not the name: he
was the Ciuil independent Magistrate, and had the chiefe
and supereminent power ouer the Isralites his Subiects; as
Moses whom he succeeded had,Num. 27, 17 and the other Kings, Dauid,
Salomon, Iosaphat, Ezekias, and Iosias. In regard whereof,
he was and may bee truely reckoned, with and among
the other kings. But when good reasons cannot bee had,
such Beggerly cauils must supply the want.
                  Secondly, that it is a most notorious slander against the
holy Scripture, and consequently á notable blasphemy against
God himselfe; to say, and desperately to avouch in
a printed Booke, that no High-priest was deposed by any
of the said Kinges. These are the expresse wordes of holie
writ. Eiecit ergo Salomon Abiathar,
                     2 Reg. 2, 27 
                     vt non esset sacerdos domini.
Therefore Salomon cast out or deposed Abiathar (the high
Priest) that he should not be the Priest of the Lord. Again
holy writ hath these expresse wordes. Et Sadoc sacerdote posuit
pro Abiathar, and the King put Sadoc the Priest,vbi supra. verse 35. in the
roome of Abiathar.
                  
                  Loe the holy scripture telleth vs two things most plainly
and expressely; and that is done euen in that Latin Vulga
                           •
                        a
editio, to which the Pope hath tyed all his Iesuites and
Iesuited Popelings. The one, that King Salomon deposed
Abiathar the High-priest. The other, that hee placed Sadoc
the priest in Abiathars roome.
                  Thirdly, that it is most absurdly auouched of our Iesuit,
that Salomon onely confined Abiathar to his house for a
time. Concerning this deposition and casting out of Abiathar
from his place, and putting Sadoc the priest in his
roome, our Iesuite is at his wits end what to say: and why
I pray you? For this end doubtles, because hence it is proued
euidently, and by a necessary consecution, that Kings
both haue and may depose priests, euen the hie priests, and
greatest priests of all. But it can neuer be proued out of the
holy scriptures, that any Priest deposed any King; no, not
the meanest king in all the world. The Iesuite contradicteth



himselfe mightily. For first hee saith, that none of the
Kings deposed any priest, Secondly, that Salomon deposed
Abiathar. Thirdly, that Abiathar was not deposed, but
onely for a time confined to his owne house. What hors
                        •
                     e
would not breake his necke, to heare this sweet melodie?
The scripture telleth vs,3 Reg. 2, v. 27. & v. 35. that king Salomon deposed Abiathar,
and for confirmation heereof, the same scripture addeth,
that Sadoc the priest, was set in his roome.
                  Fourthly, to say as the Iesuite doeth, that Salomon deposed
Abiathar not as King, but as prophet, is to speake at
randon, and to make of scripture a nose of wax, for no one
Text from the first of Genesis to the last of the Apocalipse,
doth iustifie this fond and sottish answer of the masked Iesuite;
albeit, I know this to bee true, that he wanted not
the aduise and counsell of his best learned Brethren. Whosoeuer
desireth further in sight into this subiect, and of the
soueraignty of kings ouer priests and Byshops, which are
their subiects; if he peruse my Golden ballance of tryall, I
hope in God, it will satisfie his desire.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 4.
               ¶ Containing a confutation of the sixt Chapter of the masked
Iesuite.
               
                  THe Iesuite in his sixt Chapter and first article,
is wholly occupied in impertinent
matters, and foolish demaunds, not once
touching directly ought that I haue written:
but let vs heare him once againe, and
so proceed to another Chapter.
               
                  S. R.
                  Because the question is not,Page 38 vpon what cause Kings and
Emperors humbled themselues to the Popes, but whether
they did or no: And because they haue so done (as Bell confesseth)
Catholicks infer the Pope to be their superior. Vnlesse
perhaps Bell thinke blinde zeale to disanul euery fact



or guift; and so say, the Iewes persecuted not the Church,
because they did it vpon blind zeale; nor our Catholique
ancestors gaue any liuings to Churches, because they did
it vpon blind zeale (as Bell must thinke) for maintainance
of Papistry.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  O shamelesse and impudent Iesuite? Is the question only
what was done? Where is thy wit? Where is thy faith?
Where is thy Religion? Doth not your Angellicall Doctor
Aquinas teach you, that all morall Acts haue their specification
of the end and finall cause? Doth not Scotus, Ockamus,
Gabriel, Iosephus, Durandus, and all the rest approue
the same Doctrine? How sayest thou then, O blind Iesuit,
that the question is not vpon what cause kinges humbled
themselues to the Popes, but whether they did or no, ô


Tempora! ô Mores! Doth not alms (otherwise a commendable
act) degenerate into sinne, when it is giuen for vaine
glory? And this onely, because the ende and cause for
which it is giuen, is nought and vnlawfull? Dooeth not
Christs Apostle tell thee, that whatsoeuer is not of fayth
is sinne?Rom 14, 23 1 cor. 10, 31 That whatsoeuer is done, ought to bee done to
to the glory of God? Alas, alas, euery childe that hath but
learned the rudiments of Christianity, can roundly tel our
Iesuite, that we must not so much respect what is done, as
what ought of right to be done. We may not reason as our
Iesuite Parsons doth (for he is the man) the thing was don,
therefore lawfully done. Kings yeelded supreame authority
to the Pope, therefore they did it lawfuly. By that kind
of Logicke or rather Legierdemain, all theftes, all robberies,
all Rebellions, all mischiefes vnder heauen, may bee
iustifyed and defended. You Iesuites, and your Iesuited
pope-lings, do take part with the Pope against your annointed
Soueraigne; and so by this new (no Diuinity) the
pope is our King and Superiour. For thus you reason, beecause
Kings haue so done, the Pope is their Superiour. For
the question is not, vpon whose grounde they did so, but



whether they did so or no. For by your Theology, if the
thing be done, it is lawfully done, but what? Bell perhaps
thinkes, that blinde zeale dissanulleth euery fact, and so
neither the Iewes persecuted the Church, nor our papistes
gaue any liuing to the Church, because they did it (as Bell
must thinke) vpon blind zeale. O monster of al Monsters?
ô Child of perdition? ô sonne of the Deuill? Bell saith not,
that blind zeale disanulleth any act. Bell saith not, that papists
gaue no liuings to the Church. Bell saith not, that the
Iewes did not persecute the Church. No, no, it is the deuill
in our Iesuite, that mooues him thus falsly to slaunder
Bell. It is one thing to say, the papists gaue liuinges to the
Church vpon a blinde zeale; another thing to say, they
gaue nothing at all. The former I say, the latter I denie: &
therefore, when you papists labour to proue the popes soueraignty
ouer Kings, because some Kings, haue acknowledged
it, vpon a blind zeale; I answer, that your proofe is
of no force, not for that such thinges haue not bin done;
but because they were not done, as they should, & ought
to haue bin done. You papists haue submitted your selues
to be the Popes, and the King of Spaines subiects, as Story
alledged for himselfe at his arraignment; and consequently
by Popish Diuinity, you may take vp armes against king
Iames our most gracious Soueraigne, and bee no Traytors
in so doing. For as you write with your pennes, so doe you
beleeue in your harts, and practise in your liues. Your late
Treason of Gunne-powder, to say nothing of all the rest,
makes it euident to the world. God saue our Noble King
Iames, & deliuer him from your bloudy hands: for though
you speake well of him with your tongue, yet do yee wish
in your harts to do him the greatest wrong.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  THat Emperours haue acknowledged the Popes superiority,Page 37
                     Bell himselfe confesseth, where hee saith, that
some Christian Kings and Emperours, haue vpon a blinde
zeal
                        •
                     e humbled themselues to the Pope; yea, (which is



more) haue yeelded vp their soueraigne rightes vnto him.
And shal not the Pope bee Superiour vnto them, vvho
haue humbled themselues, and yeelded their Soueraigntie
to him?
               
               
                  T. B.
                  This is my reply. First,See the secōd chapt. for this point. that one may yeeld vp some part
of his Soueraignty to another, and for all that remaine &
still continue that others Superior. The case is cleere, it
needeth no proofe. If the Iesuite will not yeeld to this, he
must perforce yeeld to that, which will confound both him
and the Pope, viz: that the pope is superior to the Emperor,
euen in Temporalibus. The reason is euident, because
the Pope challengeth the Temporall soueraigne right of
Italy, and the free donation of the Emperor.
                  Secondly, if euery one that humbleth himselfe to another,
becommeth by and by that others inferiour; then
doubtles, the priest that is confessary to the Pope, becommeth
the popes superiour: For to answere, that the Pope
doth not humble himselfe to his ghostly father, is not onely
absurd, but flat against the Popes religion: And yet our
Iesuite disputeth thus. Catholiques argue, that Kinges and
Emperors haue acknowledged Popes their superiors.Page 37 This
Bell graunteth, in confessing their humiliation to Popes,
which is neuer done but to superiors. Alas, alas, I pittie
the Iesuites folly. For first, in Popery, euery king humbleth
himselfe to a silly priest: Ergo, the priest is the kings
superiour.
                  Againe, euerie papist humbleth himselfe, to Images▪
dead bones, and especially to the wood of the crosse; yea,
sometimes to the bones of an Heretique, as I haue proued
in the Article of traditions. Ergo, Images, dead bones,
wood, &c. are superiors to the Papists. Thirdly, the Papists
are commanded to humble themselues to that, which
the Priest holdeth ouer his head at Masse; which by their
Doctrine, if it lacke consecration, (as it may many waies
fall out,) is but a bare piece of bread. Ergo a piece of Bakers



bread, is their superior. Fourthly, Pope Siluester the second
sometime a Monke, a Frenchman borne, Gilbertus by
name, humbled himselfe to the deuill, & yeelded homage
to him, so long as the deuill accomplished his desire. This
story is set downe at large in my Suruey of Poperie. Now,
that the deuill of hell was and is his superior, both to this
Pope and to many others, I admit your argument with all
applause.
                  Fiftly, kings do often humble themselues to their subiects:
Ergo, their subiects are their superiors. Sixtly, the
Emperor humbleth himselfe many times, euen vnto those
that owe duety to him: Ergo his inferiors,2 Sam. 15, 5. 6 become his superiors.
Lastly, Absalom when any man came neere vnto
him and did him obeysance, put forth his hand, and tooke
him, and kissed him, and on this manner did Absalom to al
Israel, that came to the King for Iudgement. Ergo, euerie
man in Israel, was Absaloms superiour. But the contrarie is
the truth, and our Iesuite a most notorious lyar.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 5.
               ¶ Conteyning the confutation of the seuenth Chapter of S. R.
that masked Iesuite.
               
                  S. R.
                  
                     
                        VIctoria saith,Page 42 that the glossers of the Lavve
haue giuen this Dominion to the Pope,
they being poore in substance and learning.
Here insteede of proofes, I find an vntruth.
For neyther doth Victoria in these wordes
speake of many things, but onely of Dominion, meaning
Temporall ouer the whole world; neyther yet doeth hee
call it absurd.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I answere; first, that I cited Victorias words truely after
my wonted manner, neuer adding or changing one word
in my Author.
                  
                     
Secondly, that I added these wordes (and these Lordly
Titles) not in the Latine, but in the English; not simplie,
but with a parenthesis; that the Reader might know, I did
it for explication sake: which thing is vsuall, not onely
to our Iesuite, but to all other writers.
                  Thirdly,In my Motiues. 
                     Victoria (as I haue expresly shewed elsewhere)
speaketh of many Lordly titles, ascribed to the Pope. But
our Iesuite granteth enough, (viz:) the dominion ouer the
whole world, and all power both Ecclesiasticall and temporall
on earth. For if the Pope haue all, Kings can haue
none.
                  Fourthly, maister Gerson, a man of high esteeme in the
Popish church, saith plainly, (as our Iesuite granteth) and
I affirme; that all power both in heauen & on earth, which
Christ himselfe had, is giuen to the Pope. What needes
more? This is flat blasphemy against the sonne of God.
                  Fiftly,Page 44 our Iesuite denyeth in one page, that which hee
granteth in another, concerning the Popes power. The
sound of the Bell,Page 47 maketh him forget himselfe.
               
            
            
               Chapter. 6.
               ¶ Containing the confutation of the 8. and 9. chapters of the Iesuite
S. R. touching eight steps of the Popes ladder.
               
                  S. R.
                  
                     COnstantine (saith Bell) at his departure did as the popes
Parasites tell vs,Page 49 giue large guifts to the Pope, euen
his whole power, dominion and territories, both in Rome,
Italy, and all the West. Behold a man hauing a Wolfe by
the care, which he dare neyther hold, nor yet let go. For,The first step.
if he graunt, that Constantine gaue the Pope his whole power
and dominion, ouer Rome, Italy, and all the West, he
must needes grant, that the Pope of right hath Imperiall
power ouer all the west: if he deny it, he sheweth not how
Constantines departure, was a step for the Pope to climbe
to higher authority.
               
               
                  
                  T. B.
                  If Robert Parsons that Trayterous Iesuite, who dareth
not tell his name, but hydeth it vnder S. R. be a wolfe
indeed, as I suppose he is; then doubtlesse I haue him by
the eares, legges, nose, and all, and so fast bound with
linkes and chaines of yron, as the Pope and all his Iesuited
Vassals, are neuer able to deliuer him out of my handes.
For albeit Constantine that most Noble Emperor, gaue not
the Pope his whole power and Dominion ouer Rome, Italy,
and all the West, nor any part thereof; yet doth it follow
consequently, that his departure from Rome to Constantinople,
was the first step to Popish falsly supposed Primacie.
The reason is euident, because the Emperor being
farre off at Constantinople in the East, the false pretended
donation frō 
                     Constantine was holden & beleeued for a trueth.
The multitude in the western parts, being too too credulous,
gaue credit to false reports, and rashly and inconsiderately
beleeued, that the Emperor had made a decree,
that the Pope and his successors should weare the crowne
of pure gold and precious stones which he had giuen him
from off his owne head. So that lying, and cogging, was
the first step of the Popes exalting. For, who woulde not
giue honour to him, who was so honoured of the King?
Although in truth the Popes rising, was nothing else but
a meere leasing.
                  I haue proued soundly out of famous Popish Writers,
that Constantines pretended donation was a meere fable, &
that Bellarmine himselfe, standeth in doubt thereof, and
therefore for his last refuge appealeth to prescription.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  
                     Bellarmine affirmeth, that the Pope hath two iust Titles
to hold his estate. The first, is the free gift of Princes,
whereof he can shew Authenticall euidences; the other,
prescription of time.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I answere, that for the first Title, though some of the



Popes parasites affirme it, yet do learned and wise Papists,
Laurentius Valla, Raphael Volateranus, Paulus Cathalanus,
Nicolaus Cusanus, & many others, repute it a meer Fable &
flat leasing. And for the second, that where the Original is
vniust, and the possession holden Mala fide, prescription
will not serue the turne. Howsoeuer this be, Constantines
departure was the first step to Popish primacy. For, if hee
had tarried still at Rome, such feyned and falsly pretended
Tytles, could neuer haue taken place.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  Besides that, not Constantines departure,Page 49 but his gifte
should haue beene made the step.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Not the gift good Sir, which was none indeed, yet falsely
pretended to be; but his departure from Rome to Constantinople.
For if Constantine had made his abode still at
Rome, the Popes parasites durst neuer haue giuen him
such feyned Tytles.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  The second step (saith Bell) was the fall of the Empyre
in the West,The 2. step. Page. 51 in the yeere 471. and the vacancie thereof for
almost 330. yeares. But how this fall and vacancy of the
Empire, was a step for Popes to climbe; neither he sheweth,
nor any can imagine; especially, if (as hee writeth
straight after) in this vacancy of the Empire, Rome was
spoyled with fire and sword, and the wals throwne down
to the ground, and all Italy possessed of the Barbares vntill
Carolus Magnus, who was the first Emperor after the vacancy.
If in this vacancy, Rome was destroyed, and all Italy
possessed by Barbares, (who for the most part were heathens
or Heretiques) how could it be a step for the Pope
to climbe, and not rather to fall?
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Our Iesuite seemeth to bee wise in his owne conceite,
thinking nothing to bee true, which his grossum caput cannot
apprehend. The great difficulty is this; how Rome being



                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     


                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     


                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     


                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     


                     
spoyled with fire and sword, and all Italy possessed of
Aliens and Barbarians, could bee a steppe for the Pope to
climbe and not to fall.
                  I answere,Marke. 3, 24 that when a kingdome is deuided against it
selfe, it cannot long continue; and consequently, the Visigothes
ruling in Spaine, the Aliens in Gutan and Gascoyn,
the Frenchmen in the residue of France, the Vandales in Affricke,
the Saxons in Brittaine, the Ostrogothes in Hungarie,
the Hecules and Turdilinges in Italy and in the Cittie of
Rome; the Emperor remaining in the East, was not able
to defend his imperiall right in the West, but by little and
little was dispossessed thereof. Then the Popes frends possessing
the Empire by his good helpe and furtherance, and
willing to requite one good turne with another, sought
by all meanes possible to aduance and exalt the Pope. And
so the fall of the Empire, was a step for the Pope to climb
vp to his Lordly primacy. This may be made manifest, by
the daily practise of the Pope and his Iesuites. For the
Popes and Iesuites neuer cease to stirre vp forraigne potentates
to inuade the Empire of great Brittaine, and the
kingdome of Ireland; and that onely for this end and purpose,
that the fall thereof may tend to their aduancement.
Insomuch, that they haue promised great gifts, to such as
would imploy their labours, for the ouerthrowe and fall
of this Noble kingdome, which thing is proued at large,
in my Anatomy of Popish Tyrany.
                  
               
               
                  S. R.
                  
                     Bell before said,Pag 52 Popes liued in duetifull obedience vnder
Emperors, vntill the 603. how doth he now say, that
they climbe to Tiranny from the yeare 471.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I answere; first,In the downfall. pag, 3. that our Iesuite belyeth me in wresting
my words, which is his vsuall manner. For my wordes are
not (vnder Emperors) but (to the Emperors.) Againe, I
saide not (in duetifull obedience,) but (in subiection.)
Now, euery child knoweth, that there is great difference



betweene vnder and to. As also, betweene obedience and
subiection. For our English Iesuites, are our Kinges subiects
against their will, and yet they liue not in obedience
to him. Secondly, many liue in externall obedience to
the King, as doe our English Iesuites, in acknowledging
the Kings superiority ouer them; who for all that seeke to
climbe vp on high, by poysoning and murdering his Maiesty,
if God would permit. Thirdly, to liue in obedience
or subiection to Emperors, is nothing else in my sence &
true meaning; but to confesse and freely graunt, that of
right they ought to be subiect to Christian Emperours, as
to their lawfull Soueraignes. Which subiection our Iesuite
can neuer prooue any Pope to haue denied, for the
space of 600. yeares and odde. Heere I cannot but tell
our Iesuite of his arrogant sawcinesse, ioyned with a notorious
lie. For though hee say more boldly then wisely,
that Bell wrongly saith, the Empire to haue bin dissolued
in the yeare 471. yet is it a meere truth,Page 54 and the Iesuite denying
it, sheweth himselfe to bee ignoraunt in Chronologie.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  The third step (saith Bell) was the voluntary Charter
which Constantine the Emperour of Constantinople made to
Pope Benedist the second (viz;)The 3. step. that whosoeuer the Clergy,Page 52
people, and Romane souldiors, should choose to bee
Byshop, all men should beleeue him to be the true Vicar
of Christ, without any tarrying for any authority of the
Emperour of Constantinople, or the Deputy of Italy, as the
custome and manner was euer before that day. Thus (saith
he) writeth Platina. And the Popes almost for the space
of 700. yeares could haue no iurisdiction, nor bee reputed
true Byshops of Rome, without the Letters pattentes of
the Emperour. Beholde, the impudency of this fellowe.
Platina saith, Vt antea fieri consueuerat. Bell affirmeth him
to say; It was the custome euer before that day: Where is
in Platina the word (Euer?) Where, till that day? Nay, doeth



not Platina say, that Pelagius the second was created iniussupri
                           •
                        cipis,
without command of the Prince? That Silnerius
was made pope, at the command of Theodate a Gothish
king? Did not Bell himselfe tell vs, that Barbarians ruled
in Rome, and possessed all Italy for 330. yeares, vntill
Charles the great? How then could it be, that before Benet
the second, neuer popes could haue iurisdiction, & bee
accounted true byshops of Rome, without letters patents
of Emperours; who were professed enemies, & made wars
vpon most of the Barbarians?
               
               
                  T. B.
                  If the Iesuite Parsons (for he is the libeller, and Author
of this lying and slanderous pamphlet) were not at a Non
plus, and vnable truly to answer me,Platina in vita Bened. secund. hee would neuer for
shame vtter so many lies and notorious vntruths. For first,
Platina is wholy on my side, affirming resolutely, that none
could be made byshop of Rome, without the letters pattents
of the Emperour, vntill the time of Benedict the 2.
                  Secondly, where our impudent Iesuite laboreth to make
his tale good, because Pelagius the seconde was created
without commaund of the Prince, he passeth impudencie
it selfe.I
                           •
                         vita Pelagii. 2 These are Platina his owne words; Haec autem vna
fuit causa, quare Pelagius iniussuprincipis, tam pontifex creatus
sit, cum extra obsessam abhoste vrbe, mitti quispiam non posset.
Nil. n. tum à clero in eligendo pontifice actū erat, nisi eius electionē
imper. approbasset. This was one cause, why Pelagius was thē
made Pope without the commaund of the Prince, because
none could goe to the Prince, the enemy besiedging the
Citty, for nothing doen by the Clergy at that time was in
force, vnlesse the Emperour had approued their election.
Loe, Gentle Reader, our Iesuite would prooue, that the
choice of the B. of Rome was good, without the voice of
the Emperor, because Pelagius was created without commaund
of the Prince; and he alledgeth Platina for his Author.
What a fond fellow is this? Platina first telleth him
plainely, that no election of any Pope was good, without



the Letters pattents of the Emperour. He telleth him secondly,
that Pelagius was made Pope without the command
of the Prince. That is true: But what followeth;
Forsooth, that he was so made for necessity sake, and (as
all men know) necessity hath no law. But what necessitie
was it? We haue heard already out of Platina; because the
Citty was besieged of the enemy, so as none coulde haue
passage to the Emperor. The Iesuite therefore is a fonde
disputer, bringing that for him, which maketh wholy against
him, and confoundeth both himselfe, and his pope
euerlastingly.
                  Thirdly, where foolish and Traiterous Iesuite Parsons,
laboureth to defend the Pope by the creation of Siluerius,
because he was created at the commaund of Theodate
a Gothish King; it maketh as much against him,Platini in vita Siluerii. as his
former sottish, and sencelesse affirmation. For after that
Platina hath tolde vs that Siluerius was made Byshoppe or
Pope, at the commaund of Theodate a Gothish King, hee by
and by addeth these words. Cum antea non regum, sed imperatorum
autoritas, interveniret, whereas in former times,
not the Authority of Kings, but of Emperors was requyred.
Marke these wordes, Gentle Reader, and detest the
deceitfull dealing of all Trayterous and cozening Iesuits.
The Iesuite Parsons saith,Pag 53 that Platina speaketh of the
time since Pope Virgillius: But we see, that Platina speaketh
of the time before Siluerius; which Siluerius was before
Vigiius. Yea, Pelagius the second was also after Vigilius: &
so our Iesuite is turned vpside-downe, and beaten with
his owne rod. To the fourth step, which was the deposition
of Childericke King of France,
                     The 4. step. by Pope Zachary. Our Iesuite
answereth roundly, but nothing clarkly, that the deposition
was most iust) which foolish and shamefull doctrine
I deeme sufficiently confuted, by the bare recitall
thereof;) especially, seeing I haue else where written at
large of this subiect.
               
               
                  
                  S. R.
                  The fift step (saith Bell) was the decay of the EmpyreThe 5. step.
in the East, about the yeare 756.Page 57 at what time Pipin being
called into Italy by Pope Steuen 2. to deliuer Rome frō the
siege of the Lombards; and ouer comming, gaue vp the gouernment
of Italie into the Popes hands. Heere Bell hudleth
vp store of vntruthes, that the Empyre decaied in the
East, about the yeere 756. for it decayed long before, about
the yeare 635. vnder the Hereticall Emperour Heraclius.
                  
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Here our traytorous Iesuite, full of nothing but Rebellion,
wind, vanity and lying, cryeth out with open mouth
against vntruthes, when all vntruthes proceede from his
owne pen. Nothing in this steppe of the Popes ladder, is
worthy of examination, saue that only which concerneth
the time of the decay of the Empire in the East. I say, as I
truely saide before, that the decay of the Empyre in the
East, was about the yeare 756. I adde this worde (about)
not precisely meaning any one certaine yeare. For Historiographers
and Chronographers, doe sildome or neuer
iumpe in the certaine or precise time,Page 57. or yeare. Our Iesuite
sayth, that it decayed long before, about the year 635.
We both haue and vse, this word (about) as it may seeme,
for that end and purpose which I haue already named.
                  Marke now the profe, and then iudge who is the Lyar.
Matthaeus Palmerius, in his Chronology in the yeare 756.
hath these expresse wordes:An. 756. 
                     Deficiente sedulo in Oriente Romanorum
imperio, & imperatore Christianos persequente, Stephanus
pontifex imperiales titulos ac dignitates Francorum Regibus
concessit, & Pipinum suos
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         tantum à stirpe successores in eorum
reges confirmauit; caeteris vero omnibus interdixit. When the
Romaine Empire in the East was indeed dissolued, and the
Emperour persecuted the Christians, then Pope Stephen
granted the imperiall tytles and dignities to the French K.
and confirmed Pipin and his lineall successors onely to be



their kinges, excluding all the rest. Thus writeth that famous
Historiographer; affirming directly, that the Empire
in the East, was dissolued in the yeare 756. as I doe
hold. Iohannes Nauclerus hath these expresse words; Anno
salutis 800. in die natiuitatis Dom▪ prohabita matura deliberatione,
                     Nautle. gen. 27. pag. 678
                     Leo pontifex Rom considerans imperatores Constantinopolitanas
agre ad nomen tueri, & ob eam rem vrbē Romam at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Italiam
magnis calamitatibus pressam, simul
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         retr
                           •
                        ctans errores
Graecorum frequentes, in obedientiam, & occidentale imporium
quasi pro derelicto à Graecis haebitum; erigione verò perpendens
Carolum Francorum regem potentissimum & optime de Ecclesia
meritum, qui ecclesiam ab oppressione Desiderij regis Longobardorum
liberauit, sicut pater eius Pipinus ab Aistulpho, sic est avus
Martellus 
                           •
                         Gothis & Saracenis; da propter inter missarum solemnia
eo die in Basilica S. Petri pontifex populi Romani consensu
Carolumimperatorem Romanorum declarat, a
                           •
                         diadema
                           •
                        e coronat
ter acclamante populo Romano. In the yeare of our
saluation 800. vpon the day of the Natiuity of our Lorde,
after mature deliberation, Leo Byshop of Rome, considering
that the Emperors of Constantinople could hardly defend
that name, and that for that cause the citty of Rome
and Italy was subiect to great calamities, and withall correcting
the frequent errors and disobedience, and that the
Greekes did make no reckoning of the West Empire; on
the other side pondering that Charles the French King was
most mighty, and had deserued well of the Church, and
had deliuered the Church from the oppression of Desi
                           •
                        erius
King of the Lombards, as his father Pipin from Aistulphus,
and his graundfather Martellus from the Gothes & Sarazes:
Therefore in the time of great solemnity that day in Saint
Peters Church, the Byshop by the consent of the people of
Rome, declareth Charles to be the Emperor of Rome, and
crowneth him with the Diadem, the people of Rome making
a threefold acclamation thereunto. Thus writeth
this famous Papist, a man of high esteeme in the Church
of Rome.
                  
                     
                     Sigebertus a popish Monke, iumpeth with Nauclerus, in
the yeare: So doth Arnoldus Pontacus Bnrdegatensis, iumpe
with Matthaeus Palmerius in the yeare 756. and they all differ
greatly from our Iesuites supputation, 635. That is to
say; no lesse then 121. yeares. Wherfore, I wish the Reader
to beleeue him at leysure, & neuer to giue further credite
to him, then his profes deserue.
                  Here by the way let vs obserue seriously, that Leo the bishop
of Rome with the consent of the people of Rome,
tooke roundly, (though vnchristianly) vppon him, to depose
the Emperor, and to put Charles king of France in his
place. And thus euery childe may see, how the decay of
the East Empyre, was a step to Popish primacy: for the
decay thereof, brought him into the roome, who protected
the pope in all his Lordly pontificality.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  The sixt step Bell maketh the translation of the Empire,The 6. step. Page 64
by Pope Leo the thirde from the Greekes to the Frenchmen
or Germaines, in the person of Charles the great. This
translation is rather a notorious act of the popes superiority
ouer Emperors, then a step thereunto.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I willingly graunt good Sir, that it was a notorious act
of your Pope; but yet (as we vse to say) he is a notorious
murderer, a notorious Theee, a notorious Traytor. For as
Sigibert the Popes deare Fryer telleth vs, the Romaines,Sigebert. in Chron. An. 801.
who a long time had in mind and affection reuolted from
the Emperour of Constantinople, seeing now a fit occasion
offered them, (because a Woman did gouerne them, her
sonne the Emperour being made blind,) did with one assent
sounde out imperiall acclamations to King Charles,
calling him Caesar, and Augustus, and crowning him by the
hande of Leo the Pope; yea, they did collaud his Sonne
Pipin, and made him King of Italy. Thus writeth Fryer Sigebert.
Out of whose words I obserue these points of great
consequence.
                  
                     
First, that 800. years after Christs sacred byrth the Byshops
of Rome were subiect to the Emperor, as their own
deare Monke Sigebert telleth them; and as we haue heard
already, Pope Gregory acknowledged his fealty to Mauritius
the Emperor, in the yeare 603.
                  Secondly, that the Pope and people of Rome endeuored
a long time, to shake off the yoake of obedience vnto
the Emperour, and in the yeare 801. put the same in Execution.
                  Thirdly, that the Translation of the Empire implyed
flat Treason, both in the Pope and all his Romish Popelings.
For as Fryer Sigebert telleth vs plainely, they surrendered
vp the right of their soueraigne to another man.Bellarm. tom 1. col. 831
And hence commeth it, that the Iesuitical Cardinall Bellarmine
appealeth to the law of prescription, affirming Titles
gotten by robbery to be lawfull by that meanes. And
indeede by stealth and robbery, it may well be
                        •
                     eeme a
Iesuite, to iustifie Popish late start-vp regality.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  The seuenth step (saith Bell) was the constitution of theThe 7 step.
7. electors of the future Emperour, but this was rather an
act of superiority in the Pope ouer Emperors, then a step
vnto it.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Euery thing with our Iesuite, is an act of the Popes superiority;
but yet by his fauor, not such a notorious act, as
is the notorious act of murther or rebellion,Phil. Berg. pag. 277 Auton. 3. partit. 22. cap. 5 §. 13 as is already
proued. For Gregorie the fift being a Germaine borne, and
a neere kinsman of Otho the Emperor at that time, did by
his fauour and free graunt, appoint seauen electors of the
Empire for euer. (viz:) the Archbyshoppe of Mentz, the
Archbyshop of Treuerse, the Archbyshop of Colen, the
Marques of Brandenburgh, the County Palatine, the
Duke of Saxony, and the King of Bohemia. This goodlie
constitution was enacted by the Pope and Emperor, (being
both of them not onely Germaines but also kinsmen)



that the Empire might bee established in their posterity,
and their bloud thereby aduanced for euer.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  Seeing this constitution hath euer since beene inuiolably
obserued,Page 70 and the Emperors so elected accounted as
true Emperours throughout all Christendome; a signe it
is, that Christians thinke the Pope hath Authority to appoint
Electours, who may choose what Emperour they
please, by Authority giuen them from the Pope.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I answere; first, that many thinges are holden for good
generally, which for all that are indeede counterfeite and
false. Two most notable markes wee haue heereof. The
one in Pope Iohn the woman, as is prooued at large in my
Suruey. The other in the Actes of Pope Stephanus & Pope
Romanus, as I haue prooued in my Booke of Motiues.
                  
                  Secondly, that the Emperor hath not his authority from
the Pope but from God. Per me reges regnant.
                     Prou. 8, 15 16. Rom. 13, 1 By me kings
raigne, and princes decree Iustice. By me princes rule, and
the Nobles, and all the Iudges of the earth. Let euery one
be subiect vnto higher powers; for there is no power but
of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of GOD.
Therefore the Emperour cannot haue his power from the
Pope, vnlesse he bee (as some impudently haue written)
both God and man.
                  Thirdly, the constitution for the electors of the Emperour,
was not established so much by the Pope, as by the
authority of the Emperour, the Popes neere kinsman, as
is already proued.
                  Fourthly, from the time of Otho the third, when Henricus
had stirred vp a great contention about his succession,
and all Germany was diuided into parts; it was prouided
by publick authority, that there should be seuen electors
appointed, who should from time to time elect a king
and place him in the Empire, and that the Pope shoulde
set the imperiall crowne vpon his head. And so the insoluble



so supposed Dilemma, is fully answered.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  The eight and highest step of this Ladder (sayth Bell)The 8. step.
did reach vp euen to the highest heauen, and to the veric
throne of our Lorde Iesus. Because (saith he) they challenge
the Royall right of both swordes, throughout the
Christian world.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I say so, and I prooued it in the Downefall of popery; neyther
is any Iesuite in the world able, truely to confute the
same.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  But first I deny, that the Pope as Pope, challengeth royall
right of eyther sword.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  
                     Appendix fuldensis hath these words; Hic papa constitutionem
fecerat, &c. This Pope (hee speaketh of Boniface the
eight) made a constitution, in which he affirmed himselfe
to bee both spirituall and temporall Lorde in the whole
world.Note this point well. Whereupon hee would haue had Phillip King of
France, to haue acknowledged his kingdome from him;
which thing the King scorned to do. Yea, the constitution
is expressely related in the Popes Extrauagant, which
beginneth thus; Vnam sanctum,
                     Bonifac. 8 In extr. set downe in the sixt book
of the Decretals. And as Gratianus reporteth, Pope Nicolas
taught the same Doctrine. How impudent therefore is
our fund Iesuite,dist. 22: can omnes. lib: 7. epist: 
                           •
                        
                      which denyeth such a manifest trueth?
But let vs heare, what their famous Pope Gregory saith. Si
ego servus eorum in morte Longobardorum me miscere valuissem,
hodie Longobardorum, gens nec regem, nec duces, nec con
                           •
                        ites haberet,
at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         in summa confusione esset deuisa. Sed quia deū times, in
mortem cuiuslibet hominis me miscere formido. If I their seruant
woulde haue intangled my selfe in the death of the Lombardes,
the Nation of the Lombardes, shoulde this day
neyther haue had a King, nor Dukes, nor Counties,
but should haue bene in the greatest confusion. But
because I feare GOD, I am affraide to intrude my



selfe into the death of any man. Loe Gentle Reader, for
the space of 600. yeares and odde, the Byshops of Rome
durst not deale in absoluing subiects from their alegeance,
nor in murdering of Kings and Emperors. And why I pray
you? This their owne deare Saint, Gregory (surnamed the
great) telleth vs, because he feared God, & consequently,
the late Bishops of Rome dare embrue their harts & hands
in the bloud of Gods anointed, because they haue not the
feare of GOD before their eyes. Yea, the Popes owne
Monke (as wee haue heard out of Sigebert already) pronounced
it flat Heresie,Sigebert. An. 1088. fol. 117. K to absolue subiects from the allegeance
due vnto their Soueraigne. And what saith theyr
Pontaus Burdegalensis? these are his words; Hic primus caepit
francos iuramento fidlitatis absoeluere. This Pope (Zachary)
was the first, that absolued the Frenchmen from the oath
of their fealty and allegeance.
                  This Pope liued about the yeare of our Lord God 752.
so that it was neuer heard of among the French-men for
the space of 750.Chron. An: 1088 yeares, that the Byshop of Rome tooke
vpon him to absolue subiects from their oth & allegeance
to their Soueraigne. And Sigebertus proceedeth further, &
reproueth it as a Nouelty, or rather Heresie, lately crept
into the Church. And who I pray you can doe this, but
Christ Iesus, as true God, so true man? Doth not he challenge
the right, at the least of the spirituall sword, that taketh
vpon him to absolue subiects from the oth of their allegeance?
Nay, doth hee not take vnto him the right of
both swords? For absolution I am well assured, is euen by
popish Doctrine, an act of spirituall iurisdiction; and to
serue the prince, is a secular and meere ciuil act? Antoninus
sometime Arch-byshop of Florence,Anton: 3: partit. 22: cap: 5 §. 8. and a Popish cannonized
Saint, telleth vs without blushing, that the Pope is
Christs Vicar on earth, & hath equal power with God almighty.
These are his expresse words; Cum autē Vicarius
Christi si papa, &c. For seeing the Po. is the Vicar of Christ,
none can lawfully withdraw himselfe from his obedience,



as none can lawfully withdraw himselfe from Gods obedience.
And as Christ receiued of his father, the Dukedome
and scepter of the Gentiles arising of Israel, ouer all
principality and power, and aboue euery thing that hath
being, that to him euery knee may bend; euen so Christe
hath committed most full power, to Peter and his successors.
Thus writeth our holy Arch-byshop Antoninus.
Out of whose wordes I obserue first, that as Christ is the
the head ouer his Church, so is the Pope or Byshoppe of
Rome head of the same.
                  Secondly, that as Christ receiued of God the Dukedom
ouer all power, so hath the Pope receiued the same power
of Christ.
                  Thirdly, that as Christ hath power aboue and ouer euery
thing, whatsoeuer hath any being; so hath the Pope.
                  Fourthly, that as to Christ euery knee must be bowed,
so also to the Pope.
                  Now, if this be not to challenge the royall right of both
swords, let the indifferent Reader iudge. Neither is it to
the purpose, to say that hee challengeth not Royall right.
For I weene, our Iesuite will not deny Royall right vnto
Christ, who is Lord of heauen and earth, true God, true
priest, and true King. And yet doth Antoninus ascribe and
yeeld vnto the pope, all power ouer all that hath any being,
in as ample and large manner as Christ himselfe hath
it. Yea, that Omnia genna, al knees must bow to the pope,
And the vsuall practise of papists do confirme the same, euen
to the popes good liking. For he must be carried vpon
mens shoulders, and men kneeling, must kisse the shoo of
his foot, or else not be thought to loue Christ or S. Peter.
This my selfe being an eye-witnesse thereof, am able to
testifie. When Gregory the thirteenth of that name, came
to the English Colledge in Rome, all the Students vvere
appointed by the Iesuite then maister of the Colledge, to
come two after two before him, sitting in a 
                        •
                     haire, and to
kneele downe on both knees in a great chamber, three seueral



times, before they offred to kisse his foot. And while
they kissed his foot (or the shoo of his foot) one after another,
the rest followed as it wer in procession, falling down
three times as is already said. But let vs heare the Verdict
of Fryer Austen de Ancona. The Pope (saith he) as he that is
the Vicar of the sonne of the heauenly Emperor,In summam, pag. 152 hath Vniuersal
iurisdiction ouer al kingdomes and Empires. And
is not this power ouer both swordes? Is not this to challenge
power proper to God alone? I weene it is, let others
iudge.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  But the words which Bell most vrgeth are,Page 78. that the Pope
can make something of nothing. For saith he, it is a thing
propper to God alone, to make something of nothing, in
all cases and at all times.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I say so good Iesuite, neither are you able with the help
of all your Iesuiticall broode (whom for all that I confesse
to be very learned) to proue the contrarie while the world
stands.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  But besides that the glosse neither saith,Page 78 that the pope
can make De nihilo aliquid, but, de nullo aliquid, neyther yet in
al cases, and at al times, as Bell addeth; the foresaid words
are taken our of Iustinian. C. de rei vxor. act. lib. 1. where
the Emperor saith, that because he can make to be accounted
a stipulation, where none is, much more he can an insufficient
stipulation to be sufficient. And the like authority
in humane contractes touching spirituall matters, the
glosse attributeth to the Pope. And this hee meant, when
he said, the Pope can de nullo facere aliquid, of no contract
make one. Which Bell would apply to creation, and making
creatures of nothing, as God made the world.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  For Christs sake gentle Reader, be heere an indifferent
iudge betweene our Iesuite and mee. Which if thou shalt



truely affirme; thou canst not but cleerly behold, that our
Iesuite is at his wits end, what to say or write in defence of
late start-vp Popery. His Doctrine smelleth of nothing,
but of winde,The first lye. vanity, and leasinges. His first lye is this?
That the glosse saith not, de nihilo, but, de nullo.
                  
                  The second lie is this;The 2. lye. that I affirme the glosse to say, in
all cases, and at all times.
                  The third lye is this;The 3. lye. that the words by me alledged are
taken out of Iustinian.
                  
                  The 4.The 4. lye. lie is this, that the glosse speaketh of Ciuill contracts.
Lies abundant for one short sentēce. And why doth
our Iesuit thus shamefully heap lyes vpon lyes? Doubtles
because he now seeth the halter about the Popes necke, &
the Pope ready for his trechery to be hanged on the Gallowes;
as one that is conuicted, by the flat Testimony of
his owne sworne Vassals, of most notorious blasphemy against
the sonne of God.
                  For first, to make of nothing something, is vndoubtedly
propper to the blessed Trinity, the Father, the sonne,
and the Holy-ghost, three in distinction of persons, and
one in Vnity of substance. And consequently, if the Pope
can make something of nothing, he must perforce be another
God. This consequence our Iesuit and his Pope dare
not admit in verball phrase, although they practise it in
reall act; and that the truth may euidently appeare, beecause
it is a matter of great consequence, I will examine
euery parcell of the Iesuites aunswere, seuerally by it selfe.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  The glosse saith not, the Pope can make de nihilo aliquid,
but, de nullo aliquid.
                  
               
               
                  T. B.
                  This is a most notorious lye, & I referre my selfe for the
truth hereof to al indifferent Readers, that haue the popes
decretals,Glos. lib. 1. decr
                           •
                        t
                           •
                        tit. 7. ca. 3. and can read and vnderstand the same. And if
the glosse say not de nihilo, as I affirme, but de nullo, as our
Iesuite saith; let me be discredited for euer. Oh sweet Iesus?



Who could euer thinke that the Papists would bee so
impudent, as to deny the expresse words of the text. Nay,
I will proue it by the circumstances, to the Iesuites euerlasting
shame and confusion.
                  For first, if the assertion were borrowed from
the ciuill law, and meant of ciuill contracts, pacts, or stipulations,
as our Iesuite impudently auoucheth, (but against
his owne conscience, if he haue any left) then shuld
it not be aliquid, but aliquod; as euery meane Gramarian, can
and will testifie with me.
                  Againe, the glosse saith, the Pope can change the Nature
of thinges, by applying the substance of one thing to
another. But doubtlesse, when the Emperor maketh that
to be a ciuill contract, which afore was none; hee doeth
not apply the substance of one thing to another, but onely
commandeth his subiects to accept that for a law, which
before was none.
                  Thirdly, no mortall man can apply the substance of one
thing to another, and so change the nature thereof. Although
the Pope take vppon him, to chaunge bread into
Christs body. And therefore, when the glosse addeth immediately;
(and of nothing he can make something,) hee
meaneth of that diuine power, which is propper to GOD
alone. Like as Antoninus affirmed, (as is already proued)
that the Pope doth challenge power, super omne quodcunque
est, ouer euery thing whatsoeuer is and hath any being;
and consequently, ouer God himselfe. And so, whether
he be Antichrist or no, I referre it to the iudgement of the
Reader; for if the Pope be aboue God,Anton. 3. pag. tit. 22: cap: 5 §. 8. I dare not take vpon
my selfe to bee his iudge. Neither will it serue to say,
that Saint Antoninus doth not affirm the Pope to be aboue
God. For though he say not so expressely, yet doth hee
affirme so much virtually; when he telleth vs, that hee is
aboue euery thing that hath being. For God hath not only
a being, but such a supereminent being, as surpasseth all
intelligence, and is the cause of the being of all creatures.
               
               
                  
                  S. R.
                  Neither yet in all cases, and at all times, as Bell addeth.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  If our Iesuite were not intrinsecally as it were made of
lying, he would neuer for shame delight so much therein.
These are my wordes in my Booke;In the downefall of popery. Page 16 and yet the truth is,
that as man can in some cases at some time make one thing
of another; so in all cases, at all times, to make something
of nothing, is proper to God alone. Yet the lying and
impudent Iesuite, not able to encounter me, nor to gainesay
my proofes and reasons, laboreth with might & maine
to disgrace me with the Reader, & to get the victory with
flat lying. Our slanderous and rayling Iesuite, reporteth
my wordes in this manner; for saith Bell) it is a thinge
proper to God, to make something of nothing in al cases,
and at al times. So then, all that I said was this; (viz)
That though man can at sometime in some cases, make one
thing of another; yet to make of nothing something, is
proper to GOD alone, neither is man able to performe
the same.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  The foresaide words are taken out of Iustinian, where
the Emperor saith, that because he can make to be accounted
a stipulation, where none is, much more hee can an insufficient
stipulation to be sufficient.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  The foresaid words cannot bee found in Iustinian: it is a
lye with a witnes. The Popish Religion cannot be defended,
but with falshood, deceit, and leasings. The residue
is confuted already.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  Which Bell would apply to creation, and the making of
Creatures of nothing, as God made the world.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I both would and haue applyed it so in very deed; and I
haue proued it so sufficiently, as the Iesuit cannot tel what



to say to the same: and therefore did he bethink him, to
betake himselfe to his accustomed art of Lyeng.
               
            
         
         
            The second Article;
            Touching the Masse.
            
               Chapter first.
               ¶ Of the reall presence of Christs body in the popish Masse.
               
                  S. R.
                  
                     THough saint Thomas teach, that Christes
quantity is also in the Sacrament; yet affirmeth
hee it not as a point of faith. In like
manner Bellarmine, in the place which Bell
citeth, teacheth (and truly) that Christes
quantity is in the Sacrament, but not with Bels addition,
As a point of Fayth.
                  
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Here I perceiue, I haue an Eele by the tayle; Anguis est,
elabitur. Doe our Papists teach that, which they beleeue
not to be true? And doe they that in the Sacrifice of their
most holy so supposed Masse? Who would haue beleeued
it, if our Iesuite Parsons had not said it? But good Sir, tell
me this? Doe you teach that of your reall presence, in your
holy Masse, which ye beleeue not to be true? Then doubtlesse
your silly subiects, your Iesuited Papists, haue neede
to looke to your fingers. Then must they remēber Christs
rule;Mas. 7, 15 
                     Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheepes cloathing,
but inwardly are rauening Wolues. And if you teach vs
as ye beleeue, then must your doctrin be an article of your
faith. Againe; two Popes, Vrbanus the fourth, and Innocentius


                     
the fifth haue confirmed Aquinas his Doctrine for
Authenticall; and strictly commaunded to admit and receiue
all that he hath written, for a meer vndoubted truth.
It followeth therefore by a necessary consecution, that
the quantity of Christs body to be in the Popish Masse, is
an article of popish faith.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  Let vs see therefore,Page 92 how Bell disproueth it: Forsooth,
because it implyeth contradiction for a greater body as
Christs is, to be contained in a lesser, as in a Cake. Behold
the foundation of Bels faith. We bring Christs expresse
wordes, that what he gaue to his Apostles at his last supper,
was his body giuen, and his bloud shed, for remission
of sinnes.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Our Iesuite flyeth quite from my argument (because it
striketh him dead) and laboureth to proue that Christes
body is in the Sacrament. But all in vaine: For first, that
is not now in question. Againe, he is to answere me, and
not to wander about impertinent matters. Thirdly, I haue
answered all that he obiecteth here, as also all that can be
obiected on their behalfe, in my Suruey of Popery many
yeares ago: to which no Papist durst euer frame an answer
vnto this day. Fourthly, I willingly grant, the holy bread
in the blessed Eucharist to be Christes body, and the holy
wine to be his bloud; yet not really and substantially, as
the Papists hold; but mystically and sacramentally, according
to the truth of Gods word. And I retort the Iesuites
reason out of Christes wordes, against himselfe. For, if
Christ had not meant, that his body was then giuen sacramentally,
and not really; he would haue said (which shall
be giuen) not which is giuen, in the Present tense. I proue
it; because, if Christs body had then beene giuen really,
and his bloud then shed really for the sinnes of the world;
no other Sacrifice, attonement, satisfaction, or reconciliation
had beene needfull on our behalfe: which how absurd



it is, euery childe can discerne. Christs meaning therfore
is this; This is my body sacramentally, Or this is the
sacrament of my body and bloud: but not, This is my naturall
body, and my reall bloud. He that desireth the profe
hereof at large, I refer him to my Suruey of Popery.
                  
               
               
                  S. R.
                  But to come to Bels reason:Pag 95 How proueth he it to bee
contradiction, for a greater bodie to bee contayned in a
lesse?
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Heere our Iesuite bestirreth himselfe to proue if it wold
be, that Christs body is not both contained and not contained
in their Sacrament; but all in vaine. For his proofes
(if they were true, as they be falfe) would onely conclude
this, and nothing else; viz. that God is able to do it.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  For albeit it be contradiction for a greater body occupying
a place proportionate to it greatnes, to be conteyned
in a lesse, (for so it should both be contained and not
contained in the lesse,) yet no contradiction at all it is, for
a greater body retayning it greatnes, to be so coarcted by
Gods omnipotency, that it fill a place farre lesse, then is
naturally due or proportionate to it greatnes. For in this
case it followeth not, that it should both be contained, &
not contained in the lesser bodie, (as in the former case,)
but contained onely. And thus we say, hath Christ disposed
of his bodie in the Sacrament. Wee proue it by manie
waies.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I aunswere, with all subiection and due reuerence vnto
Gods omnipotent power, that God cannot doe any thing
which eyther implyeth contradiction in it selfe, or imperfection
in God. Not because there is any defect in GOD
himselfe, (God forbid wee should so thinke) but because
there is defect in the thing that should so be done. By reason
of the former, God cannot make a dead man remayning



dead to be liuing; albeit he can raise a dead man to
life againe. So neyther can God make a blinde man remaining
blinde to see, nor a deafe man remaining deafe
to heare; nor a dumbe man remaining dumbe to speake;
albeit he can restore seeing to the blinde, hearing to the
deafe, and speech to the dumbe. By reason of the latter,
God can neyther make another God, nor any creature equall
to himselfe, nor commit any sinne, nor faile in his
promise, nor repent of any thing that he hath done. Now,
to coarct a great body so, retaining it greatnes still, that
it may be conteined in a lesse body, implyeth flat contradiction;
not for the reason which our Iesuite bringeth,
but because it is against the intrinsecall reason and the very
Essence of quantity, which is to haue partē extra partem,
one part without another. And consequently, our Iesuits
supposed coarctation, implyeth flat contradiction. For it
is impossible to conceiue or vnderstand, how a body eight
cubits long, and eight cubits broad, remaining so long &
so broad, hauing euery part without other, to be contayned
of another body, being but seuen cubits long, and seuen
cubits broad. It implyeth as flat contradiction, as to
make a deafe man remaining deafe to heare. It is therefore
impossible to all power, both create and vncreate; to
make Christs body to be contained in a little round cake,
in the Popish Masse.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  First,Page 96. because Christs body in his natiuity, opened not his
Virgin-mothers wombe. Ergo, then it occupyed not a
roome, naturally proportionate to the greatnesse. The
consequence is euident, and the antecedent is proued by
many fathers.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I deny both the consequence, and the antecedent. The
consequence, because if it were as the Iesuite supposeth,
(which I deny) yet should Christes body haue occupied a
roome, naturally proportionate to the greatnes thereof.



And our Iesuite denying it, vnawares affirmeth all Children
to be vnnaturally in their mothers wombes. The antecedent,
because Christ opened his mothers wombe as
other children do.
                  For first,Luk. 2, 23 Exod. 13, 2 Num. 8, 15 Heb. 2, 17 & 4, 15. Suruey page 474. Christ was presented to the Lord according to
the Law, as the Holy-ghost dooth record; yet the Lawe
required such presentation, onely of them, which opened
their mother wombe. Secondly, Christ was made like
vnto his Brethren in all things, sin onely excepted. Thirdly,
the auncient Fathers, Tertullian, Origen, Ambrose, and
Hierome, are of the same opinion. Their expresse words are
set downe at large in my Suruey of Popery. And it will not
serue the turne, to say as some do, that though Christ was
borne of a Virgin, yet should she haue bene corrupted, &
no Virgin, if her wombe had beene opened in the byrth
of Christ.
                  For first, not onely holy writ, but the auncient Fathers
also, and other learned Deuines, are to be heard before all
Physitions, in the misteries of our faith.
                  Secondly, Fernetius maketh nothing for the Papistes, as
who speaketh only of the dilatation of the Matrice, & that
after the naturall and ordinary course.
                  Thirdly, albeit it be most true, (as all holy Writers with
vniforme assent do contest) that Christs holy Mother the
blessed Virgin Mary, was euer a pure Virgin, before his
birth, in his birth, and after his birth; yet it is likewise
true,Aquin. 22, q. 52. ar. 1. ad. 3 that her wombe was opened in his byrth, as is already
proued. For as their owne Angellicall D. sayth, (whose
Doctrine sundry Popes one after another haue confirmed)
Virginity is not lost by fraction of the signacle, but by corruption
of the minde, and purpose of the will.
                  Saint Augustine hath a learned and large discourse, concerning
this onely point of Doctrine; wherein he sheweth
grauely,Aug. lib: 1 de ciuit. dei cap. 18 that the apertion of the matrice, may bee done,
sundry waies; (viz:) either by Arte in the way of medicine,
or by violence of the corrupter, or by other accidentall



means; and that Virginity this notwithstanding, may
be free from all corruption. Much more might Christes
most holy mothers wombe, bee opened by his diuine power,
and neuerthelesse her most sacred wombe, still remaine
inviolable.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  God can by his omnipotency bring a Cammell through
a Needles eye,Pag 99 as well as a rich man into heauen; but he
can bring a rich man to heauen keeping his riches: Ergo,
a Cammell, keeping his greatnes through a Needles eye.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I answere first, that this sillogisme is vnfitly couched, &
hangeth together, as Yorke and fowle Sutton.
                  
                  Secondly, that the consequence is so against all rules of
Logicke, as the framer thereof, is worthy to be hissed out
of all schoooles.
                  Thirdly,Mat. 19, 24 the Gospell saith indeed, it is easier for a Cammell
to passe through the eye of a Needle, then for a rich
man to enter into the kingdome of heauen. But no Prophet,
no Apostle, no Epistle, no Gospell sayth, as our Iesuite
doth. For as these wordes, (keeping his riches) are
the Scripture of our sawcie Popeling, but not the holy
scripture; so also are these words, (keeping his greatnes,)
the inuention of his own brain. And therfore I must salute
him with these words of the holy Apostle; though we,Galat. 1, 8. or
an Angell from heauen preach any other Gospell to you,
then that which we haue preached to you, let him be accursed.
                  Fourthly, that by the word (Camell) may be vnderstood
a cable rope, and not a beast. For the Greeke word is indifferent
to them both.Vide tu Theophil: in humo locum: 
                     Cauinius obseruerh out of the Thalmudists,
that it is a prouerbial phrase, by which Christ doth
insinuate vnto vs, that rich men do not without great difficulty
enter into heauen.
                  Fiftly, that a Camell keeping his greatnes still, cannot
possibly by any power passe through a Needles eye, the



Needle still keeping the former quantity. The reason is euident,
because it implyeth flat contradiction, as is already
proued. Not for that there is any defect in the omnipotency
of God, (who is able to do more, then mans wit
can comprehend) but because there is repugnance in the
thing that should be done.
                  Sixtly, that God can dilate the eie of a Needle so, as a
Camell may passe through the same, and that without any
preiudice to the naturall quantity of his body.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  GOD made the furnace of Babylon,Page 99 though neuer so
hot,Dan. 3, 35 not to heat, yea to refresh the three children. Why
then can hee not make a great body, to occupy but a smal
roome? For to occupy place is an effect and accident of
quantity, as to heat, is of heate.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I thus reply; first, Scripture is to our Iesuite as a nose of
wax. He addeth to it, and taketh away from it, as seemeth
good in his owne conceit. For, that fire did refresh the 3.
Haebrewes, no Scripture doth affirme.
                  Secondly, whether to occupy place be an effect and accident
of quantity, or no, because it is diuersly holden of
diuers learned men, and nothing pertinent to our controuersie,
transeat for the present. For, whether occupying
of place be intrinsecall or extrinsecall to quantity, it skilleth
not for this matter, and this question nowe in hand.
The reason is euident, because to haue partem extrapartem
one part without another, is by vniforme assent of al learned
Writers, as well of Phylosophers as of Diuines, so intrinsecall
and essentiall vnto quantity, as it can by no power,
neither create, nor vncreate, be taken away from it.
And this is the cause, not occupation of place, why christs
body beeing greater, cannot bee contained in the Popish
round cake.
                  This was my former reason, and it stands stil vntouched,
neither can all the Iesuites in the worlde, euer yeelde a



sound answere to the same. For if they could, it shoulde
now haue beene performed. Because our Iesuite hath had
the best aduice and helpe, that any of them could possibly
make him. Heere by the way I m
                        •
                     st tell our Iesuite of another
monster in the Popish host or Cake, (viz:) of their
accidents without subiects. Which their position is against
all Phylosophy, all reason, all learning. It is a constant
axiome generally receiued in all Schooles: Accidentis esse
est inesse. The essence and being of an accident, is the inherence
and being in the subiect. No Text in the lawe of
Moses; no sentence in the Prophet; no word in the Psalmes;
no affirmation out of the Gospell; no Testimony out
of the Epistles of the Apostles; no verdict out of the holy
Fathers; no note out of the Auncient Counsels can euer
be found; which once maketh mention of accidents without
subiects. This may suffice for answere to sundry other
impertinent bibble babbles, which our Iesuite powreth
out by ladle fuls in this Chapter.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 2.
               ¶ Containing a confutation of the Iesuites aunswere, to my reasons
against the reall presence.
               
                  S. R.
                  
                     CAietane affirmed, as Iosephus Angles (saith Bell) reporteth;
that there is no Texte that conuinceth the
Reader, to vnderstand these wordes, this is my body, properly.
But Bell greatly wrongeth both Caietan and Angles,
in changing the word Hereticke into Reader.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Let vs heare Iosephus Angles speake for himselfe, & then
shall we know Bels dealing in that behalfe.
                        
                           •
                        o. Ang. in 4 sent. part. 
                           ••
                         pag. 144. Thus doth he
write. Exconclusione posita & probationibus, quae à prē à Castro
affermiter, coligiter, cantè legendum esse Caietanum dicente, non
apparere ex euangelio aliquod, coactinum, quo possimus conuincere
haereticos ad intelligenda verba haec, hoc est corpus meum propriē:



sed tenendū hoc esse solum authoritate Ecclesiae, quae ita verba
consecrationis declarat. We gather out of the conclusion
and proofes which father à Castro bringeth, that Caietane
must be read warily, who saith, that there appeareth not
any coactiue thing in the Gospell, by which we may conuince
Heretiques to vnderstande these wordes, This is my
body, properly. But wee must hold this to be onely of the
authority of the Church, which so declareth the words of
consecration. Thus writeth Iosephus Angles, out of whose
words, I note first, that Caietane who was a learned man,
a Domincan Fryer, and sometime Cardinal of Rome, must
be read warily. Secondly, the cause for which he must be
warily read, and that consisteth of these two heads. First,
that no Text in the whole Gospel can be produced, which
conuinceth these words (This is my Body) to be vnderstood
properly.
                  Marry sir, it is high time indeed, to read this Cardinal warily,
for if his words were wel knowne and marked of all
Papists, I weene they would forsake the Pope, thicke and
threefold; If these words (this is my body) be not vnderstood
properly, as Cardinall Caietane telleth vs; then doubtlesse
farewell the Popish reall presence: then downe with the
Pope, then downe with Popish Masse and at all. Secondly,
Cardinall Caietane telleth vs plainely, that it is not the
scripture, but the authority of the Pope or Church (which
is all one in effect) that causeth vs so to vnderstande these
words (this is my body.) If this Cardinall durst haue sayde
all he thought against the Popes doctrine, it seemeth, he
would haue tolde vs more. Now, let the Reader Iudge,
whether I haue wronged Caietan and Angles, or the Iesuit
hath wronged me.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  
                     Aquinas (saith Bell) affirmeth constantly,Page 20 
                     corpus christi non
esse in pluribus locis simul, secundum proprias dimensiones. That
Christs body is not in many places at once, according to
the proper dimensions thereof. Whose assertion (sayeth



                     Bell) is my flat position.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  It is most true, that both Aquinas teacheth so, & that Bel
flatly holdeth the same Doctrine. And it is also true, that
Aquinas elsewhere contradicteth himselfe, as God willing,
shall by and by appeare.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  But Bell herein, 1. contradicteth himselfe. 2. belyeth S.
Thomas. 3. vnderstandeth him not.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Let vs heare his dispute, And marke it well.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  He contradicteth himselfe. For before he said, Aquinas
holde constantly as an Article of the Christian fayth, that
the true body of Christ is truely and really in the Sacrifice
of the masse; and now he saith, that he affirmeth constantly
an assertion, which is Bels flat position to the contrarie.
Howe can Aquinas holde constantlie two contradictorie
points?
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Marke gentle Reader, for Christes sake, and then shalt
thou see, that our Iesuit hath nothing in him but falshood,
lying, and Hypocrisie. The Iesuite will needs haue me to
contradict my selfe, because Aquinas contradicteth himselfe.
What equity? What charity? What reason is in this
man? I charge them in my Motiues and elsewhere, with
manifold dissentions and contradictions: plainely telling
them, that if they would be consonant to their writinges,
then we and they should soone agree. But our Iesuite cannot
endure, to heare himselfe and his fellowes confounded
by their owne writings.
                  Now let vs see, who vnderstandeth Aquinas aright. Aquinas
holdeth, that Christs body is in the popish cake, and
withal, that one body cannot be in two places at once. Our
Iesuite would reconcile this apparant contradiction thus.
Aquinas meaning saith he, is plaine and euident. For hee



thinketh Christs owne dimensions to bee the cause of his
being in that place, where he is naturally;Page 102 and the dimensions
of the bodie which is Transubstantiated, the cause of
his being, where he is Sacramentally. Here our Iesuite first
taketh vppon him, to tell what men thinke; which is proper
to God alone. Then he feyneth a distinction, of a double
being of Christes body. For if we once take away feyning,
Popery will soone come to mourning.
                  Christes owne dimensions, sayth our Iesuite, are the
cause of Christs naturall being; but the dimensions of the
bread changed and Transubstantiated into Christs body,
(O horrible blasphemy,) are the cause of Christes sacramentall
being. The Papists hold generally, that the accidents
of bread in their consecrated host or cake, remaine
there without a subiect. But heere we haue another tale:
viz. That they are in Christs body. Most miserable is that
Doctrine, which must be maintained with such beggerly
shifts. Well, I will prooue with one insoluble argument,
that Christs body cannot be in many places at once. Vnum
est indiuisum, in se, & diuisum à quocun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         alio. One, (as all
lerned men do grant,) is that which is vndiuided in it selfe,
and diuided from euery other thing.An argumēt vnstable. But, if Christs body
can be in many places at once, it is both diuided in it selfe,
and vndiuided from other things; Ergo, it neither is nor
can be in many places at once. When our Iesuite shall truly
answere to this argument, he will deserue a Cardinalles
hat; and I verily thinke, that the Pope for the time being,
will willingly bestowe it on him. Marry withall I adde
this; that I would not for the Popedome, be bounde too
fast till that time. Here for the better clearing of this controuersie,
I will propound an Obiection, which seemeth
to make for the Papists, at least in Popish sence and meaning.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              The Obiection.
                              Two adequate bodies may be in one place at once, and yet
neither the place be deuided into two places, nor yet the



bodies transformed or confounded into one body: Ergo,
à simili, one body may be in two places at once (as Christs
body in many thousand Altars at popish Masse,) and yet
neyther the body deuided into two places, neyther the
two places contracted into one.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  T. B.
                  When you (O Iesuite) shall be able to proue the Antecedent,
which will be ad Calendas Graecas, when men vse to
clip Pigges and Rats) I will yeeld vnto you.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  First, in Christs natiuity, two bodies were in one place
at once, because Christes body opened not his mothers
wombe.
                  2 Againe, Christ arose out of the sepulchre, the stone not
being roled away.
                  3. Christ came to his disciples when the doores were shut,
and so both his body, and the wood of the doore, were in
one place at once: Ergo, two bodies may bee in one place
at once: and consequently, one body may be in two places
at once.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Concerning the opening of the Virgins wombe, I haue
answered sufficiently already. For the rolling away of the
stone from the Sepulchre; I answere, that the Angell of
God had done it away before Christs resurrection,Mat. 28, 6. and had
brought it to the mouth of the sepulchre againe. What
need many wordes? the answere of the Angell to the women,
doth fully determine this question. He is not here (saieth
the Angell) for he is risen as he saide. Loe, Christs body
was not in the Sepulchre, because Christ was risen: so doeth
the Angell reason. But Gods Angell must goe to the
schoole againe, to learne to frame his argument in better
manner, if one body can bee in two places at once. And
why? for the women might haue said to the Angel. What
if he be risen? Yet may his body be heere stil in the graue.
For one body may be in two places at once. But the Angel
reasoned thus. He is risen, therfore he cānot be here. Or he



not heere, because, he is risen. These are the words of the
Ang. oukestin oode, egerthe gar, kathoos eipe. He is not heer, for
hee is risen,Mat. 28, 6. as he said. Where I obserue, first the assertion
simply in it selfe. Secondly, the cause and reason of the
same assertion. The assertion is this; Christ is not in the
Sepulchre. The reason heereof is this; because Christ is
risen.
                  Now then, since Christ cannot be in the sepulchre, because
he is risen; it followeth of necessity, that eyther the
Angell of God inspired with Gods holy spirit, made a very
foolish and friuolous argument (which to affirme is void
of all Christianity) or else, that Christs body cannot be in
two places at once; which is that indeed, which I intende
to proue. For, if it were not as I say; the women might
haue replyed effectually against the Angell thus; albeit
Christ be risen as you say, yet may he be also in the sepulchre
still; for he may be in two places at once. But the Angell
of GOD reputing it a thing cleere and euident, that
Christes body could not bee in two places at one and the
selfe-same time; concluded directly and forcibly (as hee
thought) Christs absence in the sepulchre, because he was
risen againe.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  
                     Bell citeth Durand, whom he saith holdeth the same opinion.
True it is, that Durand thinketh the quantitie of
Christs body not to bee in the Eucharist, yet he both affirmeth
and prooueth the substaunce of his bodie to bee
there.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  
                     Durand holdeth indeede, that Christ body is in the Eucharist;
yet after another manner, then the Pope and his
Iesuites do at this day? for hee affirmeth, that the matter
of bread remaineth still. Neuerthelesse, as wee heere see,
Durand denyeth the quantity of Christes body in the Popish
Masse; and euen so doe I with Durand, and with other
learned Papists. The Iesuite confesseth heere inough, to



his vtter shame and confusion. (viz:) That their doctrine is
so foolish and vnsound, that the best learned of them cannot
agree therein.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  
                     Bell alledgeth Saint Austen,
                     Page 103 that Christ as man is in some
place of heauen, for the manner of a true body. Againe,
that his body must be in one place. Item, that hee cannot
be at once in the Sunne, the Moone, and on the crosse, according
to his coporall presence. In all which places, he
speaketh of the naturall manner of bodies being in place.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  This is a short answere, but as vnsound as short. Let the
Reader peruse my Booke, (the Downefall of Popery) and hee
shall see the Iesuites folly.Aug. epist. 57. tom. 2 
                     Saint Austen writing to Durandus,
hath these words; cū ergo sit corpus aliqua substantia &c.
When therefore any substaunce is a bodie, the quantity
thereof is in the magnitude of the bignesse; but the health
or soundnesse is not the quantity, but the quality thereof.
The quantity therefore of the body could not attain that,
which the quality could. For the partes being so distant,
which could not be together, because all seuerallie keepe
their spaces of places, the lesse, lesser places; and the great,
greater places; there could not be in all the places seuerally,
the whole, or so much; but there is a larger quantity in
the larger parts, a shorter in shorter partes, and in no part
so much as in the whole. For if spaces of places bee taken
from bodies, they shal be in no place; and because they
shall be in no place, neyther shall they haue any being at
all▪ Out of these words of this holy father, and most graue
writer, I obserue, first that euery quantitatiue bodie, hath
one part distant from another.
                  Secondly, that the same parts occupie distinct places.
                  Thirdly, that two quantities cannot bee in the same
place, and at and the same time.
                  Fourthly, that a greater quantity must haue a greater
place, and that it cannot be contained in the lesser.
                  
                     
Fiftly, that no one part can containe so much, as the
whole.
                  Sixtly, that when bodies are without places, they then
loose their Natures and beings. I therefore conclude, that
it is impossible for Christs Naturall body, to be contained
in a little round Popish cake, and his whole body in euery
little part thereof. All which for all that, the Papists this
day, most impudently and blasphemously do auouch
               
            
            
               CHAP. 3.
               ¶ Containing the confutation of the Iesuites third Chapter, of the
second article.
               
                  S. R.
                  NOw let vs heare Bels,
                     Page 108 or rather the diuels Arguments
against Masse.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Our Iesuite before hee come to my Arguments, hath
many fond & impertinent digressions of the Popish masse;
for answere whereunto, I referre the Reader to my Suruey
of Popery; where he shall finde answered, whatsoeuer can
be said in that behalfe. It is now impertinent, and nothing
to the question in hand, ro stand vppon those points. But
our Iesuite will not aime at the marke, because hee knoweth,
he cannot giue the vpshot. Now in Gods holy name,
I defie both the Iesuite and the deuill, speaking (as it may
seeme) within him; and hartily pray God (if it be his holy
will) to forgiue him, Credidi propter quod loquutus sum. I
defend nothing, (God is my witnesse) but that which as I
am perswaded in my conscience, is the truth.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  The Apostle telleth vs, that Christ rising from the dead,
dyeth no more; the Papists tell vs, that Christ dyeth euery
day, nay a thousande times a day in the daily sacrifice of
their masse. But better might we say, that Bels tale of the
Papists containeth a thousand vntruths.
               
               
                  
                  T. B.
                  Go on Iesuite; plead for thy selfe, what thou canst; delight
not in lying, for the truth in time wil preuail. If your
Doctrine be true, Christ dyeth a thousand times, nay ten
thousand thousand times a day in your most blasphemous
Masse.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  
                     Bell will wring the contrary out of Bellarmine: as water
out of a flint. First, because he granteth, that a sacrafice implieth
intrinsecally the consumption of the thing sacrificed.Page 10
                           •
                        
                     
But this is answerd out of Bellar. teaching that Christ
hath two kinds of being; to wit, naturally, and sacramentally.
And the consumption of his sacramentall beeing in
the Masse, is no killing, because is is not by reall separating
his soule and body, but onely by consuming the Sacramentall
formes, in which he was sacramentally.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  We see heere freely graunted to vs, that a sacrifice implyeth
intrinsecally the consumption of the thing sacrificed.
Let vs hold this while wee haue it, or else our Iesuite
will out of hand take it from vs. Then let vs adde this vnto
it; viz: That no liuing thing after it be consumed, can stil
haue life in it. And consequently, eyther Christ is not truly
sacrificed in the Popish Masse, (contrary to the doctrine
of the Pope and his Iesuites) or else he is there consumed
a thousande times a day, and so often killed in the Masse.
For to be consumed is more then to be killed. The case is
cleere, euery childe may perceiue it. But what? hath our
Iesuite no euasion? Yes forsooth, but it is a very silly one.
Christ (saith he) hath a double kind of being; a being naturall,
and a beeing Sacramentall. According to the latter,
he dyeth in the sacrifice of the Masse; but according to
the former, he still lyueth in heauen.
                  What a wonderment is this? Christ is both liuing and
deade at once; both sacrificed and not sacrificed at once;
both consumed and not consumed at once. If these be not



flat contradiction, my skil is naught, let the reader iudge.
Now, methinkes this is in deede and in plaine termes, the
Iesuites answere; and consequently, the best answere that
all the Papists in Europe can make; for hee hath learned
and heard the best aduise of them all, (viz:) that Christ in
the Popish Masse, both is consumed and dyeth; yet not
really, but Sacramentally. All which my selfe will most
willingly admit, and agree vnto. But our Papists will say
and vnsay. They say that Christ is in their Masse, truely and
really sacrificed, and not onely Sacramentally. For otherwise,
we should agree to them, and they to vs. And then
must they needs say, that he is really, not onely sacramentally
sacrificed in their Masse; and consequently, that he is
killed and consumed in the same really.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  Againe, Bellarmine (saith Bell) telleth vs,Page 110. that Christs body
and bloud are offered truely and properly in the Masse.
That a true and reall sacrifice, requireth true and reall killing,
seeing the Essence of the sacrifice consisteth in killing.
But this proofe relyeth onely, vppon Bells false translating
the word, (Quando, seeing,) which he should haue translated,
(When.)
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Heere our Iesuite would haue his Reader beleeue, that
Bell hath falsely translated Bellarmine. And why, I pray
you? Because forsooth (saith he) Bell hath translated, (seeing)
the Essence of the sacrifice) for (when the Essence of
the Sacrifice.) Let vs examine this point to the bottome.
First, that Quando dooth aswell signifie seeing, as when, I
referre my selfe to all skilfull Grammarians.
                  
                  Secondly, that it is so taken in Bellarmine,
                     Tom. 2. col. 1063. A. I proue by the
circumstances of the Text. These are Bellarmines expresse
wordes; Deni
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vel in missa fit vera & realis Christi mactatio
& eccisio, vel non fit. Si non fit, non est verum & rea
                           •
                        e sacrificium
missa. Sacrificium. n. Verum & reale, veram & realem
occisionē exiuit, quando in occisione ponitur essentia sacrificij. Si autem
fit, ergo verum erit dicere, à sacerdotibus Chrstianis vere



& realiter christum accidi; at hac sacrilegium, non sacrificium
esse videtur. Finally, there is in the Masse either a true and
reall killing of Christ, or there is not. If there be not, neither
is the Masse a true and reall sacrifice. For, a true and
reall Sacrifice, requireth a true and reall killing, seeing
the Essence of Sacrifice consisteth in killing. Againe,
Bellarmine hath these wordes; Per consecrasionem, res quae
ofertur, ad veram, realem, & externam mutationē & destructionem
ordinatur,
                     Vbi supra. D. 
                     quod erat necessarium, ad rationem sacrificij. By
consecration the thing that is offered, is ordained to true,
reall, and externall mutation and destruction, as beeing
necessary for the Essence of a Sacrifice. Againe, thus;
Nam oper consecrationem, &c. For by consecration Christs
body receiueth the forme of meat,Vbi supra. D. and meat is ordained
to be eaten, and so to mutation and destruction. Againe,
in these wordes; Ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         obstat, quod corpus Christi nullam in se
laesionem patiatur, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         esse suum naturale amittat,
                     Vbi supra. D.
                      
                     cum manducatur
eucharista. Nam amittit esse sacramentale, & proinde
desinit realiter esse in altari, desinit esse cibus sensibilis. Neither
is it any hindrance, that Christes body receiueth no hurt
in it selfe, neither loseth it naturall being, when the Eucharist
is eaten. For it loseth it Sacramentall being, and
therefore it ceaseth to bee really on the Aultar, it ceaseth
to be sensible meat. Out of these wordes of Cardinall
Bellarmine, I note first, that a true and reall Sacrifice,
requireth a true and reall killing. Bellarmine prooueth it,
because otherwise the Masse should not be a true and reall
Sacrifice. Hee addeth the reason, because the Essence
of a Sacrifice consisteth in killing.
                  Secondly, that by consideration the thing which is offered,
is ordained to true, reall, and externall destruction,
as a thing needfull to the Essence of a Sacrifice; and consequently,
that if Christes body be really in the Masse, it
must be really killed or destroyed.
                  Thirdly, that Christes body suffereth no hurt in the
Masse, because only it loseth the Sacramentall being, in



ceasing to bee really on the Aultar. These obseruations
being well marked, it will appeare as cleere as the Sunne
shining at noone-day: that Bellarmine granteth the Essence
of euery true and reall Sacrifice, to consist in killing
or destruction.Tom. 2. col. 1063. And therefore doth he graunt freely, that
Christ is killed in the Masse sacramentally, though not
really. Christes body (saith hee) although it suffer no
hurt in it selfe, neither lose it naturall beeing; when the
Eucharist is eaten; yet it loseth it sacramentall being, and
ceaseth to be really on the Popish Aultar. But euery one
knoweth, that when any thing loseth the being or life, thē
it is killed and destroyed. In regard heereof, Bellarmine
(as is already prooued) affirmeth resolutely, that eyther
there is a reall killing in the Masse, or else no Sacrifice
there at all. Marry he expoundeth this reall killing in the
Masse, to bee nothing else indeede, but the sacramentall
destruction of Christs body in the Eucharist. But therein
he contradicteth himselfe; because neither a sacramental
body is a true and reall body, neyther a sacramentall killing
a true and reall killing. And so when all is saide and
done, Bellarmine can conclude no more indeed, but that
Christs body is in the Eucharist sacramentally. And therfore
when Christ saith, (This is my body,) the true sence &
meaning is this, & no other; This is my body Sacramentally,
or the Sacrament of my body.
                  
               
               
                  S. R.
                  
                     Bell fondly inferreth Christ to be killed,Page 111. if his body and
bloud be put apart in the Masse; because not to put body
and bloud apart where they were not before, but to separate
them where they are vnited, is to kill: Else GOD
should kill a man, if hee created a Soule and body apart.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  The Crow thinketh her owne Bird the fairest, and euery
foole thinketh himselfe a wise man. How fondly soeuer
Bell inferreth, and how wisely soeuer our Iesuite disputeth,
this must euer bee true, (viz:) That the Popish



Priest in the Popish Masse, doth what in him lyeth to kill
christ in the Masse, so often as he pronounceth their supposed
consecration words; if it should be true which the
Pope and his Popelinges holde, that by vertue thereof
Christes body is put apart from his bloud, and his bloud
apart from his body. For most certaine it is, that no true
man, & consequently Christ, can liue any longer, then his
body and bloud be vnited together, & it is a meerfoolery
to say as our Iesuite doth; that to put a mās body & bloud
apart where they were not before, is not to kill the man.
For example sake, because our Iesuite seemeth very grosse
(I will not say a foole) if it will please his worship to call
a Butcher to him, to take all his bloud from him, as hee
doth from an Oxe or Calfe, and to receiue it into a great
vessell, so as no part thereof fall vppon the ground; and
that doone, to carry the same to Saint Peters Church in
Rome, and to put it vnder the high altar there; and vvhen
he hath so done, to carry his body to Hexam, in the north
parts of England, there to bee solemnely buryed; if then
(I say) our Iesuite remaine aliue, and be not killed, I will
subscribe to this his doctrine. And yet is it cleere, that in
this case his body & bloud shold be put apart, where they
were not before. But our Iesuite seemeth to ayme at a farther
mark. What is that? at the creating of Christs body
and bloud. Is it so indeed? Is it possible so to thinke? It
is very so. For these are his words, as you heare, else God
should kill a man, if hee created a Soule and body apart.
Well, now I remember an old said saw,The Papists haue two Gods and two Christs. (which doubtles
is as foolish as it is old) that the priest in the popish masse
can create his God. God so blesse me and all good Christians,
that we neuer harken to such Theology.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 4.
               Containing the confutation of the lesuites fourth Chapter of the
second Article.
               IN this fourth Chapter,Page 113. our Iesuite rehearseth sundry
absurdities, which are found in the Popish Masse. But



the more hee busieth himselfe to discharge their Masse
thereof,Page 115. the more the same absurdities do increase. Let vs
take a tast of one for all. Bell (saith he) inferreth, that either
Christs Sacrifice was vnperfect in his last Supper, or
else that it was needles in his bitter passion on the crosse.
To which he answereth, that neyther of both dooth follow.
For (saith he) Christs Sacrifice at his Supper, was a
most perfect vnbloudy Sacrifice; and yet his Sacrifice on
the Crosse was needfull, as the peculiar price which
GOD exacted at his handes, for the redemption of the
World. Loe,O horrible blasphemy. he granteth freely, that Christs Sacrifice at
his Supper was most perfect, and yet the heathen Philosopher
can tell him, that Perfecto nihil addi potest; To that
which is perfect, nothing can bee added. This notwithstanding,
he affirmeth these three things.
               First, that the Sacrifice on the Crosse was needfull.
               Secondly, that it was the peculier price which GOD
exacted.
               Thirdly, that it was for the redemption of the world.
Which three points being as truely marked and remembred,
as they are truely granted; all but such as are Sensus
communis inopes, men without all, both sense & reason,
will plainely perceiue, and constantly hold, that Christs
Sacrifice at his last Supper, was either imperfect (vvhich
our Iesuite denieth;) or else no real sacrifice at al (which
I defend.) All the rest of the chapter is full of the like vanity;
for consideration whereof, it is enough to peruse
The Downefall of Popery.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 5.
               Containing the Iesuites confutation, touching Berengarius.
               VVHere in The downefall of Popery, I related truely
the cruell dealing of the Pope and his Popish
councell with Berengarius; our Iesuite would gladly excuse
the Pope and his Sinod, but it will not be.
               
                  
                  S. R.
                  
                     Bell exclaimeth mightily,Page. 126. because Berengarius was compelled
to beleeue, that Christ in the Eucharist is sensibly
touched, broken with the hands of Priests, & torne with
the teeth of the faithfull.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  
                     Bell doth so, Idque merito. He hath iust cause so to do.
               
               
                  R. S.
                  Neuerthelesse Christes body is said to be toucht, broken,Page. 127.
and chewed in the Eucharist, because the signe of
bread in which it really is, is so vsed. As GOD is said to
haue beene crucified, because the humanity in which hee
was, was so handled; and Christ touched, when his garment
was touched.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Heere is all that confessed, which I intended for to
prooue. (viz:) That the bread of the Eucharist is called
Christs body, because it is the signe and Sacrament of his
body; And therefore, that Berengarius was most cruelly
and villanously dealt withall, when he was enforced eyther
to bee burnt with fire and Fagot, or else to sweare,
that he beleeued in his hart, that Christs body was truely
touched and broken with the hands of Priests, and truely
torne with the teeth of the faithfull. When for all that,
many learned Papists, Bellarmine, Melchior Canus, and
others, with this our Iesuite, (who would and dooth say
the best he can for the Popes defence,) do freely graunt,
and plainely confesse, that Christes body can neither bee
broken with hands, nor yet torne or chewed with teeth.
Loe, Berengarius was compelled to beleeue, as an article
of his faith, that Christes body was truely, (in veritate,)
broken with the hands of Priests, and torne with teeth;
and yet the truth is farre otherwise, as both Bellarmine;
Canus, and our Iesuite do confesse. Fie on such religion,
hang vp such Popish Faith, accursed be such doctrine.
               
               
                  
                  S. R.
                  The holy Fathers, Saint Cyprian, Saint Chrysostome, and
others, do teach vs plainlie, that Christs body is broken
with hands, and chewed with teeth: yea, Christ himselfe
saith, This is my body which is broken. VVill Bell now condemne
Christ and these holy Fathers of wickednesse, villany,
blasphemy, and horrible impiety? Nay, will he condemne
both English & many forraine Protestants, whose
doctrine (saith he) is, that Christs body is broken, torne,
and consumed with mouth and teeth. Behold (good Reader.)
For Papists to say, Christs body is touched, broken,
and torne, is villany and horrible impiety; but for Protestants
to say the same, and adde consuming too, is good
doctrine.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  I prooued out of Cardinall Bellarmine, that famous Iesuiticall
Fryer, that Christs body cannot bee broken and
torne, saue only in a figure or Sacrament. And that by his
doctrine,Read the Downfall. it may be sayd to bee broken and torne, when
the signe thereof is broken and torne. Out of whose doctrine,
I inferred this golden Colorrary: (viz:) that if it
be true to say, Christs body is broken and torne, because
the signe of his body is broken & torne; then truely may
we say, and truely do we say, that Christes body is in the
Eucharist, because the signe of his body is there, because
the Sacrament of his bodye is there, because the representation
of his body is there. And much more
truely might Christ himselfe say,The Iesuite is striken dead. 
                     This is my body, when he
gaue the signe and Sacrament of his body. I then added,
that it is the constant doctrine of the church of England,
(which also many other reformed Churches approoue
therein) that Christs body is receiued, broken, torne, and
consumed with mouth & teeth, figuratiuely, significantly,
mystycally, sacramentally. And consequently, if the
Papistes would be iudged by this doctrine, which by the
pen of the Iesuite Bellarmine they heere deliuer, the controuersie



would soone bee at an end. Now, I referre my
self to the indifferent Reader, whosoeuer he be; whether
the Iesuite S. R. bee an honest man, or no. For first, hee
beareth the Reader in hand, that I condemne Christ and
the holy Fathers.
                  Secondly, that I condemne both the English Churche,
and many forraine Christians.
                  Thirdly, he chargeth mee to hold the same Doctrine,
which I vtterly condemne in Popery.
                  Fourthly, he iustifieth the condemnation of Berengarius;
whose doctrine for all that, both Bellarmine and Melchior
Canus do iustify, and himselfe vnawares in this chapter.
If I should deale with the Papists in this manner, all
the world would exclaime against me. If any indifferent
Reader shall duly and truely, (all affection and partialitie
set apart) read both The Downefall of Popery, and the Iesuites
answere to it, I perswade my selfe, hee will detest both
the Pope and popery, vntill his liues end.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  Saint Austen (saith Bell) telleth vs,Page. 132. that the bread which
the Apostles ate, was our Lord. I would Bell had marked
this himselfe: for it is the vpshot of this Controuersie,
and vnanswerable by any Protestant. For, if (as Bell noteth
out of Saint Austen) the bread which the Apostles
are was our Lord; How can Protestantes deny it, and say
it was bare bread? Or if (as S. Austen speaketh) they are
bread our Lord, how can Bell say, they are not our Lord,
but bare bread?
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Here our Iesuite triumpheth before the victorie, and
boasteth that that which I saide, was the vpshot on my
side, is the vpshot on his side, but how truely, hee saith,
he will declare. Saint Austen saith, the Apostles are Panem
Dominum. The bread our Lord, but that Iudas ate
Panem Domini, the bread of our Lord. Marke well the
words, gentle Reader. Saint Austen putteth a cleere difference,



betweene that which the Apostles are,See the Downefall. and that
which Iudas ate. The Apostles (saith hee) are the Bread
which is our lord but Iudas the bread of our lord. This assertion
of this holy father, say I, confoundeth the Papists;
for, if our Lord & maker be present really in flesh, bloud,
& bone, vnder the accidents of bread, and that so long as
the same accidents remaine vncorrupt, as the popish faith
holdeth; the doubtles, Iudas should haue receiued his redeemer;
thē perforce Iudas should also haue receiued Panē
dominū; thē 
                     Iudas could not by any possibility, haue barely
receiued Panē Domini, which yet S. Austen affirmeth most
constantly. For first, if it were true, (as it is not) that after
Popish supposed consecration, the substance of bread
were transubstantiated into Christes body naturall, as it
truely consisteth of flesh, bloud, and bone; And again, if
it were also true, that the self-same body remained vnder
the forme of bread, vntill it were corrupted, as Popish
Doctrine telleth vs; then say I, (and it will bee prooued
an vndoubted truth) that all the Papistes in Europe, and
else-where, are neuer able to shew me, how Iudas did not
receiue Panem Dominum, the bread which is the Lord, but
Panem Domini, The bread of our Lord. That is to say, how
Iudas could receiue the forme of bread, with the Flesh,
bloud, and bones of Christs Organicall and naturall body
hidden vnder the same; and for all that, not receiue
Christ himselfe, and Panem dominum, as the other Apostles
did. This indeed is the vpshot of this Question, and
striketh the Papistes starke dead: they can neuer answere
it truely, while the world standes. Now, where our fond
Iesuite asketh mee, how I can say, the Apostles are bare
bread, seeing they are the bread which Saint Austen
saith is the Lord; I answer, that though perhaps he haue
a great head, yet seemeth he to haue but little wit. For I
willingly graunt with the same Saint Austen,
                     T
                           •
                        m. 2. p. 474. that Iudas
ate the price of our Redemption; with Saint Cyprian,
that the bread which Christ gaue to his disciples, was his



true flesh; with Saint Chrysostome, that Christ offered to
Iudas the bloud which he had sold; but al this, sacramentally,Acts, 3. v. 21.
mystically, figuratiuely, and significantly. For his
sacred, true, and organicall body was, is, and must be really
in Heauen, vntill his second Aduent; yet is it Sacramentally
in the holy Eucharist. Alasse, alasse, must Berengarius
be enforced with fire and Fagot, to sweare that
Christes body was truely broken, and truely torne with
mens teeth; and that onely, because the figure of his body
is broken and torne; and we for all that and the holy
fathers, may not once say, that christs body & bloud is in
the holy Eucharist Sacramentally. Yea, the holy Fathers
do often call it the vnbloudy sacrifice, and the bloud that
issued out of Christs side, & whatsoeuer else is truely verified
of his naturall and organicall body indeede; and
this they do, because it is the sacrament and representation
of that most sacred body and Sacrifice, which was offered
for our sins vppon the Altar of the crosse. All that
possibly can be obiected in these cases.For these matters see my Suruey.
                      is fully and soundly
answered in my Suruey of Popery.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. 6.
               Conteining the confutation of the Iesuites sixt Chapter, touching
co
                     •
                  radictions in the Masse.
               
                  S. R.
                  THe Papists say,Page 136. that Christes body is the same in the
Masse which was on the crosse, and yet confesse it to
be a figure thereof. This Bell proueth to be a contradiction,
because Bellarmine saith, a figure must needs be inferior
to the thing figured. But I deny euery figure to be inferior
to the thing figured. For God the Son is the figure
of the substance of his Father,Heb. 1. v. 3. and yet true God. And
Seth an Image of Adam, and yet true man: and such a figure
of Christ is the Eucharist.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Our Iesuite may learne in the Schooles, that Nullum simile
est idem, no similitude is the same with the thing,



whereof it is a similitude. Which if it bee true, (as true it
must bee graunted, or else farewell Schoole-Doctrine,)
then doubtlesse, Christes body beeing the same in the
Masse (as Papists tell vs) which was on the crosse, cannot
possibly bee a figure thereof. But our Iesuite obiecteth,
that the Sonne of GOD is the figure of GOD, and yet
true God withall. Likewise that Seth was the Image of
man, and yet true man withall. I answer to the former,
with the auncient Father and reuerend Bishoppe Haymo
Halberstatensis,
                     Heb. 1. 3. Haymo in hunc locum. whose expresse wordes are these; Quantum
ad homin
                           •
                        s pertinet, aliud est figura, aliud est substantia,
quia dum pingitur, imago & figura alicuius hominis in pariete,
non est illud figura quod est substantia. Apostolus autem figurā
in hoc loco pro ipsa substantia & pro aequalitate essentiae posuit.
Concerning men, a figure is one thing, and substaunce
another thing; because whiles an image and figure is
painted in the Wall, the figure is not that which the substance
is. But the Apostle in this place put the figure for
the substance, and for the equality of Essence. And the
Popes owne deare Doctor Nicolaus de Lyra,
                     Lyr. in hunc loc. teacheth the
selfe-same Doctrine. These are his wordes; Dicitur imago
vel figura substantiae. 1. Eiusdem substantiae cum patre. Hee is
called the Image or figure of his substance; that is to say,
He is of the same substance with his father. By which doctrine
thus deliuered by these two learned writers, we see
euidently, that the Apostle vnderstandeth by figure Substance,
so as this is the sence; he is of the same substance
with the Father. For as the same Haymo saith in the same
place; as in the fire, three things are inseparable, the fire,
the heate, and the brightnesse, and in the brightnes is
shewed to vs the fire and heat, (though humaine things
may not be compared with things diuine;) euen so the nature
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,
is vnited inseperably; and by his word, as by brightnes,
hee hath vouchsafed to shew himselfe vnto vs. Fondly
therefore doth our Iesuite dispute, when he would proue



Christs body, to be both the figure and the thing figured
out of the apostles words; wherfore by the word (Figure)
vnderstandeth the Essence and equality of God. Hee vseth
a Metaphoricall speech, for the dulnes of our capacities;
who can vnderstand nothing in the admirable &
diuine mysteries, but by similitudes drawne from Creatures.
                  To our Iesuites second Obiection,Gen. 5, ver. 3. that Seth was both
a true man, and withall the figure of a true man, I make
this answere, (viz:) That it maketh against himselfe. The
reason is euident, because (as I haue prooued out of Haymo)
the figure of the thing figured, in humaine Creatures
are different, and the one distinguished from the other.
And the Iesuite must needes graunt so much, or else
say, (as I think he will not for shame;) that Seth was Adam,
and his owne Father. But in Christes body the case
is otherwise; for the Papistes hold, that Christes body in
the Eucharist, is Idem corpus numero, the same body in
number with his body on the crosse, and his body now
in heauen. If they shall say otherwise, then perforce must
they say, that which they dare not; that Christ hath moe
bodies then one.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  I returne Bels Argument vppon himselfe, because if figures
must needes be inferior to things figured, the Eucharist
is some nobler thing then bread.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Our Iesuite careth not what he say, so hee seeme to say
somewhat; so gladly would he and his fellowes haue the
vulgar sort to think, that they haue answered The Downfall
of Popery. But God be thanked, they still fall downe,
that striue against it. I aunswere; First, that albeit all figures
were not inferior to the things figured; yet should
my manner of disputation bee good against Bellarmine,
because my argument is deduced out of his own ground,
and therefore called after their vse, Argumentum ad hominem.


                     
Secondly, that our holy Eucharist is far nobler then
bare Bakers bread, (viz:) Christs true and reall body sacramentally;
euen that very body, which was nayled on
the crosse, & that very bloud, which with the spear issued
out of Christs side. All which I haue prooued at large, in
my Suruey of Popery; and there haue answered al that possibly
can be said, for the Popish reall presence.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  Neither Christs whole body,Page. 139. nor part thereof, is in the
Eucharist before the pronuncication of the last word; yet
are not the former words superfluous. For the last worketh
the transmutation, not by his owne vertue alone, but
with the vertue of them also, or rather God worketh all
when the last word is pronounced.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Behold here gentle Reader, what vncertaintie is in popish
faith and Doctrine. For first, our Iesuite telleth vs,
that either the last word in their supposed consecration
worketh transubstantiation alone, or with the help of the
rest; or else God worketh all, when the last word is spoken.
Marry, which of these is the truth, that hee cannot
tell vs.
                  Secondly,Aqui
                           •
                        as, part. 3. q. 75. art. 4. &. art. 7. 
                           ••
                        
                      their Angelicall Doctor, and Saint Aquinas
saith, that this conuersion is not like to naturall conuersions,
but is altogether supernaturall, wrought by the
onely power of God. Thirdly, the same Saint Aquinas
telleth vs, that this conuersion is doone in an instant.
Fourthly, if either fit matter want, or any word of consecration,
or the intention of the Priest, nothing is changed,
it still remaineth bread. Now then, on the one side,
euery action that God doth, is done in an instant; the
reason is euident, because God is of infinite power, to
whose action no resistance can be made: All learned papists
graunt this to be so. On the other side, euery action
that man doth is successiue & in time, because man is of
finite and limited power: the words therefore of consecration



either worke nothing at all, (and so they are ciphers,
which to hold is absurd in popish doctrine) or else
transubstantiation is effected in time, which is repugnant
to Gods infinite power. Heere I must tell our Iesuite,
that he passeth ouer with silence two most notable contradictions,
whereof he speaketh not one word for feare
of biting. I told him in the Downefall, that Berengarius was
compelled to confesse and beleeue, that Christes body is
broken with hands; and yet doth Bellarmine graunt, that
it is not brokē with hands: Ergo, it is broken with hands,
and not broken with hands. What can be a plainer contradiction?
None at all.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  Catholiques thinke indeed, that when the Priest wanteth
both actuall and virtuall intention,Page. 142. or omitteth any
essentiall worde, that there is no Consecration, and the
priest sinneth therein greeuously; but the people worshipping
erroneously vpon inuincible ignorance, offend
no more, then did Saint Iohn, when hee worshipped an
Angel as God; or as did Iacob when he lay with Lia who
was not his wife, thinking verily she had beene his wife
Rachell.
                  
               
               
                  T. B.
                  This is horrible impiety, that by Popish Religion, men
& women are compelled to adore that with diuine worship,
as the euerliuing God; whith perhaps, euen by the
Popes owne faith and beleefe, is nothing else but a piece
of bread: Yet is it farre greater impiety and slat blasphemy
against the sonne of God, to excuse the people from
sinne, which commit openly such palpable and grosse Idolatry.
But inuincible ignorance (saith our Iesuite) doth
excuse them as it did S. Iohn and Iacob. Howsoeuer the
case stand with S. Iohn and the Patriarke Iacob, (whereof
I am not now to dispute) ignorance can neuer excuse Idolatry.
Hee (saith Christ) that knoweth the will of God and
doth it not; shalbe beaten with many stripes. He that knoweth not



the will of God,
                     Luke, 12, 5, 48 
                     and yet doth things worthy of stripes, shalbe beaten
with few stripes.
                     Ezech. 3. 18. And we are taught in Ezechiel, that the
wicked shall die in his iniquity, though the watchman gaue him
no warning. The man of God which beleeued the old Prophet
that lyed vnto him, sinned greeuously, as appeared
by his punishment,1. Reg. 13. because he transgressed the word of
the Lord; albeit hee offended ignorantly, thinking hee
had done the will of God.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  What maketh it against the masse,Page 114. He speaketh of the counsell of Trent. that three or foure
Catholiques did in a difficult matter, before it was defined
by the Church, dissent from the rest? Let Bell if hee
can, shew this diuersity now since the Councell.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  
                     In the Downefall of Popery, I proued out of Durand, that
onely the forme of Bread is changed in the Eucharist, &
that the matter of Bread remaineth stil. Out of Rupertus
the Popish Abbot, that the bread is vnited Hypostatically
to the sonne of God. That Caietanus, Henrieus, Capreolus,
are of another opinion. That Iohannes Parisiensis, helde
also that the bread was assumpted, but in a different maner
from the opinion of Rupertus. That another opinion
affirmeth the annihilation of the bread: And that Bellarmine
holdeth with the counsell of Trent. Nowe, to this
pleasant harmony, our Iesuite addeth this goodly Corollary,
(viz:) that the Church of Rome neuer knewe how
to thinke of their real presence, for the space of one thousand,
fiue hundered, forty yeares, and odde; vntill the
late dayes of their counsell of Trent, in which Counsell,
they receiued (as it may seeme) some new (no Reuelation
from heauen,) concerning the being of Christes body in
their masse. And heere may the indifferent Reader cleerly
behold, the originall of late Popish Masse; which the
Papists for all that, would make the common people beleeue
to be the old Roman religion. I say (the late Popish
religion) because (as we heare) it was but determined &



found out in the late counsell of Trent. For the olde Roman
masse or communion (which is all one in effect) was
the same in substance, with the communion this day vsed
in our English Church.
               
               
                  S. R.
                  We say after Saint Hierom and Saint Pontian,
                     Pa. 142, et 143 that priests
Conficiunt Corpus Christi, make Christs body; but dreame
not of making God. But where is the contradiction? forsooth
because Innocentius holdeth, that all such priests do
consecrate; Durand thinketh, that he only who first pronounceth
the words; and Caietan is of another opinion.
I graunt these contradicte one another. But what is this
to the Masse? Are these contradictions in it? The matter

                        〈◊〉
                      which these three Authors contradict one another, is
no point of faith. For with catholiques it is no more matter
of faith, whether all the sayde Priestes or one onely
Consecrate; then it is with Protestants, whether all or
one should Christen the Childe, if many at once should
dippe him into the Water, and pronounce the words of
Baptisme.
               
               
                  T. B.
                  Here is first graunted, that priests make Christs body,
but not GOD. To which I say first, that such making is
great villany against the sonne of God. Secondly, that I
know not how popish priests can make Christs body, and
not make God: Vnlesse perhaps they bee Arrians, and so
deny Christ to be God. For where Christs body is, there
is Christ, true God, and true man. And therefore, when
they make Christs body apart from Christ, then they eyther
make a distinct body from Christ (and so Christ must
haue two bodies) or else they take christs body from the
God-head, and so make him no God at all.
                  Heere is secondly graunted, that one Papist contradicteth
another in the hye mistery of the Masse. But forsooth
it skilleth not, because it is no matter of faith. This
is our Iesuites short aunswere, but as much to the matter



as a poke full of Plumes. Marry sir, this is a iest indeede,
For he must be a right wise man indeed that can tell what
Popish faith is. Many most godly men and women haue
beene burnt, for denyall the Popish Transubstantiation,
and yet could not the Papists tell what it was, vntil their
late Counsell of Trent. God keep vs from such Popish
faith.
                  Heere is thirdly confessed, that it is no more matter
whether many Priests do make Christs body one after an
other, then whether many Christen a childe one after an
other. Behold heere, howe roundly this Iesuite hudleth
vp many sacred misteries, as things of smal or no account.
I must tell him, that with Godly Christians of all ages,
rebaptization was euer reputed a greeuous sinne: and
yet we see heere, that one may be baptized of many, one
baptizing after another, as one consecrating, after another;
for so is the case in this controuersie. I must tell him
likewise, that it is not onely great irreuerence, but also
execrable idolatry, and more then Heathenish Villany
so to abuse Christs most sacred body. And I cannot but
wonder, if any that shall know truely their faith and opinions,
do not detest their late start-vp Religion.
               
            
         
         
            The third Article of the Popes dispensations.
            COncerning this Article, I thinke two thinges onely
needefull.
            First, that though our Iesuite cannot deny contracted
matrimony to be de iure Diuino, and a sacrament with
them before carnall copulation, neither that the best
learned Papistes do holde it indispensable; yet doth he
not blush to say, that the Pope can dispense with the
same.
            Secondly, that he repeateth Pope Martius dispensation
with the Brother and his owne naturall sister, as his
brother or rather himselfe (for Robert Parsons, is the Author



of both) had done before in the fore-runner of Bels
Downfall. But that which he should haue done, & which
he would vndoubtedly haue done, if he had beene able
to haue performed it, that hath he not done, viz: he hath
not replyed to my answere, neither said one word to my
large confutation of the saide forerunner. I there proued
by the expresse verdicts of three famous Popish writers;
(viz:) Siluester Prieras, Bartholomaeus Fumus, and Angelus
de Clauisio: that the Popish famous Archbyshop and
canonized SaintSee the Popes funerall. 
               Austoninus affirmed resolutely, that pope
Martin dispensed with one to marry his owne naturall
and full sister, of the same father and mother. I prooued
likewise out of Cardinall Caìetan, that the Pope can disspence
in al the degrees of Consanguinity, saue only with
the father and his daughter, and with the mother and
her sonne. It is therefore no straunge thing to charge the
Pope to graunt licence for marriage, euen betweene the
brother and sister. For larger discourse heereof, I referre
the reader to my book, intituled the Popes Funeral, where
this point is so handled, as neither this Iesuite nor any of
his fellowes, is euer able to answere the same: and therefore
it is an vndoubted truth, that the Pope taketh vpon
him, to licence a brother to marry his owne sister.
            
               S. R.
               I omit Bels errour in affirming that Austen of Ancona,
                  Page, 186
dedicated his booke to Pope Iohn the twelft, who was
dead almost 400. yeares before him.
            
            
               T. B.
               I cannot omit to tell you and the Reader, that he may
take heed of you heereafter, that you are a lyar more impudent
then impudency it selfe. For Augustinus de Ancona,
the Author himselfe saith plainly, in the very title and
dedication of the Booke, that it is Dedicated to Pope
Iohn the twelft of that name. Now, whether the Authour
of the booke, or Robert Parsons that Trayterous and
shamelesse Iesuite (as the secular Priestes tearmed him)



knew better to whom the Booke was dedicated, let the
Reader iudge. Would not this fellow trow yee, gladly
find a hole in my coat? If we had a good matter in hand,
he would not vse such miserable shifts.
            
         
         
            The fourth Article, of orignall concupiscence in the
regenerate.
            THe state of this Question is this. The Pope and Iesuites
deny originall concupiscence to bee sinne in the
regenerate, because if they should graunt it to be sinne,
it would follow against their doctrine, that none could
be saued by the merit of his works. I haue therefore proued
it sufficiently in The Downefall of Popery to be sin, and
therefore will now onely confute by way of reply, such
answers and authorities as he thinketh make for his purpose.
            
               S. R.
               Nothing done against our will is sin,Pape 165. but diuer actes of
concupiscence be such; Ergo no sinne.
            
            
               T. B.
               Sinne (as the holy Apostle defineth it) is Anomia, that
is to say, iniquity or transgression of Gods law.1. Iohn, 3, 4. Aug. de cos, evang. cap. 4. Tom. 4. Here we
see what sinne is. Let vs proceed. The eternall law (saith
Saint Austen) is the reason or will of God, commaunding
the naturall order to be kept, and forbidding the same to
bee perturbed. Thus doth S. Austen describe Gods law.
So then, whatsoeuer is against Gods Lawe is sinne, and
whatsoeuer is against Gods will, is against the law; Ergo
whatsoeuer is against Gods will is sinne. Let this foundaon
thus laid, bee remembred, for by it, all Obiections
will soone be answered. I therefore deny the proposition
of the Iesuites Argument, when he saith, nothing doone
against our will is sinne, and they are enforced to confesse
the same against their willes, in Children not regenerate.
For (as the Popes law teacheth vs) Children dying



without Baptisme, are damned, and therfore they are
not buried in any Church-yard with the Papistes. Now
must they tell me, eyther what sinne they did with theyr
will, or else confesse with mee, that some thing doone against
mans will is sinne. And the reason is yeelded already
(which I wish the Reader euer to remember) (viz:)
that whatsoeuer is against the will or law of God is sin,
whether it be voluntary, or not voluntary. For Saint Iohn
placed not voluntary, in the definition of sinne.
            
            
               S. R.
               In regeneration,Page 173. either we remaine guilty of damnable
sinne, or become guiltlesse of all such sin. If we remaine
guilty, then is not our sin forgiuen. For it is impossible to
be guilty of sin, and to haue sin forgiuen.
            
            
               T. B.
               I distinguish the proposition. The regenerate are guilty
by nature, and in respect of sin which still remaineth,
for which they might iustly be damned; and yet guiltles
by way of acceptation in Christ Iesus, for whose sake and
merits, God doth not impute sinne vnto them. And this
is Saint Austens mind, when hee saith. The concupisence of
the flesh is forgiuen in Baptisme,
                  Aug. de nup. et concupisc. li, 16 cap, 25, t
                        •
                      7 
                  not so that is remaine not, but
so as it is not imputed for sinne. In which wordes Saint Austen
sheweth plainly, That concupiscence remaineth, though
not imputed for sinne. It followeth in S. Austen. Non ergo aliquid
remanet, quod non remittatur. Not any thing therefore
remaineth, which is not forgiuen. Where the Reader
must well obserue, that he saith not; nothing is sin, that
remaineth; or thus, no sinne remaineth; but thus: Not
any thing remaineth, which is not remitted or forgiuen.
As he had said; Sinne indeede remaineth still in the baptized,
but shall not be imputed to the faithfull.
            
            
               S. R.
               A iustified or regenerate man cannot be guilty of damnation,Page 173. Rom, 8, 1,
because there is no damnation to them, who are
in Christ Iesus.
            
            
               
               T. B.
               It is one thing good Iesuite, not to be damned or not
to receiue damnation; another thing, to bee guilty of
damnation: for Gods elect Children may bee guilty of
damnation, that is, deserue damnation, as Dauid, Peter,
and Paule did, but there is no damnation to such, because
they shall neuer be damned.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell confesseth,Page 173. that a man cannot be iustly condemned
for sinne remitted.
            
            
               T. B.
               I grant it. What then? Albeit originall sinne truely
remaine in the elect, yet because it is forgiuen and not
imputed to them, they shall neuer bee condemned for it,
for otherwise God should be vniust and vnfaithful in his
promise.
            
            
               S. R.
               If involuntary acts done against our will bee true sins,Page 167.
much more the acts of fooles and mad men, yea of beasts,
which are not done against will, but onely without will,
and they true Malefactors and Sinners before COD and
men, which I thinke, none but a mad man will grant.
            
            
               T. B.
               There is great disparitie (by your leaue good Mayster
Fryer) in these subiects which you name.Omnes er
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     u
                        •
                      in Adamo, se
                        •
                      in principio & 
                        •
                     adice totius humani 
                        〈◊〉
                     . For Gods commaundements
were neuer giuen to the brute beasts, neyther
were they euer made capable of doing the same. But
all men were once enabled to haue kept Gods ordinances,
euen in the protaplast Adam, in whom wee all vvere
originally. And the Pope and his Iesuites must needes
confesse so much, or else condemne God of iniustice, in
punnishing eternally the vnregenerate Infantes, for that
sinne which they neuer consented vnto, neither possibly
could auoide. And therefore grauely saith Saint Austen,
that euery sinne is voluntary,Aug. retract. lib. 1. cap. 15 Pag. 16. eyther in the act, or else in
the Originall.
            
            
               
               S. R.
               Saint Austen is so farre from thinking,
                     Page 170 Aug. ep. 200 Tom. 2. that we sinne by
inuoluntary motions of the flesh; that hee saith, if wee
consent not vnto them, we need not say; forgiue vs our
trespasses.
            
            
               T. B.
               Saint Austen saith not, if wee consent not vnto them,
we need not say, forgiue vs our sins; but if we were thorowly
renewed, and were as Adam was in Paradise before
his fall, we should haue no debts to be forgiuen; &
consequently, haue no neede to say, forgiue vs our sins.
But our case is otherwise, because that perfect renouation
cannot bee had in this life, but onely in the World to
come. And for this cause doth the ancient councell Mileuita
                        •
                     
                  
accurse him,Conc. Mileu. can. 7. & 8. that saith he is so holy, that he neede
not say the Lordes prayer for himselfe, but for others.
            
            
               S. R.
               Saint Austen saith,D
                        •
                      ciuit. lib. 1. cap. 25. if concupiscentiall disobedience be
without fault in the body of one sleeping, how much

                     •
                  ore in the body of one not consenting.
            
            
               T. B.
               I aunswere, that Saint Austen and other Fathers doe
comparatiuely, as it were extenuate and excuse innate
concupiscence, but not simply make it no sinne. When
they seeme to make it no sinne, then they so speake, eyther
for that it is not imputed to the regenerate, who
manfully fight against it; or else, because it is an ingrafted
prauity of Nature, and not a voluntary transgression of
Gods law. Breefely, the Fathers call it sinne, yet not simply,
but comparatiuely in respect of actuall sinnes. Saint
Austen in the place which our Iesuite citeth, disputeth against
the fond opinion of some persons, who to auoyde
those sinnes, to which they thought their original raging
concupiscence would drawe them, resolued to commit
one sinne for all, in murthering themselues, and so be deliuered
from many sinnes, to which they feared their concupiscence



would allure them. Saint Austen therfore disswading
from such heynous crimes, encourageth such timorous
consciences by way of extenuation, telling them
that concupiscence is without fault, in those that striue against
it, & do not consent vnto it. Not for that it is no sin
in it selfe, but because it is not imputed to the godly. For,
(as we haue heard already, and as I haue proued at large
in the Downfall of Popery) whatsoeuer deflecteth, or swarueth
from the will of God, the same is most properly sin.
The reason is euident, because not to bee correspondent
and agreeable to Gods will, is the very intrinsecall reason,
essence, and nature of sinne. Yet so it is, that the
Ataxia, disorder, and concupiscence in the regenerate, is
repugnant and disagreable to the will of God; and consequently,
it must be sinne indeed. And as for the opinion
of Saint Austen,
                  
                     See the Downefall of Popery. I haue proued at large in the Downfall,
out of fiue seuerall places of his workes, that it is both
the punnishment of sinne, the cause of sinne, and sinne it
selfe.
            
            
               S. R.
               As blindnes of hart (saith Bell out of Austen) is sinne,Page, 185.
punnishment of sinne, and cause of sinne, so concupisence
of the flesh is sinne, punnishment, and cause of sin.
But I aunswere, that Saint Austen compareth concupisence
with blindnesse of heart, in the materiall disorder
of sinne.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere; that I know not whether I should pitty the
ignorance of our Iesuite, or exclaime against his mallice.
For first, Saint Austen cannot bee expounded, as Maister
Fryer saith, though Bellarmine his Brother hath lent him
his solution. For if Saint Austen had meant materially, &
not formally, he would neuer haue called it sin the thirde
time, after hee named it twice sinne matterially before,
(viz:) when he called it the cause of sinne, and the punnishment
of sinne. Yet after both these, he addeth, that it



is sinne formally. For else he had saide no new thing.
               Secondly, because our Iesuite confuteth himselfe vnawares,
when he writeth thus; Saint Austen prooueth by
the blindnesse of hart, that it was not onely punishment
and cause of sinne,Page. 186. but also sinne; that is, naught, cuill,
and disorderly; because it is against the rule of reason,
which is to be sinne materially, though it want the form
of sinne, which is voluntarines. This is his answer: Now
I pray you Gentle Reader, iudge indifferently between
mee and this Fryer. First, hee graunteth that Originall
concupisence is naught, euill, and disorderly. Secondly,
that it is against the rule of reason, and all that he can
say for himselfe is this, that it is indeede sinne materially,
but not formally. Where if I may finde an indifferent
Reader, the victory is mine own: GOD is my
iudge, I speake as I thinke. For to be against the rule of
reason, is formally sinne.August, vbi supra. Which Saint Austen (as is already
proued) declareth euidently, when he defineth the eternall
law to be nothing else, but the reason or will of
God. The reason is confirmed, because Saint Austen compareth
it with the blindnes of hart, which (as euery good
Christian knoweth,) is sinne most formally. For if master
Fryer Parsons, shall deny blindnesse of heart, thorough
which man beleeueth not in God, to bee sinne formally,
he will be hissed out of all good schools; howsoeuer our
holy Father the Pope, sitting in his chaire vppon men
                     •
                  
shoulders, giue him ten hundred thousand yeares pardon
for the same. Nay, I will yet say more to our holy Fryer
maister Robert Parsons, (the Author of this fond presensed
answere to the Downfall of Popery,) (viz:) that in the
last precept of the Decalogue or Ten commaundementes,
(Thou shalt not lust,) is prohibited not onely actuall and
voluntary concupiscence, but the very Originall and
Fountaine of all concupiscences with all her involuntary
branches.
               I prooue it first, because that concupiscence actuall,



wherewith wee couet that that is another mans, and not
our own, is forbidden, by all the sixt, seuenth, and eight
precepts of the second Table. This doeth our maister
Christ teach vs, when hee saith; That whosoeuer shall see a
woman to lust after her,
                  Mat, 5, 29 
                  hath already committed adultery with hi
                        •
                     
in his hart. The same doctrine teacheth S. Iohn, when hee
sheweth the hatred of our brother to be agaiust this precept;
Thou shall not kill.
                  I. Iohn, 3, 5, 15.
               
               Secondly, because if no other thing were prohibited
in this commandement, but actuall concupiscence, there
shoulde bee but nine precepts in the Decalogue; seeing
the last shoulde bee no newe Commaundement, but
only a bare recitall or repetition of the nine former precepts.
               Thirdly, because S. Paul granteth himselfe to be carnally
sold vnder sin,Rom, 7, 14 5, 19, 20. by reason of original concupiscence,
and not actuall; against which he fought stoutly, and neuer
gaue consent vnto it.
               Fourthly, because that which the Saints of God detest,
& call sin by the iudgement of the holy ghost, must needs
be sin properly. But so it is, that S. Paul in the name of all
the Saints of God, detesteth this Original cōcupiscence,
calleth it sin, and mourning, tearmeth himselfe vnhappy
for it, and desireth to be deliuered from it: Ergo, it must
needs be sin properly.
               Fiftly, to say that it is called sin figuratiuely and vnproperly,
is against that generall rule which all Diuines haue
deliuered, when the scriptures must bee vnderstood properly,
and when figuratiuely, viz: that then they are taken
figuratiuely, whē the sence, which the words in their
proper signification yeeld, do not agree with other scriptures,
and the Analogy of faith, but are repugnant vnto
the same.
               Now, no scripture can bee produced, which denyeth
that Originall concupisence with the involuntary
motions thereof,Romans, 7. is properly sin: Nay, the Apostle aboue



twelue times in one Chapter, plainely and simply
calleth it sin, neither will it helpe to say, that the scripture
freeth Gods children from sinne.August, vbi supra. For as saint Austen
sayth, they are not deliuered from sinne so, that it is not
in them, but that it is not imputed to them. And the Prophet
teacheth the same doctrine, when he pronounceth
The man blessed not who hath no sin, but to whom the Lorde
imputeth no sinne.
                  Psalme, 32, 2. And the Papists must either recall their
doctrine in this point, or else cry fire and faggot for their
chiefe maister Petrus Lombardus, sur-named the Maister
of sentences (whose Booke to this day is publikely Read
in the schoole of Diuinity,Lombard. lib. 3 sent. dist. 19. c. for thus doth he write:) Secundum
animas vero iam redempti sumus &c. But touching
our soules, wee are redeemed in part, not wholly; from
the sinne, not from the paine; neyther wholly from the
sinne or fault: For we are not so redeemed from it, that it
be not (in vs) but that it rule not (ouer vs.) Lo, Maister
Lombard that famous Writer, graunteth first, that we are
redeemed in part, but not in the whole.
               Secondly, that wee are not wholly redeemed from
sinne.
               Thirdly, he telleth vs, how we are redeemed from sin,
viz: that albeit sin shall remain in vs, yet hath it not such
dominion ouer vs, that it can enforce vs to consent therevnto.
Lo, the greatest and best learned Papists, teach the
same doctrine that I do.
               Sixtly, Saint Austen affirmeth plainely, that Originall
Concupiscence is prohibited by this Precept (Thou
shalt not Lust;) and not onely the habituall concupiscence
it selfe, but also all the actuall involuntary motions
thereof;Bellar
                        •
                     . tom. 3. col 400. vide Aug. de spir. & liter. cap, vlt. tom. 3. Thus doeth hee write, as the Iesuire Bellarmine
alleadgeth him; These thinges (saith Bellarmine)
are spoken after Saint Austens mind, who by this precept
(Thou shalt not Lust) vnderstandeth all the motions
of concupiscence, euen the involuntary, to bee prohibited
in some sort; and that the consent to these motions



forbidden by that other precept; follow not thy concupiscence.
Thus writeth our Iesuiticall Cardinall; by whose
doctrin it is euident that S. Austen affirmeth the first motions
of concupiscence, which peruert reason, and cannot
be auoided, to be condemned by S. Paul, as sinfull and against
the law of God. Which doctrine of S. Austen, doth
so sting and confound all Papists, that Bellarmine knoweth
not in the world what hee shall answere to the same.
And therefore he addeth deceitfully in his exposition of
S. Austens words, this word. (Quodam modo, after a sort,)
which word for all that, is neither in S. Austen, nor yet
agreeable to his meaning. For S. Austen saith plainely,
simply, and absolutely, without all ands, or ifs, or other
qualifications, that such motions are forbidden by this
commaundement (non concupisces.) If I (gentle Reader)
should thus deale in reciting or expounding my authors,
what exclamations, what outcries wold be made against
me? all the cursed brood of Iesuites and Iesuited Papists
would pursue me with hue and cry, as if I were a rancke
Traytor. But S. Austens words are so plaine, as no denyall
or Legierdemaine can haue place: for he sayth, that Originall
concupiscence with the involuntary motions thereof
are forbidden by the last precept of the Decalogue, and
the consent to the same, by that other precept, Go not after
thy concupiscence.
                  Let this bee wel marked Heere S. Austen vttereth his owne
meaning, cōcerning this great controuersie. For he plainly
and flatly distinguisheth, betweene originall concupiscence
it selfe, and the consent that is giuen to the same.
Hee telleth vs simply and resolutely, that the concupiscence
is prohibited by one precept, and the consent to
it, by another. Which the Iesuiticall Cardinall seeing
to bee an inuincible Bulwarke against him, and against
the very essence of all Popish doctrine; hee thought it
stood him in hand to inuent some (thogh neuer so miserable)
Legier demain to dazel the eyes of the reader withal.
and for this end, he added to Saint Austen text, this



word (Quodam modo, in a sort.) Which (In a sort) though
it bee graunted him, yet will it not serue his turne. For,
if it bee prohibited in a sorte, and in a sort bee against
Gods commaundement, then must it needs followe, that
at least in a sort, it is sinne; and so the victory is mine
owne.
               Lastly, it is a constant Axiome, generally receiued of all
Logitians in all Schooles; that the cause beeing taken away,
the effect must needs be taken away also. But death
is the effect of originall sinne, Ergo if Originall sin,Ablata causa tollitur effect
                        •
                     s. Rom. 6. v, 23▪
                     
                   which
is the cause, be taken away in baptisme, then death which
is the effect thereof, must be taken away with it. Wherefore,
seeing both olde and young after Baptisme still
dye, as we daily see; it is an euident Argument, that the
cause thereof (which is originall concupiscence) is not
taken away.
            
            
               S. R.
               If in regeneration wee become guiltlesse of all damnable
sinne,
                     Page 173. Lib. 1. de imp. & concu. cap. 26. tom. 7. then haue we no such sinne in vs. For as Saint
Austen saith, to bee not guilty of sinne, is to haue no
sinne.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answer, that we are guilty in the nature of the thing,
yet guiltles & freed by Gods mercy in Christ Iesus. And
I tell our Iesuite, that he inverteth Saint Austens wordes,
as one that neuer read the same. Thus writeth Saint Austen;
Hoc est. n. Non habere peccatum, reum non esse peccati.
For this is to haue no sinne, not to be guilty of sinne. And
what is this? Forsooth S. Austen saith, he may be thought
or saide to haue no sinne in him, (though his sinne remaine
in act) whose sinne is not imputed to him.
            
            
               S. R.
               Sins remaine but by their guilt: as adultery once committed,Page 177.
remaineth in the committer, onely because he is
still guilty of the adultery that he did, vntill it bee remitted.
            
            
               
               T. B.
               Some sinnes, as Adultery, passe in acte when they are
done, and remaine in guilt. Others passe in guilt, and remaine
in acte, as originall concupiscence in the regenerate,
which remaineth in the vnregenerate, both in guilt
and in act.
            
            
               S. R.
               Though it were true which Bell saith of the reprobates,
yet would it not follow thereof,Page. 184. that concupiscence in reprobates
is formall sinne, but onely that originall sinne is
not truely forgiuen in baptisme to any reprobate: which
is false.
            
            
               T. B.
               I prooued by the testimony of the Rhemists,
                  See the Downefall. that originall
sin still remaineth in the baptized; and consequently,
that it is sinne formally in the regenerate. And so I
haue my purpose, (viz:) that sinne still abideth in the regenerate,
though it be not imputed to them. For, if originall
sinne be truely remitted in baptisme, and bee not
truely sinne indeede in the Baptised; then can none bee
iustly damned, that are baptized. For how shall they bee
iustly condemned, for that which is remitted? It cannot
be. And this notwithstanding, to grant that all baptized
shall be saued, is most absurd. For larger discourse hereof,
I refer the Reader to the Downefall it selfe. I study to
be briefe.
            
            
               S. R.
               When Saint Austen asketh,Page. 188. why concupiscence is sin
in the child, if it be in the parent baptized without sin, he
supposeth that it is no true sin in the baptized, contrary to
Bels allegation.
            
            
               T. B.
               S. Austen worthily demanded, how concupiscence can
be sinne in the Childe, if it bee none in the baptized Parent.
For how can any man impart that to another,
which he hath not himselfe? and thereupon Saint Austen


                  
concluded, that originall sin still remaineth formally in
the baptized Parent, though not imputed for sinne. This
reason is vnanswerable.
            
            
               S. R.
               Saint Austen answered,Pape 189. that by baptisme Non imputatur
in peccatum, It is not imputed for sin. In which answer,
vnlesse he did by not imputing for sin, meane, making no
sin, he hadde not answered the question, why concupiscence
was no sin in the baptized Parent. Therefore with
him, concupiscence not to be imputed to or for sin, is to
be made no sin.
            
            
               T. B.
               If you Maister Fryer Iesuite, or Iesuited Fryer, may expound
Saint Austen at your pleasure, and without eyther
Scripture, Father, Text, Circumstance, or Reason,
say this is his meaning; it must bee as you say, I shall in
vain dispute against you. But I hope the indifferent Reader
will not afforde you that freedome. The Question
which Saint Austen mooueth,Marke, for the lesuite is striken dead. is this: Why originall concupiscence
is sin in the Childe, and no sin in the Baptized
Parent. And Saint Austen himselfe, aunswereth himselfe,
because it is not imputed for sin in the Parent. Thus standeth
the case; this is the question; this is the aunswere:
The difficulty is this; How the Childe can contract and
receiue of the Parent, that which is not in the Parent; because
no man can bestow and impart that, which he himselfe
hath not. The answer to the difficulty is this; that originall
concupiscence is still in the Parent after baptisme
receiued, as truely and formally sin in it owne Nature, as
it is truely and formally sin in the vnbaptized Child: and
so the Child contracteth nothing of the Parent, but that
very same which was in him. This notwithstanding,
there is this difference betweene the sin formally in the
Parent, and the sinne formally in the Childe, (viz:) that
though it bee formally, really, and truely in them both;
yet is it is in the one after one manner, in the other after



another manner. It is formall sin in the Parent, but not so
imputed, yet in the child before Baptisme, it is both formall
sin, and so imputed. So that the difference is not in
the thing, but in the manner and modification of the
thing. And this is the true meaning of S. Austen, when
hee saith; Non imputatur in peccatum, It is not imputed
for sinne. As if he had said, it is still sin aswell in the Parent
as in the Childe, (or els the Child could not receiue
and contract it of his Father) in the nature of the thing it
selfe: Neuerthelesse, it is as if it were not in him, because
of mercy it is not imputed to him for sin. Breefely, it is
sinne in the Parent, but not so imputed; In the Childe it
both is sin, and for sin imputed.
            
            
               S. R.
               Neyther indeed can God otherwise not impute sinne,Page. 189.
but by taking it away: For his iudgement is according to
truth; and therefore, if there be sin in vs, he must needes
impute it to vs, and account vs Sinners, else hee should
not account vs as we are, and according to truth.
            
            
               T. B.
               It is time to say with Christs holy Apostle;Apoc. 22. 20. 
                  Come Lord
Iesus. For, if the World shall continue, and Iesuitisme bee
permitted to raigne,Luke 9, 58, 
                  Foxes may haue holes, and Foules of the
Ayre Nestes, but the Sonne of man hardly where to lay his head.
For I pray thee, gentle Reader, doth not our Iesuite, who
tearmeth himselfe S. R. (Saucy Rebell, if ye will so interpret
it, and know Robert Persons for the man,) take vppon
him saucily and arrogantly to appoint bounds and limits
to the power of God omnipotent? Doth he not say here,
God cannot, and God must? Euen where there is no necessity
at all.
               First, it is most false, & great blasphemy against the son
of God, to say that God cannot otherwise not impute sin
but by taking it away. If this fond assertion were true,
none could euer bee loued of God in this life, seeing all
men are full of sinne, which God euer hateth as a thing



most odious in his sight. Who but Iesuites will euer say,
that they are not Gods enemies in truth, if God respect
them after theyr deserts? Who but Iesuites will refuse to
say with the Prophet;Psal, 143, 2. 
                  Enter not into iudgmēt, with thy seruant
(O Lord) for none liuing shall bee iustifyed in thy sight. Therefore
wisely, and most christianly sayth Saint Austen;
                  Aug. conf. libr. 9. cap. 13. 
                  Woe
euen to the best liuer on earth, if thou O Lord examine his life,
(thy mercy set apart.) What? Must GOD needs impute
sinne, vvhere hee findes it? Then a sharpe Vae vobis will
fall vppon our Iesuite, vnlesse hee bee holyer then eyther
Saint Peter or Saint Paule.
                  Mat▪ 18, 24. But Sir; Heard you neuer
of a King, whose Seruant ought him tenne thousand
Talentes, which hee vvas not able to pay? Knovv yee
not, that the King his Lord imputed not the debt vnto
him? But yee vvill say, the King forgaue it him. True it
is, but how did he forgiue it him? Forsooth by not imputing
it to him. For neyther did hee pay, neyther was
hee able to pay the debt. So then, as that King (the
King of Heauen if yee vvill,) did impute the tenne thousand
Tallentes as payde, though they remained vnpaid
indeede, and esteemed him as no Debtour, who had his
debt still vnpaide: euen so, our mercifull God, both can
deale, and doth deale with vs, in not imputing our sin to
vs, though they still remaine in vs.
               Secondly, Gods iudgement is euer according to truth,
euen when hee imputeth not our sinnes to vs, as vvell
as vvhen he imputeth them to vs. For, as the King knew
right vvell that the debt vvas vnpayde, iudging rightly
that it vvas vnpayde, and vvithall accepted of it as if
it hadde beene payde, not imputing the debt to the debtour;
euen so, our mercyfull GOD and louing Father,
knovveth right vvell, Originall Concupiscence remayneth
really and formally in vs, rightly iudging that sin
to bee in vs, and vvithall accepting vs as if vvee were
no Sinners, not imputing our debts vnto vs. And this
hee dooth of his owne free mercy, for the merits of his



deare Sonne CHRIST IESVS,1, Cor, 1, 30▪
                   in whom hee is
well pleased.Tit, 3, 5.
               
               So then, we see heere,Mat, 3, 17. not onely the Iesuites blasphemy
against GOD, but also of his fond manner of disputing
euery where. For euery Childe can tell him, that
it is one thing to know and iudge that man oweth him
Money; another thing, not to impute the debt to him
that oweth the same. For example sake, (because sensuall
thinges woorke most with sensuall men,) if Thomas
Bell were bound in an Obligation of one thousand
poundes vnto S. R. for the payment of one hundered
pence vppon the first of Iuly next, at vvhich day Thomas
Bell should make default of payment, and the sayd S. R.
should not impute the default and Non paiment vnto the
said Thomas Bell, (as I thinke he would not) should not
the Obligation be still in force, and Thomas Bell still remaine
indebted to S. R? Should not Thomas Bell stand
still in the curtcs
                     •
                  e of S. R? Might not S. R. commence
suite against Thomas Bell, for his debt, notvvithstanding
his forbearaunce in not imputing the breach of
day vnto him? I cannot tell, I am not skillfull in the
Lavve; but I feare mee, Thomas Bell might bee intreated
of S. R. as the Fellow-Seruant that ought an hundred
pence,Mat, 18, 28, of whom we haue mention made in the holy
Gospell.
            
            
               S. R.
               The second thing which Bell inferreth,Page 193▪
                   and biddeth vs
marke it vvell, is, that the tenth Commaundement forbiddeth
Originall lust vvithout consent, and habituall
Concupiscence. Did euery man reade more markeable
folly? First, he maketh Originall lust to bee committed,
which is to make Originall Actuall, because what is committed
is actuall, as commission is action. Secondly, that
habituall and Originall, inclination to euill, is forbidden
by the tenth Commaundement, and calleth the contrary
most absurd.
            
            
               
               T. B.
               Doubles, Bell will confesse plainely, that hee hath not
often read more markeable folly indeed, then our markable
Fryer vttereth in this place, who will neuer gaine any
thing at T. B. his hands, vnlesse it be with his markeable
folly, and deceitfull dealing. He first leaueth out my
words, in the beginning of the sentence; then addeth he
his own, as if they were mine, in the end of the sentence;
that done, he discourseth of them & me, at his own good
pleasure: But I answer. First, that not only actual, but also
habituall inclination to euill, is forbidden in the tenth
precept. Bellarmine shall be witnesse against Robert Parsons,
whose words are these;Bellarm. tom. 3. col. 400. Aug. de spir. & liter. cap. vlt. tom. 3. 
                  Haec dicta sunt ad mentem, S.
Augustini, qui precepto, non concupisces, intelligit prohiberi aliqua
modo matus omnes concupiscentiae, etiam, involuntarios.
These thinges are spoken after the minde of Saint Austen,
who vnderstandeth all the motions, euen those
which bee involuntary, to bee forbidden in some sort
by this Commaundement, (Thou shalt not Lust.) VVhere
wee see, that not onely Bellarmine theyr Cardinall, but
Saint Austen that woorthy Piller of the Church, affirmeth
both Originall concupiscence, and the involuntary
Motions thereof, to be forbidden in this precept. Where
I may not forget to tell the Reader, that though Bellarmine
to make his matter good, (if it would) addeth
to Saint Austens wordes (In some sort,) yet dooth Saint
Austen write very simply, and sayth flatly, that they
are prohibited, and addeth not (Quodam modo, In some
sort.) That is Bellarmines addition, it is not in Saint Austen.
               
               Secondly, that habituall Originall Lust is not idle,
but woorketh ill desires in vs continually agaynst our
vvill.
               So sayth S. Austen,
                  Aug. de nup. et concup. lib. 1. co, 2. 27. in these words; Agit. n. Aliquid concupiscentia
carnis, &c. For concupiscence of the flesh worketh
somthing, euen when there is not giuen vnto it, either the



consent of the heart, where it may raigne; or the members
as VVeapons, which may accomplish what it appointeth.
And what doth it, but the very wicked and filthy
desires? For if they were good and lawfull, the Apostle
would not forbid to obey them.
               Marke these wordes, gentle Reader, for they are of
great consequence, and giue a deadly blowe to the
Papistes. Two thinges are cleered by this Testimony
of Saint Austen; the one, that Concupiscence to which
consent is not giuen, bringeth foorth ill desires; the other,
that the sayde desires are vnlawfull, and prohibited
by the Law of GOD. And so wee haue euidently
prooued, that habituall Concupiscence, to which the
regenerate yeelde no consent, but stoutly resist the same,
is so farre from beeing meritorious, as the Papists would
haue it, that it is sinne formally, and properly so called.
And wee haue further, that habituall concupiscence worketh
ill desires in vs against our will, and therefore that
those desires are truely called originall, because vvee
doe them not, but rather suffer them to bee doone in
vs.
               Thirdly, that though the Law in saying, Thou shalt not
lust, seemeth by the force of the word which signifyeth
action, to prohibite onely the voluntary act of concupiscence;
yet dooth it forbidde the very Originall
Concupiscence it selfe, withall the braunches, effects,
and involuntary motions thereof, as is already prooued
at large: Yea, Saint Austen doth vnderstand it, as Bellarmine
himselfe doth grant.
               Heere for the help of the Reader, I note, that a threefold
Concupiscence is forbidden by the tenth Commandement.
The first, is meerely called Originall. This
is that vvhich vve all contracted of Adam, and which
is the Fountaine of all concupiscences and sins, and therefore
truely called of the Apostle sin.Rom, 7, The second, is partly
Originall, and partly Actuall. Originall, because



it yssueth naturally from the Originall prauity of our nature.
Actuall, for that we couet in act, albeit against our
wil, and because it is against our wil, it is more properly
& truly called Originall, then actuall. The third, is meerely
actuall, because it is voluntary.
            
            
               S. R.
               I must note Bels important vntruths. First,Page. 202. that Pope
Vrban and Pope Innocent confirmed Saint Thomas his doctrine
for authenticall. Secondly, that Pope Vrban gaue
it the first place after cannonicall scripture.
            
            
               T. B.
               This Fryer seemeth to bee framed of lying, and as hee
hath vsually spent his whole dispute, so in the end of the
article he closeth it vp with leasing. Whosoeuer shal pervse
The Downfall of Popery, wil soon espy, how this Fryer
loadeth my back with slaunderous speeches and false reports.
I will heere in regard of breuity, onely set downe
the Testimony of a famous Papist Augustinus Hunnaeus,
by name, in that Epistle which he sent to Pope Pius the
fift. These are his words; Vrbanus &c. Vrbanus that worthy
Prelate of the Apostolique sea, admiring the excellent
doctrine of this man, (he speaketh of Aquinas) & beholding
it as fallen from heauen to driue away the naturall
mist of ignorance from mens minds, doth grauely exhort
to the study thereof, and commaundeth the vniuersity
of Tholouse to follow it as the cheefe, in all their disputations
and aunsweres concerning faith and manners.
Innocentius the fift of that name, esteemed the same mans
Doctrine so greatly, that hee doubted not to giue it the
first place after the Cannonicall scripture. Thus writeth
Hunnaeus. By whose words it may appeare, in what reuerence
the Doctrine of Aquinas is with the Papists; as also
that our Iesuite cannot answere me, but by lying. And
thus I will end this article,Page, 161▪
                   with these words of our Iesuite;
Habituall cōcupiscence includeth not only pronesse
to euill, but also difficulty to do good: and want of habibituall



order in the inferior powers, and therefore is both
positiue and priuatiue euill. Thus writeth our Iesuite;
who after he hath long wearied himselfe in struggling against
the truth, doth at the length vnawares confesse the
same. For doubtlesse, when he graunteth, that habituall
Concupiscence in the regenerate, includeth want of habituall
order in the inferior powers, and therefore is both
positiue and priuatiue euill; he graunteth in substance &
in the truth of the matter, as much as I desire. He denyeth
in wordes, that Originall concupiscence, is formally
sinne, but in effect and substance, hee graunteth the
very same. Whosoeuer shal seriously ponder both my discourse
heere and in the Downefall, especially concerning
the Nature, definition, and essence of sinne; he will perceiue
with all facility, that the Iesuite woulde say as I
write, if hee were not affrayde to displease the Pope.
            
         
         
            The fift Article, of the merite of Good workes.
            
               S. R.
               
                  BEls first position containeth two partes; the first is,
that good workes,Page, 212 neither do nor can goe before Iustification.
Behold Bell euen where he would proue himselfe
a friend to good workes, sheweth himselfe to be an
enemy, and excluding them from any going before, or any
way concurring to iustification; to which they so concurred
in Saint Mary Magdalen, as our Sauiour saide,
Many sinnes are forginen her, because shee loued much,
making her loue a kind of cause,Luke 7, 47 (viz:) disponent of her
Iustification.
            
            
               T. B.
               Our Iesuite wold gladly perswade his reader, that I am
an enemy to good workes. The best mean he hath to defend
himselfe and Popery withall, is cogging, lying, and
false dealing. I must needs be an enimy to Good workes, because,



I will not admit euill workes for good. I say with
S. Austen; Sequuntur, iustificatum, non precedent iustificandum.
                  Aug. de fide & oper. cap. 14, tom 4.
                  Good. Workes follow him that is iustified, but they go not
before him that is to be iustified. Behold here, gentle Reader,
that S. Austen is the same enemy to Good workes that I
am. He affirmeth them to follow iustification, and so doe
I. Hee denyeth them to goe before iustification, and
so doe I. What a thing is this? Our Iesuite dareth not
call Saint Austen an enemy to Good Workes; and yet doth
he call mee so, who defend and holde the same doctrine
that Saint Austen doth. Nay, how is it possible to haue
Good Workes, before wee haue fayth? Seeing (as the Apostle
teacheth vs) Without faith it is vnpossible to please GOD.
                  Heb, 11, 6
Who so listeth to pervse my Suruey of Popery, shall there
find euery thing soundly aunswered, whatsoeuer can bee
sayde for Popery in this kinde of subiect. But our Fryer
will proue Good workes to go before iustification, because
Christ sayde to Mary Magdalen;
                  Luke, 7. 47 
                  Many Sinnes are forgiuen
her, because shee loued much. I answere, that Christs
Argument is not drawne from the cause, but from the effect.
As if Christ had sayd; wee may know by her great
loue, that great gifts are bestowed on her, that many sins
are forgiuen her. For, that no remission of her sinnes proceeded
from her loue, but her loue of the forgiuenesse of
her sinnes, appeareth by the similitude of the debters. For
Christ tolde Peter of two debters, whereof the one ought
fiue hundered pence, the other fifty, and that when they
had not wherewith to pay, the Creditour forgaue them
both. Hee therefore demaunded of Peter, whether of
the Debters loued the Creditour more? Peter aunsvvered,
that he to vvhom more vvas forgiuen. Christ approued
Peters ansvver, and concluded therevpon, that seeing
Mary Magdalen loued more, he might know that she had
more forgiuen her, because saith Christ, To whome little is
forgiuen, the same loueth little. Neyther is it possible, to
draw any other meaning out of christs words. The reason



is euident, because christ saith plainly, that the debts were
freely forgiuen the debters, who were not able to pay
the debts. For otherwise, Maries forgiuenesse shoulde
haue no coherence with the similitude of the debters.
               The second part of his position is, that good works euer
follow (as fruits the tree) the persons that are freely
iustified. This is most manifestly falfe in infants, whereof
many iustified in baptisme, dye before they do any good
worke. And if his comparison of the tree be good, some
iustified, neuer do good worke; and al, want them long
time, some giue ouer doing good, as some trees are barren,
some cease to beare fruit, and none beare alwayes.
            
            
               T. B.
               This Fryer thinketh he can daunce in a net naked, and
yet no man see him; but I weene, euery indifferent Reader
doeth easily espy his manner of dealing, (viz:) that
he hath nothing in him, but Cauils, Slanders, and notorious
leasings. Good workes, sayth he, cannot euer follow
iustified persons, as fruits follow trees, because some trees
neuer do good, and all want a long time, and none beare
alwayes. Is this Fryer trow ye, wel in his wits? Hath not
malice so blinded him, that he cānot see wood for trees?
Hath the Pope dispensed with him, to say what hee list?
Good workes say I, euer follow persons freely iustified,
as fruits follow the Tree, by Gods mercy in Christ Iesus
for his merits and condigne deserts. Now what doth our
Iesuite? he aplies himselfe wholy to cauils & extreme folly.
He perceiueth, that truth wil preuail, & therfore strugleth
with cauils and deceitfull dealing against the same.
               First, he leaueth out GODS mercy, and the merites of
Christ Iesus.
               Secondly, he inferreth a fond conclusion of his owne
making, and beareth the Reader in hand, that it is mine.
               Thirdly, he triumpheth before the victory, boasting
that hee hath confuted my position, when indeede hee
hath onely confuted himselfe, and fought the combate



with his owne folly. For I do not say, that Good Workes
do euer and continually without all interruption, follow
persons freely iustified. Let the Reader duely and truely
pervse my wordes, and then tell me, if our Fryer Iesuite
be not a notorious lyar. I say Good Workes do euer folow
but not simply, absolutely, & at all seasons; but as fruites
follow trees. Now, I pray you gentle Reader, how doe
fruits follow trees? Our Fryer telleth vs. Some trees neuer
haue any fruit (sayth he) some want a long time, and
none beare fruit euer. Alas, alas, what a fond fryer-Iesuit
is this Robert Parsons? Where were their wits, that made
him the Prouinciall of England? If good workes follow
persons iustified no otherwise, but as fruits follow trees,
which is my position; then doubtlesse are they not to be
expected euery hour, but when the due circumstances of
time, place, and persons do require. For good trees do not
euer bring forth their fruits, but in due times and seasons.
            
            
               S. R.
               His first argument is taken out of Saint Paule, Rom.
                  Page 22
                        •
                     
                  
6. 23. But the gift of GOD is life euerlasting in Christ Iesu
our Lord. He argueth in this manner; Eternall life is the
free gift of God, therefore it can no way bee due to the
merit of mans workes. I aunswere, that the Antecedent is
false, and neyther heere nor any where else taught by S.
Paule.
               
            
            
               T. B.
               Our Iesuite shall aunswere and confute himselfe,Page 230 for
these are his owne words a little after. Because (sayth our
Iesuite) as workes are rewarded euen aboue their virtual
& proportionate equality, as Diuines say▪ 
                  vltra condignū;
no maruell, if S. Paul called eternall life rather Grace, or
Gift, then Stipend, seeing it hath much more of Grace, then
it hath of Iustice; yet he no where calleth it meere grace.
Beside that, as Saint Austen writeth, he might haue called
it a Stipend, as hec calleth Death in respect of Sinne, but
forbore, least wee should thinke it were so iustly deserued



by Good Workes, as death is by euill. Thus discourseth
our Fryer. Where we haue first by his owne free graunt,
that Workes are rewarded aboue their desert. Albeit before
hee called them condigne, and of condigne merite.
These are his wordes: Good workes (saith he) done in Gods
grace, are condignely meritorius of eternall life. Secondly,Page 221 that
Saint Paule calleth eternall life rather Grace then Stipend,
because it hath much more of Grace, then it hath of Iustice,
where vnawares he confuteth himselfe doubtlesse;
because where there is more of Grace then of Iustice, it
is vnpossible to establish condigne merite. For as the Apostle
teacheth vs; To him that worketh, the reward is not reckoned
of Grace,
                  Rom, 4, 4. 
                  but of debt or duety. And the same Apostle
declareth it more plainely in another place. For by Grace
(saith he) you are saued throgh faith (& that not of your selues,
                  Ephes, 2, 8:
                  for it is the gift of God) not of workes, least any man shoulde boast
himselfe.
                  Tit. 3, 5. And again in another place thus; Not by the works
of righteousnesse which we did, but according to his mercy he saued
vs.
               
               Thirdly, that the Apostle calleth eternall life, rather
grace then stipend, as S. Austen writeth; because it is not
so iustly deserued by Good Workes, as death is by euill
workes. No, no, S. Austen saith plainly; Cum Deus coronat
merita nostra, nihil aliud coronat quam munera sua. Whē
God crowneth our merites,Aug. Ep. 105. tom. 2. he crowneth nothing els but
his owne giftes. First therefore, seeing Good Workes are
rewarded aboue their deserts. Secondly, seeing Good
Workes haue more of grace then of Iustice. Thirdly, seeing
Good Workes cannot so merite heauen; as ill workes
merite hell. Fourthly, seeing the best merits are nothing
else, but the meere giftes of GOD; I must needes conclude,
that Workes are not condignely meritorious of
eternal life.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell citeth Theophilact,
                  Page, 236. because he sayth, Saint Paule
called eternall life Grace, and not a Reward, as though he



had sayd, It is not the reward of our labors. But this is nothing
against vs, who willingly confesse erernall life to
be grace, and not to proceede of our owne labours done
by our selues, but done and wrought also by the grace
of Christ.
            
            
               T. B.
               Our Iesuite is so pinched and nipped by my Authorities
and reasons, that he had rather say any thing then acknowledge
the truth that I defend. Here as we see, hee is
become a Semi-pelagian Heretique, for he affirmeth eternall
life to bee wrought and doone of our selues, yet not
wholly of our selues, but partly also of the holy Ghost.
And after such a silly manner, he is enforced to answer all
the rest, viz: euer against himselfe.
            
            
               S. R.
               True it is, that Augles as a follower of Scotus,
                  Page 247 seemeth
to thinke that the condignity of Good Workes, riseth not
of any equality which is in them vnto glory, but of Gods
promise to reward them.
            
            
               T. B.
               It is well, that ye wil once seeme to graunt a truth. The
truth is this; that both Iosephus Angles, and your Cardinall
Bellarmine, do freely grant being ouercome with the
force of trueth, that Good workes can merite nothing,
but by reason of GODS promise freely made vnto men.
I haue prooued the Controuersie so euidently, that our
Iesuite doth nothing else but weary both himselfe and his
Reader, in writing most friuolously against the same. I referre
the Reader to The Downfall it selfe; where hee shall
find euery Argument and peece of reason soundly answered,
before our Iesuite had published the same. And
therefore for mee to vse any further reply therein, were
but Actum agere. For doubtlesse, whosoeuer shall duly (all
partiality set aside,) peruse The Downfall as it came from
my penne, and lay downe this Iesuites aunswere to it



in euery place, and compare them together; he will (I
am fully perswaded) freely confesse, that no further reply
is necessary in that behalfe.
            
         
         
            The sixt Article, of the destinction of mortall and
veniall sinnes.
            
               S. R.
               ALl his proofes may be reduced to this Syllogisme.
What is against Gods Law is mortal sin;Page, 269 all sin is against
Gods law, Ergo all sinne is mortall. Beholde, Bell
here absolutely concludeth all sinne to be mortal, and after
calleth our veniall sinnes cursed and deformed: which
argueth, that he thinketh all sin to be indeed mortal, notwithstanding
Gods mercy. The propositiō he supposeth,
the assumption he prooueth out of scripture, fathers, and
schoolemen.
            
            
               T. B.
               This controuersie consisteth wholy in this viz: whether
euery sin be of it own nature mo
                     •
                  al, or no. I hold the Affirmatiue,
our Iesuite the Negatiue. And for all that, hee
freely granteth vnawares as you see, that I haue prooued
mine opinion and doctrin, both out of the holy scripture,
and also out of the fathers and schoole-Doctors.
            
            
               S. R.
               Christ (saith Bell) telleth vs,Vbi supra. that we must giue account
for euery ydle word; and S. Iohn saith, that euery sinne is
Anomia, that is, Transgression of the law. Saint Ambrose
also defineth sin in generall, to be transgression of Gods
law, and S. Austen describeth it, to be euery word, deed,
or desire against Gods law. Yea, Bellarmine arffimeth euery
sin to be against Gods law. The Rhemists also confesse,
that euery sin is a swaruing from the Law. Likewise Iosephus
Angles and Durandus, teach venial sins to be against
the law. To this argument Catholicks answer differētly,
some by denial of the proposition, others by denial of the
assumption. Some say, that euery sin which is against the



Law is not mortall, but onely that which is perfectly against
it. Others say, that veniall sinnes are not against
the Law, but besides the Law.
            
            
               T. B.
               Heere is an answere, aunswerelesse. For first, our Fryer
graunteth, that I haue prooued by the Scripture, by Saint
Ambrose, by S. Austen, by Bellarmine, their famous Cardinall,
by the Rhemists, their learned bretheren, by Iosephus
Angles, their religious Fryer, and reuerend Byshop, and
by Durandus, their famous Schoole-Doctor; that euery
sin, more and lesse is against the Law of God; and consequently,
mortall of it owne nature.
               Secondly, our Fryer freely confesseth, that this argument
of mine, doth so trouble the Papists, that they cannot
agree among themselues, how to answere the same.
Some sayth he, deny the proposition, some deny the assumption,
other some say they cannot tell what: and our
Iesuite himselfe standes amazed, whether it is better to
yeeld to the truth, or to face it out desperately, and impudently
with Legierdemain, iugling, falshood, and deceitfull
dealing.
            
            
               S. R.
               Yet better it is to say,Page, 270. that veniall sinnes are beside the
Law, then against the Lawe.
            
            
               T. B.
               Our Iesuite being in perplexity, (like as Buridanus his
Asse) what to answere to my argument, resolueth to take
the best way as he supposeth: for, he thinketh as felons &
Traytors standing at the barre in their arraigment, that
it is the best to plead (not guilty.) But I must tell him two
things: The one, that to be beside the Law and against
 the Law, is al one in effect. For as our master Christ saith,
Hee that is not with him, is against him, and consequently,Mat, 12, 30. if
he do besides Christs commaundement, hee doth against
the same.
               The other, that Durandus, and many Popish Schoole-Doctors 


                  
confesse resolutely, that euery sinne is against
Gods law. And Iosephus Angles affirmeth constantly, that
Dwrands opinion is now adaies the Doctrine of theyr
Schooles. Where I wish the Reader to note by the way,
the mutability of late start vp Romish Religion. Read the
Downefall, where this point is set downe at large.
            
            
               S. R.
               Therefore if Bell graunt indeede (as he doth in words)
that by Gods mercy some sins are made veniall;Page 271. he must
also confesse, that by Gods mercy, they are not against
his charity and friendship.
            
            
               T. B.
               I graunt, that as all sinnes is mortall of their owne nature,
(which I haue prooued copiously in The Downefall,
euen by the testimony of very famous Papists:) so are all
sins veniall by Gods mercy for the merits of his sonne Iesus,
to the regenerate his elect children, and consequently,
though all sins bee against Gods friendship (who hateth
and detesteth all sinne) in their owne nature,1, Cor. 6, 11, yet are
all the sins of Gods elect,Ephes, 1, 7. reputed not onely as veniall,
but none at all in Christ Iesus,1, Cor. 1, 30. & they receiued into Gods
fauour for Christs sake.2, Cor, 5, 21.
               
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell prooueth out of Saint Ambrose,
                  Page. 276. that sin is defined
the transgression of the law. And out of S. Austen, that
it is diuine reason, or the will of God, commaunding the
order of nature to be kept, and forbidding it to bee broken.
But these Fathers define onely mortall sin.
            
            
               T. B.
               Mark for Christs sake, and behold our Iesuite at a great
Non plus. I haue prooued both by the Scripture out of
Saint Iohn, and by the testimony of the holy Fathers, and
famous Popish Writers; that the very Essence, Nature,
and formality of sin, is the transgression of Gods Lawe.
That Gods law is nothing else, but his eternall reason or
will decreeing what ought to be done, or not to be done,



and consequently, that euery sin is mortall, as beeing against
Gods reason, Will, and Law. Now, our Fryer being
indeede at his wits end, knoweth not what aunswere to
make; but saith at Randon, that the Fathers onely define
mortall sin. He neither hath Rime nor Reason thus to say;
but we must (if ye will) admit his bare word, for he is an
honest man, I warrant you; his word is as good, as no
Obligation. The Fathers define sin generally, they make
no exception at all, yet our Iesuite will needs haue them,
to define onely mortall. What a thing is this? Who euer
hath heard the like? The Question is, whether euery
sin be mortall, or no. I affirme euery sin to bee mortall;
and I prooue it, because the holy Scripture, the Auncient
Fathers, and the Doctors doe define sin to bee so;
yet our Iesuite thinketh it enough barely to aunswere,
that they all speak of mortall sin, not of veniall. O sweet
Iesus? Our Iesuite is either too too foolish, or els too, too
malicious. His fond answer is tearmed in Schooles, Petitio
principij, the begging of the Question. He will needes
haue the Fathers to except veniall sins, and to acknowledge
such sins, although they take no notice of such sins,
neither once name such sins; but contrariwise affirme, all
sinnes without exception to bee mortall. These Fathers
(saith our fatherly Iesuite) define mortall sin, not veniall.
Euen so sorsooth, for why should they define that, which
is not? The Fathers were wise; they knew that euery sin
in it owne nature deserued death and therefore defined
sin accordingly. They knew,Rom, 6, 23, that Saint Paule saith; The
reward of sinne is death. They knew, what God saith by his
Prophet Ezechiell; The Soule that sinneth,
                  Eze, 18, 20, 
                  shall dye the death.
They knew what God saith by his Prophet Dauid;
                  Psal, 5, 4, 
                  Thou
art not a GOD that loueth wickednesse, neither shall euill dwell
with thee. They knew what Christ will say, at the day of
dome; Depart from me ye cursed, into euerlasting fire. But our
Iesuite saith,Math, 25, 41 that veniall sinnes breake not friendshippe
with God. Well,Page 271. let him stand in iudgment against God



for his venials;Psal, 143, 2▪
                   I will say with the humble Prophet: Enter
not into iudgement with thy Seruant (O Lord) for no flesh can be
iustified in thy sight.
               
            
            
               S. R.
               I admit,Page 275. that by sin Saint Iohn vnderstood all kinde of
Actuall sin, and deny that Anomia Iniquity, is taken for
wickednesse, and perfect transgression of the Lawe; but
generally as it is common to perfect transgression, & only
swaruing from the Law.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere, First, that Anomia is the transgression of the
Law, according to the nature and proper signification of
the word, as their most famous Linguist, Arias Montanus
graunteth.
               Secondly, that iniquity is perfect sin and wickednesse,Psal. 6, 9.
as the Prophet telleth vs; Discedite à me omnes, qui operamini
iniquitate. Depart from me all ye, that worke iniquity.
So the Latin Vulgata editio readeth, which the papists must
approoue perforce, because the Pope hath so inioyned
them. Heere iniquity, must needes bee taken for mortall
sin: for as our Iesuite saith, Veniall sinnes do not breake
friendship with God: and I may presume to affirme of
holy Dauid, that hee commaunded not them to depart
from him, who were in fauour with God. No, no, God
loueth not those that worke iniquity.
               Thirdly,Page 273. that Saint Iohn speaketh of mortall sinne, by
our Iesuites owne confession.
               Fourthly, that Saint Bede, Lyranus, and Carthusianus, do
all three with vniforme assent, expound it of mortall sin.
               Fiftly,Page, 278 that our Iesuite vnawares graunteth no lesse.
These are his wordes; For iniquity requireth onely want of
equitie, and conformitie to Gods Lawe. Loe, hee graunteth
iniquity, to want conformity to Gods Law: and so (say
I) vnawares he granteth, iniquity to be against Gods law,
seeing it is here confessed of our Iesuite, that it wants cō
                  formity
thereunto: for that is to be against Gods Law.
            
            
               
               S. R.
               
                  Durand and Angles (I confesse) did thinke veniall sins
to bee against the Lawe;Page 280. but neyther is this a matter of
Fayth, neyther do they intend to fauour Bell any thing.
            
            
               T. B.
               Here our Iesuite graunteth me the victory, confessing
that his owne deare friendes, Durand and Angles defend
mine opinion. But he addeth two things for his defence,
as hee thinketh, yet I deny them, and so I thinke will
the indifferent Reader, to be very ridiculous, and altogether
childish. First, he saith, it is no matter of faith. What
then good Sir? Is nothing to be regarded, but matters of
Fayth? Is it a matter of faith, that your Pope cannot erre?
That he is aboue a general Councel? That he can depose
kings? Nay, that either he or your selfe be an honest man?
And what is a matter of fayth? Forsooth, whatsoeuer the
Pope will haue a matter of fayth. Secondly, he saith, Durand
and Angles intend not to fauour mee. This is brother-folly
to the former. How farre to London, a pokefull
of Plumbes.
            
            
               S. R.
               All formall sin is formall iniquity, but not contrarywise.Page 278.
As Adultery or murther committed by a foole or
madde man, is iniquity, but no more sinne, then it is in
Beasts.
            
            
               T. B.
               First, Iniquity is wickednesse, and consequently sin, as
is already prooued.
               Secondly, Iniquity is formally against equity, as our
Iesuite hath graunted.
               Thirdly, it is formally transgression of Gods Law,Page 278 as
I haue many wayes confirmed. Ergo, it is formally sin.
               Fourthly, If Adultery or murther doone by a foole or
mad man be iniquity, it is also sin; for all iniquity is sin,
as is already prooued.
               Fiftly, to say that Adultery done by a foole or madde



man,Ignorantia iuris diuini vel naturalis, non excusat. cans. 17. q. 4. cap. siqui
                        •
                     . is no more sinne then it is in beastes, seemeth to me
a beastly affirmation. Our Iesuite barely sayth it, hee
prooueth it not. I know his supposed ground; because
forsooth, it is not voluntary. But I would haue him
to tell mee, how it is not as well sinne in Fooles and mad
men, as Adams fault is sinne in Infants against their will.
Because (saith he) they cannot auoyde it. The same say I,
of Infantes. I adde, that Beastes neuer hadde it in their
power, to auoyde sinne, and sinnefull actes; but Fooles,
madde men, and Infantes, were all at once enabled to
haue kept the Lawe, when they were in Lumbis Adae;
which is enough for their iust condemnation. And it is
confirmed, because they may as well bee freed from Originall
sin, as from murther and Adultery. It is a common
saying, that if a drunken man, kill a man,Aristotle, libr. 3. ethic. cap. 5. §. 72. when hee
is drunke; hee must bee hanged, when hee is sober:
Yea, the Ethnicke Philosopher can tell vs, that a murtherer
in his drunkennesse, is worthy of double punishment.
First, for his drunkennesse, then for the sinne that followeth
vppon the same. For though the sinne consequent, be
not voluntary in the act and deed done, yet is it voluntary
in the cause.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell noteth the Romish Religion of mutability,Page 280. 281. confessing
that the olde Romaine Religion was Catholique, sound,
& pure, with which he will not contend. But seeing you
haue granted the old Roman Religion to be pure and Catholique,
and slander the late, I bring an action of slaunder
against you, and charge you to bring good witnesse,
when, wherein, and by whom, the late Romaine Religion
corrupted the purity of the old.
            
            
               T. B.
               This is the point indeede, that seduceth the silly ignorant
sort throughout the Christiā world. For the Pope &
his flattering Parasites beare them in hand, that the late
start vp Romish doctrin, is the old Roman religion, which S.



                  Peter and Saint Paule, preached to the Romanies in their
life time: But my life and saluation I gage for the triall, it
is not so. No, no, It is a New Religion, crept by little
and little into the Church of Rome. To which doctrine if
the vulgar people would once hearken, all partiality and
sinister affection set apart; they would vndoubtedly vtterly
forsake the Pope, and detest from their hearts all
Popish faction. Here our Fryer Iesuite threatneth me, to
bring an action of the case against mee; for that (as hee
saith) I slander their Religion. He would haue me to tell
him and his Pope, when, wherein, and by whom, the late
Romish Religion corrupted the purity of the old. I answer,
first, that I desire to know our Iesuites name, because we
may perhaps agree without suite in Law. Secondly, that
I haue in a printed Booke published many yeares ago, to
the view and iudgment of all the Christian world, shewed
in plaine and expresse tearmes, at what times, in what
points, & by what persons, the old Roman Religion taught
by Saint Paule, (as holy Writ telleth vs) and by Saint Peter,
(as Histories Ecclesiasticall doe relate,) was successiuely
corrupted, errours embraced, superstition nourirished,
ignorance countenanced, and false Doctrine decreed
for the truth. This Booke is intituled the Suruey of
Popery, published about tenne yeares agoe, in the yeare
of our Lord God, 1596. I haue challenged all Iesuites
and Iesuited Papists, ioyntly and seuerally, to answere it,
and all my other Bookes. They haue oftentimes in many
of theyr slaundrous Libels, made mention both of the
Suruey, and of my other Bookes, and promised aunswers
to the same, but while the Grasse growes, the Horse
dyes. This is the first answer, that euer I receiued to this
day. Which how silly it is, let others iudge. For their late
forerunner did but snatch here and there, and aunswered
directly nothing at all. Our Iesuite heere insinuateth
something, which hee cannot well tell how to shuffle vp.
I also alleadged out of Iosephus Angles, a famous Popish



Schoole-Doctor and Byshop,Ios. Ang. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     2. s. Page 175. that the Popish Doctrine
daily altereth in their Schooles. S. Thomas (sayth he) and
his followers hold; That a Ven
                        •
                     all sin is not so much against
the Law, as besides the Law. But Durand, and many others
impugne this opinion, and auouch Veniall sinnes to bee against
the Commaundements. And this opinion (sayth hee)
seemeth now adaies to be more common in the schooles.
Here I wished the Reader to note by the way, out of the
word (Modo, Now adayes) the mutability of the Romish
Religion.
               
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Angles insinuateth Schoole opinions to be mutable.Page 280. 
                  Bell
applyeth it to the Romaine Religion, as if it consisted of
Schoole opinions, which may be held Pro & contra with
vnity of Faith.
            
            
               T. B.
               If Schoole opinions be mutable, then Popish Religion
is mutable of necessity. For how dare the Schoole-Doctours
teach publiquely, contrary to the Popes minde?
VVas not your famous Doctour Michael at Louain,
threatned to frame his opinion to the Popes liking, or
else yee w
                     ••
                  e what would haue followed? Did not the
Pope send Toledo the Iesuite, to conferre with him, and
tell him what the Pope thought, and therefore he must,
and so forth? You know it was so. Be not grieued I pray
you,Rhenan. in annot. ad libr. Tertul. to heare Beatus Rhenanus, one of your deare friends,
speake a truth of your Schooles and Schoole-Doctou
                     •
                  s.
These are his wordes? Thomas Aquinas & Scotus, &c.
Thomas Aquinas and Scotus, men too much delighted
with subtilties, haue brought confession this day to such
a p
                     •
                  sse, that Ioannes Geilerius, a Graue and reuerend Diui
                     •
                  e,
and a Preacher a long time at Argentoraium, sayd
many a time to his friendes, that it was impossible for a
man to make his confessiō, according to their Traditions.
Thus writeth Rhenanus. Out of whose words I note. First,
that the vain, curious destinctions of the Schole-doctors,



haue brought much mischeefe into the Church of GOD.
Which thing if a Papist had not spoken it, would seeme
incredible to the world.
               Secondly, that it is impossible for a Papist to make his
confession, acording to the Popish law; and consequently,
that all Papists by Popish doctrine, must perish euerlastingly.
Marke well my words (Gentle Reader) the Papists
teach vs to hold for an article of our beleefe, that we
are bound to make our confessions as the Popish law prescribeth;
that is, as Aquinas and Scotus haue set downe the
same. And for all that Gielerius a Papist himselfe & a great
diuine,Loe, Papistes dare not say al they thinke. complained often to his frends, that no man could
possibly performe the same. Now then, since on the one
side, Popish confession must be made vnder pain of damnation;
and since on the other side, none possibly can
make the same as it is required; it followeth of necessity
by Popish Doctrine, that all Papistes must be damned eternally.
O miserabie Popery, coufounded by thy selfe!
O late start-vp Religion, patched like a Beggers cloke!
Thine own Doctors, O Popery, (such force hath the truth)
haue bewrayed thy treachery to the world. Thirdly, that
many likewise among the Papists, do externally obey the
Popish Law; who for all that, in their hearts, detest the
late hatched Romish Religion. This is euident by the secret
complaint of the learned man Gielerius, who tolde
that to his trusty frends, which he durst not tell the pope.
            
            
               S. R.
               Their canonized Martyr Byshop Fisher (sayth he) and
their Popish Byshop Gerson wrote,Page, 281. that Veniall sinnes were
such onely by the mercy of God.
                  Behold the O
                        •
                     iginall of Venial Sinnes.
                   Heere Bell for one truth, vttereth
two vntruths. True it is, that Byshop Fisher & Gerson
were in that errour; but that was both before it was
condemned in the church, as it was since by Pius the v. &
Gregorius, 13. Neyther did they account involuntary motions
of Concupiscence for Veniall sinnes, as Bell doth; but



such as Catholickes account Veniall. But vntrue it is, that
eyther Byshop Fisher, is cannonized, or Gerson was a Byshop.
            
            
               T. B.
               Heere our Iesuite graunteth freely, that both the famous
learned Byshop Fisher, and that excellent Doctour
Gerson of high esteem in the Counsell of Constance, helde
for a constant position and sound Doctrine, that euery sin
is mortall of it owne nature, our Doctrine therefore is the
same, which great learned Papists do defend. And I must
needs heere put the Reader in minde, of the newnesse of
late Romish religion. (viz:) that Venial Sinnes were neuer
known to the Church, vntil the late dayes of Pius the fift,
and Gregory the 13. that is to say; about forty yeares ago.An: Dom: 1566.
                  O Popery! thou art but a childe, thou must neuer from
this day,Veniall sinnes were hatched.
                   be called the old Religion, for heere our Iesuite
confesseth thine Nonage, and proclaimeth thee to bee
the Nevv religion. I must likewise insinuate to the Reader,
another point of great importāce (viz:) that the popes act
is reputed the decree of the Church, and that no part of
Romish religion is a matter of faith, vntill it please the
Pope so to apoint it. Now, for Fisher and Gerson, the one is
a cannonized Popish Saint, the other a Popish Byshop.
But these are not matters to stand vpon, though they help
our Iesuite to passe ouer the time, and to dazle the eyes
of the Reader.
            
            
               S. R.
               He concludeth this Article with this goodly reason.Page, 281
One stealeth iust so many Egges, as are necessary to make
a Mortall sinne; another stealeth one lesse. But there can
be no reason, why God may iustly condemne the one to
hell, and not the other. Therefore they both sinne Mortally
alike. To this I aunswere, by demaunding a reason,
why the Iudge may condemne him to death that stealeth
thirteene pence halfe peny, and not him that stealeth one
peny lesse. If he answer, because the law condemneth one
and not the other; I aske againe, what reason was there,



that the Law was made against the one, and no
                     •
                   against
the other? And if Bell can find a reason in this, he wil find
one in his owne Question. The reason of both is, because
such a quantity, is a notable iniury to our neighbour, and
consequently, it is against charity, and so breaketh the
Law; and a lesse quantity is not.
            
            
               T. B.
               The destinction betweene Mortall and Veniall Sinnes
lately inuented by the Pope, doth so trouble our Iesuite
after his consultation with his best learned friendes, that
hee can shape mee no aunswere, touching a few Egges.
Gladly he would seeme to say something; yet after hee
hath wearied himselfe with strugling against the truth, he
is where he first began. Not knowing how to answere, he
demaundeth two Questions; and that done, hee telleth
me, I must answere my selfe. This notwithstanding, after
better aduisement and consideration had of the matter,
he pretends to shew a reason of both his owne questions.
But howsoeuer that be (which is indeed a meere mockery)
he leaueth my argument vntouched. Let vs suppose for
explication sake, that Egges worth thirteene pence halfe
peny makes a Mortal sinne, and that God may iustly condemne
him that stole them; as also a Mortall Iudge, amōg
Mortall men. Let vs likewise suppose for example sake,
that neyther the Ciuill Iudge, nor God himselfe can iustly
condemne him, that hath stollen but so many Egges
as are woorth twelue pence halfe penny. Nowe, this
is my Question; Nay, this is mine assertion; that there
can no good reason be yeelded, why God may iustly condemne
the one to Hell, and not the other. To answere as
the Iesuite doeth, after hee hath deepely pondered the
matter, that one is a notable iniury to our neighbor, not
so the other, is too teo childish and friuolous. For, if
thirteene pence halfe peny be a notable iniurie, so is also
twelue pence: One penny doubtlesse, cannot make
Mortall and Veniall difference: neyther is it to the purpose,



to say as our Iesuite doth; viz. that the ciuil Iudge
cannot condemne the theefe, that stealeth one peny lesse.
The reason is euident, because the ciuil Iudge is vnder the
law and subiect to it, but God Omnipotent is aboue his
Law, and may dispense with it at his good pleasure. So
did Christ aunswere the Pharisees, on the behalfe of his
disciple. The sabboath sayth Christ,Marke, 2, 27. 
                  was made for man, and
not man for the sabboth. Therefore is the sonne of Man,
Lorde of the sabboth also. The Iesuites reason thus reiected
as friuolous, and nothing to the purpose, let vs examine
the matter to the bottome, for it is a point of great
consequence. First then, this is an vndoubted truth, that
the supreme ciuill Magistrate, may as lawfully appoint
death for stealing of twelue pence, as for 13. pence halfe
peny, for the penalty of death, is wholly arbitrary to the
iudge. He must frame his laws, as serue best for the peaceable
gouernment of his people. Whereupon it commeth,
that in diuers countryes, diuers punishments are designed
for the same faults, and all agreeable to Gods law. This is
likewise an vndoubted truth in Popery, (viz:) that some
Sinnes are Veniall of their owne nature, other some mortall.
Against this false ground of Popery, doe I now contend.
We haue seene already, that a theefe may as wel be
condemned to dye for twelue pence, as for more, euen
so then, God à fortiori, may as iustly condemne one for a
Popish Veniall sinne, as for a Mortall, for euery sinne deserueth
death of it owne nature, bee it more, be it lesse.
Yea, if any sinne should of it owne nature, be Veniall, thē
should Originall sinne in an infant, be Veniall most of all,
because the Infant neyther can auoyd it, neyther hath any
will to do it. I therefore conclude, that it is against all
sence and reason, to say, that God may iustly condeme a
man, for stealing so many Egges as in Popery make a
Mortall Si
                        •
                     n
                        •
                     , (let them name what number they will,)
and that he cannot likewise condemne him, that stealeth
but one Egge lesse. And it is absurd to say or thinke, that



the least sinne that can be named, doth not breake off amity
and friendship with God,Psal, 5. 4 if wee respect the sin in it
owne Nature.Psal, 6. 8 I proue it, because the least sinne that can
be named, doth auert and turne the doer from the face of
God; Ergo, from the amity and fauour of God. I proue the
Antecedent, for the consequence is good, and cannot bee
denyed. No sinne whatsoeuer, more or lesse, can be referred
vnto God, who detesteth all sinne; Ergo, euery sinne,
bee it neuer so small, turneth vs away from the fauour of
God. Truely therefore wrote Byshop Fisher and Maister
Gerson, that euery sin is mortall of it owne nature. And so
is that proued, which I defend.
            
         
         
            The seuenth Article, of Vnwritten Traditions.
            THe Iesuite vseth many impertinent digressions, and
needlesse Ta
                     •
                  tologies in this Article. I standing to bee
breefe, will onely aunswere to such allegations, as shall
seeme necessary for the contentation of the Reader, referring
him for the rest to the Downfal, where he may find
all necessary pointes, virtually confuted, though not in
expresse termes.
            
               S. R.
               All such points of Christian fayth,Page 284. as are necessary to
be actually beleeued, of euery one that hath vse of reason
though hee be neuer so simple, are actually contained in
scripture, eyther clearely or obscurely.
            
            
               T. B.
               This doctrine is good, I approue it with all my heart,
and willingly subscribe vnto it with my pen. If our Iesuite
will stand to this Doctrine, we shall soone agree.
            
            
               S. R.
               For surely,Page. 285. the Prophets and Euangelists, writing their
Doctrin for our remembrance, would omit no one point,
which was necessary to be actually known of euery one;
especially, seeing they haue written many thinges, which



are not so necessary.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . in Ioan. tract. 49. to. 9. And this thing teacheth S. Austen,
when he sayth; those thinges are written, which seemed
sufficient for the saluation of the faithfull.
            
            
               T. B.
               This Doctrine I likewise approue; it is the verie same
that I defend. Keepe thee heere Iesuite, and we shall not
contend.
            
            
               S. R.
               Methinks S. Austen plainly auoucheth, that God hath procured
euery thing to be clearly written,Page 286 which to know is
necessary to euery mans saluation. The same teacheth S.
Syril saying;Aug. de peci. mer. lib. 2, c. vlt tom. 7. Not al things which our lord did are written,
but what the writers deemed sufficient,Ciril. in Iob. lib. 12. cap, vlt. as well for
manners, as for Doctrine; that by right saith and workes,
we may attaine the kingdome of Heauen. S. Chrisostome
sayth;Chrisost. in 2. Thes. Hom. 3. what things soeuer are necessary, the same are manifest
out of the scripture.
            
            
               T. B.
               This doctrine I still approue, as which the Reader may
find, to be taken out of the Downfall. And so our Iesuite
doth heere subscribe vnto my Doctrine, though hee take
vpon him to oppugne the same. For the truth is mighty, &
will in time preuaile. This being so, I haue no neede to
stand long vpon this point. For as the Reader seeth, the
Iesuite approoueth that Doctrine, which I in the Downefall
do defend.
            
            
               S. R.
               Truly said Saint Ephiphanius,
                  Page 291 that we may tel the inuention
of euery question, out of the consequence of Scriptures.Epipha. heres. 65
He saide not, out of the Scripture. For all cannot be
taken thence, as himself writeth; but of the consequence
of them.Heres. 61. Because all questions are resolued out of the
scriptures, or out of that which followeth of them, as the
effect of the cause.
            
            
               T. B.
               This also is sound Doctrine, and the very same which



I defend in the Downfal. And consequently, the very weapons
which our Iesuite hath put into our hands, are sufficient
to defend vs and our cause against him. For if the
Reader shal remember these grounds, and these positions
freely of him granted, and withall haue recourse vnto the
Downfall; he shall be able with all facility, to answere to
all that the Iesuite obiecteth in this Article.
            
            
               S. R.
               All points of Christian faith, cannot be sufficiently and
immediatly proued out of scripture.Page 293 For there is no place
of all the scripture, which sufficiently proueth all the rest
to be cannonicall; our B. Lady to be a perpetuall Virgin,
and. the Sabboth to be lawfully translated from Saturday
to Sunday.
            
            
               T. B.
               Now our Iesuite forgetteth himselfe, and what doctrin
he hath already deliuered. It were a sufficient answere to
tell him, that hee heere confuteth himselfe. But for the
Readers helpe, I will breefely aunswere his particulars.
To the first I say,Page. 134. it is soundly and largely answered in the
Downfall of Popery. In regard of breuity, I referre the Reader
to the place quoted in the Margent. To the second, I
answere first, that I willingly acknowledge the most blessed
Virgin, to be the Mother of true God and true man,
and to haue bin a perpetuall Virgin, both before Christs
byrth, and in his byrth, and after his byrth.
               Secondly, that albeit I defend (as our Iesuite also hath
granted) all things necessary to be beleeued vnto saluation
to be contained in the holy scriptures; yet do I not
deny, but willingly graunt, and reuerently admit many
things, receiued by the perpetuall consent of the church,
and not repugnant to the written word,Aug ad Iam
                        •
                     
                     ar. ep. 118 as true, wholesome,
and godly. For I am perswaded with S. Austen, that
whatsoeuer is neyther against Fayth, nor against good manners;
may indifferently be obserued for their society amongst whom we
do conuerse. Againe, it is one thing to say, that all necessary



points of fayth and Doctrine, are contained in the holy
scriptures; another thing to say, that nothing not contained
in the scripture, hath bin receyued by tradition, &
may be admitted for a truth. It cannot be convinced out
of the scriptures (and therefore no matter of fayth) that
Saint Peter and S, Paule dyed together at Rome; yet do I
admit it for a truth, as receiued by Tradition from the Primatiue
Church, and testified by vniforme consent of al approued
antiquity. To the third, I haue already said inough
both in my Booke of Suruey, and also in the Regiment of
the Church. For in things indifferent, the Church may determine
what is most expedient, for the due circumstances
of times, places, and persons.
            
            
               S. R.
               God (sayth Bell,) forbiddeth vs to adde to his word.Page, 295 I answere,
that such places make nothing against Traditions,
which are necessary to mans saluation, because such are
indeed Gods word, though vnwritten.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere our Iesuite with his owne words, which follow
immediately, and are these; for the two first places
onely forbid, adding to Gods word any thing of our own
heade, or which is mans word, as may be proued by the
reason of the forbiddance;Prou, 30, 6 viz: least we be disproued, &
found lyars as no doubt we might, by adding mans word
which is subiect to lye; but not by adding Gods worde,
which neuer can proue vntrue, though it be not written;
Thus writeth our Iesuite, confuting himselfe so sufficiently,
as more needs not be required.
               In these words he telleth vs two things, the one quite
opposite to the other. First, he truly saith (confuting himselfe)
that the Scripture forbiddeth, to adde of our owne
head, any thing, which is but mans word, and subiect to
falshood and lying.
               This is good. But secondly hee addeth, that to adde
Gods word though vnwritten, is a lawfull thing: but this



is a silly begging of the question, as the Schooles tearme
it. For I deny that vnwritten Word to bee Gods Word,
which our Iesuite should prooue, but cannot. And our
Iesuite hath already confessed, that all necessary pointes
of faith,Page, 284, 285. are contained in the Scriptures & written Word.
And consequently, it is to late to tell vs now, of adding
or admitting the vnwritten Word. I admit his former assertion,
as consonant to the Scriptures; this latter I reiect,
as childish, vaine, and friuolous. I proue it, because
euery word of God is to be admitted as a matter of faith;
and yet all matters of Faith are written, as is already proued
and granted. This therefore not being written, must
be hissed out of the Schoole of Christians.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell alleadgeth the Prophets words; To the Law rather,
                  Page 301.
                  and to the Testimony.
                  Esa, 8, 20. This place maketh nothing for him.
First, because the Prophet nameth not onely the Law, but
Testimony also, which comprehendeth Gods vnwritten
word. Secondly, because Esay doth not absolutely bidde
vs recurre to the Law and Testimony, but rather to them,
then to Witches; of whom he had immediately forbidden
vs to enquire.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere, that our Iesuite maketh no conscience how
hee interpret the Scripture, so he may any way make it
seeme to serue his turne. For hee desperately heere affirmeth
without all reason and authority, that by Testimony,
is vnderstood the vnwritten Word. Whereas indeede it is
the written Lawe, added onely for explication sake: as
if he had sayde; Ye must not seeke helpe at the dead, which is
the illusion of Sathan, but yee must seeke remedie in the word of
God, where his will is reuealed: ye must in all doubtes and
difficulties haue recourse to the Law of God, which is the
testification of Gods will towards man. In it ye shall find,
whatsoeuer is necessary for you to know. Breefely, as if
he had sayde; Ye must euer haue recourse to the Law, as to the



Testimony of Gods holy will. Saint Hierom yeeldeth the same
exposition of this place,Hier. iu hune locum. in these words; Si vultis noscere
quae dubia sunt, magis vos legi & Testimoniis tradite Scripturarum.
If ye will know the thinges that are doubtfull, yee
must haue recourse to the Law, and to the Testimony of
the Scriptures. Loe, hee ioyneth the Testimony with the
Law, not as a thing distinct from it, but as an explication
of the same. This reason is confirmed, by the coronation
of King Ioas;
                  2. Par. 23. 11. who receiued at his coronation these three
things; Vnction, the Testimony, or the Law; and the Diademe,
or Crowne. Where the Latin Vulgata editio (to which
the Pope hath tyed all Papists) expoundeth the Testimony
to be the Law. Which glosse striketh our Iesuites exposition
dead. So then, by the Popes own approbation, the
Testimony is taken for the written word of Gods Law, and
his Iesuite hath here proued himselfe, to be a very Daw.
And where our Iesuite weeneth to find some helpe in the
word (Rather;) It seemeth to mee, that it doth him hinder:
For, if his sence bee admitted, it will bee lawfull in
some cases and times, to haue recourse vnto Witches.
But I will leaue him to himselfe, as a carelesse and fond
Disputer.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Esay indeede bids vs go to Gods written word,Page 301, which
we refuse not to do in all doubts, wherein it resolueth vs,
but forbids vs not to go to any other, which is as he saith,
agreeable to this word. Wherfore either must Bell proue,
that the Churches Traditions are not agreeable to Gods
written Word; or he must know, that God not onely not
forbids vs, but rather commands vs to seeke after them.
            
            
               T. B.
               Heere our Iesuite seemes to correct himselfe, and to
grant, that the Prophet speakes of the Written Word. But
he addes of his owne head, that the Scripture will not resolue
them in all thinges; and that therefore they must
haue recourse, to their Vnwritten Traditions withall. Yet



like a good Fellowe, hee makes one exception, which is
this; Vnlesse I prooue their traditions not to be agreeable to Gods
word. Which thing God bee thanked,
                     This is done in the Downfall of Popery. is already done in
the Downefall it selfe. Touching the time, when Saint Iohn
the Apostle dyed; seauen famous Chronologers will contest
with me, that he liued an hundred years after Christs
sacred incarnation (though the Printer negligently put
downe Ascension amisse, as many other things;) (viz:)
Eusebius Caesariensis, Iohannes Nauclerus, Rhegino Prumiensis,
Marianus Scotus, Martinus Polonus, Pontacus Burdegalensis,
and Hermannus Contractus; that Saint Iohn the Apostle
was liuing almost 32. yeares after that our Iesuite saith
hee was dead. Now, whether our Fryer bee skilfull in
Chronology, or no; that will not I define, let the Reader
iudge. Hee himselfe boasteth of his skill; what hee hath
perfourmed, we see: But whatsoeuer his skill be, his lying
is in the highest degree.
            
            
               S. R.
               But omitting these errours, as Testimonies of Bels,
                  Page 304.
ignorance in Histories, which I regard not, to his Argument
I answere.
            
            
               T. B.
               They are not mine errors, but your owne lies. You are
full of boasting and bragging, but truth haue ye none, &
all good conscience from you is quite gone. Let vs heare
your graue answer.
            
            
               S. R.
               I answer, that those words (These are written) are meant
onely of Miracles done by Christ, and written by Saint
Iohn, to moue vs to beleeue that Christ was God.
            
            
               T. B.
               It troubleth our Iesuite more then a little,
                     Aquinas vnderstandeth these words, both of Christes sayings and doings, that I affirme
Saint Iohn to haue written his Gospell, about 100. yeares
after Christs ascension into Heauen. And for that end (as
we haue heard) he hath addicted himselfe wholy to cogging,
falshood, and lying; in so much as he would needs
haue Saint Iohn dead, while hee was liuing: and wherefore



is al this huge Masse of lying? forsooth,P 3. q. 42. art. 4. ad primum. because these
wordes of Saint Iohn (These a
                        •
                     e written) are thereby proued
to bee meant of the whole corps of the holy Bible.
For Saint Iohn writing after all, when the Cannon of the
scripture was compleate, perfect, & fully accomplished,
must needes meane of all; and that for two respects. First
because all the rest of the Scriptures tend to one and the
same end, which Saint Iohn aymeth at, (viz:) that wee
may beleeue, That Iesus is the Sonne of GOD. Secondly,
because Miracles alone without Doctrine, are not able to
worke the effect, whereof Saint Iohn speaketh. For Fayth
is not grounded in Miracles, but in the promises and word of
God. M
                        •
                     racles cannot beget Faith,
                  Mar, 16, 20, 
                  they onely are helpes and
meanes to confir me it in vs. Therefore saith Saint Luke, The
Apostles went forth, and preached the word of God, and the Lord
wrought with their preaching, and confirmed it with Miracles
following. And so do Saint Austen and Saint Cyrill, vnderstand
these words of Saint Iohn, affirming all thinges necessary
for saluation, to be conteyned in the holy scriptures.
Theyr words are set downe, in The Downefall of Popery.
               
            
            
               S. R.
               We confesse scripture to be an infallible rule,Page 308, but not the
totall rule, but as Bellarmine saith, the partiall rule.
            
            
               T. B.
               What is this, but to confesse Christ an vnperfect workman?
But to confesse Christ, to haue set downe an vnperfect
rule of Faith? But to confesse, that the Scripture
containeth not all things necessary for saluation? Which
for all that,Page, 284. you haue confessed again, and againe. As before
like a Pelagian, you said, Eternall life was not meer grace,
                  Page 285,
                  nor the meere guift of God,
                  Page, 286. 
                  but dependeth partly to mans merit;
So now you say heere,Page 230. 
                  That the Scripture is not a totall rule
of Fayth, but must haue some helpe from mens Traditions.
But I will confound you with your owne wordes, which
before came from your owne Pen. Thus doe you write;
For surely,
                  Page 285. 
                  the Prophets and Euangelistes writing their doctrine



for our better remembrance, would omit no one point, which was
necessarie to bee actually knowne of euery one; especially, seeing
they haue written some thinges which are not so necessary. Againe,Page 284.
in another place you haue these expresse wordes;
All such points of Christian Faith, as are necessary to be actually
beleeued, of euery one that hath vse of reason, are actually contained
in the Scripture. Now, out of these wordes I note:
First, that the Scriptures were written for our remembrance
and good.
               Secondly, that nothing is omitted in the Scripture,
which is necessary for our saluation.
               Thirdly, that the Prophets and Euangelists wrote many
things not so necessary for vs, and therefore, would in no
case omit those thinges which were necessary for our
soules health.
               Fourthly, that all thinges which euery one is bound to
beleeue actually, are actually set downe in the Scripture.
This being true, as it is most true indeed; I am content to
stand to the censure of euery indifferent Reader, whether
by the Iesuites confession and free graunt, the Scripture
be a totall rule of our Faith, or no. For doubtlesse, that
which containeth all necessary points of Christian Faith,
cannot be a partiall rule, but a total and consummate rule
of our faith.
            
            
               S. R.
               The most that Bell hath out of S. Cyprian, is,Page 314. That what
is no true Tradition,
                  Page 315. must be prooued by Scripture, which
I willingly graunt. Saint Cyprian thought the Pope onely
to er
                     •
                  e in a Commandement to be done;Cypr. lib. 1. ep. 3. 
                  Bell condemneth
him, in his iudiciall sentences of Faith. Whereas S.
Cyprian professeth, that false Faith can haue no accesse to
S. Peters Chaire.
            
            
               T. B.
               I haue prooued in the Downefall, that though our Papists
of late daies do impudently affirme, that their Pope
cannot erre, when hee defineth iudicially; yet this notwithwithstanding,



Saint Cyprian teacheth and telleth vs plainly
and roundly, that in his time the Byshop of Rome had
no such authority, as this day he proudly, & Antichristianly
taketh vpon him. For he roundly withstood the decree
of Pope Stephanus, who was then the Bishop of Rome,
and both sharpely reprooued him, and stoutly contemned
his falsely pretended authority. And for all that,
Saint Cyprian was euer reputed a very holy Byshoppe in
his life time, and a glorious Martyr beeing dead. But, if
the Byshop of Rome had beene Christs Vicar, and so priuiledged,
as our Papists beare the World in hand hee is;
then doublesse Saint Cyprian must needes haue beene an
Heretique, and so reputed and esteemed in the Church of
GOD, For, if any Christian shall this day do or affirme,
as Saint Cyprian did in his time, or publiquely deny the
Popes falsely pretended prymacy in any place, Country,
Territories, or Dominions, where Popery beareth the
sway; then without all peraduenture, he must bee burnt
at a stake, with fire and Fagot for his paines. Now, what
doth our Iesuite answere to this discourse? Forsooth, that
whatsoeuer is no true Tradition, the same must be tryed by
the Scripture. Alasse, alasse, Who seeth not, that our Iesuite,
(and consequently all Papistes, seeing hee hath the
aduise of all the learned among them,) is at a Non plus?
I contend, that Traditions ought to bee tryed by the
Scripture, whether they bee true and sound, or no: Our
Fryer answereth, that false Traditions, and such as bee not
true, must be so tryed. What a iest is this? The Scripture
is the Touch-stone, by which wee must try false and true
Traditions; and so we cannot know them to be true Traditions,
before we try them by the Scripture. How fondly
therefore aunswereth our Fryer, that if they bee not true,
they must be tryed by the Scripture? We deny these, and
these Traditions to bee true, and therefore appeale to the
Scripture for the tryall thereof. No, no, saith our Iesuite,
these may not bee tryed by the Scripture, because they



are true Traditions. Marry Sir, this is indeed an aunswere
answerlesse. For ye take all the tryall to your selfe, and
leaue none at all to the Scripture. You will first set down
in your iudgements, which be true Traditions, and which
be false; and that done, we must goe try those to be false
by the Scripture, which you hold for false; but with the
other, we must not deale at all. By this kind of dealing,
I must needes say, the Scripture is but a partiall rule of
Faith indeed. And what shalbe the total rule of our saith?
Our Iesuite here tels vs, that it is the Popes iudiciall sentence,
whose faith cannot faile. For false Faith (saith he)
can haue no accesse to Saint Peters chaire: as though forsooth
Saint Cyprian did thinke, that the Byshop of Romes
Faith could not faile, where hee meaneth nothing lesse,
then to ascribe such a priuiledge to the Church of Rome.
For, if he had beene of that minde, he would neuer haue
vrged Pope Stephanus, to be tryed by the Scriptures. No,
no, Saint Cyprian speaketh not of errour in Faith or Doctrine,
but of neglect of discipline and false dealing of
Schismatiques, to whose false tales and reportes, the Romaines
would neuer yeelde their consent. As if he hadde
said; The Schismatickes which wee haue driuen out of Affrica,
seeke intertainement at Rome, but the Romans (whose Faith the
Apostle praised,) will neuer hearken vnto them, or giue credite
to their reportes. He speaketh of one Felicissimus, and other
bad fellowes his Companions, whose naughty dealing
Saint Cyprian thought Cornelius and the godly Romaines
would neuer fauour. But such beggerly shifts as these be,
are good enough for Popish falsly pretended prymacy.
Of which subiect I haue written at large, in the Hunting
of the Romish Foxe.
               
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell citeth Saint Ambrose,
                  Page 319. who biddeth vs not beleeue
Argument and disputations, but to aske the Scriptures,
Apostles, Prophets, and Christ. But it maketh for
vs, because it alloweth enquiring of others besides the



Scriptures: namely, of Apostles, from whom the churches
Traditions came.
            
            
               T. B.
               Our Iesuite is a notable couetous Fellow; he will haue
all to make for him, though it bee neuer so much against
him. Because Saint Ambrose, after hee hath willed vs to
haue recourse to the Scriptures, and there to know the
resolution of all doubts, doth forthwith name the Apopostles,
Prophets, and Christ, he will haue S. Ambrose,
(Will he, Nil he) to send vs to others besides the scriptures,
vvhereas Saint Ambrose dooth onely explicate himselfe,
telling vs vvhat Scriptures wee shall search; (viz:)
not O
                        •
                     ids Metamorphosis, nor Tullies Offices, but of the
Prophets, of the Apostles, of Christ himselfe.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell citeth S. Chrysostome,
                  Page 318. who saith, that if any thing
be spoken without Scripture, the hearers mind wauereth,
somtimes doubting▪ somtimes assenting, otherwhiles denying.
But maruell it is, that he would touch Saint Chrysostome
who Hom. 42. Thessal. Vpon these wordes, (Hold
Traditions) saith. Hence it appeareth, that the Apostles
deliuered not all things by Letters, & that one aswell as
the other are worthy of the same credite. Wherefore we
thinke the Churches Traditions to deserue beleefe. It is a
Tradition, aske no more.
            
            
               T. B.
               Here I might tell our Iesuite, that Saint Chrysostome hath
but fiue Homelies in all, to the second of the Thessalonians,
though he name it the 42. Our Fryer would exclaime, if
he could 
                     •
                  ind such a fault in my writings. True it is, that
Saint Chrysostome and other of the Fathers, and my selfe
with them, doe willingly admit, and greatly reuerence,
many vnwritten Trad
                        •
                     tions beeing consonant to the Holy
Scriptures; but neither as matters of Faith, nor as partes
of necessary doctrine, but as thinges tending to order &
comelinesse in the worship of God, and administration



of his sacraments. In this kind of Traditions, I willingly agree
with Saint Chrisostome, Saint Basil, S. Ambrose, and
other fathers. Neither would I wish any to bee too curious,
in this kind of Traditions. It is enough to heare of thē,
to whom the chiefe care of the church is committed, that
it is a Tradition of the Elders: and so haue I answered enough
to all friuolous obiections of our Iesuite; especially,
if The Downefall be well marked. The rest which I let
passe, is sufficiently confuted there. Saint Chrisostoms meaning,
is plainely (as I haue said.) Hence it may apeare, because,
in the former part of this Obiection, he will admit,
nothing without the scripture; (In thinges concerning faith,
and Doctrine, euer vnder stande;) in the latter part of the
Obiection, he admitteth vnwritten Traditions, and wil not
haue vs too curious in receiuing them; (In thinge which
are indifferent, euer vnderstand.)
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell citeth Byshop Fisher because in one place, hee calleth
the Scripture the store-house of all truths,Page, 324. necessarie
to be knowne of Christians: and in another sayeth, that
vvhen Heretiques contend with vs, wee must defend our
cause with other help, thē by the holy scripture. His meaning
is, that when we dispute with Heretiques, we ought
to haue other helpes beside scripture.
            
            
               T. B.
               His meaning is as you say, and I approue the same. But
why doth he require other helpe then the scripture, seeing
the scripture as he graunteth, is the store-house of all
necessary truths? Shall I tell you? You will not thanke
me for my paines. I haue set downe at large in my Booke
of Motiues, what this your holy Byshoppe hath written of
Purgatory and Pardons. I will now recount the argument,See my Motiues, in the 7. Preamble.
onely referring the Reader to the place.
               First, Maister Fisher telleth vs, that the Greeke church
neuer bel eeued Purgatory.
               
               Secondly, that the Latine Church and Church of Rome


                  
did not beleeue the sayd Purgatory, for many hundered
of yeares after S. Peters death, whose successor for al that,
the Pope boasteth himselfe to be.
               Thirdly, that this Purgatory was not beleeued of all the
Latine Church, at one and the same time; but by litle &
little. Where I wish the Reader to note by the way, that
Popery crept into the Church by little and little, and not
all at one time, which is a point that galleth the papistes
more then a little I weene.
               Fourthly, that Purgatory was beleeued in these latter
dayes, by speciall reuelation of the holy Ghost.
               Fiftly, that Pardons came not vp, till Purgatory was
found out, for in Purgatory resteth the life of Pardons;
as which (if ther be no Purgatory,) are not worth a straw.
               Sixtly, that Purgatory was a loug time vnknowne.
               Seauenthly, that Purgatory could not be found in the
Scripture, of a very long time.
               Eightly, that it was not wholly found out by the scriptures,
but partly by Reuelations. And heere wee see that
verified, which our Iesuite out of Bellarmine telleth vs,
(viz:) that the holy Scripture is but a partial rule of faith.
For, if it be a totall rule of fayth, the Pope (as Maister Fisher
affirmeth) must both want his Purgatory, and be bereaued
of his pardons.
               Ninthly, that pardons were not heard of, or knowne,
to the Primatiue Church.
               
               Tenthly, that then Pardons began, when men began
to feare the paines of Purgatory.
               This is the summe of that worthy Doctrine, which Byshop
Fisher hath published to the world; euen at that time
when he defended the Pope and Popery, after the best
manner he could. He that shall read his words in my Motiues
at large, cannot but detest the Pope and all popish
faction. Hence it is most apparant, why the Byshop sayd
that they must vse other helpes then the holy Scripture,
for the maintenance of their Religion, for the Scripture



is but a partiall rule of popish faith, as wee haue heard
alreadie.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell citeth S. Thomas, that whatsoeuer Christ woulde
haue vs to read of his doings and sayings,Page, 328. he commanded
the Apostles to write, as with his own hands. But this maketh
nothing against vs, both because S. Thomas saith not,
what Christ would haue vs beleeue, but what hee would
haue vs read, and Traditions be such, as Christ would haue
vs beleeue, though we read them not. As also because S.
Thomas speaketh not of all points of beleefe, but onely of
Christs sayings & doings, besides which the very sayings
and dooinges of the Apostles recorded in their Acts and
Epistles, or testified by Tradition, are to be beleeued.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere; First, that Popery is this day a most miserable
Religion, and woe vnto them that do beleeue and obey
the same. This is, or may bee euident to euery one,
throughout this whole discourse. Secondly, that Aquinas
auoucheth very plainely (as I sayde in the Downefall) that
all things necessary to our saluation, are contained in the
Scriptures. For in Christs deeds are contained his myracles,
his life, his conuersation; in his sayinges Semblably,
are contained, his preaching, his teaching, his
doctrine, and consequently, whatsoeuer is necessary for
vs to know. If then this be true, as it is most true, (for the
papists may not deny the doctrine of Aquinas) that whatsoeuer
Christ would haue vs to know, of his myracles, of
his life, of his conuersation, of his preaching, of his teaching,
of his doctrine, the same is written in the Scriptures;
then doubtlesse, none but such as will Cum ratione
in sanires, can deny all thinges necessary for our saluation,
to be contained in the holy scriptures. Yea, if our Iesuite
will stand to his owne doctrine, plainly auouched in this
present Pamphlet, this Controuersie is at an end, for we
agree therein. These are his expresse words: For surely,
                  Page 278 
                  the
Prophets and Euangelists writing their Doctrine for our better



remembrance, would omit no one point, which was necessary to bee
actually knowne of euery one; especially, seeing they haue written
many things, which are not so necessary. And this teacheth S.
Austen when he sayth, that those things are written which
seemed sufficient for the saluation of the faithfull.
               Thus writeth our Fryer Iesuite: Out of whose words I
note first, that the Prophets and Apostles wrote their
doctrine for our good.
               Secondly, that they left no point vnwritten, which was
necessary for vs to know.
               Thirdly, that he yeeldeth a reason why all thinges necessary
are written; (viz:) because the Prophets & Euangelists
haue written many things which were not so necessary
for vs to know.
               Fourthly, that S. Austen teacheth vs the same doctrin,
(viz:) that all things necessary for our saluation are committed
to writing and set downe in the Scripture; yea, the
Iesuite affirmeth in another place, out of the same Saint
Austen,
                  Page 286. that all things are plainly set downe in the Scripture,
which concerne either faith or manners.
               Fiftly, that our Iesuite granteth al things to be written
of Christs both sayings, and doings, which Christ would
haue vs to read. Marry, hee addeth three worthy exceptions.
First, that though all Christs sayings and dooings,
be written, which Christ would haue vs to read, yet not
all which he would haue vs to beleeue. As thogh forsooth
Christ would haue vs beleeue something, which we may
not read. What a fond saying is this? Nay, what a fond
Religion is Popery? All things necessary for vs, are written
(saith our Iesuite,) and yet he telleth vs withall, that
we must beleeue things which are not written. And consequently,
we must beleeue thinges which are necessarie
for vs. Nay, which is more, that Articles of the Christian
fayth are not necessary for vs. Loe, Popery is a very
strange Religion.
               Secondly, that we must beleeue Traditions, which Christ



would not haue vs to read, and consequently, that Christ
would not haue vs to read our beliefe. Lord haue mercy vpon
vs, and keepe vs from this doctrine.
               
               Thirdly, that we must beleeue many vnwritten Traditions
of the Apostles, which are neither contained in
Christs sayings, nor in his dooinges. But the holy Ghost
came downe from Heauen, not to teach the Apostles
new Reuelations, saue those thinges onely which Christ
had foretold them, and which they did not perfectly vnderstand.Iohn 14, 16.
                  But the comforter the holy Ghost (saith Christ) whom
the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and
bring all thinges to your remembrance, whatsoeuer I haue saide
vnto you, so is the Originall in Greeke. Panta ha eipon
humin. But the Latine Vulgata editio, to which the Pope
hath tyed all Papists, readeth thus; Whatsoeuer I shall say
vnto you. And hence it is, that they would establish their
vnwritten Traditions. But the truth is, as we haue seene,
(viz:) that Christ hath commanded his Apostles to writ
                     •
                  
all things, both of his myracles and of his Doctrin, which
he would haue vs know and beleeue; as also, that Christs
Apostles receiued no new Reuelations of the holy ghost,
but the perfect vnderstanding of those thinges, which
Christ afore had taught them, and heere we may note by
the way,Iohn 
                        •
                     0, 31▪
                   that Aquinas vnderstandeth Saint Iohns words,
(These thinges are written) aswell of Christes Doctrine, as
of his Myracles.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell citeth an Apocryphall sentence out of Esdras,
                  Page, 327.
3. 4. vnder the name of the wise man, as if it were
Salomons.
               
            
            
               T. B.
               If our Iesuite were not at a Non plus, he would neuer be
so friuolously occupied. I name the wise man, of whome I
spake; euen Esdras, as our Iesuite graunteth. If our Fryer,
denie all men to bee wise (Salomon only excepted;) then
doubtles, not onely himselfe is a foole, as it well seemeth



by his Writing; but his Pope also (for he is not Salomon)
and so all Papists must bee ruled by a Foole, and beleeue
that a foole, cannot erre. And in the end, they sha
                     •
                  l haue
a fooles Bable, and a Foxe taile for their paines.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell citeth Victoria thus; I am not certaine of it,Page 329 (sayth
Victoria) though all Writers affirme it, which is not contayned
in the scripture. But Vistoria meaneth of thinges
spoken, not by Tradition, but by propable Opinion, as the
conception of our Lady without Originall sinne, and
such like; or he meaneth of thinges, neyther actually nor
virtually contained in Scripture, as Traditions bee, according
to our second conclusion.
            
            
               T. B.
               If I should answere fully to all our Iesuites fonde sentences;
my reply would grow to a bigger booke, then is
the great Bible. For our Iesuite thinketh himselfe a verie
wise man, though before hee would haue none wise but
Salomon. First, our Fryer telleth vs, that Victoria meaneth
not of Traditions, but of probable opinions, yet secondly
hee graunteth, that hee cannot tell what Victoria meaneth,
But perhaps (sayth hee) he meaneth of thinges, neyther
actually nor virtually contained in scripture.
               
               Lo
                     •
                   heere, Gentle Reader, Popish Traditions be neyther
virtually nor actually, contained in the Scripture.
Ergo say I, they are no points of Christian fayth. And I
prooue it, by our Iesuites owne expresse words:Page 290 
                  All points
(sayth our Fryer) of Christian faith, are virtually contained in
scripture. Thus I nowe frame an Argument,
                     A sillogisme vnanswerable. against Popish
vnwritten Traditions, to which when our Iesuite shall
aunswere soundly, I will thinke him woorthy to bee
Pope of Rome. All pointes of Christian fayth, are virtually
contained in the Scripture; but Popish vnwritten
Traditions are not contained virtually in the Scripture,
Ergo Popish vnwritten Traditions, are no pointes of Christian
fayth. The consequence is good, and cannot bee



denyed. It is in the second figure, and moode, called Baroco.
The assumption is the Iesuites owne,2. Figura. Baroco,
                   in the Page quoted
in the Margent; (viz:) 329.Page 329 The proposition also is
the Iesuites, in another place; (viz:) Page 290.Page, 290▪
                   and so I
inferre this Golden and ineuitable Corollary; (viz:) that
Popis
                     •
                   vnwritten Traditions, are no pointes of Christian
fayth. Well therefore may they bee partes of Turcisme,
of Iudaisme, of Atheisme, but partes of Christianity they
cannot be. Apage, Apage, they smell of Infidelity.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell againe citeth Victoria, who sayth, That for Opinions
we no way ought to depart from the rule of scriptures.
                  Page, 239 What is
this to the purpose? Let Bell prooue, that wee eyther for
Opinions, or any thing else depart from Scripture.
            
            
               T. B.
               
                  Bell hath proued your departure from the holy scripture,
in many of his Bookes many yeares ago published to the
view of the world, yet to this day, this is the first answer,
the last, and al, that euer came from your pens. But to satisfie
your itching eares a little, I must put you in minde,
what lately you haue heard in this short reply.
               First, that the Greekes neuer beleeued your Popish
Purgatorie, as which cannot bee prooued, out of the
Scriptures.
               Secondly, that the Byshoppe of Rome to challenge
power to depose Kings, is against the holie Scripture.
               Thirdly, that to acknowledge sinnes Veniall of their
owne Nature, is to depart from the scripture.
               Fourthly, that to giue Pardons as the Pope doeth, is to
depart from the scripture.
               Fiftly, that to establish Workes of condigne merite, is
to depart from the Scripture. And so in the rest, as I
haue both heere and else where prooued at large.
For the Reading of Holy Scripture, and the facilitie
thereof touching thinges necessary for saluation, our



Iesuite bestirreth himselfe more then a little; but the bare
pervse of the Downefall, will bee a sufficient reply to the
same. Once let vs heare him in this point.
            
            
               S. R.
               The first point is not against vs,Page 34
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   who graunt that in
Reading the Scripture, wee may find all things necessary.
            
            
               T. B.
               You told vs euen now, (Good Sir Fryer,) that your popish
vnwritten Traditions,
                  Page 329▪
                   are neyther actually nor virtually
contained in the Scripture; Ergo, by your Doctrine
now deliuered, they are not necessarie. Beholde heere,
(Gentle Reader,) howe vncertaine Popish Doctrine is,
and into what Fooleries and Contradictions the Papistes
fall, while they busie themselues to fight against
the truth.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell Obiecteth out of Theodoretus, that the Haebrewe
Bookes were Translated into all Languages. This is
nothing against vs, who deny not but Scripture hath bin
and may bee, vpon iust and vrgent causes, translated into
all languages, so it be not vulgarly vsed, and common to
all kind of vulgar people.
            
            
               T. B.
               You say, you deny not, but Scripture hath beene, and
also may bee Translated into the vulgar Languages: yet
you adde two restrictions, by which, you in effect vnsay
that, which you had saide before.
               First, you say, it may be in the Vulgar languages, so it
bee not vulgarly vsed. What is this? Fast and loose, your
Legierdemaine? To what end I pray you, shall it and may
it bee turned into the vulgar Languages? That the vulgar
people may Read it, or no? If you say, yea; then may
it be vulgarly vsed. For that is to bee vulgarly vsed, to be
read vulgarly. If you say, no; then in vaine do you graunt
it to be Translated into the vulgar tongue.
               Secondly, you say, it may also be Translated, so it be



doone vppon iust and vrgent causes. You should haue
doone well, to haue named those iust and vrgent causes.
But Sir, seeing the thing may bee doone, and seeing also
there may bee iust and vrgent causes, why it should bee
doone; how commeth it to passe, that none may doe it,
vnlesse the Pope licence him thereunto? How happeneth
it, that none may read it when it is translated, vnlesse hee
haue the Popes licence so to doe? How chanceth it, that
it was neuer done, since the Bishop of Rome aspired to his
vsurped prymacy? This would I learne.
            
            
               S. R.
               The Holy Fathers affirme,Page 364. that there are vnwritten Apostolicall
Traditions; Bell and some few start-vp Heretiques
deny it. Whether beleeue ye Christians?
            
            
               T. B.
               
                  Bell denyeth not simply, that there bee no vnwritten
Apostolicall Traditions. It is a notorious calumny; sor I willingly
admit vnwritten Traditions, as is apparant by my
Bookes published to the World. But I constantly reiect
all vnwritten Traditions whatsoeuer, which are obtruded
as necessary to saluation, or as necessary parts of doctrin,
because al such things are contained in the written Word.
Other Traditions not contrary to Gods Word, which the
Church obserueth, I am so farre from condemning them,
that I both willingly admit them, and highly reuerence
the same. And if you were constant to your own writings,Page, 284. 285. 286. 290. 291.
you would subscribe to this my doctrine. For you graunt
in many places, that all thinges necessary for saluation,
are contained in the holy Scripture. Which being granted,
you contradict your selfe, when yee vrge vnwritten
Traditions, as necessary points of Christian Faith.
            
            
               S. R.
               There are certaine and vndoubted Apostolicall Tradions.
                  Page 385.
This is against Bell.
               
            
            
               T. B.
               It is not against Bell, for Bell admitteth (as we haue seen



already) such vnwritten Traditions, as are repugnant to
the holy Scripture, and haue euer beene approued of the
whole Church. But such neither are Articles of the Chrian
faith, neither necessary to Saluation.
            
            
               S. R.
               But I prooue it, because the Traditions of the Bible to
be Gods word,Page. 385. of the perpetuall virginity of our blessed
Lady, of the transferring of the Sabboath, and such like,
are certaine, and vndoubted.
            
            
               T. B.
               
                  Crambe bis posita mors est, saith the Prouerbe. This
Cuckow song, soundeth often in our eares. This irkesome
Tautology of yours, doth you good seruice. The perpetuall
virginity of the most blessed Virgin, I admit with
all reuerence; and semblably, I approoue the translation
of the Sabboath. As this is not the first time ye vrged thē,Page, 364.
so neither the first time I answere them.Page 292. But neither are
they repugnāt to the holy Scripture, nor necessary points
of Doctrine. To the Tradition of the Bible (which is euer
your last and best trump,) aunswere shall bee made God
willing, in the ende of this Article. It is the most colourable
thing, you can alleadge, and the onely foundation,
vppon which you continually relie. I therefore reserue
it for the vpshot, and to entertaine you with such a
collation, as may be to your best liking.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bels conclusion is,Page 386. that Traditions are so vncertain, as the
learnedst Papists contend about them: and hee prooueth
it, because S. Victor contended with the Byshop of Asia;
Saint Policarpe with Saint Anicetus. Surely, he meaneth,
that these men were Papists, or else his conclusion is vnprooued:
and consequently, Papistes and Popery were
1400. yeares agoe.
            
            
               T. B.
               Two thinges our Fryer vrgeth, neither of which vvill
do him any seruice, (viz:) my meaning, and the proofe



of my conclusion. My meaning is cleerely vttered,See the place▪ Page 129. when
in the Downefall I affirmed Saint Policarpus, Saint Policrates,
and other holy Fathers, to bee so farre from acknowledging
the Byshop of Rome to bee the supreme head of
the Church, and that he could not erre; that they all reputed
themselues his equals, touching gouernment Ecclesiasticall;
that they all reprooued him very sharpely;
that they all with vniforme assent, affirmed him to defend
a grosse errour, & to hold a false opinion; and therefore
they with might and maine withstand his proceedings.
Whereas this day, if any Bishops, Magestrates, or
other Potentates in the World (where Popery beareth the
sway) should doe the like; they might all roundly be excommunicated,
and not onely deposed from their iurisdiction,
but also to be burnt with fire and Fagot for their
pains. Thus I then wrote, so as our Fryer could not doubt
of my meaning, but that malice carryeth him away to lying.
Well, but how is my conclusion proued? Thus forsooth;
I alleaged this great contention among the holy
Fathers, to proue the vncertainty of obtruded vnwritten
Traditions in these our dayes. My Argument was, A maiori
ad minus, as the Scooles tearm it, (viz:) that if the Fathers
of the most ancient Church, when she was in good
estate, and stained with very few or no corruptions at all,
could finde no certaintie in vnwritten Traditions; much
lesse can wee trust to vnwritten Traditions in these dayes,
when the Pope and his Iesuited Popelinges, employ all
their care, study, & industry, to bury the truth of Christs
Gospell vnder the ground. And so haue I both prooued
my conclusion, and also our Fryer to be either full of malice,
or a very foole.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell denyeth the keeping of Lent to be Apostolicall,
                  Page 389. because
Saint Crysostome writeth, That Christ did not bid vs imitate
his fast, but be humble; and to bee certaine, because
Eusebius out of Ieremy writeth; That in his time some thought



wee ought to fast one day, some two daies, others more, and some
fortie. Here Bell sheweth his lacke of iudgment, in citing
a place clearely against himselfe. For here Saint Ireney &
Eusebius affirme cleerely, that at the beginning there was
one manner of fasting Lent appointed, though some afterward,
either of ignorance or negligence, did breake
it. Which prooueth not the said Tradition to be vncertain
in the whole Church, vnlesse Bell will impute the fault of
some few to the whole. And by this is aunswered, vvhat
he bringeth out of Socrates touching the diuersity of time
and meate vsed in the fast of Lent. Albeit what Socrates
sayth of the Romane Church, fasting but three weekes before
Easter,Dist. 8. cap. si consue
                        •
                     udine. and not on Saterday, is an vntruth. See the
eight distinction of the Popes decrees, and note it well.
            
            
               T. B.
               I prooued in the Downefall out of Eusebius Caesariensis,
the vncertainty of Popish vnwritten Traditions, by the great
diuersity about the keeping of Lent. Because some
thought they ought only to fast one day, some two daies,
others more daies, and some forty. I prooued semblably
out of Socrates, that the people did differ no lesse in theyr
manner of eating, then they did in their daies of abstayning.
For some (saith he) would eate no liuing thing; othersome
of liuing things, eat onely Fish; some together
with fish, did ate also Birdes; but some ate onely Bread,
and others at night eate all kind of meats without difference:
yea, hee telleth vs in the same place, that the Romans
fast three weekes before Easter, besides the Sabbaoth
and the Lords day. And that the Illirians and Alexandrians
doe fast sixe weekes, and yet doe they all tearm their
fast, Lent. Here I inferred in the Downefall, the vncertainty
of Popish vnwritten Traditions. Now our Fryer thinketh
to answere all this (though a Bulwarke inuincible) with
his onely bare Word; (viz:) in telling his Reader, that
Bell sheweth his want of iudgement, in bringing a place
cleerely against himselfe. Mary Sir, this is a ready answere



indeede. If such answeres will serue, in vaine is all disputation.
But our Fryer would seeme, to yeelde a reason of
this his answere. And what is that? Forsooth, that in the
beginning all obserued one manner of Fast, though some
afterward, either of ignorance or negligence (he cannot
tell whether) did breake it. To my Testimony out of Socrates,
he saith it is an vntruth, because the Romains fasted
the Saterdaies. But I answere thus; First, that the vncertainety
of Traditions is heereby so apparant, as it is great
impudency to deny the same. For how can there bee any
certainty, where not onely the time of fasting, but also
the meats that must be eaten, is vncertaine? Both which
happen is this case.
               Secondly, that the ancient Cannons of the Apostles cō
                  firme
Socrates his affirmation; for there is it thus written;
Si quis dominicū diem, aut Sabbathū, vno solo dempto,
                  Can. 65. 
                        •
                     
                     postlop. 
                  ieiunare
deprehendatur, deponitor. If any shal be conuicted to fast the
Sunday or Sabbaoth, one onely excepted, let him bee
depriued. So then, either our Fryer must graunt, that Socrates
spake the truth, & that he hath falsly accused him;
or else (if hee like this better) that the Pope contemned
the cannon Apostolicall. Yea, the sixt Synod generall of
Constantinople, affirmeth it to bee against the Tradition of
the Church,Conc. constū
                     
                        •
                      can. 55. to fast on Saterdaie. Behold here, the comely
certainety of Popish Traditions. The Tradition of the
church saith, We must not fast on Saterday; the Pope holdeth
the contrary; and yet saith our Iesuite, Traditions are
most certaine.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Popish Traditions (saith Bell) tell vs,Page 393. that all the Bishops
of Rome, one after another, haue taught successiuely the
same Doctrine with Saint Peter: howbeit theyr owne
deere Fryer and learned Doctor, Nicholaus de Lyra, auoucheth
plainely, roundly, and boldly, to the whole Christian
world; that many Byshoppes of Rome haue falne away
from the faith, and become fit Apostataes. But well



may one bee an Apostata, and yet teach the Doctrine of
his Predecessor. As S. Peter denyed his Maister, and yet
taught no contrary Doctrine. Saint Marcellin offered sacrifice
to Idols, and yet taught no Idolatry.Ioh. 11. 51. 
                  Caiphas murdered
Christ, and yet prophesied.
            
            
               T. B.
               Marke Gentle Reader, the case is so plaine, that Popes
haue swarued from the right faith of Christ, that our Frier
cannot deny the same. They may (saith he) be flat Apostataes,
forsake the Faith, yet neuer preach a false faith.
They may sacrifice to Idolles, yet neuer preach Idolatry.
They may deny Christ, yet neuer preach against Christ.
And indeed for preaching, it may be true, in an vsual Popish
sense & meaning. For since they came to their Lordly
primacy, they haue abandoned preaching with solemnity.
Well, hee that list to know what your Popes haue
beene, and what Faith they held, I refer him to my book
of Suruey, and to my Motiues. For I desire to be breefe,
especially, since our Iesuite bringeth nothing to be aunswered,
which was not in effect confuted before it came
to light.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell telleth vs of Constantius baptisme,Page 394. but it is a meere
Historicall Tradition, & concernes no matter of saluation,
& it is vnawares contested by Bel himself, when he saith,
that he hath seene at Rome the Font, and that Constantine
is worthily called great.
            
            
               T. B.
               I wrote in the Downfall, that by Popish Tradition the Emperor
Constantine was baptized at Rome, in a Font remaining
there to this day; & that my selfe haue seen the Fons
in which (as they say) hee was baptized. Howbeit, Hyeronymus,
Eusebius, Socrates, Theodoretus, Sozomenus, Cassiodorus,
and Pompontus, doe all affirme very constantly, that
he was baptized at Nichomedia. But our Iesuite thinkes it
enough to say, that it concerns no matter of faith, & that



my selfe confesse vnawares, that I haue seene the Font, in
which they say Constantine was Baptized. I aunswere to
the former, that if a man shall go to Rome, and there reprooue
any Tradition which the Pope holdeth, or practiseth,
he shalbe burnt as an Heretique. To the latter, that
I onely report what I haue seene; I neyther say, Constantine
was christned in it, nor deny the same. This I cōstantly
affirme; that since so many learned menne deny it, it
must needes argue great vncertainty, in Popish vnwritten
Traditions.
               
            
            
               S. R.
               The Papists (saith Bell) by their Popish Traditions,
                  Platin. in vita Bonifacij. 8. & Martin. polon. p. 237. in append. make
some to honour Heretiques for Saintes. For both theyr
owne deare friende Platina, and their famous Byshoppe
Martinus Polonus doe tell vs, that the dead corps of Hermannus
were worshipped for a Saints Reliques at Ferrara,
the space of twenty yeares together, who for all that (Oh
impious Idolatry, and Idolatrous impiety) was a knowne Heretick,
as the same Platina auoucheth. Is not this a strange
thing, to make the error of common people a Popish tradition?
Besides, Platina affirmeth no such thing himselfe,
but onely that some others write so.
            
            
               T. B.
               
                  Platina writeth as other Historiographers do, that which
he hath learned by credible report. And he addeth, that
he verily deemed that Hermannus to bee one è fraticellis,
whose sect at that time abounded. But their Bishop Martinus
Polonus, or whosoeuer was the Authour of the appendix
ioyned to his Chronicle, telleth vs plainely; that
the Maisters of the Inquisition sought out the truth of the
matter, and caused Harmannus his body to be digged out
of the Graue, and to bee burnt as an Heretique, and his
sumptuous shrine to bee pulled downe. O holy Worshippers
of Deuils! But this was but the errour of the common
people and no Tradition from the Pope. Alasse, alasse,
could such a publique concourse of people bee in such a



famous place as Ferrara, and flock together to adore and
worshippe an Idoll in the Church, and the Gouernors of
the Church be ignorant thereof? Nay, would the people
haue yeelded any such worship and adoration, if theyr
Pastors, or the Popes Catch-poles had not induced them so
to do? It is vnpossible, they receiued it by Tradition. And
whosoeuer shall enquire such matters of them, shall find
that their ready answer, (viz:) that their ancestors haue
beene taught to do so.
            
            
               S. R.
               The Scriptures (saith Bell) are called Canonical,
                  Page 398. Reade the Downefall.
                   because
they are the rule of Faith, therefore all things are to bee
examined by them: And for this cause (saith he) Esay sent
vs to the Law, and to the Testimony to try the truth, &c. Aunswere.
The Bible alone is called Canonicall Scripture,
because it alone of all Scriptures the Church followeth,
as an infallible rule in beleeuing or defyning any thing.
But it neither is, nor is called the onely Cannon of Faith.
            
            
               T. B.
               First our Iesuite granteth, that the Scripture is the onely
rule & Cannon which we must follow in beleeuing & defining
any thing. That done, he by & by telleth vs, that it
neither is, nor is cald the onely Cannon of Faith. This is a
wonderment doubtles. The Scripture is an infallible rule
to be folowed, in beleeuing or defining any thing. This is
true, hold thee here good Fryer. But what followeth? The
Fryer will haue one foot further, though it cost him dear.
But it neither is, nor is called the onely Cannon of Faith.
Loe, first hee graunteth the Scripture to bee an infallible
rule of Faith, and then he denieth it to be the onely rule
of Faith. Is not that worthy to be the onely rule of Faith,
which is the infallible rule thereof? Shall we forsake the
infallible rule, & betake our selues to a fallible rule? Ther
is no remedy, the Pope will haue it so. The Scripture
therefore by Popish grant (GOD reward them for their
kindnes) is the infallible rule of our faith, but not the only



rule of the same, for vnwritten Traditions, must bee a
ioynt-rule of Faith with it.
               The scripture is an infallible rule, yet not the totall but
partiall rule of the Christian faith
                     •
                   Well, let vs holde fast
that which our Iesuite hath graunted afore, (viz:) that
all things necessary for our saluation, are contained in the
Scripture. And let vs thereupon conclude,Page 284. Page, 285. Page 286. that Popish
faith is as vnconstant as the wind, and let vs adde withal,
that it is execrable blasphemy against the sonne of God,
to make mans Traditions a partiall rule of our faith. For, as
Christ teacheth vs, they worshippe him in vaine, that for
doctrines, deliuer the Precepts of men. Read the Downfal.
                  Mat. 15, 9 2 Tim, 3, 15.
Saint Paule telleth vs; That the Scriptures are able to make
vs vvise vnto saluation. Which being so, we stand in need
of no more, it is enough. Let vs reply vppon the written
truth, and let the Papistes keepe their vnwritten vanities
to themselues. Nay, let vs remember what our Iesuit hath
told vs already, euen in these expresse wordes; For surely
the Prophets & Euangelists writing their Doctrine for our better
remembrance,
                  Page 285. 
                  would omit no one point, which was necessary to be
actually knowne of euery one; especially, seeing they haue written
many thinges not so necessary. These are the Iesuites owne
words, in the Page quoted in the Margent. And yet they
containe fully as much as I desire, and the whole trueth
now in Controuersie, whereby the Reader may perswade
himselfe, that it is the truth that I defend, and which the
Papistes oppugne maliciously, confessing the same vnawares.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell saith, Saint Iohn bids vs Try the spirites;
                  Page 400, 1, Iohn, 4. but he speaks
not of Apostolicall spirits, nor of Traditious. Besides, hee
bids vs not try them onely by scripture, and therefore hee
maketh nothing for Bels purpose.
            
            
               T. B.
               What an aunswere is this? Saint Iohn saith our Iesuite,
speakes not of Apostolicall spirits, nor of Traditions. Saint



                  Iohn speaketh of doubtfull spirits, and consequently of al
spirits & all Doctrines, not grounded & contained in the
holy scriptures. Againe, our Iesuite sayth, Hee bids not trie
them by the scripture. Saint Iohn indefinitely bids try the spirits,
and seeing he nameth not the way, (though after he
giueth some generall markes thereof) we haue to follow
the infalliable rule of Iudging aad defining euery thing,
which Rule or Canon (as our Iesuite hath freely granted)
is the scripture.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell saith, the Berhaeans examined the truth of S.Page 399. 
                  Pauls
Doctrine. I aske of him whether they were faithful whilst
they examined it, or faithlesse? If faithlesse? why proposeth
hee them to vs, an example to imitate? If faithfull,
How coulde they examine whether that were true or no,Acts 17, 11.
which they assuredly beleeued to be Diuine truth? Wherfore
they examined not the truth of S. Pauls Doctrine, but
searched the scriptures for confirmation and encrease of
their faith. And this kinde of examining, which disallow
not.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere, that the faithfull though they beleeue the
Articles of the Christian faith, yet may they without
doubting or staggering, examine vnwritten Traditions
and what Doctrine els soeuer, not expressed in the Holy
scripture. Take heed of false Prophets, which come to you in sheeps
clothing.
                  Mat, 7, 15. Iohn 5, 39. 1. Thes. 5, 21 1 Iohn 4, 1. 1 Cor. 2, 15, 
                  Search the scriptures: try al things: hold fast thaet which
is good: Beleeue not euery spirit, but try the spirits if they bee of
God. The spirituall man Iudgeth all things. By these Textes of
holy writ, it is very cleere, that we are not bound rashly
to beleeue all preaching, and much lesse all vnwritten popish
Traditions. If wee do, we shall vnawares adore the
deuill in Hermannus, as is already proued. Neither did the
Berhaeans search the scriptures, onely for the confirmation
of their faith; but for the Tryall of the trueth, as the
Texte auoucheth. And they searched the scriptures daily, if
those things were so. Loe, they examined the Doctrine, if
it were consonant to the scripture. But heere it may bee



obiected, that if euery one be a Iudge, confusion will abound
in the Church. To this Obiection I haue answered
at large, in my Booke Intituled the Golden Ballance. To
which place, I referre the Reader, which shall desire satisfaction
in that behalfe.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell faith, that in S. Cyprians dayes,Page, 40
                        •
                     . neyther tradition
was a sufficient proofe of Doctrine, nor the Popes definitiue
sentence a rule of fayth. These be both vntruths. For
he onely thought, that humane and mistaken tradition was
no sufficient rule, as hath bin shewed before.
            
            
               T. B.
               S. Cyprian was resolute, that all traditions must be exactly
tryed by the Holy scripture, as is proued at large in the
Downfall, and partly in this reply already. It is needlesse
heere to iterate the same.
            
            
               S. R.
               S. Hierom writing to Damasus, saith thus;Page, 403. 
                  Decree I pray
you, if it please you; I will not feare to say three Hypostases,
if you bid. And hee requested him to giue authority,
either to affirme or deny three Hypostases: and darest thou
Bell, make no account of the Popes sentence, when so
great a Doctor so highly esteemed it?
            
            
               T. B.
               I answer, first that if we beleeue Fryer Austen de Aneona,
the Pope in these dayes,
                     In summa Page 152. hath Vniuersal iurisdiction ouer
all Kingdomes and Empyres. Secondly, that as Antoninus
saith, He hath power ouer all things, that haue any being.
                  Aquin. in sup. q. 25. art. 1.
Thirdly, that as Aquinas saith, Hee hath as much power as
Christ himselfe had, and can giue as large Pardons, as Christ
himselfe gaue. Fourthly, that as Siluester saith,Silv. de indulg. 33. 
                  One may haue
so large a Pardon from the Pope,
                  Grat. dist. 22. can. omnes. 
                  that if he chance to die the same
houre he hath it, he shall go to heauen out of hand. Fiftly, that
as Gratianus telleth vs, Hee beareth the keyes of eternall life,
the right both of earthly & heauenly Empire. Sixtly, that as the



Popish Glosse saith; Hee hath both swords, the spirituall and
the Temporall,
                  Lyr. in 16. cap. Mat. 
                  and by that meanes, hee can translate Empires.
Seauenthly, that as Nicolaus de Lyra his owne deare fryer
telleth him; He may be an Apostata, and forsake the faith,
as many of his predecessors haue done. Eightly, that as Fryer
Caranza saith, He may enter into the Popedome as a Fox, liue
in it as a Wolfe, and dye as a Dogge.
                  Carranz. in tom, 1. concil, Dist 40. cap. si papa. Ninthly, that as his owne
Decrees tel vs, though he be so wicked that he carry many thousands
to Hell with him, yet may no mortall man Iudge him. No
maruell therefore, if our Iesuite demaund of one, how I
dare controule his dealing. Yet by his fauour, I may tell
him with humility, that Damasus was a Vertuous, Wise,
and Learned Byshop, and of great Authority by reason
of his place, and for that end did S. Hierome thinke it fitte
in the troublous state of the Church, (when the Arrians
did euery where molest the Christians) to haue his counsell
and assistaunce, in the cheefest point then in controuersie.
Like as in these our dayes, greater personages, and
better learned, will not sometime disdaine, to haue the
opinion and Iudgement of meaner men. I adde, that Sa.
Hierome knewe right well, that it was a thinge meerely
Adiaphoron, and therefore was therein resolued, to do as
Damasus should giue aduise.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bellarmine (saith Bell) telleth vs, that the greater part
of voyces must beare the sway in Counsels.Page 409. But Melchior
Canus a learned Popish Byshop, doth roundly tell vs another
tale. It is not (saith he) with vs as it is within humaine
assemblies, where moe voyces euer preuaile. For these matters
are not to be iudged by number, but by weight. And the
Counsels receiue their waight from the grauity and authority
of the Pope. Ergo (saith Bell.) There is no certainty in
Counsels. A goodly reason surely, as if nothing in counsels
were certaine, because two Byshops cannot agree of the
Popes authority.
            
            
               
               T. B.
               The reason is strong against you, for in these late daies
the Pope taketh so much vppon him, that wee see, the
best learned Papistes know not, what to thinke of the
decree.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bellarmine (saith Bell) in one place saith,Page 411. that the Consistorie
of Bishops in lawful councels, is the true assembly
of Iudges, and that their decrees and Lawes must be obserued
of necessity. Yet in another place he saith, it is all
one, whether the Pope disanul the Councel expressely, or
the Councell doe against the Popes minde. This is no
Contradiction, for though he affirme Byshoppes to bee
Iudges, and theyr iudgement to bee necessarily followed,
yet must not that bee, before it be confirmed by the
Pope.
            
            
               T. B.
               Let the Reader giue his censure; The case is euident.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell citeth M
                        •
                     lchior Canus,
                  Page 415. affirming that the Pope
cannot communicate his iudiciall power to his Legates,
whom he sendeth to Counsells; and therefore inferreth,
that the Pope abuseth the World, whereas the Pope abuseth
the World no more, then doth the Prince abuse
the Parliament, when sending thether the Lord Chancellor
to supply his place, will neuerthelesse approue nothing
what the Peeres do
                     •
                  , or decree, vnlesse himselfe
iudgeth it conuenient.
            
            
               T. B.
               The Popes dealing is shamefull, and this manner of defending
him more shamefull. For first, humaine thinges
and diuine are not alike, as your owne Doctor Canus telleth
vs. Secondly, all Princes I thinke, come in their proper
persons to all their Parliamentes. Thirdly, though
Princes negatiuely casheire & disanul such things, as they
deeme not conuenient for Gods glory, and the good of



their people; yet do they neuer affirmatiuely establish any
Law, without the ioynt consent of the Lordes Spirituall,
Lordes Temporall, and the Commons. Fourthly,
there is great disparity in the Persons, for, the Prince
may doe much more in his Kingdome, then the Pope in
generall Councels.
               First, because the Pope of right, neither can call councels,
nor yet confirme the same. This is proued in my Suruey
of Popery, and in my Golden ballance of tryall.
               
               Secondly, because euery King is supreame head ouer
all persons in his Kingdomes; not so the Pope ouer all
Kinges and people, in the Christian VVorld. Neyther
dooth the Pope in person, come to Councelles at all of
late daies.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell citeth Bell
                        •
                     rmine,
                  Page, 413. for the Emperours sitting in
Councelles aboue the Pope: Ergo, the East Church neuer
acknowledged his primacy. Who seeth not the weaknesse
of this reason?
            
            
               T. B.
               Our Iesuite falsifieth my words, and then descanteth at
his pleasure vppon them.Page 121. These are my wordes, as it may
appeare in the Downefall. The pope was neuer present at
the Councelles in the East Churches, by himselfe, and in his
owne person. The conclusion is freely confessed by Bellarmine,
who alleadgeth two reasons, for the Popes absence.
The one forsooth, because it was not conuenient,
that the head should follow the members. The other, because
the Emperour would euer sit in the highest place.
Out of these wordes I noted two pointes of importance;
the one, that in the Auncient Church, the highest place
in the Councels, was euer reserued to the Emperour. The
other, that the East Churches did neuer acknowledge the
Popes prymacie, which hee this day challengeth ouer all
Kingdomes and Regalities most arrogantly. To vvhich
twaine, this pleasant adiunct perforce must be annexed:



(viz:) that our humble Father the Pope (who hypocritically
calleth himselfe Sernus seruorum Dei,) would neuer
come to the Councels, because forsooth he could not
endure to see the Emperour sitting in the highest place.
Now the Reader hath the truth, let him him giue his censure
accordingly.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell inferreth diuers thinges requisite to be answered.Page 416.
               
            
            
               T. B.
               But yee both propound them as is best for your owne
aduantage, and answere them either with silence, or nothing
to the purpose. But let vs be content with that we
can get, and make our best commodity thereof. Say on
good Fryer, thou shalt be heard with all fauour.
            
            
               S. R.
               First, Bishops before they can be admitted in councels
(saith Bell) must sweare,Page 416. that the Pope can depose all Emperors,
and Kings in the Christian world. Secondly, they
sweare to admit the Popes decrees, whō they freely grant
may bee an Heretick. Thirdly, they sweare obedience to
him in matters of Faith, whom (as themselues confesse)
they can depose for heresie. Fourthly, that the pope is not
supreme Iudge of controuersies, seeing Bishops may examine
and iudge, whether what he commandeth be agreeable
to Gods word, & the Canons. Lastly, that they swear
flat rebellion against their soueraigns, seeing they sweare
to defend the Popes primacy, against all men whomsoeuer.
            
            
               T. B.
               Let vs examine this honest tale, made in the behalfe of
the Pope, and for the benefite of the Reader, let vs both
heare it, and answer it particularly.
            
            
               S. R.
               As for the first point, it is vntrue, as appeareth by the
answer to the first article.
            
            
               T. B.
               The first point is, that the Pope can depose Emperours



and Kings. Our Fryer denyeth it, and sendeth the Reader
to the first Article. I agree also, that the Reader peruse my
reply with the Downefall, & then yeeld his censure accordingly,
for that the Pope challengeth such power (though
the Iesuite for shame here denieth it) it is as cleere as the
Sunne shining at noone-day.
            
            
               S. R.
               The second and third containe no inconuenience.The Popes doctrine must be obei
                        •
                     d, though he be an Hereticke. For
we must obey what he decreeth or defineth iudicially, as
sitting in S. Peters chaire; though in hart he were an Hereticke:
as our Sauiour commaunded the Iewes to follow
what the Scribes taught out of Moses Chaire, but to abstaine
from their priuate Leauen.
            
            
               T. B.
               The second point was, that the Bishops sweare to admit
his Canons and decrees, whom they freely grant, may
bee an Heretique. The third point was, that the Bishops
sweare obedience to him in matters of Faith, whom they
can depose for heresie. These pointes which our Iesuite
proposeth couertly (because he would not haue the Reader
to vnderstand thē) must neuer be forgotten. We must
(saith our Fryer) obey & beleeue what the Pope decreeth
iudicially, though in hart he be an Heretick. This is strange
Doctrine to a Christian hart, though approued of all Papists.
It is not amisse here to adde, the Testimony of their
graue Quodl betist. These are his words; As the prudent
Greeke appealed from Alexander furious, to Alexander
sober; and Bishoppe Crostate from Pope Adrian priuate,
to Pope Adrian publique, and as Summus pontifex in Cathedra
Petri, so may the Seculars appeale from the Pope
as Clemens, vnto his holinesse as Peter. These words are
expressely set downe. Quodl. 6. art. 10. By this Doctrine
so plainely deliuered (which is a constant position in the
Romish Church) the Secular Priests giue vs to vnderstand,
that execrable and neuer enough detested fallacy, wherewith
the Pope & his popelings, haue a long time seduced



a great part of the Christian world, (viz:) that the Pope
may erre as a priuate man, but not as a publicke person.
Of which absurd Doctrine I haue written at large in my
Treatise, intituled The Hunting of the Romish Foxe. I will
therefore for the present onely speake thereof, as these
words giue me fit occasion.
               First then; we see heere, that if we meane to wring any
truth out of the Popes nose, we must haue recourse to his
holines, at such time as he is sober; not when he is furious
least he become starke mad, & forget for euer the knowledge
of the truth.
               Secondly, we must haue his aduise, when he is a publike
person, not a priuate man.
               Thirdly, we must go vnto him, not as he is indeed, this
or that Pope, but as he is S. Peter, that blessed Apostle of
our Lord Iesus. Thus much is deduced out of this popish
Doctrine, by euident and necessary consecution. These
points, if they be well marked, will vtterly confound all
popish Doctrine, and turne it vpside downe. For first, it is
a constant Axiome in all popish Doctrine, that the Pope
and none but the pope, must be the Iudge in all controuersies
of faith and Doctrine.
               This notwithstanding, wee see by this popish doctrine
(which is currant in the Romish Church) that if the Pope
Iudge of any matter, as he is furious and not sober; as he
is a priuate man, and not a publike person; as hee is Clemens,
Sixtus, Adrianus, or some other like pope, and not
Saint Peter himselfe; then may hee erre, and so both bee
deceiued himselfe, and deceiue all others. Whereupon it
followeth of necessity, that euery one must well examine
the popes Doctrine and Iudgement, before he beleeue it,
otherwise doubtles, he may receiue poyson for medicine,
falshood for truth, and erroneous, for Orthedoxe Christian
doctrine. Nay, otherwise he cannot possibly tell, when
he shall appeale from the pope, as a false teacher and seducer
of the people.
               
                  
Secondly, the time cannot be named, in which the Byshop
of Rome, shall be the Byshop there, & not a publick
person at the selfe-same time, for euen then when hee is a
sleepe, he is a publicke person, or else no Byshop doubtlesse.
For once a Byshop euer a Byshop, by Popish indeleble
Character. Yet I willingly graunt, that a publique
person may do some act, which may be censured the acte
of a priuate man; but that cannot serue their turne.
               Thirdly, If the Papists will neuer apeale to the pope,
nor haue any intercourse with him, vntill he be Saint Peter,
they shall neuer do it, till the worlds end.
               Fourthly, if he be Peter by Office or calling, then is hee
alwayes Peter; vnlesse perhaps hee be sometime Lucifer,
which were a rare Metamorphosis.
               
               Fiftly, this Popish distinction, may fitly be termed a trick
of fast and loose. For, if the Pope define a truth, they may
thē say, he defined as a publick person. But if he define an
error, then they say, he defined as a priuat mā. So doubtles
it may be said indeed, that he can neuer erre, but some mā
in his robes, or some Deuill vnder his pall. Briefely, on the
one side (as we haue heard already) the Pope commands
vpon paine of Sacriledge, not to dispute of his power, nor
to examine his doings, and yet on the other side, we must
know whether he speake and define as a publicke person,
or as a priuate man, before we beleeue his decrees: which
knowledge for al that can no way be had, but by due examination
of the popes doings. What remaineth but to exclaime
and complaine to our trusty friendes (as the great
learned Papist Gielerius did) that by this Popish Doctrine
no man can go to heauen.
            
            
               S. R.
               For we must obey and beleeue what he decreeth iudicially,
though in hart he be an Hereticke.
            
            
               T. B.
               Then sir, we must examine the doctrine which the pope
deliuereth, to know whither it proceedeth from the Pope
as a publique person, or as a priuate man. For otherwise



we may as soone receiue deadly poyson, as wholy medicine;
and as soone worship Harmannus the Heretiques
bones, as the reliques of S. Peter, or S. Paule. But this examination
the Pope forbids and your selfe (Maister Fryer)
tels vs the same tale in your next wordes, which are
these; Because Byshops must not examine the Doctrine, which
the Pope deliuereth iudicially out of S. Peters chaire, as supreme
pastor of Gods Church, but onely that, wherein hee vttereth his
owne priuate Opinion. Thus writeth our Iesuite, truly telling
vs the Popish faith. Which Doctrine, if any but a Papist
had deliuered it, few or none woulde haue giuen credite
thereunto. O sweet Iesus! I wonder how any Papist hearing
such Doctrine published in print, by our Iesuites, so
deare & so neare to the Pope himselfe, and duely pondering
the vanity thereof, and the blasphemy therein contained,
can still be a Papist, and not defie the Pope & his
damnable doctrine. What shal we do with holy scripture?
Is it the infallible rule of faith? Is it superior to the Popes
iudiciall sentence? No, no, if the Pope define against it,
his sentence must bee obeyed, neyther may any Byshop,
(much lesse euery priuate man) examine the same, or else
cal it into Question, Apage, Apage, fire & faggot for such
rotten Popery, God will vomit it out of his mouth.
            
            
               S. R.
               As our Sauiour commandeth the Iewes to follow,Page, 419 Mat, 23, 3 what
the Scribes taught out of Moyses chaire, but to abstaine
from their priuate leuen.
            
            
               T. B.
               You pope sitteth in Cathedra pestilentiae, & not in Cathedra
petri. I haue proued it elsewhere at large; here I wil
adde one point or two,
                     In the Golden Ballance of Tryall. for the Readers better satisfaction
in this behalfe. Iohannes Gerson a famous Papist and chansellor
of Paris teacheth so plainely, that Popes may erre
not only as priuate men, but euen as publicke persons in
their publick and iudicial decrees of faith and manners, as
none for very shame can deny the same, that shall eyther
read or heare his words.Gers. in serm. de pase. page, 3 Thus therefore doth h
                     •
                  e write;



                  Propter quod insuper apparet falsitas doctrinae papae Iohannis 22.
quae damnata fuit cum s
                        •
                     no buccinarum coram 
                        •
                     ege Phillippo per
Theologos Parisienses, & credidit potius Theologis Parisiensibus,
quam 
                        •
                     uriae. By reason whereof appeareth further the falshood
of the Doctrine of Pope Iohn, which was condemned
by the sound of Trumpets, before king Phillip by the
Diuines of Paris, & the king beleeued rather the diuines
then the court (of Rome.) Out of these words I note first,
that the Doctrine of pope Iohn the 22. of that name, was
condemned at Paris, as false and erroneous.
               Secondly, that his Doctrine was condemned with the
sound of Trumpets.
               Thirdly, that it was condemned, in the presence of the
king of France.
               
               Fourthly, that the king gaue more credit to the Diuines
of Paris, then to the Court of Rome; that is, then to the
pope and his Cardinals.
               Fiftly, that the great Learned Doctours of the most famous
Vniuersity of Paris, gaue sentence against the
popes Opinion.
               Sixtly, that neyther the king, nor the learned papistes,
did in those dayes graunt such authority to the Pope, as
now adayes the Pope arrogantly challengeth to himself,
vvhereuppon it followeth consequently, that the Pope
taught false Doctrine, euen in a weighty matter of faith.
To which is consectary, that his Doctrine was publicke,
as which was publikely condemned at Paris, and that in
the presence of the King. But now kings must not deale
in such matters, where the Popes holinesse beareth any
sway. Yet thus dealt the King of France with the Pope,
almost 300. yeares ago. I thinke it not amisse heere to insinuate
to the Reader, how the kings of France haue vsed
the Popes Messengers. Boniface the eight falling at variance
with King Phillippe the faire, woulde needes excommunicate
him, but there was neuer excommunication
cost Pope so deare, as that did him, for his Nuncios were



committed prisoners his B
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  es burnt, and Bonif
                        •
                     ce himselfe
being taken by Naueret Chancellor of Fraunce, presently
after dyed for very sorrow. Wherein king Phillippe
did nothing, but by the Counsell & consent of the whole
Clergy of France. So Bennet the 13. otherwise called peter
de Luna, interdicted Charles the sixt and his Realm, but
the king sitting in his Throne of Iustice in the Parliament
or high Court of Paris, the 21. of May. 1408. gaue sentence,
that the Bull should be rent in pieces, and that Gonsalue
and Conseloux the bearers thereof, should bee set vpon
a pillory, and publiquely notified and traduced in the
pulpit Which decree was accordingly put in execution in
the moneth of August, with the greatest scorne that could
be deuised, the two Nuncioes or Legates hauing this inscription
vppon their Miters; These men 
                        •
                     re 
                        〈◊〉
                      to the
Church, and to the King. These words are put downe by the
French papists, in their book called the Iesuites Catechisme,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      3. cap. 17, fol, 182.
translated into English by the secular priests. But because
our papists stand so much vppon this 
                     •
                  ond and most foolish
distinction of the popes double person, and that hee
cannot erre in his publique sentence and decrees, I will
haue once a bout againe, to beate it better into the Readers
head, that the Pope both may erre, and hath De facto
erred, in his iudiciall sentence and publique Decree.
Marke well my discourse. Pope Adrian (saith Alphonsus,
                  Alphons. 
                        •
                      Castro. lib. 3 advers. hoer. prope finē.
a very learned man and a zealous Papist) hath these expresse
wordes; Nou ss
                        ••
                     e fertur de Ioh
                        •
                     nne 
                        〈◊〉
                     . q
                        •
                     ò
                        •
                      publice
docuit, 
                        〈◊〉
                     , & ab omnibus teneri mandauit, quò
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
purgatae a
                        •
                     te fiuale iudicium non habent stolam, quae 
                        〈…〉
                     
facialis visio Dei; & vn
                        •
                     uersitatem Parisieasem ad 
                        〈◊〉
                      duxisse
dicitur, quod nemo in ea poterat gradum in Theologi
                        •
                      adipisci,

                        〈◊〉
                      primitus hunc errorem iurass
                        •
                     tse de
                        •
                     ens
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     m, & porpetuo
ei adhaesurum.
               
               Last of all, it is reported of Pope Iohn the 22. that hee
publiquely taught, declared, and commaunded all men
to hold, that the soules of the iust before the day of iudgment,



haue not the Stole which is the cleare and faciall
vision of God. And hee is reported to haue induced the
Vniuersity of Paris to this; that none should take degree
in Theologie, but he that did first sweare to defend this error,
& to adhere to it for euer. Thus writeth Adrian, who
himselfe was Byshoppe of Rome. And Alphonsus a man of
high esteeme in the Church of Rome, after he had reckoned
vppe fiue Heresies, setteth downe this for the sixt;
(That the soules of the iust do not see God till the day of doombe)
ascribing the said Heresie to the Arm
                        •
                     nians as to the Authors
thereof, and to the Greekes together with pope
Iohn, as to the patrons and Defenders of the same. Heere
the Gentle Reader must obserue seriously, lest he be sedused
with the colorable glosse of the Iesuit Bellarmine, who
seeing the force of this Testimony, to ouerthrowe, the
highest point in popery, bestirreth himselfe mightily in
defence of the popish faith. He telleth vs forsooth, if we
will beleeue him, (as none will that haue either any wit
or reason) that pope Iohn erred in deede, as Adrian and
Alphonsus witnesse, but he did that as a priuate man (sayth
our Iesuite) not as pope of Rome. Which distinction
doubtlesse, wanteth not onely a good foundation
whereuppon it shoulde bee built, but also it flatly destroyeth
the plaine Text; the reason is euident, euen to
euery childe.
               First, because it is said, Docuit, he taught.
               Secondly, because it is said; Publice, publikely.
               Thirdly, because it is said; Mandauit, he commaunded
all to hold it.
               Fourthly, because none coulde bee made Graduates
in the Schooles of Theologie, which helde not this Opinion.
               Fiftly, because euery graduat was sworn to defend it, &
to hold it for euer. So then, the pope may erre, & the pope
hath erred De facto, & that not only in his priuat opinion,
as a priuate man, but euen in his iudicial and publike sentence,



as a publique person and pope of Rome. This argument
is insoluble; it will neuer be truely answered, while
the world stands. This is enough, yet we wil be content,
in way of congratulation to our Iesuit, to say a litle more.Alphons. lib. 1. cap. 4. adu. haeres.
Pope Celestine the thirde of that name, erred as Pope and
publicke person in his iudiciall sentence and publicke decree.
               This to bee so, Alphonsus afore named, is a constant
witnesse, in these expresse words; Celestinum papam errasse
circa Matrimonium fidelium, quorum a
                        •
                     ter labitur in haeresim,
res est omnibus manifesta. Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      h
                        •
                     c Celestini error talis fuit, qui
soli negligentiae imputari debuit, ita vt illūerrasse dicamus, velut
priuatam personam, & n
                        •
                     n vt papam, qui in qualibet reseria definienda
consulere debet viros doctos, quoniam huiusmodi Celestini
definitio habebatur in antiquis decretalibus, in cap. laudabilem,
titulo de conuersione infid
                        •
                     lium; quam ego ipse vidi & legi? that
Pope Celestine erred about Matrimony of the faithfull,
whereof the one is fallen into Haeresie, is a thing so manifest,
as all men know the same. Neither was this errour
of pope Celestine such, that it cannot bee imputed to sole
negligence, so as wee may thinke him to haue erred as a
priuate man, and not as pope, who ought in the Decree
of euery serious matter, to aske Counsell of learned men.This point st
                        •
                     keth dead
For that definition and Decree of Celestine was in the old
Decretals, in the Chapter Laudabilem; which I my selfe
haue seene, and read. Out of these words of Alphonsus,
(who was a man both very Learned, and a zealous
papist) I obserue many woorthy lessons, for the good of
the thankfull Reader.
               First, that pope Celestine erred, and that, not as a priuate
man, but euen as pope and publique person.
Marke this, (Gentle Reader,) for it striketh dead, and
clearely taketh a 
                     •
                  ay the friuolous distinction of the
popes double person. The wordes are verie easie and
plaine; Hee erred, (sayeth the Text,) not as a priuate
man, but euen as he was pope and Byshop of Rome,



no deniall can be made.
               Secondly, that the Pope erred in a very serious matter,
euen in a matter of Popish faith; (viz:) that Matrimony
was so dissolued by reason of Heresie, that the faithfull
man or woman might marry againe, the Hereticall
party liuing. Which thing, sayth Alphonsus, was manifest
to euery man to bee an Heresie, and the late Counsell of
Trent, hath defined it to be so.
               Thirdly, that this Decree and definition of Pope Celes
                        •••
                     e,
was in those daies enrolled in the popes Deorctals.
               
               Fourthly, that Alphonsus saw and read the same.
               Fiftly that the said Decree cannot this day be found, among
the Popes Decretall Epistles. Where I wish the
Reader to note by the way, that the Decrees of our holie
fathers the Popes, haue beene such and so much against
late Popery, that they are ashamed to bring them now
to light.Canus de loc
                        •
                      lib. 6, cap. 
                        •
                     . in fine. pagina. 189. Yea, Melchior Canus, though otherwise he be
a great learned Papist, telleth vs plainly and roundly, that
Iohannes Gerson, Iacobus Almanus, and Thomas Waldensis,
all three being famous Papists, and very learned writers,
do constantly hold and defend, that the pope as pope &
publicke person, may erre iudicially in a matter of fayth.
Now, where our Iesuite obiecteth Christs words, commaunding
the Iewes to follow the Doctrine which the
Scribes taught out of Moyses chaire;Mat, 23, 3. I answere, that our
Sauiour Christ seeing many thinges amisse in the Scribes
and Pharis
                        •
                     es, thought it m
                     •
                  ete and conuenient to giue
the people warning thereof, and he wisely tempereth his
admonition, least they shoulde reiect the good together
with the euill. For to teach the Lawe and the prophets,
which was to sit in Moyses Chaire, or to ex
                     •
                  cute Moyses
Authority, (which was all one in effect) was a thing very
honest and lawfull. Christ, therefore commaunded the
people to obey them, and to doe whatsoeuer they bidde
thē do; but this must be vnderstood with this limitation;
so long as they taught & cōmanded ex cathedra, that is;



agreeable to Gods Law, not otherwise. This to be the
true sence and meaning of Christs words, I haue prooued
not onely out of Saint Austen and Saint Hylary, but also
out of Nicholaus de Lyra, and Dionysius Carthusianus, tvvo
learned Papistes, and Religious Fryers. The Reader may
finde their wordes at large, in my Golden ballance of tryall;
with solutions to all other Obiections, that can be made
in this behalfe. But I must needes put the Reader in mind
of one thing, that euen now commeth to my remēbrance,
(viz:) of one of the Popes owne decrees, in which I find
these expresse wordes;Dist. 40. cap. multi sacerdotes. 
                  Multisacerdotes, & pauci sacerdotes.
Multi in nomine, & pauci in opere. Videte ergo fratres,
quomodo sed
                        •
                     tis super cathedram. Quia non cathedra facit sacerdotem,
sed sacerdos cathedrā. Non locus sanctificat hominē,
sed homo sanctificat locū. Non omnis sacerdos santcus, sed omnis
sanctus est sacerdos. Qui bene sederit super cathedrā, honorē accipit
cathedrae. Qui male sederit, iniuriam facit cathedrae. Many
Priestes, and few Priestes. Many in name, and few in
worke. Therefore my Brethren, beware how you sit vpon
the Chaire. For, not the Chaire makes a Priest, but the
Priest makes the Chaire. The place doth not sanctifie the
Manne, but the manne sanctifies the place. Euery
Priest is not an holy man, but euery holy manne is a
Priest. Hee that shall sit well in the Chaire, receiues the
honour of the Chaire, but hee that sits euill, dooth iniury
to the Chaire. Thus saith the Popes owne Decree;
which would to GOD the Pope and his Iesuited Popelings,
did this day put in practise christianly. Let not the
Popes henceforth, boast of sitting in Peters Chaire. Let
them know that they be many in name, but few in work.
They haue not these hundered yeeres, preached an hundred
Sermons. What? say I, an hundred Sermons. For, so
far as I can learne, not one at all. Therefore as the Popes
owne Cannons tell vs, the Popes dishonour Saint Peters
Chaire.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell auoucheth an vntruth vppon the Rhemists,
                  Page 418. affirming



them to say, that the determination of Councels, is
needlesse, because the Popes iudgement alone is infallible.
            
            
               T. B.
               
                  Bell chargeth both you and your Rhemists truely; and
your religious Fryer,
                  
                     Alphons. lib. 1. cap. 2. fol. 4. c. 
                  Alphonsus de Castro, shall be the vmpire
in this mystery. These are his words; At papam, solum
abs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      congregatione concilij, posse in ijs quae ad fidem spectant
errare, multi non contemnendae authoritatis theologi asseruerunt;
imò aliquos pontifices summos in fide errasse, comper
                        •
                     uns
est. Deinde, si tanta esset solius Papae authoritas, quanta totius
concilij plene & recte congregati, frustra tantus labor pro conciliorum
congregatione sumeretur. That the Pope alone without
the assembly of a Councell, may erre in thinges pertayning
to the Faith, many Diuines of high esteeme, doe
hold and affirme; yea, it is most certain, that some Popes
haue erred in the Faith. Againe, if the Popes authority
alone, were as sure & sound, as the whole Councell fully
and lawfully assembled; then doubtlesse, in vain should
such paines bee taken, in calling a Councell together.
Thus writeth this learned Popish Fryer, affirming stoutly
and resolutely mine illation against the Rhemists. For this
which I haue often tolde the Papistes, will in the ende
be found an vndoubted and inuincible truth, (viz:) that
I defend no point of Doctrine against the Papists, which
the best learned Papists doe not approoue in their printed
Bookes. And heere by the way, I note out of this Popish
Doctor, that many great learned Papistes doe constantly
affrim, that the Pope may erre in matters of faith;
as also that sundry Popes haue De facto, erred already.
Now in Gods name, let vs proceed to the mighty Traedition,
(viz:) of the Bible it selfe.
            
            
               S. R.
               Whence haue we the Apostles Creede, but by Tradition,
as testifie Saint Hierome,
                  Page 365. Saint Austen, and Ruffinus?
VVhence the perpetuall virginity of our blessed Lady?



VVhence the lawfull transferring of the Sabbaoth day
from Saterday to Sunday? Whence many other thinges,
as testifie S. Hierome, S. Cyprian, and others, but by Tradition?
But especially, whence haue we the Bible it selfe?
Whence haue we, that euery Booke, Chapter, and verse
of it, is Gods word; and no one sentence therein corrupted
in all these 1600. yeares?
            
            
               T. B.
               This is nothing else, but ridiculous and irkesome Tantologie.
It is answered againe, and againe. The Apostles
Creede wee haue by Tradition in compendious manner,
but it is conteyned in the written Word. As the Fathers
admit many Traditions, so doe I with the Church of England.
For we reiect no Tradition, vnlesse it bee either repugnant
to holy Writ, or else obtruded as a necessary
point of Saluation. Which if the Reader marke seriously,
hee shall finde the Iesuite at a Non plus. Concerning the
Bible, that it hath not beene corrupted for these 1600.
yeares; I aunswere, that this blessing commeth not from
the late Romish Church, but from the GOD of Heauen,
who preserued the old Testament from corruption, whē
it was longer in the handes of the wicked Iewes. Howe
we know it to be the word of GOD, I haue shewed at
large in the Downefall, and thinke it needlesse heere to
iterate the same. Yet as our Iesuite shall giue occasion,
some more shall be added by way of reply.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bels first aunswere is, that there is great difference betwixt
the primatiue Church,Page. 365. & the Church of late daies.
For the Apostles heard Christes Doctrine, saw his Miracles,
and were replenished with the Holy-Ghost; and
consequently, they were fit witnesses, of all that Christ
did, and taught; which adiunctes the Church of Rome
hath not. Here Bell blasphemeth Christes Church of late
dayes, auouching her neither to be replenished with the
Holy-Ghost, contrary to our creede professing her to be



holy and Christs promise,Ioh. 14, 16. 1 l
                        •
                     . 3. 15. that the Holy-Ghost should
remaine with her for euer. Nor to be a fit Witnesse of his
truth, contrary to Saint Paule, calling her the Pillar of
Truth.
               
            
            
               T. B.
               The blasphemy proceedeth from your selues, & from
your pope, to whom you ascribe such a prerogatiue as is
proper to God alone, when you tell vs he cannot erre. I
therefore answere, that the true Church of God is holy,
hath the assistance of the Holy-Ghost, and is a constant
witnesse of Christs truth. But these promises pertaine not
to the church of Rome, but to the whole congregation of
the faithfull. This Congregation is the pillar of Truth; this
Congregation hath the Holy-Ghost; this Congregation is holy;
this Congregation cannot er
                        •
                     e, in things necess
                        ••
                     y to eternall life.
This proposition is prooued at large, in my Suruey of Popery.
It is now enough, to admonish the Reader thereof.
For I haue prooued it, both by the Testimony of the holy
Fathers, and of the best approued Popish Writers. One
or two shall now suffice.Alphon. adu. haer. lib. 1. c. 6 
                  Alphonsus that famous Popish
Fryer, hath these wordes; Ecclesiamil
                        •
                     tans est fidelium omnium,
congregatio, quae corpus vnum est, cuius caput est Christus.
The Church militant is the Congregation of all the
faithfull, which is one body, whereof Christ is the head.
Thus writeth our religious Fryer. VVho would haue
thought, that a Popish Fryer should or would, thus haue
defined the Church? The Iesuites will not thus define it.
Heere is no mention of the pope, and yet of the Popish
Church he is the head. He that opened the mouth of Balaams
Asse, opened now the mouth of our Fryer Alphonsus.
The truth must and will in time preuaile. Panormitanus
a Popish Abbot,
                  Panor. de elect. cap. signif. a Popish Arch-
                        •
                     ishop, and a Popish
Cardinall, hath these expresse wordes; Licet concilium generale
representet totamecclesiam uniuersalem, tamen in veritate
i
                        •
                     i non est vera ecclesia vn uersalis, sed repr
                        •
                     sentatiuè quia vniuer
salis ecclesia constituilur, excollectione omnium sidelium;



vnde omnes sideles orbis constitunt istam ecclesiam vniuersalē,
cuius cap
                        •
                     t & sponsus est Christus. Sequ tur, & ista est illa ecclesia,
que errare non potest. Although a generall Councell
represent the whole vniuersall Church, yet in truth, there
is not the true vniuersall Church, but representatinely:
for the Vniuersall Church consisteth of the collection of
all the faithfull. Wherefore all the faithfull in the world
make this Vniuersall Church, whose head and Spouse is
Christ. And this Church is it, that cannot erre: yea, the
Popes owne glosse vpon his owne Decrees, dooth most
liuely describe that Church which cannot erre, to bee
the congregation of the faithfull. Thus is it there written
in expresse wordes; Quaero, de qua ecclesia intelligas,
                  Caus. 24. q. 1 cap. àrecta. 
                  quod
hic dicitur, quod non possit errare. Siipso papa, certum est quod
papa errare potest. Respondeo, ipsa congregatio sidelium hic dicitur
ecclesia, & talis ecclesia non potest nonesse. I aske thee (O
pope Luci) of what Church thou vnderstands that, which
thou tellest vs in this place? To wit, that the church cannot
erre. For if thou vnderstandest it of the pope himself,
it is very certaine that the pope may erre. I answere therfore,
that the church is here taken for the congregation
of the faithfull, & such a church can neuer erre (indeed.)
Out of these words of these great Papistes, I note: First,
that the Church is the Vnïuersall Congregation of the
faithfull, throughout the whole VVorlde; whereof the
head is not the Pope, but Christ Iesus our Lord.
               Secondly, that this is that Church, which cannot erre.
               Thirdly, that when the Pope saith, the Church cannot
erre, then his owne deare and faithfull interpreter telleth
him, that that priuiledge is not graunted to the Pope, but
to the whole congregation of the faithfull. And the sayd
Glosse prooueth the same, by many Canons of the popes
owne Decrees.
               Fourthly, that the church in which the truth alwayes
abideth, is the congregation of the faithfull: and therefore
truly said Durandus; that the late popish church is not



comparable to the primatiue. Church, which heard
Christs Doctrine, saw his Miracles, and was replenished
with the Holy-ghost.
            
            
               S. R.
               But suppose, that the present Church could not bee a
fit witnes,Page 36
                        •
                     . as the Primatiue was. What is this to the Argument,
that proueth necessity of Tradition, because without
Testimony of the Church, wee cannot discerne true
Scripture from false.
            
            
               T. B.
               The visible externall church, is only an externall mean,
Instrument, or outward help, whereby we are induced to
giue humaine credite, to one Scripture rather then to another.
But the formall cause why we beleeue any Scripture
to be Gods word, is God himselfe, and the inspiration
of his holy spirit. Hereof occasion will be offered, to
speake hereafter more at large.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bels second answere is, that as Papistes admit the Iewes
Tradition of the old Testament for Gods word,Page 367. and withall
refuse many other Traditions of theirs; so Protestantes
admit this Tradition of the Bible, and reiect all other. We
contend against Protestants, that Scripture is not sufficient
to proue all points of Christian faith, but that Tradition
is necessary for some: and Bell heere confesseth it.
Where is now the Downefall of Popery? Methinkes, it is
become the Downefall of protestantry. VVhere is now Bels
first exposition? That Scripture containeth in it, euery
Doctrine necessary to mans Saluation? VVhere is now,
that wee must not adde to Gods word, if this Tradition
must needs be added thereunto? Where is now, that this
present church can be no fit witnesse, if by her testimony
wee come to know the truth? VVhere is now the curse,
which S. Paule pronounceth against him, that preacheth
any Doctrine not contained in the Scripture? Where is
now, that Scripture is the sole and onely rule of faith?
            
            
               
               T. B.
               Here our Iesuite in all brauery, tryumphing before the
victory, exclaimeth six seuerall times, where is now this,
and where is now that? And when all is done, his exclamation
is not woorth a dead Rat. Whosoeuer shall duely
peruse the Downefall, will easily perceiue therein, that
all which our Iesuite hath brought in all this his great
glory, was soundly confuted before it came to light. Neuerthelesse,
for the better contentation of the Christian
Reader, I thus reply vpon our Lordly Fryer.
               
               First,Alphons. aduers haer
                        •
                     s. lib. 1. ca. 8 with their owne deare Fryer Alphonsus à Castro,
in the words; Hocn. habemus ex ecclesia vt, sciamus quae sit
scriptura diuina: at cum Scripturam 
                        •
                     sse diuinam nobis constiterit,
iam ex seipsa habet, vt ei per omnia credere teneamur. It
commeth from the Church, that we know which is holy
Scripture: but after we know it to be the holy Scripture,
henceforth it hath of it selfe, that wee are bound to beleeue
it in euery point. Thus writeth this famous Papist;
and he doth illustrate his assertion, by a similitude drawn
from a Creditor and a Debtor. As if (saith he) witnesses
should bee brought for the proofe of an Instrument, in
which Peter standeth bound to pay to Iohn 100. crownes,
the witnesses do not make Peter to be bound to Iohn. For
although Peter should deny it, and no Witnesses could
prooue it, Peter for all that should owe the debt. But
the Witnesses effect so much, that hee may be conuicted
to owe the debt. Much more to this effect hath Alphonsus,
but I desire to bee briefe. This I inferre out of his
words, that though we grant the Scriptures to be known
by the Testimony of the Church; yet after that notification,
it deserueth credite of it selfe, for euery iote contained
in the same.
               Secondly, that seeing the Scripture acknowledged
for Gods word of all Christians, containeth by the Iesuites
confession (as is already prooued) all thinges necessary
for christian beliefe vnto Saluation; it followeth of



necessity, that no vnwritten Tradition is necessary to Saluation.
For doubtlesse, if euery Article, and all thinges
necessary to salution be written; then can nothing at all
be necessary, that remaineth vnwritten.
               Thirdly, I constantly auouch and christianly affirme,
(mark gentle Reader attentiuely) that the holy Scripture
dow shew it selfe to be Gods word; euen as the Sun and
the Candle by their light, do shew themselues what they
are. I proue it: First, because the Prophet cals the Scripture
a Lanthorne.Psal. 119, 105. 
                  Thy word O Lord (saith holy Dauid) is a
Lanthorne to my feet, and a light vnto my pathes. And the Apostle
confirmeth the same,2. Pet. 1. 19. when hee saith; Wee haue a
right sure word of prophesie, whereunto if ye take heede, as vnto
a light that shineth in a darke place, ye doe well, vntill the day
dawne, and the day-star
                        •
                     e arise in your hearts.
               
               Secondly, because Christ himselfe telleth vs, that his
Sheepe do heare his voyce.Iohn, 10. 27. Iohn, 10, 14. 
                  My Sheepe (saith he) heare
my voyce, and I know them, and they follow me. Againe thus;
I am the good Sheepheard, I know my Sheepe, and they know me.
But C
                        •
                     rtes, if it bee true, (as it is most true, because the
truth it selfe hath spoken it) that Christes Sheepe heare
Christ, and know Christs voyce, then must it needes be
true in like manner, that when they eyther read the scriptures,
or heare them read, then they know Christ speaking
in the same, and heare his voyce. Toletus a Iesuite &
Cardinall of Rome,
                  T
                        •••
                     t. in I
                        •
                     han cap. 10. hath these expresse wordes; Electi &
praedestinati dei infallibi
                        •
                     er cognoscunt pastorem Christum, quae

                        〈◊〉
                      ad tempus errent, tamen tandem suum verum agnoscent
pastorem. Sequitur, at Christum necesse est agnoscere. Est autem
haec nota effectus prioris, propterea. u. oues cognoscunt me,
quia ego cogn
                        •
                     sco eas. Gods elect and predestinate Children,
do know Christ their Pastor infallibly; because albeit
they erre for a time, yet in the ende they will know
their true Sheepheard: for of necessity they must knovv
Christ. For therefore do my Sheepe know me, because I
know them. Thus writeth our Iesuite, out of wose words



I note first, that all Gods children are not effectually called
at one time, but erre and wander as sheepe without a
s
                     •
                  epheard; but euer in the end they acknowledge Christ
their true Shepheard.
               
                  
                     ••
                  condly, that Christs Sheepe know Christ, not beecause
the Church sheweth Christ to them, but because
Christ knoweth them. This point must bee well marked,
that Christs sheep therefore know Christ, because Christ
first knoweth them; not because the church make Christ
knowne vnto them. Ergo they know the scripture to bee
Gods worde, because Christ, not the church, sheweth it
vnto them.
               Thirdly, because the spiritual man (as the Apostle writeth)
iudgeth al things,1 Cor. 2, 15 and himselfe is iudged of no man.
Ergo he can iudge the holy Bible to be Gods worde. For
doubtles, he that can Iudge euery thing, can especially Iudge that
thing, which is most necessary for him. And consequently, Hee
can Iudge truth from falshood, Gods word from the word of euery
creature. This reason is confirmed, by the constant Testimony
of many famous papists. Dionisius Carthusianus hath
these words; Spiritualis autem hom
                        •
                      in quo est spiritus dei, iudicat,
id est,
                  Carthus. in 1. Cor. 2 
                  ben
                        •
                      discernit omnia adsalutem pertinentia, de singulis
talibus verum iudicum proferendo, inter bonum & malum, verū
& falsum veraciter distinguendo. The spirituall man which
hath the spirit of God, indgeth and truely discerneth all
thinges, which pertaine to saluation, prououncing true
iudgement of euery such thing, and truely distinguishing
betweene good and euill, truth and falshood.Lyran. in hunc loc
                        ••
                     . 
                  Nicolaus de
Lyra affoordeth the same exposition to this Text of scripture.
The famous popish writer Aquinas is of the same
mind.Aquinas in 1. cor. 2. These are his words: Apostolls hic dicit, quod spiritualis
iud
                        ••
                     at omnia; quia (s
                        •
                     lt) homo habeus intellectum illustratii,
& affectum ordinatum per spiritum sanctum, de singulis quae pertinent
ad salutem rectum indicium habet? The Apostle heere
saith, that the spirituall man Iudgeth all thinges, because
forsooth a man hauing his vnderstanding enlightned, and



his affection ordered by the Holy-ghost, hath a right
Iudgement of all things which pertaine to saluation. Iohannes
Hosmeisterus hath these words;Hosmeist. in 1. cor. 2. 
                  Spiritualis fide sua eo
penetrat, vt omnia quae sunt spiritus Dei dijudicare possit, nec iudicio
su
                        •
                      fallatur, vt bonum dicat malum, vel stultum 
                        〈◊〉
                      est
sapientissimū. The spiritual man doth penetrate so far by his
faith, that he is able to iudg al things that are of the spirit
of God, neyther can he be deceiued in his Iudgment, that
he eyther call Good, euill; or that foolish, which is most
wise. Out of the words of these great popish Doctours,
(who are euer the best witnesses against the papists, I obserue
these instructions for the Reader.
               First, that euery regenerate person and child of God,
(for all such are Spiritual) is able to Iudge of euery thing,
that concernes his saluation; and consequently, which is
falshood, which is Gods word, which is not; because that
especially pertaines to his saluation.
               Secondly, that euery childe of God is able by his faith
to wade so farre, that he can iudge of all needfull trueth,
and whatsoeuer is conuenient for his soules health, & neuer
be deceiued in his Iudgement.
               Fourthly,1. Ioh. 2. 27. because S. Iohn tels vs, that the vnction which
the faithfull haue receiued, doth teach them all thinges;
Ergo to discerne Gods word from mans word. Melchior
Canus a learned Schooleman and a famous Byshop, teacheth
vs the selfe-same Doctrine in plainer termes. These
are his expresse words: Praestanti quod in se est, Deus fidem
ad salutem necessariam non negat.
                  Cam
                        ••
                      de lo. cis theol. lib. 2. cap. 8. fol. 29. b. et. fol. 30, 
                        •
                     . 
                  Sequitur; non. n. vnctio quē
                     cunque
simpliciter docet de omnibus, sed quem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      de his quae sunt
cipropria & necessaria. Sequitur; concedimus liberaliter doctrinā
cui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in sua vita & statu necessariam, illi fore prospectā & cognitam,
qui fecerit voluntatem Dei. Sicut n. gustus bene affectus,
differentias saporum facilè descernit: sic animi optima affectio facit,
vt homo doctrinam dei ad salutem necessariā discernat ab errore
contrario qui ex deo non est. To the man that doth what
in him lyeth, God neuer denyeth faith necessary to saluation.



For the vnction doth not simply teach euery one euery
thing; but it teacheth euery one so much, as is proper
and necessary for him. And we graunt freely, that doctrine
necessary for euery mans life and state, is sufficiently
knowne to him, that doth the will of God. For like as
the well affected tast, doth easily discerne the differences
of sauors or tasts; so doth the good affection of the mind
bring to passe, that a man may discerne the Doctrine of
God necessary to saluation, from contrary error which is
not of God. Thus writeth the grauest Papist for learning,
in the vniuersall world; and consequently, it is and must
bee of great force against the Papistes, whatsoeuer hath
passed from his pen. And I protest vnto the (Gentle Reader)
that nothing hath more estraunged me from Popery,
and set me at defiance with it, then the cleere & prospicuous
Doctrine, of the best Learned and most renowned
Papistes, for whosoeuer will seriously pervse the
Bookes which I haue published to the view of the world,
shall therein finde by the Testimony of the best approued
Papists, euery point of setled Doctrine in the Church of
England.
               Out of the words of this learned Popish Byshop, that
when S. Iohn sayth, The vnction teacheth vs all things: Hee
meaneth not the difficult Questions in Religion, but all,
                  1. Iohn 2. 27.
                  such points as are necessary for euery mans saluation.
               
               Secondly, that no man wanteth this knowledge and
iudgment of Doctrine, but he that is willingly ignorant,
and will not apply himselfe to liue Christianly.
               Thirdly, that euery priuate man, is able to discern true
Doctrine from Falshood and Error, so farre forth as is requisite
for his saluation; as well as a sound and good tast
is able to discern differences of tasts. Ergo, euery faithful
Christian is able to discern Gods word from mans word;
because it is a thing necessary for his owne soules health.
The case is so cleare, as it can by no reason be denyed.
               Fiftly, because the formall obiect of our faith, is Veritas



prima or God himselfe,De diuinis nomi
                        ••
                     b
                        •
                     ca. 7 as Dionisius Areopagita telleth
vs. Yea, Aquinas the Popish Angellicall Doctor teacheth
the selfe-same Doctrine. Non. n. fides inquit, diuina alicui
assemitur,
                  Aquinas 22. q. 1. art. 1 
                  nisi quia est à deo reuelatum. For Diuine faith (saith
Aquinas) will not yeeld assent to any thing, vnlesse it be
reuealed of God. The truth of which doctrine,
                     Aug. in Ep. Ioh: tract: 3. tom. 9. S. Austen
confirmeth in these Golden wordes; Iam hic videte &c.
Nowe bretheren behold heere a great sacrament. The
sound of our wordes pierceth your eares, but the Maister
that teacheth you is within. Thinke not, that man learneth
any thing of mā. We (Preachers) may admonish you
by sound of words, but if he be not within that teacheth,
in vaine is our sounde. The outward teachings, are some
helpes and admonitions, but hee sitteth in his chaire in
heauen, that teacheth the hart. The maister is within that
teacheth. It is Christ that teacheth. It is his inspiration,
that instructeth. Where his inspiration and vnction is not,
there the outward noyse of words is in vaine. Thus writeth
this holy, auncient, and Learned father, with many
moe words to the like effect. By whose doctrine togither
with that of Dionisius and Aquinas, wee may learne sufficiently,
if nothing else were saide, that howsoeuer Paule
plant, or Apollo water, yet will no increase followe vnlesse
God giue the same.
               I therefore conclude, that we do not beleeue this book
or that Booke to be Cannonical, because this man or that
man, or the church saith so, but because the Scripture is
'axiopistos; because it hath in it selfe that dignity, that verity,
and that Maiesty, which is woorthy of credite in it
selfe. The declaration of the church, doth make vs know
and beleeue the scripture; but is onely an externall help,
to bring vs thereunto. We indeed beleeue the Scripture,
& this or that Booke to be canonicall, because God doth
inwardly teach vs, and perswade our harts so to beleeue.
For Certes, if we should beleeue this or that booke to be



canonicall, because the Church saith so; then should the
formall obiect of our faith, and the last resolution therof,
be man, and not God himselfe; as Areopagna, Aquinas, &
the truth it selfe teacheth vs.
               Sixtly, because we cannot be assured, that the Church
telleth vs the truth. For how can the Church perswade
vs, that she knoweth it to be Gods word? If aunswere be
made, that shee knoweth it of another Church; then I
demaund againe, how that other Church can performe
it? And so, either contrary to all Diuinity, Phylosophy,
and right reason, Dabitur processus in infinitum; Or else
they must say, they receiued it by Tradition from the Apostles,
and thē are they where they began. For first, they
cannot make vs know that assuredly. Againe,Page 387. our Iesuite
confuteth that answer, when he liberally telleth vs, that
many partes of the Bible were long after the daies of the
Apostles doubted of, and consequently, their Apostolicall
so supposed Tradition, is of no effect. If answere be made,
that the Church knoweth it by Reuelation, then their famous
Bishop Melchior Canus telleth them plainely,Canus de Iocis, lib. 3. ca. 4 Page 101. and
roundly, that it cannot bee so. These are his expresse
wordes; Nec vllas in fide nouas reuelationes ecclesia habet.
For the Church hath no new Reuelations, in matters of
Faith. If answere be made, that the Scripture saith, the
Church cannot erre, and so her testification is an infallible
rule thereof; we admit the answer, we hold the same,
the controuersie is at an end, the victory is our own Onely
we must adde this, which is already proued, that that
Church which cannot erre, is not the late Romish church,
but the congregation of the faithfull.
               Lastly, the Scripture it selfe in many places telleth vs expresly,
that it is the word of God.
               First, wee haue in the foure Euangelistes these vvordes
expressely set downe. The Holy-Ghost of Iesus Christ according
to Matthew, Marke, Luke, and Iohn.
               
               Secondly, Saint Luke affirmeth, in the beginning of



the Actes of the Apostles, that he made a Book of al those
thinges which Iesus both did and taught; meaning that
gospell which is the third in number.
               Thirdly,2. Peter. 1. 21. wee are taught by Saint Peter, that no prophesie
of Scripture is made by any priuate motion, but
that holy men of God spake, as they were mooued by the
Holy-Ghost.
               Fourthly,1. Cor. 11. 23. S. Paule telleth vs, That he receiued that of our
Lord God, which he deliuered in the Scripture.
               
               Fiftly, the same Apostle affirmeth, that That Gospell
of God 
                        〈◊〉
                      written, which was promised by his Prophets in the holy
Scriptures.
               
               
                  Sixtly,
                  Rom. 1. 12. 
                  S. Iohn receiued his Reuelation from Christ, which he
was commaunded to write.
               Lastly,Apoc. 
                        •
                     . 10. (and this striketh dead) When the rich Glutton tormented
in Hell, desired of our holy Father Abraham,Luke 16. 29. Luke. 24. 44. 
                  that one
might be sent from the dead to his Bretheren then liuing; Abraham
answered, that they had Moses and the Prophets, whom
ther ought to heare and beleeue. And Christ himselfe told his
Apostles; that all thinges must needes bee fulfilled which were
written of him in the Law of Moses, in the Prophets,
                  Luke. 16, 13, 15, 25, 27. 
                  and in the
Psalmes. Yea, Christ tolde the two Disciples going toward Emmaus,
that they ought to beleeue all thinges which the Prophets
spake: and therefore beginning at Moses and all the Prophets,
hee did interpret to them in all the Scriptures, the thinges which
were written of himselfe. And consequently, the Scripture
it selfe doth plainely tell vs, that it is the word of GOD.
For out of these wordes of the holy Scripture, wee haue
these points of Doctrine most cleerely deliuered.
               First, that our Sauiour Christ spake them.
               Secondly, that all things must be beleeued, which are
written in the Law in the Prophets, and in the Psalmes.
               
               Thirdly, that all things foretold of Christ in the Law,
the Prophets, and the Psalmes, were fulfilled indeed.
               Fourthly, that Christ did interprete the chiefest partes
of all the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalmes. I therefore



conclude, that it is the word of GOD. As also, that the
dignity, the excellency, and the Maiesty thereof, dooth
insinuate no lesse vnto vs.
            
            
               S. R.
               Neither is Bels comparison true. For wee beleeue not
the Olde Testament to bee Gods word,Page 369. for any Tradition
which the Iewes haue; but which the Catholique church
hath from the Apostles and their successors. Who deliuered
to the church, and she to vs, as well the Old as the
New Testament for Gods word.
            
            
               T. B.
               You contradict your selfe good Maister Fryer,
                  Page 387. 2. Peter. Iohn. 2. 3. Iacob. Apocal Euseb. libr. 3. cap. 19. as who
tels vs right plainely in another place, that many parts of
the Bible were doubted of, a long time after the Apostles.
For, if you had receiued by Tradition from the Apostles,
all the Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament,
ye could neuer so long after the Apostles, haue bin
in doubt of many partes thereof. For by your supposed
Tradition, you had the same assurance for the whole, as
for the parts. And consequently, seeing you graunt your
vncertainty for many parts, you must perforce graunt the
same vncertainty for the whole. And so you confesse vnawares,
and against your wils, so much in effect and true
meaning, as I contend to proue, (viz:) that your vnwritten
supposed Apostolicall Traditions, are as vncertaine as
the winde, and not an infallible rule of faith.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bels third solution is,Page 370. that the New Testament is but
an exposition of the Old, and therefore may be tryed and
discerned by the same. But Sir? Will you indeed try the
New Testament? Will you take vpon you to iudge Gods
word? And if you will try Gods word,A very fond saying. by what will you
try the Old Testament? Surely by Tradition, or by nothing.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere, that I admit both the Old Testament and the
New, because I beleeue God speaking in the same. This



is prooued already. Againe, seeing the Law, and the Prophets,
and the Psalmes, are approoued by Christes owne
Testimony, as we haue heard already; and seeing withall,
that the New Testament is but an exposition of the
Old, as I haue prooued in the Downefall; it followeth of
necessity, that the Old being receiued, the New cannot be
reiected. Neither is he Iudge of Gods word, that discerneth
one Scripture by another
                     •
                   because hee maketh not
himselfe,Aug. de trinit. 3. cap. 26. but Gods word the iudge thereof. No more thē
hee, who conferring Scripture with Scripture, expoundeth
one place by another. Which kind of exposition S.
Austen preferreth before all other.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell saith,Page 371. canonicall Scripture may bee discerned of it
selfe, as light from darke. He prooueth it,Psa 119 105. because Gods
word is called a light and a Lanthorne which shineth to
Men.1. Pet. 1, 19. Because spirituall men iudge all things; because the
vnction teacheth Gods children all things;1. Cor. 2, 15. And Christes
Sheepe both heare and know his voyce.
                  1. Ioh. 2, 27. But this is easily refelled.
First, because though Samuell were a faithfull and
holy man,Iohn. 10, 3. 4, 27. and God spake thrice to him, yet he tooke his
word for mans word, vntill Hely the high Priest tolde
him it was Gods word. Gedeon was faithfull,
                     
                        •
                     . Reg. 3. and yet
knew not at first, that it was God that spake vnto him by
an Angell, and therefore demanded a Miracle in confirmation
of it. Likewise Saint Peter was faithfull, and yet
at first he knew not, that it was an Angell that spake and
deliuered him. Secondly,Iudic. 6. Gods word consisteth in the
sence and meaning, which the faithfull oftentimes doe
not vnderstand.Act. 12. Thirdly, the distinction of Scriptures
from not Scriptures, is not so euident, as the distinction
of light from darknesse is, for then no man could erre
therein.
            
            
               T. B.
               This aunswere of our Fryer is friuolous, and childish.
That which hee obiecteth of Samuell, Gedeon, and Peter,


                  
is not to the purpose. For, as I haue prooued out of Melchior
Canus and others; euery one of the faithfull knoweth
not euery thing, but onely so much as is necessary for
his saluation to know; neyther is such their knowledge at
euery houre & moment, but then onely and in such measure,
when and in what degree it pleaseth God to giue it.
Some of Gods children are effectually called at the first hour,
                  Mat. 20 
                  some
at the third,
                  Luke 23 
                  some at the sixt, some at the last. For though al Gods
children, be elected and predestinate before all time,
                  Rom. 9, 10. 
                  yet are they al
called both generally and effectually in time: some sooner, some later,
                  Ephes. 1, 12.
                  according to the good pleasure of the caller, who calleth freely
without respect of persons.
                  Ephes. 2, 9 Now, where our Fryer denyeth the
distinction of Gods word from mans word, to be so euident
as the distinction of light from darkenes,Act. 10, 34 because
then none (as he saith) could erre therein.Rom. 2, 11 I answere,Ioh. 15, 5 that
as he that is blinde corporally,1, Cor. 3 cannot discerne colours,
nor behold the bright beams of the sinne,1, Cor, 12 so neither can
he that is blind spiritually,2, Cor. 3 discerne Gods word frō mans
word, nor behold the brightnes of eternall truth. For as
the Apostle teacheth vs. If Christs Gospell be hid, it is hidde in
them that perish: in whom the God of this world,
                  2, Cor. 4, 4 
                  hath blinded the
minds of them which beleeue not, least the light of the gospell of
the glory of Christ, should shine vnto them. And the same Apostle
telleth vs else-where,1, Cor. 2, 25 
                  That the spirituall man iudgeth all
things, but the naturall man perceiueth not the things, which are
of God.
               
            
            
               S. R.
               Saint Iohn (sayth Bell) affirmeth that the Vnction teacheth
vs all thinges) which wee deny not;Page. 375. but no where
(saith he) that it alone teacheth vs without the testimony
of the Church, which is it that wee deny, and Bell should
proue.
            
            
               T. B.
               I haue proued at large, euen out of your owne reuerend
Byshop Melchior Canus; that as the well affected
tast, can easily discerne the differences of sauours; so can



the good affection of the minde, discerne the Doctrine
of saluation. And therfore as the testimony of the church
is not necessary to the one, no more is it to the other. Yea
if that sence of our Fryer, had beene the truth of the text,
all the graue expositors of S. Iohn, woulde neuer haue omitted
the same. But our Fryer coulde bring no expositor
for himselfe, and therefore no reason, that we should
admitte this bare denyall, against the plaine wordes of
the Text.
            
            
               S. R.
               That of the Spiritual man is not to the purpose,Page. 375 both because
all the faithfull are not spirituall, but some carnall;
and therefore may we better inferre,1 Cor. 3, 1. 2, 3 that the Gospell is
not euident to all the faithfull,Gal. 6, 1. as also because Saint Paul
explicateth not, by what meanes the spirituall man iudgeth
all things; whether by the euidency of the thinges,
as Bell woulde haue him to Iudge scripture) or by some
outward Testimony.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere; first, that all the faithfull rightly so tearmed,
are spirituall and not carnall,1. Co. 3, 1, 2, 3 neyther do the places quoted
by our Iesuite,Gal. 6, 1. proue any thing for his purpose. For if
he will haue none to bee spirituall that are sinners, then
must he deny the Apostles of our Lord to haue beene spirituall.
For as S. Iames granteth freely,Iam. 3, 2. 
                  They all sinned in many
thinges.
               
               Secondly, that if the Apostle had not explicated, by
what meanes the Spirituall man iudgeth all things, as he
did indeed, yet would it not follow thereupon, that our
Iesuite may expound it to his best liking.
               Thirdly, that the Apostle sayth plainly in the words afore
going,1. Cor. 2, 10, 12. 
                  That the spirituall man iudgeth by the spirit of God
that is in him.
               
               Fourthly, that our Iesuite belyeth Bell heere, as he doth
many times else-where. For Bell would not haue the spirituall
man to Iudge the scripture by the euidency of the



things, but by the spirit of God, which is euer at hand, euen
within him to teach him all necessary truth.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell alledgeth the Scripture,Page 375. 
                  That Christes Sheepe heare
and know his voice,
                  Ioh. 10, 3, 4, 24. which no man doubteth of. But the
question is, whether they heare it of himselfe alone, or of
his church.
            
            
               T. B.
               This is but irkesome Tautologie, it is answered againe
and againe.
               First, the late Romish Church, is not the church that
cannot erre: this is already proued.
               Secondly, I haue proued, euen out of their owne Cardinall
Tolet, That Christes sheepe know him, because hee first
knoweth them. Yea, the Text doth plainly yeeld that sence.
I knowe my sheepe (saith Christ) and they know mee, As if he
had said, My Sheepe therefore know mee,
                  Iohn. 10, 14. 
                  because I first know
them. Christ therefore, not the church, maketh his sheep
to know and discern his voyce.
               Thirdly, the church is an outward help, as is the preaching
of the word. To beget a kind of morral certitude or
humane faith in the hearers, but neither of them eyther
doth or can, beget faith Diuine in any man. Paule may
plant, and Apol'o may water, but only God can giue the increase.
                  1. Cor. 3, 6.
Experience may confirme this to be so. For no testification
of the Romish church, can make the Turke or Iew bebeleeue
or acknowledge Christs Gospel. If it were otherwise
10000. Iews this day in Rome, would becom christians
I wil say more,August▪ Vbi supra. and it is S. Austens Doctrin; Many come
to the Church, and heare the word of God read and preached vnto
thē, but beleeue it not, as their liues declare,
                  Mat. 7, 17. 
                  for euery good tree
bringeth forth good fruits, as our master christ telleth vs. And
what is the cause? Forsooth, saith S. Austen, because they
onely heare a sound in their outward eares, but not the heauenly
Preacher sounding in their harts.
               
            
            
               S. R.
               Well saide S. Austen,
                  Page 
                        •
                     77 
                  I would not beleeue the Gospell, vnlesse



the Authority of the Church did moue me thereto. This place so
stingeth Bell, as he windeth euery way to auoyd it.
            
            
               T. B.
               Howsoeuer in your opinion it stingeth me, yet haue I
so sufficiently aunswered it in the Downfall, as there is no
need heere to adde any thing in defence thereof. Neuerthelesse,
some few Annotations I will adde for explication
sake.
               First, when S. Austen saith, I wold not beleeue the Gospel, vnlesse
the Authority of the Church, did moue me thereto, He meaneth
of himselfe as being a Manichee, not as being a christian.
As if he had said; If I this day were not a Christian, but
a Manichee, as I once was, I woulde not beleeue this Gospell,
(which I wish thee to embrace) vnlesse the Churches Authority
did moue me to the same. For these are S. Austens own
words;
                     Cap. 5. cont. Epist. Funda men. tom. 6. pag. 80 
                  Si ergo invenirem aliquem, qui Euangelio nondum crèdit,
quid faceres dicenti tibi; non credo? Ego vero Euangelio nō
crederem, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae comm
                        •
                     veret authoritas.
If therefore I shoulde finde one, that yet beleeueth not
the Gospel, what wouldst thou do to him, saying to thee,
I beleeue it not? I doubtlesse would not beleeue the gospell,
vnlesse the authority of the Catholicke church, did
mooue mee ther
                     •
                  unto.
               Loe, he speaketh of him that beleeueth not the gospell,
and of himselfe not being a christian, not of himselfe, or
any other that professeth the gospell. Where I am to admonish
the Reader, that here, as in many other places of
my Bookes;I was almost 200, miles frō london. this period last recited, is vnperfect in the
Downefall. For my selfe being absent from the Presse, as
dwelling farre off, many faultes escape the Printer. That
this is the true meaning of S. Austen, I proue it first, because
in the very same Chapter hee confesseth, that the
Authority of the Gospell, is aboue the authority of the
Church.
               Secondly,Cap. 4. because in the Chapter aforegoing, after
he hath discoursed of many notable things in the church



                  Consent, Miracles, Antiquitie, and Succession; he addeth
that the truth of the Scriptures, must be preferred before
them all.
               These pointes and reasons,Page 381. I cited before out of Saint
Austen; which because they confound our Iesuite, hee
impudently denieth them; affirming that Saint Austen
saith not so. These therefore are S. Austens owne words,
in the first Chapter; Quòd si forte in euangelio aliquid apertissimum
de Manichaei Apostolatu 
                        〈◊〉
                      p
                        •
                     tueris, infirmabis
mihi catholicorum anthoritatem, qui iubent, non credam.
If happily thou canst finde in the Gospell, any manifest
thing of the Apostle-ship of Manichaeus, thou shalt discredite
the authority of Catholiques to mee, who commaund
mee not to beleeue thee. Againe, in the fourth
Chapter he hath these wordes; Apud vos sola persona
                        •
                      veritatis
pollicitatio, quae quidem si tam manifesta monstratur, vt in
dubium venire non possit, praeponenda est omnibus illis rebus, quibus
in Catholica teneor. With you onely soundeth the promise
of truth, which if it bee prooued so manifest, that it
cannot be doubted of, it is to be preferred before al those
thinges, that hold me in the catholique church. Loe, in
the former place Saint Austen graunteth freely, that the
authority of the Scripture, is aboue the authority of the
church; And in the latter, that the truth of the Scripture
must be preferred before all other things whatsoeuer. Away
therefore with our lying Fryer,
                  Vide Aug. ep. 165. and giue hearing to
his fables no longer.
               Secondly, the faith that proceedeth from the Church
for Testificatiō, is but humaine, and not diuine. For none
saue God onely, can beget faith diuine in vs. It pleaseth
GOD to vse externall meanes and Ceremonies, for the
confirmation of our Faith; but the grace, power, & vertue,
is from himselfe alone. The Law was giuen by Moyses,
                  Iohn. 1. 17.
                  but grace and truth came by Iesus Christ. I prooue it: First,
because a supernaturall effect, must needes bee produced
of a supernaturall cause; and consequently, diuine faith



beeing a supernaturall effect, cannot proceede from the
Romish Church.
               Secondly, a corporall agent, cannot ascend and penetrate
a spirituall obiect; as a materiall Sword cannot penetrate
an immateriall Spirit; and consequently, neither
produce an immateriall effect, as is faith diuine.
               Thirdly, no immateriall and spirituall accident, can bee
receyued into any corporall subiect; and consequently,
no corporall subiect is apt to produce a spirituall effect.
               Fourthly,Aug. tract. 72. in Iohan. Aquin. p. 1. q. 45. art. 5. Saint Austen saith plainly, that it is a greater
woorke to iustifie a man, then to create the VVorlde;
but no power (saith the Popish Angelicall Doctor Aquinas)
which is vpon earth, can concurre to creation; Ergo, neither
to iustification; and consequently, neither to the
producing of Faith diuine.
               Thirdly, when saith is wrought and begotten in vs, we
may not diuide the worke; giuing part to God, and part
to the Church; but we must ascribe the whole to GOD,
the true Author of the whole. Therfore, after S. Paule had
tolde the Corinthians, that he had laboured more aboundantly
then all the Apostles; hee forthwith added these
wordes.1. Cor, 15. 10. 
                  Yet not I, but the grace of God, which is with me. For
though mā be not in his actions as a brute beast or block,
but free from all coaction and constraint; yet hath he no
power but from aboue, neither hath he any part more or
lesse, in producing Grace, Faith, or the supernatuall effects.
For though it be Gods pleasure to vse mans externall
acts and operations, for the exercise of his faith, whē
he meaneth to produce supernaturall effectes; yet dooth
hee himselfe solely and wholy of himselfe, produce the
same effectes. And heere I must tell the Reader of a great
defect in the Latine Vulgata editio; which the late Councell
of Trent extolleth to the Heauens; and withall Papists
are bound to vse and beleeue.1. Cor. 15. 10 It saith thus: Yet not I,
but the grace of God with mee; as if forsooth, part were imputed
to grace, and part to the act and woorke of Saint



                  Paule.
                  Vide Hier? lib. 2. aduers. Pelag. fol. 129. D. Whereas indeed, the Apostle ascribeth the whole
to God, and vtterly refuseth to take any part to himselfe.
Which the Article (
                     •
                  ) in the Greeke left out, in the Latine
Vulgata editio, maketh plaine and euident. For after
Saint Paule had saide, That hee had laboured more then all the
Aopostles; he by and by addeth this correction; Yet not I,
but the grace of God, which is with me. And heere (because
sensible things worke most in sensile persons) let vs take
an example of the Napkins and Partlets, which were
brought from Saint Paules body vnto the sicke, for the
Napkins by touching Saint Paules body,Act, 19, 12, 11. receiued no inherent
vertue to worke Miracles. The Text saith plainely,
that God wrought the Miracles by the hand of Paule.
The Napkins and Handkerchiefes were but outward tokens,
to confirme the faith of those that were to be healed
in the absence of the Apostle; that they might thereby
know and perceiue, that the gift of healing (which
God for his own glory had bestowed on him) was not
tyed to the presence of his body. The like may be said, Of
touching Christs Garment, and of the Clay which Christ vsed in
restoring the blind man to his sight.
                  Mat. 9, 21. Iohn, 9, 6. Luke. 8. 46. For the vertue was not
in the garments, but in Christ himselfe. Christ said not;
Vertue is gone out of my Garments; but (as Saint Luke addeth)
I perceiue that vertue is gone out of mee. And all men
know, that Clay was rather an hinderance, then a furtherance,
to effect that was wrought in the blind man. For,
if we respect the nature and operation of Clay, wee shall
finde it more apt to destroy sight where it is, then to restore
sight where it is not. But it pleased Christ, this way
to try the faith and obedience of the blind man. For there
can bee no better tryall of true faith, then when a godly
mind being content with the simple word of God, doth
promise that vnto it selfe, which otherwise seemeth incredible.
Much more might be saide, but the Reader, (if
he shall ioyne this with the Downefall) shall find sufficient
matter, for the full confutation of the Fryer. And now I



proceed in Gods holy name, to bicker and grapple with
the Iesuite, concerning the last Article beeing the eyght
in number.
            
         
         
            The eyght and last Article, of the
impossibility of keeping Gods Commandements
in Popish sence.
            
               S. R.
               
                  WE daily acknowledge our sins, as Bell
confesseth, but so as wee be free from
deadly sinne,Page 422. which destroyeth charity
the end of the Law, and keepe the
Commandements in all great, though
not in small matters. As who stealeth
but trifles keepeth the Princes
Laws, though not perfectly; but if he steale great matters,
he is said no more to keepe, but to breake them.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere; First, that I haue prooued sufficiently, euery
sin of it owne nature to bee mortall, and flatly against
Gods Commaundements.
               Secondly, that whosoeuer stealeth but those thinges,
which with our Iesuite are trifles, transgresseth both
Gods Lawes, and the Lawes of his Prince. Gods Laws,Exod. 20, 15
because God absolutely without exception forbiddeth
to steale: The Princes Laws, because he that stealeth but
our Iesuites trifles, must be stocked and whipped for his
paines; & that is inflicted, by due execution of the Princes
Lawes. But our Iesuites are so acquainted with notorious
Treasons, that stealing with them is but a trifle, yet
not only their Angelicall Doctor Aquinas, but S. Austen also
writing to Consentius,
                  Aquin. 22. q 110. art. 3. Aug. ad Cō
                     sent
                        •
                     ū, cap. 8. 9. 10. tom. 4. affirmeth most christianly; that an
officious lye (which is the least lye that can bee committed,
and one of our Fryers trifles) may not bee made to
saue the whole world. And our Maister Christ telleth vs



in his holy Gospell,Mat. 12, 36 
                  That wee shall giue account of euerie ydle
word. Well, howsoeuer our Fryer flatter himselfe in stealing
strifles,Vnles he haue a dispensation. or in trifling stealing, yet whosoeuer (vnlesse
perhaps a Iesuite) breaketh the Popes Law by eating an
Egge in Lent, committeth a deadly sinne. Yea, that man,
or that woman, that shall tell a hundred lyes in one day,
shall not be so hardly censured with the Papistes, as one
godly Christian eating an Egge in Lent,Page 423 with thanksgiuing
to God for the same. Note that our Iesuite here emboldeneth
to steale trifles, affirming it, not to be against
the Princes law.
            
            
               S. R.
               First, therefore I proue it, because a young man tolde
Christ,Mat. 19, 20 
                  Hee had kept all the Commaundementes from his
youth. Bell aunswereth, that S. Hierom saith, he lyed, and
S. Austen thinketh hee spake more proudly, then truely.
Neuerthelesse more probable it is, that he spake truely,
because not onely our Sauiour did not rebuke him,Marke 10. 21 (as
likely he would haue done, if he had told him a lye) but
as S. Marke testifieth, beheld him and loued him.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere first, that our Iesuite is so troubled with the
Downefall of Popery, that he begins to proue when of right
he should answere, but in truth can performe neyther of
them both.
               Secondly, that where I haue proued in the Downfall by
the Testimony both of Saint Austen and S. Hierom, that
that the young man lyed, when he said hee had kept the
Commaundements: our Iesuite returneth this answere,
that it is probable hee spake truely. Because forsooth, S.
Marke saith, Christ behelde him and loued him. But this
answere is not to the purpose, (to say nothing of our Iesuits
pride, who so roundly reiecteth both S. Austens and
S. Hieroms opinion) because S. Mark speaketh only of externall
shew of loue, and not of true loue indeede. The
like Phrase we haue in S. Mathew, where Herod is saide



to be sorry, when he was glad indeede. And therefore
doth S. Hierom censure him in these words.Exod. 1, 17, 20, 21 Christ as true God did this. 
                  In face tristitiā,
in corde habebat laetitiam. In his face sorrow, but gladnes in
his hart. Our Sauiour Christ, as hee prospered the Midwiues,
and made them houses, not for their lying, but because
they feared him; euen so, did he looke chearefully
vpon the young man, and in louing manner set before his
eyes, what a vaine conceit he had of himselfe; not for the
lye which he boldly auouched, but because he had a desire
to go to heauen. Our Iesuite addeth, that S. Chrisostom
saith, the young man was no dissembler; and that S. Hierom
saith, Christ loued him, because he said he had done
all. But our Iesuite is addicted to lying, and falsly surchargeth
the holy Fathers. Their assertions are truly cited, in
the Downfall of Popery.
               
            
            
               S. R.
               Secondly, S. Paule. saith, not the fearers of the Lawe
are iust with God,Page 424 but the doers of the Law shal be iustified;
Ergo, there are some doers of the Law: And it is possible
to be done.
            
            
               T. B.
               This obiection I both propounded and answered in the
Downefall, so as our Iesuite may well struggle against it,
but neuer truely confute it. He maketh a gallant shew of
many verses, cited out of the 119. Psalme, that the commandements
may be kept, and were actually kept of the
Prophet Dauid. I haue not (saith the Prophet) declined from
thy Law. I haue kept thy law. I haue not declined from thy iudgements.
I haue not erred from thy Commandements.
                  Verse 51. 55 102, 110, 157. 
                  I haue not declined
from thy testimonies. But to al these & the like I answer
with all facility, that the selfe-same Prophet Dauid confesseth
freely, that neither himselfe nor any mortall man,
is able perfectly to keepe Gods law. When the Prophet
Nathan told him of his Adultery and murder,2. sam. cap: 11. & ca. 12 he humbly
confessed the same, and presently receiued remission at
Gods hands.
               Againe, in many Psalmes hee confesseth his owne sins,



and withall, constantly affirmeth, that none liuing can be
iustified by his best workes. Haue mercy on me O God, wash
me from my sinnes, and clense me from mine iniquity.
                  Psalme 51 
                  I know my
sinne, and mine iniquity is euer before me. I was borne in sinne, &
in sinne hath my Mother conceiued mee, Againe, in another
place thus; If thou O Lorde, straightly markest iniquities: O
Lorde,
                  Psalme 130 
                  who shall abide it? But with thee is mercie, that thou
mayest be feared. Againe in another place thus: Enter not into
iudgement with thy seruant,
                  Psalme 143. 
                  for in thy sight shall none that liueth
be iustified. So then, as wee haue in one Psalme, that
Dauid did keepe Gods commaundements, so haue wee in
many other Texts of holy writ, both in the Psalmes, and
else where, that neither himselfe nor any liuing, can perfectly
keep the same. What must we now do? One scripture
is not contrary to another. The spirite of God speaking
in Dauid, saith in one place, That he kept Gods Lawe;
in another place he saith, That neither hee nor any other can
keepe his Commaundements. How stand these two together?
This is the resolution and true sence of holy writ. Dauid
(as euery childe of God in like maner) is truely saide to
keepe Gods Commaundements, when he hath an inward
feruent desire to do the will of God, and chearefully applyeth
his heart and all his affections to that end,Howe Gods children thogh sinners, keepe his commaundements. so farre
foorth as standeth with mans infirmity, and the state in
which we liue, although he be a greeuons sinner indeed,
and Trangresse Gods law many waies. This I prooue to
be so by many arguments: first, because the sinnes of the
faithful, are not imputed to them for the merits of Christ
Iesus. Therefore (saith the Apostle) Being iustified by faith,
we are at peace with God, through our Lord Iesus Christ. Again
thus;Rom. 5, 1. Rom, 4, 7, 8. 
                  Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiuen, and whose
sinnes are couered. Blessed is the man, to whom the Lorde will
not impute sin. By these places it is cleare, that Gods children
are said to keepe his Commandements, not because
they keepe them exactly and perfectly, but for that the
want and defect is not imputed to them. This is it that S.



                  Austen saith, in these golden words; Omnia ergo mandata
facta deputantur,
                  Aug. lib. 1 
                        〈◊〉
                     . cap. 19 
                  quando quicquid non sit, ignoscitur. All the
Commandements are then reputed as done, when whatsoeuer
is not done (Is of mercy) forgiuen. Again, the same
S. Austen in another place hath these words; Beatus vir,
cui nō imputauit dominus peccatū. Hoc prestant viae domini, ac per
hoc quoniā ex fide iustus viuit, ab ista via domini illa alienat miquitas,
                  Aug in Pso, 118. conc. 3. pag. 925.
                  quae est infidelit as. In hac antē via domini, id est, in fide pia
quisquis ambulat, aut peccatum non operatur, aut si quid à deuiante
committitur, propter viam non imputatur, & tanquam non
fuerit operatus accipitur. Blessed is the man, to whome the
Lord hath not imputed sinne. This the wayes of our Lord
performe, and by reason heereof, because the iust man liueth
by faith, that iniquity estraungeth from this way,
which is infidelity. For in this way of the Lord, that is, in
a godly faith, whosoeuer walketh, he either sinneth not,
or if any thing be done amisse, it is not imputed by reason
of the way, and is so taken as if he had not done it. Thus
writeth this holy father vppon that very Psalme: out of
which our Iesuite hath borrowed certaine Textes, which
(as S. Austen sheweth plainely) are altogether applyed,
contrary to the Prophets meaning, and to the truth of the
matter in hād. For therfore (as we see by S. Austens Testimony)
is not only the Prophet Dauid, but also al the children
of God, thoght to keep Gods commandements, because
they aplying thēselues chearfully with hart, voyce,
and all their power to keepe them,1 Cor, 1, 30. Phil. 3, 9 2 Cor, 5, 12 Rom. 5, 19. the defect and want
is not imputed to them. Briefely, by Gods grace, not of
our selues, we keep his Commandements, though not in
such perfection as his Iustice requireth; yet, in such measure,
as he of his mercy in Christ accepteth.
               Secondly, because the sonne of God, hath truly appeased
the wrath of God,Mat. 26, 27 Mark 14, 14 by once offering vppon the Altar
of the Crosse, a perfect, sufficient, and absolute satisfaction
for the sinnes of all the faithfull and elect people of
God;Heb. 10, 14 and as a Creditor hauing receiued the iust and full



paiment of that which was due vnto him, though by the
hands of another, yet in behalfe of him who was the debtor,
cannot with Iustice require the same at the Debtors
hands; no more can GOD almighty, (who is not onely
iust, but iustice it selfe in the abstract) iustly require satissaction
of his elect for their sinnes, for whose transgressions
he hath receiued a most perfect, absolute,Mat. 3. 17. Apoc. ca. 7. 14 and consummate
satisfaction, and attonement for euer, at the
handes of his deare Sonne, In whom he is euer well pleased.
This is it, that one of the Elders said to Saint Iohn; These
are they which came out of great tribulation, and haue vvashed
their long Robes, and made them white in the bloud of the Lamb.
               
               Thirdly, to acknowledge our sinnes, and to confesse
our selues to bee grieuous Sinners, and not to trust in our
owne righteousnesse (which is none at all indeed) but in
the righteousnesse of Iesus Christ, who (as the Apostle
teacheth vs) Is our Wisedome, our Righteousnesse, our Sanctification,
                  1. Cor. 1. 30.
                  and our Redemption is in the scripture to be righteous,
& to keep Gods commandements. Therfore saith S.
Iohn,
                  1. Ioh. 1, 8, 9. Philip. 3. 9. 2. Cor. 5. 21. Rom. 10. 3. 
                  That if we say we haue no sinne, we deceiue our selues, and
the truth is not in vs. But if we knowledge our sinnes, he is faithfull
and iust to forgiue vs our sins, and to cleanse vs from all vnrighteousnesse.
Loe, to confesse our sinnes, and to acknowledge
our selues to be Sinners, is to be righteous in Gods
sight,Hier. lib. 1. ad
                        •
                     . Pelag tom. 3. sol. 120. D. and to keepe his Commaundementes. This Saint
Hierome confirmeth, in these Golden wordes; Tunc ergo
iusti sumus, quando nos peccatores fatemur; & iustitia nostra
non ex proprio merito, sed ex dei consistit misericordia. Then
therefore are wee iust, when wee confesse our selues Sinners,
and our righteousnesse consisteth not in our owne
merite, but in Gods mercy. Thus writeth this holy and
learned Father, shewing most euidently to all that haue
eyes to see it that we may both be breakers and Keepers,
of Gods Commaundementes at once; both Sinners and
Righteous at one and the same time, though not in one &
the same respect. Sinners, in respect of our selues, and



our corrupt Nature;Ezech. cap. 18, 21. Esa. 1, 18. Righteous in the sight and iudgment
of God, who of his great mercy pardoneth all penitent
Sinners, and for Christs merits doth not impute their sins
vnto them.
            
            
               S. R.
               I omit Moyses,
                  Page 426 
                  Aaron, Samuell, Dauid, Iosue, Zacharie,
Elizabeth, and the Apostles, who are said to haue kept
Gods Law, and some of them in all their hart: only Saint
Paule I cannot omit, because Bell graunteth, that he was
most free and innocent from Actuall sin, therefore surely
he kept Gods Law perfectly.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere: First, 
                     〈◊〉
                   all these holy men, were in their
life time sinners, and Transgressors of Gods holy Lawes,
which I could easily prooue by many Texes of holy Writ,
if I deemed it needfull so to doe: this onely shall suffice
for the present,Iam. 3, 2. that the Apostle saith, The best Liuers of
all offend in many thinges. And that the Prophet Dauid telleth
vs,Psa. 143, 2. 
                  That none liuing can be iustified in Gods sight. Secondly, to
Saint Paule I answere, as in the Downefall; That the raging
vnvoluntary motions of Concupiscence were sinne in him, although
he did not actually yeelde his consent vnto them. And
thereupon I inferred then, and now againe; That that sin
which Saint Paule lamented in himselfe, affirming himselfe to bee
sold vnder sinne,
                  Rom. 7. 14. 
                  was truely and properly sinne indeede, but not
Actuall, because hee gaue no consent vnto it; Ergo, hee must
needes speake of Originall. This point I deliuered so
plainly in the Downfall of Popery, as none, but eitherfooles,
or malicious Readers, can be ignorant thereof. Of other
Actuall sinnes I spake not.
            
            
               S. R.
               Christ (saith Bell) being asked what good a man shouldPage 427.
doe to attaine eternall life, aunswered; If thou wilt haue eternall
life by doing good workes,
                  Mat 19, 17. 
                  then must they keepe Gods commandemēts;
but this is impossible (saith Bell.) Here is most
shamefull abuse of Gods word, and this sheweth Bell to



haue a scared conscience: For neither in the mans Question,
nor in Christes aunswere, is there any word how a
man should come to Heauen by this way, or that way,
(viz:) by beleeuing, or by working, or by both; but only
what was the meane in generall to come to Heauen:
which the man supposing to bee good, asked what good
he should doe to come thither. Which Question of his is
common, either to Faith, or Works, or both; foral include
doing good. And our Sauiour answered him, If thou wilt
enter (not this way, nor that way, but absolutely) Into life,
Keepe the Commaundements.
               
            
            
               T. B.
               What a one is this Fryer? Hee chargeth mee to haue a
seared conscience, which may more iustly bee imputed to
himselfe. I willingly acknowledge my selfe to be a great
Sinner, GOD forgiue mee; yet may I stand at defiance
with this Iesuite, and withal the Iesuites in the World, for
any corrupt or falfe dealing, either in the Scripture, or in
the Fathers, Councels, Histories, Chronicles, or other
Writers whosoeuer, they are alike to charge me withall.
Nay, in this very point, wherein he desperately accuseth
me, I am able to charge him too deeply, and iustly retort
that agianst himselfe, which he would most falsly and vniustly
impose vpon me. He auoucheth most impudently,
that there is not any word, neither in the mans question,
nor in Christs answere, how a man should come to Heauen
this way, or that way. Let vs therefore ponder the
mans words seriously, and then yeeld our censures according
to the truth.Math. 19, 16. S. Matthew hath these wordes; Good
Maister, what good thinge shall I doe, that I may haue eternall
life?
                  Marke. 10, 17 Saint Marke hath these wordes; Good Maister,
what shall I doe, that I may haue eternall life?
                  Luke, 18, 18. Saint Luke hath
these words; Good Maister, by doing, what shall I possesse eternall
life? Now, I pray thee Gentle Reader (whosoeuer
thou art) to be an indifferent Iudge betweene the Iesuite
and me. Thou seest euidently, that the man demaunded



of Christ, what he should doe to possesse and inioy eternall
life. For he said plainely; What shall I do, & by doing?
What, shall I possesse eternall life? Doth not he aske to go to
Heauen this way, or that way, who asketh to goe thither
by doing Goodworkes? Yes doubtlesse, it cannot be denyed.
For to go to Heauen by doing this or that, & to go to
heauē this way, or that way, is al one in effect. So likewise,
he that saith, shal I go to Heauen by doing this, or by doing
that; and he that saith, shal I go to heauen this way or
that way, saith one & the same thing in effect. Truly therfore
did I answer to the Obiection, by my selfe propounded
cut of the Gospell (viz:) that our Sauiour Christ did
not shew in that place, how men may attaine eternal life,
but shewed plainly vnto the man, who trusted much vnto
his workes and good life, that perfect obseruation of the
Law is required of him, that thinketh to bee iustified by
the workes of the Law. The man did not say, how shall
I go to Heauen? Or how shall I attaine eternall life? But
thus; by doing what, shall I haue eternall life? Christ
therefore aunswered directly to his manner of demaunding;
If thou trust so much to thy works and thine owne doings,
that thou thinkes thou canst go to Heauen by doing, then do I tell
thee, that thou must looke well vnto the matter, and see thou keep
the Commandements. This answere is directly and cleerely
deduced, out of the very text it selfe.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  Bell saith,Page 429. that Goodworkes are so necessary to attaine eternall
life, as the vsuall, ordinary, & vndoubted meanes,
by which God decreed from eternity, freely for his owne
name sake, to bring his elect to saluation: and that without
them, none haue beene, are, or shall be saued, if time
be graunted to doe them. How are they now become an
impossible meane to come to Heauen? How did the man
enquire of an impossible way to heauen, by Goodworkes?
What need this challenger any aduersary, who thus ouerthroweth
himselfe?
            
            
               
               T. B.
               If our Iesuite had either eyes to see, eares to heare, or
wit to vnderstand; he could not but both see & perceiue,
that he confoundeth himselfe in his owne dispute. For, albeit
the best liuer vpon earth, cannot for any merit of his
best workes, by any possible meanes attaine eternall life,
(for it is the gifte of God,Ephes. 2, 8, 9. 10. not of workes) yet hath GOD
decreed to bring vs to heauen by good workes, which he
of his great mercy freely worketh in vs. For these are the
Apostles expresse wordes, as the Rhemists haue put them
downe. For by Grace you are saued by Faith, and that not of your
selues, for it is the gift of God, not of workes, that no man glory,
for we are his worke, created in Christ lesus in goodworks, which
God hath prepared that we should walke in them. Thus writeth
the Apostle, euen as our Papists alledge his words. Out
of which holy discourse of the chosen vessell of our Lorde
Iesus, I obserue these golden lessons.
               First, that we are saued By grace.
               
               Secondly, that saluation followeth not onely our first
iustification so called of the Papists, which they confesse
to be of Grace, but their second falsly supposed iustification
also, which they wold haue to come of Works. For (as
we see here, our saluatiō, which is after al maner of iustification
(if ther were as many as the Papists imagine) is only
of grace, not of Workes. You are saued saith Saint Paule,
marke wel the word (Saued.) He saith not, you are iustified
by grace, which goeth before saluation, but you are
saued by grace, which followeth your iustification.
               Thirdly, that the Apostle saith Negatiuely (We are not
saued of Workes,) and consequently, that he confoundeth
our Papistes, who say that their second iustification and
their saluation come of their works. But as their second
falsly so named iustification, was neuer knowne to any of
the holy Fathers, nor to any ancient counsel; so wil their
saluation neuer bee knowne to Gods elect, vnlesse they
repent and reuoke this their damnable Doctrine.
               
                  
Fourthly, that God worketh our Good Workes in vs.
               Fiftly, that God hath ordained Good Workes for this
end, that we walke in them. This doctrine is confirmed
by the same Apostle in another place,Tit. 3, 5 where he hath these
wordes. Not by the Workes of Iustice which wee did, but
according to his Mercy hee hath saued vs. Loe, the holy
Apostle is still constant in his former position, (viz:) that
We are not saued by the Workes of Iustice, but of mercy & grace.
For this cause saith S. Austen,
                  Aug. lib. 9. con. fession. cap. 13. Chrisost de cō
                     punct. cord. lib, 2. tom, 5. col. 592 
                  Woe vnto the best liuer vppon
earth, if God examin his life, his mercy set apart. For this cause
saith S. Chrisostome, & si millies moriamur &c. Though we
die a thousand times, and though we accomplish all vertues
of the minde, yet do wee nothing woorthy of those
things, which we receiue of God. For this cause saith S.
Theophilact; Seruauit nos aeternum, non ex operibus, &c. Hee
hath saued vs eternally,Theophil. in 3. cap. Tit. not of the workes which we haue
done; that is, neither haue we done the works of Iustice,
neither are wee saued by them, but his goodnes and his
clemency, hath wrought our saluation wholly. Yea,Berna. in cant. serm. 68. tom. 1 pagina 1006. for
this cause saith their highly renowned Abbot Bernardus;
Sic non est &c. So there is no cause, that thou shouldst now
aske, by what merits we hope for glory, especially since
thou hearest the Prophet say; I will do it (sayth the Lord,)
not for your sake, but for mine owne. It is sufficient to merite,
to know that our merites are not sufficient. Thus write
these holy fathers, with the famous popish Abbot, whose
words are so plaine for the truth which I defend, as euery
childe may with facility discerne the same. For I did not
say, (as our Iesuite woulde deceitfully perswade his
Reader) that Good Works are an impossible mean to come
to heauen; No, nor that the young man did enquire of an
impossible way to heauen. For I know, and I haue constantly
affirmed the same in the Downfall; that Goodworkes
are a meane, and the way that leadeth to heauen. But
withall, I said then, and now againe; that neither can the
best liuer on earth, keepe the Commandements so exactly



as the law requireth; neither can any man for any works
he doth, condignly merit eternal life. And this is the point
indeede, which I defend against the Papists. Whosoeuer
shall with a single eye pervse the Downfall, will find it to
be so. For, it is one thing to say, that Good Workes are a
meane, or the way to heauen; another thing to say, that
a man can fulfill the Law, and by his Workes condignely
merite heauen. The former I graunt willingly, the latter
I deny constantly; neither is any Papist able, to answere
my reasons in that behalfe. For example, the Pope (Boniface)
sicke at Rome, of his meere good wil bequeathed by
his Testament 7000. crownes of Gold, to Robert Parsons
the Iesuite, lame of hands and legs at Paris (his lamenesse
not knowne to the Pope) to be giuen to the said Parsons,
whē he cōmeth to Rome in his own person to demand the
same. Now, the said Parsons hauing inteligence of the said
Legacy, prouideth a good Gelding, a strong man-like
fellow, and so taketh his iourney towards Rome, where
he no sooner demaundeth the saide 7000. Crownes, but
he in friendly manner receiueth the same, acording to the
true meaning of the Popes will. In this case, the Gelding▪
the tall fellow, and the iourney it selfe, were good & necessary
meanes to receiue and possesse the said Crownes:
Howbeit, neither did they merite the said Crownes,Rom. 6, 23 neyther
were they the cause of bequeathing them Euen so in
our case,Ephes. 2, 8 
                  Eternall life (as the Apostle saith) is the free gift of
God,
                  Ephes. 2, 10 
                  it is of grace,
                  Mat. 7. 17 
                  not of Workes:
                  Rom. 8, 30 neuerthelesse, Goodworkes
(as the same Apostle telleth vs) are the way which God hath
ordained for vs to walke in; and the vsuall, ordinary, & vndoubted
meanes, by which God intendeth to bring his elect to heauen.
This notwithstanding, this must euer bee a constant
and vndoubted position, with all the children of God,
(viz:) that none (not the best liuer vpon earth) is able exactly
to keepe Gods commandements, and by the merit of his works
to enter into heauen.
               
            
            
               S. R.
               Will not Christ say in his last sentence;Page 428. 
                  Come ye blessed



of my father possesse the kingdom prouided for you,
                  Mat. 15. 34, 35 
                  from the constitution
of the world? I was hungry, and ye gaue me meate. As
well as he will say, Go you from me you cursed into euerlasting
fire? For I was hungry, and ye gaue me not to eate.
               
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere; first, that the word (For) is not heere taken
Causaliter, but Consequutiue, to speake as the Schoole-doctors
do, that is to say; It doth not Connotate the cause
but the euent, as was saide before of Mary Magdalen. So
that the sence is not for giuing meat to Christ, when hee
was hungry, or drink to him being thirsty, they did merit
heauen, but that by doing such charitable works, (which
are the effects of a true iustifying faith, they shewed thē
                  selues
to bee the children of God, and the heyres of his
kingdome. And this sence is deduced, out of the very text
it selfe. For seeing the kingdome of heauen, (as Christ heere
auoucheth) was prepared for them before the foundation.
and consequently, before they were borne, and so before
they could doe any Good Workes, it followeth of necessity,
that their workes could not merite heauen, but
only signifie to the world, that the inheritance of heauen
was due vnto them, as to the children of God the heyres
of the same. For (as the Apostle sayth) If we be sonnes, then
are we also heyres;
                  Rom. 8, 17 
                  heyres of God, and ioynt-heires with Christ.
Yea (as the same Apostle saith in another place.Ephes. 2. 4.) As he
chose vs in him before the foundation of the world, that we should
be holy and immaculate in his sight through loue, who hath predestiuated
vs into the adoption of children by Iesus Christ vnto himselfe,
according to the good pleasure of his will. To which I must
needs adde that,Rom. 8. 50. which the same Apostle saith yet in another
place; Whom he did predestinate, them also he called: and
whom he called, them also he iustified; and whom he iustified them
also he glorified. Out of this holy discourse of the Apostle of
our Lord Iesus, I obserue these golden lessons.Psa. 59, 12
               
               First, that we are the sonnes of God, not by nature (for
so we are his enemies, and the children of wrath) but by



grace and adoption in Iesus Christ.
               Secondly, that God chose vs to be his Children before
we were borne.
               Thirdly, that he chose vs, not because wee were holy,
but that we might be holy and immaculate in his sight.
               Fourthly, that he predestinated vs to bee his Children
by adoption, not for any Goodworkes wee eyther had done
or could doe, but for his owne good pleasure to the glory
of his grace. For, as to doe any workes at all before we
are borne, is altogether impossible, so to doe Goodworkes
when we are borne (seeing we are conceiued in sin, born
in sinne, and by nature the Children of wrath) is impossible
in like manner.
               Fiftly, that all our Goodworkes, are the effects and fruits
of our predestination. For,Psa. 51, 5. if it be true, as it is most true,
(else the Apostle should be a lyer) that wee were elected
to be holy,Esa. 59, 2. and to do Goodworkes; it is also true, (it cannot
be denyed) that holy life and Goodworkes,
                  Ephe. 2, 3, 5. are the effectes
and fruites of our election and predestination in
in Christ Iesus. For this cause (saith the Apostle) that predestination
proceeds freely of Gods eternall purpose; Iustification,
of predestination; and glorification, of iustification.
For first, hee chooseth vs in Christ; then,Rom. 8, 30. he iustifieth
vs in Christ. Thirdly, and lastly, he glorifieth vs
for his owne names sake. For this cause saith that famous
Papist, Nicholaus de Lyra, in this manner; Dicendum, quod
predestinatio diuina est preparatio gratiae in presenti, & gloriae in
future & ides cūsit aeterna,
                  Lyra. in cap. 6. Mat. 
                  sicut ab aeterno predestinauit al
                        •
                     quē ad
beatitudinē, ita preordinaui
                        •
                      modū quē daret sibiillā beatitudinem.
I answere (saith this Popish Doctor) that Gods predestination
is the preparation of grace in this world, and of glory
in the World to come. And therefore, seeing it is eternall,
as hee hath predestinated any one from eternity to
endlesse blisse or beatitude; so hath he also fore-ordayned
the meane, by which hee would bring him to the
same. For this cause saith the Popish Angelicall Doctor Aquinas,


                  
that predestination includeth Gods will of bestowing
both Grace and Glory.
                  Aquin. p. 1. q. 23. art. 3. ad 2. And hee addeth these
words; Nam praedestinatio ect causa, & eius quod expectatur
in futura vita à praedestinatis (selt) gloriae, & eius quod percipitur
in presenti, (selt) gratiae. For predestination is the cause,
both of that which is expected in the life to come, that is
to say, of Glory, and also of that which the predestinate
receiue in this life, that is to say, of Grace. For this cause
saith our Iesuite Bellarmine, that Goodworkes follow predestination,
as effects follow their causes. These are his expresse
wordes; Ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      sunt opera bona effectus praedestinationis.
Therefore Goodworkes are the effect of predestination. Againe,Bellar. tom. 3. col. 627. & col. 628.
in another place thus; Ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      illa propositio, (deus ab
aetet no praedestiaaut hominibus dare regnum per opera bona praeuisa)
potest & vera esse & falsa. Nam si illud (per opera praeuisa)
referaetur ad verbū (praedestinauit) falsa erit, significabit. n.
Deum praedestinasse homines, operaillorum bona praeuiderat; si
referatur adverbum (dare,) vera erit, quia significabit executionem
futuram esse per opera bona, siue quod est idem, glorificationem
effectum esse iustificationis & operum bonorum; sicut ipsa
iustificatio effectus est vocationis, & vocatio praedestinationis.
Againe, in another place thus: Non ideo pendet praedestinatio
ab operibus, sed opera à praedestinatione. Therefore predestination
doth not depend of workes, but workes depend
of predestination. Againe,Bellar. tom. 3. col. 626. & col. 628. in another place thus; Alia
ratio est praedestinationis, alia exequutionis; constituit. n. in praedestinatione
regnum caeloruū dare certis hominibus, quos abs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vlla
oper ūpraeuisione dilexit; tamen simul constituit, vt quo ad exequ
                        ••
                     
                     tionem,
via perueniends ad regnū essent opera bona. There is one
reason of predestination, another of execution; for in
predestination, God decreed to giue the Kingdome of
Heauen to certaine men, whom hee loued without any
fore-sight of workes; Howbeit hee decreed withall, that
in respect of the execution, Goodworks should be the way
to come to the Kingdome. For this cause say our Rhemists,
that our first iustification is of Gods Grace, and not



of our deseruinges; because none of all our actions that
were before our iustification, could merite or iustly procure
the Grace of iustification. Out of this discourse of
the famous Popish Doctours, I obserue these memorable
Lessons for the great good of the Reader.
               First, that all the Grace, Faith, and Goodworkes, which
we haue in this world, and the glory which we expect in
the World to come, doe wholy proceed from Gods predestination
without all deserts of man.
               Secondly, that as God prepared the kingdome of heauen
for his elect, before they were borne, or had done any
Goodworkes; so did he also prepare the way and means,
by which he intended to bring them thither.
               Thirdly, that no works either done, or foreseene to be
doone, did mooue God to predestinate any man to the
ioyes of heauen.
               Fourthly, that Goodworkes are not the cause, but the effect
of predestination.
               Fiftly, that Goodworkes are the way and meanes, which
God ordained for the execution of predestination, and
for the accomplishment of glorification.
               Sixtly, that not onely predestination, but also iustification,
proceed of Gods meere fauour, grace, and good
pleasure, without all deserts of man.
               Seuenthly, that our vocation, our iustification, and our
glorification, are the effects of predestination. I therefore
conclude, that Good workes are not the cause, vvhy
Gods Children possesse Heauen as their inheritance, seeing
it is the effect of Gods predestination; yet that they
are the ordinary way and meanes, by which God decreed
in his eternall purpose to bring his elect to Heauen. For
as hee ordained the end, that is to say, the kingdome of
heauen or eternall life; so also ordained he the way and
meanes to attaine the same; that is to say, vocation, iustification,
faith, and Goodworkes.
               
               Secondly, that there is great disparity betweene saluation



and damnation, and therefore that Goodworkes cannot
merite Saluation, though euill workes bee enough
for damnation. The reason is euident, both in Phylosophy
and Diuinity, because as Saint Dionysius Areopagita
saith (and the Popish Angelicall Doctor Aquinas approoueth
the same) Bonum ex integra causa existit,
                  A
                        ••
                     op, de diuin 
                        〈◊〉
                     , cap. 4 p 267. 
                  malum ex
quolibet defectu?) Good, is of an intire and whole cause,
but euill, comes of euery defect: yea, that more is required
to good then to euill,Aquinas, 12. q. 18. art. 4. daily experience teacheth vs;
for one may soone do that hurt to his Neghbour, which
cannot without great cost and long time be cured againe.
This S. Austen well obserued,August. tract. 72. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Ioh. tom. 9. Page. 262. when hee left in writing
to be read of all posteritie, that it is a greater thing to iustifie
the wicked man, then to make heauen and earth.
            
            
               S. R.
               I proue the conclusion,Page 429. because Christ saith, My yoke
is sweete, and my burthen light. And Saint Iohn saith, his commaundementes
are not heauy: Ergo, they are possible. Bell
aunswereth, that these words are not meant in respect of
vs,Aug. lib. 1. retr. c. 19. tom. 1 but of Christ, whose keeping the Commaundements
is imputed to vs. Which Saint Austen (saith hee) meant,
when he writ thus; Then are all the Commandements reputed
as done,
                  1. Iohn. 5. 3. 
                  when whatsoeuer is done, is forgiuen. But this is easily
refuted, for Saint Iohn spake in respect of vs assisted
by Gods Grace, when he saide; This is the Law of God, that
we keepe his Commaundements, and his Commaundementes are
not heauy. He saith not (Christ) but (We) must keep Gods
Commaundements.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere: First, that whosoeuer readeth and marketh
the Downefall, will soone perceiue, that our Iesuite is at a
Non plus; for there were these his silly Obiections solued
and refuted before they came to light.
               Secondly, that our Iesuite belyeth me, after his wonted
manner, when he saith; that I affirme the wordes to
be meant in respect of Christ, and not of our selues. For



after I had proued by many arguments drawn out of holy
Writ, that the yoke of Christ is sweet to the faithfull,1 Cor. 1, 30 I
added these words.Phil. 3, 9 This being so, we may truely say, that
in Christ we fulfill the Law:Colos. 2, 14 
                  Because he is our righteousnes,
our sanctification,
                  1 Iohn 5, 4 
                  and our Redemption; because hee hath ouercome
death; because he hath clothed vs with his righteousnes,
                  Acts 15. 11 
                  because
he hath couered our nakednes with his garments;
                  2 Cor. 5, 21 
                  because
in him we haue gotten the victory,
                  Rom. 5, 19 
                  ouer hell, death and damnation.
                  Iohn 16, 33
Thus I answered in the Downfall.
                  Psalme 32, 1
               
               Now I referre my selfe to the censure of the indifferent
Reader, how sufficiently I haue refuted the Iesuite, and
how vniustly he hath slandered me. For it is one thing to
say, we fulfill the Commaundements in Christ, another
thing to say, the wordes are spoken in respect of Christ,
not in respect of our selues: The latter are his, the former
are mine, viz: that in Christ we fulfill the law: and I learned
them, of Christs holy Apostle and chosen vessell S.
Paule. Omnia possum in eo qui me confortat. I can do all thinges
(saith he) in Christ, that strengthneth me.
                  Phil, 4, 13 Againe in another
place, the same Apostle telleth vs, That as by the disobedience
of Adam,
                  Rom. 5, 19 
                  many becam sinners; so by the obedience of Christ
many shall be made righteous. Againe in another place thus;
That I may be found in him not hauing mine owne righteousnes,
                  Phillip, 3, 9
                  which is of the Law, but that which is through the saith of Christ,
the righteousnes which is of God throgh faith. Again in another
place thus; They being ignorant of Gods righteousnes,
                  Rom. 10, 3 
                  and seeking
to establish their owne, were not subiect to the righteousnesse
of God.
               
               
                  Againe thus; Hee made him sinne for vs, which knewe
no sinne, that we might be the righteousnes of God in him. Herevpon
S. Austen that worthy pillar of Christs church,
                  2 Cor. 5, 21 
                  giueth
this glosse and true meaning of these words of Saint
Paule. Christum pro nobis peccatum fecit Deus,Aug. in enchir. cap. 41. tom. 3 pagina 118 cuireconciliandi
sumus; hoe est, sacrificium pro peccatis, per quod reconciliari
valeremus. Ipse ergo peccatum, vt nos iustitia; nec nostra, sed
dei; nec in nobis, sed in ipso; sicut ipse peccatum non s
                     •
                  um, sed



nostram, nec in se, sed in nobis constititutum, similitudine carnis
peccati, in qua crucifixus est, demonstrauit. God made Christ
sinne for vs, to whom we are to be reconciled; that is, a
sacrifice for sinnes, by which we might be reconciled. He
therefore was made sinne, that we might be made Iustice;
not our Iustice, but Gods Iustice; neither in vs, but in
him; as hee declared, sinne not to bee his, but ours; not
placed in him, but in vs, by the similitude of sinfull flesh,
in which he was crucified. Thus writeth this ancient, holy,
and learned Father. Out of whose graue Testimony,
together with the Texts of holy scripture produced already,
I obserue these memorable documentes, for the
comfort of the well affected Reader.
               
               First, that albeit wee are not able of our selues, nor
in our selues, to fulfill the Law of God, and to keepe his
commandements; yet are we able to keepe them, and to
fulfill the Law, in our Lord Iesus Christ.
               Secondly, that as we were made sinners by the disobedience
of one, euen Adam; so are we made righteous, by
the obedience of one, euen Christ Iesus.
               
               Thirdly, that our formall righteousnes is not inherent
in our selues, but in God, for the obedience of Iesus
Christ his onely sonne and our onely sauiour.
               Fourthly, that as the sinne for which Christ suffered,
was ours, not his; in vs, not in him; euen so that iustice
by which we are made righteous, is not ours, but Gods;
not in vs, but in him. I therefore conclude, that we fulfill
the Lawe in Christ, not in our selues. And I adde with S.
Austen,
                  O lesuite confesse thou art confounded. (to the euerlasting confusion of our Iesuite and al
Iesuited Papists in the world) that that Iustice, by which
and with which wee are formally iustified in Gods sight,
is not inherent in our selues, but in God; not ours, but his;
not in vs, but in him; and yet ours by imputation, as our
sinnes by imputation were his. So as all the faithfull may
ioyfully say with the Prophet Dauid; Blessed are they vvhose
iniquities are forgiuen, and whose sinnes are couered. Blessed



is the man, to whom the Lord will not impute sinne. And with
the Apostle Paul:
                  Psalm, 32, 1, 2. 
                  As many by the disobedience of Adam, were
made sinners;
                  Rom. 5, 19. 
                  so many by the obedience of Christ are made righteous.
And heere I wish the reader to marke well: that to
be iustified by imputation, is to bee made iust truely and
indeed; though not by Iustice inherent in our selues, but
by the Iustice of Christ.2 Cor. 5, 21 For as our sinnes were truely and
indeed imputed to him, so is his Iustice truely and indeed
imputed to vs. I also admonish the Reader, to remember
well these words of S. Austen,
                  Aug. in ench. cap. 41. tom. 3. pagina 118. 
                  Ipse ergo peccatum, vt nos iustitia,
&c. He was made sinne, that we might be made iustice:
not our Iustice, but Gods iustice; neither in vs, but
in him. To remember well (I say) these words, beecause
they are words of great consequence.These wordes strike dead. For they proue euidently,
that our formal iustice is not inherēt in our selues,
but in God; which confoundeth the Papists, and striketh
them dead. They conuince mans inherent Iustice to be imperfect;
and their supposed condigne merit of Workes, to
be plaine Hypocriticall.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  S. Iohn giueth vs a signe to try,Page 430 1 Iohn 2, 3, 4. if we know God (viz;)
if we keepe his commandements, and verse 3. affirmeth,
That who keepeth not his Commaundements, knoweth not God.
Wherefore eyther Bell keepeth the Commandements, or
he knoweth not God.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere;Luke 18, 13 first, that Bell humbly acknowledgeth himselfe
a great sinner, and desireth pardon for his sins with
the poore Publican. Howsoeuer our Iesuite like the Pharisee,
glory in his condigne merites, and Workes of Supererogation.
               
               Secondly,1 Cor, 13, 9. that as we know God vnperfectly, so do we
keep his commandements vnperfectly. If our Iesuite say,
that hee knoweth God perfectly: S. Paule condemneth
him for an arrogant fellow: If hee say, hee keepeth Gods
Commandements perfectly,lames 3, 2 S. Iames reproueth him as a



proud Pharisaicall Fryer.
               
            
            
               S. R.
               As for S. Austen,
                  Page 430. he said our defectuous keeping is counted
a full keeping, when the defect is pardoned; which
is a farre different thing from saying, that Christs keeping
is counted our keeping. And he meaneth, that our keeping
is defectuous, because we keep not the commandements
ad vnum apicem (as he saith) to the last iot or title, but thorough
Veniall sinnes haue neede to say, Fogiue vs our Trespasses;
which Veniall Trespasses being pardoned, we are accounted
to do all Gods Commandements.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere; first, that it is a meer calumny to charge me
with saying, that Christs keeping is our keeping. I onely
said then, and now say againe; that wee fulfill the Law in
Christ, which is such a truth, as you are neuer able to refute
the same.
               Secondly, that I haue proued already, that euery sinne
is deadly of it owne nature: and consequently, that it is
too great arrogancy in our Iesuite, to expound S. Austen
after his owne fancy, hauing neyther authority, nor reason
so to do.
               Thirdly, that when our Iesuite confesseth that their
Veniall sinnes are pardoned, he vnawares confesseth, that
they cannot keepe Gods Commandements. I prooue it,
because God either hath forbidden their Venials, or is
well pleased with them. If he be well pleased with them,
then are they no sinnes at all, for God is not well pleased
with sinne.Psalme 5, 4 This Dilemma is insoluble. If hee haue forbidden them, then are they against
his precept, and consequently, seeing the Papistes
graunt that they cannot liue without their Venials, they
must also graunt of necessity, that they cannot keep Gods
holy Precepts. And therefore it is time for all Iesuites and
Iesuited Papists, to say with S. Iames, Wee all offend in many
things.
                  Iames 3, 2 And with the Prophet Dauid, Enter not into Iudgement
with thy seruants,
                  Psalme 143, 2 
                  O Lord, for none liuing shall be iustified



in thy sight.
                  Aug. lib. 1. retract. cap. 19. I therefore conclude with Saint Austen; that
all the Commandements are then reputed as done, when
whatsoeuer is not done, Is of mercy forgiuen. And with
S. Hierome; that the true wisedome of man is,Hier. lib. 1. aduers. Pelagioones fol. 121. Lib. 1, fol. 120 lib. 2. fol. 130 to know
that he is vnperfect.
            
            
               S. R.
               Saint Hierome confesseth, that God hath giuen possible
Commaundements, least he should be Authour of Iniustice.
He saith likewise, that he is to be detested as a blasphemer,
that saith, God hath commaunded any impossible
thing. S. Austen also saith, that God could not command
any impossible thing, because he is iust.
            
            
               T. B.
               This Obiection is as a Bulwarke, for Popish supposed
Condigne Merite of vvorkes. I therefore both proposed it
in the Downefall, and answered it in the same place. My
answere is there to bee seene at large, to which I referre
the Reader. This is the summe and effect thereof, (viz:)
that God commaunded nothing, which was eyther impossible
in it selfe to be done, or to bee doone of man as
man; The same ie there prooued at large. Touching S.
Hierome, I will adde a little, because our Iesuite affirmeth
him to be on his side. The truth is this; that S. Hierom in
3. whole books against the Pelagians, hath no other scope,
purpose, or intent, saue onely to proue against them out
of the holy Scriptures, that none liuing doth keepe Gods
Commaundements, which hee prooueth no other vvay,
but because all haue sinned, and done euill in Gods sight.
Three thinges therefore are cleere and certaine with S.
Hierome.
               
               First, that all haue sinned, and cannot bee iustified, but
by the mercy and fauour of God. These are his wordes;
In multis offendimus omnes.
                  Lib. 2. aduers. Pelag fol. 130. 
                  Non pauca peccata, sed multa; non
quorundam sed omnium posuit. Omnes n. quae sua sunt quaerunt,
& non ea quae dei sunt. We all offend in many things. He
put not a few sinnes, but many; not the sinnes of some,



but of all.Vbi supra, lib. 1. sol. 123. D. For all seeke the things that are their own, and
not the things that are Gods. Again thus; Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     . n. homo
potest esse sine peccato, quod tua habet sententia; sed potest si
voluerit deus, hominem seruare sine peccato, & immaculatum
sua misericordia custodire. Hoc & ego dico, quod deo cunct
                        •
                     
possibilia sunt; homint autem, non quicquid voluerit possibile est,
& maxime idesse, quod nullam, 
                        •
                     egeris habere creaturam. For
man cannot be without sinne, as thou thinkest; but God
is able, if it please him, to preserue a man from sinne, and
to keep him immaculate by his mercy. This I also grant,
that all thinges are possible to God; but it is not possible
for man to doe, whatsoeuer hee would; especially to bee
that, which thou hast not read any Creature to haue. Againe
thus;Vbi supra, lib. 2. fol. 129. D. 
                  Hec cuncta percurro; vt oftendam à nullo legem,
esse completam, & per legem; mandat a omnia quae continentur in
lege. Sequitur; ergo non liberi arbitry potestate sed de clementia
conseruamur. I runne ouer all these thinges, to shew that
none hath fulled the Law; and by the Law, all the Commaundements
contained in the Law: Ergo, we are preserued
(Or saued) not by the power of free will, but by the
clemency (Or mercy) of God.
               Secondly, that all the elect people of God, though
they be sinfull in themselues,Vbi supra, lib. 1. fol. 120. c d. tom 3. eccles. 7 22 3. reg. 8. 46 by transgressing Gods law,
yet are they iust by the mercy of God in Christ Iesus.Psal. 19. 12. The
former p
                     •
                  rt,Psal. 43. 2. Saint Hierome prooueth thus; Non est homo
iustus, &c. There is none iust vppon the earth, none that
doth good and sinneth not. Againe, There is no man that
sinneth not. Againe, Who knoweth his sinnes, cleanse mee from
my secret faults. Againe, Enter not into iudgement w
                        •
                     th thy seruant,
for none liuing can bee iustified in thy sight. These and
many like places (saith S. Hierom) are euery where in the
Scriptures, by which it is manifest, that none liuing can
be without sinne.
               The latter part,Vbi supra. the same holy Father prooueth thus;
Audi eundem euangelistam; si confiteamur peccata nostra, sidelis
& instus est, vt dimittat nobis peccata nostra, & mundet



nos ab omni iniquitate.1. Iohn. 1, 5. Tunc ergo iusti sumus, quando nos peccatores
fatemur; & iustitia nostra non ex proprio merito, sedex
dei consistit misericordia: conclusit. n. 
                        ••
                     euso
                        •
                     ma sub peccato,
vt omnibus misereatur.Rom. 11, 31 Et haec hominis summa est iusti
                        •
                     a. quicquid
potuerit habere virtutis, non suum putare esse, sed Domini
qui largitus est. Heare the same Euangelist; If wee confesse
our sinnes, he is faithfull and iust to forgiue vs all our sins,
and to cleanse vs from all iniquity. Then therefore are
wee iust, when wee confesse our selues; and our Iustice
doth not consist of our owne merite, but of Gods mercy.
For GOD hath shut vp all vnder sinne,Vbi supra fol. 121. 
                        •
                     . that he may haue
mercy on all. Againe, in another place thus; Haec est hominis
vera sapientia, imperfectum esse se nosse; at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      (vtit a loquar)
cunctorum in carne iustorum imperfecta perfectio est. This
is the true wisedome of man, to know that hee is vnperfect;
and that the perfection of all the iust in the flesh, is
imperfect. Out of this discourse of this holy and learned
Father, I obserue these worthy documents.
               First, that all men, euen the best liuers vpon earth, haue
committed not a few, but many sins.
               Secondly, that wee neuer read of any man, who neuer
had done any sin.
               Thirdly, that it is not possible for any man, to lead his
life without sin.
               Fourthly, that no man can be saued by his free will &
holy life, but by the mercy of God.
               Fiftly, that no man fulfilleth the Law, nor keepeth the
Commaundements contained therein.Marke this point well. This is a point of
great consequence, it would be remembred.
               Sixtly, that though all men bee Sinners in respect of
themselues, yet are the faithfull iust in respect of Gods
mercy, who imputeth not their sins vnto them.
               Seuenthly, that man is thē iustified, when he acknowledgeth
himselfe to be a Sinner; and then perfect, when
he acknowledgeth his own imperfection. This is a most
excellent and golden Lesson. For here we see, how Sinners



are iust and perfect in Gods sight. Marke well, gentle
Reader. None (saith Saint Hierom) can fulfill the law;
none can keepe the Commaundementes; none can liue
without sinne; and yet the greater Sinner, the more iust
man, if hee with the lowly Publican doe humbly confesse
his sinnes. For (as Saint Hierome telleth vs) to acknovvledge
our imperfection,Luke. 18, 13. is our perfection before GOD,
and to confesse our selues sinners, is our iustification before
him in Christ Iesus. Away then with all Popish inherent
iustification; away with al Popish falsly supposed
satisfaction; away with all Popish Condigne merits; away
with all Popish supererogations.
            
            
               S. R.
               Saint Iohn saith,Page 429. 1. Iohn. 53. 
                  This is the loue of GOD, that we keepe his
Commaundements, and his Commaundements are not heauy. He
saith not (Christ) but (We) must keep Gods Commandements,
and to animate vs thereto, he addeth; that they
are not heauy, (Viz:) to vs.
            
            
               T. B.
               This is answered already,August. lib. 1. retract. cap. 19 tom. 1. where I prooued out of Saint
Austen,
                  Vbi supra, lib. 2. fol. 130. B. Ibidem. C. that all the Commaundements are then reputed
done, when whatsoeuer is not done, is (Of mercy) forgiuen.
Neuerthelesse, it shall not be amisse, to adde Saint
Hieroms censure to the latter member, for explication
sake. These are his wordes; Vis audire facilitatem preceptorum
dei? Ausculta quod dicitur; quam arcta via & Angusta
est, quae ducit ad vitam, & pauci sunt, qui inveniunt eam. Non
dixit, quigradiuntur per eam; hoc. n. difficillimum est, sed qui
inveniunt eam. Pauci. n. inveniunt, & multò pauciores ingrediuntur
per eam. Sequitur; hac dico, & iterum iterum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ac per
singulaingeram; vt erubescas ad sententiam tuam, facilia esse
dei mandata. Wilt thou heare, how easie Gods Commandements
are?Mat. 7, 14. Hearken what is saide; Strait and narrowe is
the way, which leadeth vnto life, and few they are that finde it.
He said not, which go by it, for that is a very hard thing,
but which find it; for few doe finde it, and farre fewer



enter in by it. These things I say, and will vrge them againe
and againe seuerally; that thou maist bee ashamed
to say, that Gods commaundements are easie. Thus writeth
this holy and most learned Father. Out of whose doctrine
I note thus much.
               First, that the way to heauen (that is to say Gods commaundements)
is very straight and narrow, not wide and
long, or casie.
               Secondly, that it is so straight and so narrow, that few
find it, and fewer enter in by it.
               Thirdly, that this way of Gods commandements, is so
very hard; that in S. Hieroms opinion and iudgement, he
may be ashamed, that saith it is easie. Our Iesuite therfore
may be ashamed of his Doctrine,Page 432 and twice ashamed to
make S. Hierom a Patron of the same.Page 433
               
            
            
               S. R.
               If Bell say,Page 432 that it is impossible to loue God, as wee
ought to doe: this is reproued, because hee loueth God
as he should do,Deut. 6, 5 who loueth him With all his heart, all his
soule, and all his power. But Iosue so loued God, of whom
it is written,4 Reg. 23 that hee returned in all his heart, in all his
soule, and all his strength.Psalme 119 Likewise Dauid sought God
in all his heart,3 Reg, 14, 8. and followed him in all his hart. And God
hath some seruants,2. par. 6, 14 that walk before him in all their hart,
with whom he keepeth his couenant and mercy,Deut. 30, 6 and God
promiseth to circumcise the Iewes harts, that they might
loue him in al their hearts, and all their soule.
            
            
               T. B.
               
                  Bell saith so, and that truely, and is already proued in this
discourse,4 Reg. 23, 25 and more at lage in the Downfall. Now to your
particulars. King Iosias (whom our Iesuite falsly nameth
Iosue) returned to God in al his hart, al his soul, and al his
strength. Which is nothing else indeede, but that hereturned
to God with a sincere heart, and vnfainedly, not
Hypocritically. Not that he was pure and free from sin, &
no part of his hart or soul defiled with corruption, which



our Iesuite might haue perceiued, to be implyed in the
word (Returne.) For, from what did he returne, saue only
from sinne. If he had euer beene with God in all his
heart, all his soule, and all his strength; then doubtlesse
could he not haue returned to him. For hee that is euer
with one, cannot be truly saide, to returne to him. But
the scripture decideth the Controuersie,2. Par. 35, 21 22. when it telleth
vs, that Iosias hearkened not vnto the wordes of Mecho,
                  2, Par. 15, 17.
(king of Aegipt,)de Asa. notetur which were of the mouth of God, but
came to fight in the valley of Megiddo, where hee was
slaine for his paines. K. Dauid likewise (saith our Iesuite)
sought God in all his hart, which must needs be vnderstood,
as I said of K. Iosias. For he was both an adulterer,
& a murderer,2. Sam. 12. thogh also the child of God. This is already
proued, & plainly cōfirmeth the doctrin which I defend.Psalme, 51
The same may be saide of king Ezechias, who was a great
sinner,2. Par. 22, 25 and yet is saide to haue serued God with all his
heart, and to haue kept his commaundements.4 Reg. 18. 6. 7, 8. The same
answere serueth to the rest, that God hath those, that wil
serue him with their whole heart;De Asa vide that is, vnfainedly and
chearefully.2 Par. 16, 7, 13 & cap. 15, 17 & vda. For, as wee haue heard already out of the
scriptures, None liuing is without sinne. Againe, The faithfull
are saide to keepe Gods Commandements, and to serue him with
all their heart; Because to such as serue God vnfainedly and
chearefully, whatsoeuer is left vndone, is of mercy pardoned and
forgiuen. It is the flat doctrine both of S. Austen and of S.
Hierom, as I haue already proued. And heere I may not
forget, to put our Iesuite in mind, that concerning the
circumcising of the Iewish hearts, it may please him to
read the verses following, for there shall he find his sillie
obiection fully answered, euen in the text it selfe. These
are the words:Deu. 30, 8, 10 
                  Return thou therefore and obey the voyce of the
Lord, and doe all his Commaundements, which I commaund thee
this day. Loe, the Iewes, whose hearts God promiseth to
circumcise, haue gone from him and disobeyed his voice,
and therfore must haue their harts circumcised, that they



may returne to him againe, & serue him with their whole
heart, that is to say, chearefully and vnfeignedly. Whosoeuer
can and will read S. Hierome (in the place quoted in
the Margent) seriously and at large,Hier. lib. 2. adverse. Pelag. fol. 133. tom. 3 shall finde this controuersie
so fully decided, as hee can no longer stande in
doubt thereof. For euer must this Apostolicall Doctrine,Iames 3, 2.
be holden for a most constant position:3. Reg. 8. 46 
                  In multis offendimus
omnes. We all offend in many things.2. Par, 6, 36 And this likewise
for a receiued Axiome,
                  1. Iohn 1, 8 in the Schoole of all right
Christians; Non est homo, qui non peccauit.
                  2. Par. 15, 17 & cap. 16. ver 7. & 12. 
                  There is no Man
that sinneth not. If therefore our Iesuite sinne not, hee is no
man, if his pope sinne not, he is not man, but either God
or the Deuill. GOD (I am sure) he is not, if the Deuill, God
blesse vs from him. In like manner, it is saide of King Assa
that his hart was perfect al his dayes, and yet is he reproued
both for resting vpon the king of Aram, and for not
seeking God in his disease. The speech is Sinedochicall, because
he was vpright in many things.
            
            
               S. R.
               Saint Hierome curseth this blasphemy of Bell;
                  Page 443 
                  God hath
giuen vs those commandements,Hier. epist. 
                        •
                      Damas. tom. 2 fol. 57 which we cannot possibly
keepe. Likewise Saint Austen saith, that God coulde
not commaund any impossible thing, because he is iust.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answer; first, that the Symbole or Creed (from whence
our Iesuite will needs borrow a curse,A. Aug. serm. 61 de temp. 1. and father it vpon
S. Hierom) is not his, as the censure vpon the same doth
declare. The like I may say of S. Aistens sermons de Tempore
Secondly, Saint Hieroms meaning, & S. Austens also,
is nothing else indeed, but that Gods commaundements
are possible to be kept of man as man, though not of corrupt
man after the fall of Adam. This point is handled
more at large, in the Downefall of Popery. That this is Saint
Hieroms opinion indeede, I haue already proued at large
touching S. Austen, these are his owne expresse wordes;
Certe iustus Deus, negari non potest. Imputat autm Deus homini



omne peccatum. Et hoc quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      confitendum puto, quìa ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      peccatumest,
quicquid non imputabitur in peccatū. Et si est aliquod peccatum
quod vitari non potest, quomodo iustus deus dicitur, si imputare
cuiquam creditur quod vitari non possit? Respondemus,
iam domini contra superbos esse clamatū;Psalme 32, 1. beatus cui nō imputavit
dominus peccatum. Non. n. imputat his qui sideliter ei dicunt;
dimitte nobis debita nostra,Aug. de persect iustit. ratiocin, 15. pa. 968. tom. 7. sicut & nos dimittimus debitoribus
nostris. Et iuste non imputat, quia instum est, quod ait; in qua
mensura mensi fueritis, in eadem remetietur vobis. Peccatum est
autem, cum vel non est charitas quae esse debet, vel minor est quā
debet, siue hoc voluntate vitari possit, siue non possit; quia si potest,
presens voluntas hoc facit; si autem non potest, praeterita voluntas
hoc fecit; & tamen vitari potest, non quando voluntas superbalaudatur,
sed quando humilis adiuvatur God doubtlesse
is iust, it cannot be denyed. He also imputeth euery sinne
vnto man. I also thinke that this must be granted, because
it is no sinne, whatsoeuer is not imputed for sinne: and if
there be any sinne which cannot be auoyded, how is God
called iust, if hee impute to any man, that which cannot
be auoyded? We answere, that of olde it was proclaimed
against the proud; Happy is the man, to whom the Lord hath
not imputed sin. For he imputeth not sin to thē, which faithfully
say to him, forgue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debtors.
And iustly he doth it not, because it is iust which he saith;
In what measure your selues shall measure, in the same shall it bee
measured to you againe. And it is sin when either there is not that
Charity, which ought to be, or when it is lesse then it ought to be;
whether this can bee avoyded with will, or it cannot: for if it can
be auoyded, then present wil hath done it; if it cannot be avoyded,
then wil past did it.
               
               Againe, the same Saint Austen hath these words; Ante
omniainquit, interrogandus est,
                  Vbi supra raciocin. 1. p. 965 
                  qui negat hommē sine peccato
esse posse, quid sit quodcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      peccatum; quod vitari potest, an quod
vitari non potest. Si quod vitari potest; potest homo sine peccato
esse, quod vitari potest. Nulla. n. ratio vel institia patitur saltem
dici peccatum, quod vitari nullo modo potest. Respondemus,



vitariposse peccatum, si natura vitiata sanetur gratia Dei per Iesum
C. D. N. In tantum. n. sana non est, in quantum id quod
faciendum est, aut caecitate non videt, aut infirmitate non implet,
dum caro concupiscit aduersus spiritum, & spiritus aduersus carnem,
vt ea quae non vult homo, faciat. He (saith Celestine) that
saith man cannot liue without sinne, must first of all bee
demaunded, what he will haue sinne to be; whether that
which can be auoyded, or which cannot be auoyded. If
that which can be auoided; man may be without that sin,
which can bee auoyded. For neither reason, nor Iustice
suffereth that to bee called sinne, which no way can
be auoyded. We answer, that sinne may bee auoyded, if
corrupt Nature bee healed by Gods grace through Iesus
Christ our Lord. For infomuch it is not healed, by hovv
much it either through blindnes sees not, or through infirmity
fulfils not, what ought to bee doone; while the
flesh lufteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh, so as man doth the things he would not. Thus discourseth
this holy and learned Father, the most Noble
Champion of Christes Church. Out of whose Doctrine,
these excellent obseruations may be gathered.
               First, that that is no sinne, which GOD imputeth not
for sinne: and consequently, that when GOD doth not
impute our sinnes to vs, then are wee truely saide to bee
without sin, (In Gods acceptation euer vnderstand) although
sin be still inherent in vs.
               Secondly, that they are to be condemned for proud &
arrogant persons, who thinke themselues to bee without
sinne.
               Thirdly, that our mercifull God imputeth no sinnes to
his faithfull Children, who in the Lords Prayer humbly
desire pardon for the same. This is a point of great moment;
it must bee well remembred, and neuer forgotten.
The Papistes most desperately and damnably affirme, that
some sinnes are Veniall of their owne Nature; whereas
the truth is this indeede, (viz:) that albeit all sinnes bee



mortall and deadly of their owne Nature, (as I haue proued
in the Downefall) yet are all sinnes (as Saint Austen
grauely and Christianly in this place vnfoldeth) Veniall
to Gods Children; who in true Faith inuocate his holy
Name, and humbly craue pardon for the same. So as it
may truely be said; that some sinnes are Mortall, & some
Veniall, though not in Popish sence and meaning. For,
though sinnes be mortall in their owne Nature, and not
at all Veniall, yet are all sinnes Veniall to the Faithfull,
by the great mercy of GOD, who imputeth no sinnes to
his elect Children,1. Cor. 1, 30. whē he beholdeth their Robes washed
& made white, in the bloud of the immaculate Lamb.2. Cor 5. 21.
These (I say) must bee well marked,Rom 10. 4. and firmely imprinted
in our remembrance, (viz:) Non
                        •
                     n,
                  Phil 3. 9. 
                  imputat his qui fideliter
ei dicunt, dimitte nobis debita nostra.
                  Ephe. 1. 4. For hee doth not
impute their sinnes to them,Tit. 3. 7. who faithfully desire pardon
for their sinnes.Apoc. 7. 14. Sinnes therefore are Veniall, but to
whom? Not to Atheists denying God; not to Pharisees
boasting of their Condigne workes; not to Infidels denying
Christes merits; not to impenitent persons, who eyther
dispaire, or take delight in sinne; but to the faithful,
who euer haue a feruent desire to do Gods holy will,
and to keepe his Commaundements. And though of ignorance
or frailty they often fall into sinne, yet do they
foorthwith bewayle their sinnes, humbly craue pardon
for the same, and apply themselues wholly to woorthy
fruites of repentance.
               Fourthly, that when we either want charity, or haue it
not in that degree and perfection, which the Law requireth;
we forthwith commit sinne, and become guilty in
that behalfe.
               Fiftly, that we sinne euen in doing that, which we can
no way auoyd. Hereof Saint Austen yeeldeth this reason,
(viz:) that if we can auoid it, then our present will is culpable
& in default, if we cannot auoyd it, thē 
                  will past was
the cause thereof. For (as the same holy father saith elsewhere



& is to be seen in the Downefall,) euery such sin of
ours is voluntary, eytheir in the worke it selfe, or else
in the Originall; that is to say, in the Protoplast Adam;
whose will in Gods iust iudgement is reputed ours,Heb. 7. 10. because
we were in his loynes as in the beginning,Lib. 3. ethicor. cap. 5. and root
of all mankind.§. 27. To which I adde; that though the Deuill
cannot auoyde sinne, yet cannot our Papists deny, but he
both sinneth heynously, and voluntarily: yea, the Phylopher
telleth vs, That the drunken man deserueth double punnishment.
For we must euer haue in minde, that our necessity
of sinning, is punishment iustly inflicted vpon vs, as proceeding
from our voluntary sinne in Adam. I likewise
adde for a complement and consummation of the doctrin
which I now deliuer and defend; that Celestine (against
whose errours Saint Austen wrote this Booke, Deperfectionciustitiae)
defended Mordicus as a resolued & vndoubted
doctrine; That vvhatsoeuer Man could not auoyde, but
doe of necessity, could not truely bee called sinne, nor for sinne
be iustly imputed to him. To whom Saint Austen answered;
that albeit wee cannot in this corruption of Nature liue
wholy without sin, but so farre onely as our nature is healed;
yet might we haue auoided sin perfectly and wholly
before Adams fall, which is enough to make vs truly and
formally sinners in Gods sight. Let his wordes bee well
marked and remembred, and this controuersie wil soone
be at an end. For it is all one, as if S. Austen had sayde;
Though we cannot now liue without sinne, but sinne of necessity;
yet are our sinnes iustly and truely imputed to vs, because we sinned
voluntarily in Adam, and by that means most iustly brought
this necessity vpon vs. This Doctrine the Papistes, Volentes,
Nolentes, must admit; or else accuse God of Iniustice, for
condemning Infants eternally, for that sinne which they
cannot possibly auoyde. For infants dying without Baptisme,
they affirme to perish euerlastingly.
            
            
               S. R.
               As for Bels dilernma, it is easily aunswered, and might



haue been better left out (as himselfe writeth in the margent.)
For though Infantes after they haue sinned, and
eaten the Apple in Adam, cannot avoyde the guilt of Originall
sinne, but must needs contract it by origine from
Adam: Yet becautse as Infants sinned in Adam, so they
might haue not sinned in him, but haue auoided the guilt
of sinne; falsely dooth Bell say, they could not possibly auoyde
it. And I wonder, why Bell hauing taught beefore,
that Concupiscence (the effect of Originall Sinne) is
voluntary, hee will now say, that Infants could not possibly
auoyde Originall sinne. But it is his custome to gainsay
himselfe.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere; First,Page 436. that in the Downefall of Popery, these
words are written indeed in the Margent; (Omittatur haec
clausula meo indicio.) But I protest, that neyther did I write
them, neyther did they please mee, when I espyed them.
Many like faultes are in many of my Books, which I cannot
deale withall. If I had Money at my will, (as our Iesuite
hath) to defray my charges, while my Bookes were
at the Presse, I could then so handle the matter, as such
faults should not offend his worship. How this Marginall
note crept into the place, I may coniecture and bee
deceiued. This I am assured of, that our Iesuites can do
greater matters. This euery child may know, that I wrote
it not, but our lesuite will needes haue it so. For, if I
would haue had it left out, it was in my power to haue effected
the same; this supposed (which I deny) that it was
mine owne act.
               Secondly, that our Iesuit killeth himselfe with his own
sword. For, I contend against him, that all sinnes are voluntary
in Adam, and the Law possible to haue bin kept
in him, which the Iesuite vnawares, doth heere confesse
against himselfe. This is the maine point in Controuersie,
(viz:) whether that which we cannot auoyd, may bee
sinne in vs or no. I hold the Affirmatiue, out Iesuite the



                  Negatiue. I reply, that infantes are guilty of that sinne,
which they could not avoyde; and consequently, that
that may be sinne in vs, which wee cannot avoyde. But
withall I constantly affirme, that infants sinned voluntarily
in Adam, because they were in his loynes; as also,
that we might haue kept the commaundements in innocent
Adam,
                  Heb. 7, 10 though after corrupt Adam, we cannot possibly
performe the same. This notwithstanding, I deny
that infantes could any way haue avoyded Originall sin.
For I cannot conceiue, how a childe can avoyd that sin,Qui potest capere, capiat.
which was committed before he was borne. For though
it was once in Adams power, to haue auoyded all sinne,
and so to haue freed all his posterity from all sinne, yet
was it neuer in any Infants power, to haue caused Adam
to keep Gods holy precept; which seeing no Infant was
able to performe, neyther could any Infant possibly haue
auoyded sin. Our Iesuite therefore must learne to know,
that it is one thing to say, that it was in Adams power not
to haue transgressed Gods Lawe, another thing to say,
that it was in our power before wee were borne, to haue
kept Adam from that transgression. Which seeing it was
neuer in our power, neyther were wee euer able to haue
auoyded the same; and consequently, neither to haue auoyded
sinne.
               Thirdly, where our Iesuite saith, it is Bels custome to
gaine-say himselfe; if it may please his reuerence to put
Iesuite for Bell, the truth then will be on his side.
            
            
               S. R.
               Gods Children as long as his seede abideth in them,Page 44
                        •
                     
                   sin
not,1 Iohn 3, 9 Iames 2, 10 nor offend deadly in any one point, but abide both
in the whole Law, and in euery point therof. Saint Iames
speaketh of deadly sin, and of offending deadly. But there
he Veniall sins (which Bell denyeth not) in the which iust
men may offend,Page 438. and not breake Gods Law deadly.
            
            
               T. B.
               I ansvvere first, that euery sinne is mortall of it ovvne



                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
nature (which I haue already proued. Secondly, that all
sinnes are Veniall and pardonable (which is all one,)
to Gods children and faithful seruants; not of their own
nature, but of Gods great mercy and fauour towardes
them; who for Christs merites and satisfaction (in whom
hee is euer well pleased) pardoneth all their offences, &
imputeth no sin vnto them.Mat. 3, 17 This is the constant doctrine
of S. Austen, whose words are these; Omnia ergo mandata
facta deputantur, quando quicquid non fit, ignoscitur. All the
Commaundements are then reputed as done, when what
soeuer is not done,Aug. lib. 1. retract. cap. 19. is (Of Mercy) forgiuen. The famous
Popish Abbot Bernardus, is consonant to S. Austen. These
are his wordes; Omne quod natum est ex deo, non peccat: sed
hoc dictum est de praedestinatis ad vitam; non quod omnino non
peccent, sed quod peccatum ipsis non imputetur. All that is born
of God,Bernard, de gra & lib. arbitr. pag. 1189 sinneth not. But this is spoken of the predestinate
to life; not because they sinne not at al, but for that
sinne is not imputed to them.
               Againe, in another place he sayth thus: Vti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      quod factum
est, non potest, non fieri: ipso tamen non imputante, erit quasi
non fuerit.
                  Bernard. serm, 3, in annunc. 
                  Quod Propheta quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      considerans, ait beatus vir
cui non imputabit Dominus peccatum. The sinne doubtles that
is done, cannot bee vndone, yet because God doth not
impute sinne vnto vs, we shall be as if we had not sinned.
Which the Prophet considering saith; Blessed is the man to
whom God shall not impute sinne. Out of these wordes, this
Corollary is clearly deduced (viz:) that the regenerate are
saide not to sinne, not because they do no sinne indeed,
or haue no sin in themselues (for that were against the
flat Doctrine of S. Iames,
                  Iames 3, 2) but because God of his meere
mercy for the merits of Christ Iesus doth not impute their
sinnes vnto them.
            
            
               S. R.
               It is an vniust law which is impossible; and to punnish
the breakers were against right and equity. As Bell himselfe
would graunt, if vppon paine of death he were bid



to flye to heauen, and executed if he did not.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere; First, that the Commaundements of God
are not simply and absolutely impossible, but accidentally
Per accidens. They are not impossible in themselues,
because Christ himselfe kept them, neyther impossible
to man, as man, because Adam might haue kept them:
Onely they are impossible to cortupt man: which impossibility,
commeth Per accidens,
                  Deut. 30 and not Ex natura rei.
Man hadde free will to haue doone Gods will,Eccles. 15. to haue
kept his Commaundementes, and to haue liued without
sinne perpetually;Ephes. 4, 24. thorough whose disobedience wee
are solde vnder sinne,Rom. 5, 18 and brought to that necessitie,Rom. 7, 14
that we cannot possibly avoyd sinne.Heb. 7, 5.
               
               Neuerthelesse, wee are iustly punnished for our sins,
because the necessity and impossibility, which was befallen
vs, was brought vppon vs thorough our owne
default, when that we were in the Loynes of Adam.
               
               Secondly, that our Iesuites argument of my flying to
Heauen, is both vnchristian and very childish: Vnchristian,
because it doth equalize mans precepts with Gods:
childish, because it was neuer in my power to slye to heauen,
as it was once in mans power to keepe Gods commandements.
Our Iesuite accuseth God of iniustice, in
condemning infants for Originall sinne.
            
            
               S. R.
               After the fathers, he bringeth two reasons. The one
out of the Lords prayer, where we are taught to ask forgiuenes.
But (saith he) Where pardon must be demanded, there
the Law is not exactly obserued. The other is out of our daily
confessions, where we acknowledge our faults, and most
great faults. I Answere, as the petition of forgiuing our sins,
dooth euidently conuince, that wee do not so exactly
keepe the Lawe, as that we neuer swarue from it;
so the other petition of doing Gods will heer on Earth
as it is in Heauen, euidently conuinceth, that wee



                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
can do it without deadly breaking it. As for our confessions,
wee do not confesse that our daily offences are most
great faults, but daily confesse our most great falts, whether
done then or before.
            
            
               T. B.
               I answere: first, that our Iesuite graunteth as much
as I desire, as euery childe may perceiue. For his wordes
are plaine, that they do not keepe the law so exactly, as
they neuer swarue from it. Hold thy selfe here good Fryer,
and we shall soone agree. For if you swarue from the
Law, then doubtlesse, ye doth not keepe it. This is all,
that I require at your hands, (viz:) that ye wil confesse,
that ye swarue from the Law and keepe it not.
               Secondly, that the other petition proueth not, that you
Papists can keepe Gods commandements, and liue without
sin, as the Saints do in heauen. For euery meane Logician
can tell you, that the worde (As) doth Connotate a
similitude, but not an Identity (viz.) that as the Angels &
Saints do Gods will in heauen, and liue altogether without
sinne, acording to the condition of the perfect state;
so wee may do his will in some measure and proportion,
according to the imperfect state in which we liue. And
thus much the word (as) doth import vnto vs, so often as
as say the Lords Prayer.
               Thirdly, that your answere is so Aenigmaticall, as my
slēder capacity is not able to penetrate the depth therof.
You freely grant, that you daily confesse your most great
faultes, but not that your daily offences are most great
faults, O the depth of Iesuiticall wit! Qui potest capere, capiat.
The great God Apollo must come downe from Heauen,
to vnfold this high mistery. Well, seeing it will bee
no better, let vs make the best of it we can. Let vs holde
fast that, which is freely graunted vs, (viz:) that our Iesuites
commit most great faults sometimes, though not euery
day Let vs likevvise hold this fast; (viz:) that our Iesuites
confesse those most great faultes euery day, which



they commit sometimes, but not euery day. This done;
let vs out of these two assertions plainely and freely confessed,
inferre these two most Golden and memorable
Corollaries.
               
               First, that seeing our Iesuites freely graunt, that they
commit sometimes most great faults, though not dayly;
it followeth of necessity, that sometimes they break gods
holy commaundements, though not daily; and consequently,
that sometimes they sinne damnably, though
not euery day; as also, that they are so farre from louing
Condigne Merites of Glory, as they woorthily demerite eternall
torment in hell fire.
               Secondly, that their Sacrament of Pennance doeth not
conferre Grace Ex opere operato: neyther are their most
great faults therein forgiuen; seeing after their auricular
confession and absolution receiued of their ghostly Fathers,
they still stande in such feare of remission of their
most great faults, that they must needs confesse the same
daily in time of Popish Masse. To which two Corollaries, I
cānot but adde this delicate Post-past for his holines, viz:
That the supposed certainty of the operation of Popish
sacraments, is as vncertaine as the wind. For though all
Papists of all sorts be bound to beleeue, that Popish absolution
ministred by a Popish priest, after Popish auricular
confession, doth vndoubtedly purge them from all
their sins, (though neuer so many, & neuer so great;) yet
after such confession, and such absolution receiued from
the Priestes mouth, they are bound by Popish lawe and
Doctrine, immediately to confesse their most greeuous

                     •
                  aults in time of Popish Masse. Whereupon followeth of
necessity, that Popish late start-vp Religion, is able to
bring all Papists headlong into desperation.
            
            
               S. R.
               
                  If you loue mee (saith Christ) keepe my Commaundements,Page 421.
but how can we keepe them, if they damnably,1 Iohn 14, 1
                        ••
                     
                   & deadly
breake them? Can true keeping (thinkes Bell) and true



breaking stand together?
            
            
               T. B.
               True keeping and true breaking in diuers respects, both
may and do well stand together. For as the faithful in respect
of their sinnes inherent in them, doe breake Gods
Commaundements and are in state of damnation; so, in
respect of Christs merits imputed to them of mercy, they
are iust and keepe Gods commaundements perfectly. For
as the disobedience of Adam, made all men sinners; so the obedience
of Christ,
                  Phil. 3. 9 
                  made all the faithfull holy and iust. This is it
that S. Iohn saith: He that is borne of God sinneth not,
                  1 Cor. 1, 3 which
is not meant,2 Cor. 5, 21 that he sinne not indeed, but (as wee liaue
heard out of S. Austen,
                  Rom. 5. 19 and Abbot Bernard) That his
sinnes be pardoned,
                  1 Iohn. 3, 9 
                  and not imputed to him. Hitherto, we haue
seene and viewed our Iesuites Diuinity: now a word or
two of his great charity, and there an end.
            
            
               S. R.
               What sir?Page 345. are these speeches S. Chrisostoms cited by your
selse? What neede a Sermon? What neede a Preacher?
Surely then your preaching is needlesse, and consequently
the fifty pound pension giuen to you for it, may bee
well spared.
            
            
               T. B.
               Behold heere our Iesuites charity. He tooke in hand to
aunswere the Downefall of Popery, but hauing broken his
back with the fal therof, & taking to hart that he was put
at a Non-plus, as not able to defend the Pope & Popery:
he deuised with himselfe how hee might bee auenged of
me, and so took occasion to quarrell at my pensiō. A rare
Metamorphosis doubtles: a digression of meer foolery, to
what end, it were wisedome to diuine. The question in
hande, was of the Popes souer aignety: Of Religion: Of
Faith: Of Saluation. All which things (though of great
consequence being set apart: our Iesuite, (as one forgetfull
of the text, beginneth sodainly to preach against my
pension, telling his Reader with all grauity, that it



may be well spared. It may seeme, our Iesuite would haue
a begging Fryer, and so to spend my time in seeking my
dinner.Bels pension greeueth the lesuite. But as it pleased most Noble Queene Elizabeth
of famous memory, of her Royall bounty, to bestow the
fifty pound pension on me; and as it hath hitherto well
pleased his most excellent Maiesty, to continue the same
for mine honest maintainance; so I hope, that notwithstanding
all the Iesuites pratling, (I would say preaching,)
I shall still enioy the same. Soli
Deo vni & trino, honor
& Glorìa.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            GEntle Reader by reason of the Authors absence and
mis-vnderstanding the Copy in the 49. page, these
two lines are thus rightly to be corrected. Ex conclusione
posita, & probationibus, quae à patre à Castro affirmantur, colligitur,
cautè legendum esse Caietanum dicentem, &c.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   