
      
         
            
            
            AN
EXACT DISCOVERIE
OF ROMISH
DOCTRINE IN THE CASE
OF CONSPIRACIE AND
Rebellion, by pregnant obseruations: Collected (not without direction from
our Superiours) out of the expresse
dogmaticall principles of Popish Priests
and Doctors.
            
               ISAY 29. 9. But stay your selues, and wonder; they are blinde, and
make you blinde.
            
               AT LONDON
Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for C. B. and E. W.
and are to be sould in Paules Church-yard
at the signe of the Swan. 1605.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE SEDVCED
BRETHREN
WHOSOEVER, GRACE
and peace from God the Father,
and from our Lord
Iesus Christ.
            
               MArueile not (beloued brethren)
that I salute you in
the name of brotherhood,
whom I acknowledge seduced:
It pleased our Sauiour
to call some Luk. 15.
               Sheepe,
whē as yet they were wandring:
and his Apostle nameth
them Gal. 3. 1.
               Brethren, whom hee esteemed bewitched.
With whom giue me rather leaue to
marueile in your behalfe, 
                  Gal. 1. 6.Why are you so easily remoued
from the Gospell of Christ? and in the earnest
desire of your blessed conuersion, to expostulate
in the same tenour: 
                  Gal. 3. 1.Who hath bewitched you, that
you should not obey the truth, in whom Iesus Christ was
described (that is, liuely preached) among you? It
is not then any Who, who may either preiudice a
truth, or priuilege an error: because, if truth; then

               Doe as they say, although 
                  〈…〉
                be a Pharisie:
If any other doctrine, not receiued from Christ, then
Gal. 1. 8.
               Hold him 
                     ••
                  cursed, although the Minister be an
Gal. 1. 8.
               Angell. And seeing (brethren) it hath pleased
almightie God (who bringeth light out of darknes,
and life out of death) from this late sinfull attempt,
as namelesse for vglines, as matchlesse for example,
to draw this inspiration of grace, that you,
through the detestation of their practises are now
brought to a suspition of their inchantments: I
thought it therefore my bounden dutie to discouer
vnto you positions and practises of your
Priests, whereby, as with tongues and hands,
they conspire together in like mischiefe: nothing
doubting, but when you shall perceiue the damnablenes
of their doctrine, you will Christianlie
auoide the danger of their charme. Now
then let vs (beloued) ioyntly examine
these spirits; and not, till in the
end of this tract, take our
mutuall farewell.
         
      
      
         
            A PLAINE DISCOVERIE
OF THE REBELLIOVS
DOCTRINE OF THE
Romish Church.
         
            
               PRegnant Obseruations, directlie proouing Romish
schooles to be Seminaries of Rebellions
in all Protestants gouernment: and Popish
priests, as also their adherents, to be worthily executed
for seditious and traiterous persons, proued by many
Reasons, collected from their owne publique positions
and practises.
         
         
            The first Reason.
            Their generall Assumption, whereupon all their rebellious
positions are f
                  •
               unded, is this, that All Protestants
are Heretiques; and Excommunicate. Now
then we may argue, first:
            They who by their slanderous doctrine make all Protestants
(in their common censure Heretiques) so odious,
as vnworthie of any Ciuill, or naturall societie, must necessarily
be iudged Seditious, and intolerable amongst
the Protestants: But the Romish Seminaries and Iesuites
doe brand all Protestants with detestable crimes; thereby
to denie them all ciuill or naturall respects. Ergo.
            The Minor hath two parts:
                  Crimes slanderouslie
obiected.
                  All humane societie
detracted: both
proued.
               
            
            
               
               The first part proued.
               FIrst a Stranger saith, that 
                     
                        Protestantes articulum omninò nullum tenent Symboli Apostolici. Andraeas Iurgiwicius, lib. tit. Euangel. quinti Professores.Protestants beleeue
not one Article of the Apostles Greede. Our
Countriman more strangely: 
                     Wright in his late booke of Articles.Protestants haue no
faith, no religion, no Christ; but are meere Infidels. The Master of the Seminarie at Rhemes writeth
and in
                     •
                  ituleth his booke: 
                     En Caluini Turcismum, & plane Mahometismum, &c. Reinaldus in libro, qui inscribitur, Caluino
                        •
                     turcismus.
                  Caluinish-Turcisme,
and plaine Mahometisme. Which booke
Deane Gifford doth no lesse impudently than impotently
m
                     ••
                  ntaine, saying, that 
                     
                        Caluini pseudo-Euangelium Alcorane esse in nullo melius; in multis tetrius & flagitiosius. D. Giffordus Decan. D. Petri, praef. in lib. D. Reinaldi.Caluins doctrine is worse
than the Alcoran of the Turkes. The Iesuite Possiuinus
with the same spirit of blasphemie doth c
                     •
                  mpile
a booke,
                     Institui Protestantium Atheismos explicare, &c. Possiuinus Ies▪ libello de Atheismis Protest. wherein he calleth Protestants doctrines, concerning
Christ, to be meere Atheismes. And all to this
end, that all humane societie with Protestants may be
vtterly dissolued.
            
            
               
                  The second part prooued: as first the societie
in Neighbours.
                  
                     Theft.
                     
                        
                           Haereticis licitum est auserri quae habent, melius tamen est, quod autoritate Iudicis fiat. Decretum P
                              •
                           
                           pale apud Grat. caus. 15. q. glossa.Neighbours, if Heretiques, may lawfully be
spoyled of their goods (by force) though it be better
to be taken from them by authoritie.
                  
               
               
                  2. Jn Parishioners.
                  
                     Sacriledge.Where the question is concerning paying of Tithes▪ it
is resolued: 
                        
                           Non est dubium, quin populus Catholicus iure possit haeretic
                                 •
                              s Pastores deci
                                 ••
                              s defraud
                                 •
                              re. Alanus Cardinalis & Pa
                              •
                           sonus.Parishioners may lawfully defraude
Protestant Ministers of their tithes.
                  
               
               
                  
                  3. Jn Debtors, and whosoeuer haue any matter
of trust committed vnto them.
                  
                     Perfidie.
                     
                        
                           Is apud quem Haereticus aliquid deposuerit, non tenebitur post manifestam haeresin, rem depositam illi reddere. Simancha Episc. Pacens. Instit. Cath. tit. 46. sect. 73.Such are not bound to restore that which
they haue receiued, or to satisfie their Creditors,
who are Heretiques.
                     
                        
                           Non tenentur reddere rem verbis contractam. Tolletus Ies. Instruct. Sacerd. de Excom.They are not bound hereunto.
                     
                        Si iurani me soluturum alicui pecuniam, qui excommunicatur, non teneor exsoluere; quia qualiter cunque possumus, debemus vexare malos, vt cessent à malo. Apud Gratian. caus. 15. q. 6. glossa.This is an ancient Decree.
               
               
                  4. Jn Seruants.
                  
                     Peri
                           •
                        rie.
                     
                        
                           Cust
                                 •
                              des arcium et 
                                 •
                              aeteri vassalli eadem Constitutione liberati sunt à vinculo sacramenti, quo dominis fidelitatem promiserant. Simancha Episc. quo supra, sect. 74.Also Keepers of Forts, and all other vassals
and slaues are freed from the oath of subiection
to their Lords.
                  
               
               
                  5. Jn VViues.
                  
                     A kinde of disloyaltie.
                     
                        
                           Quinetiam Vxor Catholica viro Haeretico debitum reddere non tenetur. Simancha Pacens. Episc. Instit. Greg. 13o. dicatis, & eiusdem iussu Romae impressis.Wiues are not bound to render due beneuolence
vnto their husbands, if heretiques.
                  
               
               
                  6. Jn Parents.
                  
                     Vnkindnes.
                     
                        
                           Pater, qui filium habet haereticum, qui conuerti non velit, si Pater liber & sui iuris esset ad disponendum de bonis suis vt vellet, tenetur exhaereditare filium talem. Huc adiunge. Parentes mortaliter peccant tradendo filias matrimonio Haereticis. Card. Alanus.The father must disinherit his sonne, if he
will be a Protestant.
                  
               
               
                  7. Jn Children.
                  
                     Disobedience to Parents.
                     
                        
                           Sacerdos in Angliam reuersus, & rogatus de Parentibus, qui sunt haeretici, respondere possit & veraciter negare, eos sibi esse Parentes; intelligendo quales habere debet: quia Patres solent re
                                 •
                              puere filios propter Religionem, & filij Parentes. Alanus, & Parsonus.A Priest returning into England, if his father
bee a Protestant, hee may denie him to
bee his father: meaning that hee is not such an
one, as hee ought to acknowledge his father.
                  
                  
                     

                     
                        
                           Nam propter haeresin Patris filij sunt sui iuris. Simancha quo supra, tit. 46. sect. 74.For by the heresie of the father the child is freed
from obedience.
                  
               
               
                  8. Jn all Kinred.
                  
                     The professed bloodie Massacre against the Protestants, without distinction of Sexe or Kinred.
                     
                        
                           Haeretici filij vel Consanguinei non dicuntur: sed, iuxta legem, Sit manus tua super res, vt fundas sanguinem ipsorum. Apud Grat. gloss. in Decret. lib. 5. ex decreto Greg. 9. caus. 23. q. 8. cap. legi.Heretikes may not bee termed either Children
or Kinred; but according to the old law, Thy
hand must be against them to spill their blood.
                  
               
               
                  9. Jn Natiues.
                  
                     
                        
                           Si Ciuitas tota, vel maior pars sit haeretica, potest ille negare hanc suam esse patriam: intelligendo, quod haereticam non habeat loco patria. Card. Alan. & Parsonus.If any finde his natiue Citie to be most part
infected with heresie, hee may denie it to be his
Countrie.
                  
               
               
                  Finally, by 
                        
                           Iuxta Constitutiones Gregorij 9. Haereticus priuatur omni dominio, naturali, ciuili, politico. Simancha Inst. tit. 46. sect 74.Pope Gregorie his Constitutions:
By heresie a man is depriued of all his iurisdiction,
whether naturall, ciuill or politique. So that
the tenour of the oath of the Leaguers in France is this:

                        
                           Si vnquam ad haereticorum partes deflexero, si amicitiam, si foedus, si matrimonium cùm 
                                 •
                              is faxo, si opem fidemuè d
                                 •
                              , si A
                                 •
                              e, si Vale dixero, illa die fulmine ferito. Lodouicus d'Orleance, part. 29.If ever I make marriage, vse traffique, yeeld aide,
hold friendship, giue credence vnto heretiques,
or once salute them, then let God confound me. Shall we call this Religion which dissolueth the dutie of
Seruants, Subiects, De
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     s, and strangleth the vitall
spirits of humane societie; and by not acknowledgement
of naturall duties of Wedlocke, naturall Parents; naturall
Children, naturall Countrie, doth bowell vp nature,
as it were, and depriue men of humanitie it selfe? O Babylon

                        〈…〉
                      this in all particulars were needlesse;
one kinde may satisfie.
               
            
            
               Practise.
               The Papists in France did libell against 
                     
                        Henricum 3. haereticum, homicidam, &c. Lib. de Abdicat. Henr. 3.Henry the
3. as hereticall; a manslayer: so likewise against this


                  Henry the 4. calling him a 
                     
                        Henricum 4. Culinarem canem, pogonatum Iulianum, bipedum nequissimum, Apostatam, foetidum Satanae stercus. Ludouicus d'Orleance.Kitchin-dogge, long-bearded
Iulian, most heathenish Apostate, and the
very excrement of Satan. No lesse was the ranckor of
our Cardinall Poole against his Soueraigne. 
                     
                        Si Caesarem intellexerim cùm omni sua classe aduersus Turcam cursum d
                              •
                           rigere, ac si iam Hellesp
                              •
                           nti fa
                              •
                           ces tenentem conspicerem, nunquam acquiescerem donec conuenirem, & in haec verba apud eum prorumperem: Caesar, quo paras? Quid cogitas? Si amor reip. Christianae te ma
                              •
                           et vt regem Turcarum antiquum Christiani nominis hostem aggrediare, annon vndè maius periculum Reip. Christianae imminet, & vbi nouus hostis viget, multo quàm Turca infestior, eò potius cursum conuertere oportet? viz. in Angliam, cuius semen Adulterinum vix à Turcic internasci possit? Card. Poole ad Henr. 8. pro vnit. Eccles. defens. lib. 3. pag. 384.Desirous
to diuert the Emperors forces from the Paganes,
and to inforce them vpon Henry the 8. as vpon
an enemie more pernicious than the Turke.
               
            
         
         
            The second Reason.
            Whosoeuer doe professe any Ciuill power soueraigne
ouer Kings, whether directly, or indirectly, are to be accompted
seditious: But all popish priests doe professe a
double prerogatiue ouer all Kings: Democraticall, and
Monarchicall; namely both of people, and Pope: both
which are proued by the positions.
            
               First of the People.
               Parsons: 
                     Parsons in his Dol
                           ••
                        an. pag. 13. and pag. 199. 
                           •
                        
                     The Common-wealth hath authoritie
to choose a King: and to limit him lawes at
their pleasure.The French Iesuite sheweth a reason:

                     
                        Maiesta
                              •
                            regni est in populo, potiùs quàm in persona Regis. les. libro de Iusta abdicat. pag. 36.For maiestie (saith he is rather seated in the
kingdome, than in the King. Like to Stapleton his
glosse: 
                     
                        Non populus in Principum gratiam factus; sed Principes in populi Commoda creati. Didymus pag. 261. Stapleton.People are not ordained for the Prince:
but the Prince for the people. But more finely Reinalds;

                     
                        Rex humana Creatura est, quia ab hominibus constituta. Reinaldus de Iusta Auto
                           ••
                        t. pag. 8.A King is but a creature of mans creation.
               
            
            
               Secondly the Pope.
               To auouch his preeminence, these men goe beyond the
Moone: as first Bozius, 
                     
                        Pontificem esse caput totius Ecclesiae, & habere potestatem etiam circa omnia temporalis, probamus ex Theologis, & Canonistis. Bozius de Eccl. Monarch. Tempor. Epist. dedicat. ad Clementem 8. Pontif.The Pope the head of the


Church, hath power in all temporall causes and
states. 
                  A new Article of faith.
                  
                     
                        Habet, sed tamen indirectè in ordine ad bonum spirituale. Bella
                           •
                        m. libr. 5. de Pontif. Rom. cap. 6. & 7.This is true (saith Bellarmine) vnderstood
indirectly, as it may auaile for the spirituall good.
In briefe, 
                     Stepleton in his English Counterblast against Master Horne.This supremacie of the Pope (saith
Stapleton) is a doctrine to be holden of all Christians
vpon paine of damnation, and separation
from the Church of God. We demaund how farre
th
                     •
                  se pretended powers may extend; and hereupon we
argue.
            
         
         
            The third Reason.
            Whosoeuer vpon any pretended supremacie, whether
of Pope, or people, d
                  •
               e denie the necessarie right of
Election, or of succession of Protestant Princes; are to
be holden amongst all Protestants, seditious: but all
popish priests doe vtterly abolish the title of succession
in all Protestant Princes, by pretended prerogatiue of
Pope and people. Ergo. The Minor prooued by their positions.
            
               In Election.
               1. The Romish Cardinall: 
                     
                        Nulla est Imperatoris, aut Regis Electio, si, cum eligitur, excommunicatus sit. Tolletus Ies. & Card. lib. 1. instruct. cap. 13. § Aduert. autem.There is no election,
whether of King, or Emperour, of any force, if he
that is elect (such they esteeme all Protestants) be excommunicate.
               
            
            
               In Succession.
               
                  They suggest a forraine Inuasion.Reinalds. 
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            ad regna Christianorum mai
                              ••
                            est in religione, 
                              〈◊〉
                            in success
                              •••
                           e: maius in vltione haeresis (loquitur de Protestātibus) quam in Cognatione sanguinis. Debent igitur Christiani omnem tali spem praescindere, nè ad eam ce
                              •
                           sitatem aspiret. Reignaldus Anglus in suo Rosaeus pag. 649. & pag. 670.The right of Kings Christian must
depend rather vpon their religion, than vpon order


of succession: and therefore all Christians are
bound to cut off all hope, least that any such (speaking
of Protestants) may aspire to the Throne. 
                  
                     
                        Qui contra facit, deum homini postponere, carnem spiritui anteponere dicendus est. Stapletonus in suo Didym. pag. 122.Otherwise
(saith Stapleton) what do people else but
euen preferre man before God? 
                  A professed inuasion.Hereupon doth
Simancha conclude, that 
                     
                        Regnum Haeretici defuncti ad filium Catholicum pertinet; quod si filius & consanguinei eius haeretici fuerint, Regnum Catholicum possit Regem Orthodoxum eligere: si verò Regnum haereticum fuerit, Electio Regis Catholici ad summum Pontificem pertinet: sed & Regnum illud possit à Catholicis occupari. Simancha Instit. Cath. tit. 46. sect. 75.the kingdome, of an Heretique
departed, doth lineally descend vpon his
sonne: but if the sonne in the race royall be heretical, the Catholique Common-weale may chuse
a Catholique Prince: but if also the kingdome be
hereticall, then the choice of the King belongeth
to the Pope: and so the kingdome may be taken
by Catholiques. And least peraduenture any should
consent to the lawfull succession: Father Parsons doth
pronounce sentence; 
                     Parsons in his Do
                           ••
                        an. pag. 
                           •
                        16.Whosoeuer shall consent to
the succession of a Protestant, is a most grieuous
and damnable sinner. Thus farre of the position.
Now behold their
            
            
               Practise.
               1. In France. Reinalds doth forewarne the French.

                     
                        Vultis in Regno Galliae Christianissim
                              •
                            Regem Proclamare Nauarraeum Caluinistam? Eadem operâ hominibus imperare iubetis canem; Templum Dei vi
                           
                              •
                           entis prostituitis Satanae, & in Vineam domini immittitis truculentum aprum, qui eum vastet & depascatur. Reignaldus in suo Rosaeus pag. 466.Will ye proclaime Nauarre a Caluinist, King of
the most Christian kingdome of France? What
is this else, than to aduance a dogge to be soueraigne
ouer men? 
                  
                     
                        Illinc clament, viue Rex, quem nè salutare possint, nec in d
                              •
                           mum suam recipere? Ibidem pag. 476.Shall Catholiques pray God
saue that King, whom they may not admit into
their houses? 
                  
                     
                        Dicit sortassis Nauarraeus, ego saniorem Religionem induco, sed hoc ad rem nullo modo pertinet, tenetur enim Religionem Romanam defendere. Creswellus in suo Philopater.For suppose (saith Father Creswell)
that hee professe to bring in a more sound religion;
what is this to the purpose? he is bound to
defend the Romish faith. From France we will returne
home, where Father Parsons busieth himselfe to


disable the title of succession of our most dread Soueraigne
King Iames,Parsons in his booke called a Conference concerning the next succession of the Crowne of England. with intent to aduance the Infanta
of Spaine thereunto. Thus much of Successors: now
of possessors.
            
         
         
            The fourth Reason.
            When the King is established in his Throne by common
consent of the kingdome; whosoeuer shall manacle
the hands of his subiects, detracting all obedience, may
iustly by order of law be challenged and condemned for
a disordered and rebellious person. But all popish priests
doe dissolue the oath of obedience to all Protestant gouernours.
Ergo. The Minor proued by
            
               Their Positions.
               First, one of their Bishops resolueth, that 
                     
                        Quam primùm Reges Christiani facti sunt haeretici, protenùs eius subiecti ab eorum dominio liberantur. Simancha Episc. Inst. tit. 23. sect. 11.As soone
as a Christian King becomes hereticall, foorthwith
people are freed from subiection.
               
               Secondly, their Cardinall: 
                     
                        Durante excommunicatione qui obnoxij erant vinculo fidelitatis vel iuramenti, tali vinculo liberabuntur. Tolletus Card. Instruct. Sacerd. libr. 1. cap. 13.As long as the Prince
continueth excommunicate, the subiect is freed
from the oath of subiection. By whom are they
freed?
                     
                        Non videtur negandum posse Rom. Pontificem se & alios soluere à 
                              〈◊〉
                            religione & lege, modò iusta causa subsit. Azotius Iesuita Inst. mor. cap. 15. §. sextò quaeritur.By the Pope (saith the Iesuite) who vpon
iust cause hath power to absolue from oathes
both himselfe and all others. Sometime the Prince
is personallie excommunicate: what then? 
                     
                        Postquàm per Pontificem (nominatim) excommunicatur, extunc Vasalli ab eius fidelitate denunciantur absoluti: & terra eius exponitur Catholicis occupanda, qui eam, exterminatis Haereticis, absque vllae contradictione possideant. Massouius Iuris
                           •
                        ons. de maiestate. Milit. Eccl. par. 2. libr. 4. de Imperijs pag. 676.Then
(saith their Lawyer) subiects are freed from their
allegeance: and all his hereticall assistants to be
rooted out, and their land to be exposed to be
possessed of (Strangers) Catholiques. But how if
he be not excommunicate by name? Yea, what though


not excommunicate? 
                     
                        Cùm est crimen notorium nulla est opus declaratione sententiae excommunicationis. Panormitan. cap. cum in homine extra de iudicijs.If (saith another) his heresie
be publiquely knowne, there needeth no pronunciation
of the sentence of excommunication.
                  
                     
                        Crimen haeresis, si sit notorium, vt nulla possit tergiuersatione celari; etiam ante iudi
                              •
                           is sententiam; incurritur (ex parte) poena praedicta: nim
                              •
                           rum eatenus, vt subditi licitè poss
                              ••
                           t tali domino negare obsequium. Valent. Ies. tom. 3. in Thom. disp. 1. q. 12. punct. 2. pag. 463. §. Nunc.So that (saith the Iesuite) subiects may lawfully
denie him obedience. How so? 
                     
                        In hoc articul
                              •
                            sunt Felinus & Caietanus, & communt
                              •
                           r sententia apud discipulos D. Thomae; & probant, quia in hac causa adest semper voluntas interpretati
                              ••
                            Pontificis, qui obtinet vim sententiae atque euidentia facti habet vim sententiae. Bannes in 2. 2. q. 12. Act. 2. conclus. 2.For the euidence
of the crime (saith their whole Schoole) doth inferre
a sentence of condemnation, because (as the more
common opinion defineth) there must wee vnderstand
the Pope his will is to haue him excommunicate,
whom vpon the knowledge of his fault
he would excommunicate. Say Father Creswell is
this true? 
                     
                        Hoc vniuersa Theologorum & iurisconsultorum schola tenent, & est certum, & de fide. Creswellus Ies. in suo Philopater, pag. 194.It is certaine, and of faith auouched by
the vniuersall voice of Schooles. Satisfie vs yet in
one question more: Suppose that the Protestant Prince
haue a iust quarrell: what then? 
                     In the copie of a letter sent by Cardinall Allen to Sit William Stanley. pag. 10.No warre can be
lawfully denounced or waged by the Queene;
(being excommunicate by name) though otherwise
in it selfe it were most iust: because her power
is vnlawfull. 
                  Thus farre of the Positions.
               
            
            
               Practise.
               First Pope Gregorie the 7. alias Hildebrand, beginneth
his Pageant: 
                     
                        Nos eos, qui excommunicatis fidelitate & sacramento constrictisunt, Apostolicâ autoritate tur amento absol
                              •
                           imus. Gregor. 7. Pontifex apud Grat. cans. 15. qu. 6.We by Apostolicall authoritie
doe absolue al from their oathes, which they haue
giuen to persons excommunicate. And another
Gregorie vseth the like tenour: 
                     
                        Nos excommunicamus vniuersos haereticos, vt absolutos se nouerint omni fidelitatis debito, qui ijs iur amento tenebantur astricti. Greg. 9. Pont. lib. 5. Decret. tit. 7. cap. 5. glossa.We absolue &c. in
the same case. Lastly, Pius Quintus their successor in
place; but superiour in malice: 
                     
                        Volum
                              •
                           s & iubemus &c. & absoluimus subditos vinculo iuramenti, quo Reginae Elizabethae constricti tenebantur. Pius 5. Pontifex in Bulla.We commaund all
subiects (saith he, &c.) and absolue them from
the faith they haue plight with Elizabeth their
Queene.
               
               
               We haue alreadie vnderstood how they forbid obedience
to Kings. Now will we examine how they also inforce
violence: and in this case we argue thus:
            
         
         
            The fifth Reason.
            Whosoeuer suggesteth a doctrine of forcible deposing
of Princes from their Thrones, are therein manifestly
rebellious: But all Popish priests defend violent deposing
of Kings and Emperours. Ergo.
            
               Their positions.
               Costerus: 
                     
                        Pe
                              •
                           es Romanos Pontifices semper fuit potestas ad tollend
                              •
                            incommoda Ecclesiae, & damna animarum; Reges Regnis, & Imperatores imperijs priuandi. Costerus Ies. Apolog. pro part. 1. Enchirid. pag. 64.This power (saith he) of deposing
Kings of their Crownes, and Emperours of their
dignities in behalfe of the good of the Church,
was alwaies peculiar to the Pope: 
                  
                     
                        Non enim minus autoritatis à Christo collatum est Vicario suo, ad 
                              •
                           uium tutelam & commodum, quam a villi
                              •
                           o datur Mercenario, qui pecora pascit. Ibidem pag. 64.Who hath
no lesse authoritie, as Christs Vicar ouer Christians,
than the hireling hath ouer his beasts: 
                  
                     
                        Depositio Imperatoris ex Iusta causa pertinet ad summum Pontificem: quia Imperator est tanquam Minister summi Pontificis gladiū iurisdictionis temporalis ad nutum summi Pontificis exercens. Molina Ies. Tract. 2. de Iustitia, disputat. 29. Ad secundum pag. 149.So
the Pope hath authoritie ouer the Emperor (saith
Molina) because the Emperour is but the Popes
minister, and is to vse his temporall sword only at
his beck. But what if Kings will not inthrall themselues
to the Popes authoritie? 
                     
                        Non licet Christianis tolerare Regem haereticum, si conetur pertrahere subditos ad suam haeresin. Bellarminus Ies. lib. 5. de Rom. Pont. cap. 6. 7. & 4.It is not lawfull for
Christians (saith the Cardinall) to tolerate anie
King, who draweth his subiects vnto heresie:
                  
                     
                        Sed debent subditi operam dare, vt in eius locum alius quampri
                              •
                           ùm surrogetur. Sanderus Theol. professor. de visib. monarch. libr. 2. cap. 4. §. Ius autem pag. 70.But subiects ought (saith Saunders) to endeuour
to set vp another in his place. 
                  
                     
                        Debent illum, tanquam Christi hostem, ex hominum christianorum dominatu eijcere: quae est virorum doctiss. indubitata sententia, doctrinae Apostolicae confermis. Creswellus Ies. in suo Philopater. pag. 194.Yea they
ought (saith Creswell) to expell him out of his
kingdome, as the enemie of Christ. An vndoubted
doctrine among the learned, and agreeable
to Apostolicall truth. Yea which is more:


                  
                     
                        Etiamsi pontifex toleraret regem Apostatam, tamen Resp. Christiana possit illu
                              •
                            pellere è regno; quoniam Pontifex sine ratione permittit illum impunitum. Domin. Bannes in Tho. 22. 22. quaest. 12. art. 2.Although the Pope (saith Bannes) should tolerate
an hereticall King; yet may the Commonwealth
remoue him. And yet behold a greater mysterie
of this iniquitie than all these: for suppose that
the King deposed shall be willing to be reconciled to the
Church: 
                     
                        Nec ius hoc recuperabunt, quamuis postea reconcilientur Ecclesiae. Simancha Inst. Cath. tit. 33. sect. 11▪
                     Yet notwithstanding (saith Simancha)
he may not recouer his Crowne. Let vs now see
this familie of Corah.
            
            
               Practise.
               We will omit their Henries, Fredericks, Otho's,
and like Emperours and Kings of former times: call
but to minde that which hath been visible in our daies,
the late Henry of France, concerning whom their owne
Prophet hath published a Treatise, the scope thereof is
this: 
                     
                        Henricum dignitate regiâ excidisse, Gallosque securâ conscientiâ in eum, vt publicae fidei violatorem, bellâsse. Liber de Iusta Abdicat. Hen. 3. pag. 370.The French haue with good conscience
borne armes against King Henry the 3. and depriued
him of his Crowne. Returne home, there wee
see a Comet. The Rebell O-neele is vp in armes against
his Queene: the Colledge of Sal
                     •
                  man bring pitch to
quench this flame, and resolue thus: 
                     
                        Eos omnes Catholicos peccare mortalitèr, qui Anglorum castra contra Hugonem O-neele sequuntur; nec posse eos aternam salutem consequi, nec ab vllo Sacerdote à peccatis absolui, priusquam resipiscant, & castra Anglorum deserant. Determinatio Salamanae.Whatsoeuer
Catholiques shall not forsake the defence
of the English, and follow the O-neele, doth sin
mortally, and cannot obtaine life euerlasting, except
he desist. Shall we thinke that other priests can
haue more loyall spirits? Impossible; as long as they receiue
their breath from that Maister, who commendeth
the former positions against the foresaid King of
France. 
                     
                        Theologi illi fecerunt quod consultorum, Confessarierum, Doctorum fuit. Xistus Quintus Papa, vt habetur lib. de Iusta Abdicat. Hen. 3. pag. 370.Those Diuines (saith Pope Xistus) haue
done the parts of good Lawyers, Confessors,
and Doctors. His predecessor Pope Pius against our


late Soueraigne: 
                     
                        Volumus & inbemus vt aduersus Elizabetham Angliae Reginam subdui arma capessant. Bull
                           •
                         Pij Quinti Pont. Max.We commaund the subiects of
England to take armes against Elizabeth their
Queene. Hitherto hath been manifested onely their
violence against the dignities of Princes: now heare of
their violating of their sacred persons in conspiring
their deaths.
            
         
         
            The sixth Reason.
            Whosoeuer doth intend, designe, or practise the murther
of Princes, must necessarilie be holden for desperate
Traitors: But all Popish priests are guiltie in some of
these kindes. Ergo.
            
               The Minor proued by their Positions.
               They professe all, that it is lawfull to take armes
against their Kings, as we haue prooued: from whence
wee may argue against them, as hee against a seditious
one; 
                     Cicero orat. pro Ligaria.Quis sensus armorum? What other meaning
can armes haue, but onely blood? But not to
dispute from our suppositions, but their positions, by
these degrees. First the French Defence saith, that

                     
                        Tyrannum occidere honestum est, quod cuiuis impunè facere permittitur, quod ex communi consens
                              •
                            dico. Libr. de iusta Abdicat. Henr. 3. pag. 262. & 270.Any man may lawfully murder a Tyrant: which
I defend (saith hee) by common consent. Now

                     
                        Facilè constat eum, qui quamcunque tu
                              •
                           tur haeresin, apud Christianos non minùs propriè perfecteque tyrannum effici; quàm qui apud Philosophos, spretâ ci
                              •
                           ium conseruatione, omnia in republica stupris, rapinis, & hominum caedibus implet. Reinaldus in suo Ros. pag. 157.It is euident (saith our Reinolds) that euery heretique
Prince is most properly and perfectly a
Tyrant. Which is supposed by the Spanish Iesuite; speaking
of this point, 
                     
                        Vita priuari possint, tum multò magis omnibus alijs bonis, atque adeò etiam praelatione in alios. Greg. Valent. Tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 11. punct. 2.That if (saith he) they may bee
bereaued of their liues, then much more of their
liuings and renownes. And, which is the height of
furie: 
                     
                        Imò grauiori poena digni sunt Principes haeretici, quàm priuati homines; 
                              〈◊〉
                            igitur & meritò Scythae regem suum Scylaen occiderunt, propter externos ritus, quia in Bacchanalibus sacris initiatus erat. Simancha Inst. Cath. tit. 23. Sect. 12. & 13.Hereticall Kings (saith Simancha) deserue


more grieuous punishment than priuate men:
therefore the Scythians (as he well deserued) did
put to death their King Scylen, for violating their
Bacchanals. Scythia a most barbarous nation is the fittest
glasse that these priests can finde to looke their faces
in. Well, shew vs then your Scythian and Heathenish
practises.
            
            
               Practise.
               Let vs trauell (but in your thoughts) into India,
                  
                     
                        Arnoldus in Synodo Parisiensi omnem tyrannidem Hispanorum apud Indos solis Iesuitis ascribit. Gallobelgicus tom. 2. lib. 10.where (as your Arnoldus in his publique Oration in
the Vniuersitie of Paris did contest) the generall clamour
of the poore people was, that Iesuites were
the causes of all tyrannie which was exercised amongst
them. Passe homeward through Germany;
there we see 
                     
                        Rodolphus C
                              •
                           mes contra Henricum 4. (fulmine Gregorij Pontificis percussum) bellum gessit, &c. Abbas Vrspurgensis, Cranzius, & alij in suis Chronicis.Duke Rodolph persecuting the Emperor
Henry his King by force of armes, through
instigation of the Pope. From thence wee come to
France; where Clemens the Monke, as a bloodie parricide,
did murder Henry his King. Lastly, to arriue
at home, where after the Bull of Pius Quintus few yeres
passed without such desperate attempts against their Soueraigne:
that Bull bellowing thus, 
                     
                        Iubemus vt aduersus Reginam Angliae subditi arma capessant. Bulla Pij Quinti.We will & command
subiects to take armes against their Queen.
Which breath possessed all those late conspirators: Arden,
Someruile, Parry, Cullen, Squire, Lopez, with others,
all by instigation of priests sought the death of our
and their Soueraigne. And now at this present, behold,
and be astonished. A fornace prouided to consume at
once, not onely the King, but also (because an absolute
state assembled) the whole kingdome. Durst these Inginers


doe any such thing without direction from their
priests? First, they conspire by oath vnder the seale of
the (here is a priest) Sacrament. Secondly, he that was
to put fire to it runneth once and againe to the Seminarie
at Doway, doubtlesse to consult with that priestly Oracle.
Thirdly, he will not bewray his complices, except
he may be warranted by a priest. And that this kinde of
act is their priestly function, will appeare in the subsequents.
            
         
         
            The seuenth Reason.
            Seeing, 
                  
                     Nihil interest faueas ne sceleri, an illud facias. Seneca.It is in a manner all one to commit a
villanie, and to commend it: We may argue, that
whosoeuer shall iustifie acts of treasons, and parricides,
are not vnguiltie of the same crimes: But all priests doe
iustifie such hainous parricides. Ergo.
            
               The Minor proued by their positions
practicall.
               The famous Cardinal and publique Reader in Rome
saith: 
                     
                        Multi Pontifices Principes multos autoritate su
                              •
                            regiâ meritò priuarunt, vt Leonem 3. Fredericum 1. Othonem 5. Childericum regem Franciae. Card. Bellarmin. lib. 5. de Rom. pont. cap. 6. &. 7.Many Popes haue iustly deposed many
Princes. Our Countrimen In the copie of his letter to Sir William Stanley. pa. 35▪
                  
                  Cardinall Allen, 
                  
                     Reinaldus in suo Rosaeus cap. 2.
                  Reinalds,
                  In his Dolman. part. 1. pag. 62.
                  Parsons, inciting subiects to armes against
their prince, do perswade by examples meerly rebellious:
as resisting of King Iohn, of Edward the 2. of Richard
the 2. of Henry the 6. as presidents to be followed. The
Author of the booke of 
                     Gratias agimus Deo immortali, qui operis huius fructum (nimitùm, per parricidium Monachi) tàm benè anteuerterit. Lib. de iusta abdicat. Henr. 3.
                  Deposing Henry King of
France, doth sing a In his Dolman. part. 1. pag. 62.
                  Gaudeamus for his death. And
againe, Allen approueth the perfidious rendring vp of
In his letter to Sir William Stanley, Anno 1587.
                  Douentore; and incourageth the English malcontents


to ioyne their forces with A booke intituled, An admonition to the Nobilitie and people of England. The inscription: Gul
                           •
                        helmus mise
                        
                           •
                        atione diuina S. R. E. Tituli S. Martini in montibus Cardinali
                           •
                        , C
                           •
                        nctis 
                           •
                        egnt Angli
                           •
                        e & H
                           •
                        ber
                           •
                        ae Pr
                           •
                        teribus.
                  
                  the Spanish Inuasion.
So the Colledge of the Iesuites at Salamane approued
the insurrection of See aboue Reason 6. li
                        •
                     
                     ▪ 
                     
                        •
                     .
                  Tyrene. And doe not the
most of that Sect canonize in their conceits all such popish
ones, as haue been executed for manifest treasons?
            
            
               An example of a notable patron of
high treason.
               
                  
                     Xisti Quinti Pont. Maximi de Henrici tertij morte Oratio habita in Consistorio Patrum. 2. Septembris, Anno Dom. 1589.
                  
                  Xistus Quintus maketh a publike Oration in his
Consistorie of Cardinals: the subiect matter he sheweth
is this: 
                     
                        Mortuus est Rex Francorum per manus Monachi. Pag. 3.The King of France is slaine, by the hand
of a Monke. And what of this? 
                     
                        Rarum, insigne, memorabile facinus.
                     This (saith he) is
a notable, rare, and memorable act. But why? 
                     
                        Occidit Monachus regem non pictum aut fictum in charta, aut pariete, sed regem Francorum in medio exercitus.
                     Because
he slew not (saith he) a King painted in paper,
or grauen in stone, but the King of France, in
the middest of his host. Is it a wonder any should
wonder that a Monke could murder a mortall King?
seeing popish historie doe record, that 
                     
                        Hadrianus Pontifex excommunicationem Henrico 2. denuncians, ipse à deo maledictus, à musca suff
                              •
                           
                           catus est. Nauclerus generat. 139.Pope Hadrian
being guiltie of the like seditious practise against
the Emperour Henry the 2. was choaked with a
flye. Nay but if the Monke had killed a painted image,
that had been an act farre more memorable, and lesse
intolerable: notwithstanding no fact is good, because
great; but therefore great, because good. Say then what
is to be thought of the worthines of the fact? 
                     
                        Facinus non sine Dei Opt. Max. particulari prouidentia & dispositione: (pag. 5.) non sine expressa eius voluntate, (pag. 4.) & succursu perpetratum.
                     It
was a fact done by y• admirable prouidence, will,
and succour of almightie God. How? by Gods will
counselling and approuing it? 
                     
                        Nota quàm insignis est Historia illa Sanctae Mulieris Iudith, quae vt obsessam ciuitatem suam, & populum Dei liberaret, coepit consilium, Deoque sine controuersia suggerente, de interimendo Holopherne, hostilis exercitus principe, quod & perfecit, &c. pag. 8.Holy Iudith is famous
(saith he) for the slaying of Holophernes,
which she did not without the suggestion of
Gods spirit. 
                  
                     
                        Hic verò Religiosus aggressus est, & confecit rem l
                              •
                           ngè maiorem, non fine Dei concursu. Pag. 10.But this religious man hath done


a farre more marueilous worke. O marueilous Religion!
yet so it is in this sinne of parricide, where A
Monke doth murther his King. The best word the
Pope affoordeth the murthered, is, 
                     
                        Rex infoelix, & in peccato mortuus. Pag. 3. & pag. 9.An vnhappie
King, and one perishing in his sinne. The worst he

                     •
                  oth bestow vpon the murtherer, is, 
                     Vir Religiosus. Pag. 9. & 10.
                  Religious man.
And thus in not condemning, but rather commending
one traitour, he hath made vp two. Lastly, this Henrie
(a note very materiall) was a Papist; onely he fauoured
the Protestants, and especially Prince Nauarre
(because a Protestant) excommunicate. By this
Pope, this was his crime, vpon which ensued, This fact
(to paraphrase truly of the Popes words) rare for the
attempt; notable for the wickednes; memorable for
the shame of the Sect.
            
         
         
            The eighth Reason.
            Those Snakes that do naturally sting, as soone as they
get warmth, may not be harboured in the bosome of the
Common-wealth: But all popish priests professe rebellions,
as soone as they can presume of their strength:
Ergo, &c. The Minor proued by▪
            
            
               Their Positions.
               Bannes maintaineth this as a necessarie parenthesis:

                     
                        Sit haec tertia Conclusio: vbi euidens 
                              •
                           dest notitia criminis, ante declaratoriam pontificis sententiam licet (si modo vires ei suppetunt) Regem de ponere. Dominicus Bannes in Thom. 2•. 2•. q. 12. art. 2.Subiects before sentence of excommunication
(if they haue sufficient force) may then depose
their King. This Father Creswell addeth as a warie
caution: 
                     
                        Sit haec Cautio adhibenda, vt▪ vires habeant ad hoc idoneas subditi: alioqui in Religionis Catholicae praeiudicium cederet. Creswell. in 
                           •
                        uo Philopater, pag. 198. & 199.Let subiects take heede (saith he) that
they haue competent strength in such case: otherwise


it may preiudice the Catholique cause.
And least any taking an Antidote against their poison,
should obiect the condition of the Church of Christ primitiue,
and of the glorious Christians in those times,
who intended not killing of Kings the enemies of the
Gospell; but to be willingly killed for the profession of the
holy faith: marke with what vntemperate morter these
men daube vp the consciences of Christians, 
                     
                        Quasi verò eadem instituendae ecclesiae ratio atque institutae esse credenda fit; adde quod id tum non lic
                              •
                           it, dum impi
                              •
                           rum multitudo superior esses: sed neque illi Christum professi erant, vt cogi in verbae eius mortis supplicio possent; sed tum demum, scilicet, id datum est, cum impletum fuit id prophetae
                        Esa. 44. 
                        Reges erunt nutriti; tui: & in quae temporae venimus. Lib. de Iusta abdic. Regis Henrici 3. pag. 278.Then
(saith the French Defence) the Christians did only
suffer, because the Church was not yet perfect,
and because their enemies were more in number.
Againe, 
                     
                        Illud non mo
                              •
                           eat quemquam, id landabile est; cum resistere nequeast. Lib. de Iusta abd. pag. 371.It is commendable to suffer when thou
canst not resist. Which is the last▪ miserable refuge of
their desperate cause. Whereunto notwithstanding their
grand Cardinall is glad to betake himselfe. 
                     
                        Quod si Christiani 
                              •
                           lim non deposuerunt Di
                              •
                           
                           
                           
                              •
                           letianum, Iulianum Valentem, id fuit quia deerant vires temporales Christianis. Bellam. libr. 5. de Rom. Pont. cap. 6. & 7. & 4.I answere
(saith he) that Christians in ancient times did not
beare armes and seeke to depose Emperours and
Kings, enemies to the Catholique faith, because
they wanted power. Whereby the now Romish faith
doth seeke to make wicked men excuseable. 
                     
                        Ex hac secunda Conclusione sequitur, excusand
                              •
                           s esse Anglos, quia non se exi
                              ••
                           nt exsuperiorum potestate, nec bellum contra eos gerunt: quia non suppetunt illis vires, 
                              •
                           b consequentia pericula. Dom. Bannes in 2•. 2•. Thom. quaest. 12. Art. 2.By this second
conclusion (saith Bannes) the English Catholikes,
who now doe not take armes against the
Protestants, are excused, because they want sufficient
power. Hence we may perceiue that, that as long
as Protestants liue safe, they must acknowledge thēselues
beholden to the Popish faction, because they haue no power
to hurt them: otherwise they may heare of thē before
they can see them, peraduenture in such manner, as to

                     The letter of Tresham to the Lord Mounteagle.Receiue a terrible blow, and yet not know who
did them the hurt. Yea they must perish: for 
                     
                        Populus Christianus obsistere tenetur conscientiae vincul
                              •
                            arctiss
                              •••
                           , & extr
                              •••
                            animarum periculo; si praestare rem possit. Creswell. in suo Philopater, pag. 201.Christian
people (saith Creswell) are bound in conscience
and hazard of their soules, whensoeuer


they can make resistance. These are yet positions.
Now
            
            
               Their Practise.
               In the yeere 1580. when Campion and Parsons came
into England, they procured a dispensation from the
Pope, that all Papists in England, notwithstanding the
excommunication of the Queene, might professe a large
obedience in all temporall causes: but with this addition
(Rebus sic stantibus) The case thus standing: that
is (as the sequell did interprete) till you waxe stronger:
for in the yeere 1588. when the Spanish Armado was
a flote, when by doubling their strength, they might presume
of the better: then our Countriman Allen doth
write an Admonition to the Nobilitie of England, making
his booke the Popes Nuncio to expound his former
parenthesis. 
                     In his booke of Admonition.Though the Pope (saith he) hath
tolerated obedience vnto the Queene in temporall
conditions: yet now our holy Father Xistus
Quintus doth discharge all men of their faith and
loyaltie vnto her. This is the Popes common guise;
when he doubteth his faction shall be ouermatched, then
to inioyne obedience: but it is onely in policie to gaine
his souldiers a breathing, as Clement the late Pope
dispensed with the Irish for their fidelitie to the Queene,
till that he had some confidence of Tyrones successe. For
then in the 20. of Ianuary, the yeere 1601. writ a letter
for incouragement: 
                     
                        Clemens Octa
                              •
                           us.
                     Fili dilecte nobilis vir salutem,
&c. My deare sonne, all health, &c. After he
calleth the rebellion, Sacrū foedus, An holy league;
promising in the way of blessing an happy successe: Deus


pugnabit pro vobis, conteret inimicos suos ante
faciem vestram: God will fight for you, and tread
your enemies vnder your feete. But he (God be
thanked) prooued a false Prophet.
            
         
         
            The ninth Reason.
            Whosoeuer doth perfidiously either denie or violate,
with men of diuers religion, an oath, the most sacred
bond that Ierem. 4. 4.
               God hath allotted vnto men, as the most
secure Heb. 6. 16.
               confirmation of all fidelitie with men, and
Heb. 6. 16.
               end of all contention; must necessarily be esteemed
of them as a person perfidious and treacherous: but Popish
priests are guiltie of such perfidie: Ergo, &c. The
Minor will appeare in these three: 1. In the manner of
disallowing: 2. Of deluaing: 3. Of dissoluing of a
necessarie oath.
            
               From the manner of denying a requisite
oath, we reason:
               Whatsoeuer seruant being demanded of his master,
to say or sweare, whether if he saw his master assaulted
by his professed enemies, he would defend or betray him,
would either dislike the article, or deferre his answere, he
should euidently bewary a treacherous disposition: But
all Popish priests in like articles concerning loyall subiection
to Protestant Kings, are in like manner affected:
Ergo, all their other kinde of Matth. 26.
                  Haile Master, is but to
kisse and betray. The Minor prooued
            
            
               
               By their positions and practises.
               When as it is demanded of Priests (a necessarie article
in ciuill states) what if the Pope should authorise
the Queenes subiects to rebell, or other forraine Princes
to inuade her realme; whether they would take part
with the Queene, or her enemies? First they dislike
this interrogatorie. Allen calleth it, 
                     Allen in his booke intituled, A true Defence, pag. 68. 70.An vnlawfull,
vnnaturall, intolerable search of mens consciences.
This kinde of examination which Princes make
for preseruation of the liues of themselues and subiects,
Creswell termeth, 
                     
                        Examen iniustissimum & postulata sanguinaria. Creswellus in suo Philopater pag. 350. & 351.Vniust and bloody demands.
And these questions Stapleton nameth 
                     
                        No
                              •
                           ae & capti
                              •
                           sae, in quibus i
                              •
                           est ina
                              •
                           ditum quoddam nequissimae impietatis, & barbarae calliditatis exemplum. Stapleton in suo Didymus. pag. 205. 206.Captious
questions, wicked, and full of all impious subtiltie.
As though Sampson were bound to put his head
in Iudg. 16.
                  Dalilahs lap. Nay but their answere sheweth that
this interrogatorie was as necessarily inuented, as it is
wicked impugned. For this being an inbred law of

                     
                        Nata lex quam non didicimus, sed à natura exhausimus. Cicero pro Milone.Nature, to studie for a selfe preseruation: these
men call iniust and vnnaturall: But how sensleslie,
let the very 
                     Vt i
                           •
                        gulent homines, surgunt de nocte Latrones: vt teipsum serues non expergisceris? Horatius.Heathen iudge: Theeues watch to
murder, doest thou not awake to saue thy selfe?
               
               Now secondly their delaying. When the question is
vrged: whether if the Pope, or any by his appointment
should inuade the land; which part they would take,
then they shift footing, and some (as our Gouernours
haue obserued) haue answered: I wil then take counsell
when the case shall happen: others, I will answere
then and not before: others, I am not yet
resolued: lastly, I shall then doe as God shall put
in my minde. As though these maskes were large


enough to shadow their faces: which their Creswell
hath alreadie discouered, saying, that 
                     
                        Si p
                              •
                           ntificis iussu de religione restituenda bell
                              •
                            decertar
                              •
                           tur, se conscientia salua facere non posse, quin partibus Catholicis adhaereant. Creswellus in suo Philopater pag. 352.If by the Popes
command the warre should be vndertaken, to the
end of restoring religion, then (to answere) that he
is bound in conscience to hold with the Romish.
This man speaketh without parables: make then but a
pretence of religion, and farewell all subiection.
               The second point is, their deluding of an oath by a
new tricke of equiuocation, as they (vnproperly) terme
it. Others call it reseruation: but most fitly we may name
it Collusion.
            
            
               Their Position in the Maior.
               
                  
                     
                        Cum Iudex n
                              •
                           n iuridicè petit iuramentum vel contra iustitiam, licet vti aequiuocatione secundum mentem suam, contra a mentem Iudicis, vt puta, quaerenti, fecisti ne illud? Respondeat, non feci; intelligendo inter se, non hoc tempore, aut, vt narrem tibi, aut aliquid simile. Tollet. Card. lib. 4. Inst. Sacerd. cap. 21. & 22.When any Iudge (saith one) shall demaund
an oath vniustly, then may the examinate sweare
by an aequiuocation: as for example, being thus
demanded; whether didst thou that fact or no?
he (though he did it) may answere; I did it not,
vnderstanding secretly in his minde; at this time,
or I did it not, meaning to tell it to you: or some
such like euasion. If you desire to know the author, it
is Cardinall Tollet: if his authoritie, 
                     De hoc illustri Cardinali Gregorius 13. Pontifex sic scribit: Dilecte fili, &c. Tanta est tua doctrina, quae longo & intimo vsu nobis cognita est, vt tua scripta, sicut caeterorum aliorum, iudicio atque examini subijci aequum non sit. Vasques Ies. Epist. Dedicatoria ante Com. in Luc.
                  Vasques the
Iesuite sheweth, he hath a speciall priuiledge from Pope
Gregorie 13. writing thus vnto him: We so approue
of your singular learning, that wee hold it
vnmeete that your bookes should be subiected to
the censure of others.
               
               Now their Assumption in this case of our English iustice
concerning examination of Priests: 
                     
                        Officiarij Reginae Angliae non iuridice iuramentae exigunt, quia Regina haeretica non est Regina. Greg. Martin. in libr. Resolutionis Casuum.The Officers
of the Queene of England (saith Martin) cannot
challenge answers and oathes iudiciously, because


an hereticall Queene is no Queene. Vpon
this sand is builded that which they conclude, namely,
Allen, Parsons, Gregorie Martin, that 
                     
                        Si Sacerdos interrogetur in portu, vel alibi, de antiquo suo nomine ab aliquibus, qui 
                              •
                           um habent suspectum, possit respondere illud non esse suum nomen, atque eodem modo si interrogetur de patria, pareatibus, am
                              •
                           
                           cis, &c. Resolutio quorundam casuum Nationis Anglicanae.If a Priest
shall vpon suspition chance to be asked either in
any Hauen, or elswhere, concerning his ancient
name, his countrie, kinred, or friends: he may denie
all. And againe, 
                     
                        Cum Sacerdos sistitur ad Tribunal, vbi adsu
                              •
                           t magistratus Regni, accepto iuramento, possit illud praestare iuramentum, aequiuocando, quia qui quaerunt non iuridicè interrogant, cum sint Tyranni & velint punire bona opera. Ibidem.When a Priest is conuented
before a Iudge, after the oath taken, concerning
such questions, he may answere by the foresaid
aequiuocation; because those that aske this oath,
are not to bee accounted Iudges, but Tyrants:
which point of aequiuocation (saith 
                     Parsons in his briefe Apolog. fol. 193.
                     Parsons) is
not only to be allowed by all Diuines, but iudged
necessarie also in some cases for auoiding lying
and other inconueniences. This man we see (as if
he would driue out Satan by Satan) teacheth by lying
how a man may auoide a lie. Yet this is the generall doctrine
of their See Aquinas.Schoole, more than heathenish: for among
Pagans this was a decree of conscience: 
                     
                        Fraus non dissoluit, sed distringit periurium. Cicero.Craft
in an oath doth not lessen, but strengthen periurie.
               
            
            
               Now the practise.
               The practise of this deuice of aequiuocation in Priests
hath been found to haue been common of late, by experience
of Magistrates. It may be thought to haue crept
out of their S. Francis sleeues. For 
                     
                        Sanctus Franciscus regatus quâ perrexisset quidam homicida, qui iuxta 
                              •
                           um transierat; manus per manicas immittens, respondit non transiisse illàc; intelligens, non transiisse per illius manicas. Nauar. Tom. 3. cap. 12.He (as Nauar writeth)
being asked which way the murderer did
flie, which runne by him; putting his hands in his
sleeues, answered, he went not that way, meaning
thorow his sleeues.
               
            
            
               
               The third abuse of oathes is in
dissoluing them.
               That th
                     •
                  ugh they take an oath of allegeance in cases
temporall, yet their common interpretation is still with
respect of their more supreame head, 
                     Before in Reason 4. lit. 
                           •
                        
                     During the
will of the Pope, who (say they) hath power to
free both himselfe and others from the bond of
an oath, which is their old Glosse, saying, 
                     
                        Debuit intelligi; nisi Papa remittat ei iuramentum: nam in iuramento excipitur au
                              •
                           oritas maioris. Glossa ad decret. lib. 2. tit. 24. cap. 10.That the
case is so to be interpreted, namely; Except the
Pope shall release him from his oath: because in
euery oath the authoritie of a Superiour must be
excepted.
               
            
            
               Practise.
               Their practise we haue showne in the former reasons:
we may here adde a more ancient example. 
                     
                        Ca
                              •
                           onicus quidam i
                              ••
                           ehitur in Gregorium 12. P
                              •
                           ntificem, quòd tempore magni schismatis antequam port
                              ••
                           en crearetur, iu
                              ••
                           uerat publico & solenni ritu sese abdicaturum Pont ficia potestate; postea verò Ponti
                              •
                           ex electus noluit pontificatum d
                              •
                           ponere. Azorius Ies. Inst. Mor. lib. 5. cap. 15.A
Canonist (saith a Iesuite) did inueigh against Pope
Gregorie the 12. who in the time of a great
schisme, did openly and solemnely sweare, that if
he were made Pope, he would giue it ouer again:
but being elected, hee performed nothing lesse.
The Canonist doubtlesse wanted not a Canon to condemne
this periurie, though the Iesuite vpon presumption
of [iusta causa] doth defend it. Who also in the
same volume holdeth their generall position, saying,

                     
                        Aliorum quoque iuramenta possunt P
                              •
                           ntificis autoritate relaxari. Ibidem lib. 11. cap. 9.Other mens oathes may be dissolued by the
Pope: so that when the Pope shall send but his Bull of
freeing of our English, the bond of their oath will
prooue as strong as the knot of a bulrush.
            
         
         
            
            The tenth Reason.
            Whosoeuer is so possessed with these former seditious
positions, that ex Officio (that is) as he is a Romish
priest, he must professe them: such an one is to be iudged
a most desperate traitor: But al Romish priests, as priests,
professes me, and othersome all of those seditious positions.
Ergo, &c.
            The Minor
                  1. Prooued,
                  2. Confirmed.
               
            
            Prooued by an argument of Relation: That seeing
the authors of this rebellious doctrine, are the principall
Rabbies of that sect, and publiquely authorized with
the ordinarie priuiledge of that Church: it may not be
imagined, but the schollers are infected with the leuen
of their professors and Doctors aboue named: to wit,
            1 Tollet a late Cardinall, whose writings haue this
speciall priuiledge by Pope Gregorie the 13.  That
(saith Vasques the Iesuite) they may without censure
or examination of any, be published to the
world. Now the booke, wherein these positions, or rather
poysons are contained, is intituled, De instructione
Sacerdotum: That is, The booke of Instructions
for Priests.
            
            2 Cardinall Bellarmine publique Reader in Rome,
in his booke intituled, Of the Pope of Rome, dedicated
to 
                  Beatissimo, Sanctissimoque Patri Xisto Quinto Pontifici Max. Robertus Bellarminus. In principio voluminis primi. Epist. Dedicat. de Pontifice Romano.
               Xistus Quintus Pope of Rome, and authorised
by the same Pope of Rome, to no other end, but (as he
confesseth) 
                  
                     Ad eos iu
                           •
                        enes instituendos, quos à Transalpinis Regienibus autoritas tua reuocauit. Ibidem.To instruct those schollers, whom his
Holinesse did send for from beyond the Alpes:
               

that is, All Scottish, Polish, Flemmish, Danish, and English
extrauagants.
            3 Cardinall Allen, created of the same Pope Xistus
Quintus, Anno Dom. 1588. to the like end: for in the
same yeere, when the Spanish Inuasion was intended against
England, he published his booke, intituled, An
Admonition to the Nobilitie of England, as a
trumpet of rebellion, to take armes against their Soueraigne.
            4 Molina, Diuinitie Reader in the Vniuersitie of

                  Ebor
                        •
                     ensis.
               
               Ebor.
            
            5 Gregorie of Valentia, Diuinitie Reader in the
Vniuersitie of 
                  Ingolstadensis.
               
               Ingol.
            
            6 Doctor Stapleton, Diuinity Reader in Louan..
            
            7 Dominicus Bannes, Diuinitie Reader in the
Vniuersitie of 
                  Salmanticensis.
               
               Salma. another much infected with the
same leauen, and yet priuiledged in Spaine with these
commendations: 
                  
                     Legi & expendi diligenter iussu & imperio Senatus F. Dominici Bannesii Cathedrarij Sacro-sanctae Theologiae in Salmaticensi Academia in 2• 2• D. Thomae Commentarios, & nihil reperi limâ dignum, sed admiratione: vt appareat fore opus Theologis vtilissimum & fructuosissimum. Id
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ego ratum mea fide iubeo. Frater Daques Regis Hispaniae Confessarius in Commentarios Francisci Bannesij.A worke admirable, and profitable
for all Diuines. Dignified also of the Colledge of
the Friers, called Minors, in these tearmes: 
                  
                     Ne tàm glorioso operi sanctae obedientiae meritum deesse contingat, hoc ipsum ei praecipimus in virtute Spiritus sanctisub formali praecepto, in nomine Patris, Filij, & Spiritus sancti, Amen: non obstantibus in contrarium quibuscunque. Fratrum Minorum de D. Bannefij Commentarijs Encomium.A glorious
worke, which least it want his deserued obedience,
this wee challenge in the power of the
holy Ghost, vnder our formall command (without
all exceptions) in the name of the Father,
Sonne, and holy Ghost, Amen.
            
            We haue also alleaged The Resolution of the Iesuites
Colledge of the Vniuersitie of Salamancha in
Spaine, Anno 1602. as likewise Creswels Philopater,
printed at Rome, Licentia Superiorum: By the
licence of the Superiours; signifying the Iesuites
there. What shall I neede to mention Reinolds (in his
Rosaeus) a Doctor of Diuinitie, and chiefest man in


the English Seminarie at Rhemes? Father Parsons
(in his Dolman) a principall Rector in the Seminarie
at Rome? Seeing all these be Seminaries, you may trie
the young plants by their fruites. If any desire further
experience in this kinde, he may consult with Carolus
Malinaeus, and Pontus Tyardaeus, both Parisiens,
and but euen now, before I can reade them, to be read of
all men.
            
               The Confirmation.
               It will not be denied of any Priest, but that in these
Popish Seminaries he hath vowed obedience to his generall
Fathers in those Schooles: And it is as notorious,
that all Generals are absolutely in
                     •
                  bralled to their chiefe
generall the Pope: all of them, as hands and feete, to
walke and worke, as that their head shall deuise. Which
(as we haue heard in Gregorie the 7. Gregorie the 9.
Pius Quintus, and others) haue absolued subiects
from all obedience, and charged them to take
armes against their Emperors, Kings and Queens
excommunicate, &c. Shall wee now imagine, the old
foxes being such, that their cubbes can degenerate? If
euer any of that kinde gaue hope vnto vs, it was the Secular
Priests: who for a fit did write many things very
truly against Iesuiticall rebellious practises: but after,
perceiuing the Recusants to withdraw their beneuolence,
as rather deuoted to the Iesuites; and that the
Pope also took part against them, they searing their consciences,
wholy submitted themselues vnto the Arch-priest,
whose command, vpon occasion, is countermanded
by the faction Iesuiticall. So that now we may aswell

expect grapes from thornes, or a white Aethiopian, as
loyall subiection from this Religion.
            
         
         
            Thus haue I proued (deare brethren) the dogmaticall
doctrines of these men, not particularlie
improuing, or confuting them; for this (as I vnderstand)
was not your desire, and therfore might
not challenge of me such discharge: especiallie
seeing that they be in themselues so naturally vnnaturall,
that it may be concluded hereof, 
                  The very commemoration o
                        •
                      them is a iust confutation.Haec
recitâsse refutâsse est. So that (according to the example
of our blessed Sauiour) onely relating the
fact [Doe, &c.] without examination of the guilt,
we may pronounce [Woe be vnto you Scribes and Pharisies, for you do &c.
               Woe, &c.] a condemnation
against them: in as much as all such sinnes haue
a brand of impietie in their forehead, whereby
any may discerne them, as the Apostle teacheth:

                  Gal. 5. 20.The workes of the flesh are manifest, which are these;
Adulterie, hatred, contentions, seditions, murders, and
such like; which whosoeuer doth, cannot inherit the
kingdome of God. Being so condemnable in themselues
in euery reasonable mans iudgement, that
it may be said of them, 
                  1. Tim. 5. 23.Some mens sinnes goe before
them to iudgement. Notwithstanding if, as among
these Romish professors, malefactors of all kindes
vse to take sanctuarie: so these mischiefes shall
dare to challenge the name of sanctitie or Religion:
know (dearely beloued) that (as S. Hierom
saith) this 
                  
                     Simul
                           •
                        ta sanctitas duplex iniquit
                           •
                        s.
                  Dissembling of sanctitie doth double the
iniquity: and that I am as ready to consute all forged
pretences, as they can be to suggest them. Only
at this time be you exhorted (my brethren) to

take this antidote and preseruatiue against all such
poysonable positions and practises; it is compounded
but of two simples, simplicitie of Apostolike
precept, & practise of primitiue examples.
The blessed Apostle and true Peter, farre differing
from this personate, doth thus admonish all Christians:

                  1. Pet. 4. 15.But let none of you suffer as a murtherer, an euill
doer, or as a busie bodie, in other mens matters: but if
any suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but
glorifie God in this behalfe. So then Christians suffering
for murders, may happily become martyrers,
but neuer be martyrs. Secondly, the Primitiue
example is plainly recorded by Tertullian in his
Apologie, in behalfe of zealous Christians, who
being in his daies persecuted of Tyrants for the
profession of the holie Faith, yet auouched alwaies
their faithfull allegeance after this tenour:

                  Tert. Apolog. Nos precamur, pro omnibus Imperatoribus vitam prolixā, imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus 
                           •
                        ortes, populum probum, orbem quietā.
                  Our humble prayers to God, in the behalfe of all Emperours,
are, that he would vouchsafe them long life, secure
reigne, safe guard, powerfull armies, faithfull
Counsellors, godly people, and a peaceable world. And
to remoue all ielousies of Princes, though Apostates
from Christ, holy Nazianzen is bold in defence
of Christian loyaltie to stand at defiance (as
it were) against all calumnious accusations, saying:

                  Nazianz. Orat 2. in Iulianum. In quos vestrūm; populum exastuantem contra vos, insurgere solicita
                           ••
                        mus? quibus vitae periculum attulimus?
                  Against whom of you did we at any time make
any insurrection among your people, though of themselues
prone to rebellion? Or whose death did wee euer
conspire? Now in conclusion, doe but consider
the last (I pray God euer the last) treason, and see
whether it may not challenge the name of Mark. 5. 9.
               Legion,
seeing there is found in it so many murderous

spirits, intending and attempting in one blow
so many execrable murders: that none can say of
this most infamous euill, as the Prophet spoke of
that most excellent good: 
                  Psal. 48. 8.As we haue heard, so
haue we seene: but contrariwise; That which wee
haue seene, the like was neuer heard. God of his
great mercie fashion vs to true thankfulnes, and
them to repentance, to disclaime the Guelphish
faction, and alwaies out of the confusion of their
sinnes worke the conuersion of their soules: establishing
vs all that call vpon the name of
Christ Iesus with his sanctifying spirit,
to the glorie of his sauing
grace. Whereunto
            
               Yours T. M.
               
            
            
         
      
   