
      
         
            
               


               
THE HVNTING of the Romish Foxe.
            
            Presented to the popes holines, with the kisse of his disholy foote, as an odoriferous & redolent posie verie fit for his grauitie, so often as he walketh rightstately, in his goodly Pallace Bel-vidêre.
            
               Mat. 3. 2. Repent, for the kingdome of heauen is at hand.
            
            
               EST
PERI
                     •
                  T
ET
NVENTA
            
            Imprinted at London by Richard Bradocke. Anno. 1598.
            
         
         
            
            
               To the right worshipfull M. William Cardinall, M. Humphrey Porfrie, M. Edward Sianope, and M. Iohn Ferne Esquires, and foure most worthy pillars of her Maiesties Counsell, established in the North paerts of England.
            
               DEcay of pure religion, and dissolute life (right worshipfull,) haue euer beene so great an eye-sore to the Godly and well affected magistraites; as none can be ignorant, or stand in doubt thereof, that will seriously peruse the holy Scriptures, and histories ecclesiasticall. Holy Moses was so Exod. 32. ver. 8. 19. feruent in Gods true religion, that when he sawe the Israelites worshipping and dauncing before the molten Calfe, his wrath waxed so hote against them, that



he cast the two tables of the testimonies out of his hands, and brake them in pieces; euen the tables of stone, which were written with the finger of God himselfe. King Ezechias bracke in pieces the brasen Serpent, which God himselfe commaunded 2. Reg. 18 Numb. 11 8, Moyses to set vp. And this he did for this sole and onely respect, because euen vnto his dayes, the children of Israell did burne incense to it. For which and the like religious factes, it is saide of him in holy write, that hee walked vprightly in the sight of God, so that after him was none like him among all the kings of Iuda, neither were there any such before him. The Prophet Elias was so constant and couragious. in true religion, that hee was not afraide to tell Achab that idolotrous 1. Reg, 18, vers. 18, king, that hee and his fathers house did trouble Israel, in that they had forsaken the Lord, and followed after Baalim. In which couragious spirit, he



procured fyre to come from heauen, and to consume the messengers, which the 2. Reg. 1. v. 2. 10. 12. wicked king Ahazias sent out against him, because he reproued his adolatry done to the Idoll Beel-Zebub, that god of Ekron; in which spirit the psalmoghaphe Dauid cryed out, that the zeale of Gods Psal. 69. vers. 9. house had eaten him vp, and that the rebukes of them that rebuked God and his truth, were fallen vpon him. In which spirit, S. Paule sharpely reprooued the sorcerer Bar-Iesus, calling him the Act. 13. vers. 10. child of the Deuill, because he sought to auert Sergius Paulus the proconsull, frō the faith of Chrisi Iesus, in which spirit, S. Peter smot Ananias with sodaine death, because he told a leasing to the holy Act. 5. vers. 5. 2. Tlm, 4. vers. 14 Ioan Ep, 20 Ghost. In which spirit. S. Iohn forbiddeth to receiue him into our house, or once to salute him that is an enemie to the worde of God. Which being true as it is true indeede, I cannot but from the depth of my heart, lament the iniquitie



& apostasie of these latter daies, in which daies, they who professe the faith of Christ in shewe of wordes, doe indeede denie Esay. 29. 13. Mat, 15. 8. 1. Ioan. 5, 18, Mat. 7, 15. the faith, doe indeede crucifie againe the sonne of God, and make a mocke of him, in which daies, false prophets come in sheepes clothinge, but are inwardlie rauening wolues, in which daies, as S. Bernard saith, the beast mentioned in 
                  Bernerd, ad Gars, ep. 125. the reuclation, to whome a mouth was giuen speaking blasphemies, sitteth in Peters chay
                  •
               e at Rome, as a Lyon reddy to take his pray, in regarde whereof, that I may in some measure of my small talēt, cōcurre with others of better skill, for the redresse of intollerable errours of late yeares crept into the Church; I haue with great watchings, painfull studies, and nightly lucubrations, founde out the secrete Caues, Dennes, and holes, to which the Romish Foxe, that deuoureth the innocent Lambes of Christes foulde, resorteth vsually,



and hideth himselfe therein from time to time couertly. For the profitable hunting of which Foxe, in waye of Christian merry desport: I haue prouided foureteene couple of well mouthed Romish houndes, who all followe the sent roundly with a lustye crye, euen to the gates of Rome. Which treatise I haue principally compiled, for the common good of the vulgar sort, and of other younge studentes, who either for wante of bookes, or for lacke of time, or other defectes, can not so easilye espie the subtile waies, of this Romish Foxe, or finde out his secrete dennes. In it the ignorant shall easilye finde much necessarye Doctrine for their better instruction in the truth; In it the waueringe and doubtfull sorte, shall finde inough for their confirmation; in it the constant and found Christians, shall not wante matter



for their spirituall consolation in it the Papistes themselues, if they will read it, shall finde inough, either for their spedy conuersion, or for their greater condemnation: all which I haue comprised in so small a roome, as euery one may carrye the same in his bosome, which treatise I dedicate to your worshippes for these two speciall causes. First, because I would giue some externall signe of a gratfull minde, for your manifould kinde christian courtesies towardes me; againe, for that your worships zeale in fauouring all faithfull subiects and good christians, specially the preachers of Gods holye word; hath worthilye deserued farre greater thinges, if my smal power could afford the same, & I do it the rather, because your rare zeale in furthering Gods true religion & vertue, and in punishing vices & disloyaltie, doth this day shewe it selfe as a lanterne in these North partes, where none are more contemned, none more hardely



dealt withall, whether in court or countye, (if neuer so small a surmise can he pretended against them,) then the preachers of Christs holy gospell; where none are lesse regarded, none lesse fauoured, euen with some placed in authority, then those that are sounde in religion, & for ward in her maiesties affaires; where mal-contents and disloyall recusants, shal find more fauour in one houre, then zealous Chrystians & true hearted subiectes in a whole yeare. Happie therefore is this Realme of England, that bath a princesse so zealous for the maintenance of God true religion
                  •
               ; so carefull, for the peace of her people; so mercifull, to all offendours; so bountifull to all well deseruing subiects; most noble Queene Elizabeth. And happie yea thryse happy are these North-Parts, which in these latter dayes are blessed, with such zealous, prudent, painfull, & well affected gouernours. Go forward therefore as ye



happily haue begunne, most faithfull seruants to God and the Queene. Let nothing be more deare to you, then the loue of God and his religion, nothing more ioyfull, then the faithfull seruice of your naturall soueraigne; nothing more laborious, then to minister iustice indifferently, as well to the poore as to the rich, so shall God be glorified, your Prince honoured, and your natiue country receiue comfort in your well doing. Accept this small present I pray your worships, with such minde as I do exhibit the same. And so I humbly take my leaue.
            
               Your worships most bounden, Thomas Bell.
            
         
         
            
            The names of the Houndes, that hunt the Romish Foxe.
            
            
               Victoria.
               Couarruvias.
               Aquinas.
               Vignerius,
               Fumus.
               Lyra,
               Gerson,
               Syluester.
               Rhenanus.
               Grelerius.
               Polydorus.
               Soto.
               Caietanus.
               Gratianus.
               Roffensis.
               Socrates,
               Alphonsus,
               Panormitanus,
               Durandus.
               Platina.
               Carranza.
               Bellarminus,
               Sigebertus.
               Palmerius.
               Bergomensis.
               Polanchus,
               Philaster, (sianus
               Dionysi: Carthu▪
               
            
            Glossa decretalium.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ THE HVNting of the Fox.
            
               The first Hounde.
               
                  GIue me leaue O holy father of Rome, to tell you in the way of charitie, what your owne beloued vassales, haue in printed books reported of your holinesse, Gods spirit no doubt enforcing them thereunto. Thou O disholy Pope, fearing that thy Antichristian vsurped primacie, would in time be turned vpside downe, if euery man might frely examine thy doctrine & tyrannicall constitutions, according to Gods sacred worde the true touchstone of veritie; hast by an abhominable decree in thy detestable canon-lawe, made it flat sacriledge to dispute of thy power, I will forge nothing of mine own brayn, I will deale sincerely in euery point, euen



as I will answere at the dreadfull day of dome, and therefore do I exhort the gentle readers, to marke well what I say. Franciscus a victoria, one O pope, of thy dominican Fryers, and the learnedst diuine that euer Spaine brought forth doth constantly thus report the matter; non spectat ad subditos determinare aut examinare 
                  
                     Victoria rel
                           •
                        ct, 4. de potest. papae & concilii, propos. 16. 
                  quid possit Papa aut quid non possit, & quomodo teneātur parerevel non, quia sacrilegium est disputare de poteutia principis, & praecipuè Papae. It belongeth not to popish vaslals, to determine or examine what the pope may doe, or what he may not doe, and wherein they ought to obey, or not; because he hath made it sacriledge by his lawe, to reason & dispute of his power. Consonant hereunto is a decree of the late counsell of Trent, by which it is made vnlawfull aswell to the clergie as to the layicall people, to read either the olde or the newe Testament translated into the vulgar tongue; and that vnder the paine of the Popes curse, vnlesse such person or persons be by him 
                     Pius. 4. in bulla synod, Trident.
                   licensed thereunto. Yea, it is strictly



inhibited by the said counsell, that no person or persons whosoeuer, shall print, read, keepe, or lend any booke at all; saue such only as are not oriously knowne to be allowed by the Pope, and why I pray your holinesse, did you make this most cruell law? doubtlesse, because if learned bookes might be allowed publiquely, your heathenish late Romish religion, woulde soone receiue a deadelye wound. For notwithstanding this your tyrannicall law, & many other decrees of like sort, your own dearest hounds do still hunt your holinesse, euen to very death.
            
            
               The second Hounde.
               THy hellish glosses O Pope of Rome, do tell vs manifestly that thou canst change the nature of things, that thou canst apply the substantiall parts of one thinge to another, and that thou canst make of nothing somthing; & consequētly, that thou canst make thy selfe another God. For although it may seme a wōder, that any not bewitched by the maister Deuill of Hell, woulde euer vtter



such folly and open blasphemie; yet doe I neither say any thing of malice, neither vrge any one iote against thee O Pope, but those very things, which thine owne The Popes treachery is discouered by his own dearlings. deare Doctors, haue in printed bookes published to the worlde, and this I obserue to my great comfort, wishinge al Christiā readers to note the same seriouslie; that thou O Pope with thy late predecessours, wouldest long sythence haue musseled the mouthes of these houndes, if the holy Ghost for the good of his elect had not appointed the contrarie to be done, thus therfore O Pope writeth thine owne approued glosse, euen vpon thine owne decretals; sic Papa dicitur habere caeleste arbitrium, et ideo etiam 
                  
                     G
                           ••
                        sa, 
                           •
                        iq. 1 decretal tit, 7, Cap, 3. 
                  naturam rerum immutat, substantialia vnius rei applicando alij; et de nihilo potest aliquid facere. So is the pope saide to haue celestiall arbitrement, & therfore doth he chāge the nature of things, by applying the substantiall parts of one thing to an other; and he can make that which is nothing, to be something. Beholde here most execrable blasphemie,



that euer was or henceforth can be, for it is proper to God alone to make something of nothing by his peculier worke of creation. This to be so, neither euer did, or can any diuine denie.
            
            
               The third Hound
               Tell me O Pope, haue not thy sworne vassals written of you, that Christ him selfe hath engrauen in thy thighs, that thou art king of kings, & Lord of Lords? as this also, O sweete Iesus, that though thou carry a thousand soules to hell, yet may noman say to thee, why doest thou so? sundry I knowe haue so written, but Iohannes Gerson shall speake for himselfe and the rest; I will not alter one worde or syllable that he saith. Thus doth he write; Sicut Christo collata est omnis potest as in caelo et in terra, siceam Christ us omnem 
                  
                     Ioan: Gerson de potest ate ecclesiae concl. 12. part. 3. 
                  Petro suisque successoribus dereliquit, vndo nec Constantinus Siluestro papae contulit, quod non esset prius suum, sed reddidit iniuste detentum. Porro; sicut non est potestas nisi a Deo, sic nec aliqua temporalis vel


                  
                  ecclesiastica, imperialis vel regalis, nisi a Papa; in cuius faemore scripsit Christus, Rex regum, dominus dominantium; de cuius potestate disputare, instar sacrilegij est; cui neque quisquam dicere potest, cur it a facis? mentior, sinon inueniantur haec scripta, ab illis etiam qui sapientes sunt in oculis suis. As all power was giuen to Christ, in heauen and on earth; so Christ left all that power, to Peter and his successours (for euer.) Wherefore the Emperour Constantine gaue nothing to Pope Syluester, which was not his owne before, but he onely restored that, which was vniustly kept from him. Further, as there is no power but of God, so is there neither any temporall nor ecclesiasticall, neither imperiall nor regall, but only of the Pope; in whose thighes Christ hath written, the King of Kings, the Lord of Lordes; of whose power to Behold, here the blasphemy of Antichrist. dispute; it is euen as sacriledge; to whom no man may say, why doest thou so? Let me haue the lye if these things be not found written, euen by those that seeme wise in their owne conceites. Thus



writeth Maister Doctor Gerson, who though he liued in the altitude of Popedome, yet coulde hee neither digest nor conceale these antichristian blasphemies, ascribed to the Pope against the Sonne of GOD. Neuerthelesse, the Popes themselues did chalenge the same, & tooke no small delite therein. For thus writeth Pope Gregorye the ninth of that name; ad firmamentum caeli, hoc est, vniuersalis ecclesiae, fecit deus duo magna luminaria, idest, duas instituit 
                  
                     Gregor. 9. lib. 1. decret, tit, 33. Cap, 6. 
                  dignitates, quae sunt pontificalis authoritas & regalis potestas; sed illa quae praeest diebus, idest, spiritualibus, maior est; quae vero carnalibus, minor, vt quanta est inter solem & lunam, tanta inter pontifices & reges differentia agnoscatur. To the firmament of heauen, that is, of the vniuersall Church, God made two greate lightes, to witt, hee ordeined two great dignities, which are the authoritie of the Pope, & the power Marke here the Popes goodly sermon. of the Kinge; but that power which ruleth spirituall things, is greater, & that which ruleth things carnal, is lesser; that



there may be as great difference knowne betweene Popes and Kinges, as there is betweene the Sunne and the Mone.
            
            
               The fourth Hound.
               TEll me O Pope, is not thy Romishe Purgatorie so sotted and senselesse a thinge, as it can neither be proued by the scriptures, nor yet by the ancient writers? haue not thyne owne renowmed children, Syluester Prieras, who was somtime maister of thy sacred pallace, and for his profounde knowledge surnamed Absolutus Theologus, as also thy glorious so supposed Martyr Iohn Fisher our late Byshoppe of Rochester, vttered so much in printed bookes to the viewe of the worlde? I wote it is so, and that all the worlde may knowe the vanitie and abhomination of late Romish religion, I will set downe their expresse wordes. Thus therefore writeth Syluester; Indulgentia nobis per scripturā minime innotuit, licet inducatur illud apostoli, (si quid donaui 
                  Syluester de indulg. 
                  vobis,) sed nec per dicta antiquorum doctorum


                  
                  sed modernorum, the Popes pardons were not knowne to vs by the holy scriptures, although some doe alledge S. Paul for that purpose; nether knowne by the auncient father, but onely by the late writers. Loc, pardons, and consequently purgatory being the ground thereof, cannot be proued out of the scriptures. My Lord of Rochester hath these expresse 
                     Roffensis con, assert, Luther, arti 18. prope initium.
                   wordes; sed & graecis ad hunc vsque diē, non est creditum purgatorium esse. Legat qui velit graecorum veterum commentarios, et nullum quantum opinor, aut quam rarissimum de purgatorio sermonem inueniet. Sedneque Latini simul omnes, at sensim, huius reiveritatem cōceperunt: & paulo post; non absque maxima sancti spiritus dispensatione factum est, quod post tot annorum curricula purgatorij fines, & indulgentiarū vsus ab Orthodoxis sit receptus; quamdiu nulla fuerat de purgatorij cura, nemo quaesiuit indulgentias, nam ex illo pendet omnis indulgentiarum existimatio. Si tollas purgatorium quorsum indulgentiis opus erit? his enim si nullum fuerit purgatorium, nihil indigebimus, contemplantes igitur


                  
                  aliquandiu purgatorium incognitum fuisse, deinde quibusdam pedetentim, Partim ex reuelationibus, partim ex scripturis fuisse creditum, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ita tandem generatim eius fidem ab orthodoxa ecclesia fuisse receptissimam, facillime rationem aliquā indulgentiarum intelligimus. Quum ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      purgatoriū, tā sero cognitū ac receptū ecciesiae fuerit vniuersae, quis iam de indulgentijs mirari potest, quod in principio nascentis ecclesiae nullus fuerat carū vsum; caeperunt igitur indulgentiae, post quā ad purgatorij cruciatus aliquandiu trepidatum erat. The Greeks to this day, do not beleeue there is a purgatorie. Reade who will their commentaries, Loc, a great learned man and a famous popish byshop and Martyr, doth plainly tell vs, the vanity and late birth of Romish pardons. and he shall finde either verie seldome mention of purgatorie, or rather none at all, for neither did the Latine Church, conceiue the veritie of this matter all at once, but ley surelye by little and little; neither was it done without the great dispensation of the holy ghost, that after so many yeares Catholicks both beleeued purgatory, and receiued the vse of pardons generally; so long as there was no care of purgatorie, no



man sought for pardons. For of it dependeth all the estimation, that we haue of pardons. If thou take awaie purgatory, to what end shal we need pardons. For if there be no purgatory, we shall need no pardons. Considering therfore how long purgatory was vnknown, thē that it was beleeued of some by little and little, partly by reuelations, and partly by the scriptures, and so at the last beleeued generally of the whole Church, we doe easily vnderstande the cause of pardons, synce therefore purgatory was so lately knowne, and receiued of the whole Church; who can now admire pardons, that there was no vse of them in the Primitiue Church. Pardons therefore began after the people stoode in some feare of purgatorie. Thus O Pope, writeth thine owne deare Byshoppe, whose testimonie must needes be of great credite with thee. Whose wordes notwithstanding, if they be well marked with the due circumstances thereof, are able of themselues without more adoe, to perswad any man liuing, to detest all popish religion. For first we learne here, that the 1 


                  
greekes neuer beleeued purgatory, no not to the daies of this Byshoppe, who liued within these three score yeares last past. Secondly, that the church of Rome 2 (now the mother of all superstition,) did not beleeue the said purgatory, for many hundreds of yeares after S. Peters death, whose successour for all that, thou O Pope, boasts thy selfe to be. Thirdly, that 3 this purgatory, which is now the foundation of papistry, crept by little and little, not all at once, into the Latine 4 Church. Fourthly, that purgatorie was found out by reuelation from heauen, 5 (or if you had rather so thinke, from the deuell of Hell,.) Fiftly, that pardons came not vp, vntill purgatory was found out: the reason hereof saith our popish Byshopp, is this; because forsooth, if there be no purgatory, all popish pardons are needlesse. Sixtly, that pardons were not 6 heard of, nor knowne to the Primatiue 7 Church. Seuently, that pardons then began, when men began to feare the paines of purgatorie: but of this matter I haue written more at large, in my booke



of Motiues.
               
            
            
               The Fift Hound.
               TEll me O Pope, hast thou not imposed vpon thy Monkes, Friers, and Nunnes, such an heauie yoake, as they are not able to beare? Is not the prohibition of matrimonie, contrarie to Christs institution, to the doctrine of the Apostls, & to the practise of the Primitiue church? was not Pope Syritius the first man, that made any setled law for that purpose? was not the mariage of priests allowed in the Church, for one thousand yeares after christ? doth not thine owne Gratianus tell vs, euen out of thine owne approued decrees, that many priests sonnes haue beene Popes of Rome? Doth hee not name, Bonifacius, Agapitus, Theodorus, Syluerius, Faelix, Hosius, Gelasius, Densdedit, and many others? Doth not thine owne glosse vpon the same text, thinke it better to say they were all bastardes, then to graunt them to be legitimate children, lawfully begotten in holie



wedlocke? doth not the same glosse alledge for his excuse, that vit iu tollitur per successionem, the fault is taken away by vertue of their holy succession; commeth not the same Gratian roundly vpon the glosse, and affirmeth plainly, that priests might marrie lawfully euery where, vntill the late inhibition made by Siritius? doth not Socrates that famous Greeke historiographer tell vs, that Byshops of the east Church, did in his time beget children of their lawfull wiues, and that euen in the time of their priestly function? This thing I haue prooued so effectually in my booke of Suruey, as all the papistes in Europe are not able to disproue the same. Here onely I will adde the flatte testimonie of Socrates out of his ecclesiasticall historie, whose expresse wordes are these; non pauci illorunt (Episcoporum) 
                  
                     Socrates, hist, lib, 5, Cap, 21. 
                  dum Episcopatum gerunt, liberos ex vxore legit tima procreant; Many of them saith Socrates speaking of Byshoppes, doe beget children of their lawfull wiues, euen in time of their Episcopall or Byshoplike functions. these



wordes are so plaine, that they neede no glosse.
            
            
               The sixt Hounde.
               TEll me O Pope, doe not so many intollerable excommunications, & so many dissolute dispensations, come daily and hourely from the chuch of Rome, as therby the state of vs Christians is now become more seruile, then was of olde the condition of the Iewes. I wote it is so, thine owne doctors, Uictoria, Syluester, Fumus, Gerson, Rhenanus, and Geilerius affirme the same, as I haue proued at large in my booke of Suruey. One onely Victoria I will here alledge, whose expresse wordes are these: videmus quotidie a Romana curia tam largas, imò omnino tam dissolutas dispensationes profectas, vt orbis ferre non possit, 
                  
                     Victoria de potest, Papae et con, relect, 5, pag, 139, 
                  non solum in scandalum pusillorum, sed maiorum. Wee see dailye so large, yea altogether so dissolute dispensations come from the court of Rome, that the worlde cannot endure



it, neither is this dissolutiō to the scand all only of the weake, but euen of the perfect sort, and those that are the wisest among the rest. Againe he writeth thus; ego 
                  
                     vbisupra Pag. 149. 
                  nullam dispensationem in particulari condemno, sed video duo; primunm, quid in fine anni sunt tot dispensationes factae, vt nescio an sint tot qui legem seruent, secundo, video quod omnes qui petunt adferunt dispensationes. I condemne no dispensation in particular, but I see two thinges; First, that in the ende of the yeare there are so manie dispensations gotten, that I knowe not if so many keepe the lawe: secondly, I see all that aske, bring dispensations with them. In another place, the same Victoria hath these words; Paulatim ad haue i
                        •
                     temporantiam deuentum est, 
                  
                     vbisupra pag. 
                     
                        •
                     51. 
                  & hunc tale in statum, vbi nec mala nostra, nee reme
                        ••
                     a pati possumus. Da mihi 
                  The Church of Rome is now brought to a most miserable state. 
                  Clementes, L
                        ••
                     s, Syluestros, & omnia permittā arbitrio eorū. Sed vt nihil grauius dicatar in recentiores Pontifices, certe multis partibus sunt priscis illis inferiores. By little & little we are brought to these inordinate dispensations, and to this so miserable



state, where we are neither able to endure our owne griefes, nor the remedies which shoulde mitigate the same. Yet giue me Clements, Lines, Syluesters, and I will commit all thinges to their charge. But to speake fauourably of our late Popes, they are doubtles farre inferiour to Popes of old time Loe, the Chuch of Rome is not now, as it was in old time.
            
            
               The seauenth Hound.
               TEll me O Pope, haue not thy predecessours made their beginning like Foxes and theeues and in the end dyed like dogges? haue not thine owne religious Fryers, made report of this veritie? I wote it is so, and Carranza together with thy sweete Platina shall witnesse the same with mee. Platina hath these expresse wordes; qua quidem bearitudine Ioanes caruit, fur certe in pontificatu
                        •
                     , & latro; non enim vt par fuerat, per ostium intrauit. Which happie life Pope Iohn 
                  
                     Platina in vit
                           ••
                         Ioan, 18. wanted, as who was a theese and a robber,



for he entered not in by the doore, as he should haue done. Againe, in an other place the same Platina writeth in this maner eo enim tum pontificatus deuenerat, vt qui plus largitione & ambitione, non dico 
                  
                     Platina in vita Syl, 3. 
                  sanctitate vitae et doctrina valeret, is tantum inde dignitatis gradum, bonis oppressis & reiectis obtineret, quem morem vtinam aliquando non retinuissent nostra tempora. For to that passe was the Popedome now brought, that who so could excell others in giuing bribes, & in ambition, I say not in godly lyfe & sound doctrine, Extortion and ambition is the life of popery. (for that was farre from them,) he onely should haue the degree of honor, and good men should be reiected; which vsage would to God it had neuer bene in our time. Herken O Pope, is it not now with your Byshops of Rome, as it was with Annas, Caiphas, & others of old time among the Iewes? thy holines can it not denie, but let Carranza byte thee in the haunch, whose expresse words are these: intrauit vt Vulpes, regnauit vt Lupus, mortuus est vt Canis. He entred as a foxe, he 
                     Carranza in summa con. sol. 369 reigned as a Wolfe, he died as a dogge.



He spaketh of Pope Boniface, the eight of that name. This Carranza, albeit he were one of the Popes deare Friers, is for all that a well mouthed Hound.
            
            
               The eight Hound.
               TEll me O Pope, can not thy holines with plenitudine potestatis, euacuate hellish purgatory, and deliuer all soules tormented there, & send them streight away to heauen? nay, canst thou not free all men from all punishment due to their sinnes here on earth? I am sure thou canst, for thy deare doctors Fumus, Syluester, & Vignerius, haue so affirmed to mee. Fumus shall speake for all, whose expresse wordes are these; Papa posset liberare omnes animas purgaporij, etiam si plures essent, si quis pro sis faceret 
                  
                     Fumus in verbo, Papa, 11. 
                  quod iuberet, peccaret tamen indiscretè concedendo; & in hoc sensis dicunt Doctores, quod non potest spoliare Purgatorium. The Pope coulde deliuer all the soules out



of purgatory, albeit they were very manie, if one did that which he appointed to be done, marrie the Pope should sin, for his vndiscrete dealing therein. Thus writeth our holy fryer, who addeth well in the ending, that the Pope wanteth somtime his capp of discretion, to which The Pope doth somtime want his cappe discretion. I will make another addition, if percase it may stand with the Popes good liking, to witte, that since as Popery telleth vs, the fire of purgatory is the selfe same in nature with the fire of Hell, if therefore his holinesse had but one droppe of charitie, he would neuer suffer so many soules to abide that doolfull miserie. Yet I must needes graunt, that in so doing his holinesse should want discretion; because forsooth, if there were no soules in purgatory, then for trentals, diriges, and Masses, men woulde not bestowe one quatrine vpon his vassals.
            
            
               The ninth Hounde.
               TEll me O Pope, canst not thou Free a man by thy plenary pardon; from



all punishment due in this life and in the life to come? I know thou canst doe it, because thine owne deare Syluester so affirmeth. These are his expresse words; qui plenariam indulgentiam rite assecutus 
                  
                     Syluester. de indulg, par. 33 
                  est, si eo instanti moreretur, euolaret statim ad caelum. He that hath orderly gotten the Popes plenarie pardon. if he should dye presently, he should flie to heauen out of hand. Thus writeth Syluester the Popes Theologus absolutus. Where now, if it were not sacriledge to dispute of the Popes power, as I haue proued it to be; I would aske this one question, why; any soules abide in purgatory, since a plenarie is sufficient for their discharge, Pardon my boldnes I pray your holinesse. which for all that, the Pope grauntteth vsually, as a thinge verie frequent during mine owne aboade at Rome, Is it because he cannot? that is contrary to his owne doctrine. Is it because it stādeth not with discretion, there is asmuch discretion to doe it for the deade, as for the liuing. Is it because he will not? so it seemeth, and then he wanteth charitie, as I haue already said.
            
            
               
               The tenth Hound.
               TEll me O Pope, doth not thy sottish religion tell vs, that thou maiest erre as a priuate man, but not as Pope or a publicke Person? as if it were saide, thou maiest sitte in thy pontificalibus, O monster of the world. thou mayest ride vpon thy white Palfrey, thou mayest talke and write they pleasure, and that euen while thou art Pope, and so vtter heresies and blasphemies whatsoeuer, and yet for all that canst thou neuer teach or define any errour or heresie, as beinge Pope indeede. I wote it is so, thy chiefest Doctors haue so tolde mee. Vignerius hath these expresse wordes; si dicatur, summus pontifex errare potest, & 
                  
                     vigner de potest, condendi symbolum, pag, 337. 
                  in animo suo concipere aliquem articulum Orthodoxa fidei contrarium, & etiam priuatim proferre, vt legitur de Anastasio secundo. Si ergo posset nouum symbolum edore, fides ecclesiae vnius hominis periculo subiaceret; dicendum, quod summus pontifex vt priuata persona


                  
                  errare potest, non tamen vt est summus pontifex. Ideo si vt priuata persona symbolum edere tentaret, non esset symbolum; maximè vbi a vera fide deuiaret. If any say, that the Poope may erre. and conceiue in his hearte any article contrary to the Catholike faith, and also vtter the same priuately, as we read of Pope Anastatius the seconde: If therefore hee coulde make a new creede the faith of the Church shoulde be subiecte to the hazzard of one man. We answere saith (Vignerius,) that the Pope may erre as a priuate person, but not as Pope or the hie Byshoppe. Therfore if hee should make a creede as a priuate man, it should be no creede at all; especially, where hee swerued from the right faith. Beholde here gentle reader, vpon what rotten stuffe the Papistes woulde haue vs to ground our faith. Wee must say they, beleeue that the Pope cannot erre, and yet are wee sure that hee can erre, and that hee hath alreadie erred in verie deede. Wee must likewise beleeue,



that he cannot but teach the truth; and yet must we also beleeue, that hee can both teach heresie, and be an heretike himselfe. VVe must furthermore beleeue, 
                     
                        •
                     hat heart will not derest Popery. as you haue already heard; that it is sacriledge to dispute of the Popes power, and yet must we both dispute of his power, and straitly examine his doctrine, as also know constantly, whether he speaketh publiquely as a publike man, or priuately as a priuate man. And neuertheles when we haue done all that we can, we know no more what to thinke or say of his doctrine, then when we haue an E
                     •
                  le by the taile. For when he shall tell me, I must beleeue this and that; then if hee speake as a priuate man, where is my saith? but let vs here the cry of some other houndes. That famous papist Ioh
                        •
                     ures Gerson, sometime the chancellor 
                     Iohn Gerson in serm, de pasch. part. 3. of Paris, hath these expresse wordes; hoc fecit latroni, qui verisimiliier nondum compleuer at paenitentiam pro omnibu peccatis suis, qui fuit illa hora propria beatificatus, & vidit deum facie ad faciem, sicut sanctiin Paradiso. Propter quod insuper


                  
                  apparet falsitas doctrinae papae Ioannis 22. quae damnata fuit cum souo buccinarum coram rege Philippoper Theologos Parisienses, & credidit potius Theologis Parisiensibus, quam curiae. This hee did to the theefe, who by likelihoode had not yet accomplished pennance for all his sinnes, who was blessed in that verye houre, and sawe GOD face to face, as doe the Saintes in Paradise, by reason whereof, further appeareth the falshoode of the doctrine of Pope Iohn, which was condemned with the sounde of Trumpetes, before king Phillippe by the diuines of Paris, and the king beleeued the diuines of Paris, rather then the court. In which wordes we haue to note. First, that Maister Gerson auoucheth the theefe crucified with Christ, to haue seen God face to face in that houre, and so to haue beene blessed. Secondly, that he reproueth the false doctrine of Pope Iohn. Thirdly, that his doctrine was condemned with the sound of trumpets, in the presence of the king of France Fourthly, that the king gaue more credit



to the diuines of Paris, then to the iudgement of the (Pope,) or court of Rome. Fiftie, that neither the king, nor the learned Papists, did at that time graunt to the Pope such power and authoritie, as the Pope this day doth insolently chalenge to himselfe. Sixtly that the Pope taught false doctrine euen in a weighty matter of saith. Which thing not onely Gerson affirmeth, together with the diuines of Paris, as you haue heard; but Pope Adrian himselfe testifieth the same, as the zealous papist Alphonsus de castro, 
                  
                     Alphonsus, lib. 3. adubaeres, prope finem.
                   reporteth in these expresse words; sexta haeresis docet nullam animam ante diem iudicij, esse beatam, quum vt ait, nulla anima an
                        •
                     e illum diem videt deum. Huius haeresios authores sunt Armeni, eandem etiā tuentur Greci, post istos surrexit Iohannes, 22. huius nominis pontifex. Sed ne verbis meis aliquis in hac parte deroget, verba Adriani papae referā, qui in suo quarto sentētiarum, in calce cuiusdam quaestionis de sacramento confirmationis, it a ait; nonissime fertur de Ioanne, 22. quod publice docuit, decla rauit, & ab omnibus teneri mandauit, quod a nimae purgata aute finale indicium non habent


                  
                  solā, quae est clara & facialis visio dei; & vniuersitatem Parisiense ad hec induxisse dicitur, quod nemo in ea poteraet gradum in Theologia adipisci, nisiprimitus hunc errorem iurasset se defensurum, & per petuo ei adhaesurum. Haec Adrianus. The sixt heresie teacheth, that no soule is in eternall blisse before the day of dome, because as it saith, no soule before that day, seeth God, the Armeni are the authors of this heresie, and the Greekes holde the same. After these rose vp Pope Iohn, the 22. of that name. But least any man distrust my words in this point, I will receite the words of Pope Adrian, who in his fourth booke of sentences, in the ende of a certaine question of the sacrament of confirmation, saith thus; last of all, it is reported of Pope Iohn the 22. that he publiquely taught, declared, & commaunded The Pope commandeth his Vassals, to sweare to false doctrine. all men to held (this opinion) that the soules of the iust, haue not before the day of dome, the sole, which is the cleare and faciall sight of God. And it is said, that he induced the Vniuersity of Paris to this; that no man should take degree in the same, but, he that first did swear to desend this error, & to mantain the



same for euer. Thus saith Adrian, who was him selfe the Byshoppe or Pope of Rome, and the most excellently learned Byshoppe, that euer was in that sea. And it will not serue the turne to say as the Iesuite Bellermine doth, in the defense of popish faith: to wit, that Pope Iohn erred as a priuate man, but not as Pope, for that distinction doth not onely want a good foundation, whereupon it should be built, but also it flatly destroyeth the plain text: the reason hereof is most euident, euen to euery childe. First, because 1 Pope Adrian saith, (docuit,) hee taught. Secondly, because he saith, 2 
                  (publice,) publiquelie. Thirdly, because 3 he saith, (mandauit,) he cōmaunded all to holde it. Fourthly, because none coulde be made graduate, saue onely he that held 4 this opinion. Fiftly, because euery graduate 5 did swere, to hold & defēd it foreuer. So then, the Pope may erre, not only as a priuate man, but also in the publike decree of faith, & that euen by the consente & testimonie of Adrian, who was Pope himselfe; yea, who for learning & knowledge



as the papists thēselues cōfesse, was one of the rarest Popes that euer came at Rome. But of this point, I haue spoken more largely, in my booke of Motiues.
            
            
               The eleunth Hound.
               TEll me O Pope, doe not thy Doctors deare, wrest the scriptures most cleare, that so they may serue thy turne? thou must for shame confesse it, for thine owne sworne vassall Polydorus Virgilius, doth witnesse it to be so; these are his expresse words; Non secus isti iurisconsulti 
                  
                     Polydorut. lib. 4 cap. 9. 
                  aliquoties detorquent sacras literas quo volunt, ac sutores sordidas solent dentibus extendere pelles: These popish Legistes and Canonistes, doe nowe and then so wrest and writhe the holy scriptures; euen as Coblers doe gnaw with their teeth, and stretch out their filthy skinnes. Out of these wordes I note first, that this 1. 
                  Polydore was a great papist himselfe, and so this testimonie must needs be of great force against the papistes. I note secondly, 2. that he speaketh not of the meanest and basest sort of papistes, but euen of the



best, and of their renowmed Doctors; because he meaneth Hostiensis, their grande and famous Canonist. I note thirdly, that their mangling and wresting of the holy scriptures, is most intollerable; The papists wrest the scripture, and that without the same, they cannot possibly maintaine their wicked doctrine.
            
            
               
                  The 12. Hounde.
               
               TEll me O Pope, doth not Dominicus Soto thine owne Dominican Frier, tell vs with open mouth, that no soules abide in Purgatorie aboue tenne yeares? Doest not thou for all that, giue pardons 
                     Soto in 4. lib sent. dist. 19 q. 3. arg 2. for tenne thousand yeares? doe not thy Romish priestes take money, to saye Masses for those that were dead and buried, seuen thousand yeares agoe? the vsuall practise which my self haue knowen, doth proue it to be so; I haue also proued the same in my booke of Motiues and more at large in my booke of Suruey.
            
            
               
               
                  The 13 Hounde.
               
               TEll me O Pope, doest not thou teach thy children, that they are iustified by their owne merites, and by their workes of supererogation? and yet doth not thy deare Frier Iohannes de Combis, oppose himselfe roundlie against that wicked heresie, Gods holy spirit mouing him so to doe? I wote it is so, for these are his expresse words; Hoc patet, quiae Deus semper remunerat supra 
                  
                     Ioan▪ de Combis lib; 5. theolog. verit. cap. 1
                        •
                     
                   
                  meritum, sicut punit citra condignum. All this is euident, because God euermore rewardeth vs aboue our merites, and also doth euer punish vs, lesse then we deserue. For which respect, Saint Austen saith grauely, Ue etiam laudabilvitae hominum, si remotae misericordiae discutias eam. Woe, euen to the best liuer of all, if thou (O GOD) 
                     Aug. lib. 9. confess. cap. 13. shall examine his life, thy mercie set apart.
            
            
               
               
                  The 14. Hound.
               
               TEll me O Pope, doth not thy famous Canonist and most reuerend Bishop, Couarruuias, tell vs without blushing, that albeit the doctrine of thine Angelicall Doctor Aquinas, be confirmed for Authentical by sundry Popes afore thee, The Popes doings & doctrine, must needs be defended. yet must the contrary opinion be defended of necessitie? because forsooth saith Couerruuias, the life of popery cannot otherwise saued bee. These are his expresle words; Nec me latet D. Thomam praevia maxima deliberatione afferere, 
                  
                     Couern. To. 1. ca. 20 part. 11. in 
                           •
                        ed. col. prima.
                   
                  Rom. pontificem non posse propria dispeae satione continentiae solenne votum monathorum tolere, & paulo post, oportet tamen primam opinionem defendere, neque passim fiant, euertantur omnino. Neyther am I ignorant, saith Couerruvias, that Saint Thomas affirmeth after great deliberation, that the Bishop of Rome cannot with his dispensation, take away from monks their solemne vow of chastity, this notwithstanding, we must defend the first



opinion, least the common practise of the Pope be turned vpside downe. Out of these wordes, sundry very necessarie 1 obseruations may be gathered. First, that the best learned Papistes, doe not agree 2 about the Popes Authoritie. Secondly, that great learned papistes among whom Aquinas is one, doe deny the Popes resolution, iudgement, and authority, and that euen in the highest points of doctrine. Thirdly, that false and absurd opinions 3 must be defended, for the credite and safegarde of the Popes religion. What a beggerly thing is poperie. Fourthlye, that most miserable is the Popes religion, which must haue such beggerly shiftes, for the maintenance of the same.
            
            
               
                  The 15. Hound.
               
               TEll me O Pope, doest thou not reiect the sixt generall synode, because it prescribeth limites to thy holinesse? doest thou not like wise reiect one parte of the generall counsell of Constance, for that it preferreth the authority of the



counsell against thee? doth not thine owne Iesuite Bellarmine, reiect the Epistle of Damasus to Hierome, and an other of Hierome to Damasus? doth Loe, how roundly the papists reiect the fathers. not thy renowmed canonist Nauarre, reiect the common opinion, so often as hee disliketh the same? doth not Cardinall Caietanus contemne a whole multitude of Fathers, when they seeme to him to holde against the scriptures? doth not Melchior Canus a most learned papist, oppose himselfe against the Thomistes and the Scotistes? Against all both olde and newe writers? all this is true, I knowe it well, and I houe proued it, in my booke of Motyues. One or two testimonies I will heere set downe, because they are verie profitable for the Reader. Caietanus hath these expresse wordes; Si quando occurrerit nouus sensus textui consonus, 
                  Caietan. in praefat. in quin que lib. Mos. 
                  nec à scriptura sacra, nec ab ecclesiae doctrina dissonus, quamuis à torrente doctorum sacrorum alienus, aequas se praebeant censores. Memineriut ius sum vnicuique tribuere, solis scripturae saecrae authoribus


                  
                  reseruata est authoritas haec, vt ideo credimus sic esse quod ipsi ita scripserunt, nullus ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      detestetur nouum sacrae scripturae sensum, ex hoc quod dissonat à priscis doctoribus. Sed scrutetur perspicatius textum ac contextum scripturae, & si quadrare inuenerit, laudet Deum, qui non alligauit expositionem scripturarum sacrarum priscorum doctorum sensibus, sed scripturae ipsi integrae sub catholicae ecclesiae censurae. alioquin spes nobis ac posteris tolleretur exponendi scripturam sacram, nisi transferendo (vt ainnt) de libro in quinternum. If at any time a new sense occurre, which is consonant to the text, & not dissonāt frō holy writt or doctrine of the Church, although it swarne from the opinion of neuer so many fathers; yet let the Readers iudge there of indifferentlye, and according to equitie. Let them remember to giue to euerie one his right, because this priuiledge is onelie graunted to the writers This testimonie of Caieta
                        ••
                     , is worthye to be noted. of the holy scriptures, that we must therfore beleue it to be so, because they haue written so, Let none therfore loath



a newe sense of holie scripture, because it dissenteth from the old Doctors, but let him exactly consider the text and context of the scripture, and if he find it to agree, let him praise God, who hath not tyed the exposition of the holy scriptures, to the opinions of the olde Doctors, but to the integritie of the scripture it selfe, vnder the censure of the Catholique Church. For otherwise, neither we nor our posterities shall haue any hope to expound the scripture, but onely to translate out of one booke into another. Thus we heare the crye of a well mouthed hound; to wit, the verdict of our learned Caictain, our great Thomist, our religious The holie scripture ought to be the triall of euerie doubtfull question. fryer, our Cardinall of Rome. By whose graue resolution, well worthy to be written in golden letters, it is euident to euery child, that no sense, though neuerso new; no exposition, though neuer so strange, no opinion, though different from neuer so many fathers, must, or ought to be reiected, if it be agreable to the holy scriptures. And consequently it followeth by the said resolution, that



euerie trueth is to be tryed by the scriptures, and none at all by the fathers. Melchior Canus an other learned papist, is of the selfe same opinion. These are his expresse wordes; Vbi ego si Thomistae 
                  
                     Canus de locis, lib. 8. cap. 5. Ep. 245 
                  omnes cum Scotist is existant, si cum antiquis iuniores vellent contra me pugnare, tamen superior sim necesse est, non enim vt nō
                     nulli putant, omnia sunt in the logorum authoritate. Wherein, though all the Thomistes stand with the Scotists, though the olde writers with the younge fight against me, yet shall I of necessitie haue the vpper hande ouer them. For all thinges doe not as some thinke, rest in the authoritie of diuins. And why shoulde any man, depende vpon the iudgement of men, seeing O Pope thine owne sweete Iesuite Bellarmine, doth tell vs plainely, that all Bishops doe so dissent among themselues, and so swarue from the truth of the scripturs, as he knoweth not in the worlde whom to followe. These are his expresse wordes; At sine dubio singuli episcopi 
                  
                     Bellarm. lib. 2. de conc. cap. 2.


                  
                  errare possunt, & aliquando errant, & inter se quaudoque dissentiunt, vt nesciamus quisnam eorum sequendus sit. But without all doubt, all Byshops may erre one after an other, and they sometime doe erre, and sometime dissent one from an other, so as we cannot in the worlde tell, whome it is best to followe. Out of these wordes, I note first, that God 1 who caused Balaams Asse to speake, hath enforced our Iesuite against his will to Nu, 22. 28. confesse the truth. I note secondly, 2 that there is no Bishoppe in the worlde, but he both may erre, and sometime doth erre, and consequently, that the Pope of Rome is eyther no Bishoppe at all by his owne Iesuites graunt, or else that he both may erre, and doth erre in deede. Of which testimonie I make the the greater account, because it proceedeth from a Iesuites mouth. For none more forcible weapons can be vsed against Popish doctrine is most forcible against it selfe. the papistes, then to beate them with their owne swordes. I note thirdlie, that by our Iesuites confession, euerie 3


                  
Bishoppe hath so manie errours, that the people cannot tell whom to followe. I note fourthlie, that since euerie auncient 4 father both may erre and doth erre, and that by popish grant, there is no reason, why the papistes shoulde vrge vs as they doe, to stande to the censure of the fathers in euerie thing, Nay they ought to giue vs leaue to examine their writinges, Ad amussim scripturarum, according to the true meaning of the scriptures: because the greate papistes, Caietanus, Canus, and Bellarminus, doe all three graunte the same, as is alreadie prooued. Adde heereunto the sente of the nexte hounde.
            
            
               
                  The 16. Hound.
               
               TEll me O Pope, doest not thou take awaye all freedome and libertie graunted of olde time to all



assemblies and synodes. Doest not thou denie voyces, and definitiue sentence, to all persons in all counsels, euen to the Emperour himselfe, admitting none, though neuer so learned, but Bishoppes onely, to iudge of doubtes in faith or religion? doest not thou absente thy selfe from all counsels, and yet reseruest all iudgement to thy selfe, sitting in thy chaire at home? doest thou not with all this, take thy Bishops sworne, euen when they are made Bishops, to defende thy papall Tyranny and lawes whatsoeuer? I wote it is so, and I haue proued it in my booke of Motiues. I will neuerthelesse in this place briefely shewe the same, by the testimonie of three Romish Houndes. The first hounde is Gregorie, who was himselfe the late Bishoppe of Rome. His expresse words in his decreetals, are these; Ego N. episcopus, 
                  
                     Greg. lib. 7. decret. lit. 24. cap. 4. 
                  ab hac hora sidelis ero S. Petro, sanctaeque Romanae ecclesiae, dominoque meopapae N. eiusque successoribus Canonicè intrantibus. sequitur; papatum Romanae ecclesiae, & regulas sanctorum patrum, adiutor


                  
                  ero ad defendendum & retinndum contra omnes homines; sic me Deus adiuuet, & haec sancta euangelia. I (Iohn Fisher) Bishoppe, will from this day forwarde be faithfull to saint Peter and to the holy Church of Rome, and to my Lorde (Boniface) the Pope, and to his successours chosen canonicallie, and I will bee an helper to defende the popedome or papall authoritie, and the rules of the holie fathers against all people; so God me helpe, and the holie Gospell. Out of these wordes, it may be easilie gathered, that the decrees of late Romish counsels, are in these our daies of no force at all. The reason is euident, because none but Bishops haue definitiue voyces in the saide counselles, neyther can the saide Bishops decree any thing, against eyther the Pope or the Church of Rome. For as we see by the Popes tyrannicall constitution nowe alledged, all Bishops are sworne to be faithfull to my Lorde the Pope, and to defend whatsoeuer he hath set downe, against all



people in the worlde. Te second hound is Bellarmine our Romish Iesuite, whose expresse wordes are these; Istum iuramentum non tollit Episcoporum libertatem, 
                  
                     Bellarm. lib 1. de conc. cap. vlt.
                   
                  quae in conciliis necessaria est, iurant enim se fore obediētes summo Pontifici, quod intelligitur donec Pontifex est, & dum iubet ea quae secundum Deum & sacras canones iubere potest; sed non iuràt se nō dicturos quod sentiunt in concilio, vel se non deposituros ei
                        •
                      si haeretioū esse conuincant, This oth taketh not away the liberty of Bishopps, which in counsels is necessarie. For they sweare that they will be obedient to the Pope, which is to be vnderstood, so long as he is Pope, and while hee commaundeth those thinges, which he may commaund, agreeable to God and the holy cannons; but they sweare not, that they will not speake what they thinke in the counsell, or that they will Marke this doctrine of our Iesuite. not depose him, if they proue him to be an heretique. Out of these wordes of 1 the Iesuite, I note first, that he sawe right well, that this oth bringeth no small discredite, to the late Romish religion; in regarde whereof hee seeketh



many shiftes, to saue the Popes credite if it might bee. I note secondly, 2 that all clergie-men admitted to giue voyces in counsels, are sworne wholy to obey the Popes constitutions. 3 
                  I note thirdly, that the said persons are sworne to beleeue, that the Pope cannot erre in his iudiciall decrees of faith or manners, that no counsels are of force, without the Popes confirmation; that all counsels confirmed by him, are approued by the holy Ghost: that he can excommunicate and depose, all Emperours, Kinges, Queenes, and Bishops in the Christian worlde: that hee can deliuer by his free pardons, all soules out of purgatorie, and a thousand other thinges, of like homelie qualitie, for all such matters are contayned, in the Popes holie holie cannons, and consequently, in their most lamentable othe. I note fourthlye, that they 4 are sworne to admitte his decrees, who as they beleeue, may be an heretique. I note fiftlye, that they are sworne 5 to admit his iudgement in all matters of



faith, whome yet them selues maye iudge and depose for heresie. (Fie, fie vpon all filthy popery.) I note sixtly, that the popish fundamentall article, in appointing the Pope iudge ouer all controuersies; is quite ouerthrowne & turned vpside downe in this Bellarminus his explication. For when hee saieth, (while he commaundeth &c.) he granteth euery Bishop freedome, to examine and to iudge of the Popes cōstitutions. Which libertie, if they would constantly performe, all true christians would agree with them. For none that beleeue rightly Would to God this were obserued amongest the papistes. in God, will deny obedience to the Pope, When soeuer he preacheth or teacheth any thing, which is ag
                     •
                  eeable to God & holy cannons. But true christians finding his canons to be disholy & his decrees to be against God; thinke as Bellarmine heere teacheth them, that they may iudge his bad dealing, and are not bound to obey him. The thirde hound is Melchior Canus, whose 
                     Canus, lib. 5. de aut
                           •
                        or, conc. cap. 5. pag. 102. expresse wordes are these; Decreta quoe a legatis contra sedis apostolicae


                  
                  traditionem apprebentur, non habent Romanae ecclesiae authoritatem, nec aliter se habent, quam si a consilio sine legatis prodijssent. Sequitur, solidam auctoritatem, quam in confirmandis & fratribus & dogmatibus Petrus habet, in legatos transferre non potest. The decrees which the legates shall approue against the tradition of the Church of Rome, haue no authoritie from the Church of Rome, neither are they of any more force, then if they had proceeded from the counsell without consent of the Legates. The sound authority which Peter hath in confirming his brethren and decrees, he can not transferre vnto his Legates. Thus writeth Canus, that great piller of Popishe Doctrine. Out of whose wordes I note first, that decrees of counsels 1 be of no force, without consent of the Popes Legates. I note secondly, that 2 the decrees of counsels, euen when they haue the consent of the Legates, are for all that of no force, when the Legates condiscend to any thing against the Popes minde. I note thirdly, that the 3


                  
Pope cannot giue or translate his authoritie to the legates; and consequently, that the Pope doth no little abuse the whole world, when he calleth together Late Popish counsels are of no authoritie. all Byshoppes in the world. and yet will allowe nothinge that they do, vnlesse it be the same that he decreth in his chaire at home.
            
            
               
                  The 17 Hound.
               
               TEll me O precursor of Antichrist, if thou be not that Antichrist himselfe? doest not thou take vpon thee to depose Kings, and to dispossesse them of their Scepters and regalities? doest not thou chalenge authoritie to make Kings? doest not thou tell them, that they haue not their power from God, but through thee and thy meanes? I wote it is so, thy domicican Fryer Syluester reprooueth it, thy Iesuite Bellermine confirmeth it, and thy sworne Vassals, Campion, Ballard, and their complices, did put the same in execution. Syluester hath these expresse 
                     Syluester. de papa, par 2. wordes; nec obstat, quod potestas imperialis


                  
                  est adeo concessa secundum multa iura, quia est a deo mediante Papa; quia eam concedit non vt homo, sed vt vicarius dei. Nec sunt sic distinctae potestates, spiritualis scilicet & temporal
                        •
                     s, quin vna alteri subaliernetur ad instar solis & Lunae; nec sunt distinctae, quasi semper sint in diuersis, sed quia sunt ordinata ad distincta, scilicet spiritualia & temporalia; & in vno eodemque summo pontifice, est vtraque in summo. It skilleth not that many lawes affirme imperiall power to be of GOD. For it is but from God doth not make kings but by the Popes meanes. GOD, by the Popes meanes who granteth it not as man, but as the Vicar of GOD. Neither are the two powers, the spirituall and the temporall so disti
                     •
                  ct, but that they remaine subordinate the one to the other, after the resemblance of the Sunne & the Moone. Neither are they distinct as being alwaies in diuers subiectes, but as ordeyned to distinct thinges, spirituall and temporall. For they both are in one and the same Pope, euen in the highest degree. These wordes gentle Reader, neede no interpretation, they



are full of open blasphemie, as all that haue eyes may see. Bellerminus hath these wordes; Childericum deposuit Papa, & in eius locum Pipinum Caroli magni patrem 
                  
                     Bellerm, de tom, pontifice, lib, 5, cap, 8, &, lib, eod, cap, 7. 
                  regem creari iussit. The Pope deposed Childericus, and commaunded to place Pipinus father to Charles the great, in his throne. Againe in an other place, the same Bellermine hath these expresse wordes; at si isti ijdem principes conantur auertere populū a fide, omnium consensu possunt & debent priuari suo dominio. But if these princes goe about, to auerte the people from the faith (of the Church of Rome, for so he meaneth,) then by the consent of all, they may and must be dispossessed, of their scepters & Regalities. Againe, in the second Chapter he saith Bellerm, cap, eodem. thus; quod si Christiani elim non deposuerunt Neronem, & Dioclesianum, & Iulianum apostatam, ac valentem Arianū, & similes; id fuit, quia deerant vires temporales Christianis. If the Christians in time past, did not depose Nero, Diocletian, Iulian, Valens, and such like Emperours; the cause thereof was this, because



they wanted power and force, and were not strong enough for that attempt. Againe, a little after hee hath these wordes; at non tenentur Christiani, imò 
                  Bellermin. cap, eodem. 
                  nec debent cum euidenti periculo religionis, tolerare regem infidelem. But Christians are not bound to tolerate a King that is an infidell, (or not a papist, as the Ie suite vnderstandeth the worde, who will haue none to be christians: but papistes;) nay, they must not tollerate such a one, with the euident perill of religion. And our Ie suite hath this reason, to perswade vs thus to thinke; because forsooth saith he, de iure humano est, 
                  Bellerm. vbi super. 
                  quod hunc aut illum habeamus regem. It is by the law of man, that we haue this or that man to be our Kinge. This is the doctrine of our Iesuite, and consequently of the Pope himselfe. Out of which disloyall and most vnchristian assertion, I inferre. First, that the Pope and his 1 Iesuites would most willingly, depose our most gracious Soueraigne from her royall throne and regalitie, if they were of force and power so to doe. I inferre



secondly, that our Iesuite doth here approoue 2 peremptorily, many naughtie & abhominable factes; aswell in the sight Loe, the fruites of popery is flat & open treason of god, as in the eyes of the worlde. First, the diabolicall excommunication of Pope Pius. Secondly, the disloyall fact of Murton, who brought the same into this Realme. Thirdly, the publishing thereof by Felton. Fourthly, the practising of the curse or excommunication, by Sanders, Fitz-Morice, Ballard, and others their sedicious complices. Fiftly, the renewing of the printe, & the dispercing of the copies at Rome, by our Iesuites, Persons and Campion, which thing was done during mine own abode at Rome, as a very compendious preparatiue, for their more commodious entrance into this land. I inferre thirdly, that all subiectes are by this doctrine, styrred vp and encouraged to manifest rebellion, as also to haue no scruple of conscience in so doying, the reason hereof is euident, because if kinges receiue their authoritie from man, as this Iesuite auoucheth; then may kinges indeede



be displaced by man, as Romish parasites & irreligious Pollitikes, do beare the world in hand. But God himselfe telleth vs another tale, by his annointed kinge Salomon the wise; per me reges 
                  Pro, cap, 8 vers. 15. 
                  regnant, & legum conditores iusta decernūt. By me kinge doe reigne, & Princes decree iustice. By me princes rule, and all nobles, and iudges of the earth, And the apostle saith, non est potestas nisi a Deo. There is no power but of Rom. 13. 1. GOD.
            
            
               
                  The 18, Hound.
               
               TEll me O holy disholy father of Rome, how thou hast aspired to thy Lordes titles? wilt thou holde thy peace? must I needes speake for thee? doubtles the glossers of thy Canons, gaue thee all thy Lordle titles, themselues being blind bayards, and very beggerly fellowes. For by reason of their pouertie, they flattered and sought to please; and by reason of their ignorance, they writt many things, which they did not vnderstand. The great



papist Franciscus a Victoria, hath these expresse wordes; sed glossatores iuris hoc dominium dederunt papae, cum ipsi essent pauperes rebus & doctrina. But the glossers 
                     Victor, de potest: ecclae, relect. 1 sect, 6. pag, 39. of the popish Canon-law, gaue this dominion and these royall titles to the Pope, when them selues were blinde bayards and beggerly fellowes. O noble birth of Poperie.
            
            
               
                  The 19 Hounde.
               
               TEll me O three headed Cerberus, who blasphemously namest thy selfe the Vicer vniuersall of Christ Iesus; who was he that first gaue thee, the primacye Popish pri macie began with bloude & is mainteyned with fire. and the headship of the Church? was it not that blodie Phocas the parricide? did he not rauish many godly matrons, and murder the godly Emperour Maur
                        •
                     ius together with his wife & children? didst not thou shortly after obtaine of him, that the church of Rome might be called the head of all churches? I am sure it was so: for so write thine owne zealous Papistes and renowmed Cronographerss;


                  
                  Sigebertus, Plalmerius, Bergonensis, Polidorus, and others. Sigebertus hath these very wordes; post quē Bonifacius Romanae ecclesiae presidet. Hic obtinuit 
                  Sygebert, in cron. 
                  apud Phocam 
                        •
                     mperatorem, vt ecclesia Romanacaput esset omnium ecclesiarum, cumprius Constantinopolitana id vsurpare tentasset, After whome Boniface gouerned the Church of Rome. He obtained of the Emperour Phocas, that the Church of Rome should be the head of all Churches; and this he did, because the Church of Constantinople writt it selfe the head of all Churches. by whose testimonye it is most euident, as yee see, that the Church of Rome neuer sought for the primacie ouer other Churches, vntill the church of Constantinople proudly chalenged that name. For which proude appellation. S. Gregory surnamed the great, that holy and learned Byshoppe of Rome, stoutly withstoode Iohn the Byshoppe of Constantinople, tearming him Antichrist, and the 
                     Gregor. lib. cap. pe. 6 194. name Antichristian. And because his owne assertion plainly recited, is most forcible to perswade the reader, I will set



downe his owne expresse words, which are these; ego autem fidenter dico, quia quis quis se vniuersalem sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in elatione sua, Antichristum praecurrit. I speake boldly, that whosoeuer either calleth himselfe vniuersall Priest, or desireth so to be called, is for his intollerable pride, become the precursor of Antichrist. So then, the Church of Rome for the space of sixe hundred yeares after Christ, continued in equalitie and vniformitie with other Churches; euen vntill the yeare of our Lord, 607. at which time Bonifacius 
                  
                     A. D. 607 the third of that name, was proudly exalted by Phocas as is already saide.
            
            
               
                  The 20 Hounde.
               
               TEll me O Pope, thou that makes thy selfe the foundation and rocke, vpon which the Church is built; doe not thine owne deere darlings affirme boldly, that the church is neither built vpon Peter, nor vpon thee, but vpon the faith and confession that Peter made? I wote they doe so, and thou shalt heare their



expresse wordes: Dyonisius carthusianus 
                  
                     Dionisius Carthus. in 16. cap. Math.
                   hath these wordes: super hanc petram quam confessuses, hoc est, super meipsum lapidem angularem, montem altissimum, de quo ait apostolus, fundamentum aliud nemo potest ponere, praeter id quod positum est, quod est Christus Iesus. Vpon this rock which thou hast confessed, that is, vpon mine owne selfe the corner-stone, the 1. cor. 3. 11. high mountaine of which the Apostle speaketh: another foundation can no man lay, then that which is layed, which is Iesus Christ, vpon this rocke I say, will I builde my church, that is, the congregation of the faithfull. Thus writeth thine owne Fryer, and thy deare Doctor. Nicholaus de Lyra confirmeth this verdict in these expresse wordes: & ego dico tibi, pro te & pro socijs tuis, quin tis es Petrus. 1. confessor verae petrae quae est Christus. Et super hanc petram quam confessus es, id est, super Christum, aedificabo ecclesiam meam, & portae inferi, id est, persecutiones tyrannorum et tentationes spirituum malignorum non praeualebunt ad uersus eam, a vera fide subuertendo.


                  
                  ex quo patet, quod ecclesia non consistit 
                  
                     Iyran, in 16, cap. Mat.
                   
                  in hominibus ratione potestatis vel dignitatis ecclesiasticae velsecularis, quiamulti principes, & summi pontifices, & alij inferiores, inuenti sunt apostatasse a fide; propter quod ecclesia consistet in illis personis, in quibus est notitia verae, & confessio fidei, & veritatis.
               
               And I say to thee for thee and for thy fellowes, that thou art Peter that is to say, the confessor of the true rocke which is Christ. And vpon this rocke which thou hast confessed, that is, vpon Christ, will I builde my Church, and Hel-gates, that is, the persecutious and tentations of wicked spirits, shall not preuaile against The Church is built vpon Christ, & confiteth not of wicked Popes, but of those persons that confesse the faith of Christ. it in subuerting it from the true faith. Whereby it is euident, that the Church doth not consist in men, by reason of power or dignitie, either ecclesiasticall of secular; because manie both Princes and Popes, and others of the inferiour sort, are founde to haue reuolted and made an appostasie from the faith, for which cause, the Church, consisteth in those persons, in whom



there is true knowledge, and confession of the faith and veritie. Loe, by the verdict of Lyra a great learned papist, that which was spoken to Peter, was spoken to him, not as to himselfe alone, but to him for, and in the behalfe of his fellowes. And the rocke vpon which Christ promiseth to builde his Church, is not Peter, but his owne person, euen our Lord Iesus. But this point is handled atlarge, in my booke of Suruey. To which as also to my booke of Motiues, the papists would ere this, haue framed some answere, if they knewe in the worlde, how to deuise the same. But the truth must needes in time, haue the vpper hand.
            
            
               
                  The 21 Hounde.
               
               TEll mee O pope, thou that bearest the worlde in hand, that the particular Church of Rome can not erre? is not that Church which cannot erre, the whole congregation of the faithful? I wote it is so, and thine owne children



doe testifie the same against thee. Panormitanus a famous popish Archbishope, & thyrenowmed canonist, hath these expres wordes; ecclesia uniuersitatis errare non 
                  
                     Panormit. apud Silu. deside, s. 9. 
                  potest, scilicet in fide vel articulis fidei; & pro hac tantum christus in euangelio orauit ad patrem. The church vniuersall cannot erre, to witte, in the faith, or in the articles of our beleefe; and for this church onelye was Christs prayer when he prayed to his Father in the Gospell. Syluester hath these wordes: & sicintellige glossam dicentem, quodecclesia quae errare non potest, dicatur non papa, sed congregatio fidelium, 
                  
                     Siluefter, de eccles. 5, 4. 
                  quae silicet tenet fidem, quam Petrus cum aliis populis docuit. And thus must we vnderstande the glosse which saith, that the church which cannot erre, is not the Pope: But the congregation of the faithfull, that is, such as holde that faith firmely, which S. Peter with other (godlye) people taught. By which testimonie, euery one may see that hath eyes, that all the auncient writers, euen the papistes themselues, did euer



more both thinke and write, that the church which could not erre, was onely and solely the whole companie of the faithfull, which thinge our Iesuite Bellermine, as one that forgetteth himselfe, confesseth, vnawares in these expresse wordes: secunda opinio est, pontificem etiam vt pontifex, posse esse baereticum & 
                  
                     Peller, lib. 4 de rom, pont cap. 2. 
                  docere haresim. sequitur, hanc opinionem tuentur aliquot Parisienses, vt Gerson & Almain in libris de potestate ecclesiae, nec non Alphonsus de Castro, libro primo, cap. 2. contra haereses, et Adrianus sextus papa. The second opinion is, that the Pope euen as Pope, may be an heretique and teach heresie. Certaine doctors of Paris follow this opinion, as Gerson and Almaine, Alphonsus also & pope Adrian him selfe. Loe both papists & the Pope himselfe tell vs, that the Pope euen as Pope, may be an heretique & teach vs a false The Pope as pope may teach a false faith, and flat heresie. faith, & yet must we beleeue, that whatsoeuer he desireth or teacheth as Pope, is as true as the Gospell, or else be reputed heretiques for our refusall in that behalfe, and if it rest in the Popes power, be also burned at a stake.
            
            
               
               
                  The 22 Hound.
               
               TEil mee O monstrous Pope, doe not all thy priestes in all their absolutions, ascribe remission of sinnes & eternall life, to the merites of mans works? I wote they doe so, I know your practise right Polanchus de modo aud
                        •
                     en
                        ••
                     . onsess. well, and Polanchus our Iesuire hath published the same in print. These are his expresse worde; passio D. N. I. Christi, merita, B. V. Mariae, & omnium sanctorum, & quicquid bonifeceris, vel mali sustineris, sit tibi in remissionem peccatorum tuorum, in augmentum gratiae, & praemium vitae aeternae. The passion of our Lord Iesus Christ, the merites of the blessedvirgin Marie, & of al Saints, whatsoeuer good thou shalt do, & what punishment soeuer thou shalt suffer, be to thee for remission of thy sinnes, for increase of grace, & for reward of eternall life. Thus doth our Iesuite truely set downe, the vsuall practise of the Romish Church, & of all popishe Priestes dispersed whersoeuer. This practise is agreable to the hymne made of



                  Thomas Becket late Bishop of Canterbury. 
                  In hymne Tho Caut. These ar the words; Tu, per Thomae sanguinē quem pro te impendit, fac nos Christe scandere, quo Thomas ascendit. By the bloud O Christ, which Thomas for thee did spend make vs come thither, whither Thomas did ascend. Which doubtles, is blasphemy intollerable.
            
            
               
                  The 23. Hound.
               
               TEll me O Pope, if it like your holines; what malice, hatred, and dissention, hath bene among you Popes, and that in most weighty and important matters? euen in matters of faith, & fundamentall points of your religion? did not Pope Stephanus the sixt of that name, persecute the very name of Formosus? did he not disanull his giuing of orders? did he not degrade them, that had receiued orders by him? did not Pope Romanus, abrogate the whole Actes of Pope Stephanus? did not Sergius the third persecute the very 
                     Carranza, in summa concil. Fol. 354. & fo. 355 name of Formosus? did he not cause his head to be cut of, after his body was laid in the graue? Carranza and Platina doe



so write of thee & thy brethren, O holy father of Rome.
               
            
            
               
                  The 23. Hounde.
               
               COnfesse the truth O cruell Pope; disssemble no longer with the worlde. Doe not thy wicked lawes, charge all men, women, & children of mature age, to make auricular confession of all their 
                     Caietan. in summual. Pag. 590: thoughts, words, & deeds? doth not for all that, thine owne Cardinall Caietaeine tell thee, that it is a thing impossible to be done? did not Iohannes Geilerius a very graue and reuerend diuine, who was a long time the preaher at Argentoratum, cōplaine, oftentimes to his trusty friends that it was impossible for men to make their confessions, as the Popes lawe required? I wote he did so, and thine owne deare friend Beat us Rhenanus doth so affirme. I haue set downe his expresse words, in the 12. chapter of my Suruey. And heere I note by the way, that there were euer some good men amongst the The truth is & euer was confessed by some, euē among the papistes. papistes, as this Godly Geileirus, who disliked and reproued as farre as they durst; the absurdities and abhomination, of late Romish doctrine.
            
            
               
               
                  The 24 Hound
               
               TEll me O Pope, is not thy late Romish religion, like to a patched beggars cloake, with clouts vpon clouts? doe we not knowe, how euery clout was put one to an other, by whome and at what time? I wote we knowe it, and my selfe haue proued it; in my booke of Suruey. If any papist can deny it; let him answere that, that I haue written there.
            
            
               
                  The 25. Hound.
               
               TEll me O pope, doest not thou make hauocke of Christes gospell? doest not thou dissolue that matrimonye, which Christ himselfe pronounceth to be indissoluble? doest not thou dispense with persons lawfully married, that the husbande may take an other wife, and the wife an other husbande? I wote thou doest it, and thine owne deare Doctors Nauarrus and Couerrunias, doe testifiye the same against



thee Nauarre hath these expresse words, Diuiditur (matrimonium) ante consummationem per dispensationem Papaeinsta de can sa factam. Matrimony is dissolued before 
                     Na
                           •
                        arr. in. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . cap. 22. par. 21. consummation (or carnall copulation) by the Popes dispensation, if it be granted vpon iust cause. And the same Nauarre anoucheth boldy in the place already quoted, that Paulus the third, and Pius the fourth late Bishops of Rome, did giue such dispensations in his time to certaine married persons, at the same Nauarrs request; Couerrunias hath these words; Nec me latet Paulum quartum summum ecclesiae pontificem, an: 1558. hac vsum fuisse dispensatione 
                  
                     Couarrau. t
                           •
                        m 1 cap. 7 par 4. 
                        •
                     . 3. 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   
                  quibusdam ex causis, quas iustissimas esse idem summus ecclesiae praesul existimauit; idem paulo ante Iulius tertius fecerat in eodem matrimonio, cum ecclesiae vninersali presideret. Neither am I ignorāt, that Pope Iulius the fourth put this dispensation in practise, for certaine causes which the same Pope thought to be most iust. The Pope doth dissolue 
                        •••
                     trimony at his pleasure. 
                  Iulius the third likewise when he was Bishop of Rome, granted the same dispensation in the same matrimoniall contract See more herof, in my booke of Motiues.
            
            
               
               
                  The 26. Hounde.
               
               TEll me O Pope, dost not thou teach vs, that the Virgin Mary was conceiued without sinne hast not thou for that end appointed the feast or festiuall day of her conception? doth not thine own sweete Beholde flat Idolatry, inpopish solē
                     nity. 
                  Bernard forsake thee herein; doth not he sharply reproue the Carhedrall Church of Lyons, for the self same thing? doth not he terme that practise, the nouelty of presūption, the mother of temerity, the sister of superstition, & the daughter of leuitie? do not S. Austin, S. Ambrose, S. Chrisostome S. Bede, Eusebius, Remigius, Anselmus, Bonauentura, Aquinas, Hugo, and all the resti, sing the selfe same song? are anye with these idolatrous Pope) in this point of doctrine, saue onely thy late hatched Iesuites and Seminaries? few or none I The Pope and his Iesuites, are against all the fathers assure thee, as I haue proued in my Suruey, and in my booke of Motyues. To which bookes I earnestly wish, that some of thy vassals would once frame some answere
            
            
               
                  The 27. Hounde.
               
               TEll me O pope, thou that commaū
                  dest thy Church-seruice, to be said



and song in a vnknown language which the cōmon people, & the greater part of the priests cānot vnderstand; were not all prayers & other seruice of the Church, in the vulgar tongue as well in the primitiue Church, as many hundred years after Christ, I wote it was so, & I haue proued it in my booke of Suruey. But harken O Pope what thine own Lyra telleth thee he is a wel mouthed hound, take heed lest he bite thee, for these are his words; (Cae
                        •
                     erū si benedixerit.) 1. Tu sacerdos vel episcope (spiritu) 1. abs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      hoc quod populus intelligat (qui 
                  
                     Lyra. in 1 cor. 14. 
                  supplet locū idiotae quasi diceret, quid proficit populus simplex & nō intelligens q. d. nihil aut modicū, quia nescil se cōformare tibi qui estainister ecclesiae, respōdendo Amen. Propter quod in primitiua ecclesia, benedictiones & cetera cōmunia fiebātin vulgari. But if thou shalt blesse, that is, thou that art priest or Bishop; (in spirit,) that is, so as the people vnderstand not what thou saist, what pro fit shal the simple & igno
                     •••
                   people haue? truly eyther very little or none at all, because they cannot cōforme thēselues to thee, who are the minister of the Church, in saying Amen to thy giuing of thanks. For



which cause both praiers & other cōmon the church seruice ought to be in the vulgar tongue. things, were done in the vulgar tongue in the primitiue church. Out of which words I note first, that the church-seruice in old time, was made in the vulgar tong, which  all the people vnderstood. I note secōdly  that the church seruice ought to be in the vulgar tongue, according to S. Pauls doctrine. I note thirdly, that the people receiue  no profit by the church seruice, whē it is made in a tongue, which they do not  vnderstād. I note fourthly, that the people ought to pray together with the minister & to answer Amē to this blessings. I note fiftly, that the people in the Romish  church, cānot this day performe that which their own Lyra a learned man indeed, auoucheth very constantly to be the doctrine  of S. Paul. I note sixtly that the late Romish religion is farre different & nothing like, to the olde catholike religion and practise of the primitiue Church.
            
            
               The supplement, for the solace of the vvell affected Reader.
               FIrst, the Church-seruice was made in  the vulgar tongue, in the old ancient, and primitiue Church. Secondly popish 


                  
primacy began, in the yeare, 607. by the tyranny of the Emperour Phocas, at the earnestsuit of Boniface the bishop of Rome & third of that name. Thirdly, the Popes pardons were neuer heard of, vntill the yeare 1300. Fourthtly, the mariage of priests was not prohibited, till the yeare 385. at which time Syritius then Bishop of Rome, made a wicked lawe in that behalfe. Fiftly, popish purgatory tooke no roote in the Romish Church, till the yeare 250. sixtly, popish pilgrimage began in the yeare, 420. seuenthly, the merit of works, de condigno, was disputable about the yeare, 1081. eightly, the inuocation of saints & adoratiō, was not known or hard of, till the yeare, 370. ninthly, the cōmunion vnder both kinds was neuer thought vnlawfull, till the yeare, 1414. tenthly, the Popes Buls were not authenticall, till the yeare 772. eleuenthly, auricular confessiō was not established, till the yeare, 1215. twelftly, generall coūsels were euer summoned by the Emperours. These & many other importāt matters, are proued at large in my book of Suruey; & here noted briefly for the helpe of the simple vulgar sort.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
         
      
   