
      
         
            
            
            Chruſo-thriambos.
            The Triumphes of GOLDE.
            At the Inauguration of Sir IAMES PEMBERTON, Knight, in the Dignity of Lord Maior of London: On Tueſday, the 29. of October. 1611.
            
               Performed in the harty loue, and at the charges of the Right Worſhipfull, Worthy, and Ancient Company of Golde-Smithes.
            
               Deuiſed and written by A. M. Cittizen and Draper of London.
            
            Imprinted by William Iaggard, Printer to the Honourable Citty of London. 1611.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Chruſo-thriambos.
            
               The Triumphs of Golde.
               
                  THE ancient Romaines, who were the firſt Creators of Conſuls and Senators for publike rule and honorable gonernment, vſed yearelie triumphall ſhowes and deuiſes, to grace their ſeuerall Inauguration. From which famous and commendable Cuſtome, London (as well as other Magnificent Citties of the World) hath (from time to time) both deuiſed and continued the like loue and carefull reſpect, at the Creation of her worthy Conſuls and Magiſtrates: As inſtant occaſion may ſerue to teſtifie, for the honorable enſtaulment of Sir Iames Pemberton, knight and Alderman, in the high and eminent office of Londons Maioralty. For the better effecting whereof, the Ancient, Worthy, and Right Worſhipfull Company of Gold-Smithes (ſparing no coſt; that might expreſſe their loue to ſo Honorable a Brother) added to his day of Triumphe, diuers deuiſes.
               Firſt then, concerning the ſeruices performed on the Water, when he tooke Bardge, with all the

other Companies towards Weſtminſter; ſuppoſicion muſt needes giue ſome gracefull help to inuention; and bee as ready in apprehenſion, as the other in action. Imagine then, that from the rich and Golden Indian Mines, ſundry Ships, Frigots, and Gallies, are returned home; in one of which, Ch
                        •
                     oriſon the Golden King, with Tumanama his peereleſſe Queene, are (at their owne entreatie) brought into England, with no meane quantity of Indian Gold, to behold the Countries beauty, and the immediate day of ſollemne tryumph. Diuers Sea-fights and skirmiſhes 
                     •
                  re actiuely performed, both in the paſſage on to Weſtminſter, and backe againe, each Gallant hauing his Indian Page attending on him, laden with Ingots of Golde and Silüer, and thoſe Inſtruments that delued them out of the earth. In which manner they march along by Land likewiſe, the Indian King and his Queene beeing mounted on two Golden Leopardes, that draw a goodly triumphal Chariot.
               No ſooner landeth the Lord Maior at Baynards Caſtle, but there he is ſaluted by Leofstane a Gold-Smith, the firſt Prouoſt that bare authoritie in London, who likewiſe is guarded by ten Halberdiers, to expreſſe the Martiall gouernment then in vſe. His ſpeech being ended, hee conducteth the Lord Maior and his worthy train on, till he comes to an ancient Toombe or Monument, ſtanding in apt place appointed for it: and by it is ordered the Triumphall Chariot, to performe the ſeruices thereto appointed. In the Chariot we ſuppoſe the ſhapes of king Richard the firſt, ſirnamed Cordelion,
                  
and King Iohn his Brother, that ſucceeded him in the Kingdome, and each hath his ſeuerall attending Vertue. Richard was the firſt that gaue London the dignity of a Lord Maior, reducing it from the rule of Portgreues, Prouoſts, and Bay liffes, to that more high and honourable Title: yet with this reſtriction, that the election of the Maior conſiſted then in the King himſelfe, as it did all King Richards life time, and ſo continued til the fifteenth yeare of King Iohn, who then (moſt graciouſly) gaue the Cittizens of London abſolute power, to elect a Lord Mayor amongſt themſelues, in which worthy condition it hath euer ſince continued. The ſeruices at the Tombe performed, doth ſufficiently ſpeake it ſelfe in more meete place appointed; and therefore needeth heere no further relation.
            
            
               The Orferie, or Pageant.
               ON a Quadrangle frame, of apt conſtructure, and anſwerable ſtrength, we erect a Rocke or Mount of Golde, in ſuch true proportion, as Art can beſt preſent it with clifts, crannies, and paſſable places, ſuch as may beſt inluſtrate the inuention, and expreſſe the perſons therein ſeated, according to their ſeuerall Carracter and Office. The Pioners, Miners, and Deluers, doe firſt vſe their endeuour and labour, to come by the Oare of gold and Siluer hidden in the Rock; which being (from them) conuaied to the induſtrious Finer, it is by him framed into Ingots of diuers formes, according

as further benefit is to be made of it, and the ſame applyed to moſt neceſſary vſes, as likewiſe is apparantly diſcouered, in the Mint-Maiſter, Coyners, Gold Smithes, Ieweller, Lapidarie, Pearle-Driller, Plate-Seller, and ſuch like, all liuely acting their ſundry profeſſions. To diſtinguiſh thoſe precious Mettals of Gold and Siluer, from baſe adulterating or corruption, wee ſhow there alſo an ingenious Say-Maiſter, with his Furnaces, Glaſſes of parting each Mettall from other, his Table, Ballance, and Weightes, euen to the very ſmalleſt quantitie of true valuation, in Ingots, Iewelles, Plate or Monies, for the more honour of the Prince and Countrey, when his Coynes are kept from imbaſing and abuſing.
               On the top or height of our Orferie, becauſe the Societies creaſt or ſupremeſt Embleme, may hold ſome correſpondency with our inuention (their Motto or word being, Iuſtitia Virtutum Regina.) As Queene of all other Vertues, we figure Chthoon, or Veſta (Mother to Saturn, and called likewiſe Terra, the breeding and teeming Mother of al Golde, Siluer, Mineral, and other Mettals, and ſeate her in the cheefeſt Soueraignetie. On her right hand ſits Chruſas, Gold, her eldeſt Daughter, and Argurion, Siluer; the youngeſt, richlie ſuted, according to their ſeueral Natures and qualities. After a ſuppoſed long and tedious iourney, which al her daughters, Gold and Siluer may ſeeme to haue had, thorough their Mothers large limits and Rocky kingdome, leauing in euery Vaine, Sinnew, & Artery, the rich and valuable vertue of their ſplendour:

they are returned againe, and ſeated by her, to fulfill this ſollemne day of Triumph, prepared for her eldeſt Daughter, Golde. Now, that it might bee publikely diſcerned, how vnpartiall an Empreſſe ſhe is, and vncorruptible in her rich bounty to the World; thus ſhe reueales it. That greedy and neuer ſatisfied Lydian King, who deſired, that whatſoeuer he toucht might turne to Golde, finding his own couetouſneſſe to be his ruine, & he (imaginarily) Metamorphozed into a Stone: Our Chthoon, finding this Lydian Stone fit for her vſe, tearmed it Lithos; and becauſe (in his life time) the King was ſo immeaſurably affected to Golde, ſhee impoſed this vertue on the Stone, that it ſhould (for euer after) be the Touch-Stone and Trier of both Gold and Siluer, to warne other Worldlings of the like auaritious folly. By this Stone ſhee tries the vertue of her Ingots, Iewels, Monies, &c. and poyzing them afterward in her euen-handed-Ballance, that euery Mettall might be iuſt and perfect: ſhee not onely gaue that Stone to her golden Sonnes, the Gold-Smiths, but her Daughter, Goldes figure likewiſe, appointing her to ſit on their Armories creaſt, with the Touch-Stone in the one hand, and Ballance in the other, to repreſent her owne ſacred perſon in Iuſtice, and to verify their word; Iuſtitia Virtutum Regina.
               
               Now, leaſt the inſatiable World (which neuer is ſurficed with guifts of greateſt eſteeme) ſhould rob her againe of her two precious Daughters, Chruſos and Argurion: ſhe linckes them faſt to her Chaire of State with a Chaine of Gold, faſtned in

the middeſt with a Golden Ouch or Buckle, the tongue where of hath ſo intricate a vertue, as none but her ſelfe is able to vntye it. On them alſo doe attend two beautifull Ladies, Philoponia and Mnaemae, Antiquity and Memory, who make diſcouery of Empetria, or graue Experience in the Golde-Smiths auncient profeſſion, by the imagiued Carracter of learned Dunſtane, who beeing Byſhop of Worcester, London, and Arch-Byſhop of Canterbury, had no little delight in the Arte of Cold-Smithery, and ſhewes himſelfe now (as then) acting that profeſſion.
               The Emblems going before this Orfery, a Mareman, and Mare-Maid (each quartered with a golden Vnicorne) do figure the long continued loue and amity, which (time out of minde) hath helde betweene the Gold-Smiths and Fiſh-Mongers, as Time (in his ſpeech for that purpoſe) more at large declareth.
            
            
               
                  Leofstane his firſt ſpeech at Baynards Caſtle, after the Lord Maior is Landed.
               
                  IF it ſeeme ſtrange vnto yon (Honourable and woorthy Lorde) that in this manner I preſume to ſaluce yee; the Iuſtice of the preſent cauſe, and the Suffrages due to ſuch daies of Triumph. ſhall inſtantly veild you ample ſatisfaction. Firſt for my ſelfe, I was ſometime as you are now, Lieutenant

or Gouernour of this famous Citty, albeit not in ſo milde a forme or temper; in regarde that thoſe dayes of diſturbance and rough combuſtion (after foure ſeuerall Conqueſts of the whole Land, and vnſetled aſſurance in the very laſt) required a ſtearner ſtraine of awfull rule, then now theſe ſweeter ſinging times are able to endure. Portgreues, Prouoſtes, and Bayliffes, were Londons firſt M
                     •
                  giſtrates, and (of Prouoſts) I the firſt, beeing named Leofstane, and a Golde Smith by my pro
                     •
                  eſſion, as the powerfull commaund that raiſed me from my Graue at Bermondſey, enſtructes mee that you are, and thought it fit, that the firſt honoured Brother of our auncient Fraternity, ſhould attend this day of your ſolemne Inauguration, hauing a Brother Sheriffe alſo of the ſame Society. For theſe my followers that attend mee now, as in my time of authority they did: hoſtile ſtill, to Londons enimies or rude diſturbers, but peacefull to all her friendly louers. Then honorable Lord, and Brother Gold-Smith, ſeeing Time priuately tels me, that he hath further employment for mee in this your day of Triumph, as beſt occaſion ſhal giue way thereto: heere endes my firſt ſalutations to your ſelfe, and theſe graue Senators your worthy brethren, who (in my time) were ſtyled by the Name of Domeſmen, Elder-men, or Iudges of the Kings Courts, & were then aſſiſtant to me, in care, counſel, and fatherly prouidence, for this Citties good, as theſe reuerend men haue bin to others; and now will be the like to you. And ſo I leaue ye to your further progreſsion.
            
            
               
               The ſpeeches at the Toombe.
               
                  Time.
                  
                     Leofſtane, I charge thee ſtay.
               
               
                  Leofſtane.
                  What art thou, that dar'ſt bar me of my way?
               
               
                  Time.
                  He that ſuruaies what euer deedes are done,
                  Abridges, or giues ſcope, as likes me beſt;
                  Recalling to the preſent ſight of Sunne
                  Actions, that (as forgot) haue lien at reſt,
                  And now, out of thy long ſince buried Cheſt
                  At Bermondſey, raiſd thee to ſee this day:
                  
                     Leofstane; tis he, that dares compell thy ſtay.
               
               
                  Leofſtane.
                  See in how ſhort a while a quiet Soule,
                  Hid from this world fiue hundred years and more,
                  May be forgetfull of great Times controule,
                  By ſuch gay ſights as nere I ſaw before.
                  My ſelfe yer while could tell this worthy Lord,
                  Time had reuiu'd me, to attend this day:
                  Pardon me then, that I durſt breath a word
                  In conteſtation, where all ought obey.
                  needs muſt theſe gaudier daies yeild greater crime,
                  When long gran'd Ghoſts dare thus contend with Time.
                  
               
               
                  Time.
                  Enough, no more; Now honourable Lord,
                  For whoſe inſtalment in this Dignity,
                  Thy louing Bretheren liberallie affoord,
                  Out of their loues their glad harts ſimpathie,
                  And what may elſe thy triumph dignifie:
                  
                     
As thus I turne my Glaſſe to Times of old,
                  So tune thine eares to what muſt now be told.
                  In this triumphall Chariot thus attending,
                  Sit the ſuppoſed ſhapes of two great Kings,
                  That to this Citty gaue no ſmall befriending,
                  Aduancing it from meane to mightier things,
                  From whence thy very inſtant honor ſprings:
                  For where before, ſtearne, Martial-Regiment
                  Bare ſole command, grew this graue gouernment.
                  
                     Richard the firſt, Sur-named Lyon-heart,
                  
                  For his vndaunted courage and great minde,
                  When in Gods cauſe he plaid a Champions part,
                  In faire Iudea, where the Pagane blinde
                  In Gods houſe would his mawmetry haue ſhrinde
                  And full defac'd Star-bright Hieruſalem:
                  
                  This royall Richard foild his forces then.
                  But ere he vndertooke that holy war,
                  This Citty (his cheefe Chamber) did he grace
                  With Dignity, beyond the former far,
                  For Portgreues, Prouoſts, Bayliffs held beſt place,
                  Such, and no other (then) was Londons caſe.
                  Till he bethought him of a Lord-Maiors name:
                  And ſo the Title of Lord Maior firſt came.
                  And ſhall I tell ye what that firſt Lord was? Ex Ioh Ston
                  
                  A Gold-Smith, of thine owne profeſſion,
                  
                     Henrte Fitz-Alwine, Fitz-Leofſtane, of honourable race,
                  Iudicious, learned, and of ſuch diſcretion,
                  That euen by Richards owne direction,
                  All his whole time, he held the State ſtill on;
                  And ſo, vntill the fifteenth of King Iohn.
                  
                  Which did exceed full foure and twenty yeares,
                  That this graue Gold-Smith held authority
                  
                     
Of the Lord Maior, as by Records appeares,
                  Nineteene whole yeares this ſtile of dignity
                  Came from the King: but then moſt graciouſly
                  
                     Iohn gaue the Cittizens free leaue t'elect
                  Yearely their Maior, whom beſt they ſhould reſpect.
                  Fiue yeares (each after other) til they choſe
                  That graue Fitz-Alwine to his dying day,
                  When he was called hence to bleſt repoſe.
                  Then iuſtly may we be thus bold to ſay,
                  Foure hundred years & three, the L. Maiors ſway
                  Hath held in London, vnder their command,
                  Who ſtil aſsignd that office to their hand.
                  How many Gold-Smiths haue enioyed the place,
                  Were needleſſe to recount. Yet heere ſleepes one,
                  Whom in this 
                        ••
                     ging and important caſe,
                  (He being Gold Smith too, and long ſince gone
                  Out of this world, old Nicholas Faringdon,
                  
                  Foure times Lord Maior) I may not wel omit,
                  Becauſe I thinke him for thi triumph fit.
                  Theſe gates he built, this ward of him took name, A fat ſtalled Oxe, 24 s. A f
                           •
                        t Mutton, 20 p
                           •
                        nce. A fat Goo
                           •
                        e, 2 d, ob, A fat Capon, 2 pence A fat Hen a peny Two Chick
                           •
                        ns▪ a peny Three pigeons a peny. 24 Egges a peny. A buſhell of Whea
                           •
                        e, ten pence ſold for ten ſhillings before.
                  
                  And three and fifty yeares he did ſuruine
                  After his firſt being Maior What plentie came
                  To greete his daies, with former times did ſtriue,
                  And nere the like as when hee was aliue:
                  Ariſe, ariſe I ſay, good Faringdon,
                  
                  For in this triumph thou muſt needs make one.
               
            
            
               Time ſtriketh on the Tombe with his Siluer wand, and then Faringdon ariſeth.
               
                  Faringdon.
                  AStoniſhment and frightful wonder,
                  Shakes and ſplits my ſoule in ſunder.
                  
                     
Cannot graues containe their dead,
                  Where long they haue lien buried,
                  But to Triumphs, ſports, and ſhowes
                  They muſt be raiſd? Alacke, God knowes
                  They count their quiet ſlumber hleſt,
                  Free from diſturbance, and vnreſt.
               
               
                  Time
                  I know it well good man. Yet looke about,
                  And recollect thy ſpirits free from feare,
                  Note what thou ſeeſt.
               
               
                  Faringdon.
                  How? Whence? or where
                  May I ſuppoſe my ſelfe? Well I wot,
                  (If Faringdon miſtake it not)
                  That ancient famous Cathedrall,
                  Hight the Church of bleſſed Paul.
                  
                  And that this Ward well witneſſe can,
                  Once thereof I was Alderman,
                  And gaue it mine owne proper name.
                  I built theſe gates, the verie ſame.
                  But when I note this goodly traine,
                  (Yelad in Scarlet) it ſhould ſayen
                  (And ſoothly too) that theſe are they
                  Who watch for London night and day,
                  Graue Magiſtrates; of which faire band,
                  When ſecond Edward ſwayd this land,
                  Foure ſeuerall times the chiefe was I,
                  And Lord of Londons Maioralty.
                  As by the bearing of that ſword,
                  It ſeemes that ye are Londons Lord:
                  To whom becomes me loute full lowe,
                  Old dutie yet (methinkes) I know.
                  
                     
Turne now thy Glaſſe to inſtant day,
                  And let old Faringdon thee pray:
                  Good Time, reſolue him, what is he,
                  Grac'd with this day of Dignitie?
               
               
                  Time.
                  A Brother of the Gold-Smiths Company,
                  Whoſe vertues, worth, and ſpeciall loue of all,
                  Hath raiſd vnto this high authority.
                  Moreouer note, how fit his lot doth fall,
                  That time ſhould likewiſe at this inſtant call,
                  A Sheriffe of the ſame Society:
                  To beare a part in this Solemnity.
                  See how the Bretheren of that worthy band,
                  Abound in loue and liberality;
                  To grace this Iouiall day; On tip-toe ſtand
                  Their iocond Spirits: Ioying mutually,
                  In Maior and Sheriffe of their Company.
                  How can thy Ghoſt then, but reioyce to ſee:
                  This honour of thine owne Society?
               
               
                  Faringdon.
                  Ioy and gladſome iouiſſance,
                  Doth old Faringdon in-trance,
                  To heare the tale that Time hath told,
                  Since thoſe reuerend daies of old,
                  Vnto this great Solemnity,
                  For Brethren of my Company.
                  Glad and golden be your daies,
                  Liue in Prince and peoples praiſe:
                  Honour London with your care,
                  Study ſtill for her welfare:
                  And as Gold-Smiths both you are,
                  Such good and golden deeds prepare,
                  
                     
That may renowne our Myſtery,
                  To times of vtmoſt memory.
                  My minute cals, and Ghoſts muſt go.
                  Yet loath I am to leaue ye ſo.
                  For I could well ſpend out this day,
                  And doe what ſeruice elſe I may;
                  Were Time but pleaſde that I might ſtay.
               
               
                  Leofſtane.
                  
                     Time, that in this daies honour raiſde vs both,
                  Meanes not (I truſt) ſo ſoone to ſunder vs:
                  To ſee that ſeparation, I am loath,
                  Be then to both ſo kind and gracious;
                  That we may waite vpon this worthy man:
                  And do him yet what ſeruice elſe we can.
               
               
                  Time.
                  You haue your owne deſires. Goe Faringdon,
                  
                  There in that Chariot is thy place preparde:
                  Heere, I (as Coach-man) meane to guide yee on,
                  So long as well our reſpit may be ſparde.
                  On then, away, for we haue held ye long:
                  And done (I doubt) your worthy Gueſts great wrong.
               
            
            
               Leofstans ſpeech at S. Lawrance Lane.
               HEere, my Lord, my charge was limited, to deſcribe this rich and beautious Monument vnto yee, with all relations thereto appertaining. But Time hath told me, that Gueſts of great State and Honour are come to feaſt with you, and the leaſt delay now, may be both offenſiue and troubleſom; therefore it is referred to more apt conueniency, when wee (with much better leyſure) may attend yee.
               
                  
                  Leofſlane.
                  THis Orferie, ſo ſtyled by the auncient Epithite of your Companies profeſſion, or Gold-Smithery, doth ſpeake it ſelfe vnto your honor in this manner. Heere doe the Miners and Pioners delue into the Earths entrailes, to gaine the Oare, both of Gold and Siluer; and hauing attained thereunto in plentifull meaſure, the ingenious Fyner purgeth him from his firſt Nature, and ſhapes him into to Ingots of variable forme, according as his Art beſt guids and enſtructs him. From him, theſe precious Mettals deſcend to diuers other dexterious Artezans; as the Mint-Maiſter, his Coyners, and diuers others, who make them to ſerue in publike paſſage for generall benefit, both in Coyne, Plate, and Iewels, as occaſion beſt diſcouereth the iuſt neceſſitie. Beeing brought into theſe variant ſubſtances, to preſerue thoſe pure refined bodies from baſe adulterating, the Eſsay-Maiſter or abſolute Tryer of eythers vertue, makes proofe of them in his Furnaces, and of their true worth or value. So are they commended to Soueraigne Iustice, attended by her gracious Daughters, Golde and Siluer, who bountifully hurle abroad their Mothers treaſures, after ſhe hath (yet once againe) tried them, by the Touch of vndeceiueable perfection. The reſt, that do ſufficiently ſpeake themſelues in their diſtinguiſhed places, as the Ieweller, Lapidarie, Pearle-Driller, Golde-Smith, and ſuch like, your

eye of heedefull obſeruation may ſpare their further relating. Onely I may not omit theſe two vertuous Ladies, Antiquity and Memory, who, preſent (in apt place) Graue Iudgement or Experience in the Golde-Smiths ancient facultie, by the ſuppoſed ſhape of venerable Dunſtane, a man, ſometime very practique, & ſo well skild in Gold-Smithery, as (notwithſtanding his more Diuine profeſſion) being Biſhop of Worceſter, London, and laſtly Arch-Biſhop of Canterbury, delighted therein to his vtmoſt date of life.
               
               
                  Time.
                  So much for that; There Leofſtane make a pauſe,
                  Till Time haue certified this honoured Lord
                  Concerning theſe faire Emblemes, And the cauſe
                  Of their combining in this kind accord.
                  The Argument doth inſtantly affoord,
                  The ancient loue and cordiall amity
                  Between the Fiſhmongers & Gold-Smiths Company.
                  At Feaſts and ſolemne meetings, on each ſide,
                  A Fiſh-Monger and Gold-Smith, hand in hand
                  Haue long time gone, and nothing could deuide
                  The rare continuance of that louing band:
                  Which (doubtleſſe) to the end of time will ſtand.
                  And therefore, theſe Impreſes are thus borne:
                  The ones Fiſh, with the others Vnicorne.
                  
                  Yet let no cenſure ſtray ſo far at large,
                  To thinke the reaſon of that vnity
                  Makes Fiſh-Mongers ſupport the Gold-Smithes charge,
                  And their expences ſhared equally:
                  No, ti's the Gold-Smiths ſole Society.
                  
                  
                  That in this Triumph beares the Purſſe for all:
                  As theirs the like, when like their lot doth fall.
                  Their loues (herein) may not be thought the leſſe,
                  But rather virtuall, and much ſtronger knit,
                  That each to other may the ſame expreſſe,
                  When honour (in each Science) makes men fit
                  On ſuch a Seat of Dignity to fit.
                  Then Peters Keies, with Dauids Cup of Golde:
                  May freely march together, vncontroulde.
               
               
                  Faringdon.
                  Now, as cuſtome wils it ſo,
                  On to Paules Church muſt ye goe,
                  To bleſſe God for this bounteous day.
                  Till you returne, heere will we ſtay,
                  And vſher then a gladſome guiding,
                  Home to the place of your abiding.
                  For ſuch is your kind Bretherens will:
                  And Time hath tyed vs therevntill.
               
            
            
               At night at my Lords Gate.
               
                  Leofſtane.
                  THus (honoured Lord) haue wee dutiouſly attended ye, till Time appointeth our departing, who hath tutourd Leofſtanes tongue how to take his leaue, with ſome remarkeable obſeruations, not altogether vnfitting your attention. Firſt, the day of your Election, falling out in ſuch ſtrange manner as it did, exceeded the memory of Man to ſpeake the like. And yet, notwithſtanding, ſo great a Snow, Sleete, and rough winde; at the very inſtant of your choyce, the Sunne did as readily 

thruſt foorth his Golden beames, to guilde the inſtant of your Inauguration, as harts and hands did cheerefully applaud it with free and full confirmation. Next, three Names, all of equall ſillables and ſound, to happen in the immediate choice; is a matter deſeruing regard, and (from the Maioralties firſt beginning) neuer was the like. Pemberton, Swynnerton and Middleton, Names of three moſt worthy Gentlemen, but of much greater worth in ſence and ſignificancie, as your own (my Lord, for breuitie) may yeilde an inſtance. Pemberton deriues it ſelfe from the auncient Brittiſh, Saxon, and eldeſt Engliſh, each Sillable ſuted with his apt meaning. Pem, implyeth the head, cheefe or moſt eminent part of any thing; Bert, beareth the Charracter of bright ſhining and radiant ſplendour; and Tun, hath continued the long knowne Word for any Towne or Citty, as moſt Shires in England (to this day) dooth deliuer the expreſſion of their Townes; As London, ſometime tearmed Ludstun, or Luds-Towne, may ſerue as an example. A bright head of this famous Citty, interpreting it ſelfe in the Name of Pemberton, and he being enſtaulled in the gouernment, to bee her bright-ſhining Head vnder his Soueraigne, Leofſtanes deſire is;
                  Since Pemberton doth beare ſo bright a Name,
                  And that from gold & Goldſmiths grew his fame,
                  His deedes may prooue to be like burniſht Golde:
                  By no dim darkneſſe any way controulde.
               
               
                  
                  Time.
                  Well haſt thou wiſht, therein Time ioynes with thee,
                  And tels this Lord, that ſuch a goodly name,
                  Requires bright actions, from pollution free,
                  In word and deede to be alike, the ſame,
                  For then life ſtandeth on her faireſt frame.
                  And when the Head in ſplendour ſeems deuine,
                  The people learne (by his cleare light) to ſhine.
                  Contrariwise, obſcure and miſty deedes,
                  Do giue a harſh and hatefull preſident:
                  And of faire flowers begetteth ſtinking Weedes.
                  For ill example, harmes the innocent;
                  And makes him (in bad life) as violent.
                  Be to this Citty then, ſo bright an Head,
                  That all may ſay, it nere more flouriſhed.
                  Conſider likewiſe, Iames thy gracious King,
                  Sets Iames (his Subiect) heere his Deputy.
                  When Maiesſte doth meaner perſons bring
                  To repreſent himſelfe in Soueraignty,
                  I'ſt not an high and great authority?
                  Let it be ſaid, for this high fauour done:
                  King Iames hath found, a iuſt Iames Pemberton.
                  
                  Let me not now they Bretherens loue omit,
                  So worthily (this day) to thee declarde,
                  If with like loue thou kindly welcome it,
                  Their hope is to the higheſt pitch preferde,
                  For thus they wiſh, as Time himſelfe hath heard:
                  That Pemberton, and Smithes, may both be,
                  An endleſſe honour to their Company.
               
               
                  
                  Faringdon.
                  So wiſh I too, with all my hart,
                  And ſeeing now we needs muſt part,
                  From Faringdon one farewell take,
                  Who giues it for the Gold-Smiths ſake.
                  You are Lieutenant to your King,
                  And tis a very worthy thing,
                  To minde Gods blesſing, and his grace,
                  That brought yee to ſo high a place.
                  Oh ſoyle it not with any blame,
                  That, may impeach it, or your name.
                  For they haue told ye well before,
                  That whereof I need ſpeake no more:
                  You are a Gold-Smith, Golden be
                  Your daily deedes of Charitie.
                  Golden your hearing poore mens caſes,
                  Free from partiall bribes embraces.
                  And let no rich or mighty man
                  Iniure the poore, if helpe you can.
                  The World well wots, your former care
                  Forbids ye now to pinch or ſpare,
                  But to be liberall, francke, and free,
                  And keepe good Hoſpitality,
                  Such as beſeemes a Maioraltie,
                  Yet far from prodigality.
                  To be too lauiſh, is like crime
                  As being too frugall in this time.
                  I ſay no more, but God defend ye,
                  Many daies of comfort ſend ye,
                  To whom (with all theſe) I commend ye.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   