
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  IAmes, by the prouidence of God, Biſhop of Bath & Wels. To all and ſingular
               
Arch-deacons, Officials, Parſons, Vicars, Curates, Church-Wardens, Side-men, & al
other Eccleſiaſticall Officers, And to all Teachers whatſoeuer within our ſaid Dioceſſe,
greeeting. Where is his Maieſty, for the ſeaſoning of all youth in their due Alleageance,
hath cauſed a Booke to bee Compiled and Imprinted, containing the ſum
of the Oath of Alleageance, Intituled GOD and the KING: Or a Dialogue, ſhewing
that our Soueraigne Lord King IAMES being immediate vnder GOD, within his Dominions,
doth rightfully clayme what-ſoeuer is required by the Oath of Alleageance. And to the end that the
ſame may bee duely read and exerciſed within his ſaid Kingdome, hath by his Highneſſe Letters
Patents, bearing date on the thirteenth day of March laſt paſt, commanded all Arch-biſhops, Biſhops,
Arch-deacons, Officials, and all other Eccleſiaſticall Officers and Miniſters whatſoeuer:
That by publique Act, Edict, Order, or ſuch other waies and meanes as they ſhall thinke fit, They
make knowne his Maieſties royall pleaſure to be: And further to take order that euery Teacher, aſwell
men as women, teaching eyther in the Engliſh or Latine tongues, within their ſeuerall Dioceſſe
within the ſaid Kingdome, eyther publikely or priuately, ſhall take care that euery Scholler (according
to their capacity) ſhall and may be taught the ſaide Booke eyther in Engliſh or Latine. And
that all ſuch Teachers whatſoeuer, as ſhall refuſe ſo to doe, ſhall by the Biſhop of the Dioceſſe where
the ſaid Teacher teacheth, be diſabled and prohibited from teaching of Schollers, vntill ſuch time as
they ſhall conforme themſelues thereunto: And further ſhall incurre his Highneſſe diſpleaſure, beſides
ſuch other puniſhment, as by the Lawes of this Realme may be inflicted vpon them, for their ſaid contempt
of his Highneſſe royall commandement.
            And further by his Highnes ſaid Letters Patents, hath commanded all and euery Arch-biſhops,
Biſhops, Maiors, Bayliffes, Shiriffes, Iuſtices of Peace, Officials, Parſons, Vicars, Curates,
Conſtables, and all other the Magiſtrates, Officers and Miniſters, and all other his Subiects of his
ſaid Kingdome: That they and euery of them, at all times within their ſeuerall Iuriſdictions and
places, doe further the vniuerſall reading and exerciſe of the ſaid Booke. And that euery Parſon, Vicar,
and Curate, reſpectiuely within their ſaide Pariſhes, doe take care, and ſee that euery Childe
(taught publikely or priuately) be taught the ſame eyther in the Latine or Engliſh tongue, as they may
beſt ſort with the Capacitie of ſuch Children. Aud that they and euery of them, be ayding, helping & aſſiſting,
in the due performance and execution hereof, with effect, as they tender his Maieſties royall pleaſure
and commandement herein.
            Theſe are therefore in his Maieſties name, ſtraightly to require all Maſters of Families, and euery
Teacher, or Teachers, men or women, priuate or publique, teaching eyther in the Engliſh or Latine
tongues: That they take ſuch a ſpeciall care, that all, and euery their youth, Schollers, ſeuerally and
reſpectiuely, may forthwith within the ſpace of tenne daies next after monition giuen vnto them, by
ſuch as ſhall be authoriſed for that purpoſe, haue, read, exerciſe, and learne, and bee taught the ſaide
Booke (order being already taken that there ſhall be a ſufficient number of the ſaid Bookes in readineſſe,
in places conuenient for the buyer.) And that the ſaid Bookes bee ſold by ſuch perſons, or their
Deputies onely, as his Maieſty hath thereunto authoriſed. And that they, nor any of the ſaid Deputies
ſhall preſume to take aboue the rate of ſixe pence the Booke, neither in Latine nor Engliſh, the
ſame being in Octauo, within the ſaid Dioceſſe. And further that all Perſons, Vicars, Curates,
Church-Wardens and Side-men, doe at their ordinary day of appearance in any Eccleſiaſticall Court
within our ſaid Dioceſſe, quarterly preſent a true note of all their Teachers, men or women within their
ſeueral Pariſhes, with the true number of Schollers as euery ſuch Teacher teacheth, that their Schollers
may be furniſhed with Bookes accordingly, Together with the names of all ſuch as ſhal refuſe to
conforme themſelues thereunto. And alſo that all and euery the ſaid Parſons, Vicars and Curates,
Church-Wardens and Side-men, bee truely and faithfully ayding, helping and aſſiſting, for the vniuerſall
diſperſing and teaching of all youth whatſoeuer in the ſaid Booke, being vnder the age of xxi. according
to his Maieſties Royall pleaſure, and late Proclamation, Dated at Theobals, the viii. of Nouember
laſt. Commanding all his Highneſſe louing Subiects, to obey ſuch directions, and order, as by
my Lords grace of Canterbury, my Lords grace of Yorke, and other the Biſhops of this Realme ſhall
be taken therein for the better accompliſhment, and due execution hereof, according to his Highneſſe will
and Commandement. Iames Bath: & Well:
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London. 1616.
         
      
   