
      
         
            
            
            A Briefe Chronicle, of the Succeſſe of Times, from the Creation of the World, to this inſtant.
            CONTAINING, The Originall & liues of our ancient Fore-Fathers, before and after the Floude, As alſo, of all the Monarchs, Emperours, Kinges, Popes, Kingdomes, Common-weales, Eſtates and Gouernments, in moſt Nations of this Worlde: And how in alteration, or ſucceſsion, they haue continued to this day.
            Printed by W. Iaggard, Printer to the Honourable Citty of London, and are to be ſold at his houſe in Barbican. 1611.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, SIR VVILLIAM CRAVON, Knight, Lord Maior of the Cittie of London; Sir HENRIE MONTAGVE, Seriant at Law to his Maieſtie, and Recorder of London: And to all the Knights, Aldermen, and Worſhipfull Bretheren, the carefull Fathers and Gouernours of this Honourable Estate.
            
               HAuing collected theſe briefe notes (Right Honourable, Right Worſhipfull, and my moſt reſpected) concerning the Succeſſe of Times (in moſt of the Kingdoms thorow the World) euen from the Creation, to this inſtant yeare 1611. and modelled them all in this ſlender Volume, that ſuch as fauour Reuerend Antiquity, might receiue both pleaſure & profit thereby: I thought

it part of my duty (in regard of ſome fauour and reſpect lately by mee receiued) to preſent your Honor and Worſhips there-with, as a token of my gratitude, and as a promiſe of my vttermoſt imployment, in theſe, or any other endeuours, whereto my meanneſſe in ability by you ſhall be commaunded. I know right well, and ſuch as know me, haue heard me daily confeſſe it, that I (of infinite others) was the moſt vnmeeteſt to vndergoe ſuch a ſerious buſineſſe, which required, if not the beſt able, yet thoſe that therein are much better ſeene then my ſelfe. Neuertheleſſe, importunitie of Friendes, that greeue to ſee no willing hand put to the plough, or at leaſt ſuch (euen like my ſelfe) more forward then wiſe; their perſwaſions, I ſay, and ſome regard had of the times neceſſity, euery man beeing borne for the good of his Country; hath (vnder your Honorable and Worſhipfull fauour) made me thus aduenturous.
            Concerning the helpes I haue had in this laborious trauaile, the Authors themſelues, who haue beſt written, and diſcourſed of thoſe ſeueral Kingdoms and Nations; euen them, & no other haue I herein followed, borrowing beſide ſome ſuch matters from them, as (to my knowledge) haue not in any of our Chronicles heeretofore bin remembred, or at the leaſt, not plainly reuealed.

In our home affaires, eſpecially the antiquity of this famous Cittie, I haue (with others) deliuered my opinion therin, yet ſwaruing from ſome, who haue beene thought ouer-ſcrupulous, ſometime ſtraining at a Gnat, yet very ealy ſwallowing a Camell. The Dignitie that your Honor holdeth, of Lord Maior of this Cittie, and thoſe graue Senators, the Alder-men your Brethren, I haue aymed at the Original & Antiquitie thereof; ſome Authors tearming them Domeſmen, Eldermen, or Iudges of the Kinges Court. But that the name of Alderman declareth both verie Reuerend Originall, and great Antiquitie; I find recorded, that in the time of King Eadgar, one Ailwin, a man of the bloud Royall, and, for the ſpeciall great authority and fauour hee had with the King (being Sir-named Healf-Koning, that is, Half-King) was Alderman of all England, who founded that famous Monaſterie in the Iſle of Ely. Our learned and worthy Antiquary M. Camden, hath obſerued the Epitaph engrauen on his Tombe, containing theſe wordes: Hic requieſcit Ailwinus incliti Regis Eadgari Cognatus, totius Angliae Aldermannus, et huius ſacri Coenobij miraculoſus fundator. Heere resteth Ailwin, Cozin to the Noble King Eadgar, Alderman of al England, and of this holie Abbey the miraculous Founder. Whereby appeareth, that the

Title of Alderman, in thoſe ancient, reuerend, and reſpectiue times, was an addition of honor and high repute, as diſtinguiſhing them that deſerued that grace, to be men of greater, grauer, and more ſollide iudgment, in matters appertaining to the Weale-publique, then others, vncapable of ſuch eſpeciall dignity. Of ſuch worthy Fathers hath this famous Cittie beene plentifully furniſhed from time to time, as in our Chronicle may more at large appeare, and to you thoſe graue Senators and worthily ſtyled Aldermen (out of intire and dutifull affection) haue I conſecrated the liuing memorie of theſe my poore labours: wiſhing to you all vnfeignedly, that as heauen hath beſtowed this earthly honor vpon you, ſo (hereafter) it may crowne you with neuer dying happineſſe.
            
               Yours in all dutie to be commaunded, A. Mundy.
            
         
         
            
            To the Maiſter, Wardens, Aſsiſtants, and whole Liuery, of the Honorable Company of Merchant-Tailors, being the worthy Society of S. Iohn Baptist, anciently deriued from S. Iohn of Hieruſalem, and the famous Knightes of that religious Brother-hood. Alſo to the Wardens Subſtitutes, and the ſixteene men of the ſame Company, &c.
            
               IT hath beene my hap (worthy and worſhipful Gentlemen) among the variety of Collections, to build vp the body of this briefe Chronicle; to meete with an ancient and much eſteemed Record, of a Society and brother-hood, ſtyled by the name of S. Iohn Baptiſt of Hieruſalem, and how many Great Maiſters haue gouerned that Society, from Anno. 1099. to this preſent yeare, with ſome briefe obſeruations of their liues and actions, as in Follio 187. more at large appeareth. Concerning the originall, progreſſion, & ſeuerall Fortunes of this Military Brother-hood, beeing tearmed Knights Hoſpitallers, or Knights of the Hoſpitall of S. Iohn Baptiſt of Ieruſalem; next, Knights of Rhodes, and laſtly, Knightes of Malta; I refer you there to be further ſatisfied: yet ſome thinges beeing there accidentally omitted, may fauourably (and not vnneceſſarily) here be remembred. Theſe Brethren (by ſolemne profeſſion) were bound to ſerue Pilgrims, and poore

people in the Hoſpitall of S. Iohn at Ieruſalem, and to ſecure (by their man-hood) their paſſages thither, they charitably buried the dead, were continually in praier, mortifyed themſelues with Watchings and Faſtinges, were courteous and kinde to the poore, whom they called their Maiſters, and fed them with white Bread, when themſelues did eate browne. They grew to be loued and liked of all ſortes, and, through the liberal bounty of good Princes and priuate perſons (admiring their piety and proweſſe) they roſe from this low degree, to ſo high an eſtate and great riches, that about An. 1240. they had within Chriſtendome nineteene thouſand Lordſhips or Mannors, as the Knights Templers had nine thouſand, the Reuennewes and Rentes wherof in England, fell afterward alſo to theſe knights Hoſpitallers of S. Iohn Baptist. And this eſtate of theirs (growne to ſo great an height) made way for them likewiſe to as great honors. So that their Prior in England (liuing then in the goodly Pallace of Saint Iohn Baptist of Hieruſalem, in the ſtreete which receiued name of that houſe, and is called yet to this day, Saint Iohns-ſtreet) was reputed the Prime Baron of the land, and called the Lord of S. Iohns, beeing able, with fulneſſe and abundance of all things, to maintaine a very honorable Port.
            In ſucceſſe of time, as this worthy Citty grew to encreaſe, not onely in large extendure and beautie of buildings, but alſo in election of Companies and Corporations, for better ſupply of the Magiſtracy, and conueniency of all the apteſt meanes thereto belonging; this Branch of your honorable Society of S. Iohn Baptiſt (deriued of that ancient and memorable Stem,

of Saint Iohn of Hieruſalem) grewe to burgen and ſpread it ſelfe in goodlieſt manner. Beeing Tailors of the Linnen-Armory, and brethren of Saint Iohn Baptiſt (as moſt Companies, in thoſe times, had a Saintes appellation) they grew to be great in Kinges fauours, who thought it no indignity to themſelues, to be ſtiled in the Brother-hood of S. Iohn Baptiſt, and from theyr Guildes firſt Creation by King Edward the third, with authority to hold a feaſt yearely at Midſommer, and to make choyce of a Gouernor or Mayſter (according to the order of a Great Maiſter, among the Knights Hoſpitallers, of Saint Iohn Baptiſt of Hieruſalem) and Wardens, to aſſiſt and ayde him in that weighty charge: they proceeded on ſtill (by the enſuing Kings) in further additions of gracious regard, till King Henrie the ſeauenth confirmed their Charter, naming them Merchant-Taylors, of the Brother-hood of Saint Iohn Baptist, to continue ſtill the memorie of their Originall. Heere may I not alſo forget, that as the Knightes Hoſpitallers at Hieruſalem, were alwaies reſpectiue in ſeruice to Pilgrims and Trauailers: euen ſo, as if ſuch an humble condition did well merit not to be forgotten, in this Brotherhood (at the beginning) they did vſe ech yeare to chuſe a Pilgrime, who attended the ſeruice of the Maiſter of the Company, and trauailed in behalfe of the whole Society. One of the Pilgrimes names is recorded by Iohn Stow, to be Henrie de Ryall, and that name of Pilgrime continued vntill the eleauenth year of Richard the ſecond, when the foure Wardens, were then called Purueyors of Almes, now called quarterage of the fraternity.
            Seauen Kings haue borne Bretherens name of that

Society (viz:) Edward the third; Richard the ſecond; Henrie the fourth; Henrie the fift; Henrie the ſixt; Edward the fourth; and Henrie the ſeauenth, and (as is credibly affirmed) wearing the Liueryhood on their ſhoulders, they haue gone on the election day, from the Hall, to the Pallace of Saint Iohns, in Saint Iohns Streete, there to heare diuine ſeruice, and graciouſly permitted the Maiſter to goe on the vpper-hand, ſuch (in thoſe times) was the milde nature of Princes, ſhewing (by their owne example) how Magiſtrates, and other their meaner Miniſters, ought to be held in honor and reſpect.
            Paſſing ouer the Dukes, Earles, Lords, Byſhoppes, Knightes, and Gentlemen, who haue likewiſe beene Bretheren of that honorable Society, and many other memorable perſons, of whom this little limit alloweth no ſpeech: I wil conclude this Epiſtle, with a briefe note of two or three worthy Bretheren, among infinite other, whoſe deſerts doe iuſtly challenge perpetuall acknowledgement.
            Sir William Fitz William the elder, being a Merchant Taylor, and Seruaunt ſometime to Cardinall Wolſey, was choſen Alderman of Bread-ſtreet-Ward in London, in Anno. 1506. And going afterward to dwell at Mylton in Northamptonſhire; in the fal of the Cardinall his former Maiſter, he gaue him kinde entertainement there at his houſe in the Countrey. For which deede, being called before the King, and demaunded how he durſt entertaine ſo great an enemy to the State: his anſwere was, that he had not contemptuouſly or wilfully done it, but onely becauſe he had been his Maiſter, and partly the meanes of his greateſt Fortunes. The

King was ſo well pleaſed with his anſwer, that, ſaying, himſelfe had too few ſuch Seruaunts; immediatly hee knighted him, and afterward made him a priuy Counceller. This worthy Knight dying, gaue an hundered pounds to poore Maids marriages. His debs and debtors, ouer whoſe names he had written Amore Dei remitto, he freely forgaue. He gaue to the Vniuerſities forty pound; to the poore thirty pound; to mend the high-waies betwixt Chigwell and Coperſale in Eſſex 50. pounds; to mend other high-waies about Thorney and Sawtrie Chappell, and the Bridge, fifty pounds more. And to the Merchant-Taylors his Bretheren, hee gaue his beſt ſtanding Cuppe, as a friendly remembrance of him.
            Sir Thomas White, Lord Maior of this honourable Citty, and a worthy Brother likewiſe of that Society, beeing a louer of Learning, and an earneſt furtherer thereof; firſt purchaſed the Hall in Oxenford, called Glocester-Hall, for Students and Schollers to receiue there the benefit of learning. But his priuate thoughts very often ſolliciting him, that he ſhould (in time) meet with a place where two Elmes grewe, and that there his further forward purpoſe ſhould take effect: At length he found out the place, where (at his owne coſt and expences) hee founded the famous Colledge in Oxenford, called Saint Iohn Baptist Colledge, & where thoſe two Elmes (as I haue heard) are yet ſtanding, endowing it with ſuch liberall Guifts, Lands, and Reuennewes, as would require too much time here to be remembred. Beſide his prouiſion for Learning in this worthy place, he erected other Schooles, as at Bristow, Reading, and a Colledge at Higham Ferries. More, he

gaue to the Citty of Briſtow, the ſumme of two thouſand poundes, to purchaſe Land, amounting to the yearely valew of an hundred and twenty pounds, the Maior and Cittizens paying therefore yearely an hundred pounds. Eight hundred pounds muſt bee lent to ſixteene poore Clothiers, fifty poundes each man for ten years ſpace, ſufficient ſecurity being giuen by them for the ſame. Afterward, that eight hundred poundes was to paſſe to other ſixteene Clothiers, according to diſcretion of them put in truſt. Two hundred poundes beſide was reſerued, for prouiſion of Corne and needfull occaſions for the poore, in the order and care of the Maior, Aldermen, and Cittizens, &c.
            Then, according to his will, which remaineth yet to be ſeene, out of this bountifull guift to Briſtow, theſe memorable braunches and beneuolences, were by himſelfe deuiſed and ordered, beginning in the yeare 
                  •
               577. and thence forward they went on according to his owne direction. Then was brought to the Merchant-Taylors Hall, an hundred and foure pounds, the hundred pound to be lent (for ten years ſpace) to four poore men in the Citty of Yorke: And the foure pound ouer plus, to be imploied about the charges & paines, that no man (vſed in the buſineſſe) might receiue diſcontentment. Then in An. 1578. the like ſumme was to be deliuered thence to Canterburie, and ſo thence-forward the ſame ſummes (yearely) to the Citties and Townes following orderly.
            
               1579. Reading.
               1580. The Merchant-Tayl
                     •
                  rs themſelues.
               1581. Gloceſter.
               1582. Worceſter.
               1583. Exceſter.
               1584. Salisbury.
               1585. Weſt-Cheſter.
               
                  1586. Norwich.
               1587. Sothampton.
               1588. Lincolne.
               1589. Wincheſter.
               1590. Oxenford.
               1591. Hereford Eaſt.
               1592. Cambridge.
               1493. Shrewesbu
                     •
                  ie.
               1594. Ly
                     •
                  ne.
               1595. Bathe.
               1596. Derby.
               1597. Ipſwitch.
               1598. Colcheſter.
               1599. New-Caſtle.
            
            This ſumme of one hundred and foure pounds, paſſing yearely to theſe fore-named places, from the Merchant-Taylors Hall, and to the good intended vſes of the giuer; that there might bee no breathing while for ſo iuſt a Stewards Talent, but to haue it kept on in continuall imployment for the poore: the ſame order was to take beginning againe (as before) at the Cittie of Yorke, and ſo ſucceſſiuely (while the World ſtands) to the Townes before named, in ſelfe-ſame courſe as it had the originall, with great care and obſeruaunce in them to whom it belongeth, that the dead may not be abuſed, nor poore mens right iniured.
            But did he thus ſhut vp his Purſſe, and ſay to himſelfe. I haue giuen ſufficient? No, hee did caſt his pittying eie next on the Citty of Couentry, diſtreſſed (at that time) in great and grieuous manner. What his inſtant beneuolence was, he tooke it to bee but as an houres Sun-ſhine, after a whole day of ſtorme and tempeſt, although it might yeeld ſome comfort, were the ſeaſon neuer ſo ſhort. But to eſtabliſh a certainty, that no diſmay or doubt ſhould euer after bee able to remooue, (euen as a worthy Piramide, erected to perpetuity) he gaue to the Citty of Couentry 1400. pound, therewith to purchaſe Lands, riſing to the anuall value of 70. li.

Twelue poore Inhabitants of that Citty, were to haue in free Almes twenty foure poundes, each man forty ſhillings yearely, on the eleauenth day of March. Four young men were alſo to haue fortie poundes yearely, ten pound each man, and for nine yeares ſpace, vpon ſufficient ſecurity giuen; And their turnes thus ſerued, then foure other young men to haue the like ſumme, and like limitation, and ſo from nine yeares, to nine yeares, for euer. Afterward it was ordred to two poore men of the ſame Citty, and laſtly to one; in which nature (according to the ſeuerall limitations) it doth yet, and doubtleſſe ſhall for euer continue. Alſo the ſame ſumme to one young man in Northampton; next, in the Citty of Leiceſter; Thirdlie, in Nottingham; Fourthly, in Warwick; Then returning to Couentrie again for one year, it repaſſeth to the ſaid Townes againe, each after other yearely for euer. And leaſt his worthy intent ſhould faile in the continuance, hee enlarged his firſt gift to Couentrie, of 1400. poundes, to 2000. and 60. pound, to bee imployed as hath beene remembred, fortie pound yearely being paid out of it to Saint Iohn Baptiſt Colledge in Oxford: And allowances alſo by himſelfe giuen in each place, that bonds ſhould be made without any charge to the receiuer.
            Sir Thomas Row, Lord Maior of this famous Citty, and a worthy Merchant-Taylor, beſide his charitable coſt and charges, in building the new Church-yard in Bedlem, for ſuch Pariſhes as wanted benefit of buriall: Gaue forty poundes yearely, to maintaine tenne poore men for euer, ſuch as were not Bretheren of his owne Society, but choſen out of fiue ſeuerall Companies (viz.) Clothworkers, Armorers, Carpenters, Tylers,
               
and Plaiſterers: As conſidering, that by ouer-toyling labour, dangers, fals, bruizes, and ſuch like inconueniences, they were ſooneſt like to become impotent, and vnable to helpe or maintaine themſelues. Therefore to each of theſe ten men, hee freely gaue the ſum of foure pound quarterly, to be paid them at the Merchant-Taylors Hall, during their liues; and then to ſucceede to other men in the ſame Companies, according to due conſideration, of iuſt cauſe and moſt neceſſity.
            Laſtly, worthy Gentlemen, to hold yee no longer, in matter better knowne to your ſelues then mee, becauſe it is in your owne eyes and eares (almoſt) dailie, the neuer dying memory, of a yet liuing (and long may he ſo be) Brother Merchant-Taylor, ſhall be my concluſion. This vertuous and Religious man, knowing Death to be an vnindifferent Executor, and Life much more worthy of truſt and imployment; hath preuented that gripple greedy Tyrant, and made ſuch large Legacies to Life, that Death neuer deſerued to be put in truſt withall. If men of this World, ſuch as GOD hath liberally beſtowed his bleſſings on, would (with this good-minded man) conſider, that, let their willes bee neuer ſo wiſely made, yea, all Art and Dexterity therein (to the very vttermoſt) imployed: yet death, and his long wide gaping Children, haue many hangers on, many meanes & deuiſes, but many more tricks and vnfaithfull performances; they would truſt life the better, as this man hath done, and let death haue only the reuerſion, which is the eaſier to bee conſidered on. It is not for my pen to ſet downe his praiſes, leaues of Marble or Braſſe are meeter for thoſe Carracters,

that the deuouring teeth of Time may neuer deface. Let this th
                  •
               n 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               ome addition to your honour, that you haue ſu
                  •
               h a 
                  •
               orthy Brother; mindful of the works of Mercy to th
                  •
                
               
                  •
               oore, among your ſelues, and many places elſe-where▪ carefull of offendours, whom law ſentencing with Death, by the Watch-bell of Prayer are encited to compunction; and hopefull of al goodneſſe, to purſue 
                  〈◊〉
                vertuous determinations euerie where. So that w
                  •
               en 
                  •
               is Dooue ſhall finde no reſting place for his foote▪ 
               
                  〈◊〉
                reaſon of this Worldes tumultuous waues; hee may returne to the Arke of bleſſedneſſe, the happy home, that he, you, and all elſe that feare God, ſhould daily long for.
            
               Yours euer, A. MVNDY.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE ANCIENT, WOORTHY, AND RIGHT Worſhipfull Company of the Gold-Smiths; the Maiſter, Wardens, Aſsiſtants, Liuery: and likewiſe to euery louing Brother, and member thereof.
            
               LEt me not be thought (Right Worſhipfull Society) more bolde then becomes me, that in ſearch of Antiquitie, and Succeſſe of Times, guided by good obſeruation, and probable Authorities, I thus preſent you (in vnfaigned affection) what I haue gathered, concerning your worthy Brother-hood. If I had time heere to ſet downe (without preiudice to any other Miſterie whatſoeuer) that which Holye Writ recordeth of you, and of men (then) moſt expert in your profeſsion; this poore Epiſtle would encreaſe it ſelfe to a very large diſcourſe, and exceede the limit wherto I haue tied my ſelf in the whol labor. I paſſe ouer the captiuity of Gods choſen people in Babylon, and the Offices of thoſe three eſpeciall choſen

men, Zerubbabell, Ezra, and Nehemiah: the firſt, being their Captaine to guide them home, and prouided that the Temple was builded: the ſecond, reforming manners, and making a plantation of Religion: the third and laſt, to builde vp the wals, and make a new Citty of Ieruſalem againe: Yet let me tell you, that among the multitude of Officers and Offices, appointed to this buſineſſe, for building the walles, the Merchants and Goldſmithes do beare a remarkeable note, the very words in Scripture being theſe: Betweene the Chamber of the Corner vnto the Sheepe-gate, fortifyed the Gold ſmiths and the Merchants. Beſide, that which is ſpoken of Malchi
                     •
                  h the Goldſmithes ſonne, fortifying to the houſe of the Nethinims; And then, of Bezaleell the Sonne of Vri, filled with the Spirit of God, in wiſedome and vnderſtanding, to worke in Gold, Siluer, & Braſſe; who had Aholiab ioyned with him, to make all curious workes (appointed by God himſelfe) for the Tabernacle of the Congregation, the Arke of the Couenant, and the Mercy-ſeat, &c. If theſe be not Teſtimonies of extraordinary honour and reſpect, in the very names of Merchants and Goldeſmiths (but much more, in the matter of ſo high an employment) confirmed by an aſſurance ſo vnreproueable, and equalling what can be ſaide (in like caſe) of venerable Antiquitie; I referre my ſelfe to be cenſured by the very ſeuereſt iudgement.
            
               Secondly, concerning the firſt workers in Gold, Siluer, and other Mettalles, in any place of eminence or note in Europe (vnder controul neuertheleſſe, of ſuch as haue reade and obſerued more then I haue done) I finde their Originall to be among the euer-curious & ingenious Veni
                     •
                  ians, euen at the firſt plantation of Venice, which iuſtly may be tearmed Miracolo del Mondo. The foundation of Venice, holds paritie and proportion of Antiquity, with the prime eſtate of the Francs or French, as you may obſerue where it is more at large expreſſed. Looking backe then to the firſt Note of Diuine obſeruation, and remembering (after the worlds deuiſion among the ſons of Noah) that Iaphets ſon Tubal had all Europe for his partition, with this laſt Collestion concerning Venice; and then, as all Arts and Sciences haue a place of Original, as Riuers from the Sea, and extend themſelues afterward to the remoteſt places of the worlde: So may it likewiſe be gathered, that thoſe reſpectiue times, admyring and honouring Art and Inuention, gaue ſuch way to their preſent, and ſucceeding fame & paſſage, that all Landes became Partners of their predeceſſors prerogatiues.
            Laſtly, to ſpeake but of our owne Kingdome, and therein (for breuities ſake) but of this Noble Citty it ſelf; I find, that when it had caſt off the yoke of ſtrange confuſion, endured vnder the ſufferance of ſo manie conquerings: After (I ſay) it came to haue command

within it ſelfe, vnder the awe and gracious fauour of worthie Kinges and Potentates, who made choyſe of Magiſtrates, to be their Deputies, and to preſent their God-like perſons for general obedience: the very firſt man that attained to the place of eminence, and was ſtyled Maire of this renowned Citty, was called Henry Fitz-Alwine, Fitz-Liefſtane, Goldſmith, and held that ſupreame Office more then 24. yeares together. A memorable Note, in regard of Priority, and as ſince then, carefully remembred, ſo iuſtly challenging continuance to vtmoſt poſterity.
            But becauſe this ſlender volume ſpeakes more, (though briefely) of you, then heere can wel be affoorded, and commeth to you from a free hart, in kindnes, requiring but as free and courteous acceptance: this is al the charge by me impoſed on it. To tel the whole Golden band of your worthy Brother-hood, that I haue done nothing heerein, either for flatterie or vaineglorie, or in expectation of mercinarie recompence; but according to truth, ſincerity, and honeſty which is the beſt defence for any that ſpeakes of Antiquitie.
            
               
                  Yours to be commanded, A. Mundy.
            
         
         
            
            A Table of the ſeuerall Arguments, handled in this Booke.
            
               THe Originall and Succeſsion of our forefathers, from Adam to the generall Deluge. Fol: 1.
               From the Flood, to the Princes and Iudges of Iſrael. 5
               Frō the Princes & Iudges, to the Iewiſh kings. 12
               From the Iewiſh Kings, to the Kings of Iuda. 14
               From the Kinges of Iuda and Ieruſalem, to the Monarchy, &c. 19
               The Monarchy of the Chaldeans, Aſsyrians, &c. 19
               The Monarchy of the Perſians. 20
               The Monarchy of the Grecians. 23
               The Kings of Macedon. 24
               The Kings of Syria. 26
               The Kings of Egypt. 29
               The Monarchy of the Caeſars or Romaines. 32
               The Emperors of the weſt from Charlemaign. 54
               The Emperors of the Eaſt. 61
               
                  The Ottomans or Turkiſh Emperors. 89
               Originall of the Sarazins. 102
               Byſhops & Popes of Rome, from the originall, and Ages of the Church. 108
               Originall of the Knights of S. Iohns of Ieruſalem, and all other Orders of Knight-hood. 157
               Of the Emperor of Ethiopia, Pr
                        •
                     te Ian. 214
               Of the Kingdome of Perſia. 220
               Of the Kingdome of Thunis. 227
               Of the great Prouince of Moſcouia. 229
               Of the Kingdome of Poland. 233
               Of ſundry other Kingdomes Conquered by the Romaines. 235
               Of the Kingdome of Portugall. 241
               Of the Kingdome of Italy. 255
               The Originall of the Venetians. 258
               Of the Dukes of Venice. 269
               Of the Kingdome of Spaine. 300
               Of Germany, and the Princes Electors. 304
               The Originall of the French Nation. 305
               Of Pharamond, the firſt king of France, and conſequently of all the other kings of France. 316
               Of the Earls of Holland and Zeland. 382
               Of the Kingdome of Ireland. 427
               Of the Gouernors, Lieutenants, and Deputies of Ireland. 435
               Of the Kingdome of Scotland. 442
               Of Albion, before Brutes arriuall, & what Kings

raigned there. 466
               The Light of Britaine, and of all the Kinges ſucceeding after Brute. 471
               A Catalogue of the Princes of Wales. 522
               Of Englands Biſhoppricks, & their circuits. 526
               Foundation of the Colledges in Cambridge & Oxenford. 532
               Of the Shires in England and Wales. 535
               Originall Antiquity, and modern eſtate of London. 537
               Temporall Gouernment of London, ſince the Conqueſt. 573
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A SHORT SVMmary or briefe Chronicle of TIMES.
            
            
               ¶Containing the originall and ſucceſſion of our auncient Fore-fathers, from the firſt CREATION of the World: As alſo of the Monarches, Emperours, Kings, Popes, and Famous men, with all the moſt memorable matters hapning ſince the Worldes beginning, to this inſtant time.
            
            
               OVR Eternall GOD, al good,Yeares of the world Almighty, and moſt mercifull, in the beginning, created and made the World of nothing: that is to ſay; Heauen, Earth, and Waters, as firſt and principall matter, togither with the Angels. He diſpoſed and gaue forme in ſixe daies,Geneſ. 1. (for he reſted the ſeauenth, and bleſſed it) to all thinges incloſed within the circle of Heauen. All which hée did by his word, namely Ieſus Chriſt, and the

bleſſed Spirit: theſe thrée perſons being one Diuine eſſence (for the workes of the ſacred Trinity are inſeparable) whom I moſt humbly beſéech to fauour and aſſiſt me, in beginning and ending this ſhort Summary.
            After that this ſoueraigne Architect had created (of nothing) in one inſtant, this firſt maſſe or matter, and diſpoſed in ſixe daies this whole round frame: at length, & vpon the ſixt day he created Man of the ſlime of the earth (in the Damaſcene territory ſcituate in Syria,
               The Creation of man or in Hebrō, according to the Haebrues Tradition, into which place he withdrew himſelfe after he had ſinned) and made him after his owne likeneſſe, as concerning his ſoule, which alſo he created of nothing:Gen. 1. he named him Adam, that is to ſay, Red man, or Red-Earth, according to the Hebrue language. Afterward, he took a rib from Adam, as he lay aſléepe in Paradice, and thereof formed Heuah,
               Marriage & houſhold life. which ſignifieth, as Moſes writeth (followed by Ioſephus) Soroow, and Mother of the Liuing; and according to Zorarus, Woman.
                Thus began the inſtitution of Marriage, and houſhold life togither.Geneſ. 2, 3.
            
            
               Adam and Heuah our firſt Parents, by perſwaſion of the Serpent (that is to ſay,The fall of Man. the Deuill) tranſgreſſed the Commandement which God had giuen them, for effect of their faith and obedience. In regard whereof, they were caſt out of terreſtiall Paradice, that is to ſay, a Garden abounding in pleaſures, where GOD had placed them together: and (with their poſterity)

were ſubiected to ſinne, death, and the Deuill.The reparation of man in the promiſe of Ieſus Chriſt. But our good God, being made all of mercy, perceiuing the offence of Man, did promiſe him, that the ſéede of the Woman, which is Ieſus Chriſt, ſhould breake the head of the Serpent, that is to ſay, his kingdome and power, deliuering vs from the captiuity of ſinne, death,Gen. 2, 3. & the Deuill. In this promiſe we may note the ſourſe or ſpring-head of the Goſpell▪
               Originall of the Goſpell. which afterward was oftentimes repeated, and diuerſly ſignified by ſundry figures, for comfort of our holy Forefathers, euen to the comming of Ieſus Chriſt.
            When Adam was throwne forth of Paradice,15. 
               30. he began to labour in the earth with great pain. Afterward, he knew Heuah his wife, who brought him a ſonne called Caine, who was an huſbandman, and the firſt murtherer of his brother Abell, the iuſt Shepheard.Geneſ. 2, 3. In whom began the firſt perſecution of the Saintes by the wicked, for the true and ſincere ſeruice of God.
            In this man alſo began the Kingdom or citty of God, and in the other,The City of God, and of the world. the citty of the World and of the Diuell, as ſhalbe better manifeſted in Nimrod. This murder being thus committed, Caine was abhominable in the ſight of God,Geneſ. 4. he withdrew himſelfe from his father, and builded a Citty after the name of his firſt ſon Enoch.
            
            
               Adam had daughters alſo,138. and at the age of 230. yeares, he begat Seth.
            
            
               Seth, at the age of 105. yeares, begat Enos.
               2
                     •
                  5.
            
            
               Enos aged 99. yeares, begat Cainam.
               325.
            
            
               Cainam, aged 70. years, begat Malaleel.
               395.
            
            
               
               460.
               Malaleel aged 605. yeares, begat Iared.
            
            
               622.
               Iared aged 160. yeares, begat Enoch.
            
            
               6
                     •
                  7.
               Enoch, who at the age of 65. yeares, begate Methuſalem, walked with God, declaring his iudgements, to enſue vppon men degenerating from humaine and reaſonable Nature, into brutiſh and vnbrideled voluptuouſneſſe. For the Sonnes of God (that is to ſay, the Sayntes, by the generation of Seth) beholding the Daughters of men (that is to ſay,Geneſ. 5, 6. the wicked by the generation of Caine) to be fayre: tooke them to Wife, without any regarde, and celebrated marriages with the people of abhomination, of whome Gyants were borne men▪ of might,Gyants. and great Renowne.
            
               874.
               Methuſalem at the age of 187. yeares, begate Lamech.
               9
                     •
                  0. 
               Adam dyed aged 930. yeares: Iuſt Enoch was carried aliue vp into heauen.
            
               1056.
               Lamech, at the age of 182. yeares, begat Noah the deliuerer of Iuſtice: whom the Poets (not vnderſtanding the creation of the worlde) called Heauens Chaos, Seede of the world, & Father of the Gods.
            
            
               Noah, being 500. yeares of age, with his wife Thitea, that is to ſay Earth; or, according to the Poets, Aretia, Cybele, Veſta, and Mother of the Gods, begat Sem, Cham, and Iaphet: with whom by the commandement of God, in the hundred yeare after, he entered into the Arke which had béene built by him, and was preſerued from the Flood.
            
               
               The Generall Deluge.
               BY which invndation of waters, God brought an horrible vengeance, to punniſh the wicked liues of men.
               
                  Sem, who was Melchizedech,
                  1659. 
                  Gen. 10, 11 two yeares after the flood, begat Arphaxad,
                  1695. beeing then aged 100. yeares.
               
                  Arphaxad aged 35. yeares, begat Salê.
                  1725.
               
               
                  Salê, at the age of thirty yeares, begat Heber,
                  Gen. 
                        •
                     1. and builded the Citty of Salem (though ſome ſay it was Sem) that ſhould be called Ieruſalem, the Citty of God, ſeated in the midſt of Iudea.
               
               
                  Heber,
                  1759. of whom the Hebrewes were after named, being aged 34. yeares, begate P
                        •
                     aleg:
                  The diuiſion or partage of the world. Gen. 10, 11 Beroſus in 1. de Antiquit.
                   at which time the earth was diuided betwéene the ſonnes of Noah. Sem and his off-ſpring enioied the Eaſt part of Syria, to wit, Aſia. Cham Zoroaſtres had Iudea, Egypt, Arabia
                  ▪ and all Affrica. Iaphet, who by the Poets is called Iapetus,
                  1789. had (with his people) all Europe.
               
               
                  Phaleg, at the age of thirty yeares, begat Reu,
                  
                     The kingdom of the Celts.
                     The kingdome of Italy.
                     The kingdome of Egypt.
                     
                        Beroſ 4. et 5. The Kingdome of Spaine, &c.
                   at which time, Nimrod the Babylonian Saturn, & hindmoſt Nephew of Cham, began his raigne; builded the Tower of Babell, where beganne the confuſion of tongues into ſeauenty two, the common language of the Hebrew remaining entyre. Samothes or Dis, King of the Gaules, (of whom the Gaules or Celts, tearme themſelues to be diſcended, as Caeſar declareth in his ſixt Booke) began alſo his raigne in ſhort time after: as Gomerus

Gallus likewiſe did his in Italy, and Tuball the Sonne of Iaphet his rule in Caltiberia, now called Spaine. Oceanus ſwayed in Egypt; as Tuiſcon or Aſcenas did in Allemain or Germany
               
               
                  1821.
                  Reu at the age of 32. yeares, begat Saruch.
               
               
                  1
                        ••
                     0.
                  Saruch, aged thirtie yeares, begat Nahor, or Nachor, tearmed Fayre Iupiter the ſecond, King of the Aſſyrians.
               
               
                  1879.
                  Nachor, at the age of 29. yeares, begat Thares or Terah, who is ſaide to be Ninus the third King of the Aſſyrians. Hee erected Temples, Altars, and Statues to his dead father, which were a great occaſion,Coyne firſt found out in Egypt. The kingdom of the Syconians. & the verie ſourſe of Idolatries. Oſyris and Iſis firſt found out the means of Corn at this time in Egypt, and nowe did Aegia
                        •
                     eus become firſt King of the Sicyonians, or Peloponneſus, now named Morea.
               
               
                  1950.
                  Thares, a maker and ſeller of Idolles, being 70 yeares of age, begat Abraham, Nahor, and Aran the Father of Lot.
                  Beroſ lib. 5. Diodor. lib. 3
                   
                  Semiramis the wife of Ninus, (in habit of a man) raigned ouer the Aſſyrians, in the name of her Sonne.
               
                  2007.
                  Noah, died aged 905. yeare old, 350. years after the flood.Geneſ. 9. 
                  Saturne, Pluto, Cybele, Mother of the Gentiles Gods, Sol, Iupiter, Pallas or Minerua, Venus, Cupid, Vulcane, Mercury, and all the crew of theſe faigned Gods then began.
               
                  2025.
                  Abraham, boing aged 75. yeares, by the Commaundement of God, departed from his owne Country and Kindred,Geneſ. 12. Gen. 21, 20, 25. for God had promiſed vnto him the land of Canaan, and bleſſing vppon all people, by his wiſedome which is Ieſus Chriſt:

he begate Iſaac. Saron King of Gaule ordained publicke Schooles. Druis his ſucceſſor, being a verie wiſe Prince, (of whom the Druides are ſaide to be deriued) appointed Prieſts & Phyloſophers among the Gaules. So do affirme Beroſus in his fift Booke, Caeſar in his ſixt Booke,Beroſus lib 5 Caeſar. lib. 6. Cor. Tacit in mor. Germ. and Cornelius Tacitus in the Manners of the Allemaynes or Germaines.
               
               
                  Iſaac, aged 60. yeares,2109. begat on his Wife Rebecca Eſau and Iacob, twinnes. Abraham,
                  Gen. 25. The kingdome of the Argiues Beroſ. lib. 5 Diodor. lib 6 
                  Sem and Heber dyed. Inachus was the auncient and firſt King of the Argiues. At this time Bardus K. of the Gaules, became the inventer of Verſes and of Muſicke, and Hercules ruled in Lybia.
               
               
                  Iacob, called Iſrael, at the age of 84. years,2193. maried Lea and Rachel, and of them, together with their two Hand-maids, had twelue ſonnes: Ruben, Simeon, Leui, Father of the Leuites, and Prieſtly lignage: Iuda (of whom the Iewes doo hold their name) and the Royall lignage of Ieſus Chriſt diſcended: Iſſachar, Zabulon, Gad, Aſer,
                  Gen. 29, 30 
                  Dan, Nephtalin, Ioſeph, and Beniamin, all Patriarkes, with Dina, one only daughter, who was the wife of Iob, according as Philo the Iew recordeth.
               Of theſe twelue Patriarkes, the 12. Tribes or Linages deſcended. Afterward,22
                        •
                     9 
                  Iacob being aged 130. yeares, went downe into Egypt with all his family, to his Sonne Ioſeph the Deputie to Pharaoh, who had bin ſold by his Bretheren.Gen. 37, 41 In that place he gaue vppe the ghoſt, being aged then 147. yeares: hauing propheſied, that Ieſus

Chriſt ſhould come, before that the Scepter were taken from Iuda,
                  Geneſ. 49. or a Duke of his generation. Galathes the Sonne of Hercules, was King of Gaule,
                  2257. whereof it tooke the name, Prometheus and Atlas at this time were very excellent Aſtrologians.
               
                  2311.
                  Ioſeph dyed 54. yeares after his Father. The Iſraelites now began to be euill intreated by the Egyptians.
                  Geneſ. 50. 
                  Moſes the laſt Nephew of Leui, was borne 64. yeares after the death of Ioſeph.
                  2375. 
                  Cecrops then builded the Citty of Athens, and was firſt King thereof:The kingdome of Athens. Alſo, he was the firſt Authour of the moſt abominable idolatries, that euer were among the Grecians. The Deluge of Deucalion.
               
            
            
               
                  Exodus.Princes and Iudges of Iſrael.
               
                  2454.
                  MOſes, aged 80. yeares, by the commandement of God reproued Pharoah;Leuiticus. Numbers. wrought many myracles in Egypt, with-drew the people of Iſrael our of Egypt by the Red-Sea, béeing in number more then ſixe hundred thouſand.
               
                  Exod. 12. Galath. 3.This their departure thence, happened in the yeare 430. of the promiſe made to Abraham, for the bleſſing of all Nations by his ſéede. Moyſes gaue the Law to the people (in the Deſerts of Arabia) as a School-maiſter, vntil the comming of the promiſed ſéed. For this cauſe he ordained for ye ſins of the people, diuers Ceremonies of ſacrifices marriages, puniſhments, & ſolemnities of feaſts. For the action of War,Deuterono. he numbred more then ſix hundred and thrée thouſand, without comprehenſion

of the Leuites, to whom he preſcribed theyr charge. In the end, he inſtructed the rude people in diuers commandements. For Gods ordinances he conſtituted Ioſuah his ſucceſſour, and rendred vp his ſpirit in the 120. yeare of his life: and of the departing out of Egypt, the 40. read Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy, all which are heere thus briefely collected. Da
                        •
                     danus hauing ſlaine his Brother Iaſon,
                  The kingdome of Troy. was the firſt King of Troy. Ianigines was then King in Italy: the moſt cruell Tyrant Buſiris King in Egypt: and Mercurius Triſmegiſtus, that is to ſay: thrée times the moſt great King, Prieſt and Philoſopher: See M. Ficinus in his life.
               
                  Ioſuah paſſed the people dry foote thorough the Riuer of Iordan, into the Land of Promiſe.
                     
                        •
                     465. The Sunne ſtayed while he fought the battel:Ioſuah. he ſlew one and thirty Kings. And after he had diſtributed their Countries amongſt the people: he died thirty yeares after the death of Moyſes. The Iſraelites then left God, and ſerued Idols. Orcus, King of the Moloſſes made then a rape of Proſerpina: And Cadmus brought the Charracters of Letters into Greece.
               
               
                  Othoniell, of the Lignage of Iuda,
                  2526. gouerned the people eight yeares, and was the third Iudge of Iſrael in order, and not the firſt,Iudges 3. as ſome haue ſuppoſed. He deliuered the people from the oppreſſion of the King of Meſopotamia.
               
               
                  Aiod or Ehua, ſlew the king of the Moabites,
                  2534. 
                  Iudges 3. raigned eight yeares, and deliuered the people from the idolatry of the Moabites. In this time

began, but much rather encreaſed the Gods and Idolatries of the Gentiles (according to Ioſephus) as Bacchus, Pandion, Radamanthus, Aeacus, Minos King of Creet. Dedalus and Icarus, at this time made their flight. Tantalus Amphion, founder and firſt King of Thebes. Linus.
               
               
                  2614.
                  Barach with Debora the Propheteſſe, iudged 40. yeares, ouercame with ten thouſand men only, the Army of Siſara, conſiſting of two hundred thouſand men. The Argona
                        •
                     tes ſayled then to Colchos; then liued Areus and Thieſtes, Pan alſo, and Midas King of Phrygia, abounded in Treaſures.
               
                  2654.
                  Gedeon a valiaunt Captaine, iudged fortie yeares, and deliuered the Iſraelites from the ſeruitude of the Madianites. In this time liued Circes, Medea, Enchantereſſes, with Meduſa and Andromeda.
                  The kingdome of the Micenes 
                  Euriſtheus firſt king of Mycena, & was ſlaine by Aeacides, hauing commaunded (well néere) thorough all Greece, for the ſpace of forty fiue yeares togither.
               
                  2694.
                  Abimelech, the naturall Son of Gedeon, was Iudge thrée yeares, he ſlew 69. of his naturall & legitimate Brethren, only that he might raigne. Sparta or Lacedemon was thē builded by Spartus the Sonne of Phoroneus: Others doo attribute the building thereof to Ariſthenes, who was their firſt king.
               
                  26
                        •
                     7.
                  Thola was Iudge 25. yeares: then liued Ruth Mother to the Grand-mother of Dauid:
                  Ruth. then alſo were Caſtor, Pollux, Apollo the inuenter of Muſicke, Aeſculapius his Sonne, Orpheus and

                  Muſeus, who were the firſt Poets, according to Linus.
               
               
                  Iair iudged 22. yeares, during which time,2710. the people liued in maruailous quiet, as they did before, in the raigne of Thola. But afterward there happened interregnum eightéen yeares together: in all which time, the Iſraelites were ſeruile to the Philiſtims, for their idolatries. Pyrrhus then inuented the Tennis Play: Theſeus vanquiſhed the Minotaure, and Hercules came from Spayne into Italy, 55. yeares before Aeneas.
               
               
                  Iephta the Baſtard was Iudge ſixe yeares,2760. and being thereto compelled by his vow, hee ſlew his onely Daughter. Theſeus now made his rape of Helena, ſhee being then a very young Mayden. Sybilla Aericthrea, liued in this time, ſhee that fore-told the ruine of Troy, and of whom Homer telleth many goodly tales.
               
                  Abeſan or Ibſan iudged ſeuen yeares:2766. The Hiſtory of Ruth happened in this time. Pluto, Neptune, then were, and Paris ſtole Helena, the wife to Menelaus king of the Lacedemonians.
               
               
                  Elon was Iudge ten years,2773. in whoſe time happened the Warre betwéene the Greekes and the Troyans,
                  The war of Troy. for the rape of Helena Wife to Menelaus, by Paris Sonne to Priam, the laſt King of Troy.
               
               
                  Abdon iudged eight yeares,2783. 
                  Aeneas with his companions came into Italy, and Francus (if wée may beléeue Manethous and others) the Sonne of Hector, with his followers alſo came into Auſtria. Of the one deſcended the Latines, & kings

of the Romaines: and of the other the Kinges of France. In theſe dayes liued Pilades and Oreſtes the two loyall friends.
               
                  2791.
                  Samp
                        •
                     on the ſtrong, was Iudge 20. yeares, he ſlew a thouſand Philiſtims with the iaw-bone of an Aſſe,Iudges 20. and was deceiued by a Strumpet. The Linage or Tribe of Beniamin was now almoſt vtterly deſtroyed, onely thorow deteſtable voluptuouſneſſe.
               
                  2811.
                  Hely Prieſt and Iudge, raigned fortie yeares, and was punniſhed of God, for his ouer great indulgence towards his children. The Ark of Moſes was then taken by the Philiſtims. B
                        •
                     ute the Sonne of Syluius third King of the Latines, expulſed then the cruell Gyants out of the Iſland, which (after his owne name) he called Brittaine, now England, and deuided his Land to his thrée Sonnes, in thrée ſeuerall kingdoms, to wit, Loegria to Locrine: Cambria, now called Wales, to Camber; and Albania, now called Scotland, to his third Sonne Albanact.
               
               
                  2851. 
                  The kingdomes of Lacedemō & Corinth
                  Samuel the Prophet, and innocent Iudge to thoſe wicked children. He annointed Saul to the Iſraelites, they deſiring a King t And then began the Kingdome of the Lacedemonians, inſtituted by Euriſthenes, and of the Corinthians founded by Atletes.
               
            
            
               Kings of all the Iewiſh people.
               
                  2851.
                  SAule, firſt King of the Iſraelites, with Samuel raigned fortie yeares. Hee pardoned Agag
                  
King of Amalec his Priſoner, and reſerueth the ſpoile to Sacrifice to God,1. Kinges. contrary to his Commandement. He tooke counſell of Pythoniſſa the Enchantreſſe: for which he was reproued of God, and was ſlaine in the battell.
               
                  Dauid, both King and Prophet,2891. in his youth he was a Shepherd, and feared God:11. Kinges. but afterward forgetting himſelfe, he committed both adultry & murder. He raigned forty yeares, and being wearied with many moleſtations, he wrote his Booke of Pſalmes to the glory of God. To him was renewed the ancient promiſe of Ieſus Chriſt, and of his eternall kingdom: who (as concerning his manhood, and according to the fleſh) deſcended of him.
               
                  Salomon raigned forty yeares.2931. Of ſuch prouiſion as Dauid (with mighty expences) had prepared:111. Kinges. in the fourth yeare of his raigne hee builded a Temple to God, which in ſeauen yeares after was finiſhed, it being 80. yeares,Kings. 3, 6. after ye comming forth of Egypt. He compoſed the Prouerbs, Eccleſiaſtes, and the Canticles. At length, ſpending his time in the delight of women & ſtraunge Concubines: he, who was a holy man, elected of God as both Sonne and King: fell into idolatry. In regard whereof, his kingdom (after his death) was deuided to the kingdom of Iuda, which was for Rehoboam the Sonne of Salomon; & to the kingdome of Iſraell, for Ieroboam the Sonne of Nabat.
               
            
            
               
               Kings of Iuda, or of Ieruſalem.
               
                  2971.
                  REhoboam the Sonne of Salomon, King of Iuda, deſpiſed his Elders, and adhered to the counſell of young heads. He raigned wickedly 17 yeares. Ieroboam the firſt King of Iſrael, induced the people to idolatry. In this time flouriſhed the Poet Homer.
               
               
                  2988.
                  Abiam the Sonne of Rehoboam, raigned thrée yeares. He truſting in God, ouercame Ieroboam king of Iſrael, who was accompanied with eight hundred thouſand choſen, ſtrong & valiant men, yet loſt fiue hundred thouſand of them, by the others Army, which conſiſted but of foure hundred thouſand.
               
                  2991
                  Aſa, a very good King, raigned one and fortie yeares: he tooke away the Idols, and depoſed his Mother from the Title of Lady, becauſe ſhée had erected them. He, truſting in his Phyſitians, and not requiring helpe of God, being diſeaſed in his féete, dyed.
               
                  3032.
                  Iehoſaphat raigned fiue and twenty yeares, he was a moſt debonaire Prince, appointing euery where Law-makers and Magiſtrates,1111. Kings. 4. Kings 2. admoniſhing them daily to do their dutie. In his time the great Prophet Helias was wrapt vp into heauen. Ahab a moſt wicked King of Iſrael, tooke to wife Iezabel as wicked a woman: they were both reproued by the Prophet Elias: The Prieſtes of Baal were deſtroyed.
               
                  3555.
                  Iehorum, the wicked Sonne of a vertuous Father

raigned eight yeares, beeing the huſband to Athalia the Siſter of Achab. Now was the prophet Elizeus. In theſe dayes Licurgus the Law-maker, did cut off the exceſſe of foode & garments: Heſiodus.
               
               
                  Othozias, importuned by his Mother Athalia,
                  3060. the Daughter of Amry, raigned wickedly one yeare. He was ouerthrowne by Iehu, king of Iſrael, the laſt of Salomons line. Iehu alſo vanquiſhed Iezabel, & the wife and brethren of Achab, with all the Prieſtes of Baal, in whoſe Temple they made their Thefts and Robberies.
               
                  Athalia ſlew all the Royall ſéede or race,306
                        •
                     . except Ioas, who was nouriſhed and kept by Iehoida. Afterward Athalia was ſlaine in the ſeuenth year of her raigne.
               
                  Ioas raigned iuſtly fortie years,3067. during the time of Iehoida the Prieſt: who being dead, hee ſlew Zacharias his ſonne in the Temple. Sardanapalis king of the Aſſyrians beeing then vanquiſhed, threw himſelfe into a fire. Afterward his Monarchie was diuided among his Officers, into the kingdomes of Aſſyria and Medea.
                  The kingdome o
                        •
                      Carthage. 
                  Pigmalion being king of Tyre, Dido his Siſter builded Carthage, which ſhe reduced into a kingdome: ſhee being a woman verie magnanimous, and chaſt, as Iuſtine affirmeth, in his eightéenth Booke, whatſoeuer Virgill and Ouid ſay to the contrary.
               
                  Amaſius raigned fiue and twentie yeares: hee was admoniſhed by the Prophet,3107. not to put his truſt in humain ſtrength: yet for idolatry he was taken and ſlaine by his enimies. Some do report,

that at this time was the ending of the effeminat Sa
                        ••
                     anapalu
                        •
                     , and ſo conſequentlie of the firſt Aſſyrian Monarchy, which continued after Nimrod, 1358. yeares.
               
                  3136.
                  Oſias raigned iuſtly two and fiftie yeares. He vndertook the ſacrifycing Prieſts office, for which he was ſwitten with Leproſie, in the 
                     •
                  8. yeare of his raigne. In this time, Abdias, Amos, and Ioel the Prophets liued. Belus, by ſome termed Belocus, firſt King of the Babylonians, was tranſlated to the new Kingdome of the Aſſyrians,
                  The kingdomes of the Medes and Macedonians. and now was the beginning of the Olympiad in Greece. Then alſo beganne the kingdome of the Medes, by Arſacus Lieutenant to the womaniſh Sardanapalus: And that of the Macedonians by Gramaus.
               
               
                  3188.
                  Ioathan a good King, raigned ſixtéene yeares, in which time were Micheas, Nahum, and Ionas the Prophets. Romulus and Remus, in the firſt yeare of the ſeauenth Olympiade, builded the Citie of Rome in Italy: For the beginning whereof, it is neceſſarie to read Dioniſius Halicarnaſſeus in his firſt Booke: Solynus Cap. 2, and Pauſanias, rather then Catoes Originals, and Fabius Pictors fragments, ſuſpected rather of Noueltie, then antiquity:The kingdom of the Lydians. according to Beat. Reuanus. Some do referre it to the following raigne: about this time began the kingdome of the Lydians, by Ardis,
               
               
                  3204
                  Achaz the idolater, raigned ſixtéene years. Eſay then propheſied (as appeareth in his ſeauenth Chapter) of Ieſus Chriſt, to bee borne of a Virgin.

And Micheas, that hee ſhould be borne in Bethlehem:
                  The kingdom of the Romans. About this time began the kingdom of the Romaines, by Romulus.
               
               
                  Ezechias a good King, raigned 29. yeares:3218. hee brake the Serpent of Moſes, whereunto the people had ſo many yeares offered Sacrifice. Salmanazar King of the Aſſyrians (for Idolatry) ruined the whole kingdom of Iſrael vnto Samaria, which had continued 244. yeares. The Angell of God did then ouerthrow an hundred & four-ſcore M. men of warre, in the Army of Sennacherib, for their moſt exeerable blaſphemies. Tobias was captiue then in Niniuy. Numa Pompillius, king of Rome, added two months to the yeare, Ianuary and February, there being no more before, but ten, in regard of them.
               
                  Manaſſes, being a wicked and cruel king,3247. raigned 55. yeares: he cauſed the Prophet Eſay to be ſawed in ſunder thorow the middeſt. And being captiued by his enemies, he acknowledged God; and being reduced to his kingdom, he demoliſhed the Idols. Tullus Hoſtilius, third King of Rome deſtroyed the kingdom of Alba, whence came the family of the Iulij to Rome. Candaulus & Gyges were then Kings of Lydia.
               
               
                  Amon, a more wicked King then his Father Manaſſes, raigned two yeares,3302. 
                  4. Kings 11 and was ſlaine by his owne ſeruants. Zaleucus was then Law-giuer to the Locrians.
               
               
                  Ioſias a very good King, raigned 31. yeares:3304. he cut downe the hallowed Woods and the Idolles. In this time the Bookes of Moyſes, which for

many yeares together had bin loſt, were found againe, and now liued Sophonie, Abacuck, and Ieremy the Prophets: as alſo Archilocus, Simonides, and Phocylides
                  ▪ Poets. Ancus Martius, was the fourth king of Rome, Epimenides.
               
               
                  3335.
                  Ioacham, a very euill King, the third moneth of his raigne, was led captiue into Egypt, and his Brother conſtituted king in his place, by the king of Egypt.
               
                  3336.
                  Iocim raigned eleauen yeares. For his abhominations, he was chained and led captiue to Babylon, by Nabuchadonoſer the great king of the Aſſyrians. Tarquinius Priſcus, was fift king of the Romains. In Greece then liued Sapho, Steſichorus, Pherecydes, Draco, Solon, and others of the Sages.
               
                  3346.
                  Ioachim, otherwiſe called Ieconias, being 18. yeares old, and beſiedged by the Aſſyrians, yeelded himſelfe with his Mother, his Princes, and the greater part of his people, to Nabuchadonoſer and was tranſported into Babylon, where (in priſon he begat Salathiell, Father to Zorobabell: then liued Ezechiell, Baruch, and Daniell.
               
               
                  3
                        •
                     49.
                  Sedechias his Vnckle, was conſtituted king in the place of Ieconias, by Nabuchadonoſer, by whom, after the eleuenth yeare of his raigne, hée was taken as a Rebell: his eyes were pluckt out, and then he was led with the reſt of the people to Babylon. In this time, the Temple and City of Ieruſalem was miſerably burned by the Aſſyrians
               
               Then happened that lamentable captiuity of Babylon, fore-told by the Prophets, and continued

ſeauentie yeares: all which was occaſioned by the contempt of Gods word, falſe Doctrine, and auarice in the Prieſts and Prophets: conioyned with the tirrany of their Kings, and ſinnes of the people, but eſpecially idolatry: as appeareth in Ieremy, Cap. 19, 22, 23, 29, 32. Baruch 6. Ezechiell 13, 22. And then was this great Nabuchadonoſer (for his arrogancie) thruſt out of his kingdome, and fed with the Beaſts. Seruius Tullius was ſixt King of the Romaines; Croeſus in Lydia, Balthazar in Babylon, and, for abuſing the Veſſels of the Temple, hee was ſlaine. The kingdome then deuolued to Darius the Medean, Vnckle of Cyrus, King of Perſia and Medea.
               
            
            
               The Monarchy of the Caldeans, Aſſyrians, or Babylonians.
               
                  NAbuchadonoſer,
                  3362. the great King of Babylon, in the 24. yeare of his raign, and of the world 3362. was he that eſtabliſhed the great and firſt Monarchy, deſcribed with that of the Perſians, Grecians, and Romaines by Daniell,
                  Daniel. 2, 7 compared to the head of gold, and to the Eagle flying. It endured but ſeauenty eight yeares, in three Kings, and he that raigned longeſt, it was but 43 yeares.
               
                  Euilmerodach, whom Herodotus calleth Labynitus, raigned thirty yeares. Thales, Clito,
                  3382. 
                  Herod. lib. 1
                   
                  Pittacus, Bias, Cleobulus and Periander, wiſemen

of Greece, are all referred to this time. And it is an error to ſeperate them otherwiſe, as ſome haue done, Solo
                        •
                     
                   being the moſt ancient.
               
                  3412.
                  Balthazar, the contemner of God, and renewer of the olde Caldean idolatry (aboliſhed before) abuſing (in his feaſts) thoſe veſſelles,Blaſphemie the ruine of the monarchy. which had bin taken from the temple of Ieruſalem, and making a mockery at the true God of the Iewes; was put to death by the Medes and Perſians, who poſſeſſed them-ſelues of the Monarchy, in the tenth yeare of his raigne. There is great difficulty about this Monarchie, which cannot heere bee declared.
            
            
               The Monarchy of the Perſians.
               
                  3406.
                  CYrus ſent home the Iewes into their country, with Zerobabell their condu
                     •
                  er, to repayre the Temple. He made warre againſt the Scythians for the ſpace of ſixtéene yeares: in which time raigned his Son C
                        •
                     mbyſes. Daniell then foretolo the paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt, and the deſolate ruine of Ieruſalem vnder Veſpaſian,
                  Dan. 9. Matth 24 Luke 
                        •
                     1 after ſeauenty Wéekes were paſſed ouer, which were 490. yeares after the repayration of the Citty: Tarquine the proude, for the violation of Lucretia, was then chaſed out of Rome. Conſulles were created the year 244. after the building of Rome. Cyrus raigned 29. yeares. Read more of Cyrus & his ſonne, Herodotus lib. 1, 3. Xenophon 8.
               
                  
                  Cambyſes raigned alone eight yeeres,3435. being a cruell man, he ſlew his Brother and Siſter, and cauſed a Iudges ſkin to be flayed off, becauſe hee had iudged falſely. Pythagoras the great Phyloſopher ſailed into Egypt, to learne Diuinity, and to Babylon for Aſtrologie, and the courſe of the ſtarres. Many doo referre the Hiſtory and ouerthrow of Holofernes to this time: but according to Genebrard, it is reputed to the time of Nabuehadonoſer.
               
               
                  Darius, the ſonne of Hidaſpes, otherwiſe called Ahaſuerus, the huſband of Heſter,
                  3443. raigned 36 yearee. He entred into Greece with ſixe hundred thouſand fighting men, & afterward vanquiſhed Miltiades, being accompanied onely with eleuen thouſand men. Corioſanus the Romaine was now put into exile, and Eſope compoſed his booke of Fables. Now liued alſo Anacharſis, An
                        •
                     ximenes, and Herac
                        •••
                     us Phyloſophers. Anaximander invented the Horo
                     •
                  oge and Spheare, & ſtrong Milo was in this time. Read more of Darius in Herodotus and Iuſtine. Lib. 1.
               
                  Xerxes raigned twenty yeares. Hee aſſayled the Grecians with a far greater Army,3470. then that his Father had, which was repulſed by Themiſto
                        •
                     les. In meane while, his Sonne Artaxerxes hold the Kingdome, by whoſe commaundement, E
                        ••
                     r
                        •
                     s reſtored the Common-weale of the le
                        •
                     es; and Nehemias (by ſtrong hande) repayred the walles of the Citty. Now liued C
                        •
                     mon, Ariſtedes and Pindarus the Poet, as alſo Pericles, that wiſe and valiant Athenian Captaine: of whom,

read more in his life, ſet downe by Plutarch.
               
               
                  3506.
                  Artaxerxes, or Darius Long-hand, helde the kingdom aboue twentie yeares. Now did the ten men write the law of the twelue tables at Rome; and now liued Empedocles, Sophocles, Gorgias, Anacreon, Democritus, Euclides, Hippocrares, and Herodotus. Greece became diuided into two factions,The Pelaponeſian warre. by reaſon of a great & contentious war. Read more thereof in Thucidides & Xenophon.
               
               
                  3544.
                  Darius the Baſtard raigned 19. years: in whoſe time liued Socrates, Ariſtophanes, Thucidides, Alcibiades, Lyſander, Conon, Epaminondas, Architas, Timon, Dioniſius of Siracuſa the Tyrant. And now was the kingdome of the Sicambrians, and Francus in Franconia (according to Trithemius) where raigned forty Kings.
               
                  3565.
                  Artaxerxes Mnemon, raigned fortie yeares, and exerciſed acts of Armes with his Brother Cyrus. Thraſibulus chaſed the Lacedemonian Tyrants out of Athens. Rome was taken by the Gaules, vnder the conduct of Brennus that bold warriour. Then liued Xenophon the Captaine, Phyloſopher and Orator, Plato, Phocion, Iſocrates, Polybius,
                  Tit Liu dec. 4. Lib. 8.
                   
                  Praxiteles, Metaſthenes, Camillus, and Crates.
               
               
                  3604.
                  Occhus (a moſt cruell Tyrant) raigned ſixe and twenty yeares. Phillip King of Macedon, oppreſſed the liberty of all Greece. At Rome was then Curtius Torquatus, Decius Corinnus: the hundred and ſixty Matron Sorcereſſes. Iadus was High-Pr
                     •
                  eſt of the Iewes, and then liued Beroſus the Hiſtorian.
               
                  
                  Arſes or Arſaces, raigned thrée yeares.3625. His tyrrannicall actions were the cauſe, that all the race of great Cyrus periſhed. Alexander the great, the Son of Phillip, then vanquiſhed and demoliſhed the Citty of Thebes: And then were Demoſthenes, Diogenes, and Epicurus.
               
               
                  Darius the laſt King,3629. was ingrateful and diſloyall, hee was alſo ouer-come by Alexander, in the ſixt yeare of his raigne. The Samnites then ſubdued the Romaines: and then was Ceius Papyrius Curſor. M. Curius Dentatus, triumphing in his humility of minde, refuſed the treaſures of the Samnites, and he would neither be vanquiſhed in warre, nor corrupted with money. Valer. Max. lib. 2. cap. 3.
            
            
               The Monarchy of the Graecians.
               
                  ALexander the great, hauing one onely Army, of two and thirty thouſand footmen,3630. and foure thouſand fiue hundred horſemen, marched thorow all Aſia. In the ſeuenth yeare of his Monarchy, he was poyſoned in Babylon. Read his life, ſet downe in Plutarch, and Iuſtine lib. 11.
               After his death, there grew diſſention betwéene the Captaines and Macedonian Lordes, who ſhould be ſucceſſour of this great Empyre. At length it was reſolued on the perſon of Arideus, ſur-named Phillip, the Brother of Alexander, & Perdiceas was created Captaine General. Soone after, the Prouinces and Gouernments were diſtributed among Alexanders Captains, who immediately

appropriated them to themſelues, each one enioying the title and quality of a king. Thus this great Monarchy was deuided into many parts and kingdomes: all which (neuertheleſſe) were (in ſhort while) reduced into three principall kingdomes, Macedon, Syria, and Egypt.
               
            
            
               Of Macedon, and the ſucceſsion of Kings there raigning
               
                  3641.
                  ARideus Phillippus, the Brother of Alexander, who had bin elected ſucceſſor, raigned in Macedon ſix yeares, gouerning wholy by Antipater, who managed all the affaires of the kingdome. This king was ſlain by Olympias the mother of Alexander.
               
               
                  3647.
                  Caſſander the Sonne of Antipater, after the death of Arideus inuaded Macedon, hauing cauſed the Mother and wife of Alexander to be ſlain, Olympias and Roxana: hee raigned eightéene yeares.
               
                  3665.
                  Antipater and Alexander, the ſons of Caſſander, raigned together foure years. Antipater ſlew his Mother. Alexander made warre vpon Antipater, calling Demetrius to his aide: who cauſed him to be ſlaine.
               
                  Demetrius, after the death of Alexander, raigned ſeauen yeares.3669. But hauing attempted to recouer the Empire of his father Antigonus in Aſia-min
                        •
                     r, which Seleucus then held: he was vanquiſhed and taken by Seleucus, and dyed in priſon.
               
                  
                  Antigonus, Gomathes,
                  3686. the Sonne of Demetrius, raigned afterwarde in Macedo
                        •
                     , for the ſpace of 36. yeares, hauing recouered the kingdome, which (after his Fathers death) had béene inuaded by many, that held it for the ſpace of eight yeares. For Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes, held it firſt. Lyſimachus next tooke it from him, while he was ſeriouſly buſied with the Romaines. Lyſimachus being dead, Proſom
                        •
                     us Ceraunus invaded it: but in ſhort while after, this Ptolomie was ſlaine by the Gau
                        ••
                     s, who came into Macedon, and (by this meanes) Antigonus re-entred vpon the kingdome of his Father.
               
                  Demetrius, who raigned eight yeares,3721. left his Sonne, named Phillip, verie young in years, and one Antigonus was made his Tutor or Gouernor, who marrying with the Mother of his Pupill, by that meanes made himſelfe king.
               
                  Antigonus Doſon raigned twelue yeares. Aratus chiefe of the Achaian line,3732 hee called to his aide, againſt Cleomines King of the Lacedemonians, who was vanquiſhed by Antigonus, and tooke the Cittie of Spar
                        ••
                     .
               
               
                  Phillip the ſon of Demetrius, raigned 44. years:3742. and hauing made warre againſt the Romaines, he was vanquiſhed vnder the conduct of T. Quintus Flaminius, and all taken from him that he inioyed, except the ſole kingdome of Macedon: wherein ſucceeded
               
                  Perſ
                        •
                     us who raigned eleuen yeares.3786. Hée was vanquiſhed and taken priſoner by Paulus Aemilius, Conſull and Captaine Generall of the Romaines,

and led in triumph to Rome, the yeare of the Citties building, 587. And then was Macedon reduced into the forme of a Prouince.
            
            
               Of Syria, and the Succeſſion of the Kings there raigning.
               
                  3653.AFter the death of Alexander the Great, Seleucus was the firſt king of Syria. Perdiccas being dead, he regained the Cittie of Babylon, & part of the Indiaes, Soone after, by the helpe of Ptolomy king of Egypt, hee made warre againſt Antigonus, who commaunded in the leſſer Aſia: and hauing ouercome him, laid claime to the kingdome, and was made King thereof, and in ſhort time after, he ioyned al Aſia-minor to Syria. Antigonus being ſlaine in battaile: And thus by him was eſtabliſhed the great Empire of Syria. Hee vanquiſhed alſo Lyſimachus, and took from him the kingdom of Macedon. But ſoon after, he was ſlaine by Ptolomeus Cerannus, hauing raigned 32. yeares in Syria.
               
               
                  3684.
                  Antiochus Soter (that is to ſay, Sauior or Preſeruer) the Son of Seleucus, raigned 19. yeares, to whom ſuccéeded.
               
                  37
                        •
                     3.
                  Antiochus, ſur-named Deos, that is to ſay God, who raigned 15. yeares.
               
                  3718.
                  Seleucus Callinicus, the ſon of Antiochus, raigned twentie yeares. In his time, Arſaces the Parthean, reuolted from his obedience, & hauing vanquiſhed manie of his neighboring Nations, hee founded the kingdom of the Partheans, which afterward became moſt potent.
               
                  
                  Seleuchus, ſirnamed Cerannus, (that is to ſay,3
                        •
                     3
                        •
                     . 
                  Lightning) raigned thrée yeares: And after him came Antiochus the great, who raigned 36. yéers.3741 He was conquered by the Romans (vnder the Scipioes conduct) in two foughten battailes: with whom (afterward) he made peace, on condition that he ſhould leaue the leſſer Aſia, from ye mountaine Taurus, to the Romans. After whom ſuccéeded his ſonne.
               
                  Seleuchus Philopater, that is to ſay, A Louer of his Father, who reigned twelue yeares.3
                        •
                     7
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  Antiochus Epiphanes (that is to ſay, Famous) who alſo was ſonne to great Antiochus,
                  379
                        •
                     . raigned twelue yeares. This is the King that took Ieruſalem, and did ſo much harme to the Iewes, polluted and contaminated the Temple, and would conſtraine them to change their Religion. He put the ſeauen brethren moſt cruelty to death, & made a moſt famous Martyrdome of them. His Army was vanquiſhed by Iudas Machabeus, and after him, his ſonne,
               
                  Antiochus Eupator, raigned two yeares.380
                        •
                     
                   In which time, Demetrius the Sonne of Seleuchus Philopater (who had béene giuen in Hoſtage to the Romans, for the peace of Antiochus ye great, his Graundfather) being fled from Rome, & come into Syria; cauſed a great number of the people to reuolt, that afterwarde deliuered him into the handes of the ſaid King Antiochus, who cauſed him immediatly to be put to death.
               
                  Demetrius Soter, after the death of Antiochus,
                  38
                        ••
                     
                   raigned x. yeares. In this time, the Iewes were

gouerned by the Machabees.
               
               
                  3813.
                  Alexander, the naturall ſonne of Antiochus Epiphanes, hauing gathered an Army, and being ſeized of ſome Citties in Syria, vanquiſhed Demetriu, in battaile, and ſlew him. This Alexander raigned fiue yeares.
               
                  3818.
                  Demetrius Nicanor, the ſonne of Demetrius Soler, came into Syria with an Army, and being ayded by the King of Egypt, he invaded the kingdome. Alexander fled into Arabia, where he was ſlaine: and Demetrius raigned two yeares.
               
                  3820.
                  Antiochus Sedectes, the ſonne of Alexander, (aſſiſted by Triphon) expulſed Demetrius, and inuaded the kingdome, which he held 3. yeares.
               
                  3823.
                  Triphon ſlew Antiochus and poſſeſſed himſelf of Syria, where he raigned three yeares: Demetrius being yet liuing, who was (in ſhort while after) taken by the Partheans.
               
               
                  3826.
                  Antiochus, ſurnamed Soter and Pinus, Brother of Demetrius Nicanor vāquiſhed Tryphon, who afterward was ſlaine: And hauing raigned twelue yeares, he died in a battel againſt the Partheans.
               
               
                  3838.
                  Demetrius Nicanor, who before had raigned two yeares, was let go by the Partheans, & raigned afterward foure yeares more: But being ouercome in battaile by Alexander Zebin, he was ſlaine.
               
                  3841.
                  Alexander Zebin, whome the King of Egypt had ſent to the Syrians complaining of the cruelty of Demetrius, raigned three yeares.
               
                  3844
                  Antiochus Grypus, the ſonne of Demetrius, hauing

vanquiſhed and ſlaine Alexander Zebin in battell, raigned 29. yeares. During which time, his Brother Antiochus the Cyzicenian, made warre vpon him, without intermiſſion. After the death of this Antiochus Grypus, mightie troubles were in Syria for ſome time, becauſe they of the royall race were in continuall warres, killing and ma
                     •
                  ſacring one another. Vntill ſuch time as one Antiochus (the ſole remainder of that race) dying without any ſucceſſor: Tigranes K. of Armenia inuaded this great kingdom: wherevpon. he was (not long after) ſurprized by the Romaines, vnder the conduct of Pompey, and the Countrey was then reduced into the forme of a Prouince: the yeare of the Citty of Rome, 693.
               
            
            
               Of Egypt, and the Succeſsion of the Kings there raigning.
               
                  PTolomeus Lagus,
                  3641. 
                  Soter the moſt excellent man of all Alexanders Captains, was made King, & raigned fortie yeares ouer Egypt: Theophraſtus, Zeno, Theocritus, and Menander then liuing, and the Romaines made Warre agaynſt Pyrrhus. Read more of this King in Iuſtine,
                  The kingdome of Scotland. 
                  lib. 13, 14, 15. Oroſius lib. 3, cap. 23. Ferguſius was the firſt king of Scotland.
               
               
                  Ptolome Philadelphus, raigned 38. yeares.3682. He firſt appointed that great Library in Alexandria, and cauſed the Bookes of the Bible to be tranſlated into the Gréeke tongue, by the ſeauentie two Interpreters. Ariſteus, Phalaris, Chriſyppus,

Carneades, and Aratus then liued: and at Rome happened the firſt Punick warre, Regulus.
               
               
                  Ptolomey the Liberall, huſband to his owne Siſter,
                     
                        ••
                     17. raigned 26. yeares. At Rome then grew the ſecond Punick War: and then liued the Scipioes, Fabius Maximus, and Marcellus. Hanniball was vanquiſhed by Scipio Affricanus the eldeſt: And in this time liued the Authour of the Booke of Wiſedome.
               
                  3743
                  Ptolomey the Parricide, raigned 17. yeares. He ſlew his Mother and his Siſter, who alſo was his wife. At Rome began the warre of Macedon, againſt King Phillip; and the war of Aſia, againſt the great Antiochus, and Hanniball the Fugitiue. Then liued great Cato, Ennius, Neuius, Plautus, Panetius: And Ieſus the Sonne of Syrach, Author of the Booke of Eccleſiaſticus: Simon the Iuſt being Byſhop of the Iewes.
               
               
                  3760.
                  Ptolomey Epiphanes, vnder the tutelage of the Romaines, raigned 24. yeares. The Brethren Macchabees did then valiantly withſtande Antiochus, the moſt cruell Tyraunt of Syria: his great repentance is to be read in the ſecond Booke of Macchabees, the ninth Chapter.
               
                  3784.
                  Ptolomey, called Matricide, raigned 35. yeares. Paulus Aemilius hauing taken the Perſian king, made Macedon a Prouince to the Romaynes. Then happened the third Punicke Warre: The warre of Achaia, and of Numantia in Spain, vnder Scipio Affricanus the younger, and Lelius, Terence then liuing.
               
                  3819.
                  Ptolomey the Liberall, otherwiſe called Phyſcus,
                  
a verie deteſtable man, beeing Brother to Ptolomy the Matricide, raigned nine & twentie yeares. He married his Brothers wife, and afterward her Daughter. The Sects of the Phariſies, Sadduces, and Eſſeans then aroſe.Sects of the Phariſies. At Rome was the ſeruile warre: And the lawes for actions of the field by the Gracchi.
               
               
                  Ptolomey Alexander,
                  3848. hauing expelled his brother Lathyrus, raigned ſeauentéene yeares. Afterward he was thruſt out himſelfe by his owne people, for the death of Cleopatra, a wicked woman. At Rome was the Iugurthine warre,pli. l. 2. ca. 31
                   and three Sunnes viſibly ſéene in this time. Functius doth attribute theſe ſeauentéene yeares, and this raigne, to Ptolomey Lathyrus, preferring him before Ptolomey Alexander.
               
               
                  Ptolomey Lathyrus, beeing repealed to rule againe, raigned eightéene years.3865. At Rome was the Cimbrian warre, Mithridates warre, and the ciuill warre betwéene Marius and Sylla. Then li-Lucullus, Antonius, and Craſſus Orators.Warre between Marius & Sylla 
                  Lucretius the Poet, Varro: Sylla dominéered cruelie, who retyring himſelfe, to liue ſollitarilie in the fields:Flor. lib. 3.
                   dyed of Vermine engendred in his owne bodie.
               
                  Ptolomey Aule
                        •
                     es, raigned thirty yeares.
                     
                        •
                     883. Being excluded by his owne people, vnder Pompeyes authority, he was reſeated by Gabinius. Pompey ouer-came Hieras and Sertorius, the Pyrates, as alſo Tigranes and Mithridates. Then was the conſpiracy of Cataline; Caeſar vanquiſhed the 
                     
                        •
                     aules: Cicero liued in exile: and Craſſus was

foyled by the Partheans.
               
               
                  3913.
                  Ptolomey Dionyſius, the laſt King, raigned 8. yeares: he cauſed great Pompeyes head to bée cut off. Then liued Catullus, Hortenſius, Saluſt, Diodorus Siculus, Cato Ʋtican, M. Lepidus, Marcellus, and Marke Anthony.
               
               
                  3920.
                  Cleopatra helde the kingdome a-while with her Brother, and afterward (wholly by her ſelfe) two and twentie yeares: Shee, vnderſtanding that Marke Anthonie was vanquiſhed by Auguſtus, ſlew her ſelfe. Now was the ciuil warre between Pompey and Caeſar:
                  Ciuil War betweene Caeſar and Pompey. And that goodly Library, that contained two hundred thouſand Volumes, was burned in this time. Plutarch in vit. Antoni.
               
            
            
               The Monarchy of the Caeſars, or Romaines.
               
                  3918.
                  IƲlius Caeſar, a very gracious Prince, and one of the Worlds chiefeſt Captaines: raigned fiue yeares. He vanquiſhed Pompey and his confederates: Ptolomy hee ſlew, & reſtored Cleopatra his friend (Siſter to Ptolomy) to the kingdom of Aegypt. Returning home to Rome, he was ſlaine in the Senate houſe, by Brutus, Caſsius, and other Conſpirators. Dioſcorides then liued: but if you would haue more of Caeſars life, read Suetonius & Florus, in the life of Caeſar.
               
               
                  3923.
                  Octauius Augustus, the laſt Nephew of Iulius, by the Siſters ſide, and his adopted Sonne, raigned 56. yeares: he was happy in war, moderate in peace, and liberall to euery one. Then liued

                  Virgill, Horace, Tibullus, Propertius, Vitruuius, Mecenas: And then dyed Cleopatra, and her huſband Marke Anthony, Aegypt being then reduced into a Prouince. Herod a ſtranger (fauoured by Auguſtus) was then King of Iudea. So, the Scepter being wholly taken from Iuda; Ieſus Chriſt, God and man, the Sauiour of the world, was then borne of a Virgin in Bethlehem, according to the Propheſies of Iacob, Geneſ. 49, Eſay 7, Micheas 5.
                  
               
               
                  Ieſus Chriſt came in the yeare of Auguſtus forty two, and of the world, 3963.
                  3963. 
                  Ouid was then in exile: the Citty of Lyons founded: and then liued Titus Liuius, Valerius Maximus, Strabo: and Francus King of the Sicambrians, in the lower Allemaigne: Aquila, Tuberus, Galba, Labeus and Caius were then Law-giuers, or Law-Makers. Herod the great murderer of Innocents, and there were numbred then at Rome, foure hundred, ſixty foure thouſand men.
               
                  Claudius Tiberius, the Sonne of Liuia, afterward Wife to Auguſtus, raigned 23. yeares,The yeares of Chriſt. beginning very well, but proouing afterward to bée moſt wicked. Ieſus Chriſt, for our ſaluation, was then crucified in Hieruſalem, vnder Pilate the Prouoſt of Iudea: he ſaid, that A good Shepheard ſhould clip his Sheepe, and not deuour them.
               
               
                  C. Caligula, Sonne of Germanus,
                  17 a moſt wicked Man, raigned thirtéene yeares. This beaſt, the ruine of men, made himſelfe to bee adored as God: hee poyſoned his Vnckle Tiberius, and defloured all his Siſters, leauing them then to others

like abuſing.39 
                  T. Claudius, Vnckle of Caligula, and Monſter of Men, raigned fouretéene yeares. He preferred Nero before his owne Son, by the treaſon of whom hee was poyſoned with a Muſhrome. Meſſalina, his firſt wife peereleſſe in all labricity and wickednes, then flouriſhed: And Saint Peter the Apoſtle liued (reported to bee the firſt Byſhop of Rome:) then liued likewiſe Philo the Iew, Perſeus, Mela, Pliny the elder, and Columella. Saint Paule the Apoſtle went then thorow the World, proclaiming Ieſus Chriſt, accompanyed with Saint Luke. Then liued Dioniſius Areopagita: And then was the firſt Councell of Ieruſalem.
               
               
                  43.
                  Nero, the Sonne of Agripina, afterward the Wife of Claudius, raigned thirtéene yeares. Hee was the firſt Perſecuter of the Church, and did put Saint Peter and Saint Paule to death: hee ſlew likewiſe his Maiſter Seneca, alſo his owne Mother, and Lucan the Poet. Then liued Simon Magus, and Appolonius. Nero beeing erpulſed from Rome, ſlew himſelfe: after hee had ſet Rome on fire, to make himſelfe paſtime of a Bon fire.
               
                  57.
                  Sergius Galba the ſeauenth month of his Empire, was ſlaine by Otho. Suetonius, Egeſius, Lib. 4. Cap. 21.
                  
               
               
                  70.
                  M. Siluius Otho, he alſo moſt wickedly ſlewe himſelfe, in the third month of his Empire: confeſſing, that he had cruelly tormented the ſpirit of Galba. According to Suetonius, and Tacitus, Lib. 7.
                  
               
               
                  71
                  Aulus Vitellius, brought vp at Bourdeaus de

Caprea, being a vicious Man and a glutton, was hewed in péeces, and caſt into Tyber, hauing raigned eight months. He cauſed himſelfe to bée ſerued at his Table, with two thouſand ſeuerall kinds of Fiſhes, and ſeauen thouſand of Foules, all at one ſupper. Suetonius, Lib. 9. Ioſephus, Lib. 5. de Bel. Iudas.
               
               
                  Vespaſian, a modeſt and gracious Prince, a louer of ſkilfull men, and good Artiſans, raigned ten yeares, accompanied with his Sonne Titus,
                  71. who ruinated Ieruſalem: Ioſephus, Proclus, Epictetes. This ruine was the moſt lamentable that euer happened, for therein dyed 110000. men: read Ioſephus in his ſixe and ſeauen Bookes of the Iewiſh wars, and Egeſippus.
               
               
                  Titus, the delight and ſollace of mankind,8
                        •
                     . raigned two years. He vſed to ſay, That no man ought to depart from a Prince, with a ſad countenance: Caſſtus, Neracius, Proculeius and Pegaſus were then Lawyers, and Saint Bartholmew was then martired in India: Saint Matthias in Iudea: S. Andrew in Scythia: Saint Mathew in Aethyopia, Saint Thomas in Bragmania. Hieruſalem was then taken: the Famine beeing ſo extreame, as Mothers were compelled to eate their owne children.
               
                  Domitian, Brother to Titus,
                  83. was a moſt wicked man, and perſecuter of the Chriſtians: hee raigned fiftéene yeares: then liued Martiall, Iuuenall, Statius, Trogus: and ſaint Iohn wrote the Goſpell, as alſo Ioſephus did the Warres of the Iewes. Domitian would néedes afterward bée

called God and Lord of his people, wherfore (being hated of all men) he was ſlaine.
               
                  97.
                  Nerua, a good Prince, and the adopted father of Traian, raigned one yeare: he gaue more than an hundred thouſand Crownes, to reléeue poore Cittizens. He tooke away extreame taxations, and (wanting mony) he ſold his garments, plate and Pallace, eſteeming his owne Parents and kindred much leſſe, then he did the publick benefit. The Chriſtians were in great quyet vnder him, and the baniſhed repealed, among whome was S. Iohn.
               
               
                  Traian a good Emperour, but that he perſecuted the Church:99. reigned 19. yeares. Being admoniſhed, that he was ouer gracious to all men, he anſwered: That he was ſuch to his Subiects, as he could wiſh others ſhould be to him, if he were a Subiect. Then liued, S. Ignatius, S. Euſtachius, Pliny the yonger, Plutarch, Aulus Gellius, Suetonius, Tacitus Solinus.
               
               
                  Aelius Adrianus, a man ſtudious and ſkilfull in all Sciences,118. and the firſt Emperour that ſuffered a beard on his face, raigned 21. yeares: Iulius Celſus, Iulian, and Neracius Priſcus, were Lawyers, & councellors to the Emperour. Then were liuing Ptolomy the great Aſtrologer, Phanorinus, Dioniſius the Mileſian, and Heliodorus. Hieruſalem was repaired by Adrian, who therefore had his name chaunged, and was called Helias.
               
               
                  Antoninus Pius, reigned 23. yeares. He was a Prince of ſuch eſtéeme,139. as ſtraunge Nations

would reſort vnto him, and make him Iudge of their differences; for hee had alway this ſaying ready: I had rather ſaue one Cittizen,
                  A diuine ſaying of a Pagane. 
                  then kill a thouſand Enemies. In this time were Polycarpus, Ireneus, Iuſtine Martire, Egeſippus, Appian, Florus, Macrobius, Iuſtine, Gallen, and Palladius: Lucian the Atheyſt, alſo was then torne with Dogs. This Emperour tooke awaie the wages or hire of ſtrumpets, punniſhed idle Magiſtrats, and was called Father of his country. Read Eutropius, Lib. 8. Theleſphorus the ninth Pope (as ſome report) did then inſtitute, or rather reſtore the time of Lent.
               
                  M. Antoninus, the Phyloſopher,162. called Aurelius, borne in Gaule, with L. Commodus Verus, and called Brethren in the Bookes of the Pandectes) raigned 19. yeares. This good prince being vnwilling to oppreſſe his ſubiectes, made ſale of all his faireſt and richeſt Iewels, plate, & wearing garmentes belonging vnto him and his wife. Eutrop. lib. 8.
               
               
                  Lucius Aurelius Verus, gouerned the empyre with his brother Marcus Antoninus, the ſpace of eleauen yeares: By ſome Authors he is ſet down in order before his brother, & by others after him.
               
                  L. Commodus,
                  181. the moſt wicked ſonne of good Antoninus, raigned 13. yeares. He was ſtrangled by his Concubine, and other Conſpirators. Eutrop. lib. 8. Oroſius lib. 8. cap. 18. Lampridius doth moſt amply deſcribe his life at large.
               
                  Ae
                        •
                     ius Pertinax raigned ſix moneths.194. He had refuſed the Empire, and beeing deſirous to reforme

the gouernment, he was ſlaine by Iulian his ſucceſſour; who bought the name of Caeſar of the Warriors. The people much bemoaned this Prince, crying out aloud: O father of goodneſſe; Father of the Senate; Father of al bounty: Farewell.
               
               
                  194.
                  V. Iulian, raigned ſeauen moneths, and being hated of all men, for ſleying his predeceſſor, him ſelfe was alſo ſlaine by appointment of the Senate. Diſſention grew amongſt the Chriſtians, for the celebration of Eaſter; And the ſecond Councell appointed the day of Sunday, and fiue other after, Euſeb. lib. 5, cap. 24. Metianus, S
                        •
                     euola, Martianus and Caſsius, were now Iuriſconſultes: Aphrodiſeus and Aphronius Sophyſters.
               
                  Peſcennius Niger, or Nigerius, the ſonne of Annius Fuſcus, indifferently lerned, fierce, proud, and inclined to all vice: was ſaluted as Emperour by the ſouldiors of Syria, where he commanded,195. and was ſlaine by Seuerus.
               
               
                  L. Septim
                        •
                     us Seuerus, raigned 18. yeares. He was a Perſecutor of the Church, but otherwiſe a valiant Prince, addicted both to good letters and Armes. He was ſo well beloued, and gouerned ſo nobly, that the Senate ſaid of him: Eyther he ſhould neuer haue bin borne, or elſe hee deſerued neuer to die. Read Spart. and Vict. Then liued Origen, Tertullian, Philoſtrates the Sophiſter, and Apuleyus.
               
               
                  Cl. Albinus, iſſued of the Romaines families, of the Poſthumians and Albines, made himſelfe

Emperour in France. He was ſurpriſed by the Souldiers, and brought halfe aliue to Souerus: where hauing his head ſmitten off, he was hanged on a gibbet, and being torne with dogges, he was throwne into the Riuer.
               
                  A. B. Caracalla, the ſonne of Seuerus,
                  213. and huſband to his ſtepmother, raigned ſeuen years. He ſlue Geta his brother, and Papinian the great and famous Lawyer, with diuers other. At laſt, himſelfe was ſlaine by a ſouldior of his Guarde. Herod. lib. 4.
               
               
                  Antoninus Geta, the ſonne of Seuerus and Iulia, borne at Milaiu, After the Parthian warre, wherein he wan great fauour, was called Caeſar Antoninus, in the life time of his father.
               
                  Op. Macrinus, with his ſonne Diadumenus,
                  220. raigned one yeare. Both the one and other had their heads ſmitten off by their men of warre. Macrinus was learned and ſeuere, but (withall) deteſtable and craftie, cauſing his predeceſſor to be murdred.
               
                  Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Heliogabalus,
                  221. the Baſtard of Caracalla, who was a diſhoneſt whore-hunter, and moſt abhominable in life beſide: gaue great eſtates to wicked Bawds, Pandors, Ieſters, &c. And being generally deſpiſed, he was ſlaine by his ſouldiors, in the fourth year of his raigne: both his owne bodie and his mothers being dragd along the ſtréets, and caſt into the common layſtall.
               
                  Alexander Seuerus, raigned peacebly without e
                     ••
                  uſion of bloud 13. years. He was a good prince,
                     
                        •
                     2
                        •
                     
                  
                  
and did vtterly forbid the ſelling of Offices. Vlpianus, Paulus, Pomponius, Alphenens, Affricanus, Calliſtratus, and other excellent Ciuill Lawyers (the ſchollers of Papinian) then liued, with Dion the Hiſtorian,The kingdome of Perſia and Philoſtratus The Kingdome of the Perſians was then founded by Artaxerxes, and after tranſported to the Sarazens, and now commanded by the Sophi.
               
               
                  238.
                  Maximinus, a perſecutor of the Chriſtians, raigned three yeares. Being at firſt but a ſilly ſhepheard, he was made Emperor by the Souldiors (without authority of the Senate) and then by them ſlaine.
               
                  Gordianus, a Prince of a Noble ſpirite, with his ſonne named Gordianus the younger,241. a good Prince, raigned ſix yeares, and was ſlaine by Phillip his ſucceſſor. In his time was a woonderfull Ecclipſe of the Sunne. Read I. Capitolinus, who placeth alſo Pupienus and Balbinus (created by the Senate) with Gordianus the elder.
               
                  Pupienus Maximus, a new man, and ſonne to a Smith, gaue himſelfe alwaies to vertue and Military ſeruices, prouing fortunate againſt the Polonyans and Germans.
               
               
                  M. Caelius Babynus, and Pupienus after they had béene Conſuls, and that the Gordians were ſlaine in Affryca, were created Emperors by appointment of the Senate, againſt Maximinus, and both of them were vndeſeruedly ſlaine.
               
                  Gordianus the ſecond, yongeſt ſonne of Gordianus by his daughter, born at Rome: was ſlain

in a ſedition of ſouldiers, by Phillip Prefect of the Pretorians.
               
               
                  C. Ʋalens Hostilianus, is not placed in this ranke by ſome Hiſtorians, becauſe immmediately he died, ſmitten with the Peſtilence, ſo that ſcarſly there remaineth any memory of him.
               
                  Phillip, an Arabian by Nation,247. was the firſt Chriſtian of the Caeſars, and raigned fiue yeares. He gaue (by his Teſtament) all his rightes and treaſures to Pope Fabian, And heere began the riches of the Roman Church. Hee was likewiſe ſlaine by his ſucceſſour, as he had kilde his Predeceſſour.
               
                  Decius Triaan, a perſecuter of the Chriſtians,252. reigned two yeares. S. Saturnine the Byſhop was martyred at Tholouſe. S. Laurence, Hippolita, Cecily, Agatha, and Appollina.
               
               
                  Q. Herennius Hetruſcus, is not by any Hiſtorian placed among the Emperours. Neuertheleſſe, in this ranke is his picture found, in the booke of Hubert Goltzius, and there it is recorded of him, that he was the ſonne of Decius, & that he was ſlaine in Hungaria, in a Battel againſte the Gothes.
               
               
                  
                     Ʋibius Gallus, with his ſonne Voluſianus,
                  254. reigned two yeares: Being perſecutors of the Church, were both ſlain by the ſouldiors. At this time there was ſuch a contagious peſtilence, and almoſt ſo generally diſpearſed, that in many places, there was left no Creature liuing. This peſtilence continued fiftéene yeares, and ſéemed to be partly occaſioned thorough the wicked gouernment

of this Emperor.
               
                  Aemilianus Lybienus, borne in Mauritania, in his yong yeares followed Armes, and ſoon after he was made Emperor. He was ſlain at Spoleta, being aged 40. yeares.
               
                  256.
                  Licinius Ʋalerianus, with his ſonne Galien, perſecuting the Church, raigned fiftéene yeares. He was Captiue to Sapor King of Perſya, whoe vſed him as a footſtool when he mounted on horſbacke. S. Cyprian and S. Cornelia, were then martyred. Porphirius wrote againſt the Chriſtians: The thirty Tyrants vſurped the Empyre. Read Trebellius, Polyo, &c. S. Paul the firſt Hermite began the ſolitary life.
               
                  Galien the ſon of Valerian, ſuffered the Chriſtians to liue in quiet, and reigned nine years alone, after that his father was ledde captiue into Perſia by Sapor. He was excéeding wiſe, but addicted to Luſt.
               
                  Saloninus Valerianus, the ſonne of Galien, was ſlain with his Father, being retired to Millain, and was but ten yeares old.
               
                  Caſſius Labienus Posthumus, from beeing a ſimple ſouldior, attained to great dignities: and being in France was made Emperor in the time of Galien, where he was ſlaine.
               
                  2
                        •
                     1.
                  Flauius Claudius, (of whom yſſued the familie of the Constantines) a good Prince, of Noble lignage, and highly eſtéemed, reigned two yeares. Dyoniſius being then Pope, deuided the Dioceſſes and Pariſhes of the Chriſtians. Tom. 1. de Concil. Iamblicus, Plotinus, and Iuven
                        •
                     us prieſt,

reduced the foure Goſpels into Hexameter verſes.
               
                  Aurelius Quintillius, brother to Claudius, after the death of his brother was ſaluted as Emperor by the Senate, and ſlaine 17. daies after.
               
                  
                     Ʋalerius Aurelianus, a cruell man, reigned ſix yeares. He tormented the Chriſtians,273. and repulſed the Franconians, entring out of Germanie into Gaul. He was ye firſt that wore an Emperial Crowne: a louer of Military diſcipline, and one that rigorouſly punniſhed the vices of his Souldiors. He vanquiſhed Zenobia a very Warlike Lady, holding the Empyre of the Eaſt.
               
                  Tacitus was ſlain the ſixt moneth of his empyre.279. This good Prince cauſed the books of Cornelius Tacitus to be receiued into all Libraries. The Manicheans began (from the time of Aurelianus) to infect the Church.
               
                  Annius Florianus, brother to Tacitus, being deſirous to raigne, vſurped the Empyre as by inheritance: but in a ſhort time, hee was ſlaine at Tharſus by his ſouldiors.
               
                  Probus a good Prince, the Author of peace in the high and lower Germany or Almain,
                  279. reigned ſix yeares and foure moneths. He ſaid That hee had no need of Warriors, hauing no enemies; and that the ſouldior (not doing any thing) ought not to eate vp publike prouiſion.
               
               
                  Carus, a good and wiſe Prince,286. reigned two yeares, with his ſonnes Carinus and Numerianus, two brethren of very different nature. The firſt, was moſt wicked, and full of cruelty: The

other full of goodneſſe, valour and knowledge. Then liued 
                     Ʋolcatius, Herodian, Lampridius, Spartianus, Pollio, Vopiſcus and Capitolinus Hiſtorians.
               
                  288.
                  Diocleſian with Maximianus Herculius, reigned 20. yeares: he was a moſt cruell perſecutor of the Chriſtians, and would haue himſelfe to be worſhipped. Katharine, Lucy, Agnes, Barbus, Sebastian, Ʋincent, Coſmo and Damian, and innumerable other Martyrs through the world (in his raigne, to the number of 17. M.) were put to death in thirty daies.
               
                  Valerius Maximus, ſir-named Herculius, a man of fierce and cruell nature, was very outragious in luſt, eſpecially with his owne Siſters: blockiſh in giuing councell, without ciuillity and gouernment, and therfore had Diocleſian to aſſiſt him in the Empire.
               
                  208.
                  Constantius Chlorus, father of Conſtantine and Galerius, the one gouerned in the Eaſt, the other in the Weſt foure yeares togither. Conſtantine commanded in Gaul, Spaine, Affrica and Italie: The other in Greece. Arnobius, Lactantius, Dorotheus biſhop of Tyre, Euſebius and other Learned perſonages liued at this time.
               
                  Galerius Maximianus, tearmed Armentarius, becauſe he was a Neat-heards ſon, was made Emp. being a goodly perſon, & a fortunat warrior. Maximinus, nephue to Armentarius by his ſiſter was Emp. & perſecuted the Chriſtians in ye Eaſt. Seuerus Prefect of Italy and Africke, was publiſhed Emperor by Galerius, & fighting with Maxentius
                  ▪ was taken at Ravenna and ſlaine.
               
                  
                  Maxentius, elected Emperor by his ſouldiors raigned a Tyrant, and was like vnto his Father Maximinus. Being vanquiſhed by Constantine néere to Pont-Miluius, he was drowned in a Gulfe, and his body neuer after found.
               
                  Licinius Licinianus, borne of Countrey Parents, was fortunate in the wars which he had againſt Maximinus. Afterward, hee became a mocker of Chriſt, and perſecuted ſuch as beléeued in him; and becauſe he was ignorant, hee was a great enemy to all that were learned.
               
                  Martinianus, was created Caeſar by Licinius againſt Conſtantine, he was in his camp at night, but ſled before next morning.
               
                  Conſtantine the great, ſon of Helena an holy woman, with Maxentius and Licinius,
                  310. reigned 31. yeares. He was religious and affable, and tranſported the Bible into diuers Countries. He aſſembled the Councell of Nice,
                  The Councel of Nice. againſt Arrius the Heretick. He builded the Citty of Conſtantinople, calling it after his owne name: whither the Imperiall ſeate was tranſlated, and changed from Rome into Greece, after he had granted Syluester to be Pope. Euſeb. lib. 10. Niceph. lib. 8.
                  
               
               
                  Criſpus was made Caeſar by his father Conſtantine, but being afterward falſly accuſed to his father, he was put to death, for that he would not conſent to the inordinate appetite of Fauſtine his Stepmother.
               
                  Constantine the ſecond,3
                        •
                     1. with his brethren raigned 17. yeares, ioyning thereto the thrée yeares raigne of Magnentius. Themiſtius, Donatus,
                  
and Libanius the Sophiſter then 
                     •
                  iued: and S. Anthony the Heremite was knowne in Aegypt by many miracles.
               
                  358.
                  Iulian the Apoſtata, helde the true Religion ten yeares, and was named Emperor by the men of warre in Paris, againſt his will▪ He forbad the Chriſtians the ſtudy of letters: and being wounded to death, hee cryed out: At length thou haſt vanquiſhed, O Galilean, S. Cyrill, Optatus, Baſile, Nazianzene, Epiphanius, Hilarie, Didimus, Exuperus· (all learned Diuines) then flouriſhed.
               
                  368.
                  Iouianus, a kind and learned man, raigned eight months, and made confeſſion to his Warriours, of the name of Ieſus Chriſt. Now was the firſt order of Monkes inſtituted by S. Baſile, vnder certaine rules of liuing.
               
                  368.
                  Valentian, a good and Catholique Prince, and Valens his Brother, raigned fiftéene years. This man held the error of the Arrians, and conſtrained the Monkes to vndertake Armes in war: he died vnhappily.
               
                  381.
                  Gratian, the ſon of Valentinian, during whoſe whole life time, hee was an aſſociate in the Empire. Hee raigned afterward with Valentinian the ſecond, his younger Brother, and Theodoſius ſixe yeares.
               
                  387.
                  Maximus tearmed Emperor by his Souldiers, ſlew Gratian, and held the Empire foure yeares: after which time, Valentinian returned to the Empire againe fiue yeares.
               
                  Theodoſius, after that Gratian was ſlaine by Maximus,
                  395. raigned thrée yeares with his Brother

                  Valentinian: the death of whom was bemoaned by Saint Ambroſe, for the great zeale hee had to Chriſtian Religion. S. Hierome, S. Auguſtine, and P. Oroſius then liued.
               
                  Arcadius and Honorius,
                  399 the Sons of Theodoſius, raigned twenty nine yeares, as well in the Eaſt as in the Weſt. About this time, the great Empire of Rome began to decline (by the infidelity of Ruffinus and Stilico their Tutors.) The very greateſt part thereof was vſed by the Scythians, Burgundians, Lombardes, Hungarians,
                  Rome four times ſurprized. 
                  French, Goths, and Vandals: And Rome was foure times taken by the Goths and Vandals, within a 139. yeares. Then liued S. Chryſoſtom and Claudian.
               
               
                  Honorius raigned with Theodoſius,
                  411. Sonne to his Brother, ſixtéene yeares.
               
                  Theodoſius the ſecond,427. youngeſt Sonne of Arcadius, raigned at Conſtantinople twenty ſeuen yeares, after the death of Honorius; hauing afflited Valentinian the third, the Son of Conſtantius, and Placida Daughter is Theodoſius, who raigned fiue yeares in the weſt. At this time, the Frenchmen leauing Franconia, beganne to enter vppon the Gaules, vnder Clodion their ſecond King.
               
                  F. Valerius Martianus, raigned in the Eaſt ſeauen years,
                     
                        •
                     53. and Valentinian the third (at the ſame time) in the weſt: during their raigne, the Burgundians & other weſtern Nations, were conuerted to the Faith. The Vandals came out of Spayn into Affrica, and afterward they tooke Rome, vnder

the conduct of their King Genſerichus. Attila, King of the Hunnes, entred into Gaul with fiue hundred thouſand men: deliuered battle to Meroüeus their ſecond king, who had ioined with Aetius Lieutenant to the Emperor. There hee loſt an hundred and foureſcore thouſand men, & fled into Hungaria, not any man being wounded behind. About this time was great Arthur King of Britaine.
               
               
                  460.
                  Leo the firſt, reigned 17. yeares, aſſociated by Leo the ſonne of his daughter; who after he had reigned one yeare alone, gaue vp the Empire to
               
                  476.
                  Zeno his Grandſire, who raigned tyrannically 17. yeares. The eſtate of the Church was then very greatly troubled, as alſo that of the Weſtern Empire. Italy had then nine Emperors in twenty yeares, who all ſlue one another.
               
                  493.
                  Anaſtaſius raigned twenty fiue yeares: Hée was an Eutichian Heretique, was ſmitten with lightning, and dyed (as a iuſt puniſhment) for his Hereſie. Fulgentius.
               
               
                  Iuſtine raigned 9. years: he was firſt a Swine-heard,519. afterward a Cow-heard, next a Carpenter, a Souldier, a Captaine, and laſt of all Emperor, gouerning very well and godly, and expelling the Arrian Heretiques. Then liued Boetius; and S. Bennet or Benedict began his order.
               
                  5
                        •
                     8.
                  Iuſtinian raigned thirty eight yeares. All his care and ſtudy, was to repaire the decayed Empire, and re-eſtabliſh ciuill right: in the execution wherof, he was ſeconded by excellent perſonages, eſpecially by Belfarius, Narſes, and Tribonianus.
                  
The firſt chaſed the Vandals out of Affrica, which they had held 95. years: and deliuered Rome from the Gothes, who had conquered it, and yet were once more expulſed thence by Narſes.
               
               
                  Iuſtine the ſecond, raigned ten yeares,566. beloued of al men for his liberality. Sophia his wife mocked him with Narſes, the Gouernour of Italy, whereat hee beeing offended, called the Lombardes,
                  The kingdome of the Lombardes. by whoſe helpe he reuenged himſelfe. Now was the Kingdome of the Lombardes founded by Clebus, where raigned thirty two kinges, vntill the time of Charles the Great.
               
                  Tiberius the ſecond, raigned ſeauen yeares:577. hée was a very charitable man, one that loued God and his Saints, and therefore (no doubt) was beloued of him againe.
               
                  Mauritius raigned twenty yeares:584. hee was deſcended of very meane Parentage, and (in the end) was murthered for his couetouſneſſe: a vice as much diſcommendable in a Prince, as liberality is beſéeming, and maketh him renowmed.
               
                  Phocas raigned eyght yeares:604. And beeing the Murderer of his Predeceſſor, himſelfe was likewiſe murdered, withall his Race.Contention for Primacy of the Church. Now was the contention for the Primacy of the Church, betwéene Rome and Constantinople, and now was Saint Gregory.
               
               
                  Heraclius raigned thirty yeares,612. who was the Murderer of Phocas. The fiftéenth yeare of his raigne, beganne the rule of Mahomet, the falſe Prophet of Arabia, where were the Agarenes and Sarrazins: to whom the Aegyptian and Arabian
                  
Princes (called Soldanes) next ſuccéeded. After them came the Turks, about the yeare 1300. Mahomets
                   falſe Doctrine (by the negligence of the Emperors and Chriſtian Princes) grewe to ſuch a head: that it not onely poyſoned Aſya and Affrica, but alſo a very great part of Europe.
               
               
                  640.
                  Conſtantine the third, raigned foure moneths, being a good Prince, and very young: Hee was poyſoned by his Step-mother that her ſon might raigne.
               
                  641.
                  Heraclion, who hauing his noſe and tongue cut out, was baniſhed two yeares after.
               
                  643.
                  Conſtans, the Sonne of Conſtantine, raigned twenty ſeauen yeares: And being very couetous, he was ſlain by his own followers, in the Bathes of Syracuſa.
               
               
                  670.
                  Conſtantine the fourth, reigned 17. years. He ouercame in one Battell, thirty thouſand Sarazins, and afterward fel to great wickednes. The learned and venerable Beda liued in this time.
               
                  687.
                  Iuſtinian the ſecond, a wicked man, raigned 16. yeares, but not without interruption, beeing deiected by Leontius, and Leontius by Tiberius Abſimaris, who reigned other thrée yeares, therfore theſe thrée are ſaid to raigne ſixtéene yeares.The State of the Venetians, Now was the beginning of the Dukes of 
                     Ʋennice, which had béene gouerned before (for the ſpace of 230. yeares) by Tribunes.
               
               
                  713.
                  Phillip Bardaſanes, reigned two yeares. Hee was caſt out of his Empyre by his Lieutenant, & after that, they pluckt ſoorth his eies. Hee had much talke and little wiſdome, diſpoſing badly of

the goods of the Empyre: he became after a ſchiſmaticall Monke.
               
                  Anthemius, called alſo Athanaſius the ſecond,715. reigned thrée yeares: He was deiected from his Empyre by Theodoſius chiefe of his Army, and turned into a Monaſtery. He hadde taken away the Empyre, and then pluckt out the eies of his predeceſſor.
               
                  Theodoſius the third, reigned one yeare.718 He left the Empyre, ſeeing himſelfe to be aſſayled by Leo his ſucceſſor, and became a Monke.
               
                  Leo the third, a wicked man,719. reigned twenty foure yeares. He was called Iconomachus, a defacer of Images, and would not ſuffer the Chriſtians to haue any in their Temples. Hee was excommunicated by Gregory, and by authoritie of a Councell held at Rome, againſt his owne of Conſtantinople. Blondus lib, 10.
                   The Sarazins beſieged Conſtantinople three yeares together, in which time died three hundred thouſand of Peſtilence and Famine.
               
                  Conſtantine, fift of that name,742. the ſon of Leo the Iſaurian, ſucceeded his father in the Empyre of Conſtantinople, the yeare of our ſaluation 742. He was ſirnamed Copronymus, becauſe he would diſcharge his belly in the Fonts, appointed for Chriſtian Baptiſme. He was an vtter enemy, not only to the Images of Saints, but alſo vnto their reliques, cauſing them to be burned. He did put to death many of the beſt and moſt reſpected perſons, and (among others) two Patriarches of Conſtantinople. He made warre againſte the

                  Bulgarians, both by land & Sea, Fortune ſometime ſmiling vpon him, otherwhiles 
                     •
                  owring. In his abſence, one Artabaſdus was made Emperor at Conſtantinople. But hee receiuing newes thereof returned, and either put out, or rent forth the new Emperors eies, & cauſed his children to be ſlaine. In his time, there was ſo cold a Winter, that the Sea of Conſtantinople was frozen. After many cruelties, this Emperor died a Leaper.
               
                  743.
                  Artabaſdus, albeit he was deſcended of mean birth; yet notwithſtanding, for the faithfulneſſe, good vertues, and commendable qualities which were in him, he was liked of the Senate & ſouldiors, and afterward was elected Emperor by the zealous Chriſtians, for the hatred that euery one bare to Conſtantine the fift. He became a better louer of the Saints, and fortified the Cittye of Conſtantinople againſt Conſtantine, who had bin expulſed thence. Neuertheleſſe, both hee and it were beſieged, and the Citty being ſurprized, his eies were pluckt out, & his ch
                     •
                  ldren put to death.
               
                  775.
                  Leo the fourth, was Emperor after his Father Conſtantine the fift. He was not onely heyre to the Empire, but alſo to his Fathers vices: And his mother, who was deuout and one that loued God, would giue no conſent that he ſhoulde bee Emperor. He made ſome attempts vpon the Sarazins that dwelt in Syria. He tooke the Crowne which Mauritus had dedicated to God, and ſet it on his owne head, it being very richly beautified with rich pretious ſtones: But ſoone after he had

an Impoſtume in his head, with a fiery Ague, whereof he died.
               
                  Conſtantine, ſixt of that name, and ſonne to Leo the fourth, was Emperor after his Father:780. Hee reigned nine yeares (very young) with his mother, who with his conſent alſo, was perſwaded by Theraſius Patriarch of Conſtantinople, to call a generall Councell of thrée hundred and fifty Biſhops. In ſhort while after, Conſtantine excluded his Mother from the Empyres gouernment. He cauſed the eies and toong of Nicephorus to be puld and cut out, hearing of a ſecret intention, to make him Emperor. Alſo he did ſhut vp in a Monaſtery his wife Mary, who was the daughter of King Charlemaine, and then tooke a Concubine, by the councell of his Mother, whoe pretended that her ſonne was hated of the people. Herevpon not long after, ſhe cauſed him to be taken, and plucking forth his eies, ſhut him vp in priſon, where he died, in the yeare 798. and then ſhe raigned alone, about the ſpace of fiue yeares.
               
                  Irene, iſſued from Attica,
                  798 was wife to the emperor Leo the fourth, by whom he had Conſtantine the ſixt before mentioned, and reigned with him nine yeares, and afterward alone by hirſelfe fiue yeares, or little more, as hath already beene ſaid. She was thence expelled by Nicophorus, & ſent in exile to the Iſle of Lesbos, which at this inſtant is called Mitiline. At the time when this Lady gouerned the Empire of Conſtantinople, Charlemaine
                   was ſacred and crowned Emperor of Rome (or of the Weſt) for his vertues.
            
         
         
            
            A briefe Collection of the Hiſtory & liues of the Emperours of the Weſt, from the time of King Charlemain, who was the firſt Emperor in the Weſt.
            
               803.
               
                  CHarlemaine, king of France, and the greateſt Emperor (for all perfections) that euer was: The reſtorer of Iuſtice, equity and peace, among men, and re-eſtabliſher of Common-weales, with honeſt Lawes, and Religious doctrine,The kingdome of England learned in languages and al diſciplines: raigned King and Emperor 14. yeares. Gal. lib. 4. Emil. lib. 2. The Kingdome of England then began by King Egbert.
            
            
               Lewes his ſonne, ſirnamed (the Meeke) or Debonaire,
               815. was likewiſe King and Emperour 26. yeares. He cauſed a Councell to be held, wherein all Eccleſiaſticall perſons were forbidden to weare any ſuperfluous garments, iewelles, and Ringes. In reuenge whereof, they prouoked his ſonnes to conſpire againſt him two ſeueral times.
            
               841.
               Lotharius his ſonne, contended with his Brethren, Lewes Germanicus, and Charles the Bald. After a warre no leſſe great and ſharpe, then vnhappy and lamentable, he remained Conqueror, and reigned fifteene yeares.
            
               Lewes, the ſecond ſon of Lotharius, raigned 21 yeares:8
                     •
                  6 hee was at continuall diſcord with his Vncle Charles the Bald, for the Kingdom of Auſtraſia.
            
            
               
               Charles the Bald, ſonne to Lewes the Meeke,
               877. was Emperor and king of France, two yeares.
            
               Lewes the Stammerer,879. was made Emperour by the meanes of Pope Iohn the ſecond: hee died at Compeigne vpon a good-friday.
            
               Charles the Groſſe, Emperor and k. of France,
               880. who degenerated from the Noble race of Charlemain, reigned ten yeares.
            
               Arnold, whoſe body was full of vermine,891 by the iuſt iudgement of God, he being addicted to ſo many ſeuerall rapines. He raigned 12. years.
            
               Lewes the third, or rather the fourth ſonne of Arnold raigned x. years.903 Som do hold that after Arnold, vntill the time of Otho, there was no true Emperour of Rome, but vacation of the empyre, for the ſpace of thréeſcore yeares.
            
               Conrade,
               913 being the laſt of the race of Charlemain, reigned ſeauen yeares.
            
               Henry the firſt, called the Faulconer, whoe brought peace to all Germany, reigned 18. years.910 He was expert in Armes, beganne the pence or ſmall money among the Almaynes, and ſubdued the Vandals, who then receiued the Chriſt. faith.
            
               Otho his ſonne reigned 
                  •
               6. yeares.938 It was ſaid of him, that he made good proofe, that he whō God will helpe, no man can harme, for hee had innumerable enemies, and yet very eaſily he ſubdued them all.
            
               Otho the ſecond, his ſonne, too ſeuere, raigned ten yeares. He re-ſeated Nicephorus his Godfather Emperor of Greece,
               974 after hee had bin driuen out of his Empire.
            
               
               984
               Otho the third, raigned ninetéene yeares: Hee was called (for his ſpirite) the wonder of the world. In his time began the inſtitution of the Princes Electors of the Empire,The beginning of the princes Electors of germany. in the yeare 1002. This is the common opinion, which (neuertheleſſe) the learned Onuphrius declareth to be erronious, verifying by certaine authorities, and teſtimonies of the Authors of times: that the Emperors (after this Otho) were elected, not by ſeauen Princes: but in generall, by voyce of all the Arch-biſhops, Byſhops, Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen of Germany, and continued ſo till the time of Rodolphus the firſt, which was in the yeare 1280. And he ſaith, that it cannot bee certainely gathered, at what time the ſeauen Electors were inſtituted: not finding any one of the auncient Authors that ſpeakes thereof. And yet notwithſtanding, hee is of the minde, that they were eſtabliſhed, in the Interim of the interregnum and ſchiſme of the Empire, which continued twenty three yeares after the death of Frederick the ſecond, which was in the yeare 1250. vntill the election of Rodolph of Haſpurge.
            
            
               1003
               Henry of Bauaria the ſecond, raigned twentie two yeares: Hee was a prudent and victorious Prince: and hee expulſed the Sarrazins out of Italy.
            
            
               1025
               Conrade the ſecond, raigned fiftéene yeares. In this time the name of a Cardinall (as is ſaide) came firſt in vſe.
            
               1040.
               Henry the third, ſurnamed the Black, raigned 17. yeares, hee laboured earneſtly to take away

the Schiſmes of the Church, happening by the plurality of the Popes: whereof hee depoſed three as vnwoorthy, and ordayned, that there ſhould bee no more created, without his permiſſion.
            
               Henry the fourth, raigned fifty yeares.1057. He was preſent in 62. battels, and great troubles happened betwéene him and Gregory the ſeauenth, touching the power to elect and confirme the Pope.The Kingdom of Ieruſalem. Then was Ieruſalem taken by Godfrey of Bullen, and the floure of Chriſtendomes Nobility.
            
               Henry the fift, raigned twenty yeares.1107 Hée tooke Rome, and the Pope, who would not crown him, except hee would ordaine his election to bée without the Emperor,The Kingdōs of Portugall, Naples, and Sicily. and contrary to the order of Henry the third. Now began the Kingdomes of Portugal, Naples, and Sicily.
            
            
               Lotharius the ſecond, raigned 11. years, being very much reſpected for his great valour in war,1127 his loue to religion, & reparacion of good laws, &c.
            
               Conrade the third, raigned fiftéene years,1138 a good Prince, and made warre againſt the Sarrazins, with King Lewes the young.
            
               Frederick the firſt, called Barbaroſſa, a Prince addicted to hardines, magnanimity, and Iuſtice,1152 raigned 37. yeares. This is the man, vpon whoſe ouer-much humility, Pope Alexander the third declared the inſolency of his Luciferian pride: in treading on the Emperors back, and then he began to ſing: Super Aspidem & Baſiliſcum ambulabis. Then liued Auicen, Auerroes, & Meſuus,
               The Kingdom of the Tartars. Phiſitions: And Changius was firſt King of the Tartares.
            
            
               
               Henry the ſixt, raigned tenne yeares, a good Prince,1190 he ſubdued the kingdome of Pouilla or Apulia.
            
            
               1100.
               Phillip brother to Henry, a good Prince, raigned nine yeares. In his time beganne the Frier orders of Mendicants, or begging Friers, Iacobins and Gray Friers. Ab. Vspergenſ. hiſt.
            
            
               1209.
               Otho the fourth, raigned foure yeares. He came to the Empyre by the meanes of Innocent the 3. and afterward loſt it by his owne occaſion, being murdred in the end, as he had done his predeceſſour.
            
               1212
               Fredericke the ſecond, reigned 37. yeares, being both wiſe and magnanimious. He was expulſed the Empire, by the meanes of Pope Innocent the fourth. This Prince was the reſtorer of Aſtronomy, by helpe of the Almagiſt of Ptolomy. The factions of the Guelphes and Gibelines, now cauſed great harmes in Italy.
            
            
               1250.
               Conrade the fourth, reigned thrée yeares, a good Prince. He was excommunicated by Pope Innocent the fourth, according as (by him) his Father was depriued of his Empire.
            
               1254
               Willielmus, raigned two yeares, a good prince. Albertus Maguus, Lullius and Alphonſus, King of Spaine, were then great Aſtrologers. There was interregnum 17. yeares.
            
               1273.
               Rodulphus reigned 19. yeares. He made Austria the Imperiall ſeat, ordaining his ſonne Albert firſt Duke there, of whom is the houſe of Austria deſceaded.
            
               1292
               Adolphus raigned ſix yeares. He was expulſed

for his vices, by the Princes Electors, and ſlain afterward in warre, by Albertus his ſucceſſor.
            
               Albertus raigned ten yeares.1299 Pope Boniface the eight, gaue him the Realme of France, & the Papall chaire was tranſferred to Auignion,
               The firſt turkiſh Emp. 72. yeares. New was Othoman the firſt Emperour of the Turkes.
            
               Henry the ſeauenth, reigned ſix yeares,1309 a very graue and prudent Prince: But a Iacobine frier (being ſuborned by a Florentine) poiſoned him with the conſecrated Hoſt.
            
               Lewes of Bauaria, reigned 33. yeares.1314 He vſed very great clemency towards his enemy and priſoner, Frederick of Auſtria, reſtoring him to his Dukedome. Now began the Sects of the Flagellanti or Whippers: Bartholomeus, Petrarch, and Boccace, then liuing.
            
               Charles the fourth, Author of the golden Bull,1347 raigned 32. yeares; Dante then liued.
            
               Wenceſlaus reigned 22. yeares, very careleſly.1379 He was taken by his brother Sigiſmund, and put into priſon at Vienna. They were both ſonnes to Charles the fourth. Lithuania then receiued the Chriſtian Faith.
            
               Robert or Rupert, reigned ten yeares:1400 then liued Chryſolaras, Laurentius Valla, Poge the Florentine, and Tamberlain the Tyrant of the Tartares, led an Army of a million of men.
            
               Sigiſmund reigned 27. yeares,1411 a man renowned for wiſedome and goodneſſe. Then was the Councell of Conſtance, wherein thrée popes were depoſed. Iohn Hus, and Hierom of Prage, were then burned.
            
               
               1438
               Albertus the ſecond, reigned two yeares well and valiantly. He chaſed Amurath the Turke out of Hungary.
            
            
               1440
               Frederick the third, a louer of Peace, raigned 53. yeares. Then was Constantinople taken: The Art of Printing found out: Artillerie more auncient 1380. Gaza, Victornius, Blondus, Aeneas Syluius, Platina, Beſſarion, G. Trapezoncius, N. Perottus, Pomponius Laetus, H. Barbaxus, A. Politianus, I. Picus Mirandula, B. Mantuanus. Ph. Beroaldus.
            
            
               1494
               Maximillian, a louer of vertuous men, raigned 27. yeares. He was valiant and learned, & could deliuer his actions himſelfe, in the Latine tongue. Then liued I. Nauclerus, Volaterranus, G. Ʋalla, Polydor Ʋirgill, A. Sabellicus, I. Reuchlinus, Iouianus, Pontanus, M. Ficinus, P. Crinitus, Amb. Calepinus, Trithenius, P. Bembus, and others.
            
               1514
               Charles the fift, a moſt magnanimous prince, raigned 35. yeares. In his time happened maruellous mutinies in Germany, by Peazantes and Ruſticke people, of which were ſlaine more then an hundred thouſand, in leſſe ſpace then 3. Moneths. Beſide theſe ſtrange warres, there inſued ciuill diſſentions likewiſe, about matters of religion. Eraſmus, Io. Lud Ʋiues, Luther, Munſter, Camerarius, Fuctius, Latomus, Sadole
                     •
                  us, Pagninus, Eugubinus, Melancthon, Rhenanus, S. Grineus, Zozius, Oldendorp, Alciat, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and others then liued.
            
               1558.
               Ferdinando, a Prince wiſe, vigillant, liberall,

kind, and a louer of quietneſſe: He made warre vpon the Turkes in Hungary, for the ſpace of 38. yeares, and laboured to accord the Chriſtians, to the end that the enemy might be reſiſted by generall conſent. He raigned ſeauen yeares: and then liued Geſner, Lycosthenes, Sturmius, Gualterus, Riuius, Pantaleon, Ʋadian, P. Conſtantinus, Functius, &c.
            
            
               Maximillian, the ſecond ſonne of Ferdinand,
               1564 was a good and prudent Prince, not diſſolute in habits, but liuing ſoberly, hauing knowledge in many toogues, good iudgement, ſpeaking diſcréetly and ſententiouſly, and inclined to receiue al requeſts, as alſo to giue liberally: Neuer curious of rich Cabinets, or ſumptuous buildings. He reigned twelue yeares.
            
               Rodulphus the ſecond,1576. ſonne to the moſt vertuous Prince Maximillian, and raigning at this preſent. To whom God giue grace, as to al other Monarches, Princes and Potentates, to do thoſe thinges that become a Chriſtian Prince, bleſſing him with good Councell, faithfull people, &c.
            
               Now come we againe to the Emperors of the Eaſt.
               
                  Nicephorus, who was kinſman to Irene,
                  803 got the Empire from her by craft, exiling hir thence, as hath béene before declared, and méerely vſurping the Empire of Conſtantinople. At his firſt enterance, euery one hadde a ſingular good opinion of him, becauſe they grewe weary of a Womans gouernement. Neuertheleſſe, he proued to bee

wicked, cruel and couetous, & therfore felt quickly his deſerued puniſhment. For entring battle againſt the Bulgarians, he was diſcomfited and ſlaine. His ſonne Stauratius (whom he had made fellow Emperor with him) was likewiſe then ſore wounded, and diſmiſſed of the Empire with in thrée moneths after, by Michaell Curopalates, who had married his ſiſter Procopia. And ſo hee was ſent to finiſh his daies in a Monaſtery.
               
                  804
                  Stauratius, the ſonne of Nicephorus, a man deformed and miſhapen, hauing alſo a ſimple ſpirit, was made companion and participant in the Empire with his Father: And yet notwithſtanding, very ſoone after his Fathers death, he was chaſed from his Empire, his haire being ſhauen off, and he incloſed in a Monaſtery, not raigning (after his father) aboue thrée moneths, or thereabout.
               
                  811
                  Michaell Curopalates, otherwiſe called Rangabus, was Emperour after Nicephorus and his ſonne Stauratius. This Emperor Michaell was better ſkild in the affaires of peace, pollicy, and Iuſtice, then in the action of warre. For in his firſt battell againſt the Bulgarians, he fled away like vnto a Coward, and hid himſelfe in a Monaſtery, to which life hee yéelded himſelfe, and quite forſooke the Empire, as not willing to meddle any more, eyther with warre, or the State of an Emperor. He, according as Nicephorus did the like, ſent an Ambaſſador to Charlemaine, the new made Emperor of the weſt, to treat of peace and alliance with him. And it was agréed, that

the 
                     Ʋenetians ſhould liue according to their own Lawes, Cuſtomes, and ancient liberties.
               
                  Leo of Armenia, was Emperor of Conſtantinople, being the fift of that name,813 and the fourth after Charlemaine Emperor of the Romaines, who began with Nicephorus. He was Colonell of the warlike troopes, belonging to the Emperor Michaell Curopaletes, and aſpyring to dominion, he raiſed a commotion, and ſo was made Emperor by the Souldiers. Hee being thus elected Emperor, entring into his Pallace-Royall, hee cauſed the priuy members of the Sonne of the ſaid Emperor Michaell, to be cut off, and then baniſhed him. He Conquered the Bulgarians, recouered Thrace, tooke many of his enemies, reprehended their boldneſſe, that had ſurprized Adrianapolis, and prepared alſo to beſiedge Conſtantinople. Hée would by no means ſuffer the Images of ſaints, but beat downe and defaced them. Not long after, himſelfe was taken and ſlaine in a Church, as he was aſſiſting Diuine ſeruice, in the eyght yeare of his Empire: his wife was beſtowed in a Monaſtery, and his Children cloſely conuaied away.
               
                  Michaell the Stammerer or ſtutterer,820 a wicked man, and murderer of the foreſaid Leo, was after him made Emperor of Conſtantinople. Hee was deſcended of baſe and vile place, and there was one called Thomas, a man alſo of as baſe Birth, that ſought to vſurpe the Empyre, working ſo many diſturbances thereto, that the Emperour being halfe in deſpaire, commanded a great chain

of yron to thwart the arme of the Sea, euen from Conſtantinople, ſo farre as Pera. But in the ende, he tooke this Thomas, and cauſed his handes and féet to be cut off. At this time the Sarazins ſurpriſed Candy, had two ſeuerall victories ouer the Gréekes, and Michaell died of a flux in his belly.
               
                  829.
                  Theophilus, ſonne to Michaell the Stammerer, was Emperor of Conſtantinople after his father. He was a good Iuſticer, & well affected towards his Subiects: but he held the Images of Saints in great deteſtation, and ſeuerely punniſhed all ſuch as worſhipped them, being (therein) his fathers true follower. Two ſeuerall times he gaue battell to the Sarazins, that waſted and ſpoyles the Countries of Aſia: And as many times was he foiled, looſing there all his Tents and Pauillions. Amorium, a little village of the higher Phrygia, (being the place of his birth) was beſieged, taken, and rifled by thoſe Sarazins. The Emperour grieued thereat ſo immeaſureablie, that hee refuſed to eate, and woulde drinke nothing but colde water: So falling into a Dyſenterie, hee died.
               
                  842.
                  Theodora, after the deceaſe of Theophilus her Huſband, (as Tutreſſe or Guardian vnto her ſon Michaell, who was in his young yeares) gouerned the Empire of Constantinople very ſufficiently, comforting the poore diſtreſſed Chriſtians, and reuoking home ſuch as liued in exile, about the queſtion of Images. She treated a peace with the King of Bulgaria, affiancing him vnto hir ſiſter, wherby both he and his Subiects were conuerted

to the Chriſtian Religion. At length Michaell being able to guide the reynes of the Empyre; his mother Theodora entred into Religion and left him to rule alone, in the yeare 856.856
               
               
                  Michaell the ſonne of Theophilus, ſuccéeded his father in his infancy, his mother and Gouerneſſe Theodora, holding (for him) the Empire of Conſtantinople. But when Michaell grew to greter ſtrength, hee tooke the charge of the Empire himſelfe whereto his mother gladly conſented. He more reſembled his Graundfather, then his Father, both in negligence and prodigallity, ſpending great riches which his warres brought him in. He was ſometimes ſo addicted to the Circeienſian ſports, as hardly he could be drawne from them. He made Baſilius the Macedonian, his equall companion in the Empyre, by whome hee was ſoone after ſlaine: hauing reigned eleauen yeares, nine moneths, and fiue daies, after that his mother Theodora had entred into Religion, which, with his former time of rule, compleated 25. yeares, ten moneths, and fourtéen daies.
               
                  Baſilius of Macedon,
                  867. who had ſlaine the Emperor Michaell, entred preſently vpon the empire of Conſtantinople, and was receiued and approoued of all, in the Imperiall Pallace. When hee was a yong infant, he had bin brought (among other captiues) to Conſtantinople
                  ▪ to be there ſold: Neuertheleſſe, he was in the end Emperor, and Fortune ſo fauoured him, that his children, and his childrens children, were alſo Emperors after him. Firſt of all, he cauſed thoſe ſummes of monie

to be reſtored backe againe, which Michaell his Predeceſſor had prodigally giuen away, and ſo they were deliuered into the Treaſurie. He inſtituted his thrée ſonnes heyres to the Empire. He had many battailes againſt the Sarazins, & ſtill proued victorious. Many Iewes and Scythians (by his meanes) receiued the Chriſtian faith: yet ſuch was his hard hap, to bee ſlaine (in hunting) by a Hart, that ran his hornes into his bellie.
               
                  886
                  Leo, the ſixt of that name, ſirnamed the Philoſopher, began his raigne in the yeare 886. firſt, with the helpe of the Turkes, he vanquiſhed the Bulgarians, who had reuolted from him: but ſoon after, being abuſed by the Turkes, thorow vaine ſuggeſtions, he ſuſtained great loſſe. Notwithſtanding, he failed not to leauy an Army againſt the Sarazins, whereby (vnder the conduct of Nicetus) he brought away a triumphant Victorie. He was very vigillant ouer the Common-weal, and oftentimes would walke alone in the night, (diſguiſed in habit) only to try his watches; who did beate him ſoundly, and alſo carried him to priſon, whom the next day he rewarded both with money and honors.
               
                  9
                        •
                     4.
                  Alexander, brother to Leo the forenamed Emperour, ſuc
                     •
                  éeded him in the Empire. Hee was quite contrary in manners, both to Baſilius his father, and Leo his brother, for he was of badde gouernment, giuen wholy to his pleaſures, and committed the charge of his State affaires, to Flatterers and Ieſters, who were his daily complices

and companions, in all naughty and wicked actions. He died of a fluxe of bloud, iſſuing from his Noſe and priuy-members, after he had gurmandized and exceſſiuely played at the Tennis. For, mounting (in an extreame heat) vpon his horſſe, and violently ſtretching himſelfe, hee brake a veine, whereof he died.
               
                  Conſtantine the ſeauenth, ſonne to Leo the ſixt,906 of whom we haue already ſpoken, was at the age of ſeauen yeares, left (by his father) vnder the care and charge of his mother Zoa. And he began to holde the Empire of Constantinople, after his forenamed Vnckle Alexander, the yeare of our Saluation, 906. A certaine man, named Romanus Lecapenus, made great reſiſtance againſt him for ſpace of 26. yeares, and purpoſed to deiect him quite. But in the end, Lecapenus was ſeized by his owne ſonnes, and ſhut vp into a Monaſtery, for he was the ſole cauſe, that Zoa the mother of Constantine, was likewiſe made a recluſe in a Monaſterie. Now, when the ſonnes of Lecapenus had deuiſed to doe the like to Conſtantine, as they had done vnto their father: the ſame ſtratagem happened to themſelues, and they were incloſed in a Monaſtery. So Conſtantine recouered his Empire, which he gouerned alone very ſufficiently; ſuppreſſing ſome Tyrants, and inducing diuers Princes of the Turkes to the Chriſtian Faith. He made learning to ſhine in Greece, and left a Booke vnto his ſonne, diſcourſing the affaires of the Empire, which the 
                     Ʋenetians do yet kéepe as an eſpeciall Iewell. He raigned fourtéen

yeares with his mother Zoa, with Lecapenus 26. yeares, and about fifteene yeares alone, which was in all néere 55. yeares.
               
                  920.
                  Romanus Lecapenus, a man of baſe deſcent, wrought ſo much trouble to Conſtantine the ſeauenth in his Empire, that he was conſtrained to receiue him as companion in the Imperiall dignity, in the yeare 920. and Conſtantine accepted his daughter Helena in marriage. But neyther the ſac
                     •
                  ed Oath which he had ſworne vnto him, nor yet the néere alliance in kindred with Conſtantine, could reſtraine him from vſurpation of the Empire, for himſelfe and Chriſtopher his ſon: but he ſought to thruſt Conſtantine wholy out of all. But he was deceiued in his owne diſſeigns, for, vpon the bad ſucceſſe in warre which he had againſt the Bulgarians, and Simeon their Duke, he was taken by his owne ſonnes, Stephen and Conſtantine
                  ▪ who deſpoiled him of his Emperie, and carried him to a Monaſtery in a néere neighbouring Iſland, there to pl
                     •
                  te the Philoſopher alone by himſelfe. Then, practiſing to worke the like deuice vpon Conſtantine Fortune turned hir back towards them, and in the ſame ſnare which they laid for another, themſelues were cunningly caught: for they were ſhut vp within a Monaſtery, and ſo Conſtantine remained a peaceable Emperour.
               
                  959.
                  Romanus, the yong ſonne of Conſtantine the 7. held the Empire of Conſtantinople after his Father. But he was gouerned vnder the diſpoſition and order of Nicephorus Phocas. This Emperor

                  Romanus, excluded his mother and his ſiſters: who, in gréefe and deſpight, that they ſhould fall from ſo great pompe and eſtate, concluded to ſupport the
                     •
                  r weake condition, by the worſt meanes that could be, euen the proſtitution of their bodies. And as for him, he being addicted to ſports and Epicu
                     •
                  iſme, died poiſoned.
               
                  Nicephorus Phocas, ruled the Empire of Conſtantinople, in the yeare 963.963 He fought often, & very fortunatly againſt the Sarazins, who vſurpingly held Calabria Scicily, Cyprus, Candy and Cilicia, which at this day is called Caramania. In Scicily the affaires were not well mannaged, by his Committées and Lieutenants: But concerning himſelfe, he recouered Cilicia, and the greater part of Aſia, for a good beginning: And ſoone after, he went powerfully vpon Antioche, which hee ſurpriſed in the night, and forced the Sarazins to fly for refuge. This man was hated of all his Subiects, becauſe that (vnder the coulour of Warre which he then had) he laide great Impoſts, exactions, and polings vpon them. He cauſed alſo a corrupt kind of money to be forged, and diminiſhed likewiſe the waight: by meanes whereof, being ſo out of fauour with the Cittizens, he was the eaſi
                     •
                  r ſlaine ſleeping in his chamber, by Iohn Zimiſcus, and Theophila, (wife to Nicephorus) gaue fauourable entrance to the murtherer, and all the ſtranglers that were with him.
               
                  Iohn Zimiſcus, the murderer of Nicephorus, was Emperor of Conſtantinople after him. Hee was a man valiant in warre;
                     
                        •
                     6
                        •
                     
                   he recouered all

                  Bulgaria, which the Roxalians held, and Sphendollanus their king ſubmitted himſelfe vnto him. But after this victory, being returned to Conſtantinople with triumph, he was poiſoned. He made fellowes with him in the Empire, Baſilius and Conſtantine, brethren, who were ſonnes to Romanus, the predeceſſor of Nicephorus Phocas.
               
               
                  976.
                  Baſilius the ſecond, and Conſtantine the eight, being brethren, and ſonnes to the yong Romanus, were Emperors of Conſtantinople after Iohn Zimiſcus, in the yeare of Saluation 976. Barda Sclerus made ciuill warre vpon them, intending to vſurpe the Empire: but being foiled in the battell, he fled to the Perſians. The like did Phocas, when he was ouercome, and for the ſame cauſe: for, taking it in ſcorn to be miſprized, after he had well declared his duty againſt Sclerus, he ſought to make himſelfe Emperor. Baſilius (afterward) vanquiſhed the Bulgarians in many battels, and as a punniſhment for their Rebellion, he cauſed the eies of fiftéen thouſand Captiues to be pulled out: reſeruing onely but one of them, to guide the reſt to Samuell their Duke. For they had ouerrun the Country of Thrace, Macedon, & Greece
                  ▪ and put all to fire and ſword. Now was all Bulgaria ſubiected to the Empire of Conſtantinople, which till then had euermore béene Rebellious. Duke Samuell liued not long after, but died with méere grèefe and vexation. Conſtantine was companion with his brother Baſilius in the Empyre, more in Honor then power: But after his death he was ſole Emperor almoſt thrée yeares, and died

ſwallowed vp in his pleaſures and vaine voluptuouſneſſe.
               
                  Romanus of Argyra,
                  1029 or (as he was commonlie called) Argyropilus, kinſman to Conſtantine the eight, ſuccéeded him in the Empire. At the beginning, he changed many bad matters into better: But being vnable to make head againſt the Sarazins, hee gaue his minde to gather a huge maſſe of money. Afterward, by the Treaſon of Zoa his wife, and her Adulterate companion: he was drowned as he bathed himſelfe in his ſtoue, or Hot-houſe.
               
                  Michaell the Paphlagon,
                  1034. the Adulterat friend of Zoa the Empreſſe, and who had ſuffocated her huſband Argiropilus, bathing in his Stoue: was by her made Emperor of Conſtantinople, in the yeare 1034. He had béene a ſeruant-ſtraunger, hauing his head very vnfaſhionable, and euerie houre he was ſubiect to the falling ſickneſſe, foaming at the mouth. In briefe, whatſoeuer deſerued any reſpect in him, only was, that he hadde a pleaſing Complexion, which made Zoa extreamly doate vpon him, ſhe being well ſtept into age. Yet (for all this) he did not miſgouerne the Empyre, but tooke truce with the King of Aegipt for thirty yeares. He deliuered the Citty of Edeſſa, which was beſieged, and was very benigne to all them of his Court; excep
                     •
                   to Zoa, for the horride lewdneſſe he knew by her. At length, being full of the Dropſie, he appointed Michaell Calaphates (the adopted ſonne of his Wife Zoa) to be his immediate ſucceſſor.
               
                  
                  1
                        •
                     42.
                  Michaell Calaphates, the adopted ſon of Zoa, (after the death of Michaell the P
                        •
                     phlagon) proſtrated himſelfe at her feete, ſwearing that he intended not to hold the Empire, but in name only; and that all the power ſhould remaine in her. By which flatteries & coyned ſpeeches, he was made Emperour of Constantinople, in the yeare 1042. Soone after, he laid a plot againſt Zoa, impoſing falſely vpon her, that ſhe had deuiſed to poiſon him: Whereupon, her head was ſhauen, and ſhe commaunded to a Monaſtery. But the People growing mutinous againſt him, made Theodora (ſiſter to Zoa) Empreſſe: repealed Zoa from the Monaſtery purſued Calaphates, and plucked out both his and his ſonnes eies. He was called Calaphates, becauſe his father was a maker of ſhips, or a Ship wright.
               
                  1042
                  Zoa repealed from her exile and Monaſtery, by the people, was re-placed in the Soueraigne Eſtate of Conſtantinoples empire, to enioy the ſame with her ſiſter Thedora, which was in the ſame yeare, when as Michaell Caliphates had raigned but foure moneths. Thus the bad gouernement of Emperors raiſed an opinion, that the Empire might be better ruled by Women, then by men. But, as a woman is euermore variable and vnconſtant, according to the Poets iudgement: Euen ſo Zoa (albeit ſhe was a woman, and aged thréeſcore yeares) did yet neuertheleſſe, burne in carnall and voluptuous concupiſcence. Wherevppon, ſhee re-called Conſtantine Monamachus from exile, and taking him to be her huſband,

made him Emperour. Theſe two women hauing then held the Empire, ſcarſely three moneths.
               
                  Conſtantine the ninth, ſirnamed Monamachus,
                  1042 who likewiſe being of the Imperiall line & race; was made Emperor by his w
                     ••
                  e Zoa, at Conſtantinople, in the yeare 1042. He was very careleſſe, and full of his owne pleaſures, and kept a beautifull Strumpet in ſtead of his Wife: neuertheleſſe, hee maintained and got the victory in two great ciuill warres, and ſome others beſide. It was then that the Turkes began to extend theyr powers very farre in Aſia
                        •
                     
                   and yet no withſtanding, they were vanquiſhed with the Roxalians, and Patzinaces, which were two Nations of the Scythians. Zoa died, beeing threeſcore and tenne yeares old: and Conſtantine being ful of the gout, hauing alſo a pluri
                     •
                  ie, died thereof ſome few years after.
               
                  Theodora, ſiſter to Zoa, who had formerly held the Empire of Conſtantinople,
                  1055. as hath beene already declared in our ſpeaking of Zoa: entred vpon the Empires rule againe, but alone by her ſelfe, after Constantine Monomachus, in the year 1055. and gouerned about two yeares. And we hold it no ſhame, to place her in the rancke and number of the Emperors, conſidering, that ſhe did not declare her authority in the Empire, with an effeminate or negligent ſpirite: But gaue ſo good orders, and caried her ſelfe ſo manly, that ſhe maintained peace and tranquility, as well towardes ſtrangers, as among her owne people. Moreouer, all goodneſſe and quietneſſe ſo aboundantly

flouriſhed in the time of her gouernment: as no occaſion can bee alleadged, neither will any man of wiſedome miſpriſe the Empire and Dominion of ſuch a Woman. But as ſickneſſe (with age) did ouer-charge her, by the pleaſing perſwaſions and remonſtrances of her ordinary ſeruants: ſhe made partaker with her in the Empires ſway, a certaine man (ſome-what too aged) named Michaell, and then ſhe liued not long after.
               
                  1057
                  Michaell, ſir-named the Auncient, was Emperour of Conſtantinople after the ſaide Theodora, and onely by her meanes. Hee was renowmed both for Noblity and riches: but in other affaires, concerning the ſupport and charge of the Empire: he was very vnapt, in regard of his many years, which made him burthenous and in-ſufficient. And when he had ſcarſely ruled one yeare: Iſaac Comnenes both diſmiſſed, and depoſed him from the State of the Empire. So liuing ſolitarily, and like a priuate man: he died ſoone after.
               
                  Iſaac Comnenes, was Emperour of Conſtantinople, in the yeare 1058.1058 Hee deiected from the Empire, Michaell the Auncient: neuertheleſſe, hee was a man, valiant and couragious, renowmed for his actions both in peace and war, of great ſpirit, but ſomewhat arrogant. The Patriarch of Conſtantinople gaue him good aide, in raiſing him to the Empires Dignity: but hee requited him very badly, for he baniſhed him & all his friends. He was deriued of a Noble race, diligent, ready and expeditious in al his buſineſſe: But a diſeaſe in the ſide tooke him as hee was hunting, which,

growing to deſperation of any long life, he made himſelfe a monke, inſtituting as Emperour Conſtantine Ducas, with the good liking and conſent of the Senate and people. It is written of him, that he was ſo chaſt, that he would not accompanie his wife after her firſt child: albeit his Phyſitians aduiſed him thereto, for helpe and mitigation of his diſeaſe.
               
                  Conſtantine the tenth, called alſo Ducas,
                  1060 was Emperour of Conſtantinople, after the forenamed Iſaacke, in the yeare 1060. At his firſt entrance there happened a great conſpiracy againſt him, which he ſuppreſſed, but with very great difficulty. He was deuout towards God, and a good iuſticer: but inſatiable auarice diſgraced him, for which, he was hated of his owne people, and condemned by his enemies, who did much harme to the Empire. In his time happened a ſtrange accident, and yet no nouelty to Conſtantinople, that many Churches and houſes were ouerthrowne by an Earthquake. He died aged thréeſcore years, leauing Eudoxia his wife, and thrée of his ſonnes heyres to the Empire.
               
                  Eudoxia and her ſonnes helde the Empyre of Conſtantinople,
                  1067 after their father Conſtantine Ducas. This woman would haue wel gouerned the Empires affaires, if warres had not much moleſted her abroad. As ſtrangers (then) cam ruſhing in on all ſides of the Empire, ſo was it conceiued by generall opinion, that the ableſt man that coulde be, had had his hands full, in a charge of ſuch import. And yet at length, Eudoxia (contrary

to her Oath and promiſe to hir dying huſband) hauing reigned ſeauen moneths and ſome few o
                     •
                   daies: remarried with Romaine Diogenes, which match ſhee déerely afterward repented, as being much wearied with the arrogancy of this man, who would néedes gouerne all himſelfe.
               
                  1068
                  Romaine, ſirnamed Diogenes, tooke vpon him the Empire of Constantinople, in the year 1068. He made warre two ſeuerall times, and in the firſt attempt, Fortune ſpake him faire, but very vnkindly in the ſecond: for his people being one part ſlaine, and the other driuen to flight, himſelfe left alone (albeit an Emperor) was taken: which accident had neuer been ſeen before, that the Emperour of Conſtantinople, was taken priſoner in warre. And yet notwithſtanding, it is ſaid, that the Turke, Sultan Azan hearing thoſe tidinges, could not beléeue it, but ſtayed his iourn
                     •
                  y ſomewhat ſhort of him. And then ſending for him, he had no ſooner ſéene him, but he held him in honor and eſtimation: and giuing him great preſentes, ſent him backe againe at liberty, after he had concluded a peace with him. But in this interim, all things were renverſed at Constantinople, as it is a vſuall cuſtome, ſo ſoone as vnwelcome newes are brought: For Eudoxia, was expulſed, Diogenes diſmiſſed, and Michaell de Conſtantine choſen Emperour: who firſt cauſed the eyes of Diogenes to be plucked out, and afterward baniſhed him: in which miſerable eſtate he died, and was faine to be buried by his wife Eudoxia.
               
               
                  1071.
                  Michaell, who was tearmed Parapinacius,
                  
in reguard of the great Famine that happened in his time, was made Emperour of Constantinople in the yeare 1071. He was a man altogither vnapt for ſo weighty a charge: for, béeing wholely addicted to his Booke, and to compoſe verſes with his Schoolemaiſter Pſellus, the Turkes aſſailed the Empyre on all ſides, eſpecially on that part of Aſya: Wherupon, his chiefe Commanders and Captaines, (thorow méere conſtraint) made election of another Emperour ouer them, to wit; Nic
                        •
                     phorus 
                        •
                     otaniat who was the more eaſilie accepted of the Cittizens, becauſe they held their negligent Emperour in high diſdain & contempt. I vnderſtand that Michaell was put into a Monaſtery, with his wife and ſon, and there he was made a Monke.
               
                  Nicephorus Bataniat, who was deſcended of the line of the Emperor Phocas,
                  1078 eaſily (as being the very nobleſt of all other) obtained the Empire when Michaell was expelled thence. Hee tooke Constantine, the ſon of Constantine Ducas, whoe would haue vſurped the Empire, & cauſing him to be ſhorne, aduanced him to the order of prieſthood. Afterward, Nicephorus himſelfe was deiected by the brethren of Comnenes, (who before had aſſiſted him in expelling the vſurpers of the Empire) and was ſhut vp in a Monaſtery, where hée liued but a ſhort while. Alexius Comnenes, the younger brother, but beſt beloued amongſt the ſouldiors, held the empire after him, and on the very day of Eaſter entred Conſtantinople, which he ſpoiled as an enemy.
               
                  
                  1081.
                  Alexius Comnenes, Son of the Emperour Iſaac, tooke on him the Empire of Conſtantinople, in the yeare 1081. He went with the Venetians againſt Robert Guiſcard, but he was repulſed and vanquiſhed. Moreouer, he ſtroue to hinder and breake the memorable enterpriſe of the French, for the recouery of the Holy land. But Bohemond, Duke of Apulia, leuied an Army againſt him, and beſieged Baudras. Then Alexius, dreading his power, made compoſition with him, promiſing to furniſh the French with victuals, and all other néedfull things. Afterward, he erected two goodly buildings, one for poore Orphants, and the other for a Colledge. He was alſo very charitable to poore aged men, diſcréet and moderate in his manners, and not lightly induced to puniſh. Hée gaue fauour and ſupport to all men of merite and vertue, exalting them to places of dignity. In the end, being ouerpreſſed with a long ſickneſſe, he died in the thréeſcore and tenth yeare of his age.
               
                  1118.
                  Caloian, Sonne to Alexius, held the Empyre after his father, in the yeare 1118. He made many warres in Aſia, vanquiſhing in diuers Battels, both the Turkes and Perſians, taking ſundry Citties from them. He was a contrary oppoſite to the Venetians and the French, who were then vnited: Notwithſtanding, the Venetians took the Iſles of Rhodes, Samos and Miteline. Hee died of the pricke of a Dart, which himſelfe had poiſoned, ſmiting his hand (by chance) vpon it, as he made offer with it againſt a wild Boare: He aduaunced all his owne friends to dignities.
               
                  
                  Manuell, or Emanuell, brother,1142 or (as ſome ſay) Sonne to Caloian, entred on the Empire of Constantinople after him, in the yeare 1142. He entreated Conrade Emperor of Rome, to lende him ayde againſt Roger king of Scicily, who both troubled, and would haue vſurped the Empyre, each after other, and likewiſe to aſſiſt him againſt the Turkes, as thus his requeſt ſeuerally pretended. But Manuell, hauing a contrary, and another kind of leauen hid in the dow, ſent Conrades men where they were all famiſhed. Nor did it ſuffice him to deale thus vilely with them, but he did as much to the men ſent by Lewes (ſirnamed Gods guift) king of France. So that in a ſhort while, ſo great a number of the French perriſhed by falſhood and Treaſon, that the name of Manuell became odious among the French. Roger entred (in earneſt) vpon the Countrey of Greece, beſieged Constantinople, and with a gallant brauado) culled many floures of gold and ſiluer, out of the Emperors garden. Manuell offered outrage to an Ambaſſador of Venice, and (in one day, ſurpriſed all their Marchants, whom he had betraied vnder the colour of peace: for which, the Venetians conſtrained him afterward, dearly to buy his owne peace. He made warre againſt the Turks, wherein he was almoſt taken: And after hee had raigned eight and thirty yeares, hee liued as a Monke, and died of a grieuous diſeaſe.
               
                  Alexius the ſonne of Manuell, helde the Empire after him, in the yeare 1180.1180. vnder Andronicus, his cooſin-germain, who then was his Tutor,

afterward his companion in the empire, and at laſt his murderer, for ſecretly he cauſed his hed to be cut off, and threw his body into the Sea, he being but fifteen yeares old.
               
                  1183
                  Andronicus Comnenes, the ſonne of Iſaake, entred on the empire of Conſtantinople, after his cooſine germain Alexius, whom cruelly he had cauſed to be murdered, in the yeare 1183. William, king of Sicily
                  ▪ made warre vpon him, to reuenge the death of Alexius. And as he was aſſailed on all ſides, Iſaacke, ſirnamed the Angell, (contrary to all opinion) came ſo ſuddenly vpon him, that he not onely foiled him, but deiected him from the empyre, and hauing ſeized vpon his perſon, hee cauſed one of his eies to be pulled out, and then ſet him vppon an Aſſe, with his face backward, crowning him with a wreath of rotten Garlicke or Onions, and holding the ſtalke of one of them in his hand, in ſtead of a Scepter. In this order was he ſhewen through the Citty of Conſtantitinople, men, women, and children, doing many iniuries vnto him, caſting both durt and filth in his face, ſmiting him alſo with ſtones and ſtaues. In this manner being cruelly bruiſed and murdered, he was hanged vp: when yet the women would not leaue him ſo, but diſmembred him into the ſmalleſt pieces.
               
                  Iſaack the Angell, tooke the empyre on him after Andronicus, in the yeare 1185.1185 He qualified the tyrranie of many, and entertained magnificently Frederick Emperor of Rome, who paſſed into Syria. Hee redéemed (with a great ſum of

mony) his younger brother Alexius, whoe (moſt vnthankefully) bereft him, both of his eies and Empire, becauſe he ſéemed to fauour the 
                     Ʋenetians. He kept him likewiſe in priſon, vntill that Alexius, the ſonne of Iſaac, (in deſpite of his vncles mallice) by tears and faire intreats, obtained ſuccour of the French and the 
                     Ʋenetians, wherewith he deliuered his Father: who very ſoon after died, hauing taken too much the freſh ayre, after his ſo long cloſe impriſonment.
               
                  Alexius the Angell,
                  1195. murderer of his Brother Iſaac, helde the Empire of Conſtantinople after him, in the yeare 1195. He was moſt wicked, & cruelly handled his elder brother, onely to vſurpe the Empire. The like hee would haue doone to his Nephew Alexius, who eſcaping from him, was carried by Sea into Dalmatia, where hee found the Nobility of France, with Baldwin and the Venetians, whom he moued to warre againſt his vncle, promiſing them thirty thouſand marks of gold, and all kind of victuals, if his impriſoned father, or himſelfe, might (by their meanes) regaine the Empyre. Hereupon, thoſe valiant lords hoyſed ſaile towards Conſtantinople, and tooke it; hauing firſt broken the chain which thwarted the Sea. Alex
                        •
                     us, ſaued himſelfe by flight, Iſaac was deliuered out of priſon, who died ſoone after: and his ſonne Alexius the younger, was elected Emperor.
               
                  Alexius the yonger, being ſonne to Iſaac, was ſeated in the Empire, in the yeare 1204.1204 by an agreement made betwéene him, and the French
                  
and Venetians. It is ſaid, that then it was ſought to haue the Patriarch of Conſtantinople ſubiect & inferior to the Pope of Rome: and that the Emperor ſhould recompence the French and Venetians, for the damages which Manuell had doone vnto them. But ſcarcely was he entred into his gouernment of the Empire, and employing his paines to accompliſh his promiſes, when as Murziphilus (no Noble man, yet one whom he hadde aduanced to great authority) killed him. And ſo this yong and innocent Prince died by Treaſon. Murziphilus finding his ſinne much miſliked, in the night time fledde away, with his Wife, his ſtrumpets, and treaſure: yet, not long after, hee was brought backe againe from Morea, as a Captiue to Conſtantinople, where he died miſerably. By this meanes, both the Citty and empire of Greece remained to the French, and Baldwine was the firſt Emperour of the French Nation.
               
                  1205
                  Baldwine Earle of Flanders, was after Alexius the younger, elected emperour of Constantinople, by all the warlike ſouldiors of Flaunders, as alſo the Marqueſſe of Montferrat, of Sauoy, and of 
                     Ʋenice, in the year 1205. Before this election, there was a condition thus determined: That if the emperor (who was to be elected) ſhould be of the French, the 
                     Ʋenetians ſhould make a Patriarch; as it happened. Baldwine then recouered all that belonged to the Empire of Conſtantinople, except Adrianople: which Theodor, kinſman to Alexius the murderer, held as his wiues dowry, and kept there his Empire. But as the French
                  
laide ſiege thereto, and were vpon the very point of ſurprizing it: Baldwine was there taken and put to death, hauing ſcarſly gouerned one yeare.
               
                  Henry the brother of Baldwine,
                  1206 was made Emperor after him. Hee purſued the beſieging and aſſault of Adrianople, but the Sarazins comming to ſuccour it, he retyred to Conſtantinople, which then he ſtrongly fortified. He made peace and alliance with the Vallachians, tooke their Dukes daughter in marriage, and (both farre off, and at home) guided all affaires prouidently. Hee conſtituted William, (ſon to Boniface) K. of Theſſaly, ſoon after his fathers death, leauing his daughter Iolanta as his heyre, who was married vnto Peter of Auxerre, that ſuccéeded him in the Empire.
               
                  Peter de Courtnay, or (to ſpeake better) of France, being the yongeſt ſonne of Lewes le gros,
                  1216. and Earle of Auxerre, (by the meanes and right of his wife Iolanta, in reguard that Henry hadde lefte no heyre male) ſuccéeded in the Empire of Conſtantinople, the yeare 1216. He returning to Rome after his Coronation, beſieged Baudras, in fauour of the 
                     Ʋenetians: But it proued in vaine, for at a gallaunt Banquet, hee was beheaded by Theodor Laſcarus, who called himſelfe Emperor of Adrianople, and of the Graecians. This trechery was performed vnder the ſhadow of a feigned peace, with a faithfull promiſe made vpon a falſe Oath. Others ſay, that Laſcarus had laid ambuſhes in the Forreſt of Theſſaly, in the place called Tempe, and that he ſurpriſed Peter in ſuch manner,

ſhutting him vp in Captiuity, and that ſo he died. His wife Iolanta during this his thraldom, held the Empyre two yeares.
               
                  1220.
                  Robert, ſonne to the forenamed Peter, ſo ſoone as he heard the tidings of his fathers hard aduenture, departed preſently from Fraunce, and went directly to Constantinople, where he was receyued as Emperor, in the yeare 1220. There hee carried himſelfe valiantly, vntill ſuch time as hée tooke to wife a young Lady, who was promiſed & troth-plighted to a Gentleman of Burgundy, that neither could or would endure ſuch a ſhame. But he, boldly comming into the Pallace, did cut off the Ladies noſe, and threwe hir mother into the Sea, becauſe ſhe had béen the procurer of this vniuſt marriage. To all which the Emperour durſt not ſay one word, but went to Rome to receiue the Crowne: And returning thence not long after, with an intent to bee revenged, he died of a ſtrange diſeaſe in Achaia,
               
               
                  1228
                  Baldwine the ſecond, ſonne to the ſaid Robert, ſuccéeded his Father in the Empire of Constantinople, in the yeare 1228. But becauſe he was ouer-young, Brennus King of Ieruſalem (in title onely) was ſent from Italy, to be ioyned with him as his gouernour: whoſe daughter hee married, making none account of the daughter of the king of Pontus, whereby great warres enſued. Baldwine, being but barely ſtored of money for theſe warres, and very hardly preſſed: engaged his ſon to the Venetians, and to the King S. Lewes, a peece of the true Croſſe, as it was reported to be,

and many precious Reliques of the Church. So leuying a great Army, he planted it at the entrāce of the ſtraite of Conſtantinople: But in the meane while (by ſecret intelligence) Michaell Paleologus had gotten into the Citty. Then Baldwin flying thence, with the Patriarch, betooke themſelues to Negropont, dreading only the outward harmes, while they within were ten times worſe. Then did the Greekes recouer the Empire of Conſtantinople, which the French hadde helde almoſt the ſpace of thréeſcore yeares.
               
                  Michaell Paleologus,
                  1239. hauing thus cunningly ſeized on the Empire, and got it into his owne poſſeſſion: held it ſtil very manfully, for the ſpace of two and twenty yeares. But hee ran into his peoples hatred, for making agréement with pope Gregory the tenth, in the Councell at Lyons, and acknowledging duty to him. After him, his ſon ſuccéeded.
               
                  Andronicus, who within a while after,1261 tooke his ſonne Michaell to be his aſſociate in the empire. But Michaell being dead, his ſonne Andronicus the younger, made warre vpon his graundfather Andronicus, and compelled him to accept him as companion with him in the Empire. Whereat the Emperour Andronicus conceiued ſuch inward diſlike, that he ſoone after died, hauing raigned 43. yeares.
               
                  Andronicus the yonger,1304. carried himſelfe both wiſely and valiantly in gouerning the Empyre. He died of a burning Feauer, hauing raigned 33. yeares, his ſonne ſuccéeding.
               
                  
                  1341.
                  Iohn Cantacuzen, who was Schoolmaiſter to Iohn Paleologus, and fellow alſo with him in the Empires gouernment, of whom more ſhalbe ſaid in the life of Iohn Paleologus.
               
               
                  1341
                  Iohn Paleologus, called alſo Caloian, ſuccéeded his father in the Empire of Conſtantinople, the yeare 1341. He being very young, had for his Tutor and companion in the Empire Iohn Cantacuzen, who was expulſed by the ſeditious deuiſes & ſleights of a man of meane birth, but yet quicke, dexterious, and full of courage, which made him the better accepted in Court: It is ſaid alſo, that the ambition of the Patriarch of Conſtantinople, was thereto a great furtherance. But he being impatient at ſuch an iniurie, made war for fiue yeares, againſt the mother of Iohn Paleologus, and againſt Iohn the ſaid Emperour, and was the firſt man, that brought the Turkes in Armes into Europe. At length, Conſtantinople yeilded it ſelfe vnto him, and when he tooke it, he did no wrong to any one, but carried himſelfe as fellowe Companion of the Empire, giuing his daughter in marriage to the ſaid Emperour Iohn. Afterward, he made warre vpon the Genowaies, ſpéeding one while well, and another ill, hauing (neuertheleſſe) with him the Venetians, and the men of Arragon. Then Iohn Paleologus, whoe had béene baniſhed, made warre vpon him, being principally ayded by the Turkes, and to whome hee gaue firſt habitation in Europe: by which meanes, he cunningly entred Conſtantinople, in the yeare 1357. And then Cantacuzen (forſaking

the Empire) entred into a monaſtery, and liued there as a Monke. But Matthew, his ſonne, ſéeking to be Competitor with Paleologus, was conſtrained to deſiſt. So Paleologus, hauing had the victory in diuers warres, died in the yeare 1384. hauing raigned ſixtéene yeares with his Tutour Cantacuzen, and 27. yeares alone by himſelfe, in all 43. yeares. After him was Emperour (for the ſpace of thrée yeares) Andronicus the eldeſt ſonne; who neuertheleſſe is not ſet in the number of the Emperors.
               
                  Manuell (by ſome called Emanuell) ſon to the ſaid Iohn Paleologus,
                  1387. held the Empire of Conſtantinople, in the yeare 1387. And the moſt remarkable matter in his life, was that he left ſeauen ſonnes: of which, Iohn the eldeſt, ſuccéeded in the Empyre, in the yeare 1421.
               
                  Iohn, eldeſt ſonne to Manuell,
                  1421. entred on the Empire after his fathers deceaſe. He being more addicted to peace and quietneſſe, then War, gaue his aſſiſtance in the Councell at Ferrara, which was afterward tranſferred to Florence, Eugenius the fourth, then being Pope. As Emperour of the Eaſt, he was graciouſly welcommed by both the Churches, the Greek and Latine, which were then made one. Returning home to his Empire, he liued no long time after, but died, not leauing any poſterity of him, in the yeare 1445.
               
                  Conſtantine the eleauenth, and ſonne of Manuell, after the death of his brother Iohn,
                  1445. held the Empire, called the Greeke Empire, in the yeare, 1445. He hauing bin King of Morea before, was

called Draco, for the cruelty which hee exerciſed againſt the Turkes. But when Constantinople was taken by Mahomet the ſecond, ſon to Amurath the ſecond: Then, all trembling, and hee retiring to a gate of the Citty, to eſcape by flight, was ſtifled to death, in the preaſe and confuſion of people, that likewiſe fled away, the 29. day of May, 1453. His head was carried on the point of a Launce, to be ſhewn through the enimies camp in deriſion. And vndoubtedly, it is a matter worthy note, as alſo of ſome meruaile, that Conſtantinople, edified or re-edified, enriched, and exalted by Conſtantine the firſt, ſonne to S. Helena, and after the manner of Rome: ſhoulde vnder this Conſtantine the eleauenth (hauing his mother to beare the ſame name of Helena likewiſe) bee ſurprized, and kept vnder the power of the Turkes, euen to this inſtant.
            
         
         
            
            A briefe Hiſtory or ſummarie of the Othomans or Emperors of the Turks, for the ſpace of three hundred yeares.
            
               
                  OThoman, the ſonne of Orthogules, was Emperor of the Turkes, in the yeare of our Saluation 1300.1300. He was the firſt of this Nation that carried this name; which he had, in regard of a Caſtle that he took in Galatia, And he was the firſt alſo, that renewed the glory and honor of his Nation. For theſe people hadde taken Ieruſalem, in the yeare 1008. but they were conquered by the Chriſtians, vnder the conduct of Godfrey of Bullen, and thoſe that then remained of the Turkes, retired themſelues to Nicea, hauing (neuer after) any one K. of renowne vntill this man; who made himſelfe a Monarch, & hath the firſt place in the Hiſtory of the Turkes. He was but of meane deſcent, yet of great ſpirit, cunning, dilligent, and ambitious: hauing euermore (in his hart) a deſire to raigne, and pondered vpon all meanes, that thereto might beſt aduance him. In this high diſpoſition, hee founde Fortune very fauourable to him: for he ſubdued

the greater part of Bithinia, & tooke many fortes néere to the Pontick Sea. But his very greateſt honour, was, the ſurpriſing of Sina, a Citty anciently called Sebaſtia. He died aged, in the firſt yeare of Phillip de Ʋalois, King of France, and Edward the third, King of England.
            
            
               1328
               Orchanes, Son to the ſaid Othoman, was Emperour of the Turkes after his father. He would not alter a iote of this newe authority, no more then his father did, and whom he farre ſurpaſſed in Warlike actions. By his liberality and good carriage, he woon the hearts of his people, purſuing on (very well) what his father had begunne. By his induſtry, vigilancie, and prouidence, he woon the Countries of Myſia, Lycaonia, Phrygia, and Caria, and tooke in Warre Pruſya (which is now called Burſia) and which was the aboade of the Kings of Bithynia, where he receiued a hurt, whereof he died, in the firſt yeare of the raigne of Io. K. of France, Edward the third of England ſtil raigning. He raigned 22. yeares, leauing Soliman and Amurath his ſons and ſucceſſors.
            
               1348.
               Soliman, ſonne of Orchanes, raigned 2. yeares after his Father. He made warre vpon the Greekes paſſed from Aſya into Europe
               ▪ where he vanquiſhed the Bulgarians, and tooke many places from them: eſpecially in Thrace, he got the Citties of Adrianople and Philopolis. Some ſay that he died in his Fathers life time, with a fall from his horſe in hunting, and that (very ſoone after) his father died with gréefe. And this is the reaſon, why ſome doe not ſet him in the rank of Turkiſh Emperors.
            
               
               Amurath, firſt of that name,1350 and ſonne to Orchanes, was Emperor of the Turkes, in the year 1350. Good Fortune attended on him, as ſhee did on his Graundfather, and on his own Father likewiſe: But he was as contrary to his graund father by the mothers ſide, as his father had béen to his predeceſſor, who bereft him of a great part of Cilicia, by killing his ſonne. Amurath (incited thereto by Iohn Paleologus) ſent twelue thouſand Turkes for ſeruice of the ſaid Paleologus; which was the ſource and beginning of the ruyne of Constantinople. For, being allured with the riches of Europe, to make another voyage, he paſſed (in the Genowaies gallies) ſix thouſand Turks, vnder colour of (yet) giuing freſh ſuccour to the Emperor of Conſtantinople, and to expell his enemies out of the Empire: But it was with full intention, to vſurpe Greece. So he croſſed the arme of the Hellespont Sea to Abydos, ſeazing Calypolis, and other Citties. Afterward, with a verie ſtrong power, he ſet vpon the Emperor himſelfe, who no way doubted him: Then tooke he Seruia and Bulgaria, whoſe Princes he foiled, comming in good manner againſt him. But one of the followers of Lazarus, Deſpote of Seruia, in reuenge of his Maiſters death (ſlaine in the fight) killed Amurath in the yeare 1378.
            
               Baiazeth, King or Emperor of the Turks, firſt of that name,1378. after the death of Amurath his Father, ſlew his elder brother Solyman by Treaſon, and enioyed the Empyre of the Turkes alone to himſelfe. To reuenge the death of his Father, he

made warre againſt Marke, Lord of Bulgaria, both vanquiſhing and killing him, and ſubduing beſide a great part of his country. In ſhort while after, he ran thorow the Countries of Hungaria, Albania, and Valachia, and doing great hurt vnto them, tooke many Chriſtians, whom he carried Priſoners into Thrace. In regard of moſt bold attempts in his Martiall buſineſſe (wherein hee was both hot and ſudden) hee was called Baiazeth Hildrin, that is to ſay, Heauens Lightning. He ſubdued almoſt all Greece, being aſſiſted with the guifts and graces of Nature, both in body and mind. He beſieged Constantinople, for the ſpace of eight yeares, the Emperor wherof was gon into France, to require aſſiſtance, which was granted him. Neuertheleſſe, Baiazeth had the victory ouer the French, Hungarians, Germaines, Seruians, & Myſians, at once aſſembled againſt him. And ſo returning to Conſtantinople with a freſh beſieging, and finding no meanes to preſerue the Empire of Conſtantinople: ſuddenly Tamberlain came againſt Baiazeth, and gaue him battel on mount Stella, where Pompey fought with Mithridates. There did Tamberlain conquer him, bound him in chaines of gold, & placing him in a Cage of yron, led him in that manner thorough Aſya and Syria. In which miſerable eſtate Baiazeth died, and after his deceaſe, we find that there was interregnum, vntil Mahomet one of his ſons came.
            
               1407.
               Ioſuah or Cyriſcelebes, whom ſome wrongly name Calapine, the eldeſt ſonne of Baiazeth, after the foyle of his Father, was defeated of Aſya
               
by Tamberlain, & led Captiue to Conſtantinople for the Emperor, as a ſingular prize. But he was vſed as the ſonne of a Prince, and ſoon after (with great humanity in the Emp.) releaſed, and ſent home into Aſya, where he recouered his Fathers kingdome. After, when he had well reeſtabliſhed his forces, he ſtoutly reſiſted Sigiſmond King of Hungary, who came to aſſaile him, and had woon diuers Prouinces from him: preſuming that the Turks could no way reléeue him, after ſo great an ouerthrow giuen by Tamb. But Fortune ſpake no friendlier to Sigiſmund, then ſhe had formerly don to him, when he fought againſt Baiazeth at Nicopolis, his people being al larded with arrows before they could fall into order of battell. For the Horſmen turned bridle euen at the firſt ſhocke & noiſe of the Enemy, and Cyriſcelebes remained conqueror, who was ſlaine by his brother Muſtapha, otherwiſe called Muſulman, in the very flower of his age, the yeare 1407.
            
               Muſtapha or Muſulman,
               1408 was Emperor of the Turks a very ſmall time, for his brother Moyſes poſſeſſed himſelfe of the State, and expelled him. Som, name this Muſtapha, Orchanes the ſecond; whom they tearme to be ſon and heire to Ioſuah or Cyriſcelebes, and that he was ſlaine by Moyſes, his vncle by the fathers ſide: but Moyſes quickly did ſuffer his deſerued punniſhment. For looſing both goods and life together, himſelf was alſo ſlain by his owne brother Mahometh. There be that write, that this Mahometh raigned next after his father Baiazeth, making no mention of Ioſuah,
               
or Cyriſcelebes, neither of Muſtapha or Orchanes, nor of Moyſes: but after Baiazeth, do make his ſonne Mahometh, preſently to follow.
            
               1409
               Moyſes was expulſed, and put to death by his brother Muſtapha, or (as others ſay) his nephue Orchanes, and ſoone after, he was likewiſe ſlaine by his brother Mahometh: And theſe twoe (by ſome) are not ſet in ranke with the Turkiſh Emperors, becauſe they are ſaid to raigne very little time, or not at all.
            
               1409
               Mahometh, firſt of that name, brother to Ioſuah, Muſtapha, and the forenamed Moyſes, is ſaid (notwithſtanding the reſt) to be Emperor of the Turkes, in the yeare 1409. There are ſom that doo attribute only to this man, all thoſe matters which are reported of Ioſuah or Cyriſcelebes. He ouer ran the Countries of the Bulgarians & Valachians, impoſing great Tributes and Taxations vpon them. Then he entred on the Satrapes of Aſya, recouering all thoſe places which Tamberlaine had taken. He chaſed out of Galatia, and the Countries of Pontus and Cappadocia, his own kindred and Allies, without extending any pitty, to any Princes and Lordes of his owne blood: albeit it is true, that he left ſome in their own intire dwellings. Being returned into Greece, hee came to Adrianople, (the Metropolitan Citty of Thrace) and there he conſtituted the ſeate of his Empire, expelling thence the Chriſtians that had there any abiding. He died in the twelft yeare of his Empire, which is reckoned to be in the yeare 1418. leauing his ſonne Amurath the ſecond, to be his ſucceſſor.
            
               
               Amurath the ſecond,1418 Sonne to the forenamed Mahometh, ſuccéeded his Father in the Turkiſh Empire, in the yeare 1418. He (vnderſtanding the death of his father, and deſiring to paſſe from Aſya into Thrace) vanquiſhed his Vncle Muſtapha, to whom the Gréeks gaue fauour and ſuccour. He was the firſt, that (for the guard of his perſon) made election of Chriſtian Renegados, to bee his Ianiſſaries, by the power and courage of whom, both he and his ſucceſſors haue ſubdued almoſt the whole Eaſt. He aſſailed with his forces, and did great dammages to the Countries of Hungaria, Boſnia, Albania, Ʋalachia, & Greece. He tooke Theſſalonica from the Venetians. He had victory againſt Ladiſlaus King of Poland, againſt the Cardinall Iulian, and againſt Huniades. He held the Empire or Kingdome of the Turks, for the ſpace of 32. yeares, and then left it to Mahomet his Sonne.
            
               Mahomet the ſecond, Emperor of the Turks, ſuccéeded his Father Amurath in the year, 1450.1450 He began his reigne as an Homicide, cauſing his younger Brother to be murthered, becauſe his fathers body ſhould not be buried alone. He was a moſt wicked and ſinfull man, not beléeuing in any God. For he would ſay, that his Mahomet was a falſe Prophet, like vnto himſelfe, & made a mockery of the Saintes, Prophets, and Patriarches. He woon, and left the ſirname of Great, to the houſe of the Otthomans. Hee ruyned the Empyre of Conſtantinople, which he ſeized by aſſault the 29. day of May, 1453. as hath béene already

declared, in the report of the life of Conſtantine the eleauenth; togither, with the Empire of Trebiſonde. He tooke twelue kingdomes, & two hundred Citties, from the Chriſtians, in the year 1479. He beſieged the Iſle of Rhodes, which was then held by the knights of S. Iohn of Ieruſalem, but his labour was in vaine, for it was couragiouſly defended by the ſaid Knights, & their great maiſter Peter d'Aubuſſon, or d'Ambois, a French man. At length, he died of the Collick, the fourth day after he ſickened; hauing liued 58. yeares, & reigned one and thirty.
            
               1481
               Baiazeth, ſecond of that name, and ſonne to Mahomet the ſecond, by meanes of the Ianiſſaries, was made Emperor of the Turkes, in the yeare 1481. He conquered and expulſed Zizim, his younger brother, whom the chiefeſt Lordes would haue had to be Emperour: but hee beeing fled for refuge to the Iſle of Rhodes, the great maſter of the Knights, ſent him to King Charles the eight. Baiazeth vanquiſhed Caraman, and recouered all whatſoeuer hee hadde gotten from the Turkes, on either ſide of the Mount Taurus. He ſubdued Valachia, and ſo went on againſt the Sultane of Aegipt, who was too ſtrong for him: For, hauing receiued the fugitiue Mamelukes, after the death of Caraman, and entertaining (beſides) a great number of Arabes, for his defence, oftentimes hee conquered and put Baiazeth to flight. Afterward, Baiazeth ſubiected the Inhabitants of the Ceraunian Mountaines, and tooke from the Venetians Lepanto, Modon and Duraz.
               
In the end, his youngeſt ſonne Selim, whoe (by means of the Ianiſſaries) had gotten preferment before the eldeſt, and was declared to be Emperor in his fathers life time: enforced him to flight, and afterward poiſoned him, in the yeare 1512. at the very ſame time, when the battell of Rauenna was fought, vnder the happy reigne of King Lewes the twelfth.
            
               Selim hauing expulſed,1512. and after poiſoned his Father, becauſe he liued too long, was Emperour of the Turkes, in the yeare 1512. To this parracide, he added the murder of his brethren Achmet and Corcuthus, and cauſed ſeauen of his Nephewes to be ſtrangled, that were the Children of his brothers. He conquered and expelled the Sophi of Perſya, and (in diuers battels) diſcomfited the two Souldanes, Campſon and Tomombeus, with the Mamelukes and Arabes. Hee added Aegipt and Arabia to his Empire, and tooke the great Cayro. Then returning home to his countrey of Greece, an vlcer ingendred in his Raines, which increaſing continually like a Canker, procured his death, in the eight yeare of his reygne, Anno 1519.
            
               Soliman, whom ſome tearme to be the ſecond of that name, Emperor of the Turks,1510 carried that name (as is ſaid) becauſe he very wiſely prouided for all affaires, whereunto the yſſue of them was alſo as correſpondent. For this name of Soliman (by ſom tranſpoſed ſillables) deliuereth the name of Salomon, the moſt renowmed King for Wiſedome. There was not any before him, nor of the

race of the Othomans, more ſeuere and valiaunt. For the déedes and warres of Soliman, came not one iote behinde thoſe of his Father: hauing recouered Syria, vanquiſhed Gazel that was reuoulted, and ſurpriſed Belgrade and Rhodes; then afterward Buda two ſeuerall times, and put to the worſe the Army of Auſtria, that fled away before him. And néere vnto Buda, had the victory ouer Rokandolphe, who had a great Army. He vanquiſhed the Spaniards at Caſtelnoua in Dalmatia, and put to flight the Army by Sea, which ſéemed inuinſible. In the yeare 1543.1543. he tooke Strigonia and Alba Regalis, two worthy Citties of Hungaria. He conquered the kingdomes of Aſſyria and Meſopotamia, with the Citty of Babylon, that might be compared with Memphis and Aegypt, conquered by his Father. He ouer-ran and waſted the frontiers of Armenia, Medea and Perſia, and twice tooke Tauris, the principall Cittye of Perſia, chaſing the Sophi (farre off before him) into the mountaines. For the reſt, the Turks themſelues doe confeſſe, that for 200. yeares before, they neuer had Lord that was a greater Iuſticer, more ſober, wiſe, and humane, then he was. But this humanity ceaſed in him, when he cauſed his eldeſt ſonne Mustapha to bee ſtrangled, to pleaſe his Concubine Roſa, who deſired that hir Sonne Selim might be Emperour after his Father. Hee was repulſed by the Emperour Charles the fift, when hee came (with a powerfull Army) to beſiege the Citty of 
                  Ʋienna in Auſtria. He beſieged alſo the Iſle of Malta, in the yeare 1565.1565
               
whether the Knights of S. Iohn of Ieruſalem had retired themſelues, after the ſurpriſall of Rhodes. But the Iſle was manfully defended by their great maiſter, being a Frenchman, named Peter Pariſot, called alſo; le Ʋalette, and Soliman was compelled to raiſe his ſiege. In the yeare 1566. He died in Hungary, at his ſiedge before the Caſtle of Sighet, hauing raigned 47. yeares.
            
               Selim, ſecond of that name,1566. Emperour of the Turks, ſuccéeded in the Empire (by the meanes of Baſha Mehemet) after the death of Soliman his Father in Hungary, which for a time was concealed, and hee entred into poſſeſſion of the Empire, before the death of his Father was diſcouered. He ſubdued Ainan in Arabia, and took the Iſle of Cyprus, in the yeare 1571.1571. In the end, he loſt his Nauall Army, in the battell of Lepanto, which he had againſt the Chriſtians, in the very ſame yeare 1571. But ſoone after, he came vpon them againe, and then renewed peace with the Venetians and their Common-wealth. Afterward, he recouered Thunis & the Goulette, which the king of Spaine had made vſe of in Affrica: And he died in the yeare 1574. hauing reigned eight yeares. But all the forenamed memorable actions, were performed by his Baſhaes, and not by himſelfe: for hee (all the while) tooke his pleaſure, being greatly giuen to women and wine.
            
               Amurath, third of that name,1574 and ſon to Selim, was created Emperour of the Turkes, and enioyed the Empire after his fathers death, within eight daies, in the yeare 1574. By a cruel and

barbarous cuſtome of the Contrey, he cauſed fiue Brethren of his owne to be ſlaine, and two Concubines of his Fathers, whoe were great with Child: to the end, that he might ſolely reigne alone, without feare or ſuſpition, and ſo be auoyded of all impeachments, which he wel vnderſtood might enſue by parity, and ſuch as ſhoulde laye claime to the like Fortune. He began his gouernment ſomewhat yong, being aged but 28. years, being a woonderfull louer of his paternall Ma
                  •
               ometane Religion, a great Iuſticer, and imitator of his Graundfather Soliman, He tooke ſom citties in Hungarie and Sclauonie, which afterward were regained from him. Some ſay, that he was dull and lumpiſh of ſpirit, and fell (oftentimes) with the falling ſickneſſe, which made his face to look blemiſhed, and of a leaden coulour. He gaue himſelfe to women and great feeding, for he was the Father of 102. children, and yet became very groſſe and corpulent. Hee died in Ianuary, 1595. the 21. yeare of his raigne, not hauing attained to fifty yeares of age.
            
               1595.
               Mahometh the third, ſuccéeded his Father Amurath the third, in the yeare 1595. And to ſhew himſelfe the ſonne of his father, and no whit to degenerate from his Aunceſtors, he cauſed 19. of his brethren to be barbarouſly murdered, and many of his Fathers Concubines to be drowned, that were found to be great with childe after his deceaſe, ſo that no child ſhould remaine, to trouble him in his gouernment. But, as cruelty and barbarouſneſſe doth commonly dwell in a negligent

ſp
                  •
               rit, addicted to ſloth and puſillanimity: euen ſo, did not he any thing deſeruing memory, he being wholy giuen to his bodies voluptuouſneſſe. He did put to death his eldeſt ſonne, and the mother of that ſonne, becauſe they had inquired of Aſtrologers, how long time hee ſhoulde raigne. In the yeare 1603. the Sophi of Perſya, regained Tauris and Bages, and thoſe great countries, which the predeceſſors of this Mahometh had invaded, as hath bin already declared, in our report of Selim the firſt, and Soliman the ſecond. He died of the Plague at Constantinople, in Ianuary 1604. hauing raigned nine yeares.
            
               Achmet ſuccéeded his father in the Empyre, being but ſeauentéen years old, in the year 1604.1604 In the yeare 1605. he tooke Strigonia, and ſome other places in the Kingdome of Hungaria. It is ſaid, that (in his Army) he cauſeth his Fathers dead body to be carried, embalmed and encloſed in a Coffin of Lead: holding opinion, that his military deſeigns and exployts ſhall therby proue the more fortunat. He hath made peace with the Emperour Rodulphus, and thoſe of the houſe of Auſtria for fifteen yeares, which makes it therefore the more beléeued, that hee will conuert his forces againſt the Sophi. He now reigneth, this yeare 1611. and (by outward appearance) couets to be feared.
         
         
            
            A briefe Diſcourſe concerning the Sarrazins, the Originall of their name, and what People they haue been, euen to this day.
            
               HAuing deliuered a ſhorte Suruey of the Turkiſh Ottomans, from their firſt King or Emperor to the man that now gouerneth: I thought it not impertinent to my purpoſe, to ſay ſomwhat alſo of the Sarazins, who are held to be before them, and much more auncient then they. Nor liſt I here to call in queſtion, thoſe errors committed by Sabellicus, Blondus, the Tyrian Biſhop, 
                  Ʋolatteranus, & many other graue Authors, who (in their writings) doe tearme the Mahumetiſts or Turks to be Sarazins: for they neuer knewe any ſuch name, neither were at any time ſo called, but only Mulſulmans,
               Mulſulmans what it ſignifieth. which is as much to ſay, as, people faithfull in the Law. Some others, who haue thought their iudgements to be much more pregnant, ſticke not to ſay: that this name of Sarazin
               ▪ did come of Sarra, the wife of Abraham, of whoſe race the great Prophet Mahomet, (inuenter and deuiſer of the Law or Religion, helde at this preſent by the Sarazins and Turkes) they ſay was diſcended. But this opinion likewiſe is not receineable: for they deſired rather to be called Agarians, in reguard of Agar, handmayde to Sarra,
               Whence the S
                     ••
                  azins der
                     ••
                  e theyr de cent. and mother of Iſmaeli; or elſe Iſmaelites, becauſe they iudged themſelues to be yſſued of the ſaid Iſmaell, baſtard ſon to the forenamed Abraham.
            
            
               But let vs leaue theſe falſe etymologies, which neither carry or yeeld any true likelihood, & come to the very Originall of the name Sarazin. The error grew from hence, that ſome ſhort while before Mahomet (or Muhamet, as others tearms him) aroſe, and began to extend himſelfe as well towards Suria as Perſya: there liued then in the Rocky Arabia and Idumea, certain Arabes, who made their abode or dwelling (and yet doe to this day) vnder ſmall Tents or encloſures, and hadde not any other trade or maintenance for their liuing, but by thefts and robberies,Sarazins were people dwelling in the deſert of Arabia, and Idumea which they daily exerciſed vpon all paſſengers, were they Turks, Chriſtians, Pagans or whatſoeuer. Of which Robbers and Théeues, the Countrey coulde neuer be fréeed, nor can be at this day: as ſuch doe faithfully affirme, who haue trauailed on pilgrymage to Mount Sinai in Ieruſalem. And the Turkes themſelues doe confeſſe, that when Deuotion drew them forth on Pilgrimage, to the city of Medinat al Nabi, that is to ſay: the Citty of the Prophet, ſcituate in Arabia foelix, where the Sepulcher of Mahomet is: and when likwiſe they doe yet paſſe thorow the very greateſt ſolitudes and deſarts, as many times the Chriſtians doe: They finde them to bee peopled with theſe wicked kindes of Théeues, as formerly hath bin ſa
                  ••
               , who name themſelues Sarracenis, not in regard of Religion or bloud, but by an auncient appellation of the ſaid people, of whome Ptolomey makes mention, and ſaith, that their liuing is in Idumea.
            
            
               
               Ami, Marcel, in vita Iul, Apost, lib, 14
               
               Amianus Marcellinus, in the Hiſtory of Iulian the Apoſtat Emperour, makes a deſcription of them, and ſaith: that Thoſe places (more than two hundred yeares before the Originall of Mahomet,
               The antiquity of the Sarazin people or of his Alcoran) were fully furniſhed with the ſaid Sarrazins: and Aſſyria afterward, euen ſo farre as the Cataracts of Nylus, or the kingdome of Preſter Iohn, where they vſed the ſame courſes, violences & thefts vpon merchants, and inhabitants of the neighboring Countries, according as the Arabes or Alarbes doe at this day. Whereupon, becauſe that their chiefeſt habitation was in the Deſarts and Mountaines, which are in Arabia and the neighbouring quarſers or Countries, as Chaldaea, Aſſyria, Meſapotamia, Suria and Aegipt, when the Arabes aroſe with their new Religion, and had frequented the foreſaid Regions: the néerer Countries ſuppoſed that theſe people were thoſe former Sarazins, by ignorance of their Language, as alſo by raſhneſſe of ſome Writers, who liued then in Suria, and ſince that time in Spaine, ſéeming to haue good knowledge of thoſe people, and therefore continually then called Sarazins.
            
            Moreouer to confirme that vaine appellation, thoſe Interpreters in Spaine,
               
                  
                     •
                  rro
                     •
                   in trā
                  ſlatiō of the Alchoran who (by commandement of S. Bernard) were appointed to interpret the Alchoran, in euery place where they found the vocable Mulſulman, which is as much to ſay in the Arabian tongue, as, Peaceble, and faithfull towards God: they interpreted the ſame Sarraceni
                     •
                  , or Sarazins. This Mulſulman then

is the vocable, whereby al that beléeue in the Alcoran will be called; whether they bee Arabes, Syrians, Perſians, Tartars, Turks, or Moores.
            
            Whoſoeuer then would enter into any peaceable and friendly conference with them, (albeit none doe hate their name more than the Turks) muſt call them Mulſulmans, as we do our ſelues Chriſtians, or faithfull people. So are they all named, by the Author of the Iſmaell or Iſmaelitiſh race, and by their Baſtard Prophet.Sarazins wil be called Mul
                     •
                  ulmans After our manner, and in reſpect of Religion, they term a man Mulſulmam, and a woman Mulſulmina, or Mulſulminet: albeit ſome ſay Muſſim, by a corrupt pronunciation. As we may well conceiue by our owne ſelues, who do vſe to call thoſe diſfigured wanderers, that walke among vs with deformed faces, and long ilfauored lockes, vſing all ſubtle Thefts, pi
                  ••
               eries, and legerdumaines they can deuiſe, we nick-name them to be Sarrazins, Aegiptians, or Gypſies.
            
            I thus conclude then,What people are ment by the Sarazins. that when Hyſtorians write, that the Sarrazins inuaded and made vſe of Rhodes, next of Thrace, then of Italy, Spaine, and other Countries: it is to be vnderſtood of the Orientall people and Affricanes, that were of the Mahometan Religion, becauſe they vſed the ſelfe ſame cruelties, thefts, and robberies, as the Sarazins of rockie Arabia did. And to ſpeak truly, all Europe wold (at this inſtant) haue bin haunted with thoſe people, if they had not béene formerlie expelled and ſpoiled. It remaineth yet freſhe in memory, that the great Graundfather to Phillip
               
king of Spaine (not long ſince deceaſed) named Ferdinand,
               At what time the Sarazins were expulſed out of Spaine. expulſed them out of the Kingdom of Granado, with their king called Melen, and he beſtowed ſix whole years together in ſtout wars, onely in foiling them: And then the dominion, which the Sarazins and Moores held in Spaine, had finall concluſion. After which time, thoſe faith leſſe Mahumetiſts durſt neuer preſume any more vpon Spaine, where they had held the Kingdome of Granado eight hundred yeares.
            
               A great ſlaughter of the Sarazins in Spaine.Before the ſaid Ferdinand, king Alphonſus, in the yeare of our Lord 1233. ſlew in diuers places aboue two hundred thouſand of them, when they held ſtrong forts and Citties in Spaine, which he forced them to forſake, and ſince then haue béene vtterly ruined. Henry the Emperour made another great maſſacre of them,Another in Italy. in the yeare of Ieſus Chriſt 1010. in Italy, expelling them wholy out of that Countrey. Among the Sarazins▪ there were not only very generous perſons: but likewiſe ſome men of great learning: as Auicen, Meſuus, Iſaac, Manſor, Auerroes, and many others. Now, as all things haue their viciſſitude, and alteration by courſes: ſo after that the Sarazins had raigned in Africa, and partly in Europe, for about the ſpace of eight hundred yeares, there came a people from diuers parts of Scythia, which at this day we call Turks, who in leſſe than twoe hundred yeares,The Turks 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Sarazins. ouercame in Armes thoſe people called Sarazins, with many other Chriſtians beſide, not onely in Aſya, but in Europe and Affrica. And albeit that thoſe Turks were of the ſame

Religion, to wit, Mahumetists: yet did they not abſtaine from vexing and troubling them with warre, euen in like manner as they did the Chriſtians. For in the yeare 1012. they took Ieruſalem and all Iudaea from them: but the Sarazins of Aegipt recouered them againe, and held them for three hundred yeares after. Neuertheleſſe, they were yet againe deiected thence in the year 1517 by the Turks, the Sarazins looſing then not onlie Paleſtine, and the Holy-land, but likewiſe Egipt, Syria, Arabya, and the very ſame Countrey of Idumea, where as the Sarazins had their original, and are there ſubiect to the Turkes nowe at this inſtant. For Campſon their King, loſt the daie againſt Selim, Emperor of the Turks, and Tomombeus his ſucceſſour, being next choſen to bee King in his place, was taken,The Sarazins laſt Ki. ſtrangled. and afterward ignominiouſlie ſtrangled in the graund Caire, the very principall Citty of Egypt, where we may behold the end of the Sarazins, not any part of them now remaining, except ſuch few, as are in the Turks ſeruility.
            This ſhort diſcourſe giues vs to vnderſtand, that Sarazins were not all ſuch as are called Mahumetiſts, but they that had their beginning in the Countries of Idumea, and the deſart or rockie Arabia, and all thoſe that (being ioined with them) commanded vnder them in diuers Countries, rendring other Nations ſubiect to them by Armes. Vncill ſuch time, as they were exterminate by the people, whoſe Countries they vniuſtlie vſurped, and planted their Religio
                  •
                by war:

As alſo (at length) by the Turkes, although they be of the ſame Religion. For warre is maintained among them, for deſire of ſoueraignty and ambition, euen as well as among vs that are Chriſtians.
         
         
            ¶A briefe Collection of the Byſhops and Popes of Rome, from the yeare 44. to this inſtant 1611. With the ſeuerall Ages of the Church, ſince the Aſcenſion of our bleſſed Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt vp into Heauen.
            
               The years of Grace.
               OVr Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the Nazarite, God and man, Meſſias, Sauiour of the world, Holy of holies, Soueraigne and Eternall Highe Prieſt, head of the Church.
            
               44.1 Peter, called Cephas, borne in Bethſaida, the ſonne of Iohn, and firſt called of the Apoſtles, is ſaid to hold his ſeat ſeauen yeares at Antioch, and afterward at Rome, xxiiij. yeares, vnder the Empire of Claudius and Nero, who cauſed him

to be crucified in the ſame place. Simon Magus, being reputed to be the firſt Heretique, was then condemned by him. Then was the firſt Councel holden at Ieruſalem, and then alſo was the firſt Perſecution.
            2 Linus, the ſonne of Herculanus,
               57 born at Volterra in Tuſcane, was ſaid to be the Diſciple to S. Peter, and his Coadiutor. He held the Sée, eleuen yeares, fiue Moneths, and twelue dayes: And had his head ſmitten off vnder Nero.
            
            3 Clement, the ſon of Romain Fauſtinus,
               68 firſt Prieſt of the Romain Church, was deſigned by S. Peter his ſucceſſour. He was baniſhed to Pontus, and was drowned, hauing an Anchor faſtened about his necke. He held the Sée, xij. Moneths, eleuen daies. Sede vacante, xiij. daies.
            4 Cletus, ſon to Emilianus the Romaine,77. was martyred vnder Domitian. He held the See, xij. yeares, one moneth, eleuen daies. Menander, Ebion and Cerinthus, were then Hereticks: And the ſecond Perſecution.
            
               The firſt Age.
               IN this firſt Age, liued & wrote, Philo the Iew, Dioniſius Areopagita, Ioſephus, and S. Ignatius. In this Age, were two ſeuerall Perſecutions of the Church: The firſt vnder Nero, & the ſecond vnder Domitian.
               
               5 Anacletus,
                  84. ſonne to Autiochus the Athenian, a Prieſt of the Romain Church, was martired vnder Nerua and Traian. He held the See, nine yeares, two moneths, ten daies. 
                     Ʋacante, thirteen daies.
               
                  6. Euariſtus a Greeke, Son of Iudas the Bethleemite Iew:96. was martyred vnder Traiane. Hée held the Sée, nine yeares, ten months, two daies vacante xix. dayes. Saturnine, Baſilides, and Iſidorus Heretickes liued then: And then was the third perſecution.
               7 Alexander, Sonne of Romaine Alexander, was Martird vnder Traian.
                  109 He held the Sée ſeuen yeares, ten Months, two daies, vacante xxv daies.
               
                  1178 Sixtus, Son of Romaine Paſtor, a Prieſt of the Romaine Church
                     •
                  , was Martyred vnder Adrian, He held the Sée, ten yeares, thrée Moneths, and xxj. daies. vacante foure daies. Then liued, Carpocrates, Epiphanes, and Prodicus, author of the Gnoſticke Hereticks. The fourth perſecution.
               
                  127.9 Teleſphorus a Gréeke, ſonne to Anachoretus, Prieſt of the Romaine Church, was martyred vnder Adrian. He held the Sée, eleuen years, thrée moneths, xxij. daies. vac. foure daies. Aquila of Pontus, the Heretick, then liued.
               10 Higinus a Gréeke, ſon to an Athenian Philoſopher,138. was Prieſt of the Romain Church, vnder the Empire of Antoninm. He held the ſee, 4. yeares, thrée moneths, foure daies. vac. 4. daies.
               
                  24211 Pius of Aquilea, ſonne to Ruffinus, Prieſt of the Romain church vnder Antoninus: He diſputed concerning the feaſt of Eaſter, at Laodicia. He held the See, nine yeares, thrée Monethes, foure daies. vacante foure daies. Then were hereticks, Valentinus and his Diſciples, Marcus,

Secundus, Baſſus, Colarbaſus and Heracleo.
               
               12 Anicetus a Syrian, the ſonne of Iohn,
                  153 martired vnder the Emperour Antonius verus. Hee held the Sée, nine yeares, foure monethes, xiij. daies. vacante xvij. daies.
               13 Sother, ſonne to Concordius, a Natiue of Fundi, vnder Verus. He held the Sée nine years, iij. months, two daies, Vacante xxi. daies. Then was Tatian, of whom came the Excratites, Seuerus and Ammonius Hereticks.
               14 Eleutherius of Nicopolis, ſonne to Habundius, was Deacon of the Romain Church,171 vnder Commodus. He held the Sée, xv. yeares, iij. moneths, two daies, 
                     Ʋacante fiue daies. Montanus the Phrygian, Author of the Cataphriges, Theod. Themiſt. Alexander and Symmachus Heretiques then liuing.
               15 
                     Ʋictor an Affricane borne,186 the Sonne of Foelix, vnder the Emperor Pertinax. Hee helde the Sée ten yeares, thrée months ten daies: vacante xxi. dayes. A Synod was then at Rome; ſome Counſels in Paleſtine, concerning Eaſter. Theodotus, Aeſclapiodothus, Hermopilus, and Apollonides, were then Heretiques.
               16. Zephyrinus a Romaine borne,198 Sonne to Habundius, vnder Antonius Caracalla. Hee held the Sée ſeauen yeares, ſeauen months, ten daies, vacante ſixe dayes.
               17. Calixtus, Sonne to Domitius a Romayne,
                  218 was martired vnder Aurelius Seuerus
                  ▪ He helde the Sée ſixe yeares, one month, tenne daies, Vacante vi. dayes. Then was the fift perſecution.
            
            
               
               The ſecond Age.
               2 In this ſecond Age, liued Iuſtine the Phyloſopher and Martir: Dioniſius Byſhoppe of Corinth S. Policarpus, S. Ireneus; Clemens, Alexandrinus, and Tertullian. In which Age, were thrée perſecutions: one vnder Traiane: the ſecond vnder Marcus Antoninus, and the thirde vnder Seuerus.
               
               
                  22318 Vrbane, Sonne to Pontianus a Romaine, martired vnder Alexander. Hee helde the Sée foure yeares, ten months, twelue dayes, vacante one month.
               
                  23119 Pontianus a Romaine borne, and ſonne to Capurnius, dyed in exile in Sardignia, vnder Alexander. He held the Sée nine yeares, fiue moneths, two daies, Vacante x. daies.
               
                  23620 Antherus a Greeke by birth, ſon to Romulus, martired vnder Maximinus. Hee helde the Sée fiue yeares, one month, twelue daies, Vacante xiij. daies. Then was the ſixt perſecution.
               
                  23721 Fabian a Romaine, ſonne to Fabius, vnder Maximinus. He held the Sée, fifteene yeares, eleuen dayes, 
                     Ʋacante ſix daies. Gordianus, Phillip and Decius were then martired. The Aelchefites, and Nouatus chiefe of the Nouatians, with ſome Arabian Heretickes, were then. A Counſel was holden at Rome, againſt Nouatus: The ſeuenth perſecution.
               
                  25122 Cornelius a Romaine, ſon to Caſtinus Prieſt of the Romaine Church, and martyred vnder Decius and Gallus. He held the See two yeares, two months, three daies: 
                     Ʋacante one moneth, and

three daies. Then was the Nouatian Anti-pope, and firſt ſchiſme in the Church. Two Sinodes were held in Affrica, againſt Nouatian. The ſée being vacant, a Synode was held at Rome, concerning them that had denied the Faith.
               23 Lucius a Romain,253. and ſonne to Porphirius, was martyred vnder Gallien and Valerian. He held the Sée three yeares, three moneths, iij. daies, Vacante one month, v. daies. Two councels were held at Carthage, one concerning the doubt, whether Heretiques ought to bee rebaptized: and the other about baptizing of Infantes. Two other Councels were likewiſe in Aſya, vpon the doubt, whether Heretiques were to be receiued, comming to reſipiſcence or knowledge of their error. Now was the eight Perſecution.
               24 Stephen a Romain, ſonne to Iulius,
                  255 Archdeacon of the Romain Church, martyred vnder Valerian and Gallien. He held the Sée, 7. years, fiue Moneths, and ij. daies. vacante xxij. daies. A Synode was held in Affrica, againſt Baſilides and Martiall, two renegate Biſhops.
               25 Sixtus the ſecond, an Athenian borne,257 ſon to a Phyloſopher, and martyred with S. Laurence, vnder Valerian and Gallien. He helde the Sée two years, ten months, xxiij. daies: vacante one moneth, fiue dayes. Then were liuing Noëtus and Sabellius, Author of the Sabellian hereſie, with the heretick Paule of Samoſata.
               
               26 Denis or Dioniſius, a Monke vnder Claudius the Emperour. He held the Sée, ſixe yeares,260 two moneths, foure daies. vac. ſix daies. Nepos
                  
the Heretick then renewed the Chiliaſtes, Two Synodes were at Antioch, againſt Paule of Samo ſata: And a Synode at Rome, for the cauſe of Denis of Corinth.
               
               
                  271.27 Felix a Romain, ſon of Conſtantius, martyred vnder Aurelian: He held the ſee, 4. yeares, thrée moneths, xv. daies. vacan. fiue daies. The ninth Perſecution.
               
                  27528 Eutichianus, ſonne to Maximus, & borne at Luna in Tuſcane, martired vnder Aurelian, Tacitus and Florian Emperors: He held the Sée, one yeare, one Moneth, vacante eight daies. Then was Manes, head of the Manichean Heretiques.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     8329 Caius, the ſon of Caius, borne at Salona, in Dalmatia, martyred vnder Carinus, Numerianus, Diocleſian and Maximianus Emperors. He held the See, eleuen yeares, foure Moneths, xij. daies, vacante eleuen daies.
               
                  29630 Marcellinus a Romaine, ſon to Proiectus, martyred vnder Diocleſian and Maximianus. He held the See, ſix yeares, two moneths, xvi. daies, 
                     Ʋacante ſeauen yeares, ſeuen moneths, and xxv. daies. Then was the tenth and bloudy Perſecution: And a Synode holden at Sinüeſſa, for the cauſe of Pope Marcellinus.
               
            
            
               The third Age.
               3 In this third Age flouriſhed Origen, Minutius

Foelix, S, Cyprian, S. Gregory, cald the worker of myracles; Dioniſius biſhop of Alexandria, Ʋictorinus, Biſhop of Poicters, Arnobius, and S. Methodius Byſhop of Tyre. In this age were fiue perſecutions. The firſt vnder Maximinus, the ſecond vnder Decius, the third vnder Valerianus and Gallien, the fourth vnder Aureliauus, and the fift vnder Diocleſian.
               
               31. Marcellus a Romaine,
                  304 the Sonne of Bennet or Benedict, Prieſt, Cardinall of the Romaine Church, vnder Conſtantine. Hee helde the Sée ſix yeares, fiue months, thrée dayes, vacante xx. dayes.
               32 Euſcbius a Greeke, ſonne to a Phyſitian,310 vnder Conſtantine, He held the Sée four yeares, one month, thrée daies, Vacante thrée dayes.
               33 Miltiades or Melchiades an Affricane,
                  311. Cardinall Prieſt of the Romaine Church vnder Conſtantine. He held the Sée, foure yeares, ſeauen months, nine dayes, vacante xx, daies. Then was the Schiſme of the Donatiſts in Affrica: the Elibertine Synod in Spaine; the Synod of Rome and of Carthage.
               
               34. Sylueſter a Romaine, ſonne to Ruffinus,
                  315 Cardinall Prieſt vnder Conſtantine. Hee helde the Sée three and twenty yeares, ten months, eleuen dayes, vacante fifteene dayes, Then were the Synodes of Ancyra and Neocaeſaria: The generall Counſell of Nice, wherein Arrius was condemned, and the third Sinod holden at Rome
               
               35 Marcus a Romaine, the ſonne of Priſcus, Cardinall Deacon vnder Conſtantine,
                  33
                        •
                     
                   hee helde

the Sée two yeares, eight months, twenty daies, vacante twenty daies.
               
                  33636 Iulius a Romaine, ſonne of Rusticius, Cardinall Deacon vnder Constantine and his children. Hee helde the Sée fiftéene yeares, two moneths, ten dayes, 
                     Ʋacante, two dayes. Then wer the Aſterians, Anthropomorphites, Euſebians, Macedonians, Dulians, Luciferians, and Marcellian Heretiques; with Photinus, Acacius and Aerius: The Synodes of Rome, Cullen, Sardis, Ieruſalem and Alexandria.
               
               
                  35337 Liberius a Romaine, the ſon of Auguſtus, a Cardinall Deacon, was ſent into exile vnder Conſtance. He held the Sée, twelue yeares, thrée moneths, foure daies: Vacante ſixe daies. Then was the perſecution of the church by the Arrians, and ſecond Schiſme betwéene Liberius and Foelix.
               
               
                  35538 Foelix the ſecond, a Romaine, and Son of Anastaſius, a Cardinall Deacon: was created Pope in the life time of Liberius, vnder Conſtance and martired by the faction of the Arrians. He held the Sée, one yeare, four months, two daies.
               39 Damaſus a Portuguize, ſonne of Antonio, Cardinall Deacon, vnder Valentinian, Ʋalens, Gratian,
                  366. 
                  Theodoſius and Arcadius. He helde the Sée tenne yeares, thrée monethes, eleuen daies, 
                     Ʋacante xi. dayes. The third Schiſme betwéene Damaſus and Vrſicinus then happened, and Synods were held at Rome, in Spaine, and at Valentia in France. As alſo the Euuomina, Entichian, Priſcillianiſts, Apollonarian and Meſſalian Heretickes.

A generall Counſell at Conſtantinople, againſt Macedonius.
               
               40 Siricius a Romaine, ſon of Tiburtius,
                  384 Cardinall Deacon vnder Arcadius and Honorius. He held the Sée fifteene yeares, eleuen months, fiue and twenty daies, vacante xx. daies. Some Synods were then held at Carthage: Heluidius, Dorotheus and Vigilantius heretickes, were then.
            
            
               The fourth age.
               IN this fourth Age liued Lactantius, Euſebius of Caeſaria, S. Athanaſius, Iuvencus, Sa. Hillarie Biſhop of Poictiers, Optatus Byſhop of Maltha, S. Baſile, S. Gregory Nazianzene, S: Ambroſe, S: Hierom, S: Iohn Chryſoſtome, S: Epiphanius, S: Cyrill of Ieruſalem, and Martine Archbiſhoppe of Tours.
               
               41 Anaſtaſius a Romaine,
                  398 ſonne of Maximus Cardinal Prieſt vnder Honorius: he held the Sée thrée yeares, ten daies, vacante xxi. daies. Then were the ſynodes of Cyprus and Tolledo.
               
               42 Innocentius a Natiue of Albania,
                  401. or Scotland, ſonne of Innocentius, Cardinal Deacon vnder Honorius: he held the Sée fifteen yeares, two months, fiue & twenty daies, vacante xxij. daies. The hereticks then were Arcadius, Theodoſius, and Pelagius.
               
               43 Zoſimus of Cappadocia, ſonne of Abraham,
                  416 Cardinall Prieſt vnder Theodoſyus the younger: he held the Sée one year, iij. months, xii. daies. vaca. xi. daies. Then was the ſixt ſynod of Carthage
               
               
                  
                  41044 Bonifacius a Roman, Son of Iocundus, Cardinall-Prieſt vnder Theodoſius: he held the Sée thrée yeares, eight months, ij. dayes, vacante, nine daies. The Schiſme of Eulalius Anty-Pope.
               45 Celeſtine a Romaine, Sonne of Priſcus, Cardinall-Deacon:423 he held the Sée eight years, ten months, ſeauentéen daies: vacante, 21. daies. Then was the generall Councell of Epheſus, againſt Neſtorius, vnder Theodoſius.
               
               
                  432.46 Sixtus the third, a Romaine, and Son of Sixtus, Cardinall-Prieſt vnder Valentinian: hee held the Sée 8. yeares, eighteene daies.
               
                  4
                        •
                     047 Leo the Great, a Romaine, ſonne of Quinctian, Cardinall Arch-deacon vnder Theodoſius: he held the ſée one yeare, one month, 13. daies vacante, 8. daies. Then was the generall Councell of Chalcedon, againſt Dioſcorus and Eutichus.
               
               
                  46148 Hillarius, borne in Sardignia, ſon of Criſpinus, Cardinall-deacon vnder the Empire of Leo. He held the Sée 7. yeares, three months ten daies, vacante ten daies.
               49 Simplicius, a Natiue of Tiuoli, ſonne of Caſtinus,
                  467 or Castorius, vnder Leo, he held the ſee fifteene yeares, one month, ſeauen daies, vacante 26. daies.
               
                  48
                        •
                     
                  50 Felix the third and younger, a Romaine, ſon of Felix a Prieſt, Cardinall vnder Zeno. He held the ſee ſixe yeares, eleauen monthes, ſeauentéene daies, v
                        •
                     cante fiue daies.
               51 Gelaſius an Affricane, ſonne of Valuerus Biſoppe,¶ vnder the Empire of Anaſtaſius: hee

held the See fiue yeares, eyght months, ſeauenteene daies, vacante ſeauen daies.
               52 Anaeſtaſius the ſecond, a Romaine,
                  496 ſonne of Peter, vnder Anaſtaſius. He held the ſee 1. yeare, ten monthes, twenty foure daies, vacante foure daies.
            
            
               The fift Age.
               IN this fift age liued Saint Auguſtine, Oroſius, Caſſianus, Eucherius of Lyons, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Ʋicentius Lyrinenſis, Socrates, Sozomenes, Theodoret, Proſper, Petrus Chryſologus, Saluianus Byſhop of Marſeillis, Sidonius Apollinaris, Gennadius, Petrus Diaconus, Boetius, and many others.
               53 Symmachas, a Natiue of Sardignia,
                  498 Sonne of Fortunius, vnder Anaſtaſius: he held the See fifteene yeares, ſixe months, twenty two dayes, vacante ſeauen daies. Then was the fift ſchiſme between Symmachus and Laurentius, who afterward was Byſhop of Nocera.
               
               54 Hormiſda, borne in Terra di Lauoro,
                  514 or the Land of Labour, Sonne of Iustus, vnder Anaſtaſius and Iuſtine: hee helde the ſee nine yeares, eighteene dayes, vacante ſix daies. The Synods of Geronda, of Caeſar-Auguſtus, and of Conſtantinople.
               
               55 Iohn, a Natiue of Tuſcane,
                  523 Sonne of Conſtantius, Cardinall-Prieſt vnder Iuſtine: Hee dyed in Priſon at Rauenna, hauing then

bin taken by Theodoric king of the Goths; he held the See two yeares, eight months, eight & twenty daies, vacante one month.
               
                  52656 Foelix the fourth, a Samnite borne, ſonne of Caſtorius, Cardinall Prieſt of S: Sylueſter, vnder Iuſtine and Iuſtinian: he helde the See foure yeares, two months, three daies, vacante thirteen daies. The ſecond ſynod of Tolledo.
               
               
                  5
                        •
                     057 Boniface the ſecond, a Romaine, ſonne of Sigultus, Cardinall Prieſt of S. Cecily, vnder Iuſtinian: hee helde the Sée two yeares, two daies, vacante two months. The ſixt ſchiſme betweene Boniface and Dioſcorus. Three ſynodes holden at Rome.
               
               
                  53058 Iohn the ſecond, ſur-named Mercurius, a Romaine, ſonne of Proiectus, Cardinall Prieſt of S: Clement vnder Iuſtinian: he held the Sée two yeares, foure months, vacante ſix daies.
               
                  53459 Agapetus a Romaine, ſonne of Gordianus, Cardinall Arch-Deacon of the Romaine Church vnder Iuſtinian: he held the See eleuen Months, nineteene d
                     •
                  ies, vacante one month, xxix. daies. A ſynod holden at Conſtantinople.
               
               
                  53560 
                     
                        •••
                     uerius, borne in Terra di Lauoro, ſonne of Pope 
                     
                        •
                     ormiſda, ſub-Deacon of the Romaine church vnder Iuſtinian: he held the Sée one year, fiue monthes, twelue daies, vacante ſixe dayes. Then he was expulſed and baniſhed into the Iſle Pontia, where he died. The ſecond ſynode of Orleans.
               
               
                  53761 
                     Ʋigilius a Romaine, ſonne of Iohn that had 
                     〈…〉
                   Deacon of the Roman Church

vnder Iustinian. He held the Sée eighteen years, ſix months, ſixe and twenty daies, vacante three months, fiue daies. The ſeauenth Schiſme betweene Siluerius and 
                     Ʋigilius, and the fifte Generall Counſell of Conſtantinople againſt the Origeniſts. Alſo the third Synod of Orleans.
               
               62 Pelagius a Romaine, ſonne of Iohn Vlearianus, Arch-Deacon of the Romaine Church,553 vnder Iuſtinian: he held the Sée ſixe yeares, ten moneths, eight and twentie daies, vacante, three months, and ſix and twentie daies. Two Synods at Paris.
               
               63 Iohn the third, Catelline a Roman, ſonne of Anastaſyus, vnder Iuſtinian and Iuſtine:561 he held the Sée twelue yeares, eleuen months, ſixe and twenty daies, vacante ten monthes, three daies. Then beganne the Lombardes to raigne in Italy.
               
               64 Bennet Bonoſus, a Romaine,575 ſonne of Boniface, vnder Iuſtine, and Tyberius Conſtantine: he held the See foure yeares, one month, eight & twentie daies, vacante two months, ten daies.
               65 Pelagius the ſecond, a Romaine,579 ſonne of 
                     Ʋinigildus, vnder Tiberius and Mauritius: hee held the See ten yeares, two months, ten daies, vacante ten months, x. daies. The Patriar-chate of Aquilea was then tranſferred to Grada.
               
               66 Gregory ſur-named the Great,590 a Romaine Monke, and Doctor of the Church, ſon to Gordianus the Senator, and Syluia a moſt holy woman, Arch-Deacon of the Romaine Church, Legate or Agent for the holy ſee, at Constantinople towards the Emperor, called alſo the Apoſtle of the Engliſh,

vnder Tyberius, Mauritius, and Phocas, he held the ſee thirteene yeares, ſixe monthes, tenne daies, vacante fiue months, nine daies.
            
            
               The ſixt Age.
               IN this ſixt Age flouriſhed Caſſiodorus, Bennet Abbat, Fortunatus Byſhop of Poictiers, Euagrius, Michaell Syngelus, Gregory of Tours, and others.
               
                  60467 Sabinianus, borne in Tuſcanie, ſon of Bonus, Cardinall-deacon, and Legate to the Emperour Phoeas at Conſtantinople. He held the ſee, 1. year, 5 months, 9. daies, vacante 11. months 26. daies.
               
                  60568 Boniface the third, a Roman, ſon of Iohn, Cardinall-prieſt vnder Phocas. He held the See nine months, vacante one month nine daies.
               
                  60669 Boniface the fourth, borne at Maerſia in Lombardy, ſonne of Iohn a Phiſition, Cardinall-Prieſt vnder Phocas and Heraclius. Hee held the ſee ſixe yeares, eyght months, thirteen daies, vacante ſeauen months, fifteene daies.
               
                  61370 Deus-dedit, a Romaine, ſonne of Stephen Subdeacon, cardinall-Prieſt vnder Heraclius. He held the ſee three yeares, three months, 20 daies, vacante one moneth, 16. daies. The Synod of Auxerre.
               
               
                  61771 Boniface the fift, borne at Naples, ſonne of Iohn, vnder Heraclius. He held the ſee fiue years, twenty daies, vacante thirteene daies.
               
                  62272 Honorius, borne in Terra di Lauoro, ſon of Petronius, that had been Conſul vnder Heraclius.
                  
Hee helde the See twelue yeares, eleauen months, ſixteene daies, vacante one year, ſeauen months, thirteene daies. The foure and fiue ſynods of Tolledo.
               
               73 Seuerinus a Romaine, ſon of Labienus,
                  637 vnder Heraclius: he held the ſee one year, 2. months vacante foure months 29. daies.
               74 Iohn the fourth, borne in Dalmatia ſon of 
                     Ʋenantius the Scholastick,
                  639. cardinall-deacon vnder Heraclius: hee helde the ſee one yeare, nine months, nine daies, vacante foure monthes 13. daies, the ſixt ſynod of Toledo.
               
               75 Theodorus a Grecian,
                  647 ſonne of Theodorus the Byſhop, vnder Constantine and Conſtans, he held the ſee ſixe yeares, fiue monthes, 18. dayes, vacante one moneth 22. daies. A ſynod at Rome, and three in Affrica.
               
               76 Martine a Tudertine, ſonne of Fabritius,
                  647 vnder Conſtans, by whom he was baniſhed (for the faith) to Gerſonna in the Iſle of Pontus, where he dyed: he held the ſee ſixe yeares, one month, 26. dayes, vacante one yeare, two monthes. A ſynod at Romo, another in Spaine, againſt the Monotholites.
               
               77 Eugenius a Roman, ſonne of Rufinianus,
                  654 vnder Conſtans. He held the ſee two yeares, nine months, vacante foure monthes fifteene daies: ſynod eight of Toledo.
               
               78 Vitalian a Latine, ſonne of Anaſtaſius,
                  657 vnder Conſtans and Constantine: he held the ſee 14. years, ſix months, vacante one yeare, one month, 8. daies. A ſynod at Chaalons, & of Toledo 9. and 10
               
                  
                  67279 Adeodatus a Romain Monk, ſon of Iouinianus, Cardinall Prieſt vnder Conſtantine: hee held the See foure years, two months, v. daies, vacante foure months, twenty dayes. Synodes then at Hertford in England, Toledo the xi. and at Bracharenſys the third.
               
                  67680. Domnio or Domnus, a Romaine, ſonne of Mauritius vnder Conſtantine: he helde the See, fiue yeares, fiue months, ten daies, vacante two months, ſixteene daies.
               
                  67981 Agatho, borne at Palermo in Sicily, a monk, and ſonne of Pannonius, Cardinall Prieſt vnder Conſtantine: he held the Sée two yeares, ſix moneths, fifteene daies, vacante one yeare, fiue monethes. Then was the ſixt generall Counſell of Conſtantinople againſt the Monotholites.
               
               
                  68282 Leo the ſecond, a Sicillian, ſonne of Paule, Cardinall Prieſt vnder Conſtantine: hee held the Sée one yeare, vacante eleuen months, xxi. daies. The xiij. Synod of Toledo.
               
               
                  68483 Bennet the ſecond, a Romaine, and ſonne of Iohn, Cardinall Prieſt vnder Conſtantine: he held the Sée ten months, twelue daies, vacante, two months, fiftéene daies.
               
                  68584 Iohn the fift, borne at Antioch in Syria, ſon of Cyriacus, Cardinall Arch-Deacon vnder Conſtantine and Iuſtinian: he held the Sée one yeare, vacante two months, ninetéene daies. The ſeauenth and eight Schiſme betwéene Iohn the fift, and two Anti-popes, Peter and Theodor.
               
               
                  68
                        •
                     
                  85 Cuno, or Conon, a Natiue in Thrace, ſonne of Bennet, Cardinall Prieſt vnder Iuſtinian: hee

held the Sée eleuen months, thrée daies, vacante, two months, thrée and twenty daies.
               86 Sergius borne at Antioch,
                  687 ſonne of Tyberius Cardinall Prieſt vnder Iuſtinian, Leontius, and Tyberius: he held the See thirteene yeares, eight moneths, and three and twenty daies: vacante one moneth, xx. daies. The ninth Schiſme, betweene Sergius, Theodor, and Paſchall. Three Synods at Toledo.
               
            
            
               The ſeauenth Age.
               IN this ſeuenth Age, liued S. Iſidore the biſhop, Georgius Alexandrinus, Andoemus Byſhop of Rouen, Iulianus Arch-Byſhoppe of Toledo, and others.
               87 Iohn the ſixt a Greeke, ſonne of Paturnus,
                  701. or Patronus, or Petronius, vnder Tyberius: he helde the Sée three yeares, thrée months, vacante one month, ninetéene dayes. A Synod in England.
               88 Iohn the ſeauenth, a Greeke alſo, ſon of Plato, Cardinall Deacon vnder Tyberius,
                  705 and Iuſtinian: he held the Sée two yeares, ſeuen months, ſeuenteene daies, vacante three months.
               89 Syſinnius, a Syrian, ſonne of Iohn,
                  707. vnder Iuſtinian. Hee helde the Sée xx. daies, vacante one month, eighteene daies.
               90 Constantine a Syrian, ſonne of Iohn,
                  707 vnder Iuſtinian and Phillippicus: he held the Sée ſeauen yeares, twenty daies, vacante two moneths, ten daies. A Synod holden at London in England.
               91 Gregory the ſeconde, a Romaine, ſonne of Marcellus, Cardinall Deacon vnder Anastaſius,
                  716.
                  
                  Theodoſius and Leo: he held the Sée xvi, yeares, nine months, eleuen daies, vacante one moneth. A Synod holden at Rome, about Images, & another ſynod at Moguntia or Mentz in Allemaign.
               
               
                  731.92 Gregory the third, a Syrian, ſon of Iohn, Cardinall prieſt vnder Leo Iſauricus. Hee helde the Sée, x. yeares, ix. months, xxiiij. daies, Vacante viij daies. A ſynod at Auguſta, vnder Bonifaco.
               
               
                  74193 Zacharias a Greeke, ſonne of Polycronius, Monke and Cardinall, Prieſt vnder Conſtantine Copronymus: He held the ſée, x. years, iij. months, Vacante xij. dayes. Synods at Rome, & in France.
               
               
                  752.94 Stephen the ſecond, Cardinall Prieſt vnder Conſtantine. He held the Sée thrée daies.
               
                  75295 Stephen the third, a Romaine, ſonne of Conſtantine, Cardinal Deacon vnder Conſtantine and Leo. He held the Sée v. yeares, one month, vacante one month.
               
                  757.96 Paule a Romaine, ſon of Constantine, and brother to Stephen the third Pope, Cardinal Deacon vnder Conſtantine and Leo. He held the Sée x. yeares, x. months, 
                     Ʋacante one month, the tenth ſchiſme betwéen Paul and Theophylact: ſynods in Bauaria, and in Allemayne.
               
               
                  56797 Conſtantine the ſecond Duke Nepeſius ſon, being a Lay-man, was created pope perforce. But he was afterward ſhut vp in a Monaſtery, after yt they had pluckt out his eies. He held the Sée, four months, iij. daies vacante, ix. dayes. The eleuenth ſchiſme was betwéene him and Phillip.
               
               
                  66898 Stephen the fourth, a Sicilian Monk, the ſon of Olibryus, Cardinall Prieſt vnder Conſtantine,
                  
and Leo. He held the See, 4, yeares, v. months, xxiiij. daies, 
                     Ʋacante, ix. daies. A ſynode was at Rome, to take order for enſuing ſchiſmes, and another ſynod was holden at Wormes.
               
               99 Adrian a Romain of a moſt noble family,772 and ſon to Theod
                        •
                     r, Cardinall Deacon vnder Leo the fourth. & Conſtantine his ſon. He held the Sée xxiij. years, x. months, xvi. daies. Then was the ſeuenth general Nicene counſell, againſt the Iconomaches: and after that Didier was taken, then ended the raigne of the Lombards.
               
               100 Leo the third, a Romaine, ſon of Azzupius,
                  796 cardinall Prieſt vnder Conſtantine, 8. and Nicephorus: he held the Sée twenty yeares firſt, and reſeated xvi. years. v. months, xviij. daies, vacante xvij. daies. In this Leos time, was Charles the Great, king of Fraunce, created Emperor of the Weſt, to whom he fled for refuge.
            
            
               The eighth Age.
               IN this eight age liued the learned venerable Bede, S. Iohn Damaſcene, Germaine Partriark of Conſtantinople, Paulus Diaconus, Vſuardus, and Paulinus of Aquileia.
               
               101 Stephen the fift, a Roman,816 ſon of Inlius Marinus, cardinall Prieſt vnder Lewes the meeke Emperor: he held the See ſix months, foure and twentie daies, 
                     Ʋacante xi. daies.
               102 Paſchall a Romaine, Monke and Abbot,817 ſon of Maximus Bonoſus, cardinall Prieſt vnder Lewes and Lotharius. Hee held the See ſeauen yeares, three moneths, ſeuenteene daies, vacante foure daies.
               
                  
                  824103 Eugenius the ſecond (ſur-named the poores Father) a Romaine, ſon of Boëmond, Cardinall Arch-Prieſt vnder Lewes and Lotharius: he held the Sée foure yeares, ſixe months, foure & twenty daies, vacante three daies. The xij. Schiſme betweene Eugenius and Zinzinus.
               
               
                  827104 Valentine a Romaine, ſonne of Leontius, Cardinal Arch-Prieſt vnder the ſame Emperors, he held the Sée one month, tenne daies, vacante thrée dayes.
               
                  827105 Gregory the fourth, a Romaine, ſonne of Iohn, Cardinall Prieſt vnder Lewes and Lotharius. Hee helde the Sée ſixtéene yeares, vacante fifteene daies. Two Synods in Allemayne.
               
               
                  844106 Sergius the ſecond, a Romaine, ſonne of Sergius, Cardinall Arch-prieſt, vnder Lotharius: he held the Sée three years, vacante two months, fifteene daies.
               
                  847107 Leo the fourth, a Romaine Monke, ſonne of Rodolphus, Cardinall Prieſt vnder Lotharius and Lewes the younger: hee helde the Sée, eight yeares, three months, ſixe daies, vacante fifteene daies. The Synod of Mentz vnder Rabanus.
               
               
                  855108 This is the man that ſupplies the place for Pope Ioane.
                   
                  Bennet the third, a Romaine, ſonne of Peter, Cardinall Prieſt vnder Lewes the yonger, he held the Sée two yeares, ſixe months, ix. daies, vacante fifteene daies. The xiij. Schiſme between Bennet and Anaſtaſius.
               
               
                  858109 Nicholas the Great, ſonne of Theodor, Cardinall Prieſt vnder Lewes. He held the Sée nine yeares, ſeauen months, thirteene daies, vacante ſeauen months.
               
                  110 Adrian the ſecond, a Romaine,859. ſonne of Talarus the Byſhoppe, Cardinall Prieſt vnder Lewes. He held the Sée fiue years, nine months, twelue daies: vacante twelue daies. The eight generall counſell at Constantinople, againſt Photius.
               
               111 Iohn the eight, a Romain▪
                  872 ſonne of Gundus Cardinall Arch-Deacon vnder Lewes the younger, Charles the Balde, Lewes the Stammerer, and Charles le Gros. He helde the Sée x. yeares, two daies, vacante two daies.
               112 Martine the ſecond,882. otherwiſe called Marine, borne in Tuſcane, ſonne of Palumbas, Cardinall Deacon vnder Charles le Gros: He helde the Sée one yeare, fiue months.
               113 Adrian the third, a Romaine,
                  884 other-wiſe called Agapetus, ſonne of Bennet, vnder Charles le Gros: He helde the Sée, two yeares, two monethes, vacante xij. daies.
               114 Stephen the ſixt, otherwiſe called Baſile,
                  885. ſon of Adrian, vnder Charles le Gros and Arnould: he held the Sée ſixe yeares, eleuen dayes, vacante fiue dayes. A Synod at Cullen.
               
               115 Formoſus of Portua, ſonne to Leo,
                  891 Byſhop of Portua, vnder Arnould. He helde the Sée, fiue yeares, ſixe months, Vacante two months. This is the firſt man, that (of a Byſhoppe) was made Pope. The xiiij. Schiſme, betwéene Formoſus and Sergius the third, who afterward was Pope.
               116 Boniface the ſixt, a Romaine, ſonne of Adrian, byſhop vnder Arnould, or Arnulphus Emperor: He helde the Sée, ſixe and twenty daies,

                  Vacante fourteene daies.
               
                  896117 Stephen the ſeuenth, a Romaine, Sonne of Iohn the Prieſt, Byſhoppe of Anagnia, vnder Arnulphus. He held the See one yeare, 3. months, vacante 3. daies. A ſynod at Tiburtium.
               
               118 Romanus, borne in Tuſcany, Son of Conſtantine,
                  897 who was Brother to Martine the ſecond Pope, vnder Arnulphus: he held the ſée thrée daies, vacante eight daies.
               119 Theodorus the ſecond, a Romaine, ſonne of Photius,
                  897 vnder the Empyre of Arnulphus: he held the ſee twenty daies, vacante eleauen daies.
               
                  897.120 Iohn the ninth, a Tiburtine Monke, ſon of Remp
                        •
                     aldus, Deacon of the Romain Church, vnder Arnulphus, and during the Schiſme of Sergius. He helde the Sée two yeares, fifteene dayes, vacante nine daies.
            
            
               The ninth Age.
               IN this ninth Age liued Aymonius Monachus, Theophilact, Rabanus Maurus, Anſegiſius, & Anaſtaſius.
               
               
                  899121 Bennet the fourth, a Romaine, ſonne of Mammolus, vnder Lewes the fourth, ſon of Arnulphus: he held the ſee thrée years, four months, 
                     Ʋacante ſix daies.
               122 Leo the fift, borne at Ardea; he forſooke the Papacy,903 and became a Monke, vnder Lewes the fourth. He held the See one moneth, tenne daies.
               
                  123 Christopher, a Romaine, ſonne of Leo,
                  903 Cardinall-Prieſt vnder Lewes the fourth. Hee gaue ouer his dignity to Sergius the third, & made himſelfe a Monk. He held the ſee, ſeuen months. The xv. Schiſme betwéene Leo the fift, Christopher and Sergius the third.
               124 Sergius the thirde, a Romaine,
                  903 Sonne of Bennet, one of the Earles of Tuſculum, Cardinall-Prieſt vnder Lewes the fourth. Hee held the ſee ſeauen yeares, foure monthes, ſixe daies, vacante vij. daies. Two Synods at Rheimes.
               
               125 Anaſtaſius the thirde, a Roman,
                  911. Son of Lucian, vnder the Empire of Conrade, Emperor. He held the ſee two yeares, vacante two daies.
               126 Lando, a Sabine borne, ſonne of T
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     nus,
                  913 vnder Conrade. He held the Sée ſix months, xxi. daies, 
                     Ʋacante xxvi. daies.
               127 Iohn the tenth of Rauenna, ſonne of Iohn:
                  914 Of Byſhop of Bolognia, he was made Arch-Byſhop of Rauenna, vnder Conrade and Henry, ſurnamed the Byrder, Emperors: hee helde the ſée, thirtéene yeares, two monethes, and thirtéene dayes.
               128 Leo the ſixt, a Romaine,
                  928 ſonne of Chriſtopher, vnder the fore-named Henry: he helde the Sée ſeauen moneths, fiftéene daies, vacante one month.
               129 Stephen the eight, a Romaine,
                  928 Sonne of Teudemunde, vnder Henry: hee helde the See, two yeares, and one Moneth, vacante tenne daies.
               130 Iohn the xi. a Romain,930 the natural ſon of

                  Sergius, third Pope, one of the Earles of Tuſculum, vnder Henry: He held the Sée, four years, ten months fiftéene daies, vacante twelue daies.
               
                  935131 Leo, the ſeauenth, a Romaine, vnder Otho the Great, who was the firſt Allemayne Emperor. He held the Sée thrée yeares, ſix moneths, ten daies, vacante thrée daies.
               
                  939132 Stephen the ninth a Romaine, vnder the Empire of Otho: he helde the Sée thrée yeares, foure-months, twelue daies, vacante ten daies.
               
                  942133 Martine the third, whom ſome others doo tearme Marine the ſeconde, a Romaine, vnder Otho. Hee helde the Sée thrée yeares, foure moneth
                     •
                  , twelue dayes, 
                     Ʋacante twelue daies: A Synod at Bonnonie
                  ▪
               
               134 Agapetus the ſecond, a Romain, vnder Otho:946. he held the See ſeauen yeares, nine months, ten daies. vacante twelue daies. Then was the Ingelheimenſian Synod.
               
                  956135 Iohn the twelfth, a Romaine, called alſo Octauian, the ſonne of Albericus a Romaine Prince, & an Earle of Tuſculum, Cardinall Deacon vnder Otho: hauing was depoſed in a Synod at Rome: he held the Sée ix. years, thrée months fiue daies, vacante one day.
               
                  963136 Leo, a Romaine, ſonne of Iohn, vnder Otho: hee helde the Sée, one yeare, foure months. The xvi. Schiſme after Iohn the 12. betwéen Leo the 8. and Bennet the 5.
               
                  964137 Bennet the fift, a Romain, Cardinall Deacon, was elected in the ſchiſme after the death of Iohn the twelfth: he forſooke the Papacy, by conſtraint,

and was exiled to Hamborough in Saxony, where he died: he held the Sée one yeare, ſixe monthes.
               138 Iohn the xiij. a Romaine, ſonne of Iohn the Byſhop: he was Byſhoppe of Naruia,
                  965 vnder Otho: He held the Sée ſix years, eleuen months, fiue daies, vacante xiij. dayes.
               139 Domnus the ſecond, Donus, or Domnio, a Roman vnder Otho: hee held the Sée one yeare,972 
                  vacante two daies.
               140 Bennet the ſixt, a Roman, ſonne of Hildebrand, vnder Otho: he held the ſée eight years,972 ſix months, vacante fiue daies.
               141 Boniface the ſeauenth, a Romaine,974. ſonne of Franco-Ferrutius, Cardinal Deacon vnder Otho the ſecond: he held the Sée ſeauen moneths, fiue daies, vacante twenty daies. The ſeauentéenth Schiſme betwéen Boniface the 7. and Bennet the 7.
               142 Bennet the ſeauenth, a Romaine,975 ſonne of Deus-dedit an Earle of Tuſculum, Byſhoppe of Sutrium, vnder Otho the ſecond: he held the Sée eight yeares, ſix months, 
                     Ʋacante, fiue dayes.
               143 Iohn the fourtéenth, called alſo Peter,
                  984 born in Pauia, and Byſhop of the place where he was borne; vnder Otho the third: he helde the See, thrée months.
               144 Iohn the xv. a Romaine,985 ſon of Leo Prieſt vnder Otho the third: hee held the See eight moneths, vacante ſeauen daies.
               145 Iohn xvi. a Romain, ſonne of Robert,
                  995 vnder Otho the third: he helde the See ten yeares,

ſix months, ten daies: vacante ſixe dayes.
               
                  995146 Gregory the fift, a Saxon Allemayne, called Bruno, the ſon of Otho, vnder Otho 3: he held the ſee two yeares, fiue moneths, ten daies. The xviij. Schiſme, betwéene this Gregory, and Iohn the xvij. This is he, in whoſe time the Princes Electors were firſt created in Allemaign or Germany.
               
               
                  998147 Syluester the ſecond, a Frenchman born in Aquitain, called Gerebert, Monk of S. Floure, Abbot of Bobie, of Arch-byſhoppe of Rheimes, he was made Arch-byſhop of Rauenna, a very great Phyloſopher, vnder Otho 3. He held the ſée, foure yeares, i. month, x. daies, vacante xxiij. daies.
               
                  1003148 Iohn the xvij. a Romaine, called Sicco, of very meane deſcent, vnder Henry the ſecond. He held the Sée ten months, vacante twenty daies.
            
            
               The tenth Age.
               IN this tenth Age liued Ado of Vienna, Odo Abbat of Clugnie, Suidas, Luitprandius, Regino, and Wirichinde.
               
               
                  1003149 Iohn the xviij. a Romaine, called Faſanus or Fanaſſus, vnder Henry the ſecond: he held the See foure monthes, twenty daies, Vacante nineteene dayes, A great ſynod holden in Allemaign.
               
               
                  1009150 Sergius the fourth, a Romain, called Peter, the ſonne of Martine: he held the Sée, two y
                     ••
                  res, and fifteene daies, Sede vacante eyght dayes.
               
                  1012151 Bennet the eight, a Roman, ſon of Gregogory
                  
Earle of Tuſculum vnder Henry. Hee helde the See, eleuen yeares, one moneth, thirteene dayes. The ninetéene Schiſme, between Bennet, and one whoſe name is not truely known.
               152 Iohn the xix, a Romaine,
                  1024 and Earl of Tuſ
                     
                        •
                     ulum, ſonne to Gregory, and Brother to Bennet the eight. Pope, Byſhoppe of Portua: hee helde the ſee foure yeares, foure months, vacante xix. daies.
               153 Bennet the ninth, a Roman, Earl of Tuſculum, called Theophilact, Sonne of Albericus,
                  1032. Brother to Bennet the 8, and Iohn the xix. Popes. Cardinal Deacon vnder Conrade & Henry 3. He held the See, xiij. yeares, foure moneths, nine dayes. The xx. Schiſme betweene him and Iohn the 20. called Syluester the third.
               154 Iohn 20. called Silueſter the 3. a Romain,
                  1045 ſon of Laurentius Byſhop of Sabina, vnder Henry 3. He held the ſee one month, xix. daies.
               155 Gregory the ſixt, a Romain, called,1045 
                  Iohn Gratian, ſonne of Peter Leo, Arch-Prieſt vnder Henry 3. he held the Sée two yeares, vij. months.
               156 Clement the 2. a Saxon Allemayn or Germaine, called Suidegerus, Byſhop of Bemburg,
                  1047 vnder Henry 3. He helde the Sée, nine monthes. vacante nine moneths.
               157 Damaſus 2. of Bauaria in Allemaign,
                  1048 called Pope Bagniarius, byſhoppe of Breſcia: After that Damaſus the ſecond, and Bennet the ninth, had beene depoſed, hee helde the Sée, ſixe moneths, according as hee had helde it nine moneths, and fiftéen daies, after Clement the ſecond,

he helde the Sée thrée and twenty daies, vacante ſix months.
               
                  1049158 Leo the ninth, an Allemayne, called Bruno, Count of Haſpurg, otherwiſe termed Egghiſein, ſonne to Hugh byſhop of Toul, vnder Henrie the third, and was created at Fruſina: hee helde the See fiue yeares, two months, ſix daies, vacante xi. months, xxvi. daies.
               
                  1055159 
                     Ʋictor the ſecond of Swethen, called Gebhard Count of Gaba, ſonne of Arduigus, byſhop of Eiſtat, Counſellor to Henry the third, and his Kinſman, as alſo to Henry the fourth his ſonne, and was created at Mentz: he held the Sée two yeares, three months, foure daies, vacante foure daies.
               
                  1057160 Stephen the tenth, borne in Lorraine, called Fredericke, ſonne to Gozzelon Duke of Lorrain, Cardinal Arch-Deacon vnder Henry the fourth: he held the Sée ſeauen moneths eighteene daies, vacante thirteene dayes: The one and twentith Schiſme betwéene him, and Bennet the tenth.
               
                  1
                        ••
                     8161 Bennet the tenth▪ called Iohn Mintius, ſon to Guy Count of Tuſculum, Byſhop of 
                     Ʋelitrae, vnder Henry the fourth: he held the Sée nine moneths, twentie dayes.
               
                  1058162 Nicholas the ſecond of Sauoy, called Gerard the Burgundian, Byſhop of Florence, vnder Henry the fourth: he held the Sée thrée yeares, ſix moneths, ſix and twenty daies, vacante xij. dayes.
               
                  1061163 Alexander the ſeconde, a Milanois, called Anſelme de 
                        •
                     adagio, ſon of Anſelme a Chanon Reguler, Byſhoppe of Luca in Tuſcanie, vnder

                  Henry the fourth: he held the Sée eleuen yeares, ſix months. The xxij. Schiſme betwéen him and Honorius the ſecond.
               164 Gregory the ſeauenth, a Tuſcane of Soaua,
                  1073 called Hildebrand, one of the Pitilian Countes, ſonne to Bonicius Priour of Cluny, Abbot of S. Paule at Rome, Cardinall Arch-Deacon, vnder Henry the fourth: he held the Sée twelue yeares, one month, thrée daies, vacante one yeare▪ foure months, ſeauen and twenty daies. The three & twenty Schiſme, between him, and Clement the third, who was an Anti-pope, in the times of Victor the third, 
                     Ʋrban the ſecond, and Paſchal the ſecond. And this Schiſme continued for longe time.
               165 Victor the third of Beneuentum,
                  1086 called Didier, ſonne to the Prince of Beneuentum, a Monk of Mount Caſſina, Cardinal Deacon vnder Henry the fourth: hee helde the See one yeare, foure months, vacante fiue months.
               166 Vrbane the ſecond, a Frenchman,
                  1088 borne at Chaſtillon in the Dioceſſe of Rheimes, called Otho the ſon of Milo, a Canon Reguler of Laterane, Monke of Cluny, and Byſhoppe of Ostia; vnder Henry the fourth: he held the Sée twelue yeares, foure moneths, nineteene daies, vacante thirteen daies.
            
            
               The eleuenth age.
               IN this eleuenth Age liued Burchardus Fulbertus, Byſhoppe of Chartres, Petrus Damianus,

Lanfrancus, S. Anſelme, Yues Byſhop of Chartres and Bruno, &c.
               
               
                  1099167 Paſchall the ſecond, a Tuſcane of Bleda, called Rainerius, ſonne of Creſcentius, Monke of Cluny, Abbot of S. Laurence and S. Stephen without Rome, Prieſt Cardinall vnder Henry the 4. and Henry the fift: hee held the Sée xviij. yeares, ſix months, ſeuen dayes, vacante thrée daies. Albert Atellan, Theodorick a Romaine, & Sylueſter Anti-popes vnder Paſchall 2. who cauſed the body of Clement 3. to be digged vp, and after burned which had bin buried at Rauenna.
               
               
                  1118168 Gelaſius 2. a Caietane, called Iohn, ſonne to Creſcentius Monke of Mount Caſſina, Cardinall Deacon vnder Henry the fift. He held the ſee, one yeare, vacante two dayes. The 24 Schiſme betwéene him and Gregory the eight, a Spaniard, called Maurice Bono
                        •
                     in.
               
               
                  1119169 Calixtu
                        ••
                     
                  
                  ▪ a Burgundian, called Milo, otherwiſe Guy, ſon to William Count of Burgundie, Arch-byſhop of Vienna vnder Henry the fift: he held the Sée fiue years, ten months, ſix daies. vacante eight yeares. The generall counſaile of Laterane, againſt theſe Anti-popes, wherat were preſent (almoſt) a thouſand Prelates.
               170 Honorius 2. a Bolognian, called Lambert de Fagnano,
                  1124 Chanon Reguler of Laterane, Cardinall byſhop of Oſtia, vnder Henry and Lotharius, Saxons and Emperors. He held the Sée fiue yeares, two monthes, vacante, eight dayes. The 25. Schiſme betwéene him and Celeſtine the ſecond.
               
                  171 Innocentius 2. a Romaine, ſonne of Iohn Guidon, Chanon Reguler of Latterane,
                  1130 the firſt of the Cardinal Deacons vnder Lotharius of Saxony and Conrade. He held the See, fourteen years, ſeauen months, thirteene daies. The 26, ſchiſme betweene him and two Anti-Popes, Anacletus the ſecond and 
                     Ʋictor the fourth. The ſecond generall counſell of Laterane, wherein aſſiſted well neare a thouſand byſhops.
               172 Celeſtine the 2. a Tuſcane,
                  1143 called Guy de Caſtello, cardinall-deacon, and afterward Cardinall prieſt vnder Conrade. He held the Sée, fiue months, and thirteene daies, vacante thirteene daies.
               173 Lucius the ſecond, a Bolognian, called Gerard, Cecianimicus, ſonne of Albert,
                  1144 Chanon Reguler, Cardinall Prieſt, and Chancellour to the Apoſtolique See vnder Conrade: he held the ſee eleuen months, and foure dayes, vacante two daies.
               174 Eugenius the thyrd, of Piſa,
                  1145 called Peter Bernard, a Ciſteaux Monke, Scholler to S. Bernard, Abbot of S. Ʋincent, and S. Anaſtaſius at Rome, vnder Conrade and Fredericke Barbaroſſa Emperors. He held the See, eight yeares, foure months, xx. dayes, vacante two dayes.
               175 Anaſtaſius the fourth, a Romain,1153 called Conrade of Subura, ſonne of Bennet, Canon Reguler, Abbot and Cardinall, byſhoppe of Sabina, vnder Fredericke Barbaroſſa: he helde the See, one yeare, foure months, four and twenty daies, vacante one day.
               
                  
                  1154176 Adrian the fourth, an Engliſhman, called Nicholas Break-ſpeare, ſonne of Robert a Monk, Chanon Reguler and Abbot, Cardinall Byſhop of Alba, vnder Barbaroſſa: He helde the Sée iiij. yeares, ten months, vacante three daies.
               177 Alexander the thirde, borne at Sienna in Tuſcanie,
                  1159. called Rowland Bondinelli, ſon of Ranutius, Cardinall Deacon, and afterwarde Cardinall Prieſte, and Chancellour of the Romaine church, vnder Barbaroſſa: hee helde the Sée xxi, yeares, nineteene daies, vacante, foureteene daies. The third generall counſell of Laterane. The ſeauen and twenty Schiſme, beeing moſt great, during which time, againſt Alexander was created Victor the fourth, nexte Paſchall the third, then Calixtus the thirde, and Innocentius the third, who (by conſtraint) renounced the Papacie.
               
                  1181178 Lucius the third, a Tuſcane of Luca, called 
                     Ʋbaldus Allucingolus, ſonne of Bonagiunta, Cardinal Prieſt, and afterward Biſhop of Oſtia, and of Velitrae, vnder Barbaroſſa: he held the Sée foure yeares, two months, eighteene daies, vacante twelue daies.
               
                  1185179 Vrbane the third, borne in Milaine, called Lambert Cribell, ſonne of Iohn, Cardinall Prieſt and Arch-Byſhop of Millaine, vnder Barbaroſſa: hee held the See one yeare, ten months, fifteene daies, vacante eleuen daies.
               
                  1187180 Gregory the eight, of Beneuentum, called, Albert Spanachio, otherwiſe of Mora Cardinall Deacon, and afterward
                     •
                   Cardinall Prieſt, and

Chancellor to the holy See, vnder Barbaroſſa: hee held the See one month, ſeauen and twenty daies, vacante xx. daies.
               181 Clement the third, a Romain,1188 called Paule the Scholler, ſonne of Iohn, Cardinall of Palaestrina, vnder Barbaroſſa: he held the See three yeares, fiue months, vacante eight months.
               182 Celeſtine the third, a Romaine,
                  1191 called Haicinthus Bobo, ſonne of Peter Cardinal Deacon vnder Henry the ſixt: he held the See ſix yeares, ſeauen months, eleuen daies.
            
            
               The twelfth Age.
               IN this twelfth Age liued Sigebert, Zonarus, Cedrenus, Rupertus, Sa. Bernard, Hugo de S. Victor, Peter Lombard, Peter Comeſtor, Euthimius, Nicetas Coniates, and diuers others.
               183 Innocentins the third, of Anagnia,
                  1198 called Lotharius, one of the Counts of Signia, ſonne of Tranſimund, Cardinal Deacon vnder Henry the ſixt, Otho the fourth, and Fredericke the ſeconde Emperors: he held the See eighteen yeares, vij. months, ſixtéene daies, vacante one day: The 4. generall counſell of Laterane, for reformation of the church, where a thouſand Prelates were preſent.
               184 Honorius the third, a Romaine,
                  1216 called Cen
                     
                        •
                     ius Sabellus, ſonne of Amerie, Cardinal Deacon, Chamberlaine of the church, and afterward Cardinall Prieſt vnder Fredericke the ſecond: he held the Sée ten yeares, ſeauen moneths, thirtéene

daies, vacante one day.
               
                  1227.185 Gregory the ninth of Anagnia, called Hugolin, one of the Counts of Signia: of a Cardinal Deacon he was made cardinall Byſhop of Oſtia vnder Fredericke the ſecond: he held the ſee fourteene yeares, three months, vacante one month, one day.
               
                  1241.186 Celeſtine the fourth, a Milanois, cald Gaulfridus Caſtellio, of Cardinall-Prieſt, was made Byſhop of Sabina vnder Frederick 2. He held the ſee eighteene daies, vacante one yeare, nine moneths.
               187 Innocentius the fourth, borne in Genewaie, called Sinibaldus de Fieſca, a Count of Lauinum, ſonne of Otho,
                  1243 Vice-chancellor, was made Cardinall-Prieſt vnder Fredericke the ſeconde, Conrade the fourth, Henry the fourth, & William Emperors. He held the Sée xi. yeares, ſix months, xii, daies, Vacante three daies. The generall counſell of Lyons, vnder Frederick the ſecond.
               188 Alexander the fourth of Auagnia, called Rainald,
                  1254 one of the Counts of Signia, ſonne of Girard Retraent, otherwiſe called Phillip, of Cardinall-deacon was made biſhop of Oſtia, & Deane of the Cardinal Biſhops, vnder William, Richard and Alphonſus. He held the Sée-ſixe yeares, fiue monthes, fiue daies, vacante three months, four daies.
               
                  1261189 Vrbane the fourth, a French-man of Troy in Champaigne, called Iacques Pantaleon, Patriarcke of Ieruſalem, vnder Richard and Alphonſus: he held the See three yeares, one month, 4.

daies, vacante fiue monthes.
               190 Frances, by ſome called Clement,
                  1265. of Narbona, called alſo Guy the Groſſe, ſonne of Fulcodius, Arch-byſhop of Narbona, and cardinall Biſhop of Sabina, vnder Richard and Alphonſus: he held the ſee fiue yeares, xxi. daies, vacante, two yeares, nine months.
               191 Gregory the tenth of Placentia,
                  1271 called Theobald Vicount, Arch-byſhoppe of Leige vnder Rodolphus: He held the Sée foure yeares, two moneths, ten daies, 
                     Ʋacante nine daies. The ſecond general Counſel of Lyons, for recouery of the Holy Land.
               192 Innocentius the fift, a Burgundian,
                  1276. called F. Peter of Tarentaſe, of the Order of the preaching Fryers, of Arch-byſhoppe of Lyons, he was made Byſhop Cardinall of Oſtia, and great Penetentiarie, vnder Rodolphus. He held the See ſix months, two daies, 
                     Ʋacante, nine daies.
               193 Adrian the fift of Genes, called Othobon,
                  1276 one of the Counts of Lauinum, ſonne of Thediſius, Brother to Pope Innocent the fourth, Cardinal Deacon vnder Rodolphus: Hee held the Sée one month, nine daies, vacante eight and twenty daies.
               194 Iohn the one and twentith, a Portugais of Lisbone, called M. Iohn Peter Iuliani,
                  1276 byſhop Cardinall of Tuſculanum, vnder Rodolphus. He held the ſee eight months, vacante ſixe moneths, ſeauen daies.
               195 Nicholas the third, a Roman,
                  1277 called Iohn

Caietane de Vrſini, Cardinall Deacon vnder Rodolphus: he held the Sée three yeares, eight moneths, fifteene daies, vacante fiue moneths, xx. dayes.
               
                  1281196 Martine the fourth, borne in Tours, called Simon de Brie. Cardinall Prieſt vnder Rodolphus: hee helde the See, foure yeares, one month, vacante thrée daies.
               197 Honorius the fourth, a Romaine, called, Giacomo Sabella, ſonne of Luke, firſt, Cardinall Deacon vnder Rodolphus. He held the See two yeares, one day vacante ten months.
               
                  1288.198 Nicholas the fourth, a Natiue of Aſculum, called F. Hierom; a generall Miniſter of the Friars Minors: he was made Cardinall Prieſt, afterward the Praeneſtine Byſhop, vnder Rodolphus, and Adolphus. He held the See foure years, one month, eight daies: vacante two yeares, 3. moneths, two daies.
               
                  1294199 Celeſtine the fift, borne in Iſernia, called F. Peter de Morone, ſonne of Anglerius, vnder Adolphus: he voluntarily forſooke the Popedom, and was the beginner of the Celeſtines order: he held the Sée fiue months, ſeauen dayes, vacante ten daies.
               
                  1294200 Boniface the eight, of Anagnia, called Bennet Caietane, Sonne of Luitfroy, who was borne in Spaine, Cardinall Deacon, afterward Cardinall Prieſt, vnder Adolphus and Albertus. Hee inſtituted the Iubilée of an hundred yeares, and did firſt celebrate it, in the yeare 1300. He held the ſee viii. years, nine months, ſeuenteen, daies,

                  vacante t
                     •
                  n daies.
            
            
               The thirteenth Age.
               IN this thirtéenth Age liued S. Fraunces, S. Dominicke, Albertus Magnus, Mathew Paris, Thomas▪ Aquinas, S. Bonauenture, C
                        •
                     baſilas, Henry of Seguſium, Cardinall of Oſtia, Nicholas de Lyra, Accurſius and others.
               
                  201 Bennet the eleauenth, a Treuiſane,
                  1303 called F. Nicholas Bocaſino: of Generall Miniſter of the Preachers Order, was made Cardinall Prieſt, and afterward Byſhop of Oſtia, vnder the Emperor Albertus. He held the See, eyght moneths, ſeauenteene dayes, vacante one yeare, one month.
               
                  202 Clement the fift, a French-man in Gaſcoigne of Burdeaux, called Raymond Goth,
                  1304 ſon of Bertrand: of Byſhop of Cominges, he became Arch-Biſhop of Burdeaux, vnder Albertus and Henry the ſeauenth: he held the See eight years, ten months, fifteene dayes, vacante two yeares, thrée months, ſeauenteene dayes. The generall Counſell of Vienna in France, for reformation of the Church.
               
                  203 Iohn the xxij. a Frenchman of Cahors,
                  1316 called Iacques d'Oſſa, Sonne of Amauldo, Cardinall Biſhop of Portua, vnder Lewes the fourth of Bauaria: he held the Sée ninetéene years, four months, vacante ſixtéene daies. The 
                     
                        •
                     8
                  ▪ 
                  
                     •
                  chiſm betwéene him and Nicholas the fift.
               
                  204 Bennet the xij. a Frenchman of Toloſa,
                  1334
                  
called F. Iacques Forneen de Sauardu
                        •
                     , a Ciſteaux Monke, a Diuine, Byſhoppe of Mirepoix, and Cardinall-Prieſte vnder Lewes the fourth, He helde the Sée ſeauen yeares, three monethes, ſeauentéene dayes, vacante fiftéen dayes.
               
                  1342
                  205 Clement the ſixt, a French-man, borne in Lymoſine, called F. Peter Monſtrie, ſon of Roger, Monke of Maumont, a Diuine, Abbot of Feſcamp, Arch-Byſhop of Arles, afterwarde of Sens, and laſtly of Rouen, cardinal Prieſt vnder Lewes the fourth. He celebrated the ſecond Iubilee, in the fiftith year, 1350. And held the Sée, eightéene yeares, ſixe moneths, eightéene daies. vacante ten daies.
               
                  1352
                  206 Innocent the ſixt, a French-man of Lymoſine, called Stephen d'Albert, Biſhoppe of Clermont, cardinall Prieſt, after made byſhop of Oſtia, and great Penetentiary vnder Charls the fourth: he held the See nine yeares, eight moneths, and ſixe daies, vacante one yeare, fiue moneths.
               
                  1362
                  207 Vrbane the fift, a French-man of Lymoſine, likewiſe, called F. Guillaume de Griſac, ſon of Grimauld, Monke and Abbot of S. Victor de Marſeillis, vnder Charles the fourth: hee helde the Sée eleauen yeares, eight months, vacante ſeauentéene dayes.
               
                  1370
                  208 Gregory the eleuenth, a French-man of Lymoſine, called Peter, Earle of Beau-fort. He was 
                     〈◊〉
                   Cardinall Deacon by Clement the ſixt, Pope and his Vnckle. He returned to Rome and brought the Sée thither agayne, which had

bin at Auignon for the ſpace of ſeauenty yeares. And becauſe the Romaines ſtoode in ſome doubt, leaſt the Sée might againe bee tranferred out of Rome, after the deceaſe of this Gregory, the eleuenth, they tooke eſpeciall order, that not anye French Cardinall ſhoulde afterward bee elected Pope: which procured the moſt pernicious ſchiſm that euer had bin in the Churche, and continued for the ſpace of fifty yeares, beginning with Clement, called the ſeauenth: he held the Sée ſeauen yeares, two months, ſeauen & twenty daies, vacante eleuen daies.
               
                  209 Vrbane the ſixte, a Neapolitane,
                  1378 called Bartholomew Prignano, Arch-byſhop of Acherontia, and afterwarde of Carre, vnder Wenceſlaus. Hee helde the Sée, eleauen yeares, eyght months, vacante ſeauenteene dayes. The nine and twentith Schiſme, betweene him and Clement, called the ſeauenth, who was a Frenchman of Geneua, named Robert, one of ye Counts of Geneua, Byſhop of Cambray. This Vrbane the ſixt, inſtituted the Iubilee of ſixe and thirtie yeares.
               
                  210 Boniface the ninth, a Neapolitane,
                  1389 called Peter, or Perin Tom
                        •
                     celli, of Cardinall deacon, became Cardinall Prieſt, vnder Wenceſlaus, and Robert Emperors. In the yeare 1390. He celebrated the third Iubilee inſtituted by his predeceſſor: and in the yeare 1400. the fourth Iubilee, after the ancient manner. In his time were two Popes, at Auignon, Clement, called the ſeuenth, and Bennet the thirtéenth: he held the See

eleauen yeares, eight months, vacante fifteene daies.
            
            
               The fourteenth age.
               IN this fouretéenth age, liued William de Nangis, Nicephorus, Bartolus Palanudes, Iohannes Andreas, Petrarche, Franciſcus Maronis, deuiſer of the Sorbonne, William of Auxere, and others.
               
                  1404.
                  211 Innocentius 7. of Sulmona, called Coſmatus Melioratus; of Arch-byſhop of Rauenna, and of Biſhop of Bolognia, he became Cardinal Prieſt, and Chamberlaine of the Church, vnder Robert Emperour: He held the ſee two yeares, twenty two dayes, vacante twenty thrée daies. Bennet the thirtéenth was (in his time) Pope at Auignion.
               
               
                  1406.
                  212 Gregory the twelfth, a Venetian borne, called Angelo Corratio, Patriarch of Conſtantinople, and Cardinall-prieſt vnder Robert and Sigiſmond: He helde the ſée two yeares, ſeauen months, fiue daies, vacante ten daies. Then was the Councell of Piſa, for auoiding of Schiſmes, where Gregory the twelfth, and Bennet the thirtéenth, were both depoſed.
               
                  1409.
                  213 Alexander the fift, of Creete or Candie, called Peter Philargo, of the Fryers-minors order, a Diuine, Arch-biſhop of Millaine, and Cardinall-Prieſt vnder Robert: hee was created in the Councell at Piſa (Bennet the thirtéenth béeing

then Pope at Auignion.) And helde the Sée tenne monthes, eyght dayes, vacante twelue daies.
               
                  214 Iohn the twenty thrée, a Neapolitane,
                  1410. called Balthazar Coſſa, Cardinall-Deacon, vnder Sigiſmond. He held the Sée fiue yeares, fiftéene dayes, vacante two yeares. The generall Councell was then at Conſtance, to take away all Schiſmes: where were depoſed Iohn the 23. and Bennet the thirtéenth again. Bennet would not obey the Councell, but with-drew himſelfe into Spaine, to Paniſcola: and in the ſame generall Councel, Gregory the twelfth (by his Atturney) renounced the Papacy.
               
                  215 Martine the fift, a Romaine,
                  1417. called Otho Colonna, Sonne of Agapetus, Cardinall Deacon: he was elected Pope in the Councell of Conſtance, vnder Sigiſmond: he held the ſée fouretéene yeares, thrée monthes, vacante two dayes. In his time, after the deceaſe of Bennet the thirteenth, Clement, called the eyght, was created as Anty-pope at Paniſcola: But he forſooke the Papacy, in the yeare 1428. and (by that meanes) the twenty nine ſchiſme ceaſed, which had continued fifty yeares, or thereabout. This Martine the fift, in the year 1425. celebrated the fift Iubilie.
               
               
                  216 Eugenius the fourth, a Venetian,
                  1431. called Gabriell Condelmer, Sonne of Angelus, a Celeſtine Chanon, Byſhoppe of Sienna, Cardynall-Prieſt vnder Sigiſmond, Albert, and Fredericke the third. This manne helde

the Sée fiftéene yeares, eleauen months, one and twenty daies, vacante twelue daies. The counſell of Baſile was then, where Eugenius was depoſed: but he vnwilling to obey, cauſed the generall Counſell of Ferrara to bee aſſembled, whych Counſell ended at Florence, for reduction of the Greeke Church. The 30. Schiſme betwéen Eugenius 4: and Foelix the fift, called Amades, ſomtime Duke of Sauoy, who was elected in the Counſell of Baſil, 1437. and was Pope ix▪ years, fiue months. In the end, for good of the Church, he forſooke the Papacy, and continued Cardinal byſhop of Sabina, and Legate in Germany.
               
               
                  1447
                  217 Nicholas a Natiue of Luna, called Thomas de Sarzana, or Lucana, ſonne of Bartholomew a Phyſitian, Doctor in the Arts and Diuinity, of Byſh of Bolognia, was made Cardinal Prieſt vnder Frederick the third: hee helde the Sée eight yeares, ninetéene dayes, 
                     Ʋacante four daies. In the yeare 14
                        •
                     0. he celebrated the ſixte Iubilee, and the Schiſm ceaſed by Felix the 5. renouncing the Papacy.
               
                  1455
                  218 Calixtus 3. a Spaniard of Valentia, called Alphonio Borgia, ſonne of Iohn: of byſhoppe of Valentia, became Cardinall Prieſt▪ vnder Fr
                        •
                     
                     derick the third: hee held the See three yeares 3. months, and ſixteene daies, vacante ſeauenteene daies.
               
                  1458
                  219 Pius the ſeconde, borne in Sienna, called Eneas Syluius Picolhomini, ſonne of Syluius: of byſhop of Sienna, was Cardinal Deacon, afterward Cardinal Prieſt vnder Frederick the third:

he held the See fiue yeares, eleuen months, xxvi. daies, vacante xvi. daies.
               
                  220 Paule the ſecond, a Venetian,
                  1464 called Peter Barba, ſonne of Nicholas, elect byſhoppe of Vincentia, Cardinall Deacon, and afterward Cardinall Prieſt, vnder Frederick the 3. He held the Sée ſix years, ten months, vacante eleuen dayes.
               
                  221 Sixtus the fourth of Sauona, called F. Frances de Rouero, ſonne of Leonard,
                  1471. of Miniſter generall of the Fryers Minors, was made Cardinall Prieſt, vnder Fredericke the third. He celebrated the ſeauenth Iubilee, in the yeare 1475. and held the See thirteene yeares, fiue daies: vacante xv. daies.
               
                  222 Innocentius the eight, borne in Genewaie, called Iohn Baptiſta Cibo, ſonne of Aaron:
                  1484 of Biſhop of Melphes, was made Almouer▪ and Cardinall Prieſt, vnder Fredericke: he held the Sée eight yeares, ſix and twentie daies, vacante two daies.
               
                  223 Alexander the ſixt, a Spaniard of Valencia, called Rodericke Borgia, ſonne of Geffrey,
                  149
                        •
                     
                   Byſhop of Valencia, Cardinall Deacon, after Prieſt, and laſtly byſhop of Alba, Vice-Chauncellor and Deane of the Church, vnder Maximilian. He celebrated the eight Iubilee, in the year 1500, and held the See eleuen yeares, 8. dayes, vacante foure dayes.
            
            
               The fifteenth Age.
               IN this fifteenth Age liued Iohn Gerſon, Eneas Syluius, Froiſſard, Baldus, Angelus, B
                        •
                     ſſa
                        •
                     tion,

Chalcondilus, Platina, Nauclerus. And not long after, Martine Luther, Iohn Eckius, Mo
                        •
                     e, Hoſius, Iohn Caluine, &c.
               
               
                  1502.
                  224 Pius the third, a Siennois, called Fraunces Todeſcin Picolhomini, Sonne to the ſiſter of Pope Pius the ſecond, who maried with Nannes: hee was Arch-byſhop of Sienna, and Cardinall-Deacon, vnder Maximilian: and held the See ſixteene dayes, vacante twenty foure daies.
               
                  1503.
                  225 Iulius the ſecond, of Sauona, called Iuliano de Rouero, ſonne of Raphaell, Brother to Pope Sixtus the fourth, of Cardinall-Prieſt, became Byſhoppe of Alba, afterward Byſhop of Oſtia, and great Penitentiary, vnder Maximilian. Hee held the See nine yeares, three moneths, twelue dayes, vacante ſeauenteen dayes. The generall Councell of Laterane was then.
               
                  1503.
                  226 Leo the tenth, a Florentine, called Iohn de Medicis, ſonne of Laurence, Cardinall Deacon, vnder Maximilian, and Charles the fift: He held the ſee eyght yeares, eight months, twenty one dayes, vacante one month, ſeauen daies.
               
                  1522.
                  227 Adrian the ſixt, a natiue of Vtreicht in Galia-belgica, ſonne of Florent; of Byſhop of Ertuſa, was made Cardinall-Prieſt, vnder Charles the fift, to whom hee was Schole-mayſter: he held the ſee one yeare, eight months, ſixe daies, vacante two months, foure daies.
               
                  1523.
                  228 Clement the ſeauenth, a Florentine, called Iulius de Medicis, Knight of Hieruſalem, nephew

to Pope Leo the tenth, elected Arch-Byſhoppe of Florence, Cardinall-Deacon, afterward Prieſt & Chancellour of the Church, vnder Charles the fift: he celebrated the ninth Iubilie, in the yeare 1525. And helde the ſee ten yeares, tenne monthes, eyght dayes, vacante ſixteene daies.
               
                  229 Paule the third,1534 called Alexander Farneſe, ſonne of Peter Lewes, Cardinall-deacon, was afterward Byſhoppe cardinall of Tuſculanum, Palaeſtrina, Sabina, Portua, and Oſtia, and Deane of the cardinals, vnder Charles the fift and Ferdinand. Hee held the ſee fifteene yeares, nineteene daies, vacante two months, 29. daies. The generall councell of Trent beganne Anno. 1525.
               
               
                  230 Iulius the third, borne at Arezza,
                  1550 called Iohn Maria de Monte, ſonne of Vincent Arch-Byſhop of Sipontum
                  ▪ cardinall-prieſt, and afterward Byſhop of Palaeſtrina, vnder Charles and Ferdinand. Hee celebrated the tenth Iubilie, in the yeare 1550. and held the ſee fiue yeares, one moneth, ſixteene dayes, vacante ſeauenteene daies.
               
                  231 Marcellus the ſecond, a Tuſcane,
                  1555 called Marcellus Ceruinus, ſonne of Richard; of Byſhoppe of Caſtello Nouo, hee was made cardinall-prieſt vnder Charles the fift, and Ferdinand. He held the See twenty two daies, vacante ſeauenteene daies.
               
                  232 Paule the fourth, a Neapolitane,
                  1555 called Iohn Peter Caraffa, ſonne of Iohn Alphonſo,
                  
Count of Mataluna, of Archbyſhop of Naples, he became Cardinall Prieſt of Alba, Sabina, Tuſculanum and Oſtia, and Deane of the cardinals, vnder Charles the fift, and Ferdinand: he held the See, foure yeares, two Moneths, ſeauen and twentie daies vacante, foure monethes, ſixe dayes.
               
                  1559
                  233 Pius the fourth, a Milainois, called Iohn Angelo de Medicis, ſonne of Bernardino, Cardinall Prieſt vnder Ferdinand and Maximilian the ſecond: he helde the Sée fiue yeares, eleauen moneths, eight daies. vacante nine and twentie dayes. In his time the counſel of Trent was concluded, an. 1563.
               
               
                  1566
                  234 Pius the fift, an Alexandrine Lombard, of the preaching Fryers order, called F. Michael Giller, of byſhop of Surrina, and Nepeſina, became cardinall Prieſt, Graund Inquiſitour, and byſhop of Montr
                        •
                     all, vnder Maximilian
                        •
                     . Hee held the Sée ſix yeares, three moneths, ſixteene dayes.
               
                  1572
                  235 Gregory the thirteenth, a Bolonois, called Hugo B
                        •
                     n-compagnio, ſon of Chriſtopher, Cardinall Prieſt, vnder Maximilian the ſecond, and Rodolphus the ſecond. He celebrated theeleauenth Iubilee, in anno 1575. and helde the See twelue yeares, xi months, xii. daies, vacante eleauen dayes.
               
                  1585
                  236 Sixtus the fift, De la Marche d' Ancona, cardinall de Montalto, called F. Foelix Peret, of the Friars Minors order, cardinall Prieſt vnder Rodolphus the ſecond: Hee helde the Sée, fiue

yeares, foure months, xxi. dayes, vacante fouretéene daies.
               
                  237 Vrbane the ſeauenth, a Romaine,
                  1590 called Iohn Baptiſta Caſtagnia, Sonne of Coſimo, cardinall of S. Marcellus, vnder Rodolphus the ſecond: He helde the Sée fifteene dayes, vacante two months.
               
                  238 Gregory the fourteenth, a Milanois,
                  1590 called Nicholas Sfondratus, cardinall of S. Cecilia vnder Rodolphus the ſecond: Hee helde the Sée ten monethes, tenne dayes, vacante fifteene dayes.
               
                  239 Innocentius the ninth, a Bolognois,
                  1590 called Iohn Baptiſta Fachineti, cardinall of SS. quatuor, vnder Rodolphus the ſecond, he helde thee Sée two months, vacante two months.
               
                  240 Clement the eight, a Florentine, called Hyppolito Aldobrandino, Sonne of Sylueſter,
                  1592 Auditor of Rota, and Datary or Almoner to the Pope: was made cardinall Prieſt of S. Pancratia, and great Penetentiary. He was ſent Legat into Poland, by Pope Sixtus the fift, in the yeare 1592. Hee was elected Pope vnder Rodolphus the ſecond, and held the Sée thirteene yeares, one moneth, fiue dayes, vntill the thirde of March, 1605. and then died. During his Pontificacie, which deſerueth to bee noted, hee procured peace betweene the two Kings moſt Chriſtian and catholicke, and the Duke of Sauoy: hee reduced Ferrara vnder obedience to the S. Sée: and celebrated the twelft Iubilee, in the yeare 1600.
               
               
                  241 Leo the xi. a Florentine likewiſe,1605 called

                  Alexander de Medicis, Sonne vnto Octauian, of the moſt famous houſe of the Medici, of Byſhoppe of Piſtoya, became Byſhoppe of Florence, and Ambaſſadour of Fraunces de Medicis, great Duke of Tuſcany, vnto Pope Gregorie the thirteenth. Hee was made Cardinall, beeing entitled with Saint Quirice and Saint Iulita, after, of Saint Iohn, and Saynt Paule, and in the ende, of Saint Praxedes. Beeing ſent Legate into Fraunce, by Pope Clement the eyght: Hee mediated the peace with the Spanyarde: and returning to Rome, hee was made chiefe of the Congregation of Byſhoppes. And the ſecond of Aprill, 1605. hee was created Pope: But his Pontificate, was of ſmall continuance, becauſe he helde the See but ſeauen and twenty dayes onely, and dyed the ſeauen and twenty day of the ſayde moneth, vnder the ſame Rodolphus the ſecond.
               
                  1605▪
                  
                  242 Paule the fifte, a Romaine, Originally deſcended from Sienna, called Camillo Borgheſe, who had beene Referendary vnto eyther Signature: Vicar of the Patryarchall Churche of Saint Maria Maior, Vice-Legate to Bolognia, Generall Auditour of the Apoſtolique Chamber: and Nuntio from the S. See into Spayne. Hee was made Cardinall Prieſt of Saynt Euſebius, in the yeare of our Lorde, 1596. by Pope Clement the eight, and afterward Byſhoppe of Eſino, in the Marchia d'Ancona. After the deceaſe of Pope Leo
                  
the eleauenth. Hee was elected in his place, the ſixteenth daye of May, 1605. As yet to this preſent yeare 1611. Hee remayneth lyuing and hath held the Papacie, the ſpace of fiue yeares, and ſomwhat more.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HOnourable Company of the Marchant Taylors; being the Society of Saint Iohn Baptiſt.
            
            
               ¶A briefe Collection of the Originall and Progreſſe, of the Knights of the worthy Order of S. Iohn of Ieruſalem, who were afterward called Knights of Rhodes, and Knights of Malta: Likewiſe their exployts in warre, vnder the conduct of their Great Mayſters, from the yeare 1099. vntill this preſent. With ſome, as briefe report alſo, of the Knightes Templers, and all other Orders of knight hood thorough the world.
            
            
               THe Militarie Order of S. Iohn of 
                  
                     •
                  eruſalem,
               1099 had her byrth and firſte Originall in the holy Citty of Ieruſalem, and paſſed there her firſt yeares of Infancie, with a great part of her adoleſcentie. When as the Sarazins were Maiſters of the holy Citty, and of the country

all about the ſacred Sepulchre of our Lorde, which was ruined about the yeare of ſaluation, 1012. by the commandement of Equin Califfe of the Sarrazins, and continued ſo ruined, vntill the time of Conſtantine Monomachus, Emperor of Conſtantinople, who at the intreaties of the chriſtians which then dwelte in Ieruſalem (with the conſent of Bomenſor Elmonius Stenſabus, Califfe or Soldane of Egypt) built it againe at hys owne charges, in the yeare, 1048. About which time, certain Gentlemen and Italian Merchants of the Citty of Melphes, frequenting the Portes and Maritane Citties of Syria and Egypt, and bringing good Marchandizes into thoſe Countries, woon themſelues much loue and liking, not onelie of the citties Gouernours, but alſo of the Califfe of Egypt: and being wel diſpoſed chriſtians, they would oftentimes goe to Ieruſalem, to viſit the holy memorable places: and hauing no place of retirement in the citty, they obtained fauour and permiſſion of the Califfe, to builde there a Church and a Pallace, for their owne vſe and habitation, as alſo for others of their Nation, in that quarter of the cittie, where the chriſtians might dwell neere to the holy Sepulchre. There they erected two Monaſteries, one in honor of the bleſſed Virgin Mary, called S. Maria de la Latina (differing from the Greeke churches whych were in Ieruſalem, and placed there an Abbot of Mont-Caſſina) and was builte to lodge chriſtian Pilgrims therein. The other was dedicated to S. Mary Magdalen, as a place of entertainment

of all ſuch women, as ſhould aduenture thither in pilgrimage, they being both Religiouſly gouerned. Not long after, they builded an Hoſpital, wherein to lodge as well all ſickly trauaylers, as any other Pilgrimes of honeſt diſpoſition, with a Church alſo thereto belonging, beeing both dedicated to S. Iohn Baptiſt. Theſe Monaſteries, Churches, and Hoſpitals, were long time mayntained by the care and coſt of the Amalphitanes, who founded them: and vntill ſuch tune as the Citty was conquered by the Chriſtians from the Infidels, and that Godfrey of Bullen was there elected King, which was in the yeare 1099.
            
            
               1. The Citty being thus woonne,1099 
               F. Gerard was the firſt Rector or Gouernor of the hoſpital of S. Iohn, who, when the Citty was beſiedged by the Chriſtians, was very ill dealt with by the Infidels, & was long time (by them) kept a captiue priſoner, becauſe they diſtruſted, that he had ſome ſecret intelligence with the Chriſtians, which beleagered the Citty. But after that the Chriſtians were mayſters thereof, he was delyuered out of priſon and gouerned both wiſely and charitably the Hoſpitall of S. Iohn, perſwading and induring Chriſtian Kinges and Princes, to enrich and endow it with their liberality, which (indéed) they did in bountifull manner, ſo that in France, Italy, Spaine, and other Prouinces of chriſtendome, the Hoſpitall of S. Iohn, founde good Benefactors, and attained (in ſhort time) to great reuennewes and poſſeſſions. In the yeare 1113.
               1113. Pope Paſchall the ſecond, receiued F. Gerard,
               
and the Knights of S. Iohn vnder protection of the Apoſtolique Seate, and graunted them great priuiledges, ordayning, that after the deceaſe of F. Gerard, they ſhold proceed cannonically to the election of another Rector or Gouernour: who was afterward called Great Mayſter of the Order or military hoſpitall, of S. Iohn of Ieruſalem, a name which continueth yet to this preſent after fiue hundred yeares from the beginning thereof.
            
               1118
               2 In the yeare 1118. F. Gerard departed out of this life, in the Papacie of Gelaſius the ſecond, and when as the order of the Knights Templers began.The beginning of the Knightes Templers. After his deceaſe, there ſuccéeded him by election, F. Raymond de Puy, who was a profeſſed Knight of the Order: Albeit, ſome holde opinion that F. Roger ſuccéeded deceaſed Gerard, and gouerned the hoſpitall of S. Iohn, from the yeare, 1118. vntill the death of Baldwine, ſecond of that name, King of Ieruſalem, who died in the yeare, 1131. F. Raymond (in a generall Chapter, aſſembled in Ieruſalem, with aduiſe of the other Knights) made Statutes for the Order, formed and inſtituted a rule of life, which all the following Knights were to obſerue. Hee was called Great Maiſter of the Order, and yet he qualified that Title, by calling himſelfe Seruant vnto the poore of Chriſt Ieſus, and Guardian of the hoſpitall of Ieruſalem. This Great Maiſter, perceiuing that the reuennewes of the Hoſpitall did daily encreaſe, and that hee could not better employ ſuch wealth, then againſt the Infidelles by

making war vpon them: he made offer to the K. of Ieruſalem, of himſelfe, his ſtrength, and all his Knightly Brethren, who bare in their ſtreamers & Enſignes, a Croſſe Argent, in a fielde Gules. And thence forward, theſe religious brethrē were diſtinguiſhed into thrée degrees: for one company were knights, another Captains, & the third Seruants, not hauing (from the beginning) any other difference among them, but that ſome were Eccleſiaſtical perſons, & the other Layicks. And from that time forward, there was not any enterprize in Paleſtine againſt the Infidels, but the Great-Maiſter was preſent thereat in perſon, with his religious Knights:Knightes Ho
                     •
                  pitallers of the Hoſpitall of S. Iohn in Ieruſalem: became afterward to be Knights of the Rhodes, & laſtly Knights of Malta. who were firſt called knights Hoſpitallers, or of the hoſpital of S. Iohn of Ieruſalem, afterward, knights of the Rhodes, & laſtly, knights of Malta. They grew into ſo great credit and reputation, that they were employed in the managing & guiding al affaires of chiefeſt importance. Among others, Gerard Gebert, Knight of this Order, was ſent by Foulkes K. of Aniou into England, to treat on the marriage of Conſtance (Princeſſe of Antioch, Néere to the Q. Meliſenda, & daughter to Prince Boemond) with Raymond ſon to the Earle of Poicters, who was then in the Court of Henry King of England. In like maner (this mariage being thus concluded, by ye ingenuity of this knight) at the ſame time, Raymond Berengarius, earl of Barcelona, & Prince of Cathalonia (who had cōquered the iſles of Maiorica & Minorica from the Mores, & (in ſingle combat) defended ye chaſtity & honor of Mahauld, wife

to the Emperor Henry the fift, againſt two Allemaigne Knights, that had falſely accuſed her of Idolatry) to ſhut vp the concluſion of his dayes, reſolued to take the habite of this famous Brother-hood, and in that ſacred profeſſion, he perſeuered al his life time after, which was in the year 1131.
               1131. Not much differing from this time, it is reported, that three Knights of this Order, beeing natiue Frenchmen of Picardie, & detained then by the Soldan of Egypt in captiuity, were admirably deliuered, and tranſ-ported out of Egypte, with Iſmeria, daughter to the ſaide Soldane, to the place where (at this inſtant) is the church of Noſtre Dame de Lieſſe, and this hapned in the yeare, 1139.
               1139. In the yeare 1153. Raymond the Great Maſter, cauſed the ſiedge to be continued before the cittie of Aſcalon, which the Infidelles had defended againſt the chriſtians more then fiftie yeares: and at length, it was yeilded to the ſaide Maiſter, the 12. day of Auguſt, 1154 which was in the tenth yeare of King Baldwine the 3. In acknowledgement of a prize ſo ſignale, and beneficiall to all chriſtendome, Pope Anaſtaſius the fourth, gaue and granted verie great priuiledges, to the Order of theſe Knights of S. Iohn of Ieruſalem, the firſt day of Nouember in the ſame yeare, exempting them from the iuriſdiction and controule of the Eaſt Eccleſiaſticall Prelates, which was the cauſe of great troubles, betwéene the Biſhops of the country there, and the knights of this order: albeit the Pope and his Cardinals maintained them ſtill ſtoutly. Some haue held,

that this Great M. Raymond was a Florentine, but the moſt credible opinion is, that hee was a French-man, a Natiue of Daulphine, iſſued of a verie Noble houſe, called du Puy: whereof, namelie, 
                  
                     •
                  acques Boſius the Italian (who hath amplie written the hiſtorie of this order) is an ingenuous witneſſe. Hee died in the yeare, 1160. with this reputation; that hee had bin a man of good and vertuous life, fearing god, valiant, wiſe, and aduiſed in the affaires of the world, and one wel approued in warlicke exerciſes.
            
               3 After that Raymond was deceaſed,1160 there ſuccéeded in the Maiſter-ſhip and gouernment of the Order, F. Auger de Balben, of whome there is found nothing deſeruing memorie: but that (in his time) died King Baldwin the third, who was not onlie much bemoaned of the chriſtians, but likewiſe of the Infidelles, who ſaide: That the Chriſtians had iuſt cauſe to lament for the death of Baldwine, becauſe they had loſt a Prince, that had not his equall in the world. This Great-Maiſter Auger, after he had gouerned his charge in peace and repoſe about thrée yeares, died in the yeare, 1163.
            
            
               4 Arnold de Comps,
               1163 was next elected Mayſter in his place, who was a man of great ſpirite, valour, and councell. And in ſhort time after his election, he entered into Egypt, with Amaulrie, the new King of Hieruſalem, who made warre vpon the Califfe of Egypt; becauſe he refuſed to continue and pay the anuall tribute, wherein hée had bound himſelfe to King Baldwine the third,

for a perpetuall payment to the Kinges of Hieruſalem. Arnold after he had (with great wiſedom and courage) gouerned the Hoſpitall of S. Iohn about foure yeares, died in the yeare 1167. and then ſucceeded him
            
               1167.
               5 Gilbert d'Aſſaly, or de Sailly, who was of ſtout mind, and ſo liberall; that hee flowed in bounty, eſpecially to his Souldiers, ſo that he fel into great expences, and waſted the whole treaſure of the houſe. Inſomuch, that hee was enforced to borrow Money at intereſt, with conditi
               
                  •
               ion; that if he tooke from the Infidels the Citty of Belbeis (anciently called Peluſium) he ſhould ſtand acquitted to his Brother-hood, as indéed he did, and victoriouſly performed his promiſe, the third day of Nouember, 1168. In which yeare he held a Chapter generall in Hieruſalem, where perceiuing that he was greatly indebted, and had charged the Hoſpitall, with more than an hundred thouſand Crownes of méere debts; beeing alſo much grieued, that his attemptes found not equall Iſſue to his high deſires: hee determined to renounce his great Maiſterſhip, which he did in the yeare 1169.
            
            
               1169
               6 By his reſignation, or renunciation rather, another Knight was choſen Great Maiſter, named F. Gaſtus, or Caſtus; of whom there is nothing found, that makes to any purpoſe of this our briefe Hiſtory. And the breuity of his time of gouernment was the cauſe, by reaſon he was not a full yeare in the charge, but dyed in the very ſame yeare of his election, and had
            
               
               7 F. Ioubert, a very religious man,1169. for his ſucceſſor, who in the yeare 1176. ioyned himſelfe with Phillip Earle of Flanders, that was then come into Syria, to aſſiſt King Baldwine the fourth againſt Saladine, who had a very powerfull Army, miraculouſly vanquiſhed by the Chriſtians, that were but few in number, in the moneth of Nouember 1177. at which time the Emperour Frederick Barbaroſſa, and Pope Alexander the third were reconciled together. At length, Saladine with-drew himſelfe from the Countrey of Damas, in the year 1179. And then dyed Ioubert Maiſter of the Hoſpitallers, a man very charytable to the poore, and ſickly. It is ſaide, that méere conceite of griefe, to behold (ſo manyfeſtly) the ruine of chriſtian affaires in Syria, with the ſhamefull and damageable truce, made betwéene the King of Ieruſalem, and the Earle of Tripoli (by his example) with Saladine; was the onely cauſe of abridging his dayes, hauing gouerned the Order of Saint Iohn, about tenne yeares.
            
               8 In his ſtead was elected Roger de Molins,
               1179. a man of high diſcretion and courage. In his time happened a great diſſention betwéene the Prince of Antioche, and the Patriarch of the ſaid place: and this Roger was choſen to be mediator of peace and agréement betwéene them, which followed in the yeare 1181. This Roger (with Heraclius Patriarch of Ieruſalem, and Arnald de Trogo, Maſter of the Knights Templers) was ſent by the King of Hieruſalem (in

quality of an Ambaſſador) into the Weſt, to require ayde of the Chriſtian Princes. Theſe Ambaſſadours were kindly entertained by the Emperour, King Phillip Auguſtus, Gods gift, ſirnamed the Conquerour, the Kings of Sicily, England, and Hungary: they returned back againe into Syria, all but the Maiſter of the Templers, who dyed by the way. In the yeare 1187. the Earle of Tripoli, being leagued and confederated with Saladine; graunted him paſſage, and reléeued his Army with victuals. And Saladine hauing beſiedged the citty of Ptolomais, the Knights of Saint Iohn and the Templers (ioyning together) diſordered the whole Army, and Roger the great Mayſter, fighting valiantlie, there dyed, with the fall of his Horſe vpon him, and ſmothered in his Armour, as alſo being much troden on with the enemies Horſes. His body being afterward found among the dead, was buried with great woe and ſorrow. And notwithſtanding this loſſe of the great Maiſter; yet the Knights of Saint Iohn and the Templers, won the day of battaile againſt the Turkes and Sarrazins; of whom died then in the field about fiftéen thouſand, the firſt day of May, in the yeare 1187 After whom
            
               1187
               9 F. Garnier of Naples in Syria (which was the ancient cittie of Sichem in Canaan) was elected great Maiſter. In his time was a bloudy battaile fought betwéene the Chriſtians and Infidels, wherein the King of Hieruſalem (named Guy de Luſignan) was taken Priſoner, with

the very chiefe Lordes of his Kingdome. It is ſaid alſo, that the Chriſtians had then the true Croſſe in the battell, but it was taken from them by the Infidels: and almoſt all the Knightes of Hieruſalem, and the Templers, were one part ſlaine in the battaile, and the reſt beheaded in cold bloud. F. Garnier, after he had fought verie manfully, yet being mortally wounded in many places of his body; by the goodneſſe and ſwiftnes of his Horſe, eſcaped into the Citty of Aſcalon: where ten daies after, hee departed into a better life, the fouretéenth of Iuly, hauing béene great Maiſter but two months and ſixe daies.
            
               10 The twenty day of the ſaide moneth of Iuly 1187.
               1187 the Knights that were in Ieruſalem, choſe F. Ermingard d'Aps, to bee their Mayſter. The ſecond day of October, in the ſame yeare, the Citty of Hieruſalem was ſubmitted to the power of Saladine: 88. yeares, two months and ſeauentéene daies, after that it was deliuered (by Godfrey of Bullen) from the handes of the Infidels: Frederick the firſt, ſirnamed Barbaroſſa, then holding the Empire of the Weſt, and Iſaac the Angell, that of the Eaſt, at Conſtantinople, Vrbane the third beeing Pope of Rome, and Phillip the ſecond, called Auguſtus, Gods Gift and Conquerour, raigning in Fraunce. Then were expulſed out of Hieruſalem, the Knightes Hoſpitallers, Templers, and al the Latine Chriſtians, of which Chriſtians, the Hoſpitallers redéemed from captiuity of the barbarous, to the number of two thouſand with their Money. All

the Churches of the cittie were then polluted and prophaned, except the Temple of the Reſurrection; which was bought with a great ſumme of Money, by the Chriſtians of the Eaſt. After the loſſe of Hieruſalem, the Knights Hoſpitalers were continually in Armes, faithfully aſſiſting the Chriſtian Princes, that had put on Croſſes, for the recouery of the holy Land, and did actions (of high deſert) at the ſiedge of Ptolomais: which, after a long ſiedge of thrée yeares, was regayned from the Infidels by the Chriſtians, the twelft day of Iuly, 1191.
               1191 And in that Citty, the Knights of Saint Iohn kept then their ordinary aboad and reſidence. And in the verie ſame yeare, the Chriſtians wonne a notable victorie againſt the Barbarians, and Saladine theyr chiefe: wherein they were worthily aſſiſted by the knightes Hoſpitallers and Templers. The yeare following, beeing 1192.
               1192 in Winter, dyed Ermingard d'Aps the great maiſter, in the cittie of Ptolomais, and then was choſen in his place
            
               11 Geoffrey de Duiſſon. In his time there was truce taken for fiue yeares, betwéene the Chriſtians that were in the holy Land, and Saladine, by which meanes, many Lords and Gentlemen of diuers Nations, who had worne the Croſſe, and gotten great ſtore of goodes and poſſeſſions: returned home to their Countries, and gaue their goods to the Brotherhood of ſaint Iohn, which greatly did augment their renennewes. And after the death of Henry Earle of Champaigne; the Hoſpitallers and Templers remayned

gouernours, and adminiſtrators of the kingdome of Hieruſalem: howbeit, that (by the fewer number of Chriſtians there abiding) election was made of Amaury de Luſignan, who had ſuccéeded the king of Ieruſalem in the kingdome of Cyprus, with conſent of the Patriarch, the Prelats and Barons of the Realme, in the yeare 1194. when ſoone after died Duiſſon the Great-Maiſter, and then ſuccéeded him, by election
            
               12 F. Alphonſo of Portugall,
               
                  
                     •
                  194 a knight of the Order of Saint Iohn, and of the Royall houſe of Portugall, though it dooth not appeare certainely, to what king he was Sonne. He made very worthy and commendable ſtatutes, whereof (to this day) there are ſome inuiolably kept. But becauſe he was of too ſtiffe nature, ouer-rough, ſurely and ſeuere: hee encurred the hatred of the greater part of the Knights Hoſpitallers. Which was the cauſe that hee renounced his Maiſterſhippe, and ſhipt himſelfe for returne home to Portugall, in the ſame yeare of his election: But he dyed the firſt day of March, in the yeare 1207.
            
            
               13 The ſame yeare that Alphonſo renounced the Great Maiſterſhippe, to wit, in the yeare 1194.
               1194 
               Geoffrey le Rat, who was Graund-Pryour of Fraunce, was choſen Mayſter: And Saladine then dying, his Sonne Noradine (Lord of Alepo) ſuccéeding him. About this time, Simon, Earle of Montfort, was ſent by King Phillip Auguſtus, with an Army into Syria; where finding much diſorder, he tooke truce

for tenne yeares with the Infidels, in the yeare 1198.
               1198 In the time of this tranquile eſtate, there chanced a great difference, betwéene the Knights Hoſpitallers and Templers, grounded on this occaſion. The Hoſpitallers complayned, that the Templers had enterpriſed too farre vppon their iuriſdiction, with much contempt and violation thereof. Which quarrell (after manie rough encounters and ſkirmiſhes) was appeaſed & accorded, by the interpoſition of king Amaury, the Patriarches of Antioch and Hieruſalem, and other Princes and Chriſtian Prelats, who comprimitted this difference, in the name of Innocentius the third, which fell out very ſucceſſiuely. For, after that God (the onely Staffe and ſtay of all affaires in the holy Land) had permitted this friendly vnity, betwéen theſe two millitary Orders of Knight-hood, King Amaury of Luſignan ſo preuailed, that the Great Mayſter and Knights of Saint Iohn, might liue with him in the Iſle of Cyprus, where hee graunted the gouernment of the Kingdome to them. In the yeare 1205.
               1205 King Amaury dyed, ſo did Quéene Iſabell, who appointed her Daughter Mary (which ſhe had by Conrade of Monferrat) to be her heire, and he left her to be tutoured and guided by the Knightes Hoſpitallers and Templers. In the yeare 1260. Geoffrey le Rat, the Great Mayſter dyed, and then ſuccéeded him
            
               1260
               14 Guerin de Montagu, of the language of Auuergne, who (with the Knights of his order)

ayded Lyuon, King of Armenia, againſt the Turkes and Barbarians, that had intruded into his Kingdome. In recompence whereof, he gaue them the citty of Salef, with the caſtles of Camard and new caſtle, and their dependances. Hee likewiſe recommended his heire and Kingdome, to the Knightes of the Hoſpitall of Saint Iohn; which guift was confirmed by the Pope, the fift of Auguſt 1209. Then were Iohn de Brienna, and Mary his Wife (Heire to the Kingdome) crowned King and Quéene of Hieruſalem. At length, in the yeare 1230.
               1230 
               Guerin the great Maiſter died in the citty of Ptolomais, and during his tyme, all the Chriſtians affaires in the holy Land, depended (very much) vppon the Knightes Hoſpitalers and Templers: who albeit they had many contentions betwéen them, yet did they ſtill agrée together (in all matters) againſt the Infidels. After him ſucceeded
            
               15 One F. Gerin,
               1240 of whom no other name is found remembred. Richard Duke of Cornewal,
               This is miſtaken, for this was K. Richard the firſt himſelfe. and Brother to Henrie (then King of England) arryued ſoone after in Paleſtine, with an Army of forty thouſand men, and did many worthy actions there. The great Maiſter alſo, and his knights with him (bearing him company) fought valiauntly againſt the Coraſmine Infidelles. There the ſaide Mayſter was taken, and ſent as a Priſoner to the Soldane of Egypt, where he died, and in his place, the Knights of S. Iohn elected (in the citty of Ptolomais) for their great Maiſter
            
               
               1345
               19 Bertrand de Comps, in the time of Pope Innocent the fourth, and when the Generall Counſell was called at Lyons, 1245. This great Maiſter was preſent in a furious battaile, fought againſt the Turcomans, that waſted all the country about Antioch, in the month of Auguſt, 1248 where, hauing receiud ſundry deadly wounds, he ended his daies: And in the Citty of Ptolomais, on the 24. of Aug. was elected as Great maiſter
            
               1248
               17. Peter de Villebride. In his time, Lewes K. of France, called S. Lewes, tooke on him the croſſe againſt the Infidels, with many Princes & Prelates of France, who went and beſieged Damieta where they were ayded by the knightes hoſpitallers & Templers, and the City was ſoon after ſurrendred to K. Lewes in the yeare 1250. Then did the Soldan of Egypt giue battel to the chriſtians, wherein King Lewes with his brethren, Charles and Alphonſus, the King of Cyprus, as alſo the Great maiſter, & many knights of the hoſpitalers & Templers, were all taken priſoners. Whych ſurprizall, cauſed an attonement betwéene King Lewes and the Soldane, & the hoſpitall Knights lent mony to King Lewes, to pay his ranſom. In the year 1251. Villebride the great maiſter dyed in the City of Ptolomais, & ſuccéeded by election
            
               1251
               18 Guillaum de Chaſteau-neuf, or de Caſtelno, of the ſpéech of Auuergne. He was a great obſeruer of Iuſtice, & pope Alexander 4. gaue to the knights hoſpitallers, ye caſtle & lands of Bethania, in the yeare, 1256. In his time, the Chriſtians loſt their vtmoſt hope, of any ſuccour from the

Princes of Europe: and in the yeare 1280. the Great Maiſter of Caſtelno died, when as the Hoſpitall Knights of S. Iohn, elected in his ſted
            
               19 Hugues Reuelle, or Reuel,
               1260 in the tyme of Pope Vrban the fourth, who gaue to the knights of S. Iohn, Mont-Tabor, 1261. and in Anno, 1262. they bought the Caſtle of Aſſur, but in the following two yeares, they tooke from the Sarazins a Caſtle named Lilion, whereuppon, the Soldan of Egypt concluded, to worke the ruin of the Knights Hoſpitallers, and (as an inſtance) he forcibly tooke from the ſaide Knights (in the year 1265.
               1265) the Caſtle of Aſſur, at the ſurprizal wherof, there were ſlaine to the number of 90. knights of S. Iohn, which greatly abated their power and repute. And in the yeare 1267. the Knights hoſpitallers and Temples were aſſailed, and much confuſed in battaile by the Sarazins, néere to the City of Ptolomais, for they waſted and ſpoiled al the countrey thereabout. In the yeare alſo 1270 the Knights of S. Iohn loſt the Caſtle of Cracquo, which was aſſaulted by the Soldane, and all the knights within it, were put to the ſword. It is likewiſe ſaide, that this Great Maſter Reuel, aſſiſted King Lewes in the voyage to Tunis, where the ſaid King died of the plague, and that in the ende, about the yeare, 1278. the Great Maiſter Reuel ended his daies, hauing helde fiue Chapters, or aſſemblies of the Brother-hoode of S. Iohn, wherein manie notable Statutes were made, for gouernement and reformation of the Order.
            
               
               1278
               20 After his deceaſe, Nicholas Lorgus, was choſen Great Maiſter, who, not to ſwerue a iot from his predeceſſor (wel knowing, that nothing ſooner procureth the ruine of Common-weales & Comminalties, then diſcord and diſſention) tooke ſuch paines, to reconcile the Knights hoſpitallers with the Templers, that he drew them to accord, and made them good friends. In the yeare, 1282 the Knights of S. Iohn, woon a famous victorie againſt the Sarazins, who proudely came to beſiedge the Caſtle of Margate, their very principal Fortreſſe: which was very manfully defended by the Hoſpitallers, and in the ende, quitted (at compoſition) by the knights, who returned (with their Enſignes diſplayed) to the Citty of Ptolomais. And in the yeare, 1288. Lorgus the Great Maiſter died, with very griefe, becauſe hee ſaw the Chriſtian affaires in the Holy land, dailie to fall from il, to worſe, without any means or hope of remedy.
            
               21 In the ſame yeare, Iohn de Villiers, a Frenchman borne,1288 was created Great Maiſter of the Order. In his time, the Citty of T
                     •
                  ipoly was taken from the Chriſtians, by the Infidels, as (in like manner) were the citties of Sidonia & Ba
                     •
                  uth, in the yeare, 1289. all which were ranſacked, ruined and burned, and the citty of Tyre brought vnder the Soldanes ſubiection, whereon the chriſtians of Ptolomais were gladde to ſéeke their owne peace. During which time, the Great Maiſter went to Brunduſium, with the Great Maiſter of the Templers, to ſollicite the chriſtian

Princes of the Croiſade, and the Soldane came to aſſaile the citty of Ptolomais, which was vertuouſly defended, by the Knights of the Hoſpitall and Temple, with many braue ſallies forth vpon the beſiedgers. Eſpecially the Great Maiſter Villiers, who was ſore wounded, with long ſuſtaining the whol charges of the Barbarian Infidels, the Knights Barricadoing themſelues in a quarter of the Citty, which yet was afterward taken on Friday the 18. of May, the ſame yeare 1292. With this great loſſe, the Chriſtians were driuen out of ye holy land, 191. years ten months, & thrée daies, after it had bin Conquered by Godfrey of Bullen. The Great M. with the reſt of his Knightes, fled (for ſafety) to the Iſle of Cyprus, where they were very kindly entertained by the K. of the Iſland, who aſſigned to thē & the Templers, the Citty of Limoſſon, which was a Port Towne or Hauen on the Sea. There did they inhabite, and there did the Great Maiſter aſſemble two generall Chapters, one in December, 129
                     •
                  . and the other in October 1293. making therein dyuers good Statutes for the Order: and in the yeare 12
                     ••
                  . he dyed at Limoſſon, & then ſuccéeded him
            
               22 F. Odo des Pins, borne in Prouence,
               1294 in the time of Pope Boniface the eyght. He incurred the hatred and diſgrace of the knightes of his Order, by reaſon of his negligence and couetouſneſſe. And there was a purpoſed determination, to depriue him of his Great maiſterſhippe; but it was impeached by the Pope, to auoide ſcandall,

and at length he was cited to appeare at Rome in perſon to anſwere to the complaintes of the Hoſpitallers, and thitherward he trauailed. But before he could ſée Italy, he dyed by the way, in the year 1296. hauing (in the precedent yeares) held two generall Chapters at Limoſſon. Hee caried alſo along with him a manuſcript Chronicle, wherein hee had appealed certaine letters of the Popes, containing excommunication, whereby he purſued and reléeued his owne appeale.
            
               1296
               23 The Knights hearing the death of theyr Great Maiſters des Pins, elected (at Limoſſon) the twenty foure day of March 1296. F. Guillaume de Villaret to ſuccéed him; who was of the ſame Countrey of Prouence, and Prior of S. Gilles, where he was at the time of his election. But hauing intelligence thereof, he trauailed immediatly to the Kingdome of Cyprus, and gouerned in his charge very prudently. In his time Vſau Caſſanus, King of the Tartares, became a Chriſtian, and recouered the Citty of Ieruſalem, where hee placed the Knightes Hoſpitallers and Templers in Garriſon, in the yeare 1300. Hée tooke the Citty of Damas likewiſe, but it was quickly regained by the Infidels, and the Hoſpitallers and Templers returned then to Cyprus againe, where the Great Maiſter departed out of this life, in the yeare 1308. hauing helde fiue generall Chapters at Limoſſon, and ſéene the vtter ruine of the Knights Templers.
            
               1308
               24 The great Maiſter being dead, Folquet de Villaret, of the ſame Nation of Prouence, was elected in his roome. He was a man of liuely

ſpirit and great courage, and ſéeing that he had attained to this Soueraigne dignity; he reſolued to put in execution a matter, which (in his predeceſſors daies) had often béene intended, but could not any way be effected (viz.) to depart from the Iſle of Cyprus, and to get a dwelling ſome where elſe, which hee very happily performed. For in Anne. 1308. the very yeare of his election, hée made a voyage to Conſtantinople, and afterward into France, where the Pope gaue him the Iſle of Rhodes, (if he could get it) which with his Knights he conquered, in the yeare 1309. and ſeauen other Iſlands néere adioyning. So that thither was the reſidence of ſaint Iohns knights tranſferred, and then they were afterward called,The beginning of the Knights of the Rhodes who helde their firſt name of S. Iohns Knights ſtil Knights of the Rhodes, yet kéeping the Name of Saint Iohn of Hieruſalem ſtill. Not long after, Otthoman, firſt Emperour of the Turkes, came and beſiedged Rhodes with a Potent Army: but it was reléeued by Amadis the fourth, Earle of Sauoy, and Otthoman was compelled to raiſe his ſiedge. After which time the Earles of Sauoy wore on their Armours, a Croſſe Argent, in a fielde Gules, in memory of the helpe they had giuen to the Knightes of the Rhodes. The order of the Templers (hauing béene vtterly ſuppreſſed, in a generall Councell holden at Vienna in Dolphine) the greater part of theyr goods was giuen to the Order of the Rhodes, and confirmed by Pope Clement the fift, 1312. In the yeare 1314. the Knightes of the Rhodes conquered the Iſle of Lango, with other Iſles in

the Archipelagus. And in the yeare 1317. Folquet the Great Maiſter (pleaſing his owne humour ouer-much in his victories and conqueſtes) beganne to grow haughty, proud, and inſolent, which brought him into contempt of his companions: whereupon, the Knights reuoulted from him, and if he had not ſaued himſelfe in a Caſtel, they had ſeized his perſon. But, in regard they could not get him, they depoſed him from the dignity of Great Maiſter, & in his place, elected
            
               1317
               25 Maurice de Pagnac, wherof Pope Iohn the twenty two, beeing aduertiſed, hee was greatly offended thereat, and ſent two Prelates to the Rhodes, to informe themſelues of the fact, with commaund, to cite the Great Maiſter de Villaret and de Pagnac, to appear at Auignon in perſon, Gerard des Pins beeing appointed Lieutenant Generall in the meane while. At this inſtant time, Orchanes Emperour of the Turkes, came boldly and beſiedged the Iſle of Rhodes: but the knights had an admirable victory againſt him, for there were then tenne thouſand Turkes hewen in péeces. In this Interim, Maurice de Pagnac, died at Montpellier, Anno. 1322. and Folquet de Villaret was re-eſtabliſhed in the dignity of Great Maiſter. But hee perceiuing that it was againſt the liking of his fellowe knights, renounced his Great Maiſterſhip, in ye yeare 1323. and liued as a priuate Knight, vntill the firſt day of September, 1327. when he dyed, and was buried at Montpellier.
            
            
               1327.
               26 The ſame yeare that he gaue ouer his dignity,

the Knights of the Rhodes choſe Elion de Villeneufue, borne alſo in Prouence, and Priour of Saint Gilles. In the yeare 1343. a league was made betweene the Seigneury of Venice, the K. of Cyprus, and knights of the Rhodes. And the Great Maſter hauing won the name of an happy gouernor, died the 27. of May at Rhodes. In his life time, he had encloſed the great Maiſters Pallace with wals & towers, and deuided the languages, Bayliwicks and other dignities of the Order.
            
               27 After the deceaſe of Villeneufue, Deodon,
               1346 or Gods-gift (a Natiue of Prouence) was elected Great Maiſter. About foure yeares before hée was promoted to this Dignity, hee had fought with an horrible and monſtrous Dragon, that greatly afflicted the Iſle of Rhodes. And hauing kild the Monſter, he was therefore ſo highly honored and eſtéemed, that his memory yet remaineth renowned to poſterity. In the yeare 1347. he ayded the King of Armenia againſt the Soldane of Egypt. Pope Clement the ſixt helde the Knights of Rhodes in ſuch eſtéeme, that almoſt all the Fortes in Italy (belonging to the Sée) were gouerned ſeuerally by one of them. In the yeare 1351. Conſtance King of Armenia, became a Brother Knight of Rhodes. And in the yeare 1353. the Sonne to Iohn Canta-cuzen, Emperour of Conſtantinople, came and required ayde of the Great Maiſter of Rhodes: who, after he had gouerned this Order of Saint Iohn ſeauen yeares, ſixe months, and ten daies, dyed the ſeauenth of September, in the ſaide yeare

               1353. and was buried in the Church of S. Iohn of Rhodes. Hee builded Milles in the Citty of Rhodes, and engirt the Subburbs with walles, making them very ſtrong on the Sea ſide.
            
               1353
               28 Next ſuccéeded him by election (as Great Maiſter) Peter de Cornilian, Priour of S. Gilles, borne alſo in Prouence. Hee was Maiſter, but one yeare, eight months and ſeauentéene dayes: for, falling into a gréeuous ſickneſſe, hee died in the Citty of Rhodes, the 24. of Auguſt, 1355. He was a man of very exemplarie life, and ſo ſeuere, that hee was ſur-named the Corrector of Cuſtomes. He held a generall Chapter at Rhodes, 1354. wherin many good Statutes were made.
            
               1355
               29 After the great Maiſter was deceaſed, according to acuſtomed form, Roger des Pins, born likewiſe in Prouence, did next ſuccéede him. In his time, the Pope perſwaded the Knightes of Rhodes, to buy the Principality of Achaia, of Iacques de Sauoy, Prince of Piedmont, and the Knights of Rhodes made a generall aſſembly in the Citty of Auignon, to effect the treaty of buying the ſayd principality of Achaia, and to reform ſome abuſes, crept into the Order. For their ſtatutes were now traduced into the Latine tongue, and to all Princes were ſent authenticall Copies or Volumes of them, by appointment of the great Maiſter: And in the yeare, 1359. the great Commander, & the Marſhall of the Order, were ſent into France (in quality of Ambaſſadors) to be viſiters and reformers. There was an aſſembly of the Knights, called at the Cittye of Carpentras,
               
but it could not hold, in regard of the great Mayſters death, who dyed the 28. of May, 1365. and was much lamented, but by the poore eſpecially, to whom hee was a great and charitable Almoner.
            
               30 Raymond Berengarius, of Prouence alſo,1365 was next choſen great Maiſter, who had bin before Commander of Caſtle Sarrazin. In his time the King of Cyprus, and the Knights of Rhodes made a league together, and tooke (perforce) the Citty of Alexandria in Egypt, which they ranſackt, ſpoyld▪ and burnt. The Armenians being expulſed by the Sarazins out of their dwellinges, wer charitably entertained by S. Iohns knights, in the Iſle of Lango: and at the ſame time, the Citty of Tripoli in Syria, was taken and ſacked by the King of Cyprus, and the Knightes of the Rhodes. In the yeare, 1371. the Great Maſter was (by the Pope) elected Nuntio from the Apoſtolique ſeat, to appeaſe the rumors and diuiſions, which were then in the Kingdome of Cyprus: whether he went in perſon, and both by his Authority and wiſedome, he ſoone ſeaſed all the trobles and molleſtations. The Great Maiſter hauing gouerned his Order about eighteene yeares and an halfe, departed this life in the yeare, 1373
            
            
               31 In the ſame yeare, Robert de Iuliac,
               1373. or of Gulich, great Priour of Fraunce, was choſen Great-Maiſter, who (at the time of his election) had the charge of his Priory: but vnderſtanding the newes, he went forthwith to Auignon, where he was receiued with great honor, an aſſemblie

general of this Knightly Order being then there held, and the Great Maiſter had the gouernment of Smyrna impoſed vpon him, vnder paine of excommunication. At his comming to Rhodes, he qualified all the contentions, which had hapned in the time of his abſence. At this time went the Pope, to hold his ſeat at Rome againe, which he and his predeceſſors had kept at Auignon, for the ſpace of ſeauenty one yeares 1376. In which yeare, the 29. of Iune, dyed the Great Maiſter, and then
            
               1376
               32 In his place came Iohn Fernandes d'Heredia, a Natiue of Arragon, in the Citty of Valentia, who was Prior of Cathalognia, and Caſtillian d'Empoſta. Twice he had bin marryed, and (chancing to be a Widdower) he was made a Knight of Rhodes, in the time of Villeneufue, who was then Great Maiſter. Being then but a ſimple Knight, hee went to viſite the holy Sepulchre, and other memorable places in the holie Land. He was alſo Ambaſſador from Pope Clement the ſixt, to the Kings Phillip 6. of France, and Edward the third of England, and did verie good ſeruice to King Phillip, in the yeare 1346. For he being diſmounted from his horſe, on a day of battaile againſt the Engliſh he gaue him his owne horſe, whereby the King eſcaped to a place of ſafety. In like manner he fortified the Baſtions and new wals of Auignon, whereof hee was made Gouernor by the Pope. Being great Maiſter, hee tooke his way to Rhodes, in the yeare, 1377. and being required by the Generall of the

               Venetians Army, to vnite their forces together: they went to Morca, in the yeare, 1378. where they beſiedged the Citty of Patras, and tooke both it and the Caſtle. The great Maiſter (fighting man to man with the Gouernor of Patras) ſlewe him manfully. Afterwarde, in an ambuſcado of Turkes, hee was taken priſoner, by reaſon hee was too well knowne to them: Whereuppon, to worke his liberty, Patras and other places (which had bin won from them) were re-deliuered to the Turkes. And yet notwithſtanding, they would néeds carrie him with them into Albania, where they kept him as a ſlaue thrée yeares. In the year, 1381. the great Maiſters fréedome was bought with money, and hee returning to Rhodes, the Ambaſſadors of Smirna came to deſire ſuccour of him. In the yeare, 1391. Baiazeth, Emperour of the Turkes made ſome preparation to beſiege Rhodes, whereupon, Phillebert de Naillac, Priour of Aquitaine, was ſent by his fellow knights to Auignon, with Letters to the great Maiſter, to require aide againſt Baiazeth. Naillac returning to Rhodes, in the yeare, 1396. Heredia the great Maiſter died, and was buried at Caſpa.
            
            
               33 Newes beeing brought to Rhodes,
               1395. that Heredia the great Maiſter was dead: Phillebert de Naillac, grand Priour of Aquitaine, & borne in France, ſuccéeded in his roome. At the Spring time, he was inuited by Sigiſmond King of Hungaria, to come and aſſiſt him with his Knights againſt Baiazeth, which hee did in perſon, in the yeare, 1397. And then was a battaile fought at

               Nicopolis, where Baiazeth had the victorie, the K. of Hungary, being glad to ſaue himſelfe (and with the Great Maſter) retyred to Rhodes. Thither alſo did the Emperor of Conſtantinople, ſend all his precious Iewelles, to be kept by the Great Maiſter, fearing leaſt Baiazeth ſhoulde ſurprize Conſtantinople. But hee was diſappointed by Tamberlain, who ouercame Baiazeth, and kepte him captiue in a Cage of yron, ſo long as he liued, and the ſiege of Conſtantinople being raiſed, the great Maſter ſent home again the Emperors Iewels. After the foyle of Baiazeth, the great Maiſter de Naillac ſailed with an army into Caria, & there builded an inexpugnable fortreſſe, which he named S. Peters Caſtle, in the year 1399. vnder the raigne of Charles the ſixt king of France. In the yeare, 1403. there happened wars betweene the k. of Cyprus and the Genewayes; which was pacified and ordered by the wiſedome and authority of the great Maiſter: to whom the Soldan of Egypt ſent an Ambaſſador, for requeſt of peace. In the yeare 1409. the Great Maiſter gaue his perſonall aſſiſtance in the Counſell of Piſa, aſſembled to quench the Schiſmes, which were then crept into the Church, and the guard of the Conclaue was committed to the great Maiſter, when Alexander the fift was elected Pope. The ſayde Maiſter was likewiſe at the generall Counſell of Conſtance, where thrée Popes were depoſed, and Martine 5. elected, an. 1414. the guard of the Conclaue being then againe giuen to the great Maiſter. Trauelling into France, he held a general aſſembly

of his knights at Auignon, afterward at Florence, and laſt at Ancona: whence returning to Rhodes, an. 1420. he held there a general chapter, and in the beginning of Iune, 1421. he dyed.1321.
            
            
               34 And then in the deads place, Anthony de Fluuiano, or de Riuers,
               This Anthony de Riuers was ſent for to Rhodes, he being then chiefe Commander of the Brotherhood, at S. Iohns of Ieruſalem, in Saint Iohns ſtreet. reported to be a natiue of Arragon (but more ſay of England) was created Great Maiſter. In his time began the generall Counſell of Baſile, 1430. And not long after, the Soldan of Egypt (puft vp with the victory which he wonne at Cyprus) brake the Truce, and prepared a great Armye, with intent to beſiedge Rhodes. But when hee heard, that the Great Maiſter was prouided of ſufficient ſtrength to withſtand him: he left off his determination, and ſo the Order that way remained in quiet. This Great Maſter founded, and endowed a Chappel in the Citty of Rhodes, which (afterwarde) hee made a Church for his Knights. And the 29. of October hee died, after hee had gouerned (in his place) with much wiſedome, 16. years & an halfe.
            
               35 The ſixt of Nouemb. in the ſame year 1437 Iohn de Laſtic,
               1437. borne in Auuergne was elected Great Maiſter, albeit he was abſent at his election, & remained in Auuergne, whereof he was prior. Before he wold go to Rhodes, he made a general aſſembly of his knightes at Valentia, in the month of Decem. 1438. when he cam to Rhodes, he began to build the new hoſpital for ſick people, which the precedent great M. (by his wil) had appointed to be done at his expences. In his time, Pope Eugenius 4. was depoſed by the Counſell

of Baſile, and Foelix the fift, created in his place, who was held at Rome to be an Antipope. In the yeare, 1440. the Soldane of Egypt, beeing come néer to the port of the iſle of Caſt-Lerouge (which appertained to the Knights) and from thence turning towards Rhodes, he was put to flight by an army of the Knights, who had but eight Gallies, and in the Soldanes army there were eightéene, and there were ſlaine about ſeauen hundred Sarazins, beſide a great number that were wounded. This foile did ſo highly offend the Soldan, that he leagued himſelfe with Amurath, Emperor of the Turkes, with intention to make himſelfe Maiſter of the Iſle of Rhodes, and to kill, or expell thence that famous Order of Knight-hood. Héereupon, in the yeare, 1444. he came and beſiedged Rhodes, which was vertuouſly defended by the Rhodian Knights: and in the moneth of September the ſame yeare, a generall aſſembly was held at Rhodes, to helpe the enſuing neceſſities of the Order. So the yeare following, the Great Maiſter (by aduiſe of the Pope and the King of Cyprus) made peace with Amurath, and helde a generall Chapter at Rhodes. At whiche time, the Duke of Cleues paſſed by Rhodes, in his returne from Ieruſalem, where he had viſited the holy places. In the yeare 1451. a general aſſembly was made at Rhodes, wherein, the adminiſtration and gouernment of the Treaſure, and whole Fraternity, was giuen to the Great Maiſter: who in anno 1452. after the death of Amurath, renewed the peace with Mahomet
               
the ſecond his ſonne. And yet the yeare following, Mahomet became Maiſter of the Cittye of Conſtantinople, the 29. of May: when (beeing not a little proude of this fortunate ſucceſſe) hee ſent to the great Maiſter of Rhodes, that he ſhold pay him (yearly) two thouſand Ducats, in name of tribute, otherwiſe, he purpoſed not to hold (any longer) the peace ſworne betwéen them. Wherevnto the great Maiſter made a couragious aunſwere, to wit: That neither his Religion, the Iſle of Rhodes, nor himſelfe were ſubiectes to any, but God and his Church, and that he would neuer pay Turke any tribute, being rather reſolued to dye (both he and all his Knights) then to indure Chriſtian liberty (which euer had bin free) to come now (by his meanes) into thraldome. Whereupon, he ſent Ambaſſadors to the Pope and Chriſtian Princes, to entreat ſupplye from them, againſt the periured Mahomet. And in the yeare, 1454. the 19. day of May, he died, hauing valiantly gouerned his Order ſixtéene years, ſixe months, and thirtéene daies.
            
               36 Iacques de Milly, borne in Auuergne,
               1342 whereof he was Prior, ſuccéeded as Great Mayſter the firſt day of Iune 1454. being in his Priory when he was elected, & his Nephew George de Boiſrond, brought him firſt tydings thereof. Whereuppon hee immediatly went to Rhodes, and helde a generall Chapter the ſame yeare, in the month of Nouember. In the yeare 1456. the Iſle of Rhodes was greatly afflicted with Peſtilence and Famine, whereby it became halfe deſert,

and to re-people it againe, many generall citations were ſent abroad to all the Knightes, to méete there at a certaine time. The yeare 1457. Mahomet beſiedged the Iſle of Lango, and the Caſtle of the Iſle des Singes: but he was couragiouſly repulſed, the Knights hauing a very happy and ſignat victory againſt him; which cauſed Charles the ſeauenth King of France, to ſend the Knights (as a gift) ſixtéene thouſand Crownes: The Bailiffes, Commaunders, and other Officers of the Order, being then enioyned (by a generall Chapter) to come to Rhodes, for more ſecure and ſtrong defence thereof. The ſeuentéenth of Auguſt 1461. the Great Maiſter dyed, hauing (with much prouidence) gouerned his charge in hard and troubleſome times, ſeauen yeares, two months, and ſixteene daies. He was greatly lamented, becauſe he was very benigne, affable, and humaine, deſirous to preſerue peace and vnity among his worthy Bretheren.
            
               1461.
               37 Peter Raymond Zacoſta, born in Arragon, and Caſtileon d'Empoſta, was created Great M. next; he being then abſent in Spaine; but at his comming to Rhodes, by a generall Chapter there holden, the eight language of Caſtile and Portugall, was then admitted into the Order. For till that inſtant, there were but ſeauen languages there before; to wit, three of Fraunce, Auuergne, and Prouence; one of Italy, one of Arragon, one of England, and one of Allemaigne or Germany. The yeare 1464. the Venetians Army beſiedged the Citty of Rhodes:
               
but the ſiedge was ſoone raiſed, and the Venetians returned home to their Countrey, the warre beeing appeaſed by the wiſedome of the Great-Maiſter, who cauſed the Tower of Saint Nicholas to be built, at the mouth of Rhodes Port, in the very ſame place, where (in elder times) the great Coloſſus of the Sunne (numbred among the ſeauen wonders of the world) had ſtood. As a helpe to this building, Phillip Duke of Burgundy gaue tenne thouſand Crownes of Gold. The yeare 1465. the great Turke ſent Ambaſſadours to Rhodes, to mediate a peace betwéen him and the Knights Hoſpitallers: but they worthily refuſed it, and in preſence of the Ambaſſadours, denounced Warre againſt the Turke. The generall Chapter beeing then tranſferred from Rhodes to Rome, and the Great Maiſter béeing preſent in perſon thereat: he died there the twenty one of February 1467. and was buried in the Church of Saint Peter.
            
            
               38 Baptiſta Orſino, Prior of Rome,
               1467. an Italian by Nation and tongue, ſuccéeded the Great-Maiſter Zacoſta. No ſooner was hee come to Rhodes, but hee receiued intelligence, that the great Turke prepared a puiſſant Army, purpoſing to beſiedge either Rhodes or Negropont. Wherfore he ſent for a great number of the Knightes, that were then abſent, to come forth-with for defence of the Iſland. Moreouer, hee leagued himſelfe with the Seigneury of Venice againſt the Turke. Neuertheleſſe, in the yeare 1470. Mahomet forcibly tooke the Citty of Negropont, the

laſt day of Iuly, committing very great and horrible cruelties, killing (in cold blood) all the Latines there to be found, and (by ſound of Trumpet) he proclaimed open war againſt the knights of Rhodes, which enforced them to ſéeke all meanes for their beſt defence, prouiding euerie way to withſtand the Turkiſh Army. But in this time of preparation, the eight day of Iune, the Great Maiſter died of a long lingering diſeaſe, which had afflicted him a whole yeare together: and after him ſuccéeded
            
               1476
               39 Peter d'Aubuſſon, borne in Auuergne, Prior there, & Captaine of the Citty of Rhodes. He being choſen Great Maiſter, ſolemnely took his oath (according to cuſtom) to kéep the ſtatutes of the Order. He viſited ye whole Iſle of Rhodes, and made very great prouiſion, to defend it againſt the Turkes Army: ſending for all knights and Commaunders appertaining to the Order, to repaire thither for defence of the Iſle, and renewing peace with the Soldane of Egypt. The ſame yeare, King Lewes preuailed to haue a Iubilie in Fraunce, in fauour of the Knightes of Rhodes, taking order, that the Monies thereby ariſing, ſhould ſoly be imployed for their defence: And by this Iubily came great ſtore of Money, wherewith Caſtles and fortifications were builded in the Iſle. Truce alſo was taken, betwéene the Knightes and the King of Tunis, for thirtie yeares, and the Knights of the Sepulcher at Ieruſalem, were ioyned with the Rhodians of S. Iohn. In the yeare 1479. Mahomet the ſecond

Emperour of the Turkes, held a ſolemne Councell, that Rhodes ſhould bée beſiedged with a powerfull Army, as indéede ſoone after it was: in which ſiedge, many ſallies forth were made, and the Turkes daily repulſed and chaſed, albeit they were an hundred thouſand fighting men, and the Army conſiſted of 160. Saile. The Great maiſter was much ſuccoured by Meſſire Antoine d'Aubuſſon his Brother, Vicount of Montelis, who was a great Warriour, and a moſt ſkilfull Captaine, he was elected Captaine Generall for the beſiedged. In fewe daies, the Turkes gaue thrée thouſand and ſeauen hundred ſhot with the Cannon, againſt the Citty Wals, and a maruailous aſſault was made of forty thouſand Turks: who neuertheleſſe were valiantly reſiſted, albeit the Great Maiſter receiued (in this fight) fiue great woundes, one whereof was thought to bée deadly. In the end, ſo worthily were the aſſaylants withſtood, that they were enforced to raiſe their ſiedge, hauing loſt a great number of theyr Souldiers, and the Army of Turkes returned, (with mighty ſhame and diſgrace) to Conſtantinople, after they had beſiedged the Citty for the ſpace of 89. dayes. After this ſiedge, Mahomet the ſecond, concluded to com in perſon to Rhodes, whereupon, a generall aſſembly of the Knightes was made: But the death of Mahomet hindered this deſigne, and his Sonnes Baiazeth and Zizime performed the Warre, after the deceaſe of their Father, which gaue ſome breathing time of reſt to the Knights of Rhodes. And yet Zizime
               
(in perſon) came to aſſiſt the Great Mayſter, with-drawing himſelfe to Rhodes, in the yeare 1482. where he was receiued with great honour, and from thence conducted into France. In the time of this Great Maiſter d'Aubuſſon, the ſtatutes of the Order were reformed, and brought into one volume; peace being concluded betwéen the Knights and the Great Turk Baiazeth. The Great Maiſter was made a Cardinall by Pope Innocent the eight, and Legate alſo into Aſia, with honour of Legate and Generall of the leagued Army againſt the Turke. Finally, he dyed at Rhodes, An. 1503. the third day of Iuly, full of honour and reputation, and was interred with great Funerall pompe. He had liued 80. yeares, thrée moneths and foure daies, and gouerned the Order twenty ſeauen yeares, and ſixtéene daies.
            
               1503.
               40 There were 387. Knightes aſſembled at Rhodes, when the Great Maiſter d'Aubuſſon dyed, who elected for his ſucceſſor, Emery d'Amboiſe, Brother to George d' Amboiſe, Cardinall and Legate in France, Arch-Biſhop of Rouen. He was a French-man by birth, and great Priour of France at the time of his election, Guy de Blanchefort comming into France, to accompany him in his voyage to Rhodes: where hée was receiued with much applauſe and reioycing, becauſe the Kinges of France and Spaine hadde written very fauourable Letters on his behalfe, to the Knights of the order. Hee was no ſooner there arriued, but hee helde a generall Chapter,

wherein was concluded, that a ſumptuous tomb of Braſſe ſhould be made, for the deceaſed Cardinall Great Maiſter. In the yeare following, they obtained a very famous and nauall victory, againſt the Soldane of Egypt, vnder the conduct of Phillip de Villiers, of the Iſle Adam, a French Knight of the order, and afterward he was great Maiſter. But this Maiſter Emerie d'Amboiſe dyed at Rhodes, An. 1512.
            
            
               41 And the ſame yeare,1512 
               410. of the knights were aſſembled at Rhodes, where they choſe Guy de Blanchefort (borne in Auuergne, and Nephew to the deceaſed Maiſter d'Aubuſſon) to be Great Maiſter. In his time the generall Laterane Councel was holden at Rome, where Fabritio Carretto, Admiral and Procurator for the Order of Rhodes, was Captaine of the Guard to the ſaide Councell. This great Maiſter de Blanchefort, embarking himſelfe at Nicea in Prouence, to make for Rhodes; was ſurprized, (by the way) with a dangerous ſickneſſe, wherof hee dyed the 24. of Nouember, a yeare and two daies after his election.
            
               42 In his ſtead, Fabritio de Carretto,
               1513. borne in Geneway, and an Italian by language, was treated Great Maiſter, in an aſſembly helde at Rhodes, the fifteenth of December 1513. where were then preſent 550. Knightes of the Order, the ſaid Carretto hauing formerly béen Admiral of Rhodes. In the yeare 1516. peace was made betwéene the Knights of Sain
                  •
                
               Iohn, and Tomombeus Soldane of Egypt, ſucceſſor to Campſon

Gaury, who (but a ſhort while before was ſlaine in a battaile, wherein Selim (Emperour of the Turkes) had the victory againſt him. And Tomombeus was as vnfortunate, for in the yeare 1517. he was taken, and ſtrangled at one of the Portes of the great Cayre, by the appointment of Selim. And this was the cauſe, that the great Maiſter fortifyed the Iſle of Rhodes, to his vttermoſt power, ſending Ambaſſadours to the Chriſtian Princes, to let them vnderſtand the great victoryes of Selim, the ſooner to take order for ſending ſuccour. But Selim dying, his ſon Sultan Soliman ſuccéeded him: and in Ianuary, 1521. the Great Mayſter Carretto finiſhed his daies at Rhodes, leauing great prouiſion and Munition for warre, which ſoone after did ſeruice to his ſucceſſor
            
               1521
               43 Phillip de Villiers, of the Iſle Adam, great Priour of France, and there borne; where becauſe hee alſo was at the time of his election, Gabriell de Pomereux great Commander, was choſen Lieutenant to the great Maiſter till hée came. The very ſame yeare of his election, the twenty two day of Ianuary, 1521. Sultan Soliman reſolued to beſiedge the Iſle of Rhodes, executing the laſt will of his Father Selim: whereof the Great Maiſter being aduertiſed, hee made his preparation (by all poſſible meanes) to withſtand the Turkes enterpriſe. Diligently did hee ſtrengthen the Citty of Rhodes, ſending for ſupply into Chriſtendome; which as then hée could not haue, by reaſon of the warre happening betwéene

               Frances the firſt, King of France, and the Emperor Charles the fift. In the month of Iune 1522. began the memorable ſiedge of the Cittie of Rhodes, which was beſiedged with an Army of two hundred thouſand Turkes, and afterward the army encreaſed to thrée hundred thouſand men. The beſiedged defended themſelues moſt couragiouſly, and very worthy exploits of warre were there performed: eſpecially by the Great Maiſter, who (during the ſiedge) did neuer put off his Armour. The aſſaylants were in many attemptes repulſed, and in one of them, twentie thouſand Turks remained dead in the place: Soliman hauing then a purpoſe to raiſe his ſiedge, but that there were ſome cloſe Traytours, who hindered him from ſo dooing, and yet they did not eſcape vnpuniſhed. At length,The loſſe of Rhodes, to the great g
                     •
                  eef
                     •
                   of al Chriſtendome. the Great Mayſter (receiuing no ſuccour) was enforced to ſurrender the Cittie, vppon compoſition, the twenty foure day of December 1522. the Turkes hauing loſt more then an hundered thouſand men. Soliman would néedes ſée the Great Maiſter, and when he beheld him, tears iſſued from his eyes, in méere compaſſion of him. So, the firſt day of Ianuary, 1523. the Great Maiſter (with 50. ſayle) departed from Rhodes, and tooke his way towards Candie: after that the Iſle of Rhodes had beene in the power of the Knights Hoſpitallers, for the ſpace of 213. years, to wit, from the yeare, 1309. to the ende of the yeare, 1522. After this loſſe of Rhodes, the great Maiſter and his valiant Religious Knights, had

not any aſſured place of abyding: vntill the Iſle of Malta was giuen thē by the Emperor Charles the fift. For they departed firſt into Candie: from thence they went into Sicilie and Italy, where the Pope ſent them the City of Vitterbo, and where they held a generall Chapter. Afterward they ſoiourned for ſome ſmall time, at Cornetto, then at Villefranche, and at Nicea. While they remained at Nicea, the great Maiſter made a voyage into England, and from thence to France, where being at Lyons, a great ſickneſſe tooke him: but after his recouery,The knightes of Saint Iohn becam Knightes of Malta. he went to Cambraye, to hold the Baptiſme Font for Phillebert Emmanuell, ſonne to Charles Duke of Sauoy. Afterwarde, comming with his Brethren-Knights to Malta, on Wedneſday morning the ſixt of Octob, 1530. he cauſed a Pallace to be there erected, for the abiding of him and his ſucceſſors, calling it Caſtell Angelo, building another pallace alſo in the old Citty of Malta. When he had gouerned his Order thirtéene yeares, and ſeauen months (being aged ſeauenty yeares) the 21. of Aug. 1534. he died at Malta, and was buried in a Chappell, which he had builded néere to Caſtel Angelo, and then ſuccéeded him by election
            
               1534
               44 Pierrin du Pont, a Natiue of Aſt, and an Italian by language. Before ye taking of Rhodes, he was Gouernor of the Iſle of Lango, and after the 
                  •
               oſſe thereof, he departed (with al the knights vnder his gouernment) and ioyned his power in Candie, with the armye of the Order. In his time, Charles the fift Emperor, attempted to go

in perſon to the kingdome of Tunis in Affrica; where he was aſſiſted by the Gallies belonging to the Order, and the Knights alſo, who performed there great exploits of Armes: eſpecially, in the ſurprizing of Goletta, which was helde to be a Fort vnconquerable. This war being ended, the great Maiſter (aged ſeuenty and thrée years) dyed, hauing gouerned onely fourtéene months, and 22. daies, and was buried by his predeceſſor Villiers.
            
            
               45 Deſirê, or Didier de S. Iaille de Tolon,
               1535 borne in Prouence, and Priour of Tholoſſa, was next made great Maiſter: when lifting vppe his eies to heauen, he vſed theſe words! O my God, if thou thinkeſt me fit for this great charge, I wil not refuſe the paine and labour. In his trauayling towards Malta, being very aged, ſo ſoone as he arriued at Mont-pellier, he fel into an extream ſickneſſe, whereof he died the 26. of September, 1536. and was buried with much ſolemnitie, in the church of the Commandery of S. Gilles, without the gates of Mont-pellier: when the knights were aduertiſed of his deceaſe, the eightéenth of October in the ſame yeare, they procéeded to the election of
            
               46 Iohn d'Homedes, a natiue of Arragon,
               1536. who being then in Spaine, made haſt to Malta, where he was ioyfully receiued. Albeit, he was diſcontented, that they had not ſent ſome of the gallies, nor the great Carrack of the Order, for his conduct thither: wherefore he diſarmed and deſtroied the great Carrack, which cauſed manie complaints

againſt him. Very often would hee diſcourſe of the ſiedge at Rhodes, becauſe hee gaue generall notice thereby, that there he had loſt one of his eies. He made a goodly Parke of Dear, and a very beautiful Garden in the Iſle of S. Michael, & there would he ſpend the greater part of the day: which raiſed occaſion of murmuring againſt him, that he was ſlacke in his publicke gouernement, and no way carefull to prouide the Iſle of Malta, of needfull ſupplies againſt the Turks forces, for he truſted too much in the ſtrength of Caſtell Angello. In his time, the Citty of Tripoli in Barbary, was loſt by the Knights of the Order, & taken by the Turkes, which droue him to no little feare and amazement. In the year, 1552. Leo Strozzi, an eſpeciall Commander of the Order, made an attempt vpon the Iſle of Zoara, which had very hard ſucceſſe, becauſe many Knightes were then ſlaine there of all Nations, eſpeciallye many French, Auuergnacs and Prouenceals. It being declared to the Great Mayſter, he grieued extraordinarily thereat, and ſayde: That a greater loſſe had not happened to the Order, ſince the ſurprizall of Rhodes. Hee builded the Caſtles of Saint Elme, and Saint Michaell, and being eighty yeares old, died the ſixt of September, 1558. hauing gouerned ſixtéene yeares, ten months, and xv. daies, and was buried in the Great Maiſters Chappell.
            
               1558
               46 Claudius de la Single, borne in Fraunce, was next created Great Maiſter, and at his election,

there were then preſent at Malta, aboue 400 Knights of the Order. Hee gouerned verie diſcréetly, by Counſell of fiue woorthie Knights his Officers, and attendaunts, (to witte:) by his Steward, Mayſter of the Houſhold, Maiſter of the Horſſe, the Treaſurer, and Secretary. So that the Order was in great happyneſſe, during the time of his Maiſter-ſhip, hauing obtayned the priuiledge of Neutralitie, of King Henry the ſecond, and Charles the fifte Emperor, who made Warre againſt him. Hee was verye valiant, Religious, and a moſt profitable Adminiſtrator of the Orders reuennewes, in whoſe Treaſurie he left abundant ſtore: dying of a Catarrhe, which had much ſuffocated him, after he had attained to the Climacteriall yeare 63. of his age.
            
               47 F. Iohn de Valette, borne in Prouence,
               1561. ſuccéeded next as great Maiſter, and his election was very pleaſing to all the Order of S. Iohn, becauſe he was generally beloued of all the Nations, and vniuerſally deſired, as moſt woorthie of that charge and dignity. In leſſe ſpace then two yeares, hee was Generall of the Gallyes, Bayliffe of Lango, Great Commander, Priour of S. Gilles, and Lieutenant to the great Maſter, and now at length great Maiſter alſo. He did ſo affect his Knights & Order, that, after the day he firſt entred in it, he wold neuer more return into his country. So that, by making continuall reſidence therwith them, he paſſed thorow al the degrées & offices of honor in the profeſſion: apearing

ſtill (in all his actions) to bee of rare iudgement, perfect integrity, and incomparable valour. So ſoone as he was aduanced to this ſoueraigne dignity, he reſolued to builde a new Citty at Malta, vpon the Mountaine of S. Elme,
               A new Citty builte at Malta on S. Elemes Mount. knowing, that al the other Forts were not ſufficiently mumted, to endure the battery of a potent enemy: yet this deſſeigne was deferred till a further time. Hee fortified the Caſtle of the Iſle of Goza, and (forſaking his abiding at the Caſtle of S. Angello) came and dwelt within the Towne of Malta, which he defended moſt valiauntly, agaynſt the ſiedge of the Emperor Sultan Soliman, when he was gréeuouſly wounded in his leg, in the yeare 1565. But the ſiedge being raiſed, to the ſhame and confuſion of the Turkes, hee greatly ſtrengthened the Iſle of Malta, and began to builde the new Citty, which was called Valette, according to his ſur-name, and whereof himſelfe ſolemnely laide the firſt ſtone, on Monday, the eight and twenty of March, 1566. And by the ſollicitude of the Great-Maiſter, the building thereof continued on ſtill, eight thouſand perſons being daylye imployed therein, and fiue hundred thouſande Crownes monthly paid to the worke-men. At length, the one and twenty of Auguſt, 1568. the Great Maiſter died, on the like day as hee was promoted to his place, hauing gouerned eleauen yeares, fully compleat.
            
               1568
               48 After the obſequies of Valette, the Great Maiſter, they procéeded to elect a new ſucceſſor, which was Pedro de Mente, an Italian borne, &

Priour of Capua. Immediately after his promotion to the Maiſter-ſhip, hee cauſed his predeceſſors body to be carried into the new Citty, and to be honorably buried in the Chappell of our Ladie of Victory, for he worthily deſerued to be ſurnamed the Father of Souldiours, the Shielde and defender of the Catholicke faith, and the great perſecutor or queller of proude Infidelles. This newe Great Maiſter, before hee attained to ſo high degrée, had made good proofe of his Wiſedome and valour, in ſundry other honorable and worthy offices. For he was firſt, Patron of the Gally, which was Captaine or Commaunder of the band: Next, Lieutenant General of the gallies, Caſtillion or gouernor of the Caſtell S. Angello at Rome; he was then Admiral next Generall of the whole Fleet, and Ambaſſador for the Order to the Popes Pius the fourth, and Pius the fift. Hee came from Rome to Malta, when he was choſen great Maiſter, and followed hys charge ſo effectually, that the new Citty was finiſhed, and thither he purpoſed to tranſ
                  •
               ferre the dwelling of the Order. For the good Olde-man thought it as great honour, to dwell in the newe Cittie▪ and make it habitable, as it was for his predeceſſour Valette to builde it. In his time, the memorable Nauall battaile of Lepanto was ſought, and victorie obtained againſt the Turks, wherin the Knights of the Order did many worthy actions of armes. The great Maiſter deceaſing at Malta
            
            
               49 Iohn, Biſhop of Caſſiera, borne in Auuergn,
               1572
               
did next ſuccéed him, in the yeare, 1572. Before his election to this office, his vertue had appeared in diuers waighty charges. For, at the enterprize of Zoara, he was Enſigne-bearer to the Order, & defended the Standard very woorthily, bringing it backe with him to Malta, when both it & himſelfe were ſmitten into the ſea: yet both of them ſaued by a Gally belonging to the order, after he had a long time fought vndauntedly againſt the Infidels. Soone after, hee was choſen Captaine general of the horſemen: Commiſſary of the fortifications, then, Marſhall of the Order, and now laſt great Maiſter, wherein he liued very vertuouſly, not letting any day paſſe him, without ſom eſpecial péece of ſeruice, and féeding (with his own hands) thirtéene poore men. With his owne mony, he builded the great Church dedicated to S. Iohn Baptiſt, in the new City of Valette, endowing it with a thouſand Crownes of annuall Reuennues: erecting alſo a goodly Sepulchre, for interring therein the bodies of the great Maiſters his predeceſſors. There happened ſome diſcontentment betwéene the Knights and him, which ſhortning his daies, he died.
            
               1582
               50 And the twelfth of Ianuary, 1582. Hugues de Loubenx Verdale, borne in Prouence was elected great Maiſter. He was but a yong knight, yet both learning and military knowledge ſhined clearly in him: For he was in the attempt at Zoara, where he declared himſelfe to be truely valiant, and had many honorable Offices impoſed vpon him. He dying,
            
               
               51 Martin Garzes, a natiue of Arragon,
               1595. ſuccéeded him next as great Maiſter. Hee qualified the diſcontentmentes amongſt his Brethren-Knights, and tooke away thoſe Taxes, which had bin impoſed, and interdicted (for a time) the officers of the order, to giue a new forme to his owne gouernement, and to the good liking of all the the Knights. He did expreſſely prohibit, that not any Knight (nor the Great Maiſter himſelfe) might particularly haue any ſhippe on the Sea) to vſe any Pyracies for his owne profit. He died alſo at Malta, and lieth buried in the Sepulchre of the great Maiſters.
            
               52 The Knights aſſembling for a new election, the tenth of February, 1601.
               1601 
               Aloph de Vignacourt, born in France, was created great maiſter. In the yeare 1566. hee comming to Malta, with great ſtore of other French Gentlemen, vpon a flying rumor, that the Iſle was likely to bee beſiedged againe by the Turkes Armie, entered into the order, vnder the Great Maiſter Valette, receiuing (afterwarde) ſundrie great charges, wherein his wiſedome and man-hoode was euidently diſcerned: hauing bin Captain of the citty of Valette, and not long after, great hoſpitaller of the Order. He yet continueth in the office of great Maiſter, a great comfort (wee hope) to Chriſtendom, & a terror to the Othomans Empire, whenſoeuer they ſhall attempt the hurte of the Iſle of Malta, where the famous memorie, of that ancient Order of Knight-hood of S. Iohn of Ieruſalem, is ſtill kept and maintained.
            
               
               ¶ The ſeuerall Orders of Knight-hood, both Eccleſiaſticke and Secular; as they haue beene, and are yet honoured in this Chriſtian World.
               
                  
                     Eccleſiaſticall orders.Knights of Saint Iames of Compostella.
                  
                     1070IN the yeare 1070. this Order of Knight-hood began in Spaine, after that Ramirus had won the moſt famous victory, in ye Prouince of Compoſtella, againſt the Moores.
                  
                  At firſt, their number conſiſted but of thirtéen, and it was lawfull for them to take Wiues. There was a chéefe man choſen of this Order, by the Name of Great Maiſter; who (together with the other thirtéene) had power to elect other Knights.
                  The badge or note of honor of this knight-hood, was a red Croſſe, carrying the forme of a downe pointed Sword. At the Feaſt of All-Saints. was their méeting appointed, that they might conferre about their affaires. Many yeares haue they continued, with many priuiledges, and ſcarcely any but they (called Auguſtines) holde any ſuch lawes.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Knightes of Saint Iohns of Ieruſalem, who were afterward Knights of the Rhodes, and at this day are called Knights of Malta.
               IN the yeare 1099.1099 the Citty of Hieruſalem being recouered againſt the impulſions of the Infidels, by Godfrey of Bullen, Duke of Lorraine: About that very time, a certaine Hoſpital was erected by the Chriſtians in Hieruſalem, conſecrated by the name of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, for the entertainement of Pilgrims. Soone after, was this Order of Knight-hood inſtituted, and the firſt Rector or Ruler was called Gerard, and the next after him Raimond. Theſe knights wore a blacke Garment, with a Croſſe Argent, in a field Gules vpon their breaſts.
               In the yeare 1308.1308. being enforced from their former abyding by the Turks, & the Iſle Rhodes graunted them by Pope Clement the fift, they were (in that regard) called Knights of Rhodes.
               
               In the yeare 1523.1523. 
                  Rhodes béeing wonne from them, Malta was affoorded them; whereon to this day they are called Knights of Malta.
               
               The duty of this Knight-hoods-order, was, to fight for the Chriſtian Faith, to reléeue the oppreſſed, to defend Widdowes and Orphanes, &c. Nor was any one to bee admitted into this Order, that was deſcended of a Moore, lew, Mahumetiſt, or any ſuch ignoble race.
            
            
               
               ¶ Knights Templers, or Knights of the Temple.
               
                  ANno Domi. 1117. Gotfredus Aldemarus Alexandrinus,
                  1117. and Hugo de Planco de Paganis (Godfrey Duke of Lorraine, and King of Hieruſalem beeing dead, and Baldwine then raigning) this order of Knight-hood firſt began; And a ſeat was graunted them in the Temple of Hieruſalem, whereupon, they were cald knights Templers, or Knights of the Temple.
               By entreaty of Stephen, Patriarch of Ieruſalem, Pope Honorius brought in this order, and confirmed their Society; giuing them a white garment, whereunto Eugenius the third added a red Croſſe on the breaſt.
               The charge of theſe Knightes, was, to guide trauailers on the way of Ieruſalem, and to entertaine ſtrangers.
               
                  1310
                  Anno Domini 1310. Clement the fift (who then helde his Sée in Fraunce) by perſwaſion of Phillip King of Fraunce, gaue order for the vtter ſubuerſion of this Knight-hoods Society, and all their Colledges, thorough-out our Chriſtian world, whereſoeuer they were builded: in regard of a moſt abhominable treachery, by them intended and ratified.
            
            
               Knights Teutons, or Knights of Allemaigne.
               SOone after that Hieruſalem was regained from the Chriſtians, one Teuto a Nobleman,

and abounding in riches; inſtituted this Society of knight-hood, building an houſe (for their entertainment) at Ieruſalem, called Hoſpitium virgini Mariae.
               
               Among this Order of Knight-hood, neyther Knight of Malta, nor any other, except a Germain (and he likewiſe to be Noble by birth) could be receiued into their degrée. Their garment was white, and a blacke Croſſe figured vppon theyr breaſts.
               In the yeare 1184. theſe Knightes (the Cittie of Hieruſalem being ſurpriſed by the Sarrazins) Ptolomais was graunted them: but beeing likewiſe driuen thence, they came into their Country of Germany.
               
               In the yeare 1220. they entreated Frederick the ſecond, Emperour, that he would ſuffer them to take Armes againſt certaine fugitiue Idolaters in Pruſſia: who beeing by them ſubdued, they obtained there a newe ſeating, and theyr Dition or Lordſhip of Liuonia was then added to them.
            
            
               ¶ Calatranian Knights, or Knights of Calatrana.
               IN the yeare 1130.1130 this Order of Knight-hood was inſtituted by Santio King of Toledo, in imitation of the Order of Saint Iames.
               
               Theſe Knights tooke the name of Calatrana, which was a place granted vnto them, where (in former times) had ſtood a Church, that belonged

to the Knights Templers: And when the Sarazins were ouer-powerful for them, thoſe knights were conſtrayned to ſurrender this place vnto them.
               Theſe Knights did weare a blacke Garment, with a red croſſe vpon their breaſt; and were ſaid to be of the Ciſternian Order, holding in Spayne very large poſſeſſions.
            
            
               ¶ Knights of Alcantara.
               
                  1150THeſe Knights held their name of a Citty in Caſtile, called Alcantara, and were of the Ciſternian Order.
               They had a goodly Temple néere to the Ryuer Tagus, where they held very ample poſſeſſions.
               Their Enſigne or Badge was a greene Croſſe.
            
            
               ¶ Knights of the Redemption.
               
                  1212IN Anno Dom. 1212. this Order was inſtituted by Iames King of Arragon, who conquered the Iſlands called Baleares, or Maiorque and Minorque in the Spaniſh Sea.
               It was the Office of theſe Knights, to redéeme Captiues, whereuppon, the Tytle of Redemption was giuen them: they were alſo called Knights of Marie.
               
               Theſe Knights Order was confirmed by Gregory the ninth, By ſhoppe of Rome: And they wore a white Garment with a blacke Croſſe vpon it.
            
            
               
               ¶ Knights of Monteſia.
               THis order was inſtituted,11
                        •
                     0. much about that very ſame time, as the Knights of Calatrana were.
               They deriued their name from Monteſia in Valentia, where was their place of abiding.
               The Enſigne of theſe Knights was a red croſſe.
            
            
               ¶ Knights of the holy Sepulcher.
               THeſe Knightes (who deriued their name of Chriſts Sepulcher) did wear two red croſſes.1219
               
               This order (at this day) is quite extinct, or (as ſome do imagine) the Order of the Knightes of Malta is ſaid to be ſome-what néere it.
            
            
               ¶ Knights of Chriſt.
               IN Anno Dom. 1320.1320 this order was inſtituted by Iohn the twentith, Byſhop of Rome. The place of theſe Knights abyding, was in Portugall.
               
               A blacke garment, and a double Croſſe, were the Enſignes of this Knight-hoods order.
            
            
               ¶Knights of Saint Marie, the Mother of Chriſt.
               CErtaine Noble-men of Bolognia and Modena in Italy,
                  12
                        ••
                     
                   being much troubled and moleſted

by perturbations among the Princes, deſired of Vrbane the fourth, Biſhop of Rome, that they might be ſuffered to begin ſome kind of Society. Whereupon this order was graunted them, to holde in frée and peacefull manner.
               A little red Croſſe, reflected with Golde, they wore vpon their breaſts.
               Theſe Knights did weare coſtly Garmentes, and fared delicately: whereuppon they were vulgarly called by the Italians, Frati Gaudenti.
               
               They might not weare any gilt Spurs, or vſe any Gold on their Horſes furniture.
            
            
               ¶Knights of Saint Lazarus of Hieruſalem.
               
                  1048THis Order was confirmed, or (as ſome will haue it) reſtored by Pius Quartus. And yet the Knightes of this Order, (are ſaide to bée) in the times of Baſilius, and Pope Damaſus, when Iulian the Apoſtata raigned, and then they flouriſhed, as ſome do affirme.
               The Enſigne or Impreſe of this Order, was a gréen Croſſe, worn on the left ſide of the breaſt.
               A man twice married might not bee admitted into this order.
            
            
               ¶ Knights of the round Table.
               
                  The Secular Orders.IN Anno Domini 516. Arthur, a worthy and Warlike King, raigning in the Iſle of Brittaine,
                  
the Countrey beeing infeſted and troubled with Armies of Saxons, &c. was yet (by him) very valiantly ſupported, and his fame out-ſtretched to the remoteſt Regions. Afterward, when peace was eſtabliſhed; that other Knightly mindes might bée inflamed with the like glory: this Order hee inſtituted, which contynued (with others) in long and honourable obſeruation.
               The Order of theſe Knightes was (eſpecially) in the Citty of VVincheſter, as ſome haue recorded; and theyr yearely méeting was there, at the Feaſt of Pentecoſt or Whitſontide.
            
            
               ¶ Knights of the Garter.
               IN the yeare 1349.1349 
                  Edward the third, King of England, hauing hadde verie great victories againſt the French, and other neighbouring Nations, did inſtitute this Order, and conſecrated it to S. George.
               
               The King appointed a Garter to be the Enſign of this Order, wrought richly with Golde and precious ſtones, which ſhould circle the Leg beneath the knée, and on it to haue theſe words apparantly diſcerned:
HONI. SOIT. QVI. MAL. Y. PENSE.
               
               The number of theſe Knights are 26. whereof the King himſelfe is the chiefe.
               The time of this Societies méeting, is the

feaſt of Saint George, and celebrated at Windſore.
               
               Theſe Knightes doe weare the Enſigne of S. George, (fighting with a Draggon) faſtened to a rich Chaine or Collar, which weigheth or valueth, neither more or leſſe then eighty poundes of Engliſh Money, as hath béene ſaide in former times. Their garments is Purple, with a redde Croſſe.
            
            
               ¶ Knights of the Starre.
               
                  1350
                  ANno Dom. 1350 Iohn King of Fraunce, being much mooued with the glory of Edward the third, King of England; did inſtitute this order of Knight-hood, entitling it by thoſe 3 Magi, who (going from the Eaſt to honour Chriſt) were guided by a Starre.
               The Enſigne of this Order was a Starre, ſet eminently in the Hat: and the wordes were
Monſtrant Regibus Aſtra Ʋiam.
               
               The founder of this order, béeing much moleſted with the difficulties happening in warre; could not perfect what hée had inſtituted. And therefore (within a ſhort while after) this Order ceaſed.
            
            
               ¶ Knightes of the Band.
               
                  1367IN the yeare 1367. this Order was inſtituted 
                     •
                  y Alphonſus King of Spaine, the Sonne of Ferdinand and Conſtance.
               
               
                  Theſe Knights did weare a certaine red ſcarffe or Band, of three Fingers breadth, which (like a ſcole) was faſtned on the left Shoulder, and ſo come vnderneath the right Arme, thwart the body.
               Into this Order, younger borne Bretheren onely (of Noble deſcent and Family) and none of the elder, might be admitted.
               Many Articles (belonging to this order, and to bee obſerued by theſe Knightes) are at large ſet downe by Sanſouino.
               
            
            
               ¶ Knights of the Annunciation.
               
                  ANno Dom. 1409.
                  1409 
                  Amades or Amadeus, as ſome write, the ſixt, ſurnamed The greene Earle of Sauoy, deuiſed this Order, who were tearmed Knights of the virgin Mary, and for this reaſon inſtituted: becauſe Amades the firſt Earle of Sauoy, (with wonderfull fortitude) defended Rhodes againſt the Turkiſh powers, in his memory it was thus celebrated.
               A Chaine or Collar (ſuch as Knightes vſe to weare, made of Gold and Siluer plates, and faſtened together with little linkes) each man had about his necke, with theſe Letters engrauen thereon, F. E. R. T. that is, Fortitudo eius Rhodū tenuit. Thereat hung alſo (by another ſmall Chaine) the Picture of the Virgine Mary, with the Angels ſalutation.
            
            
               
               ¶ Knights of the golden Fliece.
               
                  1429.IN the yeare 1429. Phillip, ſir-named the good Duke of Burgundie, inſtituted this Order, and dedicated it vnto Saint Iames.
               
               The number theſe Knightes were twenty foure, whereof the Duke of Burgundy was the chiefe.
               They vſed to weare the Picture of a Golden Shéepe, affixed to a Chaine, inter-wouen like flames of fire.
               
                  Charles the warrelike Duke of Burgundy (who alſo is ſayde by euery one, to bee the firſt Founder of this Order) added thereunto theſe words: Aute ferit, quam flamma micet.
               
               But now at this day, the Knights haue theſe words: PRETIVM NON VILE LABORVM.
               
            
            
               ¶ Knights of Saint Michaell.
               
                  1469IN the yeare 1469. Lewes, the eleauenth King of Fraunce, inſtituted this Order at Amiens, and dedicated it to S. Michaell.
               
               The beginning of this Society, conſiſted of a Band of Men, to the number of thirty ſixe, the very chéefeſt and Nobleſt Péeres of the kingdome, béeing Knights cleare from all detection; and the very chéefe of them was the King himſelfe.
               At this day, there are a great number of theſe

Knightes, and the kingdome of Fraunce is not now ſo reſpectiue in their election, as at the firſt.
               Theſe knights weare a Chaine of gold daily, wouen like little ſhelles, valewing two hundered Crownes: And thereat hangeth the picture of Saint Michaell, fighting with the Deuill, the Wordes beeing theſe, Immenſi tremor Oceani.
               
               Theſe knights did vſe to méet euerie yeare, at the Feaſt of S. Michaell, in the Church of S. Michaell on the Mount.
               Their garments by Henry the ſecond, king of France, were apointed in very honorable maner.
            
            
               Knights of S. Stephen.
               In the yeare, 1561. this Order was inſtituted by Coſmo de Medices, Duke of Florence,
                  1561. and the ſame confirmed by Pius Quartus.
               
               The Enſigne of theſe knightes, was a redde Croſſe, worne on a blacke garment.
               The Statutes of this Order, do not much differ from them of Malta knights: and they were allowed to haue wiues.
               The Duke of Florence, is alwayes the chiefe of this Order, and it is not to be cenſured by anie of the religious degrées, but properly it doth hold a fréedome in liberty.
            
            
               Knights of the Holy-Ghoſt.
               In the yeare, 1578. Henry the third,1578 king of

                  France, inſtituted this Order, and named it of the Holy-Ghoſt: the memory whereof, was to be celebrated in the time of Pentecoſt: vpon which day, the King was borne, and ſuccéeded alſo in the Kingdome. Theſe Knights are an hundered in number, and the King him-ſelf is the Preſident.
               This Feaſt is celebrated yearely the firſt day of Ianuary, in the Auguſtines Church in Paris, by the Pariſians.
               
               The Enſigne of theſe Knights, is a Doue (in which forme the Holy-Ghoſt appeared) in midſt of a Croſſe.
               The laſt or loweſt degrée of Knight-hoode, is theirs, who (as reward of their Vertues) haue golden Spurres put on their héeles, and vulgarly are called Knights.
               Concerning Knights Bannerets, who hadde that Title giuen them by the Kings of England in Warre: And Knights of the Bath, they beeing alſo created by the Kings of that kingdome: becauſe they are of another Nature, I paſſe them ouer, without vſing any further ſpéech of them.
            
            
               ¶ Of the Emperor of Ethyopia, called Prete-Ian, or Preſter-Iohn: Of his Originall, and cuſtomes of his people.
               
                  Sabellic. lib. 8. de Suplem. Chron.THe great Emperor of Ethyopia, to whome wee (corruptly) giue the name Preſter, or Presbiter Iohn, is neither Prieſt or Sacrificer,

though he be (by ſome) called Prete-Ian, and (by his owne people) named Beldugian, that is to ſay, Ioy of incomparable excellency, or of moſt great value, and by others of them, he is alſo called Ian, which (in their language) ſignifyeth Mighty.
                  The power of Preſter-Ian. He commandeth ouer ſeuenty and two Kinges, who are all of different languages, hauing their diuerſity of cuſtomes, and the colour of their faces or complexions are much diſagréeing. He is able to levie in preparation for war, a million of fighting men: fiue hundred Elephantes, with their armour and munition for encounter, with an infinit number of Horſes and Camelles.His ſouldi
                     
                        ••
                     s Armour fo
                        •
                      t
                        ••
                     ir defence. His Knights or warlike Souldiors, enter armed to the battell each wearing a long coat of Maile, ſtretching downe cloſely to their thighes a Sallet or head-péece on the head, a round Target or Pauois, a crooked Fauchion by his ſide, and a Launce with two Stéele points or Pikes. Such as haue no Sallets or head-pieces, do wear thick red quilted Cappes on their heades, plated after the manner of the Mameluke Souldiors. The younger ſort carried Darts▪ Arrows and Slings, obſeruing the ſame diſcipline, and be as obedient or well gouerned, in ranging their battails as we are. They vſe Drummes of Braſſe, and Trumpets alſo, to incourage their ſouldiors to the fight, which is performed with great hardiment, appointing likewiſe ſundry honours and reſpectiue rewards, to ſuch as declare them
                     •
                  elues to bee of higheſt merit. They do daily pay the families of their warriors, and marke the children that are

borne of them, with a Croſſe, which they imprint ſuddenly in the fleſh with an hot yron, ſo that the ſigne remayneth, as if it were naturall vnto them.
               
                  The exerciſe of the King Ptete-Ian.The King himſelfe moſt commonly called Prete-Ian, after he hath beſtowed ſome houres about State affayres, when he perceiueth that he is indifferently eaſed of them: he imployeth almoſt al the remainder of his time, in the ſtudy of holye Readings and Hiſtories, which being doone, he vſeth a litle exerciſe of the body, and then entring into his Bath, afterward hee takes his refection, alone by himſelfe (as moſt of our Kings vſe to do) vpon a little Table of Golde, without any Cloth or Napkin, and it is ſet in ſuch a place as there are diuers ſteppes or degrées in aſcending to it. He is ſerued by ſundry Pages, who are of noble birth, and they bring him his meat (ready cut and prepared) in little Baſkets or Panyers. He drinketh wine in a cup of gold, but hee hath another kinde of drink,His dyet & manner of life. made of ſower Apples, and mingled with Suger, which he receiueth in a cuppe of Chriſtall. While he féedeth, thrée hundred luſty young men (choſen out of the ſeuerall kingdomes vnder his Dominion, hauing the place of Archers, and of his Guarde) do ſtand round about the Tent-Royall: For, by an ancient cuſtome it hath béene kept, that the King continually liueth out of any Citty, wherein he neuer abydeth but two dayes onely, and thoſe Tents are erected in ſuch manner, that the backe part is euermore placed to the Eaſt, and the doore or opening is oppoſite

to the Weſt.
               The vſuall Armes or weapons of thoſe guards, are Swords, Daggers, and Iauelinges, theyr neckes and ſhoulders, being gorgetted with thick ſkinnes of Beaſts. Foure Kings,The attendance and ſeruice of the Emperor. who (by commandement) do attend the Court, followe (each after the other) the Table ſeruice, accompanyed with many Barons and meaner Officers, euen from the Kitchin, to the Tent of Prete-Ian, all cloathed in ſilke, Seudal and Scarlet: And there they deliuer it to the Pages, who come foorth to receiue it. The King and all his Court fare deliciouſly, with Fowle, Fiſh, and all kinds of Veniſon. So ſoon as he hath dined (for he neuer ſups but on Feſtiuall daies) his Eunuches go to fetch diuers Quéenes (according to their ſeueral quarters, being the Wiues of the fore-named Kings, to waite on the Quéene and Wife to Prete-Ian, conducting her vnto his Tent,The wiues of the Emperor. to giue him pleaſure and contentment, and there they ſing and Daunce in his preſence. Hee hath foure wiues, who are the daughters of his Neighbour-Kings, but he lodgeth but with one of them, to whom he is ſolemnly married with many Ceremonies: but if it chance, that he haue no children by her, then he cals to his bed one of the other.
               When hee purpoſeth to ſhew himſelfe in publique, his face is couered with a Vayle of Taffata, which hee lifteth vppe and pulleth downe, that hardlie can his face bee wholly diſcerned: but if it be, it is very quickly couered againe. He vſeth to ſhewe himſelfe vnto the people, three

times in the yeare, that is to ſay, on the dayes of Chriſtmaſſe, Eaſter, and the holy Croſſe in September▪ and (for this purpoſe) is a gooly high ſcaffold duly prepared.The Originall of the Ceremony The cauſe of this ceremony, receiued Originall from Dauid Prete-Ian, Surnamed Alexander, whoſe death was three whole yeares concealed by his chiefe Seruants, that gouerned the kingdome in his time. Therefore, to auoide all the like ſuccéeding inconueniences, the father of Dauid Prete-Ian, at the earneſt intreaties of his people, began firſt to ſhew himſelfe on theſe ordained daies, which hath conrinually euer ſince been obſerued, euen to Panuſius Prete-Ian, which is nowe raigning in Ethiopia: onely excepted, when hee marcheth in warre, for then he goeth daily diſcouered. He is crowned with a precious Diadem,The Emperors Crown Scepter, and habit. the one part whereof is Gold, and the other Siluer, and carrieth (inſteade of a Scepter) a Croſſe of Siluer in his hand: All his Seruants are marked with a Croſſe, in the verie fleſh on the right ſhoulder. Hee is cloathed with rich garments of frizeled Cloath of Golde, wearing a ſhirte of ſilke, with very large and w
                     •
                  de ſléeues, as Dukes in elder times were woont to do: And from the Girdle downward he weareth a wide Kirtle of ſilke and cloath of golde, with a Linnen couer-ture after a Byſhoppes manner. On either ſide of him goe two Pages, richly apparre
                     •
                  led, each holding a Croſſe of Siluer in the one hand, and a naked ſword in the other.
               His Lords, who are as Kings, and carrie that Title, do pay him tribute of Gold and other mettals,

of horſſes and great Cattle of ſeueral kinds:The Emperors tribute by his Kings. likewiſe of cloath of Gold, and of wooll, according to the quality and beſt Nature, of thoſe countries that are vnder theyr gouernment: which rightes and Tributes they haue from their Subiects, although they bee vaſſailes (indéede) to none but Prete-Ian, himſelfe and to whom they yéelde the greater part of their ſubſtance. Some do pay him large quantities of Corne, and of Salte,Tributes in generall of his people. for the maintaining of his Armies: Others doo bring him Pepper, which is a rare commodity in that Country, and ſome do pay him ſlaues. The Ruſtickes or countrey Bo
                     ••
                  es, who liue in the wilde and ſilde-frequented Forreſts, do bring vnto the Court, great ſtore of Lyons, Tygres, and other liuing ſauage beaſts, which are afterwarde ſhut vp into apt apointed places, to yéeld pleaſure and delight to him and his Princes. As for ſuch as dwell further off from the Court▪ it is ſufficient for them to bring the ſkinnes of ſuch beaſts only wherewith the Abyſſines do (in a brauery cloth) themſelues, when they go to warre.
               This Great Emperour Prete-Ian, gouerneth many Countries, and boundleſſe Seas, whereof, becauſe this place alloweth me not to make any large diſcourſe, as alſo of the maine matters of State concerning his kingdoms: I referre ye to the Generall Hiſtory of the Worlde, where, whatſoeuer I am compelled in this Chronicle to abreuiate (not onely of this Emperor, but of all other kingdomes whatſoeuer) ſhall bee at large deſcribed. Let it ſuffice then, that I cloſe vp this

report, with the onely glories of Prete-Ian, and his Ethyopians,
                  The onely glories of Prete-Ian his Ethyopians. which are, that they doo repute themſelues to be the very ancienteſt Nation, among men, becauſe they haue alwaies liued in their innated liberty, and were neuer conquered, either by Semyramis, nor Hercules, nor Dyoniſius, nor the Romaines: but that they themſelues vanquiſhed King Cambyſes, and ouerthrew his potent army. Héereto they adde a more true and eminent glory indéede, which is, that they were one of the firſt Nations, in receipt of the Chriſtian faith, wel néere from the very beginning therof. By meanes of the Eunnuch to the famous Quéene Candace, who was baptized by S. Phillip: And that ſince their conuerſion, they haue conſtantly kept the ſame Religion, for ſo manie hundreds of yeares. Aibeit▪ that during this time they haue béene generally (euen as yet they are at this day) molleſted, aſſaulted, and enuyroned with Moores, Sarrazins, and the Idolatrous Worſhippers of Mahomet, yet notwithſtanding all thoſe cruell Tempeſts (which héeretofore deſtroyed the Romaine Empire, and the very greateſt part of Chriſtendome) Ethiopia could neuer hitherto bee ſpoyled, either of their Dominion or Religion, albeit ſom Idolatrous mixture hath crept thereinto. Which is the leſſe to be maruailed at, if we may credit their owne ſaying, in alledging their conſtancy and antiquitye,Whence the Ethyopians de deriue their antiquity. becauſe they deriue this their noble Originall and continuance, from the Royall Kinges Dauid and Salomon, of whom the moſt bleſſed Virgin Marie
                  
(Mother to our Sauiour) deſcended, and he himſelfe according to the fleſh: Of whom they kéepe a very ſolemne memory, and (aboue any other of the Apoſtles) thinke reuerently of S. Thomas the Apoſtle.
            
            
               Of the Kingdome of Perſia.
               
                  PErſia hath carried the ſame name, from the beginning to this day, containing in it theſe Regions, Lar and Requelmall.
                  The chiefe Citty of Perſia. The principall Citty thereof is called Siras, in elder times tearmed Perſipolis, which is gouerned by the Sophy, Great Lord of all Perſia, and Azimia, called by our elders Aſſiria; and the Kingdom of Dearbech, ſometime named Meſopotamia; And Seroan, that was Media; and Parthia, now called Iex; with Hirca, nowe tearmed Coraxan; Sarmania, nowe Dulcendano; and Aſia, nowe at this inſtant called Hetti. All theſe ſeuerall Regions, with the greater Armenia, which is a part alſo of them, are gouerned by the great Sophy,
                  The gouernment of the great Sophy. and their greateſt or chiefeſt Cittie is named Tauris, being built in the midſt of the Mountain Taurus, foure daies iourney off from the Caſpian Sea. Next vnto Tauris, there are other Cittyes, as of Soltauia, Concaſſan, Spahan, Corazan, Lera, Mora, Sarmachand, Geſti, Far, Siras, and Ormuz, a Citty in the Perſick Sea, which at this day is called Mare Miſindia. In this Citty is great commerce of Merchandize,Fiſhing for Pearles. made with the Portugales, and there they fiſh for great aboundance

of Pearles. There are other Citties alſo, Cureh, Iex, Caſmine, Coy, with infinite Caſtles. On the Weſt ſide of Tauris are the Caſpian Mountaines, which are nowe called the Mountains of Arath; And on the Bacchan Sea, aunciently named the Caſpian Sea, are theſe Citties, Sumacchia, Derbent, Bacchan, and Mamutaga. All theſe Prouinces and their Regions, are very barren, becauſe they haue ſmall ſtore of Riuers, the greateſt whereof is called Bindarin, but in former times they entitled it Bragada. Concerning the gouernment obſerued among the Perſians,
                  Of the Perſian gouernment, and nature of the people. it differs farre from all the other Mahumetiſts; becauſe they hate Nobility, and relying on the ſeruile fidelity of ſlaues, eyther murther their Friendes and Kindred, or put out their eyes. But among the Perſians, the Sophy is highly reſpected, Nobility had in Honour, and many wealthy Lordes are liuing amongſt them, whereof not one is to bee found in the Turkiſh Dominions. The people alſo are the very ciuilleſt in all Aſia, men of vndaunted courage, and ſpeciall good Warriours, both on Horſe-backe and foote: affecting Muſique, Learning and Poeſie, wherein ſome attaine to no meane excellency, and they are much addicted to the ſtudy of Aſtrology. So much in bréefe concerning the Perſians, the reſt remaineth to our Generall Hiſtory of the World.
               
            
            
               
               ¶Of the Kingdome of Thunis.
               THE Citty of Thunis or Tunis being very great, was by the Latines called Tunetum, and of the Arabians Tunus: but they holde that name to be a very corrupt vocable, becauſe (in their Language) Tunus dooth not ſignifie any thing. This Cittie was anciently called Tharſus, as that other in Aſia, and was at firſt but a very little Cittie, builded by the Affricanes, vpon the Lake which was formed from the Goletta, diſtant from the Mediterranian Sea, about twelue miles.The ancient name of Tunis. But after that Carthage was deſtroyed, then did thoſe Citties beginne to encreaſe, both in number of habitations and dwellers: in regard that the Armies which ſurprized Carthage, béeing vnwilling to tarry there (for feare of freſh ſupplyes from Europe) came to abide at Tunis, and there they builded many Houſes. Not long after, there came thither a Captaine, named Hucha di Vtmen, who gaue them to vnderſtand, that an Army ought not to ſhut vppe it ſelfe, in any Citty that ſhoulde touch or bee néere vnto the Sea: And therefore they made a Citty, which they named Cairoan,
                  Cairoan, a new Citty builded. about the diſtaunce of thirty ſixe miles from the Sea, and accounted to be an hundred miles from Tunis. Then did the Armies forſake Tunis, and inhabited this newe Citty; other people gouerning thoſe houſes in Tunis, that had bin abandoned by the Armirs.
               
                  After this, about thrée hundered and fiftie yeares,Cairoan deſtroyed by the Arabes. the Citty of Cairoan was deſtroyed by the Arabians, ſo that the Rector or Ruler thereof fled thence into the Weſt, and raigned in Buggia, as alſo ouer all the neighbouring partes: but there remained ſtill in Tunis, a Family or kindred of the ſaid Rector or Gouernour, fledde from Cairoan, who ſtill poſſeſſed the ſame, as Soueraigne Lordes thereof. About ten yeares after, they of Buggia were expulſed by Ioſeph, the ſon of Teſſino: but beholding the humility and kindneſſe of the ſaide Lord, they left the State vnto him, which continued in tranquility, ſo long as the Family of Ioſeph raigned. But Abdull Mumen, King of Marocco, hauing regained Mabdia, which had béene taken by the Chriſtians; paſſed homeward in his returne by Tunis, where hée tooke the gouernment vpon him: And all the time that Abdull Mumen liued,Tunis gouerned by the Kinges of Marocco and Ioſeph his Sonne, with their Succeſſours, Iacob & Manſor, Tunis continued in peace vnder the rule of the Kinges of Marocco. After the death of Manſor, his Sonne Muhamet Ennaſir, mooued Warre againſt the King of Spaine, but was ouercome and forced to flight, eſcaping backe to Marrocco, where (after this foile) hee liued but few yeares. Then was his Brother Ioſeph elected King, who was ſlaine by certaine Souldiers to the King of Tebeſm. Now in the Interim, betwéene the ouerthrow of Muhament, his death, as alſo the murthering of his Brother Ioſeph, the Arabians returned backe on Tunis,
                  
and beſiedged it: But the Gouernour of Tunis,
                  Tunis beſiedged by the Arabes. gaue notice thereof to the King of Marocco, that if he ſent him not ſome immediate ſuccour, he ſhould be conſtrayned to deliuer the Cittie to the Arabes. The King well conſidering on a caſe of ſuch importance, did as became a man of his high ſpirit and experience, electing (aboue all other in his Court) one borne in Ciuill, a Citty of Granado, named Habdulnaihidi, whom hee foorth-with ſent thyther, with the ſame authority, as if he had gone himſelfe in perſon. Béeing accompanyed with twenty goodly great Sippes,Tunis deliuered frō the Arabes. he arriued at Tunis, which was then euen halfe vanquiſhed by the Arabes: But by his wiſedome, prouidence, and flowing eloquence, hee foyled the Enemy, pacified the State, ſet all thinges in good order, and made the Countries entrance ſure againſt all Intruders. After him his Sonne ſucceeded, named Abu Zaccheria, who in learning and wiſedome excelled his Father. Hée cauſed to bée builded in Tunis, on the Weſt ſide of the Cittyes very higheſt part, a mightie great Rocke, and many goodly Pallaces in the Cittie, with a beautifull Temple, that had an high Tower on the top thereof, round engirt with ſtrong wals.
               This Abu Zaccheria went likewiſe to Tripoli, where his valour won him ſuch renowne, and his wiſedome made ſo good benefite of the Countrey; that (at his death) hée left an infinite Maſſe of Treaſure behinde him. Hée being dead, his Sonne ſuccéeded him, who was

an ambitious proude young man, and would no longer ſuffer himſelfe vnder command of Marocco;The declyning of the kingdome of Marocco, & riſing of that of Fez. becauſe he perceiued the declining and downfall of thoſe Lords, and that the family of Marino began to get fooling, raigning ouer the Regions of Fez, as Beni Zeiren did in Telenſm, and in Granado. Theſe two great Potentates beganne to warre vppon each other, and to contend for priority of State; But by this their diſcord; the power of the Lordes of Tunis encreaſed, ſo that they went with an Army againſt Telenſi, and compelled them to pay them tribute. Whereupon the King that new aroſe from the Houſe of Marino, and had béene at ſurprizall of Marocco, ſent many rich preſents to the Gouernour of Tunis, recommending both himſelfe and his whole State vnto his fauour. The Gouernour accepted him as a Friende, alwaies prouided, that hee ſhould be inferiour to him: And ſo he returned in tryumph to Tunis, cauſing himſelfe to bée called King of Affrica,
                  The King of Tunis King of Affrica. which Tytle was thought very deſertfull for him, becauſe (as then) there was not a more powerfull Prince in all Affrica, then hée. He began then to ordaine his Court Royall, with Secretarie, Councellers, and a Captaine Generall, vſing all thoſe Ceremonies, that the Kinges of Marocco formerly had done. And from the time of this Prince, euen to our dayes, Tunis held on the ſame encreaſing Dignity, as well in habitations as ciuility, ſo that it became the onely and ſingular Cittie of Affrica. Where now wee leaue her to our larger Hiſtory, as alſo

the Kingdome of Fez, becauſe the Originall of the one came from the other, and therefore they are the more capable of an intire diſcourſe, which aryſeth to a very ſpacious and large quantitie: There alſo will we relate the condition and originall of ſundry other remote Kingdomes, which (for the reaſon before alleadged) are in this briefe Chronicle purpoſely omitted.
            
            
               ¶ Of the great Prouince of Moſcouia; As alſo the Manners, Religion, and power of the Prince their ruling.
               
                  MOſcouia is a very great Northerly Region, containing more then fiue hundered leagues in length: The principall Citty thereof beeing called Moſca, or Moſcuua, greater then the Citty Paris in Fraunce, and ſeated on the Riuer Moſqua. There is a large Stone ſquared, in the middeſt of the Cittie,A ſtrange election of the duke of Moſcouia. whereon whoſoeuer can mount himſelfe (without beating down) in the vacancy of the Crowne; he is held as Prince of the Countrey, and obtayneth the principality: For very great fightes and combates, the Inhabitants haue had one againſt another, about the mounting on that ſtone. Hée that comes to be Prince of the Countrey, dooth not call himſelfe King, but Duke, being contented with that popular name, and differeth not in Garments from the other Noble-men of the land, ſaue only, that he weareth a higher bonnet.

It is a Countrey rich in Siluer, and ſo ſtronglie guarded thorow out,Concerning the Countrey. that not onely ſtraungers, but their owne natiue people likewiſe, can paſſe no way without the Princes Letters. The countrey is flat and plaine, without any Mountains: therefore, that which is ſaide of the Ryphean Mountaines, and that they are in this Countrey is méerely fabulous, for there is not any ſuch hill at all. There are great ſtore of Forreſts, abounding with wilde Beaſts, which are daily chaſed: and great profite is made (by Trafficke) for the ſkinnes of thoſe Beaſts, as of Harts, Wolues, Ermines, Martines, Zubelines, Fouoynes, and diuers others. This Prouince confineth Liuonia on the one ſide, Tartaria, on the other, & on the third quarter it hath the Euxine Sea: containing many other Prouinces to it,Men for the Warre. ſo that the Prince can (in very few daies) leuie foure hundered thouſand men on foote, to begin warre withall. They drinke nothing but a kinde of Béere, and yet none but the rich may drinke thereof, for they haue no Wine, but what is broughte from other countries. They be ſubiect to drunkennes, as all other Northerly people are, and Winter is there ſo ſharpe, long and extreame, that if any Water be hurled vp into the Ayre, it fréezeth before it can fall to the earth. Their Corne 
                     ••
                  uer perfectly ripens,Their drink and Corne. but when they haue reaped it, they dry it in their ſtoues or hot-houſes, and then grinde it. The Spring time is very colde with them and their Summer, which laſteth but two months onely, is extreamly hot. They haue not

any vſe of money, but inſtead thereof,Their money. they haue Plates of Gold or ſiluer ſquared, without anie marke or ſtampe thereon, which is taken for as much as it weigheth in merchandize. As for their Garments, they go cloathed like Turks, in long Gownes or Robes, hauing narrow ſléeues, and girded about their middle:Their Religion. Their buildings and manner of life, differeth very little from them of Poland and Bohemia. They are Chriſtians like vnto the Greekes, receiuing order of Prieſt-hood from the Patriarche of Conſtantinople, ſaying Seruice in their Temples in their vulgar toong, which is the Sclauonian Language, and theyr Carracters are Greeke.
               
               The abiding of the Prince,The Princes Court. is in a goodly great Pallace, in the Citty of Moſcuna, built after the Italian manner, being ſo ſtrong and ſpacious, as (in our times) the like is not to be found. There are in the fore-named Citty, as alſo in diuers other places, men very learned and wiſe, that did make their aboad whereas the Schooles be. The Muſcouite is Tributary to the King of Tartaria,
                  Learned men amōg them. who ouercame them in the yeare of the Worlde, 6745. according as their Annales doo deliuer: their Chronologies are not according to our Obſeruation, in accounting after the yeares of Ieſus Chriſt. When the Tartarian Ambaſſadors doo come before the Moſcouite Prince, hee ſtandeth bare headed before them, and they ſit couered.His daily warres. He hath (wel-néere) daily Warres againſt the Polonois and Scythian, who albeit they are ſubiects to other Kings, yet doth he much enlarge his dominions

ouer them. Now, although (as we ſaid at the firſt) theſe Princes contented them-ſelues with the name of Duke, vntill the time of hys Father now raigning: yet would he néeds vſurp the name of King, giuing himſelfe theſe enſuing Titles,The K. of Muſcou
                        •
                     aes Tules. as his Son alſo doth the ſame. The great Lord Baſilius, by the grace of God, king & Prince of Ruſſia; Great Duke of Volodimeria, Moſcouia, Nouogardia, Pleſcouia, Sureluchia, Tuueria Iugaria, Permia, Vraquia, Bulgaria; Great Lord and Duke of the Lands in Nouagadia the lower: of Cyeruigouia, Rezauia, Riſcouia, Belloya, Iaroſlauia, Bieroſolia, Vdoria, Obdoria, Condidia, &c. By which large plurality of Titles, it appeareth, that he is farre more potent then ſome haue immagined him to be. But concerning his vaſſailage to the King of Tartars, he holdes it no diſhonor to him,He is tributary to the King of the Tartars. for he doth it to this end: That, while hee kéepeth peace with him, hee bringeth (much more eaſily) vnder his obedience, all the néere neighboring people, and with the power of the great Tartare, he is ten times ſtronger then of himſelfe: For the ſaide Tartare bringes (ordinarily) a Million of men with him to the field, al well appointed for warre, with two or thrée hundered péeces of Cannon, and thrée hundred thouſand horſſe, &c.
            
            
               Of the Kingdome of Poland.
               
                  POlonia, in elder times called Sarmatia, is ſaid to receiue that name of the worde Pole,
                  
which in that Language is as much to ſay,Of the maner and ſcituation of Polonia. as plaine, ſmooth, or éeuen: and ſo much the rather is it to bee credited, becauſe all the Countrey is plaine, ſpacious, full of thicke woodes, and verie few hilles or mountaines in it. The Earth is colde and fréezing, whereby it produceth little ſtore of Wine or Oyle: but contrarywiſe, it yéeldeth much Graine, and diuers other kindes of Pulſe, &c.
               
                  Zechus and Lechus, or Leſchus,
                  The firſte Rulers of Poland. were the firſt that euer gouerned in Polonia, or there builded any Citty & Caſtle. They both gouerned for ſome time, but after the whole race of Lechus was extirpated, the Barons of the kingdome aſſembling to giue ſucceſſion to Leſchus, concluded to liue at liberty, and without any farther checke or controule. Neuertheleſſe, that Iuſtice might be adminiſtred to the people,Vayuodes, called Paladines. and they gouerned as neceſſity required: they ordained twelue Vaiuodes or Paladines, which order hath continued in that kingdome, euen to our daies, but not without great hurt to the whole land. For there was no change of theſe Officers, but the dignitye laſted their life time, although they carried them-ſelues badly in their authority, deſpiſing their betters, and euill entreating their Inferiours. Such as among theſe Vaiuodes, were Caſtillians, Commaunders of Caſtelles, Captaines, Iudges, and ſuch like great Magiſtrates, did what themſelues pleaſed, whereby enſued, that this Kingdome could neuer haue any great progreſſion in armes, being oppreſſed by ſuch petty, and no mightie or

potent Lords. But in no long while after, the faction of Lechus (growing in hatred of the Vaiuodes or Paladines gouernment) would néedes haue one peculiar Prince: and therefore, they made choiſe of a worthy and valiant man,Gracchus the firſte Prince of Poland. named Gracchus, who dwelt at the foote of the Sarmatian Mountaines, néere vnto the Riuer Viſtula. He builded a Citty, calling it Graccouia (which is nowe corruptly named Cracouia) a Cittie greatly bleſſed, both in beautie and Scituation, as alſo infinite Marchandizes, which is there Trafficked from all Nations of the worlde, it being the Metropolis of the whole kingdome.
               
                  Paladines choſen againe.The race of Gracchus fayling, it returned againe to the gouernement of twelue Paladines, but with much infelicity: becauſe, in contending for Competitors, diuers factions grewe amongſt them, and (conſequently) inſurrections in armes to withſtand one another, wherby great damage happened to the whole lande. Among theſe turbulent ſpirits, there was a Polander named P
                        ••
                     
                     ariſlaus, a man expert in armes, of quicke apprehenſion, and one that could well fiſh in ſuch troubled Waters. The people reuolted all to his faction,A King created againe. they made him their King, and he was the fift Gouernour of that Prouince, after the firſte Lechus or Leſchus. After his death, another gallant young man ſuccéeded him, tearmed by the Polacks, Leſchus the ſecond, who proued to be a man of ſinguler prudence: but made olde with time, and dying, he left it to his Sonne Leſchus the third. This man made his Sonne Pompilius
                  
Legittimate, but deuided the Kingdome among twenty other, that were his Baſtards, to the great detriment of the Country. But Pompilius being legittimate, entred into the gouernment,Gracouia forſaken by the King. and (leauing Cracouia) appointed his ſeate in another City, called Gneza: but finding it too molleſtuous, he tranſferred the State to another Citty, named Cruſuicza. In this Citty he died of the Stone, according as himſelfe had continually foretold: And the chiefe Lords being aſſembled in Counſell, they determined, that no more of Pompilius his ſucceſſours ſhoulde raigne ouer them: but (with one conſent) made choiſe of a Countreyman, named Piaſtus, one of no great ſtature, but ſtrong and well ſinnewed. This was the firſt branch of thoſe Kings, that continued to the time of Caſimirus the ſecond, & of Lodwick: of which ſelfeſame race, were alſo deſcended the moderne Princes of Sleſia.
               
               This Piaſtus accepting the Gouernement, tooke vpon him the Title of Duke onely, whoſe ſucceſſion comming at length to Boleſlaus,
                  Piaſtus refuſed the name of K calling him ſelfe Duke of Poland. in the yeare, D. CCCC. XC. IX. hee was then made King by Otho the third, Emperour. But the Kingdome comming to another Boleſlaus, ſucceſſour to the former: hee was expulſed thence, and dyed: Whereupon, the Polonians aduaunced in his place, his Brother Vladiſlaus, in the yeare, MLXXXII. by the Title of Duke. But in the yeare, MCCXCV. the Title of King was taken againe, by Primiſlaus the ſecond, who at firſt was Duke of the greater Poland, and of Pomerauia
                  
or Pomerland, and ſo continued the ſucceſſion euen to Ladiſlaus, the firſt begotten ſonne of Caſſimirus, who (while his Father liued) was deſigned to bee King of Hungaria, and of Bohemia.
                  The diſcent of the kings of Poland. He tooke in Marriage Anne, Daughter to the King of Fraunce, by whom hee had Lodwick and Anne. Lodwicke ſuccéeded his Father in both his Kingdomes, and tooke to Wife Marie, Siſter to Charles the Emperour. But in the yeare of Chriſt, 1492. the Barons of Polonia (at a dyet) elected, after the Death of Caſsimirus, his Sonne Iohn Albertus. His continuaunce was but a while, therefore by the greater part of the Barons, Alexander Great Duke of Lithuania, was elected: who going in Armes agaynſte the Tartares, dyed in Vilua, aged fiue & forty yeares. Sigiſmond, his younger Brother, ſuccéeded him, Anno 1500. who hadde the Title of King, Anno 1506. and made great Warre vppon the Neighbouring Nations, eſpecially on the Moſcouites, of whom he ſlew thirty thouſand, in the yeare, 1514. He deceaſing, Auguſtus Sigiſmond tooke his place: and after him, Henry the thirde, Brother to Charles the ninth, King of Fraunce, was choſen and made King.Henry heire of France, King of Poland. But his Brother dying, and he affecting his paternall kingdome, (more then the other) forſooke Poland, and went into France to his rightfull Inheritance. The Polanders being thus forſaken they made choiſe of Maximilian the ſecond, being Emperour, to be their King: But he not reſoluing to accept it, and the Kingdom ſtanding on ſome doubtful tearms,

                  Stephanus Battori, Prince of Tranſiluania, being a man of great valor, came into Poland with a ſlender power, where he was created King, and ſo continueth.
            
         
         
            A briefe Suruay of ſundry other kingdomes, as they were (by commaund of the Emperor Iuſtinian) ſet downe in the Romaine Bookes de Iuriſ-prudentia.
            
            
               THe Romaine Emperors, in their Imperiall Titles of honour and renowne, did not onely obſerue & giue to themſelues, the names of thoſe Prouinces wonne by them, or reduced vnder the yoke of their Empire: but likewiſe of ſuch Nations and people, as lefte theyr owne Countreyes (in abounding multitudes) and entered vppon the poſſeſſions of others, to expell and chaſe thence the Naturall Inhabitauntes, to plant there their owne abyding, by bidding them many Battailes: in ſome ſurmounting, and in others ſpéeding according to the Fortune of Warre. Of thoſe Nations, I intend to ſpeake in ſome meaſure, of their Originall, and howe they ſucceeded, becauſe (at length) they ruined the greate Romayne Empyre:Strange nations weakned the Roman Empire. whereto I am the rather induced, to inſtruct ſuch as are little ſkilled in Hiſtories (not onelye Coſmographicall, but likewiſe Geographicall) and to ſhewe them

apparantly, howe much they haue iniured the greater part of our Hemiſphere.
            Wee will firſt beginne with the Gothes, becauſe they were the firſt that forſooke their owne natiue Countrey, which was called Gothia, or Gothland,
               The originall of the Gothes. ſignifying a good Land, it béeing a Northerne Prouince of Germanie. This Land abounded in Graine, Fruites, Cattle, Woodes, Riuers, Mettals; but eſpecially, in Copper, and Skinnes ſeruing for Furres. At all times, and as yet (at this day) is to be diſcerned, the Kingdom of Sweſſia or Sweuia, hath bin comprized vnder the Dominion of the Gothes. As the Countrey was fertile in fruites, euen ſo were the Women thereof likewiſe in Children, for, as they were ſtrong and of great ſtature; ſo had they vſually two Children at a birth, which was the cauſe then,More people then the Countrey can feede. and ſo it yet continueth, that they had and haue more people, then can wel liue together, the Country not being ſufficient to find ſuſtenance for ſo many. In like manner, they are very great féeders, much more then they that liue in the Eaſterne or Meridionall partes. The Gothes perceiuing, and aduiſedly pondering on this vrgent caſe, they leuied the more part, of the youngeſt and ſtrongeſt men of their Countrey, to the number of thrée hundred thouſand; and married ſuch as were not, to ridde themſelues of the charge of Daughters, as well as of Sonnes, for the Countrey ordinarily abounded in the Feminine, more then in the Maſculine Sexe. So, being well prouided of all neceſſaries for warre,

and leauing a chiefe commander at home, of the Royal linage; they wandred abroad through the fields, to win by power, or compaſſe by loue,The Goths wander to ſeeke a new dwelling. ſome new habitation wherein to liue.
            Many Authors, and among the reſt Trebellius ſayth, that the firſt tidings of this their ſtraiing, was vnder the raigne of the Emperour Flauius Claudius, about the yeare of Ieſus Chriſt 272. And that they paſſed thorough Allemaign, Hungary, Thrace, Greece, Gaule, and into Italy. They loſt many battailes, and wonne likewiſe as many againſt the Romaines, and other people, maintaining themſelues ſo well; that they raigned in Italie (euen in deſpight of the Italians and Emperours) the ſpace of ſeauentie one yeares, as Procopius auoucheth.The Goths raigne in Italy and Spaine. At length they went into Spaine, whence afterward they would not remooue: For the Catholique Kinges of Spaine, that then raigned by ſucceſſion, and raigne yet to this preſent, were iſſued from the race and line of their Kinges, who were (indéed) very generous people. Now it is not to bee imagined, that in regard of ſuch a mightie leuy of men, the Countrey of Gothia or Gothland, or the neighbouring borders remained without Inhabitants, or the rule of Kinges: For there were then left behinde, ſo many as the Land was able to nouriſh, who had their Kinges in authority ouer them, and ſtrength ſufficient,The reaſon of the Gothes continuance. to withſtand any inuaſion of the Countrey. As for the conquering Armyes abroad, they continued in Honour for a very long time, albeit they loſt great

ſtore of men in battailes, encounters, ſurpriſals, and paſſages of Riuers: yet were theſe diſaduantages ſtill ſupplied, by the daily birth of Children among them, becauſe they had their wiues in all places with them. Perhaps ſome ſtrangers mingled among thē, who wearing their habits, & learning their language, holp ſtill to ſupply the fri
                  •
                of this people.Of the Oſtrogoths. Such as haue bin named Oſtrogoths, were people iſſued of the ſame country of Gothia, or Gotteland, frō a place which is yet cald Oſtrogothia: the principall Citties whereof are Sche
                  
                     •
                  ng and Lincopt. They vſed to warre alone by themſelues, being ſeparate from the Goths, yet ranging the world according as they did.
            
               Weſtrogoths.The Weſtrogothes in like manner, came out of a Country cald Weſtrogothia, among whom the chéefeſt Citties, to this day, are Scaris and Vernen.
               Wiſigoths 
               Wiſigoths, or Biſigoths, came foorth of a Countrey named Visbi, the principall Cittie whereof i
                  •
                yet called Visbi. I was the more willing to make this diſcription; becauſe I haue heard of diuers (who are but ſlenderly experienced in Coſmography) that do tearme thoſe Oſtro
                  
                     •
                  goths,
               The errour of ſome young Coſmographer to bee Gothes Orientall, or of the Eaſt; and the Weſtrogoths, Occidentall Gothes, or dwelling in the Weſt, and ſo contrarywiſe of the other. Albeit they were all deſcended and came out of the kingdome of Gothia, or Gotteland, as Munſter hath very well obſerued.
            
               Of the Vandales.The Vandales, in the erronious iudgement of Procopius, a Gréeke Authour, are ſaid to bée of the ſame Nation, and that all the people of

               Goths, Vandales, Alains, Hunnes, and others, (whom I am hereafter to deſcribe) were deriued out of one and the ſame Land,The errour of Procopius. and were comprehended all vnder the Name of Sauromates, or Sarmates, and haue no other difference, but by the names of their Captaines or Kinges. But I muſt maintaine againſt him, that the land of the Vandales is diſtant from Gotheland, aboue the ſpace of two hundered leagues, and therefore they cannot bee one people with the Gothes. True it is, that this Nation is Septentrionall, or in the North, as the others are, and is a Maritime Countrey, named yet to this day Vandalia: but, as I haue already ſaide, very farre off the one from the other. This people did (almoſt) as much hurt to the Romaine Empire, as the Gothes did, for,The trauels of the Vandales into diuers coū
                  tries. ioyning diuers other people with them, as the Alaines, Suabes, & Franconians, they trauerſſed the Rheine, Gauderichus béeing then their King, and paſſing among the Gaules, waſted and ſpoyled them very greatlie. Then went they into Spaine, and tooke poſſeſſion (in deſpight of the Gothes) of the Countrey adioyning to the Kingdome of Granado, which (to this day) is called Vandalia, or (by corrupting the Worlde) Vandeluſia, albeit the Spanyards mince it more nicely, and nick-name it to be Andaluſia. But to bee bréefe, they were thruſt foorth of Spayne (wholly) in the yeare 431. vnder another of their Kings, named Genſericus, and paſſed thence into Aſia, where they raigned 76. years. From thence they were compelled, in ye
               
ſeauenth yeare of the Emperor Iuſtinian, Anno Dom. 528. by the valour of one of his Captaines, named Beliſarius.
            
            
               The Huns of Scythia, and theyr trauailes.The Hunnes departed alſo out of their Countrey, for the ſelfe-ſame cauſe as the Gothes did, about the yeare one hundred ſixty eyght, onely to ſéeke ſome Land, where they might liue after the Scythians Religion, making firſt choyce of Pannonia: where they alwayes ſo ſtrongly kept and guarded it, till (after their owne name) it was called Hungaria. This people came from that part of Scythia, which is tearmed Hunos, no long diſtance from the Riuer Tanais: but it is a miſerable eſtate at this day, and vnder ſubiection of the Moſcouite. Hauing vſurped Pannonia, they kept it manfully againſt the Romaines, and two hundred yeares after, Attila theyr King,Attila, King of the Huns accompanied with ſome people of Allemaigne, as Bohemians, Gepides, or Girpides, Schleſites, Werlies, Thuringians, Goths, Oſtrogothes, and others, making (in all) about the number of ſixe hundred thouſand men: paſſed through Allemaigne, which they much endamaged.Attila, his loſſe in France. Then went he into France, where hee loſt a battaile, in which periſhed a great number of his men: this battel was giuen him by the Romans, Gaules, and certaine Goths, allied together, and he loſt (as ſome Authors doe affirme) aboue two hundred thouſand men. At length he iournyed into Italy, which he (well-néere) vt
                  •
               erly ruined: and retiring afterward into his owne Countrey of Hungary, he died within fewe following moneths,

and on the day of his nuptials, which was in the yeare of Ieſus Chriſt 443.
            
            The Lombards were a Northerne people,Of the Lombardes, and whence they deſcended. decended out of Denmarke, as Euſebius maintaineth: and no other reaſon had they to leaue their Countrey, but onely a deſire to win ſome other. There happened in the time of Seno or Sweno, as ſome call him, King of Denmark, a very great dearth or ſcarſity (in the Land) of victuals, and becauſe the people endured it very impatiently: it was concluded by the King and his Councell, (to eaſe the Countrey of ſo many men as were ready to famiſh) that all ſuch perſons as were vnable, either for war, or labor of the ground, ſhould be ſlaine, whether they were old or young. But this ſeuere Edict being reuoked,A very ſeuere Edict. they then reſolued, to make a leuy of all ſorts of people, that (by the help of armes) might trauaile to find out ſome other dwelling, ſo to diſburthen the charge of the Countrey. This being put in execution, they trauailed ſo far, and carried themſelues ſo couragiouſly in trauerſing diuers lands: that they came at laſt into Italy, and there conquered the Countrey which was called Iſtria, making themſelues abſolute Maiſters thereof. Now,Iſtria in Italy conquered, and new named Lombardy. becauſe theſe people were long and tall of ſtature the Italians and Iſtrians called them long Barbarians, which by corruption of the word, and ſucceſſion of times made them tearmed Longbards, or Lombardes. Some are of opinion, that vnder the raign of Valentinian the Emperor, they began to make thē
               ſelues firſt knowne, which was about the yeare

of Chriſt 385. and that they became commaunders in Iſtria, in the yeare 570. Likewiſe, according to Diaconus, the Emperours made peace with them, in the yeare 730. and euer ſince they haue held that Country, which at this day is named Lombardy. Let it here be further noted, that where (in any Hiſtory) mention is made of people tearmed Daces, or Danians; the Nation of Denmarke is thereby vnderſtood: out of which countrey, many great Armies haue trauailed at ſundry times, and haue mightily troubled diuers kingdomes: among which, they continued long time in England, but were thence expelled, about the yeare 860.
            
            
               The Normans iſſued from Norduegia.The Normanes were people of Norduegia, or otherwiſe called Normania, or Norwey, a Countrey in the North, being much addicted to crueltie and inhumanitie, becauſe they vſed many great Piracies on the Sea. An hundred and fifty thouſand men of this Nation, beſtowed themſelues in veſſels on the Sea, and took poſſeſſion of that part of Gaule or Fraunce, which was then tearmed Neuſtria, now Normandie, which was doone in the yeare of Ieſus Chriſt, 600. others ſaie 884. and in the time of Charles le Gros. But bée it howſoeuer, they haue (ſince then) kept it againſt all encounters of the Emperours, Kings of France and England, preſeruing it ſtill by the Name of Normandy, and themſelues reckoned to bee people of vndaunted courage. There are diuers others, that doe ſauour of this their firſt originall, and doe yet proule vppon the

Seas, committing many cruell Robberies.
            The Nation which we call Sweſſes, Zuitzers,
               Sueſſes cam out of Sweuia. or Sweues, who (at this daie) are auxiliarie to the French, came out of Sweuia or Sweueland, a Northerly Region, like vnto the other. They likewiſe (by the dearth of food among them) departed forth of their Countrey, about the yeare of Grace 800. and went ſo farre as the Rhine, which they would haue paſſed, but were hindered therein by the Franconians. Thence went they to the Land of the Heluetians,
               They goe among the Heluetians. who diſpiſing the Sueſſians (becauſe they were poorely and wretchedly apparelled, rude in their féeding, and not looking like ſouldiers) ſuffered them to wander about their Countrey. At length, perceiuing the kinde ſufferaunce of the Heluetians, they ſought to abide in a certaine Canton of their Land. Which when the Heluetians noted, they demaunded of them, to what ende they thus wandered about the World. They anſwered, that they were poore people, and ſought but to weare out their liues in trauaile, by deluing or labouring in the Earth. And ſéeing that there was waſt Ground in thoſe partes, vnlaboured,Their pouertie among the Heluetians. or any vſe made of (it béeing Hilles and Vallies, enuironed with Lakes) they deſired the Heluetians, to permit them to woorke in thoſe rough Fieldes, as yet not cultiue, and they ſhould receiue the benefit thereof, onely allowing them but nouriſhment for their pains. This was all that they ſéemed to pretend, iuſtifying their requeſts with ſolemne oathes and proteſtations.

Theyr deſire was graunted, and not long after, the Countrey wherein they liued, was not onely called Sueſia, in regarde of the Sweſians there dwelling: but likewiſe the ancient Inhabitants had the ſame name giuen then, and yet the country is very hilly, and vnapt for Ryding. Howe afterward it came to be called the Lande of Cantons or Leagues, ſhall at large be ſhewne in our Generall hiſtory.
            
               Of the Allemaignes, & whence they were deriued.
               Iuſtinian, and other Emperors (both before & after him) entitled themſelues Lordes of the Allemaignes, for hauing receiued ſome victories ouer the Allemaignes. But this may not be ſaid, (as ſome doo) that thoſe victories were obtayned againſt the Germaines: For euen at this daye, when we ſpeake or write, of Allemaigne, therein is comprehended all the Nations, which are contained throughout Germany, and that do ſpeake the Language of the Tentones. But as for Allemaigne,
               The true Alemaigns of Suaba. or Almaines, the Romains neuer vnderſtood, or meant any other people, then thoſe of Suaba. And to ſpeake vprightly, they haue euer bin the true and ancient Allemaines, as Cornelius Tacitus plainely confirmeth. Druſus Nero, was the firſt that ſtyled himſelfe Germanicus, for hauing rather angered the Germaines, then foyled them, as diuers other Emperours afterward did. Moreouer, by Germany is to be vnderſtood, nine and forty great Prouinces, as well of the lower part, as the higher part of the ſayde Germany, comprizing the Countrey of the Suiſſes and Heluetians.
            
            
               Now, concerning the Alaines, or Alans,
               Alaines, what people they were, and whence they came. many haue ſuppoſed them to be a people of Germanie: But therein they were and are deceiued, for Ptolomy knew them, whom he placeth in a parte of Scythia. Capitolinus beſtowes them in Dacia: Marcelinus, Plinie, & Dioniſius the Poet, giues them a being in Sarmatia of Europe. Ioſephus in his laſt Booke, affirmes their aboade to bee betwéene the Riuer Tanais, and the Palus Moeotides: And ſaith moreouer, that, in his time, the Alaines or Alanes, accompanied with the Hyrcanians, both robbed and ſpoyled all the Region of the Medes. As for my ſelfe, by that which I haue gathered, from ſuch as haue written on the actions of the Gothes: I am perſwaded, that thoſe Alaines were theyr companions, and that oftentimes (in their warres) for their owne aduantage they ſundered them-ſelues from them, as one while they did with the Vandales. But queſtionleſſe, their diſcent was from Scythia, according to Ptolomies affirmation.
            If we ſhall ſpeake of the Gepides, Girpedes,
               Of the Gepides or Girpedes. or Iupedes, what people they were, there are opinions enow concerning them. Some ſay, that they were at firſt of Scythia, and came thence as the Lombards did into Italy. But hauing made a more curious and dilligent ſearch, I finde, that they were a people of Germany, and called then Gepudij or Sepuſij, and (according to Ptolomeus Matauaſtus) now at this day, Siebemburgs, that followed the Gothes, the Vandals, and the Normands alſo: beeing erring and Vagabonde

people, till at length they ventured on the Seas, and went to inhabite the Iſles of the Orchades, whereof Thylle is the lateſt inhabited, as Volateranus auoucheth, and they are now ſubiectes to the King of Scotland.
            
            
               The Originall of the Picts, and their comming into the Iſle of Orkeney.In ſpeaking of ſo many Nations, who are all ſaid to be deriued from the Scithians, we may not forget the Picts, who (by moſt Writers opinion) are ſaid to be a people of Germany, that had their Originall out of Scythia, deſcending of the Agathyrſi in Sarmatia, who vſed to paint and collour their faces, & thereupon were named Picts. Before they entred into Britaine, they inhabited the Iſle of Orkeney for a long time together, ferrying ouer into Cathneſſe daily, & ſo multiplying both in power & number, that (getting vp further into the land) they poſſeſſed Roſſe, Murrey-land, Merne & Anguſſe, whence paſſing into Fife and Louthian, they droue thence the Brittain Inhabitantes, who were onely poore people, that liued by nouriſhing & breeding Cattle. This their entrance into Albion (for ſo was it then called) was in the year of the worlds creation,The firſt k. of the Picts. 
               3633. Cruthneus Camelonus is ſaid to be the firſt king of the Picts, & that he builded a famous Citty on the bank of the Riuer called Caron, appointing it to be the chief City of all the Pictiſh kingdom. He builded alſo the town of Agneda, afterward called Edenbrough, of Ethus king of the Picts, and the Caſtle, named The Caſtle of Maydens, becauſe ye 
               Pictiſh kings kept their daughters there vnder ſtrict cuſtody, in all good exerciſes, til their yeares of mariage. Concerning

the warres, ſtrifes, and bloody contentions, betwéene the Albion Scots and Picts, thorough all their Kings raigns, til their vtter ouerthrow, and quite deſolation of Pict-land,Kenneth K. of Scots. deſolateth Pictland. by Kenneth the victorious King of Scots: I referre it to our larger diſcourſe. Only letting you know, that this ſubuerſion, and vtter ruine of the Picts, hapned in the year of our redemption, 839. in the ſixt yeare of King Kenneths glorious raigne, & 1168. yeares after their firſt plantation in Albion.
            
            The Getes haue bin,Of the Getes. and yet are a warlick people, molleſted greatly by the Turkes at this inſtant: and yet they found the Romain work ſufficient. Theſe are the Tranſyluanians, Valachians & Moldauians, & their country is neere to the Riuer Iſter, where it falleth into the Pontick ſea.
            The Bourguignons are helde by Oroſius, to come forth of Germany, and Volatteranus ſaith,Of the Bourguignons. that Iouinianus the Emperour vanquiſhed ſome ſuch people, that liued by the Riuer of Rhine. But there is nothing more certaine (according as I haue gathered by the Germaine Hiſtories) then that they yſſued from ſome remaynes of the Gothes, Vandals, and Hunnes, who beeing altogether chaſed by the Romains, threw themſelues on that part of Gaule, which is called after theyr name, and there (perforce) enthroned themſelues. For afterwarde, they coulde ſo well reſiſt the Romaines, that they were conſtrained to yéelde them tolleration, and let them liue in the ſaide Countrey amongſt the firſt Inhabitants. There they builded Fortes, Villages,

and Townes,Of their firſt name. which they called then Bourgs of the Gothes & Hunnes: but being ſoone corrupted into one word, from Bourgs-Goth-Hunnes, they are now called Bourguignons, as much to ſay, as a martiall people. Aetius, Lieutenant to the Emperor Theodoſius, gaue them a battel in the yeare of Chriſt, 435. and won the day: But it coſt him ſo deare, that he would neuer after meddle any more with them. About the yeare, 430. they receiued and embraced the Chriſtian fayth. This people in theſe dayes are become very ciuill,A faire vniuerſitie in Bourgougn and are as much addicted to Learning, as to Armes: For they haue a goodly Vniuerſitie, founded by one of the Dukes of Bourgougne, wherein many Lectures are read of all the Sciences, to Schollers of all Nations, at Dola the Capitall Cittye of that parte of Bourgougne, which is vnder commaund of the houſe of Auſtria, and there they hold a Parliament alſo. As for the other part of Bourgougne, in obedience to the Crowne of France, Digeon is the Metropolitane Citty thereof, where likewiſe is helde another Parlament: And theſe two Bourgougnes are maintained in very good peace, albeit they are in obeyſance to diuers Princes.
            We wil conclude this diſcourſe with the kingdome of Naples,
               Of the kingdome of Naples. which is a Citty very auncient and Noble in all reſpects, and giueth the Title of kingdome to the whole Prouince, by her owne proper name. As concerning the name of Kingcome, I do not hold it to be of any great antiquity, becauſe the Normanes took it, from the Grecians,
               
who poſſeſſed this Prouince in diuers partes thereof, and then it was entitled the Earldome of Apulia or Puglia, as ſome do yet tearme it. Robert Guiſcard, a verie valiant and woorthy man, expulſed ſuddenly the Grecians thence,Robert Guiſcard the valiant Norman. and tooke Sicilie alſo from the Sarrazins, entitling himſelfe Duke of Apulia, and of Calabria, and Earle of Sicilie. In no long time after, his nephew Ruggiero or Roger, hauing conquered the Citty of Naples, which till that time had béene in the Grecians Gouernment, receiued the Title of King of both the Scicilies, by Anacletus the Anti-Pope, in the yeare of our Lorde, 1130. which afterwarde was confirmed vnto him in good and lawfull manner. And from that time forwarde, it was called the kingdome of Scicilie, on this ſide Pharos,
               The Scicilian euening. vntill the raigne of Charles the firſt, when it became deuided from Sicilie, by occaſion of that famous accident, called Veſro Sciciliano, the Scicilian Euening, wherein ſo many of the French were ſlaine. I finde moreouer in many good Hiſtorians, that Naples hath had three ſeuerall Names to wit; the Kingdome of Naples; the Kingdome of Apulia, and the Kingdome of Scicilie, on this ſide Pharos.
            
            
               ¶ Of the Kingdome of Portugall.
               THe Kingdome of Portugall, beganne in the yeare of Chriſt, M.C.X. after this manner,

                  Henry Earle of Lorrayne comming thether,Hen. count of Lorraine performed many valiant déedes againſt the Sarrazins: And his high deſeruings mooued Alphonſus the ſixte, King of Caſtile, to giue him a Baſtard daughter of his in mariage, named Tireſia, and (in way of Dowrye) aſſigned him alſo that part of Galicia, which then was contained in Luſitania. Of this marriage was Alphonſus borne, who was the firſt that euer ſtiled himſelfe K. of Portugall,
                  The firſt K. of Portugal and he was the firſt alſo that tooke the Citty of Lisbone from the Sarrazins. For he hauing conquered fiue of their kings in ſeueral battels, cauſed his Armes to bee adorned with fiue ſeuerall Crownes and Coat-Armors, which euer after continued the Enſigne of the kings of Portugall, in perpetuall memory of his valour. But he quickly ſtained this faire fame, with crueltie vſed by him to his owne mother, for, after her ſecond marriage, he cauſed her to be impriſoned: & albeit the Pope labored the matter greatly by his Legate, yet could hee neuer compaſſe her deliuerance. Which ſin was ſeuerely puniſhed on him by his enemies, who afterward tooke him in battell. And then his ſon Sanctio ſuccéeded him, and after Sanctio diuers other, to Iohn, who was the tenth King in direct and natural line. This Iohn was at the firſt expulſed from his Kingdome,The King of Portugal a Knight of S. Iohn of Ieruſalem. and made a Knight of S. Iohn of Ieruſalem: but at length he was re-called to his kingdome, where he made very honorable proofe of his valour, and (among diuers famous déeds) he tooke from the Sarrazins the Citty of Septia. Hee had ſeauen

Sonnes, among which Ferdinand (for intergrity of life) was tearmed a Saint. Henry another of his Sons, was the firſt that found Noua Inſula in the Athlantike Sea. He being very ſkilful in the Mathematicks, liued continually without a Wife, and made his daily abiding in a Promontory, which was called the Cape of S. Vincent, and there he died in the yeare, 1460. But Edward, who was the eldeſt brother, was made King, and (by warres) he adioyned to the kingdome of Portugall, Zelia, Tigea, and Alcazar in Affrica. He had two Daughters, or Siſters (as ſome ſay) named Ioane and Leonora:
                  The ſucceſſion of the Kinges of Portugall. the firſt was married to the king of Caſtille, and the other to Frederick the third, Emperor: of whom was borne Maximilian the firſt, who was afterward Emperor, and Grandfather to Charles the fift. He had alſo a Son named Alphonſus, who ſuccéeded him in the Kingdome, and begate Iohn & Emanuel, who was 14. king of Portugal. Emanuel had Iohn, who took to wife, ye ſiſter of Charls 5. Emperor, called Katherine. Lodwick died an infant, but Iſabel was wife to the ſaid Charles, & he had another daughter yt was maried to Charls D. of Sauoy. After him ſuccéeded Sebaſtian, who (in our time, fighting with the Moors was ſlain, and the king of Marocco, with diuers other great Lords of the Moores. Henry, Vnckle to the deceaſed king, followed him in ſucceſſion, he being then a Cardinal, & very aged; holding the kingdom but ſome few months. But he dying, Phillip king of Spain entred on the kingdom, reſiſting the claime

of Don Anthonio, beeing a Brothers-ſon of the dead King Henry, and ſo out-wearied him, that hée could neuer attaine thereto in full poſſeſſion. So it remaineth ſtill vnder the Spaniſh gouernment.
            
            
               ¶ The Kingdome of Italy.
               COncerning the Kingdome of Italy, the antiquity thereof, when at firſt it was called Ianicula, of Ianus; Cameſena, of Cameſes; Saturnia, of Saturnus, Heſperia, of Heſper, and Italia of Italus, with all the Kinges there raigning, till the Latines, and thoſe likewiſe that deſcended of Eneas, to the time of Romulus, with the Hiſtory both of olde Rome, and Rome as it now is; it remaineth to our generall Hiſtory. Onely we will ſay ſomewhat of the Originall of Venice, moued thereto by iuſt occaſion.
            
         
         
            A breefe diſcourſe of the Originall of the Venetians; the foundation of Venice, and how it hath beene gouerned, from the year of our ſaluation 421. to thi
                  •
                inſtant.
            To the ancient, Right Worſhipfull, and worthy Society of the Gold-Smiths.
            HIſtoriographers, who haue written of the Venetians, doe not agrée together in theyr true Originall. For ſome doe write, that they are deſcended of the Venetian Gaules, inhabiting along

the Ocean Sea in little Britaigne, called Armorica, whereof one of the principall Citties (béeing a Biſhops Sée) was called Vennes. Others, and among them; Titus Liuius borne in Padua, aſſures vs, that they came forth of Paphlagonia, and that Philemon their Captaine, (being ſlaine at Troy the great) they went with Antenor into Italy. Others write, that this Nation, hauing béene Neighbours to the Cappadocians, and venturing fight with the Cimmerians; they hazzarded further vpon the Adriatick Sea in their Fortune. The moſt common opinion, is of them, who ſay, that the Hinitians or Henetes came with Antenor, and,People of Paphlagonia in ſometime after (by changing of a letter) were called Venitians, or Venetes. Firſt of all, they expelled the Euganeans, who inhabited this Countrey,People by the inner gulfe of the Adriatick Sea, towardes the Alpes. betwéene the Adriatick Sea and the Alpes, and builded the Cittie of Padua. Afterward, by ſucceſſe of time, they increaſed in ſuch ſort, as they would not be ſatiſfied to bee Maiſters (onely) of that which had appertained to the Euganeans, (conſiſting of thirtie foure faire Citties and Townes;) but intruded farther, to ſeaze on Breſſano and Forli. Some report this Countrey to be bounded with the Riuers of Pau, and that of Adde, as alſo the Lake of Guard, aunciently called the Benack the Alpes, and the Adriatick Sea.
            And ſo the auncient Venetians, in this manner extended their Dominion, both in longitude and latitude, in the moſt pleaſant Countrey of Italy:
               
but the ſeating of the places, did daily beget the elder eſtate of the Venitians hatred. For on the one ſide,Liburnia, the Countrey of Croaua, between Iſtria & Dalmatia the ordinary robberies of the Liburnians, and on the other ſide, ye frequent and frightful courſes of the Barbarians, did hinder them frō any long time of continuing in quiet. For, without theſe impeachments, this Nation had béene moſt fortunate, in conquering (by the right of Warre) one of the moſt goodly and beautifull Regions in all Italie.
               The ſcituation of Venice, and capacitie thereof. Nowe, ouer and beſide, that on the South-ſide, it is enuironed with a moſt calme circuite of the Sea, and in regard thereof, is the more capable of receiuing all ſtrange Merchandizes: So is it likewiſe wattered with very delectable Riuers, whereby, whatſoeuer commeth from the Sea, is eaſilie tranſported to the very Nauell of the Prouince. It aboundeth in Pooles, Pondes, Forreſts and vnder-woodes, and the whole Land is choicelie fertile in Corne, Wine, Oyle, and all kindes of Fruites. It is alſo plentifully ſtored with Countrey Houſes, Townes, Citties, and Villages, Caſtles, Fortes, and ſuch like, very commendable for the ſcituation, and encloſure of their Wals.
            Theſe n
                  •
               w Inhabitants, when their weake eſtate beganne to growe in fairer forme: they were ſeldome exempted from the Warres and incurſions of Straungers. For, after manie bolde inſolencies of the Barbarians, with continued Warres againſt each other, euen from their very beginning, vntill the time of Attila:

they were yet much more dreadfully encombered, with the furious aſſault of the Gothes, a tēmpeſt farre excéeding in turbulencie, all other former diſaſters happening to them whatſoeuer: For firſt, the Hunnes (a people of Scythia,
               Mountains in the north part of Scythia, where ſnow lieth continually dwelling néere to the Riphean Mountaines) conducted by Attila, the Sonne of Mandluck, diſperſed themſelues ouer Italie, and making horrible ſpoyle whereſoeuer they went; fell into the Prouince belonging to the Vinitians. After a long ſiedge, they tooke the Cittie of Aquileia, and ſpoyled and burnt it wholly.An ancient citty in that part of Italy, called Forum I
                        •
                     lij.
                In like manner did they ruinate the Citties of Concordia and Altina, and almoſt all the Venitian Region.
            At the fearefull newes of this Warre, the Venitians were more amazed then any other, and ſo much the rather, becauſe they had béene formerly invred, to ſuſtaine their chéefeſt miſhappes amongſt the Barbarians. Whereupon, it is ſaide, that (euen then) a great number of perſons with-drewe them-ſelues from the firme Land, to the Iſles where Venice at this inſtant is builded: haſting thither from all other partes, eſpeciall vpon the arriuall of this cruell Enemie Attila. Some (of the better ſort of Padua) firſt began the retreat, and being come to the entrance or iſſue of the Riuer, which was then very déepe, (whence the name of Rialto hath remained to the ſame place,The firſt foundation of Venice. as deriued of the word Riuealto) they there laid the firſt foundation of the Cittie of Venice.
            
            
               The meaner people of Paduaj, enforced by the ſelfe ſame feare; fled thence, and began to people themſelues in Chioggia,
               Litle Iſlāds in the Sea, and neere adioining. 
               Malamocco and Albiola. Some of them of Aquileia (at the ſame time) betooke themſelues to the Marſhes or Fennes of Grada, and, vpon the freſh returne of Attila, the people ranne (in mighty affluence) along the ſea Coaſtes to the neighbouring Iſles. They of Aquileia beſtowed themſelues in Grada, a place néereſt to firme Land, yet engirt with Waters. They that fledde from Concordia, made vſe of Coarli and the Attinois, ſixe little Iſlands néere to one another; which they gaue names vnto, according to the Names of the Gates of their former loſt and ruined Citties: To wit; Torcello, Maiorbo, Buriano, Muriano, Amiana, & Gonſtantiaco.
            
            
               The prime eſtate of the place wher Venice now ſtandeth.Theſe ſeuerall places, where at this preſent the citty of Venice is ſeated, were (in elder times) very ſtraite or narrow Iſlandes, and néere vnto each other: ſauing onely that they were ſeparated by the pleaſing courſe of Riuers, which ranne into, and returned againe from the Sea, according to the changes of his fluxe and reflux. Nor in theſe ſtraites were then any dwellinges to bee diſcerned, but onely of Sea-Fowles, that flew thither from the Seas, to ſport themſelues vppon the Sunnie banckes;The firſt builders of Venice, & at what time. and Fiſhermen alſo would ſome-times there put in for harbour.
            The Paduans, that tooke vp the Rialto, were the firſt that beganne to builde, and it was in the very

ſame place, where the firſt Foundation of the Citty was laid: namely, the 25. day of March, in the yeare of our Lord, 421. and ſecond yeare of the raigne of Pharamond, firſt King of the Gaules or French-men; in the time alſo of Pope Boniface the firſt, and of the Emperour Honorius. Whereby it plainly appeareth, that at one and the ſelfe-ſame time, began both the kingdome of France, and the Commonwealth of Venice. And that both the one and the other haue continued to this preſent, for twelue hundred yeares, very little, either more or leſſe.
            This Cittie ſo newlie begun, encreaſed dailie both in people and buildings. But ſée what happened vppon a ſuddaine, a Greeke Carpenters Houſe (or rather he was one of the Shipwrights,Theyr firſt buildings deſtroyed by fire. named Entinopus) falling a fire, conſumed in a moment (with a violent & continual embracing) 24. faire new built Houſes. Which when theſe new-come Inhabitantes perceiued, and fearing that Heauen was offended with this their manner of beginning, forgetting God, and ſeruing their owne appetites. They fell all to praier, and made a ſolemne vow, to builde a Church in the honour of God, and in memory of the Apoſtle S. Iames; at which very inſtant time, a mighty tempeſt of raine (as ſuddainelie fell) whereby the reſt of the new-begun Cittie was happilie preſerued.
            That Church is yet at this daie plainelie to be diſcerned, with the markes and appearances of great antiquity, euen in the very midſt of the Rialto:
               
And it was then conſecrated by foure Byſhops,The firſt Church built in Venice. to wit; Seuerianus Biſhop of Padua; Ambroſe, Biſhop of Altina; Iocundus, Biſhoppe of Treuiſa, & Epodius, biſhop of Vderzo, & a Prieſt was there appointed, to performe diuine ſeruice.
            
               Noble and rich men the firſt foū
                  ders of Venice.The firſt foundations of this famous Citty, were men of honeſt repute, Noble and rich. For the ancient Venitians, at the change of their abiding, brought with them thither their Wiues and Children, with the very wealthieſt mooueables which they had, and ſo (at leiſure) withdrew themſelues, to places of a more ſecure dwelling. But béeing impeached (by incurſſions of the Hunnes) to Till the Groundes vppon the Sea Coaſtes; ſuch as had any meanes or apt commoditie: gaue themſelues to fighting, and to make Salt, or to tranſport the goods of their neighbors; eſtéeming the benefite thereby gotten, to bee no more diſhoneſt or vnbefitting, then to Plough and huſband the grounds of others.
            As for the wealthier ſort, they addicted themſelus to Traffick Merchandizes with ſtrangers, and by their frequent aduenturing into diuers Countries, ſome of them, being very ſkilfull Miners, and well experienced in the triall of ſeuerall Dors or Mettals hidden in the ground, which by induſtry and endeauour they found in the earth; became Finers or Triers of thoſe Mettals, and extracted (from the groſſer ſubſtances) the purer perfections of Golde and Siluer, whereby (in their owne language they were tearmed Orifici, deriued of the Latin word Aurifex, Gold-ſmiths,

or Hammer-Men, that (of thoſe refined Mettals) could frame Cuppes, Pots, Ringes, Baſons, Ewres, or any other néedfull matter whatſoeuer, both for the ſeruice of God in Churches and Temples, and for the royaltie of Emperors, Kinges, and Princes. So that, by the conſent of diuers good Authours, as Liuie, Florus, Caſſidorus, Trogus Pompëius, and others,The firſt Goldſmiths knowne in Europe, were in Venice. the firſt Gold-Smiths, Workers in Gold and Siluer, and framers of thoſe excellent Mettals into ſuch orderly meanes for vſe (within the partes of Europe) liued in Venice, whereas yet (to this day) doe remaine the very beſt, ingenious and perfect work-men for ſuch matters (according to the iudgement of many) that are to bee found in any part of the World. Concerning ſuch, as remained more ordinarily at home, for rare and ſafety of the Cittie, they applied their Spirites, to deuiſe good lawes and cuſtomes for generall benefite. During which time, ſuch was their due reſpect of Iuſtice, and ſo preciſe care of equitie and right to all men, as,Care of Iuſtice and common good. among ſo great a number of people, there could not bee any diſorderly differences noted.
            Catholique Religion they ſo ſingularly commended,Loue of religion, in eſpecial reſpect. and the daylie preſence of ſome reuerend Prelates, who had ſaued themſelues with their Compatriots: that it augmented (among them) a common affection to piety. And their aſſiſtance appeared very requiſite, not onely for the miniſtry of holy offices; but alſo for retention of the Inhabitants of this new Citty, in auncient piety and Religion.
            
               Fearing, leaſt they might bee infected with the poyſon of Arrian Hereſie: becauſe nothing elſe made more ſpoyle and hauocke thorough all the Prouince, except the Weapons of the Gothes and Hunnes.
            
            Such was the beginning of the Citty of Venice, and in ſuch manner of liuing, and in ſuch exerciſes, ſhee ſpent her firſt infancy: till (by her Vertues) ſhee attained to greater groweth, and grounded her ſelfe in her inſtant ſtate and condition. It hath conſtantly bin held, that this common-wealth (euer-more) retained that forme of gouernment which is tearmed Ariſtocratia, that is,Ariſtocratia optimatum principatus. that the moſt noble and woorthieſt Cittizens, ſhould guide and gouerne. For although it be ſaide, that it hath bin gouerned, firſt by Conſuls, then by Tribunes, and laſtly by Dukes, & Maiſters of warlicke power: yet notwithſtanding, al theſe Dignities, being but electiue, and not hereditary, the election ſhould (in right) appertain to the moſt Noble Iſlanders, and Gentlemen of name, by whoſe aduiſe the Common-weal ought to be managed, euen as it hath bin, and ſtill continueth to this day.
            Conſuls, to the number of thrée, were choſen for two yeares,The Gouernment of Conſuls, and who were the firſt in Venice. and albeit that this kinde of Gouernment laſted▪ for about the ſpace of thréeſcore yeares, yet we finde only but thrée conſecutiue or ſuccéeding elections of them. The firſt Conſuls, were Albertus Phalarius, Thomas Candianus, and Zeno Daulo. Theſe men firſt gouerned the Citty in her Nonage, and ſome are of the minde,

that they were the firſt Authors of the Padnaus ſlight, and their retyrement to the Lakiſh or marſhie Iſles, as alſo of their firſt building there. The ſecond Conſuls, were Lucianus Graulus, Maximus, or Marinus Lucius, and Hugo Fuſcus. The third, were Marcus Aurelius, Andreas Claudius & Albinus Maurus. The names of ſuch as were elected after theſe, are not to be found in any Hiſtories.
            After, that the Iſles (about the Rialto) were filled with Inhabitants: in ſted of Conſuls,The creation of Tribunes, and what they were. Tribunes were created, and for their creation, the matter was firſt debated priuately by fewe people, afterwarde, it was ordained and reſolued in open aſſembly of the Iſlanders: that in each Iſle there ſhould be a Tribune, and he ſhoulde bee a yearely Magiſtrate, to render Iuſtice to the Cittizens, and with ſeuerity, to punniſh their offences. But the remainder, which concerned the generality of the Common-weale: was referred to the generall aſſembly of the Iſlanders, to bee by them determined. Afterward, there was but one Tribune created, for gouernement of the Iſles, which continued for ſome yeares. Finally, they concluded to create tenne, whereunto were added two more, who ſhould dwell in Heraclea: And this Tribunary dignity held place for more then two hundred yeares. Héere is to be noted, that the Tribunes of the Iſles, abuſing their authorities, did ſo trouble the State with ciuill diſſentions, as it plainly appeared, that the maine bodie of the Citty would bee diſſolued, without ſome

good and immediate remedy. Which gaue occaſion, that (to heare the complaints of euery one) a generall aſſembly of the Iſles was publiſhed, and their méeting to be in Heraclea.
            
            In this aſſembly, Chriſtophero, Biſh. of Grada was Preſident, accompanied with a great number of the Clergy, & after diuine ſeruice was performed, the firſt propoſition which he made, was, yt (for good of the commonwealth) each man might complain of ye future Tribune, which being done, and the offences no longer to be indured, for publick benefit of the ſtate in general, reſolution was ſet down,Election of a Duke among the Venetians. to make election of a Duke, who ſhould repreſent all honor and Maieſty in the State or Siegneurie, and he ſhould haue power to aſſemble the generall counſell, when queſtions were to be made, of any important matter concerning the Common-wealth. He ſhould haue power alſo, to elect yearly Tribunes, or Magiſtrates in euery Iſle, and their appellations to bee brought before him. Moreouer, if any ſhould obtaine any dignity, Prelacy or benefice, by Suffrages of the Cleargie or people: that he ſhould not enioy it, or be poſſeſſed thereof, without the good liking and conſent of the Duke, whoſe power alſo ended with his life.
            
               Who was the firſt D. of Venice.This being thus concluded, in the yeare, 697. Paullucio was created the firſt duke, and ſo hath yt Ducal dignity continued euer ſince. Saue only that in the yeare, 737. after the death of the third Duke Orſo: it was determined, that no Duke ſhould be elected, for ſix yeares, but that a Maſter

of the armed troopes or ſoldiors ſhould bee eſtabliſhed, and his authority to be annual, which laſted no longer then fiue yeares. For in the yeare, 742 they procéeded againe to a Dukes election, & ſince that time, the Commonwealth of Venice hath euermore had Dukes and Princes of the Seigneury: by whoſe wiſedome (and his Counſell aſſiſting) it hath bin preſerued in an euer flouriſhing eſtate, euen to this inſtant yeare, 1611.
         
         
            ¶ A ſhort Summary, of the liues of the Dukes and Princes of Venice: and a breuiate alſo of the moſt remarkable actions, in the times of their gouernment.
            
               
                  PAuluccio Annapeſto, was firſte Duke of the people, choſen in Heraclea. Hee tooke his Oath before Chriſtophero patriarch of Grada to gouerne according to ye Lawes, and to regard nothing more then the weale publicke. He pacified the difference which Luitprand k. of the Lombards had with king Aribert, and made friendſhip with them both: As well by his authority, as by armes. He brought the rebellious Aequilius vnder obedience, encreaſed the Citties cuſtomes and reuennewes, and dyed, hauing bin Duke xx. yeares, vi. months, and viij. daies.
            2 Marcello Tegaliano, of the ſame place of Heraclea, was elected his ſucceſſour, by common voyce of the people. Hee was deuoute,

modeſt and affable, but much leſſe diligent in gouerning, then his predeceſſor. The Patriarchat of Grada was tranſ-ferred into Aquileia in hys time, by Luitprand, and there he had great wars about the diſſentions of the Byſhops, whereinto he would not interpoſe himſelfe, but died, hauing bin Duke nine yeares, and xxi. dayes.
            3 Orſo Hipato, a Noble-man of Heraclea, woon himſelfe great Reputation by his famous déedes. Paulo the Exarcho had recourſe to him, the Grecian Army being broken, and ſiedge laid to Rauenna by Luitprand. He regained Rauenna, made the Kings Nephew his priſoner, ſlewe the Duke of Vicenza, and reſeated the Exarcho in his due rights. Hee brideled the Aquileians, who troubled the publicke peace, and put courage into the ſoules of the younger ſort. He was ſlain by reaſon of the diſſentions of Ieſolo, the xi. yeare and fift month, of his Principality.
            4 Theodato Hipato, ſonne of Orſo, was proclaimed Duke fiue yeares after the death of his Father: during which time, the people were gouerned by a Marſhall or Maiſter of the ſoldiors: and forſaking Heraclea, he brought the State to Malamocco. There he was the firſt created, and limitted his confines with Aſtolpho king of the Lombards. He was alſo ſlaine, by Galla a citizen of Malamocco, in the 13. year of his principality.
            5 Galla de Malamocco, a wicked and ſeditious man, yet ſhewing himſelfe as Protector of publick peace, he was eſtabliſhed in the place of Theodato. But his wickedneſſe being knowne, and

that (being but a ſubiect) he would néedes make himſelfe abſolute Lord, hauing before ſlaine his chiefe Maiſter Theodato: the people pluckt out his eies, and tooke from him the dignity, which he had a yeare vſurped.
            6 Dominico Monegario, of Malamocco, was ſeated in the ſted of Galla. Somewhat to bridle his Dukes authority, the people ioined two yearly Tribunes with him. But he, being a man audacious and arrogant, ſought to tiranize ouer the people: whereat they growing into fury, pluckt out his eies, the 8. yeare of his Principality.
            7 Mauritio Galbaio, a Noble Heraclean, for his Iuſtice, wiſedome, and wealth, was choſen to this dignity. Hee made his ſonne Duke with him, and they gouerned together. In his time, the church of Grada being molleſted, he ſent an Ambaſſador to pope Stephen, to accord the difference. The Biſhopprick of S. Peter de Caſtello Oliuolo was then erected. And he died, hauing gouerned 23. yeares.
            8 Giouanni Galbaio, hauing bin Duke 9. years with his father, gouerned the commonwealth yet 9. yeares more, and after the ſaid time, hee made Mauritio his Sonne companion with him in the Principality. But they being both of wicked and vnſufferable life, hauing murdered Iohn Patriarchat of Grada, throwing him downe headlong from an high tower: Fortunatus, ſucceſſor in the Patriarchate, made a conſpiracy againſt them, & another was elected Duke. Wherat, being not a little confounded, the Father fled into France, &

the ſon to Mantua, the xvi. yeare of their rule.
            9 Obelerio, being elected Prince by them that had intelligence with Fortunatus, tooke his Brother Beato as his aſſociate, and Valentine beſide (being their thirde brother) was admitted with them in the ſame dignity. And it is worth note, that of theſe thrée brethren, Beato is onely placed in the rank of Dukes in the Counſell chamber of Venice, where as Obelerio incited Pepin king of Italy, to make war on the Venetians: and Beato maintained the cōmonwealth raigning 5. years.
            10 Angelo Participatio, after he had well born himſelfe in the warre againſt Pepin, was elected Duke, the people being ſummoned to the Rialto. He founded the Dukes Palace, in the ſame place where that now built, ſtandeth. The deuiſion of the Empire was made in his time, & the Venetians left in their own liberty. The City was diuided into wards, ſtréets and precinctes. The Pregadi, & the Ouaranta, who (for criminal offences) was then inſtituted among them. He gouerned eightéen yeares.
            11 Giuſtiniano Participatio, hauing bin an aſſociate in the dignity with his father, was (after his death) confirmed by the people. He repealed home his brother Iohn, who was then at Conſtantinople, & accepted him as his fellow ruler: he made the peoples authority greater than before, & gaue aid to Michael the Emp. againſt the Sarazins. The body of S. Mark was in his time broght from Alexandria, accepting into his protection, & the church remaining at this day, was cōſecrated

in his memory. He died the 2. year of his dignity.
            13 Giouanni Participatio remained in the royaltie, & inlarged the Church of S. Marke, placing therein a great number of prieſts & Canons, and appointing a Primicerio to gouern them. He cauſed the head of Obelerio to be cut off, whom hee had beſiedged in the Iſle of Curtia. He made war vpon the Nauratines, and ouercame them. In the end, a conſpiracy was deuiſed againſt him, and being confined to Grada, in the eight yeare of his Principality, he ſhaued his head and bearde, and made himſelfe a Monke, in which eſtate he died.
            13 Pietro Tradonico of Pola, hauing carryed himſelfe to the peoples contentment in the wars againſt Pepin, was elected duke. He ioyned Iohn his ſon in rule with him, & gaue ſuccor to ye Emp. of Conſtantinople, who made requeſt thereof by Theodoſius Patricius. He was made Protoſpatary of the empire, in help whereof he ſent 60. gallies. Lewes 2. granted him many priuiledges, & in the end he was ſlain by a ſedition, in his 27. year.
            14 Orſo Participatio, hauing appeaſed the ſedition, was made Duke. The Turkes hauing ſpoiled Dalmatia, euen ſo far as Grada, wer vanquiſhed by him, & Giouanni Participatio his ſon, whom he had made aſſociate with him in his gouernment. Baſilius the Emperor highly honored him for that good Seruice, and made him Protoſpatarie of the Empire. He gouerned 17. yeares.
            15 Giouanni Participatio, beeing confirmed in his dignity, tooke and burned Comachio, waſted the County of Rauenna, to reuenge himſelfe

on the Count of Comachio, who had impriſoned and wounded to death his Brother Badoario. He growing much ouercome with ſickneſſe, cauſed the Church of Saint Cornelius and S. Cyprian to be built at Malamocco; and hauing gouerned fiue yeares and ſixe monthes, renounced the Dignitie.
            16 Pietro Candiano, was elected after the voluntarie diſmiſſion of his Predeceſſour. Hée was a valiaunt Man, and expert in Armes, and yet notwithſtanding, greatlie addicted to deuotion. He went (in perſon) with tenne Gallies againſt the Narantines, who (as Théeus) robbed and purloined from the Venitians. Fighting valiantlie againſt them, hee died at the ſecond time, with the weapons in his hands. He gouerned no longer then fiue months.
            
               Dominico Tribuno, is ſet by ſome in rank with the Dukes: but others, leſſe curious in ſearch of the Hiſtory, haue omitted him, becauſe hee was Duke but thrée months and thirtéen daies, and nothing is remarkeable in his time, but a certaine priuiledge granted by him to Chioggia.
            
            17 Pietro Tribuno, Sonne of Dominico, was elected Duke. He obtained of Guydo, Emperour and King of Italy, a confirmation of all auncient Priuiledges. The Barbarian Hunnes came againe into Italy, and burned Heraclea, Capo de Arger, and Chioggia. This Prince ouercame them, with very much honour, and this was the third time, that thoſe Strangers ſought to vſurpe on that State. Hee gouerned twentie

foure yeares.
            18 Orſo Badoaro, called himſelfe Participatio, and was the firſt that changed his name. He ſent for his Son Pietro to Conſtantinople, and he was made Protoſpatarie. In the yeare 920. he obtained of Rodolphus, Emperour and King of Italy, the confirmation of the Venitians auncient authority, to ſtamp Monies. He addicted himſelfe wholy to piety, and in his 20. yeare, hee renounced the Dignity, to make him-ſelfe a Monke, and liue priuately.
            19 Pietro Candiano the ſecond, was a worthy man, and made war on Lauterio Marqueſſe of Iſtria, who hindred the Traffique of the Venitians: he ouer-came him, and reconquered the people of Capo d'Iſtria. He vanquiſhed Albertus, Son to the Emperour Berengarius, who impatronizing himſelf of Rauenna, impeached the paſſage of the Venitians Ships. In his time, Maydens were ſtolne by the Teſtaines, to ioyne in marriage with them; but they were ſoone recouered. He gouerned ſeauen yeares.
            20 Pietro Badoaro, the Sonne of Orſo, was redéemed by him from the Sclauonians. Hée gouerned but two yeares and ſeauen moneths, alwaies in peace, which he much affected. Berengarius the Emperour did him many fauours, for his great deſerts.
            21 Pietro Candiano the third, Sonne to the ſecond Candiano, aſſociated himſelfe in his dignity with his ſon Pietro; & at two ſeuerall times armed 33. Shippes againſt the Narentines; but

at the ſecond time, he made peace with them. His ſon being reproued by him for his bad behauior; reuolted from him, and againſt the Common-wealth. The people would haue ſlaine him, but he was ſent into exile: where ioyning with Guydo, Sonne of Berengarius; hee endangered the Common-wealth. Whereat his father grieuing, died in his fiftéenth yeare of his gouernment.
            22 Pietro Candiano the fourth, being repealed from exile (albeit the people had ſworne neuer to receiue him) was made prince with very great applauſe. Hee dealt in ſuch ſort with Pope Iohn the 12. that the Churches of Grada was made Patriarchall, and Metropolitane of all the Venitians State, and of Iſtria. Otho the Emperour, granted him many honourable priuiledges. Hée ruined Vderzo, and was ſlaine with his Sonne, in a ſedition of the people: hauing gouerned 20. yeares.
            23 Pietro Orſeolo, was a man altogether deuout, and was elected by the people againſt his will. He would very often walke in an vnknown habite, to viſite the Houſes of poore people and Hoſpitalles. Hee appeaſed the diſſentions betwéen the Venitians, and them of Capo d'Iſtria, who yéelding themſelues tributarie. Hée went with Beato Romualdo of Rauenna, to liue religiouſlie. Hée gouerned two yeares and two moneths, dooing many woorthy and charitable déedes.
            24 Vitale Candiano, Sonne of Peitro the third, made the confederacy with the Emperour

               Otho. He fell ſicke ſo ſoone as hee entred vppon his charge: wherfore he became a Monk, hauing gouerned about a yeare.
            25 Tribuno Memo, was very rich, but no man of State. In his time happened great diſſentions, betwéene the Families of Moreſina and Caloprina, by reaſon wherof, many notorious murders were committed. He took part with the Moreſini, which cauſed the other faction to withdraw themſelues to Verona to the Emperour Otho. He gaue the Iſle of Saint Giorgio Maggiore to the Abbat of Moreſini: And renounced the Principality in his twelfth yeare, entering into Religion.
            26 Pietro Orſeolo the ſecond, being a verie diſcréete man, ordered the matter ſo well with the Emperours Baſilius and Alexius, that the Venitians were exempted from Toules and taxations. Otho the Emperour lying at Verona, did highly fauour him; and, among other graces, to hold one of his Sonnes at Baptiſme. He was the firſt that extended their Confines on the ſea, winning many places in Iſtria and Dalmatia. Hauing cauſed the Church and Pallace to be finiſhed in his time, hee died the 
                  •
               8. yeare of his Principality.
            27 Ottone Orſeolo, hauing gouerned ſome ſpace with his Father Pietro, was confirmed in the dignity, at the age of eighteen years. He won ſuch reputation, that Geta King of Hungaria, gaue him one of his Siſters in marriage. In perſon he conquered them of Iſtria, who were become

Rebels; And went into Dalmatia, in the enterpriſe againſt Creſmura. At length, the malicious enuiers of his glories, deuiſed a conſpiracy againſt him, and hee was confined into Greece, in the 17. yeare of his rule.
            28 Pietro Centranico, or Barbolano, ſuccéeded next to Otho. But hauing not well qualified all diſſentions, as well concerning the Cittizens remouing, as the other neighbours: he was compelled to forſake the dignitie, and make himſelfe a Monke. Orſo, Brother of Otho, returned from Conſtantinople, being Patriarch of Grada, and he was conſtituted in expectation of Othos comming. He continued about a yeare in the pallace, and forſooke the Principality, newes béeing brought of Othos death. Dominico Orſeolo would then perforce vſurpe the Dignity, but hée was expelled by the people the next morning, and dyed at Rauenna.
            
            29 Dominico Flabanico, was elected during his exile, by the faction of them that had excluded Dominico Orſolo. In his time, and in the yeare 1040. the national Councel was held, for gouernment of the Eccleſiaſticks. He made the Familie of Orſeolo ſuſpitious to the State, by his owne meanes, and laboured for their vtter ſupplantation. He gouerned ten yeares, foure months, and twelue daies.
            30 Dominico Contarini was very pleaſing to the people. He brought Dalmatia to peace, béeing heauily burdened with the rebellion of Zara. Hée fauored the Normans againſt Robert K. of Apulia.
               
And the diſcord which happened betwéene the Common-wealth, and Pepo Patriarch of Aquileia, was by him qualified. Hee builded the Monaſtery on the Lido, and died in his 28. yeare.
            31 Dominico Silino, won himſelfe ſuch reputation, that Nicephorus Emperor of Conſtantinople, gaue him his ſiſter in marriage; by whoſe perſwaſion he made war vpon the forenamed K. Robert of Apulia, and (at the firſt attempt) returned with a very honorable victory, poſſeſing himſelfe of Duras. But at his ſecond aduenture, he fought with ſmall aduantage; whereby enſued the diminution of his credit. He pergetted the Church of S. Marke with Marble, firſt and before any other, cauſing it alſo to bee beautified with an artificiall Checquer-worke. Hee died in the 13. yeare of his gouernment.
            32 Vitale Faliero beeing made Duke, he immediatly obtained of Alexius, then Emperor, to haue the Soueraignety of Dalmatia and Croatia. Henry, ſucceſſour in the Empire, did him many great fauours: and comming in deuotion to Venice, hée held on of his Daughters at Baptiſme. The Office of Proprieties was conſtituted in his time, and the workemanſhip of Saint Markes Church continued. He died in his ſixtéen yeare.
            33 Vitale Michele, by his woorthy aduenturing on the Sea, did very farre extend the Common-wealths limits. Hée made the Eaſterne warre, by perſwaſion of Pope Vrban the ſecond, for conqueſt of the holy Land, with the Princes

of Chriſtendome. The Iſle of Smyrna, Suria and Ieruſalem were then recouered from ye Infidels. He died in his ſixt yeare.
            34 Ordelafo Faliero, Sonne of Vitale, aſſiſted King Baldwine againſt the Infidels, in conqueſt of the Holy Land; and made ſuch progreſſion, as they deuided the Empire betwéene them, thoroughout all the Kingdome of Iudea. In the eight yeare of his Principality, Malamocco was almoſt all burned and ſubmerged▪ by reaſon whereof, the Epiſcopall Sée was tranſferred to Chioggia; He went in perſon to the war againſt Zara, which was become rebellious, and winning the victory: hee would néedes returne thither againe a ſecond time, and on the like occaſion; where he died in Armes, in the 15. yeare of his principality.
            35 Dominico Michele, being made Duke for his high repute and merit; went to giue ayde to the Chriſtians in the holy Land. With 200. wel appointed ſhips and Gallies, hee made the Infidels to raiſe their ſiedge from before Ioppa. Hée took Tyre, which he gaue to Vaumond Patriarch of Ieruſalem. Emanuell the Emperor made war againſt him, from whom he won Chio, Rhodes, Samos, Mitylline, and Iſter. Hée renounced his Principality, in the 13. yeare of his rule.
            36 Pietro Polani, Kinſman to Michele, was a very wiſe Man, inſomuch as hee was made Arbitratour of the difference betwéene Conrade and Emanuell the Emperour. Hée made Warre againſt them of Piſa and Padua, whom

hée conquered. He armed himſelfe againſt the Duke of Apulia, in behalfe of the ſaid Emanuell, to whoſe Empire he added many worthy poſſeſſions. Some ſay, it was his Sonne that won all the battailes, and that himſelfe, being fallen ſick, returned thence, and died in his eightéene yeare of rule.
            37 Dominico Moreſini, hée ſwept the Gulfe of certaine Pyrats of Ancona, the chéefe whereof, béeing called Guiſcardo, was taken and hanged. He laide ſiedge to Pola, which hée tooke, with Parenzo; which Citties were become rebellious in Iſtria. Hee held confederacy with William King of Sicilie, of whom hee obtained many exemptions for the Traffique of his Merchants. Zara made the Metropolitane Cittie, at his inſtaunce, and hee ſo preuayled, that Dominico his Sonne was made an Earle. He beautifyed the buildinges of the Cittie of Venice, and began the Tower of Saint Marke. He died ſeauen monthes after the eight yeare of his Election.
            38 Vitale Michele the ſecond, ſubdued the Tarentines, which nowe had rebelled the third time. He impriſoned Vlrick Patriarch of Aquileia, and twelue Channons. In an hundred dayes, hée put foorth an hundred Gallies, and twenty Ships on the Sea, againſt the Emperor Emanuell. The great Family of the Iuſtiniani, were, in his time brought to one onely man, and hee was become Religious; whom hee tooke forth of his Monaſtery (by the Popes conſent)

and gaue him his owne daughter in mariage, be
               
                  •
               auſe he would not haue ſo worthy a houſe to bee extinct. There happened a great peſtilence in hys time, the occaſion whereof, the people in theyr weake iudgement laid vpon him. He was wounded, and dyed, hauing gouerned xvij. years, and xxvij. daies.
            39 Sebaſtiano Ziani was the firſt that euer was elected by the eleauen electors. In his time there was a great Schiſme in the Churche, by meanes of the Emperor Frederick Barbaroſſa, who cauſed Alexander the thirde to forſake the Sée, Octauian hauing bin made Anti-pope. Alexander made his retirement to Venice, where hauing a long time ſerued in the Monaſtery of la Charita; he was in the end knowne, and taken thence by the Prince and Seigneury. Héereupon, Barbaroſſa made warre againſt the Venetians: but his ſonne Octauian being taken, he mediated reconciliation betwéene them. He died in the fift yeare of his gouernment.
            40 Orio Malipiero, or Maſtropetro, was the firſt Duke elected by the 40. and for that purpoſe was created by the death of Ziani. He hadde ſixe Councellors allowed him▪ to authorize his deliberations. He reconquered Zara, that had nowe the fourth time rebelled. He ſent ſupply vnto the Chriſtians againſt the Moores, who beganne to vſurpe in the Holy-Lande, 88. yeares after that Baldwine had deliuered it. Ptolomais was recouered▪ and Andronicus, ſucceſſor to Emanuell the Emperour, deliuered many Venitian Merchants.

He renounced the Principality in his 14 yeare, and entred into Religion.
            41 Henrico Dandolo was likewiſe elected by the forty. They of Zaro were once againe vanquiſhed, and Pola conquered. In his time was the ſurprizall of Conſtantinople, and the acquiſition of the Eaſt Empire, wherein hee aſſiſted the Princes and French Barons. Hee dyed in his thirtéenth yeare, being Generall of all the Chriſtian Army.
            42 Pietro Ziani, ſon of Sebaſtian, was made Duke within a while after the death of Dandalo, the Correctors being then firſt inſtituted. In his time came Ambaſſadors from Athens & Achaia, to ſubmit themſelues in obedience to the Common-wealth. Candie was then peopled with a Colony of Noble Vinitians. He married Conſtance, Daughter to Tancrede King of Sicilie. In the end, hee renounced the Principality, hauing gouerned 24. yeares.
            43 Giacomo 
                     •
                  epolo, was made Duke by chance, in concurrency of Renieri Candolo, who had as many voyces as he. Candie rebelled, and the ſeditious were ſeuerely chaſtiſed. Zara, that had long borne the yoake, was now reduced vnder obedience. Hee had Warre againſt them of Ferrara, and againſt Ezzelino, who would haue inueſted himſelfe with Padua. In concluſion, he gaue ouer the Principality in his twentith yeare, and dyed ſoone after.
            44 Marino Moreſini, was made Duke by the one and fortith, by reaſon of the precedent concurrence.

In his time was another Colony of Noblemen ſent into Candie, who builded there Canea. Hee made Warre againſt Ezzelino, who beſiedged Mantua, and who (in a furious rage) cauſed twelue thouſande Paduans to bee hewne in peeces, which he had with him then in his Army. He died in the fourth year of his Principality.
            45 Reuieri Zeno Podeſta, at Fermo was elected Duke, and ſent to bee fetcht thence with foure Gallies. Vnder him, the Commonwealth won a famous victorie, againſt them of Genes: but the contentment therewith was very briefe, becauſe Michaell Paleologus expelled both the French-men and Venitians out of Conſtantinople, being ayded by the Genewaie forces, whych was eight and fiftye yeares after the ſurprizing of the ſayde Citty: yet once more (after that) the ſame people were againe reconquered: And hauing gouerned this Dignity ſixtéene yeares, he dyed.
            46 Lorenzo Tiepolo was made Duke, in memory of the victory hee had againſte them of Genes at Tyre: hee allyed two of his Sonnes, (verie Nobly) with two ſtrange Ladies: by reaſon whereof, a Law was then made, that the like might not afterward be done. He brought Seruia in obedience to the Common-wealth, and the Bolognians were vanquiſhed by him: he gouerned ſeauen yeares, and xxv. daies.
            47 Giouanni Contarini, being aged eightie yeares, and Atturney of S. Marke, was made

Duke. The Law againſt illegitimates was then enacted, and they excluded from all publicke offices. There were ſome rebellions moued in Iſtria, and by them of Genes, but they were quickly appeaſed. At length, through vnwieldineſſe of age, and by aduiſe of the Senat, he gaue ouer the dignity, hauing gouerned foure yeares, and ſix moneths.
            48 Giouanni Dandolo was elected, beeing then abſent. The Citty was (in his time) much afflicted by water, and an Earthquake. He made war in Iſtria, aginſt the Patriarch of Aquileia, & the Count of Goritia. At the inſtance of pope Nicholas, he aſſiſted the Archbyſhop of Tripoli with 25. gallies. He died ſeauen months after his viij. yeare of rule.
            49 Pietro Gradanigo, a man of great courage, deliuered the common-wealth from two important dangers. One, was a high diſgrace, which hapned in a battel againſt them of Genes: The other, was the conſpiracy of Baiamonte, which was boldly checked with weapon in hande, vpon the place of S. Marke. It was then ordained, that Noblemen onely ſhould gouerne, and the counſel of tenne was then inſtituted. Hauing ruled 22. yeares and nine months, he died.
            50 Marino Giorgio, was a man of ſuch life, that they termed him a Saint. Venice was continually excommunicated in his time, by reaſon of the taking of Ferrara. Zara rebelled againe the ſixte time, and much labour it coſt to reduce it vnder obedience againe. After, hee

builded the Monaſtery of S. Dominick, and died (aged 81. yeares) in his firſt yeare, hauing gouerned ten months, and ten daies.
            52 Giouanni Soranzo, had the honor of recouering Zara, and many other places, which had reuolted in his Predeceſſors time. Negropont, was re-obtained, and Warre afreſh commenced againſt them of Genes. The excommunication was quitted from Venice, by the interpoſition of Franciſco Dandolo, knéeling before the Pope, with a Chaine of yron about his necke. The number of Atturneyes of S. Marke, was increaſed to ſixe. He gouerned ſixtéene yeares, and ſixe months.
            52 Franciſco Dandolo, who had ſo lowely humbled himſelfe for his Countreyes good, was therefore exalted to her higheſt Dignitie. They of Pola, and of Valeſia, ſubmitted themſelues to the Common-wealth, which gaue way vnto the warre againſt the Patriarch of Aquilea. Padua was taken on Albert Scaliger, and Treuiſa and the County remained to the Common-wealth. This man was of the league with the Chriſtian Princes, againſte the Turke, and in his time were ſixty ſeuerall Ambaſſadors at Venice. He gouerned ten yeares, and ten months.
            55 Bartolomeo Gradenigo, Atturney of Saint Marke, was made Duke at 76. yeares of age▪ by the interceſſion of Andrea Dandolo, and his ceſſation. In his time was Venice myraculouſly deliuered from a mighty imminent invndation. Candie rebelled, and the Rebelles

were ſeuerely punniſhed. There happened a great Dearth in the Cittie, which droue the people to diſcontentment. Hee died in his fourth yeare.
            54 Andrea Dandolo, who had before reſigned his place to Gradenigo, cauſed the dearth for to ceaſe, by ſending for great ſtore of Corne out of Sicilie. Hee obtained of the king of Babylon, frée Nauigation into Egypt. Zara rebelled the ſeauenth time, and was reprized. The Warre betwéene them of Genes and the Citty, was trobled by two great accidents: One, was an earthquake verie dreadfull, and the other, was a gréeuous Peſtilence. Hee gouerned twelue yeares, wanting ſome few months.
            55 Marino Faliero, was elected Duke, being then Ambaſſador at Rome. Hauing receyued an iniurie by ſome perticulers, which was not reuenged according vnto his owne deſire: he determined in the eighty yeare of his age, to make himſelfe abſolutely Lorde, without any controule. The Conſpiracy beeing diſcouered by Nicholo Lion; he had his head ſmitten off within the Pallace. And it was ordayned, that his Picture ſhoulde not bee placed among the other Dukes, but the place being left voyde, had onely this Writing. This is the place of Marino Faliero, who, for his greeuous offence, had his head cut off: he was Duke but ten moneths.
            56 Giouanni Gradenigo had an excellent ſpirite, but a much miſhappen countenance. The

Warre was renewed againſte the Genes, which tearmined with a mutuall peace. Hee had warre againſt the King of Hungarie for Dalmatia. Treuiſa was beſiedged in his time, and thether hee went in perſon. He gouerned one yeare, thrée moneths and fourtéene daies.
            57 Giouanni Delfino, was elected Duke when he was in Treuiſa, defending it againſt the King of Hungary. The Senat ſent to demand free paſſage for him, which being denied, he came foorth with 200. horſe to beard the enemy, & ſo attained to Margliera, where the Senat in perſon receiued him. In ſhort time he gaue end to this war, & recouered Conciliano, Serualla, & Aſola. He made peace for the ſoueraignty of Dalmatia, and died aged 45. yeares, hauing gouerned foure yeares, two months, & eleuen daies.
            58 Lorenzo Celſo, vpon a falſe bruit of a victory againſt them of reuolted Genes, was made duke in concurrence of Pietro Gradenigo, Leonardo Dandolo, & Marro Cornaro. Candie rebelled again, & it was regained with very great difficulty. On this occaſion, a Iuſts and feaſt was publickly made in the place of S. Mark: he died 2. dayes after the fourth yeare of his Principality.
            59 Marco Cornaro, a man very wiſe & learned, was ſent into Candie, which was rebellious, and there he made a cruel bloody war: the Pope granting plenary Indulgence to al ſuch as went thether. The Rebels being ſeuerely puniſhed, ye commonwealth ſent to Pope Vrbane 5. a certain nū
               ber of their Gallies. He gouerned 2. years, 5. moneths and 24. daies.
            
               60 Andrea Contarini, 
               
                  •
               led to the Paduans, fearing to be elected Duke, and as preſaging the ruine which (in his time) wold betide the common-wealth. Firſt of all, he made warre with them of Trieſta, then ſoon after, with Carrara for the confines of Padua: and ſuch was the fortune, that Chioggia beeing taken, the Cittie of Venice found it ſelfe to bee in extreame daunger. But in the ende, hee went and oppoſed him-ſelfe (in perſon) againſt the Enemies, vanquiſhed them, and regained Chioggia. Hee dyed, hauing gouerned fiftéene yeares, foure months, and fiftéene daies.
            61 Michele Moriſini, was a man well furniſhed with Learning and Wiſedome. Some ſay, that in his time the Iſle of Thenedes was taken, and not in the time of his Predeceſſour Contarini. There were diuers Lawes then made, and (amongſt others) it was ordayned, that Homicides, who formerly had beene hanged, ſhould afterwardes haue their heads ſmitten off. He liued but four months, & fiue dayes in his Dignity, and died in the 74. yeare of his age.
            62 Antonio Veniero, was a rigorous obſeruer of Iuſtice. He confined one of his owne Sonnes in exile, becauſe he had (ouer-lightly) offended the Familie of a Noble Venitian. Hee made league with Galeazzo the Vicounte, againſt Carrara, whereupon hee tooke Padua. Hee aſſiſted the Emperour Emmanuell againſt the Turke, and gaue ayde alſo vnto Sigiſmond,
               
King of Hungaria, who afterward came to the Empire. The place of Saint Marke, and that of the Rialto, were greatly beautified in his time. He died two months and thrée daies, after the 18 yeare of his rule.
            63 Michele Steno, had the dignity of Atturney of Saint Marke, with that of Duke. Hée wonne an important battaile againſt the Genewaies. Carrera was now the laſt time vanquiſhed, and Padua and Verona ſurprized. They of Vicenza, to frée themſelues from his tyranny, yéelded themſelues to the Common-wealth. Ladiſlaus King of Hungaria, did likewiſe for-goe Zara. He died, hauing gouerned 13. yeares and thrée daies.
            64 Thomaſo Mocenigo, was firſt Generall of the Goulfe. Hee embraced peace, to the ende, that the Cittizens might Traffique. Vdina became obedient to the Common-wealth, with the Countrey of Friuoli; by meanes of the Lordes of Sauorguani, who were made Noble-men of Venice. The Florentines were alſo ſuccoured againſt the Duke of Milaine. In his tenth yeare he died.
            65 Franceſco Foſcari did ſtoutly repreſſe the Duke of Milaine, who procéeded too farre on the liberties of Italy. Breſcia, Bergamo, and other Citties of Lombardie were then won: among which were Loda and Parma, and Rauenna in Romania. Hée made alſo a large progreſſe on the Seas, euen into Morea. The Senate aſſiſted Paleodogus the Emperour, againſt the Turkes,
               
who vſurped Conſtantinople in the yeare 1453. Hée was made Arbitratour by the Duke of Milaine, in certaine differences of neighbour-hood. The King of Dacia was made a Noble Venitian: And afterward, the Duke (in regard of his age and infirmities) was diſmiſſed, hauing gouerned 34. yeares, and ſixe months.
            66 Paſchale Malapiero, was appointed in the place of Foſcari, being Atturny of S. Mark, who died two daies after his diſmiſſion. Hee made a Law, that in following times, the Duke ſhould not be depoſed. In his daies, the famous Arte of Printing was brought into Venice. The Arſenall was greatly encreaſed: And hee maintained the people in peace, during foure years, 6. months, and fiue daies that he gouerned.
            67 Chriſtophoro Moro, of Procuratour of S. Marke, was made Duke. He liued for ſome time in peace, till the ſecond yeare of his gouernment; and then the Turke (proud of his ſurprizall of Conſtantinople) declared Warre againſt the Venitians. He made heace with Pope Pius the fift, and the Duke of Burgundy: But the Pope dying, they remained alone, and maintayned war which laſted twenty yeares. And yet he dyed, hauing raigned 9 yeares and ſixe months.
            68 Nicholo T
                     •
                  ono had ſuch good happe, that (in his time) the common-wealths affaires went well againſt the Turke. Pietro Mocenigo, General in the Archipelagus, vnited his power with the Popes. The King of Naples, & they of Rhods ſent 85. Gallies together, and tooke Satalia, a cittie

of Pamphilia. He made league likewiſe with the King of Perſia, againſt the Turke. Iames King of Cyprus comming to Venice, eſpouſed Catharina Cornara, adoptiue Daughter of S. Mark. He gouerned one year, eight months, and fiue daies.
            69 Nicholo Marcello, Atturney of S. Matk, after ſome lawes made by the Correctours; was elected Duke. In his time there was a conſpiracie in Cyprus, to haue the Kingdome fall into the power of Ferdinand King of Naples. Pietro Morcenigo went thither with a great Armie, where hee appeaſed all troubles, and ſeuerelie chaſtiſed the Rebelles. Scutari, a Cittie in Liburnia, was beſiedged by the Turke, and valiantly defended by Antonio Loredano. This Duke gouerned one yeare, foure monthes, and 17. daies.
            70 Pietro Mocenigo was elected Duke, in deſert of all his worthy deeds. Lepanto was beſiedged in his time by the Turke, & vertuouſly maintained by Antonio Loredano. They brought their power likewiſe before the Iſle of Stalimena, but the ſame Loredano (by his valour) defended it. The Daughter to King Ferdinand came to Venice, with the Cardinall her Brother, where they were roially entertained. This Prince cauſed a Mony to be ſtamped, which he ſirnamed by his owne name: And gouerned but two yeares and nine months.
            71 Andrea Vendramino had ſuch ill hap in his gouernment, that the Venitian Army was

two ſeuerall times put to flight by the Turkes: Once, néere to Croya in Albania, and the other, in the Countrey of Friuli. He was a goodly man of perſon, and had a moſt beautifull Ladie to his Wife, by whom hée had as goodlie Children, whom he allyed in marriage with the chéefeſt Families. He gouerned one yeare and eyght months.
            72 Giouanni Mocenigo, Brother to Pietro Mocenigo, hauing continued the Warre againſt the Turke; in the ende made peace with him: Ordering the matter ſo, that hée left Scutari and Stipula in libertie of commerce, and power to kéepe a Deputie at Conſtantinople. Hée made Warre againſt Ferdinand King of Naples, at the inſtance of Pope Sixtus the fourth, which occaſioned the long Warre called Sociale. In the ende, peace was made, the Common-wealth hauing gotten Rouigo and Poleſano. The Cittie became much diſgraced by fire, and a peſtilent ſickneſſe: The Prince dyed, hauing raigned ſeauen yeares and ſix moneths.
            73 Marco Barbarigo, the Plague béeing ceaſed, cauſed all to bée new builded, which the Fire had defaced in the Pallace. Hee was greatly differing from from all other Princes, to wit, in pardoning, and forgetting perticuler iniuries doone vnto him: but ſuch as were committed againſt the State, he would haue reuenged with ſtrictteſt ſeueritie. The Grand Signeur or Turke, ſent a perticular Ambaſſadour

vnto him, to congratulate his election. He gouerned but nine months.
            74 Agoſtino Barbarigo, withſtood the progreſſe of Charls 8. King of France, when he made war againſt them of Arragon, for the kingdome of Naples, which he conquered. The Turke vſurped on the Common weales of Lepanto, Modona, and Corona. The Kingdome of Cyprus was brought vnder the tutelage of the Senate, and Quéen Catharina brought thence to Venice. The Office de la Sante was created, by occaſion of the Peſtilence. The Duke gouerned 15. years, and 21. daies.
            75 Leonardo Lauredano ſuſtained a very rigorous war againſt the chiefeſt Princes of the world: there being a league made at Cambray, betwéene the Emperor Maximilian; the King of France; them of Naples; and the Dukes of Sauoy, Ferrara and Mantua, incited thereto by Pope Iulius the ſecond. All the whole eſtate of firme land was ſurprized, except Treuiſa; but in the end it was recouered. He liued in the Principality ninetéene yeares, eight months, and 20. daies.
            76 Antonio Grimani, being Generall, had a moſt infamous diſrout or foile, by which occaſion, he was diſmiſſed of the charge of Procurator of S. Marke, and confined to Cherſo. Hee brake his limitation, and with-drewe himſelfe to Rome to the Cardinall his Sonne: where hee had ſo many woorthy Offices impoſed vppon him, as, not onely he was re-eſtabliſhed in his

Atturnies place againe; but hée was likewiſe made Duke, at the age of eighty two yeares, and gouerned but one yeare, ten monthes, and two daies.
            77 Andrea Gritti, gaining beſt part of the glory, for the repriſall of Padua, was in very great eſtéeme. Hee dealt ſo with the King of Fraunce, (to whom he was Priſoner) that his Maieſty allyed himſelfe with the Common-wealth, and Breſcia and Verona were reconquered. Hee knew very well, how to make his carriage pleaſing to the Senate, during the warres betwéene Charles the fift, Emperour, and King Fraunces the firſt, as alſo againſt Solyman. Hee gouerned fiftéene yeares, ſeauen monthes, and eyght daies.
            78 Peitro Lando continued the defence of the Common-wealth againſt the Turk: with whom (at laſt) he made a peace, knowing how to make vſe thereof, & maintaine his owne charge, while the war continued betwéen Charles the fift, and King Frances the firſt. He gouerned ſixe yeares and eight months.
            79 Franceſco Donato, making benefit alſo of this peace, beautified the Citty with many goodly buildings, beſides that of the Pallace. He ſent ſuccour to the Emperour, againſt certain Rebels in Germany. The Princes of Guiſe, comming to Venice in his time, were entertained as fitted their dignity. He gouerned ſeauen yeares and ſix months.
            80 Marco Antonio Treuiſano, a Man altogether

deuoute, laboured that the Common-wealth might abound in goodneſſe and ciuill manners; preuenting (by his owne worthy example) that vices ſhould not be winekt at, as, in too many Countries, they are. He gouerned a yeare, wanting thrée daies.
            81 Franceſco Veniero, could ſo well ſkill of gouerning the Common-wealth, that albeit the Turke (in his time) made Warre in Apulia, and the King of Fraunce in Tuſcanie: yet all was well at Venice, and the Quéene of Poland Royallie welcommed thither. Hée gouerned two yeares, one moneth, and twentie daies.
            82 Lorenzo Priuli, was ſollicited (by the Pope) to make Warre againſt the Emperor. But hée being a Friend to the Common-wealth; by no meanes would offend him, but mediated a pacification of thoſe affaires. In his time peace was made betwéene Fraunce and Spayne, and Charles the fift dyed. This Prince gouerned thrée yeares, eleauen months, and eyght daies.
            83 Girolamo Priuli, Brother to the precedent Prince, enioyed thoſe great Honours which Pope Pius the fourth gaue to the Common-wealth: And all his delight was to heare Ambaſſadours in the Hall of Kinges. In his time the Councell of Trent was concluded, whither he ſent (as Ambaſſadors) Nicholo de Ponte, and Matheo Dandolo.
            
            The Common-wealth held (at Baptiſme)

the Sonne to the Duke of Sauoy b
                  •
                a Deputie, borne of Marguerite of France. He dyed, hauing gouerned eight yeares, two monthes, and foure daies.
            84 Pietro Loredano, by the concurrence of two others, was elected Duke, contrarie to the hope of all, or his owne expectation. The Arſenall was burned in his time, and there then alſo happened a very great dearth of all thinges. Selim, Succeſſour to Solyman, tooke occaſion to breake peace with the Common-wealth, demaunding of them the Kingdome of Cyprus, and mooued Warre vppon this Subiect. He gouerned foure yeares, fiue monthes, and eight daies.
            85 Luigi Mocenigo, Warre beeing kindled againſt the Turke; loſt the Kingdome of Cyprus, Nicoſia béeing taken, and Famagoſta ſurrendered. The Common-wealth made league with Pope Pius the fift, and Phillip King of Spayne
               ▪ ſo that their Armies (béeing ioyned together in the yeare 1571. they obtayned a woorthy victorie againſt the Turkes. Soone after, Henry the third, King of Fraunce, came to Venice, where hee was magnyficently entertayned. This Prince dyed in his ſeauenth yeare.
            86 Sebaſtiano Veniero was elected by common voyce, and with ſuch applauſe, that dyuers Turkes ranne to him, and kiſſed his féete. Hée created fiue Correctours of the Lawes, for ruling the affaires of the Pallace. The

Citty was deliuered of a dangerous plague, and the Pallace was againe very greatly defaced by fire. This Prince gouerned not aboue one whol yeare.
            87 Nicholo de Ponte, was created Duke, a man very learned in al the Sciences, and whereof he had made publicke profeſſion in Venice. He paſſed thorow all the honours of the Common-wealth, wherewith the Cittizens coulde poſſibly gratifie him. The Seminary of S. Marke was inſtituted by him. Certaine Princes of Iapponia arriuing then at Venice, were by him moſt honourably entertained. He builded the Bridge of Canareggio: and gouerned ſeauen yeares, nine months, and thirteene daies.
            88 Paſchale Cicogna, Procurator of S. Mark, was elected when he was at diuine ſeruice in the Church. In his time there was great warres betwéene France and Spaine about Piedmont, and betwéene the Emperor and the Turke, for ſome parts in Hungaria
               ▪ He cauſed the Town of Palma to be builded, in the confines of the countrey of Friuli, and a newe Caſtle or Fortreſſe, in the Iſle of Cephalonia. He hadde the honour of the wonderfull Bridge of the Rialto, which hee builded: And gouerned ten yeares, or thereabout.
            89 Marino G
                     •
                  imini, Procurator of S. Mark, was ſo highly in grace and fauour of the people, that on the day of his election, they declared extraordinary ſignes of ioy, and continued them for many following daies. The ſecond yeare of his Principality, he cauſed the Dutcheſſe his Wife

to be crowned in great Triumph. At which time Pope Clement the eight ſent hir the Roſe of gold. In his time much ioy and triumph was made, for the peace concluded betwéen the Kings of France and Spayne. Vppon occaſion of the Popes comming to Ferrara, obtained by the Eccleſiaſticall Eſtate, the Cardinall Aldobrandino paſſed thence to Venice, where he was moſt honorably welcommed with diuers other Cardinals. There was ſuch an extraordinary ouer-flow of waters, in the fift yeare of his Principality, yt the Barks, Boats, and Gundeloes floated on the place of S. Marke, euen as if they had béen in a ful maine riuer. He dyed, and was much bemoaned of the people, hauing gouerned ten yeares, and eight moneths.
            90 Leonardo Dandolo, hauing by his woorthy deſeruings, ſinguler wiſedom and dexterity, managed paſſed affaires, and gone through al honors of the Common-wealth, giuing euident teſtimony of his care and faithfulneſſe, was aduanced in the place of Grimani, the tenth day of Ianuary, 1606. He had bin ſent Ambaſſador to Conſtantinople to Mahomet (hee being newlie come to the Empire of the Eaſt) in the common-wealthes-name, to ſalute him with accuſtomed complements. He hath ſuch a practiue brain, and ſo happy a memory, ſeated in a ſoule ſo religiouſly zealous for common benefite, that the Senate hath referred more to him then to any other of his Predeceſſors. The Citty hath (in his time) béene excommunicated, by Paulus Quintus now pope,

about ſome pretentions appertaining to his Sée: But it may well be ſaide of this Prince, that, againſt ſuch Thunder-clappes and lightning flaſhes, he hath ſhewne himſelfe like an immooueable Rocke, in defence of that eſtate in generall. In like manner, two principall Pillers of Chriſtendome, threatned great diſaſter and ruine: bu
                  •
                that moſt Chriſtian Henry the fourth, King of Fraunce, embracing thoſe two Collombes, vpheld both the one and other, & redreſſed all diſcontentment, by the entermiſe of his Ambaſſadors, and hath erected a Triumphall Arche, to the immortality of his glorie. This Prince now liuing happily in peace, doth dayly acknowledge to Fraunce, his particular affection for ſuch fauour, and may (in time) much better declare it. God long preſerue him, and all other good Princes.
            
               
                  ❧ Of the Kingdome of Spaine.
               
                  
                     SPaine was (in her yonger daies) held by ſundry petty Kings and Tetrarches;Spaine deuided (at firſt) into ſix Prouinces. viz.

                        1. Terracon.
                        2. Carthage.
                        3. Luſ
                              •
                           tania.
                        4. Gallacia.
                        5. Boetia.
                        6. Tingintaua.
                     
                   and afterward became deuided into many Commonweals. The Carthiginians (a people of Affrica) hazzarding their fortune thither, helde one part thereof, and poſſeſſed themſelues of many Citties, Townes, and places, vntill they were expelled thence by

the Romaines, in the time of the Punick warres. Since when, it was continually ſubiect vnto the Commonwealth of the Romaine, & reduced into forme of a Prouince only, in the raign of the Emperor Auguſtus. So it remained till the Emperor Honorius; in whoſe daies the Vandales (a people of the North parts) broght it vnder their command.433. But they were (ſoone after) chaſed thence by the Gothes, who eſtabliſhed there the ſeate of their kingdom, which in that kind they maintained, for the ſpace of about two hundred years: nor were they then called kings of Spaine, but kings of the Goths. In the raigne of Roderick, king of the Goths, the Moores of Affrica entred Spaine,
                  The Moors in poſſeſsion of all Spaine. in the yeare 715. they beeing brought thither by one named Iulian, in very deſpightfull indignation, and to ſhape out a way to his bloody reuenge, becauſe King Roderick had diſhonoured his Siſter, or (as ſome others ſay) his daughter. And ſo did the Moores poſſeſſe themſelues (wel-néer) of al Spain, ſeizing the city of Tolledo, which was thē the capital city. Thus ended the kingdom & name of the Goths in Spain. Nor reſted they ſo, but purſued on their conqueſt ſtill, & there remained none but Galitia, the Aſturies & Leon, which countries king Pelagius, Vnkle & ſucceſſor of Roderick, had fled to for refuge, & there ſhut vp himſelf, in regard that thoſe places were inuironed with Mountaines & might wel defend & ſhelter him for ſome time. But his ſucceſſors, being hardly preſſed by the Sarrazins, could no longer reſiſt: wherefore, vnder the raigne of Alphonſus the ſeconde, they

were forced to craue the helpe of Charlemaigne, King of Fraunce, by whoſe valour and Vertue, the Moores were beaten thence a great way, and had bin quite caſt out of the Country, if the Spaniards mallice had bin no hinderance thereto. Afterward, the kings of Leon and Galicia (for ſuch were then their only titles) being ſo formerly preſerued, began ſomwhat to increaſe in power. And in regarde of this expedition, performed by the French, the ſtrength of the Moores was ſo weakned and diminiſhed, that many other Kingdoms were eſtabliſhed in Spaine,
                  The Kingdomes of Nauarre & Arragon. as that of Nauarre by Enocho Counte of Bigorre, in the yeare, 960. which he tooke away from the Moores and Sarrazins, by a very valiant conqueſt of them. The Son of this Enocho, being named Garzias, ſecond king of Nauarre, woon and conquered Arragon from the ſame enemies. And afterward, in the year 116. was Arragon reduced to be a kingdome, by the Will and Teſtament of Sanchio the Great, fourth King of Nauarre, for loue to Ramyrus his Natural Sonne, who was the firſt King thereof. This was the ſame Sanchio, who being Earle of Caſtille in the kingdome of Leon, tooke on him firſt the name of King Caſtille, which he left vnto his Sonne Ferdinand.
                  Portugall conquered from the Moores. The Kingdome of Portugal was alſo conquered from the ſame Moores, by Earle Henry, Sonne vnto the Duke of Lorraine; who held it firſt of all, vnder Title of Earle, in the year, 1110. but quickly after brought he it to be a Kingdome. Spaine did continue ſo (in this kinde of State) for a long

time, deuided into many Kingdomes: And the Moores had alſo theyr abiding there, poſſeſſing ſtill a great part thereof, till ſuch time as
               
                  Ferdinand the fifte, King of Arragon,
                  1492 who was married to Iſabell, the onely heire of Caſtille: And he (wholly) expulſed the Moores out of Spaine, in the yeare, 1492. In no great diſtance of time after, he poſſeſſed himſelfe of Sicilie & Naples, inuading alſo the Eaſt Indiaes. But fraudulentlie he vſurped the Kingdom of Nauar,
                  The beginning of the kingdom of Spaine, and de
                        •
                     cent of their kings. againſt Iohn d'Albret, who was (indéede) the lawfull King. And it is this Ferdinand, and Iſabell his Wife, that (wee may ſay truely) the Kingdome of Spaine onely had beginning in. They left one onelie Daughter, named Ioane, who was married to
               
                  Phillip the firſt, of Auſtria, Sonne vnto the Emperor Maximillian, and Mary of Bourgundie: hee ſuccéeded in this Kingdome of Spaine, and other Countreyes beſide. He was likewiſe Earle of Bourgondie, of Flaunders, and Lorde of the Lowe-Countreyes, in the right of his Mother. In this his Marriage, was borne
               
                  Charles the fift, who was afterward Emperor.1516. Hee raigned nine and thirtie yeares, preſeruing his Prouinces verie happilie: And he left for ſucceſſour, both in Spaine, and the more part of his other Countries, his ſonne
               
                  Phillip the ſecond,1555 who raigned thrée and fortie yeares, hauing adioyned (to his other Eſtates) the Kingdome of Portugall, in the yeare of our

Lorde, 1580. and ſo (conſequentlie) all that which the Portugalles helde in the Eaſt Indiaes, and elſe-where, as in Affrica and Braſile, which came vnto him by the death of King Henrie the Cardinall. Hee died aged ſeauentie yeares, the thirtéenth day of September, 1598. No long time before his death, he hadde made peace with the mighty and moſt Chriſtian King of Fraunce and Nauarre, Henry the fourth.
               
                  1598
                  Phillip the thirde, his Sonne, ſuccéeded him, and raigneth as yet to this day. He married Margaret, Daughter to the Arch-Duke of Auſtria, by whom he had a Sonne, in the month of April, 1606.
               
                  Of Germany and the Princes Electors.
                  
                     Of Germany, and the Princes Electors.LIttle can we héere ſpeake of Germany, in regard it requireth a large & ample diſcourſe: Onely concerning the Princes Electors, I finde it recorded, that Pope Gregorie, the fifte of that name, being a Natiue of Saxonie in Germanie, and Kinſman to the Emperour Otho; to the end that the Empyre might long remaine, in the hands of them of his Nation, procured a Law to be made, with the conſent of Otho, about the election of the Emperor, in the yeare of our Lord, 1002. which Law was afterward duely kepte, and hath béene to our time, that it ſhoulde be alwayes lawful and permitted to the Allemaignes or Germaines only, to elect and chuſe the Prince, that was to be called Caeſar, and King of the Romaines, with the Title likewiſe of Soueraigne Emperour and Auguſtus, ſo ſoone as his election

was approoued. It was therefore ordered, that that thrée Eccleſiaſticall perſons, and foure of the Laytie, ſhoulde haue the full authority heerein, with the voyce of all the State in generall.Three Eccleſiaſtiks, and three Layickes, with addition of a fourth, the K. of Bohemia. The Eccleſiaſticall men, were the Arch-Byſhoppes of Magonoe, Treues, and Colongne; The Layickes were the Marqueſſe of Bradenbourg, the Count Palatine of Rhine, the Duke of Saxony, and the King of Bohemia, to all whoſe Succeſſors this Dignitie appertained. And the King of Bohemia was added for the ſeauenth Electour, to the end, of auoyding all differences which might happen in the election, and to iudge eſpecially ouer the other.
               
            
         
         
            ¶ A ſhort Chronologicall Diſcourſe of Fraunce, the Originall of that Nation, and a briefe Hiſtory of their kings, from Pharamond their firſt Gouernour, to Lewes 13. now raigning.
            ¶ To the Worſhipful Mayſter Richard Langley, Eſquire, Towne-Clarke of the Honourable Cittie of London.
            THe greater part of ſuch as haue Written, concerning the Originall and Etymologie of the Name Francs or Francions, who afterwarde came to bee called Frenchmen, haue ſcarſe faithfully or reſpectiuelie

handled that Subiect. Many ancient moderate Writers,The errour of Writers, about the names originall. as Sigisbert, Gregory of Tours, Aimonius the Monk, Hunibant, and the more part of our Chroniclers and Annaliſtes, made theyr whole recourſe to Dreames and Fables, becauſe they liued in thoſe barbarous times, when learning was trodden vnder-foot, and good Bookes were burned by the Gothes, Vandales and Hunnes, with other vnciuil Nations, who quenched and ſmothered the light of good Letters, which being hidden vnder-ground (to auoid ſuch barbarous and abortiue fury) our fore-named Writers were robd of knowing thoſe ſound Authors, without whom they could not iudiciouſlie cenſure, or write the Hiſtory of the French Nation. Others that long time after, and much néerer to our inſtant Age, haue likewiſe written on the ſame Argument; by following the track of thoſe former blinde-guides, haue fallen into their errour and folly: reading no other Authours but thoſe miſſe-leaders, neyther taking any paines to peruſe thoſe graue auncients, which more poliſhed ſeaſons haue diſcouered vnto vs. So that thoſe beſt embraced Authours of the French, are euen the loudeſt lyers, leauing a rooted opinion in their ydle fancies; that they are iſſued of the Troyans, and that they were named French of Francus,
               Francus or Frencion, the ſon of Hector. or Francion, the Sonne of Hector, who, after ſacke and ſpoile of the ſaide Citty, ſaued himſelfe (with ſo many as could eſcape the Graecians Sword and fire) in the Palus Maeotides, and that (of his name, whom they thus followed)

they were firſt called Francks, or Francions. Next, that néere to this Palus Maeotides, they builded a Citty, which they named Sicambria, after the name of an Aunt to Francus,
               Sicambra the Daughter of King Priam. the Daughter of King Priam; and that there they dwelt, vntill the Emperor Valentinians time, being then conſtrained to paſſe into Allemaigne, and thence into Gaule. See héere the conceite of ſome fond French-men, concerning the Etimologie of their name; which if any one ſhould offer to take from them, he ſhould (in their iudgment) commit no mean crime. And albeit there are many, and contrary opinions in this caſe, yet I will plainely tell ye no more, then what I haue read, and ſéene written.
            Some ſay, that (in times paſt) there was a nation in Europe, ſcattered & diſpierced héere and there, who were called Cimmerians;
               Cimmerians. Cimbrians. Sicambrians. Francs or Francions. one part of them had the Name of Cimbrians, another Sicambrians, and a third Francs, or Francions. Theſe people paſſing thorough the Countrey of Pannonia (now deuided into two parts, the one called Hungaria, and the other Auſtria) were driuen from their precedent dwelling, which was at the Cimmerian Boſphorus by the Goths, in the yeare of the Worldes Creation, 3520. Others ſay, that theſe Cimmerians tearmed thē
               ſelues to bée deriued of thoſe Fraci, that appeared on the Earth after Noahs Floud (viz:) that of thoſe diuiſions made in the whole vniuerſe, by partage of the Mediterranean Sea, thoſe which were in Europe (diſtinctly on the right hand)

gaue to the Haebrews theſe Fraci,
               The Hebrew Fraci, and the Affricanes. euen as them on the left hand did the Affricanes. There are ſome others, who doe fetch the Originall of thoſe Cimmerians, from Gomer the Sonne of Iaphet, and youngeſt Sonne of Noah, of whom they ſhould take their Name, by change of ſome Letters, calling them Cimmerians, inſtead of Gomorians. But howſoeuer it was, that Nation of Cimmerians, abandoning the vtmoſt Confines of Thrace, and the fore-named Boſphorus; deuided themſelues into dyuers bands: o
                  •
               e whereof made their way to the Pannonians; another to that ſide of Germanie, where the Cimbrian Cherſonneſus is deſcribed by our Geographers; And the reſt, leauing Europe,
               The Cimbrian Cherſonneſus. paſſed into Phrygia, and making vppe higher into Aſia, ſet downe their reſt on the Banckes of Danubie, and the maine Ocean. There (once more) they ſeparated them-ſelues into two Troopes: One whereof entred into Europe, vnder conduct of their King named Francion. And, being no other then méere Vacabond perſons, enquiring ſtill for noueltie of Countries, after they had runne through a great part of Europe; at length, they reſted on the banckes of Rhine, where they would néeds build a Citty, in ſemblaunce and Name of Troy, the Capitall Commaunder of Phrigia. They began the foundation,Torches or Torques of Torquor their King. but the worke remained imperfect. The other ſort, that made their aboad on the banckes of Danubie, elected for their K. one named Torchor, by whoſe name they were called Torches or

               Torques: euen as on the contrary ſide, the other, after the name of Francion their King, were tearmed Francs, Françions, or Françons. They waxing weary of their kings Empire (which grew to an inſupportable tyranny) expulſed them, & liued a long time without any King, vnder authoritie of their Captaines. But in the end, corruption ouer-ſwaying thoſe Captaines, and threatning a tyranicall vſurpation: they did likewiſe caſt them off, and grew to their former election of Kings againe, euen from the ſelfe-ſame ſtirp and race, whereof their firſt Kings had bin elected. They made choiſe then of a Man named Theudomer,
               Theudomer, a kinſman (by deſcent) to king Priam ſon to Richomer, a man of ſtrong, great and goodly ſtature, wearing his Haire long, and hée was deſcended of the race of Priam King of Phrygia, and of Francion. So that, if this opinion be true, it ſhould enſtruct vs, that the Originall of the Françons or Françions, procéeded of the Cimmerians, and that thoſe Cimmerians came from Phrygia, and the Troyans.
            
            The Cimbrians, who were deſcended of the Cimmerians, went to the banckes of Rhine, and dwelt there in thoſe ſtraits, where (in theſe daies) are the Countries of Holland and Gueldres: But they were forced thence, by frequent ouerflowings, and ſtrange invndations of the waters of Rhine.
            
            The Sicambrians, being iſſued of theſe Cimbrians, and who neuer boudged from the ſhoares of Rhine, as theſe others did, of whom we haue formerly ſpoken: they paſſed into Italy, and from

thence into other Regions heretofore mentioned. And it is to be noted, that when the Cimbrians went firſt to Rhine (bee it that they came from the Pannonians by Land, or from Phrygia and Thrace by the Germaine Sea, being in number about 489360.) they were by the Teutones and Thuringians, Neighbors to Rhine, named Neumagi,
               Neumagi, is new kinſmen. as much to ſay, as new Kinſ-men or Couſins.
            Afterward, when their King Antenor (a man of great power) had eſpouſed Cambra, a beautifull,Antenor married Cambra Daughter to the King of Britaine. wiſe, and chaſt Lady, borne in the Country of Brittaine, now called England: in fauour of her, he tearmed his people Sicambrians. This happened in the yeare of the Worlds Creation, 1550. At which time Artaxerxes raigned ouer the Perſians, and Hanniball paſſed firſt into Italie.
            
            
               Priam, Son to Antenor ſucceeded him, & then Marcomedes.
               Antenor, King of the Sicambrians, leſt to thoſe his people inhabiting on the Rhine, his Sonne Priam for their King. After whom ſuccéeded Marcomedes, who extended his Dominion from the banckes of Rhine, ſo farre as Thuringe. The other Sicambrian Kinges, ſuccéeding after theſe fore-named; did (almoſt all of them) tearme themſelues Troyans: which holdeth (with good iudgement) to ſhew, that the Sicambrians were iſſued of the Cimmerians and Phrygians.
            
            There were alſo many Kinges of theſe Nations, and after that the Sicambrians grew to encreaſe néere the Rhine, both in multitude of men and riches: diuers other Kinges raigned ouer

them, who extended the limites of their poſſeſſions, on eyther ſide the Rhine. In the raignes of Clodion, Clodomire the ſecond,Clodion, Clodomire, Meradac & Bolō kings, leagued with the Teutones. 
               Meradac and Bolon, (vnder conduct of whom, the Cimbrians forſooke the ſhoares of Rhine, by reaſon of the invndations of the ſaide Riuer, and likewiſe of the Sea) they leagued them-ſelues with the Teutones or Allemaignes, and departed in great troopes from their habitations; leauing very few there behinde them, who being afterward vanquiſhed by the Romaines, with other people of the Gaules neighbouring néere the Rhine; continued peaceably in their dwellings, vntill the declining of the Romaine Empire: but yet they were wadged as Souldiers in the Romaine Legions, and ſerued the Romains faithfully in all their wars.
            Some certaine yeares after, they rebelled againſt the Emperour Honorius, who conqu
                  •
               
               red them in a battaile: But, recouering theyr loſſe, they grew in to good fauour with the Emperour Valentinian. Héereupon ſome haue written, that in regard they gaue him good ayde againſt the Ala
                     •
                  nes, & expelled them from the Palus Maeotides: they were by him called Francks,
               Why the Emperour Valentinian called thē Franc
                     •
                  . and diſpenſed withall for tenne yeares tribute, which formerly (as a Due) they payed to the Romaines. But at the ten yeares end, the Emperor ſent his Collectours to them, to leuy againe the ſaide tribute: whereto they would in no wiſe liſten, but deſpiſing his commaundement, they murdered his Officers.
            
               The Emperor being offended at their rebellion,K. Priam ſlaine, and his people fled into Germany. aſſembled a potent Army, that vanquiſhed them in battaile, wherein alſo Priam their King was ſlaine, and they driuen to flight from theyr Cittie Sicambria. Beeing thus expulſed thence, they came into Germany, which then was enimy to the Romains, & poſſeſſing themſelues of Thuringe; they liued there (for ſome time) vnder the raigne of Marcomedes, ſon to Priam, & of Sueno, ſonne to Antenor, one of their Kings: thus you may ſée what ſome haue ſaid. But, as concerning the Citty of Sicambria, builded néer to the Palus Maeotides, not by the Françones or Françions, but onely ſo auouched, by the writings of Hunibant, & afterward by thoſe of Gregory of Tours, of Rheginon, and of Sigisbert: good Authors do make a méere mockery of it, for they neuer knew any other Citty named Sicambria, but that famous Citty which is in Allemaigne. So that by this our inſtant deduction, it euidently appears, that ye 
               Sicambrians dwelt with the Pannonians,
               The Sicambrians liued with the Pánonians. & that (from thence) they came into Germany, to the ſh
                  •
               ars of Rhine: and hauing in ſuch manner obtained their liberty, they were then firſt of all called Francs. But now to come againe to our Francs, Francions, or Francones, admit them to be iſſued of the S
                     •
                  cambrians, or of the Cimbrians, or of the Germans, or of any other: It is notorious enough,Franconia in Saxonie, and France in Gaule. that two great Prouinces were by them inhabited, & named; to wit, Orientall France or Françonia, in the Country of Saxony, & the kingdome of France in Gaule: and that the

very firſt time, that any ſpeach was heard of thē, it was in the declining of the Romaine Empire, vnder the Emperors Aurelianus, Probus, Florianus, and Proculus. Which hath made ſome to conceit the very ſame matter of the Sicambrians, and that the name of Francs was giuen them. eyther after one of their Kings; or of their bold courage, or of the Hebrew Fraci. The Emperor Aurelianus had to deale with them, when they would needs paſſe the Rhine, to come into Gaule, and (as ſome report) ſlue a great number of them. And yet they were not ſo much weakened, but they could rebell againe, and withſtand the ſuccéeding Emperors.
            Now let vs come to the Etimologie of this name of Franc, or Francs, there are ſome,Of the word Franc or Francs. who make no other proofe thereof, but that it was only in regard of the immunity, giuen vnto them by the Emperor Valentinian, after they had holpen him againſt the Alaines: Inferring alſo, that he called them ſo by a Greek name, François, which is as much to ſay; as bold, hardy, & valiant, and by thoſe means were enfranchiſed from all touls, ſubſidies, and tributes for ten years ſpace. But there is not any Etimology receiued by our Frenchmen, but ſuch as certaine Authors, by idle forged Hiſtories of their owne braine, would make them to beleeue: and that they are deriued of Françus or Françion, ſon to Hector, according as we haue already declared.
            Now, to anſwere all theſe recited opinions, and to begin with the word Ferocitie, as deriued

of the adiectiue Ferox,
               The French wold haue their name deriued of Ferocitie. and whereof ſome great eſtimulation is made: There is no apparance at al, that they ſhoulde deriue their name from thence, this Etymologie being but puld in by the eares, and ſo farre off from the name of Francs, as there néeds no other reaſon to obiect againſt it, but the very ſpacious diſtance betwéene theſe two words Ferocitie and Francois, conſidering withal, that all Authors haue deſcribed the French, to be men milde, courteous and affable, and not fierce, ſtern or cruell. As for the other reaſon, the beſt receyued of them, that ſtriues to make vs beléeue, that they are iſſued of Francus or Francion, the ſon of Hector: It is moſt certain, that there neuer was any ſuch Francus or Francion ſon to Hector, becauſe Hector had but one ſon,Hector had no ſon but Aſtianax. named Aſtianax, who at the ſurprizail of Troy, was thrown by the Greeks from a very high Tower, to the end, that no one of the Troyans race might remaine, to reuenge (vpon the Greekes) the ſacke of Troy. And to ſay,Franchiſe and Immunitie. that the Etymology of the name of Francs came from the franchiſe and immunity, which was giuen vnto them by the Emperor Valentinian: It hath no likelyhood of reaſon, becauſe they were called ſo before Valentinian was borne. Now, albeit that the name of franchiſe, comes néereſt to that of Francs: yet cannot that deriuation be receiued for authentical, becauſe the name of this Nation is more auncient (by more then a thouſande yeares) then the worde of franchiſe, which is but a new coynde word in reſpect of the other, and which, by Frenchmen (louers of their

owne language) hath bin allowed to ſignifie the ſaid liberty.
            
               ¶ The Election of Pharamond, who was the firſt King of France, how he was elected for his Vertues and Heroyick actions only. The Francs gaue ayde to the Emperor Valentinian, and (by that occaſion) were exempted from paying Tribute for ten yeares. In like manner, what Ceremonies were aunciently obſerued, in election of their Kings; and of the Salique Law.
               
                  THe Francs, Francions, or Francons (of whoſe aduentures and Etymologie wee haue amplie diſcourſed) hauing after many peregrinations, Voyages,The Francs builded a Citty neere to the Palus Maeotides. and Trauerſes, made choiſe of their abiding at Paulus Maeotides: very néere thereunto, and (according to the opinion of the moſt common and receiued) they builded a Citty, where they inhabited vntill the time of the Emperor Valentinian, whom they valiantly aſſiſted againſt the Alaines, that had rebelled againſt the Emperor and the Romaine Empire. In recompence of which good ſuccour & ſeruice, the Emperor diſcharged them (for tenne yeares ſpace) from paying the ordinary Tribute, which they owed to the Romains: yet ordering, that (at expyrarion of ſuch time) they ſhoulde returne to their former ſeruitude. The ten yeares being expyred, conſtraint came for repayment of

the Tribute: But they (féeling ye ſwéetnes of ſuch an immunity▪ & deſirous to reduce to a perpetuall priuiledge, that which the Emperour had but in grace graunted) in pride and preſumption replyed, that they purpoſed no longer paiment of any thing: but, ſince with price of theyr bloude, and no meane daunger of their lines, they had fréely bought and purchaſed their fréedome: they were not ſo weakely aduiſed, to forgoe (at ſo cheape a Market) that which had coſt them ſo deare.
               The Emperour diſpleaſed with this their refuſall, brought a great Armie againſt them, and foyling them in the fight, expelled them from their dwelling:The Francs foyled by the Emperor, chuſe a Captaine named Marcomir. So that they were enforced to aſſemble themſelues, vnder the conduct of a chiefe Captaine amongeſt them, named Marcomir or Marcmeier, which (in the olde Franc Language) ſignifieth a Gouernour of they Country. Thus they withdrewe them-ſelues into a Prouince of Germanie (at this preſent called Allemaigne) where they inhabited, and after their own name, called the Prouince of their abiding, Franconia. There are ſome Authors, who will not auouch, that the Emperour Valentinian did vanquiſhe them, becauſe (in verie trueth) there is no ſuch matter founde in any verye auncient Writer. Contrary-wi
                     •
                  e, Amianus Marcellinus, an olde and true Hiſtoriographer, ſayeth, That when as Valentinian was in Italie,
                  The words of Amianus Marcellinus 
                  he receyued tydings, that great Brittaine (now named England) was then ouer-runne and ſpoyled) by the Pictes

and Scottes; And likewiſe, that a great number of the Francs, as alſo of the Saxons, did ouerſpreade Gaule. But common Opinion houldeth, that the Francs woulde not pay the Tribute, after tenne yeares were expyred, and that beeing, thereuppon, ouercome by the Emperour Valentinian; they were (as alreadye hath béene ſayde) expulſed from theyr abiding, and compelled to ſaue them-ſelues in the ſayde Prouince.
               Being there ſeated, they grewe deſirous,They chuſe an order of gouerment among thē. to chooſe and eſtabliſhe a manner of Gouerning their Eſtate, whereby enſued manie contentions among them. For, ſome woulde haue it brought into a Monarchie, which is the Gouernement of one Prince onely: And others, into an Ariſtocratie, which is to bee gouerned by a certaine number of Wiſe and diſcréete perſonnes.
               Héereuppon, in a publlque aſſemblie made,The aduiſe of Charamond, concerning the election of Pharamond on this occaſion, one among them, named Charamond, made a verie eloquent Oration in the behalfe of Monarchie, and his maine ſcope aymed; that they ſhoulde elect for their King and Prince, Pharamond, a man iuſt, verie deuoute, of good ſorte, and valiaunt▪ qualities neceſſarilie requyred to bee in a Prince.  Moreouer, hee added, that if hee ſhoulde doo anie thing, vnfitting for a King and Prince: it was a very eaſie matter for them, to take away from him the adminiſtration of his Kingdome and Gouernement, becauſe people were before

Kings and made them their Rulers. 
                  Nor can I be perſwaded, quoth he, that the man now to be elected, will any way fall into Tiranny, or raiſe vs in any diſobedience towardes him, in regard of the vertuous qualities wherewith he is endued: And from him may we well expect, all ſuch Iuſtice, kindneſſe, care, and aſſiſtaunce, as Subiects can hope for in their Prince, his actions & behauiour of life being ſo wel knowne vnto vs. He is Sonne to this woorthy Captaine Marcomir, who ſo wiſely and happily hath brought vs hither, who ſo ſecurely hath heere eſtabliſhed vs, and who ſo valiantly ſheelded vs from the Romaines threatnings; when (by inequality of our power to theyrs) wee were compelled to forſake the Palus Maeotides. Wee are then much obliged to Pharamond, in memory of his Fathers weighty merites: And theſe two eſpeciall reaſons ſhoulde mooue vs to receyue him as our King, and preferre him (before all other) to that dignity; euen as wee ought to aduance Monarchy before Ariſtocratie, whereunto I know ſome among vs will encline, without fore-ſeeing the harmes that will befall vs, if we embrace it. For, if wee conſider our auncient manner of life, it hath beene to obey one, and not many, in which regarde, me-thinkes, that the firſt thing, which ought to be reſpected in the eſtabliſhing of an Eſtate, is the humour of the Inhabitantes, and to conſider, of what commaund or gouernement they are moſt capeable, to wit; of Monarchie alone, or

many-headed Ariſtocratie.
               
               Thus ſpake Charamond, and then manie contrarieties were mooued among them, about diuerſitie of Opinions. Whereupon, Prince Charamond beganne agayne another moſt excellent Oration, maintaining his former ſpéeches againſte Quadrek, a great Prince likewiſe, who defended the contrarie, ſaying:Quadrek his oppoſition againſt Charamond 
                  That Kingdomes gouerned by many Princes, were more peaceable, and better pollicied, then to be ſubiects to one king onely.
               
               After all theſe diſputes (long debated on eyther ſide) the Francs (who were more capeable to liue vnder a Monarchie, then a publicke commaunde, becauſe they were men free,The election of King Pharamond moſt hardie, and couragious) by common conſent, elected King Pharamond, and according to their cuſtome, placing him vppon a Pauois, lifted him vppon the Shoulders of men, and ſo walked with him thrée times about the place of their méeting, proclaiming him theyr King. This was in the yeare of the Worldes creation, 438
                        •
                     . And of Ieſus Chriſt▪ 
                  420. Or after others, foure hundred twenty ſix, or four hundred twenty and ſeauen.
               Some ſay, that he was the Sonne of Marcomir, yet others ſay no. His name was Pharamōd or Waramond, which in the ancient Franc Language, ſignifyeth a man of truth. And wee may well conceiue, that his name and Nature were correſpondent, and that he was a vertuous perſonage: conſidering they choſe him for their king,

after ſuch a great contention, and withall, that ſuch as deſire to liue vnder a Monarchy, and to haue one King: will haue him to be a good man, which is the onely felicitie that can come to any Eſtate, when a Prince is furniſhed with integritie and trueth, and all other Vertues commendable in a Prince: Euen as contrariwiſe, it can ſuſtaine no greater miſchiefe, then to be ſubiected to barbarouſneſſe, and Iniuſtice of a cruell Tyrant.
               All the trueſt Hiſtories doo agrée, that Pharamond was the firſte King of the Francs or Francons,
                  Pharamond firſt King of the Francs or Franconians. in Franconia a Prouince of Germanie: but they ſpeake not of his paſſage into Gaule, for hee was neuer there. And the firſt of them that euer went thither, was Clodion the Hayrie,Clodion was the firſt that entred into Gaule. Sonne (according to ſome) of the fore-named Pharamond. Nor came he alſo thither (but as wee vſe to ſay) to bidde the Countrey Good morrow: For hee was repulſed, chaſed, and compelled to returne thence. And hee, that (of the two Nations of the Francones and Gaules) made them but one, reducing them into one bodye: was Meroneus, the Sonne of Clodion, as ſhall bee after declared in his due place. Pharamond liued onelye on the Bankes of Rhine, without paſſing anye further thence: it contented him to bring his people onely thither, to ſounde, not the foord, but the fortune of paſſage into Gaule.
               
               Beeing choſen King, hee conceiued, that the verie ſtrongeſt bonde, which bindes and ſhuttes

vp anie State for longeſt continuance, is the Conſtitution of Lawes: which are nothing elſe, but a reaſon planted in Nature, commending honeſt occaſions, and prohibiting their contraries. Beſide that, they had neuer béene made by Lawe-Makers, but for the conſeruation of States, Empyres, Kingdomes, Seigneuries, Citties, and theyr Inhabitantes. And becauſe long Warres, as alſo their ſo recent and late foyle, had brought his people vnto ſome good forme of obedience: hee concluded to make new Lawes, which might cauſe them to liue vnder certaine Rules of pollicy, conſidering,Pharamond deuiſeth Lawes for his people, with conſent of his Lords. that as hardlie can a people liue without Lawes, as the body without members.
               For the better eſtabliſhing of theſe newe Lawes, hee vſed the aduiſe of foure his cheefeſt Barons, euen thoſe of woorthieſt merrite amongeſt all his Lordes, to whome ſome doo giue theſe Names Vridogaſt, Sagobaſt, Vriſogaſt, and Boſogaſt. Hee likewiſe deuiſed certaine Lawes,Lawes Saliques or Ripuaries. which hee tearmed Saliques and Ripuaries, the Chapters whereof are yet to bee ſeene, which doo not ſpeake any thing of the generall right of his Kingdomes, but concerning the particular right of euerie one, eſpecially in the Article of Succeſſion. From whence our French Nation hath deriued the Lawe Salique, ſpeaking of the ſucceſſion of the Realme of France, the inſtitution whereof, they attribute to Pharamond.
               
               Againſt which Iudgement, wee will not

oppoſe our ſelues any way, onely we ſay, by the teſtimony of trueſt Hiſtories, there is not found any but this Salique Law, which the French doe boldely affirme to bee made by Pharamond. Yet ſuch as labour to haue vs beléeue this opinion, doe ſcarcely know howe the Kingdomes of Barbarians, and their Kinges gouerned: Albeit it was a cuſtome obſerued among Barbarous Nations,A cuſtome among barbarous Nations. that their Daughters ſhould neuer ſuccéede in the Crownes of their Kingdomes. Alſo, in the raigne of Pharamond, the third generall Councell of Epheſus was holden, againſt Neſtorius Byſhop of Conſtantinople; & the fourth Schiſme came into the Church.Eſpeciall maters happening in the time of Pharamond Saint Hierome and Saint Auguſtine died, the one aged ninetie one yeares, and the other ſeuenty ſix, after they had long time gouerned their Churches: And then began Chriſtian Religion to flouriſh, by the holy and painefull writings of many Doctours. This is all that can be ſaide of Pharamond, firſt King of the Francs, or Franconians, who afterward were called French-men: And hee, after he had raigned ten, or (according to ſome others) eleauen yeares, died in Anno Dom. 431. Our Hiſtoryes haue not giuen him any Wi
                     •
                  e, albeit ſome ſay, that Clodion his Succeſſor was his Sonne.
               
                  431
                  2 Clodion, ſecond King of the Francs, Franconians,
                  Clodion ſir
                        •
                     named Hayrie, for wearing long hayre, and a beard in ſigne of liberty. or French, ſucceeded his Father Pharamond, in the yeare of grace 431. He was ſir-named Clodion the Hairy, becauſe hee wore his Beard and Haire long, ordaining the French to

weare the like, in ſigne of liberty: becauſe the Romaines vſed to poule and ſhaue all ſuch as they ſubdued, in ſigne of ſeruitude, and this faſhion of wearing long haire continued in France, vntill the time of Peter Lombard, in the raigne of Lewes the younger, fourth King of that name. Clodion perceiuing the Romaines to war weak, by Warres which they maintained againſt the Vriſigotes, and loath to looſe occaſion for enlarging his Kingdome: leuied a mighty Army,The deedes of Clodion for enlarging his Kingdome. ſubdued the Thuringians or Lorraignes, took Cambray by aſſault, putting all the Romaines to the Sword that were therein, and vanquiſhed their Army néere to the Riuer of Rhine. Then paſſing the Forreſt Charbonniere, hee tooke Tournay; and purſuing his purpoſe, for dilation of his Confines, he went into France, conquering Burgundy, Tholouſe, Angoleſme and all Aquitain. Clodion hauing raigned twenty yeares, died in An. 449.
               
               
                  3 Meroneus, third King of the French,
                  450 ſuccéeded Clodion as his Sonne, or néereſt Kinſman, Anno 450. Tritemius writeth, that he was Sonne to Clodion, but it is not found to bee ſo in the Hiſtories of France. In him the generation of the Kings of Fraunce tooke beginning, which endured vntill King Pepin,
                  The beginning of the Kinges of France in generation. the Sonne of Charles Martell. Meroneus (like vnto his Predeceſſors) was a Pagan; yet very bold and couragious in warre, as he declared by many foughten battailes, wherein hee was continually preſent. In his time, Attila King of the Hunnes or

                  Hungares (who tearmed himſelfe Flagellum Dei) leuyed an Army of fiue hundred thouſand Men, and came into the Countrey of Gaule; where he ſpoyled Coulongue and Treues, with many Caſtles ſcituated on the Rhine.
                  Attila with his Hunnes inuaded Gaule. Hee trauerſed Fraunce alſo, where hée waſted Amiens, Beauuais, Chaalons, Troys and Rheimes, bringing his ſiedge before Orleaunce. Meroneus ſéeing Fraunce ſo much oppreſſed (with the helpe of Aetius, Lieutenant Generall in Gaule for the Armie of Theodoſius the younger, Emperour of Rome, and of Theodorick King of the Vuiſegothes) gaue him a ſtrong battaile in the Catalaunique Fieldes (which is ſayde to be néere to Chaalons in Champaigne) in which fight, were ſlaine about two hundred thouſand Men of Warre,The 
                        •
                     ight of Attila out of Oval. as well on the one ſide as the other▪ 
                  Attila beholding his Men in diſorder, and that he could not call them backe againe as he would: was enforced to retire home to Hungarie, where he could neuer after re-aſſemble them of that company.
               This battaile was fought in the yeare 452. Others ſay, it was in the twenty ſeuenth year of the Empire of Valentinian the third. Meroneus hauing his hopes much more highly aduaunced. by ſuch a great and glorious victory: tooke the Citties of Sens, Paris, and a great part of Gaule, not finding any to offer him reſiſtance. So that thence forward, the Countrey which before has beene tearmed Gaule, began euen then to be called France.
               
                  He cauſed one of his Sonnes to be throwne into a Fire,When Gaul began to be cald Franc
                        •
                     
                   becauſe hee hadde ſlaine the King of Cornewall, who came in courteſie to bée merrie with him; Cornewall béeing then tributarie to France, as ſome haue reported, who alſo doe entitle Meroneus to be the firſt king of the French, and all his Race the Merouingians. Hee dyed in the tenth yeare of his raigne (after hee hadde very much enlarged his Kingdome) in Anno Domini. 472. Or, according to others, 459.
               
               
                  4 Childerick, or, as ſome tearme him,460 
                  Chilperick, Sonne to Moroneus, ſuccéeded him in the year 460. The great luxurie,The incontinent life of Childerick. and bad life which he led, in the beginning of his raign, abuſing the Wiues and Daughters of many worthy Lords, begot him ſuch indignation and hatred among thē; that they purpoſing to ſurprize him, he was faigne to ſaue himſelfe by flight to Baſinus, king of Thuringe, now called Lorraigne. This did he by the councell of a friend of his, named Vidomarck, who (as a ſecret token betwéene them) breaking a Ring of Gold, gaue him the one halfe: coniuring him, to giue no faith (for his returne) but to him that ſhould bring him that other halfe. The French elected (in his place) a Lieutenant of the Romaines, named Gillon, who held Soiſſons, and laide ſuch heauy exactions on euery man, exerciſing alſo ſuch cruelties on the Princes of France: that (in the 8. yeare) hée was expelled, and Childerick againe reſtored, wholly by the meanes of Vidomarch.
               
               
                  
                  Childerick purſued Gillon his Enemy, and had great victories and conqueſtes againſt him. Hee fought a battaile alſo néere to Orleaunce, againſt Andoacre, who was Duke of the Saxons. Hee enlarged his Kingdome along the Riuer of Loyre, ſo far as Angeirs. One great and irreparable errour he committed, for breaking the right of Hoſpitality,Childebert wronged his deareſt frend with Baſinus King of Thuringe, (who had receiued, and relieued him in the chiefeſt of his aduerſity) he caried away with him his wife Baſina, by whom he had a Son called Clouis. He died in An. 485. the 26. of his raigne.
               
                  The firſt Chriſtian K. of France.
                  5 Clouis, firſt King Chriſtian, and fift King of France, ſuccéeded his Father in the year of our ſaluation 485. He married Clotilda, Siſter to the Duke of Burgundy. He made warre vppon Siagrius, the Sonne of Gillon, Lieutenant to the Romaines, who held Soiſſons, and ſom other parts of Belgick Gaule: from whence hée expulſed him, and made him fly to Tholouze, to Ala
                     
                        •
                     ic King of the Vuiſegoths; who betrayed him, and ſending back to Clouis,
                  The Romaines Dominion ended in France. he had his head ſmitten off. So the Romaines, being partly fled, and partly ſlaine; held no longer dominion in France. Hauing likewiſe vanquiſhed King Baſinus, hee 
                     ••
                  bdued Thuringe, now called Lorraigne: and amplified the kingdom, euen from ye 
                  Rhine, ſo far as Seine, extending her limits to the riuer Loyre. The Quéene his Wife did often times ſollicite him to become a Chriſtian, whereto he would by no means liſten: til being in a hot conflict againſt the Allemaignes (who deſcended in great companies,

to driue the French out of Gaule) and deſparing of the battaile;How Clouis conuerted and becam a Chriſtian, by means of his Queene. hee thought vppon the God of Clotilda his Quéene, promiſing, that he would be a Chriſtian, if that day he obtayned the victory. It pleaſed God to grant it him, and hée was Baptized at his returne in the Cittie of Rheimes by Remy Arch-Byſhoppe of the ſayde place, with his two Siſters, and more then thrée thouſand of the Nobility. The ſacred Oyle was poured on his head, euen in his Baptiſme, and all his ſucceſſours (at their Coronations) haue in like manner béene ſacred. Clouis changed his former Coate of Armes, taking thrée Golden Floure-de-luces, in a fielde Azure: where-with hée firſt warred vppon Gondebant King of Burgundy, who was Vnckle to his Wife, and diſcomfited the Vuiſegothes before Poictiers, hauing ſlaine (with his owne hand) Alaric theyr King, and wonne from them the Countrey of Aquitaine, ſo farre as the Pyrenean Mountaines, and almoſt all Gaule and Allemaigne.
                  The Emperour ſent Clouis a Crowne of Gold. Héereuppon, the Emperour Anaſtaſius ſent him a Crowne of Golde, with th
                     •
                   Title and veſture of Patritius and Conſull. He made a choyſe of Paris for his ordinarie abyding, and commaunded it to bée the chéefe Cittie of his Kingdome: where he dyed in Anno 514. béeing aged eyghty yeares. And was buryed in the Church of S. Geneuiefue du mont de Paris, which himſelfe had founded, in memory of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, leauing four Sons and two daughters.
               
                  
                  515.
                  6 Childebert ſuccéeded his Father Clouis, in the yeare fiue hundred fiftéene, but not in the whole kingdome;Foure kings raigning together in France. For he leauing foure Sonnes liuing, it was deuided into foure partes among them, and each one was King of his ſeuerall portion. Childebert hadde for his part Paris, where hée held his Seate royall, with other dependaunces, as Poictu, Maine, Touraine, Champaigne, Aniou, Guienne, and Auuergne. Clothaire was King of Soiſſons; Clodomire King of Orleaunce; and Theodorick the Baſtard, béeing the eldeſt, was King of Metz. They made Warre by the procurement of Clotilda their Mother, on Sigiſmond King of Burgundy; who was ſlaine (with his Wife & Child) by Clodomire king of Orleaunce: who likewiſe (in another battaile) was kild himſelfe by Gondemar, vnder a feigned pretence of friendſhippe: but for this (in the end) Burgundy was taken and deſtroied.Clothaire & Childebert warre in Spaine. 
                  Clothaire aſſiſted by Childebert, poſſeſſed himſelfe of the Kingdom of Orleaunce, and ſlew his Nephewes. Clothaire and Childebert had great wars together, which in the ende was accorded; and they paſſed with their armies into Spaine againſt Almarick, who vſed their Siſter very hardly, becauſe ſhe would not bee an Arrian: And killing him in the battaile, they brought her backe with them into France. Hée raigned 45. yeares, and dyed without any Children: hee lieth buried at S. Germaine des Prez, which he founded by the name of S. Vincent.
               
               
                  559
                  7 Clothaire, the Sonne of Clouis, ſuccéeded

his Brother Childebert, in the yeare 559. or as ſome ſay, 560. hee had before béene King of Soyſſons fortie fiue yeares, and ſuruiued all his Brethren and their Children; ſo that (at length) he remained ſole-king of France. He was luxurious, and cruell in the death of his two Nephews, Children to Clodomire King of Orleaunce. He likewiſe (with much diſgrace) vpon a Good-Friday, ſlewe Gauliter d'Yuetot in a Church: For reparation of which wrong, he aduanced or erected the Land of Yuetot (which is in Normandy) into a kingdome, to the heires of the ſaid Gaultier.
                  Clothaire Sole-Monarch of the Gaules. 
                  Clothaire ſéeing himſelfe Sole-Monarch of the Gaules; would néedes leuy the third part of the Churches reuennewes: Againſt which the Arch-biſhop of Tours made reſiſtance, telling the King boldly, that the reuennewes of the Church, were the goods of the poore. He loſt a battaile againſt the Saxons and Thuringians, becauſe hee would not take them to mercie, and ſuffer them to depart with their liues ſaued. Hee ouercame (in warre) Cran his Baſtard Sonne, who roſe in armes againſt him, cauſing him, his wife and Children to be burned: hauing alſo formerly ſlaine the Duke of Bretaigne, whom he had cauſed to reuoult. Hee raigned 51. yeares; dyed at Compeigne, and lieth buryed at S. Medard de Soyſſons. Anno 567.
               
               
                  8 Cherebert or Aribert,
                  567 ſuccéeded his Father Clothaire, in the yeare 567. Paris fell to him by partage. He was very vnchaſt of life,Cherebert an vnchaſt King. & repudiated his Wife, to entertaine two of her waighting

women: for which Germaine Byſhoppe of Paris excommunicated him. Hee raigned nine yeares, died without any heires: And lieth buried at Saynt Romaine néere Blaye in Gaſcoigne.
               
               
                  157
                  9 Chilperick, ſuccéeded his Brother Cherebert, in the year 577. hauing before raigned nine yeares King of Soiſſons. He had thrée wiues, the firſt whereof he diuorced from him, compelling her to enter into Religion. The ſecond, beeing named Audoüera,
                  Fredegond Concubine to Chilperick. he baniſhed. And the thyrde, called Athanagilde, he cauſed to be ſtrangled in her bedde. All which was done by the procurement of Fredegonde, his Concubine, whom hée then married, and had a Sonne by her, named Clothaire. His Brethren warred againſte him for his inhumanities, and woulde haue depoſed him: but in the ende, they were pacifyed. Chilperick perceiuing his Brother Sigibert, king of Metz, to be much moleſted by the Allemaigns, tooke many Citties from him: whereat Sigibert being iuſtly offended, neuer ceaſed, till (by the helpe of Gontran) hee recouered all that was taken from him, purſuing him ſtill in ſuch ſort, that Theodebert his Son was ſlaine, and hee glad to ſaue himſelſe in Iournay, where Sigibert beſieged him. Sigibert was ſlaine in his Tent, by two Traitors hyred thereto by Fredegonde. In ſhort while after, Fredegonde knowing that the king had noted ouermuch familiarity,F
                        •
                     edegonde cauſed the King to bee murdered. betwéene her and Landry (Maire of the Pallace) her adulterer: ſhe cauſed the king to be murdered by the

ſaid Landry, at Chelles néere Paris, as hee returned ſomewhat late one night from hunting, hauing raigned in all 23. years, and lieth buried at S. Germaine des Prez.
               
               
                  10 In the year, 587.
                  587 
                  Clothaire, ſecond of that name, the ſon of Chilperick & Fredegonde, (being but foure months old) was acknowledged for Legitimate, and made king, vnder the gouernement of Gontran King of Orleans his Vnckle, who made Landry (Maire of the Pallace) Tutor to the young King, and becauſe he ſhould bee noriſhed with his Mother Fredegonde.
                  Childebert ſeeketh to reuenge his fathers death. 
                  Childebert King of Metz, endeuoured by Armes to get the gouernment of the kingdome, and (as much as in him lay) to haue Fredegonde puniſhed, for the death of his Father Sigibert, and of his Vnckle Chilperik, whom ſhe had cauſed to be both murdered. Gontran appeaſed him by making hym his heire: yet notwithſtanding, in ſhort while after he began war againe, againſt which Landry with Fredegonde (who was a woman of admired courage) oppoſed themſelues.Fredegonde a woman of great ſpirit. And ſhe (to imbolden the French) carried the young king hir ſon in her armes, walking ſo with him thorough the thickeſt of the battell, and ſhewing him vnto the ſoldiors, ſhe would ſay: Fight for your younge King, and defend his kingdom: by which means Sigibert was foiled, and driuen to flight. Brunehault,
                  Brunehault executed. hauing put to death many children of the bloud Royall, was deliuered to Clothaire, who cauſed her to be torne with four horſes. He reuenged himſelfe on the Saxons, leauing no male child

aliue that was taller then his ſword. He raigned 44. yeares, and lyeth buried at S. Germaine des Pres.
               
               
                  631.
                  11 Dagobert, firſt of that name, ſuccéeded his Father Clothaire, in the yeare, 631. he gaue to his brother Aribert, the kingdom of Aquitaine in partage, which returned to him againe, by ſuruiuing his ſaide Brother. Dagobert was in great peril of death, in the life time of his father, becauſe he had cut off his ſchoolmaiſters beard, and cauſed him to bee grieuouſly beaten:The building of the Church of S. Denis. but miraculouſly he auoyded the anger of his father, whereupon he builded the Church of S. Denis in France, which he inriched with treaſures taken from other churches, eſpecially that of Poictiers, and graunted them alſo the Fayre of Lendit. Hee was the firſt that gaue any patrimony of the Crown to Churches. He conquered the Sclauonians, who were then Idolaters, and quieted the Gaſcoignes that had rebeld againſt him, compelling alſo the King of Bretaigne to do him homage. It is ſaid, that being much addicted to pleaſure, he would train after him a troupe of gallant maidens, apparrelled like to Quéenes.Iewes baniſhed out of France. By a perpetuall Edict, hee baniſhed all Iewes out of France, that would not bée baptiſed. During his raigne, Mahomet the falſe Prophet, a natiue of Arabia, began to ſhew himſelfe. He raigned ſixtéene yeares, died of a Flux in his belly at Eſpinay, and lieth buried at Saint Denis, which hee inſtituted as a Sepulchre for Kings.
               
                  645
                  12 Clouis, ſecond of that name, ſuccéeded his

Father Dagobert, in the yeare of mans ſaluation, 645. He had but one baſtard Brother, named Sigibert, who in the life time of his father Dagobert was prouided of the Kingdome of Auſtraſia, and raigned there but eleauen yeares, leauing a Sonne, whom hee dearely re-commended vnto Grimoald, Maire of his Pallace. But he,The treachery of Grimoald Maire of the Pallace. inſted of aduancing him in his right, cauſed him to bee ſhauen, and ſent vnto a Monaſtery in Scotland, making his owne ſonne Hildebert King of Auſtraſia. Clouis hearing this wicked act, within two yeares after, cauſed Grimoald to bee put to death,Clouis ſole Monarch of the Gaules. and expulſed Hildebert out of the Kingdome: by which meanes, Clouis remained ſole Monarch of the Gaules. He had by his wife Baudone (a Lady of Saxonie) thrée Sons, who were all Kings each aft
                     •
                  r other. In his time there hapned in Fraunce ſuch ſcarſity of victuals, and conſequently ſuch an extreame famine, that Clouis, to redreſſe it, took from the Church of S. Denis, the ſiluer couertures about the Relicks and roofe,The care of Clouis for feeding the poore. and other treaſures (wherewith his father Dagobert had enriched it, to féede the poore in ſo great a miſery, exempting thereto (in recompence) the iuriſdiction of the Biſhop of Paris. He went to Ieruſalem, and there warred againſt the Infidels. He raigned ſixtéene yeares, and dying, was buried at S. Denis.
               
               
                  13 In the yeare, 663.
                  663 
                  Clothaire, thirde of that name, ſuccéeded after his father Clouis. Kinges (in thoſe times) were ſo careleſſe of maintaining their Maieſtie Royall, that they ſuffered

themſelues to be gouerned by the Maires of their Pallace, who had charge of all their publicke affaires, while they (in meane ſpace) gaue themſelues wholly to voluptuouſneſſe.The Maires of the Pals lace ouerrule the Kings. Theſe Maires héereby tooke ſuch authority vpon them, that the king was but as their vaſſaile, and him woulde they kéepe in ſome Caſtle, or other place of pleaſure, neuer ſhewing him to the people, but onely once in a yeare, the firſt day of May, and then it was done with great pompe, and Royall magnificence, mounted in a triumphall Chariot, and the people that tooke pleaſure in ſuch ſights, wold ſalute him onely with loud acclamations. This courſe continued till Pepin le Bref, which was almoſt an hundred yeares. During the raygne of ſuch Kings, Paris and Normandie was all their largeſt demaines: the reſt of O
                        •
                     ule being diuorced as it were from the Kings Soueraigne prerogatiue, was in the poſſeſſion of many Princes, making themſelues Dukes and Earles in theyr ſeuerall iuriſdiction. He lieth buried at Chelles néere Paris, dying in the yeare, 666. and fourth of his raigne. Hee did not any thing deſeruing to be written, but onely kept his ſubiects in peace: For Ebroin was ſo terrible (he being then Maire and Gouernor) as neither the princes of France, or any other Straungers, durſt attempt to rayſe Warre againſt him. The honor both of kings and Kingdome, died with Clothaire, for the Maires of the Pallace, pretending to guard the rightes of the Crowne; beganne (each one thorowe his owne auarice) to debate the Gouernement

of publicke affaires, as formerly hath béene declared.
               
                  14 Childerick, ſecond of that name,666 and ſonne of Dagobert, ſuccéeded his Brother Clothaire, in the yeare, 666. being receiued by the French, in hatred of Theodorick: who (by the perſwaſion of Ebroine) was crowned King, but afterward ſhauen, and put into S. Denis Monaſtery, as Ebroine himſelfe was at Lucon in Burgundie. His inſolencies and cruelties,Childerick was ſlaine in hunting, and his Q. alſo. haſtened his tragicall ending, being ſlaine as he was hunting with his wife Blitilda great with childe, by one named Bodille, a Gentleman of Franconia, whō he had cauſed to be cruelly beaten. He raigned 12 yeares, and is buryed at S. Germain des Pres.
               
               
                  15 Theodorick, firſt of that name,680 Sonne alſo to Dagobert, and Brother to Childerick, was againe made king in the year, 680. He, after the death of Cothaire the third, raigned a yeare and more, before Childerick, albeit he was the younger Brother, onely by the meanes of Ebroine, Maire of the Pallace. But in regard of his badde gouernment, he was ſhut vp in a Monaſtery, and ſo was Ebroin Maire of the Pallace, whoſe cruelties the French could not endure. But Childerick and his Quéen being murdered in hunting, he was fetcht forth of the Monaſtery, and aduanced againe to the dignity Royall, in the yeare before expreſſed: And then was Landreſill, the ſon of Archambauld, made Maire of his Pallace.Landreſill murdered by Ebroin. But Ebroin (forſaking his Cloiſter, got a great Army together, & won the victory againſt them;

killing Landreſill by Treaſon, and taking the King and kingdome into his owne gouernment, reuenging himſelfe, without ſparing any. Hee ouercame Pepin and Martine, Brothers to the Duke of Auſtraſia, and (contrary to his faithfull promiſe) killed the ſaide Martine: himſelfe alſo being after ſlaine (in the night time) by Hermanfroy,
                  Pepin Heriſtel Maire of the Pallace. Count of the ſame country. Pepin Heriſtell was then made Maire of the Pallace, who carried himſelfe valiantly in his Office, and greatlie augmented the kingdome.
               This King Theodorick, whom ſome doo call Thierry, hauing raigned xix. yeares, died in Anno 693. leauing two ſons by his wife Clotilda, Clouis who was king after him, and Childebert. During the raigns of theſe two precedent kings, the greatneſſe of Royal Maieſty (which ought to be in Kings) did ouer-much obſcure it ſelfe: & the Church of Rauenna (diſſenting from the Romain Church) was yet by meanes of Pope Donus, drawne to voluntary conformity, which greatlie encreaſed the Cleargies honour, and their dignities, ſo that the Romain Church much augmented it ſelfe.
               
                  694.
                  16 Clouis, third of that name, and eldeſt ſonne to Theodorick, entred into poſſeſſion of the Royaltie,The woorthy deeds of Pepin Heriſtell. being verie yong in years, An. 694. In his time, Pepin Heriſtell, Maire of the Pallace, paſſed the Rhine with a puiſſant Army, ſubduing ye 
                  Saxons and Sueuians, who had reuolted from obedience, by reaſon of ſome troubles happening in France. Hee alſo conquered the Friſons with

their Duke, and made them to receiue the Chriſtian faith. He raigned foure yeares, and his buriall is not recorded.
               
                  17 Childebert, ſecond of that name, ſuccéeded his Brother Clouis, in the yeare, 698.
                  698 Of his déeds there is little ſet downe in writing, for Pepin Heriſtell (Maire of the Pallace) ruled then the whole kingdome, and mannaged all the affayres of Fraunce at his pleaſure.The power and authority of Pepin Heriſtel He heard Ambaſſadors, and gaue them aunſwere, according peace or truce, as to himſelfe ſéemed beſt. In theſe raignes, the Maires of the Pallace held ſuch authority, as it was not lawful for any to contradict them. And yet Lambert, Biſh. of Vtrecht (whom Pepin had reuoked from banniſhment) notwithſtanding al his power, did not forbeare to reproue his adultry: but it coſt him his life, for hee was ſlaine by Dodon, brother to his concubine. Pepin made his own ſon Grimoald, Mair of the palace, in which office he was ſoone after ſlaine.Charles Martell Baſtard ſonne to Pepin Heriſtell. Then he made his baſtard ſon, called Charls Martel, duke of Auſtraſia, and Maire of the pallace. Pepin died in the 17. year of his gouernment, as Maire of ye Pallace: And Plectrude his wife, being deſirous to rule, with her young ſonne Thibaulte, cauſed Charles Martel to be impriſoned at Colougne. Childebert die
                     •
                  , hauing raigned 18. yeares, and lieth buried at S. Stephens of Naucy, as ſome haue ſuppoſed that his brother Clouis doth alſo.
               
                  18 Dagobert, ſecond of that name, ſuccéeded his father Childebert, in the yeare 716.
                  716. He was gouerned by Plectrude, widdow to Pepin Heriſtel,
                  
and by Thibaulte, Sonne to his ſonne Drogon. Some French men Crowned (as their King) one named Daniell, or Chilperick, hauing the Counte Hermanfroy,
                  Hermanfroy Maire of the Pallace. Maire of the Pallace, that had ſlaine the cruell Ebroine. Charles Martell was ſtill kept Priſoner at Coulongue, by Plectrude, who hindred him (by that meanes) from enioying his Dukedome of Auſtraſia. Thibault the youngeſt Sonne of Plectrude, aſpyring to bee Sole-Maire of the Pallace, as alſo to expell Hermanfroy, and his King Chilperick; rayſed an Army againſt them: But Hermanfroy withſtood him ſo couragiouſly, néere to the Forreſt Charboniere,
                  Hermanfroy preuailed againſt Thibaulte. that Thibaulte was glad to fly, with loſſe of his people. By this meanes, Hermanfroy (like a Conqueror) ſupported the raign of Chilperick, vntill that Charles Martell was eſcaped out of Priſon. Dagobert raigned foure years, leauing two Sons; who, by the factions of diuers Princes (affecting the gouernment) were made Monkes.
               
                  720
                  19 Clothaire, fourth of that name, was king in Anno. 720. After that Charles Martell had eſcaped out of Priſon, wherein he had béene detained by Plectrude his Step-mother: he came preſently into Fraunce with a ſtrong Army, to reſeaze his Lordſhip of Maire of the Pallace, and to exclude Chilperick (called Daniell) with duke Hermanfroy, Maire of the Pallace, who hadde made him King of France after the death of Dagobert the ſecond. They encountred together, and by the ayde of the Duke of Friſe; hée was

diſcomfited and fled. But yet his courage was not quailed, for afterward hee foiled Chilperick néere to Cambray: who hauing revnited his forces, with the helpe of Eudo Duke of Aquitaine, was once more vanquiſhed in Champaign. The Duke of Aquitaine retyring, tooke Chilpericke home with him into his Country. Hermanfroy, (called by ſome Rainfroy) was purſued and taken in the Cittye of Angiers, where Martell (in kindneſſe) left him to finiſh his daies.Charls Martell maire & great Gouernour of France. 
                  Charles Martell hauing preuailed againſt all diſaduantages, was receiued in Fraunce for Maire and great Gouernor. After the firſt victory, which he had againſt Chilperick; he made Clothaire the fourth King of France, whom ſome do tearme to be Brother, and others Vnckle to Dagobert the ſecond. He raigned two yeares, and lieth buried at Nancy.
               
               
                  20 Chilperick, ſecond of that name,722 otherwiſe called Daniel, hauing bin nouriſhed young in a Monaſtery, had formerly raigned two yeares, before Clothayre the fourth. Charles Martell, after the death of the ſaid Clothaire, ſent for him out of Gaſcoigne, and acknowledging his lawfull right, cauſed him to be conſtituted King,The ſubtle pollicy of Charls Martell. in the yeare, 722. This did he the rather (nowe in the freſh Sun-ſhine of his reconfirmed power) to hold him as King in apearance onely, that he dying without iſſue, might leaue the Crown to his Brother. He raigned almoſt fiue yeares, and lyeth buried ot Noyon.
               
               
                  21 Theodorick, ſecond of that name,727 or Thierry,
                  
as ſome call him, eldeſt ſonne of Dagobert the ſecond, was made King in the yeare, 727. Charles Martell ſent to fetch him forth of a Monaſtery, whereinto he had bin put when he was young, and created him King, in bare Title only: For Charles Martell (beeing Maire of the Pallace) did mannage the whole buſineſſe of the Kingdome,Charles Martel ruled the whol kingdome. and carried himſelfe therein with very good credit.
               Thus did the Maires take ſuch aduantage of the Kings careleſneſſe, as (in the end) they expelled them from the Royall dignity and vſed it only for themſelues. Charles Martell ſubdued the Saxons, and thoſe of Bauaria, that entred into rebellion. Eudo Duke of Aquitain raiſed the Sarrazins (who then bare great ſway in Spayne) to come with him, and Warre in France, making open paſſage for them. They came thether, to the number of foure hundered thouſand perſons, with Women, Children, and Seruaunts, with purpoſe to inhabite the Country, waſting it al along as they went.Charles Martell made a gret ſlaughter of the Sarrazins. But Charles Martell met them néere Tours, where hee vanquiſhed and ſlew 350000. with very ſmall loſſe of his owne followers. Afterward hee preuailed againſt the Friſons, and once more hee foyled the Sarrazins before Auignon, expelling them (in the ende) quite out of Fraunce. This king hauing raigned fiftéene yeares, dyed, and lieth buried at S. Denis.
               
               
                  741
                  22 Childerick, thirde of that name, Surnamed the Inſenſible, in regard of his blockiſh neglect

and careleſneſſe, beeing likewiſe brought from the Monaſtery, ſuccéeded his brother Theodorick, in the yeare, 741. In which yeare, Charles Martell (Maire of the Pallace,The death of Charles Martel who left three Sonnes. and Gouernour of Fraunce) after many famous and woorthy victories by him obtained, dyed: and was in Royall habite interred at Saint Denis, in the ranke of Kinges, albeit hee neuer had the Name nor Title. He left thrée Sonnes, Pepin, Carloman, and Griffon. Pepin, being Maire of the Pallace, loſt not a iotte of that authoritie, which his Father hadde formerly exerciſed ouer the Kinges: but gouerned the Realme with his Brother Carloman. Griffon, thinking himſelfe not ſufficiently remembered by his Father, ſeazed Laon to himſelfe, and helde it ſtronglie: but in the ende, hee was conſtrained to agree with his Bretheren. Carloman, contemning the goodes and honours of this Worlde, went to Rome to Pope Zacharie, and receiued the habite of Religion at his hands. Pepin, ſuccéeding as heyre, to that which Carloman had forſaken, and hauing the fauour of the chiefeſt in the Kingdome: ſawe occaſion ſmile vppon him,Pepin maketh means to inioy the Kingdome. to make himſelfe a King, and therefore woulde not let ſlippe ſo fayre an opportunity. Héereupon by his Ambaſſadors, hee gained the conſent of Pope Zachary, whom hee thorowly acquainted with the puſilanimity and diſſolute life of k. Childerick, with other his predeceſſors. In like maner he layed open to him, the paines and Trauayles

of his Father and himſelfe, only in defence of the Kingdome, and how it was more conuenable, that hee who attended the charge of publicke affaires, ſhould likewiſe beare the name of king, rather then hee that waited not thereon at all, but followed his own delights and voluptuous pleaſures, which being conſidered by the Pope, by the intermiſe of Bruchard Byſhop of Bourges, and Folrad,
                  The death of Childerick and his wife. Chaplaine vnto the ſaide Pepin; it was ordained, that Childerick ſhould be ſhauen, and ſent vnto his Monaſtery againe, where he dyed, with Giſala his wife, hauing raigned nine years. And then was Pepin with ful conſent of the Nobility, and generall ſufferages of all the people, proclaimed King of France.
               
            
            
               Heere ended the firſt generation of the Kinges of Fraunce, in the ligne Maſculine, beeing termed the race of the Merouingians: which laſted from Pharamond to this Pepin, 331. yeares. And heere beginneth the ſecond generation; called the race of the Carlouingians.
               
                  751
                  
                     PEpin, ſurnamed Le Bref, or Short, Son of Charls Martel, was made king of France, in the year of grace 751. hauing bin nine years Maire of the Pallace, from the raigne of Chilperick the third. This man, as well by conſent of Pope Zacharie, as fauour of the French Nobility (his former good gouernment alſo (eſpecially

conſidered) was ſacred King, the firſt of that race. Pope Stephen, who ſucceeded Zacharie, withdrew himſelfe into France, to haue ſuccour againſt Aſtulphus King of the Lombards. Pepin being acquainted therewith,Pepin aideth Rome againſt the Lombards. tooke part with the holy ſée of Rome, promiſing to reſtore that which was vſurped from it: In requitall whereof, the Pope ſacred him againe, with his two Sonnes: And Pepin marching with his Armie into Italy, ſent the Pope home to Rome againe, for Aſtulphus was beſiedged in Pauia, and conſtrained to make agréement with the Pope. Pepin gaue to the Sée of Rome, the Exarchate of Rauenna, and many other Citties and Towns by him conquered. He had many victories againſt Gaiſer, or Waifer, Duke of Aquitaine, who (in the ende) was ſlaine, and his Country conquered, in a battaile which he won néere to Perigord. He ſubdued the Saxons,
                  Pepin inſtituted the Court of parliament. who were reuolted from their allegeance: And he inſtituted the Court of Parlament in France. He died at Paris, in the eyghteenth yeare of his raigne, leauing two Sonnes and ſeauen Daughters, which hee had by Bertha his Wife. In his time was Robert,
                  Robert the Deuill Surnamed the Deuill, Sonne vnto Aubert Duke of Normandy.
               
               
                  24 Charles the Great, called Charlemaigne,
                  768 ſon of Pepin le Bref, ſuccéeded in the kingdome, the yeare of Grace, 768. and was Crowned at Wormes, after he had made partage with Caroloman his Brother, when hee had raigned 32. yeares King of France, by conſent of the Cleargie

and Romaine people (in regarde of the great good done by him to Chriſtendome, & the Church of Rome) he was proclaimed,Charlemain made Emp: of the weſt, And the firſt that was called moſt Chriſtian King, and crowned Emperor of Rome, in the year, 800. vpon Chriſtmas day, the people crying aloud thrée ſeuerall times: To Charls Auguſtus, crowned of God, the great and peaceable Emperor; life & victory. He was the firſt, called Moſt Chriſtian King, being a man of great ſtature, admirable ſtrength, eloquent in many languages, ſtudious, affecting to heare the reading of hiſtories, a great louer of learning and the learned, as Parls and Piſa can well witneſſe. Nicephorus & he deuided the Empire, agreeing, that the one ſhold be called Emperor of the Eaſt, and the other of the Weſt. He quailed the commotion raiſed in Gui
                        •
                     nne, by the procurement of his Brother Caroloman, who therefore went in a rage to Rome, and returning thence, died ſoone after. To pleaſe his Mother he married Theodora, Siſter or daughter to Didier k. of the Lombardes: whom he quickly diuorced, and remarried Hildegrande, Daughter vnto the Duke of Swethen, by whom he had Charles, Pepin, Lewes, Rotrude, Bertha, and Gilette. Hauing pacified the broyles in Aqui
                        •
                     aine, at the requeſt of Pope Adrian, he went in
                     •
                  o Italy againſt Didier; whom he ſubdued, and ſo gaue ending to the Lombards kingdome,The ending of the Lombards kingdome. ſending the king, his wife and children into exile. He conquered the Saxons, againſt whom he warred thirty yeares, hauing twelue ſeuerall Battailes againſt them. He repulſed the Sarrazins, that waſted Spaine, and

loſt one battaile in dealing with them, wherein perriſhed thirtie thouſand of his men: but returning on them the ſecond time, he won a famous victory. But too true it is, that bringing his armie home into Fraunce, and paſſing by Ronceuaux; his arrieregarde was rudely aſſayled by the Gaſcoignes,
                  The vnfortunate battaile of Ronceuaux and there he loſt a great number of his Knights, among whome were Rowland and Oliuer. He conquered the H
                        •
                     nnes, Sclauonians, Bauarians, and Danes; looſing his two beſt Sonnes, Charles and Pepin, accompliſhing many déedes woorthy of memory, as well in war as peace. He founded the Vniuerſities of Paris. Pauia, and Bolongne: apointing alſo Orders for Eccleſiaſticall perſonnes, called Capitula Caroli Magni, and cauſed the Counſelles of Maience, Rheimes, Tours, Chaalons, Arles & Francfort to bee holden, ordaining withall,The twelue Peeres of Fraunce. the twelue Péeres of Fraunce. Such was the raygne of this great Charles, till beeing crazed with a Feauer: hee dyed, in the ſixe and fortyeth yeare of his Kingly Gouernement, the fouretéenth yeare of his Empyre, the ſeauenty one of his age, and lyeth buried at Aix la Chapelle.
               
               25 Lewes,
                  816 Surnamed the Debonnaire or méeke, ſuccéeded his Father Charlemaigne,
                  Great difference betweene the Sonne and Father. both in the Romaine Empyre, and Kingdom of Fraunce, but not in his Vertue and greatneſſe of courage, for hee was ſo Nick-named, in regarde of his ouer-much readineſſe and facility, which made his authority deſpiſed, both

of his owne people and ſtraungers, in the yeare, 816. Many debanches hapned vnder his raigne, as well on behalfe of Bernard his Nephew, king of Italy, his wife and children (whom he cauſed to be put to death) as alſo in his war againſt the Bretons, who would not bee brought vnder his obedience. He had thrée ſonnes by his firſt wife, to wit; Lothaire, whom he made King of Italy, Pepin King of Aquitaine, and Lewes King of Bauiere. In ſecond marriage, hee had Iudith, daughter to the Count of Altorfe; by whome he had Charles the Balde, who (after him) was K. of France. Hee endeuoured to reforme the ouer-great pompe and diſſolutions in them of the Churche, by a Counſell holden at Aix la Chapelle.
                  The ſons in Armes againſt theyr father, and their vſage to him. His three firſt Sonnes made diuers wars vppon him, being thereto prouoked, as well by the Eccleſiaſtickes, as by the partage which hee had made to Charles the Balde, his yongeſt ſon. In their firſt attempte, they beſiedged him at Compeigne, where they tooke their ſecond mother Iudith, whom when they had ſhorne & vayled, they ſent her in Religion to Poictiers; leauing their Father (then) without any adminiſtration or royall charge. But afterward, beeing recouered from ſuch ſeruility, and cauſing his wife to be brought him againe: he was ſo milde and méeke, that he pardoned the Rebels all their offences. A ſeconde time his Sonnes aroſe againſt him, and (accompanied with manie other Traytours) leuied a great Army, wherein Pope Gregory tooke part with them: and then

they compelled their Father, to come and ſubmit himſelfe to their mercy, bereauing him of his imperiall Ornaments, and giuing him the habite of a Monke, they cauſed him to be ſtrictly guarded in the Abbey of Saint Medard de Soiſſons. His Wife they ſent as an exile into Italy, and his Sonne Charles (as a Priſoner) to Prouence. The Lordes of Fraunce and Allemaigne, béeing vnwilling to ſuffer that ſuch ſhame and indignity ſhould bee done to an Emperour;The Lordes of Fraunce releaſe their Emperour. in the following yeare they gaue him his liberty, bringing his Wife and Son againe vnto him, & Lothaire (chéefe cauſer of his Fathers captiuity) was glad to fly thence into Italy. The Emperor conſtrayned his Sonnes to ſéeke his mercy, and then hée fréely forgaue them. At Mayence hée dyed, hauing raigned twenty ſixe yeares, and was interred at Metz.
               
               26 In the yeare 843.843 
                  Charles the Baulde, Sonne of Lewes the Méeke, was made King, by a diuiſion or partage made with his Bretheren. Charles remained King of France, Lewes king of Germany; and Lothaire had Italy, with the Empire, Prouence and Auſtraſia, whereof he made a Dutchy, calling it Lorraine, after his owne name. Before the ſaide partage, they had a great battaile néere to Auxerre; wherein almoſt all the Nobility of France loſt their liues.The Normans became Maiſters (almoſt) of all France. Which was the cauſe that the Normans (who were riſen vnder conduct of two valiant leaders) were become Maiſters well-néere of all France; but in the ende, they were expelled by the King,

who was 
                     •
                  rowned Emperour by Pope Iohn, after the deceaſe of his Nephew Lewes, the Son of Lothaire. In this time he became very high minded, contemning the French manner of habite, an
                     •
                   wearing the Graecian faſhion, with a Dalmatian garment hanging down to his héels, beſide other ſtrange & pompous attires. Hauing raigned two yeares in the Empire, he was poyſoned by his Phiſition;K. Charles poyſoned by his phiſition. dying at Mantua; and buried at Verceillis, but ſeauen years after, his body was tranſported to S. Denis. He raigned in all 38. yeares.
               
                  87927 Lewes the ſecond, ſirnamed the Stutter or Stammerer, Sonne of Charles the Bauld, ſuccéeded his Father both in the Empire and Kingdome, in the yeare 879. Charles the Bauld had thrée ſons, the firſt was named Charlon; whoſe eyes hee cauſed to bee puld out, in regard of his wicked gouernment. The ſecond was called Charles, who dyed before him. And the third, was this Lewes, ſir-named the Stammerer, becauſe his tongue was ſomewhat ſhort, and made him to falter in his ſpéech.The Pope eſcaped out of priſon. Pope Iohn came into France, being eſcaped out of priſon, becauſe he
                     •
                   ſtood againſt the crowning of Charles le Gros, (Sonne to Lewes of Bauaria) Emperour. He Crowned King Lewes the Stutter Emperour, which hée enioyed not long, in regard of his ſicklyneſſe, for he dyed in the ſecond yeare of his raigne: leauing his Wife Richeult (Siſter to the King of England, and who was returned home to her Brother) great with Child of a Son,

that was afterward called Charles the Simple. He appointed as his Guardian, Odo, Sonne to the Earle of Aniou, hoping great comfort of the fruit in her Womb. Hee left alſo two Baſtard Sons, Lewes and Carlon. During his raigne, the Normans were valiantly repulſed: hee lyeth buried at Compeigne.
               
               28 Carlon and Lewes,
                  881 the illegitimate ſons of Lewes le Begue, were Kings after his deceaſe,The baſe ſons of Lewes made Kings. in the yeare 881. not hauing any other heire to ſuccéed him. Some ſought to giue the kingdom to Boſon, King of Prouence: and others to Charls the Emperor, king of Germany. Carlon & Lewes (neuertheleſſe) were crowned Kings, and carried themſelues valiantly againſt the Normans, who (for fiue years ſpace) made very great enterpriſes on France. In the battaile which they had néere to Chinon, they fought manfully vpon the riuer of Vienna; there nine thouſand were ſlaine, beſide them that were drowned in flight. They expelled alſo the fore-named Boſon and Charls the Emperor, ſéeking to make themſelues Kinges of France. Theſe two brethren died ſtrangely.The ſtrange death of both the Kinges. 
                  Lewes, purſuing a wilde Beare with his Iaueling, was ſhot thorow with an arrow, which one of his traine did let fly at the beaſt, & ſo he died, in the 4. yeare of his raigne. Carlon died a yeare after, as vnluckily, for hee being one day very pleaſant on horſe-back, galloping after a faire Damſell, who ran (for her ſafety) into a ſmall Country cottage: he (not ſtaying his horſe, nor minding the impoſſibility of his paſſage) brake his necke at the doors entrance.
               
                  Now, becauſe he was the eldeſt, and ſuruiued his Brother, the name of King is atttibuted to him, as if that he had raigned alone. They were both buried at S. Denis.
               
               
                  18629 Lewes the third, ſirnamed Fai-neant, Do nothing, after the death of Carlon his Father, was made King in the yeare 886. This man, being altogether careleſſe, albeit hee hadde a great number of men, which his Father had aſſembled to reſiſt the Normans (who waſted the kingdome very much) would not vſe any reſiſtance: but like one fearefull and negligent,A diſhonorable compoſition wt the Normans. made agréement with them, and promiſed to giue them 12. thouſand pounds of Money yearely, till twelue yeares ſhould bee expired. Whereuppon, the French (diſdaining to bée tributary to the Normans) depoſed the ſaid Doe nothing, and made him a ſhauen Monke at Saint Denis. And the rather they did it, becauſe he had taken a Nunne from Challes S. Baudour, néere Paris, & married her whether ſhe would or no. To reſiſt the Normans, the French ſent for Charles le Gros, Emperor of Rome, Nephew alſo to Charles the bald, and him they made King. The Normans kept Paris beſiedged, with forty thouſand men, who were in ſuch ſort foyled, as not a man of them eſcaped aliue.A great ſl
                        •
                     ughter of the Normans. Neuertheleſſe, to containe them in ſome more moderation; hee made alliance and agréement with their Dukes. Which raiſed ſuch ſtrange garboiles in the Realme, ſo diſpleaſed the people, and incenſed them with ſuch hatred againſt him: that they expulſed him both

out of the Empire and Kingdome,Charles le Gros expulſed from the Empire & kingdom and hee dyed in a poore Village of Suauba, very poore and miſerably. Yet the fiue yeares of this raigne are attributed to him and not to Lewes Doe nothing.
               
               30 Odo, or Eudes,
                  891 Sonne to Robert Earle of Angiers, was made King in the yeare 891. after Charles le Gros, by aduiſe of the Princes: albeit hee was not of the race of Charlemaigne, but onely Tutour to Charles the Simple, and he was preferred by Arnould the Emperour (ſucceſſour to Charles le Gros) who would haue had the Kingdome himſelfe. During his raigne, the Normans (breaking their agréement made with Charles le Gros) began to warre againe, much more cruelly then before, and now the ſecond time beſiedged Paris: But Odo carried himſelfe ſo vndauntedly, that he ouer-came them manie times. In this while, certaine Barons of the Realme,Charles the Simple ſent for out of England, & crowned K. had ſent for Charles the Simple into England, and Crowned him King of Fraunce, at the age of fouretéene yeares. Odo, who was then in Aquitaine (hardly brooking this diſgrace) mooued great warre againſt Charles the Simple, which continued for long time. Neuertheleſſe, at the houre of his death, hee entreated the Princes of Fraunce, that they ſhould reſtore the ſaide Charles to the Kingdome, becauſe (in true right) it appertained to him. This Odo brought vp (as a noueltie) to haue a great many Flourede-Luces (without any direct number) in the Armes of Fraunce, which continued ſo till the time of Charles the ſixt. He raigned nine years,

and lieth buried at S. Denis.
               
               
                  90031 Charles the third, ſirnamed the Simple, ſon of Lewes le Begue, or the Stammerer, began to raigne ſoly in the yeare 900. After his Tutours death, who had held the kingdome in the minority of his yeares. The warre of the Normans continued ſtil: yet the king fel into acquaintance with Raoull, or Rollo their Duke, and gaue him his daughter in marriage, endowed with all the Land,Neuſtria, now named Normandy. which then was called Neuſtria, and afterward made a dutchy, and named Normandy, with eſpecial condition, that he ſhould be baptized. Robert Earle of Paris, Brother to Odo, (lately deceaſed) pretended to vſurp the kingdom, and drawing many Lords into his faction, crowned himſelfe King. But Charles, with the ayde of the Emperour Henrie, gaue him battaile néere to Soiſſons, wherein the ſaide Robert was vanquiſhed and ſlaine. Héereat Hebert, Earle of Vermandois (his Brother in Law) was highlie diſpleaſed, yet hee diſſembled it for an apt time, and one day, pretending to feaſt the King, he entreated him to lodge in his caſtle of Peronne. No ſooner was he entred,Charles cō
                     pelled to reſigne his Kingdome. but he did ſhut him vp in a Tower (where hee dyed) compelling him to reſigne the Kingdome to Raoull, Brother to the Duke of Burgundy. Hee left by Theargina his Wife, a Sonne named Lewes, who fledde for his ſafetie into England. This King raigned alone 14. yeares, and lyeth enterred at Peronne.
               
               
                  92732 Raoull of Burgundy, Sonne to Richard Duke of Burgundy, was made King in the year

917. This man not being of the linage of kings, would néedes bée crowned at Soiſſons:
                  Hugh the great Cou
                        •
                     t of Paris. as well by fauour of Hugh the great Earle of Paris, as alſo of Hebert Earle of Vermandois, who then kept King Charles the Simple Priſoner, ſeazing his perſon, vnder coulour of feaſting him, and conſtrayning him (before his death) to reſigne his Kingdome, in preſence of many Lords, and to giue it (as a frée guift) to the ſayde Raoull, which yéelded the greater authority to his raigne.
               The Quéene Theargina, wife to King Charles the Simple, ſéeing ſuch troubles in France; made her retirement into England, to the King her Brother, with her Son Lewes,
                  Lewes d' Outremer, or of beyond-Sea. called Lewes of beyond the Sea. Raoull made a voyage into Italy, pretending to get the Empire, which was then in ſtrife, and there he vanquiſhed Berengarius an Italian Prince, who laide ſome claime thereto. But finding himſelfe not wel affected of the Italians; hee with-drew thence into France: where hee dyed of a very ſtrange diſeaſe,Raoull died very ſtrange lie. béeing eaten with wormes, notwithſtanding all remedies applied by his Phiſitions. He raigned about tenne yeares, died at Auxerre, and was buried at S. Colombe néere Sens.
               
               33 Lewes, fourth of that name,929. ſir-named Lewes d'Outre-mer, or of beyond the Sea. Son of Charles the Simple, was made K. in the yeare 929. being then in England with the K. his vnckle, the Princes, Prelats, and Barons of France ſent for him into England: whither his Mother

                  Theargina had carried him for refuge, when Hebert had betraied King Charles her Huſband; & he was crowned at Laon. The King had debate with Raoul of Burgundy, about the Kingdome, and made warre vppon the Emperour Otho for the Dutchy of Lorraine: but peace being made betwéene them, he tooke to Wife Herberge, Siſter to the ſaid Emperour. At his returne home into Fraunce,Hebert Earl of Vermandois executed. hee cauſed Hebert Earle of Vermandois to bee hanged, who had procured his Father to dye in Priſon. Hugh, the great Earle of Paris, who then held the full ſayle of the kingdome; raiſed the Normans to rebell againſt the King: But the King drawing him to his ſide, he rebelled from him again, becauſe he had made an agréement with the Normans without him, and cauſed them alſo to alter their purpoſe, with a freſh begunne warre: wherein the King was taken Priſoner, and carried to Rouen. Afterward he was deliuered to the great Earle Hugh, who detained him at Laon: but the Emperour Otho came to his ſuccour, & deliuered him. Lewes raigned twenty ſeauen yeares, and lieth buryed at S. Remy of Rheimes.
               
               
                  95634 Lothaire, Sonne of Lewes d' Outremer, or of beyond the Sea, was made King in the yeare 956. At the beginning of his raigne, Hugh the great Earle of Paris gouerned all the affaires of France:The death of Hugh the great Earl of Paris. but he dyed ſoone after (leauing thrée Sonnes, to wit, Hugh Capet, who afterward vſurped the kingdom; Otho and Henry, who were ſucceſſiuely Dukes of Burgundy;)

and was ſumptuouſly enterred at Saint Denis. Lothaire raigned 31. yeares, and lieth buried at S. Remy of Rheimes.
               
               35 After King Lothaire, Lewes his Sonne,986 fift of that name, ſuccéeded in the gouernment, in the yeare 986. He raigned but one yeare, died without any heire, and was the laſt King of the race or linage of Charles the great, his burial was at Compeigne. Charles, Duke of Lorraine,
                  Charls duke of Lorraine ſeeketh to be King. (who was his Unckle and néereſt Heire) hearing of his death, would néedes paſſe into France, to make himſelfe King: But the French hated him extreamely, as well becauſe he had continually pertaken with the Allemaignes, ſworne enemies then to the French; as alſo, in regard hee was a bad Prince to his owne Subiectes. So that they would not receiue him for their King, but wholy ranne to Hugh Capet, then Maire of the pallace, a very wiſe and woorthy man. Hee perceiuing that the French fauoured and affected him, knew well enough how to ſow (both in their eares and hearts) an vnliking opinion of Charles Duke of Lorrain, to make him the more hatefull to them. He firſt laid before them, how hee had permitted the Allemaignes frée paſſage,D. Charles diſabled by Hugh Capet. when they came and warred on France. Next, that he had maintained the chéefe enemies to the crown of France, wherein hee ſtood guilty of high treaſon; And ſo, (by conſequent) was diſabled of any ſucceſſion to the ſaid Crowne.
            
            
               
               ¶ Heere endeth the ſecond generation of the Kinges of France, in the ligne Maſculine, being the race of the Carlouingians, and which continued (after Pepin) for the ſpace of 233. yeares.
               
                  987
                  
                     HVgh Capet, Sonne to Hugh the great Earle of Paris, poſſeſſed himſelf of the Crown of France, in the yeare 987. He was (by ſome of the French) proclaymed King at Noyon firſt of al; ſoone after, in the Citty of Rheimes (partly by fauour, and partly perforce) Crowned King of Fraunce, and made his entrance into Paris: whereuppon, Charles Duke of Lorraine took Rheimes, Laon, and Soiſſons. Hugh Capet with a potent Armie beſiedged Laon,
                  D. Charles and his wife & Children ſurprized by treaſon. where hee tooke Charles with his Wife and Children, by Treaſon in the Byſhop of the ſaid place, and ſent them Priſoners to Orleaunce, where they were very ſtrictly kept, and died. Capet being the Conqueror, maintained, that the kingdome ſhould wholy appertaine to him: becauſe Raoull of Burgundy (his vnckle) had formerly poſſeſſed himſelfe thereof, by the voluntary reſignation of Charles the Simple. Hée cauſed his ſon Robert (who had followed his ſtudies) to be crowned at Orleaunce, and to aſſociate him in the kingdomes regiment: taking away the authority of the Maire of the Pallace, when thus he aduanced his ſon, whom he had by Adela,
                  
daughter to Edward King of England. Hee appointed alſo the twelue Peeres againe; beganne the dignity & office of Conſtable; and eſtabliſhed the Marſhals of France. He raigned alone, & with his Son 9. yeares. He founded the Abbay of S. Magloire at Paris, and lieth buried at S. Denis.
               
               37 Robert, the ſonne of Hugh Capet, béeing Crowned King in the life time of his Father,997 began to rule alone in the yeare 997. as true inheritour, both of the Crowne, and likewiſe of his Fathers vertues. He raigned worthily, béeing a Man very deuout and méeke, the Kingdome continuing peaceable, and without warre.The vertues of Robert, ſon to Hugh Capet. This King was very wiſe, and could compoſe in Latine very learnedlie: for he made many Proſes, Himnes, and anſweres, which yet (to this day) are ſung in the Church. He was alſo well ſkild in Muſique, and would oft-times ſing among the Channons, and weare a Coape (for companie) with them, liuing as religiouſly, as royally. Henrie Duke of Burgundy (his Vnckle by the Mothers ſide) made him Heire of his Dutchie, leauing it vnto him by his Teſtament: and incited him againſt Landry Duke of Neuers, (béeing beloued and ſupported by the Burgundians) who inſulted vppon his right, in which attempt they foyled him, and droue him to flight. Hée ioyned the Cittie of Sens to the Crowne, by confiſcation, for a certaine delict doone by the Counte Reynard. He ſent his Armie againſt the Valentians, with Richard Duke of Normandy, to aſſiſt the Earle of Flanders his Kinſ-man,

againſt Henry the Emperor.His Wiues & children. He had thrée wiues▪ 
                  Luthard, Bertha (whom hee forſooke vppon ſome occaſion) and Conſtance, by whom hee had thrée ſons, one whereof died during his raigne. In his time was an vniuerſal famine and mortality. He dyed, hauing raigned 34. yeares, and lieth buried at S. Denis.
               
               
                  1030.38 Henry the firſt ſuccéeded in the kingdome, after his Father Robert, in the yeare 1030. In his beginning to gouerne, his younger Brother Robert warred againſt him, béeing allied to the Earles of Champaigne and Flaunders; who ſtroue to make him King, by the procurement of his Step-mother: but he (aſſiſted by the Duke of Normandy, and the Earle of Corbeile) mayntained his owne quietneſſe. He ioyned Meulanc to his Crowne, by rebellion of the Earle of that place. Raoull king of high Burgundy being dead, the Emperor Conrade ſeazed on that part thereof, which wee call La Franche Conte; And the Dutchy béeing Roberts, Brother to the King, the kingdome of Burgundy (which had ſo contied an hundred and thirtie yeares) was then aboliſhed.The ending of the kingdome of Burgundy. The King ſeated young William the Baſtard, Duke of Normandy, (to whom he had béene Guardian) peaceably in his Dutchy, becauſe ſome of his Subiects would haue depriued him thereof, as beeing vnwilling to entertaine him.The King of the Ruſſians. He founded Saint Martine des Champs, in the ſame place where his Pallace was, without Paris. By Anne his wife, daughter to George or Gaultier king of the Ruſſians, he had Phillip and

                  Hugh, and a Daughter married to the Duke of Normandy. Féeling himſelfe to waxe weeke, he cauſed his Sonne Phillip to bee crowned King of France: And before his death, he left Baldwine Earle of Flanders as Guardian of his Children. He reigned 31. yeares, and lieth buried at Saint Denis.
               
               39 Phillip the firſt, ſuccéeded after his Father,1061. in the year 1061. During his time, William the Baſtard, Duke of Normandy,
                  The conqueſt of England by William the Baſtard. conquered the Realme of England: and Godfrey of Bullen was made King of Ieruſalem; alſo the Countrey of Gaſtinois came then to the Crown. This king raigned 48. yeares, and lyeth buried at S. Bennets on Loire.
               
               40 Lewes the ſixt, ſir named le Gros,
                  1110 immediatly after the death of King Phillip his Father, in the year 1110. was ſacred at Orleaunce by the Biſhoppe of Sens, the way of Rheimes not beeing then ſecure. Some Princes and Lordes (aſſiſted by the King of England) in the beginning of his raigne, did giue him many moleſtations; but ſtill it was his happe to be Conquerour, and the Warre of the Engliſh (verie many times appointed) was at laſt ended.The Pope flieth for refuge into France. Pope Gelaſius fled for refuge into France, where hee was ſuccoured againſt the Emperour. In the yeare 1129. the King cauſed his Sonne Phillip to bée Crowned; who (two yeares after) dyed at Paris, by reaſon of a Hogges running betwéene the Legges of his Horſe, that threwe him violently on the Pauement, and dying of

that hurt, he was buryed at Saint Denis. Afterward, hée had his other Sonne Lewes crowned, and it was done by Pope Innocent, he béeing then in France.
               
               At this time were a great company of Lazers and Leapers in Fraunce, who would haue infected all the reſt of the people; but they were all taken and burned.Knights Templers, & Chartreux Monkes▪
                   The order of the Knights Templers, & Chartreux Monks began in this kinges raigne: and the winds were ſo rough and impetuous, in the yeare 1135. that they ouer-turned many Towers, Caſtles, Trées in Forreſts, and Mils. This King appeaſed the troubles in Flanders, Bou
                        •
                     bonnois, & Auuergne: he builded the Abbay of Saint Victor néere Paris; raigned 28. yeares, died at the age of ſixty, leauing ſix Sons and a daughter, and lieth buried at S. Denis.
               
               
                  113841 Lewes the ſeauenth, ſir-named the Young man, beganne to raigne after his Father, in the yeare 1138. He made war on Thibault Earle of Champaigne, too
                     •
                  o
                     •
                   him the Citty of Vitry: And (in a great 
                     •
                  age) burned the Church, with 13 hundred perſons in it,1300. perſons 
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     ned in a church. that had fledde thither for ſafety. By the ſolicitation of S. Bernald, he went to Hieruſalem with his Queene, and with the Army of the Emperour Conrade: where, beſiedging Damas, thorough diſcord in the Army, hée could boaſt of no aduauntage; but retyring thence, had not the Shippes of Sicily befriended him and his; they hadde remained Priſoners there. Beeing returned into Fraunce, hée made a ſeparation betwéene him and Queene

                  Aelianor his wife, Dutcheſſe of Aquitaine and Aniou, vppon two ſuſpitions conceiued againſt her. Henry, Duke of Normandie (who afterward was King of England) married her, with her Patrimony of the ſaide two Dutchies: and there-about followed great Warres betwéene France and England. The King married Conſtance, Daughter to the K. of Spayn, who dyed ſoon after: And then he remarried Alice, daughter to the Earle of Blois, by whom he had Phillip Dieu-donne, Gods gift. Then happened great diſturbance in England, betwéene the King and his ſon, who making his recourſe to Lewes, cauſed thereby a very troubleſome war, without any aduantage to either ſide. But in ye end they were accorded, and a marriage concluded,A marriage betweene England & France. of Alice the daughter of Lewes to the ſon of England. The King died at Paris, hauing raigned 43. yeares, and lieth buried in the Abbay of Barbeau, which was founded by him.
               42 Phillip Auguſtus, ſir-named Dieu-donne,
                  1181. 
                  Gods gift, ſuccéeded after his Father, in the year 1181. He baniſhed all the Iewes out of Fraunce, and yet afterward permitted them entraunce againe: ordaining many Edicts againſt Blaſphemers, as alſo the vſury of the Iewes. He did put to death the Albigeois Heretiques, and them of Beſiers: augmenting greatly the Cittie of Paris, inſtituting Sheriffes and Alder-men,Vertuous deedes in a King. commaunding the ſtréetes to be paued, building alſo the Halles for Studentes, and the Churchyard of S. Innocent, and encloſing with wals the

Vniuerſity ſide. Hée went to recouer the Citty of Hieruſalem, with Richard Cueur de Lyon, King of England; and falling off from him, returned home into France. Hee hadde afterward great wars againſt the ſaid K. Richard, and Iohn without Land his brother, who ſuccéeded him; about the titles of Normandy, Aquitain, Poictu, Maine, Aniou, & Auuergne. He won the battaile at Bouines againſt the Emperor Otho, and other French Lords who were entred into rebellion againſt him:Fifty thouſand men ſlain in one battaile. In which battell periſhed fifty thouſand men, and Otho himſelfe was enforced to flight, the Earle of Flanders and the Earl of Bolongne being taken Priſoners, by which reaſon the king was called the Conqueror. He raigned 43. yeares, died at Mante, aged 59. & lieth buried at S. Denis, leauing two ſons and a daughter.
               
                  122443 Lewes the eyght, ſuccéeded after his Father, in the yeare 1224. In the life time of his Father, hee croſſed the Seas, and made Warre in England, attayning to no ſuch ſucceſſe as hee expected. Hee renewed kindneſſe and Brotherhood betwéene the French and Germaines, tooke Auignon, and warred vpon the Albigeois. He raigned thrée yeares, and lyeth buryed at Saint Denis.
               
               
                  122744 Lewes the ninth, ſucceeded his Father Lewes the eyght, in the yeare 1227. Blaunche his Mother (in regard of his young yeares) was appointed to bée Regent: whereat ſome Lords were diſcontented, but ſhe tooke order ſufficiently with them. She maintained the warre

againſt the Engliſh, and agréement was made with them vpon ſolemne Oath,Peace between Englande and France. to holde Aquitaine, doing homage, and to yéelde vp Normandie, Ponthieu, Maine, and Poictiers. The king being in peace, exerciſed himſelfe to liue Religiouſly, building Churches, Hoſpitals, and Monaſteries, enriching them with rents & reuennues. In the 24. yeare of his raigne, hee went to recouer the Holy Land, deſcended into Egypt, and tooke Damieta. He was afterward ſo rudely aſſayled, that he was taken by the Soldane: but deliuered againe, vppon his reſtoring Damieta, and paying a great ranſome. Hee bought of the Venetians, the Crown of Thornes (as was ſuppoſed) with other Relickes of the paſſion, & cauſed them to be ſafely kept in the holy Chappel at Paris. Many Shepheards,Peazants ari
                        •
                     e, and do great hurt in France. vnderſtanding that the King was priſoner, aroſe vp in armes, and made great ſpoile in France: but they were foyled by them of Orleance and Bourges. The king at his returne, did very ſeuerely chaſtiſe blaſphemers: And paſſing afterward into Affrica, tooke Carthage, and aſſailed Thunis, where the Peſtilence happening in his Campe, he died of a flux of blood. He raigned 34. yeares, and lieth buried at S. Denis.
               
               Behold briefely the life and death of King Lewes, ninth of that name, who afterward by Pope Boniface the eight, in the time of Phillip le Bel,
                  K. of France cald a Saint was cannonized among the number of Saints in Romes Kalender, and called S. Lewes. His raigne was truely in piety, religion, ſanctitie and

iuſtice. His youth was much tormented with rebellions, ſubleuations, & ſeditions of ſome Lords: but his manly yeares did diſperſe them, as the Sunne doth dimme clouds. Hee was deuoute, vpright, valiant, liberal, ſeuere, and yet clement, vſing all theſe Vertues, according as hee knewe them to be néedfull.
               
                  127145 Phillip the third, Son of S. Lewes, was proclaimed King in the Campe before Thunis, in the yeare, 1271. but was afterward Sacred at Rheimes. He was Sur-named Phillip the hardie, and at his comming back into France, he had many difficulties, about the death of Phillip his impoyſoned Sonne, in the Warres of Foix and Terracon. Vpon an Eaſter day, in the euening houre, all the French (being then in Sicily) were euery one ſlaine,The Sicili-Veſpres. whereon grew the By-word of the Sicilian Veſpres or Euening. The king died at Parpignan, in the fortith yeare of his age, and lieth buried at Saint Denis, hee married Iſabel, Daughter to Peter of Arragon, by whom he had Phillip, Charles, and Marie: And then, remarrying Marie, Daughter vnto Henrie Duke of Brabant, he hadde by her Lewes and Margaret.
               
               
                  1286.46 Phillip the fourth, Sur-named le Bell, or the Fayre, Sonne to the fore-named Phillip, ſuccéeded his Father, in the yeare, 1286. both in the Kingdome of France and Nauarre, in right of his wife. In his younger daies he had a Schoolemaiſter, a Roman borne, and a great Diuine, named Gilles, who cauſed the King to write an excellent

worke (yet to be ſéene) called The Inſtitution of Princes. As the King was at Paris,
                  A Booke written by the King. being returned from his Corronation at Rheimes; this Diuine (according to the Vniuerſities ancient cuſtome, which was, to make a learned ſpéech after the kings ſacring) made a ſinguler Oratiō to him to encreaſe his deſire in following Vertue & piety, preſeruing his ſubiects in peace and tranquility. He built the ſumptuous Pallace of Paris, & ſubdued the Flemings, who had forſaken his part, & giuen aide to the Engliſh againſt him; the Earle of Flanders, and his two ſons beeing then taken priſoners. The King left a Garriſon in the countrey, but they were ſlaine in a commotion of the people: Whereupon, the Earle of Flanders (hauing giuen his faith to the King) was ſent thyther with one of his ſons: but being able to do no good, he returned backe againe to the King, and died ſoon after at Compeign. The k. went thither himſelfe in perſon, & at the firſt had no better ſucceſſe: but at length, he charged them ſo furiouſly, that he foiled 36000. wheron they were conſtrained to make attonement, and pay him 200000. Crownes. The day of Coutray, was afterward fauourable to the Flemmings, but deplorable to the French, the Engliſh preuayling mightily againſt them. Then came the Bulles of Pope Boniface againſt Phillippe,
                  The Popes Buls againſt the King, burned. but they were burned in the Court of the Pallace: which made Boniface to excommunicate the King, but Bennet his Succeſſour abſolued him againe. In his time was the Papall See, tranſ-ferred

to Auignon,
                  The Popes See was brought to Auignon. where it continued thréeſcore & ten yeares, Rome being then gouerned by Legates. The king died at Fountainebleu, which was the place of his byrth: hauing raigned 28. years, and lieth buried at S. Denis.
               
               47 Lewes the tenth, Sur-named Hutin (after the conformity of his manners) ſuccéeded his Father, in the yeare, 1314.1314 and had his right alſo, (after his Mother) in the kingdome of Nauarre. Enguerrand de Marigni, General of the Finances, being accuſed to haue robbed the kings treaſury, was hanged at Mont-faucon, which hee himſelfe firſt cauſed to be made. Lewes tooke firſt to wife Margaret,
                  Enguerrand executed at Mont-faucon. Daughter to Robert Duke of Burgundy, by whom he had a Daughter. Next, he married Conſtance, whom he left with child of a Sonne, named Iohn, that liued but eyght daies. This King raigned but xviij. months, died at Boys de Vinciennes, and is buried at S. Denis.
               
               
                  1316.48 Phillip the fift, Surnamed the Long, ſuccéeded after his Brother Lewes Hutin in ye kingdome, being called Long
                  ▪ in regard of his tal ſtature and ſlenderneſſe. The Duke of Burgundie, would haue troubled his poſſeſſion of the crown, in regarde of his Daughters Daughter▪ but the Salique Law did not fauour him therein. This King Phillip married Iane, Daughter to Otholine Earle of Burgundy, by whom hee had three daughters: The firſt married with the Sonne to the Duke of Burgundy; the ſecond, the Sonne to the Earle of Flaunders; and the thirde to the

                  Daulphine of Viennois, by which marriages all Warres were aſſwaged in Fraunce.
                  Marriages make peace in France. During his raigne, diuers Leapers and Lazers (procured thereunto by the Iewes) poyſoned all the welles which cauſed a great Peſtilence thorough the Kingdom: but both the one and other were grieuouſly punniſhed therefore. Neuer coulde this King obtaine of his people, any impoſt or Taxation by him leuied. He made a Law, that there ſhold be in his kingdom, but one kind of weight, one meaſure, and one money, commanding that it ſhould be duely kept. But while this was in execution, he died, without any heires male, hauing raigned fiue yeares in peace, and lieth buried at S. Denis.
               
               In theſe times, certaine Troopes of Countrey people, that were called Paſtors and Shepherds, aroſe againe in Fraunce, as formerly ſome had done in the time of King Lewes the ninth. Theſe men made their vaunt,Another riſing of Peazants in France. that they would croſſe the Seas, and go warre againſt the Infidels. They had two chiefe men of marke among them, and wel beſeeming ſuch an aſſembly, to wit, a Prieſt, that (for his miſ-behauiour) was expulſed his Church: and an Apoſtata Monke, of the Order of S. Bennet. Theſe two fellowes, ſo abuſed the hearts and beléefe of the poore popularity, that ſilly Shepheards left their Flocks, and Laborers their Manuall trades, to follow theſe two impoſtures: who made them verily beleeue, that the Holy Land could be recouered by none but them. In concluſion, this heape of Raſcality was quailed

in Languedoc, becauſe, in ſtead of preparing their fury againſt the Infidels, and paſſing the Seas: they fell vpon the Iewes, whom the king had repealed into France.
               
                  132149 Charles le Bell, Son to Phillip the fourth, ſuccéeded after his Brother, in the year 1321. and likewiſe was King of Nauarre, as his thrée predeceſſors had bin. He had thrée wiues▪ 
                  Blaunch, (whom he diuorced for her adultery) Marie, and Margaret. Iourdain de l'Iſle (albeit hee was Nephew to Pope Iohn the two and twentieth) was hanged and ſtrangled at Paris,
                  Iourdain de l'Iſle hanged at Paris for his ſtrange offences. This King fel to concord with the Engliſh, appeaſed the Earle of Flaunders, and drewe his people to a mutuall Reconciliation. He was a great Iuſticer, raigned ſeauen yeares, dyed at Boys de Vinciennes, and is buried at Saint Denis.
               
            
            
               By his death, the ſecond branch of the Capets (called De Valois) came to the Royalty, and began in
               
                  1328.50 PHillip de Valois, Coozin Germaine to the thrée precedent Kings, dying without heire male: his ſucceſſion was in the yeare, 1328. His right to the Crowne was dearely diſputed, betweene him and King Edward the third of England, Son to the Siſter of the thrée forenamed Kings, who (preferring his Mothers Title) would néeds be King of France, contrary to the Decrée of the Law Salique, and conſent of al

the States. He did king Phillip homage for Guyenne and Ponthieu; but (being not well pleaſed therewith) cut him off quite from Flanders, Bretaigne, Germany, Crecy,
                  The Battell of Crecy, & great loſſe of the French. where Phillip loſt the day, with the very flower of al the French Nobility, taking Calais alſo by their flight. Truce being taken betwéene both the Kings: Edward of England had both the Title of king, and Armes of France or conqueſt, which euer after was attributed to him & his. Phillip, raigned 22. yeares, died at Nogent, and lieth buried at S. Denis.
               
               51 Iohn, Sonne to Phillip de Valois,
                  1350. ſuccee-his Father, in the yeare 1350. proouing as vnfortunate in thoſe tempeſtuous times, as his father had done before him. He married Ioane, Counteſſe of Bolongne, by whom he had foure ſonnes and one Daughter. Raoull the Conſtable of France was beheaded in priſon.King Iohn, as a priſoner brought into England. In the day at Poictiers, King Iohn was taken by the Engliſh, and carried into England, which impriſonment of his, cauſed many pittifull Tragedies, the moſt furious whereof were acted in the chiefe Citties of France. Foure yeares after, King Iohn paſſed into England, for the fréedome of his Oſtages: but there he died at London, hauing raigned 13. yeares. His ſonne cauſed his body to be brought to S. Denis.
               
               52 Charles the fift, Sonne to King Iohn,
                  1364. ſuccéeded his Father, in the yeare 1364. Hee ſuſtained very great troubles during the captiuitie of his father, by a commotion which the k. of Nauar raiſed at Paris, who was aided by the merchants

of the ſaide Citty, and woulde haue had the Regency, but that Charles (being then Daulphine) made oppoſition againſt him. He dealte for the ranſome and deliueraunce of his Father: after whoſe deceaſe, he was crowned King. Hee tooke to Wife Ioane, Daughter to Charles Duke of Burbon, by whom he had three Sonnes, and one daughter. He maintained great warres againſt the Engliſh,Fiue armies at one time againſte the Engliſh. hauing (at one inſtant) fiue ſeueral Armies in field againſt them, becauſe they were ſuch potent enemies: And to ſupply ſo mightie a charge, he was faine to lay a heauie taxation vpon wine and Salt. Bertrand de Gueſclin, a moſt worthy Knight, was then his high Conſtable: And the Baſtille at Paris was then builded. A ſedition happened at Montpellier, and ſix hundred of the ſeditious were executed. This King was ſurnamed the Wiſe, for his deep diſcretion, goodneſſe, and gouernment.The Bibles firſt verſsion into the French tongue. He ſo loued Learning, that he cauſed the Holy Bible to be tranſlated into the French Language (which remaineth yet) in the Royal Cabinet of the Louure) with many other good Bookes beſide. Hee had ſtil an eye to Iuſtice, ſitting daily to hear cauſes, and ordering all his affayres by Counſel. With much adoo, he regained ſome Townes from the Engliſh, in Poictu and Xaintonge. Hee raigned ſixteene yeares, yeelded his ſoule to God at Chaſteau de Beaute, and lieth buried at S. Denis. The Sect of the Turlupins was then aboliſhed. See Emil. Lib. 9.
               
                  138052 Charles the ſixt, ſonne of Charles the fift,

was crowned King at the age of fouretéen years, being vnder the gouernment of his Vnckles, the Dukes of Berry, Burgundy,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   and the Duke of Aniou, who got into their cuſtody many millions of Gold, left by the King deceaſt. And then, (no Money being to bee found) the people were charged with heauy impoſitions, whereby great ſeditions happened at Paris, Rouen, and Orleaunce. The King tooke into the Armes of France againe, the thrée Floure-de-Luces onely,Factions in the Court of France. and fell ſicke of a Phrenzy: by reaſon of two factions in his Court, the Dukes of Berry and Burgundy, againſt the Dukes of Orleaunce and Bourbon, whereby many lamentable miſhaps enſued. The Princes tooke the gouernment into their hands, and diuiſion happening (concerning the treaſure) the Duke of Burgundy cauſed the Duke of Orleaunce to bee ſlaine at Paris, and the Duke of Burgundy was ſlaine at Montereau. Phillip his Sonne craued ayde of the Engliſh, who preſently tooke (well neere) all Normandy; beſide the vnhappy day (to the French) of Agincourt or Azincourt, where many wo
                     •
                  ull Tragedies were acted on the Theater of France by the Engliſh, Burgundians, and the Kings Mother, who was impriſoned at Paris. The King of England maried Madame Katherine of France. The Duke of Burgundy deliuered him the King, the Quéene, and the Citty of Paris,
                  The King of England crowned in France. where he cauſed him to be crowned King, and many other Citties and Towns were deliuered him beſide. King Charls hauing raigned forty two yeares, died at Paris,
                  
and lieth buried at Saint Denis. His raigne was long, but full of calamity.
               
                  142354 Charles the ſeauenth, Sonne to Charles the ſixt, was made King in the yeare 142. Hée found his Kingdome poſſeſſed (in all partes) by the Engliſh; Paris and the greater part of the Realme, beeing then commaunded by the Duke of Bedford, Regent for young Henry King of England; who called himſelfe King of Fraunce; held his Parliament at Paris; was there crowned king; and made the Seale and Monies alſo in his own name: King Charles hauing nothing elſe, but the Countries of Poictu, Berry, and Orleaunce, whereon the Engliſh (in a mockery) called him the king of Bourges. They went to beſiedge the Cittie of Orleaunce; but they were thence repulſed by the French Captaines: For they had a Maide in their Company, who was called Ioan the Pucelle,
                  Ioane the Pucelle of France. and they verily beléeued, that ſhe was ſent of God, for the ſuccour of King Charles, and to chaſe the Engliſh out of France. The King, after the diſcomfiture of the Engliſh néere to Partenay; was conducted to Rheimes, and there crowned: But the Engliſh got the Pucelle, and burned her at Rouen The King made peace with the Duke of Burgundy, who foorthwith left the Engliſh; and afterward recouered Paris and Normandy from them. King Charles raigned 38. yeares, and lieth buried at S. Denis.
               
               
                  146155 Lewes the eleuenth, ſuccéeded his Father, in the yeare 1461. beeing then in Burgundy, whence the Duke conuayed him to Rheimes, where he was crowned. Hée found a number of

notable Enemies, both Domeſticall and Forraigne: For his Lords made warre againſt him, which they tearmed The Weale-publike warre, & he loſt the day to them at Montle-hery,
                  The order of S. Michael inſtituted 
                  Granſſon, Nancy, and Guinegaſte. The order of S. Michaell was then inſtituted, and Iacques d'Armaguac beheaded. His raigne was full of feare, ſuſpition, and treachery, which ſo pierced his hart; that, in a long time of diſmay (after 33. yeares gouernment) he died, and lieth buried at Noſtre Dame de Clery.
               
               56 Charles the eight,1484. ſuccéeded his Father Lewes, in the yeare 1484. being crowned at the age of 14. yeares: yet the States méeting at Tours, appointed that hee ſhould not haue any Regent. Hee ſuſtained a long warre in Bretayne, which termined by his marriage with Anne, eldeſt Daughter to Fraunces Duke of Bretayne; by whom he had three Sons, but could not long enioy any one of them. At the requeſt of his Confeſſour, hee rendered to the King of Spaine the Earledomes of Rouſſillon and Parpignan, which his Father had won. Being in peace, he aduentured to recouer the kingdom of Naples,
                  The Kingdom of Naples wonne by the French. which he did (without ſtriking one ſtroke) in full conqueſt: K. Alphonſus and his ſon Ferdinand being thence retired, & left Glibert de Montpenſier Vice-Roy there. Returning home into France, he was aſſailed on the way by the Romans, Venitians, and them of Milleyne at Fornouë, where his perſon was in great danger, the enemies being tenne to one: Neuertheleſſe, hee charged them with ſuch

courage, that he bare thence the victory. He deliuered the Duke of Orleaunce, béeing beſiedged in Nouarre, and made peace with the Duke of Millaine. He returned home into France, where hee dyed (within a yeare after) at Amboiſe, as hée ſtood and beheld the Princes playing at Tennis. He raigned fouretéene yeares, and lieth buried at S. Denis.
               
            
            
               Thus ended (in him) the direct ligne of Valois, he dying without any heires Maſle; and then followed the collaterall Iſſue, which began in
               
                  149957 LEwes the twelft, néereſt of Kinne to Charles the eight, in the yeare 1499. Hée beeing Duke of Orleaunce, and alſo of Valois. He repudiated Ioane, Daughter to King Lewes the eleauenth, whom hee had married perforce; and eſpouſed Anne of Bretaigne, Widdow to the King his Predeceſſour. He eſtabliſhed a Parliament at Rouen, gaue orders to the Uniuerſitie of Paris; ſent his Army into Italy, tooke Genes and Millayne, and Lewes Sforza, Duke of Milleyne,
                  The kingdome of Naples reconquered who dyed a Priſoner in France. The Kingdome of Naples was re-taken, vnder the conduct of Monſieur d' Aubigny: And the King vanquiſhed the Venetians Army at Agnadell, where hée tooke Bartholmew their Leader, albeit the Pope banded with the Venetians againſt him.Gaſton de Foix. 
                  Gaſton de Foix tooke Boulongne, and wonne the battaile néere to Rauenna: where he

was ſlaine, by chaſing the enemies ouer-far; and yet notwithſtanding, the victory remained to the French, with ſurprizall of the Cittie, and many Captaines and great perſons taken Priſoners. Hereupon, the Pope raiſed many heauy enemies againſt him, whom (in the ende) hee woorthily vanquiſhed. He raigned 17. yeares, and lieth buried at S. Denis.
               
               58 Frances de Valois (as néereſt of Kin) ſuccéeded King Lewes, in the yeare 1515.1515 This King bare ſuch affection to learning, that he was ſir-named The Father and Reſtorer of the Sciences. At his beginning, he ouercame the Switzers, took Millaine and Fontarabie. Afterward, being deſirous to winne the Townes belonging to the Dutchy of Millaine, and to bring his ſiedge before Pauia: hee was taken Priſoner, in the yeare 1524. and carried Captiue into Spaine.
                  The King carried priſoner into Spaine. 
                  Fraunce was then very greatly afflicted, not only by this diſaſter; but by a great Famine, becauſe the Corne was frozen vppe in the Earth. The King was deliuered by a treaty holden at Madrill, and married Elianor, Siſter to Charles the fift, Emperour; peace beeing then concluded, in the yeare 1535. The King poſſeſſed himſelfe of Sauoy & Piedmont, repulſing the Emperour out of Prouence: But peace beeing made for tenne yeares, the Emperour paſſed thorough Fraunce, with very great entertainement. War began in the Low-Countries,The Engliſh wonne Bullen. which (after many alarmes) was accorded in the yeare 1544. euen then when the Engliſh won Bullen. The King deceaſed at

                  Rambouillet, hauing raigned 32. yeares, an lieth buried at S. Denis.
               
               
                  1547.59 Henry the ſecond ſuccéeded his father Frances de Valois, in the yeare 1547. No way degenerating from the laudable vertues of his father. Hee renewed and confirmed the alliance (made by his Father) with the Switzers, and tooke the Fortes about Bullen on the Sea, by ſuch furious aſſaultes, and ouer-much neglect in the Engliſh, that they forſooke them, and made a peace. In the yeare 1552. he made his voyage for Germanie, to maintaine the liberty of certaine Princes, who had (in ye caſe) required his help. He brought Metz in Lorraine vnder his obedience; and (at his returne) tooke Danuilliers, Yuoy, Monmedy, and other places, with-drawne by his Enemies. He made agréement with Pope Iulius the third, deliuering Mirandola & Parma; reducing alſo Siennato her ancient liberty, wherof the Spaniards had bereaued her. During this time, the Emperor came and beſiedged Metz, where (without doing any thing) he loſt a great number of his men. The K. marching into the Low-Countryes, took Mariembourg, Bouoines, and Diuant, driuing his Enemie vndauntedly before him. In the yeare 1555. truce beeing taken with the Empeperour, Phillip King of Spayne, and the King of England (which laſted but a while) & the French forces being in Italy, vnder conduct of Seigneur de Guyſe:
                  S. Laurance day at Saint Quintines. the King aſſailed S. Quintines, and won the day, which was called S. Laurance day. In the yeare 1557. the K. hauing aſſembled the

ſame power, and vnder the ſame Leader; tooke Callice, Guines, Hames, and the County of Oy, with the Cittie of Thionuille the yeare following. Peace beeing finally concluded betwéene them, by meanes of marriage of Phillip King of Spaine, with Elizabeth the eldeſt Daughter of France, and the Prince of Piedmont, with Margaret onely Siſter to King Henry: In toy of the ſaide marriages and peace, a Turney was celebrated in Paris, in the ſtreete of Saint Anthony,
                  King Henry hurt in 
                        ••
                     lting. & died ſoone after. where King Henry (running in the Liſts) was ſmitten with the Counter-cuffe of a Launce into the head, whereof he died the tenth day of Iuly, 1559. and in the 13. yeare of his raigne, being interred at Saint Denis.
               
               60 Frances, ſecond of that name,155
                        •
                     
                   aged about 15. or 16. yeares olde, ſuccéeded his Father, in Anno. 1559. In the life time of his Father, hee marryed Madame Mary Stuart
                  ▪ Daughter to the King of Scots: And the 15. day of September, he was ſacred at Rheimes, by the Cardinall of Lorraine, Arch-Biſhop of the ſaid place. Thence hee accompanied Madame the Dutcheſſe of Lorrain his Siſter, ſo far as Barleduc, and with-drawing thence to Amboiſe, thither came diuers men in armes (whereon it was called the tumult of Amboiſe) who ſaide;The tumult of Amboiſe that they would preſent requeſts to the King, concerning the gouernment, and matter of Religion: But becauſe they came in Armes, ſome of them were executed, and the reſt appeaſed by the Kings Edict. The King, after a Councell holden at Fontainebleau;
                  
appointing an aſſembly of the States, to heare the gréeuances of his people, and diſtruſting ſome intended mutiny: he went to the Citty of Orleance in Armes, where being deſirous to procéede in his purpoſe, hee fell ſicke of a Catarrhe which happened in one of his eares, whereof hee dyed the fift day of December, 1560. and lieth buried at S. Denis.
               
               
                  156061 Charles, ninth of that name, ſuccéeded his Brother Fraunces, in the yeare, 1560. And béecauſe he was but eleauen yeares olde, the Kingdomes affayres were gouerned by the Quéen his Mother:Anthony of Bourbon Lieutenant Generall. 
                  Anthonie of Bourbon, and king of Nauarre, being made Lieutenant generall, which was to the great contentment of all the States then aſſembled at Orleaunce. The raigne of this King was trauerſſed with many ciuill diſſentions, about the matter of Religion: whereon enſued the aſſembly of Poiſſi, the Edict of Ianuary, the death of the Duke de Guyſe, ſlaine at ye ſiege of Orleaunce by Poltrot. Then followed the Voyage of Bayonne, the battels of Dreux, S. Denis, Ia
                        •
                     nac, and Montcontour, with other Edicts of pacification: And the marriage of Henrie of Bourbon, with Margaret de Valois, whereat happened that moſt bloody and lamentable maſſacre.The bloudy maſſacre at Paris. Then the ſiedge of Sancerre, and that of Rochelle, with the retraite of the Prince of Conde in Germany: And laſtly, the death of the King, (without any children) being euen ouer-wearied with ſuch numberleſſe diſturbances. The King died the 30. day of May, 1574. at Chaſteau de

Vinciennes lez Paris. But before his death, hee left the Quéene his Mother Regent, vntill hys Brother (who was then King of Poland) were returned to France; and he lieth buried at Saint Denis.
               
               62 Henry, third of that name,1574 being returned from Poland (to the no little griefe of that Nation, ſo to part with their King) vppon the thyrde day of February, 1575. it being the verye ſame day in Lent, whereon he had bin formerly crowned King of Poland in the Citty of Cracouia, was likewiſe Sacred and Crowned at Rheimes by the reuerent Cardinall of Guyſe. The 15. day following of the ſame month, was he married to Madame Loyſe, Daughter to my Lord the Earle of Vaudemont, of the ancient and noble houſe of Lorraine. His raigne was diuerſly agitated with partialities in Religion, which paſſed vnder pretext (in faction formed againſt the State) and couered with the name of an holy league or Vnion,The holy League or Vnion. againſt which, he combatted with difficulties enow▪ and diuerſity of exploits on either ſide. Vnder his gouernement was the ouerthrowe of the Rutters Army: the battel of Coutras, the Eſtates of Blois, and almoſt the whole reuolt of France. The Reconciliation of two Kings, which ſo preſſed the factious and rebellious:The King murdered by a Iacobine Fryer. that they had no other recourſe, but to a moſt execrable parracide, which was committed on the Kings perſon at S. Clou, by Iacques Clement a Iacobine Monke, the firſt day of Auguſt. 1589.
            
            
               
               And ſo ended (in him) the race of that Royall branch of Valois.
               
                  1589.63 
                     HEnry the fourth, being formerly King of Nauar, by right of ſucceſſion came to be K. of France alſo, being iſſued in direct ligne from Robert Earl of Clermont in Beaunoiſis, and the laſt Son of S. Lewes. The beginning of his raigne was very Thorny, marked with very ſignale actions in his progreſſe, the moſt memorable whereof, (for breuities ſake) by a perſon of great honor and repute, were noted in theſe foure liues.
               
                  
                     Arques, Yuri, Dijon ſtill ſhall beare the markes,
                  Of honor right and courage in that king,
                  To whom the ſtrangers pride ſtands trembling,
                  To heare the fights of Dijon, Yuri, Arques.
                  
               
               Héere, the life, fame, and due merit of that great King, would giue mee way into a large fielde of ample diſcourſe, did not my purpoſed breuitie make imbarment. Wherefore, with the verie wordes of a woorthy and learned Gentleman, I will conclude, and ſumme vp this Man of men, this Prince-like Souldiour, and Souldiour-like Prince: whoſe Royall face was white with Time, watchinges, and experience, and the Lawrelles which did beguirt his venerable head, and tooke their roote in his Caſke, were gathered

in the grounds of thrée pitched fieldes, thirtie fiue encounters of Armies, one hundered and forty Combats, and thrée hundred ſeuerall ſiedges of places, in all which, his perſon ſtroue (if it were poſſible) to haue got the ſtart of his corage. That the ſacred perſon of ſo great a King, ſhould be vndone by the hand of an vnholy villaine, and his owne▪ vaſſaile: that a Prince of the Sworde, ſhould be butchered with a Knife. That he, who had returned victoriouſly aliue, from the heade of ſo manie Armies (where death kept his open Shambles) ſhould bee robbed of his life, by the hand of onely one, and in the peacefull ſtréetes of Paris, which were as yet euen warme with the glorie of his Quéenes Coronation, perfourmed but the day before: Is ſuch a villanie, as excéeds (if it were poſſible) the iuſt merrit of damnation, and that two Kings of one Kingdome, ſhoulde one after the other be ſo ſhamefully murdred,Iacques Clement. the one by a Iacobine Frier, the other ſometimes of the Feliants Order,Francis Rauilliart. is ſuch an indelible blot on the brow of Fraunce, as the vtmoſt date of time can neuer wipe off, nor any Penne ſufficientlie expreſſe, the ſorrowe fitting a Theame ſo vnpleaſing.
               64 Lewes, the thirteenth of that Name,1610. elbeſt Sonne to King Henry the fourth, and Maria de Medices his Quéene, being then ſcarcelie tenne yeares olde, ſucceeded his Father, in the Kingdomes Dignitie, but the Queene his Mother was proclaimed Regent. May hee long liue, heire vnto his Fathers Fame and

Heroycall vertues, but, defended (by the hand of heauen) from his fate and hard Fortune, as all Chriſtian Princes elſe (I pray to God) may be likewiſe preſerued.
            
         
         
            A Briefe Chronologicall Suruay, concerning the Netherlands, deuided into 17. prouinces: with a Breuiate of the Earles and Princes there raigning, from Thierrie (who was the firſt Earle of Holland and Zeland) to this inſtant time.
            
               COncerning the Originall of the people inhabiting theſe countries, we finde, that two Brethren, ſons to the King of A people neere to the Se
                     •
                  thians. 
               Cathes, the one being named Battus, or Batton, & the other Zelandus, were the firſt Fathers of them, and that (from them) they deriued theyr names. For theſe two Princes, being too extreamly purſued by the hatred of a Stepmother, & no way pittied or ſupported by the King their father (eſcaping many traines and machinations, of poyſoning, murthering, and diuers other dangers by her daily deuiſed, & put in practiſe againſt them) were forced to forſake their natiue abiding & flie to an Iſland within the Rhine: where Battus determining to make his ſtay,Battauia is Holland. called it Battauia after his owne name, & that is, in plainer vnderſtanding, Holland. Zelandus, not liking to liue ſo néere, or with his Brother (leaſt purſute ſhould ſurprize them both, & reuenge there faſten, which

in more deſperate place they had auoided) he trauailed on to the vttermoſt cou
                  •
               nes of the Rhine, and liking there to ſet down his reſt, imitated his Brothers example (in ſtyling the Country) and called it Zeland.
               Zeland named by Zelandus. Concerning their building of Citties, Townes, Caſtles, and Fortes, which afterward came to be ruined and defaced againe, by wars with the Romans, Saxons, Gauls, Danes, &c. or to what order of life the people diſpoſed thē
               ſelues, and thorough how many and infinite encumbrances (from their originall) they paſſed for no meane ſtore of years together: theſe are matters méerely exempt from our intended breuitie, and may more amply be ſéen in ye hiſtory at large, whereunto I referre any ſuch deſirous Reader, and borrowing fauour for ſo large a leape, I inſtantly procéede to the yeare, 863. when Holland firſt became to be an Earledome.
            In the yeare before mentioned,863 
               Charles the Bald, King of France, at Bladell, in the Prouince of Campeigne, hauing there (in his company) a general aſſembly of his Princes and Barons, for conſultation of many important matters: pleaſed to aduance the two Sons of Count Haghen (who was Vnckle to the King) for their great deſeruinges,The two Sonnes of Counte Haghen. and for the farther encouragement of the like vertuous minded Gentlemen. Walger, who was the eldeſt Sonne, hee made Earle of Teyſterbaudt; and Thierrie, the youngeſt Sonne, or Theodor, as ſome tearme him, being formerly called Thierrie of Aquitaine, hee made Earle of Holland.
            
            
               This gift of the Kings, eſpecially that to Thierry, was much withſtood by the Frizelanders, as ſcorning to be commanded by any new Lorde or Ruler: wherfore they conſulted with the Hollanders, and a plot was layde to expell this newe Earle. But it proued to no effect, for the King comming thither (in perſon) with a powerfull army, made ſuch an example on the Ring-leaders in this Rebellion, that the reſt (in great humility) ſubmitted themſelues, caſting their weapons not onely at the Kinges féete, but likewiſe at the Earles, and (vppon pardon) they vowed theyr continuall bounden dutie to Thierrie. His authority was then further ſtrengthened, in the yeare 868. by the Letters Patents of King Charles, as alſo by them of Lewes,
               Thierry Earl of Holland, Zeland and Lord of Frizeland. King of Germany, confirming him to be Earle of Holland, Zeland, and Lord of Frizeland. This Thierrie maried Genna, or Ienna, Daughter to Pepin the Bald, king of Italy, Sonne to the Emperor Charlemaigne. He woorthily foiled the Danes, that then poſſeſſed the Towne of Vtrecht, the Wiltes and the Slaues, diſabling them from any further footing in Holland, which made them preſume to meddle in Zeland, but thence they were repulſed likewiſe. By which meanes he remained afterward in peace, beautifying his Countries, both wyth fayre buildings and good Lawes. Hee dyed verie old, hauing raigned forty yeares, and after him ſuccéeded
            
               2 Thierrie his Sonne, ſecond of that name, Earle of Holland, Zeland, and Lorde of Frizeland,
               
who married with Hildegarde, Daughter to King Lewes of France, the Stammerer, and Siſter to King Charles the Simple. The Frizelanders did twice reuolt from their obedience,The Frizelanders rebell againe. and would not allow Earle Thierrie to be their Lord, but ſlew very many of them that obeyed ye Earle, waſting, ſpoiling, and burning all the way as they went. But at length, they were iuſtly repayed for their inſolency, and ſuch a ſlaughter was made of the Fryſons (without any merrie) that few or none of them returned home to their dwellings. Afterward, he forced them to make the doores of entrance into their houſes, ſo low and narrow, that they muſt ſtoope very lowe before they could get in, and this he did, to make them ye more humble and ſeruile, receiuing a new Oath of allegeance of them. And hauing raigned about fiftie yeares, beeing then aged 88. yeares olde, he dyed, leauing two Sonnes behinde him, the eldeſt whereof (being named Egbert) became Arch-Biſhop of Treues, and Arnold his yongeſt Sonne ſuccéeded him.
            
               3 Arnolde, or (as others will haue it) Arnulph, youngeſt Sonne to Earle Thierrie, followed in rule as his Fathers Succeſſour: But hee helde the Earledomes of Holland, Zeland, and Lordſhippe of Frizeland, no longer of the Crowne of France, but of Otho the third, Emperor, and ſo became in fée to the Empyre. A verie fearful Comet appeared in his time, with ſtrange Ecclipſes both of the Sunne and Moone, being

as red as blood,A dreadfull Comet, Ecclipſes and earthquakes and terrible Earth-quakes: a fire alſo fell from Heauen, in ſimilitude like an huge Tower, burning for a long time: after which enſued ſo violent a Peſtilence, that the liuing dyed burying the dead. The Frizons reuolting againe from obedience, made all his raigne a continuall warfare, and the Armies (on eyther ſide) méeting néere vnto Winckell, ſo dreadfull a battaile was fought betwéene them; that the Hollanders ſuſtained the worſt, Count Arnolde being there ſlaine, and a great number of his chéefeſt Nobility. This battaile was fought the eightéenth of October, the morrow after Saint Lamberts day, in the yeare 993. So this Earle Arnolde, hauing raigned fiue years, and being thus vnfortunately ſlaine, was buryed by his Father and Grand-father, in the Abbie of Egmont.
            
            
               4 Thierrie, third of that name, and Sonne to Counte Arnolde, ſuccéeded as fourth Earle of Holland, Zeland, and Lord of Frizeland. Being deſirous to reuenge his Fathers death vppon the Frizons: hee was much impeached therein by Adelbold,
               Adelbold Byſhop of Vtrecht. Biſhoppe of Vtrecht, againſt whom (neuertheleſſe) hepreuailed in two foughten battailes, in the year 10
                     •
                  8. and (with great ſlaughter of the Fryzons) brought them vnder obedyence to his youngeſt Sonne Floris, whom hee made Lord of them. This Earle Thierrie, liuing afterward in very peacefull daies, vndertooke a Pilgrimage to Ieruſalem, with the Lord of Arckell
               ▪ his loyall Subiect; who died at Hieruſalem, and was there very honourably buried by Thierrie.
               
After whoſe returne home, and ſome yeares paſſed in peace with his Wife and Children, hauing raigned 46. yeares, he died in Anno 1039. and was buried by his Fathers in the Abbay of Egmont.
            
            
               5 Thierrie, fourth of that name,1039. was the fift Earle of Holland, Zeland, and Lord of Frizeland, after the deceaſe of Thierrie his Father. In a Iourney of Princes and Lords, performed (for pleaſure) in the Cittie of Liege, it was this Earles hard hap, to kill a Brother of the Biſhops of Cullen and Liege:
               The Biſhops of Cullen and Liege. whereby enſued ſuch diſcord and molleſtation, that, after many aduentures of reuenge, vnder-taken by the Germaine Gentlemen, albeit, therein they ſuſtained much loſſe of men, the Earle was ſhot into the Thigh with a poiſoned Dart, of which wound hee dyed the fiftéenth of May 1048.
               1048. after he had gouerned nine years, and was buryed by his Fathers, in the Abbay of Egmont. He was neuer marryed, and therefore left not any Childe to ſuccéede him.
            
               6 Floris, who (as you haue heard before) was Earl of Frizeland, now after his Brothers death, became the ſixt Earl of Holland and Zeland. The former miſhap at Liege, could not as yet be forgotten by the Biſhops of Cullen and Liege; but they would needes proſecute freſh reuenge vppon Count Floris, who beeing a man of vndaunted ſpirite, defeated his Enemies in two ſeuerall attempts. Once by a cunning Stratagem,Two millitary Stratagems. cauſing Ditches and Pit-fals to be made in South Holland, and couering them with Straw and graſſe,

ſo that they could not be eaſily diſcerned. At this time, a bloody battaile beeing fought betwéene them, there was forty thouſand of the Earles enemies ſlaine, beſide twenty ſixe thouſand more, who were drowned and ſmothered in thoſe Ditches. An. Dom. 1058. The ſecond foile of his aduerſaries, happened foure yeares after this, when the Hollanders (putting the Germans to flight) returned with rich ſpoiles and great ſtore of Priſoners, this was in the yeare 1062. yet was it this Earles ill fortune, to be afterward ſlaine vnarmed, as he ſate vnder an Elme, taking the aire, his enemies preuailing by this aduantage. Hee had ruled in Holland 14. yeares, and in Frizeland 21. and lieth buried at Egmont.
            
            
               7, 8. Gertrude, widow to Earl Floris, in regard that Thierrie her ſon was in his nonage, gouerned thoſe Countries in his right. And in the year 1063.
               1063. ſhe remarried with Robert the Frizon (ſon to Baldwin of Liſle de Buck,
               Robert the Frizon. Earle of Flanders) with the good lyking of all the States and Nobility. Hee alſo was made Guardian of young Earle Thierrie, and (had this Gertrude) thrée Sonnes, Robert, Sur-named the young (who went with Godfrey of Bullen to the holy Land, and was (after his Father deceaſe) Earle of Flanders;) Phillip, father to William of Ixt, & Baldwin Biſhop of Teroanne; beſide thrée daughters alſo, which he had by the ſaide Gertrude. This Robert was called the Frizon, not in regard of his birth, but of his big ſtature, ſtrength and courage, for hauing preuailed againſt the Frizons,
               
and hearing of his Brothers death, Baldwine de Mons, Earle of Flanders; hee laide claime to the ſaide Earledome, and (notwithſtanding the oppoſition of Richild Widdow to Earle Baldwin: by meanes of the Flemings, hee ouer-threwe the King of France in a battaile, and ſhee with her Sonne Baldwine, remaining ſatiſfied with the Country of Henault,
               Robert Earl of Flanders 
               Robert became quietly Earl of Flanders. For eight yeares ſpace, he carryed himſelfe with great wiſedome and valour, and dying in the yeare 1077.
               1077▪
                was buried in the Cannons Church, founded by himſelfe at Caſſel. Gertrudes time of rule by her ſelfe, and Roberts after, are reckoned as two ſeuerall gouernments.
            
               9 Godfrey,
               The Crook backt duke of Lorraine ſir-named the Crooke-backt Duke of Lorraine, in this time of young Earle Thierries minority, was made an inſtrument (in regard of the former quarrell of Count Floris, and the Byſhops of Cullen and Liege, as yet not reuenged to their minds) to ſuggeſt a falſe information to Henry the fourth, Emperour, whereby the ſayde Godfrey became an Vſurper of the young Earles right, for the ſpace of foure yeares. But, as he was ſitting on the draught to eaſe his body, a Seruant of young Count Thierries, did thruſt a Iaueling vp into his fundament, whereof he died (not long after) at Maeſtrecht.
            
            
               10 Thierry, fift of that name, who (by Crookebackt Godfrey, and other ſtrange oppoſitions) had long time bin debarred from quiet poſſeſſion of his right; at length, by an abſolute conqueſt

of the Frizons,
               The Fryzons conquered in two battels. in two ſeuerall great battailes, recouered all, and returned home as a Conquerour. Afterward, he married Whithilde, daughter to Frederick, Duke of Saxonie, by whom hee had a Son and a Daughter: Floris, that ſucceeded him, and Mathild, married to the Duke of Orleans. Earle Thierrie hauing gouerned fiftéen yeares, dyed, and was buried in the Abbey of Egmont.
            
            
               1119
               11 Floris, ſecond of that name, and ſir-named the Fat or Groſſe, ſuccéeded next after his father Thierrie: he greatly fauoured men of the Church, whereby the Abby of Egmonts reuenewes were largely encreaſed. He being a man of very peacefull inclination, little or no diſturbaunces happened in his time: but onely by the Frizons, who, for their rebelling, were ſeuerely punniſhed, and forced to ſubmit themſelues to his mercy. This Floris married Petronilla, or Parnell, Daughter to Didier,
               Dider duke of Sauoy▪
                Duke of Saxony, and Siſter to Lotharius the Emperor: By her he had thrée Sonnes; Thierrie, Floris, called the Blacke Prince of Kenemerlandt; and Symon, alſo one Daughter, named Hadewick, who was Counteſſe of Gueldres. Hauing gouerned his Countries very honorably, for the ſpace of thirty one yeares; Hée died in Anno. 1133. and lieth buried in the Abby of Egmont.
            
            
               1133
               12 Thierrie, ſixt of that name, ſuccéeded his Father Floris, and was much molleſted by the Frizons, in regard, that his Brother Floris the Blacke Prince, enuying the happineſſe & quiet of

               Thierrie, went and tooke part with them againſt him; vntill ſuch time as the Emperor Lotharius (beeing their Vnckle) had reconciled them, and made them friends. Conrade being ioyned as competitor in the Empire, with Lotharius,
               Lotharius & Conrade Emperors. cauſed a freſh quarrell betwéen Thierrie and the Biſhop of Vtrecht, he ratifying the former grant of Henry, which cauſed very long contention, and much blood to be ſhed on either ſide. Thierrie hauing gouerned his countries of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland 40. yeares, died in An. 1163. and lieth buried in the Abbey of Egmont.
            
            
               13 Floris the third, eldeſt Son of Earle Thierrie, as Heire to his Father,11
                     •
                  3 inherited his right in Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland. The Frizons (pretending their former fréedomes and imperial liberties) made ſtill their reuoltes from time to time, imboldned thereto by the often ſuggeſtions of Godfrey of Rhemen, Biſhop of Vtrecht, who as his predeceſſors had done before him,Earledomes of Oſtergo & Weſtergoe. ſtill queſtioned the Earledomes of Oſtergo & Weſtergoe in Frizeland: but the Emperor Frederick went himſelfe in perſon, & made an agréement in writing betwéene them. Al which notwithſtanding, much hurt was doone on either ſide, as time and treachery fitted them with apt opportunity. A great controuerſie hapned between the Earles of Holland & Flanders, for the Iſle of Walchren,
               1166▪
                and Count Floris (in triall of fight) became Priſoner to the Earle of Flanders: who neuertheleſſe vſed him princely, and they being accorded by ye Archbiſhop of Cullen, and the Biſhoppe of Liege; the

great hole néere to the Dam or Sluce,The Dam or Sluce, called dogs Sluce. was recouered with much adoe, by caſting a Dogge-Fiſh thereinto, & ſpéedy filling it vp with earth, whereon they named it Hond
                     •
                  dam, that is, Dogs-ſluce. This Earle Floris, aſſiſting the Emperor Frederick, Phillip King of France, Richard K. of England, with many other Dukes, Chriſtian Princes & Earles, at the ſiedge of Damieta in So
                     •
                  ia; fel there ſick in the Army,1208. and died in the year 1208 hauing gouerned his Prouinces 27. yeares.
            
               14 Thierrie the ſeauenth, hearing of his Fathers death in Paleſtine; ſuccéeded as his heire in all his Earledomes. The whole time of his regiment, was in warre and continual combuſtions. Firſt by his Brother Lord William of Holland,
               L. William of Holland. (who was with his Father Floris in Paleſtine, & performed there many honourable ſeruices) thorow diuers diſagréements yt happened betwéene them, notwithſtanding as many labored reconcilings,1198. and pacifications. Next, Baldwin Earle of Flanders, he was as moleſtuous to him likewiſe, for the Iſle of Walchien: beſides the Frizons rebellions, and his trouble with the Biſhops of Cologne and Liege, as alſo his impriſonment to the Duke of Brabant, and then the intruſion of the Biſhop of Vtrecht, after which, enſued a peace & vnited amity on all ſides. This Count Thierrie had no heirs male, but two beautifull daughters; Adella, married to Henry of Gueldres, who died without any Children, and Ada, meanely married by her Mother, (af
                  •
               er her Fathers death) to Count Lewes of Loos, that ſo the gouernment

might be diſpoſed at her pleaſure.1203. In ye year 1203 Earle Thierry died, hauing gouerned his Countries 1.3 yeares, and lieth buried in the Abbay of Egmont.
            
            
               15 Ada, daughter to Earl Thierry, was Counteſſe of Holland & Zeland, after her fathers death;The gouernmet of a Woman deſpiſed. which moued a great hart-burning in the Lordes & Gentlemen, that they ſhould liue vnder a Woman, and a poore Earls command. Therfore they ſent into Frizeland for Count. William, proteſting to aſſiſt him in attaining the gouernment of Holland. The young Counteſſe Ada was ſurpriſed in their firſt attempt, and her huſband the Earle of Loos driuen to flight; who yet won the Biſhop of Vtrecht (by Money and other promiſes) to aide him, and by this meanes he had ſome ſmall ſucceſſe for a while. But the Counteſſe Ada dying without any Children, Earle William was then the true and onely Heire to Holland and Zeland, in which right of his, he went with his power againſt the Earle of Loos, and ſuch was his ſucceſſe, that the Women did beat his Enemies with Diſtaues and Stones,Women beat Men with Diſtaues and ſtones. they beeing glad to caſt away their Armour for lightneſſe, to ſaue themſelues by flight: yet many were drowned in the Ditches, and a great number taken Priſoners, with all the Earle of Loos Tentes, Pauillions, Plate, Iewels, and Munition, which Count VVilliam royally deuided among his Hollanders, remaining abſolute Prince of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland.
            
            
               16 William, firſt of that Name,121
                     •
                  . ſuccéeded

rightfully in all his Earledomes, by the death of his Néece the young Counteſſe Ada. Hee had ſome ſtrife with Didier Byſhop of Vtretcht, and Gerard Vander Are his Brother: but (vpon certaine Articles) al diſpleaſures were qualified. By his firſt wife Alix, daughter to the Earle of Gueldres, he had Floris, that next ſuccéeded him, Otho biſhop of Vtretcht, William, Lieutenant of Holland, and two Daughters, the one was Abbeſſe at Rhynsbourg,
               Edmund of Lancaſter, ſon to the K. of England. and the other at Delfte. His ſecond wife was named Mary, Daughter to Edmund of Lancaſter, ſon to Henry the third, K. of England, by whom he had no iſſue. He gouerned 19. yeares, & dying, lieth buried at Rhynsbourg. 17 Floris the fourth, ſuccéeded his Father Count William in his Earledomes. Hee tooke great delight in Iuſts and Turnaments, and the Earl of Clermont proclaiming a publicke Triumph for all commers (at the Counteſſe his Wiues requeſt who greatly deſired to ſée this Floris, of whom ſhe had heard much fame and commendation) this honourable Earle of Holland, Zeland, &c. was there treacherouſly ſlaine, onely thorough the iealous ſuſpition of the olde Earle of Clermont, who was there likewiſe preſently ſlaine himſelf, and the Countes (grieuing for this great miſhap) dyed ſoone after.The wonderful birth of 365. Children. This Count Floris hadde a Daughter named Mathilde, or Margaret, as ſome call her, who was married to Count Herman of Henneberg; She deſpiſing a poore Widdow, that deſired her almes vpon vrgent neceſſity, holding in either arme a ſwéete young childe,

both which, God hath ſent her at one birth, gaue her uery reproachfull words beſide, as, that ſhee could not be honeſt of her bodie, and (by her huſband) haue two children lawfully begotten.This Hiſtory is auouched for a truth by diuers good Authors. The poore Woman, grieuing to be reiected in ſuch extreame want and néede, but much more, to heare her reputation ſo néerely touched, knowing her ſoule cleare from all diſhoneſt detection, made no further ſuite to the Lady, but (falling vppon her knées) appealed to God for defence of her Innocency, and earneſtly deſired, that as ſhee had conceiued, & borne thoſe two infants lawfully by her huſband, euen ſo, if euer that Lady ſhould be ſubiect to the cuſtom of women, that it would pleaſe him, to ſend hir as many children at one birth, as there were daies in the years. Not long after, the Lady conceiued with child by her huſband, & (for hir deliuerance) went into Holland, to viſit ye earl hir brother, taking vp lodging in the Abbey of religious women at Losdunen, and grew ſo excéeding great, as the like had neuer before bin ſéene. When her time came, on ye Friday before Palm-ſunday, in the yeare 1276. ſhee was deliuered of 365. children, the one halfe being ſons, and the other daughters: but the odde child was an Hermaphrodite, and they were all wel ſhaped & proportioned in their little members. Theſe children were laid in two Baſins, and were all baptized by Guydon, Suffragan to the Biſh. of Vtrecht, who named al the ſonnes Iohn, and the Daughters Elizabeth, but what name he gaue the Hermaphrodite, is not recorded. They were no ſooner

baptized, but they all died, and the Mother alſo. The two Baſins are yet to be ſéene in the ſayde Church of Loſdunen, and a memory of them, both in Latine & Dutch. The Latine beginning thus. Margareta, Comitis Hennebergiae vxor, & Florentij Hollandiae & Zelandiae filia, &c. Vnderneath are theſe verſes:

                  En tibi monſtroſum & memorabile factum,
                  Quale nec à mundi conditione datum.
               
This Count Floris, being ſo treacherouſly ſlaine, as you haue heard before, had his body brought backe into Holland, by the Earle of Cleues, and other Noble Lords, who buried it in the Abbey of Rhynsbourg; hee hauing honorably and vertuouſly gouerned his Countries 12. yeares. He left but one Son named William, ſix years old, who was in the tutelage of his Vnckle Otho, biſhop of Vtrecht, during his minority.
            
               18 William, ſecond of that name, ſuccéeded his father Floris in all his dominions, being al ye time of his vnder yeares, in the gouernment of Otho Biſhop of Vtrecht his Vnckle, who was a verie worthy and carefull Guardian to him. The pope hauing depoſed Frederick the ſecond, & Conrade his ſonne from the Empire: the princes Electors (in deſpight of the Pope) made this Earle William King of the Romaines, and crowned him at Aix la Chapelle,
               Earle William king of the Romans he hauing then attained to the age of 20. yeares. A long and tedious trouble happened, betweene him, and Margaret Counteſſe of Flanders, a very high minded and proude woman, for the Country of Walchren, wherein,

after a great foyle and ſlaug
                  •
                
               
                  •
               he Flemings, (taking part with hir) & impr
                  •
               ent of her two ſons, Guy & Iohn, ſhe implored the aid of Charles Duke of Aniou, againſt king William, and ſped thereby no better then ſhee had done before, but was glad in the end to ſéeke reconcilement. This K. William did build the Pallace of the Earles of Holland, in the village of La Hage, or the Hague where it is at this day, & a goodly Cloiſter at Harlem. At his wars in Weſt Frizeland, where he preuailed very ſucceſſefully, he wold néeds, without any other aſſiſtance then himſelf, follow ye rebels ouer the Ice, where his horſe ſlipping in, him ſelfe almoſt drowned, & none néer to help him, but enemies of the Frizons, yt lay ſecretly in ambuſh:K. William cruelly ſlain they beat him down with clubs & ſtaues, not knoing that it was the king, & ſo they ſlew him. But when afterward they took better notice of him, by his Target & Armes theron emblazoned, in very harty ſorrow for their foule déed, they buried him ſecretly, in a poore houſe in the village of Hooktwonde, thinking ſo to wipe out all remēbrance of him. But his body was after found, and buried in the Abby of Middlebourg, in the Iſle of walchrē. 19 Floris the fift, ſon to king William, who was ſlaine ſo inhumanely, albeit hee was but ſixe moneths old, yet he ſuccéeded his father, his Vnckle Floris being his Gouernor and Tutor. At 17. yeares of age, he went with an army againſt the euer-reuolting Frizons, and ouercame them at a village called Schellinckhout, very ſeuerely reuenging his fathers death on them, & (by building

foure Caſtles i
                  •
                
               
                  •
               land) brought them wholy vnder his obed
                  •
                Afterward, Counte Floris made a voyage into England,1290 where a marriage was contracted, betwéene Iohn, eldeſt Sonne to Earle Floris, and Elizabeth, Daughter to King Edward the firſt, Iohn being (not long after) ſent into England, to accompliſh the ſaide marriage, where he remained in the Court of England, till his Fathers vnfortunate death, which briefely was thus.
            A Knight liued in the Earles Courte, named Gerard Van Velſon,
               The Hiſtory of the death of Earle Floris who had bin a whole years ſpace detained in priſon, and his Brother beheaded, through certaine falſe ſuggeſtions whiſpered to the Earle, which (afterward) appearing to be a meere iniurie, the Earle ſought to repaire this wrong, with verie eſpeciall fauours doone to the Knight, great aduancements, and woulde haue beſtowed alſo his Concubine in mariage on him. Which Gerard diſdaining, and replying, that he would not weare his caſt ſhooes: the Earle raſhly anſwered, that he ſhould take his leauings, in deſpight of his heart. To preuent marriage with the Earles Minion, the Knight beſtowed his affections elſe where, and wedded a Lady of great honor and beauty. Which when the Earl vnderſtood, he purſued his former raſh folly, to the price of his owne life. Sending Gerard on an employment of much credit and reſpect, and wherewith he was not a little pleaſed, not doubting any ſuch wicked intention. The Earl came vnto Gerardes houſe, vnder colour of hoſpitaliiy, and there (winning

her to priuat conferen
                  •
               e in her bed chamber) forcibly defloured her, to performe his raſhe promiſe to her huſband. At Gerards return, and this foule wrong diſcouered, it was purſued with very bloody reuenge, by a reſolued conſpiracy ſworn againſt his life: which albeit he had ſome warning of (by a paper deliuered him by a poor woman) yet his diſaſter being ineuitable, a train was laid for him as he rode a hauking, and xxi. wounds he receiued on his body, by the hand of the ſaide Gerard. But he and the reſt of the conſpirators eſcaped not vnpuniſhed,Aſeuere r
                     •
                  
                  uenge for the Earles death. for they had their heads ſmitten off, and were then laide vpon whéeles: but Gerard was put (ſtard naked) into a Pipe ſtuck full of ſharpe nailes, and was ſo rowled vp and downe through all the ſtréets of Leyden. Then was he beheaded, and laide on a whéele, and all his Kinred to the ninth degrée, put to death, and laide vpon whéeles.
            
               20 After the wicked murther of Earle Floris the fift, committed by the Fryzons,
               1297 as hath béen declared, Iohn his onely ſon (being then in England with King Edward his Father in law) was next to ſuccéede him as his rightful heire. But before he could leaue England, ſome partialities & factions happened in Holland for the gouernement, which ſoone were qualified at Earle Iohns being there preſent, notwithſtanding the ſubtle policie of Wolfart of Borſſele, ſeizing the perſon of Earle Iohn, and Ladie Elizabeth his Wife,Wolfart of Borſſele his ſecret intention. thinking to haue the gouernement of the ſayde Earle, becauſe as yet hee was but young. Earle

               Iohn preuailed againſt the Frizons, and the Byſhop of Vtrecht, and hauing gouerned his countries about foure yeares,1300 hee fell ſicke at Harlem, and there died. He was the firſt of al the Earls of Holland,
               The end of the race of the Dukes of Aquitain and ſucceſſion of the Earles of Henault. that died without children: wherfore in him failed the line maſculine of the Earles from the Dukes of Aquitain, which from Thierrie, or Theodor, the firſt Earl of Holland, had continued 437. yeares. He was buried in the Abbey of Rhynsbourg, his widdow Lady Elizabeth being carried back into England, where ſhe was afterward maried to the Earle of Oxford: So that by the death of Earl Iohn in this maner, thoſe countries were deuolued to the earls of Henault, iſſuing by the mothers ſide frō the Earls of Holland.
            
            
               1301.
               21 Iohn, ſecond of that name, called Iohn of Henault (claiming his right from Alix, ſiſter to William king of the Romans) ſuccéeded after Iohn, as Earle of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland, &c. He had a long and tedious trouble with Iohn de Reueſſe, who perſwaded the Emperor, that Iohn Earle of Holland dying without iſſue, his Earledomes ought (in right) to returne to the Empire: according as Charles the Bald, Emperor of the Romans, had at firſt giuen them in ſée & homage to Thierrie of Aquitaine. This ſuggeſtion raiſed the Emperor Albert in Armes, againſt Iohn of Henault,
               Iohn de Reueſſe drowned. but the Biſhop of Cullen compounded the matter betwéen them, and Iohn de Reueſſe was afteeward drowned, by which means, Iohn of Henault was rid of a turbulent enemy. Iohn of Henault, hauing gouerned Henault thirty years,

and his Countries of Holland, Zeland,
               1305 & Frizeland 5. years, died & was buried at Valenciennes
            
            
               22 VVilliam the thirde, ſon and heire to Count Iohn of Henault, ſuccéeded his fathers earldoms:The good Earle william. he was commonly called The good Earle william, for his Vertues, Iuſtice, good life, and honorable actions. In his time happened ſo great a dearth and famine tn Holland,
               1316 that poore people died with hunger,A wonderfull dearth. euen in the ſtreetes as they went: ſeeking alſo for hearbes and rootes in the fields and woods, there they were likewiſe found dead, and in the common high wayes: litle children died ſucking at their Mothers breaſts, and ſome were enforced to feede on their deade Children. In this time of Famine, a poore waman in the Towne of Leyden, being extreamly ouercharged with hunger, entreated her owne ſiſter,A ſtraunge example of an vnmercifull Siſter. (being a woman of better ability) to lend hir ſom Bread, which ſhe would thankfully repay again, when God ſhould inable hir. She very vnkindly, & without any pitty of hir extremity, denied her oftentimes, notwithſtanding the others often vrgings, that ſhe was aſſured, ſhee could not bee without bread. Heereupon, the vnmercifull Siſter (lying both to God, and to her owne poore ſiſter) ſaide: If I haue any bread, I wiſh that it may inſtantly be turned into a ſtone: wherewith the heauy diſpleaſure of God laid hold vppon her words, & going afterward to her Cupboord (to relieue hir ſelf) ſhe found al her loaues of bread conuerted into apparant ſtones, & died her ſelfe with extreamity of hunger. It is crediblie ſaide,

that one or two of thoſe ſtones, are yet to be ſéene in S. Peters Church at Leyden, as a memorie of this iuſt iudgement of God.
            
               A worthy action of Iuſtice, don by this good Earle William.There is alſo recorded another memorable Hiſtorie, of vpright Iuſtice doone by this good Earle VVilliam, to a poore Countrey-Man, againſt a Bayliffe of South Holland, who hadde taken a goodly faire Cowe from him, that was the releefe of himſelfe, his poore Wife and Children, as there are ſome Kine in that Countrey, which doe giue twenty pottles of Milke and more, in a day. The Bayliffe, at the poore mans complaint to this good Earle William, who lay then ſick in his Bed at Valenciennes (yet neuer debarred any ſuters from audience, were he ſick or well) was adiudged to giue the poore man an hundred Crownes of good Gold, for the wrong he had done to him, which was accordingly performed. But for his iniury to publique Iuſtice, (being himſelfe an Officer) and abuſing the authoritie committed in truſt to him, the Earle ſent for an Executioner, and cauſed his head to be ſmitten off by his Beddes ſide. This good Count William, beeing a vertuous Prince, victorious in warre, a Man learned, wiſe, well ſpoken, and iudicious, a great friend to peace, gracious to all men, & beloued in all Princes courts, hauing gouerned his Prouences 32. yeares, died the 9. of Iune 1337. and was buried with great pomp at Valenciennes.
            
            
               1337
               23 William the fourth, Sonne to the good Earle William, came to his Fathers Earledoms

by lawfull ſucceſſion.Earle William a worthy ſouldier He was a man of high merit, and a moſt famous Souldier, whereof hée made good proofe; firſt againſt the Sarrazins and Moores, in the Kingdome of Granada; Next,1338 with the Emperour Lewes, and many Noble Earles, ayding his brother in law Edward the 3. King of England, againſt the King of Fraunce;1342 Th
                  ••
               ly, in ouer-running all Lithuania, Liuonia, and warring againſt the Ruſſian Infidels, lading home his men with victory and wealthy ſpoiles; And laſtly, in preuailing againſt the Frizons,
               Robert of Arckel, gouernour of Vtrecht. and Robert of Arckell Gouernour of Vtrecht. Yet it was his hard hap to bee ſlaine vnknowne (among the Frizons) before any coulde haue power to help him: ſo that he left no lawful Childe to ſuccéede him, and therefore his Siſter,1346 (being Empreſſe) remained his onely Heire.
            
               24 Margaret, Wiſe to Lewes of Bauaria,
               Margaret the Empreſſe Princeſſe of Holland. (then Emperour) and eldeſt Siſter to Earl William, ſlaine (as you haue heard) by the Frizons, by the Emperours interpoſition of his authority, and her owne Natiue right, went downe by the Rhine into Holland, accompanied with a moſt princely and well beſéeming traine, and was acknowledged to be Lady and Princeſſe of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland. But before her returne backe to the Emperour againe, ſhee conſtituted both his and her eldeſt ſonne (named William of Bauaria) to be her Regent there in thoſe Countries, for a ſumme of Money yearely paied to her; but remaining vnpaid, ſhe might reſume all her rights to her ſelfe againe. The Emperour

deceaſing, the Empreſſe Margaret came thither againe, and had reſignation (from her ſon William) of all the fore-ſaid Countries, retyring himſelfe into Henault, as being well contented there to liue:The factions of Cabillaux and Hoecks. till by inteſtine diſcord, & dangerous practiſes of two intruded factions, called Cabillaux and Hoecks (wherein both Nobles and Gentlemen did too far enter) the Mothers gouernment did grow vnſufferable, and Duke William was recouered from Henault, to vnder-goe the Sole-authority. Two very bloudy battailes were fought betwéen the Empreſſe and her Son;1351. and in the firſt, Earl William eſcaped with great difficultie, and fledde into Holland, for this battaile was fought at La Vere in Zeland. But in the ſecond, there was ſo much bloud ſpilt, that (for thrée daies after) the old Riuer of Menſe (at full Sea) was (all ouer) red in that place.A grear effufion of bloud. The Empreſſe (by helpe of a ſmall Barke) eſcaped into England, and, vppon an agreement afterward made betwéene them; Duke VVilliam had the quiet poſſeſſion of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland aſſigned him, and the Empreſſe Margaret had the County of Henault, where (fiue yeares after) ſhe ended her daies, and lieth buried at Valenciennes.
            
            
               25 Duke William being peaceably poſſeſſed of his Seigneuries, according to the former compoſition,Mathilda, daughter to Henry duke of Lancaſter béeing alſo Duke of Bauaria, Palatine of Rhine, and Earle of Henault by his Mothers death, tooke to Wife the Lady Mathilda, daughter to Henry Duke of Lancaſter in England,

by whō he had not any children. Much ſtrife, war, and bloodie bickering, happened betwéene him and the Byſhoppe of Vtrecht, with ſhrewd diſaduantages on eyther ſide; till, by the meanes of ſome Noblemen, they were reduced to amity.1358 This Duke VVilliam (by what occaſion it could neuer bee knowne) fell diſtracted of his ſenſes, and ſlew a Knight with a blow of his Fiſt: ſo that hee was ſhut vppe (vnder good Guarde) for ninetéene yeares ſpace, euen till he dyed. Hauing gouerned his Prouinces of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland (before his madneſſe) ſeauen yeares, and Henault two.
            
               26 Albert of Bauaria, Brother to Duke William, in the time of his diſtraction, was ſent for from Bauaria, and made Gouernour of his Brothers Countries, in hope of his recouery, which by no meanes coulde hee compaſſed. Hee vanquiſhed the Frizons in many rebellions,The Barons of Eughien beheaded. tooke the Towne of Delft, and beheaded the Baron of Eughien, vppon ſiniſter informations, which cauſed great trouble betweene him, and fire bretheren of the ſaid Baron: but, vpon their reconcilement, Count Albert builded the Channorny of the Chappell, at the Court of the Hage.
            
            In his time,1368. a Sea-Woman (by reaſon of great Tempeſtes at Sea, and extraordinarie high tides) was ſeene ſwimming in the Zuyderzee, betwéene the Townes of Campen and Edam; which béeing brought to Edam,
               A Sea Woman ſeen in the Zuyderzee. and cleanſed from the Sea-Moſſe grown about her, by her long abiding there: ſhe was like to another woman,

endured to be apparrelled, & would féede on meates as others did,1401 yet ſought ſhee all meanes to eſcape, and get into the water againe, had ſhee not very carefully bin tended. She did learne to ſpin, and exerciſe other womanly qualities, being daily ſéene of infinite perſons, who haue made perfect teſtimoniall of this race accident, and ſignified if for an vndoubted truth, auouching, that ſhe liued fiftéene yeares, and lyeth there buryed in the Church-yard.1404 In the yeare 1404. this famous Prince Albert dyed, after hée had gouerned his Countries forty ſixe yeares: ninetéene as he was Tutor to his diſtracted Brother, and twenty ſeauen as Prince, Heire and Lorde of thoſe Countries, beeing buryed at the Hage in Holland.
            
            
               27 William, ſixt of that name, after the death of Duke Albert of Bauaria his Father, ſuccéeded as his immediate Heire. His firſt Wife was Daughter to Charles the fift, King of Fraunce, and ſhée dyed young, without any Iſſue. He ſecondly married the Daughter of Iohn, Sonne to Phillip the bold Duke of Burgundie, by whom he had one onely Daughtex,Phillip the bold Duke of Burgundy. named Iaqueline, or Iacoba, as the Dutch vſe to call her. This Count William waſted Frizeland, ſpoiled Liege, and preuailed againſt the Gueldres, as alſo the Lordes (Father and Sonne) of Arckell at Gorrichom, and reconciled the Duke of Burgundy to the French King. The Dolphine of France, Sonne to King Charles the ſixt, marryed Iaqueline, Count Williams Daughter; but

he being poyſoned, by putting on a ſhirt of maile,1417 died without Iſſue: As Earle William himſelfe did not long after, being bitten in the Legge by a mad Dogge, which hurt could neuer bee cured. So that Lady Iaqueline (his Daughter, and widow to the Dolphine of Fraunce) was his true Heire in all his Seigneuries: He gouerned thirtéene yeares, and lieth buried at Valenciennes in Henault.
            
            
               28 Iaqueline, or Iacoba
               ▪ Daughter and Sole-heire to William of Bauaria, ſuccéeded her Father in all his Earledomes and Seigneuries, being then Widdow to the Dolphine of France, and yet but 19. yeares of age. In regard of her youth and widdow-hood, ſhe endured much molleſtation in her gouernment, chiefely in Holland: for the two factions tooke head againe, and bandied their boldneſſe on both ſides, the Hoeckins, fauouring the Counteſſes faction▪ and the Cabillantines her Enemies, by which meanes her rule was greatly diſturbed.Iohn of Bauaria Byſhop of Liege. For Iohn of Bauaria (forſaking his Biſhoppricke of Liege) ſought to make himſelfe an Earle, and marry his Nice Iaqueline (vtterly againſt her will) and yet to diſpoſſeſſe her of her rightfull inheritance, for which purpoſe he leagued himſelfe with the Cabillantines, and other powerfull Friends, who neuertheleſſe were ſlaine in their bolde aduenture at Gorrichome. And, to fruſtrate the Biſhoppes vaine hope, the Pope diſpenced her marriage, with Iohn Duke of Brabant, albeit hee was her néere Kinſman, whereby their Patrimoniall inheritances

were the more ſtrengthened, and hée acknowledged as their Prince, in Henault, Holland, Zeland, Frizeland, &c. It were néedleſſe here to relate,Iohn of Bauaria the Biſhop reckoned the 29. Earl of Holland. the following moleſtations of Iohn of Bauaria the biſhop, to his Niece Iaqueline, taking on himſelfe the title of Earle, and therefore, (by ſome) rancked among the Earls of Holland, or the after marriages of Lady Iaqueline; to the Duke of Gloceſter, Vnckle to Henry the ſixt, King of England; the fourth and laſt time (in great priuacy) to Frank of Borſſelle, Lieutenant of Zeland, or her (no meane troubles) by the Duke of Burgundy, to whom ſhe reſigned vp all her Countries:1463 Let it ſuffice, that ſhe liued in continuall vexations 19. yeares, and dying at the Hage, was buried in the Chappell of the Court of Holland.
            
            
               30 Phillip Duke of Burgundy, being (both by Father and Mother) rightfull yeire and ſucceſſor to the fore-named Counteſſe Iaqueline; was thus entitled:The Titles of Phillip Duke of Bourgogne. 
               Phillip Duke of Bourgogne, Brabant, and Lembourg; Earle of Flanders, Artois, Burgogne, Henault, Holland, Zeland, and Namur; Marqueſſe of the holy Empire; & Lord of Frizeland, Salins and Macklyn. He had thrée Wiues; by the two firſt hee had no Children, but by the laſt, named Iſabel (daughter to Iohn K. of Portugall) he had thrée ſons; Anthony & loſſe, who died young, and Charles Martin, Earle of Charolois,
               The order of the golden Fliece inſtituted. and ſucceſſor to his father. This Phillip of Bourgogn inſtituted the order of Knight-hood of ye 
               golden Fliece, & had much diſcontent with his

Son Charles, whom (at length he married to the Lady Margaret, Siſter to Edward the fourth, K. of England. The Rebels of Gaunt and Bruges dearly felt the valour of this Phillip; he beſieged Callis, ſurprized Luxemboug. ſubdued Liege; and ouer-came the Hamecons; Hee excéeded all his predeceſſors (Duks of Bourgogne) in riches, Seigneuries, height of Pomp and State. He died the fift of Iune 1467.
               1467. hauing gouerned about forty yeares. In his time was the famous Art of Printing firſt inuented,The Art of printing firſt inuented. the men of Harlem in Holland do challenge the firſt honor thereof, but it was reduced to perfection at Mentz, by one Iohn Fauſtus, who had béen Seruaunt to Laurence Ianſon of Harlem, as they conſtantly affirme it.
            
               31 Charles,
               The warlike Duke of Bourgogne Sur-named the Warlique Duke of Bourgogne, ſuccéeded in all his Fathers Titles and Dignities. The Inhabitants of Gant reſiſting him, he brought them vnder obeyſance, & defeated the Liegeois in battaile, which enforced Liege to yéelde to him. He made peace with the French King, who doubted to be detayned at Peronne by Duke Charles. Vpon a freſh rebellion of the Liegeois. The Duke forced king Lewes to go with him to the ſiedge of their town; which hee ruined, and practiſed the like of the Houſe of Brederode. He warred againſt the Frizons; and carried many Prin
                  •
               es in hope of his daughters mariage. The French K. and the duke ſought to deceiue each other, and the Conſtable of S. Paul (waxing hatefull to them both) they reſolued

his ruine, and (on a truce taken for 9. years, betwéen the King and Duke) the Conſtable was beheaded at Paris. The Duke warred againſt the Swiſſes, and was defeated by them, both at Granſon and Morat, wherewith ye 
               Swiſſes were enriched. The Duke beſiedged Nancie, and was there ſlain in battel, by the Treaſon of the Earle of Campobachio,
               The Earle of Campobachio. an Italian: where being engirt with a great troupe of Lanciers, he receiued thrée wounds,1477 one in the head, the ſecond in the thigh, and the third in the fundament. He left one onlie Daughter and heire.
            
               32 Mary, Daughter and Heire to Duke Charles, the warlike Duke of Bourgogne, ſuccéeded her Father in al his Countries: being but 18. yeares old when he was ſlaine before Nancy, wherefore ſhee remained vnder the charge of the Duke of Cleues, and his Brother the Lord of Raueſtein. The French King ſeized Piccardie and Arthois: ſhe happening into the Ganthois power, endured much trouble, by putting her chiefeſt ſeruants and Councellers to death: the Flemings were defeated, and the young Duke of Gueldres ſlaine.The Duke of Gueldres ſlaine. Afterward, a marriage was concluded betwéene Maximilian Arch-duke of Auſtria, Son to the Emperor Frederick, and the Lady Marie of Bourgogne
               ▪ albeit ſhee would more gladly haue matched with the houſe of France.
            
               33 Maximilian, Arch-Duke of Auſtria, and Son to the Emperour Fredericke, marrying the Princeſſe Mary of Bourgogne, was thereby wedded to much war and trouble. For firſt the

               Gueldres reuolted from the houſe of Bourgogne; Next, happened the battel of Guinegate, wherein the Arch-Duke was the Conquerour: Then,1479 
               Turnay yéelded to him, truce was taken betwéen him and the French King,Newe tumults of the Cabillaux and Hoecks and the new tumults of the Cabillaux and Hoecks, were likewiſe by him pacified. Dordrecht was ſurprized by the young Lord of Egmont; alſo, many Townes in Guelders yéelded to the Arch-Duke: and (not long after) followed the death of the Arch-Dutcheſſe Mary;
               1482 who had (the firſt yeare of her mariage, a Sonne, named Phillip (Father to Charls the fift) the ſecond yeare a Daughter, called Margaret, betroathed in her infancye, to Charles the Dolphin of France, Sonne to King Lewes 11. and the third year, a Sonne named Frances, according to the name of Fraunces Duke of Brittaine his Godfather.Engelbert, earl of Naſſawe. 1491 
               Maximilian beeing choſen King of the Romaines, he made Engelbert, Earl of Naſſau, Gouernour of the Netherlands in his abſence: And afterward, vpon the bold inſolency of the Ganthois and B
                     •
                  ugois (kéeping the King of Romaines priſoner) Albert Duke of Saxonie, was made ſecond Gouernor of the Netherlands, and General for the Emperor Frederick againſt the Flemings. But Frederick dying,1494 his Sonne Maximilian ſucceeded him in the Empire, by which meanes, Phillip of Auſtria, ſon to the ſaid Maximilian, inherited his right in Holland, Zeland, Frizeland, &c.
            
               34 Phillip, ſecond of that name, being but 16. yeares olde, and ſucceeding his father Maximilian,
               
Emperor in the Netherlands, had theſe Titles.The Titles of Phillip. Arch-duke o
                     •
                   Auſtria. 
               Phillippe Arch-Duke of Auſtria, Duke of Bourgogne, Lothier, Brabant, Styria, Carinthia, Lembourg, Luxembourg, and Guelders; Earle of Haſpourg, Flaunders, Arthois, Bourgogne, Ferrette and Kiburch; Palatine of Henault, Holland, Zeland, Namur and Zutphen: Marqueſſe of the Holie Empyre, and of Bourgan;
               1497 
               Landtgraue of Elſaten, Lorde of Windiſmarke, Portenau, Salynes, and Macklyn. Vpon his full poſſeſſion of the Netherlandes, peace was made betwéen him, & Charles the 8. King of France, warre happening betwixt the Arch-duke and the Duke of Guelders, great inconueniences followed thereon:1503 but Duke Albert beeing ſlaine before Groningen, the Arch-Duke inherited the realme of Spain by his wife, being made King of Caſtile, and George Duke of Saxonie (being then made gouernor of the Netherlands, for the Arch-Duke Phillip) continued the warres in Frizeland. For, vpon the death of Iſabell Q. of Caſtile,
               Iane, daughter to Iſabel married to the Arch-duke Phillip 
               Iane her daughter, being onely heyre, and married to the Arch-Duke Phillip; ſhe héerby inueſted him in the Realmes of Spain, Leon, Granado, &c. as abſolute King. But he enioyed that dignity not long,1505 for in the yeare, 1506. the 27. of September,1506 hee died (ſuddenly) in the Citty of Bourgos, ſuſpected to be poyſoned. After the death of Phillip King of Caſtile, the Emperour Maximilian tooke vppon him the gouernement of the Netherlandes, as Guardian vnto Charles and Ferdinand his Grand-children, being

the Sons of Phillip and Iane, King & Quéen of Caſtille.
            
            
               35 Charles of Auſtria, ſecond of that name, ſuccéeded rightfully in all his Fathers Landes and Seigneuries,1508 and by the Emperors appointment his daughter the Ladye Margaret (Dowager of Sauoy, and Aunt to the Princes Charles and Ferdinand) was Regent of the low countries.1515 Afterwarde, Prince Charles tooke poſſeſſion of the Netherlands, and being crowned K. of Spain and Arragon, ſoone after followed the death of the Emperor Maximilian,
               1519 and in an aſſemblye at Francfort, for choiſe of a new Emperor, Charles King of Spaine had frée election, by the name of Charles the fift. Then was Ladye Margaret,
               1520 (Widdow both of Caſtile and Sauoy, and Aunt to the Emperour Charles) accepted as ſole Gouerneſſe of the Netherlandes,Lady Margaret ſole Gouerneſſe. in her Nephewes abſence. Troubles happened in Spaine, by reaſon of the Kings departure thence, and not onelie warre in Frizeland, but likewiſe betweene the French and Bourguignons, as alſo the warre of Boores or Peazants in Germany: and the Groningeois reiecting the Du. of Guelders,
               1526 did yeild themſelues to the Emperor: then, hapned the 2. bloody edict frō the Emp. againſt the Netherland proteſtants, & then was the imperial diet at Auſbourg, wher the proteſtant princes preſented the confeſſion of their faith. After followed the deuouring inundation in the Netherlands, & the death of the Lady dowager Margaret, whereby Mary of Auſtria, 2. daughter to K. Phillip, and Q. Iane of

               Caſtile,
               1531. ſuccéeded in the gouernment of the Netherlands.Mary of Auſtria. Warre happened betwéene the Emperor and the French King, but vppon the comming of Quéene Elenor of Fraunce to the Emperor her Brother,1554. peace was concluded betwixte them.
            
               36 While Mary of Auſtria gouerned the Netherlands, for the Emperor Charles her brother, great troubles happened to the Proteſtantes, by oppoſition of the Pope and Emperour againſte them.1549. The Emperor affected the Empyre for Prince Phillip his Sonne, which bred a quarrel betwixt the Emperor, and his brother Ferdinand King of Hungary, to whome the Princes of the Empire were more enclined, then to Phillip; and then the Proteſtantes denied their comming to the Counſell of Trent.
               1555 
               Phillip King of Spaine married Mary Quéene of England: And not long after, ye Emperor reſigned the Netherlands to his Sonne King Phillip (whereby he was reckoned the 36. Earle of Holland, Zeland, &c.) and the Empire to his Brother Ferdinand, K. of the Romans and Hungary, departing out of the Netherlands, to end his daies quietly in a Monaſtery, not far from Placentia. He reſerued 100000 Crownes yearely to himſelfe, employing 4000. for his diet and maintenance, appointing the reſt to young maides marriages,1556. and the releefe of Widdowes and Orphanes, he not liuing aboue two yeares after. When not onely happened his death, but likewiſe the deaths of the Quéens Dowagers of France and Hungarie, as alſo of

               Mary Quéene of England, after whom ſuccéeded her Siſter Elizabeth, in which time,Elizabeth Q of England. 
               Emanuell Philebert, Duke of Sauoy, and Prince of Piemont, was Gouernour and Lieutenant Generall of the Netherlands, for King Phillip: till the King of Spaines marriage (beeing turned into tears, by the vntimely death of the French king) cauſed Margaret of Auſtria, Baſtard to the Emperor Charles the fift, and Dutcheſſe of Parma, to ſuccéede the Duke of Sauoy in the Netherlandes regiment.1559 King Phillip returned then home into Spaine, it being his laſt departure out of thoſe Countries:The Spaniſh Inquition. whereon (not long after) enſued the ſubtle bringing of the Spaniſh Inquiſition into ye Netherlands, by the creation of new Byſhops,1565 and ſuch was the power and priuiledge of the Inquiſitors, as none were able to withſtande them, in confiſcation both of body and goodes at their owne pleaſure.
            Nowe, albeit the Tyrannie of the Dutcheſſe gouernment in the Lowe Countries, was more then the people could well endure,1568 yet (to putte a ſharper Snaffle in their mouthes) King Phillip remooued his Baſtard Siſter Margaret, and ſent Don Ferdinando Aluares, Duke of Alua, who quickly brought the Netherlands into a moſt pittifull eſtate: making himſelfe ſure of Gaunt, and Count Horne and Count Egmont (abuſiuelie) made Priſoners: he builded the Caſtle of Antuerpe, where he erected his owne proud Statue, and procéeded to apprehend the prince of Orange by Commiſſion, ſetting downe Articles by the

               Spaniſh Inquiſition (which were confirmed by the King) to ruinate the Netherlandes, vppon which, ſoone followed the execution of the ſons of Batembourg at Bruſſels, as alſo the Earls of Egmont and Horne.
               1574 
               William of Naſſau, Prince of Orange,
               Wil. Prince of Orange The Commaunder of Caſtile. was made Gouernor of Holland, Zeland & Vtrecht for the States, and proued verie fortunate in many attempts againſt the Duke of Alua, which made him labor his repeale home into Spaine, with Don Frederick his ſon. Don Lewes de Requeſens, the great commander of Caſtile, was ſent to ſpoil the Dukes place in the Netherlands, for the king of Spain, to whom Aluaes former behauiour ſerued for an example, in hys procéeding, and notwithſtanding his beſieging of Middlebourg (néere hande to famiſhment) yet was his fléet defeated before his face,1575 & the Town yeilded vppe by Collonell Mondragon, to the Prince of Orange. After many dangerous turmoiles, on both ſides, the States ſent to require ſuccour of Elizabeth Quéene of England, and ſoone after dyed Don Lewes de Requeſens at Bruſſels;
               Don Iohn of Auſtria. in whoſe roome ſuccéeded Don Iohn of Auſtria (Baſtard ſonne to the Emperor Charles the fift) as Gouernor for King Phillip in the Netherlands, all the Prouinces whereof were vnited at the pacification of Gand, whereupon, the Caſtle was yeelded vnto the States, and all the Spaniards departed out of Antuerp caſtle, which was alſo deliuered into the States handes. Don Iohn being receiued as Gouernor, he ſought ocaſions how to renew warre againſt the Prince of

               Orange, and diuers diſcontentmentes,1577. as alſo treacherous practiſes, being noted in Don Iohn, the States grew iealous of him, and he was proclaimed the Countries enemye. Then was the Arch-Duke Mathias called to be Gouernor,The Arch-Duke Mathias. and while the heart-burnings helde betweene Don Iohn and the States, the Duke of Aniou, and Duke Caſimire alſo were required to ſuccour them, but to little effect, for Arthois and Henault fell from the Netherlands generall vnion, and then followed the death of Don Iohn,
               1578. of the plague, in the Campe néere vnto Mamure.
            
            Then Alexander Farnaſe,
               The Prince of Parma. Duke of Parma and Placentia, baſtard Nephew to the king of Spain, ſuccéeded Don Iohn in the Netherlands gouernment: Whereuppon, a ſtricter Vnion (then before) was made betwixte the Prouinces at Vtrecht.
               1580. The Duke of Aniou was called to bee Protector,The Duke of Aniou. and partly Lord of the Countreyes in the Vnion, which made the King of Spaine proſcribe the Prince of Oraunge, and ſet his life at ſale, to which proſcription the Prince (in euerie point) made his iuſt anſwere.1581. Then were valiant and woorthye ſeruices performed by Syr Iohn Norris, and Captain (afterwards) Sir Roger Williams. In the yeare following, the Generall Eſtates of the vnited Prouinces, hauing declared Phillip K. of Spain, ſecond of that name, to be faln from the Seigneury of the ſaid prouinces, in regard of his extraordinary and too violent gouernement, againſt their priuiledges and freedomes (ſolemnly ſworne by himſelfe.) In way

of right and Armes, tooke vpon them all the Gouernment of the politicke Eſtate, and of the Religion in thoſe Prouinces,The States for themſelues. breaking the Kinges Seales, abſoluing the Subiects of their Oath to him, and cauſing them to take a new Oath, for preſeruation of their Countrey, and obedience to the ſaide States. Vpon a bargaine made by the King of Spaine, to kill the Prince of Orange, the ſaide Prince was ſhot by one Iohn Iauvregui, a banquerout-Merchants Seruant,1582 who was preſently ſlaine, but the Prince eſcaped that attempt with life.The prince of Orange ſhot. Afterward, he was traiterouſly murdered by one Balthazar Gerard a high Bourguignon,
               1584 
               The Prince of Orange murdered. at Delft in Holland: whereon, Prince Maurice (being his Sonne) ſuccéeded his Father in the gouernment. Then followed the ſied
                  •
               e of Antuerpe, in which time, the States once more, re-commended their cauſe to the Q. of England, either to giue her the full Soueraignty of the Netherlands, or elſe to ſuccor and reléeue them with her forces, vppon good conditions offered. Her Maieſty graunted to ſend them aſſiſtance, but no ſoueraignty or protection of them, would ſhe take vpon her: whereupon, certain cautionary towns and Skonces were deliuered vp to her, for repaiment of ſuch ſums of Mony, as ſhould be diſburſed by her,1585 and Articles of couenant ſet down betwéene them. Alſo, Robert Lord Dudley, Baron of Denbigh, and Earle of Leiceſter, was appointed by the Quéene of England,
               The Earle of Leiceſter. to be her Gouernor generall, ouer the Engliſh powers in the Netherlands.
            
               In the time of the Earle of Leiceſters gouernment for the Quéene, were ſundry woorthy ſeruices performed by the Earle of Eſſex, Sir Iohn Norris, the Lord Willoughby, Sir Phillip Sidney, Sir William Ruſſell, &c. beſide the ſubtile pretences of Sir William Stanley, Rowland Yorke, Patton, and others, who held faire weather with the Earle of Leiceſter, and had the gouernment of Zutphen Sconce, and the ſtrong Towne of Deuenter (to the great diſlike of the States) yet performed no ſuch matter, as the Earles hope was perſwaded of them. For, after the death of that matchleſſe Noble Gentleman Sir Phillip Sidney, he being ſhot before Zutphen,
               Sir Phillip Sidney ſlain and thereof dying;1587 the Earle of Leiceſter (being gone for England) both Deuenter and Zutphen Sconce were deliuered vp to the Spaniards, by baſe 
                  •
               oruption of Money. And (not long after) the Prince of Parma beleagering S
                     •
                  luice;
               Sluice. by compoſition it was alſo yeelded vp, after it hadde endured 17000. Cannon ſhot and more. Beſide, vpon ſome diſcontentment, betwéene the Earle of Leiceſter and the States; the Quéene called home the ſaid Earle into England,The Lord willoughby and the Lord Willoughby remayned there Generall of the Engliſh forces. The ſundry worthy ſeruices, both by him, and the Engliſh performed, with the Spaniſh vndoubted hopes of Englands cōqueſt,158
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                in the dreadfull yeare of 1588. Prince Maurice his entrance into the Netherlands regiment,Prince Maurice. and the Duke of Parmaes wars in France
               ▪ all theſe I paſſe ouer, referring ſuch as deſire farther ſatiſfaction

therein, to the large Hiſtory of the Netherlands.
            The Prince of Parma dying at Artas (after his retreate from Rouen) the ſecond of September 1592.
               1592 
               Maurice of Naſſan, borne Prince of Orange, Marqueſſe of La Vere, and of 
                  •
               ing, &c. was made great Captaine and Admirall Generall of the vnited Prouinces of the Low
                  •
               countries,Erneſtus D. of Auſtria. by the Eſtates: And Erneſtus, Arch-duke of Auſtria, was alſo made Lieutenant Gouernour, and Captaine Generall for Phillip King of Spaine.
            
            Prince Maurice proouing very ſucceſſefull in his warlike artemptes, a Renegate or Apoſtat Prieſt (in the habite of a Souldier) was corrupted (by the Arch-Duke Erneſtus) to murther the Prince Maurice at Breda; and vppon his owne confeſſion thereof,1594. hée was executed at the Hage.
               Prince Maurice ſhoulde be murdered twice. Afterward, vppon Prince Maurice his valiant ſurpriſall of Gronning, Erneſtus hadde dealt in like manner with a Souldier, named Peter du Four (who had ſometime ſerued in the company of the Guarde to Prince Maurice) 
                  •
               o vndertake the murdering of him at Lillo: the which treaſon beeing confeſſed by the man himſelfe, he was executed in the Towne of Berghen vp-zoom. Here might much be ſaid of the honorable ſeruices of Sir Frances Vere,
               Sir Frances Vere. and others, but our purpoſed breuity is the onely imbarment; and the Netherlandes Hiſtory (at large) may thereof diſcharge me. The Arch-Duke Erneſtus dyed the twenty one day of February, 1595.
               1595.
               
               Mo
                     •
                  dragons forces defeated by Prince Maurice, and La Motte ſlaine before Dourlaus; the Eſtates (vnder the King of Spaine) gladly ſought peace with the vnited Prouinces▪ and ſent Articles in writing to Prince Maurice, for conſideration of their motion. This was not done but, vppon good aduiſe in the King of Spaine, perceyuing the Netherlandes, and Prince Maurice his great fortunes againſt him, adding euery daie, (more and more) to his vtter abolition thence. Hereupon, Albertus the Cardinall, Brother to deceaſed Erneſtus, & Arch-Duke of Auſtria,
               Albertus Arch duke of Auſtria. was ſent (by the King) to gouerne there for him▪ many Eaſterlings and Netherland ſhips, which had bin ſtaied in Spain to méet the Indian fléete, were ſuddenly releaſed; and Phillip of Naſſau (who is now Prince of Orange and Earle of Buron,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                that had long time béene reſtrained of his liberty in Spain) for better countenancing ye intended buſineſſe,1596 he likewiſe was ſent along with the Cardinall Albertus.
            
            The Cardinall being made Gouernour▪ for the King de Spaine, tooke Callice from the French King, as his firſt peece of ſeruice, but for loſſe thereof, he recouered La-fere from the Spaniards.
               Hulſt beſiedged. Whereuppon, the Cardinall beſiedged Hulſt in Flanders, which yeilded in the end: but it was a deare purchaſe to the Cardinall, for this ſiedge, (continuing ſome two months) coſt him the liues of aboue threeſcore valiant Captaines, beſides other Commanders, Collonels, and men of mark, and 
                  •
               bou
                  •
                fiue thouſand well approued ſouldiers.
            
               Then did the king of Spaine diſpenſe with himſelfe for payment of his debtes, which made many Merchants in Spaine, Italy, Antwerp, Amſterdam, and Middlebourg, to become Banquerouts.1597 A league was made betwéen the French King, the Quéene of England, and the States, againſt the Spaniardes, and then did Prince Maurice goe to Tournhoult,
               Tournhoult where the Earle of Varax was ſlaine. Amiens alſo was ſurpriſed by the Spaniardes; but ſoone beſiedged and recouered by the French King, albeit the Cardinall offered ſuccour, which prooued in vaine. Prince Maurice beſiedged and tooke the Townes of Alpen, Meurs▪ Rhinberg, Groll, Brefort, Enſcheyde, Oldenzeel, Otmarſom, Goor, and Lingen, all which ſeruices he performed in thrée monthes. Then hapned another treacherous plot,1598 againſt the life of Prince Maurice, by perſwaſion of the Ieſuites at Doway,
               The Ieſuits conſpire the death of Prince Maurice. and vnder-taken by Peter Panne, a Cooper by Trade, but beeing then a Broaker or Banquerout Merchant; who hauing receiued the Sacrament, to performe the déede either with Knife, Ponyard, or Piſtoll, the Prouinciall of the Ieſuites made a long Sermon, to encourage him in the action, and aſſuring him of Paradice, if he performed it, vſed theſe wordes to him beſides: Goe in peace, for thou ſhalt go like an Angell, in the guard of God. But the man (beeing terrifyed in conſcience) diſcouered the whole Treaſon, without any compulſion, and was therefore executed at Leyden in Holland. The King of Spaine growing weake and ſickly,

gaue his Daughter the Infanta, named Iſabella Clara Eugenia, in marriage to the Arch-duke & Cardinall Albertus, with tranſaction of the Netherlands and Bourgogne: whereupon hee left his Cardinals habit, & went to fetch the Infanta. Soone after died the King of Spaine,
               The death of K. Phillip on the 13. day of September, Anno 1598. being ſeuenty one yeares old, add foure months.
            The Arch-Duke and the Infanta beeing come into the Neatherlandes,1599 had their inſtalment at Bruſſels, Louaine, Antwerp, &c. The Emperour ſent to the States, concerning a peace, but theyr reſolution held to make warre in Flanders.
               1600 Then happened the ſiedge and memorable battaile of Nieuport,
               The battaile of Nicuport where Prince Maurice tooke dyuers Fortes from the Spanyards, and ouer-threw the Arch-dukes Army, he being there in perſon: but gladly fled away, leauing his Armes, Horſe of Combate, all his Houſhold, Artillerie, and baggage behind him, and loſt 6000. men, beſide 800. taken Priſoners, among whom was Don Franceſco de Mendoza, Admirall of Arragon, Marqueſſe of Guadaleſte, and Lieutenant Generall of the Arch-Dukes Army, who was led to Ooſtend; Don Baptiſta de Villa noua, led to Horne in Holland; Don Alonzo Ricquell, to Delft, Don Gonzalo Hernandes de Spinola, to Vtrecht; Don Pedro de Montenegro, to ye 
               Hague; Don Pedro de Valaſco, to Berghen, with Don Franciſco de Torres, & Don Antonio de Mendoza, & Don Pedro de Leuſina, to Enchuiſē: beſides the Arch-dukes thrée Pages, Count Carlo Rezi,

Don Diego de Guzman, and Mortier; Don Pedro de Monte-maior, his chiefe taſter; likewiſe his Phiſition, Barber, Harbinger, Rider, Cook, Porter, the Grooms of his Chamber; moſt of the Archers and Halberdiers of his Guard, and (in a manner) all his houſhold; with thrée Prieſtes or Monkes; 40. Auncients, and 37. Pentioners, tearmed (by them) Ancient and Sergeants reformed. He loſt alſo ſixe pieces of Ordynance, 136. Enſignes of foot taken, and fiue Cornets of horſe, comprehending the Mutiners Standerd, and the recouered loſt Colours. Moreouer, on the Arch-Dukes ſide were ſlaine, the Earle of Saume, the Earle of La Fere, the Seneſhall of Montelimar, the Baron of Pimereull, Chaſſy Ortigny, Son to the Preſident Richadot; Don Gaſpar de Sapena, Colonel, who dyed at Ooſt-end, Don Diego de Torres, Don Gaſpar de Loyazo, Don Gonzalo d'Eſpinola, Don Ioan de Pardo, Don Garcia de Toledo, Don Lopode Capeta, Don Alouzo Carcamo, Don Louis Faccardo Sebaſtian Velaſco, Sebaſtian Doteloa, Chriſtionall Verdugues, Mattheo d'Otteuille, Ioannettin de caſa nueua, the Pay-Maiſter Alines, and many other neuer knowne.
            
               Prince Maurice and the ſtates loſſe.Prince Maurice and the States, at the firſt encounter in the morning, and laſtly in the battell, loſt about 2000. men▪ among whom were Bernard, Couteler, and Hamelton, Captaines of Horſe and ſome twenty Captaines of foote, but no Man of Marke or ſpeciall note. In this braue exploit at Neiuport, the vertue and valour of Sir

               Frances Vere Generall, and Sir Horatio Vere, his Brother Colonell, will for euer bee remembred.
            The occurrences in the following yeares,1601 as the beſiedging of Oaſt-ende; The enterpriſe on Fleſſigne; The practiſe to ſacke Antwarpe again; Graue yeilded vp to Prince Maurice;
               1602. Alſo his honourable offers to the Town of Sluice,
               1604 and it beeing yeelded to him vppon compoſition, euen in the viewe of the Arch-Dukes Army: They require a larger field of diſcourſe, then by this breuity can be admitted. Procéed we then to ſpeake of the long continued ſiedge at Oaſt-end, which laſting thrée whole yeares,The long ſiedge at Oaſtend. and eleauen wéekes, was at laſt compounded withall, and on the twenty two day of September 1604. yéelded to the Arch-duke.
            What numbers were ſlaine in this long continued ſiedge of Oaſtende, can hardly be gathered, albeit, a note was found in a Commiſſaries Pocket (who hadde beene ſlaine the ſeauenth of Auguſt 1604. before Oaſtend) wherein were dyuers good obſeruations; eſpecially concerning the Arch-Dukes Campe, and what number (of each degree) dyed and were ſlaine therein, during this ſiedge, vntill the yeelding vppe thereof, (viz:) Maiſters of the Campe, ſeauen; Colonelles, fifteene; Sergeant Maiors,The Arch-dukes loſſe at Oaſtend. twenty nine Captaines, 565. Lieutenants 11
                     •
                  6. Enſignes, 322. Sergeants 1911. Corporals, 116
                     •
                  . Lanſpizadees, 600. Souldiers, 54663. Mariners, 611 Women and Children, 119. all amounting to 72124. perſons.
            
               To continue the memory of this long ſiedge, as alſo the winning of Sluice, Counters (of Siluer and Copper) were made in the vnited Prouinces, bearing (on the one ſide) the figure of Ooſtend, & on the 
                  •
               ther, the Towns of Rhinberke, Graue, Sluice, Ardenbourg, with the Forts of Iſendyke and Cadſant, with this inſcription round about; Plus triennio obſeſſa, hoſti rudera, Patriae quatuor ex me vrbes dedi. Ooſt-end being more then 3. yeares beſiedged, gaue the Enemy an heape of ſtones, and to her natiue Country four Towns.
                Another Counter, concerning Sluice, had theſe words on the one ſide, Traxit, duxit, dedit. Anno 1604. And with the Armes of Zeland on ye other ſide, were theſe words: Beatus populus cuius adiutor Deus. For the following yeares, from 1604 to 1608.
               1605. I finde no eſpeciall or memorable accydents;1606 but an enterpriſe by prince Maurice, on the Riuer of 
                  
                     ••
                  held & Antwerp,
               1607 with the taking of the Caſtle of Wouwe,
               1608 néere to Berghen Vpzoome;
               1069 
               Spiholas taking of Linghen, with an attempt on Berghen, and Groll, taken by compoſition,1610. &c. For a treaty of peace hapning between England and Spaine, the like alſo chanced to bee talkt on, concerning the Netherlands, and many méetings were made to bring it to effect. At length it was brought to paſſe by the labor and endeuor of a Frier (as was reported) who made many errands between Spain and the Netherlands, vntil it was accompliſhed. Since when, nothing hath hapned of any conſequence, but the taking in of the Towne of Guliche in Germany, where the prince Maurice behaued himſelf very honorably.
            
               
               Of the Kingdome of Ireland.
               
                  AVoyding all nice and ſecupulous curioſity, about the firſt name and Originall of Ireland, I purpoſe to follow theſe beſt receiued authors, as Giraldus Cambrenſis, Flatſbury, Henry of Marleborow, and others, that therein do giue the beſt direction.The Originall of the Iriſh. They ſay and affirme, that the Hiſpaniards the Originall offſpring of the Iriſh, becauſe Hiſpaine, in thoſe ancient daies was called Iberia, after the name of Iberius, the Sonne of Iuball, and in regard alſo, that the famous Riuer Iberus was then their habitation, did entitle this land Iberia, as Leyland, and ſome other Chroniclers Write, or Ibernia,
                  Leyland in Cyg. Ca
                        •
                     t. with addition of the letter (n) to expreſſe a kinde of variation. From which Ibernia, it may eaſily be preſumed, that Iberland, or Iuerland receiued firſt ſound, and ſo Ireland, by contraction or corruption in common phraſe. It is ſaid like wiſe to be called Scotia, at the very ſame time, in reuerend reſpect of Scotach, or Scota,
                  Scotach or Scota the wife of Gathelus. wife to Gathelus, an ancient Noble Captaine of thoſe Iberians, ſhe being Mother, others ſay Grand-mother, to Hiberus and Hermon, the Sons of Metellus, raigning then in Hiſpaine. Fiue brethren men of no meane merit and valour (beeing ſons to one Dela) all woorthy Sea-men, and ſkilfull Pilots, rigging a fleete, arriued in Ireland, and perceiuing it to be but ſlenderly peopled, concluded

(by caſting lots, for ſeuerall ſhares) to diuide the Country among themſelues. The foure elder brethren, who were named Gandius, Genandius,
                  An. mund. 2
                           •
                        33 Camb
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     . Lib. 1. dict 3. rub. 5, 6.
                   
                  Sagandus or Gangandus, Rutheragus or Rutheranus, hauing caſt the whole Iſland into four partitions, and finding their yonger brother Slanius to ſtand quite exempted from any abyding, ſucuaying more aduiſedly their ſeueral portions: (which were thus ſquared, Lagenia, Leinſter, lying Eaſt: Connatia, Connaght, weſt: Vltonia, Vlſter, North: & Momonia Mouuſter ſouth, each made an abatement of his proportion, & amongſt them laid out a fift part, named Media, Meeth, which afterward, from being the leſſer ſhare (by his manly carriage) proued to be the largeſt, & he obtained the whole monarchy of Ireland, appointing Meeth to ſerue for ye monarchs diet or table.
               
                  The firſt K. of Ireland.It appeareth then, that Ireland was thus deuided into fiue ſeueral territories or kingdoms, and that the Spaniards, or Hiſpaniardes firſt peopled the ſame. There are alſo accounted 130. pettye Kings of that Nation, from Hermon, that ſlewe his Brother Hiberus (of whoſe name the Iriſh receiued theirs) to Laogirius, the Son of Nealus Magnus, in whoſe daies Ireland was conuerted to the Chriſtian faith, by that holy man S. Pat
                        •
                     ik. About which time cam Roderick a Scithian Prince,Roderick K. of the Picts. with no great number of men, who were the Picts, & he their king, and there they ſought to make their abiding: but the Iriſh perſwaded thē thence, and then they betooke themſelues to the North part of Brittaine, where both Rodericke
                  
and the more number of his followers, were ſlain by Marius King of Brittaine. In no long while after, one Turgeſius, a notable Pyrat of the Norweig
                        •
                     ans, came thether likewiſe,Turgeſius the Tyrant. with a ſtrong power, and made himſelfe King or Conquerour of Ireland, vſing much tirrany, and deflouring al the other Kings daughters: till by the pollicie of Omalaghlilen, King of Meth, whoſe daughter alſo the tyrant would needs rauiſh, a company of young youths were diſguiſed like faire Nimphs, with ſhorte ſharpe Skeines hidden vnder theyr Garments, and the faire young Ladye her ſelfe, Daughter to Omalaghlilen, was theyr chiefe conducter to the laſciuious Tyrants bed Chamber. Turgeſius, his onely companions at that inſtant, were a few diſſolute young men, affected like himſelfe, whom the King had made acquainted with this amorous purchaſe, promiſing, that (his luſt being ſatiſfied) where he liked to make election, the reſt ſhould remaine at their free diſpoſition. No ſooner were theſe diſguiſed yong Gallantes entered the Chamber, and the king preparing him-ſelfe to embrace the Kinge of Meths Daughter, but,The iuſt puniſhment of a laſciuious Tyrant. drawing foorthe theyr Skeynes, they firſt cooled the Tyrants heate in his owne bloude, and afterwarde his Minions were in like ſort ſerued. The fame of this valiant acte being quickely flowne thorough Ireland, and the Princes riſing in Armes on ſo apte an aduantage, they reſolued to free themſelues from ſuch ſeruility: as indeede they did, and made Omalaghlilen their chiefe King or

commander, in honor of this their great deliuerance.
               Concerning diuers other inuaſions of Ireland afterwarde, by the Danes, Norwegians, Swedens,
                  Saxo Grammat. Albert. Crantz. 
                  Normans, &c. reported by Saxo Grammaticus, Albert Crantzius, and others: they are matters no way incident to our preſent purpoſe, but referred to our generall determination, more capeable of ſuch plenty of diſcourſe. Therefore, paſſing ouer thoſe former yeares of trouble and diſturbance,Sylueſt. Girald. Cambrenſis. let vs come to Sylueſter Giraldus Cambrenſis, his hiſtory of the conqueſt of Ireland, when Dermon Mac Morogh, K. of Leynſter. fled out of Ireland, to craue ſuccor of Henrie the ſecond, King of England, who was then in Aquitaine, buſied with very ſerious affayres, wherein I will be ſo briefe as I may.
               This Dermon Mac Morough, King of Leinſter,
                  O Dermon Mac Morogh. hauing bin (from his youth and entrance into the Kingdome) tirranous ouer his Nobilitie, and full of oppreſſion to all the Gentrie, became highly hated and deſpiſed, and ſo much the rather for rauiſhing the wife to Ororike prince of Meth, in the abſence of her huſband. Ororike not brooking ſuch an indignity, procured Rotherick (K. of Connagh, and Monarch of all Ireland ouer the other Kings) to giue him aid, with al the forces that either of them could make. Dermon vnderſtanding this main oppoſition, fled into Aquitaine, where he found Henry the ſecond, King of England, and ſuch was his diſtreſſefull tale to him, with Oath of allegeance ſworne vnto him.

to be his true vaſſaile and ſubiect:Dermon ſweareth allegiance to K Henry. that king Henry made kind acceptance of him, and took him into his protection, graunting him his Letters pattents into England, to vſe the aide and meanes of his Subiects, for recouery of his right in Ireland. Beeing returned from King Henry into England, he came to Briſtow, where his letters Patents were many times publickely read, and liberall wadges and offers made, to ſuch as in this extreamity would giue him aſſiſtance.Gilbert Earl of Chepſtone. All proued in vaine, till Richard, ſonne to Gilbert, Earle of Chepſtone (being promiſed Dermons Daughter & heire in marriage,Robert Fitz Stephens, & Maurice Fitz-gerard▪
                   with inheritance and ſucceſſion in his Kingdome) was bounde to viſit him with aide in Ireland, at the following Spring: Robert Fitz-Stephens, and Maurice Fitz-gerald, had promiſe alſo of the Towne of Wexford, being the chiefeſt Towne in Leinſter, and ſixe Cantreds of land to them and theirs for euer, to come likewiſe (with their beſt help) at the Spring enſuing. Vpon hope of this aſſiſtaunce, Dermon ventured home among his enimies,Fitzſtephens & his men paſſe into Ireland. but in very priuate manner for his owne ſafety. At time appointed, Robert Fitz-Stephens accompanied with Maurice Fitz-gerald and with thirtie ſeruiceable Gentlemen, all of his Kinred, beſide thrée hundred bold Archers, the beſt choſen, and onely men of Wales, ſailed in three ſundry barks, and landed in thē Calends of May, at the Banne in Ireland. Whereby,A propheſ
                        •
                      of Merlin
                        •
                     
                   an old Propheſy of Merlins was ſaid to be fulfilled, (viz.) A Knight by-parted, ſhould enter firſt with force in Armes,

and breake the bounds of Ireland. Their landing there, proued ſo ſucceſful to Derman, that hee kept his word with Fitz-ſtephens & Fitz-gerald, for the town of Wexford, & territories thereto appertaining with the cantreds of land: he ſent alſo for Richard Strongbow, Earle of Pembroke, ſon to Earle Gilbert of Chepſtone,
                  Richard Strongbow Earle of Chepſtone and Pembroke. who, vppon Dermons letters, and intelligence of Fitz-Stephens great fortunes (with his followers) there deſiring erneſtly to make one in ſo worthy an imploiment made ſute to k. Henry for his paſſage thither. But whither he obtained leaue or no, he being of very noble parentage, greater in ſpirit, then poſſeſſions, & aiming at the faireſt fortunes: dreadles of the kings diſpleaſure, with ſuch power as hee coulde prouide, he landed at Waterford in September. Héere it ſhall not differ much from our purpoſe, to report thoſe Noble mens names, who before any other of the Engliſh aſſiſted this woorthy Earle Richard Strongbow for Dermon, in ſubduing Ireland to the Crowne of England, according as they are recorded in the chancery of Ireland, & as the learned M. Camden hath alſo obſerued them.

                     
                        Robert Fitz-Stephens.
                     
                     
                        Haruey de Mont-ma
                              •
                           iſh.
                     
                     
                        Maurice Prendergeſt.
                     
                     
                        Robert Barr.
                     
                     
                        Meiler Meilerine.
                     
                     
                        Maurice Fitz-Gi
                              •
                           ald.
                     
                     
                        Redmund, Nephew of Fitz-Stephens.
                     
                     
                        William Ferrand.
                     
                     
                        Miles de Cogan.
                     
                     
                        Gualter de Ridensford.
                     
                     
                        Gualter, & Alexander, ſons of Maurice Fitz-Girald.
                     
                     
                        William Notte.
                     
                     
                        Robert Fitz-Bernard.
                     
                     
                        Hugh de Lacie.
                     
                     
                        William Fitz-Adelm.
                     
                     
                        VVilliam Marcarell.
                     
                     
                        
                        Humfrey Bohun.
                     
                     
                        Hugh de Gundeuill.
                     
                     
                        Phillip de Haſting.
                     
                     
                        Hugh Titell.
                     
                     
                        Dauid VValſh.
                     
                     
                        Robert Poe
                              •
                           .
                     
                     
                        Osbert de Hetloter.
                     
                     
                        william de Bendenges.
                     
                     
                        Adam de Geruez.
                     
                     
                        Griffin Fitz-Stephens Nephew.
                     
                        Raulfe Fitz-Stephens.
                     
                     
                        VValter de Barry.
                     
                     
                        Phillip VValſh.
                     
                     
                        Adam de Hereford.
                     
                     
                        Iohn Curcy.
                     
                     
                        Hugh Contilon.
                     
                     
                        Redmund Cau
                              ••
                           more.
                     
                     
                        Redmund Fitz-Hugh.
                     
                     
                        Miles of S. Dauids.
                     
                     
                        VVith diuers other beſide.
                     
                  
Then alſo was it generally noiſed, that Celidons propheſie was fulfilled,Celidons propheſye. 
                  (viz) A little Fire-brand ſhal go before a great fire, and as the ſparks kindle the leſſer wood, ſo ſhal the ſame ſet the g
                        •
                     et wood on fire. There was another propheſy alſo,Merlins Propheſie, of Merlins, viz. A great fore-runner of a greater follower, ſhall come, & he ſhall tread down the heads of Deſmond & Leinſter, & the waies (before opened and made ready) hee ſhall in large. Dublin, Leinſter, & diuers other places were immediatly won, & Earle Richard married to Eua, Dermons daughter.
               By which marriage, he enioyed but one daughter onely, who enriched VVilliam Mare
                        •
                     chall with the Earledome of Pembrokes Title, faire Lands in Ireland, fiue Sonnes, all dying childleſſe, and as many daughters, who honored their huſbands (viz. Hugh Bigod, Earle of No folk, Guarin Montchenſey, Gilbert Earle of Gloceſter, VVilliam Ferrars Earle of Derbie, and william Breoſe, with children, goodly honours, and rich poſſeſſions.
               
                  Vpon the newes in England, of Earl Strongbow and his followers daily preuailing in Ireland,King Henry offended with Earle Strongbow King Henry grew offended with him, and made a Proclamation againſt him, that none of his Subiectes ſhoulde further aſſiſt Dermon or him. But, vppon the Earles priuate paſſage into England, and conference with the King at Newham, néere to Gloceſter, all diſpleaſure was forgotten, and the King (hauing then an Armie in readines) ſhould paſſe forthwith into Ireland, where all ſhould be deliuered vp into the Kinges poſſeſſion. King Henry landed at Waterford, on Saint Lukes day, in the ſeauenth yeare of hys raigne, the 41. of his age, and of our Lord, 1172. Dermon Mac Morogh beeing deade ſome ſhort while before.The princes of Ireland ſweare fealty to King Henry. The King beeing Royally welcommed into Ireland, Dermon or Mac Carti, Prince of Corke, Donald O Bren, Prince of Limerick, Donold O Carel, Prince of Oſſorie, and Macleighlin O Felin, Prince of the Decies or Ophalie, O Ro
                        •
                     ke, K. of Meth, & Oneale, King of Vlſter
                  ▪ with Rotherick O Conor Dun, the Brown Monarch of Ireland, came al & ſubmitted themſelues to k. Henry, ſwearing fealty & to be tributaries to him. Al matters being ordered in Ireland to the Kings good lyking, he departed thence to England, hauing made Earle Strong-bow Earle of Pembroke, the firſt Lorde Gouernor of Ireland, ioyning Reimond le Grace in Commiſſion with him▪ in the yeare, 1174.
            
            
               
               ¶ The names of the Gouernors, Lieutenants, Lord Iuſtices, and Deputies of Ireland, ſince the conqueſt thereof, by King Henry the ſecond.The yeares of our Lord
               
               
                  RIchard Strongbow, Earle of Pembroke,1174 
                     Gouernor, Reimond le Grace being ioyned (for his more eaſe) in commiſſion with him.
                  
                  Reimond le Grace, Lieutenant by himſelfe.
                     1177
                  
                  William Fitz Adelme, Lieutenant, hauing Iohn de Curcy, Robert Fitzſtephans, and Miles Cogan ioyned in Commiſſion with him.
                  
                  Hugh Lacie, Lieutenant.
                  
                  Iohn Lacy, Conſtable of Cheſter. and Richard de Peche. Gouernours.
                     1182
                  
                  Hugh Lacy, againe Lieutenant.
                  
                  Hugh Lacy the younger, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  Henry Loandoris, Arch-biſhop of Dublin,1227 
                     Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  Maurice Fitzgirald, Lord Iuſtice.
                     1228.
                  
                  Iohn Fitzgeffery, Knight, Lord Iuſtice.
                     1253
                  
                  Alain de la Zouch, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  Stephen de Long Eſpe, Lord Iuſtice.
                     1258
                  
                  William Deane, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     Sir Richard Rochell, or Capell, Lord Iuſtice.
                     1261.
                  
                  Dauid Barry, Lord Iuſtice.
                     1267
                  
                  Robert Vfford, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  Richard de Exceſter, Lord Iuſtice.
                     1268
                  
                  Iames Lord Audley, Lord Iuſtice.
                     1269
                  
                  Maurice Fitzmaurice, Lord Iuſtice.
                     1270
                  
                  Walter, Lord Genuille, Lord Iuſtice.
                     1272
                  
                  
                     Robert Vfford, againe lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1281Fulborne, Byſhoppe of Waterford, Lorde Iuſtice.
                  
                  Iohn Stamford, Arch-Biſhop of Dublin, Lorde Iuſtice.
                  
                  William Veſcie, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1295VVilliam Dodingſels, lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  Thomas Fitz-Maurice, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1293Iohn Wogan, lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1314Theobald Verdo
                        •
                     , lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1315Edmund Butler, lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1317.Roger, Lord Mortimer, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  Alexander Bignor, Arch-Biſhoppe of Dubline, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1319Roger, lord Mortimer, the ſecond time lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1320Thomas Fitz-Iohn, Earle of Kildare, lorde Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1321Iohn Birmingham, Earle of Louth, lorde Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1323Iohn, Lord Darcy, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1327Roger Outlaw, Prior of Kilmainan, lorde Iuſtice.
                  
                  Anthony, lord Lucy, lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1332Iohn, lord Darcy, ſecond time lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  Iohn, lord Charleton, lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1338Thomas, Biſhop of Hereford, lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1339Iohn, Lord Darcy, ordayned lord Iuſtice by Patent, during his life, by King Edward the third.
                  
                  Raphe Vfford, lord Iuſtire.
                  
                  
                     1346.Robert Darcy, lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Fitz-Maurice, lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  VValter, lord Birmingham, Lorde Iuſtice, his Deputies were Iohn Archer, Priour of Kilmainan, and Baron Carew, with Sir ThoRokesby.
                  Maurice Fitz-Thomas, Earle of Deſmond, had the Office of Lord Iuſtice, for tearme of his life, by the graunt of King Edward the third.
                  
                  Thomas Rokesby, Knight, lord Iuſtice.
                     1355
                  
                  Almericke de S. Amand.1357 
                     appointed Lord Iuſtices by turnes.
                  
                  Iohn Butler, Earle of Ormund. appointed Lord Iuſtices by turnes.
                  
                  Maurice Fitz-Henry, Earle of Kildare. appointed Lord Iuſtices by turnes.
                  
                  Lionell, Duke of Clarence, Lord Iuſtice.
                     1361
                  
                  Gerald Fitz-Maurice, Earle of Deſmond,1367 
                     lorde Iuſtice.
                  
                  VVilliam, lord Windſor,1369 
                     the firſt Lieutenant in Ireland.
                  Roger Aſhton, lord Iuſtice.
                     1372
                  
                  Roger Mortimer.1381 
                     Iuſtices and Lieutenaunts eſpecially recorded, in the dayes of King Richard the ſecond.
                  
                  Phillip Courtney. Iuſtices and Lieutenaunts eſpecially recorded, in the dayes of King Richard the ſecond.
                  
                  Iames Earl of Ormund. Iuſtices and Lieutenaunts eſpecially recorded, in the dayes of King Richard the ſecond.
                  
                  Robert Vere, Earle of Oxford, Marqueſſe of Dublin, created Duke of Ireland.
                  Roger Mortimer, Earle of March, Lieutenant.
                     1394
                  
                  Roger Mortimer, Earle of March and Vlſter, lieutenant.
                  
                  Roger Grey, lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  Iohn Stanley, Knight, lord lieutenant.
                  
                  Thomas of Lancaſter,1401. 
                     brother to king Henry the

fourth, lord Lieutenant; whoſe Deputies at ſundry times, were Alexander, Biſhop of Meth, Stephen Scrope, knight, & the Prior of Kilmainan.
                  
                     1403Iames Butler, Earle of Ormond, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  Gerald, Earle of Kildare, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1407Iames Butler, Earle of Ormond, Son to the foreſaid Iames, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1413Iohn Stanley, againe Lord Lieutenant.
                  
                  Thomas Cranley, Arch-Biſhop of Dublin, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1414Iohn, Lord Talbot of Shefield, Lieutenant.
                  
                  
                     1420.Iames Butler, Earle of Ormond, the ſecond time Lieutenant.
                  
                  Edmund, Earle of March, Iames, Earl of Ormond, his Deputy. Lieutenants to K. Henrie the ſixt.
                  
                  Iohn Sutton, Lord Dudly, Sir Thomas Strange, his Deputy. Lieutenants to K. Henrie the ſixt.
                  
                  
                     Sir Thomas Stanley, Sir Chriſtopher Plunket his Deputy. Lieutenants to K. Henrie the ſixt.
                  
                  Lion, Lorde Welles, Deputy to the Earle of Ormond. Lieutenants to K. Henrie the ſixt.
                  
                  Iames, Earle of Ormond, by himſelfe. Lieutenants to K. Henrie the ſixt.
                  
                  Iohn, Earl of Shrewsbury, the Archbiſhop of Dublin (in his abſence) Lord Iuſtice. Lieutenants to K. Henrie the ſixt.
                  
                  Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, Father to King Edw: the fourth, had the Office of Lieutenant, by letters patents from king Henry the ſixt, for tenne years. His Deputies (at ſundry times) were the Baron of Deluin; Richard Fits-Euſtace, Knight; Iames Earle of Ormond;

                     and Thomas Fitzmoris, Earl of Kildare.
                  Thomas Fitzmoris, Earle of Kildare, Lord Iuſtice in the daies of King Edward the fourth, vntill the third yeare of his raigne. After whom, George Duke of Clarence, brother to the King, had the office of Lieutenant during his life, and made his Deputies (at ſundry times) theſe Men following;
                  Thomas, Earle of Deſmond. Deputies to the duke of Clarence.
                  Iohn Tiptoft, Earle of Worceſter. Deputies to the duke of Clarence.
                  Thomas, Earle of Kildare. Deputies to the duke of Clarence.1470
                  
                  Henry, Lord Gray of Ruthine. Deputies to the duke of Clarence.
                  
                     Sir Rowland Euſtace, Lord Deputy.
                  
                  Richard, Duke of Yorke, younger ſon to King Edward the fourth, Lieutenant.
                  
                  Edward, Son to K. Richard the 3. Lieutenant, his Deputy was Gerald, Earle of Kildare.
                  Iaſper, Duke of Bedford, & Earl of Pembroke, Lieutenant: his Deputy was Walter, Archbiſhop of Dublin.
                  Edward Poynings, Knight, Lord Deputy.
                     1494
                  
                  Henry, Duke of Yorke, afterward King,1501 by the name of Henry the eight, Lieutenant; his Deputy was Gerald, Earle of Kildare.
                  Gerald Fitz-gerald, Earl of Kildare, L. Deputy.
                  
                  Thomas Howard, Earle of Surry, afterwarde,
                     1520 
                     Duke of Norffolke, Lieutenant.
                  
                  Piers Butler, Earle of Oſſorie, Lord Deputy.
                  
                  Geralde Fitzgeralde, Earle of Kildare,1523 
                     againe Lord Deputy.
                  
                  
                     The Baron of Dublin, Lord Deputy.
                  
                  Piers Butler, Earle of Oſſorie, again L. Deputy.
                     1529
                  
                  
                     William Skeffington, Knight, Lord Deputy.
                  
                  Gerald Fitzgerald, Earle of Kildare, ye third time Lord Deputy.
                  
                  William Skeffington, againe Lord Deputy.
                  
                  
                     1534.Leonard, Lord Gray, Lord Deputy.
                  
                  
                     1540
                     Sir William Brereton, Knight, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1541
                     Sir Anthony Sentleger, Knight, Lord Deputy.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The names of all the Lordes, Deputies, and Iuſtices in Ireland, ſince the death of King Henry the eight, who died in Ianuary 1546.
               
                  
                     1546.
                     
                        SIr Anthony Sentleger, knight, by Patent,
                     1546 
                     dated 24. Martij. Anno primo Edw. 6.
                  
                     Sir Edward Bellingham, Lord Deputy,
                     1547 22. Aprills An. eodem.
                  
                     1548.
                     Sir Francis Brian. Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1549
                     Sir VVilliam Brabeſton, Lord Iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     1550
                     Sir Anthony Seutleger, the third time Lord deputy, 4. Auguſt.
                  
                  
                     1551
                     Sir Iames Croftes, Lord Deputie, twenty nine Aprilis.
                  
                     1553
                     Sir Anthony Sentleger, the fourth time Lorde Deputy, September 1. Anno primo Reg. Marie.
                  
                     1555Thomas, Lord Fitzwalter, Lorde Deputie 27. Aprilis.
                  
                     1556
                     Sir Henry Sidney. Lordes Iuſtices.
                  
                  
                     Doctor Coren, or Corwen. Lordes Iuſtices.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Iuſtice alone,
                     1556. 
                     eightéen Ianuary.
                  Thomas Earle of Suſſex, Lord Lieutenant,
                     1557 19. Martij.
                  
                     Sir William Fitz-Williams, Lord Iuſtice.
                     1558
                  
                  Thomas, Earle of Suſſex, Lord Deputy,
                     1559 6. Maij Anno primo R. Elizab.
                  
                     Sir Nicholas Arnold, Lord Iuſtice.
                     1564
                  
                  
                     Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Deputie the third time.
                     1565
                  
                  
                     Doctor Weſton, Lord Chancellour.
                  
                  
                     Sir William Fitzwilliams.1567
                  
                  
                     Sir Henry Sidney,1568. 
                     Lorde Deputy the fourth time.
                  
                  
                     Sir William Fitz-williams, Lord Iuſtice.
                     1570
                  
                  
                     Sir William Fitz williams, Lorde Deputy,
                     1571 11. Decemb. Anno. 14. Elizab.
                  
                     Sir Henry Sidney, Lorde Deputy the fift time,
                     1572 
                     Auguſt 3.
                  
                     Sir William Drury, Lord Iuſtice,
                     1579. 14. Septem. by patent, 18. May.
                  
                  
                     Sir William Pelham, lord Iuſtice.
                     1580.
                  
                  
                     The Lord Arthur Gray.1580.
                  
                  Adam Arch-Byſhoppe of Dublin. Lordes Iuſtices.
                     1582
                  
                  
                     Sir Henry Wallop. Lordes Iuſtices.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Perot, Lord Deputy.
                     1584.
                  
                  
                     Sir William Fitz-Williams, Lord Deputy.
                     1588
                  
                  
                     Sir William Ruſſell, Lord Deputy.
                     1595
                  
                  Thomas, Lord Burrough, lord Deputy.
                     1597
                  
                  Robert, Earle of Eſſex, Lord Lieutenant.
                     1599
                  
                  Charles Blunt, Barou Montioy, Lord Deputie.
                     1600
                  
                  
                     Sir George Carew, Lord Deputy.
                     1602.
                  
                  
                     
                     1604.
                     Sir Arthur Chicheſter, Lord Deputy, who yet to this day continueth in that honourable office.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Of the Kingdome of Scotland.
               
                  ACcording to the ancient Hiſtoriographers of Scotland in deſcription of their Nations firſt off-ſpring and originall (after Brutes firſt deuiſion of Brittaine to his Sonnes) they make relation of a Noble man among the Grecians,
                  Gathelus a noble Grecian. that was named Gathelus, the ſonne of Cecrops (in the iudgement of ſome) who builded Athens: but, according to the conceite of others, the Sonne of Argus Nealus, fourth King of the Argines. This Gathelus, being baniſhed by his Father, for ſome matter of diſobedience, departed thence into Aegypt, in the thirty three yeare of Pharao Orus,
                  An. Mund. 2416,
                   then King of that Countrey, and there carried himſelfe with ſuch valiant and extraordinary ſucceſſe, againſt the Countries Enemies,Ioſeph. Lib. 2 Cap. 7.
                   (in the company of Moſes, Generall vnder the King himſelfe) that Pharao beſtowed his faire Daughter (named Scota) on him in mariage, hauing alſo then giuen him and his foll
                     •
                  
                  wers, the Citty Thebes (Aegyptiaca) reported to be taken from the Iſraelites. Vpon iuſt occaſion, Gathelus (after his Fathers in Lawes deceaſe) leauing Egypt, being prouided of Shippes and other apt neceſſaries, tooke his Wife, Children,

and a great multitude both of Greeks and Ethyopians, and ſetting forth of Nilus, determined to ſéeke his fortune in other Countries.Gathelus his departure out of Egypt. This was in the year of the worlds creation, 2453. and after his abiding in Egypt, aboue 39. years: what accidents befell him in this voyage, is néedeleſſe to report, his firſt arriuall was on the Coaſtes of Numidia in Affrick, now named Barbary: but being not able to ſettle there, he came into a part of Spaine, long after termed Luſitania. It is ſaid that the place of his landing there, was called Port-Gathele, after the name of Gathelus,
                  He landed in Portingale. which afterward became (corruptly) to bee called Portgale, or Portingale, the certainty whereof I referre to better iudgements. The people there inhabiting, gaue both him and his, at the firſt, a bold repulſe, but in the end hee preuailed victoriouſly, and after further friendly conference with the Spaniards, he began to builde a Citty named Brachara, on the bankes of the Riuer Mundus,
                  The Citty Brachara builded. and ſo at the firſt did hee name the Citty it ſelfe. Gathelus by the Spaniards further perſwaſions & promiſe of aſſiſtance to their vttermoſt, whatſoeuer diſaſters ſhould betide him and his: remooued to the Northſide of Spaine, on the Cantabrian Sea coaſts, now called Galitia, where he builded likewiſe another Cittie, named Brigantia, afterwarde called Nouium, and nowe Compoſtella.
               
               Héere did Gathelus bear the Title of king,Campoſtella builded. and gaue lawes to his people, commanding that they ſhould all be called Scottiſh-men, to honour the

name of his deare beloued wife Scota, as hee had alwayes ſo tearmed them, in the time of his trauailes. In time, they grew to be ſo great a Nation,The Scots foyleth the spaniards. that the Spaniards warring with them for their owne ſafety, ſuſtained the worſt: & though victory remained to the Scots, yet ſuch good Orders were agréed on, that both Scots and Spaniards ſhould obſerue their own lawes, without inuaſion offered on either ſide. Then did Gathelus liue in peace with his neighbors, ſitting daily on his Marble ſtone in Brigantia, adminiſtring Lawes and Iuſtice to his people:Gathelus his Marble ſtone. which ſtone was faſhioned like a ſeat or chaire, hauing ſuch a fate thereto belonging (as is ſaid) that whereſoeuer that ſtone ſhould be found, there ſhoulde the Scottiſhmen raigne and hold dominion. Héereof it enſued, that there firſt in Spain, afterward in Ireland, and next in Scotland, the Kings ruling ouer the Scottiſhmen, receiued the Crowne ſitting vppon that ſtone, vntill the time of Robert the firſt, King of Scotland. On the ſtone was this inſcription engrauen.

                     The inſcription on the ſtone of Gathelus.Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum▪
                     
Inuenient lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
               
               Engliſhed thus:

                     Except olde Sawes doo faile,
                     and Wizards wits be blinde:
                     The Scots in place muſt raigne,
                     
                        Gathelus his people doo greatly aabound.where they this Stone ſhal finde.
                  
This quiet life of Gathelus, did ſo daily encreaſe the aboundance of his people, that the bounds of

his dominion was not able to containe them, and he beeing religious in couenant with the Spaniards, auoiding all meanes of breach of the peace: hauing intelligence of an Iſland lying North ouer againſt Spaine, and wherein was but fewe inhabitantes: made readie his ſhipping, leuyed an Armie of his ſubiectes, and vnder conduct of his two ſonnes, named Hiberus and Himecus, or Hermion (which hee had by his Quéene Scota) conueyed them ouer into that Iſland,Gathelus his two ſonnes come into Ireland. which after-warde was named Hibernia, after the name of Hiberus. The Hiſtory recordeth, that the Scottiſhmen offered no violence to the inhabitants, but fought all meanes to win them by gentleneſſe, which in the end was eaſilie compaſſed, and all thinges appointed in decent order: which made Hiber leaue his Brother to gouerne there in Hilberland or Ireland,
                  The death of Gathelus and valor of his ſon Hiberus. and return backe to Spaine. There he found his Father Gathelus to be dead, and hee (with the peoples ioyfull conſent) was admitted to ſuccéed him as his ſon: but in regard of his admirable courage, & not ſatiſfied with thoſe bounds that pleaſed his father; he made conqueſt of other Citties & Towns neere about him, ſo that they were inforced to ſue vnto him for peace, and agreed to ſuch conditions,Scottes and Spaniardes one nation. that a league concluded amity, and mariage contracts betwéen both Scots and Spaniards, cauſing them to become as one people, continuing their ſucceſſion of Kings (after Hibers death) in his poſterity, amongſt which were Metellus, Hermoneus, Ptolomeus, Hiberius, and Simon Brechus.
               
               
                  Paſſing ouer the contentions in Ireland, vnder the rule of the fore-named Himecus, the three ſonnes of Metellus (viz) Hermoneus, Ptolomeus and Hiberius, being ſent thither in defence of the iniuried Scots; let vs ſpeake of this Simon Brechus,
                  Simon Brechus in Ireland, firſt K. ouer the Scots. lineally deſcended of the Scottiſh blood, who was the firſt King that raigned ouer the Scots in Ireland, he brought with him thither ye fatal Marble ſtone, and was thereon crowned, in ſigne of his full poſſeſſion of that kingdome, & in the yeare from the worlds creation, 3270. after the floud, 1616.55. from the building of Rome, after Brutes entrance into Brittaine, 870. and before our Sauiours incarnation, 697. He gouerned his ſubiects with great Iuſtice fortie yeares, after whom ſucceeded Fandufus, from whom yſſued Ethion,
                  Fandufus & his iſſue. that begate Glaucus, whoſe ſonne (named Nottaſilus) was the father of Rothſay, all which raigned ſucceſſiuely ouer the Scots in Ireland.
               
               
                  Rothſay, to auoide the ſuper-abounding encreaſe of the Scottiſh Nation in Ireland,
                  Rothſay tranſporteth his Scots into the weſtern Iſles. tranſported them (by diuers numbers) into the Iſles anciently called Ebonides, afterward Hebrides, but now (by the Scots) the Weſterne Iſles, lying on the Weſt halfe of Scotland, and named the Iſle he firſt poſſeſſed them of, the iſle of Rothſay, after his owne name: this was 133. yeares after Simon Brechus was crowned King. Nor may we forget, yt they alſo named thoſe Iſlandes (and an eſpeciall part thereof) by the name of Argathelia, in memory of their firſt guide & Prince

                  Gathelus,
                  Argathelia in remembraunce of Gathelus. and as yet to this day it is called Arguile, wherein alſo, as all ouer the mayne and firme land, called then Albion, and they Albion-Scots, they planted themſelues, albeit it was a waſt and very deſert dwelling.
               Héere could I enter into a neceſſary declaration, concerning the comming of the Pictes, into thoſe partes of Albion, what people they were,The Pictes come into Albion. their combuſtions with the Brittains and Scots, and rule of their Kings, till their abſolute deſtruction, according to an ancient Propheſie: That the Scots ſhould in the end deſtroy all the Pictiſh progeny: But becauſe I haue briefely ſpoken of them, and hauing referred their further relation to our generall Hiſtory, we will now goe on with our matter of the Albion Scots. In the troubles of Ireland,
                  Ferguhardus in Ireland. among the Scots there inhabiting, one Ferguhardus, a very worthy and noble Prince, raigned there, who ſent an armie to aſſiſt the Brittiſh and Albion Scots, vppon theyr requeſt of aide, vnder the conduct of his ſon Ferguſius, who was a young gallant Prince, yet an expert Warrior, and tooke with him the Marble ſtone, becauſe he went to a dangerous war, and hoped withall, that the iſſue of his paines ſhould be the attaining of a kingdome: As indéed, vpon an aſſembly and parlement held at Arguile, and his high merit to excéed all others whatſoeuer, he was elected and ſacred in that ſupreame office,Ferguſius the firſt king of Scotland in the yeare after the worlds creation, 3640. before our bleſſed Sauiours incarnation, 327. after the building of Rome 420. and after Brutes entrance

into Britaine, 790. This Ferguſius, after he had raigned royally the ſpace of 25. yeares, ſayling into Ireland, to quiet a diſcontentment amongſt the Nobility, was driuen vpon a Rocke, where he periſhed by drowning, and that Rocke hath euer ſince, euen to this day, bin called Rock-Ferguſe, otherwiſe Knock-Ferguſe.
               
               After the much lamented death of Ferguſius, becauſe his ſonnes were ouer young, to vndergo the waighty charge of gouernment,Feritharis the ſecond k. of Scotland. his Brother Feritharis was crowned King, being enthroned in his Kingly Ornaments, with all ſolemnitie: his two edged ſworde, his ſcepter Royall, and his Crowne of Golde, made in forme of a Rampire, for preſeruation of his Countries libertie: which manner of inueſting continued (without any alteration) till the dayes of Achaius King of Scotland, who confirming a perpetuall league with Charlemaigne, Emperor and K. of France, to laſt for euer betwéene Scots and French, added to the Crowne foure Floure de Lices, with four Croſlets, deuided in ſunder with equal ſpaces, riſing ſomewhat higher then the Floure de Lices, that thereby, the obſeruing of Chriſtian Religion, and ſincere faith (maintained by the Scottiſh Nation) might appeare the more apparant to al that behelde it. After Feritharis (who raigned worthy 15. yeares) not Ferlegus,
                  Howe the firſt kinges of s
                        •
                     ottes ſucceded each other. the eldeſt ſonne of Ferguſius ſuccéeded, but Mainus the younger ſonne, being then aged 24. yeares: and after him his ſon Do
                        •
                     uadille, the following ſucceſſion we will thus briefely relate.
               
                  
                  
                     Doruadil raigned 28. yeares.
                  
                     Nothatus, Brother to Doruadil, raygned two yeares.
                  
                     Reuther, ſon to Doruadill, 26. yeares.
                  
                     Reutha, the Vnckles ſon to Reuther, ſeuentéene yeares, and then entering into a priuate life, he reſigned the Crowne to Thereus.
                  
                  
                     Thereus, the ſonne of Reuther, who raigned 12. yeares.
                  
                     Conanus, Lord of Galloway, who after the deceaſe of Thereus in Brittaine, yeelded the gouernment to Ioſina, Brother to Thereus, and raigned 24. yeares.
                  
                     Finnanus, ſonne to Ioſina, thirty yeares.
                  
                     Durſtus, ſonne to Finnanus, nine yeares.
                  
                     Ewin, Vnckles ſonne to Durſtus, xix. yeares.
                  
                     Gillus, baſe ſonne to Ewin, who being expulſed, Ewin, ſecond of that name, was crowned K. and raigning xix. yeares, reſigned his ſtate to Ederus.
                  
                  
                     Ederus, the ſonne of Dothan, 38. yeares.
                  
                     Ewin the third, ſon to Ederus, 7. yeares.
                  
                     Metellanus, ſonne to Carren, the Brother of Ederus, in the 12. yeare of whoſe raigne,The birth of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt. our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt was borne of the bleſſed Virgin Mary in Bethlem, which was 324 yeares, after the eſtabliſhing of the Scottiſh kingdome by Ferguſius. This Metellanus died in the 28. yeare of his raigne.
                  
                     Caratake, ſon to Cadallan,
                     54 and Nephew to Metellanus, raigned xxi. yeares.
                  
                     Corbreid, yongſt brother to Caratake, 34. years.58
                  
                  
                     
                     71
                     Dardan, ſur-named the Great, for his huge ſtature foure yeares.
                  
                     75
                     Corbreid Gald, eldeſt ſonne of King Corbreid, 35. yeares. This was a very worthy and famous King, and the Countrey where hee laſt fought with the Romaines, in memory of his owne name, was called Galdia, which (as ſome thinke) is that now named Galloway.
                  
                  
                     131
                     Lingthake, ſon to Corbreid Gald, two yeares.
                  
                     133
                     Mogall, nephew to Corbreid Gald, ſix and thirty yeares.
                  
                     162
                     Conarus, ſon to Mogall, 14. yeares.
                  
                     176
                     Ethodius, Nephewe to King Mogall. In this Kingsraigne, Lucius, King of the Brittains, with a great part of his people, receyued the Chriſtian faith, being according to the Scottiſh Chronicles, in the yeare after our Sauiours byrth, 187. This Ethodius raigned 33. yeares.
                  
                     207
                     Satrahell, or Serrahell, Brother to Ethodius, raigned foure yeares.
                  
                     211
                     Donald, Brother to Satrahell, 21. years. In this kings time, the Scots receiued with him the Chriſtian faith, 330. yeares after the erection of the Scottiſh Kingdome. And this Donald was the firſt that cauſed Golde and Siluer to bee coyned in his Realme, ſtamping a Croſſe on the one ſide▪ and his face on the other.
                  
                     216
                     Euthodius the ſecond, beeing Sonne to the former King Euthodius, raigned 16. yeares.
                  
                     242
                     Athirco, ſon to Ethodius, 12. yeares.
                  
                     252
                     Natholocus, a Noble man of Argile, xi. yeares.
                  
                     
                     Findocke, ſonne to Athirco, ten yeares.
                  
                     Donald, Brother to Findock, being named Donald of the Iſles, twelue yeares.273
                  
                  
                     Crathlint, Son to King Findock,
                     287 twenty foure yeares.
                  
                     Fincomarke, the Vncles ſonne to Crathlint,
                     322 47. yeares.
                  
                     Romacus, Nephewe to King Crathlint,
                     358 foure yeares.
                  
                     Anguſianus, Nephewe to King Crathlint,
                     360 two yeares.
                  
                     Fethelmachus, Cozin to Anguſianus, thrée years.363
                  
                  
                     Eugenius, the Sonne of King Fincomarke,
                     369 thrée yeares.
                  
                     Ferguſe, Sonne to Erthus, who was Sonne to
                  
                     Ethodius, Brother to Eugenius,
                     424. and borne in Denmarke, 16. yeares.
               
               
                  Eugenius, the Son of Ferguſe,
                  440 in whoſe time the Wall, called Adrians Wall, was vndermined and ouerthrowne; Alſo the Brittaines were made tributary to the Scots and Pictes:The Brittaines tributary to the Scots and Picts. which was about fiue hundred yeares, after that Iulius Caeſar had brought them in ſubiection to the Romaines; after our Sauiours birth 446. and the ſeauenth of Eugenius his raigne. Then was the Iſle of Albion ſore infected with the Pelagians Hereſie, and Paladius (tearmed by ſome the Apoſtle of Scotland) was ſent by Pope Celeſtine to the Scots and Picts. This Eugenius raigned 30. yeares, and aduanced the State of his Countrey to more wealth and felicity, then any of his Predeceſſors had done before him.
               
                  
                  470
                  Dongard, brother to Eugenius, raignd 5. years.
               
                  481
                  Conſtantine, Brother alſo to Eugenius, 17. yeares.
               
                  501
                  Dongall, or Congall, Nephew to Conſtantine, and ſon to his Brother Dongard, 20. years.
               
                  521
                  Conranus, Brother to Congall, in whoſe time the great K. Arthur was borne, and S. Germane preached among the Souldiers in the Camp, and bare the Kings Standard in the field, wben with the cry of Alleluia thrée tunes together, the Saxons were miraculouſly diſcomfited. This Conranus died in the 20. yeare of his raigne, the 16. of Arthurs ouer the Brittaines, and fift of the Emperor Iuſtinian, An. Chriſti. 531.
               
                  531
                  Eugenius, his Nephew, and ſon to his brother Congall, in whoſe time was the bloudy battell betweene the Britaines, Scots, and Picts, wherein aboue 20000. men were ſlain, with Mordred, K. Arthur,
                  The death of King Arthur, Mordred, &c. & Gawan or Gauan, brother to Mordred, and moſt part of ye Brittiſh Nobility. This Eugenius raigned 38. yeares.
               
                  578
                  Conuall, Brother to Eugenius, in whoſe time S. Colme, or Colombe, came from Ireland into Scotland. This Conuall raigned ten yeares, and then Kinnatill his Brother, being enthroned at Argile by free election, liued but twenty dayes after his Coronation.
               
                  588
                  Aldan, Sonne to King Conran, was crowned by the holy Father Saint Colme, and raigned thirty ſeauen yeares. In this Aidans time, the Saxons hauing driuen the Brittaines into Wales, and inſulting ouer their lands and Countries;

deuided the kingdome into ſeauen parts or deuiſions,England made ſeuen kingdomes. ordaining ſeuen ſeuerall Kings to rule ouer them. In this King Aidans rule, died Saint Colme, at Dune in Ireland, whereon his toomb theſe verſes were found engraued.
               
                  Hi tres in Duno, tumulo tumulantur in vno,
                  Brigida, Patricius at que Columba pius.
                  Saint Colme, Saint Patrick, and Brigetta pure,
                  Theſe three in Dune lies in one Sepulture.
               
               
                  Kenethus Keir, Son of Conuall, or Conwall,
                  606 raigued foure months.
               
                  Eugenius, fourth of that name,620. Son to King Aidan, and (by ſome) called Brudus, according to S. Colmes prophecy of him, was crowned King of Scotland. He raigned 15. yeares.
               
                  Ferquhard, Son to Eugenius, 13. yeares.632
               
               
                  Donald, or Donwald,
                  645 the third ſon of Eugenius, 15. yeares.
               
                  Ferquhard the ſecond, Nephew to Donwald,
                  664 18. yeares.
               
                  Maldwin, Sonne of king Donwald,
                  684 in whoſe time was a grieuous Peſtilence through moſt part of the World,A generall Peſtilence. conſuming a greater number of Men before it ceaſed, then were left aliue, for it continued the ſpace of three yeares together. He raigned twenty yeares.
               
                  Eugenius the fift, Nephew to Maldwin,
                  688 foure yeares.
               
                  Eugenius the ſixt, the Sonne of Ferquhard,
                  697 ten yeares.
               
                  
                  Strange viſions in Albion.In this Kinges raigne were many wonderfull viſions ſéen in Albion. In the Riuer of Humber (to the apparant view of a multitude of men) a number of Ships appeared vnder ſaile, as ready furniſhed for the war. In the Church at Camelon, a noyſe was heard like the clattering of Armour. Milke was turned into bloud in dyuers places of Pict-land, and Chéeſe conuerted into a bloudie Maſſe or Cake. Corne, as it was gathered in Harueſt time, was all bloudie, and it rained blood in the further partes of Scotland, as the Scottiſh Chronicles doe make mention.
               
                  6
                        •
                     9
                  Ambirkeleth, Nephew, or Son (as ſome ſay) to Eugenius the fift, raigned not fully two years.
               
                  716
                  Eugenius the ſeauenth, Brother to Ambirkeleth, who cauſed the Hiſtories of his Anceſtours liues to be written in Books and volumes,The Hiſtories of the Kings liues written. for example to poſterity, appointing thoſe Monuments to bee carefully kept in the Abbay of Iona, now called Colmekill; he raigned 17. yeares, and dyed much lamented.
               
                  734
                  Mordacke, Nephew to Eugenius. In whoſe time (according to venerable Bede) foure ſeueral people liued in peace and quietneſſe within the boundes of Albion, though differing in manners, language, lawes, and ordenaunces: Saxons, whom hee called Engliſh-men, Brittaynes, Scots, and Picts. In which time alſo, Bede concluded his hiſtory, with the ending of King Mordacks life.
               
                  762
                  Ethfine, Son to Eugenius the ſeauenth, who

had foure Gouernors vnder him in his Realme: Donald, Treaſurer of Argile, Collane of Athol, and Mordake of Galloway his Lieutenants, & Conrath the Thane of Murreyland. He raigned 30. yeares.
               
                  Eugenius, the eight Son of King Mordacke,
                  767 thrée yeares.
               
                  Ferguſe the third, Son of King Ethfine,
                  769 thrée yeares.
               
                  Soluathius, Son of Eugenius the eight,788 twenty yeares.
               
                  Achaius, Sonne of King Ethfine,
                  819 in whoſe time was a perpetuall league confirmed betwéen him and the Emperor Charlemaigne of France. And then had Hungus, the Pictiſh King, the viſion of Saint Andrew and his Croſſe, as is reported, whereby S. Andrew, became Patron both of the Scots and Picts. This Achaius raigned 32 yeares.
               
                  Conuall, the Brother of King Ethfine,
                  824 fiue yeares.
               
                  Dongall, Sonne of King Soluathius,
                  830. fiue yeares.
               
                  Alpine, the Sonne of King Achaius,
                  833 foure yeares.
               
                  Kenneth, the Sonne of Alpine.
                  839 This is that famous and renowmed King, in whoſe time the Pictiſh Nation were vtterly deſtroyed,The vtter ſ
                        •
                     buerſion of the Picts. the Cittie of Camelon caſt downe, the Caſtle of Maidens forſaken by the Picts, and none, or verie few of them left liuing in Albion. Which happened after their firſt beginning to raigne there,

1173. yeares; 1166. from the enterance of Ferguſius; eight hundred thirty nine after our Sauiours birth, and from the Worldes Creation, 4806.Tranſlation of the Marble ſtone. In memorie of this his famous victorie, King Kenneth brought the Marble Stone out of Argile (where till then it hadde béene kept) into Gourie, and placed it at Scone, néere to the place where he preuailed againſt the Picts. This roiall K. died in the yeare 856. hauing raigned 20. yeares in great renowne and glory.
               
                  860.
                  Donald, Brother to King Kenneth, died in the ſixt yeare of his raigne, which was much molleſted by the Danes, vnder Cadane King of Denmarke, pretending a Title to the Picts lands.
               
                  874
                  Conſtantine, the Sonne of King Kenneth, a very worthy and famous king, who redreſſed al diſorders in his Land, appointing Prieſts to apply their vocation, and not to meddle with any ſeculer buſineſſe, going to warre, or kéeping any Horſes,A vertuous King. Haukes, or Hounds. The youth of his land (to auoide wantonneſſe and idleneſſe) were appointed but one meale a day; and drunkennes, either in man or Woman, was punniſhed with death. He raigned 13. yeares.
               
                  876.
                  Ethus, brother of Conſtantine, who was a man of ſuch ſwiftneſſe of 
                     •
                  oot, that he could match and make way in running, with Harts and Hounds, whereupon he was ſir-named Light-foot. Hee gouerned ſcarce two yeares.
               
                  893.
                  Gregory, the ſon of Dongall, that raigned before Alpine; in whoſe time liued Iohn Scot the famous Clerke. This Gregory raignd 18. years.
               
                  
                  Donald the fift,903 Sonne of Conſtantine the ſecond, in whoſe time Gormond and his Danes were baptized, and Gormonds name was changed to Athelſtane. He raigned almoſt 11. years.943.
               
               
                  Conſtantine the third, Son of Ethus ye ſwift, 40. yeares. He gaue ouer his kingly dignity, and entred into Religion, as Hector Boetius affirmeth.
               
                  Malcolme, the Sonne of Donald, 15. yeares.959
               
               
                  Iudulph, Sonne of Conſtantine the third,968 and prince of Cumberland, he raigned about 9. years
               
                  Duffe, the Sonne of King Malcolme,
                  972 foure yeares.
               
                  Culene, Prince of Cumberland,
                  976 and Sonne of King Iudulph, raigned not fully fiue yeares.
               
                  Kenneth, Sonne to King Malcolme the firſt,1000 25. yeares.
               
                  Conſtantine, the Sonne of King Culene,
                  1002 not three yeares.
               
                  Grime, Nephew to King Duffe,
                  1010. not fully nine yeares.
               
                  Malcolme the Son of Kenneth,
                  1034 and Prince of Cumberland, 25. yeares.
               
                  Duncane, Nephew to Malcolme, 6. yeares.1046. In his time was Banquho Thaine of Lochquaber; of whō the houſe of the Stuarts is deſcended, euen to his Maieſty now raigning. And then was England. deuided, betwéene Canutus King of Denmarke, and Edmund Ironſide, after a valiant Combate fought betwéene them.
               
                  Mackbeth, ſon to Sinell, Thaine of Glammis,
                  1057 raigned 17. yeares.
               
                  
                  1092
                  Malcolme Cammore, Sonne of King Duncane, hee changed the name of Thaines were as Barons. 
                  Thaines into Earls, being t
                     •
                  en the firſt that euer were among the Scots, according to their owne Hiſtories. At this time did William the Baſtard, duke of Normandy, make his Conqueſt of England. This King Malcolme raigned 36. yeares. And after ſome difference for the Crown betwéene Donald Bane, Brother to King Malcolme, and Duncane a Baſtard Son to King Malcolme (which vſurpation continued for the ſpace of thrée years) Edgar the rightfull Prince attayned to his due claime.
               
                  1101
                  Edgar, Son to King Malcolme, was the firſt that euer was annointed King in Scotland: now was the generall paſſage to the Holy land, vnder Godfrey of Bullen, and many other Chriſtian Princes. This King Edgar raigned nine years.
               
                  1109
                  Alexander, Brother to Edgar, being ſir-named Alexander the fierce, for his ſtearne valiancy in purſuing Théeues and Robbers. Dauid, Brother to King Alexander, being in England, married Maude, Daughter to Waltheof, Earle of Huntingdon and Northumberland, & (in right of his wife) was made Earle of Huntingdon and Northumberland, with inheritance of the lands to them belonging. In this King Alexanders time (who raigned 17. yeares compleate) the order of the Knightes of Rhodes,
                  The beginning of the Knights of Rhodes. beeing formerlie Knightes of Saint Iohn of Hieruſalem, tooke beginning, and the order of the white Monkes. Then liued alſo the Holy Man Richard de

ſancte Victore, beeing a Scot borne, but lyuing (the more part of his time at Paris in Fraunce) where hee died, and lieth buried in the Abbey of S. Victore, hee being a Brother of the ſame houſe.
               
                  Dauid, Brother to Alexander,
                  1153 ſuccéeded as lawfull heire, and ruled 29. yeares, and two moneths. It is recorded of this King, that he excelled in Noble Vertues, and ſober conuerſation of life, being very pittifull to the poore, and ſomewhat ouer-bountifull to the Church.The vertuous life and raigne of K. Dauid. For when King Iames the firſt, came to his Tomb at Dunfirmling, he ſaide, That hee was a ſore Saint for the Crowne, leauing the Church ouer-rich, and the Crowne too poore. He purged his Court ſo cleane of al vicious behauiour, and diſordered cuſtomes, that it appeared to be a ſchoole of vertue. No riotous banquetting, ſurfetting cheare, or laſciuious word could be herd there, or any wanton ſignes, whereby to kindle luſt or idle concupiſcence. All the words, workes, and whole demeanor of his ſeruants, tended euer to ſome good concluſion, frée from moouing ſtrife, or a thought of ſedition: the Kings owne life and example, ſeruing for their guide and direction. He builded 15 Abbeyes (viz) Holy-Rood houſe, Kelſo, Iedburgh, Melroſſe, Newbottell, Holmecultrane, Dundranane, Cambuskenneth, Kinlois, Dunfirmling, Holme in Cumberland. Alſo two Nunneries, one at Carleill, and the other at Northe Berwike; with two Abbeyes beſide New-Caſtle, one of S. Benedictes order, and the other of

white Monks. He erected likewiſe foure Biſhoppricks in his Realme Roſſe, Brechin, Dunkeld, & Dublane: endowing them with rich rents, faire lands, and very commodious poſſeſſions.
               
                  1165
                  Malcolme, Sur-named Malcolme the Maid, becauſe his conuerſation & delight (both in minde and body) was ſo chaſte from his verie infancie, that he liued ſingle al his daies, and without mariage. Hee was Son to Prince Henry, that was ſonne and heire to King Dauid, and raigned not fully twelue yeares.
               
                  1214
                  William, Brother to King Malcolme, and for his ſinguler Iuſtice Sur-named the Lyon. In this Kings time, Richard King of England, ſur-named Cueur de Lyon, went his voyage to the Holy-Lande: King William raigned nine and forty yeares.
               
                  1249
                  Alexander the ſecond, Sonne to King William the Lyon, who cauſed his Fathers death to be mourned for thorow his whole kingdom: hee raigned 35. yeares.
               
                  1290
                  Alexander the third, ſonne to the former King Alexander, in whoſe time was a generall Counſell at Lyons in France. He raigned 42. yeares, and by reaſon of his dying without any iſſue, the controuerſie betweene Iohn Ballioll, and Robert Bruſe then happened: which was heard and cenſured by Edward the firſt,The ſeueral claimes of Iohn Baliol, and Robert Bruſe▪
                   king of England, albeit they maintained both their claimes, vpon their Titles ſeuerally, Balioll deſcending of Margaret, eldeſt Daughter to Dauid, Earle of Huntington, Brother vnto William the Lyon; and

                  Bruſe comming of Iſabell, ſecond daughter of the ſaide Earle Dauid, and the next heire male to William the Lyon, for want of ſucceſſion in the right line. By which Title (how euer Balioll is ſaide to be crowned King) Robert Bruſe inioyed the royal dignitie, in the year, 1305. He had iſſue, Dauid, that left no poſterity, and Margery, maried to Walter, Greate Stewarde of Scotland, (deſcended lineallie from the Princes of Wales, by Neſte, Daughter to Griffith
                        •
                     ap Lhewlyn, Mother to VValter, the ſonne of Fleance, made Great Stewarde of Scotland by Malcolme the fourth.) Of whom came Robert the ſecond, firſt of the ſur-name of Stuart, that bare dominion in Scotland.
               
                  Robert Stuart, being called Robert the ſecond,1250 was crowned King with Royall ſolemnitie at Scone, in the 47. yeare of his age,The firſte comming of the Stuarts to the Crowne, on the Annuntiation day of our Lady in Lent, 1370. he raigned ten years. It is recorded of this K. Robert the 2. that h
                     •
                  s Captaines & commanders were alwaies fortunat in war, neuer returning but with ſpoils and victories. He was a Prince of ſuch conſtancy in promiſe, that he ſildome ſpake the word which hee not performed. Such an obſeruer of Iuſtice was he alſo, that he would not remoue from any place, but Proclamation was firſt made, that if any of his men or officers did take any thing vnpaid for: the partie to whome the debt was due, ſhould come in, and imediatelie ſatiſfied, he willinglie heard the complaints of the poore, and was as diligent in ſeeing their wrongs redreſſed.
               
                  
                  1390
                  Iohn Stuart, Earle of Carrike, and ſonne to King Robert before named, was crowned king: but becauſe Iohn was iudged to bee an vnfortunate name for Kings, they changed it, and called him Robert,
                  The Kings name changed. after his Fathers name, and ſo hee was King Robert the third. Then was the firſt creation of Dukes in Scotland, for the king made his eldeſt Sonne Dauid, Duke of Rothſay, and his Brother Robert, Duke of Albanie; yet neyther of theſe ſonnes ſuccéeded their father, but another ſon, who was named Iames. This King Robert raigned 16. yeares.
               
                  1424
                  Iames, Sonne to King Robert, ſuccéeded his Father in the kingdome of Scotland: his Quéen was deliuered of two Sonnes at a birth, named Alexander and Iames; Alexander dyed in his infancy, but Iames liued, and ſuccéeded hys Father. This King Iames the firſt, raigned thirtéene yeares. Of whom it is written, that he was a very ſeuere and vpright Iuſticer, yet ſo milde and ſwéete of Nature, that not any of their Princes did more reuerently embrace peace at home among his ſubiects or more willingly conclude it abroad with ſtrangers, then he. His Wiſedome appeared ſo manifeſtly, in many very great and eſpeciall affaires, that Kinges of other Nations did louingly ioyne in league and friendſhip with him. He had bin ſo wel educated in all Sciences and Gentlemanly actiuity, by the carefull dilligence of the beſt Schoole-maiſters, that it coulde not be eaſily iudged, in which hee was moſt perfect: For hee was an excellent Muſitian, a rare

Poet, a moſt elequent Orator, & ſo exactly (both in minde and memory he comprehended ye depth of Diuinity and Lawe) that for all theſe (in his time) he gaue not place to any one. Laſtly, he was not onely a beauty to his Countrey, in prouiding his peoples quiet at home, but fought alſo for their defence againſt their enemies abroad.The inuention of guns in this kings time. The inuention of Gunnes happened in his time, and he cauſed diuers pieces of Artillery to be made in Flanders, one of which being a great and goodly Piece, he called the Lyon, whereon theſe verſes he cauſed to be engranen.
               
                  Illustri Iacobo Scotorum Principi digno,
                  Regs magnifico, dum fulmin
                        •
                      castra a reduce,
                  Factus ſum ſubito, nuncuper ergo Leo.
               
               
                  Iames the ſecond, ſon to King Iames the firſt,1436. being but ſixe yeares olde, ſuccéeded his Father in the Crown, and was the 103. King of Scotland from Ferguſius the firſt.The Arte of Printing found out. In this Kings time was the famous Art of Printing inuented, in the Citty of Mentz in Germany. This King raygned 24. yeares, & among his Subiects in the Camp, hee carried himſelfe ſo gently towards all men, that they ſeemed not to feare him as their King, but reuerenced and loued him like a father. Hee would ride vp and downe amongſt them, and eat and drinke with them, euen as if hee had bin fellow-like with the meaneſt.
               
                  Iames the third,1461 Sonne to King Iames the ſecond, being but ſeauen years of age, ſuccéeded his

father in the kingdome, and raigned 29. yeares.
               
                  1488.
                  Iames the fourth, ſon to King Iames the third, was crowned King of Scotland, the 24. day of Iune, 1488. he being then aged xvi. yeares. This King Iames the fourth, married the Princeſſe Margaret,
                  King Iames married the eldeſt daughter to Henry 7. King of England. eldeſt Daughter vnto Henry the ſeauenth, King of England, and raigned fiue and twenty yeares, deſeruing to be ranked and numbred amongſt the beſt princes that euer there gouerned, for his polliticke rule, and adminiſtration of Iuſtice.
               
                  1513
                  Iames the fift, being a Childe, aged one yeare, fiue moneths, and ten daies, and ſonne to king Iames the fourth, was Crowned King of Scotland, the one and twentieth day of September, 1513. his Mother the Quéene being appoynted Regent of the Realme. This King raigned 32. yeares, being an obſeruice of Iuſtice, a defender of the Law, and a ſound ſhielde for the poore and innocent, in which regard (of his Nobility) hee was called King of the Commoners. He would ſet at libertie the poore oppreſſed with the tyranny of the rich, and repreſſe the rich from ſpoyling the poore. All which he did with a kinde of ſeueritie, but yet in ſuch ſort, as therein appeared a woonderfull gentleneſſe in his naturall diſpoſition: becauſe he ſeldom did put any of them to death, but did eyther by inpriſonment, or mulct, puniſh the offence. For it was his vſuall ſaying, That he would neuer take life from any, but onelie to keepe the Lawe ſound, for example to others, and to keepe downe their boldneſſe, that dwelt

about the borders. His death was great lamented of his ſubiects, to whom he was a perfect Patron, and a louing Father.
               
                  Mary, Daughter and heire to King Iames the fift, began her raigne ouer Scotland,1542 the 18. of December, 1542. She was but ſeauen daies old when the King her Father died, and left her his kingdome, hir mother then lying in child-bed, in the Caſtle of Lithquo, of which place the Lorde Leuingſton being then Captaine, had the charge both of mother and daughter committed to him, with the mothers good liking, & frée conſent. This Q. Mary maried Frances the Dolphin of France, who after his fathers death was king of France: but King Frances dying, Mary Qu. of Scotland,
                  Mary Dowager of France returneth backe into Scotland. and Dowager of France, returned home againe into Scotland, where hir Mother had bin Regent al the time of hir abſence, I meane vntill the x. of Iune, 1560. on which day the Queen Mother of Scotland died. Afterward, Mary Q. of Scots maried Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, Earl of Roſſe, Duke of Albanie, & ſon to the Earle of Lennox, who was proclaimed king at the Market Croſſe in Edenburgh, the 28. of Iuly, 1564. and on the tenth of February, 1566. he was made Knight of the Order of S. Michael, in the Chappel of Holirood houſe, with great reuerence and ſolemnitie. In the month of Iune next folowing, the 19. day, and betwéen the houres of x. and xi. before noone, Quéene Mary was deliuered of a goodlie young Prince, who afterwarde was crowned King of Scotland, by the name of Iames the ſixt.
               
                  
                  1567
                  Iames the ſixt, Sonne to King Henry and Q. Mary, being about a yeare old, began his raigne ouer Scotland, and was crowned King thereof, the 19. of July, 1567. Hee ſuccéeded alſo in his rightfull inheritance of the Crowne of England, (after the deceaſe of Queen Elizabeth, of famous memory) the 24. day of March, 1602. gloriouſly vniting thoſe kingdomes in one, which formerly (by Brute) had bin long time deuided.
            
            
               ¶Of the Iſland of Albion, before Brutes arriuall there, and tearming it Brittaine, after his owne name; Alſo, what Kinges raigned there before he came thither.
               ¶To the Worſhipfull, Maister William Dios, Eſquire, Remembrauncer of the Honourable Citty of London.
               
                  WHether this Lande were peopled before the flood or no, it is no part of my purpoſe to argue heer thereon,Geog. Com. lib. Beroſ. ant Lib. 1.
                   albeit Dominicus Marius Niger, and Beroſus do affirme, that well as this Iſlande was inhabited with people, long before the dayes of Noah, as any other Countrey or part of ye world

beſide. But after the floud,Annius de Viter. in Cō
                     ment. ſup. 4. Lib. Beroſ. de aut. Lib. 1
                   according to Annius de Viterbo, Beroſus and others, when Noah deuided the earth among his thrée Sonnes, that part which is now knowne by the name of Aſia, fell to the lot of his eldeſt Sonne Sem; Affrica to his ſecond Sonne Cham; and Europe (withall the Iſles thereto appertaining) to his third Son Iaphet, among which, this Iſland (now called Brittaine, with other Iſles thereto belonging) was certainely numbred. Iaphet, Noahs third Sonne (by ſome called Iapetus; by others, Atlas Maurus, becauſe hee died in Mauritania) in the iudgement of Bodinus,
                  Iohannes Bodin ad fact. hiſt. cogn. auouching the conſent and authority of the Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine Writers, was the firſt that peopled the Countries of Europe, deuiding it alſo (by the Grand-fathers example) among his Sonnes,Franciſcus Tarapha. of whom Tuball (according to Tarapha) had the rule of Spaine, Gomer the Italians, and Samothes was the founder of Celtica, which contained in it (as Bale teſtifieth) a great part of Europe, but eſpecially thoſe Countries now called Gallia and Britannia, which peopling of this Iſland (by Iaphets Children) is affirmed to be 200 yeares after the floud.
               
                  Samothes, being the ſixt Sonne of Iaphet,
                  Samothes, firſt King of Celtica. Wolfang. Lazius demigr. gen.
                   and called (by Moſes) Meſech, by others, Dis, had for his portion (as Wolfangus Lazius auoucheth) the Countrey betweene the Riuer of Rhine, & the Pyrenean Mountaines, where hee founded the kingdom of Celtica, tearming his people Celtae: which name was as indifferent to them of Gallia,
                  
as to the Inhabitantes of the Iſle of Britaine. This King Samothes, is reported to bee a Man excelling all other (in that age) in learning and knowled
                     •
                  e, & that (of him) thē aroſe a ſect of Philoſophers,Lib. de Magic. ſucceſſ. Lib. 22.
                   both in Britaine & Gallia, which were cald Samothei, & as Ariſtotle and Secion do ſay, were ſurpaſſing, both in the Law of God & man, and therefore greatly addicted to religion: eſpecially them of Britaine, which not onely made the whole nation to take name of them, but, as Bale and Doctor Caius affirme, the Iſland it ſelfe was named Samothea,
                  De ant. Cāt. ce
                        •
                     t. Lib. 1. Script. Brit. ce
                        •
                     t. 1. Magus ſecond King.
                   which was the firſt peculiar name it had, before the arriuall of Albion.
               
               
                  Magus, the Sonne of Samothes, was ſecond King of Celtica after his Father. This Magus was likewiſe ſo famous for his learning, that the Perſians Magi, or Diuines, are ſaid to come of him.
               
                  Sarron third King.
                  Sarron, ſuccéeded his Father Magus, in the Countrey of Gallia, and the Iſle Samothea, of whom Diodorus Siculus reporteth, that a ſect of Philoſophers deſcended among the Celtes, who were called Sarronides.
               
               
                  Druis 4. K.
                  Druis, or (after Seneca) Dryus, raigned after his Father Sarron, indifferently ouer the Celtes and Samotheans. Of him came the Philoſphers, called Druides,
                  De bello Gal gic
                        •
                     . Lib. 9. & Lib. 6.
                   whom Caeſar anoucheth, to haue the charge of common and priuate ſacrifices, the diſcuſſing of pointes of Religion, the education of youth, the determining of matters in variance, and full power to interdict ſo many from the Sacrifices to their Gods, and ſocietie of men,

as diſobeyed their award. If any doubt aroſe in the Countries, about matters of Diſcipline; they alwayes reſorted to theſe Druides, who,Anti. Lib. 5
                   (as Humphtey Llhoyd witneſſeth) made theyr chéefeſt aboade in the Iſle now called Angleſey, and there (at all times) receiued their reſolution.
               
                  Bardus, the Sonne of Druis,
                  Bardus fift King. was the fifth King ouer the Celtes and Samotheans: a man much renowmed for inuention of Muſique and Ditties, and he made an order of Philoſophicall Poets, or Herauldes, calling them Bardi, after his owne Name. Of theſe Bardi, Nonnius; Strabo, Diodorus, Stephanus. Bale, and Sir Iohn Price doe thus record. That they vſed to Regiſter the Noble exploits of auncient Captaines, and to draw the pedegrées and Genealogies of ſuch as were liuing. They did ſo excell, in ſinging ſwéete Songes and Ditties to theyr Harpes, that, if two Armies had béene ready to ioyne battaile, and any one of theſe Bards (by fortune) entred among them; they had not the power to ſtrike, vntill he left ſinging, and went from the Armies.
               When Bardus was deceaſed, the Celts began to affect liberty,The Celtes ſubiected by Albion the Gyant. and (addicting themſelues to pleaſure and ydleneſſe) would liue no longer vnder the ſtrict orders of their auncient Kinges: which brought them the ſooner vnder ſubiection to the Gyant Albion, who ſtraited Celtica and the Celtes, within the boundes of Gallia, tearming this Iſland (formerly called

                  Samothea) Albion, according to his owne name, and ſubdued the people; albeit the Title of Samotheans (according to the iudgement of diuers Writers) had continued from Samothes to Albion, the ſpace of 310. yeares. This Albion was the fourth Sonne of Neptune, whom Moyſes calleth Nepthuim, and who did put his ſaid Son in poſſeſſion of this Iſland, by conquering the Samotheans,
                  Bergion ruled in Ireland. as he did the like to his other Sonne, named Bergion, in Ireland and the Orkenies, which were brought vnder his obeyſance. Concerning the Hiſtorie of Hercules Lybicus, (whom Moyſes nameth Laabin) his Conqueſts in Spaine, his paſſage into Italy againſt Leſtrigo, and laſtly his killing Albion and his Brother Bergion; it being nothing incident to my preſent purpoſe, I leaue it. Alſo the Story of Danaus Daughters, being fifty in number, that they ſhould arriue in this Iſland (after the ſlaughter of their Huſbandes, the fifty Sonnes of King Aegyptus) and that one of thoſe Ladies ſhould bee named Albina, of whom this Land ſhould bée called Albion: I paſſe it ouer likewiſe, and will now procéede to the knowne Hiſtory of Brute. Yet not daring to enter into ſo rich a Mine of hidden treaſure, till being guided by the Light of Brittaine (the learned labour of a worthy Gentleman and Antiquarie, Maiſter Henry Lyte of Lyteſcarie, Eſquire, and which (with his owne hand) hée preſented to our late Soueraigne Quéene and matchleſſe Miſtreſſe, on the day when ſhee came in royall manner to Paules
                  
Church) I be guided therein for my better direction, vſing his owne words.
            
            
               The Light of Britaine.
               
                  
                     BRitannia Maior (the Countrey of the bright Britona,
                  Britania of Britona, and Britomartis called Britomartis, the preſident of Britaine) that is to ſay, the chaſt Diana of Calydonia ſylua: Astrorum decus; Syluarum dea; casta et innupta; cuſtos, et cultrix nemorum; metuenda Ʋirago; terror ſylueſtribus apris. This Britannia maior, was firſt found by Brute of Albania; the Conqueror of the Greeks; the mightie deliuerer of the Troyans, and firſt founder of the Noble Britaines. Who by the Oracle of the bright Britona,
                  Diana Britonas Oracle. Albania. Calydonia. Aetolia. called Diana of Calydonia ſylua (Aſtrorum decus) brought the remaines of the Albanian Troyans of Aſia, from Albania Calydonia ſylua, & Aetolia in Greece; to Albania Calydonia ſylua, and Aetolia in Briraine. Before whoſe moſt happy and fortunate arriuall, there was neither Towne, Citty, Countrey, Riuer, Region, or place of name in Britannia: for Britannia (at Brutes arriuall) was no Britannia, but a rude and ſolitary Deſert or wilderneſſe, without name, Ferarum altrix,
                  Britannia a Wildernes. Ferarum altrix.
                   a verie nurſery or place of ſtore for wilde Beaſtes. The Countries and Regions of Britayne, were then all ouer-growne with Woodes, repleniſhed with all kindnes of ſauage and cruell beaſts; as Lyons, Beares, Wolues, Foxes, wild Boares,

and all other game belonging to the Chaſe. Beſide diuers other kind of wilde Beaſtes and Cattell; eſpecially a certaine kinde of white monſterous wilde Buls and Kine,Wilde Buls and Kine. with long ſhagd curled haire and maines, which kind of Cattel were as fierce and cruell, as Lyons, and could neuer be tamed by mans art; as you may finde it regiſtred and recorded in our ancient Chronicles, and noted in the very common Dictionaries, vppon theſe wordes Caledonia, and Caledonia ſylua Britanniae, alwayes miſtaken, and corruptly Written Caledonia, for Calydonia: becauſe the reaſon why our Countrey was firſt called Caledonia ſylua, was no better knowne to the auncient Romaines in Iulius Caeſars time, then it is (at this day) knowne to dyuers of our Antiquaries and Chronicles of Britayne. For one deriueth Caledonia ſylua, from Calden, and another fetcheth Calydonia ſylua, from Kaled: But the ones faire Daughter Kaled, is too young to bee the Mother of Calydon, or Calydonia ſylua Britanniae; And the others Calden, or Hazellſticke, is as weake to be the Mother of Calydon. For Calydon,
                  
                     Calydon was the ſon of Aetolus. Mars the father of Etolus.
                     Parthaon & Britona.
                   of whom Calydonia ſylua, by Aetolia in Greece tooke name, was the Sonne of Aetolus, who was the Sonne of Mars, the God or Patron of battaile. Mars was the father of Aetolus, of Parthaon, & of the bright Britona called Britomaris, the preſident of Britayne.
               
               
                  Aetolus, the Sonne of Mars, and Brother to bright Britona, was Father of Calydon, of whom Calydonia ſylua, by Aetolia in Greece,
                  
(Mother of our Calydonia ſylua, the generall name of all Britayne) tooke name: but eſpecially of Calydonia ſylua ſecunda, which is Scotland, called Britannia ſecunda. In which part of Brytaine, at this day, is the moſt ancient Towne of Parthaon, now called Perth;
                  Parthaon, now Perth in Aetolia. Aetolia, now Athol. and Saint Iohns Towne, the principall Towne of Aetolia, now called Atholl, a Region or Countrey of Britannia, Albania, or Calydonia ſylua ſecunda, where the great Calydon Wood,Calydon wood. which beginneth at Striueling (called the Dolorus Mount) runneth foorth thorough Mentieth and Stratherne, to Aetolia (that fruitefull Region of Grampius Mount) which reacheth to Lochquhaber,
                  Calydoniū Cathneſſe. and to Calydonium Promontorium, which is Cathneſſe or Orcha, the angle, point, cape, foreland or lands end of Scotland.
               
               This Calydonia ſylua Brytannia, was the daughter of Calidonia ſylua,
                  Calydon. by Aetolia in Greece who tooke his originall from Calydon the Sonne of Aetolus. Aetolia,
                  Aetolia. now called Atholl in Britayne, is the Daughter of Aetolia, a Citty of Albania, and Calydonia ſylua in Greece, ſo called of Aetolus the Sonne of Mars. Parthaon,
                  Parthaon. now called Perth, or Saint Iohns Towne, the principall Towne of Aetolia in Scotland, tooke his glorious name of Parthaon, the Brother to bright Britona, called Britomaris, the preſident Brytaine: Of whome, all Britannia (contayning all the Countries and Regions of England, Scotland, Wales, and Cornewall, called by Alexander Necham, in his book De diuina ſapientia,

Bruti tellus) took the moſt glorious name of Britaine.
               
               
                  Britannia of Britona.For Brute of Albania, the Founder of Brittaine, came to this Iſle by the Oracle of Britona, called Diana of Calydonia ſylua: therefore hee called this Iſle of Britannia, of the bright Britana, &c. The ſame Brute alſo, who was borne in Albania,
                  Albania of Albania. banniſhed to Albania, and the firſt founder of Britayne called Albania; called all our Countrey of Britayne, Albion, ſeu Albania: not of the White Rockes and Cliftes, as ſome men ſuppoſe, but of Albania in Aſia, and Albania Epiri in Greece, the Countrey of Helenus and Andromache, Quéene of Albania Epiri, from whence, Brute of Albania brought the Albanian Troyans, the founders of Britayne.
               
               
                  Chronicles and written Records of Brute.To approue what formerly hath béene ſayde, without any néede of repetition, wée haue a multitude of moſt glorious Recordes and Chronicles, Written and Printed, confirmed by the Teſtimony of Iulius Caeſar, by Pope Eleutherius; by a Parliament holden at Norham vppon Twede; and another at Lincolne, in the time of King Edward the firſt, who, by his Letters ſent from Lyncolne 
                  
                     •
                  o Pope Boniface, dooth approoue Brutes
                  ▪ Hiſtorie to bee no F
                     •
                  
                  ble: as ſome Criticks of our time haue done, who will not beleeue our ancient written Records, although confirmed by Emperors, Kings, Popes, and Parliamentes, neyther the Teſtimony of Strangers. Wherefore, by the Oracle of Diana, called Britomartis, the Preſident of Britayne
                  ▪
                  
and by the Oracle of Diana Lucifera, that is to ſay, Venus, called Boſphorus, the bright Quéen of Phrygia, and Caria, Mother of Eneas, and the Graces, of whom came Brute of Albania, founder of Britaine, who brought in Carius, a Noble Prince of Lydia and Caria, with the people of Caria, and Swannes of Carie in Britaine: By the Oracles aforeſaide, the Swans of Carie in Britaine, are now ſtirred vp to maintain the verity of the Brittiſh Hiſtory. The Goddes of the Gentiles, whoſe Temples our fore-fathers (of the Troyan race) erected in diuers Countries and regions of Britaine: eſpecially at Troia-noua,
                  Dianas Temple at Troia noua now called London in Britaine, where the Troynouants did ſometimes Sacrifice Buls, Bullocks,Diana Tauropolia, Theonte
                        •
                      Dea. and Stags, to Diana Tauropolia, whome the Gentiles called the Quéene of Heauen: whych was the ſame Diana called Bellona, whome the Brigantes honoured at Yorke, Brigantium Ciuitas. And what were theſe Brigantes, I pray ye?Diana Bellona of Yorke. 
                  Herodian ſaith, that the Briges, Phryges, and Brigantes were all one. Whereupon I conclude, that the Brigantes, that is to ſay, our Northerne Britaines, were Phrygian Troyans.
                  Briges. Phryges. Brigantes. The Brigantes of Brittaine, are the people of Yorkſhire, Richmondſhire, Lancaſhire, Dutham, weſtmerland and Cumberland, hard to the Pictes Wall, where the Abij and Picti Agathyrſi dwell, about Abus Aeſtuariū, now called Humber.
                  Abus Aeſtuarium. And what were thoſe Abij, but Albanian Troyans, that came alſo from Abus, a Riuer of Albania Epiri? And the auncient Brittaines, called Picti Agathyrſi,
                  
what were they? Euen Scythian Troyans of Albania,
                  Abij Alba
                     
                        •
                     i Agathyrſi who ſprang of Scythes and Agathyrſus, the Sonnes of Hercules, that ſometime raigned in Troy: for the famous Cittie of Troy in Phrygia, the head of all Aſia, was in Scythia.
               
               
                  Troyans, called Taurini, & Tauroſcythi.The noble Troyans were called Taurini, and Tauroſcythi, of a famous mountaine of Aſia, called Tau
                        •
                     us Mount, which runneth thorough all Aſia; a great part of the Mountain Taurus endeth in Caria which is a countrey of Aſia belonging to Troy.
                  Taurus the manſion of Venus. 
                  Venus, called Boſphorus, the mother of Eneas and the Graces (of whome came Brute of Albania, the founder of Britaine) was Quéen of Phrygia and Caria. The famous Riuer of Maeander is in Caria, which riuer hath Golden ſands and ſinging Swannes, that ſometime ſerued Venus, Quéen of Phrygia and Caria: wherefore the Swans of Caria, and Signets of Troy in Britaine, muſt alwayes ſing of Troy & Troyans.
                  Riuers of Britaine, are Recordes of Brute. The daughters of heauen and earth, Iſis, Themis, Rhea, Thetis, Abus, Arius, Alanus, Ax, Tameres, and all our famous Riuers of Britain, with the Deucalion Sea, and Iſlandes of Brittaine, eſpecially Archadia, Aemonia, & Arachne are glorious records of Brute and the Troyans, the founders of Britaine. Diuers our moſt ancient Citties and Townes of Britaine, as Oxford vpon Iſis and Themis, Troia-noua vppon Iſis, Themis,
                  Towns and Citties, Recordes of Brute. and Rhea Albanorum; Yorke, Brigantium ciuitas; Antandros, turned to S. Andros; Parthaon, Perthe, turned to Saynt Iohns Town, Albanum ciuitas, turned to S. Albanes,

Cheſter, and Doriſceſtria, with the auncient Townes of Derby and Leiceſter; and Tyanton vpon Tamares Riuer of Britaine, with diuers other Townes and Citties of Britaine, are Records of Brute and the Troyans, Founders of Britaine.
               The diuers Nations and people of Britaine,Diuers Nations and people of Britain, Recordes of Brute. as the Troy-nouants, Brigantes, Scotobrigantes, the people of Albania, Calydonia, and Aetolia; the Iberi, the Albani, and Georgij, the people of Derbie and Leyceſter, the people of Cheſter, that came from Ceſtria Epiri, with the Dores, loues, and Cares, and the Tamarites of Tyanton, commonly called Tanton: All theſe are Records of the Noble people of Greece and Aſia, the remaines of the Troyans that came into to Britaine with Brute.
               
               To theſe, adde a Catalogue or Regiſter,Princes, Noblemen, and Gentlemen Recordes of Brute. of the ancient Princes, Noblemen, and Gentlemen of Britaine, whereof there are ſome remaining to this verie day, beginne wee then thus. Brute, Corineus, Locrine, Camber, Albanacte, Madan, Mempricius, Ebranke, and hys twentie Sonnes, Brute Greenſheild, Aſſaracus, and Cecilius, &c. Belinus and Brennus, Cambra, or Cambria, Antenors Wife, Cambra, Belinus Daughter, Conidagus King of Albania, ſlewe Morgan at Glammorgan. Conidagus builded ye Temple of Minerua at Bangor in Wales, & the temple of Mars at Parthaon, now S. Iohns town of Aetolia in Scotland. Aruiragus, in whoſe

dayes, a Ioſeph of Aramithia, preached in Brittaine. Leile, Androgeus, Brother to Caſſibelanus; this Androgeus let Iulius Caeſar into Brittaine. Pirrhus, Alexander Arcadius, Alexander Audax, Achaius, Etolus, Helena, Coile, Conſtantine; Graye, Perſie, Dercie, Carie, Buſir, or Bouſir, Cicell, Cydne, Dennis, Bridgis, Andros, Carowe, Caros, Tracie, Rheſe ap Rheſus; Oen, or Owen, King of Calydon, Brent the ſon of Hercules. Thinn, Euance, Bryce, Hil, Drake, Calais, Nele, Gryne, Dorill, Hodie, Crane, &c. Theſe and infinite more beſide, whiche Brute brought with him from the Countries of Iſis and Themis, and from Albania, Calydonia Sylua, and Etolia in Greece, to Albania, Calydonia Sylua, and Etolia in Britaine, are vndoubted records of him and the Troyans, Founders of Britaine.
               
               Thus much out of Maiſter Lytes Light of Brittaine, which worthy Gentleman being deceaſed, his Son Maiſter Thomas Lyte, of Lyteſcarie, Eſquire, a true immitator and heyre to his Fathers Vertues, hath (not long ſince) preſented the Maieſty of King Iames, with an excellent Mappe or Genealogicall Table (contayning the bredth and circumference of twenty large ſhéets of Paper) which he entitleth Brittaines Monarchy, approouing Brutes Hiſtory, and the whole ſucceſſion of this our Nation, from the very Original, with the iuſt obſeruation of al times, changes and occaſions therein happening. This worthy worke, hauing coſt aboue ſeauen yeares labour,

beſide great charges and expence, his highneſſe hath made very gracious acceptance of, and to witneſſe the ſame, in Court it hangeth in an eſpeciall place of eminence. Pitty it is, that this Phoenix (as yet) affoordeth not a fellowe, or that from priuacie, it might not bee made more generall: but, as his Maieſty hath graunted him priuiledge, ſo, that the world might be woorthie to enioy it, whereto, if friendſhip may preuaile, as he hath bin already, ſo ſhall he be ſtill as earneſtly ſollicited.
               
                  Brute, the ſonne of Siluius, hauing vnfortunately ſlaine his father in hunting,Brute ſlewe his Father Siluius. as he ſhot his Arrow at a Deare, was therefore banniſhed his Countrey, whereupon he went into Grece, where a great number of the Troyans (liuing before in ſeruitude) reſorted to him, and by his valour hee gaue them liberty, by conquerring Pandraſus, King of that Country, who was deſcended of the Noble Achilles. Hee compelled him alſo, to let him haue his faire Daughter Innogen in marriage, with furniture, money, victuals, and Shipping, wherewith (after many hard aduentures) paſſing along the ſtraits of Gibralterra,
                  Brute met with Corineus. and coaſting along the ſhore on the right hand: hee met with Corineus, and another company, that came with him from Troy likewiſe with Antenor. Ioyning then their powers together, they ſayled on, til arriuing within the riuers mouth of Loire, which deuideth Aquitaine from Celtike Gallia, (ſuppoſed to bee Gaſcoigne) they landed in the Dominions of a King, called Goffarius, and

Surnamed Pictus, by reaſon hee was deſcended of the people of Agathyiſi, who were other-wiſe termed Picts. King Goffarius with his men dyd ſharply reſiſt thoſe new commers, but ſuſtayned the worſt twice,Brutes reſiſtance in Gallia. & in the laſt conflict, Brutes Nephew (named Turnus) was ſlaine; in whoſe memory Brute builded there a City, which (to this day) is called Tours in Touraigne. Departing thence, he and his traine came to the Iſle of Britaine, and landed at the hauen, now called Totneſſe, Anno. 2855. and after the deſtruction of Troy 66. before the building of Rome,Brutes landing in Albion. 
                  368. years which was before our Sauiours natiuity, 1116. almoſt ended. He found this land deſolate, ſauing a few Giants, who in ſhort time were vanquiſhed: for Corineus wraſtled with the ſtrongeſt of them, named Goemagot or Gogmagog, at a place beſide Doner, where hee caſt him headlong downe from one of the rockes in regard whereof, the place is called Gogmagogs Leap or fal. Brute builded London,
                  The building of London. calling it Troy-newydh, or Troia-noua. He begate on his wife Innogen, 3. ſons, among whom he deuided his kingdome before his death. To Locrine, who was the eldeſt, hee gaue the middle part, calling it Loegria, or Loegiers.
                  The deuiſion of Brittaine by Brute, to his ſonnes. To Camber his ſecond ſonne, he gaue the weſt part of the Iſland, calling it Cambria or Cymbry, deuided from Loegria, by the riuer Seuerne. To his third ſon Albanact, he gaue al the North part, entitling it Alban or Albania, according alſo to his name. To Corineus his deare eſtéemed friende and companion, hee gaue that

part of the Land, which (after him) to this day is called Corinwall. Laſtly, when he had gouerned this land 24. yeares. Hee died and was buried at that new Citty which he had builded. Anno ante incarnat. Chriſti, 1132.
               
               
                  Locrine, after his Father Brutes death, was king of Loegria, and Lorde Paramount of the whol Iſland of Britain. In his time, Humber or Humyr, King of the Hunnes entered into Albania, and ſlew Albanact.
                  The death of Albanact But Locrine and Camber, to reuenge their brothers death, met in Arms with Humber, neere to an arme of the Sea, that parted Loegria and Albania: where killing him in the fight, they threw his body into the water, which in memory of his name, is yet called Humber. Locrine married Guendolen, Daughter to Corineus, but falling in loue with Eſtrilde, a ſtrange Lady in King Humbers Campe: hee reiected his wife, which cauſed her to raiſe an army againſte him. In triall of that fight. Locrine was ſlaine, and Guendolen drowned Eſtrilde,
                  The death of k. Locrine with her Daughter Sabrine, or Hauren, in the Riuer of Seuerne, ſo called after her name. Locrine raigned twenty yeares, and left a Sonne, named Madan.
               
               
                  Madan, ſonne of Locrine and Guendolen, began his raigne ouer the Britons, an. mundi, 2909 He vſed great tyranny among his people, & builded Madancaiſtre, now called Dancaſter.
                  Madan deuoured by Wolues. Hauing ruled this land 40. yeares, hee was deuoured of Wolues & other wild beaſts, as he was abroad in hunting. He left 2. ſons, Mempricius & Manlius.
               
               
                  
                  2949
                  Mempricius, eldeſt ſonne of Madan, ſuccéeded his Father, and ſlew his Brother Manlius, for better confirmation of his gouernement. He fell into vnlawfull luſting after women, ſo that hee forced his peoples wiues and daughters: and albeit he had a wife and many Concubines, yet he vſed the abhominable ſinne of Sodome.
                  Memprecius deuoured by wild beaſts. So that becomming hatefull both to God and man, being one day loſt of his people, as he was hunting, hee (as his father) was eaten of wilde beaſtes, after he had raigned 20. yeares.
               
                  2969
                  Ebranke, ſonne of Mempricius by his lawfull wife, ſuccéeded in rule ouer the Britons. Hee had one and twenty wiues, on whom he begat twenty Sonnes, and thirty Daughters. He was the firſt Prince of this Land, that euer inuaded Gallia, now called France, from whence he returned with great riches and triumph.The building of York Hee builded the Citty of Caerbranke nowe called Yorke, about the 14. yeare of his raigne: & in Albania or Scotland, hee builded alſo the Caſtle of Maidens, and the Cittie of Alclud. He gouerned Brittain very nobly forty yeares, and lieth buried at Caerbranke or Yorke.
               
               
                  3009
                  Brute Tarianlas, or Greeneſhield, Sonne of Ebranke, ſuccéeded his Father in the regiment of Brittaine. Hee ſought to bring all Gallia vnder his ſubiection, and (ſome do auouch) that hee performed it, albeit Brinchild gaue him a great foile in Henault. He raigned twelue yeares, and was buried by his father at Yorke.
               
               
                  3021
                  Leill, the ſonne of Brute Greenſhield, raigned

after his Father. He builded the Citty called Caerleil, that is to ſay, Leill his Citty,The building of Carleill. or the Citty of Leill, and repaired alſo Carleon, now called Cheſter, which is ſaide to bee built before Brutes entrance into this land, by a Gyant named Leon Gauer. Leill raigned 25. yeares, and was buried at Carleill.
               
               
                  Lud, or Ludhurdibras, the Son of Leill,
                  3046. ruled Britaine after his Father. He builded the Citty of Kaerkin, now called Canterbury;
                  The building of Cā
                     terbury, Wincheſter and Shaftſbury. the Citty of Caerguent, now called Wincheſter, and Mount Paladour, now cald Shaftsbury: Aquila, a Prophet or Bardh of the Britiſh nation, wrote diuers Propheſies concerning the building of Shaftsbury▪ Lud raigned 29. yeares, and was buryed at Canterbury.
               
               
                  Baldus, or Bladus, ſon of Lud-hurdibras,
                  3085 ſuccéeded his Father in the rule of Brittaine. Hee was ſkilfull in the Sciences of Aſtronomy and Nigromancy: he builded the Citty of Caerbran, now called Bathe, and made there hot Bathes;The building of Bath though William of Malmsbury is of ye mind that Iulius Caeſar made thoſe baths: which cannot bée ſo, becauſe Iulius Caeſar neuer went ſo farre that way into the Land. This Bladud was ſo proud of his art, that he would needes preſume to fly in the aire: but hee fell on the Temple of Apollo in Troy-nouant, and was there torne in pieces, hauing raigned twenty yeares.
               
                  Leir, the Son of Bladud,
                  3105. followed his Father in Britaines gouernment, being a Prince of moſt Noble Nature, and gouerned his Subiectes very

royally.The building of Leirceſter, on the Riuer of Sore. He builded the Towne of Caerleir, now called Leirceſter. And becauſe the Hiſtory of his thrée Daughters, Gonorill, Regan, & Cordeilla, with their ſeuerall marriages to Henuinus, duke of Cornewall, Maglanus, Duke of Albania, and Agauippus prince of Gallia, is very wel known, and all the fortunes thereto belonging; I am the eaſier induced to paſſe it ouer, with all the troubles happening to King Leir, through his owne weakneſſe. Leir raigned forty yeares, and was buried at Leirceſter.
               
               
                  3155
                  Cordeilla, youngeſt daughter to K. Leir, ſuccéeded as Quéen and Gouerneſſe of Britain; but her two Nephewes, Cunedagius and Morgan, ſons to hir, as vnkind Siſters, made ſhort hir time of gouernment, after the deceaſe of her Huſband Aganippus. For they impriſoning her, and ſhee being a Lady of vnconquerable courage: gréefe, and deſpaire of liberty, made her there to ſlay her ſelfe, after ſhe had ruled fiue yeares.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     150.
                  Cunedagius and Morgan, deuided the whole land between them,Britaine deuided the ſecond time after Cordeillas death. But enuy and couetous deſire in either, to rule alone, raiſed them in armes againſt each other, & Morgan was ſlaine in Cambria by Cunedagius, and the place of his death is yet called Glan-Morgan, Morgans land, he not hauing raigned aboue two yeares with his Brother: who afterward builded thrée temples,Cunedagius builded 3. Temples. one to Mars, at Perth in Scotland, another to Mercury, at Bangor in Cambria, and the third to Apollo in Cornwall. He raigned 33. yeares, and was buried at Troy-nouant.
               
               
                  
                  Riuallus, Son of Cunedagius,
                  3203. next ruled Britaine, in whoſe time it rained blood 3. daies together, which blood engendered ſuch multitudes of Horſeflies,The building of Rome. that many people were ſtung to death by them. In his time was the City of Rome builded: he raigned 46. yeares, & was buried at York.
               
               
                  Gurguſtius, ſon of Riuallus, raigned 37. years.3249
               
               
                  Syſillius, or Cecilius, Brother of Gurguſtius,
                  3287 
                  49. yeares.
               
                  Iago, or Lago, Cozin to Gurguſtius,
                  3336 twentie eight yeares.
               
                  Kinimacus, or Kinmarus, Son of Siſillius,
                  3364 
                  54. yeares.
               
                  Corbodug, Son of Kinimacus, 43. yeares,3418 or (by ſome) 62. yeares.
               
                  Ferrex and Porrex, Sons or Gorbodug,
                  3476. raigned ioyntly, till ambition deuided them, & Ferrex being ſlaine in battaile, the Mother of them both wrought (afterward) the death of Porrex. After which, great troubles endured for the ſpace of fifty yeares, for the Sole-Monarchie of this land became then a Pentarchie,The Pentarchy of fiue Kings: as deuided betwixt fiue Kinges or Rulers: And héere ended the line of Brute.
               
               
                  The Pentarchy.
                  
                     1. Rudacus. King of Cambria or Wales.
                  
                  
                     2. Cloton. King of Cornewall.
                  
                  
                     3. Pinnor. King of Loegria.
                  
                  
                     4. Staterus. King of Aibania.
                  
                  
                     5. Yewan, or Owen. King of Northumberland.
                  
               
               
                  
                  3529
                  Mulmutius Dunwallo, the Sonne of Cloton, who was allowed for moſt rightfull Heire, hee ſuccéeded as Sole-Monarch of Britaine, after his Father. This Mulmutius builded a Temple in Troy-nouant, cald ye Temple of Peace, which ſome do hold to be that ancient monument, called Blackwell-Hall.
                  
                     The building of Blackwell hall.
                     Malmsbury and the vies builded. Mulmutius Lawes.
                   He builded alſo two Townes, Malmsbury and the Vies, and was the firſt king that was crowned with a Crowne of Gold. He made diuers good Lawes, which long time after were called Mulmutius lawes, being turned out of Britiſh into Latine, by Gildas Priſcus, & (long time after) tranſlated out of Latine into Engliſh, by Alfred K. of England, and mingled among his ſtatutes.The 4 high waies of England. The beginning of ſanctuary. He began to make the foure great high waies of Britain, and gaue priueledges to Temples, Ploughes, Citties, & high waies leading to them, ſo that whoſoeuer fled to them, ſhould bee in ſafety from bodily harme, and thence he might depart without preiudice to his perſon. In regard that he was the firſt king crowned with a golden Crowne, moſt writers giue him the name of the firſt King of Britaine, And among his other ordinances,Waights & meaſures to buy and ſell by. he firſt appointed weights and meaſures whereby men ſhould buy and ſel, and deuiſed very ſeuere puniſhments for Theft. He raigned 40 yeares, and was buried at Troy-nouant.
               
               
                  3574
                  Brennus and Belinus, the Sonnes of Mulmutius, had (in their Fathers life time) the Land once more deuided betwéene them: Belinus enioying Loegria,
                  Britaine againe diuided. 
                  Wales, & Cornwall: and Brennus all the Countries ouer and beyonde Humber.
                  
But when Brennus grew couetous to exceed his portion, and ſought to compaſſe it by forraine aſſiſtance, he was enforced to flight, and Belinus quietly ſeated in the whole poſſeſſion. Then finiſhed he the foure high-waies of Britaine, which his Father had begunne, which were called,
                     The names of the foure high wayes of England. Belines-gate.
                     The building of the Tovver of London.
                   the Foſſe, Watling-ſtreete, Erming-ſtreete, and Hiknel-ſtreete, confirming to them the priuileges which his Father had formerly granted. He builded the Hauen called Belines-gate, and a Caſtle alſo Eaſt-ward from that Gate, called (long time after) Belines Caſtel, but is the ſame, which we now call the Tower of London: Hee raigned twenty ſixe yeares, and was buried in Troy-nouant.
               
               
                  Gurguintus, the Son of Belinus,
                  3596 ſuccéeded in Britaine after his Father. He ſubdued Denmark, and made them pay tribute to Brittaine: In his daies was the Towne of Cambridge,
                  The foundation of Cambridge. with the Vniuerſity, firſt founded by Cantaber a Spanyard, according to Caius. Hee raigned 19. yeares, and was buried at Troy-nouant.
               
               
                  Guintholinus, Sonne to Gurguintus,
                  3614 raigned after his Father, beeing marryed to a vertuous Lady, named Mertia, who deuiſed certaine Lawes, which afterward were tearmed Mercian Lawes. He ruled 27. yeares, and was buried at Troy-nouant.
               
               
                  Sicilus, Sonne to Guintholinus,
                  3657 raigned after his Father, albeit hee was then but ſeauen yeares old, but his Mother Mertia had both the gouernment of his perſon, and of the Realme,

in which time ſhee deuiſed thoſe Lawes before mentioned. It is ſaide, that then the Picts arriued in Brittaine, and poſſeſſed thoſe partes, which now are the Marches of England and Scotland:The arriual of the Picts. hee raigned ſeauen yeares, and was buried at Troy-nouant.
               
               
                  3663.
                  Kimarus, Sonne of Sicilius, raigned thrée yeares.
               
                  3669
                  Elanius, Sonne of Kimarus, raigned ſeauen yeares.
               
                  3670
                  Morindus, Baſtard Son of Elanius; In his time a came a wonderful Monſter out of the Iriſh Seas, that deſtroyed many people, and the King in fighting with the ſaid monſter, was deuoured by him: hauing raigned ſixe yeares.
               
                  3676
                  Gorbouianus, firſt Sonne of Morindus, who builded the town of Grantham, raignd 10. years.
               
                  3686
                  Archigallus, Elidurus, Vigenius, and Peridurus, being all likewiſe the Sonnes of Morindus, raigned ſeuerally in Brittaine, by great contentions, all their times ſcarcely reaching to 27. years, yet Elidurus was crowned King three times, ech after other. But no ſooner died Elidurus (a King of moſt milde and princely nature) but there paſſed aboue 185. yeares, betweene the ſaid Elidurus, and the beginning of King Luds raigne, in which time there raigned 33. Kinges:33. Kinges betwixt Elidurus and Lud. of whoſe names and rule, Authors doe ſo diſagrée, that I paſſe them ouer, and come to King Helie, who was the laſt of thoſe 33. Kings, who gaue name to the Iſle of Elie,
                  The Iſle of Ely. builded a goodly pallace there, with reparatiens of the Sluces, Ditches, & Cauſies

about the Iſle, for conuayance away of the water, yet he raigned not fully a yeare.
               
                  Lud, eldeſt ſon to King Hely,
                  3895 ſucceeded in Britaines gouernment. He encloſed Troy-nouant with a Wall made of lime and ſtone, and fortified with diuers faire townes; building alſo a gate in the weſt part of the wall,Luds-gate. which he cald Luds-gate. He erected likewiſe a goodly Pallace, ſomewhat néere to Luds-gate, which is now the Byſhop of Londons Pallace, and (in méere affection to the Citty) hee altered the name thereof from Troy-nouant, & called it Caer-Lud,
                  Troy-nouant altered to Luds Towne. that is Luds Towne
                  ▪ ſince when, corruption hath tearmed it London. K. Lud raigned 11. yeares, & was buried néere Lud-gate. He left two ſons, named Androgeus & Tenancius, whoſe minority in yeares made them vncapable of gouernment.
               
                  Caſſibaline, Brother to K. Lud,
                  3508 was admitted King of Britaine, or rather Ruler and Protectour of the Land, during his Nephewes nonage. In the 8. yeare of his raigne, Iulius Caeſar (with his Romans) came into Britain,
                  The Romā comming into Britain with Caeſar. wher being wearied (at firſt) with a ſharp battell, & (after that) his nauy well-néere deſtroyed by a ſudden tempeſt; hee returned back into Gallia or France. But ye next ſpring (being the year before Chriſt 51.) he croſſed the ſeas againe with a greater army, and compelled Caſſibelane to conſent, that Brittaine ſhould become tributary to the Romains. Then raigned foure Kings in Kent, Cingetorix, Taximagulus,
                  Four Kings in Kent. 
                  Caruilius, & Segonax, all whoſe power could not withſtand Caeſar: whoſe preuailing thus in Britaine,
                  
was Anno mundi, 3913. and after Brute, 1060. Caſſibelane raigned 17. yeares.
               
                  3921
                  Tenantius, Luds youngeſt Sonne, ſuccéeded as lawfull King of Brittaine, becauſe his Brother Androgeus had aſſiſted Caeſar, againſt Caſſibelane: He raigned 23. years, and was buried at London.
               
               
                  3944
                  Kymbeline, or Cimbeline, Son to Tenantius, ſuccéeded after his Fathers deceaſe. In his time was the Sauiour of the World,The birth of Ieſus Chriſt our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, borne of the euer-bleſſed virgine Marie: Kymbeline raigned 35. yeares.
               
                  Guiderius, eldeſt Sonne to Kymbaline, was King of Britaine,
                  The year of Chriſt in the yeare of our Lorde after his incarnation 17. Hee, iudging the Romaines tribute to bée vniuſt,17 denied to pay it. This Guiderius was ſlaine at Portcheſter,
                  Guideruis ſlaine at Portcheſter. valiantly reſiſting againſt Claudius & his Romains, where one Hamo, who was on the Romans ſide, attired him ſelfe like a Britain, changed his ſhield and armor, and ſo entring the thickeſt of the Britiſh hoſt, cam at laſt where the K. was, and ſo ſlew him. But Aruiragus, Brother to Guiderius, perceiuing this villainy, cauſed himſelf preſently to be clad in the kings coat, armor, and other furniture, whereby the Kings death was ſcarcely diſcerned. He renewed the fight with ſuch vndaunted courage, ye 
                  Claudius was beat backe to his ſhips, & Homo to the next adioyning Woods, whether Aruiragus purſued him, and ſlew him ere he could get off the hauen, caſting him peece-meal into the ſea, which Hauen (in memory of his name) was euer after

called Hamans Hauen,How South hampton became ſo named. afterward by corruption) Hampton Hauen, and now (at this day) commonly called Southampton. Guiderius raigned 23. or (after others) 29. yeares.
               
                  Aruiragus, youngeſt Sonne to Kymbeline,
                  46 ſuccéeded his Brother, as King of Brittaine. In his time, Veſpaſian came into Britaine, landing at Sandwich or Richborough. Alſo, about the yeare of Chriſt,Ioſeph of Arimathia came into Brittaine. 
                  53. and while this Aruiragus raigned, Ioſeph of Arimathia was ſent by Phillip the Apoſtle into Brittain: and one Simon Zelotes came then thether alſo. Then began Brittaine to be gouerned by Romaine Lieutenantes and Treaſurers. Aruiragus raigned 28. yeares,Britain gouerned by Romayne. Deputies. dyed in the yeare of Grace, 73. and was buried at Gloceſter.
               
               
                  Marius, ſonne of Aruiragus, ſuccéeded his father in the State, and then came the Picts,
                  73 with Roderick their King, into this land:The Pictes comming into Britain but Roderick was ſlaine by Marius, and his people vanquiſhed. In memory of which victory againſt the Picts, Marius erected a Stone, where the battell w
                     •
                  s fought, whereon was engragen Marij victoria. The Stone was ſet vppon Staneſmoore, and the whole Country thereabout, taking name of this Marius, was cald Weſtmaria, now Weſtmerland. Marius raigned 53. yeares,Weſtmaria, Weſtmerland. and was buried at Carleill.
               
               
                  Coilus, Sone of Marius, was (after his Fathers death) King of Britaine,
                  125 hauing bin educated among the Romaines, which made him pay them the tribute all the time of his raigne. Hee

builded the Towne of Colicheſter in Eſſex,
                  Colcheſter builded. now called Colcheſter: he raigned 55. yeares, departed this life at Yorke, and lieth there buried, as ſome ſay, but others, at Co
                        •
                     lcheſter.
               
               
                  16
                        •
                     
                  
                  Lucius, ſonne of Coilus, ſuccéeded King after his Father, being a very godlye and Vertuous Prince. And becauſe ſince the comming of Ioſeph of Arimathia into the land, there was much talke about Chriſt, and Holy Religion, whych many had begun to embrace, he ſent to Pope Eleutherius, that hee would ſend ſome more learned men to him, whereby both he and his might fully be enſtructed in the faith of Chriſt. Eleutherius ſent vnto him D
                        •
                     ianus and Faganus (by ſome called Fugatius and Damianus) two woorthy learned Clearkes,Britain conuerted to the Chriſtian faith. who at theyr comming, conuerted the King and his people from Paganiſme. There were in thoſe dayes (within the bounds of Britaine) 28. Flamines, and 3. Ach-flamines,
                  Arch-byſhops & Biſhops appointed in Britaine. that were as Byſhoppes and Arch-byſhoppes of the Pagan Religion: in whoſe place King Lucius appointed the 28. Byſhoppes, and thrée Arch-Byſhops of Chriſtian Religion. O
                     ••
                   of which Arch-byſhops held his Sée at London, another at Yorke, and the thirde at Caerleon Arſwike in Glaumorganſhire. To the Arch-byſhop of London was ſubiect Cornewall, and all the middle part of England, euen vnto Humber. To the Arch-Byſhoppe of Yorke, all the North parts of Britaine, from the Riuer of Humber, to the furtheſt parts of Scotland. And to the Arch-Byſhop of Caerleon, was ſubiect all wales, within

which countrey were then ſeauen Byſhoppes, where now there are but foure. This King Lucius is ſaide to builde the Church of Saint Peter at VVeſtminſter, and Saint Peters Church of Cornehill in London.
                  
                     S. Peters Churches at Weſtminſter & London in Corne-hill This Lucius raigned 12. yeares, and dying without iſſue, the Brittaines fell at variance, by which meanes, the Romaine Lieutenants go on againe with their Gouernement, the Emperor Adrian comming in perſon into Britain, & then the wal of Adrian was built,The Wall of Adrian. from the mouth of Tine, to the Water of Eske, containing thirty miles in length. Adrian hauing quieted all diſturbances in Britain, Lollius, Vrbicus, Calphurnius Agricola, Vlpius Marcellus, Pertinax, Clodius Albinus and Heraclitus, ſuccéeded each other as Lieutenantes (ouer the Brittaines) for the Romaines, which manner of Gouernement ſo continued, to the yeare of our Lord, 207.
               
               
                  Seuerns, Emperor of Rome,207 did now beginne his rule in Britaine, cauſing a Trench to bee caſt from Sea to Sea. Hee raigned not fullye fiue yeares, and was buried at Yorke.
                  A Trench caſt in Brittaine from ſea to ſea. His Sonnes Geta and Baſſianus contended for the Gouernment, Geta was ſlaine in battell, and Baſſianus ruled ſixe yeares: but hee was likewiſe ſlaine by one Caranſius, a Britaine of vnknowne Byrth, whom the Britaines accepted as their King▪ till Alectus was ſent from Rome with his Legions of Souldiors, who conquered Caranſius in field, and ſlewe him.
               
                  
                  Aeſclepiodotus, Duke of Cornwall, preuayling in fight againſt Alectus, and Liuius Gallus, or Wallus, whom (when he had ſlaine, he threw into a Brooke,Wallus Brooke, Walbrook. which tooke name of him, and was called Wallus Brooke, nowe Walbrooke) was admitted to raigne ouer the Britaines. And diſcord being afterward raiſed, betwéene the King, and one Coell, Earle of Colcheſter, they met in a fielde of battaile, where Aſclepiodotus was ſlaine, after he had raigned thirty yeares. At this time was Britaine in cruell perſecution,The martirdome of S. Alban. vnder the bloody tyrants Diocleſian and Maximus; Alban, a Cittizen of Werlamcheſter, being the firſt that ſuffered martirdome in Britaine, hee being conuerted to Chriſtian faith by zealous Amphibilaus, and becauſe he would not ſacrifice to their falſe Gods, he was beheaded on the top of the hill ouer-againſt VVerlamcheſter, where a Church and Monaſtery was builded in memory of hys martyrdom,Werlamcheſter, S. Albanes. and VVerlamcheſter being deſtroyed, the place tooke name of him, and is to this day called S. Albanes. A number of Chriſtians were likewiſe aſſembled at another place,Iohn Roſſus Warwiconſ. in l
                        ••
                     . de wigor
                        •
                     . Epiſ. to heare the word of life preached by that vertuous man Amphibilaus, but they were all there ſlaine by the Pagans, and the place (in their memory) named Lichfield, The fielde of dead bodies. It is alſo recorded,Lichfielde▪ why it was ſo called. that in the dayes of theſe Tyrants, Diocleſian and Maximus, of godly men and Women, profeſſing the faith of Ieſus Chriſte, there were martired in ſundry place, aboue 17000.
               
               
                  26
                        •
                     
                  
                  Coell, Earle of Colcheſter, began his rule ouer

the Britaines, in An. Dom. 262. But Conſtantius being ſent from Rome to ſuppreſſe him,Conſtantius married Helena, daughter to King Coell. hee couenanted to pay the tribute, & gaue his daughter Helena (a Noble and learned Lady) in marriage to Conſtantius. King Coell raigned 27. yeares, and is ſaid to be buried at Colcheſter, or rather at Gloceſter.
               
               
                  Conſtantius ſuccéeded in the rule of Britain,
                  189 after Coell, and had by his wife Helena a Sonne, named Conſtantine, that was afterwarde Emperor, and ſir-named Conſtantine the Great.The martirdome of Amphibilaus. In this Conſtantius dayes, Amphibliaus was apprehended, and ſuffered martyrdome at Redburne, néere to VVerlamcheſter, fiftéene yeares after the death of S. Alban: Conſtantius raigned eleuen yeares.
               
                  Conſtantine,
                  306 ſonne of Conſtantius and Helena, and ſir named the Great, was King after his Father, and created Emperor in Britaine.
                  Q Helena found the Croſſe and the Nailes. His Mother Quéene Helena went to Ieruſalē, where ſhe found the Croſſe that our Sauiour was crucified on, and the Nailes, which ſhee gaue to her Sonne Conſtantine; who did ſet one of them in the Creſt of his Helmet, another in the bridle of his horſe, and the third he threw into the Sea, to aſſwage a rough Tempeſt.
               
                  Octauius or Octauian, beganne his raigne ouer the Britaines in Anno 329.
                  329 being called Duke of VVindſore.
                  Octauius put to flight by Trahernes He aſſembled a great companye of people, and fought with the Gouernours of the Land which Conſtantine had heere appoynted: yet was he expelled by Traherne into Norway,
                  
and Traherne being ſlaine by treaſon afterward, Octauius ſent Maximianus, Coſin to the Emperor Conſtantine, to whom he gaue his daughter in marriage. Octauius raigned 54. years. About this time,Helena walleth London & Colcheſter. the Empreſſe Helena, Mother to Conſtantine, for loue ſhe bare to Colcheſter and London, did newly engirt them both with Walles rounde about, cauſing great Bricke and huge Tyles to be purpoſely therefore made, which are yet to be ſeene in the Towne and Caſtle of Colcheſter.
               
               
                  383
                  Maximianus, or Maximus, vſurped in Brittaine the Title of the Empyre, and aſſembling all the men of Warre, and youth of the Realme, he went into France, expelled the French-men out of Armorica, and placed Brittaines there vnder Conon Meridoc, Duke of Cornewall, whereon it was euer after called Britayne the Leſſe.
                  Litle Britain This Maximus or Maximianus, hauing ſlayne the Emperour Gratian, at Lyons in France, was ſlaine himſelfe at Aquileia, by the Emperor Theodoſius, after he had gouerned the Britaines eight yeares.
               
                  390
                  Gratian, a Britaine, taking on him-ſelfe the Rule of Britaine, for his ſtearne and rough Gouernement was quickely ſlaine. About this time,The Saxons firſt enterance into Britaine. did the Saxons firſt enter into this Lande, and the Romain Empyre greatly declining, their rule in this kingdome, and payment of Tribute (which hadde continued for the ſpace of foure hundered eighty three yeares) nowe quite ceaſed.
               
                  
                  Conſtantinus, Brother of Aldroemus, King of little Brittaine, at the ſute of the Arche-Byſhoppe of London, in Name of all the Brittaines, accepted the Gouernment of this Lande,Conſtantinus crownd at Ciceſter. and was Crowned at Ciceſter. Hee had three Sonnes, Conſtantius (who was made a Monk) Aurelius Ambroſius, and Vter, Sur-named Pendragon. This Conſtantinus was Trayterouſly ſlayne in his Chamber, by a Pict, and then one Vortiger, a Britaine, a man of great power amongeſt the Britaines, tooke Conſtantius out of the Abbey of Wincheſter, and Crowned him King. But cauſing him ſoone after to bee murdered, and the murderers ſtrangled, leaſt hee ſhould bee diſcouered, hee got himſelfe to bee choſen King, Aurelius Ambroſius, and Vter Pendragon, (Bretheren to the murdered king) being glad to flye into Brittaine Armorica. Hengiſt the Saxon, and his Brother Horſſus, bringing great ſtore of Saxons into the Realme, by marrying his Daughter Rowen to Vortiger,
                  Hengiſt the Saxon & his Brother Horſus. grewe into no meane ſauour, filling ſtill the Lande with three ſortes of Germaine people, (to witte:) Saxons, Iutes, and Angles, who at length, made ſuch ſpoyle and hauucke of the Brittaines, that from Sea to Sea, the whole Realme, was moſt pittifully waſted and ruined: the Britaines beeing enforced for to flye out of theyr owne Countrey,Vortiger depoſed, & Vortimer Crowned. and the Saxons enioyed their poſſeſſions. Vortiger was depoſed, and Vortimer his Sonne crowned King, who had foure principall Battailes with the Saxons,
                  
and preuailed very worthily againſt them, til (by the meanes of Rowen, Daughter to Hengiſt) Vortimer was poyſoned after hee had gouerned the Britaines ſeauen yeares and odde moneths. Then was Vortiger reſtored to his kingdom againe, and Hengiſt performed his bloody treachery on Salisbury Plaine,The Britain Nobles murdered on Salisbury plaine. on a May day, murdering 460. Noble Britaines with Kniues, which he and his Saxons had cloſely hid in their Pockets. There was Vortiger taken priſoner, and could not gaine his liberty, till hee had graunted Hengiſt three Prouinces or Countreyes of his Kingdome, to wit, Kent and Eſſex, or (as ſome write) Suſſex, where the South Saxons afterwarde inhabited, and Norffolke and Suffolke, where the Eaſt-Angles planted themſelues. At this time was the Heptarchie or ſeauen Kingdomes of this Lande, Aurelius and his Brother Vter, returned out of Brittaine Armorica, with a powerfull Army, and marching into VVales againſt Vortiger,
                  The death of Vortiger. aſſayled him in his Caſtle, which they conſumed with fire, where perriſhed Vortiger, and all elſe there with him.
               
                  Aurelius Ambroſe was made King of Britain, anno 481.
                  481. He gaue Hengiſt battaile, who flying for ſafety,The death of Hengiſt. was taken by Edoll Earle of Cheſter, & beheaded at Conningsborow. In memory of the Britaines ſlaughter on Salisbury plain, ſtones were fetcht out of Ireland, and ſet vp in the ſame place,Stone-heng and called to this day Stone-heng. Aurelius raigned nineteene yeares, was poyſoned by a counterfeit Monk, and buried at Stone-heng.
               
               
                  
                  Vter, ſur-named Pendragon,
                  500 becauſe Merlin likened him to a Dragons heade, which (at his birth) maruailouſly appeared in the firmament,The birth of Arthur. at the corner of a blazing Starre. He loued fayre Igrine, wife to Gorlois Duke of Cornwall, on whom he begot the valiant Prince Arthur. Vter raigned 18. yeares, and was buried by his Brother at Stone-heng.
               
               
                  Arthur, Sonne of Vter Pendragon,
                  5
                        •
                     6 ſuccéeded his Father in the kingdome. Hee fought twelue battailes againſt the Saxons,
                  Arthur had 12. battailes againſt the Saxons. returning Conqueror in euery one of them: yet coulde he not driue them out of the land, but ſtill they poſſeſſed Kent, Sutherie and Norfolke. He inſtituted the order of the round Table, was deadly wounded in a battell which he fought with his cozen Mordred; and hauing raigned 26. yeares, was buryed at Glaſtenbury betwéene two Pillers, where hys body was afterward found, in the dayes of King Henry the ſecond, about the yeare, 1191.
               
               
                  Conſtantine, Cozen to Arthur,
                  542 and Sonne of Cador, Duke of Cornewall, ſuccéeded next in ye gouernement: But Aurelius Conan warred againſt him, and ſlew him in the fielde, when hee had raigned foure yeares, and was buryed at Stone-heng.
               
               
                  Aurelius Conan, was next King of Britaine,
                  546 albeit his Vnckle had moſt right thereto, whom he impriſoned, and cruelly murdred his two ſons:Conan murdered his Nephewes. after which himſelfe liued not long, but died before he had raigned two yeares.548
               
               
                  Vortiporus raigned after his Father Aurelius

Conan foure yeares, and left no iſſue to ſucceede him in the kingdome.
               
                  580
                  Malgo, Nephew of Aurelius Conan, raigned fiue yeares.
               
                  Careticus ruled Britain thrée yeares, and the Engliſh and Saxon Kings (remoouing the Britaines) enlarged the boundes of theyr owne Dominions: ſo that beſide the Kinges of Britayne, there raigned eight Kings of the Engliſh & Saxons,
                  Eight kings of the Engliſh & Saxons. as Ethelbert in Kent, Ciſſa in Suſſex, Ceauline in Weſtſex, Creda or Crida in Mercia, Erkenwine in Eſſex, Titila in Eaſt-Angles, Ella in Deira, and Alfred in Bernitia. The Brittaines loſt poſſeſſion of the more part of their auncient ſeats,The Britains looſe theyr ancient ſeats and the faith of Chriſt was thereby greatly decayed, for the Churches were deſtroyed, and the Arch-Byſhoppes of Caerleon Arſwike, London and Yorke, withdrew (together with theyr Cleargie) into the Mountaines and Woodes in Wales. Now was Auguſtine the Monke, and others ſent to preach the Chriſtian faith in Brittaine,
                  Auguſtine the Monke ſent into Britaine. and was made Arch-byſhop of Britaine, or the Engliſh Nation, and King Ethelbert (with his people of Kent) were conuerted to the Chriſtian faith.
               
                  613
                  Cadwan was elected King of the Britaines in Anno 613.
                  The Britain
                        •
                      24. yeares without a King. For (after Careticus) they had remained (for about the ſpace of 24. years) without any eſpeciall Gouernor, being led by ſundry Rulers: this Cadwan had before bin Duke or Ruler of North-wales. He gouerned two and twentie yeares.
               
                  
                  Cadwallo or Cadwalline, Sonne of Cadwan,
                  635 ſuccéeded as King of the Britaines, after his Father. He raigned 48. yeares, and being dead, his body was balmed with ſweete confections, and put into a Brazen Image, by meruailous Arte melted and caſt, which Image was alſo mounted on a goodly brazen horſe, and ſo ſet vp aloft on the Weſt gate of London, called Ludgate, in token of his Conqueſts, and for a terror to the Saxons.
                  S. Martins at Ludgate built. The Church of Saint Martine vnder the ſame Gate, was then alſo builded by the Britaines.
               
               
                  Cadwallader, Sonne of Cadwallo,
                  678 ſuccéeded him in the Britaines gouernment, whoſe raygne laſted but thrée yeares, for hee was conſtrayned (with his people) to forſake their Natiue Countrey, and by Sea to flye ouer into Britaine Armorica, there to ſéeke reléefe for their languiſhing bodies. In this Cadwallader ended the line and gouernment of the Britains,
                  The ending of the Brytaines Gouernment. now called Welchmen, which name they tooke of their Leader Wallo or Gallo, or elſe of a Quéen of Wales, called Gales or Wales. The Britaines had the greater part of this Lande in rule (reckoning from Brute to this time) 1822. yeares, and nowe the whole Dominion of the Lande, came to the Saxons.
               
               
                  Egbert, the Son of Alcmund, a petty Prince,800 the ſon of Offa, of the bloude of Ina, King of the Weſt-Saxons, hauing bin baniſhed by k. Brightrick into France; after Brightricks death, was repealed home, and ſuccéeded as the ſeauentéenth King of the Weſt-Saxons. He ſubdued the Corniſhmen,
                  
and ſeuearely puniſhed the vnquyet Welch-men.
                  The victories of King Egbert. 
                  Bernulfe King of Mercia, was ouerthrowne by him, and Kent, Eſſex, Southrie, and Suſſex, with their ſeuerall Kings, al brought vnder his obeyſance, and the kingdome of Northumberland yeelded vnto him. Then ſubdued he North-wales, and tooke the Citty of Cheſter. Afterward, aſſembling a Counſell at Wincheſter, he was there crowned King and Soueraign Lord of the whole land: which he chaunged from the name of Britaine, and from the ſeuerall appellations of the Heptarchie, and called it Englelond,
                  The firſt no
                     
                        •
                     ination of England, by K. Egbert. or Angles-land, that is to ſay, The Engliſhmens Land, wherof in Latine it was termed Anglia, a name taken from the Angles, whych, of the three people then poſſeſſing it, to wit, the Iutes, Saxons, and Angles (being indéede all but one Nation) were the moſt valiaunt and populous. In his time was the firſt inuaſion of the Danes, and hee had an ouerthrowe by them at Carrum:The firſt in
                     
                        •
                     aſion of the Danes. which ſucceſſe cauſing them to aduenture the like attempt the yeare following, landing theyr Fléet in Wales, and ioyning with the Welch-men, they were ouerthrowne by K. Egbert, at a place called Hengiſtenton, and a great number of them ſlaine. This glorious Prince, hauing greatly enlarged the bounds of his kingdome, and raigned ſeauen and thirtie yeares, died, and was verie Royally buried at Wincheſter.
               
               
                  837.
                  Ethelwolph, eldeſt ſonne to the moſt victorious King Egbert, ſuccéeded next in the kingdom

of England. All the time of his raigne, hee was grieuouſly troubled with the Danes inuaſions;A woorthie victory ouer the Danes but he had a worthy victory ouer them at Ockley in Southrey, ſuch as the like hath hardly béene heard of in the Engliſh Dominions. He deuided the kingdom betweene himſelf, & his ſon Ethelbald, & hauing raigned twenty yeares▪ was honourably buried in the Cathedrall Church at Wincheſter.
                  857
               
               
                  Ethelbald ſuccéeded his Father Ethelwolphe by inheritance, but to his ſecond ſonne Ethelbert (in his life time) he had giuen the kingdomes of Kent and Eſſex, which he had conquered.Ethelbald defiled his fathers bed. This Ethelbald preſumed to defile his Fathers bedde, and maried his Step-mother Iudith: he raygned fiue years, and dying, was buried at Shirbourn.
               
               
                  Ethelbert, ſecond ſonne of King Ethelwolph,
                  862. ſuccéeded after his Brother Ethelbald in the regiment. This Ethelbert droue the Danes out of Kent, many times ouerthrew them, & put them to flight. He raigned fiue yeares, and was buryed by his Brother Ethelbald at Shirbourne.
               
               
                  Ethelred, third Sonne to King Ethelwolph,
                  867 raigned next after his Brother Ethelbert. Hee fought nine battails with the Danes in one year,Nine Ba
                        •
                     t
                        ••
                      fought with the Dan
                        •
                     s in one ye
                        •
                     
                   bearing ſtill the victory away with him; but diſſention among the Saxon Kinges, furthered the Danes in conqueſt of their kingdomes. Ethelred was ſlaine in fight with the Danes, hauing raigned fiue yeares, and was buried at Winbourne Abbey.
               
                  Alfred, or Alured, ſur-named the Great,87
                        •
                     
                   yongeſt

Sonne to Ethelwolph, ſuccéeded his Brother in the Kingdome. Hee was very greatly troubled with the Danes, who inuading diuers parts of the Land, did moſt cruelly waſt it: yet had he (in one yeare) ſeuen battailes with them, and ouer-throwing them at length, recouered his kingdome. He builded 3. Monaſteries, one at Edlingſey, afterward called Athelny, neer Taunton in Sommerſet-ſhire;
                  K. Alfred builded 3. Monaſteries the ſecond at Wincheſter, called the New Minſter; and the third at Shaftſbury, where his Daughter Ethelgeda was Abbeſſe.Oxford built by Ki. Alfred. But, by perſwaſion of Neote, a famous Learned Monke, he built the Vniuerſity of Oxford, being himſelfe a good Grammarian, Rhetorician, Phyloſopher, Muſitian and Poet, as alſo a moſt perfect Architect. Hee raigned 29. yeares, and ſix months, and was buried in hys New-Minſter, at Wincheſter.
               
               
                  900
                  Edward, ſonne to King Alfred, and Surnamed the Elder, ſuccéeded in the kingdome after his Father. Hee ſubdued the Kingdome of the Eaſt-Angles, and ſo enlarged the boundes of his Kingdome,The Eaſt-Angles cō
                     quered by K▪ Edward. that he had moſt part of Great Brittaine vnder his obedience; he built a new Town at Nottingham, on the South-ſide of Trent, and made a Bridge ouer betwéene the old Town and new. He repayred Mancheſter in Lancaſhyre, (accounted then the Southend of Northumberland) and built a Towne, called (by ancient writers) Thilwall,
                  K. Edward a great builder. néere to the Riuer of Mercia, placing therein a Garriſon of Soldiors. Diuer other Townes and Caſtels alſo he builded, as two at

                  Buckingham, on either ſide the Riuer Ouſe, againſt the Danes incurſions, and another at the mouth of Auon: he repayred the Towns of Toceter and Wigmore, and hauing raygned 24. yeares, was buried in the New Minſter or Monaſtery at Wincheſter.
               
               
                  Athelſtane, or Adelſtane, eldeſt Son of King Edward, ſuccéeded his Father,924 and (as his Aunceſtors) was crowned at Kingſton on Thames. A great army of the Danes, Scots, and Iriſh, was ouerthrowne by King Athelſtane; Northumberland, Weſtmerland, and Cumberland yéelded vnto him.King Athelſtane the firſt monark of England. Hee was the firſt of the Engliſh Kinges, that obtained the gouernement of the whole Kingdome, which continued ſo 140. years after, though not without ſome interruption, the Danes (in the meane time) vſurping the Crown by the ſpace of thirty yeares. The Welch & Corniſhmen ware ſubdued by him. He builded two Monaſteries, one at Wilton, in the Dioceſſe of Salisbury, and another at Michelme in Somerſetſhire, founding alſo a Colledge of Prieſts, at S. Edmundſ-bury. There were fewe famous Monaſteries in this land, but he beautified them either with ſome new piece of building, Iewels, Bookes, or Lands, and cauſed the ſacred Scriptures to be tranſlated out of the moſt pure Fountaine of the Haebrewes, into the Engliſh Saxon tongue. He raigned 16. yeares, and was buried at Malmesbury.
               
               
                  Edmund, Brother to King Athelſtane, ſuccéeded next after him, and vanquiſhing the Danes,
                  940
                  
was afterward vnfortunatly ſlain, hauing raigned fiue yeares, and was buried at Glaſtenbury.
               
               
                  946
                  Eldred or Eadred, Brother to King Edmund, ſuccéeded next in the royall Dignity, being crowned alſo at Kingſtone vpon Thames. Edwin and Edgar, Sonnes to King Edmund, were put by from ruling, in regard of their tender age. Eldred ſubdued the Northumbers, repayred the Abbey of Abington, built by King Ina, but ruined by the Danes. And hauing raigned nine yeares, was buried in the olde Monaſterie at VVincheſter.
               
               
                  955
                  Edwine, eldeſt Sonne to King Edmund, ſuccéeded his Vnckle Eldred, and was crowned at Kingſton. This Edwin was wholly addicted to ſenſuality and pleaſure, baniſhed Dunſtane, Abbot of Glaſtenbury, for reproouing his Rape of Algiua, his neere Kinſwoman, euen when hys Lords were ſitting in Counſell. He hauing raigned foure yeares, was depriued, and dying with greefe, was buryed in the new Abbey at VVincheſter.
               
               
                  959
                  Edgar, Brother to King Edwine, was annointed and crowned King at Bathe, and afterward at Kingſtone. He was a great fauourer of Religious men, and had a Fleete of three thouſand and ſixe hundered ſhippes alwayes in readineſſe,K. Edgar his fleet of ſhips and ſayled therewith (once a yeare) about all great Britaine. Hee had the whole Iſle, and all the Kinges thereof in ſubiection to him, and was rowed vp and downe the Riuer of Dee, by ſeauen Kings his vaſſailes: Luduall, one of thoſe

Kings, did pay him a yearly tribute of Wolues.A tribute of Wolues. He raigned 16. yeares, and was buried at Glaſtenburie.
               
               
                  Edward, eldeſt Sonne to King Edgar,
                  975 ſucceeded his Father, being crowned at Kingſton, but by Counſell of Elfrith, his Step-mother, he was treacherouſly murdered, when hee had raygned three yeares, and was buried at Shaftesbury.
               
               
                  Ethelred, or Egelred,
                  979 ſecond Sonne to King Edgar, was crowned at Kingſtone; but becauſe his comming to the Crown was by his brothers murder, he could neuer obtaine his peoples affection.The Danes murdered in one night. Al the Danes in England (by the command of King Ethelred) were murdered in one night. He raigned 38. yeares, and was buried in Saint Paules Church in London.
               
               
                  Edmund, Son to King Ethelred,
                  1016 and Surnamed Ironſide, was immediately proclaimed K. after his Fathers death; as the Cleargy and Nobility did the like to Canutus, becauſe they hadde ſworne fealty to his Father Swaine, or Sweno:
                  Edmund Ironſide and Canutus both proclaimed Kings. whereon three great battailes were fought betwixt King Edmund and Canutus, & the Danes ouerthrowne at Otford in Kent, beſide the great battell at Aſhdone in Eſſex, neere Saffron walden, where the Engliſhmen were foyled by the Danes, and the Land once againe deuided, betweene Canutus and King Edmund, who was treacherouſly ſlaine at Oxford, hauing raigned but one yeare, and ſome few months, and was buried at Glaſtenbury.
               
               
                  Canutus the Dane,
                  1017. challenging all England

to himſelfe, was crowned King in Saint Paules Church in London, and maried Quéen Emma, the widdow of king Etheldred: hee raigned xx. yeares, and was buried at Wincheſter.
               
               
                  1035.
                  Harold, ſurnamed Harefoot, vſing the power of the Danes in England, inuaded the Realme, while his brother Hardi-kenutus Gouerned in Denmarke. Hee raigned foure yeares, dyed at Oxford, and was buried at Weſtminſter.
               
                  Hardikenutus, or Hardy-Canutus, Sonne of King Canutus,
                  1041 and his Quéene Emma, obtayning his Fathers Kingdome; ſent for his mother from exile. He died with the cup in his hand, as he ſat merrily diſpoſed at his Table, in the third yeare of his raigne,The ending of the Danes gouerment in England. and was buried at Wincheſter. With this Hardy-Canutus, ended the dominion of the Danes in England, who had grieuouſly oppreſſed this nation, for the ſpace of 250. yeares.
               
                  1042
                  Edward, the ſonne of Ethelred and Emma, was next crowned King at Wincheſter, all the Danes being then quite expulſed the land. This Edward was Surnamed the Confeſſor, for hys vertuous life and worthy Lawes: alſo he is ſaide to be the firſt that cured the Diſeaſe, called, The Kinges Euill.
                  The Kinges Euill. Hee raigned three and twentie yeares, and was buried at Weſtminſter, which (in his life time) hee had moſt ſumptuouſlye repayred.
               
                  1067
                  Harold, ſonne of Earle Goodwin, tooke vpon him the gouernment of the kingdome: but William, Duke of Normandy, came into England

with a powerfull Army, and (in battell) Harold was ſhot through the braines with an Arrowe,England conquered by D. William. hauing raigned but nine months, and was buried in the Monaſtery of Waltham in Eſſex, by whoſe death, Duke William obtained his Conqueſt of England.
               
                  William, Duke of Normandy,
                  1067 baſe Sonne of Robert, Duke of Normandie, and Nephew to King Edward the Confeſſor, whom he perceiued more addicted to vertue, then policy,Duke Williams policy to get the Crowne. and through debility of body not like to liue long: contryued his owne attaining to the crowne of this land, after the deceaſe of the aged King. For hee placed diuers Normans, in the cheefeſt roomes about him while he liued, and when he was dead, leuied an Army of diuers Nations, and there-with pretending the Patronage of England, agaynſt Harold, Earle Godwins Sonne, who vſurped the Kingdome; firſt fought with him, and flewe him at a place now called Battell, in Suſſex, and then tooke the Crowne on him, by election of the Eſtates. Seeking next to barre Titles,Edgar Etheling, true heire of the Saxons blood he impriſoned Edgar Etheling, the onely true heire of the Saxons bloud, and by means of Ethelbert, Arch-biſhop of Hamborow, procured Sweno, King of Denmark (for money) to ceaſe the Danes claime. Hee builded foure ſtrong Caſtles: one, at Nottingham, another at Lincoln, the third at York, and the fourth neere to Haftings, where he landed at his firſt arriuall in England. Hee deuiſed the Couer le feu Bell, to bee Rung nightly at eight of the clocke, in all Citties, Townes,Rake vp the fire. and

Villages, for preuention of mighty tumults. He ordained the Tearmes,The foure Tearmes. and that they ſhoulde be kept foure times in the yeare, and Iudges to ſit in ſeuerall Courtes, for deſciding controuerſiall matters betwixt party and party, as is vſed vnto this day. He appointed Sheriffes in euery ſhyre, and Iuſtices of the peace, to ſee offenders punniſhed, and the Countries kept in quiet. He ordained the Court of Exchequer, with the Barons, Clarkes and Officers, thereto belonging, as alſo the high Court of Chancery, with the Booke then called,The Exchequer and Court of Chancery. 
                  The Rowle of Wincheſter, nowe, The Doomeſday Booke, whereby the whole Land was taxed, and euery mans eſtate, and wealth thoroughly knowne. He raigned twenty yeares, ten months, and 26. dayes, and was buried in the Abbey of Saint Stephen, at Ca
                        •
                     n in Normandy, which he had founded. And this is well worthy memory, that hee being ſo great a Conqueror,K. William deſtitute of a Graue. yet after his death, coulde not haue ſo much ground to bury his dead body, without wronging ſome other, vntill that (by his Executors) it was bought for him.
               
                  William Rufus, ſecond ſonne to the Conqueror,1087 by his Fathers appointment ſucceeded him in the Kingdom, and was crowned at Weſtminſter. Robert, elder Brother to King William, & Duke of Normandy, went with Godfrey Duke of Bullen, and other Chriſtian Princes to the Holy-land, to recouer it from the Sarazi
                        •
                     s. This King William Rufus, cauſed new Walles to be builded about the Tower of London, and layed

the foundation of Weſtminſter Hall.The foundation of Weſtminſter Hall. Hee raigned thirteene yeares, and was ſlain with an Arrow, by one Sir Walter Tyrel, a French knight, in the New Forreſt in Hampſhire, his body being buried at VVincheſter. In which Forreſt, not many yeares before,511 had ſtoode 36. Pariſh Churches, diuers faire Townes, Villages, and Hamlets, containing thirty miles in circuite:New forreſt in Hampſhire, and ſtrange accidents the
                        •
                      happening. all which was laide waſt by the Conqueror, the poor inhabitants expelled thence, and it was made a place for wilde beaſtes to liue in. It was ſomewhat ſtrange, that in that very place, the King ſhould bee ſo vnfortunately ſlaine; Richard his Brother blaſted to death, and Henry the Conquerors Nephew, by his eldeſt Sonne Robert, as hee ouer-earneſtly purſued the game, in the the buſhes (like to another Abſolon) ſtraungely ſtrangled to death; vengeaunce from God (as was thought) punniſhing the fathers offence in his poſterity.
               
                  Henry,
                  1100 ſur-named Beauclerke for his Learning, and youngeſt ſonne to the Conqueror, ſucceeded his Brother King William, & was crowned at VVeſtminſter. Robert,
                  Robert D. of Normandy. Duke of Normandy, being returned from the Holie-Lande, warred with his Brother Henry, for his right in the crowne of England, and after much contention, being taken and committed Priſoner vnto Cardiffe Caſtle in VVales, after 26. yeares impriſonment, hee there dyed, and was buried at Gloceſter. Maud, King Henries Daughter, was maried to the Emperor Henry: but his other

children, William, Duke of Normandy, his Siſter Marie, Counteſſe of Perch; Richard, Earle of Cheſter, with his Brother Otwell, Gouernor to Duke William, and the ſaide Earle of Cheſter his wife,King Henries Children drowned. the Kinges Neece, with diuers others, to the number of 140. perſons, beſide 50. Marriners, following the king out of Normandie, were all drowned. King Henry raigned 35. years, died in the Forreſt of Lyons in Normandie, and was buried in the Abbey of Reading, which he had founded. In this king Henry firſt of that name, ended the line of ye Norman kings, concerning their heires male, who had raigned about 69. yeares: and then began the French, by Title of the heyres generall.
               
                  1135
                  Stephen, Earle of Bullen and Mortaigne, ſon to Stephen Earle of Bloys, by Adela, Daughter to king William the Conquerour, vſurped the crowne from Maud the Empreſſe, and her young ſonne Henry,
                  K. Stephen vſurped the Crowne. which cauſed great Warres betweene him and her, and very miſerable times to the people; till by an aſſembly of the Lordes at Wincheſter, Articles of peace and agreement were concluded. King Stephen raigned eyghteene yeares, ten moneths, and three and twenty dayes, and was buried in the Abby of Feuerſham in Kent.
               
               
                  1154
                  Henry, ſur-named Fitz-Empreſſe, and Shortmantle, ſucceeded next in the crown of England. He expelled ſtrangers out of the Land, and had a long and troubleſome contention,Tho. Becket Archbiſhop of Canterb. with Thomas Becket, Arch-Biſhop of Canterburie. Hee

crowned his ſonne Henry, as fellow-King with him, which procured him much molleſtation, by meanes of his Quéene, and his other ſonnes. In his time, was the conqueſt of Ireland, Dublin, and Waterford, being woon by Earle Strongbow. He had diuers Concubines, but eſpecially fayre Roſamond, whom he kept in a Labyrinth at Woodſtock, where ſhe was poyſoned by Q. Elianor. King Henry the ſecond raigned 34. yeares, nine months and two dayes, and dying, was buried at Font-Euerard in the Dutchy of Alanſon. In him ended the raigne both of the Normans and French-men, ouer the Realme of England.
               
               
                  Richard, Earle of Poictiers,
                  1189 and ſecond Son to King Henry, was crowned King at Weſtminſter. He went to the Holy-land,Ki. Richard went to the holy-Land, he was called Cuee
                        •
                     
                     de-Lion. and performed many worthy ſeruices there: his brother Iohn (in his abſence) aſpired to rule the whole land, being prouoked thereto by the French king. As King Richard beſiedged the Caſtle of Chalus Cheuerel; he was wounded with an impoyſoned quarrell, ſhot at him by one Barturam de Gurden, or Peter Bazile, whereof he dyed, hauing raigned nine yeares, nine moneths, and odde daies, and was buried at Font-Euerard.
               
               
                  Iohn, Lord of Ireland, Earle of Mortaign and Gloceſter, & brother to king Richard,
                  1199 was crowned at weſtm. He had long & tedious contentions with his Barons, as alſo with the pope, by whoſe meanes, Lewes the French kinges ſonne, was drawne into the buſineſſe, & had the crowne offered

him by the Lords, whereon he wrought great ſpoile in the Land. King Iohn raigned 17. years, ſix months, and 27. dayes, and dying by poyſon, was buried at VVorceſter.
               
               
                  1216
                  Henry, third of that name, and eldeſt Son to King Iohn, ſucceeded immediately after his Father, albeit he was but nine yeares old: the Barons and French Lewes, being ſtill very molleſtuous,William Marſhall, Earle of Pembroke. againſt whom VVilliam Marſhal, Earle of Pembroke, was chiefe Generall of the Kings forces, and preuayled worthily. This King Henry, raigned 56. yeares, and 27. dayes, and was buried at Weſtminſter.
               
               
                  1272
                  Edward, eldeſt Sonne to King Henrie, and Surnamed Long-ſhankes, was crowned at Weſtminſter, after his returne home from the Holy Land.Wales conquered This King conquered Wales, and deuided it into Shyres; and baniſhed the Iewes for euer out of England. Hauing raigned 34. yeares, ſeauen months, and twenty dayes, hee dyed, and was buried at VVeſtminſter.
               
               
                  Edward of Carnaruon, ſonne to King Edward the firſt,2307 ſucceeded in the kingdome after his Father. This king did ouermuch affect an Eſquire of Gaſcoigne,
                  Piece Gau
                        •
                     ſton. called Pierce Gauaſton, and diſſhonoured many of his Lords, to aduance him: as he did the like, by the two Spenſers, the Father and Sonne. At length, he was impriſoned by his Barons, with helpe of the Queene and Prince, and then depoſed, when he had raigned nineteene yeares, ſixe months, and ſeauenteene dayes.
               
                  
                  Edward the third,1327 ſon to king Edward the ſecond, was crowned at Weſtminſter in his Fathers life time. Flanders, yeelded themſelues & all their Townes to King Edward, and, laying claime to the Crowne of France (in right of his Mother Queen Iſabell) he entred that land with a puiſſant army, and quartered the Armes of France, with his owne of England.
                  The Order of the Garter. He deuiſed the woorthy Order of the Garter: and Prince Edward, Surnamed the Blacke Prince (beſide his famous victories in Fraunce) reſeated Don Peter king of Caſtile in his kingdom, which his baſtard Brother Henrie vſurped againſt him. K. Edward the third raigned fifty yeares, and fiue monethes, and dying at Sheene, was buried at Weſtminſter.
               
               
                  Richard, ſecond of that name,1277. ſon to Edward the Blacke Prince, being about eleauen yeares old, ſucceeded after his Grand-father King Edward; the Duke of Lancaſter, and the Earle of Cambridge, being Protectors of the yong kings perſon. The rebellion of Iacke Straw,
                  Iack Straw, & his rebels and Wat Tyler, with the Eſſex and Kentiſhmen then hapned, and the worthy act of William Walworth, Lord Maior of London, in arreſting the traitor. Great ſtormes aroſe betweene the king and hys Nobles, becauſe he had let to Farme the realme of England, to Lords that abuſed the king, and much miſgouerned him, ſending abroad blanke Charters, &c. Whereupon, in the end,Articles againſt the King. Articles were framed againſt the king, and he committed to the Tower of London: Henrie, Surnamed

                  Bullingbrooke, ſonne to Iohn of Gaunt, being proclaimed king, and Richard quite depryued, when he had raigned 22. years, three months, & nine dayes. Dying, hee was buried at Langley.
               
               
                  1399.
                  Henry Plantagenet, borne at Bullingbroke, in the County of Lincolne, beeing Coſin-Germaine to king Richard the ſecond, ſucceeded next by Richards depriuation,The Crown entailed. and entailed the crown to him and his heires. Owen Glendoure, with his VVelchmen, entered into Rebellion againſt the king, and did put him in great daunger of his life by Treaſon, by conueying a Caltrop into his bed. This king Henry raigned 13. yeares, and odde months, and was buried at Canterburie, with great ſolemnity.
               
                  1413
                  Henry of Monmouth, ſonne and heire to king Henry the fourth, ſucceeded after his father. Hee vrged his title to France,
                  The battell of Agin-court. and fought the famous battell at Agin-court. Hee raigned nine yeares, ſixe months, and foure daies, and dying at Boys de Vinciennes in France, was buried at Weſtminſter.
               
                  Henry of windſore, being but nine moneths olde,1423 did yet ſucceed in his lawfull right. He was alſo crowned king of France at Paris, and had his time troubled with many grieuous combuſtions both abroad and at home, as alſo diuers foughten battailes,The houſes of Yorke & Lancaſter. to the effuſion of much blood. He raigned 38. yeares, ſixe months, and foure daies, and was buried firſt at Chertſey, and afterwarde remoued to windſore.
               
               
                  1461
                  Edward, Earle of March, tooke on him the

gouernment of the Realm, being ſon to Richard Duke of Yorke, that was ſlaine at Wakefield. His raigne alſo was filled with many troubles, broyles, and Rebellions: yet hee gouerned 22. years, one month, and eight daies, and was buried at Windſore.
               
               
                  Edward the fift, ſon to king Edward the fourth,1483 ſucceeded after his father, being neuer crowned, but depoſed by his Vnckle Richard, Duke of Gloceſter, when he had raigned two months,Edw. 5. neuer crownd & eleuen dayes, and with his brother, was murdered in the Tower of London, where both theyr bodies were obſcurely buried.
               
                  Richard, Duke of Gloceſter, vſurped the kingdome two years, two months, and one day:1483. and was ſlaine in battell at Boſworth fielde,Boſworth field. by Henrie Earle of Richmond, and buried at Leiceſter. In him ended the line of the Plantagenets.
               
               
                  Henry, Earle of Richmond,
                  1485 ſurnamed Tudor, ſon to Edmund of Hadham, Earle of Richmond, who was ſon of Owen ap Meredyth, and Queene Katherine the French kings daughter, wife to king Henry the fift. This king Henrie, builded and repayred in his life time, many goodly houſes, beſide his Mannor of Richmond,
                  The memorable buildings of king Henrie the ſeuenth. and his Chappell at Weſtminſter; as Baynards Caſtle in London; the goodly Hoſpitall of the Sauoy, neere. Charing-Croſſe, to which hee gaue lands, for releefe of an hundred poore people. Sir Religious houſes for Franciſcan Friers, of the Obſeruant and Couentall orders, (viz.) at Richmond,
                  
at Greenwich, and at Newarke, for Obſeruants: at Canterbury, New-Caſtle, & Southhampton, for Couentals. Hee gaue alſo manie ſums of money, to good and godly vſes. And for that one of the goodlieſt Chappelles in Europe, was (by his meanes) finiſhed, formerly begun by king Henry the ſixt, called the Kings colledge Chappell,Kinges Colledge chappel in Cambridge. in the Vniuerſitie of Cambridge: I cannot omit the ſumme he gaue to accompliſh the ſame, which was 10000. lt. (viz.) 5000. pounds in his life time, and the reſt by will at his death, vnder his great Seale of England, which was truely paide, as is yet to be ſeen in the ſame Colledge. Hee married his eldeſt daughter Margaret, to Iames the fourth, King af Scots: of which happy marriage, we enioy our dread Soueraign now raigning, King Iames the ſixt. King Hentie raigned 23. yeares, and ſomwhat more then 8. months, and was buried in his new Chappell at Weſtminſter.
               
               
                  1509
                  Henry the eight, ſonne of king Henry the ſeauenth, ſucceeded next in the kingdome after hys father. He baniſhed the Popes authority out of England, and was proclaimed King of Ireland, becauſe the former Kinges were onely called Lords of Ireland.Lords of Ireland. He wun Terwin, Tourney, and Bullen in Fraunce, and gaue the Church of the Gray Fryers in London to the Cittie, to bee a place of releefe for poore people;King Henries gifts, to charitable vſes. S. Bartholomewes Spittle, the Gray Fryers, and two pariſh Churches, the one called S. Nicholas in the Shambles, the other S. Ewin in Newgate Market,

were then made all one pariſh Church, and he gaue in Lands for maintenance thereof, fiue hundred Markes by the yeare for euer. He raigned 37. years, 9. months, and 5. daies, and was buried at Windſore.
               
               
                  Edward the ſixt,1549 onely ſon to king Henry the eight, was crowned king at Weſtminſter. Hée cauſed the Maſſe to be vtterly aboliſhed,The Maſſe aboliſhed. Images to be defaced in Churches, and the Lords ſupper to be miniſtred in both kindes. There was then good orders deuiſed for the poores reliefe, & poore people were diſtinguiſhed by thrée ſeuerall degrées, in manner following:

                     Three degrees of poore.
                     
                        1. The poore by impotency.
                     
                        2. Poore by caſualty.
                     
                        3. Thriſtleſſe poore.
                  
                  
                     
                        1. The poore by impotency, were alſo diuided into 3 kinds

                           
                              1. The fatherles pore mans ch
                                 ••
                              d.
                           
                              2. The aged, blinde, and lame.
                           
                              3. The diſeaſed perſon, by leproſie dropſie, &c.
                        
                     
                     
                        2. The poore by caſualty, were alſo of three kinds.

                           
                              1. The wounded Souldior.
                           
                              2. The decayed Houſholder.
                           
                              3. The viſited wt grieuous diſeaſe.
                        
                     
                     
                        3. The thriftleſſe poore were likewiſe of 3. kinds.

                           
                              1. The Riotor, that conſ
                                 •
                              meth all.
                           
                              2. The Vagabond, that will abyde in no place.
                           
                              3. The ydle 
                                 •
                              erſon, as Strumpets and others.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  1 Chriſts Hoſpitall was appointed for the innocent and fatherleſſe childe,Chriſts hoſpitall. to be trained vp in

knowledge of God, and vertuous exerciſes.
               
                  2 Saint Thomas Hoſpitall in Southwark, was appointed for reliefe of the aged,S. Thomas Hoſpitall. blinde, and lame.
               
                  Bridewell.
                  3 Bridewel was alſo appointed for the Vagabond, ydle ſtrumpet, and vnthrift.
               Of all which ſeuerall Hoſpitals, this Vertuous yong k. Edward was the founder, and gaue the lands of the Sauoy (which then ſerued as a harbour to Loyterers, Vagabonds, and ſtrumpets, that lay all day in the fieldes, and at Night were harboured there) to the maintenance of theſe houſes: which Lands were of the yearelie value of ſixe hundred pounds, and he gaue 4000 Markes beſide, of Lands taken in M
                        ••
                     tmaine, ſo yearely valewed. This worthy young King raigned ſixe years, fiue months, and eight dayes, and was buried at Weſtminſter.
               
               
                  1553
                  Mary, eldeſt daughter to King Henry the eight, and Siſter to King Edward, ſucceeded after her Brother. She married with the Prince of Spain, who was afterward king, and raigning 5. years, fiue monethes, and tenne dayes, was buried at Weſtminſter.
               
                  1558
                  Elizabeth, ſecond Daughter to king Henrie the eight, and Siſter alſo to king Edward, came next to her right in the Crowne of England. To write of the Princely life and raigne of that Virgin Empreſſe, and matchleſſe Queene, woulde require large Volumes, yet all too little for her high deſeruing merit. Hauing liued (well neere) threeſcore and ten years, and happily raigned 44.
                  
yeares, 4. months, and od dayes: ſhe died the 24 of March, 1602. & was buried at Weſtm. The lines engrauen on her Tombe, may ſerue for her further memory.
            
            
               A Sacrifice to Poſterity.
               HAuing reſtored Religion to the Primitiue ſincerity, eſtabliſhed Peace, reduced coine to the iuſt valew, reuenged Domeſtical rebellion, ſuccored France, greeued by ciuill war, ſupported Belgia, ouer-come the Spaniſh inuincible Nauy, pacified Ireland, by driuing out the Spaniards, and compelling the Rebels to yeeld to her pardon, increaſed very much the Reuennewes of both Vniuerſities, by a Law for theyr prouiſion of Victuall, enriched all England, & adminiſtring moſt prudently the Imperial ſtate thereof 45. yeares in true piety, in the ſeauenty yeare of her age (in moſt happy & peaceable maner departed this life) leauing heere hir mortal parts, enterred in this famous and renowned Church (by her conſerued) til by the command of Chriſt, they riſe againe immortall.
               Iames, king of England, Scotland, Fraunce,1602 
                  and Ireland, firſt Monarch of the whole Iſlands or Countrey, was proclaimed king the 24. of March, 1602. being the onely inheritour to k. Henry the ſeauenth, and Elizabeth his Queene, iſſuing from Lady Margaret, eldeſt Daughter to them both. In whoſe happy marriage, ended

the long ciuill diſſentions, of the two deuided families of Yorke and Lancaſter: And by his moſt rightfull ſucceſſion, in the deuided kingdomes of England and Scotland, hath vnited them in one ſole Monarchy of Great Britaine. Long may hee raigne, to Gods glory, and comfort of his Kingdomes.
               
            
         
         
            ¶A briefe Catalogue of the Princes of Wales, from the time that King Edward the firſt had conquered Wales, to this inſtant.
            1. EDward, borne at Caernaruon, & therefore called Edward of Caernaruon, being Sonne to king Edward of England, firſt of that name, was the firſt Prince of Wales of the Engliſh bloud, after the death of Prince Lhewelyn, and came to Cheſter, in the 29. year of his fathers raigne, where he receiued the homage of the frée-holders of Wales.
            
            2 Edward of Windſore, beeing eldeſt ſon to king Edward the ſecond, in the 15. yeare of his fathers raigne, was created Prince of VVales, and Duke of Aquitaine, in a Parlament holden at Yorke.
            
            3 Edward borne at Woodſtock, & ſonne and heyre to king Edward the third, in the 17. yeare of his Fathers raigne, was created Prince of Wales at London. This Prince was ſurnamed the Blacke Prince, hee tooke Iohn the French King priſoner, and dyed in the 46. yeare of his

age, his father yet liuing.
            4 Richard, ſonne to Edward the Black Prince, was created Prince of Wales at Hauering in the Bower, in the fiftie yeare, of king Edward the 3. his Grandfather, and was afterward king of England, by the name of king Richard the ſecond.
            5 Henry of Monmouth, ſonne and heire to king Henry the fourth, was in the firſt yeare of his fathers raigne, created Prince of Wales at VVeſtminſter.
            
            6 Edward of Weſtminſter, ſonne and heyre to king Henry the ſixt, in the 31. yeare of his Fathers raigne, was created Prince of wales, and Earle of Cheſter, at weſtminſter.
            
            7 Edward, eldeſt ſonne of king Edward the 4. borne in the Sanctuary at Weſtminſter, in the 11. yeare of his Fathers raigne, was created Prince of Wales, and Earle of Cheſter at London. He was afterward king of England, by the name of Edward the fift, but neuer crowned, becauſe both he and his Brother were made away, by the treachery of their Vnckle Richard, Duke of Gloceſter, that vſurped the Crowne.
            8 Edward, the onely Sonne of king Richard the third, being a child of ten years olde, in the firſt yeare of the ſaid kings raign, was created prince of wales at London.
            
            9 Arthur, ſonne and heire to king Henrie the ſeuenth, in the fift yeare of his Fathers raigne, was created Prince of wales at London: & dying at Ludlow Caſtle, in the 17. yeare of his

fathers raigne, was buried with great Funerall ſolemnity at Worceſter.
            
            10 Henry, Duke of Yorke, ſon to King Henry the ſeauenth, and Brother vnto Prince Arthur, was after the ſaide Princes death, in the ninetéenth yeare of his Fathers raigne, created Prince of Wales: and was afterward King of England, by the name of King Henry the 8. In the 26. yeare of his raigne, the Principality and Countrey of Wales, was (by Parliament) incorporated and vnited vnto the Kingdome of England, and all the Inhabitants thereof made equall in freedomes, liberties, rightes, priuiledges, lawes, and in all other reſpects, to the naturall ſubiects of England.
            
            11 Edward, ſonne to King Henry the eight, and borne at Hampton Court, the Principality of Wales, being incorporated (as hath bin ſayde) to the Crowne and kingdome of England, was no otherwiſe Prince of Wales, then vnder the generall Title of England, as the King his Father was king of England,
               Prince of Wales by general title and (vnder ye name) king of Wales, as it being a member of England. Nor do I read of any other creation or inueſture, that he had in that Principality. He was King after his Father, by the name of K. Edward 6.
            
               1. Princeſſe of Wales.1 Marie, Daughter to King Henry the eight by the Princeſſe Katherine Dowager, Widdow of Prince Arthur, was Princeſſe of Wales.
            
            
               2. Princeſſe of Wales.2 Elizabeth, Daughter alſo to King Henrie t
                  •
               e eight, was in a Parliament, in the 25. yeare

of her Fathers raigne, declared Princeſſe and Inheretrix of the crowne of England, with all dominions to the ſame belonging; and therefore was (as her Siſter) Princeſſe of Wales.
            
            All theſe fore-named Princes of Wales, were created (ſolemnely) by and in Court of Parliament, except three, which were Richard the ſecond, Edward the fifte, and Edward, Sonne to Richard the thyrde. Thoſe that were created out of Parliament, were Princes, whoſe fortunes proued hard and diſaſtrous: For Richard the ſecond was depoſed, and after murdered; Edward the fift was alſo murdered in the Tower of London; and Edward, ſonne to Richard the thirde, dyed within three moneths after, as a iuſt iudgement of God, for his Fathers wickedneſſe.
            12. Henrie, ſonne and heire to our dread Soueraigne King. Iames, in the eight yeare of his Fathers raigne ouer England,
               Prince of Wales by creation. &c. was created in the Court of Parliament at Weſtminſter, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and Rothſay, Earle of Cheſter, and Knight of the moſt Noble Order of the Garter: The ſtrong arme of Heauen be his continuall keeper and defender.
         
         
            
            Briefe Obſeruations, not vnfitly annexed to this our ſhort Summary of England.
            
               ¶Of Biſhopprickes, and their circuites.
               
                  Iuriſdiction of Canterb.
                  
                     CAnterbury erected firſt by Auguſtine the Monke, in the time of Ethelbert, king of Kent, by prouincial regiment, reacheth ouer all the South and weſt parts of this Lande, and Ireland alſo, and there are few ſhyres, wherein the Arch-byſhop hath not ſome peculiets. But in it ſelfe, as (from the beginning) was, and is proper to the See. It extendeth but ouer one parcell of Kent, which Rudburne calleth Cantwarland, the Iuriſdiction of Rocheſter including the reſt: ſo that in this one County, both the greateſt Archbiſhopricke, and leaſt Biſhoppricke are vnited together. Canterbury hath vnder it one Arch-deaconry, that hath iuriſdiction ouer 11. Deanries, or 161. Pariſh Churches. In time of popery, vndername of firſt fruites, it paide to Rome (at euery alienation) 10000. Ducats or Florens, beſide 5000. which the new elect did vſually pay for his pall, each ducat being then worth an Engliſh Crowne.
               
                  Iuriſdiction of Rocheſter.
                  Rocheſter, included within the limits of Kent, was erected alſo by Auguſtine, in the raygne of Ceolrijc, ouer the weſt-Saxons. It hath one Arch-Deacon, whoſe gouernement in ſpirituall cauſes, ruleth 3. Deanries, or 132. pariſh Churches,

whereby appeareth, that in Kent are 393. pariſh churches, whereof the ſaide two Arch-deacons haue cure and charge. It paid to Rome at the biſhops admiſſion, 1300. Ducats or Florens.
               
                  London was erected at firſt by king Lucius,
                  Iuriſdiction of London who made it an Archbiſhops See (as in due place hath already bin remembred) and ſo it continued till Auguſtine tranſlated that title to Canterbury. It includeth Eſſex, Middleſex, and parte of Hertfordſhire, containing (in quantity) the ancient Kingdome of the Eaſt-Angles, before it was vnited to the Weſt-Saxons. It hath foure Arch-deaconries, (viz.) London, Eſſex, Middleſex and Colcheſter, that haue vnder them 363. pariſh Churches, beſide peculiers. The Archdeaconry of S. Albanes, was added thereto by king Henry the eight, which hath alſo 25. pariſhes, whereof foure are in Buckingham, the reſt in Hertfordſhire. It payed to Rome, three thouſand Florens.
               
                  Chicheſter beganne in the Iſle of Seales or Seolſie,
                  Iuriſdiction of Chicheſter. and was tranſlated to Chicheſter in the time of William the Conqueror, when generall remoue of Sees was made, from ſmall Villages to greater Townes. It hath Suſſex onely vnder iuriſdiction, wherein are 16. Deanries, and 551 pariſh Churches: and paide to Rome (at euerie alienation) 333. Ducates.
               
                  VVincheſter, was giuen to Biri
                        •
                     us,
                  Iuriſdiction of wincheſt. & his ſucceſſors, by Kinigils & Oſwald, of the Northumbers, in whoſe time it was erected. It Gouerneth Hampſhire, Surrie, Iardſeie, Gardeſeie, and

the Iſle of Wight; contayning eight deanries, 276. Pariſh-Churches, beſide perpetuall Prelary of the Honourable Order of the Garter. It paid to Rome 12000. Ducates or Florens.
               
                  Iuriſdiction of Salisbury
                  Salisbury was made chiefe Sée of Shirbourne, by Byſhop Harman (Predeceſſour to Oſmond) who brought it from Shirbourne to that Cittie. It gouerneth Barkſhire, Wiltſhire, and Dorſetſhire. It paid to Rome 4000. Florens.
               
                  Iuriſdiction of Exceſter.
                  Exceſter hath Deuonſhire and Cornewall, ſometimes two ſeuerall Biſhoppricks, but (in the end) brought into one of Cornewall, and from thence to Exceſter, in the time of King William the Conqueror. It paid to Rome at euery alienation, ſixe thouſand Ducates or Florens.
               
                  Iuriſdiction of Bath.
                  Bath, the Sée whereof was ſometime at Wels, before Iohn (the biſhop there) annexed the church of Bath vnto it, which was in An. 1094. it hath Somerſetſhire onely, and it paide to the Court of Rome, 430. Florens.
               
                  Iuriſdiction of Worceſter.
                  Worceſter, hath VVorceſterſhire, and part of Warwickſhire; Before the Biſhopricke of Gloceſter was taken from it, it paid to the Pope two thouſand Ducates of Golde, at change of euerie Prelate. It began in the time of Offa, King of the Eaſt-Angles.
               
               
                  Iuriſdiction of Gloſter.
                  Gloceſter hath Gloceſterſhire onely, wherein are nine Deanries, and 294. Pariſh-Churches. It neuer paide any thing to Rome, becauſe it was erected by King Henry the eyght, when he had aboliſhed the Popes vſurped authority.
               
                  Iuriſdiction of Hereford
                  Hereford, hath Herefordſhire, and part of

                  Shropſhire. It paid to Rome at euery alienation 1800. Ducates.
               
                  Lichfielde, had Couentry added to it,Iuriſdiction of Lichfield in the raigne of King Henry the firſt, at the earneſt ſute of Robert, Biſhop of that Sée: It hath Staffordſhire, Darbiſhire, part of Shropſhire, and the reſt of Warwickſhire, voide of ſubiection to the Sée of VVorceſter. It was erected in the time of Penda, King of the South-Mercians: And paide to the Pope thrée thouſand Florens, at euery alienation.
               
                  Oxford, hath Oxfordſhire onely,Iuriſdiction of Oxford. & neuer paide any taxation to Rome, being erected by K. Henry the eight.
               
                  Elie, hath Cambridgeſhire, and the Iſle of Elie, being at firſt a wealthy Abbey;Iuriſdiction of Elie. it was erected by King Henry the firſt, in Anno 1109. It paid to the Pope at euery alienation, 7000. Ducates.
               
                  Norwich,
                  Iuriſdiction of Norwich called in elder times Epiſcopatus Donnicenſis, Dononiae, or Aeſtanglorum, was firſt erected at Felſtow, or Felixſtow; afterward remoued to Donwich; thence to Helmham; next to Theodford, or Thetford; and laſtly (in the Conquerours time) to Norwich. It contayneth Norffolke and Suffolke onely, but (at firſt) included Cambridgeſhire alſo, and ſo much as lay within the Kingdome of the Eaſt-Angles. It began vnder Cerpenwald, King of the Eaſt-Saxons; and paid to Rome 5000. Ducates. It contained ſometime 1563. Pariſh-Churches, beſide 88. religious Houſes; but now wee heare of no more then 1200.
               
                  
                  Iuriſdiction of Peterborow.
                  Peterborow, ſometimes a notable Monaſtery, hath Northampton and Rutlandſhires, beeing a Dioceſſe erected likewiſe by King Henrie the eyght, and neuer paied firſt Fruites to the Pope.
               
                  Iuriſdiction of Briſtow.
                  Briſtow, hath Dorſetſhire, ſometime belonging to Salisbury: a Sée alſo erected by king Henry the eight.
               
                  Iuriſdiction of Lincoln.
                  Lincolne, of all other (of late times) was the greateſt, and albeit that (out of it) were taken the Sées of Oxford and Peterborow; yet it ſtill retaineth Lincolne, Leiceſter, Huntingdon, Bedford, Buckingham ſhires, and the reſt of Hertfordſhire, extending it ſelf from Thames to Humber. It paied to the Pope at euery alienation, 5000. Ducates: and began in the time of King William Rufus. Thus much of the Biſhoprickes in Lhoegres or England, as it was left to Locrine; now goe we to VVales.
               
               
                  Iuriſdiction of Landaffe.
                  Landaffe, or the Church of Taw, hath Eccleſiaſticall Iuriſdiction in Glamorgan, Monmouth, Brechnoch, and Radnor ſhires, and paide 700. Ducates to Rome, at euery exchange of Prelat. But it was a poore aunſwere (vppon call) of the incumbent, in Court before the Lord Preſident, when hée ſayd: The Daffe is héere, but the Land is gone.
               
                  Iuriſdiction of S. DauidsS. Dauids, hath Pembroke and Caermardineſhires, whoſe liuery and firſt fruites to the Sée of Rome, was 1500. Ducates.
               
                  Iuriſdiction of Bangor.
                  Bangor is in North-wales, and hath Caernaruon, Angleſeie, and Merioneth ſhires: and paid

to Rome, 126. Ducates.
               S. Aſaphes, hath Preſtholme,
                  Iuriſdiction of Saint Aſaphes. and part of Denbigh, and Flint Shires, in eccleſiaſticall Iuriſdiction, and is the leaſt in circuite in VVales, amounting (in all) not to one good Countie; yet it paied to Rome at euery alienation, 470. Ducates. Hitherto of the Prouince of Canterburie, for ſo much thereof as now lieth within compaſſe of this Iſland.
               The Archbiſhops Sée of Yorke was reſtored about the yeare of Grace 625. in the time of Eadwin, king of Northumberland,York & her Iuriſdiction. Paulinus ſitting as firſt Byſhoppe there, by ordination of Iuſtus Arch-biſhop of Canterbury. It hath Iuriſdiction ouer Yorkeſhire, Nottinghamſhire, and the reſt of Lancaſhire (not ſubiect to the Sée of Cheſter.) It paied to Rome 1000. Ducates, beſide 5000. for the pall of the new elect.
               
                  Cheſter vpon Dee,
                  Iuriſdiction of Cheſter. otherwiſe called Weſtcheſter, hath Cheſterſhire, Darbiſhire, the moſt part of Lancaſhire, euen to the Ribell, Richmond, & a part of Flint and Denbighſhires in Wales. It was made a Byſhoppricke by Henry the eyght, An. regni 33. Iuly 16.
               
                  Durham, hath the County of Durham,
                  Iuriſdiction of Durham. & Northumberland, with the Dales; the Biſhops haue bin (ſometimes) Earles Palantines, ruling vnder name and ſucceſſion of Saint Cuthbert. It paid to Rome 9000. Ducates, at euery alienation.
               
                  Caerleill,
                  Iuriſdiction of Caerleill. was erected Anno 1132. by king Henry the firſt, and hath Cumberland & VVeſtmerland in rule. It paid to the Pope a thouſand Florens.
               
                  
                  Biſh. of ManThere is another Biſhopricke, called the Sée of Mona, or Man, ſomtime named Epiſcopatus Sodorenſis, whereof one VVimundus was ordained the firſt Biſhop, and Iohn the ſecond, in the troubleſome time of king Stephen. But the guift of this Prelacy is ſaid to reſt in the Earls of Darby, to nominate thereto (from time to time) ſuch as they déeme conuenient.
            
            
               ¶Of the Colledges in Cambridge and Oxford and their Founders.
               
                  In Cambridge.
                  
                     Years of the foundationsColledges. by Founders.
                  
                     1546
                     1. Trinity Colledge. by King Henry the 8. King Henry the ſixt,
                  
                     1441
                     2. The Kings Col. by Edward the fourth, Henry the 7. Hen. 8.
                  
                  
                     1511
                     3. Saint Iohns. by L. Margaret, grandmother to Henry 8.
                  
                  
                     1505
                     4. Chriſts Colledge. by K Hen. 6. and Lady Marg. before named.
                  
                     1446
                     5. The Quéens col. by Lady Margaret, wife to Henry the ſixt.
                  
                     1496
                     6. Ieſus Colledge. by Iohn Alcock, biſhop of Elie.
                  
                  
                     1342
                     7. Bennet Colledge. by The Brethren of a Guild, cald Cor. Chr.
                  
                  
                     1343
                     8 Pembroke Hall. by Maria de Valencia, Counteſſe of Pembr.
                  
                  
                     
                     9. Peter Colledge. by Hugh Balſham,
                     1256 byſhop of Elie.
                  
                  
                     10. Gundeuill, and Caius Colledge. by Edmund Gundeuil,
                     1348 Parſon of Tertington, and Iohn Caius, Doctour of Phiſicke.
                  
                     11. Trinity Hall. by VVilliam Bateman,
                     1354 biſhop of Norwich.
                  
                  
                     12. Clare Hall. by Rich. Badow,
                     1326 Chanceller of Cambridg.
                  
                  
                     13. Katherine Hall. by Robert Woodlark,
                     1459 Doctor of diuinity.
                  
                     14. Magdalen Colle. by Edward D. of Buck,
                     1519 and Tho. L. Audley.
                  
                  
                     15. Emanuell Colle. by Sir VValter Mildmay, &c.
                     1585
                  
               
               
                  In Oxford.
                  
                     1. Chriſtes Church.1539 by King Henry the eight.
                  
                     2. Magdalen colledge by Wil. Wainfleet,
                     1459 firſt fellow of Merton Colledge, then ſcholler of Wincheſter, and afterward Biſhop there.
                  
                     3. New Colledge. by Wil. Wickham.
                     1375. Byſhop of Wincheſter.
                  
                  
                     4. Merton colledge. by Walter Merton,
                     1276 Byſhop of Rocheſter.
                  
                  
                     5. All Soules Colledge. by Hen. Chichelie,
                     1437 Arch biſhop of Canterbury
                  
                  
                     6. Corpus Chriſti Colledge. by Richard Fox,
                     1516 Biſhop of Wincheſter.
                  
                  
                     7. Lincoln colledge. by Richard Fleming,
                     1430 biſhop

of Lincolne.
                  
                  
                     1323
                     8. Auriell Colledge. by Abraham Browne, Almoner to K. Ed. 2.
                  
                  
                     1340
                     9. Quéens colledge. by R. Eglesfield, Chaplaine to Phillip, Queene and Wife to King Edward the third.
                  
                     1263
                     10. Balioll Colledge by Iohn Baliol, king of Scotland.
                  
                  
                     1557
                     11. Saint Iohns colledge. by Sir Thomas White, Lord Mayor of London.
                  
                     1556
                     12. Trinity Colledge by Sir Thomas Pope Knight.
                  
                     1316
                     13. Exceſter colledge by Walter Stapleton, biſhop of Exceſter.
                  
                  
                     1517
                     14. Brazen-noſe. by William Smith, Biſhop of Lincolne.
                  
                  
                     873
                     15. Vniuerſity Col. by William Archdeacon of Du
                           •
                        eſme.
                  
                  
                     16. Gloceſter Colledge. by Iohn Gifford, who made it a Cell for 13 Monkes.
                  
                     17. Ieſus Colledge. by Hugh ap Rice, Doctor of the Ciuill-law.
                  
               
               
                  Hoſtels or Hals in Oxford.
                  
                     Broade-gates.
                  
                  
                     Hart Hall.
                  
                  
                     Magdalen Hall.
                  
                  
                     Alburne Hall.
                  
                  
                     Poſtminſter Hall.
                  
                  
                     Saint Mary Hall.
                  
                  
                     White Hall.
                  
                  
                     New Inne.
                  
                  
                     Edmund Hall.
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The Names of the Shires in England and Wales.
               
                  THE firſt tenne Shires do lye betwéene the Brittiſh Sea, and the Thames, according to Polydore.
               
                  Kent.
                  Suſſex.
                  Surrey.
                  Hampſhire.
                  Barkſhire.
                  Wiltſhire.
                  Dorſetſhire.
                  Sommerſetſhire.
                  Deuonſhire.
                  Cornewall.
               
               
                  On the North-ſide of the Thames, betwéene it and Trent, which paſſeth thorough the midſt of England, are 16. other Shires, ſixe toward the Eaſt, and the other toward the weſt.
                  
                     Eſſex, ſometime all Forreſt, ſaue one hundred.
                     
                     Middleſex.
                     Hertfordſhire.
                     Suffolke.
                     Norffolke.
                     Cambridgeſhire, wherein are twelu hundreds.
                     
                     Bedfordſhire.
                     Huntingdon, wherein are foure hundreds.
                     
                     Buckingham.
                     Oxford.
                     Northampton.
                     Rutland.
                     Leiceſterſhire.
                     Nottinghamſhire.
                     Warwickſhire.
                     Lincolnſhire.
                  
                  There are ſix alſo weſtward, toward Wales.

                     Gloceſter.
                     Hereford.
                     Worceſter.
                     Shropſhire.
                     Stafford.
                     Cheſterſhire.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Theſe are the 32. Shires, which lye by South of the Riuer Trent; beyond which Riuer, there are other eight.
                  
                     Darby.
                     Yorke.
                     Lancaſter.
                     Cumberland.
                     Weſtmerland.
                     Richmond, wherein are fiue Wapentakes; And when it is accounted as a parcell of Yorkſhire (out of which it is taken) then is it reputed for the whole Riding.
                     
                     Durham.
                     Northumberland.
                  
                  So that in the portion ſomtime called Lhoegria, there are now forty Shires. In Wales alſo there be thirtéen, whereof ſeauen are in South Wales.

                     Cardigan, or Cereticon.
                     Penmoroke, or Penbroke.
                     Caermardin, wherein are nine hundreds or Commots.
                     
                     Glamorgan.
                     Monmouth.
                     Brecknocke.
                     Radnor.
                  
                  In North-wales likewiſe are ſixe.
                  
                     Angleſcie.
                     Caernaruon.
                     Merioneth.
                     Denbigh.
                     Flint.
                     Montgomerie.
                  
               
               Which beeing added to thoſe of England, doe make vp 53. Shieres or Counties.
            
            
               
               ¶ A Briefe Collection, of the Originall, Antiquity, Increaſe and Moderne eſtate of the honourable Citty of London.
               To the Worſhipfull, M. Cornelius Fiſh, Eſquire, and Chamberlaine of the ſaide moſt famous Cittie.
               
                  COncerning the name of this auncient and worthy Citty,The names by diuers giuen to London. by diuers Authors it hath bin (as diuerſly) deſcanted on: Tacitus, Ptolomeus, and Antoninus called it Londinium and Longidinium: Amianus Marcellinus tearmed it Lundinum and Auguſta: Stephen (in his Citties) calleth it 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : our Britaines, Lundayn: the old Saxons, Londonceaſter, or Londonbeig; Strangers, Londra and Londres; and the Inhabitants, London. By other writers (whom ſome iudge fabulous) it hath bin called Troia-noua, or Troynouant, New Troy, according to the Name that Brute (firſt founder thereof) gaue it: Dinas Belin, Belins Citty; & Caer-Lud, or Luds-Towne, of King Lud: who not onely re-edified, but alſo gaue it that name. Eraſmus deriued it from Lindum, a Cittye in the Iſle of Rhodes: and ſo (by variety of iudgements) it hath run into the like variety of names. In which ſtraunge ſtreame of opinion, howe a man may beſt carry himſelfe,

without impeach to any, is, freely to leaue each man maiſter of his owne coniecture: whether Londons true name took originall from any of theſe fore-mentioned, or whether Woodes and Groues (being named in ye 
                  Britiſh toong L'lhwn) London ſhould receiue her title, by way of excellency,Caeſar and Strabo, alledged by M. Camden and be called, The Citty, or A City thicke of Trees, becauſe the Britains called thoſe woods and Groues by the names of Citties & Townes, which they had fenced with trees caſt downe and plaſhed, to ſtop vp all paſſage.
               
                  London burnt by the Danes.But leauing the name, we finde that London was burnt and deſtroyed (howe faire ſoeuer it was built before) by the Danes, and other Pagan enemies, about the yeare of Chriſt, 839. but afterward, in the yeare, 886. Alfred, King of the weſt-Saxons, both reſtored, repayred, and made it honourably habitable: giuing the charge and keeping thereof, to his Sonne in Law Ethelred, Earle of the Mercians, with whom hee had formerly married his Daughter Ethelfleda. That it was ſtrongly defenced with wals, I read, that the Londoners did ſhut vp their gates, and manfully withſtood the Danes,
                  Wil. Malinſbury. preſeruing their king Ethelred within their wals; this was in Anno Chriſti, 994. Alſo in Anno 1016. when Edmund Ironſide gouerned the VVeſt-Saxons, Canutus the Dane brought hys Fleete to the Weſt part of the bridge, and threw a trench about the Citty, as hoping by aſſault to win it: but the Citizens repulſed him, and droue him from theyr walles. Thoſe walles were (from time to time)

wel maintained & repayred:Maintenance of the wals. with ſtones from the Iewes broken houſes, in King Iohns iime, 1215. when the Barons (entring by Ealdgate, or Aldgate) brake their houſes downe. And in K. Henries time the thirde, when the walles and gates were repayred (in more ſéemely wiſe then before) at the common charge of the Citty. The circuite of London wall on the landes ſide, is meaſured thus. From the Tower of London in the Eaſt,London wall in circuite. to Ealdgate, commonly called Aldgate, 82. perches. From Algate to Byſhopſgate, 86. perches: From Byſhopſgate in the North, to the Poſtern of Cripleſgate, 162. perches. From Cripleſgate to Ealderſgate, or Eldrich gate, 75. perches. From Ealderſgate to Newgate, 66. perches. From Newgate in the Weſt, to Ludgate, 42. perches, amounting in all to 513. perches of Aſſize. From Ludgate to the Fleete Dike, 60. perches. From Fleet-bridge South, to the Riuer of Thames, about 70. perches. Which perches (in compleat number) riſe to 643. each perch contayning fiue yards and an halfe: which in yards doe amount to 3536. & an halfe, containing 10608. foote, that make vp two Engliſh miles, & more by 608. foote.
               There were but foure Gates (at firſt) made in the wall of this Citty, viz: Aldgate, Eaſtward;Four Gates & no more in elder time. 
                  Alderſgate, North-ward; Ludgate, Weſtward; and the Bridge-gate (ouer Thames) South-ward. But other Gates and Poſterns (for eaſe and conueniency of paſſage) were afterwarde made, as mens affayres required to other quarters

of the Citty.The Poſterne gate by the Tower. A Poſterne gate was ſomtime neere to the Tower of London, which decaying by length of time, and a deepe Ditch made without the wall, it fell downe in the year, 1440. the eighteenth of King Henry the ſixt, and was neuer after builte againe: but a plaine Cottage of Timber, Lath, and Loame, with a narrow paſſage, being erected inſtead thereof, it ſo continueth.Aldgate. 
                  Aldgate was next in the Eaſt, ſo named by the antiquity thereof: for it was ſo called in king Edgars time: and the Soke or Franchiſe (wyth the Port of Aldgate, and all cuſtoms thereto appertaining) were likewiſe giuen by Matilda (Q. to Henry the firſt) to the Priour of the B. Trinitie, within Aldgate (and by her founded) in as ample and free maner as ſhe enioyed them.Biſhopſgate The third was Biſhopſgate toward the North, built by ſome Biſhop of London, as is imagined, for other certainty is not as yet found, which Gate did much eaſe to ſuch as trauailed Eaſt, and by North, as to Norffolke, Suffolke, Cambridgeſhire, &c. becauſe before the erection thereof, ſuch as iournied out at Aldgate, of neceſſity helde on to the miles end, and turning them on the lefte hand to Blethon-hall, now Bednal-Greene, r
                     •
                  de directly to Cambridge Heath, and ſo tooke their iournies North, or Eaſt, and by North, or occaſion required. Otherwiſe, refuſing Aldgate way, they had no other helpe then out at Alderſgate, through Alderſgate ſtreete, and Goſwell ſtreet, now tearmed Pickt-hatch, towards Iſeldon, and by a Croſſe of ſtone on their right hand,

ſet vp for a marke by the North end of Goldinglane; paſſed throgh a long ſtreet (yet called Ald-ſtreete, or Old-ſtreet) to another Croſſe by Sewers ditch Church, where now ſtands a ſmiths Fordge, and there they turned againe North-wards, to Totenham, Enfield, waltham, ware, &c. This Biſhopſgate,
                  The Eaſterlings. the Dutch Marchants of the Haunce, Stiliard, or Guildhalla Tentonicorum, were bound by couenant, both to repayre and defend, at all times of daunger and extremity. The fourth, was a Poſterne, now called Mooregate, which one Thomas Faulconer,
                  Mooregate. Maior of London, An. 1413. and third of Henry the fift, cauſed to be made there on the Moores ſide, where neuer Gate was before: that people might paſſe vpon cauſe-wayes into the fielde for recreation, becauſe the fielde was then a mariſh. The fift Gate was the Poſterne of Cripleſgate,
                  Cripleſgate. ſo called long before the Conqueſt, in regarde of Criples begging there: and the body of S. Edmond the Martyre was brought into London thereat, when it was conuayed from Bedriſworth (now called Bury S. Edmunds) thorough the Eaſt Saxons Kingdome, to the pariſh church of S. Gregory, neere to the Cathedrall church of S. Paul, where it reſted 3. daies. This poſterne of Crippleſgate, was a priſon of commitment for Cittizens and others, being arreſted for debte or common treſpaſſes, as now the Compters are:Fabians manuſcript. & it was new builded by the Brewers of London, An. 1244. But in An. 1483. Edmund Shaa, or Shaw, Goldſmith and Maior of London, gaue

                  400. Markes by his will, and ſtuffe of the Olde gate, to builde it againe new, as now it is, which his executors performed in the yeare, 1491. The ſixt was Aldreſgate, or Alderſgate, not Aldrich,
                  Alderſgate. 
                  Elders or Elderngate, as deriued from ancient men that builded it, or trées there ſometime growing: but from antiquity of the gate it ſelfe, being one of the foure that were firſt builded, and to ſerue the North-parts, as Aldgate did for the Eaſt, both bearing the name of Aldgate, and Alder or Alderſgate, to differ their ſeniority in building. The 7. was a Poſterne gate made in the 6. yeare of Edw. the 6. in the Wall of the diſſolued cloyſter of Gray F
                        •
                     iers, now cald Chriſts Church and Hoſpitall,Chriſts hoſpital poſtem ſeruing for paſſage to S. Bartholmewes in Smithfield. The 8. weſt and by North, was called Newgate, becauſe it was later buylded then the reſt,New-gate. by reaſon that S. Pauls Church being burned in the Conquerors time, about the yeare 1086. Mauritius, then biſh. of London, not repayring ye old church, but ſeeking to begin another, extended ye work in ſuch largenes of ground, that al paſſage from Aldgate in the Eaſt to Ludgate in the weſt, was almoſt ſtopt vp. Whereupon this gate was firſt deuiſed and made, and ſo named: ſeruing aptly for paſſage & cariages, from Aldgate, along Cornhil, through Weſt-cheap, & S. Nicholas Shambles, and the Market taking name of Newgate, to any Weſtward part ouer Oldborne bridge; or turning (without the gate) into Smithfield, to Iſeldon. or any part North & by weſt. It hath bin a Gaole or priſon for ſellons

& other offenders long time, as the records in K. Iohns time teſtifieth. And in an. 1422. the firſt of Henry 6. the executors to Richard Whittington had licenſe to reedify the ſaid gate,Ludgate. which they did with his goods. The 8. gate was Ludgate in the weſt, builded by k. Lud, before Chriſts natiuitie, 66. years, ſeruing for the weſt, as Aldgate for the Eaſt, & was repaired with the ſtones of ye 
                  Iewes defaced houſes, when the Barons were in armes in k. Iohns time, as Aldgate & the other gates thē were. A notable teſtimony to confirm this aſſertion, apeared in the year 158
                        •
                     . when the gate was taken downe to be new builded, for a ſtone was then found in the wal, which had bin taken from one of thoſe Iewes houſes, with this Inſcription thereon (but in Hebrew Caracters) Haec eſt ſtatio Rabbi Moſes, filij inſignis Rabbi Iſaac: This is the ſtation or ward of Rabbi Moſes, ſon of the honorable Rabbi Iſaac. And it ſeemed to haue bin fixed in the front of ſome one of the Iewes houſes, as a note or ſigne, yt ſuch a one dwelled there. It was made a frée priſon in the 1. yeare of K. Richard 2. Nicholas Brembar being then maior, & after confirmed (in the time of Iohn Northampton Maior 1382) by a common Counſel in the Guild-hal, ye fréemen of the City, for debt, trepaſſes,Ludgate made a free priſon. accounts & contempts, ſhold be impriſoned in Ludgate, & for treaſons, fellonies, murders, and other criminall offences, Newgate ſhould be the priſon. Laſtly, there is alſo a breach in the Citty Wall, and a Bridge made of Timber ouer the Fleete Dike, betwixte Fleete-bridge and Thames, directlie ouer

againſt the Houſe of Bride-Well, but it is not as (as I thinke) called any Gate.
               
                  The South ſide of London.Now concerning the South-ſide of the Citty, and that it was ſometime walled too, the Citty being then round engirt with a Wal: the Teſtimony of William Fitz-Stephen (who wrote in the raigne of King Henry the ſecond) may ſerue to approue it,William Fitz Stephē his words. for theſe are his very wordes. The Wall is high and great, well towred on the North-ſide, with due diſtances betweene the Towers. On the South-ſide alſo, the Citty was walled and towred: but the Fiſhfull Riuer of Thames, with his ebbing and flowing, hath long ſince ſubuerted them. If then wee ſhall ſpeake of Water-Gates,Water gates as already wee haue done of Land-gates, and, being now in the weſt, returne towards the Eaſt; the firſt then was called Ripa Reginae, the Queens-banck, or Queens Hith,
                  Queenes-Hith. deſeruing well to bee eſtéemed a Water-Gate, and the very chiefe of the Citty, beeing a common Strand or landing place, equall with, and (in olde time) farre excelling Belines-Gate. For, beſide the antiquity thereof, and to whom, (in thoſe daies) it ſeuerally appertained; I finde that King Henry the third, in the ninth of his raigne, commaunded the Conſtables of the Tower of London, to arreſt the Shippes of the Cinque-Portes on the Riuer of Thames,
                  The Stilyard, or Guilda-Halla Teutonicorum. and compell them to bring their Corne and Fiſh to no other place, but to the Queenes-Hith only. And when corn arriued betwéen the Gate of Guilde-Hall, of the Merchantes of Colleyne, and the

Soke of the Arch-biſhop of Canterbury (for hee had then a Houſe néere to the Blacke-Fryers) it was not to bee meaſured by any other quarter, then that of the Quéenes Soke or Hith, on paine of forty ſhillinges amercement. Afterward, Queenes-Hith, and the Farme thereof (granted by Richard Earle of Cornewall) was by the ſaid King Henry the third, confirmed to Iohn Giſors then Maior, the Comminaltie of London, and their Succeſſours for euer (as appeareth by his royall Charter) for the ſum of fifty poundes. It was alſo ordained by King Edward the fourth, that all Shippes, Veſſels, or Boates, bringing prouiſion of Victuall to the Cittie (of what quality ſoeuer) if but one Veſſell only: it came to the Queenes-Hith; if two, the one to Quéenes-Hithe, the other to Belins-gate; if thrée,The order for the Citties prouiſion, at Belins gate, and Queenes-hithe. two to Quéenes-Hithe, the third to Belins-gate, &c. ſo that (alwaies) the more part came to Quéenes-Hithe. But if the Veſſel were ſo great, comming with Salt or otherwiſe, from the Bay, and could not conueniently come to theſe Gates or Keyes; it was then to bee conuaied to them, (as afore-ſaid) by Lighters.
               
                  Downe-gate is the next,Downe-gate. and was ſo named (as is ſuppoſed) by reaſon of the waies ſuddaine deſcent or ſtooping, from Saint Iohns Church in Walbroke, to the Riuer of Thames. It was ſome-time a large Water-gate, frequented with Shippes and veſſels, like to the Queenes-Hithe; and appeared (by an Inquiſition, in the twentie eight yeare of Henry the third) to be a part thereof,

being ordered by the cuſtomes thereto belonging.
               
                  Wolfeſgate
                  Wolfes-gate, now out of vſe; one part being builded on by the Earle of Shrewsbury, the other by the Chamberlain of London, and now called Cold-Harbor.
               
               
                  Ebgate.
                  Ebgate, ſo called of olde time: but now it is a narrow paſſage to the Thames, called Ebgatelane, or old Swan.
               
               
                  Oyſter-gate
                  Oyſter-gate, ſo called of Oyſters vſually there ſold, as chiefeſt market for them, and other ſhellfiſh. There now ſtands the water-engine, that ſerues the Citty with water, made in the yeare 1582. by Peter Moris, Dutchman.
               
               
                  Bridge-gate.
                  Bridge-gate, ſo called of London Bridge, whereon it ſtandeth, béeing one of the Citties firſt foure and principall Gates, and long before the Conqueſt, when there (then) ſtood a bridge of Timber.
               
                  Buttolphs-gate.
                  Buttolphs-gate, ſo called of the Pariſh-church of S. Buttolph néer adioyning: which Gate was ſome-time giuen, and confirmed by William the Conqueror, to the Monkes of Weſtminſter, by vertue of a former guift, which Almundus (of the Port of S. Buttolph) gaue them, when hée was there made Monke.
               
                  Belins-gate.
                  Belins-gate, or Belingſgate, the largeſt water-gate now on the Thames, and moſt frequented. Belin, a King of the Brittons (according to Geffrey of Monmouth) firſt built it, and gaue it his owne name, about 400. years before Chriſts Natiuity.
               
                  There are two Water-gates more,Two water gates. one on the weſt-ſide of Wooll-wharffe, or Cuſtomers Key, beautifully enlarged and built of late: This gate is commonly called the Water-Gate, at South end of Water-lane. The other, by the Tower Bulwarke, and is the laſt and turtheſt Water-gate Eaſt-ward. Beſide theſe common Water-gates, there were then diuers priuate wharffes & Keies, all along from Eaſt to Weſt of the Cittie, on the banck of the Riuer of Thames.
               
               Before we part further frō this famous riuer,London-bridge. let vs here remēber Londonbridge ouer it, which, before there was any bridge at al, or it a bridge of timber, there was a Ferry kept in the ſame place, & no other paſſage was there then to Southwark, but by the Ferry onely. The Ferry-man and his Wife dying, left this Ferry to their only daughter, named Mary; who (with her Parents goods left her, & the profits ariſing from the Ferry) built a houſe of Siſters,S. Marie Oueries. where the Eaſt part of S. Mary Oueries Church (aboue the Quier) now ſtandeth, and where ſhe her ſelfe was buried; giuing them alſo the ouer ſight & benefits of the ferry. Afterward this houſe of Siſters (being conuerted to a Colledge of Prieſtes) the Prieſtes builded the Bridge of timber, and kept it in good reparations,Londonbridge of Timber. till the continuall charges growing ouer-burthenous, about the yeare 1176. the courſe of the Riuer being then turned another way, for a time, by a trench purpoſely deuiſed (beginning about Rodriffe, or Redriffe in the Eaſt, and ending aboue Patrickſeie, or Baterſey in the weſt) the Bridge

of ſtone began to be founded, and continued 33. yeares in building.London bridge of Timber burnt. The Bridge of timber, in the yeare 1136. was burnt down by fire, but in An. 1163. it was not only repaired, but new made of Timber againe, by one Peter of Cole-Church, Prieſt and Chaplaine: who alſo began the foundation of the Stone-bridge, ſom-what néer to the Timber-bridge, and liued till within foure years of the works ending, being buried in a Chappell erected on the Bridge: But the whole bridge of ſtone, was finiſhed by the worthy Merchants of London, Setle Mercer, Wil. Almaine, & Benedict Botewrite, principal Maiſters of that work.
               Other bridges of ſtone, alſo belonging to the City,Fleetbridge as Fleetbridge without Ludgate, made at the charges of Iohn Wels, Maior, Anno. 1431. Oldborne-bridge,
                  Oldbourne bridge. ſo called of a Bourne, which ſometime ran down Old-borne. Cowbridge, by Cow-bridge-ſtreet,
                  Cowbridge or Cow-lane; which beeing decaied, another of timber was made by Chicklane. Beſide, there were other Bridges ouer the Town-ditch, as without Aldgate, Biſhopſgate, Mooregate, Cripples-gate, Alderſgate, the Poſterne of Chriſts Hoſpitall, Newgate, and Ludgate, al paued ouer with ſtone, and leuelled with the ſtréets: beſide diuers bridges (in elder times) ouer the courſe of Walbrooke.
               
               While wee are thus ſpeaking of Water and Bridges, belonging to the Citty, heere I thinke it moſt conuenient alſo, to ſay ſomewhat concerning the Conduits,Of the Cō
                     duites. and ſwéete-waters conuaied to them by Pipes of Lead. The firſt Ceſterne

whereof (caſtellated with Stone in the Citty of London) was called the great Conduit in Weſtcheap,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   which was begun to be builded in the year 1285. Henry Wales, then being Maior.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   The Tonne vpon Cornehill, was ceſterned in Anno. 1401. Iohn Chadworth then being Maior. Boſſes of water, at Belins-gate; by Paules-wharffe, and by S. Gyles Church without Cripples-gate, were made about the yeare 1423.
               
               Water was brought to the Standard in weſt Cheape, about the yeare 1431.
                  The S
                        •••
                     
                     dard 
                        〈…〉
                      cheap▪
                   And King Henry the ſixt, in An. 1442. granted to Iohn Hatharley, Mayor, licence to take vppe 200. Fodar of Lead, for the building of Conduites; a common Granery, and of a new Croſſe in Weſt-Cheape, for Honor of the Citty.
               The Conduit in Aldermanbury,
                  Conduits Alderman burie and Fleeſtreets. and the Standard in Fleet-ſtreet, were made and finiſhed by the executors of Sir Wil. Eaſtfield, in An. 147
                        •
                     . A Ceſterne was alſo added to the Standard in Fleet-ſtreet; a ſecond made at Fléet-bridge; and another without Cripples-gate, in An. 1478.
               
               The Conduit in Graſſe-ſtreet, in An. 1491.
               
               The Conduit at Old-bourne Croſſe, about 1498. and made new againe by Maſter William Lambe, 1577. with an help alſo at Old-bournebridge.
               
               The little Conduite, commonly tearmed the Piſſing-Conduit, by the Stocks-Market, about 1500.
               
               The Conduit at Biſhops-gate, 1513.
               
               The Conduit at London-wall, 1528.
               
               
                  The Conduit without Aldgate, 1535.
               
               The Conduite in Lothbury and Colman-ſtreet, 1546.
               
               The Conduit of Thames-water, at Downe-gate, 1568.
               
               Nor may I hear forget the ſtandard of Thames water by Leaden-hall, which being deriued from the forcier of water, made by Peter Moris forenamed, aſcending vp ouer the ſtéeple of S. Magnus Church, at the north end of London bridge, conuaieth water into many mens houſes in Thames ſtreete, New-Fiſh-ſtreete, Graſſe-ſtreete; And ſo mounteth vp ſtil in Pipes, to the North-weſt corner of Leaden-Hall (the higheſt ground in al the Citty) where the waſt of the maine Pipe riſing into this ſtandard (prouided at the cities charge) at euery tide was prouided to run forth 4. waies, at foure ſeuerall ſpouts, for plentiful ſeruice of the néere adioyning Inhabitants, and cleanſing the Channels paſſing thoſe foure ſeuerall waies.
               The Conduits of Thames-water, by the Pariſh-Churches of S. Mary Magdalen, and Saint Nicholas Cold-Abbey, neere to old Fiſh-ſtréete, were made in An. 1583. Beſide the water▪ Forcier by London Bridge, before remembred, and another (made ſince) néere to Broken-wharffe, for conueiance of Thames-water into mens Houſes, by an Engliſh gentleman, named M. Beuis Bulmar, in An. 1594. Nor will wee forget the new Conduit, lately built by Alderſgate, & Thames-water alſo thither conuaied, by an Engliſh Gentleman, named Thomas Hayes, in An. 1610.
               
               
                  Come we now to the ancient deuiſion of this worthy Citty, which (as Fitz-Stephen, ſayeth,The Citties deuiſion into Wardes. foure hundred yeares agoe.) This Citty, euen as Rome, is deuided into Wards. It hath yearelie Sheriffes, inſtead of Conſuls; and hath the dignitie of Senators, in Aldermen. Thoſe wards, both before, and in the raigne of Henry the third, were 
                     
                        •
                     4. in number, 13, lying on the Eaſt-ſide of Walbrooke, and 11. on the Weſt: but thoſe Wards in the weſt, growing in greatnes to ex
                  
                     •
                  e the other in the Eaſt: in Anno 1393. and 2. of Richard the ſecond. Faringdon Ward, (being then one entire ward) was by Parliament deuided into two, alſo tearmed Faringdon within, Faringdon without, and allowed to haue two Aldermen. So ye twelue wards were then on the weſt ſide of Wa
                        •
                     brooke, and the whole number made 25. wards. The Liberties of the Borough of South-warke, were afterwarde purchaſed by the Maior. C
                     •
                  mminalty, and Cittizens, and added to London
                  ▪ as the 26. warde,26. wards, 26. Aldermē
                   in An. 1150. whereby the number of Alder-men grewe to bee 26. But becauſe my purpoſed breuity, kéeps within the Cities bounds only, and not (at this time, till publication of my generall Chronicle of London and Middleſex, euen ſo farre as the Lorde Maior and Sheriffes power extendeth) permits mee to exceede that compaſſe; I ſhall nowe ſay nothing, eyther of South-warke, or Londons Subburbs.
               
                  Portſoken ward (ſo named of the Franchiſe of Aldgate) was ſomtime a Guild,Portſoken Ward. and beganne in

King Edgars time, aboue 600. yeares ſince, being called Knighten Guilde,
                  K
                        •
                     hten Guilde. of 13. poore knights or Souldiors, that (being fauoured by the King and Land, for (ſeruice done them) had a parcel of Land granted them on the Citties Eaſt ſide, and liberty of a Guild for euer. Prouided, that each of them ſhould victoriouſly accompliſhe 3. combates; one aboue ground, one vnder ground; & the third in the water: Alſo, at a certaine day appointed, they ſhoulde run with Speares in Eaſt Smithfield, againſt all commers: all which, they worthily performed, and therefore the King called it Knighten Guilde. I read but of one pariſh church in this ward, which is called S. Buttolph without Algate, and a ſmall pariſh Church, for the Inhabitants of the Cloſe, ſometime called S. Trinity, afterward the Minories. This Portſoken Ward hath an Alderman, and his Deputy, ſire common Counſellors, foure Conſtables, four Scauengers eighteen wardmote Enqueſtmen, and a Beadle. It is ſeſſed at foure pounde, ten ſhillings, for the fifteene.
               
                  To
                        •••
                     ſtreet W
                        ••
                     d.
                  Tower-ſtreet ward, is the firſt warde within London-wall Eaſt-ward. In which ward are thrée pariſh churches, viz. Alhallowes Barking, S. Olaue in Hart-ſtreet, and S. Dunſtane in the Eaſt, beſide S. Peter in the Tower, for the inhabitants there. Alſo two Halles of Companies, viz. Cloth-workers Hall, in Mincheon Lane, and Bakers Hall,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   in Ha
                        •
                     t or Harpe Lane. This ward hath an Alderman, and his Deputy; common Counſell, eight: Conſtables thirteen. Scauengers,

twelue. Wardemote Enqueſt, thirteene, & a Beadle: It is alſo ſeized at 26. pounds to the fifteene.
               
                  Aldgate Ward, taketh name of the Gate.Algate ward In which ward are three pariſh churches, viz. S. Katherine Chriſt-Church: Saint 
                  Of a ſhaft or Maypole higher then the Church Steeple. 
                  Andrew Vnderſhaft, and S. Katherine 
                  Of Colmā Haw, a Haw yard or garden. 
                  Coleman. Likewiſe thrée Hals of Societies or companies: Iremongers Hall, in Fen-Church-ſtreete, Bricklayers Hall, in Sprinckle Alley, now called Sugerloafe Alley, of the like ſigne: and Fletchers Hal in S. Maryſtreet. It hath an Alderman and his Deputy, ſixe common Counſellors, nine Scauengers, eightéene Wardemote Enqueſtmen, and a Beadle. It is alſo taxed at fiue pound to the fifteene.
               
                  Limeſtreet ward, ſo named,Limeſtreete Ward. Leaden hall of vſuall making and ſelling of Lime there in formertimes, as is ſuppoſed. In this ward ſtandeth Leaden-Hall, which, before it was built of ſtone, appertained to Sir Hugh Neuill Knight, in Anno 1309. Afterward, the famous and mighty man, Syr Simon Eyre, ſometime and Vpholſter, and next a Draper, builded it ſquare of ſtone, as now it ſtandeth, with a fayre and large chappell in the Eaſtſide of the Quadrant, on the Porch wherof, was engrauen, Dextra Domini exaltauit me; The right hand of the Lord hath exalted mee:
                   And on the North-wall in the Church, theſe wordes, Honorandus famoſus Mercator Simon Eyre, huius operis, &c. The honorable and famous Marchant Simon Eyre, founder of this worke, once

Maior of this Citty, and Cittizen and Draper of the ſame.
                   He builded there alſo a goodly Granary for corne, and made there an open and free market. It was once intended for a Burſſe, for aſſembly of Merchants: but tooke not effect, the Merchants meeting ſtill in Lombard-ſtreete, 
                  
                     •
                  s before they had done. In this ward, is not anie Pariſh church, but ſmal portions of two pariſhes, and no hall of any company. It hath an Alderman and his Deputy, four common Counſellors, foure Conſtables, two Scauengers, ſixteene wardemote Enqueſt, and a Beadle. It is ſeſſed at one pound, nineteene ſhillings, two pence half penny farthing in the fifteene.
               
                  Biſhopſgate Ward.
                  Byſhopſgate ward, ſo named of the gate, ſuppoſed to be built by a byſhop of London. Within this warde and Liberties of London, ſtandeth the Hoſpitall of S. Marie of Bethlem, founded by Simon Fitz-Mary,
                  Hoſpitall of Bethelem. New church yard. Sheriffe of London, Anno. 1246. beeing an Hoſpitall for diſtracted people. Alſo, a goodly church-yard for burial of the dead, encloſed with a wall of bricke, performed at the charge of Sir Thomas Roe, Merchant Taylor, and Lorde Maior of London. There is likewiſe a goodly houſe,Fiſhers folly named Fiſhers-folly by Queene Elizabeth;
                  Cro
                        •
                     by place. and Crosbies place, ſo called by the builder thereof, Sir Iohn Crosbie, Grocer and Wool-man.Greſham Colledge. Alſo Greſham Colledge, builded by Sir Thomas Greſham, Knight, and appointed (by his will) to be a colledge of Readers (wyth large ſtipends allowed them) in Diuinity, Law, Phiſicke, Aſtronomy, Geometry, and Muſicke.

In this ward is three pariſh churches, viz. Saint Buttolphes without Byſhopſ-gate, S. Ethelburge within the Gate, S. Helens adioyning to the Nunnes Prior. There was alſo (ſometime) the pariſh Clearkes Hall,Leather ſellers Hall. and nowe there is the Leather Sellers Hall, which they haue (verie lately) to their great coſt, new builded. It hath an Alderman, and his two Deputies, one without, and the other within the gate, 6. common Counſellers, 7. Conſtables, 7. Scauengers, 13. wardmote Enqueſt, and a Beadle. It is taxed at 13. li. to the Fiftéene.
               
                  Broadſtreet ward, tooke name of a ſtréet,Brodeſtreet ward. called Brodeſtreet, wherein are diuers goodly houſes, one that belonged to Sir William Powlet, Lord Treaſurer, another to the Earle of Shrewſbury, and a third, wherein (ſometime dwelt the Earle of O
                        •
                     enford, neere to Sir Thomas Greſhams Almes houſes. In this ward are ſixe pariſh churches, viz. Alhallowes by the wall, at the North-end of Brodeſtreet, S. Peters the poore, at the South-end, S. Martines Oteſwitch, in Three-needle ſtreete, S. Bennet 
                  Of three men ſo named, founders thereof 
                  Fynk, Saint Bartholomew by the Exchange, and S. Chriſtopher by the Stockes Market. Beſide the Friers Auguſtines,
                  Of Fynke the founder. which ſerueth for the Dutch nation, and another church ſeruing in like manner for the French. There is alſo a free Schoole called S. Anthonies ſchoole, and two hals of ſocieties:
                     S Anthonies ſchoole. Drapers hal one in Throgmorton ſtreet, called Drapers hall, which ſomtime belonged to the Lord Cromwel; the other in Three-needle-ſtreete,
                  Merchant Taylers hal. called Merchant

Taylors Hall. This ward hath an Aldermon and his deputy, 10. common counſellers, 10 Conſtables, 8. Scauengers, 12. wardmote Enqueſt, and a Beadle. It is taxed to the fifteene in London at 27, li. and accounted in the Exchequer after 25. li.
               
                  
                     Corne-hill Ward
                     The Weyhouſe.
                  
                  Cornhil ward, deriued the name thereof from a corne Market, which had bin there kept time out of mind. In this ward is the Weyhouſe or Kings beame, for all Merchandizes brought from beyond the ſeas; which houſe was builded by Syr Thomas Louell, Knight, and a faire front of Tenements towards the ſtreet, which he gaue to the worſhipfull company of Grocers, he being a free Brother of that ſociety. There is alſo the Burſſe for Merchants,The Royall Exchange. afterward by Queen Elizabeth named the Royal Exchange, builded by S. Thomas Greſham, knight, Agent to her Maieſty, begun in an. 1566. and finiſhed 1567. In this ward likewiſe is a Grammer Schoole, adioyning to S. Peters church,S. Peters ſchoole. which in times paſt, had bin a Library, and repaired by the executors of ſir Iohn Crosby, Alderman. In Corne-hill ward are two pariſh churches, viz. S. Peters vppon Cornhill, builded in the time of king Lucius, by Thean, the firſt Arch-byſhop of London; And S. Michaell Tharchangell, the foundation thereof being vncertaine, but William Rus, Alderman, gaue a fayre bell to this church,Rus Bell in Cornehill. naming it Rus (corruptly called Rouſe) to ring out nightly at eight of the clock. No hall of any Society is in this ward, but it hath an Alderman and his Deputie, foure

commrn counſellors, foure conſtables, four Scauengers, ſixteen wardmote Enqueſt, and a Beadle: It is charged at ſixteene pound in the Fifteene.
               
                  Langborne Warde,Langborne Ward, all fenny about with a Moriſh ground. bearing name of a long Bourne of ſweete water, which (in elder times) breaking forth into Fen-church ſtreet, ran along the ſame ſtreete, and Lombards ſtreet alſo, called of the Longobards, or Lombards (Merchaunts there meeting twice a day) to the weſt end of S. Mary woolnothes church, where turning ſouthward, and breaking into ſmall ſhares, Rilles, or ſtreames: it gaue a name to Shareborn Lane, South-borne Lane, or Shirborne Lane, running thence South into the Thames. In this warde are ſeauen Pariſh churches, viz. S. Gabriell Fenchurch, corruptly called Fanchurch; Saint Dionis Backchurch, at Lime-ſtreet end; Alhallowes Staning, or Stane church, or Stone church (by differing from others, then builded of timber) at Martlane end. S. Edmond the king & martir. in Lombardsſtreet, néere Of Birchouer the firſt builder and owner. 
                  Birchouers lane, now called Birchen lane. Alhallowes in Lombardes ſtréet; S. Nicholas Acon or Hacon, in S. Nicholas lane; and S. Mary Woolnoth in Lombardſtreet. One Hal there is in this ward,Pewterers Hall. called Pewterers Hall, in Limeſtreet, which ſociety was admitted a brotherhood, in the 13. yeare of Edward the 4. It hath alſo an Alderman & his deputy, 8. common counſellers, 15. conſtables. 9. Scauengers, 17. wardmote Enqueſt, and a Beadle: In the Exchequer, it is taxed at 20 li. 9. s. d. to the fifteen.
               
                  
                  Belins-gate Ward.
                  Belins gate, or Billingſgate ward (ſo named of Belin the king, firſt founder of the gate or hauen) wherein are many Keyes and Wharfes, whereof is not now my purpoſe to ſpeake, becauſe they are referred to my Chronicle of London at large. In this ward are fiue pariſh churches, viz. Saint Buttolph by Belings-gate, in Thames ſtreet, S. Marie on the Hill, the ſtreete or lane being ſo called; S. Margaret Pattens (becauſe pattens were vſually there made and ſolde) in Rode lane; S. Andrew Hubbert, in Eaſt cheape; and Saynt George in Buttolph-lane. It hath alſo an Alderman and his Deputy, common councellers vncertaine, Conſtables eleuen, Scauengers ſix, Wardmote Enqueſt foureteene, and a Beadle. It is taxed in London to the Fifteene, at two & thirty pound, and in the Exchequer, at one and thirty pounnd, ten ſhillings.
               
                  Bridgeward
                  Bridge-ward within, receiued name of the famous Bridge of London. In it are foure pariſh churches, viz. S. Magnus, at the Bridge-foote, Saint Margaret in Bridge-ſtreet, S. Leonard Milke Church (ſo named of William Melker, an eſpecially builder thereof) on Fiſh-ſtreete hill, and S. Benet Graſſe-church, ſo tearmed of the Hearbe-Market there kept. In this ward alſo, is the Fiſhmongers Hall,Fiſhmongers Hall. Stock fiſhmongers. Salt fiſhmongers. which Societie were (ſomtime) two ſeuerall companies, called Stock-fiſhmongers, and Saltfiſhmongers: and they had ſixe ſeuerall Halles, becauſe their companie was ſo great. It hath an Alderman and his deputy, ſixteene common counſellers, fifteene conſtables,

Scauengers ſix, ſixteene wardmote Enqueſt, and a Beadle. It is taxed at 47. pound to the Fifteene.
               
                  Candlewick-ſtreet Ward,Candlewick ſtreet ward. or Candle-wright ſtreete Ward, ſo called (as is likelieſt) of Chandlers or makers of candles, both of wax and Tallow,Weauers of Drapery, Tapery, and Napery. who ſeemed (for the more part) there to inhabite. Albeit it is verie euident, that Weauers of Drapery, Taperie, and Naperie, did altogether dwell there, time out of minde; till they were out-worne, and their place poſſeſſed by the Drapers.
               In this Warde are fiue Pariſh churches, (viz.) Saint Clements in Eaſt-cheape, Saynt Mary Abchurch, or Vpchurch, Saint Michaell in Crookedlane, which was ſometime called the colledge in Crooked-lane, Saint Martine Orgar, and Saint Lawrence Poultney, ſo called by Iohn Poultney, Maior of London, who made it a colledge of Ieſus, and of Corpus Chriſti, for a Mayſter and ſeauen Chaplaynes. This Ward hath an Alderman and his Deputie, eight common counſellers, eyght conſtables, ſix Scauengers, twelue Wardemote Enqueſt, and a Beadle. It is taxed at ſixteene pound to the fifteene.
               
                  Walbrooke Warde,Walbrooke Ward. taketh Name of the ſtreete, where vnder was (ſometime) a brooke, named Wallus Brooke, as hath already beene elſe-where declared. In which Ward are fiue Pariſh churches, viz. S. Swithen by Londonſtone, S. Mary Woolchurch, ſo called of a beam

to weigh wooll,Wooll-Church Haw or Beame. and was called Wooll-Church Haw; Saint Stephen by Walbrooke; Saint Iohn vpon Walbrooke; and Saint Mary Buthaw, or Boathaw, ſo called, of néere adioyning to a Yard or Haw, where Boates (in elder times) were made, and landed (from Downegate) there to be mended. It hath an Alderman and his Deputy; 11. common Councellers; 9. Conſtables; 6. Scauengers; 13. Wardmote Enqueſt, and a Beadle. It is taxed in London at 33. pounds to the fiftéene.
               
                  Downegate Ward.
                  Downgate ward, ſo cald, vpon the down deſcending to the Thames. In this ward is the Guilda Aula,
                  Guilda Aula Teutonicorum. or Halla Teutonicorū, for the Merchants of the Haunce, or of Allemaigne, commonly cald the Stilyard, where they had their Garners to lay vppe their Corne, and other commodities; as Cables, Ropes, Maſts, Pitch, Tarre, Flax, Hemp, Linnen-cloth, Wainſcots, Wax, Stéele, &c. There is alſo a Houſe, anciently called Cold-Harbrough,
                  Colde Harbrough. which (after diuers paſſages from Man to Man) in the eyght yeare of King Edward the third, came to Sir Iohn Poultney, who hauing béene Maior foure times in that houſe, it then tooke the name of Poultneys Inne. More, there is a famous Grammar-Schoole, founded in the yeare 1561. by the M. Wardens and aſſiſtants of the Merchant-Taylors, in the Pariſh of Saint Laurance Poultney.
                  Merchaunt Taylors ſchoole, the Mannor of the Roſe. 
                  Richard Hilles, ſometime Maiſter of that worthy Society, had giuen formerly fiue hundred poundes towardes the purchaſe of an houſe, called The Mannor of

the Roſe, belonging ſome-time to the Duke of Buckingham, wherein the ſaide Schoole is kept. In this Ward are two Pariſh-Churches (Viz:) Alhallowes ad foenum, in the Ropery, (becauſe Hay was there ſold at Hay-wharffe, and Ropes in the High-ſtréete) or Alhallowes the more; and Alhallowes on the Cellers (becauſe it ſtandeth on Vaults) or Alhallowes the leſſe. There are likewiſe foure ſeuerall Hals of Companies, as,
                     Skinners hall.
                     Tallow-Chandlers Hall.
                     Ioyners hall Dyers Hall.
                   vpon Walbrooke, the Skinners Hall, belonging to that Worſhipfull Company; and Tallow-Chandlers Hall; Ioyners Hall in Greenewich-lane, now called Fryer-lane; and Dyers Hall in Thames-ſtreete. This Ward hath an Alderman and his Deputie; 9. common Councellers; 8. Conſtables; 5. Scauengers; 14. Wardemote Enqueſt, and a Beadle. It is taxed at 28. pounds to the fiftéene. Héere we end the thirtéene Wardes, that are all on the Eaſt ſide of the water courſe of Walbrooke, not any one houſe lying on the Weſt-ſide.
            
            
               ¶ Wardes on the Weſt-ſide of Walbrooke.
               
                  
                     VIntry Ward,
                  Vintry ward. of Vintoners (cled in olde time Merchants Vintoners) & the Vintry, for the Merchantes of Burdeaux there craned vp their Wines, out of Lighters and other Veſſels, and being there landed, made Sale of them within forty daies after, &c. There are in

this Ward, foure Pariſh Churches (viz.) Saint Michaell Pater Noſter in the Royall, which Church was new builded and made a Colledge of Saint Spirit,
                  Whittingtons Colledge. and Saint Marie, founded by Richard Whittington, Mercer, foure times Maior; for a Maiſter, foure fellowes Maiſters of Art; Clearkes, Conducts, Choriſts, &c. And an Almes-houſe called Gods-houſe, or Hoſpitall, for thirtéene poore Men, &c. Saint Thomas Apoſtle, by Wringwren-lane; Saint Martine in the Vinttie, ſometime called Saint Martine de Beremand Church; and Saint Iames at Garlicke-Hithe, becauſe Garlicke was ſold vſually there, on the bancke of the Riuer of Thames. Richard Plat, Brewer, founded a Frée-ſchoole there,Pariſh Clerks hall. 1601. In Brode lane is ye Pariſh Clearks Hall purchaſed by them, after loſſe of their Hall in Byſhopſgateſtreet. Vintoners Hall, néere the Lane called Stodies Lane,Vintners hall. Plummers Hall. Fruiterers Hall. Cutlers hall Glaſiers hal giuen them by Sir Iohn Stodie, Vintoner, Mayor, in Anno 1357. Plummers Hall in Palmers Lane, nowe called Anchor-lane. Fruiterers Hall, in Worceſter houſe, ſome-times belonging to the Earles of Worceſter. Cutlers Hall, in Horſebridgeſtreet. Glaſiers Hall in Kerion Lane: All which Halls are in the ſaid Ward. It hath alſo an Alderman and his Deputy; nine Common Councellers; nine Conſtables; foure Scauengers; fouretéene Wardmote Enqueſt, and a Beadle: It is taxed at ſixe pounds, thirtéene Shillings, foure pence, to the fiftéene.
               
                  Cordwainer ſtreet ward.
                  Cordwainer-ſtreete-ward, taking name of

                  Cordwainers, or Shoe-makers, Curriers, and Workers of Leather, there dwelling. In this Ward are thrée Pariſh-churches, viz. Saint Anthonies in Budge-Rowe, corruptly called Saint Antlings; Alde Mary Church; and new Marie Church, or Mary le Bow of Saint Marie de Arcubus, in Weſt-Cheaping, being builded (in the Conquerours time) vppon Arches:Nine a clocke Bell is nightly rung. In which Church is kept the Court of the Arches, which here taketh name of the place, & not of the Court. This Ward hath an Alderman and his Deputy; common Councellers eight, Conſtables, 8. Scauengers eight, Wardmote Enqueſt fouretéene, and a Beadle. It is taxed in London to the fiftéene, at 52. li. 16. s. And in the Exchequer at 52. li. 6. s.
               
                  Cheape-Ward,
                  Cheap ward taking name of the Market there kept, called Weſt-cheaping, hath in it ſeauen Pariſh Churches, viz. Saint Benet Shrog, or Shorehog, but the moſt ancient name is Benet Shorne, of Benedict Shorne, ſome-time a Cittizen and Stocke-Fiſh-Monger, a newe builder, repayrer, and Benefactor thereof. S. Pancrace by Sopars-lane; Saint Mildred in the Poultry; Saint Marie Cole-church, of one Cole that builded it; Saint Martin Pomerie, in Ironmong-lane, ſo called of Apples ſome-time there growing; Alhallowes in Honny-Lane; Saint Laurance in the Iury, and the Chappell of Guild-Hall, ſometime a Colledge.Guilde Hall built, Anno 1411. 
                  Guild Hall it ſelfe alſo is in this Ward, begunne to be new builded in Anno 1411. the twelfth of Henry the fourth,

by Thomas Knoles then Maior, and the Aldermen his brethren to the charge whereof the companies gaue large beneuolences: it was made (of a little cottage:) ſo large and goodlie as now it ſtandeth, to haue the Courts for the Cittie kept therein, being nine in number.
               
                  The Courts kept in Guild.
                  
                     Courts for the Citty.1. Court of Common Councell.
                  
                  2. Court of the Lord Maior, and the Aldermen his Bretheren.
                  
                  3. The Court of Huſtings.
                  
                  4. The Court of Orphanes.
                  
                  5. The Sheriffes two Courts.
                  
                  6. The Court of the Wardmote.
                  
                  7. The Court of Hall-mote.
                  
                  8. The Court of Requeſts, commonly called the Court of Conſcience.
                  
                  9. The Chamberlaines Court for Prentiſes, and making them free.
                  
               
               Moreouer, in this Ward, are the Hals of two very worſhipfull Companies;Grocers hal the Grocers Hall in Conyhope lane, which Companie being firſt called Pepperers, were incorporated by the name of Grocers,
                  Mercers Chappell and Hall. in Anno 1345. The Mercers Hall, ſometime an Hoſpitall, entitled of Saint Thomas of Acon, or Acars, wherein is ſaid a Free-Schoole to haue béene long kept. This Ward hath an Alderman and his Deputy, 11. common Councellers; 9. Scauengers; 12. Wardmote

Enqueſt, and a Beadle. In London it is ſeſſed at 72, li. 16, s. to the fifteen, and in the Exchequer, at 72. li. 11. s.
               
                  Colemanſtreete-ward,
                  Coleman ſtreet ward. taking name of a ſtréet ſo called, by one Coleman, the firſt builder and owner thereof, wherein are three Pariſh Churches, viz. Saint Olaue Vpwell in the old Iewry, called Colechurch-ſtreete ſometimes; Saint Margaret in Lothbury: and Saint Stephen in Colemanſtreere. It was named the Old Iewry, becauſe the Iewes had a Sinagogue, where now ſtandeth the Tauerne, knowne by the name of the Windmill,
                  Founders hall. and their dwelling was all there-about. The Founders Hall in Lothbury; Lathbery, or Loadberie, ſo named of a Bery or Court in elder time there kept; whereof ſome vſe hath bin, and is alſo made by the Merchants Aduentures: and in Coleman ſtreet is the Armorers Hall,Armorers Hall. who were made a Fraternitie or Guild of S. George, in the firſt yeare of King Henry the ſixt. This Ward hath an Alder-man and his Deputie; common Counſellors foure, Conſtables foure, Scauengers foure, wardmote Enqueſt thirteene, and a Beadle. It is taxed at fiftéene pounds, ſixetéen ſhillings nine pence to the fiftéene.
               
                  Baſſings Hall Ward,Baſsings Hal ward. and ſaid to be ſo named of Baſſinges Hall, the very principall Houſe of the Ward, which appertained to the Familie of the Baſſings (a name of great renowne and antiquity in this Realme) who builded the goodlie building (afterward called Bakewell Hall, of one

                  Thomas Bakewel dwelling there, corruptly tearmed Blackwell Hall) and gaue it the Name of Baſſings Haugh,
                  Baſsinges Haugh. or Hall, as by theyr Armes, (before the old worke was taken downe) in very many places appeared. In this Ward is but one Pariſh Church, called Saint Michaell at Baſſings Haugh: and diuers Halles of Companies,Maſons hall Weauers hall. as Maſons Hall, of what antiquity, appeareth not. Weauers Hall, being then Weauers of Woollen-cloath, whoſe Fraternity or Guilde is of great antiquity and power, confirmed by Charter from King Henrie the ſecond, as they held it in time of his Grandfather,Weauers of Woollen Clothes. King Henrie the firſt, or rather (as the very wordes are) fréeer, better, worſhipfullier, and wholier, then in his ſaid Grand-fathers time.
               Other ordinaunces were there then beſide, that Woollen-cloathes ſhoulde bee in breadth two yardes within the Liſtes, and as good in the midſt, as in the ſides, &c. But if any Man made Cloath of Spaniſh Wooll, mixed with Engliſh Wooll; the Port-graue, or principall Magiſtrate of London ought to burne it, &c. There is alſo Girdlers Hall,
                  Girdlers hal Coopers Hall. and Coopers haue their Hall néer to the Pariſh Church of Saint Michaell. This Ward hath an Alderman and his Deputy, foure Common Councellers; two Conſtables; two Scauengers; 17. Wardmote Enqueſt, and a a Beadle. In London it is taxed at 7. li. and ſo in the Exchequer likewiſe, to the fifteene.
               
                  Cripples gate Ward.
                  Cripples-gate ward, ſo named of the gate, called Cripples-gate, wherin are 6. pariſh churthes,

                  viz. S. Mary Aldermanbury, of a Bery or courthal there kept, now cald the Guildhal, ſ. Alphage (ſometime Elfing Hoſpital or ſpittle) by London w
                     •
                  l, ſ. Mary Magdalen in Milkſtreet, ſ. Albons in woodſtreet, ſ. Michael in Huggenlane,
                  Haberdaſhers hall. Waxchandlers hall. Plaiſterers hall. Brewers hal. Pinners hal. Bowyers hal and ſ. Giles without Crippleſgate. Halles of companies, are Habberdaſhers Hall, in Mayden lane, and Waxchandlers Hall there alſo. Pinners hal ſometime, but nowe Plaiſterers Hall, in Adle ſtreet: and Pinners Hal is now in Siluerſtreet. Brewers Hall likewiſe in Adleſtreete, and Bowyers Hall not farre from Monkswel-ſtreet. This warde hath an Alderman and his Deputy within the Gate, eight common counſellers, nine conſtables, twelue ſcauengers, fifteen wardmote Enqueſt, and a beadle. Without the Gate alſo, it hath a Deputy, two common counſellors, foure conſtables, foure Scauengers, ſeauenteen wardmote Enqueſt, and a Beadle: It is taxed in London at forty pound to the Fif-teene.
               
                  Alderſgate warde,Alderſgate Ward taking name likewiſe of Alderſgate, hath ſix Pariſh churches in it (viz.) ſaint Marie Staining, in Stayning lane, ſ. Iohn Zachary, in Engaine or Maidenlane, ſ. Leonard in Fauſter-lane, ſaint Olaue in Siluerſtreet, ſaint Anne by Alderſgate, and ſaint Buttolph without Alderſgate. Hals of companies, firſt,Goldſmiths Hall. 
                  Goldſmiths Hall at Maydenlane end, they beeing an ancient and very worſhipfull ſociety; for the firſt Maior that euer was in London, was a brother of that ſociety, named Henry Fitz-Alwin, Fitz-Lieſſtane, who continued Maior more then 24.

yeares together.Cooks hall. The Cookes or Paſtelers haue a Hall alſo in Alderſgateſtreet, and they were admitted to be a company, and to haue a Mayſter and wardens, in the 22. yeare of Edward the fourth. This ward hath an Alderman and his two Deputies; one within, the other without, common counſellers fiue, Conſtables, 8. Scauengers, 9. wardmote Enqueſt, fourteene, and a Beadle. In London it is taxed at ſeauen pound to the fifteene, and in Exchequer at ſix pounde, nineteene ſhillings.
               
                  Faringdon ward within
                  Faringdon ward within, or Infra, diſtinguiſhed (by that word of difference) from the other warde of the ſame name, which is without the citty wals, and thereon fearmed Faringdon extra, or without. Yet (in elder times) theſe two wardes were but one, and vnder the care of one alderman, vntill the 17. yeare of king Richard the ſecond; when, the greatneſſe thereof cauſed it to be deuided into two wardes, being then ordered (by parliament) to haue two aldermen alſo as to this day it continueth. This whole great ward of Faringdon both within and without,How Faringdon warde took name. deriued her name of W. Faringdon, or Farendon, Goldſmith, alderman of that warde, and one of the ſheriffes of London, in anno 1281. the ninth yeare of King Edward the firſt, when he purchaſed the aldermanry of this ward, as is euident to be ſeene, by an abſtract of deedes, from Thomas de Ardene, or Arderna, to Ankerinꝰ de Auern, Ralphe le Feure, and ſo to William Farringdon, or Farendon, cittizen and Goldſmith, and to his

heires, ſo comming to Nicholas Faringdon, ſon to the ſaid William, which Nicholas was a goldſmith alſo, and 4. times Maior: liuing 53. years after his firſt being Maior, and hee buylded the Arch or gate by S. Auguſtines Church, whych giueth paſſage into the South Churchyard of S. Pauls.
               
               In this ward of Faringdon within,1361. is the goodly Cathedrall Church of S. Paule, and 9. other pariſh Churches beſide, viz. ſ. Peter at the croſſe in Weſt cheape, Saint Fauſter in Fauſter-lane;
                  The free ſchoole in Paules Churchyard, founded by Iohn Collet, Doctor in Diuinity and Deane of Paules. 
                  Chriſt Church, made a Pariſh churche of the Gray-Friers Church, and of two Pariſh churches, S. Nicholas, and ſaint Ewin, and alſo an Hoſpitall for poore children, ſaint Mathew in Friday ſtreet, S. Auguſtine by Paules gate, Saint Faith vnder Paules Church, S. Martins at Ludgate, Saint Anne at the Black-fryers, S. Michael ad Bladum, or at Corne (corruptly called the Querne) by Pauls gate, where ſomtime was a Corne market kept, and the chappel of ſ. Iames by Crippleſgate. Hals of Societies,Imbroyderers hall. Barbar chirurgions hall. Sadlers hall. Butchers & Felt makers hall. Imbroiderers Hall in Guthurus. Barbar Chirurgions hal in Monkes-well-ſtreet, Sadlers hall in Cheap, Butchers Hall in Chick-lane in the Shambles, which ſerueth alſo for ye Feltmakers. This ward hath an Alderman and his Deputie, twelue Common Counſellors, ſeauenteene Conſtables, eighteene Scauengers, eyghteen wardmote Enqueſt, and a Beadle, It is taxed at 50. pound to the Fifteene.
               
                  Bread-ſtreete Ward,Bread-ſtreet Ward. ſo called of bread there

ſolde (in elder time) in that ſtreete, which giueth name to the whole Warde, and hath foure Pariſh Churches in it. viz. Alhallowes in Bread-ſtreete, ſaint Mildreds in Bread-ſtreete, ſaynt Iohn Euangeliſt in Friday-ſtreete, and ſ. Margaret Moyſes in Friday-ſtreete. Hals of companies,Salters hall. Cordwa
                        •
                     
                     ners hall. are the Salters Hall in Bread-ſtreete, and Corwainers or Shoo-makers Hall, in Maidenlane, or Diſtar lane. This ward hath an Alderman, and his Deputy; tenne common Counſellors, tenne Conſtables, eight Scauengers thirteene Wardemote Enqueſt, and a Beadle. In London it is taxed at thirty ſeauen pound to the fifteen, and in the Exchequer at 36. pounde, 18. ſhillings, two pence.
               
                  Queenes Hith ward.
                  Queene-Hith Ward, ſo called of the Queens Hith or water Gate, whereof wee haue alreadye ſpoken. In which warde are ſeauen Pariſh churches, Viz. ſaint Trinity in Trinity lane, ſaint Nicholas Cold-abbey, at Knight-riders ſtreete, ſaint Nicholas Olaue on Bredſtreet hill, ſaint Mary de Monte Alto, or Mounthaunt, by Old Fiſhſtreet hill, or Fiue foot lane, ſaint Machael at the Queens Hith, ſaint Mary Summerſet neere Broken wharfe, and ſaint Peter, called Parua,
                  Painters hal. by Paules wharfe. Hals of companies are theſe, Painter Stayners Hall in Trinitie Lane, Blackſmiths Hall on Lambert hill.
                  Blackſmiths hall. This warde hath an Alderman and his Deputy, ſixe common Counſellors, nine conſtables, eight Scauengers, thirtéene Warde-mote Enqueſt, and a beadle. In London it is taxed at twenty pound

to the fifteen, and in the Exchequer at 19. pound 16. ſhillings, two pence.
               
                  Caſtel Baynard ward,Caſtle Baynard ward. ſo named of an auncient caſtle there ſtanding, belonging ſometime to one Baynard, a Nobleman, that came into this Lande with the conquerour, and firſt builded it. In this ward are foure pariſh churches, viz. ſaint Benet Hude, or Hithe, by Paules Wharfe, ſaint Andrew by the Wardrobe, ſaint Mary Magdalen in Old-fiſhſtreete, and ſaynt Gregory by Paules church. Halles of companies, are theſe, Wood-mongers Hall,Woodmongees hall. Stationers Hall. on the Eaſt-ſide of Paules wharfe Hill, and the Stationers Hall, neere the weſt end of Paules: but conuerted to a Tauerne ſince then, and the Hall was alſo in Milkeſtreet, for a while, but afterwarde tranſlated agayne into Amen lane, at the end of Pater noſter row, to a goodly auncient houſe in oldetime, belonging to Iohn Duke of Britaine, and Earle of Richmond. Afterward called Pembrokes Inne, as appertaining to the Earles of Pembroke, in the time of Richard the ſecond, the eighteenth yeare, and Henry the ſixt the fourteenth yeare. But it lately belonged to Henry Lord of Aburgaueny, and was called Aburgauenie houſe. This ward hath an Alderman and his Deputie, common counſellers, 9. conſtables, 10. Scauengers, 7. wardmote Enqueſt, 14. and a Beadle: In London it is taxed at twelue pound to the fifteen, and in the Exchequer at 11. li. 13. s.
               There remayne, yet two more, Faringdon
                  
ward without,Faringdon warde and Bride-ward both without. and Bridgeward without, or the Borough of the South-warke, & the round inuironing Suburbs without the wals, the Dutchy of Lancaſter, and Cittie of Weſtminſter; All which beeing not comprized within this inſtant determination, craue fauour for reference to our Chronicle of London, wherein, whatſoeuer is wanting heere, and this ſlender pile woulde not permit (ſtretching alreadye beyond expectation) ſhall (by Gods aſſiſtance) be more fully, effectually, and largely performed, then (as yet) Mayſter Iohn Stow his Suruey, or any other worke (that I haue ſeene) hath ſo amply deliuered, eſpecially concerning this honorable Citty, and the Countie of Middleſex, ſo far as the cities bounds and priuiledges do grant admittance. Let me not be raſhly cenſured in theſe gayſeeming words, to caſt any diſgrace or il aſperſion, on the painful labors of that worthy and induſtrious man Mayſter Iohn Stow (whom liuing, I loued as a dear and intimate friend, and dead, I honor with all kinde remembrance) for ſuch as haue had knowledge of our inward reſpect of each other, & what hath paſt betwéene vs (concerning this buſineſſe for the Citty) I know will no way miſ-conceite of me: they are too wiſe and vertuous, to ſwerue in a knowne truth, and more ſounde and ſolide, then malice can haue any power to ſeduce: whatſoeuer then is referred to our further intention, as it hath bin a labour willingly vnder-taken by me (albeit both beſéeming and requiring a much better Iudgement) So, by his helpe, who is

both the hope and helpe of all Vertuous endeauours, it ſhall bee effected with all poſſible dilligence.
            
            
               Of the Temporall Gouernment of this Honorable Citty, ſince the Conqueſt.
               To the worſhipfull M. Rowland Smart, Eſquire, Sword-Bearer of London.
               
                  PAſſing ouer thoſe Tempeſtuous times of the old Britons, Romans, Saxons, and Danes,
                  Ethelred Earle of Mercia till Ethelred or Alfred, Earle of Mercia, who had the cuſtody of this citty in his power: he no ſooner dyed, but both it, and all other poſſeſſions belonging to the ſaide Earle, returned to King Edward (ſurnamed the Elder &) c. Remaining thus in obedience to him, he then ordaining Portgraues, to haue the gouernement thereof vnder him: which name, Portgraue, or Portreue, is compounded of two Saxon wordes, Porte and Gerefe, or Reue:
                  Portgraue or Portreue 
                  Porte ſignifyeng a Towne or City, & Gerefe or Reue, a Guardian or Ruler of the ſaid town or city. Before the conqueſt, in the daies of k. Edw. the Confeſſor, one Wolfegare was Portgraue, as appeareth by the kings charter to him, thus: Edward K. greeteth Alfward byſhop, Wolfegare my Portgraue,
                  Wolfegar Portgraue. 
                  & al the Burgeſſes in London, &c. Theſe Portgraues continued in William the conquerors time, William

Rufus, and Henry the firſt, when Hugh Buche was Portgraue, and Leofſtanus, Gold-ſmith, Prouoſt,
                  Prouoſt. which name of Prouoſt then beganne: for Aubery de Vere was (afterward) Portgraue, and Robert Bar-Querel,
                  Robert Bar-Querel prouoſt. Prouoſt. Then (by the ſame King) was the ſheriuewick of London and Middleſex granted to the Cittizens of London. In the raigne of King Stephen, Gilbert Becket was Portgraue, and Andrew Bucheuet Prouoſt: and Godfrey Magnauilla, or Mandeuil (by guift of Maude the Empreſſe) was Portgraue or ſheriffe of London and Middleſex,
                  Portgraue and Sheriffe of London & Middleſex. for the yearely farme of three hundred pound, as appeareth by the Charter. In the time of k. Henry the ſecond, thoſe Portgraues were likewiſe (in diuers records) called Vicecomites, Vicounties or ſheriffes, as being vnder an Earle, and then (as ſince) vſed that Office, as the ſheriffes of London now doo. Albeit ſome Authors tearme them Domeſmen, Elder-men, or Iudges of the Kings court. Heere then, it ſhall not ſeeme impertinent, once more to remember the wordes of William Fitz-ſtephen, ſaying. Euen as Rome is deuided into Wards,
                  William Fitz Stephen his words. 
                  ſo is this Citty. It hath yearely Sheriffes, inſted of Conſuls. It hath the dignity of Senators, in Aldermen; It hath vnder Officers, and (according to the qualitie of Lawes) ſo hath it ſeueral Courts, and generall aſſemblies, vpon appointed daies.
               
               At parting with the name of Portgraues and Prouoſts,
                  Bayliffes of London. in the firſt yeare of K. Richard 1. the cittizens obtained to be gouerned by 2. Baliffes,

who (in auncient déedes) were called Sheriffes, as the Lawe tearmeth the Shire Balliua, vſing the ſame office of Shriuewick, as the Portgraues before did. The names of the firſt Bayliffes or Officers, entring into their dignity at the Feaſt of Saint Michaell the Arch-angell, Anno 1189 were Henry Cornehill, and Richard Reynere.
                  The firſt Bayliffes of London. King Richard alſo (at that very time) appointed a ſupreame Officer aboue the reſt, by the name of Maior, which worde was borrowed from the Haebrew word Mar, and ſignifieth Dominus, Lord; a word vſed by the Franconians and old Saxons, their Neighbours (of whom Engliſh-men haue their Originall) but called Maire, as the French did their Maires of the Pallace. Thus was the chiefe Gouernor called Lord Maire,
                  Beginning of the Mayralty. or Maior, becauſe they vnderſtood not, that the epethite Maire, or Maior, implyed no leſſe then lord, without any other additions, yet thus was it thē giuen, for a larger augmentation of Honor.
               Now, as the Goldſmiths yéelded London a Prouoſt before (named Leofſtanus) euen ſo the ſame Company (albeit not as yet rancked into a Liſt of Brother-hood) gaue London likewiſe, the firſt Lord Maire or Maior in Dignity,The firſt L. Maire of London. whoſe name was Henry Fitz-Alwin, Fitz-Liefſtane, and being ſo appointed by the King; he continued in that ſupreame Office, from the firſt yeare of King Richard the firſt, vntill the fiftéenth of K. Iohn, which was more then twenty foure years. Henry Cornehill and Richard Reynere (béeing firſt choſen Bayliffes) ſerued then as Sheriffes,

(by all likelihood) to the ſaid Henry Fitz-Alwin,
                  The time of the L. Mairs election. 
                  Fitz-Leifſtane, Maire
                  ▪ whereby very well may bee obſerued, the progreſſe and continuaunce of thoſe ſeuerall elections and choyces (euen to this day) the Sheriffes beeing firſt appointed, and then the Lorde Maire after choſen, & at the Feaſt of Saint Michaell the Arch-aungell, at the firſt, (by King Richard) it was ordained. King Iohn in like manner, after this high Dignity (begun by his Brother) graunted them frée liberty by Charter,Choyce of Lord Maire by voyces and hands. Choyce of Sheriffes. to chuſe by (voyces and handes) yearely, out of the twelue chiefeſt and principall Companies, their Praetor or Maire: Alſo two Sheriffes, whereof the one ſhould be called the Kings Sheriffe, and the other the Citties Sheriffe, which (in that forme) hath continued euen to this inſtant. Nay more, he graunted them full power and authority, not onely to chuſe theyr Sheriffes at their owne pleaſure, but alſo (vppon iuſt occaſion, either of contempt, mutiny, diſobedience, or other offences) to degrade and depriue them.Forreſt of Middleſex and warren of Stanes. The Forreſt of Middleſex, and the Warren of Stanes, being laid open in An. 1218. the King afterward, in the yeare 1226. confirmed to the Citizens of London, frée warrant and liberty, to hunt a limited circuite about the Citty, and in the Warren of Stanes. Alſo, that the Cittizens of London ſhoulde paſſe Toule-frée, thorough al England:Toule free thorough al England granted to London. and the Kedeles or weres in the Riuer of Thames or Midway, to be pluckt vp and deſtroyed for euer. When the Franchiſes and liberties were thus confirmed by King Iohn,
                  
he granted moreouer, that either Sheriffe ſhould haue two Clarks, and two Sergeants; alſo,Common ſeale of the Citty. that the Citty ſhould haue a common Seale, and that the Maior ſhould bee preſented to the Barons of the Exchequer, and they then to admit him, as lawful Lieutenant and Deputy (vnder the king) to gouerne the Citty.
               Hauing thus briefly diſcourſed, how the dignity of honor began in this famous Citty, both in the ſtile of Lord Maior and Sheriffes; as briefly wil we alſo part their progreſſe and ſucceſſion, from that firſt woorthy man Henry Fitz-Alwin, Fitz-Liefſtane, Gold-Smith, to the as worthy Man, Sir William Crauon, now gouerning, this preſent yeare, 1611.
               
               
                  Henry Fitz-Alwin, Fitz-Liefſtane,
                  1189 Goldeſmith, beginning to take that high office on him, in the firſt yeare of King Richard the firſt (who was alſo for his valour and courage Surnamed Cueur de Lion) continued ſtill in the ſame Dignity, for more then twenty foure years, and then deceaſſing, in the 15. yeare of King Iohn, he was buried in the Priory of the holy Trinity, néer vnto Aldgate.
               In the ſaid 15. yeare of King Iohn (either to ſerue out the remainder of that yeare,1213. or to go on in a new election,) Roger Fitz-Alwain was choſen Lord Maire: but I neyther find his freedom, or his death, albeit he continued (as it ſéemeth) in Office but one yeare; the like did Serle Mercer, and William Hardell, in the yeares 1214. and 1215. And then began the raigne of King Henry
                  
the third, Son to King Iohn, the 19. of October, 1216.
               
               
                  1216
                  Iames Alderman, and Salomon Blaſing, Lord Maiors, ſerued out this yeare (by ſeuerall parts) each after other.
               
                  1217.
                  Serle Mercer, was againe choſen Lord Maior, and continued in the Dignity ſixe yeares together.
               
                  1223
                  Richard Renger, beeing choſen Lord Maior, continued ſo the ſpace of foure yeares.
               
                  1227
                  Roger Duke, or Duck, was Lord Maior of London foure yeares.
               
                  1231
                  Andrew Bokerell, Pepperer, was Lord Maior of London ſeauen yeares together.
               
                  1238
                  Richard Renger, Lorde Maior againe one yeare.
               
                  1239
                  William Ioyner, Lord Maior one yeare, who builded the Quier of the Gray-Fryers Church in London, and afterward became a lay brother of that houſe.
               
                  1240
                  Gerard Bat, Lord Maior one yeare: and béeing elected againe for the enſuing yeare, the King would not ſuffer it, becauſe he had béene charged (in the former yeare) with taking Money of the Victuallers, and could ſhew no reaſon for it.
               
                  1241
                  Reginald Bongey, was Lorde Maior two yeares.
               
                  1243.
                  Raphe Aſhwy, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1244
                  Michaell Tony, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1245
                  Iohn Giſors, Pepperer, Lorde Mayor two yeares.
               
                  1247
                  Peter Fitz-Alwin, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  
                  Michaell Tonny, Lord Maior againe one yeare.1248
               
               
                  Roger Fitz-Roger, Lord Maior one yeare.1249
               
               
                  Iohn Norman, Lord Maior one yeare▪
                  1250
               
               
                  Adam Baſing, Lord Maior one yeare.1251
               
               
                  Iohn Tolaſon, Draper, Lord Maior one yeare.1252
               
               
                  Richard Hardell, Draper,
                  1253 was Lorde Maior ſixe yeares together.
               
                  Iohn Giſors, Pepperer,
                  1259 againe Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  William Fitz-Richard,
                  1260 was Lorde Maior two yeares.
               
                  Thomas Fitz-Richard,
                  1262 was Lorde Maior foure yeares together.
               
                  Will Richards, againe Lord Maior one yeare.1266
               
               
                  Allen le Zouch, Lorde Maior one yeare:1267 and beeing a Baron of the Land, and chiefe Iuſtice alſo, he was ſlaine in Weſtminſter Hall, by Iohn Warren, Earle of Surry, in An. 1270.
               
               Sir Stephen Edwards, Lord Maior one year.1268
               
               Sir Hugh Fitz-Othon,
                  1269 was made Cuſtos of London, and Conſtable of the Tower, by reaſon of a great quarrell happening betwéene the Gold-ſmiths and the Taylors: ſo that the King gaue the kéeping of the Cittie to his Son Prince Edward
                  ▪ who made the ſaide Sir Hugh Fitz-Othon Cuſtos of the Citty,A Cuſtos appointed ouer the Cittie of London. and Conſtable of the Tower, as his Deputie. But Prince Edward quickly obtained of the King his Father, to haue the Citties ancient liberties confirmed by Charter againe, and ſo they proceeded on to their wonted election of a lord Maior and Sheriffes, as before, and Sir Hugh Fitz Othon was diſcharged

of his office.
               
                  1270
                  Iohn Adrian, Vintoner, was Lorde Maior of London two yeares.
               
                  1272.Sir Walter Haruey, Lord Maior, and H. Frowike, Pepperer, likewiſe for part of that yeare: wherein began the raigne of King Edward the firſt, the 16. of Nouember, 1272.
               
               
                  1273.Sir Walter Haruey, Lorde Maior againe for one yeare.
               
                  1274
                  Henry Walleis, Lord Maior for one yeare.
               
                  1275
                  Gregory Rokſley, Golde-Smith, chiefe Say Maiſter of all the Kinges Mints thorough England, and kéeper of the Kings Exchange at London; was Lord Maior ſe
                     •
                  uen yeares together.
               
                  1282
                  Henry Walleis, who builded the Tonne vpon Cornhill, to be a Priſon, and the Stockes to be a Market-houſe, was Lorde Maior againe three yeares together.
               
                  1285
                  Gregory Rokſley being choſen Lord Maior againe, King Edward was informed, that the ſaid Gregory Rokſley tooke bribes of the Bakers, and ſuffered them to ſell bread, that wanted ſixe or ſeauen ounces of weight in a Pennie-loafe, yet Wheat was then ſold at London for 12. & 16 pence the quarter. Vpō which information, the K. ſeized the Franchiſes and liberties into his own handes, appointing firſt one Iohn Sandwich, to be Cuſtos thereof for one part of the yeare, and Sir Iohn Breton,
                  London againe in the charge or rule of a Cuſtos. Knight, for the other part. Thus did the Cittie of London continue vnder the gouernment of ſeuerall Men, bearing the names of Cuſtos, till King Edward the ſecond

began his raigne, which was the ſeauenth day of Iuly, 1307.
               
               Sir Iohn Blunt, Knight,1307 hauing béene Cuſtos of the Cittie, for the ſpace of ſixe yeares before, was now in the firſt yeare of King Edward the ſecond, Lord Maior for one yeare.
               
                  Nicholas Faringdon, or Farendon,
                  1308 Golde-ſmith, of whom the Ward of Faringdon (both within, and without) tooke name, was L. Maior for one yeare.
               
                  Thomas Romaine, Lord Maior one yeare.1309
               
               
                  Richard Reffam, Mercer, Maior one yeare.1310
               
               Sir Iohn Giſors, Pepperer,1311 Lord Maior two yeares.
               
                  Nicholas Faringdon, Gold-Smith,1313 againe Lord Maior one yeare.
               Sir Iohn Giſors, Pepperer,1314 againe L. Maior one yeare.
               
                  Stephen Abendon, Lord Maior one yeare.1315
               
               
                  Iohn Wingraue, Lorde Maior thrée yeares.1316 In his time happened ſuch cheapneſſe of Corne, that a Buſhell of Wheate (which had béene ſold formerly for ten ſhillings) was then ſolde for ten pence.
               
                  Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer,
                  1319 
                  Lorde Mayor one yeare.
               
                  Nicholas Faringdon,
                  1320 again Lord Maior one years.
               
                  Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer,
                  1321 againe Lord Mayor two yeare.
               
                  Nicholas Faringdon, Gold-ſmith,1323 againe L. Maior one yeare.
               
                  
                  1324
                  Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer, againe Lord Mayor two yeares.
               
                  1326
                  Richard Britaine, Gold-ſmith, Lorde Mayor one yeare. In whoſe time King Edward the third began his raigne, the 25 day of Ianuary, 1326. who graunted the Lord Maior to bee Iuſtice for the Gaole deliuery at New-gate;The Lord Maior Iuſtice for Gaole deliuery at New gate. and the Cittizens of London not to goe (by any conſtraint) to any Warre out of the Citty of London. Beſide, that the Franchiſes and liberties of the Citty, ſhould not thence-forward (for any cauſe) bée ſeized into the Kinges handes: Nor 
                     •
                  ny Eſchetor to bee in the Citty, but the Lorde Maior for the time being.
               
                  1327
                  Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer, againe Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1328
                  Iohn Grantham, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1329
                  Richard Swandland, Lord Maior one yeare: In whoſe time the King kept a great Iuſting in Cheape, betwéene Sopa
                        •
                     s-lane and the great Croſſe.
               
                  1330Sir Iohn Poultney, Draper, Lord Maior two yeares.
               
                  1332
                  Iohn Preſton, Draper, Lord Maior one year.
               
                  1333Sir Iohn Poultney, Draper, againe L. Maior one yeare.
               
                  1334
                  Reginald at the Conduit, Vintoner, L. Maior one yeare.
               
                  1335
                  Nicholas Wotten, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1336Sir Iohn Poultney, Draper, again Lord Maior one yeare. He founded a Colledge in the pariſh Church of Saint Laurance Poultney, by Candlewick-ſtreete.
               
               
                  
                  Henry Darcy, Lord Maior two yeares:1337 In whoſe time the Sergeants to the Lorde Mayor,The firſt Maces to Sergeants granted. and Sheriffes of London, were graunted by the King, to beate Maces of Siluer and Guilt, with the Kings armes on them.
               
                  Andrew Aubery▪ Grocer, L. Maior two years.1339
               
               
                  Iohn of Oxenford, Vintoner,
                  1341 
                  Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Simon Francis, Mercer, L. Maior one yeare.1342
               
               
                  Iohn Hamond, Lorde Mayor two yeares.1343
               
               
                  Richard Leget, Lord Maior one yeare.1345
               
               
                  Geffrey Witchingham, L. Maior one yeare.1346
               
               
                  Tho. Leggy, Skinner, Lord Maior one year.1347
               
               
                  Iohn Louekin, Fiſh-Monger,
                  1348 Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Walter Turk, Fiſh-Monger,
                  1349 
                  Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Richard Killingbury, Lord Maior one yeare.1350
               
               
                  Andrew Aubery, Grocer,
                  1351 againe Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Simon Francis, Mercer,
                  1352 who (with Henry Frowike) founded the Colledge in Guild-hall Chappell, and was againe Lord Maior two yeares.
               
                  Thomas Leggy, Skinner,
                  1354 againe Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Simon Francis, Mercer,
                  1355 againe Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Henry Prichard, or Piccard, Vintoner,
                  1356 who (in one day) feaſted the kings of England, France,
                  Foure kings feaſted at the L. Maiors houſe in one day. 
                  Scots, and Cypres, at his own houſe, and was L. Maior one yeare.
               
                  
                  1357
                  Iohn Stody, Vintoner, Lorde Mayor one yeare.
               
                  1358
                  Iohn Louekin, Fiſh-Monger, againe Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  1359
                  Simon Dolesby, Grocer, Lord Mayor one yeare.
               
                  1360
                  Iohn Wroth, Fiſh-Monger, Lorde Mayor one yeare.
               
                  1361
                  Iohn Peche, Fiſh-Monger, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1362
                  Stephen Gondiſh, Draper, Lorde Mayor one yeare.
               
                  1362
                  Iohn Not, Grocer, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1364
                  Adam of Burie, Skinner, Lorde Mayor one yeare.
               
                  1365
                  Iohn Louekin, Fiſh-Monger, againe Lorde Maior, and Adam of Bury one yeare.
               
                  1366
                  Iohn Louekin, Fiſh-Monger, againe Lorde Mayor one yeare. This Iohn Louekin builded Saint Michaels Church in crooked-lane.
               
                  1367
                  Iames Andrew, Draper, Lorde Mayor one yeare.
               
                  1368
                  Simon Mordon, Fiſh-monger, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1369
                  Iohn Chicheſter, Gold-ſmith, Lord Mayor one yeare.
               
                  1370
                  Iohn Barnes, Mercer, Lorde Mayor two yeares.
               
                  1372
                  Iohn Piell, Mercer, Lord Mayor one yeare.
               
                  1373
                  Adam of Bury, Skinner, againe Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  
                  William Walworth, Fiſh-Monger,1374 Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  Iohn VVarde, Grocer,
                  1375 Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  Adam Staple, Mercer, Lord Maior one yeare.1376 His time no ſooner expired, but therewith ended the life of King Edward the third, and on the 21. of Iune 1377. began the raign of King Richard the ſecond.
               Sir Nicholas Brember, Grocer,
                  1377 Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Iohn Philpot, Grocer, Lord Maior one year.1378
               
               
                  Iohn Hadley, Grocer, Lord Maior one year.1379
               
               
                  Wil. Walworth, Fiſh-Monger,
                  1380 againe Lord Maior. In this yeare of his Mairalty happened the tumultuous rebellion of Iack Straw, Wat Tiler, Iack Carter, Iack Truman, &c. with the commons of Kent, Eſſex, and other places: But William Walworth, being then Lord Maior,The Lord Mayor kild Iack Straw the Rebell. arreſted the Traytor Iack Straw ſo ſtoutly with his Weapon on the head (euen as he ſaucily took the Kings Horſe by the bridle in Smithfielde) that, thruſting him afterward through the throat; the whole crewe were diſhartened, and ſéeing theyr Captaine ſlaine, betooke themſelues to flight. For which worthy act, the King immediatly knighted the Lorde Maior William Walworth, and with him Ralphe Standiſh, Iohn Philpot, Nicholas Brember, Iohn Launde, and Nicholas Twifield, Burgeſſes of the Citty,The dagger added to the Citties Armes. adding the Dagger into the Citties Armes, which till that day was a red Croſſe in a Siluer field onely.
               
                  
                  1381
                  Iohn Northampton, Draper, Lord Maior two yeares.
               
                  1383Sir Nicholas Brember, Grocer, knighted with Syr William Walworth, Lorde Maior three yeares together.
               
                  1387
                  Nicholas Exton, fiſhmon. lord maior 1. yeare
               
                  1388
                  Nicholas T
                        ••
                     ifield, or T
                        •
                     ylorde, knighted with Syr William Walworth, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1389
                  William V
                        •
                     na
                        •
                     r, Grocer, Lord Maior, one yeare.
               
                  1
                        •
                     90
                  Adam B
                        •
                     mme, Goldſmith (who prouided the Cittie of ſuch plenty of corne from beyonde the ſeas, that the Citty was able to furniſh the countrey) Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  13
                        •
                     1
                  Iohn Hend, Draper, in whoſe time happened a great tumult in London, becauſe one of the biſhop of Salisburies men, had taken a Horſe-loafe from a Bakers man in Fleete-ſtreete, and on the Byſhops complaint to the King, the Lord Maior being ſent for to Windſore, and other of hys Brethren; the Maior, Sheriffes, and other ſubſtantiall Cittizens, were there arreſted, the Maior committed to the caſtle of Windſore, and the reſt to other Caſtles and Holdes. The King ſeized the citty into his hands, appointing a Warden to gouerne it,A Warden appointed to gouerne London. named Sir Edward Darling
                     
                        ••
                     g, knight, &c. But in ſhort while the Kinges diſpleaſure was pacified, and the liberties of London reſtored and ratifyed.
               
                  1392
                  William S
                        •
                     ondon, Grocer, lord maior 1. year.
               
                  1393
                  Iohn Hadley, Grocer, againe lord maior one yeare.
               
                  
                  Iohn Froſhe, Mercer, Lorde maior one yeare.1394
               
               
                  William More, Vintner,1395 L. Maior one yeare
               
                  Adam Bamme, Gold-Smith,1396 againe Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  Richard Whittington, mercer,1397 
                  Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  Drew Barentine, Gold-ſmith,1398 
                  Lord Maior 1. yeare. At his expiration of Office, beganne the raigne of King Henry the fourth, the 29. of September, 1399.
               
               
                  Thomas Knolles, Grocer, lord maior 1. yeare.1399
               
               
                  Iohn Francis, Goldſmith, lord maior one year.1400
               
               
                  Iohn Shadworth, mercer, lord maior one yeare.1401
               
               
                  Iohn Walcote, Draper, lorde maior one yeare.1402
               
               
                  William Aſcham, Fiſhmonger,1403 lord maior one yeare.
               
                  Iohn Hend, draper, again lord maior one year,1304 he builded new againe the pariſh Church of ſaint Swithen at London ſtone.
               
               
                  Iohn woodcock, mercer, lord maior one yeare.1405
               
               
                  Richard VVhittington, mercer,1406 agayne lorde maior one yeare. In which year died of ye plague more then 30000. people.
               
                  William Stondon, Grocer,1407 againe lord maior one yeare.
               
                  Drew Barentine, Gold-ſmith,1408 againe lorde maior one yeare. Hee builded part of the Goldeſmiths Hall, and gaue them lands.
               
                  Richard Marlow, Ironmonger,1409 
                  Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  Thomas Knoles, Grocer,1410 againe L. Maior one yeare: he began anew to builde the Guild-Hall
                  
in London, &c.
               
                  1411
                  Robert Chichley, Grocer, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  1412
                  William Waldren, mercer, Lord Maior one yeare. In his time died king Henry the fourth, & his ſonne King Henry the fift began his raigne, the 20. day of march, 1412.
               
               
                  1413
                  William Cromar, Draper, lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  1414
                  Thomas Faulconer, mercer, who builded the Poſtern at Moorgate, and lent the king 10000. markes vpon Iewels, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1415
                  Nicholas Wotton, Draper, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1416
                  Henry Barton, Skinner, who firſt ordayned Lanthorn and Candle-light in the winter Euenings,Firſt Lantherne and candle-light from Hallontide to Candlemaſſe: Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  1417
                  Richard Marlow, Iremonger, againe Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  1418
                  William Seuenoke, Grocer, (who founded a free Schoole, and Almes houſes at Seuenoke in Kent) Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1419
                  Richard Whittington, mercer, of whoſe worthy déeds we haue elſe where ſpoken, Lord Maior again one yeare.
               
                  1420
                  William Cambridge, Grocer, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  1421
                  Robert Chicheley, Grocer, againe L. Maior one yeare. He gaue the plot of ground, to builde the pariſh church of S. Stephens in Walbrooke thereon: In his time died king Henry the fifte,

and King Henry the ſixt began his raigne the 31 of Auguſt, 1422.
               
               
                  William walderne, mercer,1422 again Lord Maior one yeare. Newgate was then builded by Richard Whittingtons executors.
               
                  William Cromar, Draper,1423 againe Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Iohn Michell, Fiſhmonger,1424 Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Iohn Couentrie, mercer, Lord Maior one year.1425
               
               
                  Iohn Reinwell, Fiſhm. lord maior one yeare.1426
               
               
                  Iohn Gidney, Draper Lord Maior one yeare.1427
               
               
                  Henry Barton, Skinner,1428 againe Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  William Eaſt-field, mercer,1429 Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  Nicholas wotton, Draper,1430 againe Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Iohn Welles, Grocer, a liberall benefactor,1431 for newe building the chappell by Guild-Hald; beſide, of his goodes was builte the Standarde in weſt-Cheape, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Iohn Parneis, Fiſhmonger,1432 Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  Iohn Brokle, Draper, Lord Maior one yeare.1433
               
               
                  Roger Oteley, Grocer, Lord Maior one year.1434
               
               
                  Henry Frowicke, Mercer,1435 L
                     •
                  de Maior one yeare.
               
                  Iohn Michell, Fiſhmonger,1436 againe L. Maior one yeare.
               Sir VVilliam Eaſt-field, mercer (who was made a Knight of the Bathe,1437 and gaue great

bounty to rhe Water conduits,L. Maior, Knight of the Bath. Lorde Maior againe one yeare.
               
                  1438
                  Stephen Browne, Grocer, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  1439
                  Robert Large, mercer, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  1440
                  Iohn Paddeſley, Gold-ſmith, mint-maiſter, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1441
                  Robert Clopto
                        •
                     , Draper, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  1442
                  Iohn Hatherley, Ironmonger, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  1443
                  Thomas Catworth, Grocer, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  1444
                  Henry Frowicke, mercer, in whoſe time Pauls Steeple was fiered with lightning, and hardlye quenched,Pauls ſte
                        •
                     
                     ple fired. Lord Maior againe one yeare.
               
                  1445Sir Simon Eyre, Draper (who builded Leaden Hal, for a common Granary to the city, &c.) Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1446
                  Iohn Olney, mercer, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1447
                  Iohn Sidney, Draper, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1448
                  Stephen Browne, Grocer, againe Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1449
                  Thomas Chalton, mercer (in whoſe time happened the Rebellion of Iack Cade of Kent) Lord Maior one year
                     •
                  .
               
                  1450
                  Nicholas VVilford, Grocer, lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  1451
                  William Gregory, Skinner, lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  1452
                  Godfrey Filding, mercer, who was made one

of the counſell to King Henry the ſixt, and King Edward the fourth, lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Iohn Norman, Draper,1453 who was the firſte maior that was rowed by water to weſtminſter,
                  The firſt Maior rowed to Weſtminſter. for (till that time) they rode thither on horſeback, lord Maior, one yeare.
               
                  Stephen Foſter,
                  1454 Fiſhmonger (who enlarged Ludgate) Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  William Marrow, Grocer,1455 lorde Maior one yeare.
               
                  T
                        •
                     omas Canning, Grocer,1456 Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Godfrey Boloine,
                  1457 mercer (who gaue a 1000. li. to poore houſholders in London, &c.) lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Thomas Scot,
                  1458 Draper lord Maior one yeare
               
                  William Hulin, Fiſhmonger,1459 lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  Richard Lee, Grocer, lord Maior one yeare.1460 In his time began King Henry the ſixt his troubles, and King Edward the fourth entered hys raigne the fourth of March, 1460.
               
               
                  Hugh witch, mercer, lord Maior one yeare.1461
               
               
                  Thomas Cooke, Draper,1462 
                  Lord Maior Knight of the Bath. made knight of the Bath, in the fifte yeare of King Edward the 4. Lord maior one yeare.
               
                  Mathew Phillip, Gold-ſmith (made Knight of the Bath the fift yeare of Edward the fourth,1463 
                  Lord Maior Knighted in the fielde. and afterward knighted in field, the tenth of Edward the fourth, Lord maior one yeare.
               
                  Raphe Ioceline, Draper,1464 Knight of the Bath and knighted alſo in field, Lord maior one yeare.
               
                  
                  1465 
                  A ſheriffe knight of the Bath.
                  Raph Verney, mercer Lord Maior one yeare. Henry weauer, one of the Sheriffes of London, was then made knight of the Bath.
               
                  1466
                  Iohn Yong, Grocer (knighted in the field) L. Maior one yeare.1467
               
               
                  1468
                  Tho. O
                        •
                     dgraue, Skinner, L. Mayor 1. year.
               
                  1469
                  William Tayler, Grocer, L. Maior one yeare.
               
                  Lord Maior deliuered the king out of the Tower.
                  Richard Lee, Grocer, againe lord Maior one yeare. In whoſe time the Tower of London being deliuered to him and his brethren, they releaſed King Henry the ſixt thence.
               
                  1470
                  Iohn Stockton, mercer, who worthily withſtanding the Baſtard Fauconbridge, hee, with eleuen Aldermen,L. Maior 11 Aldermen, and the Recorder, knighted in fielde. & Thomas Vrſwick, then Recorder, were all knighted in the fielde by K. Edward the fourth; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
                  William Edwards, Grocer, L. Maior 1. year.
               
                  1471Sir william Hampton, Fiſhmonger, Lorde Maior one yeare.1472
               
               
                  1473
                  Iohn Tate, mercer, lord maior one yeare. In his time ye Sheriffes of London were appointed to haue ſeuerally 16. Sergeants,Sergeants, yeomen, & Clearks appointed. & each Sergeant his Yeoman. Then alſo was ordained ſixe Clearkes, viz. a Secondary, a Clarke of the Papers, and foure other Clarkes, beſide the vnder-Sheriffes Clarkes.
               
                  1474
                  Robert Drope, Draper, L. Maior one yeare.
               
                  1475
                  Robert Baſſet, Salter, L. Maior▪
                   one yeare.
               
                  1407Sir Raphe Ioceline, Draper, knight of the Bath, lord maior one yeare.
               
                  1477
                  Humfrey Hayford, Gold-ſmith, lord maior, one yeare.
               
                  
                  Richard Gardener, mercer, lord maior one year.1478
               
               Sir Bartholmew Iames, Draper,1479 Knighted in field and (who newly builded the great Conduit in Weſt-Cheape) lord maior one yeare.
               
                  Iohn Browne, mercer, lorde maior one yeare.1480
               
               
                  William Hariot, Draper,1481 lord maior one year
               
                  Edmund Shaa, Goldſmith,1482 who builded Crippleſgate, lord maior one yeare. Then beganne the raigne of King Edward the fift, ſon to King Edward the fourth; but preuented by the cruell vſurpation of his Vncle Richard, Duke of Gloceſter, who began his raign the 22. day of Iune, 1483.
               
               And becauſe many haue often deſired, to know the country and parentage of our Lord Maiors of London, in regard that diuers worthy houſes haue deſcended of them: my purpoſe was, to haue examined our ancient Recordes, from the verye beginning of that honourable dignity, and ſo to haue purſued the tract thereof (by reporting each mans Fathers name and Country) euen to this inſtant. Wherein I haue had the moſt laborious and painfull helpe, of my eſpeciall kind friende, maiſter W. Williams: And ſhaping our courſe from the preſent gouernment of ſir William Crauon, hoping to haue reached the maine height of our purpoſe, euen to Henry Fitz-Alwin, &c. We could procéed no further backward, then the raign of king Richard the third, where I will now begin with their country, and parents, and ſo heereafter, go on with the reſt, if this great labor may be but fauourably accepted.
            
            
               
               ¶ The raigne of King Richard the third.
               
                  1483RObert Billiſdon, Haberdaſher, Sonne to Alexander Billiſdō, of Queeningborough, in the Countie of Leiceſter, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1484Thomas Hill, Grocer, Sonne to William Hil of Hilſton, in the Countie of Kent. Sir William Stocker, Draper, ſonne to Thomas Stocker, of Eton,Three Lord Maiors in one yeare. 
                  in the Countie of Bedford. And Iohn Ward, Grocer, ſon to Richard Ward, of Howdon, in the Countie of Yorke. Theſe thrée Maiors were all in this one yeare, by reaſon a ſweating ſickneſſe. And King Richard, being ſlaine at Boſworth-field; Henry the ſeauenth began his raigne the 22. of Auguſt 1485.
               
                  1485Hugh Brice, Gold-ſmith, Sonne to Richard Brice of Dubline in Ireland: Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1486Henry Collet, Mercer, ſon to Robert Collet of Windouer, in the Countie of Buckingham, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1487
                  Sir William Horne, Salter (made Knight in the field by King Henry the ſeauenth) was ſon to Thomas Horne of Snaylewell, in Cambridgeſhire; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1488Robert Tate, Mercer, Sonne to Thomas Tate, of the Cittie of Couentry; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1489William White, Draper, ſon to Wil. White

                  of Tickhill in the Countie of York; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               Iohn Mathew, Linnen-Draper,1490 
                  and tranſlated to the Mercers, Sonne to Thomas Mathew of Sherington, in the Countie of Buckingham; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               Hugh Clopton, Mercer, ſon to Iohn Clopton of Stratford vppon Auon,1491 
                  in the Countie of Warwicke (where the ſaide Hugh builded the goodlie Stone-Bridge) Lord Mayor one yeare.
               
               William Martine, Skinner,1492 
                  ſonne to Walter Martin, of the Countie of Hertford; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Raphe Oſtrich,1493 Fiſh-Monger (knighted by Henry the ſeauenth) ſonne to Henry Oſtrich of Hitchin, in the Countie of Hertford, lord Maior one yeare.
               
               Richard Chawry, Salter,
                  1494 
                  Son to William Chawry, of Weſtram in Kent; Lord Mayor one yeare.
               
               Henry Collet, Mercer,1495. 
                  again Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               Iohn Tate, Mercer,1496 
                  ſonne to Thomas Tate of Couentry, and Brother to Robert Tate Maior, forenamed, Lord Mayor one yeare.
               
               
                  This Iohn Tate, Robert Sheffielde, Recorder, and both the Sheriffes, were knighted in the fielde by King Henry the ſeauenth,
                  Black heath field. 
                  for theyr good ſeruice againſt the Rebelles at Black-Heath Fielde.
               
               William Purchas, Mercer,1497. 
                  ſon to Iohn Purchas of Gamelinghey, in the County of Cambridge,

Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1498
                  Sir Iohn Perciuall, Merchant-Taylor, knighted in field by King Henry the ſeuenth) ſonne to Roger Perciuall of London; L. Maior one year.
               
               
                  1499Nicholas Aldwine, Mercer, Son to Richard Aldwine of Spalding in Lincolnſhire, lord Maior one yeare. Hee gaue twelue pence a péece to 3000. poore people in London, and the like to as many in Spalding.
               
                  1500William Remington, Fiſh-Monger, ſon to Robert Remington, of Boſton in Lincolneſhire, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1501Iohn Shaa, Gold-ſmith, ſon to Iohn Shaa of Rochford in Eſſex,Lord Mairs firſt riding from the Guild Hall, to take Bardge to Weſtminſter. Lord Maior one yeare. Hee was made Knight in the fielde by King Henry the ſeauenth, and hee cauſed the Aldermen his Bretheren, to ride from the Guilde-Hall to the Thames ſide, when he took Bardge to Weſtminſter, where he was ſworne by the Kinges Councell. He firſt kept Court alone in the afternoon, for redreſſe of matters called before him.
               
               
                  1502Bartholmew Reade, Gold-ſmith, ſon of Roger Reade of Crowmer in Norffolke; L. Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1503William Capell, Draper, ſon of Iohn Capell of Stokeneyland in Suffolke; Lorde Maior one yeare.
                  Firſt ſetting vp of Cadges. 
                  He was knighted by King Henry the ſeauenth. And he firſt cauſed Cadges to be ſet vp in euery Ward, for puniſhment of Rogues and vagabonds.
               
               
                  1504Iohn Winger, Grocer, ſon to William Winger of Leiceſter; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Thomas Kneſworth, Fiſh-Monger,1505 
                  ſonne to Iohn Kneſworth, of Kneſworth in Cambridgeſhire, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Richard Haddon, Mercer,1506 
                  ſon of VVilliam Haddon, Cittizen and Mercer of London, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               VVilliam Browne, Mercer,1507 
                  Sonne of Iohn Browne, Cittizen and Mercer of London, Lord Maior for one part of the yeare, and Laurance Ailmer, Draper, Sonne of Thomas Ailmer, of Elleſnam in Eſſex, Lorde Maior for the other part.
               
               Stephen Iennings, Merchant-Taylor,1508 
                  ſonne to VVilliam Iennings, of VVolnerhampton in Staffordſhire (where hee builded a frée Schoole, worthily yet maintained by the Merchant-Taylors, and the greater part of S. Andrews Vnder-ſhaft Pariſh Church in London) Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               Thomas Bradbury, Mercer,1509 
                  ſonne to VVilliam Bradbury of Branghing in Hertfordſhire: Lord Maior part of the yeare, and Sir VVilliam Capell the reſt, wherein dyed King Henry the ſeauenth, and Henry the eight his ſonne, began his raigne the 22. of Aprill, 1509.
               Henry Keble, Grocer,1510 
                  ſon to George Keble of London, Cittizen and Grocer; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               Roger Acheley, Draper,1511 
                  ſonne to Thomas Acheley of Stanwardine in Shropſhire; Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir VVilliam Coppinger, Fiſh-Monger,1512 
                  ſon

to VValter Coppinger, of Buckſeill in Suffolk; And Sir Richard Haddon, Mercer, were Lord Maiors this yeare by ſeuerall partes, each after other.
               
               
                  1513.William Browne, Mercer, ſonne to Iohn Browne, Cittizen and Mercer of London, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1514George Monox, Draper, borne in London, Lord Mayor one yeare.
               
               
                  1515
                  Sir William Butler, Grocer, ſon to Richard Butler, of Bindenham in Bedfordſhire, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1516Iohn Reeſt, Grocer, ſonne to William Reeſt of Peterborow, in Northamptonſhire, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1517
                  Sir Thomas Exmew, Golde-ſmith, ſonne to Richard Exmew of Ruthin in Cheſhire; Lorde Maior one yeare: he made the Water-Conduite in London wall by Moore-gate, &c.
               
                  1518Thomas Mirfin, Skinner, ſonne to George Mirfin, of Elie in Cambridgeſhire, L. Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1519
                  Sir Iames Yardford, Mercer, ſonne to William Yardford of Kidwelley in Wales; L. Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1520
                  Sir Iohn Brugge, Draper, ſonne to Thomas Brugge of Dymmocke in Gloceſterſhire; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1511
                  Sir Iohn Milborne, Draper, ſon to Iohn Milborne of Long-Melford in Suffolke; L. Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1522
                  Sir Iohn Mundy, Gold-Smith, ſon to William

Mundy of Wycomb in Buckinghamſhire; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Thomas Baldry, Mercer,1523 
                  ſon to Richard Baldry, of Stow-market in Suffolke; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir William Baylie, Draper,1524 
                  ſon to Iohn Baylie of Thackſtead in Eſſex; Lorde Mayor one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Iohn Allen, Mercer,1525 
                  ſon to Richard Allen of Thackſtead, in Eſſex; Lorde Mayor two yeares.
               
               
                  Sir Thomas Seymor, Mercer,1526 
                  ſonne to Iohn Seymor of London, Fiſh-Monger, who was Sonne to Robert Seymor of Walden in Eſſex; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Iames Spencer, Vintoner,1527 
                  ſon to Robert Spencer of Congleton in Cheſhire, Lord Mayor one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Iohn Rudſtone, Draper,1528 
                  ſon to Robert Rudſtone of Hatton in Yorkſhire; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Raphe Dodmer, Mercer,1529 
                  ſon to Henrie Dodmer, of Pickering-Leigh in Yorkſhire; béeing frée of the Brewers, he was from them tranſlated to the Mercers, and Lorde Mayor one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Thomas Pargitor, Salter,1530 
                  ſonne to Iohn Pargitor, of Chipping-norton in Oxfordſhire, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Nicholas Lambert, Grocer, ſon to Edmond Lambert of Wilton in Wiltſhire;1531 
                  L. Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  
                  1532.
                  Sir Stephen Peacock, Haberdaſher, ſonne to Stephen Peacock of the Citty of Dublin; Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1533
                  Sir Chriſtopher Askew, Draper, ſon to Iohn Askew of Edmonton in Middleſex; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1534
                  Sir Iohn Champneis, Skinner, ſonne to R. Campneis, of Chew in Somerſetſhire; Lorde Mayor one yeare.
               
               
                  1535
                  Sir Iohn Allen, Mercer, againe Lord Maior one yeare, and made a priuy Counceller to the King, for his great wiſedome.
               
               
                  1136
                  Sir Raphe Warren Mercer, ſon to Thomas Warren of London, Fuller, who was ſonne to William Warren, of Fering in Eſſex: L. Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1537
                  Sir Richard Greſham, Mercer, ſon to Iohn Greſham, of Holte in Norffolke; Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1538
                  Sir William Forman, Haberdaſher, ſonne to Willi
                     •
                   Forman of Gainsburgh in Lincolnſhire, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1539
                  Sir William Hollis of London, Mercer, L. Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1540
                  Sir William Roche, Draper, ſonne to Iohn Roche of Wixley in Yorkſhire; Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1541
                  Sir Michaell Dormer, Mercer, ſon to Geffrey Dormer of Tame in Orfordſhire; L. Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1542Iohn Cootes, Salter, ſon to Thomas Coots of Bearton, in Buckinghamſhire; Lorde Maire

one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir William Bowyer, Draper, ſon to William Bowyer, of Harſton in Cambridgſhire,
                  1543 
                  Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir William Laxton, Grocer,1544 
                  ſonne to Iohn Laxton, of Yongdel in Northamptonſhire; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Martin Bowes, Golde-Smith,1545. 
                  ſonne to Thomas Bowes of Yorke Citty, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Henry Hubberthorne,1546 
                  Merchant-Taylor, ſon to Chriſtopher Hubberthorne, of VVadingworth in Lincolnſhire, L. Maior one year. In whoſe time died King Henry the 8. and King Edward the ſixt, began his raigne the 28. of Ianuary, 1546.
               
                  Sir Iohn Greſham, Mercer,
                  1547 
                  ſon to Iohn Greſham of Holte in Norffolke, Lorde Mayor one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Henry Amcotes, Fiſh-Monger,1548 
                  ſon to William Amcotes of Aſtrap in Lincolnſhire, L. Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Rowland Hill, Mercer,
                  1549 
                  ſonne to Thomas Hill of Hodnet in Shropſhire: Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Andrew Iudde, Skinner,1550 
                  ſon to Iohn Iud of Tonebridge in Kent, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Richard Dobbes, Skinner,1551 
                  ſon to Robert Dobbes of Baitby in Yorkeſhire: L. Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir George Barne, Haberdaſher,
                  1552 
                  ſonne to George Barne, Cittizen and Haberdaſher of
                  
London, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1553
                  Sir Thomas White, Merchant-Taylor, ſon to Thomas White of Rickmanſworth, in Hertfordſhire, Lord maior one yeare. Then died king Edward, and Queene Mary began her raign the 6. day of Iuly, 1553. This ſir Thomas White founded S. Iohn Baptiſts Colledge in Oxenford: and gaue 2000. li. to the Citty of Briſtoll, to purchaſe 100. and 20. li. land yearely, &c.
               
               
                  1554
                  Sir Thomas Lyon, Grocer, ſon to Iohn Lyon of Peryfare in Middleſex, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1555
                  Sir William Gerard, Haberdaſher, ſonne to Iohn Gerard, Cittizen and Grocer of London, who was ſon to William Gerard, of Seddingbourne in Kent; Lord Maior one year.
               
               
                  1556
                  Sir Thomas Offley, Merchant-Taylor, ſonne to VVilliam Offley, of the Citty of Cheſter, lord maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1557
                  Sir Thomas Curteis, Fiſh-Monger, ſonne to Iohn Curteis of Enfield in Middleſex, he was frée of the Pewterers, and from them tranſlated to the Fiſh-Mongers, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1558
                  Sir Thomas Leigh, Mercer, ſonne to Roger Leigh, of VVillington, in Shropſhire, Lorde Maior one yeare. In which yeare died Quéene Mary, and Quéene Elizabeth began her princely raigne the ſeauentéenth day of Nouember, 1558.
               
                  1559
                  Sir William Huet, Cloth-worker, ſon to Edmond Huet of Wales in Yorkſhire: Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  
                  Sir William Cheſter, Draper,
                  1560 
                  ſonne to Iohn Cheſter, Cittizen and Draper of London; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir William Harper, Merchant-Taylor,1561 
                  ſon to William Harper, of the Towne of Bedford, lord maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Thomas Lodge, Grocer,
                  1562 
                  ſon to William Lodge, of Creſſet in Shropſhire, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Iohn White, Grocer,
                  1563 
                  Sonne to Robert White of Farnam in Surry, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Richard Malory, Mercer,
                  1564 
                  ſon to Anthony Malory of Papworthamus, in Cambridgeſhire; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Richard Champion, Draper,
                  1565 
                  ſon to Richard Champion of Godilming in Surrey, Lord maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Chtiſtopher Draper, Iron-monger,
                  1566 
                  ſon to Iohn Draper of Melton Mowbrey; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Roger Martin, Mercer,
                  1567 
                  ſon to Laurance Martine of Melford in Suffolke, Lord maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Thomas Roe Merchant-Taylor,1568 
                  ſon to Robert Roe, Cittizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, who was ſon to Reiginald Roe, of Lee in Kent, lord maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Alexander Auenand, Iron-monger,
                  1569 
                  ſon to Robert Auenand, of Kings-Norton in Worceſterſhire, Lorde maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Rowland Heyward, Cloth-worker,
                  1570 
                  ſonne

to George Heiward of Bridge-north in Shropſhire, Lord Maior one year.
               
               
                  1571
                  Sir William Allen, Mercer, ſon to William Allen, Cittizen and Paſteller of London, who was ſon to Richard Allen, of Stondon in Hertfordſhire; Lord Mayor one yeare.
               
               
                  1572
                  Sir Lionell Ducket, Mercer, ſon to William Ducket of Flynton in Nottinghamſhire, Lorde maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1573
                  Sir Iohn Riuers, Grocer, ſon to Richard Riuers of Penſeherſt in Kent L. Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1574
                  Sir Iames Hawes, Cloth-worker, ſon to Thomas Hawes, Cittizen and Merchant of London, who was ſon to Iohn Hawes of Stokenwenton, in Middleſex, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1575
                  Sir Ambroſe Nicholas, Salter, ſonne to Iohn Nicholas of Nedingworth in Huntingdonſhire, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1576
                  Sir Iohn Langley, Gold-Smith, ſon to Robert Langley, of Althrop in Lincolnſhire, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1577
                  Sir Thomas Ramſey, Grocer, ſonne to Iohn Ramſey, of Elenbridge in Kent; lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1578
                  Sir Richard Pipe, Draper, ſonne to Richard Pipe of Wolnerhampton, in Staffordſhire, hée was frée of the Leather-ſellers, and from them tranſlated to the Drapers, Lord Maior one year.
               
               
                  1579
                  Sir Nicholas Woodroue, Haberdaſher, ſon to Dauid Woodroue, Cittizen and Haberdaſher of London, who was ſon to Iohn Woodroue, of the Pariſh of Vſcombe in Deuonſhire; Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  
                  Sir Iohn Branche, Draper,
                  1580 
                  ſonne to Iohn Branche, Cittizen and Draper of London, who was ſon to Iohn Branch of Laynham in Suffolk; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Iames Haruey, Iron-monger,
                  1581 
                  ſon to William Haruey, of Cotwalton in Staffordſhire, L. Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Thomas Blanke, Haberdaſher,
                  1582 ſonne to Thomas Blanke, Cittizen and Haberdaſher of London, who was ſonne to Thomas Blancke of Guildford in Surry, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Edward Osborne, Cloth-worker,
                  1583 
                  ſonne to Richard Osborne of Aſhford in Kent, Lorde Maior one year.
               
               
                  Sir Thomas Pulloccill, Draper,
                  1584 
                  ſon to William Pulloccill, of Foteſcray in Kent, lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Wolſtane Dixie, Skinner,1585 
                  ſon to Thomas Dixie of Catworth in Huntingdonſhire, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir George Barne, Haberdaſher,
                  1586 
                  ſon to Sir George Barne, Knight, Cittizen and Haberdaſher of London, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir George Bond, Haberdaſher,
                  1587 
                  ſonne of R. Bond of Trull in Somerſetſhire, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Martine Calthrop,1588 
                  Cittizen and Draper of London, Lord Maior for part of the yeare, and Richard Martine, Gold-ſmith, for the reſt.
               
               
                  Sir Iohn Hart, Grocer,1589 
                  ſon of Raphe Hart of Sproſton Court in Yorkſhire, L. Maior one year
               
               
                  Sir Iohn Allot, Fiſh-Monger,1590 
                  ſon to Richard

Allot of Lymbergh in Lincolnſhire, Lord Maior one part of the yeare, and Sir Rowland Heywerd the reſt.
               
               
                  159
                        •
                     
                  
                  Sir William Webbe, Salter, Sonne to Iohn Webbe of Reading in Barkſhire, lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1592
                  Sir William Roe, Iron-monger, Sonne to Thomas Roe of Penſeherſt in Kent, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1593
                  Sir Cutbbert Buckle, Vintoner, ſon to Chriſtopher Buckle, of Bourgh in Weſtmerland, L. Maior for part of the yeare, and ſir Richard Martine Goldſmith, the reſt: This ſir Richard Martine was ſonne to Thomas Martine, of Saffron VValden in Eſſex.
               
                  1594
                  Sir Iohn Spenſer, Cloth-worker, ſon to Rich. Spenſer of Waldinfield in Suffolke, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1595
                  Sir Stephen Slaney, Skinner, ſonne to Iohn Slaney of Mitton in Staffordſhire, Lorde Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1596Thomas Skinner, Cloth-worker, ſon to Iohn Skinner of Walden in Eſſex: Lorde Maior for part of the yeare, and ſir Henry Billingſley Haberdaſher the reſt. This ſir Henrie Billingſley was ſonne to William Billingſley, Cittizen and Haberdaſher of London, who was ſonne to Roger Billingſley, of the Citty of Canterbury in Kent.
               
               
                  1597
                  Sir Richard Saltonſtall, Skinner, ſon to Gilbert Saltonſtal, of Hallyfax in Yorkeſhire, Lord Mayor one year.
               
               
                  
                  Sir Stephen Soame, Grocer,
                  1598 
                  ſon to Thomas Soame of Bradley in Suffolke, Lord Maior one year. He was frée of the Girdlers, and from them tranſlated to the Grocers.
               
               
                  Sir Nicholas Moſley, Cloth-worker,
                  1599 
                  ſonne to Edward Moſley of Hough in Lancaſhire, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir William Ryder, Haberdaſher,
                  1600 
                  ſonne to Thomas Ryder of Muckleſton in Staffordſhire, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Iohn Gerard, Haberdaſher,
                  1601 
                  ſon to ſir William Gerard, Knight, Cittizen and Haberdaſher of London, Lorde maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Robert Lee, Merchant-Taylor,1602 
                  ſonne to Humphrey Lee of Bridge-north, in Shropſhire, Lord maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Thomas Benet, Mercer,
                  1603 
                  ſonne to Thomas Benet of Wallingford in Barkſhire, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Thomas Low, Haberdaſher,
                  1604 
                  ſon to Simon Low, Cittizen and Merchant-Tailor of London, who was ſonne to Raphe Low of London, Gentleman; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Leonard Holyday, Merchant-Taylor,
                  1605 
                  ſon to William Holyday, of Redborow in Gloceſterſhire, Lord maior one yeare.
               
               
                  Sir Iohn Wats, Cloth-worker,
                  1606 
                  ſonne to Thomas Wats of Buntingford in Hertfordſhire, Lord maior one year.
               
               
                  Sir Henry Roe, Mercer,1607 
                  ſonne to ſir Thomas Roe, Knight, Cittizen and Merchant-Taylor of London; Lorde Mayor one yeare.
               
               
                  
                  1608
                  Sir Humphrey Welde, Grocer, ſon to Iohn Welde of Eaton in Cheſhire; Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1609
                  Sir Thomas Cambell, Iron-Monger, ſon to Robert Cambell, of Fulſam in Norffolk, Lord Maior one yeare.
               
               
                  1610
                  Sir William Crauon, Merchant-Taylor, ſon to William Crauon, of Appletreewick in Yorkſhire; Lord Maior now gouerning, to whom (with the reſt of his worthy Brethren) I wiſh all health and happineſſe.
               
            
            
               
               Since the time alſo of King Richard the third, theſe Gentlemen haue born office in this Citty, according to their names and places.
               
                  ¶ Recorders of this Citty.
                  
                     M. HVmphrey Statkey, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Thomas Fitz-Williams, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     Sir Robert Sheffield, Knight.
                  
                  
                     M. Iohn Chaloner, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Robert Brooke, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Shelley, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Baker, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Roger Cholmeley, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Richard Onſlow, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Thomas Bromeley, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. VVilliam Fleetwood, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Edward Coke, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Edward Drew, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Thomas Fleming, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Iohn Crooke, Eſquire.
                  
                  Sir Henry Montague, Knight.
                  
               
               
                  Common Sergeants of this Citty.
                  
                     M. Robert Moloneux, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Iohn Haugh, Eſquier. Thomas Higham.
                  
                     M. Thomas Frowick, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Thomas Marow, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Iohn Greene, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. VVhite, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. VValſingham, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     
                     M. VVonley, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Robert Sothwell, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Robert Brooke, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Atkins, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Marſh, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Randall, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Thomas Kirton, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Thomas Wilbraham, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Richard Wheeler, Eſquire.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Chamberlaines of this Citty.
                  
                     M. WIlliam Phillip, Eſquire.
                  
                  
                     M. Miles Adys.
                  
                     M. VVilliam Purhas.
                  
                     M. William Milborne.
                  
                     M. Nicholas Mattock.
                  
                     M. George Medley.
                  
                     M. Thomas Haies.
                  
                     M. Iohn Sturgeon.
                  
                     M. George Heaton.
                  
                     M. Iohn Mabbe.
                  
                     M. Robert Brandon.
                  
                     M. Thomas Wilford.
                  
                     M. Cornelius Fiſh.
               
               
                  ¶ Common-Clearkes, or Towne-Clearkes.
                  
                     M. WIlliam Dunthorne.
                  
                     M. Nicholas Pakenham.
                  
                     
                     M. Walter Stub.
                  
                     M. William Pauior.
                  
                     M. Thomas Ruſhton.
                  
                     M. Blackwell.
                  
                     M. Anthony Stapleton.
                  
                     M. William Sebright.
                  
                     M. Richard Langley.
               
               
                  Eſquires attending on the Lorde Maior in his houſe, and elſe-where. Sword-bearers.
                  IOhn Metford.
                  Walter Thomas.
                  Iohn Pynchbecke.
                  Valentine Maſon.
                  Richard Berwick.
                  Walter Smith.
                  Robert Smart.
                  Mathew Sturdeuant.
                  Rowland Smart.
               
               
                  Common Hunt.
                  IOhn Stokker.
                  Arnold Babington.
                  Iohn Burton.
                  Thomas Abbot.
                  Thomas Vnderhill.
                  Iohn Lune.
                  Iohn Dewell.
                  William Richbell.
               
               
                  
                  Common Proclaimer, or Cryer.
                  Iohn Aſhe.
                  Thomas Camery.
                  Thomas Say.
                  Richard White.
                  VVilliam Nicholſon.
                  Iohn Hallyday.
                  Iohn Greene.
                  Chriſtopher Fowkes.
                  Iohn Northage.
                  Edward Ap-Iohn.
               
               
                  VVater Bayliffe.
                  IOhn Good.
                  Henry Snowe.
                  Geffrey Morton.
                  Thomas Briggs.
                  Sebaſtian Hillarie.
                  Henry King.
                  Nicholas VVillie.
                  Robert Sharborowe.
                  Cuthbert Thursbie.
                  Thomas Benſon.
               
            
            
               Theſe Officers alſo doo attend the Lorde Maior in their ſeuerall places.
               VNder Chamberlaine.
               Foure Clearkes of the Lord Maiors court, who wrote weekely in the Lorde Maiors houſe ſeuerally.
               
                  
                  Coroner of London.
                  Sergeant Caruers, three.
                  Sergeants of the Chamber, three.
                  Sergeant of the Chanell.
                  Yeoman of the Channell.
                  Yeomen of the Water-ſide, foure.
                  Vnder water Balyffe
                  Yeomen of the Chamber▪ two.
                  Meale weighers▪ three.
                  Yeomen of the wood wharfes, two.
                  The Sword-Bearers man. Eſquires men.
                  Common Huntſ-men two Eſquires men.
                  Common Cryers man▪ Eſquires men.
                  Water 
                        •
                     ayliffes men two Eſquires men.
                  The Caruers man Eſquires men.
                  Nine of theſe haue 
                        •
                     iueries of the 
                        •
                     
                     ▪ 
                     
                        •
                     aior. v
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  The Sword bearer, and his man.
                  Three Caruers.
                  Foure Yeomen of the water ſide.
               
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   