
      
         
            
            
            THE POPES Funerall. Containing a plaine, succinct, and pithy reply, to a pretensed answere of a shamelesse and foolish Libell, intituled, The Forerunner of Bels downfall. VVhich is nothing else indeede, (as the indifferent Reader shall perceiue by the due peruse thereof,) but an euident manifestation of his owne folly; ith the vtter confusion of Poperie, and all popish vassals throughout the Christian world.
            2. Reg. 9. V. 34.
            Visit yonder cursed woman, and burie her; for she is a Kings daughter.
            Psal. 58.10.
            
The righteous shall reioyce, when he seeth the vengeance of the wicked, he shall wash his feete in the blood of the vngodly.
            LONDON Printed by T. C. For William Welby, and are to be sold at his shop in Paules Church-yard, at the signe of the Grayhound. 1605.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧ To the most puissant, wise, vertuous, learned, iudicious, and religious Monarch, Iames, by Gods holy prouidēce and eternal purpose, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland, most constant defendor of the auncient, Christian, Catholike & Apostolique Faith, and supreme gouernour within his said Realmes, Kingdomes, territories, and Dominions, next and immediately vnder the King of heauen, ouer all persons, and ouer all causes, aswell Ecclesiasticall as ciuill.
            
               GReat is the deepenesse (most gracious Soueraigne,
                  Rom. 11. Vers. 33. Iob. 26. V. 8. Iob. 27. V. 11▪ 
                  Iob. 38. V. 8.) of the wisedome and knowledge of the euerliuing God; vnsearchable are his iudgements, his waies past finding out. Hee bindeth the waters in his Clouds, and the cloud is not broken vnder them. He so limiteth the floods, that they neither doe nor can ouerflowe. He shut vp the Sea with doores, when it issued forth as out of the wombe. His decree staied her proud

waues, & appointed her bounds whether she should come, but no farther. He doth great, vnsearchable, and maruellous things without number.
                  Iob. 38. Vers. 11. Iob. 5.9. Yea, his mercies and fauours towards my sillie selfe, a most wretched creature, and vnworthie (for any desert in my selfe,) to tread vppon the ground; are so many, so great, and so wonderfull, that I stand amazed at the remembrance thereof:
                  I might here recount many other rare & extraordinary fauours of God towards me.
                being farre vnable with Penne and Inke to expresse the same. The rehearsall of one, may suffice for the present: Being student at Rome in the English Colledge, not long afore my arriuall in this Kingdome, and on a time walking abroad to take the ayre with many other of the same Colledge, when we came without one of the Posterne gates of the Citie, we espied certaine Bufloes with their Keeper at the Riuerside. Which spectacle, (as vnpleasant to the eye, so also most terrible to the heart,
                  The Bufloes are as terrible beasts as the Lyons.
               ) my fellowes and countrey-men no sooner behelde, but they betooke themselues to their best speede. My selfe more bolde therein then wise, would not amend my pace, and so remained bird alone. Sodainly the furious, raging, and cruell Bufloes brake from their keeper, and with great violence, rage, and furie came vpon me. My fellowes standing a farre off vpon the toppe of an high mountaine, durst not for their liues approach, to afford me any comfort, helpe, aide, or succour. They neither did, nor could expect any other thing, saue onely present and moste cruell death. Howbeit, (most gratious Soueraigne,) the wilde, cruell, raging, and furious Bufloes, (a thing very strange,
                  Many yet liuing, knowe 
                        •
                     his to be most true.
                rare, and wonderfull, if a miracle, let the Reader iudge,) did no hurt vnto me at all, but sported with mee, as one childe playeth with another. After a while, the furious Bufloes left mee, and departed in peace from mee. At the last, my fellowes beholding the departure of the Bufloes, and perswading themselues that I was most cruellie slaine, came with conuenient speede to visite my corpes. But finding me aliue, and as liue-like as I

was afore, we al returned to the Colledge, with great ioy and speede. The rector of the Colledge could no way be perswaded, but that I was very grieuously wounded; albeit neither my selfe felt any, neither could their eyes or wits discerne any hurt at all,
                  A thing neuer heard or knowne before.
                saue onely that my face was something bloody, by reason of the sodaine fall I gotte while I made hast to haue escaped from the imminent daunger. For, it had neuer bin knowne or heard among them; that euer any man, woman, or childe escaped with life, being once in that kind of daunger; to witte, in the curtesie of the furious Bufloes. Many gaue their censures concerning the fact and euent. The generall resolution was this, viz. That I might fight with Bufloes in England, and haue the vpper hand. My selfe did deeme it probable, & this day me thinketh, the same is brought to passe; though, (Gods name be blessed for it,) in a farre different sense and meaning, from that which either they or my selfe did then imagine. I thought then to fight against the true professors of Christs Gospell, (whō I deemed heretiques & spiritual Bufloes:) but God, (whose wisedome reacheth from end to ende, mightily,
                  Sap. 8.1. Ephes. 1. Vers. 4.11. Rom. 9. Vers. 11.15.16. &c. Ephes. 6. Vers. 12. Act. 9. Vers. 1.2.3. &c.
                and disposeth all things sweetely,) ordained me in his eternall purpose, to a farre more honourable and sacred Warfare; viz. to encounter the trayterous Iesuits and Iesuited popelings, and valiantly to fight the battell of Christs Church, against those most furious, brainlesse, & cruell Bufloes of mens soules. When Saul breathing out slaughter against ye
                Saints of God, desired of the high Priests, letters, by vertue whereof he might bring all to Hierusalem, that professed the name of Christ Iesus: then our Lord himselfe appeared to him, opened his eyes, & enlightened him with the knowledge of the truth. Semblably, when my selfe was drowned in the depth of superstitious and erronious Poperie, and therein so

blinded, that I could not discerne trueth from falshood; it pleased the same God, so to opē the eies of mine heart and soule,
                  Let mee die a most cruell death, if I shall not confound Popery by best approued Popish Doctors, against any English Papist that shall haue courage to defend the same. Psal. 118. verse 23. that I foorthwith beheld as cleerely, as the Sunne-shining at noone day, late vpstart Poperie, farre dissonant from the olde Romane Religion, to be battered, ouerthrowne, and cleane turned vp-side downe; and that, euen by the cleere euidence, plaine verdict, and constant doctrine of the best learned Doctors, and most renowned writers in the Church of Rome. Which metamorphosis and right Christian alteration being wrought in my soule, I foorthwith bewayled my former dayes of ignorance, very ioyfully embraced the truth in my heart, publiquely acknowledged Gods wonderfull operation in mee, and most humbly yeelded and submitted my selfe, to the mercie of most noble Queene Elizabeth. This was the Lords doing, and it is wonderfull in our eyes. I protest vpon my saluation, that I haue at this houre a good testimonie of a well setled conscience, and vnspeakable comfort in my soule, (God make me euer thankfull for this and all other his manifold mercies,) as I haue also euer had, since I first renounced frō my heart, the late vpstart Romish Religion. For this nowe professed Romish Religion, is not as the sillie seduced Papists imagine,) the old Romane Religion; but a new no Religion, patched like Mahomets Alcoran, and by little and little crept into the Church;
                  In the Survey of Poperie.
                as I haue prooued elsewhere at large. But the Papists being condemned in their own consciences, dare not for their liues publish any direct and full answere, either to my Motiues, or to my Survey, or to any other of my bookes, written against them and their p
                  •
               t
                  ••
               ed Hotch-potch Religion. Yet this last moneth of Februarie, one shamelesse and namelesse Iesuite, hath published, not a direct and full answere, but a Fore-runner

forsooth against mee. In which Pamphlet,
                  The Papists cannot abide to heare their religion thus tearmed. But they must volētes nolētes endure it, till they answere all my bookes. Forerunner, pag. 15. Nascctur ridiculus mus.
                hee turneth himselfe this way, that way, and euery way, saue onely to the marke at which hee neuer aymeth. He perceiueth right well, that many of the Popelings beginne to stagger at their doctrine and Romish faith: because they haue beene so long silent, and dare not answere my Bookes. For the procuring of which mortall wound, he telleth them of a most rare and soueraigne medicine, which the Iesuits haue brought out of the new found worlde: viz. That my Bookes were answered fiue yeare agoe: and that the answere is suppressed hitherto for speciall vnknowne causes, but must shortly come abroad. Hereof more at large, in the proper place.
            Now so it is, (most excellent King,) that the Fore-runner would seeme desirous, though indeed he desireth nothing lesse, to haue a publique dispute, and so to fight the combate with me Viua voce; and therefore doth hee challenge me, daring and redaring me to the same. Who if he knew how willingly & gladly I am ready to cast him my Gauntlet, would doubtlesse vse his words more sparingly in this behalfe. In regard hereof (most gracious and dread Soueraigne,
                  O noble King for Christs sake graunt my request. The victory is already gotten, none of them dare vndertake the quarrell. Let me be hanged, bowelled and quartred; yea, and and my corpes cast to the fowles of the ayre, if the victorie fall not on my side.
               ) I now prostrate vpon my knees, doe most humblie beseech your most excellent Maiestie, that it will please your Highnes of your most Princely fauour, to graunt your Royall licence▪ and safe conduct for any English Iesuite, or Iesuited Papist in the whole worlde, that shall haue courage to appeare for the true performance of the challenge, in such manner as is in this replie expressed. (Oh most gratious Soueraigne,) I am joyfull, when I remember this future combat. I wish in my heart, that it may bee effected with all expedition, for I confidentlie perswade my selfe in our Lorde Iesus, that his Name shall thereby bee glorified: your Maiestie highlie honoured; the Papists stricken dead; and all true hearted English subiects receiue vnvnspeakeable

endlesse comfort. If it shall fall out otherwise, and that I shall not be found euen in your Maiesties iudgement, to haue the victorie and vpper hand; I will be content to loose my life for my iust reward, as one that hath dishonoured your Maiestie, and the cause. The Almightie blesse your Maiestie, with a long and most happie raigne vpon earth, and with eternall glorie in the world to come, Amen, 
            
               From my studie, this eighteenth of March, 1605.
                
               Your Maiesties most humble subiect, Tho. Bels.
            
         
         
            
            How faults escaped in the first Booke, may be corrected by the Reader.
            THe Booke for expedition sake, was committed to three seuerall Printers, by reason whereof the Pages could not bee distinguished with numbers. Hence it commeth, that the Reader can not so easily find out the faults corrected, as he may in some other Bookes. Howbeit, if hee shall marke the Booke and the Chapters, and reckon the Pages from the Chapter, vntil he come to that page & line in which the fault is named, he can not but haue his desire in that behalfe.
            
               How faults of the first Booke escaped in the Printing, are to be corrected.
               In the first Chapter, seuenth page, and first line, the word (but) must be added before the word (here.) Chap. 1. page 9. line 1. the word (worlde) must be added before the word (well.) Chap. 2. P. 4. l. 23. the word (and) must be taken away. Chap. 2. P. 4. l. 6. the word (were) must followe the word (and.) Chap. 2. P. 5. l. 24 the word (they) must be added before the word (shew.) Chap. 2. P. 6. l. 14. the word (two) must be added for the word (three.) Chap. 2. p. 10. l. 20. the word (one) must goe before the word (onely.) Chap. 2. p 11. l. 5. the word (them) must be made (the) chap. 2. p. 11. l. 15. the word (doltlesse) must be made (doltish.) Chap. 2. p. 13. l. 19. many words are superfluous. Chap. 3. p. 2. l. 20. for nor, reade not. Chap. 3. p. 4. l. 8. for soule in the margent, reade soyle. chap. 4 p. 2. l. 10. for discourse, read discouerie.
               
               In the Caveat, p. 1. l. 16. for Operaepertiū, reade Operaepretium. Ibid. p. 7. l. 20.
               
            
            
               How faults escaped in the second Booke, are to be corrected.
               Chap. 2. p. 2. l. 12. for obiection, reade contradiction. Chap. 3. page foure, l. three and thirtie, for so, reade Saint. Chap. 3. p. 2.23. for his, reade the. chap. 7. in the 4. reason, for dialogue, reade decalogue. Some other faults there are, but the Reader may very easily discerne them.
            
         
         
            
            A Table, containing the principall contents of all the Chapters.
            
               Chapters of the first booke.
               Chap. 1. Of the Methode of the discourse, with the reason of the same.
               Chap. 2. Of the Libellers notorious vntruthes, lyes, and slaunders.
               Chap. 3. Of the libellers foolish & arrogāt challenge. (of the name.
               Chap. 4. Of the Romish hotch-potch Religion, with the reason.
            
            
               Chapters of the second booke.
               Chap. 1. Of dissention among Papists.
               Chap. 2. Of the marriage of Priests.
               Chap. 3. Of a terrible monster without both head and foote.
               Chap. 4. Of Card. Bellermines opinion and doctrine.
               Chap. 5. Of the condigne merite of workes.
               Chap. 6. Of S. Austens opinion, touching involuntarie motions.
               Chap. 7. Of Pope Martins dispensation.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE POPES Funerall.
            The first Booke of certaine ridiculous, scandalous, slaunderous, godlesse, shamelesse, and senselesse extravagants; vttered and made salable for a Souse, by a most impudent, brasen-faced, brainelesse, and namelesse Libeller, in the behalfe of the whole rabble and most cursed crewe of English traiterous Iesuites, and others their Iesuited and deuoted vassals.
            
               CHAP. I. Of the Methode obserued in this discourse, together with the reason of the same.
               
                  THe abiect and forlorne cursed crew of Iesuites, (who by the verdict, iudgement,
                     All this and much more is verified of our Iesuites; as is proued at large, in my Anatomie of Popish tyranny.
                   and testimonie of the popish Secular Seminarie-priests, are notorious lyars, coozeners, theeues, traitours, and most wicked men vpon earth,) feeling them selues pricked, galled, and deepely goared, with the strong reasons, euident proofes, irrefragable testimonies, and invincible demonstrations, laid open

before the eyes of my readers, throughout all my bookes; as most strong forts, towers, & stony rockes, harder then any flint, enuironed on euery side, with well fortified bulwarkes & rampiers; especially, seeing and with inward sighs and sobs perceiuing their Pope and Poperie to be turned vpside downe, and with deadly woundes to lye a bleeding: and all this to be verified by the constant verdict & doome of their most famous, best learned, & best approued popish writers, & thereupon bestirring themselues, this way, that way, & euery way, like mad-men hopping and skipping in the Alpes,
                  
                     They haue bene now more then ten yeares, buzzing about the answere of my bookes; but none can be had.
                   and as vagarant persons vpon the stonie Rockes of mount Synai, seeking passages, but finding none, haue at the length called to mind and bethought themselues, how they might cunningly, (though shamefully, falsly, & most damnably,) dazel the eyes, and steale away the hearts of my readers; viz. to propine vnto them a cup of dangerous Letharge, (which pittifully annoyeth the power sensitiue, & almost vtterly quencheth right reasō,) that so they shuld neither be able to discerne truth from falshood, nor to behold the bright light shining cleerly before their faces. On the one side it grieued them aboue measure, & vexed them at their very hearts,
                     See Act. 19. V. 24. &c.
                   to heare continuall out-cryes against them for the non-answering of my bookes. On the other side, it wounded, galled, and deepely goared their cōsciences; that they were not able to withstād or gainsay my strong reasons, euident proofes, & inuincible demonstrations. Being thus perplexed, and

at their wits end what to say or do; they resolued to publish a counterfeit and pretensed answere, rather then none at all; so to stay in some sort at the least, the outcryes & exclamations of the people against them. And to the ende, their couzonage and legierdemaine should not be espyed, if that were a thing possible to bee done and effected: their scurrilous Libell, (which containeth onely fiue Chapters in all,) is fraught with nothing else for the foure first, but with notorious lyes, antichristian speeches, vain bragges, railing words, couzoning trickes, ridiculous asseverations, most slaunderous and false accusations. Yea, of fiue partes, one only is reserued, for their pretensed answere to my booke. I say (of their pretensed answere,) because all the Iesuits,
                     All the Iesuits haue laid their heads and wits together, for the pretensed answere to my booke: albeit they labour to father on it a namelesse Libeller.
                   or at the least the best of them, aswell beyond the seas, as in this kingdome, gaue their best aduise for the effecting thereof. Now if any man demaund the cause, why they bestir themselues so much, waste so much pretious time, & spend so many Chapters in things meerely impertinent and plaine by-matters: mee thinketh I can not answere that question more fitly, then by relating their owne words in their scurrilous and shamelesse Libell▪ albeit by them intended to an other purpose.
               These are their expresse words: If he be such a sincere writer, as he protesteth, & so consideratiue and respectiue in the penning of his bookes, that no suspition of misreporting, or corruptiō, can be iustly fastned vpon him: then doth it euidently followe,

that we haue great dissentions in matters of Faith,
                     This is a point of great importance, let it be well marked for Christs sake: it is able to perswade any man.
                   and that our Doctors bee the bane of Catholique doctrine: and then no maruell, if hee make challenge vppon challenge, and remaine vnanswered: when as not onely our enemies, but also those that we take for our friends, and rely vpon, stand in open field against vs, and haue as it were sworne our destruction. Thus writeth the Libeller: vnder which name I euer vnderstand the Iesuites, and all Iesuited persons,
                     Chap. 5. Pag. 32. Pag. 34. whose heads & wits concurred in deuising the same. Againe, a little after he hath these words: the matter, as he handleth it, seemeth so odious, that some no question condemne vs highly vpon his report: and my selfe was since the comming forth of his booke, assaulted with this very question, so markeable it is in euery mans eye.
                     Loe, my Bookes gall the Papists, euen by their owne confession.
                   Thus prateth the godlesse Libeller, euen to his owne shame and confusiō, though vnwittingly. Out of whose words I note sundry very necessarie & memorable points, for the true comfort of the Christian Reader.
               
                   First, that of force and meere necessitie it must be graunted, that the Papists haue great dissentions  among them, euen in matters of Faith. Secondly, that their very best doctors, be the bane of the Pope,  and the Popes religion. Thirdly, that it is no maruaile, that I make challenge vpon challenge, and stil  remaine vnanswered. Fourthly, that those doctors whom they take for their friends, and doe relie vpon, stand in open field against them, as if they were their sworne enemies.
               
                  Fiftly, that many Papists begin to stagger, and to stand in doubt of the popish Religion; and that by  reading of my bookes, as by an Instrument vnder God in that behalfe.
               Sixthly, that the libeller himselfe hath bene assaulted, with that which hath beene gathered out of my bookes.
               Seuenthly, that the doctrine deliuered in my  books, is verie markable in euery mans eye. Blessed be our Lord God, for all his mercies and fauours to this our Church of England. Wee see here, (gentle Reader,) that the Papists generally, euen the Iesuits and Seminarie-Priests, begin to feare the ruine and downe-fall of Poperie. One thing the Reader must heere remember; that the first foure notes or obseruations are respectiue, & must be vnderstood conditionally; viz. that if the Papists doe not confute my bookes effectually; then must they all and euery of them perforce and of necessitie, be truly verified of the papists, & of their popish religiō. It therfore standeth the Papists vpon, to answere me both directly and soundly; for else destruction of necessitie must come vpon them, and breake the necke of their Poperie. This confession, (God be praised,) I haue by insoluble reasons, and euident demonstrations, extorted from their owne pennes. But (gentle Reader) they will neuer answere my bookes till the worlds end, because they cannot; and consequently, euen by their owne free confession, (which is to be admired,) Poperie must haue a downefal: the sooner, the

better. Amen: the case is cleere and evident, euen to euery child. For they that haue bene buzzing about the answering of my bookes these many yeares,
                     Marke this well. It cannot be denied.
                   and confesse freely withall, that the life of their Poperie depends vppon the confutation of my bookes, and thereupon haue assaid all meanes they could deuise; haue no doubt made choyse of those small parcels, with which they thought themselues most able to deale. VVherein for al that, they haue done nothing else indeede; but onely laid open to the viewe of the world, their great malice and extreame folly. VVhich (if I bee not deceiued,) euery indifferent Reader will affirme with mee, so soone as hee hath perused this my briefe & plaine discourse; so briefe and succinct, as none (I thinke,) will deeme it tedious; so sound and sincere, as none can iustly and truly reproue it; and so plaine, facile, and perspicuous, as euery childe may vnderstand the same. For if I doe not soundly, pithily, and effectually confute the Libeller; yea, euen turne him out of his skin, I will be content and well pleased, to lose my life for my paines. And let the Reader thus perswade himselfe, bcause euident reason conuinceth it to be so; that if the Iesuits and Iesuited Papists are not able to make good against mee, those sillie snatches and pieces of my bookes,
                     The Iesuits and all other Iesuited Papists, are here goared to death.
                   whereof themselues haue made the choyse; that much lesse are they able to confute my whole workes. No, no, they doe in effect confesse so much, while they dare neither answere any one booke of all, nor

yet any one Chapter wholy; heere and there, an odde piece or sentence. I protest vnto the gentle Reader, that I partly blush on their behalfe.
               
                  Garnet, the prouinciall of the Iesuits in England, some yeares agoe, was cōsulted with, & his aduise required, that some course might be taken for the answering of my bookes: because their silence in that behalfe, brought no smal detriment to their Religion.
                     The Iesuits Cap of consideration.
                   The good father hauing on his Cappe of consideration, answered right grauely, (though neither honestly, nor yet Clarkely,) that they should either not meddle at all with that matter, or else deale rather against my person, then against my Doctrine. This aduise (as it seemeth,) hath now taken place. For this Libeller fighteth with might and maine against my person, but dealeth too too niggardly with my Doctrine.
                     In my counterblast.
                   I haue else-where made mention of this Garnets Letter: where I made full rehearsall thereof Ad verbum, and framed a direct answere to the same. The great maister Iesuite Robert Parsons, affirmed about three yeares agoe, that the confutation of my worthy workes,
                     In his detection.
                   (as he scornfully termeth them,) was vndertaken, and to bee published, if it should seeme necessarie. Now Sir, this most necessarie confutation, which they haue been so many yeares buzzing about, is published to the worlde. Yet so sillie and so simple a thing, as I cannot tell what to make of it, or how to name it.
               
                  The foure first Chapters of this Libell, I would let passe without answere, if two causes did not vrge me thereunto; because they containe nothing but meere by-matters, and impertinent stuffe: First, for that the well affected Reader may make good vse thereof: especially, by helpe of my censure annexed to the same. Secondly, because wise Salomon aduiseth me,
                     Prouer. 26. Vers: 5. to answere a foole according to his foolishnesse, least he seeme wise in his own conceit. I therefore purpose in God, to reduce to certaine distinct heads and chapters, the notorious lies, vaine brags, vnchristian slaunders, and false accusations, which the Libeller hath abruptly without all Eutaxia, dispersed in euery page of the aforesaid Chapters, so I thinke to enlarge his most filthy and most scurrilous Libell, which else for the quantitie might be an Almanack. But by the power of God, I will handle the last Chapter cathauton, & ad amussim, duly examining euery sentence & period thereof to the very bottome, so as no starting hole shall be left him, to be a sanctuarie or refuge to hide his face. The Libeller would seeme desirous to grapple with me, but it appeareth farre otherwise by his dealing. For what man in the world, taking vpon him to answere my booke,
                     If my selfe were this day a Papist, this their maner of dealing, would cause me to forsake them▪ renounce their Religion. And me thinketh, it should be able to worke the same effect in others.
                   (the downefal of Poperie,) would flye from the whole booke, & from euery article; nay, from euery main point, ground, and period thereof, as one afraid once to touch the same, and onely to snatch here and there a sentence, of the least force to his witting? none doubtlesse. It is apparant to all the

well, all this notwithstanding, I haue so mangled and maymed him with my dartes, and so wounded him with my bullets; that the scarres and markes will bee seene vpon him, so long as he liueth in this world. In his fift and last Chapter, (though he hath dealt very sparingly in answering those fewe sentences, whereof he made his choyse,) I wil God willing, so bicker, skirmish, and grapple with him; as I shal neither leaue him one whole bone in his skin, nor one tooth in his head, nor yet one haire on his beard. That done, I will send him to his good maisters, as a cur-dogge that barketh apace, but cannot bite, and as a beardlesse boy without haire on his face, voide of all learning, wit, sense, and reason; that so hee may bring them newes of his good fortune. VVhat I doe here promise, I hope in God to performe the same in due season.
            
            
               CHAP. II. Of the Libellers notorious vntruthes, or (to speake plaine English) of his flat lyes.
               
                  
                     THe first word of the title of his Libell, (the forerūner of Bels downfal,) implyeth a flat lye. So forsooth to insinuate to his Readers, that a filthy and huge fardell of lyes, but small or no truth at all, can be expected from his Penne. But how is this proued? Thus. Forerunner must perforce

be vnderstood, either in respect of my person, or else in respect of my booke. If in respect of my person; it is both impertinent to the matter in hand, and is also a manifest and flat lye in his way of proceeding. I proue it, because in his iudgement I had my downefall, when I renounced their late Romish Religion; which I thanke God for it, was many yeares agoe.
                        Chap. 4. Pag. 23. Againe, this Libeller of his great charitie auoucheth desperately, that long since a foule downefall brake the necke of my soule. God forgiue mee my sinnes, and saue the necke of his soule, if it bee his holy will, I feare no such causelesse curses,
                        Prou. 25. Vers. 2. Rom. 10. Ve
                              •
                           se
                              •
                           
                         
                        
                           •
                        0.13 1. Ioh. 2. Vers. 1.2. Mat. 18.22. Luk. 17.4. but haue a firme and stedfast hope of my saluation in CHRIST IESVS. If in respect of my booke, it is also a flat lye; because it is so farre from being a forerunner, that it is a plaine aftercreeping, and doth aunswere my booke with as much speede, as one may driue a Snaile to Rome. Thus much for his first lye. Let vs proceede.
               
               
                  2
                  
                     
                        Chap. 1. Pag. 1.2.3. Chap. 3. Pag. 45.1. The libeller Robert Parsons is made of lying, as it will soone appeare.
                     The Libeller pleaseth himselfe aboue measure, in calling mee a turne-coate, and a patched minister. This hee repeateth againe and againe, in foure seuerall Pages. My aunswere standeth thus. First, I most willingly confesse my selfe to bee a turne-coate, in a godly sense, and Christian meaning; that is to say, to haue turned from falshod to truth, from vice to vertue: from

iniquitie to pietie: and from sinne to a Godly Christian life. Hee that disdaineth or shameth to bee a turne-coate in this sense, shall neuer see Gods face in his Kingdome.
                        Iac. 3.2. Iam. 3. V. 10.11.12. Rom. 5. V. 12 Gen 6.5. Psal. 143.2. Psal. 130.3. Iob. 15 15. For as holy writte teacheth vs euerie where, they that are the holiest of all, sinne manie a time; and therefore must they either repent and turne their coate of conuersation, or else perish euerlastingly. And as for mine owne turning, my selfe freely confessed it in the first booke which I published: and to reproach one for his sinnes and errors, which he humbly acknowledgeth; is not only against sincere christianitie, but also against all modest humanitie. Neither is it to the purpose,
                        Mat. 23. Vers. 2.3. or question in controuersie betweene vs. For it skilleth not what I am my selfe, so the Doctrine bee sound which I deliuer. But the want of an honest cause, & lacke of good grounds, and reasons to defend your Poperie, draweth you violētly to these foolish & impertinent by matters.
                  
                  Secondly, as Peter denied Christ three times,
                        Mat. 26. V. 69 70.71.72.74. Act. 9.1. 1. Tim. 1. v. 13 14.15. 1. Ioh. 2. V. 1.2. Rom. 4. V. 2.3.4. Rom. 5.1. Rom. 6. Vers. 23. Tit. 3. V. 5. of infirmitie: and as Paul persecuted Christs Church of ignorance: and they both for all that, found mercie and fauour with God for Christs sake; so my selfe I trust, and constantly beleeue, who erred ignorantly in my yonger yeares, (at which time I carefully sought the truth, but found it not,) haue attained remission of my sins according to mercie through faith in Christ Iesus. S. Austin was a Manichee, after that being a Catholick Bishop, hee slipped into sundrie errors. Petrus Martyr, Martinus Bucerus,
                     
reuerend Cranmer, graue Latimer, learned Ridley, and many others, were sometime Popish Priests; and yet after that, most singular Preachers', and notable Champions of Christs holy Gospell. But of these yee Papists make no reckoning, albeit sundrie of them sealed their Doctrine with their blood,
                        These Bishops sounded alarum against the Pope.
                      and by the Papists burnt with fire and fagot for the same. Howbeit they cannot for shame denie, that their famous Bishops, Boner of London, Tunstall of Durham,and Gardiner of Winchester, wrote sharply against the vsurped and falsly challenged authoritie of the Bishoppe of Rome. Who for all that were neuer termed turne-coates, neither by your Popes, nor by any of your crew, the like I might say of your famous Doctor and Proctor maister Harding, and of many others. But no man is a turn-coate with you & your cursed brood, that turneth from the Gospell to your  superstitious and Idolatrous Poperie.
                  Thirdly, I affirme constantly, (though I glorie not in that behalfe) that I neither am Parson, Vicar, or Curat, (though the shamelesse lying Libeller charge mee with ietting vp and downe like a cocke of courage,
                        Page. 11. vpon the dung-hil, and of mine own parish,
                        The Iesuite is a most notorious lyer.
                     ) neither did I euer to this day celebrate the holy Communion, (but the Popish Masse too often,) neither euer was I authorized by the lawes of our English church to doe it. Howbeit, I was authorized in time of need where I taught the schoole, to reade the common prayers of the Church. But all that I did in that behalfe, had an ende within the terme of one onely yeare, which being true, (as it is most

true indeede,
                        Prou. 14.5.) I must needes tell our shamelesse Libeller, that hee is a shamelesse and impudent lyar. Let him remember,
                        Psal. 5.5. that a faithfull witnesse will not lie, as also, that God will destroy them, that speake lyes. This for the second lye.
               
               
                  3
                  Our shameles lying Libeller telleth his readers,
                        Pag. 15. It is an answere answereles.
                      that Bels bookes haue long since receiued their answere: Marrie Syr, he by & by addeth a merie iest by way of correction, in these expresse words: but the answere hath beene hitherto suppressed vpon iust occasion: and in another place,
                        Pag. 18. he telleth vs another like merry iest, (for he seemes to be the Popes owne iester, that fiue Bookes are written against my Motiues, and my Survey of Poperie:
                        Loe, their answere may not behold the light.
                      and to giue a grace to his tale, he addeth, that this supposed answere was finished fiue yeares agoe, here is a most cozening legierdemain. Here the Iesuites play their parts, and shew themselues not onely egregious lyars and most cursed deceiuers, but also (as the priests write of them,) the most wicked men that liue vpon the earth: it was not without great cause,
                        Libr. 2. cap. 17. that the learned Papists in France published a booke against them, which they named the Iesuites Catechisme: in which booke shew at large, that the further a Iesuite goes, the louder he lyes. An other booke, intituled,
                        The Franke discourse. Pag. 98. the Franke discourse, affirmeth constantlie, that the Iesuits neuer harboured in their heartes any other proiect, but the subuersion of States, disauthorizing

of Magistrates, & seducing of subiects from their allegeance. The aforenamed Catechisme, saith in another place,
                        Libr. 2. Cap. 17. that the whole processe of Iesuits is nothing else, but a particular cozening of our priuate families, and a generall villanie of all the countries, where they inhabite.
                        
                           Behold here, the holy fraternitie of our Iesuits: not I, but the Papists affirme it to be so.
                        
                        
                           In his detection, published, Anno, 1602.
                      Now sir, that we may the better perceiue the legierdemain of this cozening companion, impudent Sycophant, and shamelesse Libeller, (who like a deceitfull Iugler, tucketh vp his sleeues, layeth open his hands before our eyes, and maketh a pretence of the plainest dealing that can be vsed,) we must call to our remembrāce, what a brother of his E. O, or the selfe same Robert Parsons (if ye will) told vs aboue three yeares agoe: viz. that the confutation of my Bookes was then vndertaken, and to bee published, if it should bee thought expedient. This is a matter of great importance, and therefore will I make rehearsall of his owne wordes. These are they, as they came from his own forge & pen: To these former he speaketh of two very famous writers, M. Doctor Sutcliffe, and M. Willet,) I was once determined to haue adoyned a reformed brother of theirs,
                        A most notorious lye▪ it is against the late Romish Church not against the Catholique Church, God forbid.
                      one Thomas Bell, (natiue of Rascall in Yorkeshire,) who since his last illumination, hath published certaine bookes against the Catholique Church; & vaunteth mightily, and with insolent words braueth all Seminaries. But I altered my purpose, partly vpon other considerations, but especially because the confutation of his worthy works is already vndertakē, & to be published,

if it shall bee thought necessarie. Thus writeth E. O, or Robert Parsons the brasen faced Iesuit, whom we now know right well.
                        The lying Iesuit Parsons, was the penner of both.
                     
                  
                  Out of these wordes of these two Iesuits, (as they would seeme, but both are one onely indeed, euē 
                     Robert Parsons,) a most notorious cozening trick is offered to our considerations. For, the detector (marke well my wordes) telleth vs: that the confutation of my bookes, when he published his Libel,
                        If this point be once well marked, it will bring both the Pope and his popelings to their death.
                      was but vndertaken by his fellowes: that is to say, it was then concluded amongst his brethren, that my Bookes should bee answered. Nowe, the supposed answere to my Bookes, being then at the most but in fieri, not in facto esse, as the Schooles terme it: viz. being at that time but in hand, or in doing at the most, and not done or finished indeed. Nay, it was but then resolued amongst them, that some answere should bee made vnto my Bookes. And therefore saith Parsons the detector, that hee was once determined to haue said somthing against my books, but hearing that his fellowes were about the same matter, he altered his purpose. Well, this detection was published,
                        An. 1602. but in the yeare 1602. let the time be remembred.
                  Nowe sir, the fore-runner singeth another song, and affirmeth desperately, but to his vtter shame and confusion:
                        Ah poore papists, what a silly religion is yours.
                      that forsooth my Bookes were answered fiue yeares agoe. And least some should obiect against him, that it seemes otherwise, because no man can see them, reade them, or heare of them: hee to preuent that obiection, telleth vs

that the answere is suppressed, and vpon iust occasion stayed from the publication. Because indeede there is no such answere in Rerum natura; or else which is worse, when they had well viewed their said answer, it seemed so deformed, and ill fauoured in their eyes, that they were ashamed to publish it. Let vs put together these two seueral assertions. Out of the forerunner wee haue it affirmed for a truth, (such a truth euer vnderstand, as is currant amongst the Iesuits,) that my bookes (my Motiues, and Suruey,) were answered fiue yeares agoe, that is to say, almost three whole yeares before the answere was begunne. For the answere was finished, saith the forerunner, fiue yeares agoe; viz. An. 1599. and the same answere was but vndertaken in the yeare 1602. as the detector telleth vs. These Iesuits their asseuerations,
                        An. 1599. Iudg. 15.4. are much like to Sampsons Foxes; That is to say, their tailes are tied together, but their heads and mindes are farre asunder. So then, this must needes be the conclusion,
                        An answere answerelesse.
                      that my bookes were answered fiue yeares agoe, and yet vnanswered two yeares agoe. This in my conceit, is not onely a Riddle, but a plaine miracle. Yet such a miracle vnderstand, as the Iesuits wrought vpon Sebastian the late King of Portingall;
                        In the dolefull cry of Rome.
                      of which miracle, I haue written elsewhere more at large, couple these Iesuits by their tailes, for their heades and wits can neuer meete. Well, all the world may see by this their dealing, that they haue published the best answere they had in store, and are at their wits end, what to say or write, turning themselues

this way, that way, and euery way, by cozening, lying, iugling, & by what other meanes they possibly can deuise, how to stay the outcries of the people, and their popish vassals: for beeing so long silent touching the answere of my books. Alas, alas; who seeth not the miserie and nakednesse of the late hatched Romish Religion? to what impudent, desperate, and damnable shifts, are the Papists driuen for the defence thereof?
                        A shame of all shames in the world.
                      how are they not ashamed to confesse to the whole world, that they haue beene buzzing about the answere of my Bookes, almost the space of sixe whole yeares: and that when the answere was framed after their best maner, they haue suppressed the same, for the space of fiue yeares? These are the expresse words of the Fore-runner:
                        Pag. 15. 
                     Bels bookes haue long since receiued their answere, & though vpon iust occasion it hath hitherto bin suppressed, yet shortly,
                        Loe, how they are netled, goared, and whipped with my bookes.
                      (viz. ad Calendas Graecas,) by Gods grace to bee set foorth. Thus writeth our shamelesse Fore-runner. By whose words it is apparāt to al ye world, that my bookes are this day vnanswered: albeit it hath been auouched againe and againe with open mouthes, yea, audaciously affirmed to my face, that their answere was abroad. For no Papist may reade either my books, or any other bookes against poperie, without a speciall licence from the Pope himselfe. For, if all were permitted to reade thē, the Pope would soone haue but a small company, in this kingdome of England. Yet the wiser sort I hope, will borrow a dispensation for the safegard of their soules. For, (O miserie of

all miseries!) seeing they may not reade my bookes, they must beleeue what their Maisters tell them: to wit, that this Fore-runner hath answered me gallātly. Although he hath confuted himselfe vnawares; when he saith, the answere is yet to bee published, and that, that which he hath done, is but a taste. When the Iesuits and Seminarie-priests consulted with Garnet their Prouinciall, what course was best to be takē in hand,
                        
                           His letter is to be scene, if need require. Loe▪ a great number euen of the best, haue consulted to answer me.
                        
                        
                           Marke this wonderment, the answer to my bookes was 5. yeares a preparing, 5. other years kept close in a pipkin from sun burning: and it must come forth ad calēdas graecas, & liue in tenebris Cimmeriis, till their woman Pope Ioan be with child againe.
                        
                      that my books might be answered; because their silence in that behalfe, was very dāgerous vnto their Pope & poperie: the father Iesuit hauing on his cappe of consideration, answered very peremptorily, though neither clarkely nor honestly, that they must either not meddle with the matter at all, or els deale rather with my person, then with my doctrine, yet he addeth very grauely, these words: Neuerthelesse, for this matter as you shal all agree. For I doubt not, but so many & such will see what is best. Where we haue to learne by the way, in perpetuam reimemoriam: that not onely Iesuit or Seminarie-priest writeth against mee, but euen the whole broode, tagge & ragge, haue bēt their bowes to shoote their arrowes at me. For though one odde cōpanion be singled out to take the quarrell in hād, yet is the same fellowe garded and assisted with the ioynt counsel, aduise, iudgement, & helpe of all the rest. Alas, alas, poore answere? how art thou turmoiled with these shamelesse & cozening Iesuits? after they haue spent 5. or 6. whole years, in consultation about an answer; & after they haue employed other 5▪ or 6. yeares, with all might & maine to giue thee a being▪ in the end for al that, thy beeing is so vglie, so

vnsightly, so deformed, & so euilshapen euery way; that themselues are ashamed on thy behalfe, and thererfore haue they kept the 5. whole years,
                        Pag. 15. (if we may trust thē,) vnder a Pipkin. Their meaning peraduenture is, to keepe them from sunne-burning. They haue learned (saith our fore-runner,) by some of iudgement, that not any was thought necessarie. But is this possible, trow wee? doth not the Iesuite Garnet, their prouinciall tell vs, that they were both many and very wise? I wote hee doth so, wee haue heard his owne words. Alas, alas, that so many will be caried away, with your foolish, vaine, ridiculous, and late vp-start Romish religion:
                        Behold, here fit counsellors for the popes holines.
                      were all your Iesuits & their Iesuited vassals, with your fathers the secular priests, so sottish, so doltlesse and so senselesse noddies, that they could not for the space of fiue whole years, perceiue, vnderstand, & penetrate the nature of the subiect, against which they bent their force and might, and tooke so great paines so many years for answering the same? must the iudgement of some few stay them from publishing that answer, which they tooke in hand with the consent of al, or at least of ye
                      wiser sort? that answer I say, vpon which they had bestowed so much time, so great paines, & studie? No, no, this is but your vsual kind of cozenage, & old legierdemain: for you tel vs, that it must be published shortly. And for the better credite of your report, you tel vs ye
                      number of the books, & the particular contēts of the same. Touching the nūber, the Fore-runner saith they are 5. But the man is so swift in running, especially in lying; that I dare not for my life, giue any credite to his words. Well,

for the number, I must receiue (when I can catch them,
                        Viz ad Calendas Graecas.
                     ) 5▪ for 2. Here is great aduantage & encrease; it seemes they would make me a pettie Vsurer. But I thanke God, I haue published one whole booke against that subiect: for the contents vou shall heare them in due time,
                        Pag. 20. Pag 21. He is a very cozening companion, as his owne deare brethen haue truely termed him.
                      & order. Our Fore-runner auoucheth audaciously, (but with lying lippes after his wonted maner), that he wil take the paines to view oueral my bookes, which came forth after my Motiues & suruey. But he faileth aswel in the naming as he doth in the performing. In the naming, because he maketh mention only of the hunting of the romish Foxe, of the golden Ballance, & of the downfal of popery: as for the Anatomie of popish tyrāny, hee durst not so much as once name it; their hearts pant so oftē as they remēber it. I haue in that booke so anatomized them, and so pourtraied them in their best beseeming colours, as all the world may behold with all facilitie, their murders, their thefts, their cozenage, their cogging, their lying, their iugling, their tyrannie, their counterfeite miracles, and other their manifold and vnspeakable villanous knauerie: al which I haue sincerely collected, out of the bookes of their owne deare brethren the secular priestes. Which my collection, I haue beene, am, and euer shall be ready during life,
                        If no Iesuit, or Iesuited papist dare this doe; then fie vpon them all, both great and small.
                      to iustifie vpon the perill of my life, against any Iesuit or Iesuited Papist whosoeuer, that shall dare to encounter me, and to cast me his gauntlet vpon the like perill, for the due tryall of the truth thereof.
                  
                     Shame and confusion must needes befall them, for not accepting this challenge; seeing sundrie yeares are now expired, since it was made and published.
                  In the performance, because he saith Ne gry quidem, neither against my golden ballance, nor yet against my hunting of the romish Foxe. Which hunting I performed, with seuen couple of such well mouthed Romish Houndes;
                        I haue hunted the Pope euen to death & that with his owne doctors; and yet no Papist is of courage, once to encounter me therein.
                      as all the Iesuits and Iesuited Popelings in England and else where, are neuer able to heale, & cure the wounds of their Pope. He is so gashed, so bitten, and so wounded with the teeth of his owne dogges, that his sores are become incurable. What the sillie Libeller saith against my other bookes, is as harmelesse to the truth thereof; as the biting of a toothlesse beagle, is to a Beare, Bull, or Lion. And I must needes giue him to wit; that it is as good nothing at al, as neuer a whit the better; that it is as good nothing at al, as neuer a whit the better. Touching the contents of their answere, (if any such can be found,) our Libeller telleth vs, that their answere to my Motiues, and Suruey,
                        Pag. 18.19▪20. is contained in fiue bookes. I would once haue a sight of it, it is long in comming. I thinke it comes as neere the matter; as if one should aske, how farre to London; and another should answere, a poke full of Plumbes. For so it falleth out with this Libeller, as partly wee haue seene alreadie, and more plainly it wil appeare hereafter.
                        The dog is a
                              •
                            London with the lye.
                      The first book of their supposed answere (saith our Libeller,) containeth many of my notable vnvntruthes,

corruptions, and falsifications. The second presenteth a gallant and desperate fray, betwixt the reformed Minister of Baskall, and Thomas Bell, Preacher of the word. The third handleth a couple more of extraordinarie and choise contradictions. The fourth entreateth of the weake grounds of my workes. The fift and last answereth the recapitulatiō of my Suruey. The Libeller hauing thus gallantly discouered theirs & his owne treacheries, got bread & cheese, & went laughing away. But soft and faire, good sir, haue once about with you, if yee goe but one mile a day. My answere to this forged tale, of a meere chimericall imagined answere flying in the aire, and congealed in the middle region, standeth thus.
                        Pag. 33. First, the Libeller protesteth in sad earnest, that  he would haue none to beleeue him vpon his bare word. I for my part agree thereunto, and wish all others to doe the same. And consequently, there is no answere at all against my bookes. And why? because forsooth, he bringeth no reason to proue it; and (as we haue heard,) wee may not beleeue his bare  word. Secondly, if there were notable contradictions & falsifications found out by his brethren, in my bookes of Suruey, & Motiues; it had bene more for his credite, to haue alleaged some one of them at the least; then to stand buzzing about things of smal or rather no importāce, neither can go thorowstitch with the same. And it wil not serue his turne to say, that he will not meddle with my Suruey & Motiues, for that his brethren haue dealt therewith. The

reason is euident, because he hath made choise of a sentence taken out of my Motiues, which mightily galleth & goareth himselfe; as shall God-willing be seene, when I come the second booke. Thirdly, not  one of the fiue imagined bookes of answere, doe directly touch either my Suruey or my Motiues, the last onely excepted; as euery child may conceiue by their cōtents, expressed & set down by the Libeller. And that last book (as we heare) is afraid to encounter me, and to answere directly either of my bookes. For, it professeth onely, to answere the recapitulation of my Suruey. Alas, alas, who can but blush on their behalfe? who doth not see their backes at the wall? who will beleeue them any longer? who seeth not the weakenesse & nakednesse of late Romish religion? who will not detest & abhorre poperie? we see, they are not able to defend their late vpstart religion. They dare not by their own cōfessiō, answere directly to any one Chapter of any one booke. Onely they will answere the end or recapitulation of my Suruey. That is to say; they dare not deale with my grounds, reasons, & proofes,
                        What a shamelesse dealing is this? their consiences condemne them▪ their hearts faile them.
                      but onely with my bare recital of the contents of my bookes. As if they had said; we wil plead for the cōtinuance of our Church after our olde wonted manner; so still to seduce the people, as we haue done. But with his grounds, reasons, and authorities, with which he battereth down our Popes vsurped Primacie, and confuteth our Religion, we will not deale at all.
                  
                     For, in my recapitulation, I onely tell the Reader plainly and briefely, what I haue proued in my whole booke; so to helpe the memorie and vnderstanding of the ignorant. And I pray you (my good friends) is this your manner of answering? then doubtlesse, you neede not haue staid so long simpering vpon the matter. VVell, let mee haue your answere such as it is, about which you haue beene buzzing aboue tenne yeares; and I promise, (if God graunt mee life and health,) to returne my replie vnto it, within the space of one yeare. Thus much for the third lie.
                  The Libeller gageth his credite many waies, and sets it a sale for a souse; so to worke my discredite, if it would or could be brought to passe. These are his wordes,
                        Pag. 19. hee giueth them most iust cause, to suspect him of playing bootie, and that his heart is still an harbourer of Poperie, or at least not replenished with the liuely liquor of the new Gospell. These are his glorious wordes. It were enough for his answer, to tell him, that by his owne lawe, his wordes without proofe, are of no credite at all. But I will answere himselfe with himselfe,
                        Pag. 9, and confound him with his owne wordes, and beate him with his owne rodde. In another place,
                        Amost palpable contradiction in the Iesuite Parsons wordes.
                      he hath these wordes; we make no doubt, but that he mightily enuieth her felicitie, (he meaneth their Romish Church,) and greedily thirsteth after her destructiō 
                     haec ille. Now, if the Reader wil couple and combine the former sentence, where he impudently auoucheth, (like a wretched Caterpiller

and bondslaue of Satan,) that I am an harbourer of Poperie in my heart; together with this other, in which he maketh it out of doubt, that I thirst greedily the destruction of their Romish Church; he cannot but see euidently a flat contradiction, with a manifest lye implied in the same.
                        What will not malice doe?
                      For I cannot both harbour Poperie in my heart, and greedily desire the ruine thereof. Thus much for the fourth lye. Many other lies he hath, which I let passe of purpose, in regard of breuitie. But some of them shall be touched Obiter, (God willing,) when I come to his supposed answere in my second booke.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III. Of the Libellers foolish, arrogant, shamelesse, and senselesse Challenge.
               
                  THus writeth our shamelesse and namelesse Libeller; but in the name of Robert Parsons,
                  
                     Pag. 14. soft and faire a while, your cooler is at hand.
                   and the rest of our Iesuits and Iesuited Papists. I challenge this challenging coward, dare and redare this daring dastard, that he will for the honour of his cause, the credite of his learning, and defence of his bragging and insolent lookes, labour effectually, that we may in manner aforesaid grapple together. If he refuse this condition, so reasonable, so iust▪ so indifferent; no remedie, but I must come vpon him, with a

lawe case of Nouerint vniuersi,
                  
                     A vaine and insolent brag, as shall soone appeare, God willing.
                   Be it knowne vnto all men, that the date of his learning is out, his great and flowing courage daunted, and drawne drie; proclaime him contemptible and banckrout, hauing broken with his own dependants and creditors, and expose him for a iesting-stocke to all Christian people, from generation to generation world without end. Amen. Againe in another place hee writeth thus;
                     Pag. 9. 10. the Minister braggeth and braueth others to disputation, either by word or writing, and like a desperate coward,
                     Beholde a coward in graine. Neither this Libeller Robert Parsōs, nor any of his crewe, durst now for ten yeares answere or accept my challenge, And yet is he bold to call me coward, being himself the coward indeede.
                   feareth not to fight with any: prouided alwaies, that they be far enough off, and himselfe out of al daunger. haec ille. Then he telleth a long tale of the Coliar of Croyden, of his brethren in Wisbich, and of maister Wright; reproaching me, & charging me with cowardnesse, for that I went not to them. To which vnseasoned challenge and insolent bragges, I answere in this maner. First, that he is a coward, who being challenged, dareth not accept, nor answere the same; nor he that challengeth, if he be readie to performe withall, whatsoeuer is contained in his challenge. And consequently, that not my selfe am a coward, but our Libeller, & all other English Iesuites and Iesuited Papists. That they are cowards, it is apparant to the world, seeing they durst neuer to this day accept my challenge and offer made vnto them; albeit I offered it at the publication of my first booke, to be effected either in England, or in any other part of Christendome.
                     The Libeller is the coward in very deed.
                   This is so cleere and euident, that our Libeller graunteth the same

in these wordes,
                     Pag. 11. What a shamelesse Iesuite as this Libeller? his owne wordes do condemne him.
                   was hee vnwilling to take so long a iourney? No iust cause of any such suspition, when hee affirmeth about the like businesses, with a safe conduct to repaire into any part of Christendome. Thus doth hee write. Now, let the indifferent Readers speake the truth, whether my selfe, or the Iesuites and Iesuited papists, are truly termed cowardes, I wonder, (before God I speake it,) that they are not ashamed thus to confound themselues, and to murder their owne soules and bodies desperately, and malitiously, by lying, slaundering, and couzening trickes. They giue manifest signes, that they are giuen vp in reprobum sensum, and become the children of perdition. Is hee a coward, that offereth to come into any part of Christendome, vpon the safe conduct of any Christian king, there to make trial of that which he hath written? No doubtlesse,
                     O impudent Iesuits, more impudent then impudencie is selfe.
                   no man in his right wits will say it. Yet we see, that our Libelber affirmeth both the one and the other. No, No, their combes are cut, their crests are falne, they stand amazed with feare, their spirits rampant are made couchant, their doome will soone appeare. Amen.
               
               Secondly, that the Libellers brethren in Wisbich, and maister Wright in the Clinke, if their courages had not failed them, would haue accepted the challenge, and haue requested, that the trial might haue bene made heere in England; but they had no such desire. Againe, the Iesuites might easily haue procured a safe conduct, and so haue called me beyond the Seas. And that done, if I had refused

to performe my challenge, they might with reason haue exclaimed against me. But seeing their courages failed them,
                     The Iesuits are cowards, not daring to defend their poperie vpon their owne soule.
                   and that they went neuer about the matter, I may with great reason both exclaime and declaime against them, and truly tell them all, that they are cowards indeede.
               Thirdly, seeing the Recusants in Yorke refused to talke with me, it gaue me iust cause to suspect, that the rest would haue done the like; especially seeing none of them durst vndertake to answere the challenge.
               Fourthly, the best triall is to be made by writing, the reasō is euidēt, for sundry respects. First, because the Parties may better consider the matter, and lay downe their conceits more orderly. Secondly, because many men of good vnderstanding haue weake memories. Thirdly, because sundry for their present wit and excellent memorie, are farre ouermatches extempore for many learned men, who indeede are better learned then themselues multis parasangis:
                     Better learned, Multis parasangis.
                   Fourthly, bicause the vulgar people are caried away with sugred words, if they be deliuered with a flowing tongue, howsoeuer they be void of truth. Fiftly, because the truth cannot wholy and truly be reported, for that none can write so fast as words doe passe in any disputation. Sixtly, because littera scripta manet, but wordes passe as the winde. Many other reasons may bee alledged; but these for this time shall suffice. Lastly, these things notwithstanding, I haue lately sent a booke to the presse, before the Libellers

booke came to my hands. In which booke, I haue made a new challenge to all English Iesuites and Iesuited persons, whosoeuer of them listeth and dareth to accept the same. VVhich challenge containeth a full answere to the challenging Libeller, although I had sent it toward the Presse, before I either saw his challenge, or heard any thing thereof.
                     A new larum to the Iesuits, and to all Iesuited Popelings.
                   VVhich challenge I doe at this present renewe afresh, and doe adde this vnto the same, viz. that if the Libeller, or any other Iesuite, or Iesuited English Papist whosoeuer, shall haue a minde, heart, and courage, with the helpe and aduise of al other Papists, tagge and ragge, none excepted; to publish in Print, a direct, iust, and full answere, to my booke intituled the down fall of Poperie; answering the booke directly and fully,
                     The Libellers answering, is nothing else but a fond kind of fidling.
                   not omitting the chiefest groundes, foundations, authorities, and reasons, (as the sillie Fidler and shamelesse Libeller hath done) snatching here a peece, & there a peece; or if he or they dare not deale with that little booke, then if hee, or they, or any of them, shall publish in Print, a direct & full answere, either to my booke of motiues, or to my booke of ye
                   suruey of Poperie, leauing no ground, foundation, authoritie, or reason vnanswered, or if he or they be afraid to deale with those bookes; then if he or they, or any of them, shal publish or cause to be published in print, a direct and ful answere in maner aforesaid, to my least book intituled the hunting of the Romish Foxe; and shall withal put down his name at large, with the vsual addition of his condition, order, or calling, signifying

to the world, that hee doth accept the challenge or offer: then I promise herewith vnder my hand, (if God shal grant me life and health,
                     Make hast O Iesuits, and let me haue an answere with speede.
                   to fall down prostrate vpon my knees, before the feete of the most mightie, wise, learned, and religious Monarch, Iames by Gods holy Ordinance, King of great Britaine, France, & Ireland, and my most gracious Soueraigne: then and there most humbly to request a safe conduct for his safe comming, safe abiding, and safe returning, that shall accept the challenge in maner aforesaid, and withall performe the answere in manner aforesaide. And I protest vppon my saluation, to doe with a willing minde and cheerefull heart so much as in me lyeth,
                     Prepare thy selfe O Iesuit, to fight the combate valiantly.
                   that the field may be fought valiantly Viua voce, for the due & vpright triall of the controuersie with all conuenient speed.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII. Of the Romish Hotch-potch Religion, and the reason of the name.
               
                  THe Libeller can not endure to heare that their Religiō should be called a Hotch-potch of Omnigitherum;
                     Pag. 2. but after the due explication of the name, the original therof, and the reason of the same; he will no question wish in his heart, that he had neuer vrged me thereunto. The secular seminarie-priestes giue this commendation to the religion of the Iesuits. VVe desire you (say they) by the mercies of God, to take heede of novelties and

Iesuitisme: for it is nothing, but treacherie, dissimulation, ambition, & a very vizard of most deepe hypocrisie.
                     Import consid. Pag. 39. These words are set downe in the important considerations.
               The Iesuits haue prouided, that all who come out of Spaine, must sweare, vowe, professe, or at least acknowledge an obedience to M. Black well in all things; yea,
                     George Blackwell the new vpstart archpriest.
                   euen to become rancke traitors against their prince and country, for that is principally intended. These words are in the sparing discourse toward the ende of the Epistle.
               Now then, the actions of the Iesuits tending so euidently, as they doe and haue done, to the ruine, subuersion, and ouerthrow of our prince and countrie, both by secret practises and open incursions of Spanish invasions, (as is manifest both by their owne bookes, letters, & other dealings,
                     O bloodie and trayterous Iesuits.
                   aswell in Ireland as England,) what good subiect or true hearted English man, can doe lesse then disclaime with his mouth, resist with his blood, & open with his tongue, all such vnnaturall and treacherous attempts? we are too much acquainted therwith, and therefore bound to reueale what we know therein, when it shalbe necessarie for the preseruation of our Prince & coūtry.
                     Reply to Parsons Libell, Fol. 28. Al Catholiques must hereafter depend vpō 
                  Blackwell, & Blackwell vpon Garnet, & Garnet vpon Parsons, & Parsons vpon the deuil. These words are set downe in the discouerie. Page. 70.
               By Parsons platformes, secular priests must depend vpon Blackwell, and Blackwell vpon Garnet, & Garnet vpon Parsons, & Parsons the priests bastard vpon the

deuil: and therefore doe the Secular Priests pray thus, when they say the Letanie: A machinationibus Parsoni libera nos Domine,
                  
                     Diseou. Pag. 70. From Parsons diuellish purposes, O Lord deliuer vs. These wordes are set downe in the discouerie.
               The Iesuits are to bee marked out, for the most malicious, traiterous, and irreligious calumniators that euer liued on earth, vnworthy that euer the earth should beare them; and it is an intolerable indignitie to the whole Church of GOD, that euer such wicked members should liue vnpunished in her, as they doe. These words are set downe, Quodlib. 4. Art. 2. Pag. 99.
               
                  
                     Loe, the Seminarie Priests gaue the name, Which turneth to your eternal shame.
                  The Iesuits haue made Religion, but an art of such as liue by their wits, & a very Hotch-potch of Omnium githerum. Quodlib. 2. Art. 8. Pa. 43. Thus write the Popes owne deere vassals, the Seminary Priests.
               In whose wordes, the Reader may plainely behold, euen as cleerely as the Sunne shining at noonday, that the Religion which the Iesuits professe, to be termed a very hotch-potch of Omniumgitherum.
               
               Now, our Iesuits must either pardon me for this name, or else denie the Romish Religion to be that which they beleeue and professe. Which if they wil say, and send their affirmance to me: I shal (God willing) shape thē an answere speedily, which I suppose, wil not please their grauitie. But let vs proceed a little further. I haue proued by good authoritie, euē by the testimonie of best approued popish

Writers: how that the late Romish Religion crept into the Church by little and little. That Popish Primacie began, in the yeare 607. That Priests mariage was neuer prohibited, till the yeare 385.
                     In my booke of Suruey, else where.
                   That Popes pardons were neuer heard of, till the yeare 1300. That popish Purgatorie tooke no roote in the Romish Church, till the yeare 250. That Popish inuocation and adoration was not knowne, till the year 370. And so of the other parts of late popish religion. I say, (of late popish or Romish Religion,) because I onely impugne the late romish Faith and Doctrine, which the Pope and his Romish schoolmen haue brought into the Church.
                     See my booke the downfal, Pag. 83. Rom. 1.8. For I willingly grant with Saint Paul, that the olde Romane Religion was Catholique, sound, and pure, & with it doe not I contend. And hence it is apparant to all the world, that the late romish Religion is a patched Hotch-potch of Omnigitherum; because the Papists dare not answere my proofes, grounds, foundations, and reasons in that behalfe.
               I am perswaded in my conscience, (and I thinke many others are of mine opinion,) that the Papists sigh, sobbe, grone, and pant at the verie heart, so often as they remember what I haue written against them.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V Of Bels Apostasie.
               
                  1. Iohn 1. Vers. 8.9.10.
                  THe holy Apostle telleth vs, that if we denie our sinnes and our selues to bee sinners, then wee deceiue our selues, make God a liar, & haue not the truth in vs. But on the contrarie part, if wee acknowledge our sinnes, then God is faithfull and iust, and will forgiue vs our sinnes, and clense vs from all vnrighteousnesse. Which being true, as it is most true indeede, (for the spirite of God can not lie,) I doe most willingly confesse my selfe to bee a grieuous sinner, with Dauid, Matthew, Peter, Paul, and others: and in a godly sense and meaning, to haue committed two kindes of Apostasie. Which as I am worthy to heare it, so is the Libeller vnworthy to vpbraid me with it.
               
                  
                     Page. 30. Vpon my saluation, I deale truely. Pag. 59.In one place, hee hath these wordes; Bell pretendeth great sinceritie, like a true Apostle, and yet like a false Apostara vseth it not. In another place, hee hath these wordes: who hath as shamefully apostated from his vocation, and waged warre against his mother the church, as euer did that gracelesse Impe reuolt from his naturall alleageance, and tooke Armes a gainst his father the King. Hee speaketh of Absolon, and my selfe. My answere standeth thus.
               
                  First, that this Libeller and his brethren the English Iesuits, are most notorious traytours, and consequently Apostataes, I haue proued it at large in my Anatomie of Popish tyrannie. Which booke whosoeuer shall reade attentiuely, cannot but abhorre and detest in his heart, all Iesuits, and Iesuited villanie. Secondly, that as their Angelicall Doctor  and Saint, Aquinas telleth them,
                     Tho. Aquinas, 2.2. q. 12 Art. 1. corp.
                   Apostasie chaunceth three wayes: by breaking of Gods precepts, by departing from Religion which he professed, or the order which hee receiued: And by departure from the true Christian Faith: and this last onelie is simply, properly, and absolutely called Apostasie.
                     I dare not bost of works, but I appeale to Gods free mercy, for the merites of Christ Iesus.
                   Whose doctrine in this behalfe, I willingly admit; confessing my selfe to be an Apostata euery day, by breaking Gods holy lawes and Commandements, leauing the Papists to boast of their holy liues and condigne merits.
               I likewise confesse, that I haue in a godly sort revolted from that Religion, which I once did embrace; yet not aplos wholy, but cata ti, that is, from the corruptions & superstition lately crept into the Romish Church. For so much thereof,
                     Whatsoeuer the Romish Church hath consonant to the holy Scriptures, our English Church holdeth the same.
                   as is consonant to the holy Scriptures, I still professe, admit, and beleeue. I also freely graunt, that I haue departed from the Popish orders, which I receiued in the Romish church; as many worthy, learned, & famous men haue done before me: but this I did onely cata ti, not aplos
                  ▪ that is to say in respect of their superstitious toyes & beggerly ceremonies, which are

meerly accidentall and extrinsecall, and no way intrinsecall or essentiall to the thing it selfe. Where I must needes tell the Papists this one thing, which (I feare) they wil not brooke kindly, nor take it in good part. This it is. They tell vs, that their sacrament of Priesthood (as they terme it) imprinteth an indelible Character in the receiuer;
                     This is a memorable note
                   and yet doe I auouch it constantly, that neither the Pope himselfe, nor any other Popish so supposed Priest, can be assured by an infallible signe, rule, or proofe, that he is a Popish Priest. This I knowe, wil at the first seeme a wonder; but I shal God willing, make it so cleere and euident, that euery child may perceiue the same; and euerie Papist sigh, sob, and mourne, when he remembreth it. Marke well gentle Reader, what I shall deliuer in this behalfe. The Popish general Councel of Florence hath these wordes; Haec omnia sacramenta tribus perficiuntur;
                  
                     Concil. flor. Page. 390. 
                  videlicet rebus tanquam materia, verbis tanquam forma, & persona ministri conferentis sacramentum, cum intentione faciendi quod facit ecclesia. Quorum si aliquid desit, non perficitur sacramentum.
               
               All these sacraments (Baptisme, confirmation, eucharist, penance, extreame vnction, order, and Matrimonie) are finished and made perfect with three things, viz. with the things as with the matter, with the wordes as with the forme, and with the person of the minister that giueth the sacraments, and hath intention to doe that which the Church doth. Of which three things, if any one want, the Sacrament is not perfect. Out of these words of this popish general

councel, (which by Popish doctrine cannot erre) I note this point of great importance, viz. that none can be a perfect Priest, but he that is made priest of that Bishoppe, who had intention to make him a Priest. Now Syr, no mortall man but the Bishoppe himselfe, can tell what intention he had;
                     O miserable Poperie.
                   and consequently, no Priest, not the Pope himselfe, can tell and affirme certainly of himselfe, that he is a Priest. Hereupon two most lamentable corollaries, must be inferred of necessitie: Alas, alas, for pittie. The first,
                     The 1. coroll.
                   that the Priest who saith Masse, must belieue that none but a lawfull Priest can doe that function, and withall this must be added, that he neither doth, nor may belieue, that himselfe is a priest. O most wretched, cursed, and miserable Poperie.
               The second, that euery Priest which saith Masse,
                     The. 2. corol.
                   and euery other Papist that heareth and is present at the Masse, is bound by the lawes and doctrine of the Romish Church, to belieue that y• which the Priest lifteth vp ouer his head, (which they call the host,
                     O miserie of all miseries in the world.
                  ) is God Almightie, and to adore the same with the honour and seruice due to God omnipotent. And if any refuse to doe so, he must be burnt with fire & fagot for an Heretique. To which I must needes adde for the vpshot, that if the Priest which saith Masse, want intentiō to doe that which the Romish church would haue done, then the Host (as they tearme it,) is but a piece of plaine bakers bread, euen by plaine Popish doctrine; and yet at al aduentures, it must be adored for the euerliuing God.
               
                  
                   Thirdly, touching that Apostasie, which is simply, properly, & absolutely so called,) I thank God, I am far from it; as who belieue constantly, christianly, & vnfainedly, whatsoeuer is contained in the old and new testament expressely, & also whatsoeuer can by necessarie consequence be deduced out of the same. But I aduise you to call to minde, what your owne deare doctor a great learned man, Nicolaus de Lyra by name, affirmeth plainly & resolutely of your Popes. These are his expresse wordes; multi principes, & summipontifices, & alij inferiores, inuēti sunt à fide apostatasse Many princes,
                     Lyr. in. cap. 16. Mat.
                   & popes, & others of inferiour calling, are found to haue bin Apostataes, and to haue swarued from their faith. Loe, your own Popes haue bin Apostataes, euen by the verdict of your best popish Doctors. Much larger proofe of this and other like matters,
                     
                        The Papists dare not touch the maine points of my bookes, neither lugges, nor for their guts.
                     
                     
                        Oh, that I could anyway draw them to answere me directly.
                     
                   you haue in my bookes published against you & your fellowes: But they are too hote for you; you dare not once touch thē, lest they burn you. Only you dare snatch at a sentence heere & there, which is but spoken obiter, & seemeth more easie to be dealt withal. And yet God wote, you doe that so niggardly, and so sparingly▪ as euery childe may espie your cowardnesse in that kind of proceeding. Marrie, in lying, rayling, bragging, & impertinent by-matters, you are too too large & copious. I now hast toward that sillie pretensed answere, which you haue published against the downe-fall of Poperie.
            
            Here endeth the first booke.
            
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧ The second Booke, of the pretensed answere of the Libeller, against some oddé pieces, and broken periods of my Booke, intituled, The downe-fall of Popery.
            
               CHAP. I. Of dissention among Papists.
               
                  THE Libeller pretendeth to answere my booke, intituled, The downe-fall of Popery, and yet he is often fiddling after his best maner, at other impertinent by-matters: But his fiddling is so vntuneable, and his musicke so full of discord, as it would make a dogge daunce to heare him.
                     The Libeller knoweth not what to say or doe.
                   He is so afrayd to deale with the Downe-fall (lest he chaunce to slip and crush his bones) that he roueth in this booke and in that booke, and neuer commeth neere the marke: he is sometime in my booke of Motiues, and sometime in my booke of Suruey, as a poore Pilgrime that can finde no Church, where hee should make his abode to pray. First therefore, I purpose in God, to examine that little poore thing, (a poore thing indeed, & that will the Reader say when he heareth it) which hee hath chosen as the chiefest matter for him selfe to deale withal, out of my book of Motiues. I wil deale sincerely; I will euer alledge his expresse words, and euery sentence, word, piece of sentence, and circumstance which he hath layd downe in his owne behalfe.

These are his expresse words: Many Papists (quoth he) as Aquinas, Richardus, &c. doe hold that a simple Priest,
                     Pag. 25. by vertue of the Popes dispensation, may lawfully and effectually minister their Sacrament of Confirmation. We willingly graunt it, as being the most receiued and common opinion.
                     Marry sir, you confute your owne selfe: you leaue it not for others so doe.
                   What of al this? But this opinion, sayth hee, is stoutly impugned by other great Papists, to wit, Bonauentura, Alphonsus, Durandus, Scotus, Maior, &c. Be it so, what then? such dissention as this, is without any violation of fayth at all. Mac ill
                        •
                     , Marke my Reply.
               
                  The Reply.
                  I answere; First, in my second booke of Motiues, and eight chapter,
                        In my Motyues, chap. 8. art. 12. I haue handled two & thirty articles of dissentions amongst the Papists: all which I haue proued by the testimonies of very learned and famous Popish writers: among the which 32. articles, this rouing & ranging Iesuitical Libeller, can find but this one for his purpose. In this very same book, being the first that euer I published in print against thē, I haue impugned & battered to the ground, ten special articles of popish  fayth & religion. First, I haue shewed the insufficiency, blasphemy, and absurdities of popish pardons.
                  
                      Secondly, that the Pope both may erre, and hath erred de facto, not only as a priuate person in priuate opinion; but euen as Pope and publike person, and that in his iudiciall and definitiue sentence.
                  
                      Thirdly, that general Councels in these latter daies, are nothing els but a meere mockery and sophisticall subtility, to deceiue Gods people withall.
                  
                     Fourthly, that the Popes dispensations are wicked, licentious, and intolerable.
                  Fiftly, that Kings are aboue Popes, that their power  royall is independant, & that they are subiect to none, but to God alone. Sixtly, that popish dissention is of  matters most important, and incredible to such, as are not wel acquainted with their books. I haue set down 32. in number, of their dissentions. Seuenthly, that the writings of the ancient fathers, are to bee receiued  with great reuerence; yet so, as we acknowledge them to be men, to haue their errours, and to bynd vs to their authorities no further, then they accord and agree to the holy scriptures. Eyghtly, that all things  necessary for our saluation, are contayned in the holy scriptures, and that popish vnwritten traditions are so vncertaine, as the best learned Papists cannot agree therein. Ninthly, that after this life there is neyther  merit, nor demerit, nor satisfaction to be made; and that the bookes of the Machabees cannot establish popish purgatory. Tenthly, that the specificall enumeration  and confession of all our sinnes, is not onely not commaunded by the Scriptures, but flat repugnant to the same, & impossible to be accomplished by the power of man. All which poynts and articles I haue proued, not only by scriptures, authorities and reasons, but euen by the expresse testimonies of the Popes owne deare Doctors, and best learned Papists. A demonstration so forceable against the Papists, as nothing can be more.
                  This book was extant in print, about 12. yeres ago.

The Iesuits haue bene long fiddling & buzzing about some answere to this & my other books; yea, they haue many yeres ago promised the world, that they would speedily frame an answere to the same: but while the grasse growes (as the cōmon saying is) the horse dyes. My selfe am now wel stricken in yeres, & by the course of nature, shortly to go the way of al flesh. They are so nettled, so pricked and goared, and their religion so battred, with their owne best learned Doctors, & most skilfull Proctors, that gladly they would satisfy their Iesuited Popelings, & wipe away that discredit which hangeth at their beards; for which end they vse many coozening tricks, iugglings, & legierdemains, so to stay the out-cries of the people, vntill I be dead, and then, by your fauour, they will come vpon me with good speed: for Canis mortuus non mordet.
                     
                        They dare not (because they cannot) answere me directly and fully.
                      But before that day (my life I gage in that behalfe) they dare not for their guts, publish any direct and full answere to my bookes: I say, any direct and full answere; because to snatch here a piece, and there a piece, is no answere at all, but a meere toy for yong children to play withall.
                  
                      Secondly, this silly dissention, which our Libeller (Robert Parsons,
                     
                        Parsons penned the libel, but with the instructions of the best learned Iesuites.
                      that honest man, if yee will) hath picked out of all the two and thirty in number, (as that with which hee thought himselfe best able to grapple) doeth vtterly confound him, and strike him dead.
                  I proue it first, because he graunteth as much as I desire or affirme; for these are his wordes: (Wee willingly graunt it; bee it so: what then?) This

forsooth; you graunt the dissention among your best Doctours, which is all that I tooke vpon me to proue. O sweet Iesus! who seeth not these Iesuites so besotted and blinded with malice, that they cannot perceyue their owne dotage? They impugne that in one sentence, which they graunt in another. Who will not perswade himselfe,
                        They doe instify my bookes vnwittingly. Who cannot see it?
                      that my booke of Motiues (being the first I writ) is most sincerely and soundly penned? No man can but doe it: the reason is euident, because all that the malicious Iesuite durst impugne, (who no question made choyce of his best aduantage) is (by his owne confession) as true, as the trueth it selfe: but (sayth he) it is no dissention in matters of fayth.
                  Fye, fye, fye; Popery cannot stand, vnlesse it bee supported and vnderpropped with slaunderous lyes. He would haue his Reader to beleeue, that I affirmed the dissention to be a matter of fayth: which if I had done, as I did not, yet would it nothing serue his turne. This is one notorious lye, that I affirmed it to bee a matter of fayth.
                  Where I must needes put him in mind of his coozening trickes, in suppressing the name of the Pope, with &c. which he did,
                        Loe, Pope Adrian is against Pope Gregory, in a matter of great importance.
                      lest the Reader should bee dismayed, when hee should perceyue the Popes owne Doctours, yea, and Pope Adrian himselfe, (whose name hee likewise suppresseth, as hee did the name of Pope Gregorie) to withstand the Pope, and to tell him flatly, that hee was a man, and therefore both might erre, and erred indeede egregiously.
                  
                     Loe, Pope Adrian with sundry learned Papists, taught this doctrine: That none but Bishops could be the true Ministers of Confirmation.
                  Pope Gregorie with other learned Papists, taught the contrary doctrine, and put the same in execution.
                  
                     
                        Iosep. Aug. in 4. s. P. 1. Pag. 81. Bellarm. de matrimonio, col. 1259.Pope Gregorie, Alexander, Paludanus, and Bellarminus, hold it for a constant doctrine, that Confirmation ministred per Sacerdotem simplicem (by a single Priest, which is no Bishop) so he haue the Popes dispensation, is a true Sacrament of their popish church. But Pope Adrian, a very learned man indeede, and Durandus a famous Schoole-doctor, hold Confirmation so ministred, to be no Sacrament at all.
                  If this be not a dissention of importance, and touching popish fayth, let the indifferent Reader iudge: for the silly vulgar people must beleeue,
                        Here is fast and loose, a sacrament and no sacrament, as pleaseth the Pope.
                      that their children being confirmed after the popish maner, haue receyued a Sacrament; and yet sayth Pope Adrian, and Bishop Durand, that it is no Sacrament at all.
                  I therefore conclude, that the Libeller is a notorious lyar; and that the doctryne contayned in my Motiues, is so sound, true, and sincere, as no Iesuite, or Iesuited Papist, can by any meanes gaynsay any thing contayned in the same.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. II. Of the marriage of Priests.
               ABout three yeres agoe, Robert Parsons, that scurrilous Libeller & traytrous Iesuite (who will affirme or deny any thing, as his owne deare brethrē the secular Priests write of him) published a scādalous & rayling libell, which he termed a Detectiō, &c. in which libel he findeth himself grieued, for the books which I haue written against their Popes, & their late Romish Religiō; for which respect he frameth himselfe this way, that way, and euery way, to find out some fit matter against me, & so to be auēged of me. At the last, he hath stūbled on a silly so supposed contradiction, in my book of the Suruey of Popery. This Detectiō was written & published in the yere 1602. & my Suruey in the yeere 1596. so that my Suruey had thē bin in their hands 6. whole yeres: howbeit, after so many yeeres,
                     For the space of six yeeres, they haue espyed but one only supposed cōtradiction in one book, and nothing in all the rest▪
                     
                   they can find nothing at all in it, sauing one onely contradiction falsely so supposed: and yet the seeking out of it hath so troubled them, that they were enforced to huddle vp and mingle together three seueral places far distant one from another: which supposed contradiction, if it were as they falsely imagine, would bee too deare of one quatryne. If they could haue picked out of the sayd Suruey, or my Motiues, or my Hunting of the Romysh Fox (all which three were published long before their Detection) any one thing of moment,

they would not for very shame haue published in a printed book,
                     They neuer deale with any matter of importāce, but eyther with pieces of sentences, or els with by-matters, & impertinent stuffe.
                   such a silly obiection as this. Now in the yere 1605. an other Libeller in his Forerunner (which runnes as speedily as a Snayle after the truth) hath ripped vp the same quarrell againe; so to be auenged vpon the poore booke, for the masters sake: which booke they found so fortified with strong Bulwarks, & so inuironed with inuincible Rampiers, that neyther the brazen-faced Detector, nor this shamelesse Libeller was able to picke out any fitter matter for them to worke vpon, then one onely silly so supposed obiection: I say (so supposed) because it is none indeede, as shall, God willing, be proued out of hand.
               
                  
                     Suruey, pag. 193.In one place of my Suruey, I affirme the Bishops of Rome to haue bin very godly men, till S. Austens time, and long after him.
                     Pag. 228. In another place for all that, I doe charge Pope Siricius to haue published wicked doctrine:
                     P. 488. and in the third place, I charge Pope Sozimus to haue falsified the Councell of Nice.
               
                  
                     It appeareth the Suruey contayneth most sound doctrine in it seeing nothing can be reproued therein, but one silly, and that falsely imagined cōtradiction.
                  This is all that our two Iesuites, the one after the other, can say against my Suruey, after their many yeres studies how to pick a quarrell against the same. They are neither content, that I cōmend their good Bishops of old time, nor yet that I set before their eyes, the bad dealing of their Bishops of later dayes. A man would thinke, that they would rather haue imployed their wits, industry and learning, to haue purged their Popes frō most hainous sinnes imputed to them, viz. from the publishing of false doctrine, and from the falsifying of the famous generall Councell of Nice.
               
                  These matters & these most execrable sinnes they doe not once touch,
                     These most detestable facts should haue bene defended: but, alas, they cannot answere my bookes.
                   but smoothely passe them ouer with deepe silence: and yet (as the cōmon saying is) Qui tacet, consentire videtur. The trueth is (as euery child may easily perceiue) that the crimes obiected and imputed to their Popes, cannot be defended, nor yet any other matter, poynt, or article of doctrine or maners, which I haue published against the late Romish religion.
               Well, since it will bee no otherwise, let vs view what they say of the supposed contradiction. I replyed in my Counterblast,
                     See my Coū
                        terblast, chap. 4. to the answere of E. O. or to Robert Parsons, where, by sixe seuerall answeres, I shewed the supposed contradiction to bee none at all. It shal now suffice, to alledge one of them, which is the answere of their Cardinall Bellarmine, in another like subiect; viz. that it is the maner of the scripture, so to speak of many, as of all. And therfore did I very modestly & honestly, commend the olde Bishops of Rome for very godly men; because sundrie of them were holy Martyrs (about the number of 30. after S. Peter) and diuers others were good men, & taught the same doctrine which S. Peter had done afore them: yet our silly Libeller, beholding, as in a glasse of cristall, not his owne shame and confusion only, but of his brethren the Iesuits, & of the whole rabble of Papists in like maner, to bee concluded by the generall iudgement of the whole world, vnlesse they did answere the bookes which I haue published against them, and their superstitious, idolatrous,

and plaine Antichristian Romish religion, deemed it the best course for himselfe,
                     In my Counterblast, chap. 4. & for the safegard of the life of their mouse-eaten and rotten Popery, to let passe vntouched my Reply to Parsons his fellow Iesuite, and to set abroach some new foolish and odde conceit, so to keepe the peoples heads occupied: for their only drift and shift is this, to seduce the people with coozening trickes of their counterfeit legierdemain,
                     See the story in my Anatomy.
                   as they dealt with Sebastian, the late King of Portugall.
               Well, what saith he? Forsooth, that I haue charged the Iesuite E. O. or (if ye will haue it so) Robert  Parsons, to be a lyar. This is my answere: First, that I see not how I can offend in calling him a lyar, to whō the zealous Papists, the secular Priests, giue this Epitheton, as being his proper and peculiar Badge, that hee hath a brazen face, and will affirme or deny any thing.
               
                   Secondly, that it is most true, which I sayd of him, viz. that hee set downe his owne wordes in stead of mine, and with lying lips affirmed them to be mine: thus doth he write: Pope Siricius (as Thomas Bell affirmeth) was seduced by Satan, published wicked doctrine,
                     Suruey pag. 228. and taught the flat doctrine of the deuill. These are the expresse words of E. O. in his Detection.
               
                  
                     Mat. 19.
                        •
                     .11.12. Heb. 13.4. 1. Tim. 4.3. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Apo
                           ••
                        .
                  But these are my expresse words in my Suruey: After that Christ had graunted marriage for all men, appoynting all such to vse it for an wholsome medicine, as wanted the gift of continency: after that S.

                  Paul had pronounced freely marriage to bee lawfull in all sorts of men: after that the Apostles had decreed, that neither Bishops, Priests, nor Deacons, should leaue the company of their wiues, vnder pretence of Religion: after that many holy Bishops, Priests, & Deacons, had liued laudably in the church, and had the help of holy wedlock aboue three hundred eightie and fiue yeres (all which I haue already proued) then one Siricius aduaunced to the Popedome, in the yere three hundred eighty fiue, seduced by Satan, published wicked doctrine, and prohibited marriage as an vnlawful thing. So then, E. O. omitting my wordes (and prohibited marriage as an vnlawfull thing) and placing these words for them, (and taught the flat doctrine of the deuill) declared himselfe to bee a lyar, and the child of the deuill; let the Reader iudge. No English Iesuite, or Iesuited Papist in Christendome (this is a big word) dare send me a full & direct answere to those 2. chapters of Priestes marriage, in my booke of Suruey,
                     I feare, I must not liue to see any full and direct answer. I forsake my part of heauen, if I doe not great
                           •
                        y desire to see it.
                   I meane the 3. and 4. chapters of the third part, and make due tryall of his answere when he hath done. I dare and redare all English Iesuites and Iesuited Papists whosoeuer and whersoeuer, to let me haue their speedy answer, & the acceptance of this challēge, in such maner as is required in the former challēge. They haue now 2. seueral times assaulted my booke of Suruey, & haue fought the combat with one silly so supposed cōtradiction, set down in the 3. chapter of Priests marriage; they therefore cannot for shame refuse the acceptance of this challenge.
               
                  I do require but an answere to two only chapters of my said booke of Suruey, where the dealing of Pope Siricius is handled at large; and doubtles, if they dare not answere two chapters of one onely booke, (because they cannot perform the same) much lesse dare they answere the whole booke of my Suruey;
                     They wil answere if they can, no question to the contrary.
                   and least of all dare they frame, set forth, and publish to the view of the world, a direct & full answer to all my books: No, no, they dare neuer do such an act, dum spiritus hos alit artus; what they dare do when I am dead, I know not. Let vs now proceed to the Downe-fall of Popery, and view how the libelling Iesuite doeth vnderprop and stay the same from falling.
            
            
               CHAP. III. Of a terrible Monster without both head and foote.
               THE scurrilous Libeller, that noysome Caterpiller, hauing perused my whole booke of the Downe-fall of Popery, hath picked out fiue things onely of the least importance, with the which his courage serued him to grapple: yet like a toothlesse dog that cannot bite,
                     The Iesuite is a toothlesse dogge.
                   he doeth but snatch here and there at my shoe-heeles, grinning and barking as a mad curre. One article that booke hath of vnwritten Popish traditions, containing about eight and twentie whole leaues, foure propositions, and foure conclusions, with sundry obiections, solutions

and much other matter of great importance. This notwithstanding,
                     O poore Libeller, I pity thy case!
                   the silly Libeller (alas for pity) hath made choyce, not of one sentence, but of one onely piece of one sentence: to what end and purpose, let the Reader iudge; for it passeth my skill to diuine. Dauus sum, non Oedipus.
               
               These are his expresse words: Many Papists, quoth he,
                     Pag. 49. are so blinded and besotted with vnsauory traditions, & superstitious illusions, that they deeme it a greater sin to eate flesh in Lent, then to commit adultery, murder, or periury.
               This is all that the Libeller hath against my booke, touching the 5. things wherof he made his choyce. If it bee demaunded, to what end hee brought this patch or piece of one only sentence? I answere, as before in the title of the chapter, that it is a monster without either head or foote, and so aboue my reach. Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos. My sentence,
                     Page 130. being a part of the proofe of my fourth proposition, beginneth thus: Another cōtrouersy touching traditions, &c.
                     A most notorious corruption, which sheweth the Libeller to be the childe of the Deuil.
                   It containeth nine whole lines, whereof he omitted almost fiue, together with the word (yea;) which word did intimate vnto him, that his words were respectiue, and had relation vnto that which went before: yet he of purpose omitted it, because it would not serue his turne, but haue marred his game. But doth he say nothing for himself? Truly he saith somthing, but it is scarce worth the rehearsall. The substāce is this; That I haue vttered a notable vntruth, & brought nothing to support it, but mine owne bare

word.
                     Meere by-matters, & impertinent toyes.
                   Much railing stuffe he hath of Precisians, of a Winters morning lecture practised in the Family of loue, and of one that was drowned, &c. which things being altogether impertinent, I let passe as foolish toyes, and leaue them to himselfe. For the proofe of  my bare word, I answer thus; First, that my bare word of affirmation in such a piece of a sentence, is as good as his bare negation in the same case; especially, seeing he hath cut my sentence asunder, & with his patching and nipping hath deformed it, and marred the beauty thereof.
               Secondly, that things known by experience, must  be tryed by men expert in that kind of faculty. For example sake, if the Libeller will deny the fire to be hote, or water to bee cold, I can say no more, but appeale to experience.
               
                   Thirdly, that the controuersy may soone be decided,
                     In the Anatomy of Popish tyranny, pag. 107.43.37.2
                        •
                     . if we call to mind, what the Seminary Popish Priests haue written against the Iesuits. They charge the Iesuits to take pleasure in murdring Princes; to haue murdred Henrie the third, King of Fraunce; to haue suborned Yorke, Williams, Squire, and sundry others, to lay their violent hands vpon Queene Elizabeth, late Queene of England of happy memory. Piercie the Iesuite escaping from Wisbich,
                     Vbi super pag. 25. is charged to haue taken fraudulently from Benefactors abroad, fiftie seuen pounds, seuenteene shillings; and the yere after to haue stolen twenty seuen pounds of the common money, by the consent of the other his fellow-Iesuites.
               
                  An other Iesuite is charged to haue taken at times, aboue fiue hundred pounds that was giuen to the imprisoned Priests then at Wisbich,
                     Page 24. & to haue imployed the same at his owne pleasure. The Iesuites are charged to affect rule ouer the Secular Cleargy,
                     Page 21. so to bring armes and conquest into the Church, contrary to all scriptures; and to that end, to manage matters of State more Machauisianly, then Machiauel himselfe: yea, the learned Papists of Fraunce (in their Catechisme trāslated into English by the seminary priests) affirme Henrie Sammier of Luxenburge,
                     Lib. 3. cap. 11. fol. 162 that notable Iesuite, to haue dealt as ordinarily with Dice, Cards, and women, as with his prefixed houres of prayer.
               Much other like stuffe I might easily bring against our Iesuites,
                     At the next Mart, they shall heare from me ex abundanti, if they bring any newe wares.
                   but let this content them vntill the next Mart: and yet forsooth, our Iesuites (who deale so familiarly with murders, theft, cards, dice, women, and coozenage) wil in no wise without the Popes dispensation, eate an egge or a piece of cheese in Lent: so scrupulous they are in the one, and so licencious and prodigall in the other.
               So Austens testimony is sufficient in this behalfe, whose wordes are these:
                     August. Ep. 119. ad Ianuar, in fiue.
                   
                  Sed hoc nimis doleo, quia multa quae in diuinis libris saluberrima praecepta sunt, minus curantur, & tam multis prasumptionibus sic plena sunt omnia, vt grauius corripiatur, qui per octauas suas terram nudo pede tetigerit, quàm qui m
                        •
                     ntem vinolentia sepelierit.
               
               But this I greatly lamēt, that many things cōmanded

most wholesomely in the holy scriptures, are not regarded; and all things so replenished with presumptions, that he is more seuerely reproued, who with his bare foot toucheth the ground within his Octaues, then he that lyeth drunke in the streete. So then, it is apparent to all such as haue eyes to see, that many are more scrupulous to doe against a superstitious obseruation, then to transgresse Gods holy precepts. Wel, if the Libeller durst to haue but once touched the substance of any one article in the Down-fall of Popery,
                     The Libeller durst not deale with any important matter.
                   I should haue turned him vpside downe, and wholy out of his skin: which thing he so feared indeede, that hee durst not deale but by snatches and patches, by slaundering, lying, coozening, and iuggling.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII. Of Cardinall Bellarmines opinion and doctrine.
               IN the seuenth Article, handled in the Downe-fall of Popery, the second proposition is contayned in these expresse words:
               All persons, of what sexe, state, or condition soeuer they bee, may lawfully, and ought seriously to read the holy Scriptures; as out of which, euen the simplest of all may gather so much as is necessary for their saluation. This I say, against that Popish,

ridiculous, vnchristian, & very pestilent abuse, where the Pope deliuereth to the people, as it were by way of Apostolical tradition, the Scriptures, Sacraments, and Church-seruice, in a strange tongue to them vnknowne: which to bee flatly against the practise of the primitiue Church, I haue proued copiously in my booke of Suruey. Here therefore I will onely shew, that it is both lawful and necessary for al sorts of people, that desire to attaine eternal life, to read diligently the holy Scriptures.
               This is the propositiō with the reason of the same, being of 4. there handled, the second in number. Which proposition I haue there proued at large, by the plaine testimony of S. Chrysostome, Origen, S. Austen, S Hierome, Theodorite, and Cardinall Bellarmine. Now,
                     The Libeller, dareth not for his gut
                           •
                         deale with the matter but by snatches onely. Page 113.114.115. the libelling Iesuite not daring to deale with the proposition, & the strong bulwarks, with the which it is inuironed and fortified, snatcheth at the second allegation out of Bellarmine, omitting the former, which gaue light and euidence to the latter. In the Down-fall of Popery, my words against Bellarmine are these: The Iesuite Bellarmine (a wonderfull thing to be heard, & almost incredible, sauing that the truth must needs in time haue the vpper hand) confesseth so much vnwares, as is able sufficiently to proue and conclude my intended scope & propositiō. These are his expresse words: His notatis▪ &c. These obseruatiōs being marked, I answere, that all those things were written by the Apostles, which are necessary for all men, & which the Apostles preached openly to al the

vulgar people; but that all other things were not written.
               Thus writeth our skilful Iesuite, who in the name of all Papists (being as it were their mouth) faith all that can be said, in defence of late Romish religiō: out of  whose words I note first, that al things necessary for al men, and al women, old men, young men, maids and babes, rich & poore, noble and ignoble, are set down  & contained in the holy Scriptures. Secondly, that al things contained in the written word, are necessary for all people.
               
                   Thirdly, that those things which are not contained in the writtē word, were neuer preached openly to al people,
                     Iesuitisme is the newest & the proudest sect of all.
                   but secretly to some fewe persons in secret corners; peraduenture to our Iesuits & Iesuited Popelings, sauing that their sect was not then hatched, as which is not yet 80. yeres old. Fourthly, that those  things which are not contayned in the Scriptures & written word, are not necessary for all people, but only for Iesuites and Papists, to bring them to perdition.
               Fiftly, that seeing on the one side, al things needeful  for all men, and al women, for yong and old, rich and poore, noble and ignoble, are contained in the Scriptures; & seeing withal on the other side, that al things in the writtē word are necessary for al people, (marke well what I say, gentle Reader; for I build my worke vpon that foundation which the Iesuite hath layd;) it followeth by necessary consequence, that all people ought seriously to read the holy scripture; as also, that

they may safely contemne all vnwritten traditions, as nothing needfull or pertayning to them. But let vs heare our Cardinall-Iesuite once againe speake for himselfe, and for the honour of his holy father the Pope.
               These are his expresse words: At in nouo, &c. But in the new Testament, because Christ hath fulfilled the figures and the prophesies; although many do not vnderstand the sentences of the Scriptures, yet do they vnderstand the mysteries of our Redemption, euen the Countrey fellowes, and the very women.
               Thus writeth our Iesuite, affirming that euen women, and the very Rusticks of the Countrey, doe vnderstand the Scriptures, so farre forth as pertayneth to the mysteries of their Redemption. And I pray you, why then doeth the Pope debarre them from the reading thereof? What more knowledge is needfull, ouer and besides the mysteries of mans Redemption?1. Cor. 2.2
                        •
                     
                   It is all the knowledge which S. Paul desired to haue: who (as he saith of himselfe) esteemed not to know any thing among them, saue Iesus Christ, and him crucified.
               I therefore conclude, by our Iesuites owne free graunt, that it behooueth all men and women, children, and maydes, diligently to read the holy Scriptures, seeing they may vnderstand therein all the mysteries of their Redemption; viz. all knowledge necessary for their saluation. Which knowledge is so necessary, as nothing can be more.
               
                  
                  
                     Deut. 11.18, 19, 20.Yee (sayth God by the mouth of his seruant Moses) shal lay vp these my words in your heart, and in your soule, & shall binde them for a signe vpon your hand, that they may be a frontlet between your eyes: & ye shall teach them your children, speaking of thē when thou sittest in thy house,
                     Deut. 6.8, 9 Deut. 4.9. & when thou walkest by the way, and when thou lyest downe, & when thou risest vp, and thou shalt write them vpon the posts of thy house, and vpon thy gates. But our Papists obiect against vs, that when the fathers exhort all men & women to read the scriptures, they speak then as Pulpit-men agreeably to their audience, and the peoples default,
                     Rhem. Test. 
                           〈◊〉
                         Pref. sec. 
                     
                        •
                     5. but not as Readers in the schoole, making exact & generall rules to be obserued at all times and in all places. To which I answer; First, that the truth must  be spoken, as well in the Pulpit, as in the schoole. Secondly, that the doctrine in the Pulpit is & ought to  be as exact, absolu
                     •
                  e, and necessary, as the doctrine in schoole. The sole & only difference is, or ought to be this: viz that the Pulpit hath euer the prick of exhortation annexed, which the schoole wanteth. For the Preacher may not speake at randon in the Pulpit, but euen there must he haue the girdle of truth about his  loynes. Thirdly, that holy Dauid regarded no such popish distinction,
                     Psa. 119.9. when asking, wherby a yong man shall clense his wayes? He answereth thus; By study, meditation, and keeping of the law of God. Neither the godly men of Berhaea, when they dayly searched the Scriptures,
                     Act. 17.11 euen to examine the doctrine of the Apostles by them. Our Papists obiect

likewise, that S. Paul wil haue womē to liue in silence,1. Tim. 2.12. and not to chat & prattle of the scriptures. I answer, that though S. Paul will not permit women to teach publikely before men, yet doth he neither forbid thē to read the Scriptures, nor yet to teach priuatly, whē due circumstances do occurre:
                     Tit. 2.3. for the same Apostle elswhere cōmaundeth mothers, to teach godly things to their children. So Salomon,
                  
                     Prou. 31▪ 1. the wisest child that euer was among the sonnes of Adam, one Christ euer excepted, confesseth plainely & humbly, what doctrine his mother Bathsheba taught him. So Priscilla, wife to Aquila the Iew borne in Pontus, expoūded the Scriptures to the Iew Apollo borne at Alexandria,
                     Act. 18.26▪
                   a very eloquent man. So Timothy was throughly instructed in the Scriptures, by his mother Eunice,
                  2. Tim. 1.5. 2. Tim. 3.15. and by his grandmother Lois. By which notable examples, it is euident and cleare to euery one, that neither mothers must forbeare to teach, nor yet yong babes forbeare to learne the holy Scriptures.
               These be the things which I concluded out of Bellarmine,
                  
                     The Libeller is a corrupter and false accuser.
                   and therfore may I iustly cal the Libeller a silly diuine, and a most false accuser: when he omitting the latter halfe of the wordes which I cited out of Bellarmine, telleth me, that I bely Bellarmine. But how doth he proue it? Truly, if the man were not either giuen vp in reprobum sensum, or past all shame, hee would neuer for shame deale so childishly, in matters of such importance.
               Hee belyeth Bellarmine (saith our Libeller:) he sayth not, that women and rustickes doe vnderstand

the Scriptures, so farre forth as pertaineth to the mystery of their Redemption. Nay, he saith the contrary in the wordes by him alledged. Although many, quoth he, vnderstand not the sentences of the Scriptures. In which number, I thinke Rusticks & women must be contained. If then they vnderstand not the sentences of the Scriptures, as Bellarmine affirmeth, how doe they vnderstand the Scriptures, so far forth, as pertaineth to the mysteries of their Redemption?
               Thus reasoneth our Libeller, or more truly sayd; thus prateth our insolent Sycophant, thus babbleth our false accuser: for, when hee hath corrupted Bellarmine, nipping and cutting the sentence asunder, citing only the fore part, and omitting the latter, which would soone haue discouered his falshood;
                     O shamelesse corrupter! where is thy honesty?
                   he forthwith tryumpheth, as though he had the victory: But if a very child do but ioyne the latter part of the sentence, which he omitted like a coozener & deceitful Sycophant, to the former; he shall behold as clearely as the Sunne shining at noone tyde, the victory to be on my side.
               
                  Bellarmines wordes are these, sayth the Libeller; Although many vnderstand not the sentences of the Scriptures: And then he crieth out, that Bellarmine saith, they doe not vnderstand the mysteries of their Redemption in the Scriptures. But here is plaine legierdemaine, & deepe coozenage, euen coozenage in graine: for Bellarmines words are these: But in the new Testamēt,
                     Marke for Christs sake.
                   because Christ hath fulfilled the figures & prophesies, although many doe not vnderstand the

sentences of the scriptures, yet do they vnderstād the mysteries of our redemption, euen the cōmon country fellowes and women. Thus writeth Bellarmine
                  ▪ whose words, because they giue a deadly woūd to Popery, our libelling Iesuite, Bellarmines brother in profession, not daring to reiect his doctrine, citeth (as the Reader may easily behold) only the mids of the sentence. First, he omitteth the former part, which containeth the reason; that is to say, these words; But in the new Testament, because Christ hath fulfilled the figures and the prophesies.
                     Behold a very knaue in grayne.
                   Then he cutteth away the last part, which ministreth the true sence & meaning, that is to say, these words; Yet do they vnderstand the mysteries of our Redemption, euen the rusticks and women. Who would not be ashamed, thus to mangle a sentence which is in cōtrouersie? If I were a Papist, this kind of dealing would cause me to renounce Popery.
               Although they vnderstand not the sentences of the Scriptures, saith Bellarmine:
                     Popery must needs be vnderpropped with coozenage.
                   and there the Libeller resteth himselfe, because he was wearied in hearing the truth; yet doe they vnderstand the mysteries of our redemptiō, euen the country fellowes & women. So then, 3. things must be obserued; First, that there is  one thing, which the vulgar people do vnderstand, to wit, the mysteries of our redemption; and this is the point which I defend, & Bellarmine affirmeth it in very plain termes, & expresse words. Secondly, that there  is an other thing, which the vulgar people do not vnderstand; to wit, the sentences of the Scriptures.
               
                  
                   Thirdly, a third thing must be remembred, to wit, that Bellarmine doeth not say at all, that the common people do not vnderstand the Scriptures, but the sentences of the Scriptures; which doubtlesse was not done of him, but for some end and purpose: for hee might sooner haue sayd, They vnderstand not the Scriptures, then the sentences of the Scriptures.
               Two things therefore are most euident in Bellarmine: first, that the Scriptures are so obscure in many places thereof, that the common people doe not vnderstand the sentences therin contained. Secondly, that sundry places of the Scriptures are so plaine and manifest, that the very country fellowes and women doe vnderstand the same, and the things therein contayned are called of Bellarmine, the mysteries of our Redemption.
               The former obseruation, the Libeller doeth willingly admit;
                     Tom. 1. col. 129. and the latter, I shall proue out of Bellarmines 
                   owne words abundantly: for first, Bellarmine answering to the ninth argument, touching the difference betweene the old & new Testament, affirmeth plainly the difference to be this: viz. that in the old Testament, the people did neither vnderstand the sentences of the Scriptures, nor yet the mysteries of Christ. But in the new Testament, it is far otherwise: where though the people vnderstand not the sentences of the Scriptures (generally) yet doe they vnderstand  the mysteries of mans Redemption. Secondly, the same Bellarmine expoundeth his own meaning in his answere to the sixt argument, where he hath these

expresse words: Quaedam reperiuntur obscurissima,
                  
                     Tom. 1. col. 128. 
                  quae nunquam in tota scriptura explicantur, vt magnapars Apocalypsis, principium & finis Ezechielis, &c. Some things are found most obscure, which are neuer explicated in the whole Scriptures, as a great part of the Reuelation, the beginning and the end of Ezechiel, &c. Now,
                     Mark this poynt well: for it is all that I desire.
                   when Bellarmine affirmeth but some special things onely to be obscure, euery child can easily discerne, that he graunteth many things to be plaine & manifest. And Bellarmine saith nothing, but that which S. Augustine sayd long before Bellarmine was borne, in far more plain & manifest termes. These are his expresse words: In his,
                  
                     Aug. de doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9. 
                  n
                        •
                     qua aperte in scriptura posita sunt, inueniuntur illa omnia, quae continent fidem mores
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      viuendi: for in those things, which are plainly set downe in the holy Scripture, are found all things cō
                  cerning faith and maners: which thing I haue proued so largely & substantially in the Down-fal of Popery, not onely by the testimony of S. Austen in many places of his works, but also of S. Hierome, S. Chrysostome, S. Theodorite, and others, that all the English Iesuites and Iesuited Papists in Europe, dare not once oppugne the same, by publishing any direct answere thereunto: so as euery article, conclusion, and proposition therein contayned, may truly be called (Noli me tangere;) because they dare not for ten thousand millions of gold, once touch the same fully and directly.
               Thirdly, that the same Bellarmine graunteth freely and willingly, that many sentences of the Scriptures 
                  
are most plaine and easie. These among many others, are his owne words; Quid. n. facilius, quā, diliges proximum tuum?
                     Tom. 1. col. 126. d.
                   for what is more easie, thē, thou shalt loue thy neighbour? Yea, a thousād histories, as S. Chrisost. saith, are contained in the Scriptures, which the meanest & simplest cannot but vnderstand. Which thing our Iesuite Bellarmine did truly obserue,
                     Vbisuper, col. 128, d.
                   when he affirmeth the same S. Chrisostome, where hee saith the Scriptures are easy to be vnderstood, to speak only of the historie & such like things. So then, our sottish & doltish Iesuite may go sighing and sobbing to his brethren, and tel thē in sad earnest, that it is better for him to sit stil, then to rise vp & fal, as he hath already done.
            
            
               CHAP. V. Of the condigne merit of workes.
               THE Libeller hath so long pleased himself in his coozening tricks, and in his bewitching of the simple & ignorant Papists; that he bosteth therof, and presumeth to preuaile vnto the end: but by the power of God, I shal proue him such a noddy before I leaue him, that all the world wil deeme him worthy to weare in his forhead a cox-combe for his foolishnes, and on his back, a fox-tayle for his badge. Disputing,
                     Pag. 43. In lib. 2. sent. p. 150. The Libeller falsifieth my w
                           •
                        rdes.
                   saith our shameles Libeller, against the condigne merits of works, he citeth this sentēce of a Catholike writer, Iosephus Angles: Eodem etiam modo, &c. as other holy Doctors also, considering after the same maner, the natural value only of good works, and perceiuing

that it is exceeding far distant from the value and iust estimation of eternall life, said wisely, That our works are not meritorious nor worthy of eternall life: yet for the couenāt and promise made vnto vs, the good works of man with the helpe of grace, are worthy of eternall life, and equall with it: which for all that, that promise of God which is frequent in Scripture, set aside, were altogether vnworthy of so great a reward. Thus doth the shamelesse Libeller recite my words; and that done, hee proceedeth in this maner, in these words: Although nothing be contained hurtfull to Catholike doctrine, yet Bell by his Alchymisticall arte of changing truth into falshood, can gather out matter sufficiently against vs. Now mark the answer, and both his knauery and folly will appeare.
               
                  The Answere.
                  I answere; first, that Robert Parsons that trayterous  Iesuite (whome I challenge to bee the penner of the shamelesse Libel) is a most notorious lyar,
                        Parsons is a most notorious lyar, and corrupter of the Doctors▪
                        
                      and malicious corrupter of my Authors. I proue it, because in the very beginning of that only Doctors words, (of whome Parsons made choyce before all the rest,) hee hath changed the first word, which hee perceiued to strike him dead, & to giue the Pope a mortall woūd: for where the Popish Fryer and Bishop Iosephus Angles, hath these words, (All other holy Doctors;) the Libeller hath these words, (As other holy Doctors,) placing the word (as) for the word (all.) What a trechery is this? Parsons committeth the murder, and chargeth an other man with the fact.
                  
                     
                     
                        He calleth another man thiefe, and is the thiefe himselfe.
                     Hee telleth me of changing truth into falshood, which hee neither is, nor euer shall be able to proue; and yet doeth himselfe change so much trueth into falshood, & vse so many coozening tricks, as I am very weary in relating a small part therof. All other holy Doctors, sayth Iosephus Angles; As other holy Doctors,
                        Ioh. 8.44. sayth Parsons. Diabolus mendax est, & pater eius. Parsons our shamelesse lyar & impudent Libeller, not able to indure the sound of their holy Friar and reuerend Bishop, when hee affirmeth all holy Doctors to be against their holy Pope,
                        Behold a most shamelesse, & most malicious corruption.
                      & his late Romish religiō, deemed it his best course, to change the word (all) into the word (as;) that so the Reader might bee bewitched with his legierdemaine, and not able to behold the truth. But Iosephus Angles telleth vs plainly, that all other holy Doctors teach the very same doctrine.
                  Marke well (gentle Reader) for Christs sake, & for the sauing of thine own soule: for (my life & my soule I dare gage in this quarrell) the Iesuite is at his non plus, condemned in his owne conscience, and neuer able to defend the cause, which he hath takē in hand.
                  The Papists are so impudent, that they affirme their late Romish religion to be the old Religion, and Catholike doctrine. And with this most shamelesse and impudent asseueratiō, they haue a long time seduced and bewitched a great part of the Christian world.
                  But this very questiō of condigne merits of works, (which the Libeller snatched at, but durst not for his lugges answere directly to it) will make their coozening tricks & their legierdemaine so manifest, and so

vnfold their iuggling, and so lay open the nakednesse of late Popery; that all the world may perceiue the doctrine which I deliuer, (which is also the doctrine of the Church of England) to be not the new Religion (as many silly soules do think;
                        This is proued in my booke of Suruey at large.
                     ) but the old Roman Religion, from which the late Bishops of Rome by little & little haue swarued, and the true ancient Catholike faith. The doctrine (which the Church of England maintayneth, and my selfe defends) is not a new Religion (as the Papists falsely beare the world in hand;) but the olde, ancient, Christian, Catholike, Romane Religiō; reformed, refined, and purged from superstitions, errors, and heresies, which by peecemeale haue crept into the Church. Would God the Papists durst once answer my books directly,
                        They dare not answere directly.
                      that so the combat for the triall of this controuersy might be foughten valiantly. But they are cowards, they dare not do it. Secondly, that when the Libeller saith, Nothing brought is hurtfull to Catholike doctrine, (by which words he euer vnderstandeth late Romish Religion;
                        The Libeller dares not deale with the whole sentence, but snatcheth at a piece.
                     ) he sheweth himself to be an impudent lyar, with a shamelesse brazen face. For Iosephus Angles doth not only tel the Pope, (and in him all his popish vassals) that the best works of all, considered in their owne nature and natural value, are vnworthy of eternall life: but also (marke well my words) that the best works of all, euen with the helpe of Gods grace, and the assistance of the holy Ghost, are altogether vnworthy of eternall life, if Gods promise & free acceptation be set apart. Where I wish the reader to marke

seriously these words, prorsus indigna, altogether vnworthie, which are not mine, but the Fryers, and are most emphaticall against the late Romish Religion. I proued this point of doctrine, both by the Scriptures, fathers,
                        The Libeller and all his fellowes, are cowards.
                      & best approued Popish writers; yea, euen by the verdict of Cardinall Bellarmine himselfe. But the Libeller durst not aduenture to encounter me, and to grapple with my doctrine. I wil now adde some few sentences out of Bellarmine, which afore I did not  once touch. The first sentence: At vt bono operi debeatur merces ex iustitio,
                     
                        Bellarm. Tom. 3. col. 1285. 
                     conuentio vel promissio necessaria est. non. n. tenetur vnus alterius obsequium acceptare, nisi cōuentio interuenerit. Deus autem non promisit mercedem vita aeternae, nisi per Christi gratiā regeneratis et adoptatis. But that reward be due of iustice to good works, a couenant or promise is necessary: for one is not bound to accept the seruice of another, vnles there be a couenant: But God promised not the reward of eternal life, saue only to the regenerate through the grace of  Christ. The secōd sentence; Respondeo, absolute non posse hominem a Deo aliquid exigere cum omnia sint ipsius;
                     
                        Bellarm. Tom. 3. col. 1298. 
                     tamē posita eius voluntate & pacto, quo non vult e
                           ••
                        gere a nobis opera nostra gratis, sed mercedem reddere iuxta proportionem operū, vere possumus ab eo mercedē exigere; quomodo seruus non potest absolute a Domino suo vllum praemium postulare, cum omnia quae seruus acquirit, Domino suo acquirat: tamen si Domino place at donare illi opera sua, & pro ijsdem tanquam sibi non debitis mercedem promittere, iure mercedem pro suis operibus postulabit. I answere, that man cannot absolutely require any thing of God, seeing al things are his; yet seeing his pleasure and couenant

is such, that he will not require our works of vs for nothing, but will reward vs in proportion of our works, we may truly require reward of him; like as a seruant cannot absolutely require any reward of his master, seeing all things which he gaineth are his masters: yet if it be his masters pleasure to giue him his labours, and for the same as not due vnto him, to promise reward, hee may iustly require wages for his works. The third sentence; Sed facilis est responsio. Nam  dicitur Deus reddere debita nulli debēs,
                     
                        Bellarm. Tom. 3. col. 1303. 
                     quia nihil vlli debet absolute, sed solum ex promissione et dono suo. Pari ratione dicimus Deo, Redde, quia promisisti; nō dicimus, Redde, quia accepisti; quoniam fundamentū primū debiti diuini, non in opere nostro, sed in eius promissione consistit. But the answer is easy: for God is said to pay debts,
                        Who seeth not the truth of the question?
                      being dettor to none; because hee oweth nothing to any absolutely, but only in respect of his free gift & promise. In like maner we say to God, Giue, because thou hast promised; we say not, Giue, because thou hast receiued: for the chiefe foundation of Gods debt, doeth not consist in our worke, but in his promise. The fourth sentence; Primū igitur, opera iustorū, remoto pacto  vel promissione,
                     
                        Bellarm. Tom. 3. col. 1300. Super cap. 14. in 2. ratione.
                      
                     non esse meritoria vitae aeternae ex cōdigno siue ex iustitia, ita vt non possit deus sine iniustitia talem negare mercedē, satis probatū est. scriptura, siquidem et patres, vbicū
                        
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         dicunt deum fidelē esse et iustū in reddendo praemio, semper aut fere semper mention
                           •
                         faciunt promissionis. First therfore, it is proued sufficiētly, that the works of the iust, Gods couenant & promise set apart, are not meritorious of eternall life condignely and iustly, so as God cannot deny such reward without iniustice:

for the scripture and the fathers, whēsoeuer they say, God is faithful & iust in rendring reward; do euer, or almost euer, make mention of his promise.
                  Out of these assertions of our Iesuiticall Cardinal Bellarmine,
                     
                        Popery is stricken dead.
                      I obserue these golden lessons against the Pope, to whō the book was dedicated, against Popery it selfe, and against all popish and Iesuited vassals.  First, that Gods promise is so necessary to attaine reward, that without it no reward cā iustly be required.  Secōdly, that no reward is due to any, but only to the  regenerate. Thirdly, that the reward is not promised for any merit in mans worke, but for Christs sake and  merit. Fourthly, that mā can require nothing of God absolutely, but only for his couenant & promise sake.  Fiftly, that God is no mās dettor absolutely, but only  by reason of his free gift & promise made to mā. Sixtly, that the chief foundation of Gods debt, cōsisteth in Gods free promise, but not in the work of man. Seuenthly,  that the works of the best liuers do not merit eternal life iustly & cōdignely, but by reason of Gods  couenant & promise. Eightly, (and this obseruation striketh dead,
                        The Papists are stricken dead, by the verdict of their dearest Iesuite.
                      and bringeth the Pope to his funeral,) that both the Scripture & the fathers, do either euer, or almost euer make mention of Gods promise, whē
                     soeuer they tel vs, that God is faithful & iust in rewarding men for their works; and that they so do, for this end and purpose; that man may know there is no reward due vnto his works, for any merit, condignity, or worthinesse inherent in his best work; but only & solely for that promise, which God of his free mercy made vnto him in Christ Iesus.
                  
                     All this is most plainly and fully contained in the 4. sentence out of our Romish Cardinal Bellarmine.
                     
                        Bury the Pope, interre him, sing Placebo for his soule: for hee is dead vndoubted
                              •
                           y. Page 45. Lo, he hopeth to preuaile, by corruptiō and deceytfull dealing.
                      Read it, gentle Reader, againe and againe; peruse it, volue it, reuolue it, think vpon it when thou risest, & when thou goest to bed, & neuer forget it til thy liues end. Now, let vs proceed and see, how gallantly the Libeller answereth me. These are his words; The fathers (saith Bell) out of the testimony of Iosephus confesse, that good works, according to their naturall value, be not meritorious of eternall life. What is that against vs? do not al Catholiks graunt as much, whē they acknowledge that they receyue all their efficacy of working from Gods grace? which doctrine of ours hee may learne out of the Councell of Trent, where it is handled at large. Now marke my Reply.
               
               
                  The Reply.
                  I answere,
                        The Libeller is more shamelesse then the deuill of hell.
                      and I wish the Reader to marke wel my words, and to iudge of them indifferently, all partiality set apart: which doubtlesse, if it be performed, the Reader who is a good Christian, will thereby bee confirmed in his faith; and he that is a Papist, will detest and renounce Popery world without end. Amen.
                  
                  First therfore, the impudent & shamelesse brazen-faced  Libeller,
                        A most impudent coozening trick Marke 
                              〈◊〉
                            well.
                      (I cannot name him so ill as hee deserues) corrupteth my words, cutteth the testimony of Iosephus Angles asunder, and putteth down to the Readers eyes but one onely snatch, patch, and piece thereof, not daring for his lugges and guts, to put the period wholy together, and to frame a full and direct answere to the same.
                  
                     Secondly, so soone as he hath corrupted the testimony, and snatched only at the third part, which is of least force,
                        O impudent Parsons! O shamelesse Iesuite! O Fairy brat!
                      leauing 2. parts behinde him; which containe the main poynt, & the very life of the cōtrouersy, he exclaimeth in these words; What is this against vs? Truly, sir Libeller, it is nothing against you, as your lying lips auouch it for a truth: howbeit, whē the testimony of Iosephus Angles, is truly, wholy, fully, & soundly related,
                        If euer it be truly answered, let mee lose my life for the same
                      as it came from his pen, & was by me fitly and rightly applyed, it wil make so much against you, against your Pope, against your Coūcel of Trent, and against al other Papists, as they are neuer able to answere it while the world indures. These are the expresse words of Iosephus Angles, which I did truly relate; but our shameles Libeller guilefully, deceitfully and maliciously omitted them; because forsooth, hee knew right wel▪ that the rehearsal of thē would marre his market, & strike him dead; Ex lege tamen, siue conuentione, siue promissione facta nobiscū, opera bona hominis cum adiutorio gratiae dei fiūt aeternae vitae digna, & illi aequalia; quae, seclusa illa dei promissione, quae passim in sacris literis reperitur, fu
                           •
                        ssent taz to praemio prorsus indigna. Yet for the couenant and promise made vnto vs, or with vs, the good works of man with the helpe of Gods grace, are worthy of eternall life, and equall with it; which for al that,
                        These words which he omitted, will be his death
                      that promise of God which is euery where found in the holy Scriptures set apart, were altogether vnworthy of so great reward.
                  These are the expresse words of Iosephus Angles, that learned Fryer, & Popish Bishop. Now the question is,

whether these words, which the Libeller deceitfully omitted, doe make against him or not.
                        Marke wel, for Christes sake, and yeeld thy censure with out partiality.
                      If they make for him against me, I am content to be the liar, & to be ouerthrown in my pleading: but if they make against him, (as vndoubtedly they do) then must hee bee the lyar, lose the victory, & be quite ouerthrowne in his owne cause: yea, then must his friends sing a blacke Dirige for his soule, and all Popish vassals a dolefull Placebo for the Popes funerall.
                  The tryal standeth thus; two things are euidently set downe in this part of the period, and testimony of Frier Angles; first, that the good works of man ioyned with the helpe of Gods grace, are by reason of Gods couenant and promise made with man, worthy of eternal life.
                  Secondly, that the selfe same good works of man, euen as they proceede from the helpe and grace of God, are altogether vnworthy of eternal life, if Gods couenant and promise be set apart. What can be more plainely spoken? Nothing in the world. But to vnderstand the Fryers testimony and doctrine exactly and to the bottome; foure things which are contayned therein, must bee seuerally, and apart considered.
                  First, the naturall value of mans workes.
                  
                  Secondly, good workes proceeding of grace, together with the onely promise and couenant of God.
                  Thirdly, good workes proceeding of GODS grace, but seuered and set apart from 
                     
                      the promise and couenant made to man. Fourthly, these wordes, (prorsus indigna, altogether vnworthy) these 4. obseruations, euery child may find in the testimony of Frier Iosephus, if he ponder the text seriously,
                        In the Down fall of Popery, article 5. with this my explicatiō: especially, if he peruse the whole article, as it is set downe at large in my former booke. Now, the Libeller made choyce only of the first (such coozening tricks he vseth) to wit, of the naturall value of mans works (omitting all the other three, lest if he once touched thē, they should burne him to death.) & that done, he boasteth ante victoriā, as if he were a conqueror,
                        O deceitfull wretch! O coozening villaine! O child of the deuill!
                      when his own conscience cōdemneth him, & telleth him, that he is a dastardly coward, and must be taken prisoner for his deceitfull dealing. Mans works thus taken, that is, in their natural value, are not worthy of eternall life. Heerein I agree to the Libeller: but I must needs tel him withal, that he is a pestilent Sycophant, & a most coozening villaine, (who seemeth to haue entred league with the deuil of hell,
                        O most damnable coozenage.
                      and to haue made shipwrack of his soule,) in that he resteth in an vnperfit part of the period, omitting the very pith & substance therof, so to seduce & deceiue his Readers.
                        Marke these poynts soundly.
                      The second obseruatiō telleth vs, that good works ioyned with the grace of God, are worthy indeed of eternall life; yet not absolutely, but respectiuely; that is to say, in regard of Gods couenant and promise made to man. This is a poynt & obseruation, of the greatest importance that may be.Seclusa illa Dei promissione. The third obseruation teacheth vs, that good works which proceed of Gods grace, if they wanted and were destitute of the promise of God, could no

way be worthy of eternall life. The fourth & last obseruation telleth vs, that good works ioyned with grace, but destitute of Gods promise, are prorsus indigna, not only vnworthy, but wholy and altogether vnworthy of eternal life. Now I refer it to the Reader, to giue his indifferent censure, whether I be the lyar, or the impudent Libeller. And here once againe,
                        This is a more liberal challenge. The fift article in the Downe fall of Popery. A direct & full answere to euery part of the article as it is set downe in my booke: but not by pieces & snatches, omitting the chiefe proofs as the Libeller hath done A new challenge, which I desire with all my heart to be performed, as knoweth our mercifull God.
                      I do inlarge my former challenge, promising vnder my hand, that if this Libeller wil with conuenient speed, or any other English Iesuite, or Iesuited Papist whosoeuer he be, publish in print a direct & full answer to my first article, which is of the condigne merit of works, and putting downe his name at large, with his vsuall addition, shal accept the challenge, & promise vpon a safe conduct to defend the same publikely and viua voce, to fall down prostrate vpon my knees before the most mighty, learned, wise, vertuous, and religious Prince, Iames, King of great Brittaine, France & Ireland, and my most gracious Soueraigne, so soone as I shall receiue a copy therof, then and there with heart and voyce most hūbly to request his most excellent Maiesty, that a safe conduct may be published, for the due triall of the supposed condigne merit of works, in maner already specified. I require in this challēge, but a direct & ful answere to one only article. If no English Papist be of courage, neither to answer directly & fully all my books, nor any one of them, nor one only poore article, being but a small part therof; what shal I say? or what can I say? nay, what can the Papists thē selues say? or what can all the world say? but fye vpon them, & vpon their late vpstart Romish Religion.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI. Of the inuoluntary motions of Concupiscence.
               SO shamelesse and impudent is the Libeller in all his dealing, that I doe not thinke it strange, to receine a huge fardel of lyes from his pen. But now he so farre surpasseth impudency it selfe,
                     Quodl. 8. art. 5. Quodl. 4. art. 5. that he seemeth not to bee a meere man, but some Fairies Brat, begotten of some Incubus or ayerish spirit, vpō the body of a base woman; a monster of mankind, fitter for hel then middle earth: For so his owne fellowes haue published to the world of him.
               The Libeller, after his wonted maner, hath singled out by way of snatching, from the words vpon which they did depend, & from whence they receiued their true sence and meaning, ten lines out of ten leaues: which he hath no sooner done, but he glorieth in this maner;
                     Page. 50. S, Austen (quoth he) proueth at large in sundry places of his works, that inuoluntary motions of concupiscence are sin indeed, and truly so called. In his first booke of Retractations,
                     Aug. lib. 1. retract. cap. 13. pag. 13. Aug. retr. lib. 1. ca. 15. pag. 16. he hath these words; That which in Infants is called originall sin, when as yet they vse not free arbitrimēt of wil, is not absurdly called voluntary; because being contracted of the euill will of the first man, it is become in sort hereditary.
               It is not therfore false which I said; Sinne is an euil so voluntary, that it is no way sinne, if it bee not voluntary.
               
                  Whether Bell fathereth not a notable vntrueth vpon S. Austen, when he citeth these words of his, to proue that inuoluntary motions of concupiscence be sinne indeed, and truly so called, I report me to the words by mee alledged;
                     Your braines are cleane out of tune indeed, as will appeare out of hand.
                   for no such thing is in them to be found. Nay, either my braines are not in good tune, or else Saint Austen proueth the cleane contrary.
               It is a constant doctrine with that holy father, that sinne is voluntary, otherwise no sinne. And for as much as some doubt might be made of originall sinne, because it seemeth wholy inuoluntary, he affirmeth also that sinne to bee voluntary, and so concludeth generally all sinne to be so. Marry, a man of the Ministers learning,
                     Lo, it netleth the Papists, to be ouerthrown with their owne Doctours.
                   may quickly ouerthrow vs with our owne Doctors, if by that rare skill which hee hath in lying, when they say one thing, hee can without all blushing, maintayne them to say the contrary.
               Thus gallantly prateth our shamelesse Libeller. Now heare my Reply.
               
                  The Reply.
                  My Reply or confutation standeth thus. First, that the shamelesse Iesuite durst not deale with my whole  article, but only with one silly patch or piece thereof, which he hath guilefully and corruptly singled out.
                        The Libeller neuer taketh the whole sentence.
                      O strange and most dastardly cowardnesse! Fye vpon your shamelesse dealing. What a Religion and fayth doe you Papists hold, who dare not for your liues answere directly to any one booke, chapter,

article, or period which I haue many yeeres sithence published,O dastardly cowards! against the chiefe parts of your late vpstart Romish Religion? You seeke out odde corners, you flye to by-matters, you dare not, for your liues, encounter me in the openfield.
                  
                      Secondly, that I haue indeede ouerthrowne them with their own Doctors; yea, euen with their chiefest Doctors, and that al the world doth now perceiue the same. For which respect they haue now at the last deemed it better, to snatch heere a piece and there a piece out of my books, and so to face out the matter with coozenage, slaundering, railing, lying, and most notorious corruption, rather then to be wholy silent, as they haue bene in former yeres.
                  
                      Thirdly, that seeing Robert Parsons, the trayterous Iesuite (whom I challenge to haue penned the Libel) is euen by the iudgemēt of the popish secular priests, an arrant Traitor, a Priests bastard, a monster of mankind,
                        All this is proued in my anatomy of Popish tyranny.
                      a gybsey, a man so impudēt, that he will affirme or deny any thing, a notorious lyar, an incestuous person, an heretike of the Family of Loue, a drunken spunge, a Fairies Brat, the slaue of the deuill; yea, the wickedst man vpon earth, no man of iudgement and good conscience, will giue credit to his bare words, when he bringeth no proofe for the same.
                  
                      Fourthly, that in the fourth article, handled in the Downe-fall of Popery at large, I haue proued very soundly by the Scriptures, fathers, and best approued Popish writers, as also by many plaine testimonies out of S. Austens bookes, that concupiscence remayning

after Baptisme in the regenerate, is both called sinne, and is properly sinne indeed; that the first motions of concupiscence, which are connaturall to the corrupt man, & can no way be auoyded, are flatly forbiddē by this commaundement, (Thou shalt not couet;) that though the said rebellious motions bee voluntary in the worke, yet are they voluntary in the original; that Cardinall Bellarmine not able truly to answere S. Austens words,
                        Cardinall Bellarmine corrupteth S. Austen.
                      hath in his explicatiō added very deceitfully, this word (quodāmodo, after a sort;) which word for all that, can neither be found in S. Austen, neither is it agreeable to his meaning. But such beggerly shifts & silly euasions, are the props and stayes of late Romish Religion. This done, I haue confuted the exposition of the Rhemists,
                        Rhem. Tost. in Rom. 7. who beare the world in hand, that S. Paul speaketh not of the habituall concupiscence, or sensual desire & inclinatiō to euil, whē he forbiddeth to lust. For, if only the consent of our reason & mind to obey and to follow the lusts therof, were sin indeed; then should S. Austens exposition be very childish & too too absurd, who telleth vs plainly in expresse tearmes;
                        Aug. de nupt. & concupisc. lib. 
                        
                           •
                         
                        cap. 29. that S. Paul could not fulfill that precept, although he did not yeld his consent vnto it, neither did obey or follow the desires therof. Where I told the Reader, that it will not serue or help the Papists to obiect that, which is euer in their mouths, viz. that it is inuoluntary, & can no way be auoyded, and therefore no sinne at all.
                  Many strong reasons I alleadged for the proofe hereof, in the Down-fall of Popery: amongst which

the Libeller found one only, with which his courage serued him to grapple. But alas, all that he hath gayned, is nothing els in very deed, but to proue himselfe a malicious foole, and the master. Noddy of all Popish noddies in the world. For the very next words in Saint Austen, set downe in the Downe-fall, (which the shamelesse Libeller maliciously and guilefully omitted▪) condemne him for a notorious coozener; as which doe proue Saint Austen flatly on my side, and wholy against himselfe.
                  Thus writeth Saint Austen; Quod si quisquam, &c. But if any man say,
                        See the Downe-fall.
                      that concupiscence is nothing else, then a will that is vicious and seruing sinne, there is no resistance to bee made; neither must controuersie bee in words, when the thing is cleere and euident. For so wee proue euerie sinne to bee voluntary, eyther in the act, or in the originall.
                  These are the expresse wordes of Saint Austen, with which our Libeller durst not deale; although in my booke they bee immediatly annexed to the former:
                        They knowe right well, that they are not able to answere me truly.
                      For the Libeller Robert Parsons, and all his cursed Iesuited English broode, doe know right wel, that they are not able, (while the world endures,) to answere tru
                        •
                     ly and directly any one of my books, or any one Chapter, or any one Article of the same.
                  Alas, alas, the case is too manifest. For the Libeller confesseth, that hitherto they haue not answered mee. And hee addeth a toy for young children

to play withall, viz. that an answere was framed fiue yeeres agoe,
                        Page 15. but hitherto suppressed vpon iust occasion; because (forsooth) it was not to the purpose, or (if yee wil) none at all.
                  What a thing is this? the like was neuer heard, knowne, or seene. All the Iesuites haue layd their heads together to answere my books. About which answere, (as due circumstances will conuince,) they haue spent sixe whole yeeres, plus minus; in which space of time, (as our Fore-runner telleth vs,) they haue (though long first) answered my bookes. But what followeth? Marry sir, that the answere hath hitherto beene suppressed, euen for the space of fiue yeres, and no lesse.
                  Is this possible? It is most true; read his booke, page 15. and you shall find it to be so.
                        Page 15. But what pretense hath hee in this behalfe? viz. To suppresse the answere so many yeeres. Forsooth he saith, vpon iust occasion. But what iust occasion that is, neither can I tel, neither I thinke himselfe.
                  Well, gentle Reader, wilt thou know the trueth?
                        The Papists are stricken dead.
                      They haue no answere to my books, and therfore do they publish none. And if they will needs stand vpon this poynt, that they haue an answere in store, but still suppresse it for vnknowne causes, I must bee so bolde with their grauities, as to tell them in sad earnest, that their answere is such a silly one, as they are ashamed to haue it knowne or seene; and therfore do they hide it in a poore pipkin, lest wisemen should deride their folly therein. For vpō my credit (and my

life I gage for the tryall thereof;
                        O most dastardly cowards! O most shamelesse Iesuites! why durst you not publish your answere in fiue yeres space?
                     ) I haue confuted Popery, euen by the testimony of the best approued Popish writers. Whē we affirme with S. Austen & S. Paul, that the vnuoluntary motions of cōcupiscence in the regenerate, are truly and properly sin indeed; the Papists answer vs with S. Austen, that euery sin is voluntary, and consequently, that the said motions being vnuoluntary, are no sin at all. To this obiection, I replyed out of S. Austen in many places of his works; that albeit such motions were vnuoluntary in the act, yet were the same voluntary in the originall. To which I added, that the Papists may as well deny cō
                     cupiscence to be sin in vnbaptized infants, as in them that are baptized, vpon this their falsely supposed groūd: for it is as inuoluntary in the one, as it is in the other; neither can it be any more auoided in the one, then in the other. Now let the Reader iudge, what coozening tricks the shamelesse Libeller vseth.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII. Of Pope Martins dispensation.
               THE Libeller is here in great iolity, and tryumpheth before the victory. howbeit, I haue reserued this Dispensation for the last end, which he placed in the beginning. My reason is this; because I hope in God to giue him such a Down-fall therby, as all the Papists in England and elsewhere, shall not bee able to lift him vp again. Marry, if the Popes holinesse

will dispense with him therein,
                     It is sacriledge to dispute of the Popes power
                   (of whose power it is sacriledge to dispute,) to that can I say nothing. In the Down-fal of Popery, I haue proued most euidently, euen by the testimony of most famous Popish Doctors, that the Pope hath often by his most execrable dispensations, taken vpon him to dissolue that matrimony, which is most firme and stable by Christs holy institution.
               One onely example the Libeller espied, with the which his courage serued him to deale,
                     The Papists may sing Dirge for the soule of their Forerunner.
                   not daring for his guts to answer the article directly, though it be a very short one. No, no, this one example will bee ynough for him, if not too much. It wil make his heart pant, his neck crack, his belly ake, and his bowels to gush out; whē he shal read or heare my Reply, which I haue directly and soundly framed to the same. The controuersie standeth thus. I affirmed out of Antoninus, that Pope Martin gaue one licence to marry his owne naturall sister. The Libeller answereth, that I haue belyed their Arch-bishop, and that their Pope gaue no such dispensatiō. Now, that the controuersy may bee examined ad amussim, I purpose in God to proceed in this maner. First, I wil purge my selfe, and  retort the lie vpon the Libellers head; as vpon the author & the person, that best deserueth the same.
                     An in esragable demonstration.
                   And this I wil perform (God willing,) by the testimony of most famous, and best approued Popish writers. This being truly & soundly effected; al wise men (I weene) wil deeme the Libeller worthy for his iust reward, to keepe continually a whetstone about his neck, a cox-combe

in his forhead,
                     Robert Parsons attire.
                   a Foxe tayle in his right hand, and a fooles bable in his left; to this end forsooth, that being so comely attired in regard of his great wisedome,
                     A fit Counseller for our holy father the Pope.
                   he may henceforth be a fit Counseller for the Pope. Howbeit, if he shall vse no better dexterity in counselling, then hee hath practised in defending the Pope; it may be feared, that his final reward wil be a rope.
               
                   Secondly, I wil answere directly and fully to euery thing and things, reasons, causes, circumstances, and imaginations, which the Libeller with the ioynt aduice of his friends, possibly could deuise in his owne defence, and for the honour of their Pope and Popery. The first Popish Doctor is Siluester Prieras, a religious Frier, an absolute diuine, so termed by the Papists, & sometime master of his Holinesse sacred Palace. He must therefore bee of good credit amongst the Papists; and the victory is mine owne, if he stand on my side. These are his expresse words; Reperitur tamen Martinus quintus,
                  
                     Siluest. in verb. Papa. page 279. 
                  (vt archiep, refert) dispensasse cum eo qui cum sua germana contraxerat & consummauerat; habito consilio cum peritis Theologis & Canonistis, propter mala & scandala alias inde ventura; licet aliqui dicerent, eum hoc non posse. Howbeit Pope Martin the 5. (as the Arch-bishop reporteth) dispensed with him, who had contracted and consummated matrimony with his owne naturall sister;
                     Loe, this learned Papist iumpeth with me.
                   hauing first consulted with his skilful diuines & Canonists▪ so to auoyd scā
                  dall, which otherwise was likely to insue thereupon, although some said, he could not do it.
               
                  The second Popish Doctor, is Bartholomaeus Fumus, a religious Dominican Frier, & one of the masters of their most holy Inquisition (as they terme it;) & therfore a man of great credit amōg the Papists: For I wil confound & kil Popery with Popery (God willing,) after my wōted maner. These are his expresse words;
                     Barthol. Fumus, in verbo, dispensatio.
                   
                  Post factum tamen, dicit archi. Flor. Martinum quintum dispensasse cum quodā, qui cum sua germana contraxerat, & consummauerat, habito tamen prius peritorum consilio propter scandala & alia mala vitanda.
               
               Neuerthelesse, when the deed was done, the Archbishop of Florence affirmeth,
                     Lo, this learned Papist is also on my side.
                   
                  Martin the fift to haue dispensed with one, who had contracted & consummated marriage with his owne naturall sister; after he had the counsel of the learned, for the auoyding of scandall and other euils.
               The third Popish Doctor is Angelus de Clauasio, a very religious Franciscan Frier, and Vicar generall of the Cismontain-Minors; and consequently, a witnesse of good reckoning among the Papists. These are his expresse words; Vnde Dominus archi. Flor. in summa,
                  
                     Angelus de Cla. in verbo, Papa.
                   
                  dicit se audiuisse a fide dignis, quod Papa Martinus quintus, habita consaltatione cum multes doctissimis viris in sacra Theologia & iure Canonico, dispensauìt cum quodam qui acceperat germanam suam in vxorem; propter multa mala & scandala quae euenissent, si eam dimisisset, & quae euitari non poterant, nisi sic dispensaretur.
               
               Wherupon my L. Arch-bishop of Florence in his sūme, affirmeth, that he heard men of good credit say,

that Pope Martin the fift,
                     Lo, this learned Papist is also on my side.
                   after hee had consulted with many very learned diuines & Canonists, dispensed with one that had married his owne naturall and ful sister, to auoyd much euil & scandal which would haue chaunced, if hee had forsaken her, and which could no way be auoyded, but by such a dispensatiō.
               Thus write these three learned Papists, who were religious Friers,
                     Loe, three most famous Papists are on my side, against the Libeller.
                   famous Schoolemen, great diuines, & men of high esteeme & authority, euen in the church of Rome. By whose ioynt and vniforme testimony, it is most true & euident; which I affirmed out of Antoninus, the Popish Archbishop of Florence; viz. that Pope Martin the fift of that name, dispēsed with one who had contracted and consummated matrimony, with his owne naturall and full sister. Whosoeuer is not either blinded with malice, or carried away with partiall affection, cannot for his life, but giue iudgement on my side. But this case will yet be farre more apparant, when I shall haue confuted the Libellers most silly, sottish, and plaine childish reasons, which he in a fooles paradice extolleth aboue the skies. Let vs therfore proceed. The Libeller hath 5. reasons in al, such as they be; which I wil (God willing) propound and examine otothen, framing direct, plaine, & sound solutiōs to the same. Which being effected, I wil soūd alarum against all English Iesuites,
                     Alarum against the Papists.
                   and Iesuited Popelings, as well in England, as throughout the Christian world: and, that the controuersie may be sounded to the bottome; I will euer put downe the Libeller before his reasons, and my name before my answere.
               
                  
                  The Libeller.
                  FIrst therefore I say,
                        
                           The first reason, pa. 35.
                        
                        
                           Truly sayd, I belieue it.
                        
                      that it is nothing preiudiciall to the Catholicke Faith, were it true. For we defend not all the particular facts of any, though Popes. We know, that they may erre, either by wronge information; yea or of wilfull malice.
               
               
                  Thomas Bell.
                  I Answere; first, that I yeeld to the first part of  this answere, so it be taken in a true and godly sence, for so it maketh against the Libeller, but not against my selfe. The reason is euident; because the Popes errors in faith and maners, doe only hurt himselfe and the Papists, who beleeue him and depend vpon him, taking that for the Catholique Church,
                        Ma. 16.18 1. Cor. 3.11 1. Tim. 3.15. which followeth him and beleeueth as he doth. But his Errours are nothing preiudicial to the true Chatholike Church indeed, which is built vpon a most sure rocke, (euen Christ Iesus) & neuer swarueth from the Truth. Secondly, that it is the Libellers best course, not to defend all the  perticular facts of their Popes, for else hee must defend Pope Boniface, who entred into his Popedome as a Foxe, liued in it as a Woolfe,
                        In the dolefull crie of Rome.
                      and dyed out of it as a Dogge. Yea, he must defend much other most execrable & abhominable stuffe, wherof I haue written else where at large. Thirdly,
                     
that he must either defend this fact now in question, (as it shall appeare in the due place, God willing;) or else crie fire and faggot for the Pope, and  so an end. Fourthly, that seeing the pope by popish graunt, may erre by wronge information; it standeth all good Christians in hand, to looke narrowly vnto his fingers, to examine diligently his dealings, and not to venture too boldly vpon his decrees.
                        Vbi supra.
                      For else, they may perhaps, (as I haue prooued elsewhere,) adore and worship damned  spirits, in stead of holy Saints. Fiftly, that seeing the pope by popish graunt, may erre of wilfull malice;
                        O bloody & cruell Tyrant!
                      it must needs be a most intollerable tyrannie, and cruell villanie, to tye mens soules to his decree of faith and manners. For, whether his Holynesse decides matters of wilfull malice, or not; God and his owne conscience onely can tell, all others must remaine perplexed and in suspence,  what to say or thinke thereof. Sixtly, this was such a matter of fact, as concernes saluation; and consequently, if the pope should erre herein, (as vndoubtedly he did,) the Romish faith should be ouerthrowne, and turned vp-side downe. For (as Bellarmine the popes mouth teacheth vs,
                        Bellar. tom. 1. Col. 744. c.
                     ) this is the Romish faith. Non solum in decretis fidei errare non potest summus pontifex, sed neque in preceptis morum quae toti ecclesiae praescribuntur, & quae in rebus necessarijs ad salutem, vel in ijs quae per se bona vel mala sunt, versantur. The pope cannot erre, not only in the decrees of faith, but neither in the

precepts of manners, which are prescribed to the whole Church, and which pertaine to things necessarie vnto saluation, and which of their owne nature are good or euill. Now so it is, that this dispensation of pope Martin, concernes a matter of faith and saluation. For after the popes dispensation, the man was bound to beleeue,
                        O most miserable Papists! How dangerous is the state of your soules
                      that his Sister was his lawfull wife: neither could he haue liued with her as with his wife vnder paine of damnation, if he had beene perswaded otherwise. Here the Libeller filleth vp his Pamphlet, with a long tale of a Prelates Daughter; to no end or purpose at all, but onely for want of matter. For our English Church holdeth not, as their popish Church doth of her popes; that her Bishops cannot erre in the decrees of faith or manners.
               
               
                  The Libeller.
                  SEcondly, I tell him, that his lips haue lashed out too lustily,
                        The secōd reason. pa. 37.
                      and that he hath wickedly slaundred Pope Martin, and most perfidiously corrupted Antoninus. The verie Title of the Chapter might haue taught him, that he was in errour,
                        Sir, you speake like a Pope, but you haue well deserued the Rope.
                      or at least haue giuen him a greater Caueat, better to consider of the matter: for it is de affinitate, of affinitie. And therefore, had the Pope giuen one licence to marrie his owne naturall sister, hee had dispensed in consanguinitie, and so nothing fitting the matter intreated of in that Chapter.
               
               
                  
                  Tho: Bell.
                  I Answere: first, that this silly kinde of reasoning  which the Libeller vseth, sheweth euidently his backe to be at the wall,
                        The Iesuite is at a Nonplus, and in great daunger to loose his wits for sorrow.
                      himselfe at a Nonplus, and his wits not at home. For if Antoninus may not intreat of consanguinite, because the Title of the Chapter is of affinitie: great absurdities may iustly be imputed to many, not onely prophane, but also most holy Writers: euen to those, whose pennes were directed by the holy ghost. For, holy Moses intituled, The first Booke of his Pentatench, (Bereshith) to which Title, the first word only was answerable. S. Mathew semblably, intituled the sacred gospel, (The Booke of the Generation of Iesus Christ:
                     
                        The Iesuite is a fond Doctor, euen a Doctor Doddie poll.
                     ) to which title, one onely part of the first Chapter, is fitly answerable. Yea, the Libeller intituleth his rayling and slaunderous pamphlet, (The Fore-runner of Bels Downefall:) and for all that, small fore running can be found in it, but great store of lyes, slaunders, cosening trickes, and I cannot tell what.
                        Pag. 51. Pag. 25. Nay, he dealeth both with my counterblast, and with my Motiues. So exactly doth this Goodfellow our Iesuite obserue that, to which he more than peremptorily would gladly tye his betters.
                  Secondly, that though Antoninus intreat in  the beginning of the Chapter, de affinitate, of affinitie: yet hath he in the same Chapter one whole

Paragraph, of the Popes power in dispensing, as well with consanguinitie as affinitie.
                        O Noddie, noddy Iesuite.
                      These are Antoninus his owne expresse wordes: In primo gradu affinitatis ascendentium, sicut & consanguinitatis, Papa dispensare non potest:
                     
                        Antonin. 3. pag. tit. 1. Cap. 11. §. 1 
                     quia est contraius diuinum & naturale. Sequitur; item & in linea transuersali, in primo gradu prohibetur matrimonium consanguinitatis & affinitatis iure diuino.
                     
                        Loe, here are the very words in cō
                           trouersie.
                      
                     Vnde nec Papa dispensare potest, etiam quodammodo est contra naturam, vt scz. quis contrahat cum germana sua, vel vxore germani sui eo mortuo. In the first degree of affinitie of ascendents, as also of consanguinitie, the Pope cannot dispense▪ because it is against the law Diuine, and the law of nature. Euen so also in the line transuersall: in the first degree, matrimonie of consanguinitie and affinity is prohibited by the law Diuine. So that the Pope cannot dispense, it being in sort against nature, that one marie his owne naturall sister, (marke these wordes, for they touch the quicke) or the wife of his owne naturall brother, when hee is dead.
                        Loe, hee speaketh of despensing with ones owne naturall sister.
                      Much more Antoninus hath in the same chapter to the same effect; but this may suffice the Reader, to prooue that Antoninus speaketh plainely, and chiefly of the Popes dispensation, by which hee licenseth the brother to marrie his owne sister. Let this be remembred, vntil opportunitie be offered, to speake yet more plainely thereof.
               
               
                  
                  The Libeller.
                  LEt any that is desirous of truth, by this one place take a scantling of Bels holy sinceritie:
                        The third reason, Pag. 39.
                      because he found S. Antoninus to speake of a dispensation graunted to one, after he had married and consummate matrimonie with her,
                        A most notorious lie.
                      whose sister before his marriage he had knowne carnally, and so a dispensation onely in affinitie, contracted by vnlawfull copulation; (for which the Minister, had he beene consulted, would rather haue laughed at him for his simple scrupulositie, then thought it needefull to sue for any such fauour or grace,
                        Here is knauerie in graine. Marke wel the answer.
                     ) which did nothing fit his purpose; and therefore meaning to make it in spight of all honestie to serue his turne, he hath first corrupted the sentence by false translation, saying (with his naturall sister) in stead of these words, (with her naturall sister.) And although euerie one cannot espie his cunning conueyance, because hee suppressed the other part of the sentence following, yet it is apparant ynough to any Gramarian.
                        O shameles Iesuite!
                      For were the Latine as he turneth it, then should it not be, cum quadam eius Germana,
                     
                        O follie of all follies!
                      but cum quadam sua Germana.
                  
               
               
                  Thomas Bell.
                  
                      I Answere: first, that pope Martin dispensed with one,
                        This answere striketh the Libeller at the verie heart.
                      to marrie his owne naturall sister. And I haue alreadie prooued the same, by the flatte,

plaine, and euident verdicts of three famous popish writers: viz. Syluester Prieras, Eartholomaus Fumus, and Angelus de Clauasio. Secondly, that all  the same popish Doctors, did vnderstand Antoninus as I doe. Thirdly, that the same Doctors omitted  the same words following, which I omitted. And the reason is soone rendred: because they are not materiall, and the sentence perfect without them. Fourthly, that my sincere dealing was such (as it hath euer beene in all my Bookes) that I did  not omit or chaunge one word or piece of word, which I found in the Author: though such dealing be too common and vsuall, with the shamelesse Libeller. Fiftly, that I kept the word (eius) still, (because I doe neuer alter any one iote in my Authors,) yet did the three learned papists afore named, chaunge it into (sua.) where I wish the Reader to vnderstand,
                        Who seeth not this proofe too euident?
                      that the Libeller is cleane ouerthrowne in his owne pleading. I prooue it, because he graunteth, that if Antoninus had sayd, (cum Germana sua) and not (eius;) the meaning had beene, as I doe hold. And therefore, seeing so many learned papists did chaunge (eius) into (sua;) it followeth of necessitie, that it must needs be as I say, and not as the Libeller would haue it. To which I adde, that the Libeller, though he seeme to glorie in his skill of Grammar,
                        The Libeller is a poore Gramarian.
                      may goe to schoole againe to learne it better. For albeit, that (eius) may be referred aswel to that which followeth, as to that which goeth before, and (sua) onely

to that which goeth afore, because it is reciprocal, yet may they be vsed mutually in antecedentibus, the one for the other, as I could prooue by infinite authoritie. One onely authoritie I will vse, which cannot but strike the Libeller dead. It is the Latine Vulgata aeditio, which he neither may nor dare denie. It hath in verie many places, eius for sua. It is fiue times at the least,
                        Math. 2. vers. 11.13 14.20.21. in one onely Chapter. So in the 4. Chapter, vers. 21. chap. 10, vers. 3. Luk. 6.14. Act. 16.15. Iob, 5.4. Iob. 14.21. Ezech. 46.17. Psal. 108. vers. 7.9. Prou. 31. vers. 27.28. (eius) and (sua) are vsed indifferently. Sixtly, that the true sense & meaning, may be cleerely gatherd out of Antoninus his owne wordes. For first, he graunteth, (as is alreadie prooued) that the pope cannot dispense with mariage betweene brother and sister. Secondly, because Antoninus sayth, that the learned men with whom the pope consulted,
                        This is a strange reason.
                      cold not agree: some of them holding that he could dispense therewith, others that he could not, who doubtlesse would all haue agreed roundly, that the pope could haue dispensed therewith, if the case had been as the Libeller wold haue it. Wherfore Antoninus, Syluester, Fumus, and Angelus, doe all conclude: that because it is as sacriledge to dispute of the popes power, they must referre the iudgement thereof to God, as being a thing farre aboue the capacitie and reach of man.
                        Fumus in verbo, dispensat. pag. 221. 
                     Fumus hath these wordes: Quando facit, credendum est talem dispensationem esse validam. Cur, Deus ipse nouit:
                     
when such a dispensation is graunted, we must beleeue that it is of force. But why it is so, God onely knoweth. Here I wish the Reader to obserue two memorable things with me: thone against the Libeller, denying the Popes dispensation for marriage betweene brother and sister. Thother, against all papists in general,
                        Poperie is a fond Religion, and a verie hotchpotch of omnigitherum.
                      because they must beleeue the Pope to haue that power, wherof and for which they are not able to yeeld any reason. Fie vpon such Religion. And to make this controuersie out of doubt: let the Reader perswade himselfe vndoubtedly, that great learned papists, euen Cardinall Caietane for one, doe hold it for a constant position, that the pope may dispense with the brother to marrie his owne naturall sister.
                        Fumus, vbi supra.
                      Thus doth Bartholomaeus Fumus write of him, Caietan tamen 2, 2 q. 154. ar. 9. dicit Papam in omnibus gradibus consanguinitatis & affinitatis, nisi cum patre & filia, & matre & filio, posse dispensare. Howbeit Caietane affirmeth,
                        Behold, the Pope taketh vpon him that power, which is proper to God alone. Nauarr. euchir. pag. 515. Caiet. in Leuitic. cap. 18. that the pope can dispense in all the degrees of consanguinitie and affinitie, saue onelie with the father and his daughter, and with the mother and her sonne. It is therefore no strange thing, to charge the pope to graunt licence for mariage between the brother and the sister. Nauarrus that famous popish Canonist, defendeth lustilie the same opinion; yea Cardinall Caietain in his cōmentaries vpon Leuiticus, which he dedicated to pope Clement with the popes good liking and gratefull acceptance,

singeth the same songe.
               
               
                  The Libeller.
                  
                     
                        The fourth reason, pag. 40. O shamelesse and foolish Iesuite!
                     FOr, had one married his naturall sister, as Bell not so confidently as impudently affirmeth; then should it not haue been truly sayd, that he had committed Fornication, but incest; a sinne distinct in nature, and farre more odious in the sight of God.
               
               
                  Tho: Bell.
                  
                      I Answere; first, that if the Libeller were not giuen vp in reprobum sensum,
                     
                        O impudent brasenfaced Parsons!
                      and so linked in couenant with the Diuell, that he must needes striue against the truth: he would neuer so desperately make ship-wracke of his owne soule, wittingly and willingly oppugning that, which his  owne conscience telleth him to be the truth. Secondly, that the sinne of incest is contayned, both in Fornication,
                        Fornicatio strictè & l
                              •
                           gè sumitur.
                      and in Adulterie. For albeit Fornication, stricktly taken, be a sinne distinct in nature from incest and other sinnes of the flesh: yet in a more large and generall acceptance, it compriseth and conteyneth vnder it, all manner sinnes of the flesh. And the same may be truly verified, of Adulterie in like sort. For the Libeller (I ween) wil graunt incest to be prohibited in the Dialogue, vnder the generall name of Adulterie. And for Fornication his own approoued popish Doctors,

shall teach him the truth in this controuersie. Fumus hath these expresse words:
                        Fumus, in verbo Fornicatio.
                      
                     Fornicatio tripliciter capitur: vno modo pro omni peccato, secundum Tho: 22. q. 151. ar. 2. alio modo spiritualiter, pro idololatria, Iere. 5. tertio, pro omni illicito coitu. Proprie tamen accipitur, vt distinguitur contra alias species luxuriae. Fornication is taken three waies: one way, for euerie sinne after the mind of Aquinas. Another way, spiritually, for Idolatrie. Thirdly, for euerie vnlawfull copulation. Yet it is taken properly, as it is distinguished against other kindes of Leacherie.
                  
                     Angelus à Clauasio hath these wordes: Fornicatio est omnis illicitus coitus: vt, 30. q. 2. §. qui ergo.
                     
                        Angel. in verbo fornicatio.
                      
                     Sed proprie fornicatio est inordinatus concubitus naturalis, quo solutus solutam naturali vsu cognoscit. Fornication is euery vnlawful copulatiō: but properly it is that vnordinate natural copulation, in which a single man knoweth a single woman by natural vse. Aboundant testimonies I could alleadge, out of famous popish writers: if it were needfull so to doe. But I will appeale to the verdict of S. Paule, for the vtter confusion of the impudent and shamelesse Iesuite. Amongst the Corinthyans one had comitted most notorious incest; which sinne for all that, the holy Apostle was not afraid to terme fornication.1. Cor. 5. vers. 1. 
                     There goeth a common saying, (sayth S. Paule) that there is Fornication amonge you; and such Fornication, as is not named among the Gentiles; that one should haue his Fathers wife. Thus

sayth S. Paule. The originall word in the Greeke is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ;
                        The Libeller controlleth S. Paul.
                      the Vulgata editio in Latine, approoued by the late popish Councell of Trent, hath the word Fornicatio; Arias Montanus that famous popish Linguist, translateth 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      into Fornicatio; and the Rhemists translate, as I haue Verbatim put downe their words. So then, if Incest cannot truly be termed Fornication, (as our most impudent Libeller auoucheth,) then is not onely Thomas Bell a lyar, but together with him S. Paul also; Arias Montanus; the Rhemists; the Councell of Trent; yea, and the Pope who approoued it; to say nothing of Aquinas, Fumus, and Angelus. But alas, alas, the Libeller may tell the Pope and his Popelings, that his wits fayle him; and that therefore he will henceforth giue ouer all dispute in Theologie, and take a more fit Occupation vppon him. And what is that I pray you? Forsooth to bee a Swine-heard,
                        Ah poore Iesuite: art thou become a Swine-heard?
                      and to keepe the Townes Swine. Where I would as a friend aduise him; to keepe his fingers from stealing, and his tongue from lying. For doubtlesse, if he deale not more honestly in keeping Swine, than he hath done in matters Diuine, I will tell him one thing in good fidelitie, that his best preferment will be the Pillorie.
               
               
                  The Libeller.
                  
                     
                        The fifth reason, pag. 40.
                     NEither could the matter haue been secret, as Antoninus sayth it was, not yet the separation scandalous,

but rather offensiue to haue suffered them to continue together in filthy pretensed matrimonie.
               
               
                  Tho: Bell.
                  I Answer,
                        This cannot with reason be denyed.
                      that this matter might aswell be secret as the Pope of Rome might be a woman, and neuer known till she had a Child. Now, seeing you will needes enforce me, to discouer your Popes shame: I will take the paines for the good of the Reader, to relate the Storie truly, as I finde it in famous popish writers. Marianus Scotus a religious Monke, a learned Diuine,
                        In Chron. an. 854. and a verie famous Historiographer, hath these expresse words; Huic successit Iohanna mulier, annis duobus, mensibus quinque, diebus quatuor. Pope Iohan a woman was successor to Leo, and continued Pope two yeeres, fiue moneths, and foure dayes
                  
                     Sigebertus Gemblacensis,
                     
                        Jn Chron. an. 854. another religious Monke or Friar, hath these expresse words; Fama est hunc Iohannem foeminam fuisse, & vni soli familiart tantum cognitam, qui eam complexus est, & grauida facta peperit Papa existens: quare eam non numerant quidam inter pontifices. The same is, that this Iohn was a woman, knowne onely to one sole familiar friend, who embraced her, and she being bigge with child laboured in time of her Popedome; for which respect, some do not reckon her among the Popes.
                  
                     Martinus Polonus, a Popish Arch-bishop, and

the Popes owne deere Paenitentiarie, hath these expresse wordes;
                        An. 855. 
                     Post hunc Leonem, Iohannes Anglus Moguntinus sed
                           •
                        t annis duobus, mensibus quinque, diebus quatuor. Hic, vt asseritur, foemina suit, &c. After this Leo, Iohn who was reported to be a woman, liued in the Popedome two yeres, fiue moneths, and foure dayes.
                  
                     
                        An. 858.
                     Iacobus Phillippus Bergomensis, a religious Heremite, and a famous Historiographer, affirmeth the same doctrine with the rest. And both this Bergomensis and Polonus tell vs for a truth, that this woman Pope or popish woman laboured sodainly, as she went in procession from Vatican to Lateran, betweene Colisaeus and S. Clement, where she died and was buried without all honour. In detestation of which fact: the Popes since that time, refuse to goe that way in procession.
                  
                     
                        In summa conc. pag. 334.
                     Bartholomaeus Caranza, a Dominican Friar, affirmeth this woman to haue belyed her sexe, and by euill meanes to haue aspired to the Popedome.
                  
                     Matthaeus Palmerius, (who continued the chronicle of S. Hierome,
                     
                        Matthae Palmer. Florent.
                      vntill the yeere 1449.) standeth wholy for the truth of the same Historie.
                  
                     Baptisia surnamed Platina, a most learned papist, and of such esteeme with the popes,
                        Platina in vita Ioh. 8. cap. 134. that he was made Apostolicus Abbreuiator, relateth the storie of our holy mistresse pope, Iohn that womanly pope, euen in the same wordes with Martinus Polonus, and Iacobus Phillippus Bergomensis.
                  
                  Thus the indifferent Reader may behold and

perceiue as clerely as the sunne-shining at noone day: that by the testimonie of seuen learned papists, (who were all of them in high esteeme euen in the Church of Rome,) one of their popes was a woman, yea, a verie strumpet, filthy whore, and most detestable drabbe; so as from her no lawfull authoritie, no true orders, no publique Doctrine, no true sacrament could be had? For by S. Paules constant Doctrine, (which must needes be of credite against our mistresse Pope) no woman can haue publique regiment in the Church.1. Tim. 2. vers. 11, 12 And consequently, it being true, (which so many Papists of great note in the romish church affirme for truth,) Poperie must needs thereby receiue a markeable and most deadly wound: yea, be ouerthrowne and turned vpside downe. And the truth of the storie, may yet be more strongely confirmed, if neede shall so require.
                        In annot. Ioh. 8. For Onuphrius Panuinius in his Commentaries vpon Bap. Platina, when he hath sayd all that possibly hee could say, for the good pleasure and contentation of the Pope, (to whose Holynesse he dedicated his holy labours,) confesseth freely, (because the truth it selfe enforced the Friar to speake the truth,
                        Marke the Fryars confession; for it is wonderfull.
                     ) that not onely the common people, but men also of high esteeme, and many in number, did receiue the Storie of our holy mistresse woman-pope, as true and authenticall. And the silly euasion, which he like a flattering Fryar vseth, is not worth the hearing. I adde hereunto, as a memorable post-past, that this storie

of Iohn their woman Pope, is publiquely painted, and this day to bee seene, in the Cathedrall Church of Scyenna, or Sena. Which painting did so goare and gall our newly hatched Iesuites,
                        The Iesuits are a newely hatched Sect.
                      (whose sect was not known in the world, for the space of fifteene hundred and fourtie yeeres after Christ,) that they laboured with might and maine (as I heard by credible report,) to haue had that storie defaced, in the late repairing of that Church; but the Cardinal being the chefe there, would not suffer them to haue their hearts desire in that behalfe. And doubtlesse, the Reader cannot but perswade himselfe: that seauen famous popish Historiographers,
                        Let this be verie well noted, as a thing of verie great consequence
                      (who liued a long time one after another,) would neuer haue published one and the selfe same storie to the view of the whole world, (especially such a storie, as brought vtter shame, confusion, and ruine, to their Popes, themselues, and their popish religion,) if any one of them cold in his life-time, haue learned the contrarie to bee the truth. Nay, the popes (who most cruelly and tyrannically burne both the Bookes and their authors, when they make against them and their poperie,) would neuer haue suffered such Bookes to remaine vnburnt to these our daies,
                        A reason insoluble, which striketh the papists at the heart.
                      for a constant and euident testimonie against them and their patched religion; if the vnsearchable wisedome of God had not so ordained, for the vtter shame, confusion, and desolation, of late vpstart romish Doctrine.
               
               
                  
                  The Corollarie.
                  FIrst therefore, seeing three famous popish Writers, (viz. Syluester Prieras, Bartholomaeus  Fumus, and Angelus de Clauasio,
                     
                        Marke this point of verie great importance.
                      doe all constantly and with vniforme assent affirme, auouch, and publish in print to the view of the whole world; that Pope Martin graunted license to the brother, to marrie his owne naturall sister; Secondly, seeing the selfe-same popish Doctors doe constantly hold and affirme, that the popish Archbishop Antoninus did relate the same before them; Thirdly, seeing the Libeller himselfe confesseth, that if the word (sua) had beene in Antoninus for that the word (eius,) then the sence had beene as I affirme; Fourthly, seeing all the aforenamed writers, 
                     Syluester, Fumus, and Angelus, doe constantly and vniformely vse the same word (sua) for the word (eius) in Antoninus; Fiftly, seeing the reasons which the Libeller bringeth for his grounds, are verie silly ones and of no force at all; Sixtly, seeing their renowned Cardinall Caietanus,
                     
                        If this power be not proper to God alone, let others iudge.
                      and their famous Canonist Nauarrus, doe resolutely hold and affirme, that the pope hath power to dispence with all manner of persons in the contract of matrimonie, the father with his daughter, and the mother with her sonne onely excepted; Seauenthly, seeing Antoninus, Syluester, Fumus, and  
                     Angelus, dare not counsell the pope to giue such

dispensations, because they deeme it to be a thing vnlawfull; yet are they so fearefull to censure the Popes dealing therein,
                        O foolish papists, how hath Satan seduced you?
                      (because it is holden as sacriledge to dispute of his power;) that after the fact be committed, they affirme the Popes doing to be lawfull and of force, albeit they haue neither ground nor reason for the same; I cannot but conclude, and affirme it for an vndoubted truth, that the Pope taketh vpon him that power, which is proper to God alone. And consequently, that our Libeller (Robert Parsons that shamelesse and impudent Iesuite,) is a most notorious lyar, and in regard of his manifold slaunders, corruptions, lyes, and cozening trickes, well worthy to gaine the pillotie for his iust reward.
               
            
         
         
            
            A FRESH LARVM OR NEW CHALLENGE, to all English Iesuites and Iesuited Papists in the vniuersall World, tagge and ragge none at all excepted, whosoeuer shall appeare in the shape of man.
            
               I Here make a new and fresh Challenge, to all English Iesuites and Iesuited papists whosoeuer and wheresoeuer they bee; not to cassiere, retract, denie,
                  I am most willing to performe euerie Challenge, as I desire to be saued. Would God any Papist durst encounter me.
                or call backe any of the former Challenges, (as who most hartily and earnestly desire the true perfourmance of them all, and will for mine owne part omit nothing that can be wished in that behalfe,) but that all the world may know the euident truth to be on my side, and that I am innocent and free from those notorious slaunders, with which the shamelesse Libeller chargeth me; as also that it may be knowne to al languages, people,

and nations, that the Iesuits and Iesuited popelings, are condemned in their owne consciences, & haue now no other shift or means in the world, but to face out the matter with flat lyes, notorious slaunders,
                  A sillie shift in deede.
                and deepe cozenage; albeit this be the meanest, and the silliest shift of all others. I therefore challenge all English Iesuites and Iesuited papists ioyntly and seuerally to laye their heades and wittes together, and to choose out some one among them all, whome they shall thinke the fittest for learning and courage to take the quarrell in hand; and that done, to put down his name and addition in print, so to make it knowne vnto the world, that he is willing and readie to answere the Challenge; viz. either to iustifie all the assertions contayned in the Fore-runner,
                  If none of them dare vnder-goe this Challenge, who will not detest poperie? none doubtlesse that hath either conscience, sense, or reason.
                or at the least two of the same; that is to say, that more bold than wise assertion, which chargeth me to haue belyed Iosephus Angles, touching the condigne merite of workes. And that other audacious and plaine Antichristian speech, which diabolically chargeth me to haue slaundered Pope Martin, concerning his license for marriage between the brother and his owne naturall sister. And if any one Iesuite or Iesuited papist whosoeuer, either in England or elsewhere, shall haue courage to vndertake the Challenge, and so valiantly to encounter me, viua voce, for the due, sinceere, and sound tryall of the Fore-runners answere to Bels Downefall, as hee tearmeth it; I promise, (as I will answere God and

intend to bee saued,) vpon the receit of notice giuen thereof in print in manner aforesayd, to doe so much as in me lyeth,
                  If the Papists will not accept and perfourme this Challenge, all carefull of their saluation, will forsake thē.
                to procure a safe conduct for the safe comming, safe abiding, and safe departure of him, (whosoeuer he be) that shall accept and vndertake the true performance of the Challenge, in manner aforesayd. Now, if no papist in all the world, shall haue courage to defend this short answere, which is but an answere to some odde sentences and pieces of my Bookes, and of those pieces which themselues haue made choyse of, and in their best iudgement singled out, as the weakest parts and thinges of least force; I cannot but perswade my selfe, that all the world knowing and hearing of their dastardly cowardnesse in defending their Religion, will forthwith acquit and discharge me of their notorious lyes, cozenage, and slaunders; and withall, detest as the deadly poyson of their immortall soules, their lyes; their iugling; their slaunders; their legierdemaine, and their vsuall cozening trickes; wherewith they haue a long time seduced, deceiued, and bewitched, a great part of the Christian world The Libeller in one place, chargeth mee thus; Be it known to him, that he belyeth Iosephus,
               
                  pag. 45. Marke the end of all. pag. 37. The Diuell is a lyar, and the Libeller his Brother.
                for no such thing as he noteth, can bee wronge, racked, or coniured out of his wordes. Againe, in another place he chargeth me in this manner; I tell him, his lippes haue lashed out too lustily, and that he hath wickedly slaundered Pope Martin.
               
Where the Reader may see euidently, that I am peremptorily charged, as a most notorious Malefactor, with two heynous crimes; viz. to haue belyed Iosephus Angles, and to haue wickedly slandered Pope Martin. Well, if I be found nocent and guiltie of these two most heynous crimes; then let all the people and nations spit in my face, and speake their full pleasures on me, in Gods holy name. But on the other side; if either no papist dare appeare to performe and answere the Challenge, (and to speake plaine English, I thinke it will so fall out;) or if some foole-hardie Iesuited papist shall appeare, who shall fayle in defending the cause, and be ouerthrowne in his owne pleading, (which doubtlesse is the best end, that can fall on their side;) then I hope, the people will spit in his face; and not that onely, but also detest him, the pope, and all late vpstart Romish Religion, Amen.
            
            The Popes necke is alreadie broken; his funerall is prepared; and no remedie, but he must in all hast be interred. And doubtlesse, if euer this future expected Challenge, come once to handstrokes and valiant bickering, viua voce; the whole crew of Iesuites and Iesuited papists, will thereby receiue such mortall woundes, that they must shortly be interred after their pope.
            If any Iesuit or Iesuited papist now in England, (wheof there is good store) haue any hart and corage to defēd their Fore-runner, let him signifie so

much in manner required in my Challenge, that we may grapple together viua voce, while I am in London. They are so earnest to know my reply, that (as I heare,) they fetch euerie proofe from the presse, assoone as it is readie. If none of them dareth this performe, then may all the rest perswade themselues, that they hange their soules vpon them, who are not able to defend that, which they force them to beleeue. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
         
         
            
            
            A Caueet, or Christian admonition to the Reader.
            
               AFter my Reply against a shamelesse Libel, intituled the Fore-runner of Bels downe-fall, was sent to the the Presse, beeing authorized by higher powers to bee imprinted; a sincere Christiā of good esteeme, (the Lord of Heauen and earth reward his godly zeale,) acquainted me with a new Fore-runner of Bels downefall, (so eagerly doe the Papists wish my downe-fall,) with this newe addition in the Title. The second time set forth, and such faults corrected as escaped in the first Print, as in the Preface is declared. To this second Fore-runner of Antichrist, and to the Catch-poll of Satan, the Preface addressed for an ornament in that behalfe; I haue deemed it Operaepertium, to adde a briefe censure therunto, for the instruction and necessarie satisfaction of the godly and well affected Reader; albeit it came so lately to my hands, as very hardly I could effect the same. A great wonderment it is to mee, (and if I be not deceiued,) to all the Sages and wise men of the Christian world; what should moue the Author of the Fore-runner, so suddenly to set foorth a second Fore-runner immediately after the former. If I may diuine, and without offence to the Popes holinesse, & the grauitie of his sanctified Popelings, this is the true cause indeed; & not that with which the Libeller would gladly dazell the eyes of his Reader, viz. The Iesuits who rule and ouer-rule all papists in ye
                world, (I dare not say the Pope himself.)

& who haue their spies in euery corner of this land, hauing receiued intelligence by their saide Spies, that I was in hand with a Reply or answere to their saide Fore-runner, and their owne consciences withall condemning them, and telling them that they are not able to endure the force and truth of my reply, haue laid their heads together, & deuised the best shift they could to seduce the simple papists which depend vpon them, and hang the saluation of their soules vpon their shoulders. For thus the case standeth with them. They may not read any Booke, no, nor heare any read vnto them, which either my selfe or any other good Christian shall set forth against the Pope, or any one iote of Popish religion. If otherwise, the partie that shall so doe, (vnlesse hee haue the Popes dispensation,) is excommunicated Ipso facto, deliuered vp to Satan, and cast out of the Popish Church.
            Now sir, when these simple and sillie Papists, (alas, alas, for pitty, shall heare of my Reply, and shall tell the Iesuits and Iesuited Priests, what report flyeth abroad of the condemnation of their Fore-runner and Religion, they will tell them roundly a tale of Robin Hood, and little Iohn: viz. That I haue not answered their Booke at all, but another counterfeit Pamphlet deuised by mine owne braine. This to be so, I proue by a triple meane.
            
                First, because the Libeller denyeth to acknowledge hat Pamphlet to be his owne, against which I haue framed my Replye.
            
                Secondly, because the second Fore-runner is

in euery Chapter, in euery Page, in euery sentence and Period, the very same in true sense and meaning, with the former Fore-runner, of Bels downfall: yea, so many faults haue escaped in the latter Print, as in the first.
            To which I must needes adde, that as I did not once touch their faults escaped in the first Print, no more doe I say any thing against the faultes escaped in the second Print. For I doe and euer did scorne to take any aduantage against the Author, by reason of that which chanceth through the default of the Printer.
            Thirdly, because himselfe freely granteth, that he  doth not so much lamēt the losse of the books of the first Print,
                  
                     Loe, the Libeller wisheth that all his bookes had beene burnt.
                  
                  
                     In the Preface of the second Fore-runner.
                  
                as it grieueth him to think yt
                any be escaped to carry newes vnto Bel. And why, (I pray you) doth he desire and wish, that all his books had bene burnt, and yt none of thē had escaped to bring newes to Bel? doubtlesse, because his own conscience condemned him for that silly patched answere which hee had framed against Bell, & which he knew himselfe very vnable to defend. And for that end, if all the Copies had beene consumed vp of Vulcan, he would haue rested in peace, and neuer haue bickered with Bel at all. Marry, seeing all the Copies, could no way bee kept from Bels knowledge, hee thought it a matter of great consequence & pollicie, to inuent some cozening trick & point of legierdemain, by help wherof he might set such a braue face on the matter, as though he were innocent, and no

way to be touched. This is the first point, which I haue thought good to intimate to the Reader.
            The Libeller in one place of his first Fore-runner telleth vs,
                  Page 25. that wee shall haue more choyse of wares at the next Mart: and in another place he affirmeth, that by the next Poste we shall know more of his meaning. Now sir, both the next Poste is come,
                  Page. 30. and the next Mart is past, and yet haue wee receiued no other wares, nor any further meaning, saue that onely which is already touched. The Libeller therefore must perforce, either confesse that this cozening tricke and point of Legierdemaine, was the thing which hee intended: or else, that he is a notorious lyar. Vtrūhorum mavis, accipe, gentle Fore-runner. This is the second point, which I haue obserued for the good of the Reader.
            The Libeller in his second Fore-runner, telleth his Reader, that vnlesse I stay my selfe from answering him,
                  In the Preface.
                vntill I heare another manner of peale rung of fiue Bels, hee will commend mee to my friends for a wrangler, and contemne me for a captious cauelling companion. Oh sweete Iesus, what maner of people are our English Iesuits, and other Iesuited Popelings? My Bookes haue beene in their hands many yeares: they haue volued and reuolued them; they haue read and perused them againe and againe; they haue tossed and turned them ouer and ouer: they haue a long time borne all simple Papists in hands, that my books haue bene answered many yeares agoe.
            
               To which most impudent and false assertion, the sillie ignorant Papists (who dare not once reade or turne ouer one leafe of any booke, which looketh awry against the Pope or popish doctrine,) haue giuē such credite, that they haue audaciously affirmed to my face, that my bookes were answered by the Iesuites. Although (such is the force of truth,) the libeller both in his first & second forerunner, cōfesseth plainly without all dissimulation,
                  Pag. 15. Pag. 18.) which is not his vsuall maner,) that albeit my bookes haue fiue yeares agoe, (if his tongue were not a lyar, I would belieue it,) receiued their answere, yet is that answere hitherto suppressed vpon iust occasion. Now, if you demand of me what occasion that is, I knowe not doubtlesse how to answere you more truly, then in this plaine and simple maner. viz. That either they haue no answere at all in store; or else that it is such a sillie one, that they are ashamed to publish it; or at the least, that the answere which they speake of, is meere & deepe silēce. And so I grant willingly,
                  Silence is the answere to my bookes.
                that my books haue receiued their answere in very deede. For as they haue hitherto answered me with silence, so I thinke they mean to do in future times; vnlesse perhaps they purpose to publish some sillie counterfeit answere, after it shall please God to call me to his mercie, and to take me out of this vale of mortalitie. For indeed they haue no reall answere in store, as I haue proued out of their own bookes; which the indifferent Reader will perceiue with all facilitie, in due peruse of this my present discourse: This is the third point,
                  In the preface of the second Fore-runner.
                which the gentle Reader is to obserue.
            The Libeller telleth his Reader, (if hee may beleeue

him,) that in this spirituall fight we haue the aduantage of the ground, and they both sunne and wind against them. And the Iesuits with their Iesuited Popelings, doe often complaine of the inequalitie of time. But it is a false complaint, and wholy swaruing from the truth, in this present case of writing & publishing of bookes. For first, they are many, and my selfe but one. Secondly, they either al or the best learned amongst them, haue consulted and laid their heades and wits together, how and in what sort to answere me; as I haue already proued, in this short discourse. But my selfe haue consulted with none saue onely with God alone;
                  They are more able to buy bookes, then I am: for else I would haue better store, then yet I baac.
                how or in what sort to writ against thē, as I protest vpō my saluatiō. Thirdly, they haue better store of bookes, (though they complaine of want therein, so to saue their credite if it would be,) then I either haue, or am able any way to procure. I proue it many waies. First, because the Iesuites in other countries haue most excellent Libraries, & are indeed many of them very profound & learned men. By meanes whereof, our English Iesuites are able to write and publish moe bookes in three moneths, then my self can do in three whole yeares, if the truth were on their sides. For their father generall, hath all the Iesuites in the world at his cōmand: who must lay their heades and wits together to doe at a becke whatsoeuer hee shall designe to be done. Hence commeth it, that our English Iesuites haue written and published, & this day doe write & publish bookes at their good pleasure. But the truth doth and will preuaile, maugre their malice, and in spight of the diuell. Secondly, the Iesuits haue all the Libraries

of all the Papists in this land, to vse them at their pleasures and commaunds. Thirdly, the Iesuits can command the purses of the ablest and richest Papists in this kingdome, for the prouision and buying of all such bookes as they desire. Fourthly, they can haue what bookes they will to be sent out of other countries to them. Fiftly, they haue such store of Gold and mony, that (as the secular Priests their brethren write of them,) the Iesuite Garnets pompe & expēces amounted yearely, to fiue hundred pounds at the least. The extraordinarie excesse of Iohn Gerard that gallant and swaggering Iesuite, was valued at an higher rate, then the priests could for shame expresse: the horses of the same Gerard were many, and of no small price. He had two Geldings in a Gentlemans stable, at 30. pounds a Gelding, besides other elsewhere, and horses of good vse.
                  All this is proued at large in my anatomie.
                When he was Prisoner in the Clinke, he rode into the countrie at his own pleasure, (oh grieuous imprisonment,) and he maintained two horses in the towne, with seruants in them continually. The apparell of the Iesuite Oldcorne, (though but a pettie Iesuite,) was seldome lesse worth, then thirtie or fortie poundes. Beside hee had eight good geldings, at one and the selfe same time. Another Iesuite had a girdle & hangers, at the price of thirtie pounds. O braue Iesuites. O poore begging Fryers. Where is that pouertie, which you professe? the Iesuite Holt and his companions gathered of the Papists in this Realme,50000. pounds giuen for dispensations.
                the full summe of fiftie thousand pounds for English dispensations; which (as the secular Priests their brethren doe reckon it) make two hundred millions of Italian scuts. Al this which I here affirme of the gallantrie of

our poore begging Fryers the Iesuites, is to be seene in my anatomie of popish tyrannie; euen verbatim, as it came from the Pennes of the Popish Seminary-Priest. Which I haue for this end here inserted, that the Reader may the better vnderstand that in equalitie of time, whereof the Libeller complaineth in the preface of his second Fore-runner.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   