
      
         
            
            
            THE
DOVVNEFALL
OF POPERIE: Proposed by way of a new challenge to
all English Iesuits and Iesuited or Italianized papists:
daring them all iointly, and euery one of them seuerally,
to make answere thereunto if they can, or haue any truth on
their side; knowing for a truth that otherwise all
the world will crie with open mouths, Fie
vpon them, and their patched hotchpotch
religion.
            
               Psal. 116. vers. 10.
               Credidi, propter quod loquutus sum.
            
            LONDON.
Printed by A. Jslip, for Arthur Iohnson:
and are to be sold at the signe of the
White Horse, ouer against the great
North doore of Paules.
1604.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST PVissant,
Wise, Vertuous, Learned,
Iudicious, and Religious Monarch, James,
by Gods permission and holy ordinance, king of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, defendour of the
auncient Christian Catholike faith, and supreme gouernour
within his said Realmes, Kingdomes, Territotories,
and Dominions, next and immediately
vnder God, ouer all persons
and causes, as well Ecclesiasticall
as Ciuile.
            
               THe Truth is of such force (most gracious
and dread Soueraigne) that it
hath enforced the professed enemies
of truth (the cursed brood of English
traitorous Iesuits and Iesuited
papists I meane) to testifie the truth
against themselues. The secular Seminarie priests (the
Popes owne deere vassals, who professe the selfesame

religion with the Iesuits, and yeeld the selfe same obedience
to the Pope,) tell vs plainly in printed bookes
puplished to the view of the whole world (a thing verie
rare and greatly to bee admired) of such brutish,
barbarous, cruell, villanous, traytorous, and most
bloodie dealing, practised not onely by their deere
brethren the Iesuites, but euen by themselues also,
though not in one or the same degree; that my selfe
doubtlesse could neuer haue giuen credit thereunto, if
their owne selues had not so written, and so testified
against themselues. They affirme constantly, in many
printed bookes published to the view of the whole
world, that the Iesuits by treacherous practises and
most bloodie complots, haue long sought for the vtter
ruine and conquest of noble England, and that
their owne hearts and hands had sometime beene imbrewed
with the same. They affirme against the Iesuits:
First, that they are great lyers. Secondly, that
they are proud men, richly apparelled, furnished with
coaches, and attended on with a great traine of seruingmen,
as if they were Barrons or Earles: Yea,
it is constantly auouched, that the Iesuit Gerard had
two geldings in a gentlemans stable, at thirtie pounds
a gelding, besides others else where, and horses of
good vse. It is also set downe in print, that a Iesuit
had a girdle and hangers of thirtie pound price. Thirdly,
that they trowle vp and downe from good cheere
to good cheere, commaunding their chambers to bee
perfumed, and gentlewomen to pull off their boots.
Fourthly, that they are great statesmen, and that matters
of state, titles of princes, genealogies of kings,

right of succession, disposing of scepters, with other
matters of like qualitie, are their chiefe studies. Fiftly,
that they threaten a conquest, and promise great
preferment to all that will execute their most traitorous
designements. Sixtly, that they are cruell
tyrants, and firebrands of all sedition. Seuenthly,
that they are theeues and murderers, and that the
Iesuit Percie stole seuen and twentie pound of the
common money, by the consent of the other his
fellow Iesuits. Eightly, that they haue a mint of
counterfeit miracles, with which they labour to
seduce the world: Yea, that they endeuoured with
a false miracle, to persuade Sebastian the late king
of Portugall, to establish a setled law, That from
thence forward none might bee capable of the
crowne of Portugall, except hee were a Iesuit,
or chosen by their societie, as at Rome the Pope
is chosen by the Colledge of Cardinals. Nninthly,
that the Iesuits are right Machiauels, and that whosoeuer
will adhere vnto thē, must depend vpon the
deuil of hell. Tenthly, that the Iesuits are flat cousiners;
and that their religion is nothing else, but an
hotchpotch of omnigitherum. And to knit vp all in a
word, that they are the wickedst men vpon earth.
            They confesse against themselues: first, that
Sanders a secular priest, was the architect of religion,
both in England and in Ireland. Secondly,
that the same Sanders did too much extoll
the rebels, seeing they were executed by the
auncient lawes of our countrey, for high treason.
Thirdly, that the Iesuits came into England by the

instinct of the deuill, and were the chiefest instruments
of all traitorous practises against our late
Soueraine of most happie memorie. Fourthly,
that popish Seminaries are erected for treason. Fiftly,
that the Iesuits and the secular priests expected
a chaunge, which now they haue indeed; but
God bee thanked, to their euerlasting woe and
griefe. Sixtly, that the Seminarie priests are sworne
to be traytours against their dread Soueraigne and
natiue countrey. Seuenthly, that all Iesuited papists
must depend vpon the deuill. Eightly, that poperie
is inseparably annexed with treason. Ninthly,
that the hearts and hands of the secular priests,
had sometime beene as deepe in treasonable practises,
as the cursed crew of Iesuits. Tenthly, that
the lawes of the land are iustly made, both against
the Iesuits and themselues; and that they
are not put to death for religion, but for treason.
Eleuenthly, that long hidden treasons are miraculously
reuealed, God so appointing it to be done.
All these asseuerations to be true, (most dread Soueraine)
I am readie to iustifie out of their owne
printed bookes, euen vpon the perill of my life:
if any of them vpon the like perill, will challenge
mee to haue charged them falsly in that behalfe.
This notwithstandlng, the Iesuits, Seminaries, and
other Iesuited papists, doe still expect a tolleration,
to liue as they list, within your Maiesties kingdomes
and dominions; that is in plaine English,
to bee rancke traytours as they haue beene. For
this end they neuer cease to buzze into mens

heads and eares (so to withdraw them from their
due allegeance, and to become popish vassals)
that the next parliament, they shall not faile of
their desire. Against this cursed brood, I haue published
many bookes; but to this day, could I not
receiue answere to any of them all. Neither can
they alledge for their excuse, that they haue not
seene my bookes, or else they would haue answered
the same. For, about a yeere agoe the
masked Iesuit E. O. did publish a treatise against
two learned writers of this age,
                  Viz. Against M. D. Sutcliffe and M. Willet. in which he taketh
notice to the bookes which I have published
against them, and their late vpstart Romish
religion; which by piece meale, and by little and little
hath crept into the Church, as I haue prooued
at large in my former volumes.
            These are the expresse wordes of the masked
Iesuit;In his Preface to the reader. To these former, I was once determined
to haue adioined a reformed brother of theirs, one
Thomas Bell, who hath published certaine bookes
against the Catholicke Church, and vaunteth
mightily, and with insolent words braueth all Seminaries:
but I altered my purpose, partly vpon
other considerations, but especially, because the
confutation of his worthy workes is alreadie vndertaken,
and to bee published, if it shall bee
thought necessarie.
            Thus doth the Iesuit write. By whose wordes
it is very apparant, cleere, and euident, that they
haue beene many yeeres buzzing about some answere,
either to all or some one of my bookes;

but neuer yet durst aduenture to frame any answere
to any one of the said bookes, and to publish
it to the view of the world. Their silence in
not answering my said bookes, hath reclaimed many
a man from their popish faction: and therefore
would they gladly haue the the world to thinke,
that they are in mind to answere my said bookes,
but they seeme to meane nothing lesse in deed:
and why? hee telleth vs forsooth, That the confutation
which hath beene long vndertaken, must
be published, but with this addition, (If it shall be
thought necessarie.) What a iest is this? the Iesuits
and Seminarie priests, haue consulted now for the
space of eight yeeres and aboue, and haue all that
time deuised how to frame some colourable answere
at the least, to all or some of the said bookes;
and in the end of the yeere, 1602, haue vndertaken
the confutation of my worthy workes (as they
scornefully tearme them;) but for all that cannot
yet tell, whether it be expedient to publish the said
confutation, or no. Are these men the great Statists
of the world? are these men the skilfull Polititians
that must manage all Europe? are these our learned
Diuines? are these they indeed, vpon whose doctrin
and guiding all Lay-papists do depend, and on their
shoulders do hang their soules and saluation? doubtlesse,
they may preach this goodly sermon to wise
men, but onely noddies and starke fooles will beleeue
them. In regard hereof (most dread Soueraigne)
and because I greatly desire once during my
life, to receiue answere to some part of my labours

published against our English Iesuited papists, that
so wee may valianly fight the combat, my selfe so
hauing occasion to reply vpon their answere, which
would bee to mee melle & fauo dulcius; I haue
compiled and couched in a small roome, a fewe
distinct articles: for answere whereunto, I once
againe challenge Robert Persons that traitorous Iesuit;
George Blackwell that seditious and late start-vp
archpriest; and all other English Iesuits, Seminarie
priests, and Iesuited papists, whosoeuer
and wheresoeuer, ioyntly and seuerally; daring
them all ioyntly, and euerie one of them seuerally,
to answere either all my bookes, or some
one of them, or these few articles; or at least
to confesse plainely, that they cannot answere,
because I hold and defend the truth. These my
late studies (most gratious Soueraigne) I haue
presumed to dedicate vnto your Maiestie, in congratulation
of your most happie raigne ouer vs;
whom God of his great mercie hath raised vp in
our greatest necessitie, to continue his holy Gospell
among vs, and to abolish all idolatrie and superstition
out of his Church. It is not such a present
I confesse, as beseemeth your most royall
excellencie; yet such a one, as my small talent
is able to affoord: I most humbly beseech your
Highnesse for to accept it, as our Lord Iesus
Christ did accept the two mytes of the poore
widdow; and withall for to protect and patronize
the same, against the traitorous Iesuits and

Iesuited papists within your Maiesties Realmes;
who seeke by might and maine (as I am credibly
informed) not onely to impaire my good
fame and name with their malicious tongues, but
also to take away my life with their bloodie
hands. The Almightie blesse your Maiestie with
long, prosperous, and happie raigne in this world,
and with euerlasting life in the world to
come, Amen. From my studie
this fourteenth of Ianuarie.
1603.
            
               Your Maiesties loyall subiect,
and faithfull seruant,
Thomas Bell.
            
         
         
            
            To all English Iesuits, Seminarie
priests, and Iesuited papists,
in England, Scotland, or
wheresoeuer els.
            
               I Haue written many times at
large in larger volumes,In my Motiues, booke 2. chap. 1. heartily
and instantlie desiring to haue
receiued some answere from you,
either from all ioyntly, or from
some of you seuerallie. In my
first booke, published in the yeare
1593, I promised to yeeld, if any of you could conuince
me; either to haue alleadged any writer corruptlie, or
to haue quoted any place guilefullie, or to haue charged
any author falslie: since that time I haue challenged
you againe and againe to answere me, but Ne gry quidem
will be had; no answere can you make, or dare you
make. In regard hereof, I haue at this present compiled
a few articles couched in a small roome, challenging
you once againe, to frame the best answere you can vnto
the same: if you can sieceerelie and trulie confute these
articles, or any one of my former bookes, I promise
herewith (and I protest before God to performe it) to
subscribe vnto your doctrine. If you therefore shall refuse

to answere me, because you cannot, (for if you
can, you will vndoubtedlie performe it) all wise men
which haue any care of their saluation, will without all
peraduenture after notice hereof made knowen vnto
them, crie, Fie vpon you and your religion. Answere
therefore ô papists, if ye can; if ye cannot so
doe, then repent for shame, and
yeeld vnto the truth.
Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST ARTICLE,
of the falsely so supposed soueraignetie
of the Bishop of Rome.
            
               YOu Papists tell vs, that your
Pope, the Bishop of Rome,
is aboue all powers and potentates
on earth, that he
can depose kings and emperours
from their royall
thrones, and translate their
empires and regalities at his
good will and pleasure. But
this doctrine is false, absurd,
and nothing els but a meere fable: and consequently,
late Romish religion consisteth of meere falshoods, fables,
and flat leasings.
            The proposition, the Iesuit Bellarmine that late Romish
Cardinall,Bellarm. lib. 5. de Rom. pont. ca. 7. col. 824. setteth downe in these words: Si ergo princeps
aliquis ex oue aut ariete fiat lupus, id est, ex Christiano fiat haereticus,
poterit pastor ecclesiae eum arcere per excommunicationem, &
simul iubere populo, ne eum sequantur, ac proinde priuare eum dominio
in subditos.
            
            If therefore any prince, of a sheepe or ramme become
a wolfe, that is to say, of a Christian be made an heretick;
then the pastors of the Church (the Pope forsooth) may

driue him away by excommunication, and withall commaund
the people not to obey him, and therfore depriue
him of his dominion ouer his subiects. Thus we see, that
when any prince is not, or ceaseth to be a Papist, for that
(with this Iesuiticall Cardinall and all others of his brood)
is to be an hereticke; then the Pope forsooth may depose
such a prince from his royall scepter, and absolue
his subiects from their alleageance to him. This is the
common doctrine of all Iesuited papists, as I haue proued
in my anatomie of Popish tyrannie.
            The assumption is prooued by the flat testimonie of
their famous Pope Gregorie the great,Gregor. lib. 2. epist. 61. cap. 100 in these words: Ego
quidem iussioni subiectus, eandem legem per diuersas terrarum
partes transmittifeci; & quia lex ipsa omnipotenti deo minime concordat,
ecce, per suggestionis meae paginam, serenissimis dominis
nunciaui; vtrobique ergo quae debui exolui, qui & imperatori obedientiam
praebui, & pro deo quod sensi, minimè tacui.
            
            I being your subiect, and at your commaund, haue
caused the same law to be sent through diuerse parts of
the land; and because the law it selfe doth not accord to
Gods will, behold, I haue signified so much vnto your maiesties
by my epistle; and so I haue discharged my dutie
in both respects, as who haue rendered mine obedience
to the emperour, and haue not concealed what I thought
in Gods behalfe.
            These are the words of Gregorius, who was himselfe bishop
of Rome anno 603. and liued aboue six hundred
yeares after Christ; for which time the Popes liued in dutifull
obedience vnder the emperours, as is euident by
his expresse words alreadie alleaged: For first, Pope Gregorie
freely and willingly acknowledgeth the emperour to
be his soueraigne lord.
            Secondly, he confesseth himselfe to be the emperours
subiect.
            Thirdly, he graunteth that he oweth loyall obedience
to the emperour, and for that respect he thought
himselfe bound in conscience to publish the emperours

law, though in some part it seemed to disagree with Gods
will; and that (forsooth) least he should be found guiltie
of disloyaltie toward his prince.
            Fourthly, this alleageance he acknowledged to the
emperour Mauritius, who liued more than six hundred
yeares after Christs sacred incarnation. During which
tearme of years, the bishops of Rome, now called Popes,
liued in subiection to the emperours of Rome, as other
bishops doe this day to their lawfull kings.
            S. Ambrose freeth kings from all lawes made by man,Ambros. de apologia Dauid, cap. 10. pag. 386.
these are his expresse words: Rex vtique erat, nullis ipse legibus
tenebatur humanis. Neque enim reges vllis ad poenam vocantur
legibus, tuti imperij potestate. Homini ergo non peccauit, cui non
tenebatur obnoxius.
            
            He was indeed a king, he was subiect to no law of
man: for kings being freed by royall prerogatiues of imperiall
power, are not punishable by the lawes of man.
He therefore sinned not to man, to whom he was not subiect.
S. Hierome teacheth the same doctrine,Hieron. tom. 1. fol. 63. d. if his words be
well marked.
            Enthimius hath these words, Cum sim vex,Enthi. in Psal. 50. & te solum commissorum
à me scelerum iudicem habeam, tibi soli peccasse videor,
hoc est, tibi soli iudici subijcior. Coeterorum enim omnium ego dominus
sum, & ob potentiam meam licere mihi videntur, quaecunque
libuerint.
            Seeing I am a king, and haue thee only my iudge ouer
my sinnes, I seeme to sinne onely to thee; that is, I am
subject onely to thee, as to my iudge. For I am lord ouer
all others, and in regard of my power and maiestie, whatsoeuer
pleaseth me, seemeth to be lawfull for me.
            The Popish ordinarie glosse singeth the same song,Glossa ordin. in Ps. 50.
these are the expresse words: Rex omnibus superior, tantum
à deo puniendus est.
            
            The king is aboue all, and he can be punished of none
but of God alone.
            
               Nicolaus Lyranus,
               Lyranus in Ps. 50. a man of great reckoning with the
papists, teacheth the same doctrine with the rest. These

are his expresse words; Tibi soli peccaui, scilicet tanquam iudici
& punire potenti. Peccauerat enim contra Vriam, & alios occasione
huius interfectos. Tamen quia erat rex, non habebat iudicem
superiorem qui posset eum punire, nisi deum.
            
            To thee onely haue I sinned; that is to say, to thee only,
as to my iudge, and to him that can punish me. For he
had now sinned against Vrias and others, whom he caused
to be murthered by that occasion: yet because he was a
king, he had no superior iudge that could punish or controule
him, saue God alone.
            
               Thomas Aquinas,
               Aquin. 1. 2. q. 96. ar. 5. ad. 3. being as it were halfe a god with the
Papists, teacheth the selfesame doctrine, with Lyra and
the rest. But I hasten to the verdict of a Cardinall of
Rome.
            
               Hugo Cardinalis hath these expresse words;Hugo Card. in Ps. 50. 
               Tibi soli,
quia non est super me alius quam tu, qui possit punire. Ego enim sum
rex, & non est aliquis praeter te super me.
            
            To thee onely, saith Cardinall Hugo,
               See S. Cyprians opinion in the sixt article following, in the first proposition and second reason; and note it well, because it is of great importance. because there
is not any aboue me but thy selfe alone, that hath power
to punish me: for I am a king, and so besides thee, there
is none aboue me.
            Thus gentle reader, it is cleere and euident, as well
by the flat testimonie of the auntient fathers, as also of
most famous and renowned Popish writers; that the
Pope or Bishop of Rome is so farre from hauing power
to depose kings and emperours, that he himselfe ought
to be subiect to them, and hath no authoritie at all to punish
them. VVhat can be more plainely spoken? what
testimonies can be more manifest? what doctrine can
be clearer? for if none but God be superior to the king,
if none but God can iudge the king, if none but God
can punish the king, (all which both auntient fathers
and the Popes owne deare doctors affirme) then doubtlesse
cannot the Pope depose the king; then can he not
absolue his subiects from their alleageance; then can he
not translate empires and kingdomes, and bestow the
same at his owne pleasure. The good kings, Iosue, Dauid,

Salomon, Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Iosias, knew right well, that
they had authoritie aboue all the priests, and therefore
tooke vpon them, not onely to commaund and
controll them, but also to depose and thrust them from
their places and functions, yea euen the high priests
themselues, when their deserts did so require. VVhich
thing is prooued at large in my golden ballance of triall.
Yet here for better satisfaction of the vulgar people, I
will propound a common obiection, that much troubleth
many of them; and that done, frame a plaine and sincere
solution to the same.
            
               The Obiection.
               The empire was translated by the Popes authoritie,
and the emperours after their election are this day confirmed
by the Pope: yea, many emperors haue acknowledged
the Popes soueraignetie ouer them, in so much
as they haue fallen downe prostrate, and kissed his holy
feet.
            
            
               The Answere.
               I answere, that many absurd things haue beene affirmed
by Popish parasites, for the aduancement of the
primacie, as Franciscus à Victoria, a famous Popish schoole
doctor, and Spanish frier, sometime professour of Theologie
in the Vniuersitie of Salmantica,Victor. de potest, eccles. relect. 1. sect. 6. p. 39. doth testifie in
these words; Sed gloss atores iuris hoc dominium dederunt papae,
cum ipsi essent pauperes rebus & doctrina.
               
               But the glossers of the Popes law (saith this great doctor
and zealous papist, for the truth it selfe enforced him
to vtter the truth) gaue this dominion (and these lordly
titles) vnto the Pope, when themselues were blind bayards
and beggerly fellowes.
               Thus writeth their owne Popish Frier, affirming that
ignorance and pouertie were the beginning of all lordly
poperie: and no maruell; for by reason of their pouertie

they flattered and sought to please the Pope, and by
reason of their ignorance, they set abroach many things
which they did not vnderstand.
               
                  Iohannes Gerson, a famous papist likewise, and sometime
chancelour of Paris, reporteth much like stuffe, and
more lordly titles, ascribed to the Pope by his popish parasites.Gerson de potest. eccles. consid. 12 part. 3.
These are his expresse words; Sicut Christo collata
estomnis potestas in coelo & in terra, sic eam Christus, omnem Petro
suis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      successoribus dereliquit. Sequitur; sicut non est potestas nisi
à deo, sic nec aliqua temporalis vel ecclesiastica, imperialis vel regalis,
nisi à Papa; in cuius foemore scripsit Christus, rex regum, dominus
dominantium; de cuius potestate disputare, instar sacrilegij
est; cui ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      quisquam dicere potest, cur ita facis.
               
               As all power was giuen to Christ in heauen and on
earth, so Christ left all the same power to Peter, and to his
successours (the Bishops of Rome.) As there is no power
but of God, so is there neither any temporall or ecclesiasticall,
neither imperiall nor regall, but of the Pope; in
whose thigh Christ hath written, the king of kings and
lord of lords; of whose power to dispute, is as it were sacriledge;
to whome no man may say, VVhy doest
thou so?
               These are the words of this great learned doctor, who
though he were a zealous papist, yet could he not conceale
these Antichristian blasphemies within his breast.
Neuerthelesse Pope Boniface, or (if ye will) Pope maliface,
did not only acknowledge them, but with great pleasure
practised the same, as witnesseth the said Gerson in these
words; Hanc existimationem habuisse visus est Bonifacius octauus
in quadam decretali; putatur ab alijs,
                  Gerson vbi supra. 
                  depositio vnius regis franciae
per papam Zachariam hic esse fundata; tanquam papa sit, qui
transferre possit reges & regna.
               
               Pope Boniface the eight seemeth in a certaine decretall
to haue had this opinion of his owne authoritie. Others
thinke, that the deposition of (Childericus) the French
king by Pope Zacharie, was grounded in this (Antichristian
and godlesse conceit;) as if forsooth the Pope were

he, that could depose princes, and translate their kingdomes.
               By these authorities it is cleare, that the late Bishops
of Rome haue taken vpon them, not onely to depose
kings, and to translate their kingdomes; but withall haue
challenged more than humane and royall power, euen
that power which is due and proper to God alone. So as
we haue not so much to consider what hath beene done,
as what ought of right to be done. I will therefore for
perspicuitie sake proceed by way of gradation, and set
downe the very steps of the ladder, by which the late bishops
of Rome, did climbe vp to their vsurped tyrannicall
primacie.
               1 The first step, was the departure of the emperour
Constantinus from Rome to Constantinople, at what time
(as the Popes parasites tell vs) the emperour gaue large
gifts to the Pope, euen his whole power, dominion, and
territories, both in Rome, Italie, and all the VVest parts:
for thus is it written by Gratian in the Popes own decrees:
Constantinus imperator coronam & omnem regiam dignitatem,
                  Dist. 96. can. Constantinus. 
                  in
vrbe Romana, & in Italia, & in partibus occidentalibus Apostolico
concessit. Sequitur, decreuimus ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      & hoc, vt ipse & successores
eius diademate, viz. corona quam ex capite nostro illi concessimus
ex auro purissime & gemmis pretiosis, vti debeat pro honore B. Petri.
Constantine the emperour gaue the Pope his crowne
and all royall dignitie in the citie of Rome, and in Italie,
and in all the VVest parts. It followeth a little after in the
next Cannon. VVe therefore haue made also this decree,
that the Pope and his successours shall for the honour of
S. Peter, weare the crown of pure gold and pretious stones,
which we haue giuen him from off our owne head. Thus
saith the decree. But Laurentius Valla, Raphael Voluteranus,
Paulus Catthalanus,
                  Bellarm. lib. 5. de rom. pont. cap. 9. 
                  Nicolaus Cusanus, and many other popish
writers, repute the same as a fable. Yea our Iesuit Bellarmine
seemeth to doubt thereof, and of other like supposed
donations, and therefore hath he inuented a soueraign
remedie for the same. These are his expresse words:

Extant Romae authentica instrumenta harum & similium donationum.
Sed etiamsi nihil horum extaret, abunde sufficeret prescriptio
800. annorum. Nam etiam regna & imperia per latrocinium acquisita,
tandem longo tempore flunt legitima.
               There be extant at Rome authenticall instruments of
these and the like gifts. But if there were no such thing,
yet would prescription of 800 yeares be sufficient: for
euen kingdomes & empires gotten by robberie, through
continuance of time become lawfull. Thus writeth our
Iesuit, who hath left nothing vnsaid, that can be said for
poperie.
               The second step, was the fall of the empire in the
VVest. For after the diuision of the empire, it begun daily
to decline, and was vtterly dissolued in Augustulus, in
the yeare 471.A. D. 471. of whom was made this epigram; Augustus
romanum imperium condidit,
                  Ar. Pontac. Burdeg. pag. 93. 
                  Augustulus labefactauit. Augustus
set vp the empire, but Augustulus pulled it downe.
For after Orestes his father was slaine (who was neuer emperour
but a captain vnder Nepos) the said Augustulus gaue
vp the diademe, and betooke himselfe to a priuat life.
From this time the empire in the VVest was vacant about
330 yeares. By meanes whereof, the Popes power did daily
increase by little and little, and from step to step.
               The Vissigothes ruled in Spaine, the Abienes in
Guian and Gascoyn, the Frenchmen in the residue of
France, the Vandales in Affricke, the Saxones in Brittaine,
the Ostrogothes in Hungarie, the Herules and Turdilings
in Italie and in the citie of Rome: onely the name
of the empire, remained with Zenon in the East. About the
yeare 536.A. D. 536. 
                  Totilas king of the Gothes by force of armes
and famine subdued well neere all Italie, and after long
siege tooke the citie of Rome, and spoyled it with sword
and fire, ouerthrowing the wals and towers euen to the
ground, and vntill Carolus magnus the Abiens and Barbarians
possessed all Italie.
               The third step was the voluntarie charter which
Constantine the emperour of Constantinople made to

Pope Benedict the second; viz. that whomsoeuer the clergie,
people, and the Romane souldiours should chuse to
be Bishop,A. D. 684 all men should beleeue him to be the true vicar
of Christ, without any tarrying for any authoritie of
the emperour of Constantinople, or the deputie of Italie,
as the custome and maner was euer before that day. Thus
writeth Platina,
                  Platina in vita Benedicti secūdi. who was the Popes owne deere vassale.
This was a very gallant step: for as you see here, the
Popes for the space almost of seuen hundred yeares, viz.
vntill this Bennet in the yeare 684.Vide Ar. Pontac. fol. 111. a. acknowledged the emperours
for their superiours and lords, without whose letters
pattents they could haue no iurisdiction, nor be reputed
the true Bishops of Rome: but now the Bishops of
Rome by priuiledge graunted from this emperour, wrested
their neckes from the emperours subiection. Let
these words of Platina be well remembred; because he
being a famous papist, must needs be of good credit against
them.A. D. 607. I let passe the petite step, when the emperor
Phocas made Rome the head of all churches, which for all
that, is of some moment.
               The fourth step, was the great amitie betweene Zacharie
then Bishop of Rome, and Pipine gouernour of
France vnder Childerich the king: for Pipine purposing to
defeat his lord and soueraigne of the kingdome, and to
inuest himselfe therein, sent his embassadours to Zacharie
then Bishop of Rome, and his bounden friend, to demaund
this question of him, viz. VVhether he were more
worthy to be king, which was king only by name and naturall
succession; or els he, who bare the whole burthen of
the kingdome alone, & yet lacked the dignitie of a king?
The Pope vnderstanding the parable right well, and respecting
his owne future aduancement likely to ensue
thereupon, answered roundly (I will not say clerkely, but
like a right doctor of the Romish rout) that it was more
rightfull forsooth, that he which tooke the charge of all
things, should be called king.A. D. 751. Vpon this iudgement so
clerkely yeelded, Pipine forthwith presumed to depose

                  Childerich, and made himselfe king: that done, saintlesse
(not sackles) Zacharie the Bishop of Rome (that antichrists
forerunner might be known)Geraes. 28. v. 12. assoiled Pipine and the other
Frenchmen of their oath of allegeance and fealtie made
to Childerich, and confirmed Pipine the traitor in the kingdome
of France. This was indeed a step, not of Iacobs ladder,
nor of Scala coeli, but of Scala inferni, Scala Antichristi,
and of the ladder of the master deuill of hell. Yet is not
our Iesuit and Cardinall Bellarmine (the mouth of all papists,Bellar. lib. 5. de Rom pont. cap. 8. and of the Pope himselfe) ashamed to publish the
same as a ground of the popish religion. For these are his
owne words: Childericum deposuit Zacharias, & in eius locum
Pipinum Caroli magni patrem creari iussit. Cuius causa fuit, quia
propter socordiam Childerici, & religioni & regno in Gallia extrema
ruina imminere videbatur.
               
               Pope Zacharie deposed Childericke, and commaunded to
place and inuest Pipine, father to Charles the great, in his
throne: the cause whereof was this; because forsooth
through the slouthfull and negligent gouernment of
Childericus, the kingdome and religion in Fraunce seemed
to be in great danger. This is the deepe diuinitie of the
Pope and his clergie, by which we may learne many worthie
lessons.
               1 First, that the Pope may set vp and pull downe
kings at his pleasure by Iesuiticall doctrine and late Romish
religion.
               2 Secondly, that the Pope and Iesuites are the grandmasters
and architects of seditions, rebellions, and most
bloudie treasons.
               3 Thirdly, that it is very true which the secular priests
haue written, concerning the traiterous proceedings of
Iesuits and Iesuited papists.
               4 Fourthly, that the Pope commaunded to depose the
Soueraigne, and to inthronize the subiect in his place.
               5 Fiftly, that all this was done, because forsooth the
king did not rule after the Popes fansie and pleasure.
Hereupon I inferre this necessarie correlarie; viz. that it

behooueth Christian kings to be vigilant, and in due
time to expell all traiterous papists out of their dominions.
And if the Bishop of Rome shall send any seditious
popeling into their kingdomes and territories, with his
thunderbolts, buls, and excommunications; then to deale
with the messengers,A. D. 1294. as king Philip the faire dealt with
pope Boniface his nuncioes in France; whom he committed
to prison, and caused the Popes buls to be burnt in
the fire. And as Charles the sixt, when Bennet the 13. did
interdict his realme,A. D. 1408. sitting in the throne of iustice in his
high court of parliament the 21 of May, in the yeere
1408. gaue sentence, that the bull should be rent in pieces,
and that Gonsalue and Conseleux the bearer thereof
should be set vpon a pillorie, and publickely traduced in
the pulpit. The storie is set downe at large by the French
papists, in their booke intituled the Iesuites catechisme,
and the same is recorded in my anatomie of Popish
tyrannie.
               The fift step was the decay of the empire in the East
about the yeere 756.A. D. 756. For when Aistulphus, or (as some
write) Aristulphus king of the Lombards, besieged the citie
of Rome for the space of three whole moneths, exacting
an huge tribute of the Romanes; then Pope Stephanus
the second, made suite to Pipinus king of France to
stand their good master, and to defend the citie from the
furie of the Lombards. King Pipine willing to gratifie his
good friend the Bishop of Rome, came with a mightie
armie against Aistulphus, and besieged him in Pauie; and
then and there constrained him to appeale to his mercie,
and to yeeld vp the exerchate of Rauenna and Pentapolis
into his hands.Manus manum fricat. This being effected, king Pipine (whom
Pope Zacharie of a traitour had made king, as is alreadie
prooued) gave vp the gouernment of Italie into the
Popes hands. And the king had reason so to doe: for as
we know, one good turne requires another. So now the
lieutenants of the emperours of Constantinople, ended
their whole power in Italie, who aforetime had their seats

at Rauenna: and now was he taken out of the way, who
(as the Apostle telleth vs) did hinder the comming of Antichrist:2.
Thess. 2. for Pope Stephen in way of gratitude confirmed
the inheritance royall of the kingdome of France to the
said Pipine and to his posteritie for euer. Here began a new
progenie of the kings of France: for Childericus was the
last king of the stocke of Meroneus, who was the first king
Christian of France. This truth is apparant by the testimonie
of many renowned Chronographers, it cannot
be denied.
               The sixt step,Bellar. tom. 3. col. 827. was the translation of the Romane
empire from the Greeks to the Frenchmen or Germans,
in the person of magnificall Charles, as the Iesuit Bellarmine
tearmeth him. The truth is this, as popish Chronographers
doe record and testifie to the world; viz. That when
the Romanes had driuen from among them, Pope Leo
the third, he appealed to Charles then king of France,
who came to Rome, and examined the matter: and in
the end appeased the Romanes, and restored the Pope
to his place and dignitie againe. For this good worke and
kind fauour of the king, the Pope, and people of Rome,
hauing now a long time in mind and affection, reuolted
from the emperour of Constantinople; and seeing a fit
opportunitie offered to accomplish their long wished desires,
did with vniforme consent and ioyfull acclamation
proclaime Charles the great, the emperour of Rome, giuing
him the imperiall names of Caesar and Augustus, and
setting the royall diademe vpon his head by the hands of
Pope Leo. And for the better credit of mine assertion, I
will here recount the very words of Sigebertus, a famous
Chronographer and popish monke,A. D. 801. who therefore must
needs be of credit with the Pope and all his popelings.
Thus doth he write: Romani qui ab imperatore Constantinopolitano
iam diu animo desciuerant, nunc accepta occasionis opportunitate,
quia mulier excaecato imperatore Constantino filio suo eis imperabat,
vno omnium consensu Carolo regi imperatorias laudes acclamant,
eumque per manum Leonis papae coronant, Caesarem & Augustum

appellant; Pipinum verò filium eius regem Italiae ordinatum
collandant.
               
               The Romanes, who a long time had in mind and affection
reuolted from the emperour of Constantinople, seeing
now a fit occasion offered them, because a woman did
gouerne them, her sonne the emperour Constantine being
made blind, did all with one consent found out imperiall
and royall acclamations to king Charles, calling him Caesar
and Augustus, and crowning him by the hand of Leo the
Pope: yea they collaud his son Pipine made king of Italie.
               Out of these words I wish the Reader, to obserue these
important points with me.
               1 First, that 800. yeeres after Christs sacred birth, the
Bishops of Rome were subiect to the emperour, as their
owne deere monke Sigebert telleth them; and as you haue
heard already, Pope Gregorie acknowledged his fealtie to
Mauritius the emperour, in the yeere 603.
               2 Secondly, that the Pope and people of Rome endeuoured
a long time, to shake off the yoke of obedience
to the emperour, and in the yeere 801 put the same in
execution.
               3 Thirdly, that the translation of the empire implied
flat treason, in the Pope and all his Romish Popelings.
For as Fryer Sigebert telleth vs, they surrendred vp the
right of their soueraigne to an other man: and hence
commeth it, that the Iesuiticall Cardinall Bellarmine appealeth
to the law of perscription, affirming titles gotten
by robberie to be lawfull by that meanes. And indeede
by stealth and robberie, it may well beseeme a Iesuite,
to iustifie popish late start vp regalitie.
               4 Fourthly, that the Bishop of Rome is not the true
and lawfull king of Italie: for the papists doe not agree
in their assertions, touching this counterfeit regalitie of
their popes. Bl
                        •
                     ndus and Platina write, that Pippine gaue
the exerchate of Rauenna and Pentapolis to Gregorie;
Regino referreth the donation to Steuen; and Sigebert saith
here, that Pippine in the yeere 801 had it in his owne possession

still. Yea, the same Sigebert saith further, that in
the yeere 812 the emperour Charles imposed the imperiall
crowne vpon the head of his sonne Lewis, and made
Bernard sonne of Pippine the king of Italie. But doubtlesse
if Pippine were king of Italie in the yeere 801 and Bernard
king thereof in the yeere 812, I see not how the pope was
then,A. D. 727. or that is now, any king at all. And therefore wee
may credite Bellarmine at leisure, when he telleth vs out of
Ado, that king Pippine gaue Reuenna and all Pentapolis
to Saint Peter and Saint Paul: but it is well, that S. Paul
is become coheire with Saint Peter. For by his meanes, other
bishops must haue as great a share, as the Bishops of
Rome: there the reader must not forget, what frier Sigebert
telleth vs of Charles the great,A. D. 805. after that he was inthronized
in the empire. These are his expresse wordes;
Carolus imperator &c. Charles the emperour, when the emperours
of Constantinople had indignation against him,
for the name of emperour giuen him by the Romanes;
suffered them with great patience and magnanimitie:
And because he was afraid of their mightie power, with
often ambassades hee procured them to bee his deare
friends: yet our Iesuite Bellarmine would haue vs to beleeue,
that the emperours of Constantinople did freelie
graunt, that the Pope and the Romanes had full right to
translate the empire; but their owne deare friend (as we
see heere,) affirmeth the contrary for a truth. Yea, both
Bl
                        •
                     ndus and Platina affirme very constantly,Vide Ar. Poniac. fol. 122. that Charles
did agree first with the empresse Irene, and afterwith the
emperour Nicephorus, that he with their fauours might
rule ouer the VVest.
               The seuenth step, was the constitution of the electors
of the future emperour.Vide Phillip. Bergemens. p. 277. For Gregorie the fift being
a Germane borne, and a neere kinsman to Otho the emperour
at that time, did by his fauour and free graunt, appoint
seuen electors of the empire for euer.Antoninus 3. par. tit. 22. cap. 5. §. 13. 
                  viz. the archbishop
of Mentz, the archbishop of Treuerse, the archbishop
of Colen, the marques of Brandenburgh, the countie

Palatine, the duke of Saxonie, and the king of Bohemia.
This goodly constitution was enacted by the Pope
and emperour,A. D. 994. (being both of them not onely Germanes
but also kinsmen) that the empire might be established
in their posteritie, and their blood thereby aduanced for
euer.
               The eight and highest step of this ladder, did reach
vp euen to the highest heauen, and to the very throne of
our Lord Iesus. For the Pope hauing now enlarged his
soueraigntie, by little and little, from steppe to steppe;
was neither abased nor afraid to challenge the authoritie
and royall right,A. D. 1294. of both swordes throughout the christian
world: for he made a flat decree for the confirmation
thereof, as is euident by the extrauagant of Boniface the
eight, (vnam sanctam, de maioritate & obedienta) set downe
in the sixt booke of the decretals.Dest. 22. can. omnes. And as Gratianus reporteth,
Pope Nicholas taught the same doctrine: these are
the expresse wordes, Christus beato Petro aeternae vitae clauigero,
terreni simul & caelestis imperij iura commisit.
               
               Christ committed to Saint Peter that beareth the keyes
of eternall life, the right both of earthly and heauenly
empire. And the glosse, which the Popes parasites haue
annexed to this decree,Gloss. F. caelestis. hath these very wordes; Argumentum
quod Papa habet vtrun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      gladium, & spiritualem & temporalem.
An argument, that the Pope hath both the
swords, aswell the spirituall as the temporall. And in the
marginall note, it is there set downe, Papa habens vtrun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
gladium transtulit imperium: the Pope hauing both swords,
translated the empire. And appendix Fuldensis vnfoldeth
this cursed decree, in these most plaine tearmes:
               Hic Papa (Bonifacius 8.) constitutionem fecerat,Appendix Fuldensis. in quae se dominum
spiritualem & temporalem in vniuerso mundo asserebat. Vnde
requisiuit Philippum regem Franciae, vt a se regnum suum cognosceret,
quod rex facere contempsit.
               This Pope (he speaketh of Boniface the eight) made a
constitution, in which he affirmed himselfe, to be both
spirituall and temporall lord in the whole world. VVhervpon

he would haue had Philip king of France, to haue
acknowledged his kingdome from him: which thing the
king scorned to doe.
               Since this ladder was thus framed, the Bishops of Rome
haue tyrannized aboue measure in the world, and taking
vpon them that authoritie which pertaineth to god
alone, they haue disposed of kings and kingdomes, translated
royall diademes, tyrannized ouer mens soules, and
troden all sacred soueraigntie vnder foot. For, that popish
canons ascribe plaine diuine titles to the Pope, it can
not possibly be denied, because in the Popes owne decretals,Gloss. lib. 1. decret. tit. 7. cap. 3. I find these expresse wordes; Sic (Papa) dicitur
habere caeleste
                        •
                      arbitrium, & ideo etiam naturam rerum immutat,
substantiam vnius rei applicando alij; & de nihilo potest aliquid facere.
So the Pope is said to haue celestiall arbitrement,
and therefore doth he alter the nature of things, applying
the substantiall parts of one thing to an other; and
so can make of nothing something. Thus the papists
write of their Pope, and he is well pleased therewith. And
yet the truth is, that as man can in some cases at some time
make one thing of an other; so in all cases at all times, to
make some thing of nothing, is proper to God alone.
               The Popes parasites write thus of his power in generall;Gersō.
de potest. eccl
                        •
                     s. consider. 12. part. 3. 
                  Sicut non est potestas nisia deo, sic nec aliqua temporalis vel
ecclesiastica, imperialis vel regalis, nisi à Papa; in cuius foemore
scripsit Christus, rex regum, dominus dominantium. Like as there
is no power but of God, so is there neither any temporall
nor ecclesiasticall, neither imperiall nor regall, but of the
Pope; in whose thigh Christ hath written, the King of
kings, and Lord of lords. Loe here gentle reader, two
things are proper to God alone; the one, to be King
of kings, and Lord of lords; the other, to be the author
of all power: both which you see here ascribed to the
Pope.
               The Pope himselfe from his owne pen,Greg. 9. libr. 1. decr. tit. 33. cap. 6. 
                  Gregorie the
ninth, deliuereth vs this doctrine, Ad firmamentum coeli, hoc
est, vniuers alis ecclesiae, fecit deus duo magna luminaria, id est, duas

instituit dignitates, quae sunt pontificalis authoritas, & regalis
potestas sequitur; vt quanta est inter solem & lunam, tanta inter
pontifices & reges differentia cognoscatur. To the firmament of
heauen, that is, of the vniuersall church, God made two
lights, pontificall authoritie, and power royall: that we
may know there is asmuch difference between Popes
and kings, as there is betweene the sunne & the moone.
The glosse setteth downe precisely,Gloss. ibid. how farre a king is
inferiour to a Pope, that is, to any bishop of Rome, in
these words; Restat, vt pontificalis dignitas, quadragesies septies
sit maior regali dignitate. It remaineth, that the dignitie
of the Pope, is fourtie times seuen times greater than the
power of the king.
               Now touching the kissing of the Popes feete, I answere
that some Christian kings and emperours vpon a
blind zeale not grounded in knowledge, humbling themselues
to the Bishop of Rome, and yeelding vp their soueraigne
rights to him, opened the window to all antichristian
tyrannie. For in short time after, (as is alreadie
prooued) the Romish bishops became so lordly and insolent,
that they tooke vpon them to depose the emperors,
to translate their empires, and to dispose at their pleasures
of their royall scepters and regalities. Much more
might be said in this matter, but for that the Pope hath
made it sacriledge to dispute of this, I will here onely tell
thee gentle reader,Sigebert. in anno, 1088. what the Popes deere frier Sigebertus
hath written of his holines. These are his expresse words;
Vt pace omnium honorum dixerim, haec sola nouitas, non dicam haeresis,
nondum in mundo emerserat, vt sacerdotes illius, qui regnarefacit
hypocritā propter peccata populi, doceant populum quod malis regibus
nullam debeant subiectionem, & licet ei sacramentum fidelitatis
fecerint, nullam tamen debeant fidelitatem, nec periuri dicantur,
qui contra regem senserint; imo qui regi pa
                        ••
                     erit, pro excommunicato
habeatur; qui contra regem fecerit, noxa iniustitiae & periuris
absoluatur. To speake by the fauour of all good men,
this sole noueltie, I wil not say heresie, was not yet known
in the world; that his priests who maketh an hypocrite

to reigne for the sinnes of the people, should teach the
people, that they owe no subiection to wicked kings;
and that although they haue taken the oth of fealtie, yet
doe they owe them no allegeance, neither are they periured
that thinke ill against the king: yea, he that obeyeth
the king, is this day reputed an excommunicate person;
and he that taketh part against the king, is absolued
from the crime of iniustice and periurie.
               This is our very case (gentle reader) this day in England,
so liuely painted out in best beseeming coulours,
as if the writer had bene liuing euen now amongst vs. So
then, wee haue to obserue here for our instruction,
That the Popes owne monkes and friers haue thought
as ill of the Popes dealings in former times, as we thinke
of his procedings in these latter dayes: As also, That popish
religon hath alwaies bene condemned,Answere ô papists if you can: if not, repent for shame. euen of great
learned papists that liued in the Popes Church. VVhereof
none can be ignorant, that will seriously peruse my
bookes of Motiues and Suruey. And this shall suffice
for the first article: to which (if their hearts doe not
faint them, or their consciences condemne
them) the papists will frame
some answere vndoubtedly.
            
         
         
            
            The second Article, touching
the erroneous doctrine of
the Popish masse.
            
               The first member. Of the impossibilitie of
their supposed reall presence.
               
                  
                     AQuinas, the Iesuit Bellarmine, the
councell of Trent, Melchior Canus,
Iosephus Angles, and the rest of the
Romish brood, hold constantlie
as an article of their christian faith,Conc. tri. sess. 3. can. 1. Aquin. 3. p. q. 76. ar. 1. Ioseph. Angles, in 4. 1. p. q. 4. de euchar. Bellar. de euch. libr. 1. cap. 2. col. 468. B.
That the true, organicall and naturall
bodie of Christ Iesus, which
was borne of the Virgin Marie,
which was crucified and nayled on the crosse, which rose
againe the third day from death, and is circumscriptiuely
and locally in heauen; is also truelie, really, and substantially,
vnder the forme of bread and wine, in the sacrifice
of the popish masse, But this is impossible, as which implieth
flat contradiction; and consequently, late romish
religion consisteth of impossibilities, falshoodes, and contradictions.
The doubt hereof is onely in the assumption;
for proofe whereof, I set downe this supposall with
our Cardinall Bellarmine, viz. That we are not bound to beleeue
any thing which implyeth contradiction.Bellarm. de euchar. lib. 3. cap. 19. col. 748. A. And because
I will proceed sincerely, yee shall heare his owne
words: thus doth he write; Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      fides nostra ad id nos obligat, vt
ea defendamus, quae euidenter implicant contradictionem. Neither
doth our faith bind vs so, that wee must defend those
things which implie euident contradiction. But so it is,
that the popish imaginarie being of Christs bodie in a

little round cake, implieth in it selfe euident contradiction,
and cannot possibly be brought to passe. For example,
no power vpon earth or in heauen can bring to passe
that a bodie being three cubits long and one cubit broad,
remaining still so long and so broad, shall be contained in
another bodie of two cubits length, and halfe a cubite
breadth. The reason hereof is euident, because so to containe
and be so contained, implieth flat contradiction.
And this is the case now in controuersie, concerning
Christs supposed being in the round popish cake.Aquin, 3. p. q. 76 ar. 4. contra. For if
Christs naturall and organicall bodie be there, as popish
faith auoucheth: then must the papists beleeue euident
contradictions, contrarie to Iesuit Bellarmines resolution;
yea, contrarie to all power, all Logicke, all reason. All
the papists in England are not able to solue this reason. I
challenge them all, and aduise them to consult together,
and to craue helpe of their friends elswhere, and then to
let me haue their speedie answere hereunto.
               Cardinall Caietane affirmeth boldly,Apud Ioseph. Angles, in 4. sect 1. p. pag. 144. that no text in the
whole Gospell doth prooue effectually, and conuince the
reader to vnderstand these words properly (This is my
bodie.) For which respect frier Ioseph aduiseth grauely, to
read their Cardinall (caute) warily.
               
                  Aquinas affirmeth constantly,Aquinas, in 4. s. d. 10. q. 1. art. 1. 
                  Corpus Christi non esse in
pluribus locis simul, secundū proprias dimensiones; that Christs bodie
is not in many places at once, according to the proper
dimensions thereof: whose assertion is my flat position.
For Christs naturall bodie cannot be without those
dimensions which naturally pertaine vnto it. Durandus
holdeth the very same opinion.
               S. Austine saith plainely,Aug. epist. ad Dardan. in fine. that Christs true bodie can be
but in one onely place of heauen. Vbi totum presentem esse
non dubites tanquam deum, & in codem templo dei esse tanquam inhabitantem
deum, & in loco aliquo coeli propter veri corporis modum.
Thou must not doubt (saith S. Austen) that Christ is
wholly present euery where as God, and in the same temple
of God, as God inhabiting it, and in some one place

of heauen, for the manner of a true bodie. Lo, this graue
father telleth vs, that Christ as God is euery where; but
yet in respect of his true bodie, he is onely in heauen,
and in some certaine place of heauen. Only in heauen,
because the Scripture saith, That he shall be there till
the worlds end, in some certaine place of heauen, to declare
the nature and veritie of a true bodie indeed. So
then, if he were present as the papists would haue him,
his bodie should lose the nature and veritie of a true bodie
indeed.
               Againe in another place S. Austen hath these words;Aug. de consecr. dist. 2. can. prima quidem.
                  Donec seculum finiatur, sursum est dominus, sed tamen etiam hic nobiscum
est veritas domini; corpus enim in quo resurrexit, in vno loco
esse oportet; veritas autem eius vbique diffusa est. Our Lord is
aboue vntill the worlds end, but yet his truth is with vs
here; for the bodie of our Lord, wherein he rose againe,
must needs be in one place; but this truth is diffused
euery where.
               Againe,Aug. cont. Faust. lib. 20. ca. 11. to. 6 the same S. Austen writing against Faustus the
Manichee, hath these expresse words: Secundum presentiam
corporalem, simul & in Sole, & in Luna, & in cruce esse non
posset. According to his corporall presence, it was not possible
for him to be both in the Sunne, and in the Moone,
and on the crosse, at one and the same time. O papists,
answere if you can; if not, recant for shame.
            
            
               The second Member. Of the Sacrifice
of the Popish Masse.
               THe Papists teach and beleeue as an article of Christian
faith,Conc. trid. sess. 6. can. 2. die 17. sep. Bellar. li. 1. ca. 12 Aq in. 3. p q. 82 art. 4. That in their masse Christs true and reall
bodie is truly and really sacrificed to God the father,
vnder the forme of bread, as also his true and reall
bloud vnder the forme of wine. Yet this implieth horrible
impietie and brutish crueltie, as shall be prooued: and
consequently, popish Masse is to be abhorred.
               
                  
First, where the Apostle telleth vs, that Christ rising
againe from the dead, henceforth dieth no more, because
death hath no more dominion ouer him; the papists tell
vs a contrarie tale, that Christ dieth euery day, nay, a
thousand times a day, in the daily sacrifice of their masse:
for with them all priests (the Pope, Cardinals, and some
others excepted) doe ordinarily say masse euery day, and
three masses vpon euery Christmas day. VVhich being
so, and three hundred Iesuits and seminarie priests being
this day in England and Scotland, as the Iesuites tell vs;
an huge multitude of masses must be said daily in these
realmes, and many times must Christ be put to death, so
farre forth as in them lieth, though they pretend to honour
him thereby.
               For,Note this reason. as Cardinall Bellarmine graunteth freely, a sacrifice
implieth intrinsecally, the consumption of the thing that
is sacrificed. I will not auouch any vntruth vpon any
man (gentle reader) these are his owne words: Sacrificium
enim preter oblationem, requirit mutationem, & consumptionem rei
quae offertur.
                  Beller. de missa, lib. 1. cap. 2. col. 957. For, saith Bellarmine, a sacrifice besides the oblation
requires an alteration and a consumption of the
thing which is offered.
               Againe,Vbi sup. col. 697. 
                  Bellarmine in another place telleth vs, that the
bodie and bloud of Christ are offered in the masse, verè &
propriè, truly and properly, vnder the formes of bread and
wine.
               Againe,Vbi sup. col. 1015. 
                  Bellarmine saith in another place, that flesh and
bloud are not fit for meat, nisi prius animal moriatur, vnlesse
the beast first die (and be slaine.)
               Againe,Bellar. de missa. lib. 1. cap. vlt. the same Bellarmine teacheth the same doctrin,
yet more plainely in another place. Thus doth he write:
Sacrificium enim verum & reale, veram & realem occisionem exigit,
quando in occisione ponitur essentia sacrificij. For a true and
reall sacrifice requireth a true and reall killing, seeing
that the essence of the sacrifice consisteth in the killing
thereof.Hebr. 9. ver. 17, 25, 26, 27, 28. And in very deed, this is that constant doctrine
which S. Paule doth inculcate to the Hebrewes.
               
                  
So then, we see it cleare and euident by popish faith
and doctrine, that Iesus Christ our sweet redeemer, must
first be killed, then offered, lastly torne and consumed by
the teeth of the sacrificing masse-priest; or els the popish
masse cannot be perfect, as their most perfect doctor telleth
vs.
               For confirmation of this popish doctrine, it is a constant
position and generally receiued axiome in the popish
church, that by vertue of their consecratorie words,
Christs bodie is put apart from his bloud, and his bloud
apart from his bodie; and so Christ is there slaine by force
of their consecration, though he still liue indeed, because
the priests words haue not so much force as they imagin.
You shall heare Bellarmines owne words;Bellar. de missa, lib. 1. cap. 12. col. 1015. a. 
                  Nam inprimis ideo
in coena seorsim consecratur corpus, & seorsim sanguis, vt intelligamus
presentiam corporis & sanguinis in coena, esse ad modum occisi
& mortui corporis. For first, therfore is the bodie consecrate
apart in the supper, and the bloud asunder, that we may
vnderstand the presence of the bodie and bloud in the
supper, to be there after the manner of a bodie slaine and
dead. These are his words, and this which he thus deliuereth,
is the constant doctrine of the Popish Church.
VVhereupon it followeth of necessitie, that if any papist
should haue said masse, in triduo mortis Christi, during Christs
death; then Christs bodie by vertue there of should haue
been dead in one place, and his bloud in another place:
for otherwise, Christ should haue been both quicke and
dead at once, which implieth contradiction. Aquinas
graunteth this illation, these are his words: Ideo si in illo triduo
mortis fuisset hoc sacramentum celebratum,
                  Aquin. 3. p. q. 76. ar. 1. 
                  non fuisset ibi anima
Christi. Therefore during Christs death, if this sacrament
had been celebrated, the soule of Christ should not
haue been in it.
               Secondly, if this popish kind of doctrine were true,
these absurdities and grosse impieties must perforce follow
hereupon, viz. that Christ the night before he was crucified,
was both sitting at the table, and borne in his own

hands, both liuing and dead, both visible and inuisible,
both long and short, both broad and narrow, both light
and heauie; that he was a sacrifice for our sinnes, before
he died for our sinnes; that his sacrifice was either vnperfect
in the former oblation in his last supper, or els that it
was needlesse in his bitter immolation vpon the altar of
the crosse.Hebr. 9. v. 27. For as the Apostle telleth vs, Christ was not to
offer himselfe often, as the high priest did, but once to the
destruction of sinne, by the sacrifice of himselfe. These
are his words, as the papists (our English Rhemists I
meane) haue put them downe; and as it is appointed to
men to die once, and after this the iudgement: so also
Christ was offered once, to exhaust the sinnes of many.
Loe, Christ died but once; and that one oblation was
sufficient to take away all sinnes in the world. The word
(exhaust) which the Rhemists vse, doth significantly expresse
so much. But the words of S. Paul in another place
are most manifest, and doe plainely conuince this truth:
In the which will (saith S. Paule) we are made holy,Hebr. 10. v. 10. euen
by the offering of the bodie of Iesus Christ once for all.
Againe thus: But this man,ibid. v. 12. after he hath offered one sacrifice
for sinnes, is set downe for euer on the right hand
of God.ibid. v. 14. Againe in these words: For with one offering
hath he made perfect for euer them that are sanctified.
Loe, gentle reader, Christ, saith Christs apostle, made but
one oblation; Christ, say the papists, hath made many,
and still maketh moe oblations. Christ, saith Christs Apostle,
died but once on the crosse; Christ, say the papists,
dieth euery day in the masse. Christ, saith Christ apostle,
made perfect, finished, and consummated mans redemption,
with one onely sacrifice. Christ, say the papists, doth
perfect and consummate his, with the daily sacrifice of the
masse. Now, whether Christs apostle, or our papists be of
better credit, let the indifferent reader iudge.
               Thirdly, the cup is the new testament in my bloud
saith Christ,Luke, 22. v. 20. which is shed for you. But a testament is not
of force without the death of the testator,Hebr. 9. v. 17. as S. Paul teacheth

vs. And consequently either Christs bodie was not
really offered in his supper, or at least it was a sacrifice of
no force, value, or efficacie at all; for that it was not yet
ratified by the death of the testator. Hereupon it followeth
of necessitie,Luke 22. v. 20. that when Christ saith in S. Luke, This
cup is the new testament in my bloud:Math. 26. v. 28. and in S. Matthew,
This is my bloud of the new Testament: the sence is all
one, most plaine, and cleare, viz. that the cup is a sacrament
of the bloud of Christ, and of the new Testament
confirmed thereby; but indeed is no more really the
bloud of Christ it selfe, than it is really the new testament
it selfe. For the expresse mention of remission of sinnes,
is referred to the bloud of Christ shed vpon the crosse,
and not to the sacrament of his bloud; seeing his bloud
was not shed in his supper, but in his bitter passion.
               Fourthly, the Apostle saith flatly, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
there is not henceforth any oblation for sinne.Hebr. 10. 18. But if Saint
Paule say truly, that there is no oblation for sinne, after
Christs death on the crosse; then doubtlesse the papists
must needs say falsely, that they haue a daily propitiatorie
sacrifice in their popish masse. Neither will it serue
their turne to answere, that it is the selfesame sacrifice of
the crosse, but offered in another manner; for if that
were true, then should their masse-sacrifice be of infinit
value: which for all that, no papist dareth auouch. Nay,
Bellarmine saith in plaine tearmes: Valor sacrificij missae finitus
est.
                  Bellar. de missa, lib. 2. cap. 4. col. 1076. The value or worth of the masse, is finit, not infinit.
And yet, if the value of the masse be not infinit, then
doubtlesse, that sacrifice cannot be the sonne of God, for
he is of infinit power, of infinit maiestie, of infinit value.
Yea, whosoeuer denieth Christs bodie and bloud, subsisting
in the person of God by hypostaticall vnion, to be
of infinit value, he is become a flat Arrian, beleeuing
Christ to be pure man, and not God. And consequently,
the papists, howsoeuer they thinke or speake of their
masse, yet in making it a sacrifice, they must perforce be
blasphemous against the sonne of God. Again, Bellarmine
                  
confesseth against himselfe vnawares, and against an article
of popish faith, That their popish masse is not verè &
propriè,
                  Bellar. de missa, lib. 2. cap 4. col. 1076. truly and properly propitiarie: Quod Christus nunc
immortalis, nec mereri, nec satisfacere potest. Because, saith
Bellarmine, Christ now being immortall, can neither merit
nor satisfie. But I am well assured, that their holy late
councell of Trent teacheth otherwise. These are the
words: Et quoniam in diuino hoc sacrificio, quod in missa peragitur,
                  Conc. trid. sess. 6. can. 2. die 17. sep. 
                  idem ille Christus continetur, & incruentè immolatur, qui in ara
crucis semel seipsum cruentè obtulit, docet sanctasynodus sacrificium
istud verè propitiatorium esse. And because in this diuine sacrifice
which is made in the masse, that same Christ is contained,
and offered vnbloudily, who on the altar of the
crosse once offered himselfe bloudily, the holy councell
teacheth it to be a propitiatorie sacrifice truly & indeed.
Loe, how the papists say and vnsay: one while it is truly
a propitiatorie sacrifice; another while it cannot truly be
so called. VVell, the Pope hath allowed Bellarmines doctrine,
and he hath also allowed the Councell; and yet
wise men can see how they flatly disagree, and that in the
highest point of their melodie.
               Fiftly, the Popes owne decrees doe seale vp this truth
against the Pope, these are his words: Sicut ergo coelestis panis
qui Christi caro est,
                  De consecrat. dist. 2. can. hoc est 
                  suo modo vocatur corpus Christi, cum reuera
sit sacramentum corporis Christi, illius viz. quod visibile, quod palpabile, mortale, in cruce positum est; vocatur
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ipso immolatio carnis
quae sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi passio, mors, crucifixio; non rei
veritate, sed significante mysterio; sic sacrum fidei quod baptismus
intelligitur, fides est. As therefore the heauenly bread, which
is the flesh of Christ, is after it manner called the bodie of
Christ, when indeed it is the sacrament of Christs bodie, of
that bodie which is visible, which is palpable, mortall, and
nailed on the crosse: and that oblation of flesh which is
made by the hands of the priest, is called Christs passion,
death, crucifixion, not in the truth of the thing, but in a
mysterie, which signifieth the thing: so the sacrament of
faith, by which baptisme is vnderstood, is faith.
               
                  
Thus saith the text. Let vs now heare their own glosse
vpon the same text, these are the expresse words: Coeleste
sacramentum quod verè representat Christi carnem, dicitur corpus
Christi, sed improprie, vnde dicitur suo modo, sed non rei veritate, sed
significate mysterio: vt sit sensus, vocatur Christi corpus, id est,
significatur. The heauenly sacrament which representeth
Christs flesh truly, is called the bodie of Christ, but vnproperly,
wherefore it is said, suo modo, after it manner, but not
in the truth of the thing, but in the mysterie of the thing
signified: that this may be the sence, it is called Christs
bodie, that is to say, it signifieth his bodie.
               Out of these golden words, deliuered as God would
haue it by the pens of papists, to the confusion of all papists,
I note first, that the holy and blessed bread of the Eucharist
or Lords supper, is called the bodie of Christ. Secondly,
that it is also called the passion & death of Christ.
Thirdly, that it is not Christs bodie truly, properly, and in
the truth of the thing. Fourthly, that it is Christs body, as
the sacrament of baptisme is faith. Fifthly, that it is not
Christs bodie in truth, but in signification. Sixtly, that it is
only called Christs bodie, because it is the sacrament of his
body; as baptisme is called faith, being only the sacrament
of faith. Seuenthly, that it is Christs bodie, impropriè, suo modo,
significat
                        •
                      mysterio; improperly, after a sort, in the mysterie
of the thing, signified: which words must be well remembred
and marked. Lastly, that it is said negatiuely,
non rei veritate: it is not Christs bodie, in truth, in deed, or in
the veritie of the thing. These words are the very vpshot
of the controuersie, they can admit no solution. For if
Christs bodie were in the sacrament really and substantially,
with bodie, flesh, bloud, sinews, bones, and quantitie,
as the papists say and beleeue; then doubtlesse he should
be there in rei veritate, in the truth of the thing, euen in that
true bodie which was borne of the blessed virgin, the true
mother of true God and true man. Answere papists, if ye
can, or els come home, and yeeld to the truth for shame.
            
            
               
               The third Member. Of the barbarous and plaine
villanous proceeding against Berengarius,
for deniall of the abouenamed
popish sacrifice.
               POpish decrees tell vs a long tale of one Berengarius,
sometime deacon of a church in Gaunt, who held a
doctrine surely grounded vpon the holy scriptures,
but wholie opposite to the late popish faith; viz. That the
bread and wine in the holy Eucharist,De consecrat. dist. 2. can. Ego Berengarius. after Christs words
vttered, which they call consecration; are onely the sacrament,
and not the true bodie and blood of our Lord
Iesus Christ; and that they cannot sensuallie or sensibly,
(for so their owne word sensualiter signifieth) bee handled
or broken with the hands of the priests, or torne with
the teeth of the faithfull. For this opinion so setled vpon
Gods word, as all the cursed Romish brood, are not able
in truth to gainesay the same; Pope Nicholas with his Romish
synod, did so cruelly proceed against the sillie deacon,
as he must needs either abiure and renounce the
truth, or else betake himselfe to be burnt with popish fire
and faggot out of hand. In regard whereof, the poore
deacon ouercome with humane frailtie, yeelded at least
in shew of wordes, to their most wicked, cruell, and very
barbarous, or rather villanous suggestion. Then the
Pope and Councell set downe the forme of words, which
he should pronounce, the summe whereof I haue alreadie
alleaged: who as list may read the words at large, in
the place quoted in the margent. I omit the wordes, because
they are long and tedious: onely I wish the reader
to obserue seriously with me, (for this reason can neuer
be answered till the worlds end) that it is an article of
popish faith, (oh horrible blasphemie) That the true and
reall body of the sonne of God, which was borne of the
vigin Marie, and sitteth at the right hand of God the father
omnipotent and all sufficient, is torne in pieces with

the teeth of the faithfull, and broken asunder with the
hands of the priest, in their idolatrous masse. For these
are the words of the popish synod; Manibus sacerdotum
frangi, & fidelium dentibus atteri. Which wordes are so
fully farced with blasphemie, and repugnant to the truth,
that neither Melchior Canus, nor the popish glosse, nor Bellarmine,
can tell how to shuffle vp the same, but with
shame inough, they passe it ouer as they can. Bellarmine,
who is as it were the Popes owne mouth, writeth in this
manner;Bellar. de con. lib. 2. cap. 8. d. 
                  Respondeo, nunquam fuisse quaestionem, an Christi corpus
vere vt est in se, frangeretur manibus, & dentibus tereretur; certum
enim est, & semper fuit, Christi corpus incorruptibile nunc existens,
non posse frangi & teri, nisi in signo siue sacramento: ita vt dicatur
frangi ac teri, cum signum eius, id est, species panis frangitur, &
teritur. I answere (saith the Iesuite) that question was neuer
made, if the body of Christ as it is in it selfe, were truely
broken with hands, and torne with teeth; for it is and
and euer was certaine and sure, that Christs bodie being
now incorruptible, cannot be broken and torne, saue only
in a signe or sacrament; so as it may be said to be broken
and torne, when the signe thereof, that is to say, the
forme of bread is broken and torne.
               Out of these words I note first, that by the Popes owne
doctrine, (for the Iesuites doctrine is the doctrine of the
Pope, seeing the Pope hath approoued it,) Christs bodie
cannot be broken or torne, truely and indeede. I
note secondly, that the Pope and his Councell decreed
the contrarie doctrine, and that as an article of popish
faith; when they compelled Berengarius, to confesse it
with his mouth, and to beleeue it with his heart, and did
also publish the same, per vrbes Italiae, Germaniae, & Galliae,
through the cities of Italie, France, and Germanie: for so
saith the decree, Ego Berengarius. I note thirdly, that it is
truely said, Christs bodie is broken; because the forme
of the bread is broken, as popish doctrine teacheth vs.
For we see here, that this is all that the papists can say
for themselues: and vpon this strong foundation, and inuincible

bulwarke, I inferre this golden and euident corollarie;
viz. That if it be true to say, Christs bodie is broken
and torne, because the signe of his bodie is broken
and torne; then truely may wee say, and truelie doe we
say, that Christs bodie is in the Eucharist, because the
signe of his bodie is there, because the sacrament of his
bodie is there, because the representation of his bodie is
there. And much more truly might Christ himselfe say,
This is my bodie, when he gaue the signe and sacrament
of his bodie. I note fourthly, that it is the constant doctrine
of the church of England (which also many other
reformed churches approoue therein) that Christs bodie
is receiued, broken, torne, and consumed with mouth and
teeth, figuratiuely, significantly, mystically, sacramentally.
And consequently, if the papists would be iudged by
this doctrine, which by the pen of the Iesuit Bellarmine
they here deliuer, the controuersie would soone be at an
end. But I must needs tell the reader, what the Popes
owne glosse teacheth vs:Gloss. de Cons. dist. 2. cap. ego Berengarius. it is singular and worthie to be
noted, these are the words: Nisi sane intelligas verba Berengarij,
in maiorem incides haeresim, quam ipse habuit; & ideo omnia
referas species ipsas, nam de corpore Christi partes non facimus.
Vnlesse thou vnderstand the words of Berengarius
soundly, thou shalt fall into a greater heresie than he
had; and therefore thou must referre all things to the
formes, for of Christs bodie we make no parts. Marke
these words, gentle reader, for they are important: They
teach vs plainly, that it is a most dangerous thing to relie
vpon popish decrees, euen then when they pretend to reforme
the church, and to condemne heresies.
               S. Austen confirmeth the doctrine, which the Pope
compelled Bellengarius to abiure,August. in Ioan. tract. 
                        •
                     9. and that in many places
of his workes; one onely assertion I will now set downe.
These are his words: Illi manducabant panem dominum; ille,
panem domini contra dominum. They (the other Apostles) are
the bread, that was the Lord, he (Iudas) ate (not our Lord,
but) the bread of our Lord, against our Lord.
               
                  
Note these words, gentle reader, and marke them seriously.
S. Austen telleth vs, that the bread which the other
Apostles ate, was our Lord; yet that which Iudas receiued,
was but the bread of the Lord. This assertion confoundeth
the papists. For, if our Lord and maker be present really,
in flesh, bloud, and bone, vnder the accidents
of bread; and that so long as the same accidents remaine
vncorrupt, as the popish faith holdeth: then doubtlesse
Iudas should haue receiued his redeemer; thē perforce Iudas
should also haue receiued panē dominū
                   thē 
                  Iudas could
not by any possibilitie haue barely receiued panem domini,
which yet S. Austen affirmeth most constantly. For first,
if it were true, that after popish supposed consecration,
the substance of bread were transubstantiated into Christs
naturall bodie, as it truly consisteth of flesh, bloud, and
bone: and againe, if it were also true, that the selfesame
bodie remained vnder the forme of bread, vntill it were
corrupted, then let all the papists in England, with the
best aduise of all their adherents and brother papists elswhere
in Europe, tell me how Iudas could receiue (panem
domini) the bread of our Lord, and not (panem dominum)
the bread which is the Lord, as S. Austen plainely auoucheth,
that is, how Iudas could receiue the forme, with the
flesh, bloud, and bones, of Christs organicall and naturall
bodie hidden vnder the same; and for all that, not receiue
Christ himselfe, and panem dominum, as the other Apostles
did. Let them I say tell me this, and I herewith promise
to subscribe, and neuer henceforth to write against
them or any part of their popish doctrine. If they will
not this doe, because they cannot (for if they can doe it,
all the world must thinke they will doe it, for their owne
credit and the credit of their cause) then doubtlesse, if the
feare of God be before their eyes, they will acknowledge
the truth, and with open mouth confesse the same. Corde
enim creditur ad iustitiam, & ore confessio fit ad salutem.
                  Rom. 10. v. 10.
               
            
            
               
               The fourth Member. Of the apparent contradictions
in the Popish masse.
               FIrst, the papists tell vs, that Christs bodie in their
masse, is the selfesame bodie that was nailed on the
crosse. And withall they tell vs, that it is a figure of
the same bodie. That it is a flat contradiction, their owne
deare Cardinall Bellarmine shall tell them: These are his
words:Bellar. de Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 3. col. 474. 
                  Figurae necessario, inferiores esse debent rebus figuratis.
Figures of necessitie must be inferiour to the things figured
by them. And this doctrine is most true indeed, as
S. Paul discourseth to the Hebrewes.Hebr. 10. Now would I know
of the papists, if they can say ought for the life of their
masse, how Christs bodie in the masse being the selfesame
bodie numero, as they teach and beleeue, can be inferiour
to Christs bodie on the crosse; how it can be both inferiour
and superiour to it selfe; how it can be both of greater
and lesser value than Christs body on the crosse, being
euer the selfesame bodie on the crosse.
               Secondly, the papists tell vs, that Christs naturall bodie
is contained in a little round cake, or vnder the accidents
and forme of bread. Now would I know of the same
papists, how the bigger can be contained of the lesser,
how a bushell can be couched in a pecke, how a great oxe
can be closed vp in a little calues bellie. For all these implie
euident contradiction.
               Thirdly,Bellar. de Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 2. col. 472. the papists tell vs, that Christs bodie is truly
broken. For these are the Iesuit Bellarmines words: Deni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
in concilio Romano sub Nicolao 2. compulsus est Berengarius confiteri,
Christi corpus sensualiter sacerdotum manibus tangi & frangi.
Finally, in a councell at Rome vnder Pope Nicholas
the second, Berengarius was compelled to confesse, that
Christs bodie is sensuallie touched and broken with the
priests hands.
               Now would I know, how it can be true, that Christs

bodie is broken, and also true, that it is not broken, speaking
of the same bodie at the same time. Let all papists
answere, and tell me if they can, how it implieth not contradiction.
For to say, that not the bodie but the accident
of bread is broken, is too too childish and friuolous. The
reason is euident, because Berengarius (ô cruell impietie)
was compelled to confesse, that Christs bodie was sensually
broken.
               Fourthly, the papists tell vs, that the pronouncing of
these words by a priest (This is my bodie) do make Christs
bodie present in their masse, and also in other places: insomuch
(marke well gentle reader what I say) that if a
popish priest come into a great market place, where
there is great store of wheat bread, though a thousand or
moe loaues in number, and there looking on the bread,
shall pronounce the said words, with intention to consecrate,
then forthwith euery loafe is God almightie, and
the people must adore the same. Triall hereof was once
made de facto in Italie, as my selfe being in Rome, heard
from the mouth of a Iesuit. For, as the Iesuit reported, a
priest being degraded and designed to die, as he passed in
the street by a bakers house, beheld a great quantitie of
wheat bread, and recited these words (Hoc est corpus meum)
and told the people, that he had consecrated the said
bread.This is a great wonderment, and extreame popish sollie. VVhereupon consultation was had out of hand
among the learned, and sentence giuen, that euery loafe
was God almightie: and the bread was caried away with
great solemnitie, reuerence, and such adoration as was
due to the sonne of the euerliuing God. Now would I
know, when the priest hath pronounced three of the said
words, viz. (hoc est corpus.) what is become of the bread afore
him. For if they answere, that it is Christs bodie: then
will it follow to their shame, that one of the words of
their consecration is of no force; which to die for it, the
papists may not admit. If they say, that a part of Christs
bodie is then wrought really, by vertue of the said words,
then will it follow to their greater shame, that Christs bodie

is really torne in pieces, by force of their bloodie and
most cruell masse. If they say, that nought is indeed effected,
vntill the last sillable of the last word be pronounced;
then will it follow to their confusion, that of foure
words wherein consisteth their whole consecration, three
are of no vertue, force, or efficacie, but stand as cyphers
to fill vp the place, and to make a shew of that which is
not.
               Fiftlie, Durandus telleth vs, that onely the forme of
bread is chaunged, and that the matter of bread remaineth
still in the Eucharist. Rupertus the popish Abbot holdeth,
that the bread is vnited hypostaticallie to the son of
God. Caietanus, Henricus, and Capreolus, are of another opinion:
Iohanncs Parisiensis held also that the bread was assumpted,
but in a different manner from the opinion of
Rupertus. Another opinion, affirmeth the annihilation of
the bread: but the Iesuit Bellarmine holdeth with their
Councell of Trent, that the bread is transubstantiated into
the bodie of Christ.
               Sixtly, the papists tell vs, that when the priest is at
masse, then all spectators must adore that which he holdeth
ouer his head, and constantly beleeue it to be their
maker and redeemer of the world: and if any hold contrarie
opinion, or teach the contrarie doctrine, that person
must be burnt with fire and faggot for his paines. But
yet for all this the popish faith telleth vs, that if either the
priest want intention to consecrate, (which often chaunceth,
or at least may chaunce, by reason of wandering
imaginations) or of purpose meaneth not to consecrate,
or of negligence omitteth, or miscalleth any word of consecration;
then by popish doctrine, faith, and religion, the
thing adored for God almightie, is but pure bakers
bread; and consequently, the adorers there of become
idolaters, worshipping a piece of bread for the euerliuing
God.
               Seuenthly, the papists tell vs, that many priests are appointed
at once to pronounce the words of consecration,

in the Romish Church Lateran when they are made
priests. But they cannot tell vs, how many gods, or how
many times God is made in one and the same piece or
cake of bread, in and at that masse of the newlie made
priests. For they are all appointed to consecrate, they
doe all pronounce the wordes, they are all bounden to
haue intention, and they all haue the fit and requisite
matter to worke vpon: but when the principall actor and
chiefe agent, to wit, the bishop, is at the last syllable; then
some of the rest be in the middest, some toward the end,
some in one place, some in an other, neuer one iumping
with other in that instant, in which they should their
bread-god make. For of this dreadfull mysterie, there
are three solemne dissonant opinions.Ioseph. Angl. in 4. s. pag. 180. Pope Innocentius
holdeth, that they all doe consecrate: Durandus auoucheth,
that that priest onely consecrateth, which with greatest
speed first commeth to the end: but Cardinall Caietanus
hath a different consideration. Now would I know,
how these so different popish opinions, in a matter
of so great importance, can be reconciled
and salued from contradiction. Answere
papists if you can, or else relent
and yeeld to the truth
for shame.

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            The third Article. Of popish
dispensations.
            
               
                  ANtoninus sometime archbishop of
Florence, comming as ambassadour
from the Pope, telleth vs,
if wee may beleeue him,Antoninus, 3. par tit. 22. cap. 5. §. 8. that the
Pope is Christs vicar vpon earth,
and hath equall power with God
almightie. These are his owne expresse
words; Cum autē vicarius Christi
sit Papa, nullus potest seipsum subtrahere ab obedientia eius de
iure, sicut nullus de iure potest se subtrahere abobedientia Dei. Et sicut
recepit Christus a patre ducatum & sceptrum ecclesiae gentium ex Israel
egrediens, super omnem principatum & potestatem, & super
omne quodcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   est, vt ei genua cuncta curuentur; sic ipse Petro
& successoribus eius, plenissimam potestatem commisit. For seeing
the Pope is the vicar of Christ, none can lawfully withdraw
himselfe from his obedience, as none can lawfully
withdraw himselfe from Gods obedience. And as Christ
receiued of his father, the dukedome and scepter of the
Church of the gentiles arising of Israel, ouer all principalitie
and power, and aboue euery thing that hath being,
that to him euery knee may bend: euen so Christ hath
committed most full power to Peter and his successors.
            The famous popish frier,Aug. de Anch. in summa, pag. 152. 
               Augustinus de Ancona, in that
booke which he dedicated to Pope Iohn the twelft of that
name, singeth the same song, and affirmeth the Pope to
haue the same power. These are his expresse words; (Papa)
tanquam vicarius Dei filij caelestis imperatoris, iurisdictionem habet
vniuersalem super omniaregna & imperia. The Pope, as he that
is the vicar of the sonne of God the heauenly emperour,
hath vniuersall iurisdiction ouer all kingdoms & empires.
            
               
Many other papists haue the like testimonies, but they
are needlesse, seeing the Pope is a sufficient witnes against
himselfe, hauing often reduced their assertions to actuall
execution. For the Pope hath often by his wicked and
execrable dispensations taken vpon him to dissolue that
matrimonie which is firme and stable by Christs owne institution.
The former part is prooued by their learned canonist
Martinus Nauarrus,
               Nauar. in Euchar. cap. 22. par. 21. in these expresse wordes: Diuiditur
(matrimonium) ante consummationem, per dispensationem papae
iusta de causa factam. Matrimonie is dissolued before
consummation, by the Popes dispensation vpon iust cause
graunted. Now to prooue that the Pope may this doe,
Nauarre taketh it for a good ground, that the Pope hath
practised the same. Thus doth he write: Quorum opinio adeo
obseruatur,
               Nauar. vbi sup. 
               quod etiam ter vel quater ad petitiones consilio meo antequam
in vrbem venissem oblatas, Paulus 3. & Pius 4. per suas dispensationes,
dissoluerant quaedam matrimonia omnino clandestina
nondum consummata, in remedium animarum alioquin probabiliter
periturarum. VVhose opinion (he speaketh of the Canonists)
is so obserued, that three or foure times before my
comming to Rome, vpon petitions made by mine aduise,
Pope Paulus the third, and Pope Pius the fourth, with their
dispensations dissolued certaine secret matrimonies not
yet consummate, for the safegard of souls, which by likelyhood
would otherwise haue perished.
            And another famous popish Canonist Couarruvias affirmeth,Couar.
to. 1. cap. 7. par. 4. n. 13. col. 1 that Pope Paulus the fourth and Iulius the third dispensed
in like manner. These are his words: Necme latet
Paulum quartum summum ecclesiae pontificem, anno 1558. hac vsum
fuisse dispensatione quibusdam excausis, quas iustissimas esse idem
summus ecclesiae praesul existimauit. Idem Paulo ante Iulius tertius
fecerat in eodem matrimonio, cum ecclesiae vniuersali praesiderit. Neither
am I ignorant, that the Pope Paul the fourth put this dispensation
in practise, for certaine causes which the same
Pope thought to be most iust. Iulius the third, when he
was Pope, in the like case graunted the like dispensation.
Thus we see the former part of mine assertion to be most

sufficiently prooued, viz. that Pope taketh vpon him
to dissolue lawfull and perfect matrimony. Now for proofe
of the latter, viz. that wedlocke before consummation or
copulation, is firme and perfect, and cannot be dissolued
by the power of man: Christs owne words are a sufficient
ground.Matth. 19. v. 7. 
               Quod deus coniunxit, homo non separet. That which
God hath conioyned, let not man put asunder. And in
another place Christ hath these words:Luke, 16. v. 18. 
               Omnis qui dimittit
vxorem suam, & alteram ducit, moechatur. Euery one that putteth
away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth
adulterie.
            S. Paule vpon the same argument deliuereth the like
doctrine in these words:1. Cor. 7. v. 10. 
               His autem qui matrimonio iuncti sunt,
precipio non ego sed dominus, vxorem à viro non discedere; quod si
discesserit, manere innuptam, aut viro suo reconciliari, & vir vxorem
non dimittat. Those that are married commaund not I,
but the Lord, that the wife depart not from her husband:
but if she shall depart, then to abide vnmarried, or to be
reconciled to her husband.
            Thus saith S. Paul, and thus saith Christ himselfe, that
man and wife ioyned by Christ, must abide during life together,
or liue vnmarried, and not be seuered by the
Popes dispensation.
            And it will not helpe the Pope to say as the Iesuit Bellarmine
doth, and others with him, That Christ only speaketh
de matrimonio consummato, and that matrimonium ratum,
with which the Pope dispenseth, is not de iure diuino.
            
            For first, if matrimonium ratum were not de iure diuino, the
greatest popish doctors would not denie the Popes dispensation
therein.
            Secondly, Christ speaketh absolutely, and maketh no
mention of copulation or popish consummation at all.
            Thirdly, matrimonie with papists is a diuine sacrament,
and consequently, it both is perfect without carnall
copulation, and also indispensable by the power of
man.Canus de locis, lib. 8. ca. p. 246. For as their owne famous doctor Melchior Canus saith:
Sanctus spiritus & sacramenti gratia, per coitum non datur. The

holy ghost and the grace of sacrament is not giuen by
copulation.
            Fourthly, it followeth hereupon, that matrimonie is
not fully perfect in the popish church, because copulation
followeth a good while after.
            Fiftly, because it is absurd to say, that it beginneth to
be a sacrament by carnall copulation, and was not a sacrament
by the priests action.
            Sixtly, it followeth hereupon, that there was not perfect
matrimonie betweene Adam and Eue, for their matrimonie
was in the state of innocencie, and before all carnall
copulation.
            Seuenthly, because if matrimonie be not de iure diuino,
euen before copulation, there is no cause why both parties
agreeing together, may not release the bargaine, and
quite dissolue the contract. For as the law saith, Quisque
potest suo iuri cedere. Euery man may yeeld vp his right:
which thing, all, as well Canonists as Diuines, admit for
good in sponsalibus.
            
            Eightly, it followeth hereupon,Matth. 1. that the marriage betweene
the blessed virgin and S. Ioseph, was not perfect
matrimonie: for there doubtlesse wanted carnall copulation;
but the angell of God feared not to call her Iosephs
wife.
            S. Ambrose hath these words: Non enim defloratio virginitatis
facit coniugium,
               Ambros. de instit. virg. cap. 6. 
               sed pactio coniugalis. For not the deflouring
of virginitie maketh wedlocke, but the coniugall couenant.
            S. Austens iudgement herein is most cleere and euident.August. de consens. euang. lib. 2. cap. 1. to 4.
These are his words: Cum igitur ipse narret, non ex concubitu
Ioseph, sed ex Maria virgine natum Christum, vnde eum patrem eius
appellat, nisi quia & virum Mariae rectè intelligimus sine commixtione
carnis, ipsa copulatione coniugij. VVhen therefore he
telleth vs, that Christ is not borne of Iosephs copulation,
but of the virgine Marie; vpon what ground doth he call
him his father, but onely for that we doe rightly conceiue
him to be Maries husband without the commixtion of

flesh, by the very copulation of wedlocke.
            The same father writing to Valerius, discourseth of this
matter at large,Augustin. de nup
                     •
                  ijs & concupisc. lib. 1. cap. 11. tom. 7. and among many other notable sentences
setteth downe these words: Quibus vero placuit, ex consensu
ab vsu carnalis concupiscentiae in perpetuum continer, absit vt
inter illos vinculum coniugale rumpatur. Secquitar neque enim fallaciter
ab angelo dictum est ad Ioseph, noli timere, accipere Mariam coniugem
tuam. They that were content by mutuall consent
to abstaine for euer from the vse of carnall copulation,
God forbid, that betweene them should be dissolued the
bond of wedlocke. For the Angell did not speak deceitfully
to Ioseph, when he willed him not to feare to take Marie
his wife vnto him.
            Thus we see it cleare, that the pope taketh vpon him
that power and authoritie which is proper to God alone:
for he practically auoucheth (as I haue prooued by his
owne deere doctors) that his dispensations are of force to
vnmarrie and put asunder those persons whom God himselfe
hath ioyned together in holy wedlocke. And contrariwise
(as I shall prooue vnto you) he practically hath
taken vpon him to ioyne in wedlocke those persons, to
whom God himselfe hath forbidden marriage. I will omit
knowne examples, and alledge one only not knowne to
many; which as it is rare and notorious, so is it able to prouoke
all that heare it, to exclaime against the execrable
practise of the Pope.
            
               Antoninus,
               Antonin. 3. p. tit. 1. cap. 11. prope fin. a man of no small credit (for he was an archbishop
of the popish stampe, and by the Pope reported
for a saint) hath these very wordes: Reperitur tamen papa
Martinus quintus dispensasse cum quodam, qui contraxerat & consummauerat
matrimonium cum quadam cius germana. Neuerthelesse,
it is knowne, that Pope Martin the fift did dispense
with one who had contracted and consummate matrimomonie
with his owne naturall and full sister,Fatetur Durandus olim papam dispensando errasse. lib. 4. sent. dist. 7. q. 4. in fine. of the same
father and same mother, for so much the word (Germana)
doth import. Behold here, gentle reader, the excellencie
of holy poperie: and if thou desirest more of such melodie,

thou mayest find it in my booke of Motiues. But this
here is a sufficient antepast for all our English Iesuits and
Iesuited popelings. None are so ignorant, but they know
that onely God can giue licence to marrie a mans owne
naturall sister. Answere papists if ye can, or els yeeld vnto
the truth for shame.
         
         
            The fourth Article. Of originall
concupiscence in the
regenerat.
            
               SAint Paule throughout the whole seuenth
chapter to the Romans,Rom. 7. proueth
originall concupiscence in the regenerate
to be sinne. But the papists cannot
abide to heare this doctrine,Psal. 58. v. 6. they stop
their eares against the charmer, though
he charme neuer so wisely. And why, I
pray you? because forsooth it ouerthroweth their holy so
supposed iustifications, their inherent purities, their mutuall
satisfactions, their condigne merites, their pharisaicall
supererogations. And yet Petrus Lombardus their famous
master of sentences (whose book to this day is publickely
read in their schooles of diuinitie) vtterly condemneth
their damnable doctrine in this point.Lombard. lib. 3. sent. dist. 19. These are
his expresse words: Secundum animas vero iam redemptisumus
ex parte, non ex toto; à culpa, non à poena, nec omnino à eulpa, non
enim ab ea sic redempti sumus, vt non sit, sed vt non dominetur. But
touching our soules, we are redeemed in part, not wholly,
from the sinne, not from the paine, neither wholly from
the sinne or fault. For we are not so redeemed from it,

that it be not (in vs) but that it rule not (ouer vs.) Thus
writeth the worshipfull popish master,Now must the papists perforce either recant their doctrine, or els crie fire and faggot for their chiefe master. our reuerend father
Lombard: out of whose words we may gather with facilitie
so much as will serue our turne against the papists.
For first he saith we are redeemed in part, but not in the
whole. Secondly, that we are not wholly redeemed from
sinne. Thirdly, he telleth vs how we are redeemed from
sinne, viz. that albeit sinne still remaine in vs, yet hath it
not such dominion ouer vs, that it can enforce vs to consent thereunto.
Loe, this doctrine is not mine, but the flat
doctrine of the papists, which I learned of that great papist,
who for his learning was surnamed the master of sentences,
and to this day is publickly read in their diuinitie
schooles.
            Touching S. Paule,
               Rom. 7. v. 25. he saith first in this manner: I my
selfe with the mind serue the law of God, but with the
flesh, the law of sinne. Out of these words I note first,
that the Apostle speaketh of the regenerate throughout
this whole chapter, because he nameth himselfe, who was
Gods chosen and elect vessell. For which respect, and the
like expressed in the seuenth chapter to the Romanes,
S. Austen changed his opinion, and graunted S. Paule to
speake here of the regenerate.Aug. li. 1. retract cap. 22. p. 23.  I note secondly, that the
elect and regenerate doe serue the law of sinne. I note
thirdly, that the best liuers are so farre from meriting ex
condigno, grace and glorie, that they deserue in rigour of
iustice, eternall death, because death is the reward of sin.
VVhich for that S. Austen could not well digest at the
first, he thought that S. Paules words were to be vnderstood
of the reprobate, and not of the elect and godly
sort: but when he had pondered the Apostles discourse
and words more seriously, he changed his opinion. This
is confirmed in the selfesame chapter in these words: But
I see another law in my members, rebelling against the
law of my mind,Rom. 7. v. 23. and subduing me vnto the law of sinne,
which is in my members. By these words it is euident,
that albeit S. Paule were the child of God, yet could he

not merite any thing in Gods sight: but rather in rigour
of iustice prouoke Gods heauie displeasure against him:
For where or what could be his merite, who was prisoner
to the law of sinne?Rom. 7. v. 19. Againe, the same is confirmed in these
words: For I do not the good which I would, but the euill
which I would not, that doe I. Thus saith S. Paule. And
doubtlesse, since he did the euill which he would not, he
sinned, though he were regenerate: and in that he sinned,
he was guiltie of damnation, because death is the
stipend of sinne.August. epist. 105. pag. 301. For this cause grauely saith S. Austen:
Cum deus coronat merita nostra, nihil aliud coronat, quam munera
sua. VVhen God crowneth our merites, he crowneth nothing
els but his owne gifts. Againe, the same is confirmed
in these words, For the law is spirituall, but I am carnall
sold vnder sinne.Rom. 7, v. 14. Thus saith S. Paule of himselfe. And
yet it is most true, that one vnder the buthen of sinne can
merite nothing saue hell fire and eternall paine. Againe,
the same is confirmed in these words: If I do that I would
not,Rom. 7. v. 20. then it is not I that doth it, but sinne that dwelleth in
me. Loe S. Paule graunteth that to be sinne in himselfe,
which yet himself consenteth not vnto. And that he speaketh
of originall concupiscence, which remaineth in the
regenerate after baptisme, it cannot be denied. And it
will not serue the turne, to say as Bellarmine doth, viz. that
originall concupiscence remaineth after baptisme, but is
no sinne at all: and, that it is called sinne onely in this respect,
because it prouoketh a man to sinne; as a mans writing
is called his hand, because it is written with his hand.
For first, their owne master Petrus Lombardus graunteth it
to be sinne, euen as S. Paule doth. Secondly, it causeth
man to serue the law of sinne, which seruice can neuer be
but sinne. Thirdly, S. Paule saith, he doth that ill which
he would not, and that which he doth hate. All which
must needs be meant of sinne.
            That concupiscence remaining after baptisme, is truly
called sinne, the papists themselues confesse vnawares in a
maine point of doctrine and setled ground of their religion.

Marke well gentle reader what I shall deliuer in this
behalfe.
            God chose all in Christ that shall be saued before the
foundation of the world: and likewise reprobated al both
negatiuely and positiuely (that I may vse their schoole-tearmes:)
but positiuely, for the foresight of original sinne.
For the proofe hereof, it will suffice to alledge the words
of our papists at Rhemes,Rhemes test. in Rom. 9. v. 14. in their notes vpon the new testament.
Thus doe they write: So likewise, God seeing all
mankind, and euery one of the same, in a generall condemnation
and masse of sinne in and by Adam, deliuereth
some and not othersome. These are their own words: and
that which they teach, is the common doctrine of the Romish
church.Rhem. Rom. 9. v. 11. Againe, the same Rhemists in the chapter afore
quoted haue these words: by the same example of
those twins, it is euident also, that neither nations nor
particular persons be elected eternally, or called temporally,
or preferred to Gods fauour before others by their
owne merits: because God when he made choise and first
loued Iacob, and refused Esau, respected them both as ill,
and the one no lesse than the other guiltie of damnation
for originall sinne, which was alike in them both. And
therefore where iustly he might haue reprobated both,
he saued of mercie one. This is that strong foundation,
whereon the papists thinke predestination to be built: the
which I willingly doe admit, as which will make good my
positiō euen against themselues. For seeing as they grant.
That God beholding all in a generall condemnation for
originall sinne,Marke wel this Dilemma. saueth the elect of mercie, and iustly decreeth
to condemne the reprobate for originall sinne: it
followeth of necessity, that either some reprobate shall be
saued, which the papists neither dare nor may auouch, or
els that concupiscence remaining after baptisme, is sinne
indeed,Junò per actualia, & propria sua peccata quid ni? which is the doctrine I defend. The consequution
and illation is euident. For if originall sinne be truly remitted
in baptisme, and be not truly sinne in the baptised,
then can none be iustly damned that are baptised: for how

shal they be iustly condemned, for that which is remitted?
it cannot be. And to graunt that all baptised persons
shalbe saued, is most absurd; neither can I thinke any papist
so senselesse, as to affirme the same. For to name one
for all: their Pope Boniface the eight, who (as their owne
deere frier Caranza saith) entred into the popedome as a
foxe,Caranza in summa conciliorum. fol. 369. reigned in it as a wolfe, and died in the end as a dog;
is not I trow a saint in heauen; and yet must we thinke he
was baptised, or els a terrible vae vobis will fall vpon our
papists.
            Now because the papists vse to boast, that S. Austen is
on their side, I will prooue at large, that he defendeth
this my doctrine here deliuered: and that I purpose in
God to doe so plainely and euidently, as none can stand
in doubt thereof, that shal seriously ponder my discourse.
            
               The first place of Saint Austen.
               
                  SIcut caecitas cordis, quam solus remouet illuminator Deus, & peccatum
est quo in deum non creditur;
                  Aug. lib. 5. cont. Iulian. cap. 3. tom. 7. 
                  & poena peccati, qua cor superbum
digna animaduersione punitur: & causa peccati, cum mali
aliquid caeci cordis errore committitur; ita concupiscentia carnis, aduersus
quam bonus concupiscit spiritus, & peccatum est, quia inest illi
inobedientia contra dominatum mentis: & poena peccati est, quia
reddita est meritis inobedientis; & causa peccatiest, defectione consentientis,
vel contagione nascentis. Like as the blindnesse of
heart, which onely God the illuminatour doth remooue,
is sinne, through which man beleeueth not in God; and
the punishment of sinne, wherwith a proud heart is iustly
chastened; and the cause of sinne, when through the
blindnesse of heart any euill is committed; euen so concupiscence
of the flesh, against which the good spirit coueteth,
is sinne, because there is in it disobedience against
the gouernment of the mind: and also a punishment of
sinne, because it was rendred to the merits of the disobedient:
and it is also the cause of sinne, by defection of him
that consenteth, or by contagion of the child that is
borne.
               
                  
In these wordes, Saint Austen expresseth three things
precisely; first, that concupiscence in the regenerate, is
the punishment of sinne; secondly, that it is the cause of
sinne; thirdly, that it is sinne it selfe. VVhich three, S.
Austen doth not onely distinguish, but withall he yeeldeth
three seuerall reasons for the same: and that he speaketh
of the regenerate, it is euident in this; because he speaketh
of that concupiscence, against which the good spirit
striueth. Most impudent therefore are the papists, when
they auouch with open mouth, that Saint Austen onely
calleth it sinne, because it is the cause of sinne. And the
gentle reader may here also obserue, that S. Austen compareth
concupiscence of the flesh, with that blindnesse of
heart which breedeth infidelity in man: which how great
a sinne it is, euery one can tell.
            
            
               The second place of Saint Austen.
               
                  NEque enim nulla est iniquitas, cum in vno homine vel superiora
inferioribus turpit
                        •
                     r seruiunt;
                  Aug. contr. Iulian. lib. 6. cap. 8. to. 7. 
                  vel inferiora superioribus contumaciter
reluctantur, etiam si vincere non sinantur. For it is some
iniquitie, when in one man, either the superiour parts
shamefully serue the inferiour; or the inferiour partes
stubbornly striue against the superiour, although they be
not suffered to preuaile.
               These words of Saint Austen are so plaine, as the papists
cannot possible inuent any euasion at all. For he saith in
plaine and expresse tearmes; that the rebellion which is
betweene the flesh and the spirit, is sinne; yea, that it is
euen then sinne, when it is resisted, and cannot preuaile.
At which time and in which respect, the papists will haue
it to be merite, but no sinne at all. Behold a flat contradiction,
it is sinne, saith Saint Austen: it is merite and no
sinne, say the papists.
            
            
               The third place of Saint Austen.
               
                  SI in parente baptizato potest & esse & peccatum non esse,
                  August. de. nuptijs & concupis. lib. 1. cap. 25. to. 7. 
                  cur eadem
ipsa in prole peccatum est? ad haec respondetur, dimitti concupiscentiam

carnis in baptismo, non vt non sit, sed vt in peccatum non
imputetur. Sequitur, non ergo aliquid remanet quod non remittatur,
cum fit sicut scriptum est, propitius dominus omnibus iniquitatibus
nostris; sed donec fiat & quod sequitur,Ps. 103. v. 3. qui sanat omnes languores
tuo, qui redimet de corruptione vitam tuam: manet in corpore mortis
huius carnalis concupiscentia.
                  It remaineth sinne by nature, and so passeth by regeneration, from the parents to the children. If concupiscence can both be in
the baptised parent, and withall be no sinne, why is the
selfe same made sinne in the child? to this, this is the answere:
that the concupiscence of the flesh is forgiuen in
baptisme, not so that it remaine not, but so that it is not
reputed for sinne. Not any thing therefore remaineth,
which is not forgiuen, seeing that is done which is written,
God is mercifull to all our iniquities: but vntill that
be done also which followeth: which healeth all thine infirmities;
which redeemeth thy life from corruption:
carnall concupiscence abideth in the bodie of this death.
               Saint Austen in these wordes sheweth plainely, that
concupiscence remaineth aswell in the baptised parent,
as in the vnbaptised child; yet with this difference, that
it is sinne in the parent, though not for sinne imputed;
but in the child it both is sinne, and is also so reputed. And
the reader must not forget, that Saint Austen saith, Nothing
remaineth which is not forgiuen. He doth not say,
Nothing is sinne that remaineth; or thus, No sinne remaineth:
but thus, Not any thing remaineth, which is not remitted.
As if he had said, sinne indeede remaineth still
in the baptised, but shall not be imputed to the faithfull.
Marke well gentle reader, the phrase which Saint Austen
here vseth. It is forgiuen that still remaineth, saith Saint
Austen; or, not any thing remaineth, which is not forgiuen.
Therefore he must needes meane, that something
remaineth which is sinne, though pardoned and not reputed
sinne. For nothing hath need of forgiuenesse, but
that which is sinne indeed.
            
            
               The fourth place of Saint Austen.
               
                  I Deo apostolus non ait facere bonum sibi non adiacere,
                  August. de nupttijs & concupis. libr. 1. cap. 29. 
                  sed perficere.
Multum enim boni facit, qui facit quod scriptum est; post concupiscentias

tuas non eas; sed non perficit, quia non implet quod scriptum
est; non concupisces. The apostle therefore saith not, that
he hath not power to doe good, but that he cannot perfect
that which is good. For he doth great good, who
doth that which is written; Follow not thy lustes: but he
doth not perfect his well doing, because he doth not fulfil
that which is written, Thou shalt not lust.
               Out of these wordes of Saint Austen, I note many memorable
documents. First, that Saint Austen speaketh
these wordes of the regenerate; for they onely can doe
this good, whereof the apostle speaketh. Secondly, that
though the regenerate can doe good, and striue against
lust; yet can they not doe that good so perfectly, but it
is alwayes annexed to sinne, and chayned with it, as with
an heauie yokefellow. Thirdly, that the tenth commandement
(marke well my wordes) prohibiteth not onely
actuall lust done with consent, but also originall lust committed
without consent; and consequently, that concupiscence
remaining in the regenerate, is sinne properlie
and formallie. I prooue it, because Saint Paul could not
performe this precept, as Saint Austen truely and learnedly
obserued: who for all that touching actuall sinne,
was most free and innocent. For he fought mightily against
his raging concupiscence, and did in no wise yeeld
thereunto. He was therefore guiltie by reason of originall
concupiscence, which abode in him against his will.
Therefore most absurd is the exposition of the Rhemists,Rom. 7. v. 7.
who beare the reader in hand, that Saint Paul speaketh
not of the habituall concupiscence, or sensuall desire and
inclination to euill, when he forbiddeth to lust. For if
onely the consent of our reason and mind, to obey and to
follow the lusts thereof, were sinne indeede; then should
Saint Austens exposition be very childish and too too absurd,
who telleth vs plainely in expresse tearmes, That
S. Paul could not fulfill that precept, although he did not
yeeld his consent vnto it, neither did obey or follow the
desires thereof. No, no, Saint Paul had no such meaning;

he named it sinne, as it is indeed. He saith, hee had not
knowne lust to be sinne,Rom. 7. v. 7. except the law had said, Thou
shalt not lust. But he could neuer be ignorant, that concupiscence
with consent was sinne; seeing the verie heathen
men did know, and confesse the same. Againe, that
actuall concupiscence which our Rhemists speake of,Matt. 5. v. 22. is
forbidden in the sixt, seuenth, and eight commaundements;
as Christ himselfe expondeth them. And consequently,
the tenth commandement forbiddeth, the very
habituall and sensuall desire, or inclination to sinne, and
the euill fruits thereof; that is, wicked, vicious, and iniurious
thoughts, though wee resist and striue against
them. This is the expresse doctrine of Saint Austen in another
place,August. de nupt. & concup. lib. 1. cap. 27. which he deliuereth in these words; Agitenim
aliquid concupiscentia carnis, & quando non exhibetur ei vel cordis
assensus, vbi regnet, vel membra velut arma, quibus impleatur
quod iubet: agit autem quid, nisi ipsa desideria mala & turpia?
Non enim si bona & licita essent, eis obedire prohiberet apostolus.
For concupiscence of the flesh worketh something, euen
when there is not giuen vnto it, either the consent of the
heart,Rom. 6. v. 12. where it may reigne; or the members as weapons,
which may accomplish what it appointeth. And what
doth it, but the very wicked and filthy desires? For if
they were good and lawfull, the apostle would not forbid
to obey them.
               Marke these wordes gentle reader; for they fortifie
that which is already said, and giue a deadly blow to the
papists: two things are cleered by this testimony of Saint
Austen, the one, that concupiscence to which consent is
not giuen, bringeth foorth ill desires: the other, that the
said desires are vnlawfull, and prohibited by the law of
God. And so we haue it euidently prooued, by many
inuinsible reasons; that concupiscence habitued, to
which the regenerate yeeld no consent, but stoutly resist
the same; is so farre from being meritorious, as the papist
teach, that it is sinne formally, and properly so called.
Neither will it serue their turne, to obiect that which is euer

in their mouthes, that it is inuoluntarie, and can no
way be auoided, and so no sinne at all. This obiection I
grant, carrieth a maiestie with it; and it seemeth to many
men, to be insoluble. But God willing, I shall make it so
cleere and euident, as euery child may behold with facilitie,
the weakenesse, falshood, and absurditie thereof.
               Saint Austen prooueth at large in sundrie places of his
workes,Aug. lib. 1. retract. cap. 13. pag. 13. that inuoluntarie motions of concupiscence are
sinne in deed, and truely so called. In his first booke of
retractations, he hath these wordes; Illud quod in paruulis
dicitur originale peccatum, cum adhuc non vtantur libero arbitrio
voluntatis, non absurdè vocatur etiam voluntarium; quid ex primi
hominis mala voluntate contractum, factum est quodammodo
haereditarium. Non ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      falsum est quod dixi, vs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      adeo peccatum
voluntarium malum est, vt nullo modo sit peccatum si non sit voluntarium.
That which in infants is called originall sinne, when
as yet they vse not free arbitrement of will, is not absurdly
called voluntarie; because being contracted of the euill
will of the first man, it is become in a sort hereditarie.
It is not therefore false which I said,Aug. retract. lib. 1. cap. 15. pag. 16. sinne is an euill so voluntarie,
that it is no way sinne, if it be not voluntarie.
               Againe, in an other place S. Austen hath these words;
Quod si quisquam dicit etiam ipsam cupiditatē nihil esse aliud quam
voluntatē, sed vitiosam peccato
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      seruientem, non resistendum est, nec
de verbis, cum res constat, controuersia facienda est. Sic enim ostenditur
sine voluntate nullū esse peccatū, siue in opere, siue in origine. But
if any man say, that concupiscence is nothing else, than a
wil that is vitious & seruing sinne, there is no resistance to
be made; neither must controuersie be in words, when
the thing is cleere & euident. For so we proue euery sinne
to be voluntarie, either in the act, or else in the originall.
               Againe, he hath these wordes;August. vbi sup pag. 17. 
                  Propterea non perturbat de
paruulis questio, quia ex illius origine rei tenentur qui voluntate peccauit,
quando libero & ad faciendū, & ad non faciendū motu animi
non carebat, ei
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ab opere malo abstinendi sūma potestas erat. Therfore
let no man be troubled with the question about infants,
because they are guiltie by reason of his originall,

that sinned voluntarily; hauing free motion of mind both
to do & not to do, as also full power to absteine from euil.
               Thus we see most euidently, that the vnuoluntary motions
of concupiscence, so tearmed of the papists, are both
sinfull and voluntarie: sinfull in their nature, and voluntarie
in the originall. And the papists may as well denie
concupiscence to bee sinne in the infants vnbaptised, as
in them that are baptised, vpon this their falsly supposed
ground. For it is as vnuoluntarie in the one, as it is in the
other; neither can it bee any more auoided in the one,
than in the other. This is the gordian knot which the
papists are neuer able to loose, or vntie.
               
                  Bellarmine himselfe is enforced to confesse,Bellarm. tom. 3. col. 400. vide Aug. de spiritu & liter. cap. vlt. tom. 3. that Saint
Austen acknowledgeth all the motions of concupiscence,
euen those which be inuoluntarie, to be properly sinne,
and flatly condemned by the tenth commaundement.
These are his expresse wordes; Haec dicta sunt ad mentem
S. Augustini, qui precepto, non concupisces, intelligit prohiberi
aliquo modo motus omnes concupiscentiae, etiam inuoluntarios; assensum
vero his motibus, prohibere docet illo alio precepto: post concupiscentias
tuas non eas. These things are spoken after Saint
Austens mind,Eccles. 18. v. 30. who by this precept, (Thou shalt not lust)
vnderstandeth all the motions of concupiscence, euen the
inuoluntarie, to be prohibited in some sort; and that the
consent to these motions, is forbidden by that other precept;
Follow not thy concupiscence. Thus writeth the
Iesuiticall Cardinall: by whose doctrine it is euident, that
Saint Austen affirmeth the first motions of concupiscence:
which preuent reason cannot be auoyded to bee condemned
by Saint Paul, as sinfull and against the law of
God. Which doctrine of Saint Austen doth so sting and
confound all papists, that Bellarmine knoweth not in the
world what he shall answere to the same. And therefore
deceitfully he addeth in his exposition of Saint Austens
words, the word (quodammodo, after a sort;) which word
neither is in Saint Austen, nor yet agreeable to his meaning.
For Saint Austen saith plainely, simply, and absolutely,

without all ands, or ifs, or other qualifications, that
such motions are forbidden by this commandement, (non
concupisces.) And for the consummation of this doctrine,
(which ouerthroweth the best part of poperie,) I will
here adde to Saint Pauls doctrine, and the exposition of
Saint Austen; the flat testimonie of Saint Iohn an other
Apostle, who singeth the same song with Saint Paul.
               
               Saint Iohn in his first epistle,1. Ioan. 3. v. 4. hath these words;

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Euery one
that sinneth, transgresseth the law. And sinne is the transgression
of the law. These are S. Iohns words truly translated
out of the originall Greeke. But before we proceed
any further in the discourse hereof,
                     Rhem
                           •
                         test. in the notes in 1. Ioan. 3. 4. let vs take a view of
that doctrine, which our papists of Rhemes haue sent vs.
These are their words; Iniquitie is not taken here for
wickednesse, as it is commonly vsed both in Latin and in
our language, as is plaine by the Greeke word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifying
nothing else, but swaruing or declining from the
straight line of the law of God, or nature. So that the Apostle
meaneth, that euery sinne is an obliquitie or defect
from the rule of the law: but not contrarie, that euery
such swaruing from the law, should be properly a sinne,
as the heretikes doe vntruly gather, to proue that concupiscence
remaining after baptisme is a very sinne, though
we neuer giue our consent vnto it. Thus they write. Out
of whose words, I gather two notable documēts; the one,
that the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is a defect and swaruing from the law,
but not properly a sinne: the other, that if 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   be proued
to be sinne properly, then wil it also follow of necessity by
S. Iohns doctrine, that concupiscence in the regenerate is
properly sinne. Let this doctrine be wel marked, as which
is no lesse apparant then important. Now, it only remaineth
for the victorie, & truth of this article, That I proue
against our papists the Rhemists, that the Greeke word

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   doth signifie sinne properly: behold the proofe.
               A very famous papist and great linguist,Arias Montan. in 1. Ioan. 3. 
                  Ben. Arias
Montanus, saith plainely in expresse teames, that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  
is transgressio legis, the transgression of the law. Now, that
the transgression of Gods law is properly sinne, none is so
sottish, that he doth not vnderstand it; none so impious,
that he will denie it; none so peeuish, that he will not acknowledge
it. But I proue the same.
               S. Ambrose hath these words: Quid est enim peccatum, nisi
preuaricatio legis diuine,
                  Ambros. de parad. cap. 8. tom. 4. 
                  & coelestium inobedientia preceptorum?
For what is sinne,Vide Ambros. in 7. cap. ad rom. & in sine huius articuli. but the transgression of Gods law, and
disobedience to his heauenly precepts? Loe, sinne (saith
S. Ambrose) is nothing els but the transgression of Gods
law, that is to say, nothing els but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , as S. Iohn tearmeth
it, and as Arias Montanus doth interprete it.
               S. Austen hath these words:August. de consensu Euangel. cap. 4. tom. 4. 
                  Peccatum est transgressio legis.
Sinne is a transgression of the law. Loe S. Austen concludeth
with S. Ambrose, and they both agree with S. Iohn.
               
               The same S. Austen in another place defineth sinne in
this manner.Aug. cont. Faust. lib. 22. cap. 27. tom. 6. pag. 281. 
                  Peccatum est dictum, vel factum, vel concupitum aliquid,
contra legem aternam. Sinne is a word, deed, thought, or
desire, against the eternall law (of God.) And what the
eternall law is, he sheweth in these words next following
in the same place: Lex aeterna est ratio diuina vel voluntas Dei,
ordinem naturalem conseruari iubens,
                  Vide Bernard. de aduent. dom. serm. 6. to. 1. p. 16. 
                  perturbari vetans. The eternall
law is the reason or will of God, which commaundeth
the naturall order to be obserued, and forbiddeth the
same to be perturbed.
               Thus writeth this auntient, graue, and learned father;
by whose iudgement it is properly sinne, whatsoeuer is
against the will of God. So then, Gods will is that law and
rule, by which euery sinne must be measured and tried.
And consequently, whatsoeuer deflecteth, declineth, or
swarueth from the will of God, the same is most properlie
sinne. The reason hereof is euident, because not to be correspondent
and agreeable to Gods will, is the very intrinsecall
reason, essence, and nature of sinne. But so it is,
that the 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , disorder, and concupiscence in the regenerate,
is repugnant and disagreeable to the will of God:
and consequently, it must be sinne indeed.
               
                  
S. Bede,
                  
                     
                        •
                      Beda in 1. Ioan. 3 who for his learning and vertue was renowned
throughout the whole Christian world, and thereupon
surnamed venerabilis, hath these expresse words: Virtus huius
sententiae facilius in lingua Graecorum, qua edita est epistola, comprehenditur.
Si quidem apud eos iniquitas 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      vocatur, quod significat
quasi contra legem vel sine lege factum. Si quidem lex Graece

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      appellatur sequitur; sed & latinum nomen eidem rationi congruit,
quod iniquitas quasi aequitati aduersa nuncupatur. Quia quicunque
peccat, contarius nimirum aequitati diuinae legis peccando
existit. The force and efficacie of this sentence is more easily
perceiued in the Greeke tongue, in which the epistle
was written. For iniquitie with them is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which
signifieth, As done against law, or without law. For the law
is called in Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . The Latine word also agreeth to
the same reason, because it is called iniquitie, as being against
equitie: for euery one that sinneth, is by reason of
sinne, contrarie to the equitie of Gods law. See more to
this effect in the eight article following.
               
                  Dionysius Carthusianus,
                  Dionys. Carthus. in 1. Ioan. 3. a famous papist, hath these words:
Lex autem diuina est aequitas ipsa; sic
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      mortale peccatum est iniquitas,
id est, non aequitas, vtpote violatio aequitatis. The law of
God is equitie it selfe: and consequently, iniquitie, that
is, not equitie, to wit, the transgression of equitie, is a mortall
sinne.
               
                  Nicolaus de Lyra,
                  Lyr. in 1. Ioan. 3. another famous popish writer, hath
these words: Peccatum est transgressio legis diuinae. Lex autem
diuina est ipsa aequitas; & ideo in omni peccato mortali est equitatis
corruptio, & per consequens, iniquitas. Sinne is the transgression
of the law diuine, and therefore in euery mortall sinne
there is corruption of equitie: and consequently, there is
also iniquitie.
            
            
               The Corollarie.
               Now gentle reader, thou hast heard the expresse words
and plaine testimonies, as well of the auntient fathers,
S. Ambrose, S. Austen, and S. Bede, as also of the two famous
popish writers, Carthusianus, and Lyranus, concerning this
great question and most important point of doctrine, in

which the very life of poperie doth consist.
               I haue proued first euen by the testimonie of S. Paule,
and of S. Austen, expounding his words, as also of the Iesuit
Bellarmine graunting the same, that concupiscence remaining
after baptisme in the regenerate, is both called
sinne, and is properly sinne indeed.
               Secondly, that the first motions of concupiscence which
are connaturall to the corrupt man, and can no way be
auoided, are flatly forbidden by this commaundement,
Thou shalt not couet.
               
               Thirdly, that though the said rebellious motions be
inuoluntarie in the worke; yet are they voluntarie in the
originall: which is sufficient saith S. Austen.
               
               Fourthly, that Cardinall Bellarmine not able truly to answere
S. Austens words, hath in his explication added deceitfully,
this word (quodammodo) after a sort: VVhich word
cannot be found in S. Austen, neither is it agreeable to his
meaning. But such beggerly shifts and sillie euasions are
the props and staies of late Romish religion.
               Fiftly, that by S. Iohns doctrine euery deflection from
the eternall law, is properly 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and consequently, it is
properly sinne.
               Sixtly, that S. Ambrose, S. Austen, and S. Bede, doe all
three affirme constantly and with vniforme assent, that
sinne is nothing els but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and a transgression of the
law of God.
               Seuenthly, that by the flat doctrine not only of Saint
Bede, but also of two famous popish writers (whose authoritie
is euer most forcible against papists) Dionysius Carthus.
and Nicholaus Lyranus, iniquitie is a mortall sinne, because
it is against the eternall law, which is equitie it selfe, and
the will of God.
               Eightly, that our papists of Rhemes do confute themselues
vnawares, while they tell vs, that euery sinne is a
declining and swaruing from Gods law: but withal denie,
that euery such swaruing from Gods law, is properly sinne.
For, seeing Gods law is nothing els but his will, as is alreadie

proued, the papists must either confesse, that to swarue
and decline from Gods will is properly sinne; or els, that
to decline and swarue from Gods will, is consonant and agreeable
to his will: which to hold, is not onely most absurd,
but withall implieth flat contradiction.
               Against this discourse of originall concupiscence in the
regenerate, nothing in truth can be alledged for the papists.
Yet,Rhemists in 1. John 3. to take away all wrangling, I will truly put
downe the vpshot of our Rhemists, and frame my answer
to the same. Thus doe they write, Though in the 5. chapter,
verse 17. the Apostle turne the speech, affirming euery
iniquitie to be sinne; yet there the Greeke word is not
the same as before, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . By which it is plaine,
that there he meaneth by iniquitie, mans actuall and proper
transgression, which must needs be a sinne. These are
their words, to which I answere in this wise.
               First, that though the Greeke word be different, yet is
it equiualent, and so the sence all one. This to be so, S. Austen
will testifie with me in these words: Nemo dicat, aliud est
peccatum,
                  August. in epist. Ioan. tract 4. tom. 9. pag. 412. 
                  at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      aliud iniquitas. Nemo dicat, ego peccator homo sum,
sed iniquus non sum. Omnis qui facit peccatum, & iniquitatem facit.
Let no man say, sinne is one thing, and iniquitie another
thing. Let no man say, I am a sinfull man, but not vnrighteous.
For euery one that committeth sinne, committeth
also iniquitie. Thus writeth S. Austen, and what he
saith, the same say Beda and Oecumenius. VVho as we see
here, doth plainely and expressely affirme, sinne and iniquitie
to be all one. So that whatsoeuer is sinne, must also
be iniquitie; and whatsoeuer is iniquitie, the same likewise
must be sinne. Neither is it to the purpose to iterate their
vsuall song, because, as is alreadie prooued, Saint Ambrose
telleth them in another place, that this sinne is committed
against the will of man.Ambros in 7 cap. ad Roman. p. 205 These are his words: Numquid
quia inuitum hominem dicit peccare, immunis debet videri à crimine;
quia hoc agit quod non vult, pressus vi potestatis? Non vtique. Ipsius
enim vitio & desidia haec caepta sunt. Quia enim mancipauit se
per assensum peccato, iure illius dominatur. Is therefore a man

cleere and free from sinne, because he saith man sinneth
against his will? because he doth that which he would not
doe, being pressed with the violence of power? No truly:
for these things began through his fault and negligence.
For seeing he consented to be a slaue vnto sinne, sinne by
right hath dominion ouer him. Loe, a man is guiltie of
sinne, yea euen of that sinne which he doth against his
will, and cannot auoid the same, that is, of originall concupiscence.
And S. Ambrose yeeldeth a reason hereof, because
this impossibilitie came of mans default. And this is the very
case of infants, as is alreadie said. Let the reader here
obserue seriously with me,Inuoluntarie in the act, yet voluntarie in the cause. that S. Ambrose calleth this inuoluntarie
concupiscence, crimen, a crime or mortall sinne.
               Secondly, that S. Bede affirmeth not only all to be sinne
which is iniquitie; but also reputeth the very corruption of
innocencie, which commeth of infirmitie, to be sinne in
Gods sight. These are his expresse words: Omnes qui peccant,
praeuaricationis rei sunt;
                  Beda vbi supr. 
                  hoc est, non solum illi qui data sibi scriptae
legis scita contemnunt, sed & illi qui innocentiam legis naturalis
quam in protoplasto omnes accepimus, siue infirmitate, siue negligentia
siue etiam ignorantia corrumpunt. All that sinne, are guiltie of
preuarication or transgression of the law; that is, not only
they which contemne the precepts of the written law giuen
them, but they also, which either of infirmitie, or of
negligence, or of ignorance, corrupt the innocencie of the
law of Nature, which we all receiue in the Protoplast
(Adam.)
               S. Ambrose in another place iumpeth with Bede in these
words:Ambros. in 7 cap ad Roman. p. 203 
                  Non discreuit concupiscentiam hanc à peccato, sed miscuit,
hoc significans, quia cum nec suspicio quidem esset istud non licerè
apud deum, cognoui inquit, esse peccatum. Sub sua persona, quasi generalem
agit causam. Lexita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      concupiscentiam prohibet, quae propterea
quod oblectamento est, non putabatur esse peccatum. He hath
not discerned this concupiscence from sinne, but hath
coupled it with sinne, signifying thereby, that when there
was not so much as any suspition, that this thing was not
lawfull before God, I knew, saith he, that it is sinne. Vnder

his own person, he pleadeth as it were the generall cause.
The law therefore forbiddeth concupiscence, which because
it delighteth, seemeth not to be sinne. Thus writeth
S. Ambrose; whose words cannot possibly be vnderstood of
any other concupiscence, than of that which is inuoluntarie
and originall.
               Thirdly, that their owne vulgar Latine text, (which
the late councell of Trent preferreth before both the Hebrew
and the Greeke, and commandeth all papists to vse
it as authenticall, and none other) hath the word (iniquitas)
in both places; and doth call as well 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   as 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Ininiquitie:
these are the expresse words; omnis iniquitas peccatum
est: All iniquitie is sinne. Loe, their owne translation
(to which all papists are tied as a Beare to a stake)
doth flatlie confound them all, and saith plainelie and expressely,
That euerie iniquitie is a sinne. And yet the papists
of Rhemes bluntishly and impudently defend the
contrarie, crying out with open mouthes, That some iniquitie
is not sinne. The truth is this, that they are driuen
to a non plus, and cannot tell in the world what to say against
this doctrine of concupiscence in the regenerate.
For both 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is truly and fitly tearmed iniquitas
or iniquitie. VVhich (but that I studie to be briefe) I could
shew by a thousand testimonies, out of S. Austen, S. Ambrose,
and S. Bede. Answere therefore ô papist if ye can, or if ye
dare not, because ye cannot, then reclaime your selues,
and yeeld vnto the truth for shame. I challenge you, and
adiure you, if your hearts faile you not, and if your owne
consciences condemne you not, to send me an answere to
this short challenge, which I haue compiled very briefely,
so once to prouoke you to the open combat, which I haue
now many years expected at your hands, and could neuer
yet find so much courage in any of you all. VVherefore to
seale vp the veritie of this article, as an vndoubted truth,
I will here adde for the complement, as amost delicat post-past,
to satisfie the longing appetites of the Iesuit Parsons,
the arch priest Blackwell, and all the traiterous crew of that

Iesuited brotherhood; the flat testimonie of their saint
Thomas Aquinas, whose doctrine they are bound to defend,
beleeue, and approue, and may not in any case refuse or
denie the same:Aquinas. 1. 2. q. 74. art. 3. 3. these are his expresse words; Dicendū quod
illud quod homo facit sine deliberatione rationisnon perfectè ipse facit;
quia nihil operatur ibi id quod est principale in homine, vnde non est
perfectè actus humanus, & per consequens non potest esse perfectè
actus virtutis vel peccati, sed aliquid imperfectum ingenere horum.
Vnde talis motus sensualitatis rationem perueniens, est peccatum veniale,
quod est quiddam imperfectum in genere peccati. VVe must
answere, that that which man doth without the deliberation
of reason, he doth it not perfectly, because that which
is the chiefest in man, worketh nothing there: wherefore
it is not perfectly mans act, and consequently it cannot be
perfectly the act of vertue or of sinne, but some vnperfect
thing in this kind. VVhereupon it commeth, that such a
motion of sensualitie preuenting reason, is a veniall sinne,
which is a certaine imperfect thing in the nature of sinne.
               Thus writeth Aquinas, out of whose words I note these
important obseruations. First, that this Aquinas is a popish
canonized saint. Secondly, that for his great learning he
was surnamed, Doctor Angelicus, The Angelicall Doctor.
Thirdly, that Pope Vrbanus the fourth, and Pope Innocentius
the fift, did so admire and reuerence the excellent learning
of this famous schoole-doctor (who was a learned
clarke indeed) that they confirmed his doctrine for authenticall,
and gaue it the first place after the canonicall
Scripture. Fourthly, that this great doctor, so highly renowned
in the Romish church, that no papist may denie
or gainesay that which he hath written, graunteeth freely,
teacheth plainely, and auoucheth constantly, that the inordinate
motion of sensualitie which goeth before reason
is properly a sinne, though but a veniall sinne, as he tearmeth
it. For it is one thing, to be a sinne perfectly, another
thing, to be a sinne properly. A veniall and little sinne is
as well and as truly a sinne, as a mortall and great sinne, as
the papists tearme them. For he is as truly and properly a

theefe that stealeth a lambe or a goose, as he that stealeth
an oxe or a horse, though not a theefe in so high degree.
For mortall and veniall sinnes (as the papists tearm them)
doe onely differ, Secundum magis & minus, according to
more and lesse. But in truth, euery sinne is mortall, as I
haue alreadie proued in my booke of Motiues.Add to this the sixt article, & note it well Answer ô
papists, if ye can; if not, repent for shame.
            
         
         
            The fift Article. Of the condigne
so supposed merite
of workes.
            
               THe papists either of ignorance or of
malice, doe most vnchristianlie slander
the professors of Christs Gospell, as
though they were enemies to good
workes: when in deed, they both
thinke, preach, and write, more Christianly,
more religiously, and more
sincerely, than the papists doe, of and concerning
godlie actions and good workes. In regard hereof,
before I come to the maine point of that, which I purpose
to oppugne in this article: I graunt first of all, that
though good workes neither doe nor can goe before
iustification; yet they euer follow (as the fruits follow
the tree) the persons that are freely iustified by
Gods mercie in Christ Iesus, for his merits and condigne
deserts.
            I graunt secondly, that though good workes goe not
before iustification; yet doe they so necessarilie goe before
saluation, that no man without them can attaine

eternall life, when possibilitie is graunted to doe them.
            I graunt thirdly, that good workes are the true effects
of predestination; by which the children of God make
their saluation sure vnto themselues, and manifest vnto
the world. Yet this notwithstanding, I hold constantlie,
beleeue stedfastly, and affirme Christianlie, that albeit
good workes are the effects of predestination, and necessarie
fruits of faith and iustification; yet neither are they
the cause of predestination, nor of iustification, neither
doe they or can they merit ex condigno, eternall life or glorie.
I say (merit ex condigno) because I willingly graunt
with the auntient writers and holie fathers, that good
workes in a godly sense may be said to merit; that is to
say, to impetrate fauour and reward at Gods hands, for
his mercie and promise sake, who hath promised not to
leaue vnrewarded,Matt. 10. v. 42. lac. 1. 12. so much as one cup of cold water giuen
in his name: but they can neuer truly be said to merite,
for any worthinesse or condigne desert of the works
that are done. Against which last part, I contend with
the papists at this present; and namely, against the late
decree of the late Romish Counsell of Trent,Concil. Trid. sess. 6. die 13. Ian. can. 32. whose expresse
wordes are these; Si quis dixerit hominis iustificati bona
opera ita esse dona Dei, vt non sint etiam bona ipsius iustificati merita,
aut ipsum iustificatum, bonis operibus quae ab eo per Dei gratiam
& Iesu Christi meritum, cuius membrum viuum est, fiunt, non verè
mereri augmentum gratiae, vitam aeternam, & ipsius vitae aeternae, si
tamen in gratia decesserit, consecutionem, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   etiam gloriae augmentum,
anathema sit. If any shall say, that the good workes of
the iustified man are so the gifts of God, that they be not
also the good merites of him that is iustified; or that the
iustified man, by his good workes which he doth by the
grace of God, and merit of Christ Iesus, whose liuely
member he is, doth not truly merit the increase of grace,
eternall life, and the consequution of the same eternall
life, if he shal depart hence in grace, and also the augment
of glory, let him be accursed.
            Here we see the flat doctrine of the Romish Church;

which whosoeuer will not beleeue stedfastly, must bee
damned euerlastingly, and with fire and faggot bee sent
packing speedily. Yet that this doctrine is most absurd in
it selfe, most blaphemous against the free mercie of God,
and most iniurious to the inestimable merits of our Lord
Iesus; I vndertake by Gods assistance, to prooue by such
cleere and euident demonstrations, as shalbe able to satisfie
all indifferent readers, and to put the papists to silence
for euer in this behalfe.
            
               The first reason, drawne from the holy Scriptures.
               THe first place of holy scripture, is conteined in these
words;

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . But the gift of God is life euerlasting,Rom. 6. v. 23. in Christ Iesus
our Lord. This text of scripture doth plainely conuince,
that life eternall cannot be condignely atchieued, by the
workes of man; for being the free gift of God, it can no
way be due to the merite of mans worke. The Rhemists
to extenuate the cleerenesse of this text, and as it were
to hide and conceale the euidencie thereof, doe translate,
for the Gift of God, the Grace of God, following their old
vulgar Latin edition. VVhich translation though in this
place it mae be admitted, yet doth it not sufficiently expresse
the efficacie of the originall word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which
signifieth a gift freely bestowed; for which respect, their
owne famous linguist Arias Montanus, who was the onely
man chosen as most sufficient, for the translation of the
old testament out of the Hebrew, and of the new out of
Greeke, and imployed by the king of Spaine for that onlie
end, did not translate gratia, but donatio; not grace,
but donation (or free gift.) Now, let vs see and view the
iudgement of the holy fathers, vpon this portion of holy
writ. Saint Theodoret hath these wordes; Hic non dicit mercedem,
                  Theod. in cap. 6. ad Roman.
                  sed gratiam: est enim Dei donum vita aeterna, & si quis enim
summam & absolutam iustitiam praestiterit, temporalibus laboribus
aeterna in aequilibrio non respondent. He saith no there reward,
but grace; for eternal life is the gift of God: For although

one could performe the highest and absolute iustice, yet
eternall ioyes being weighed with temporall labours, are
nothing answerable.
               Saint Chrysostome hath these wordes;Chrysost, in cap. 6. ad Roman. 
                  Non eundem seruat
oppositorum ordinem. Non enim dicit, merces benefactorum vestrorum
vita aeterna, sed donum Dei vita aeterna; vt ostenderet, quod
non proprijs viribus liberati sint, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      debitum, aut merces, aut laborum
sit retributio, sed omnia illa ex diuino munere gratuitò acceperint.
He doth not obserue the same order of opposites.
For he saith not, eternall life is the reward of your good
workes; but, eternall life is the gift of God: that he might
shew, that they are not deliuered by their owne strength
or vertues; and that it is not a debt, or a wages, or a retribution
of labours, but that they haue receiued all those
things freely of the gift of God.
               
                  Origen writeth thus,Origen. in cap. 6. ad Rom. vpon the same wordes; Deum verò
non erat dignum militibus suis stipendia, quasi debitum ali
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      dare;
sed donum & gratiam quae est vita aeterna, in Christo Iesu domino
nostro. But it was not a thing worthy beseeming God, to
giue stipends to his souldiers, as a due debt or wage; but
to bestow on them a gift or free grace, which is eternall
life in Christ Iesus our Lord.
               Saint Ambrose hath these wordes;Ambros. in cap. 6. ad Rom. 
                  Sicut enim sequentes peccatum
acquirunt mortem, ita & sequentes gratium Dei, id est, fidem
Christi quae donat peccata, babebunt vitam aeternam. For as they
that follow sinne, gaine death: so they that follow the
grace of Christ, that is, the faith of Christ which forgiueth
sinnes, shall haue eternall life.
               
                  Theophilact hath these wordes;Theoph. in cap. 6. Rom. 
                  Gratiam autem, non mercedem
dixit à Deo futurum, perinde ac si inquiat; non enim laborum
accipitis premia, sed per gratiam fiunt haec omnia in Christo Iesu, qui
haec operatur & factitat. He said grace, not wages, was to
come from God; as if he should say, for ye receiue not rewards
of labours, but all these things are done by grace
in Christ Iesus, who worketh and doth them.
               
                  Anselmus and Photius haue the same wordes in effect,
which I omit in regard of breuitie.
               
                  
By these manifold testimonies of the holy fathers, the
doctrine which I defend, is cleere and euident; viz. that
eternall life is the free gift of God, and is not merited or
purchased by desert of man; that eternall life is not a
due debt, a deserued wages, or retribution of mans labours,
but proceedeth wholy and solie of the free mercy
and grace of God; that mans workes waighed in the ballance,
with the ioyes of heauen, are nothing at all answerable
vnto them. To which fathers, I will add the verdict
of Paulus Burgensis,
                  Paulus Burgen. addit. 2 in 6. ca. ad Rom. a verie famous popish Spanish Bishop.
These are his wordes: Noluit ergo dicere, stipendium iustitiae
vita aeterna: sed maluit dicere, gratia Dei vita aeterna: quia eadem
merita quibus redditur, non a nobis sunt, sed in nobis à Deo facta
sunt per gratiam. He would not therefore say, eternall life
is the stipend of iustice: but he had rather say, eternall
life is the grace of God: because the same merits to which
it is rendered, are not of our selues, but wrought in our
selues by God through grace.
               The second text of holy scripture, is contained in these
wordes:Rom. 8. v. 18. I count that the afflictions of this present time,
are not worthy of the future glory which shall be reuealed
toward vs. Loe, all our 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , all our passions, afflictions,
and penalties, that we are able to endure in this
life, are so farre from being meritorious of eternall life,
that they are in no wise comparable to the same.
               
                  Theoderetus doth liuely expresse this verietie, in these
most golden wordes:Theodor. in cap. 8. ad Rom. 
                  Superant certamina coronae, non comparantur
cum laboribus remunerationes labor enim paruus est, sed
magnum lucrum speratur. Et propterea non mercedem, sed gloriam
vocauit ea quae expectantur. The conflicts of the crowne doe
remaine, the labours are not comparable to the rewards:
for the labour is small, but the gaine hoped for, is great.
And therefore the things expected, are not called a reward,
but glory.
               
                  Anselmus hath these wordes;Anselmus in 8. cap. ad Rom. 
                  Hoc est, si quis pateretur omnes
paenarum acerbitates, quae in tempore presentis vitae sufferri possunt;
non essent omnes illae passiones dignum meritum ad consequutionem

futurae gloriae, quae ablato omni velamine reuelabitur in nobis.
If one should suffer all kindes of torment, which can bee
endured in this life: yet would not all those afflictions,
torments, or passions, be a sufficient and condigne merite,
to atteine the future glory; which, when euery
vaile is taken out of the way, shalbe reuealed in vs. Marke
well these wordes in this famous popish writer, because
they are most important: for, seeing he was a great papist,
his proofe must needes be good against the papists.
Againe, his words are so cleere and manifest, that no euasion
can haue place. For, he saith in plaine and expresse
tearmes; that all which is possible to be done or endured
in this world, can not be a worthy or condigne merite of
eternall life. No answere in truth, can be made hereunto,
it iumpeth in deed; with the true sense and meaning of
Saint Paul.
               
               The third place of holy scripture,Tit. 3. 5. is contained in
these words: Not by the works of iustice which we haue
done, but according to his mercie he hath saued vs, by
the lauer of regeneration and renouation of the holy
Ghost. These are the Apostles words, euen as our Rhemists
haue alledged them. By which words it is most
cleere and apparant, that we are not onely iustified, but
also saued of meere mercie and the free gift of God. And
consequently, that eternall life hath no merite on the behalfe
of man. For after saluation once accomplished, all
merite is vaine and needlesse.
               
                  Anselmus hath these golden words;Anselmus in tit. cap. 3. 
                  Tunc saluos nos fecit,
qui nostris meritis eramus perditione digni: non enim ex operibus iustitiae
quae fecimus nos, processit haec salus, quia nulla opera iustitiae feceramus,
vnde salutem meruissemus; sed ipse secundum misericordiam
suam saluos nos fecit, non secundum merita nostra nobis hanc salutem
dedit. Then did he saue vs, who by our owne merites
deserued perdition. For, this saluation came not from the
workes of iustice, which we haue done, because we had
done no workes of iustice, by which wee should merite
saluation: but hee according to his mercie saued vs,

and not according to our merites gaue hee vs this saluation.
               The famous papist Dionysius Carthusianus,
                  Dionys. in tit. 3. expoundeth
Saint Paul euen as Anselmus did. These are his wordes:
Non ex operibus iustitiae quae fecimus nos: id est, non propter merita
nostra quae nulla fuerunt, quia predictis peccatis eramus obnoxij sed
secundam suam misericordiam saluos nos fecit, à potestate diaboli &
reatuaeterui tormenti, merito suae conuersations & passionis. Not
of the works of righteousnesse which we haue done; that
is, not for our merites which were none at all, because we
were subiect to the afore named sinnes: but according to
his mercie hath he saued vs, from the power of the deuill
and guilt of eternall torment, by the merit of his holy
conuersation and passion. Loe, our saluation commeth
not of mans merits, but of the merits of the sonne of
God. This shall suffice for the first reason, which is drawne
from the authortiie of holy writ.
            
            
               The second reason, drawne from the authoritie
of the holy fathers.
               SAint Austen hath many excellent testimonies in his
workes, which doe euidently approoue and confirme
this my doctrine, against the popish supposed condigne
merit of works; but I will content my selfe, with one or
two at this present.Aug. ad Hieron. epist. 29. Thus doth he write; Virtus est charitas,
quaid quod diligendū est diligitur: haec in alijs maior, in alijs minor,
in alijs nulla est; plenissima vero, quae iam non possit augeri, quandiu
hic homo viuit, estin nemine: quandiu autem augeri potest, profecto
illud quod minus est quā debit, ex vitio est. Ex quo vitio non est iustus
in terra qui faciat bonum, & non peccet. Ex quo vitio, non iustificabitur
in conspectu Dei omnis viuens. Propter quod vitium, si dixerimus
quia peccatum non habemus, nos met ipsos seducimus, & veritas
in nobis non est. Propter quod etiam quantum libet p
                        •
                     ofecerimus, necessarium
est nobis dicere; dimitte nobis debita nostra, cum iam
omnia in baptismo dicta, facta, cogitata, dimissa sint. Charitie
is a vertue, with which we lout that that ought to be loued.
This in some is more, in others lesse, in others none

at all; but the perfect charitie, which cannot be increased
while a man here liueth, is found in none: so long as
it can be increased, that doubtlesse which is lesse then it
should be, proceedeth of sinne; by reason of which sinne,
there is not one iust vpon earth, that doth good and sinneth
not: by reason of which vice, if we say we haue no
sinne, we deceiue our selues, and the truth is not in vs:
by reason of which sinne, how much soeuer we profit, yet
must we say of necessitie. Forgiue vs our trespasses, euen
after that all our thoughts, words, and workes, are forgiuen
in baptisme. Thus writeth Saint Austen, that mightie
piller of Christs Church: out of whose most golden
wordes, I note sundrie excellent documents to the great
comfort of the faithfull, and to the euerlasting confusion
of all impenitent papists. For first Saint Austen saith,
that no man can haue charitie in that perfect degree,
which the law requireth. Secondly, that the want thereof,
proceedeth of that vice that is inherent in vs. Thirdlie,
that by reason of this vice, euery man is a sinner.
Fourthly, that by reason thereof, none liuing can be iustified
in Gods sight. Fiftly, that by reason thereof, whosoeuer
saith he hath no sinne, is a flat lier. Sixtly, that
how vertuously soeuer we liue, yet must we desire God to
forgiue vs our sinnes, by reason of this inherent vice.
Seauenthly, that we must thus pray, euen after all sinnes
be forgiuen vs in our baptisme.
               Againe,August. in epist. Joan. tract. 4. tom. 9. the same Saint Austen in another place hath
these wordes; Iustitia modo nostra ex fide, iustitia perfecta non
est nisi in angelis, & vixin angelis si Deo comparentur; tamen si qua
perfecta iustitia anim arum & spirituum est, quos Deus creauit, in
angelis sanctis, iustis, bonis, nullo lapsu auersis, nulla superbia cadentibus,
sed manentibus semper in contemplatione verbi Dei, & nihil
aliud dulce habentibus, nisi à quo creati sunt, in ipsis perfecta iustitia
est, in nobis autem ex fide coepit esse secundum spiritum. Our
iustice is now of faith, there is no perfect iustice but in the
angels, and scarce in the angels, if they be compared to
God. Yet if there be any perfect iustice of soules and spispirits

which God hath created in the holy Angels, iust,
good, by no lapse auerted, by no pride falling, but euer
abiding in the contemplation of the word of God, and
thinking nothing sweet, but him onely which created
them: in them iustice is perfect, but in vs (it is not perfect)
it is onely begun of faith according to the spirit. Thus
saith Saint Austen, telling vs very plainely, that there is
no perfect iustice in man: but doubtlesse, where no perfect
iustice is, there can be no condigne merite of eternall
life.
               S. Ambrose is consonant to S. Austen,
                  Ambros. lib. 10. epist. 84. tom. 3. who writeth in this
manner: Caro contra spiritum, & contra carnem spiritus concupiscit;
nec inuenitur in vllo hominum tant a concordia, vt legi mentis
lex quae membris est insita, non repugnet. Propter quod ex omnium
sanctorum persona accipitur, quod Ioannes Apostolus ait; si dixerimus
quoniam peccatum non habemus, nos ipsos seducimus, & verit as in nobis
non est. The flesh (saith S. Ambrose) coueteth against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: neither can there be
found in any man such concord or agreement, that the
law which is ingrafted in the members, fighteth not against
the law of the mind. And for that cause Saint Iohns
words are taken as spoken in the person of all Saints; If
we say we haue no sinne, we deceiue our selues, and there
is no truth in vs.
               Thus writeth S. Ambrose; out of whose words I note first,
that concupiscence mooueth rebellion against the spirit,
in the holiest man vpon earth. Secondly, that this rebellion
is sinne in euery one: for S. Iohn speaketh of sinne indeed.
Thirdly, that no man liuing is free from sinne; and
consequently, that none liuing in this pilgrimage of mortalitie,
can condignely merite eternall life.
               S. Chrysostome is consonant to S. Ambrose and S. Austen:
these are his words; Etsi millies moriamur,
                  Chrysost. de conpunct. cord. lib. 2. nom. 5. col. 592. 
                  etsi omnes virtutes
animi expleamus, nibil dignum gerimus adea, quae ipsi percepimus
à deo. Though we die a thousand times, and though we accomplish
all vertues of the mind; yet doe we nothing
worthie of those things which we receiue of God.
               
                  
                  Theophilact saith in this manner: Seruauit nos aeternum,
                  Theophil. in 3. cap. Tit. 
                  non
ex operibus quae fecimus, hoc est, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      secimus opera iustitiae, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      per
haec conseruati sumus, sed vniuersam salutem bonit as ipsius at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
elementia operata est. He hath saued vs eternally, not of the
works which we haue done, that is, neither haue we done
the workes of iustice, neither are we saued by them, but
his goodnesse and his clemencie hath wrought our saluation
wholly.
               Now, to knit vp this reason with all consents in one, I
will here set downe the flat and plaine report of a famous
Frier and popish bishop, in that booke which he dedicated
to Pope Sixtus the fift:Iosephus Angles in 2. lib. s. pag. 103. 
                  Post humillim am sanctorum pedum
deosculationem. These are the words: Eodem etiam modo considerantes
omnes alij doctores sancti naturalem solum modo bonorum
operum valorem, & illum à valore & iusta vitae aeterae aestimatione
longissimè distare perpendentes, prudenter dixerunt, opera nostra non
esse meritoria aut digna vita aeterna. Ex lege tamen, siue conuentione,
siue promissione facta nobiscum, opera bona hominis cum adiutorio
gratiae dei fiunt aeternae vitae digna, & illi aequalia; quae seclusa
illa dei promissione, quae passim in sacris literis reperitur, fuissent tanto
premio prorsus indigna.
                  Loe, this Frier granteth, that all the holy fathers are against the papists. All other holy doctors also, considering
after the same manner the naturall value onely of
good workes, and perceiuing that it is exceeding farre distant
from the value and iust estimation of eternall life,
said wisely, That our works are not meritorious nor worthie
of eternall life. Yet for the couenant and promise
made vnto vs, the good workes of man with the helpe of
Gods grace, are worthy of eternall life, and equall with it;
which for all that, that promise of God which is frequent
in the Scripture, set aside, were altogether vnworthie of
so great reward.
               Thus saith our popish bishop, our holy Frier, euen to
the Pope himselfe, after the humble kissing of his most
holy feet. VVho though he bestirre himselfe more than a
little, to establish the condigne merite of mans workes,
yet doth he in his owne kind of dispute and reasoning; vtterly
confute and confound himselfe. For first, he graunteth,

that not onely S. Chrysostome, but all the rest of the holy
fathers with him (marke well, gentle reader) affirme
constantly and vniformely with one voice and assent (a
testimonie almost incredible to proceed from the mouth
of a papist, so deere to the Pope) That good workes neither
are meritorious nor worthie of eternall life. Secondly,
he graunteth freely, that the best workes considered in
their owne nature and kind, are vnworthy of eternall life.
Thirdly, he graunteth willingly, and telleth the Pope
roundly (post deosculationem pedum, but after the kissing of
his feet) that good workes, euen as they proceed of grace
and assistance of the holyghost,The papists grant as much as we desire. are for all that altogether
vnworthie of eternall life, if Gods promise and free acceptation
be set apart. VVhich three points doubtlesse, are
all that we desire to be graunted, concerning the doctrine
of good workes. And consequently, though the papists
neuer cease to impeach, accuse, slaunder, and condemne
vs in this behalfe: yet doe we defend nothing herein (as
is euident to the indifferent reader) but euen that which
their owne best doctors in their printed bookes doe teach
vs; yea, in those very bookes which are dedicate to the
Pope himselfe, and that with the solemne and religious
deosculation of his holy feet. The conceits which bishop
Frier Ioseph alledgeth, to make good his imagined condign
merite of workes, are very childish and too too friuolous.
For first, where he saith, that the fathers speake of good
workes, onely in respect of their naturall value, as he tearmeth
it; I answere, that that silly glosse is onely inuented
by him and his fellowes, to saue the life of their beggerly
doctrine, if it would be. For no such thing can be found in
any one of all their bookes. Nay, our Frier bishop confuteth
himselfe vnawares (of such force is the truth) when he
graunteth, that good workes done in grace are vtterly
vnworthie of heauen, if Gods promise bee set apart.
Where I wish the reader to obserue seriously the word
(prorsus, vtterly) which is indeed his owne, and most emphaticall
against himselfe.
               
                  
Their highly renowned Abbot and cononized saint
Bernardus shall tell them the truth, and giue the vpshot of
the game:Bernard. serm. 1. in annune. B. M. V. pag. 160. tom. 1. these are his expresse words: Iam vero de aeterna
vita scimus, qu
                        •
                     non sunt condignae passiones huius temporis ad futuram
gloriam, nec si vnus omnes sustineat. Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      enim talia sunt hominum
merita, vt propter ea vita aeterna debeatur ex iure, aut deus iniuriam
aliquam faceret, nisi eam donaret. Now touching eternall
life, we know that the sufferings of this time are not worthie
of the glorie to come; no, not if one man could sustaine
all. For the merits of men are not such, that for
them eternall life is due by right, or that God should doe
some iniurie, if he gaue it not.
               The same Bernard in another place hath these expresseBernard. in eam. serm. 67. p. 1003 tom. 1. words: Deest gratiae, quicquid meritis deput. 13. Nolo meritum, quod
gratiam excludat. Horreo quicquid de meo est, vt sim meus; nist
quod illud magis forsit an meum est, quod me meum facit. Gratiae
reddit memihi iustificatum gratis, & sie liberatum à seruitute peccats.
It derogateth from grace, whatsoeuer thou ascribest
to merite. I will haue no merite that excludeth grace.
I abhorre whatsoeuer is of mine owne, that I may be mine
owne, vnlesse perchance that is more mine owne which
maketh me mine owne. Grace iustifieth me to my selfe
freely, and so deliuereth me from the bondage of sinne.
               The same Bernard in another place hath these expresse
words:Bernard. in cant. set. 68. p. 1006. 
                  Sic non est, quod iam quaeras quibus meritis speremus bona,
presertim cum audias apud prophetam; non propter vos, sed propterme
ego faciam, dicit dominus. Sufficit admeritum, scire quod non sufficiant
merita. Sed vt ad meritum satis est, demeritis non presumere;
sic carere meritis, satis ad iudicium est. So there is no cause,
that thou shouldest now aske by what merits we hope for
glorie, especially, since thou hearest the prophet say, I
will doe it, saith the Lord, not for your sake, but for mine
owne. It is sufficient to merite, to know that our merites
are not sufficient. But as it is ynough to merite, not to
presume of merites, so to want merites, is ynough to
iudgement.
               Out of the most excellent testimonies of this famous

papist, I note many worthie lessons for the benefit of the
reader. First, that nothing which man can doe or suffer in
this life, is worthie of the ioies of heauen. Secondly, that
heauen is not due to any man for his owne deserts. Thirdly,
that God should doe no man wrong, no, not the best
liuer on earth, if he should debarre him from the ioyes of
heauen. Fourthly, that whatsoeuer is ascribed to mans
merite, the same is derogatorie to Gods grace. Fiftly,
that Bernard renounceth all merit, which excludeth grace,
that is to say, all merit of mans workes whatsoeuer: for so
himselfe expoundeth himselfe. Sixtly, that he abhorreth
whatsoeuer is his owne, and so he denieth any thing within
himselfe to be meritorious, or worthie of eternall life.
Seuenthly, that the most sufficient merit in man, is this,
viz. to know and confesse, that our merits are no merits
indeed. Eightly, that to want merits, is ynough for mans
condemnation. VVhich last obseruation doth fitly expound
that which I vttered in the beginning of this article,
to wit, that the word (merit) in that sence in which the
fathers vse it, is not to be reiected, though in these our
daies it commonly be abused. For to want merits in their
sence (as Bernard here declareth euidently) is to haue no
good workes: which good works I affirme willingly, both
with the old and late writers of best account, to be so necessarie
to attaine eternall life, as the vsuall, ordinarie, and
vndoubted means, by which God decreed from eternitie
freely for his owne name sake, to bring his chosen and elect
to saluation; that without the same, none haue beene,
are, or shall be saued world without end; if, as I said in the
beginning, time be graunted to doe them.
            
            
               The third reason, drawne from the doctrine of best approoued
Papists, and their renowned schoole-doctors.
               THomas Aquinas (whose doctrine no papist may gainesay
or refuse) hath these expresse words:
                  Aquinas, 12. q. 114. art. 1. in corp. Manifestum
est autem, quod inter deum & hominem est maxima inaequalitas, in
infinitum enim distant; totum quod est hominis bonum, est à deo;

vnde non potest hominis à deo esse iustitia secundum absolutam aequalitatem,
sed secundum proportienem quandam; in quantum scilicet
vter
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   operatur secundum modum suum. Modus autem & mensura
humanae virtutis homini est à Deo, & ideo meritū hominis apud deum
esse non potest, nisi secundum presuppositionem diuinae ordinationis;
ita scilicet, vt id homo consequatur à Deo persuam operationem quasi
mercedem, ad quod Deus ei virtute operandi destinauit. It is manifest,
that between God and man there is exceeding great
inequalitie, as which doe differ in infinit; all the good that
man hath, is of God. VVherefore mans iustice receiued
of God, cannot be according to absolute equalitie, but after
a certaine proportion, to wit, in as much as either worketh
according to his condition. Now, man hath the measure
and condition of his vertue from God; and therefore
mans merit cannot be with God, saue onely according to
the supposall of Gods holy ordinance; so forsooth, that
man may attaine that at Gods hand by his working, as a
reward, to which God hath designed to him the facultie
and power of working.
               
               Thus writeth their grand master papist Aquilias, who
vtterly ouerthroweth all popish merit, as it is this day defended
and beleeued in the Church of Rome. For first
Aquinas telleth vs (marke well, for this is a weightie point)
that where there is not perfect equalitie, there can be no
merit properly. Secondly, he graunteth freely, that there
is infinit inequalitie betweene God and man, as euery
child knoweth to be true. Thirdly, he freely confesseth,
that mans iustice is not absolute, but imperfect. Fourthly,
he graunteth willingly, that man doth merit nothing in
Gods sight, saue onely by way of his free acceptation.
Fiftly, he confesseth in like manner, that eternall life is not
properly hire, but as it were hire, quasi mercedem; and that,
by reason of the same free acceptation.
               
                  Durandus,
                  Durand. in 2. s. dist. 27. q. 2. in med. a very famous popish Schoole-doctor, hath
these expresse words: Tale meritum de coniligno inuenitur inter
homines, sed non est hominis ad deum. Quod patet, qu
                        •
                      quod redditur
potius ex libe alitate dantis, quam ex debito operis, non cadit sub merito

de condigno strictè & propriè accepto. Sequitur; quod si quis dicat,
quod quamuis deus non constituatur nobis deb tor ex aliquo nostro
opere, constituitur tamen debitor ex sua promissione, quam exprimit
scripturu; non valet propter duo. Primū est, quod promissio diuina
in scripturis sanctis non sonat in aliquam oblig ationem, sed insinuat
meram dispositionem liber alitatis diuinae. Secundū est, quod quod redditur,
non redditur ex debito operis, sed ex promissione precedente;
non quod redditur ex merito operis de condigne, sed solum vel principaliter
ex promisso. Et it a non est illud debitum, de quo loquimur. Et
sic patet, quod meritum de condigno strictè & propriè sumptum, viz.
pro actione voluntaria, propter quam oper anti debetur merces ex iustitia,
sic quod si non reddatur, ille ad quem pertinet reddere, iniustè
facit, & est simpliciter & propriè iniustus, non est hominis ad deum.
Et ideo propter tale meritum, cum sit homini simpliciter impossibile,
non est necesse in nobis ponere gratiam, vel charitatem habitualem.
Such condigne merit is found among men, but is not betweene
God and man. VVhich hereby is cleere, because
that which is rendered rather of the liberalitie of the giuer,
than of debt due to the worke, falleth not vnder condigne
merit, properly so called. If any say, that though
God become not our debtor by reason of our worke, yet
is he made our debtor by reason of his promise, which the
Scripture expresseth: that answere is of no force for two
respects. First, because Gods promise in the Scriptures
doth not sound to any bond, but insinuateth the meere
disposition of Gods liberalitie. Secondly, because that
which is giuen, is not giuen for the debt arising of the
worke, but of promise that went before; not that it is rendered
for the condigne merit of the worke, but onely or
principally for his promise sake. And so there is not that
debt of which we speake. So then it is cleere, that condigne
merit, properly so called, viz. for a voluntarie action,
for which reward is due of iustice to the worker, so that
if it be not rendered, he to whom it appertaineth to giue
it, doth vniustly, and is simply and properly vniust, is not
betweene God and man. And therefore for such a merit,
seeing it is simply impossible to man, there is no need to

put in vs grace or charitie habituall. Thus saith M. Durand;
out of whose words I note first, that condigne merit
cannot be betweene God and man. Secondly, that eternall
life is giuen of Gods free liberalitie, not of any dutie
due to the works that we doe. Thirdly, that God rewardeth
vs principally for his promise sake, and not for any
thing we either haue done or can doe. Fourthly, that condigne
merit is so farre aboue mans capacitie, that no man
can by any possibilitie haue it. And consequently, that
late popish doctrine is impossible.
               
                  Gregorius Ariminensis,
                  Apud Ioseph. Angl. in 2. s. dist. 27. ar. 2. p. 105. 
                  Marsilius, Thomas Waldensis, Paulus
Burgensis, and Eckius, fiue most zealous papists, doe all
with one assent affirme very constantly, that mans works
are not meritorious of eternall life, how holy soeuer the
man be.
               
                  Dominicus Soto a zealous monke and famous popish writer,Soto, de nat. & grat. lib. 3. cap. 6. pag. 138.
telleth the papists roundly, and teacheth them grauely,
that no pure man is able to make condigne satisfaction
for his sinnes; and so à fortiori, against his will and meaning,
that no man can by condigne merit attaine eternall
life. These are his expresse words; Perfecta satisfactio est illa,
cuius valor & pretiū totū emanat à debitore, nulla vel p
                        ••
                     ueniente, vel
interueniente gratia creditoris; taliter vt sit redditio aequiualētis alias
indebiti voluntaria. Perfect satisfaction is that, whose value
and price proceedeth whollie from the debtour, without
either preuenting or interuenting grace of the creditour;
so as the voluntarie reddition be of that which is equiualent,
and not otherwise due. This is true doctrine which
our frier Soto deliuereth to the world: hee teacheth vs
foure things. First, that the satisfaction must proceed
wholie from the debtour. Secondly, that there must be
no preuenting nor interuenting grace of the creditour.
Thirdly, that there must be equiualent restitutiō. Fourthly,
that that equiualent reddition must be a worke, which
is otherwise not due. These foure conditions (which our
popish M. Soto and Dominican frier requireth in euery satisfaction)
when any papist can find in any one of their merits

or satisfactions, I will be their bondman, neither shall
the popes holines be excepted. But to come to this bondage
vpon this couenant, I am in no feare at all: For the
ethnicke philosopher Aristotle,
                  Aristo. in 8. ethic. cap. 7. perceiued by the naturall
discourse of right reason, That no man can euer make cō
                  digne
compensation to God and his naturall parents.
For which respect,Aquinas, 12. q. 114. ar. 1. 3. m. 
                  Aquinas affirmeth constantly, that God
is not simply and truely said to be debtor to vs, but to
himselfe and to his owne promise, which he freely without
all our deserts made vnto vs. And their great schoole-doctour
Iosephus Angles, after he hath disputed this question
of condigne merit too and fro, pro & contra, doth in the
end though vnawares,Iosephus Angles, in 2. sent. pag. 107. plainely confesse the selfe same
doctrine, that I now intend to prooue. He telleth vs forsooth,
that the price of euery thing may be equall to the
value and worth of the same thing, two wayes; first, of
the nature of the thing; secondly, of the pact, couenant
and promise of him that doth promise the same thing:
for saith he, if one penny be the full value answereable to
the labour; yet if a greater reward be promised, which
farre exceedeth the worth & value of the work wrought,
then that reward is also due by couenant. He addeth the
reason thereof; viz. because the law of nature teacheth
to keepe promises which farre exceed the value of the
thing. And hereupon this great learned doctour concludeth
roundly, that though our good workes come farre
short of eternall life, if we respect the worthinesse thereof:
yet doe they condignely merit the ioyes of heauen, if
we respect the free promise of Christ Iesus. And this condignitie
of workes, our frier bishop, or bishopfrier, (as you
will) calleth aequalitas ex promissione tantum, equalitie of promise
onely. Now, I pray thee gentle reader, what childish
wit is not able to penetrat the very bowels of this deepe
diuinitie? and yet is it the maine point and onely foundation,
to which all papists doe and must appeale, in this
weighty and most important question. For example sake,
if thou wouldest wish me to lend thee my cloake, to defend

thee from a showre of raine, and promise to giue me
an hundred pounds for the loane; then doubtlesse were it
true to say, that after such loane an hundreth pounds
were due vnto me: yet withall would it be most true also,
that such loane of my cloake were not the condigne merit
of that hundreth pounds; but that it proceeded principally
of the free gift and promise made vnto me, farre
aboue my merit and desert: neither could my act be any
way rightly tearmed, the condigne merit of that reward.
And yet it is euident, that thus standeth the state of the
question, betweene the condigne merit of mans workes,
and the excellencie of the ioyes of heauen. For I willingly
graunt, that eternall life is due to the workes of Gods
elect, and that it is as well the crowne of iustice, as of mercie:
but withall I constantly affirme,2. Tim. 4. v. 8. that God bestoweth
it on his elect freely for his owne name sake,Iac. 1. v. 12. and not for
any merit,Rom. 8. v. 18. worthinesse, or condignitie of their workes.
               For this cause,Rom. 6. v. 23. their owne deere frier Ioannes de Combis,
                  Ps. 103. v. 4.
teacheth this golden lesson:Ps. 145. v. 9. 
                  Meritum condigni dicit aequalitatem
meriti ad remunerationem:
                  Iac. 2. v. 83. 
                  dico autem aequalitatem, non arithmeticam,
sed geometrieam:
                  Joan. de Combis lib. 5. theolog. verit. cap. 11. 
                  id est, non quantitatis, sed proportionis.
Et hoc patet, quia Deus semper remunerat supra meritum, sicut punit
citra condignum. Condigne merit doth connotat the
equalitie of merit, to the thing that is merited; I say equalitie,
not arithmeticall, but geometricall, that is, not of
quantitie, but of proportion: And this is euident, because
God euer rewardeth aboue our merits, as he punisheth
lesse than we deserue. Out of these wordes we see two
things cleered: the one, that we deserue greater punishment
for our sinnes, than God inflicteth vpon vs for the
same: the other, that for our well doing we receiue greater reward,
than our workes doe or can deserue. And
consequently, that wee doe not condignely merit eternall
life.
               For this cause saith their famous popish doctour, Nicolaus
de Lyra, in this maner: Salus enim aeterna,
                  Lyra in 3. ca
                        ••
                     it. 
                  excedit totaliter
facultatem naturae humanae. Propter quod non potest eam attingere,

nisi ex largitate diuinae misericordiae. For eternall life doth farre
surmount and wholly exceed the facultie and power of
mans nature. VVherefore man can no way attaine vnto
it,Carthus. in 6. cap. ad Rom. but onely by the liberalitie of Gods mercy.
               For this cause saith another popish doctor, Dionysius
Carthusianuns, in this maner: Ex gratia seu per gratiam Dei, datur
iustis pro praemio vita aeterna. Non hoc dicitur merita excludendo,
sed vt insinuctur, quod principaliter ascribendum sit gratia
Dei, qui etiam premiat vltra condignum. Eternall life is giuen
for reward to the iust, of grace or through the grace of
God. This is not said to exclude merits, but to insinuate,
that reward must principally bee ascribed to the grace of
God, who rewardeth vs aboue our deserts. Loe, this
great papist laboreth with maine and might, to stablish
popish condigne merit of workes: who affirming more
boldly than wisely, that the elect doe merit eternall life;
telleth vs with one breath, that the reward is aboue our
merits and deserts. And so vnwittingly and vnwillingly
he confuteth himselfe, and refelleth that doctrine, which
he gladly would confirme.
               To conclude, our Iesuit and renowned Cardinall,
frier Bellarmine, who after mature deliberation and graue
consultation had with all the best learned Iesuits in the
world, and with the Pope himselfe (whose faith iudiciall
cannot faile, say they) saith all that possibly can be said
for the life of poperie, doth with great grauitie and prudent
sagacitie in the name of all papists, deliuer this doctrine
vnto vs;Bellarm. de iustifie. tom. 3. col. 1296. & col. 1298. 
                  Quod vero attinet ad rem ipsam, Durandi sententia,
si nihil aliud vellet, nisi merita nostra non esse ex condigno, siue
ex iustitia absolutè, sed tantum ex hypothesi, id est, posita liberali
Dei promissione, non esset reprobanda, sequitur; respondeo, absolutè
non posse hominem á Deo aliquid exigere, cum omnia sint ipsius; tamen
posita eius voluntate & pacto, quo non vult exigere à nobis
opera nostra gratis, sed mercedem reddere iuxta proportionem operum,
verè possumus ab eo mercedem exigere; quomodo seruus non potest
absolutè a domino suo vllum premium postulare, cum omnia quae
seruus acquirit, domino suo acquirat; tamen si domino placeat donare

illi opera sua, & pro ijsdem tanquam sibi non debitis mercedem
promittere, iure mercedem pro suis operibus postulabit. Touching
the matter it selfe, Durands opinion, if he had no other
meaning, but that our merits are not absolutely iust and
condigne, but hypothetically in respect of Gods liberall
promise, were not to be reiected: I answere, that man
cannot absolutely exact any thing of God, seeing all
things are Gods owne; neuerthelesse, his will and couenant
being made, that he will not exact our workes of vs
freely, but will reward them according to their proportion:
we may truly require hyer of him, like as a bondman
cannot absolutelie require any reward of his lord, seeing
euery thing which the bondman gaineth, is gotten and
gained to his master: yet for all that, if it shall please his
master and lord to bestow his works on him, and to promise
reward for the same, as if they were not due vnto
him, then may the bondseruant iustly demaund reward
for his workes.
               Thus saith the Iesuit Bellarmine; and consequently,
this is all that all papists say, or can say, for the life of popish
doctrine. Out of whose wordes I note first, that his
brother Durands opinion hath put him to his best trumpe.
Secondly, that Durands opinion (as is already prooued)
is this; viz. that the merit of workes in the best liuer vpon
earth, cannot truly and properly be called meritum ex
condigno, condigne merit; but onely merit in way of acceptation,
and in respect of Gods free mercy, and promise
made vnto man without all deserts. Thirdly, that Bellarmine
graunteth this opinion in this sense: For hee saith
plainely, If Durand admit merit in respect of Gods promise,
his opinion cannot be reproued. Fourthly, that our
Iesuit maketh good that doctrine, which I here defend,
as which is the selfe same, that Durand holdes. And consequenly,
if Bellarmine and his popish fellowes and followers,
would stand constantly to their owne doctrine, which
they publish in printed bookes; wee and they should
soone agree, and these great controuersies would haue

an end. Fourthly, that man cannot absolutely exact any
thing at Gods hands, because all things are Gods owne.
Fiftly, that in respect of Gods good pleasure and couenant
frely made to man, we may truely require reward
of God. Yea, my selfe graunt, that we may not onely truly,
but also iustly require reward at Gods hands, in regard
of his promise freely made vnto vs. But I euer denie withall,
that any reward is due to our best workes; for any
condigne merit or desert of or in our workes, Gods free
acceptation, mercie, and promise set apart. For as Saint
Austen grauely saith;Aug. lib. 9. confess. cap. 13. 
                  Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum, si remota
misericordia discutias eam. Woe euen to the best liuer
vpon earth, if thou examine his life, thy mercy set apart.
Answere ô papists, if ye can; and if ye cannot, then repent,
and yeeld vnto the truth for shame. I challenge
you, I prouoke you to the combat; I adiure you all
ioyntlie, and euery one of you seuerally, for the credite
of your cause, for the honour of your Pope, and the
life of popish doctrine, which now lieth bleeding,
and wil shortly yeeld vp the Ghost, if some
soueraigne remedie bee not
speedily prouided for
the same.
            
         
         
            
            The sixt Article. Of the Popish
distinction of mortall and
veniall sinnes.
            
               ALthough it be true, that all sinnes
are not equall, but one greater
than another: and although it be
also true, that in a good and godly
sence, some sinne may be tearmed
mortall, and some veniall; which
yet may more fitly be called, sinnes
regnant, and not regnant: neuerthelesse
most true it is, to the euerlasting
confusion of all impenitent papists, that euery sinne
is mortall of it owne nature, and onely veniall by way of
Gods free acceptation and mercie, for his owne name
sake, and merits of his deare sonne our Lord Iesus.
            I prooue it first both briefely and euidently. For Christ
himselfe telleth vs in his holy Gospell,Matth. 12. v. 3. that we must giue
a straight account of euery idle word in the generall day
of iudgement. And for no other end doubtlesse must this
account be made, but onely, because euery idle word is
flatly against the law of God. This the papists can neuer
denie, it is euident to euery child. And yet must they likewise
confesse, that idle words be those sinnes which they
call venials. And consequently, they must confesse against
their wils, and against their professed Romish doctrine,
that all sinnes are mortall, that is to say, against the law
of God.
            This doctrine of our Sauiour Christ Iesus is confirmed
by the testimonie of S. Iohn his beloued Apostle,1. Ioh. 3. v. 4. where he
telleth vs, that euery sinne is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, the transgression

of Gods law, as is alreadie prooued at large in the
fourth article of concupiscence. And the Hebrew word

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which signifieth a declining from the right way,
doth plainely confirme the same.
            Secondly, because our popish Rhemists confesse in
plaine tearms,Rhemists in 1. Joh. 3. v. 4. that euery sinne is a swaruing from the law
of God. For doubtlesse, that which swarueth from the
law, is truly said to be against the law, but not agreeable
to the law.
            Thirdly, because the famous popish Frier and Romish
bishop Iosephus Angles teacheth the same doctrine in his
booke dedicated to the Pope himselfe. These are his own
expresse words:Iosephus Angles in 4. sent. p. 215. 
               Omne peccatum veniale est alicuius legis transgressio.
Patet, quia omne veniale est contra rectam rationem, & agere
contra rectam rationē, est agere contra legem naturalem, precipientem
non esse à regula rectae rationis deuiandum. Euery sinne veniall
is the transgression of some law. This is cleere, because
euery veniall sinne is against right reason; and to doe against
right reason, is to doe against the law of nature,
which commaundeth vs not to depart or swarue from the
rule of right reason. Loe, euery veniall sinne is against
right reason, and against the law of nature, which is giuen
to euery one in his creation, in his birth or natiuitie.
            Fourthly, because Durandus, another famous papist,
confuteth the late receiued popish opinion of Thomas Aquinas,
which the Pope and his Iesuits hold, to wit, that veniall
sinnes are preter legem, non contra: Besides the law, but
not against the law.Duran. in 2. sent. di
                     •
                  t. 42. q. 6. These are Du
                     •
                  ands owne words: Ad
argumentum dicendum, quod omne peccatum est contra legem dei naturalem,
vel inspiratam, vel ab eis deriuatam. To the argument
answere must be made, that euery sinne is against the law
of God, either naturall, or inspired, or deriued from them.
And this opinion of M. Durand, is this day commonly defended
in the popish vniuersities and schooles. So saith
Frier Ioseph, these are his words:Jos. Angl. in 2. s. pag. 275. 
               D. Thomas & eius sectatores
tenent, peccatum veniale non tam esse contra legem, quam preter legem.
Sequitur; Durandus tamen & alij permulti hanc sententiam

impugnant, affirmantes peccata venialia esse contra mandata. Et
haec opinio modo in scbolis videtur communior. S. Thomas and his
followers hold, that a veniall sinne is not so much against
the law, as besides the law. But Durand and many others
impugne this opinion, auouching veniall sinnes to be against
the commaundements. And this opinion seemeth
now adaies to be more common in the schooles.
            Here I wish the reader to note by the way, out of the
word (modo, now adaies) the mutabilitie of Romish religion.
For in that he saith (modo, now adaies) he giueth vs to
vnderstand, that their doctrine is now otherwise than it
was of old and in former ages. A note worthie to be remembred.
For the old Romane religion was catholicke,
pure, and sound, and with it doe not I contend: but I impugne
late Romish faith and doctrine, which the Pope
and his Romish Schoole-men haue brought into the
Church.
            Fiftly, because their canonized martyr Iohn Fisher, the
late bishop of Rochester, teacheth the same doctrine so
plainely, as euery child must needs perceiue the truth in
that behalfe.Roffensis art. 32. a
                     •
                  u. Luth. These are his expresse words: Quod peccatum
veniale solum ex dei misericordia veniale sit, in hoc tecum sentio.
That a veniall sinne is onely veniall through the mercie
of God (and not of it owne nature) therein doe I agree
vnto you. Thus saith our bishop. And as he telleth me,
that he agreeth with Luther therein: so doe I tell our Iesuites,
that I agree with him, with Durand, Almaine, and the
other papists, that teach the same doctrine.
            Sixtly, because Gerson, another famous popish writer,
holdeth the same opinion. These are his expresse words:
Nulla offensa dei est venialis de se,
               Jo. Gers. de vita spiritual. lect. 1. part. 3. in 1. corol. 
               nisi tantum modo per respectum
ad diuinam misericordiam, qui non vult de facto quamlibet offensam
imputare ad mortem, cum illud posset iustissimè. Et ita concluditur,
quod peccatum mortale & veniale in esse tali, non distinguuntur intrinsecè
& essentialiter, sed solum per respectum ad diuinam gratiam,
quae peccatum istud imputat ad poenam mortis, & aliud non. No
offence of God is veniall of it owne nature, but onely in

respect of Gods mercie, who will not de facto imputa, euery
offence to death, though he might doe it most iustly. And
so I conclude, that mortall and veniall sinnes, as they be
such, are not distinguished intrinse cally and essentially,
but onely in respect of Gods grace, which assigneth one
sinne to the paine or torture of death, and not another.
            Thus writeth this famous popish bishop, who was a
man of high esteeme in the counsell of Constance. Whose
onely testimonie (if his words be well marked) is able to
confound the papists, and to strike them dead. For first
he telleth them plainely, that euery sinne is mortall of it
owne nature. Secondly, that no sinne is veniall, saue only
in respect of Gods mercie. Thirdly, that God may most
iustly (iustissimè) condeme vs for the least sinne we do. Note
seriously, gentle reader, the word (iustissimè.) Fourthly,
that mortall and veniall sinnes are the same intrinse cally
and essentially, and differ but accidentally, that is to say,
they differ in accident, but not in nature; in quantitie, but
not in qualitie; in mercy, but not in deformitie; in the subiect,
but not in the obiect; in imputation, but not in enormitie;
saue onely, that the one is a greater mortall sinne
than is the other. For (as Gerson auoucheth) we may iustly
be damned for the least sinne of all, howsoeuer other papists
doe flatter themselues in their cursed deformed
venials.
            Seuenthly, because sinne in generall is the transgression
of Gods law, as S. Ambrose defineth it, yea, euery word,
deed, or desire against Gods law, as S. Austen describeth it,
Their words are set downe in the fourth article of this
discourse.
            Eightly, because the Iesuit Bellarmine vnawares confesseth
the same against himselfe. These are his owne words:
Respondeo,
               Bellar. t
                     •
                  m. 1. pag. 804. 
               omne peccatum esse contra legem dei, non positiuam, sed
aternam, vt Aug. rectè docet. Omnis enim iusta lex, siue à deo, siue
ab bomine detur, ab aterna dei lege deriuatur. Est enim aterna lex,
vt malum sit viol are regulam. I answere, that euery sinne is against
the law of God, not positiue, but eternall, as Austen
               
teacheth rightly. For euery iust law, whether it be given
of God, or of man, is deriued from the eternal law of God.
For the eternall law is, that it is euill to offend against the
rule. These are our Iesuits owne words, which (as euery
child can easily discerne) doe euidently confute himselfe
and his Romish doctrine. For first, vnder euery sinne must
needs be contained their veniall sinnes, or els some sinnes
shall be no sinnes; which implieth flat contradiction. Secondly,
he tel
                  •
               eth vs, that euery sinne, and consequently
veniall sinnes are against the eternall law of God. Thirdly,
he graunteth, that they are not onely besides the law,
sed contra legem, but euen against the law. Fourthly, hence it
is cleere and euident, that the law eternall is the chiefe
and principall law of all other laws, seeing from it all other
lawes are deriued.
            Ninthly, because the papists cannot possibly yeeld any
sound reason, why in the sinnes of theft one shall be mortall,
and another veniall. For example sake, let vs suppose
one at one time to steale so many egs as will make a mortall
sinne by Romish doctrine; another at another time to
steale so many as will make a venial sinne by the same doctrine:
then I demaund of our papists, Why God cannot
iustly condemne the theefe to hell that stealeth but so many
egs; and for all that can iustly condemne him to eternall
torment, that stealeth but one only egge aboue the
said number. For this must they doe, and a good reason
here of must they yeeld (which I am well assured they can
neuer do) or els confesse euery sinne to be mortall, and so
against their wils to subscribe to mine opinion. Answere
ô papists if ye can; if ye cannot then repent
for shame, and yeeld vnto
the truth.
         
         
            
            The seuenth Article. Of popish
vnwritten traditions.
            
               THe papists beare the world in hand,
that many things necessarie for mans
saluation, are not conteined in the holy
scriptures of the old and new testament:
and consequently, that none
can be saued, but such as beleeue their
vnwritten traditions, and what their
Pope telleth them. For the exact knowledge whereof, I
put downe these propositions.
            
               The first Proposition, with the first reason.
               THe written word or holy scripture, containeth in it
selfe, euery doctrine necessarie for mans saluation.
I prooue it, by the manifold texts both of the old and
new testament; by the authoritie of the holy fathers, and
by the the testimonie of renowned and best approoued
popish writers.
               
                  Ex testamente veteri.
                  
                     Locus primus.
                     Deut. 4. v. 2. Ye shall not add to the word which I speak
vnto you, neither shall ye take any thing away from it.
Againe thus,Deut. 12. v. 32. That which I command, that only doe thou
to the Lord. Neither add any thing, nor take any thing
away.Ios. 1. v. 7. Againe thus, Only be thou strong, and of a valiant
courage,Ios. 23. v. 6. that thou mayest obserue and doe according to
all the law, which Moses my seruant hath cōmanded thee.
Thou shalt not turne away from it, neither to the right
hand nor to the left. Bee carefull that ye keepe all
things which are written in the booke of the law of Moses;
                     
that ye decline not from them, neither to the right hand
nor to the left.
                  By these manifold texts we may see euidently, that
the holy scriptures are most perfect, and that nothing
may bee taken from them, neither any thing added to
them. But doubtlesse, if all doctrine necessarie for mans
saluation, were not sufficiently conteined in them, then of
necessitie, many things should be added to them. Bellarmine
(the mouth of all papists) answereth to these and the
like places, that they are not spoken of the written word
precisely,Bellarm. tom. 1. col. 183. A. B. but of Gods word generally, which is partly
written, and partly vnwritten. Non ait, inquit ille, ad verbum
quod scripsi, sed quod ego precipio. He saith not, (quoth our Iesuite)
to the word which I haue written, but which I command.
But doublesse, this is a miserable shift, and a very
childish answere. For first, God himselfe wrote his owne
wordes in two tables of stone,Deut. 5. 22. and then deliuered them
to Moses. Yea, after Moses had broken the said tables, in
his vehement zeale against Idolatrie;Deut. 9. 17. God commanded
Moses to hew two other tables of stone like to the first, in
which he writ againe the wordes that were in the first tables,Deut. 10. v. 1. 4.
and commanded Moses to put them vp in an arke of
wood.Deut. 1. 5. Secondly, Moses expounded the law of God to the
Israelites at large. VVhich large explication of the law,
God himselfe commanded him to write,Deut. 31. v. 19. 24. and to giue the
same to the Israelites; that they might put it in the side
of the arke of the couenant, and there keepe it for a witnesse
against them. Thirdly, God commanded Iosue to
keepe and obserue all things, which were written in the
booke of the law,Ios. 1. v. 8. which Moses had deliuered to the Leuites:
charging him to meditate therein day and night,
that he might doe according to the same. Fourthly, Moses
telleth vs expresly,Deut. 9. v. 10. that the two tables written with the
finger of God, contained all the wordes, which the Lord
spake to them in the mount out of the midst of the fire, in
the day of the assembly. Fiftly, God commanded that
the king of the Israelies, so soone as he should be established

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
in his throne,Deut. 17. v. 18. should write out the Deutronomie (or
law repeated) in a book; according to the example, which
the priests of the Leuiticall tribe should giue him, that he
might meditate therein all the dayes of his life. Sixtly,
Iosue made a couenant with the people,Ios. 24. v. 25, 26 and gaue them a
law in Sichem, and wrote all the wordes in the booke of
the law. VVhich words were nothing else but a repetition
of the couenant written by Moses; which couenant
Iosue was commanded to obserue so strictly,Ios. 1. v. 7. that he might
neither decline to the right hand,Deut. cap. 1. per totum. nor to the left. And
the same law contained all those precepts,Deut. 11. 1. ceremonies,
and iudgements, which God commanded Moses to teach
the people of Israel.
                  
                     Locus secundus. Ne addas quicquam verbis eius (Dei) ne forte
arguat te, & inueniaris mendax. Thou must ad nothing to
Gods words,Prou. 30. v. 6. lest he reprooue thee, and thou be found a
lier. This text Saint Hierome vnderstandeth of the holy
scriptures, to which no man may ad any thing, bee it
more, be it lesse. The scriptures therefore are most perfect
and absoute, and containe euery doctrine needfull
for vs to know.
                  
                     Locus tertius.
                     Esa. 8. v. 20. 
                     Ad legem magis, & ad testimonium: Quod si non
dixerint iuxta verbum hoc, non erit eis matutina lux. To the law,
and to the testimonie. If they speake not according to
this word, there is no matutine or true light in them,
                  Loe, they that refuse to be taught of Gods prophet,
who is the mouth of God; and seeke helpe at the dead,
which is the illusion of Satan; are here reprooued as men
void of knowledge, and as blind leaders of the blind.
And withall they are charged to seeke remedie in the
word of God, where his will is declared. They and wee
must euer in all doubts and difficulties, haue continuall
recourse to the law of God; which law is here tearmed
the testimonie, because it is the testification of Gods will
toward man; because there is set downe, what God requireth
of vs; because we may find in it, whatsoeuer is necessarie
for vs to know. For the Prophet ioyneth the testimonie

with the law, not as a thing distinct from it, but as
an explication of the same. As if he had said, yee must in
all doubts haue recourse to the law of God, because it is
the testimonie of his holy will.Hier. in 8. cap. Esa. Saint Hierome yeeldeth the
like sense; and interpretation of this place; these are his
wordes. Si vultis nosse quae dubia sunt, magis vae legi & testimonijs
tradite scripturarum. Quia si noluerit vestra congregatio verbum
domini quoerere, non habebit lucē veritatis, sed versabitur in
erroris tenebris. If ye will know the things that are doubtfull,
ye must haue recourse to the law, and to the testimonies
of the scriptures. For, if your people will not seeke
Gods word, they cannot attaine the light of truth, but
shall walke in the darknesse of errour.
                  
                     Locus quartus. Mementote legis Mosis serui mei, quam mandaui ei
in Horeb ad omnem Israel.Mal. 4. v. 4. Remember the law of Moses
my seruant, which I commanded to him in Horeb to all
Israel. Marke these wordes seriously, because they proue
euidently, the question now in hand. For this Malachias
being the last of Gods Prophets, and foreseeing by the
spirit of God, that the Israelites should bee without Prophets
a long time, euen till the comming of Christ; doth
here exhort them diligently, to be mindfull of the law
of Moses. As if he should say; the time is at hand, when
ye shall be destitute of Prophets, and therefore yee must
marke well what the law saith, and doe according to the
prescript rule thereof. But what is the reason, why hee
maketh no mention of the Prophets? doubtlesse, because
all things (as you haue already heard) are fully comprised
in the written word of the law. For, although the
law and the Prophets were vntill Iohn;
                     Matt. 11. v. 13. the one foretelling
Christs comming by word, the other by tipes and figures:
yet was the doctrine of the Prophets nothing else
in deede, but an explication of the law; and consequently,
Malachie willing the Israelites to remember the law of
Moses, doth thereby sufficiently insinuat the doctrine
of the Prophets, as who are nothing else but the interpreters
of Moses. For from the law they might neither turne

to the right hand, nor to the left. That the law containeth
the whole Christian doctrine, necessarie vnto saluation,Lyra. &. Corth. in 23. cap. Mat.
two famous. popish doctors (Lyra and Dionisius Carthusianus,) doe testifie: whose wordes shall be alledged expresly,
when I come to the places of the new testament.
               
               
                  Ex nouo Testamento.
                  
                     Locus primus.
                     Ioh 20 v. 30. 
                     Haec scripta sunt, &c. These are written, that
you may beleeue, that Iesus is Christ the sonne of God:
and that in beleeuing yee might haue life through his
name. Here the reader must obserue seriously with me,
that this Gospell was written after all other scriptures
of the old and new testament; euen when the canon of
the scriptures was complet, perfect, and fully accomplished,
viz. almost an hundred yeeres after Christ ascention
into heauen, about the fourteenth yeere of the raigne of
Domitianus then emperour. VVhich obseruation being
well marked, all the sottish cauils of the papists will easilie
be auoided. Now let vs see, how the auntient fathers
doe vnderstand this place of scripture.
                  Saint Cyrill hath these wordes;Cyrillus lib. 12. in Iohan. cap. vlt. 
                     Non omnia quae Dominus
fecit, conscripta sunt, sed quae scribentes tam ad mores quam ad
dogmata sufficere putarunt; vt recta fide & operibus ad regnum
coelorum perueniamus. All things which our Lord did, are
not written: but those things onely, which the writers
deemed sufficient, as well for manners as for doctrine;
that by a right faith and good life, we may attaine the
kingdome of heauen.
                  Saint Austen hath these wordes;Aug. in. Iohan. tract. 49. tom. 9. in initio, 
                     Cum multa fecisset dominus,
non omnia scripta sunt: electa sunt antem quae scriberentur,
que saluti credentium sufficere videbantur. VVhen our Lord had
done many things, all were not written; but so much
was chosen out to be written, as was thought to be sufficient
for the saluation of the faithfull.
                  Loe, gentle reader, so much is comprised in the holy
scriptures, as is necessarie for our saluation, as well in those
things which concerne our life and manners, as in things
concerning faith and doctrine. VVhich if the papists will

graunt vs, they may keepe their vnwritten traditions, vntill
Gods people haue need thereof. For I see not, why
they should enforce vs to admit them, except they were
necessarie, either for faith, or at the least for good maners:
both which notwithstanding, not the scriptures onely,
but the fathers also doe denie.
                  
                     Locus secundus. Non enim subterfugi,
                     Act. 20. v. 27. 
                     quo minus annuntiarum
vobis omne consilium Dei. For I haue not spared to shew vnto
you, the whole counsell of God. This portion of scripture,
is vnderstood of things pertaining to our saluation;
as two famous popish writers, Nicholaus Lyranus and Dyonisius
Carthusianus, doe contest with me.
                  
                     Carthusiauus hath these wordes;Carthus. in 20. cap. act. apost. 
                     Sed cum alibi scriptum
sit; quis consiliarius eius fuit? sapiens quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         dixerit; quis homini
poterit scire consilium Dei; quomodo potuit Paulus omne consilium
Dei annuntiare hominibus? & respondendum, quod non simpliciter
de omni consili
                           ••
                         Dei intendit, sed de omni consilio Dei, quantum ad
humanam spectai salutem. Quemadmodum etiam ait saluator;
                     Rom. 11. 34. sap. 9. 
                     omnia
audiui à patre meo, nota feci vobis. But seeing it is written
else where; who hath beene his counseller? and seeing
the wise man also saith; what man can know the counsell
of God? how could Paul shew vnto men, all the counsell
of God? answere must bee made, that he meaneth not
simply of all the counsell of God; but of all the counsell
of God, so farre foorth as appertaineth to mans saluation.
As our sauiour also saith; all things which I heard my father,
I haue notified vnto you.
                  
                     Lyra teacheth the very same doctrine,Lyra. in 20. cap. act. apost. I omit his words,
for the regard I haue to breuitie. By whose iudgement it
is most euident, that the whole counsell of God touching
our saluation, is contained in the holy Scriptures. And it
will not helpe the papists to answere or say, that all the
counsell of God was preached, but not written. For first,
the Apostle saith, he was called to be an Apostle, seuered
into the Gospell of God,Rom. 1. which he had promised afore by
his prophets in the holy Scriptures. Secondly, he auoucheth
plainely, that he taught none other things than

those which the prophets and Moses did say should come
to passe.Act. 26. v. 22. Thirdly, Lyranus and Carthusianus, two renowmed
papists, tell vs, that all necessarie doctrine is contained in
the precepts of loue. Carthusianus hath these words: Omnia
precepta,
                     Carthus. in 22. cap. Matt. 
                     documenta, & hortamenta legis ac prophetarum, ordinantur
ad horum obseruantiam mandatorum, & virtualiter continentur
in cis, sicut conclusiones in primis principijs. All precepts,
documents, and exhortations of the law and the prophets
are ordained to the keeping of these cōmandements, and
are virtually contained in them, as conclusions in the first
principles.
                  
                     Lyranus hath these words:Lyra in 22. cap. Matt. 
                     Propter hoc omnia mandata legis
& monitiones, non sunt nisi quaedam explicationes istorum duorum
mandatorū. Quia omnia ordinantur ad dilectionem dei & proximi;
& similiter doctrina prophetarum ad hoc ordinatur. For this cause
all the commandements of the law, and all admonitions,
are nothing els but certaine explications of these two
commaundements. Because all things are ordained to
the loue of God and of our neighbour: and in like manner,
the doctrine of the prophets is referred to the same
end.
                  Fourthly, the Iesuit Bellarmine telleth vs, that the books
of the prophets and Apostles are the infallible rule of
faith.Bellar. tom. 1. col. 2. These are his expresse words: Illud in primis statuendum
erit, Propheticos & Apostolicos libros iuxta mentem ecclesiae
Cath. & olim in Conc. 3. Carthag. & nuper in Conc. Trid. explicatam,
verum esse verbum dei, & certam ac stabilem regulam fidei.
This must be set downe for a ground and sure foundation,
that the bookes of the prophets and Apostles, according
to the mind of the Catholike Church declared aforetime
in the third counsell of Carthage, and of late in the
counsell of Trent, is the true word of God, and the sure
and stable rule of our faith.
                  The same Iesuit in another place hath yet more manifast
and cleere words,Bellar. tom. 1. col. 4. which are these: Quare cum sacra scriptura
regula credendi certissima tutissima
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         sit, sanus profecto non erit,
qui ea neglecta spiritus interni
                           •
                        soepe fallacis, & semper incerti iudicio

se commiserit. VVherefore, seeing the holy Scripture is
the most certaine and most secure rule of faith, he is not
well in his wits doubtlesse, who hauing neglected the
same, shall commit himselfe to the iudgement of the internall
spirit, which often deceiueth, and neuer is sure or
found.
                  These words of our Iesuiticall Cardinall (if they be
well marked) will not onely confound himselfe, who elswhere
teacheth the contrarie doctrine, but also euidently
proue the controuersie now in hand. For first, he saith, that
the bookes of the Apostles and Prophets rightly expounded,
are the infallible rule of faith. Secondly, that the holy
Scripture is the most safe and most secure rule how to beleeue.
Thirdly, that he is mad, whosoeuer will giue credit
to the inward spirit, and not stay himselfe vpon the written
word. All which doubtlesse confound him and his
Iesuiticall broode; as who will not relie vpon the written
testimonies of Gods truth, but seeke after vnwritten
falshoods and vanities, and ground their faith vpon the
same.
                  Fiftly, S. Austen teacheth the selfesame truth, when he
telleth vs flatly, that nothing is contained in the Gospell
and epistles of the Apostles, which is not also comprised in
the law and the Prophets. These are his expresse words:
In eo tanta praedicatio & prenuntiatio noui testamenti est,
                     August. contra Adimant. cap. 3. tom. 6. pag. 121. 
                     vt nulla
in euangelica at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Apostolica disciplina reperiantur, qua
                           •
                        uis ardua
& diuina proecepta & promissa, quae illis etiam libris veteribus desint.
In the old testament, the new testament is so largely
preached and foreshewed, that nothing can be found in
the discipline or doctrine of the Gospell and of the Apostles,
although they be hard and diuine precepts and promises,
which are wanting in those old bookes. This being
so, it followeth of necessitie, that all things needfull to
saluation, are contained in the Scriptures. For S. Paule
preached all the counsell of God; S. Paules preachings are
contained in the doctrine of the prophets; the doctrine
of the prophets is contained in the law; the law was written

with the finger of God; Ergo à primo ad vltimum, all
things necessarie for our saluation, are contained in the
written word of God.
                  
                     Locus tertius. Because from thine infancie thou hast
knowne the holy Scriptures, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
VVhich are able to make thee wise vnto saluatiō,2. Tim. 3. v. 15. throgh
faith which is in Christ Iesus. Thus saith S. Paul. But doubtlesse,
if so much be written as is able to make vs wise to
saluation; we stand in need of no more, it is ynough. Let
the papists keepe their vnwritten traditions to themselues,
let vs relie vpon the written truth. Let vs be wise
vnto saluation, contenting our selues with that which it
pleased God to reueale in his written word, and let them
be presumptuous and curious to follow mans inuentions,
and to beleeue vnwritten vanities.
               
            
            
               The second reason, drawne from the authoritie
of the holy Fathers.
               
                  DIonysius Areopagita, who liued in the daies of the Apostles,De diuinis nominib. cap. 1. in initio.
doth liuely deliuer this truth vnto vs in these
expresse words: Omnino igitur non audendum est, quicquam de
summa abstrusa
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      diuinitate aut dicere aut cogitare, praeter ea quae
nobis diuinitus scripturae diuinae countiarunt. In no wise therfore
may we make bold to speake or thinke any thing of the
most high and ineffable diuinitie, saue that only which holy
writ hath reuealed to vs from heauen.
               S. Augustine, that glistering beame and strong pillar of
Christs church, auoucheth plainely, that all things necessarie
for our saluation are contained in the written word,
as is alreadie prooued in the former reason: and he confirmeth
the same doctrine in another place, where he hath
these expresse words: In his enim quae apertè in scriptura posita
sunt,
                  Aug. de doctrina Christ. li. 2. cap. 6 & cap. 9. tom. 3. 
                  inueniunter illa omnia, quae continent fidem mores
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      viuendi;
spem scilicet at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      charitatem. For in those things which are
plainely set downe in the holy Scripture, all things are
found which containe faith and manners, that is to say,
hope and charitie.
               
                  
The same S. Austen in another place hath these expresse
words: Credo quod etiam hinc diuinorum eloquiorum clarissima authoritas
esset,
                  Aug. de peccat. merit. & remiss. lib. 2. cap. vlt. tom. 7. 
                  si homo sine dispendio promissae salutis illud ignorare
non posset. I beleeue, that euen in this point also we should
haue most cleere testimonie of holy writ, if a man could
not be ignorant thereof, without the losse of his saluation.
               S. Irenaeus hath these words: Non emim per alios dispositionem
salutis nostrae cognouimus,
                  Irenae. li. 3. cap. 1 
                  quam per eos, per quos euangelium
peruenit ad nos; quod quidem tunc preconiauerunt, postea vero per
dei voluntatem in scripturis nobis tradiderunt, fundamentum &
columnam fidei nostrae futurum. For we know the dispensation
of our saluation, by them onely by whom the Gospell
came to our hands, which Gospell they first preached: but
afterward by Gods appointment they deliuered the same
vnto vs in writing, that it might be the foundation and
pillar of our faith.
               
                  Tertullianus an auncient writer,Tertullian. contra Hermogen. pag. 373. (who liued aboue 1300
yeeres agoe) hath these expresse wordes; Adoro scripturae
plenitudinem, quae mihi & factorem manifestat, & facta. An autem
ex aliqua subiacenti materia facta sint omnia, nusquam adhuc legi.
Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis offiicina: si non est scriptum, timeat
vae illud adijcientibus aut detrahentibus destinatum. I reuerence
the plenitude, fulnesse, and perfection of the scripture;
as which sheweth to me, both the maker, and the
things which are made. But that all things are made of
some subiacent matter, I neuer could yet read any where.
Let Hermogenes his shop shew vs, where it is written. If it be
no where written, let him be afraid of that woe which is
prouided for them that adde or take away from the
Scripture.
               Loe (gentle reader) these three most auntient fathers
doe teach vs many very excellent documents. First, that
we know the dispensation of our saluation by Christs Apostles.
Secondly, that we receiued the Gospell from
them. Thirdly, that they first preached the mysteries of
our saluation, deliuering the Gospell by word of mouth.

Fourthly, that afterward they committed the same to
writing. Fiftly, that the Scripture was written by Gods
owne appointment. Sixtly, that it was written for this
end and purpose, That it might be the pillar and foundation
of our faith. Seuenthly, that we may not speake or
thinke any thing of God, which we find not written in
Gods booke. Eightly, that the holy Scripture is perfect,
and containeth all things necessarie for vs to know.
Ninthly, that all such as teach or beleeue any doctrine
not contained in the Scriptures, must drinke of the cup
of eternall woe for their paines. Let vs proceed and see,
what other fathers of later times tell vs.
               S. Cyprian (who liued about 249 yeares after Christ,Cyprian ep 74. ad Pompeium. cont. epist. Steph. col. 229.
                  viz. aboue 1300 yeares agoe) hath these words: Vnde ista
traditio? Vtrumne de dominica & euangelica authoritate descendens,
an de Apostolorum mandatis & epistolis veniens? Ea enim facienda
esse quae scripta sunt, deus testatur, & proponit ad Iesum Nave
dicens; Non recedet liber legis huius ex ore tuo, sed meditaberis in eo
die ac nocte, vt obserues facere omnia quae scripta sunt in eo. Si ergo
aut euangelio precipitur, aut in Apostolorum epistolis, aut astibus
continetur, obseruetur diuina haec & sancta traditio. From whence
came this tradition? Did it descend from the authoritie
of our Lord, or his Gospell? Or came it from the mandates
of the Apostles, or their epistles? For, that those
things must be done which are written, God himselfe doth
witnesse, and propose to Iesus Naue, saying: The booke of
this law shall not depart from thy mouth, but thou shalt
meditate therein night and day, that thou maiest obserue
to doe all things which are written in it. If therefore it
be either commaunded in the Gospell, or be contained in
the Epistles, or in the Acts of the Apostles, let this diuine
and holy tradition be obserued.
               Thus writeth S. Cyprian, shewing plainely,
that all traditions
ought to be examined by the written word, and
nothing to be admitted, which is not contained in the
same, or grounded thereupon. VVhere I note by the
way, for the helpe of the reader, that though Cornelius,
                  
then bishop of Rome (whom now the papists tearme
Pope and his holinesse) together with the whole nationall
synode of all the bishops of Italie, had made a flat
decree touching rebaptization: and though also Pope
Stephanus his holinesse had confirmed the same decree,
and commaunded it to be obserued: and thirdly, though
our papists of late daies doe obstinately affirme, that their
Pope cannot erre when he defineth iudicially. Yet this
notwithstanding, S. Cyprian teacheth and telleth vs plainly
and roundly,Euseb. lib. 7. hist. cap. 2, 3, 4. that in his time the bishop of Rome had
no such authoritie, as this day he proudly and antichristianly
taketh vpon him: for he roundly withstood the
decree of Pope Stephanus, who then was bishop of Rome,
and both sharpely reprooued him, and contemned his
falsely pretended authoritie. And for all that, S. Cyprian
was euer reputed an holy bishop in his life time, and a
glorious martyr being dead. But, if the bishop of Rome
had beene Christs vicar, and so priuiledged, as our papists
beare the world in hand he is, then doubtlesse S. Cyprian
must needs haue beene an hereticke, and so reputed and
esteemed in the Church of God. For, if any Christian shall
this day doe or affirme as S. Cyprian did, or publickely denie
the Popes falsely pretended prymacie in any place,
countrey, territories, or dominions, where poperie beareth
the sway, then without all peraduenture he must
be burnt at a stake, with fire and faggot for his paines.
               S. Athanasius hath these words: Sufficiunt sanctae ac diuinitus
inspiratae scripturae,
                  Athanas. contrae gentes, seu idola. 
                  ad veritatis iuditionem. The holy scriptures
inspired of God, are sufficient, for the discussion and
manifestation of the truth. VVhere the reader must obserue
with me, that Athanasius contending against the
Gentiles, that their idols were not gods; and proouing
that Christ was true God and true man by the Scriptures;
and withall auouching, that the Scriptures were sufficient
to decide and determine the controuersie; should
haue made a very foolish argument, and haue concluded
nothing at all, if any necessarie truth had beene

wanting, and not fully contained in the holy scriptures.
               S. Epiphanius hath these words:Epiph. haeres. 65. 
                  Nos vniuscuius
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      quaestionis
inuentionem, non ex proprijs ratiocinationibus dicere possumus,
sed ex scripturarum consequentia. VVe cannot shew the inuention
of euery question out of our owne proper reasons,
but by consequence of the scriptures.
               S. Cyrill hath these words:Cyrillus lib. 2. de recta fide ad regin. tom. 2. 
                  Necessarium nobis est diuinas
sequi literas, & in nullo ab earum prescripto discedere. It is necessarie
for vs to follow the holy scriptures, and not in the
least iot to depart from the prescript rule thereof.
               S. Chrysostome hath these words:Chrys. in Ps. 95. tom. 1. prope finē. 
                  Si quid dicatur abs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      scriptura,
auditorum cogitatio claudicat, nunc annuens, nunc haesitans,
& interdum sermonem vt friuolum aduersans, interdum vt probabilem
recipiens. Verum vbi è scriptura diuinae vocis prodijt testimonium,
& loquentis sermonem, & audientis animum confirmat. If
any thing be spoken without the scripture, the cogitation
of the auditours faileth, sometime yeelding, sometime
staggering, and sometime reiecting the speech as friuolous,
sometime receiuing it as probable. But, so soone as
the testimonie of Gods voice is heard out of the scripture,
it confirmeth both the word of the speaker, and the mind
of the hearer.
               The same S. Chrysostome in another place hath these
words:Chrysost. hom. 41. in Matt. 22. in opere imperf. 
                  Quicquid quaeritur ad salutem, totum iam adimpletum
est in scripturis. Loe, these holy fathers and auntient writers
(who all of them liued aboue a thousand and one
hundred yeeres agoe) teach the selfesame doctrine with
the former fathers. They tell vs first, that the holy scripture
is sufficient to decide all controuersies. Secondly,
that we must affirme or hold no doctrine, but that which
we find in the scriptures. Thirdly, that we must not in the
least point of doctrine depart or swarue from the rule of
holy scripture. Fourthly, that in the holy scripture is
fully comprised whatsoeuer is necessarie for mans saluation.
But let vs yet heare the verdict of some others.
               S. Ambrose hath these words:Ambros. de fide ad Grat. lib. 1. cap. 4. tom. 2. 
                  Non negamus, imò potius horremus
hanc vocem. Sed nolo argumento credas sancte imperator, &

nostrae disputationi. Scripturas interrogemus; interrogemus apostolos;
interrogemus prophetas; interrogemus Christum. VVe denie
not, but rather abhorre the word. Yet, holy emperour, I
would neither haue you beleeue our argument nor our
disputation. Let vs aske counsell vpon the scriptures; let
vs aske the Apostles; let vs aske the Prophets; let vs
aske Christ himselfe, and so know what is the truth.
               S. Basill hath these words: Si quicquid ex fide non est,
                  Basilius in ethicis, definit, vlt. prope finem. 
                  peccatum
est, sicut dicit apostolus; fides vero ex auditu, auditus autem
per verbum dei; ergo quicquid extra diuinam scripturam est, cum
ex fide non sit, peccatum est. If whatsoeuer is not of faith, be
sinne, as the Apostle saith; and if also faith come by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God; then doubtlesse,
whatsoeuer is not in the holy scripture, the same is sinne,
because it is not of faith.
               The same S Basill in another place hath these words:Basilius ad Eustath. medieum, epist. 80.
                  Stemus arbitratu in spiratae à deo scripturae; & apud quos inueniuntur
dogmata diuinis oraculis consona, illis omnino veritatis adiudicetur
sententia. Let vs be iudged by the scripture, which
came from God by inspiration; and whose doctrine shall
be found consonant to Gods Oracles, let the truth be
iudged to be on their side.
               S. Hierome hath these words:Hier. in cap. 23 Matth. Vide Paul. Burgens. in 1. cap. Osee. 
                  Hoc quia de scripturis non habet
authoritatem, eadem facilitate contemnitur, qua probatur. This
opinion is as easily reiected as it is affirmed, because it
hath no authoritie from the scriptures.
               The same S. Hierome in another place hath these words:Hier. in Psal. 86.
                  Quomodo narrabit? non verbo, sed scriptura. Videte quid dicat qui
fuerunt, non qui sunt: vt exceptis Apostolis quodcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      aliud postea decatur,
abscindatur, non habeat postea authoritatē. Quamuis ergo sanctus
sit aliquis post Apostolos, quamuis disertus sit, non habeat authoritatē.
Quoniā dominus narrat inscriptura populorū, & principū horam
qui fuerunt in ea. How shall he shew it? not by word, but by
the holy scripture. Marke what he saith, who were, but not
who are; to the end, that the Apostles being excepted,
whatsoeuer other thing be afterward spokē, it must be reiected,
it must haue no authority at all. Wherfore, though

a man be holy, though he be learned, yet seeing he commeth
after the Apostles, let him be of no authoritie. For
our Lord speaketh to vs in the scripture of his people, and
of the princes that were therein.
               The same Saint Hierome in an other place hath these
wordes;Hier. in lere. cap. 9. tom. 5. 
                  Erog nec parentum, nec maiorum error sequendus est, sed
authoritas scripturarum, & Dei docentis imperium. Therefore we
must neither follow the errour of our parents, nor of
our auncestours, but the authoritie of the scriptures, and
the commandement of God teaching vs.
            
            
               The third reason, drawne from the authoritie of
famous popish writers.
               
                  IOhn frier the late bishop of Rochester,Roffencis, art. 37. aduers. Luther. pa, 411. one highly renowmed
amongst the papists, and with them canonized
for a Saint and glorious Martyr, so as his authoritie
must perforce be of credit against them, hath these expresse
words; Scriptura sacra conclaue quoddam est omnium veritatum,
quae Christianis scitu necessaria sunt. The holy scripture
is a certaine store-house of all truths, which are
needfull to be knowne of Christians.
               In another place the same famous papist hath these
wordes;Roffens. aduers. art. Luther. verit. 4. 
                  Contendentibus ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nobiscum haereticis, nos alio subsidio
nostram oportet tueri causam, quam scripturae sacrae. Therefore
when heretiques contend with vs, wee must defend our
cause by other meanes, than by the holy scripture. These
are the very expresse words of their owne famous popish
bishop, of their holy Saint, of their glorious matyr; who
laboured with might and maine for the Popes vsurped
soueraintie, and defended the same in the best manner he
was able. And yet for all that, he hath bolted out vnawares
and against his will, (such is the force of truth, which
must needs in time preuaile) so much in plaine tearmes,
as is sufficient to ouerthrow all poperie for euer, and to
cause all people that haue any care of their saluation, to
renounce the Pope and his abhominable doctrine to
their liues end. For first, our popish bishop telleth vs

plainely, and without all dissimulation, (his mouth being
now opened by him that caused Balaams asse to speake)Numer. cap. 22. v. 28.
That in the holy scripture, as in a plentifull storehouse, is
laid vp for vs and our instruction, all knowledge necessarie
for mans saluation. Againe, the same popish bishop,
Saint, and Martyr, (of papists so esteemed and reputed)
telleth vs roundly, That they must not (because forsooth
they cannot) defend and maintaine their poperie by the
authoritie of the scripture, but by some other way and
meanes, to wit, by mans inuentions and popish vnwritten
vanities, which they tearme the Churches traditions.
Now gentle reader, how can any papist (who is not giuen
vp in reprobum sensum for his iust deserts) read such testimonies
against poperie,Rom. 1. v. 24. freely confessed and published
to the world by papists, euen when they bestirre themsulues
busily to maintaine their Pope and his popish doctrine;
and for all that continue papists still, and bee
carried away headlong into perdition; beleeuing and
obeying that doctrine, which cannot be defended by the
written word of God, which is the store-house of all necessarie
knowledge;2. Thes. 2. v. 12. Rom. 1. v. 24. They doubtlesse are either very
senselesse, or so blinded for their former sinnes, that they
cannot behold the sunne shining at noone tide: me thinks
they should be ashamed, to hold and beleeue that doctrine;
in defence whereof, they can yeeld no better reasons.
But let vs yet heare what other renowned popish
writers tel vs; who doubtlesse will not bewray their owne
cause, but against their wils. Howbeit as the wise man
saith, Magnaest veritas, & praeualet; The truth is of such force
as it must needes preuaile,3. Esdr. 4. v. 42. and in time haue the vpper
hand.
               
                  Melchior Canus another popish bishop,Melch. Canus de llocis theolog. lib. 7. cap. 3. and a very learned
schoole-doctor, hath these expresse words; Cum sit
perfectus scripturarum canon, sibi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad omnia satis super
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      sufficiat;
quid opus est, vt ei sanctorum & intelligentia iungatur, & authoritas.
Seeing the canon of the scripture is perfect, and most
sufficient of it selfe to euery end, and in euery respect;

what need haue we to ioyne therewith, either the exposition
or the authoritie of the fathers. Thus writeth this
great learned papist, not denying the sufficiencie of the
holy scripture, but requiring the commentaries of the fathers,
for the better vnderstanding of the same. VVhose
opinion I doe approue and commend in that respect,
as is euident to all that shall peruse my booke of Motiues.
               
                  Thomas Aquinas,
                  Aquinas, p. 1. q. 36. art. 2. ad primum. (whom the Pope hath cannonized
for a Saint, and his doctrine for authenticall) teacheth vs
not to beleeue any thing concerning God, sauing that only
which is contained in the scripture expresly, or at least
significantly. These are his owne words: Dicendum, quod de
Deo dicere non debemus, quod in sacra scriptura non inuenitur, vel
per verba, vel per sensum. VVe must answere, that nothing
is to be verified of God, which is not contained in holy
writ, either expresly, or in sense.
               The same popish doctour in an other place hath these
wordes:Aquinas, p. 3. q 42. art. 4. ad primum. 
                  Quicquid enim ille (Christus) de suis factis & dictis nos
legere voluit, hoc scribendum illis tanquam suis manibus imperauit.
For whatsoeuer Christ would haue vs to read of his doings
and sayings, the same he commaunded his Apostles
to write, as if he had done it with his owne hands. Loe,
in these wordes Aquinas auoucheth very plainely, that all
things necessarie for our saluation, are contained in the
scriptures. For in Christs deeds, are contained his myracles,
his life, his conuersation: in his sayings semblably,
are contained his preaching, his teaching, his doctrine;
and consequently, whatsoeuer is necessary for vs to know.
If then this be true, as it is most true, (for the papists neither
will,See the Iesuit Bellarmins doctrine, in the end of the sercond exposition, and note it well. nor can denie the doctrine of Aquinas) that
whatsoeuer Christ would haue vs to know, of his miracles,
of his life, of his conuersation, of his preaching, of
his teaching, of his doctrine, the same is now written in
the scriptures: no man doubtlesse, but he that will cum ratione
insanire, can denie all things necessarie for our saluation,
to be contained in the holy scriptures.
               To this doctrine deliuered by Aquinas, agreeth their

owne renowmed professor, and most learned schoole-doctor
Franciscus a victoria,
                  Victor. de sacra. pag. 120. that Spanish frier. His expresse
wordes are these; Non est mihi certum, licet omnes dicant, quod
in scriptura non continetur. I doe not thinke it certaine and
sure, although all writers affirme it, which is not contained
in the scripture.
               The same popish doctor and frier,Victor. relect. 8. de augment. charit p. 308. in another place
hath these words: Propter quas (opiniones) nullo modo debemus,
discedere à regula & synceritate scripturarum. For which opinions
we must by no meanes depart from the rule and synceritie
of the holy scriptures. Loe (gentle reader) our
popish frier will beleeue no doctrine, which is not contained
in the scripture; although all writers teach the
same. Mad men therefore may they be deemed, that will
beleeue whatsoeuer the Pope telleth them, though it
be neuer so repugnant to the scripture.Vide tu Anselm. in 2. tim. cap. 3. & Lyran. in matt. 19. 
                  Anselmus and Lyra
two other famous popish writers, doe teach vs the selfe
same doctrine.
            
            
               The second Proposition.
               All persons of what sexe, state, calling, or condition soeuer
they be, may lawfully, and ought seriously to read
the holy scriptures; as out of which, euen the simplest of
all may gather so much as is necessarie for their saluation.
This I say, against that popish, ridiculous, vnchristian, and
verie pestilent abuse, where the Pope deliuereth to the
people, as it were by was of apostolicall traditon; the
scriptures, sacraments, and church-seruice, in a strange
tongue to them vnknowne. VVhich to be flatly against
the practise of the primitiue Church, I haue proued copiously
in my booke of Suruey. Here therefore I will onely
shew, that it is both lawfull and necessarie for all sorts of
people that desire to attaine eternall life, to read diligently
the holy scriptures.
               S. Chrysostome discourseth at large of this subiect in many
places of his workes;Chrysost. in proaemio epist. ad. Rom. but I will content my selfe with
some few for the present. In his commentaries vpon Saint
Paul he hath these words: Et vos ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , si lectioni cum animi

alacritate volueritis attendere, nullo alio preterea opus habebitis. Verus
enim est sermo Christi, cum dicit; quaerite & inuenietis, pulsate
& aperietur. Verum quia plures exijs qui huc conuenere, & liberorum
educationem, & vxoris curam, gubernandae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      domus insesereceperunt,
at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ideo non sustinent totos se labori isti addicere, saltem ad
percipienda quae alij collegerunt, excitamini: tantum ijs quae dicuntur
audiendis impendite diligentiae, quantum colligendis pecunijs. Tam
etsi enim turpe sit non nisi tantum a vobis exigere, tamen contenti erimus,
si vel tantum prestetis. Nam hinc iunumera mala nata sunt,
quod scripturae ignorantur. Hinc erupit multa illa haereseon pernicies;
hinc vita dissoluta, hinc inutiles labores: quemadmodum enim qui
luce ista priuatisunt, recta vti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      non pergunt: ita qui ad radios diuinarum.
Scripturarum non respiciunt, multa coguntur continuò delinquere,
vtpote in longe peioribus tenebris ambulantes; quod ne
nobis vsu veniat, occulos ad splendorem Apostolicorum verborum aperiamus.
If therefore you will read the scriptures with alacritie
of mind, you shall need no other helpe at all. For
Christs word is true, when he saith: Seeke, and ye shall
find; knocke, and it shall be opened vnto you. But because
many of you are charged with wiues, children, and
domesticall regiment, and so can not wholy addict your
selues to this studie: yet at the least bee readie to heare
what others haue gathered, and bestow so much diligence
in hearing what is said, as you doe in scraping worldlie
goods together. For albeit it bee a shame to require no
more of you, yet will I be content, if ye doe so much. For,
the cause of infinit euils, is your ignorance in the scriptures:
From hence springeth the manifold mischiefe of
heresies; from hence, dissolute life; from hence, vaine
and vnprofitable labours. For, euen as they that are bereaued
of this light, cannot goe the right way: so they
that doe not behold the beames of the holy scriptures,
are enforced inconintently to offend in many things, as
walking in farre greater darknesse.
               This is the golden censure of Saint Chrysostome, rightly
surnamed the golden mouthed doctour. Out of whose
doctrine, I gather these worthy obseruations: First, that

whosoeuer studieth the scriptures seriously, and with
alacritie, shall find therein, and vnderstand so much, as
is necessarie for his saluation. And consequently, that our
disholy father the Pope, debarreth vs of the ordinarie
meanes of our saluation; when he vpon paine of excommunication,
inhibiteth vs to read the scriptures in our
vulgar tongue, vnlesse we haue his licence and dispensation
so to doe. And he hath I confesse, some reason thus
to deale: because forsooth poperie would haue a short
reigne, if euery papist might freely read the holy scripture,
and other godly bookes written for their instruction.
But alasse, they are so bewitched with his blessings,
that they thinke they shalbe damned, if they doe but
read this my discourse, or any other opposite to poperie,
not hauing his licence so to doe. But all his priests are licenced;
and so they can pretend no excuse, if they doe
not frame some answere hereunto.
               Secondly, that it is a very shame, for men charged
with wiues, children, and families; that they doe but onlie
heare sermons, and doe not withall studie the holy
scriptures; and consequently, that it is much more shame
for others that be more free, not to read them diligently;
and greatest shame of all for a bishop, to approue or commend
them that will not so doe,
               Thirdly, that heresies, dissolute life, and all other euils,
doe proceed of ignorance, and of not reading the holy
scriptures.
               The same Saint Chysostome in an other place hath these
wordes.Chrysost. in 9. ca. genes. hom. 29. to. 1. 
                  Propterea obsecro, vt subinde huc veniatis, & diuinae
scripturae lectionem diligenter auscultetis; nec solum cum huc venitis,
sed & domi diuina b
                        •
                     blia in manus sumite, & vtilitatem in illis
positam magno studio suscipitc. Sequitur Paulo inferius. Tantum igitur
lucrum oro, ne per negligentiam amittemus, sed & domi vacemus
diuinarum scriptur arum lectioni, & hic presentes non in nugis
& inutilibus colloquijs tempus decoquamus. I beseech you
therefore, that you will come hither now and then, and

attend diligently the reading of the holy scriptures; neither
that onely when ye come hither, but at home also
take the holy bibles into your hands, and with great studie
embrace the profit contained in them. I pray you
therefore, let vs not negligently loose so great gaine, but
when we are at home, let vs then apply our selues to read
the holy scriptures: and being here, let vs not spend our
time idlely and vainely.
               By these testimonies, (to omit many others) we may
perceiue most euidently, how grieuously Saint Chrysostome
lamenteth, that the people in his time were so negligent
in reading the holy scripture. VVhat therefore would
that holy father say, if he liued in these our daies, in which
the Pope burneth such scriptures, as the people vnderstand
in their vulgar tongue: In which he commaundeth
all church-seruice to be in straunge and vnknowne language:
In which he excommunicateth all say-persons be
they neuer so well learned,6. decret. lib. 5. cap. quicunque. that reason of matter of faith,
or dispute of his power? VVhat would he say, if he heard
priests pronounce absolution in their popish sacrament
of penance, which neither the penitents, nor the priests
themselues doe often vnderstand? Nay, what would he
say, if he were this day in popish Churches, where they
doe not onely read their Churchseruice in Latine, but also
Latine homilies or sermons vnto the vulgar sort; which
yet they tearme an exposition of the scripture: which
maner of proceeding is practised euery festiuall day of
nine lessons, in the time of their mattens? In fine, what
would he say, if he knew the rude vulgar sort, who are
commaunded to heare the Gospell read in Latine, and
withall should see them listening with their eares, least
any word should not be heard, though impossible of
them to be vnderstood? would he not, and might he not
iustly say with the holy Apostle,1. Cor. 14. v. 24. that they were mad?
Yes doublesse, it cannot be denied.
               
                  Origen, who liued aboue a thousand and three hundred

yeares agoe, doth not onely exhort the people seriously
to read the scriptures, but withall sheweth plainely, that
in his time they were read in the vulgar tongue. These are
his words:Origen hom. 4. pe super leuit. pro finem. 
                  Certè, si non omnia possumus, saltem ea quae nunc docentur
in ecclesia, vel quae recitantur, memoriae commendemus.
Doubtlesse, if we cannot beare away all things contained
in the scriptures, yet at the least let vs remember those
things which are taught and read in the Church. Loe, in
these golden words he speaketh not onely of sermons,
but also of the Gospels, Epistles, Prayers, Lessons, and histories
of the Bible. For sermons are contained in the word
(docentur, which are preached;) and the rest in the word (recitantur,
which are read or rehearsed:) but certes, if such
things had beene read in a strange and vnknown tongue,
the vulgar sort could not haue committed them to memorie.
And consequently, to no end or purpose should
Origen haue made this exhortation. And the obiection
which is common in the mouthes of our papists, That
Saint Peter affirmeth the scriptures to be obscure and hard
to bee vnderstood (notwithstanding the great brags and
insolent vaunts of our Rhemists) is too too foolish,Rhemist. in 2. Pet. cap. 3.
and of no force at all. For first, Saint Peter saith not, that
the whole scripture is hard to be vnderstood, but some
things in S. Paules Epistles. Secondly, he speaketh not
solely and barely of the vnlearned, but of the vnlearned
which are vnstable. Thirdly, he speaketh not generally
of all readers of the scripture, but of those wicked ones,
which depraue not onely S. Paules Epistles,Vide D. Chrysost. in proemio epist. ad Rom. in in
                        •
                     io. but also all other
scriptures, to their owne perdition. Howbeit, to debarre
all the godly, who with all humilitie and reuerence
desire to read the scriptures; and to abandon one onely
particular euill, by taking away the good wholly and generally;
may well be resembled to those vnskilfull physitions,
who cannot deliuer their patients from any particular
disease, except they take away their liues. But wise
Salomon was of another mind,Prou. 8. v. 8, 9. when he affirmed all the

words of wisedome to be open and easie to euery one of
vnderstanding, that is, which haue a desire to the truth,
and are not blinded of the prince of this world. For, as
by the foole, he meaneth euery wicked man: so by a man
of vnderstanding he meaneth euery one that is godly.
Hereupon it is said,Psal. 25. v. 9. that God reuealeth his secret counsels
to all that feare him:Iohn. 7. v. 17. That whosoeuer will do the will
of God,Iohn. 8. v. 31: 32 the same shal know his doctrine: That they which
abide in Gods word, shall know the truth:Matth. 11. v. 25. That God reuealeth
his will vnto the simple and vnlearned ones, and
hideth his secrets from the wise and prudent:Ps. 119. v. 105. That the
whole bodie of the scripture, from the head to the foot
thereof, is tearmed a lanterne to ourfeet, and a light vnto
our pathes: That Gods word is like a candle, shining in
a darke place, vntill the day dawne, and the day-star arise
in our hearts:2. Pet. 1. v. 19. That the spirituall man doth vnderstand all
things which are necessarie for his saluation:1. Cor. 2. v. 15. for so Lyra
and Dionysius Carthusianus, two great learned papists, doe
expound the place. And consequently, if Gods word be
hidden to any, it is hidden to those that perish, to those
whose vnderstandings the God of this world hath blinded,2. Cor. 4. v. 3, 4.
that the light of the Gospell of the glorie of Christ,
should not shine vnto them.
               S. Chrysostome hath these golden words:Chrys. in 2. Thes. cap. 2. hom. 3. 
                  Quid opus est
concionatore? Per nostram negligentiam necessitas ista facta est.
Quamobrem nam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      concione opus est? Omnia clara sunt & plana ex
diuiais scripturis; quaecun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     s necessaria sunt, manifesta sunt. VVhat
need is there of a preacher? Our negligence hath caused
this necessitie. For to what end is a sermon needfull? All
things are cleere and euident in the holy scriptures, what
things soeuer are necessarie, the same are manifest.
               The same S. Chrysostome in his Commentaries vpon the
Epistle of the Colossians,Chrys. in Coloss. hom. 9. col. 1290. hath these words: Audite quotquot
estis mundani, & vxoribus prae estis ac liberis, quomodo & vobis
potissimum precipiat scripturas legere; id
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      non simpliciter, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
abiter, sed magna diligentia, Sequitur Paulo inferius. Audite obsecro

seculares omnes. Comparate vobis biblia, animae pharmaca. Si
nihil aliud vultis, vel nouum testamentum acquirite, Apostolum,
Acta, Euangelia, continuos ac sedulos doctores. Si acciderit maestitia,
huc veluti apothecam pharmacorum introspice. Hinc tibi sume
solamen mali, siue damnū euenerit, siue mors, siue amissio domesticorum.
Imònon introspice solum, sed omnia iterum at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iterum versa,
mente
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      illa contine. Hoc demum malorum omnium causa est, quod
scripturae ignorantur. Iterum; doce puerum tuum Psalmos illos canere
Philosophiae plenos. Hearken all ye that are encombred with
worldly affaires, and haue charge of wiues and children,
how you specially are commanded to read the scriptures,
and that not simply nor slenderly, but with great diligence.
Heare I pray you, all secular persons. Prouide and
furnish your selues with bibles, the soueraigne medicines
of your soules. If you will haue no other thing, at the
least prouide the new Testament, the Apostle, the Acts,
the Gospell, the continuall and diligent doctors. If any
griefe come, turne thine eye vnto the scripture, as to the
Apothecaries shop full of medicines. From hence receiue
sollace of euill, whether domage, or death, or losse of
worldly goods chance vnto thee. Yea, looke not onely
to the scripture, but volue and reuolue all things contained
therein, and keepe the same in mind. For this is the
cause of all manner of euils, that men are ignorant in the
holy scriptures. Teach your children to sing Psalmes,
which are full of Philosophie.
               Thus writeth this holy father, teaching vs at large,
how necessarie and needfull a thing it is for euery one to
studie and read diligently the holy scriptures. For first, he
telleth vs plainely, that all necessarie points of doctrine
are so plaine and manifest, as one may vnderstand the
same without the preacher. Secondly, that they who are
charged with wiues, children, and worldly affaires, are specially
and more than others, commaunded to read the
scriptures: The reason hereof he yeeldeth in another
place; because the more they are encombered with the

cares of the world, the more need they haue to enioy the
helpes of the holy scripture. These are his words: Quid ais
homo?
                  Chrysost. conc. 3. de lazaro, tom. 2. col. 1340. 
                  Non est tui negotij scripturas euoluere, quoniam in numeris
curis distraberis? Imò tuum magis est, quam illorum. Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      enim illi
perinde scripturarum egent presidio, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vos in medijs negotiorum
vndis iactati. VVhat sayest thou ô man? Is it not thy part
and dutie to read the holy scriptures, because thou art
encombred with many worldly cares? yea, it is so much
more thy charge than it is theirs: For they haue not so
great need of the helpe of the scriptures as you haue,
who are tossed in the middest of the waues of worldly
troubles. Thirdly, that all secular persons of both sexes
must furnish themselues with the holy Bible. Fourthly,
that they must not onely read the scriptures barely and
slenderly, but that they must doe the same with great diligence.
Fiftly, that the scriptures doe minister comforts
for all sorrowes, and soueraigne medicines for all sores.
Sixtly, that the ignorance of the scriptures is the cause of
all euils. Seuenthly, that parents must teach their children
to sing Psalmes, yea, euen those Psalmes which are
replenished with Philosophie.
               S. Austen teacheth in the same manner,August. de doct. Christ. li, 2. cap. 9. that all things
necessarie for mans saluation, are plaine and easie to be
vnderstood. These are his expresse words: In his enim qu
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
apertè in scriptura posita sunt▪ inueniuntur illa omnia, quae continent
fidem mores
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      viuendi. For in those things which are
plainely set downe in the holy scripture, are found all
things concerning faith and manners.
               The same S. Austen in another place hath these words:August. de doct. Christ. li. 2. cap. 6.
                  Magnifice igitur & salubriter spiritus sanctus ita scripturas sanctas
modificauit, vt locis apertioribus fami occurreret, obscurioribus autem
fastidia detergeret. God hath so tempered the holy scriptures,
that by manifold places he might prouide against
famine, and by those which are more obscure, he might
cleanse the loathsomenesse of our stomacke. And his reason
hereof followeth in these next words: Nihil enim fere

de illis obscurit atibus eruitnr, quod non planissime dictum alibi reperiatur.
For almost nothing is contained in obscure places,
which is not most plainely vttered in some other place.
               The same father in an other place hath these wordes;
Nec solum vobis sufficiat,
                  Aug. de tempor
                        •
                      ser. 55. 
                  quod in ecclesia diuinas lectiones auditis,
sed etiam in domibus vestris aut ipsi legite, aut alios legentes requirite,
& libenter audite. Let it not be enough for you, onely
to heare Gods word in the Church; but also read it your
selues in your houses, or else procure others to read it,
and heare you them willing.
               Out of these wordes of this holy writer, and antient
father, we may learne many godly lessons. First, that all
things needfull for our saluation, are plainely set downe
in the scriptures. Secondly, that things which are obscurely
touched in some places, are plainelie handled in other
places. Thirdly, that the scriptures are obscure in some
places, to exercise our wits, and to cleanse the loathsomenesse
of our stomackes. Fourthly, that we must read the
scriptures at home in our houses, & not heare them read
in the Churches. Fiftly, that if we cannot read them our
selues, then must we procure others to read them to vs,
and marke diligently what they read, and heare them
with desire and alacritie of mind.
               Saint Hierome is consonant to Saint Austen and Saint
Chysostome,
                  Hieron. in Ps. 133. affirming, that in his time (which was about
1200 yeeres agoe) both monkes, men, and women, did
contend who could learne moe scriptures without book.
These are his expresse wordes; Solent & viri, solent & monachi;
solent & mulierculae hoc inter se habere certamen, vt plures
ediscant scripturas; & in eose putant esse meliores si plures edidicerint.
Men, women, and monkes, vse to contend one
with another, who can learne moe scriptures: and herein
they thinke themselues better, if they can learne
more.
               The same Saint Hierome in an other place, speaking of
the education of a yoong maid of seuen yeeres old, hath

these wordes;Hieron. ad Gaudentium, tom. 1. fol. 44. B. 
                  Matris nutum pro verbis ac monitis, & pro imperio
habeat. Amet vt parentem, subijciatur vt dominae, timeat vt magistram.
Cum autem virgunculam rudem & edentulam septimus aetatis
annus exceperit, & caeperit erubescere, scire quid taceat, dubitare
quid dicat; discat memoriter psalterium, & vs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad annos pubertatis
libros Salomonis, euangelia, Apostolos, & prophetas, sui cordis
thesaurum faciat. Let her mothers beck to her, be in steed of
wordes, admonitions, and commaunds. Let her loue her
as her parent, obey her as her ladie, and feare her as her
mistris. And when the rude and toothlesse girle shall bee
seuen yeere old, and shall begin to be bashfull, to know
when to be silent, and when to speake; then let her learne
the Psames by heart, and without booke: and till she be
twelue yeeres of age, or marriageable, let her make the
bookes of Salomon, the Gospels, Apostles, and Prophets,
the treasure of her heart. Thus writeth Saint Hierome: out
of whose golden words I note these golden obseruations.
First, that both men and women in his dayes, did studie
and read the scriptures, as diligently and painfully as the
monkes. Secondly, that in his time they thought themselues
the happiest people, who could con by heart the
most texts of holy scripture: Wheras amongst the papists
they are deemed most holy, that can by heart no scripture
at all, but absteine from the reading thereof, as from
the poyson of their soules. Thirdly, that yong women being
but seuen yeeres of age, must be acquainted with the
holy scriptures, & learne by heart the booke of Psalmes.
Fourthly, that from seuen yeeres vpward vntill puberty,
that is to say, vntill the twelft yere of their age, they must
read seriously the bookes of Salomon, the Gospels, Apostles,
and Prophets, and set their whole delite therein.
And the same holy father in his Epistle to the godly matrone
Celantia,
                  Hieron. ad Celant. tom. 1. fol. 50. A. doth perswade her for the best course of her
life, to be continually conuersant in the holy scriptures.
These are his wordes; Sint ergo diuinae scipturae semper in manibus
tuis, & iugiter mente voluantur. Let therefore the holy

scriptures be alwayes in thy hands, and let them be vncessantly
tossed or rolled in thy mind.
               Saint Theodoretus telleth vs with good liking thereof,Theodor. lib. 5. de Graeca, affect. curat. pag. 521.
that in his time the scriptures were translated into all maner
of languages, & that they were not onely vnderstood
of doctors, & masters of the Church, but euen of the lay-people,
and common artificers. His expresse wordes I
will alledge, which are these; Hebraici vero libri, non modo in
Graecum idioma conuersi sunt, sed in Romanam quoque linguam,
Aegyptiam, Persicam, Indicam, Armenica
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , & Scythicam, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
adeo Sauromaticam, semel
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vt dicam, in linguas omnes, quibus ad
hanc diem nationes vtuntur. Sequitur paulò inferius, fossores
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      adeo
ac bubulcos inuenias; plant arum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      consitores de diuina trinitate, rerum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
omnium creatione discertantes. The Hebrew bookes are
turned not onely into the Greeke tongue, but also into
the Roman language also, into the Aegyptian, Persian,
Indians, Armenian, and Scythian, as also into the Sauromatick
tongue, & to speake all in a word, into all tongues,
which this day are in vse amongst nations. And after hee
hath told vs, that the Church-doctrine, is knowne to all
maner artizans of both sexes; he addeth, that we may
find ditchers, deluers, neatheards, and gardiners, disputing
euen of the blessed trinitie, and of the creation of all
things. VVhereupon it is euident, that in the auncient
Church, and in the time of old religion, (as the sillie foolish
papists call their Romish inuentions, which is in deed
a newly inuented religion, as I haue proued in my Suruey
of poperie) euery nation had the holy scriptures in their
vulgar language: and that in those dayes, all the Christians
did read the holy scriptures so seriously, that both
men and women, of all trades and conditions, were able
to dispute of the holy trinitie, and of the creation of the
world. VVhich two points doubtlesse, are the most difficult,
obscure, hard, and intricate articles, in the whole
course of theologie.
               The Iesuit Bellarmine, (a wonderfull thing to be heard,

and a most incredible, sauing (that the truth must needes
in time haue the vpper hand) confesseth so much vnawares,
as is able sufficiently to prooue and conclude my
intended scope and proposition.Bellar. tom 1. ed. 191. lib. 4. de verbo Deiscrip. to. cap. 11. a. These are his expresse
wordes; His notatis, dico illa omnia scripta esse ab apostolis, quae
sunt omnibus necessariae, & quaeipsipalam omnibus vulgo praedicauerant;
alia autem non omnia scripta esse. These obseruations
being marked, I answere, that all those things were written
by the Apostles, which are necessarie for all men, and
which the Apostles preached openly to all the vulgar
people; but that all other things were not written. Thus
writeth our skilfull Iesuit, who in the name of all papists,
(being as it were their mouth) saith all that can be
said, in defence of late Romish religion. Out of whose
words I note first, that all thing necessarie for all men and
all women, old men, yoong men, maids, and babes, rich
and poore, noble and ignoble, are set downe and conteined
in the holy scriptures. Secondly, that all things contained
in the written word, are necessarie for all people.
Thirdly, that those things which are not contained in the
written word, were neuer preached openly to all people,
but secretly to some few persons in secret corners; peraduenture
to our Iesuits and Iesuited popelings, sauing that
their sect was not then hatched, as which is not yet eighty
yeeres old. Fourthly, that those things which are not
contained in the scriptures and written word, are not necessarie
for all people, but onely for Iesuits and papists, to
bring them to perdition. Fiftly, that seeing on the one
side, all things needfull for all men and all women, for
yong and old, rich and poore, noble and ignoble, are
contained in the scriptures; and seeing withall on the
other side, that all things in the written word are necessarie
for all people, (marke well what I say, gentle reader,
for I build my worke vpon that foundation which
the Iesuit hath laid) it followeth by necessarie consequution,
that all people ought seriously to read the holy

scripture: as also that they may safely contemne all
vnwritten traditions, as nothing needfull or pertaining
to them. But let vs heare our Cardinall Iesuit once again
speake for himselfe and for the honour of this holy father
the Pope.Bellar. de verbo dei, lib. 3. cap. 2. tom. 1. col. 129. These are his expresse words: At in nouo testamento,
quia Christus impleuit figuras & prophetias; etsi multi non
intelligant sententias scripturarum, intelligunt tamen ipsa mysteria
redemptionis, etiam rustici & mulieres. But in the new testament,
because Christ hath fulfilled the figures and the
prophesies; although many doe not vnderstand the sentences
of the scriptures, yet doe they vnderstand the mysteries
of our redemption, euen the common countrey
fellowes and the very women.
               Thus writeth our Iesuit, affirming, that euen women
and the very rustickes of the countrey, doe vnderstand
the scriptures, so farre forth as pertaineth to the mysteries
of their redemption: and I pray you, why then doth the
Pope debarre them from the reading thereof? VVhat
more knowledge is needfull ouer and besides the mysteries
of mans redemption? It is all the knowledge which
Saint Paule desired to haue:1. Cor. 2. v. 2. who (as he saith of himselfe)
esteemed not to know any thing among them, saue Iesus
Christ, & him crucified. I therfore conclude by our Iesuits
owne free graunt, that it behooueth all men and women,
children and maids, diligently to read the holy scriptures,
seeing they may vnderstand therein all the mysteries of
their redemption, viz. all knowledge necessarie for their
saluation. VVhich knowledge is so necessarie, as nothing
can be more.Deut. 11. v. 18, 19, 20. Ye (saith God by the mouth of his seruant
Moses) shall lay vp these my words in your heart and in
your soule, and bind them for a signe vpon your hand,
that they may be as a frontlet betweene your eyes.Deut. 6. v. 8, 9. And
ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them whē
thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the
way, and when thou liest downe, and when thou risest vp.
And thou shalt write them vpon the posts of thine house,Deut. 4. v. 9.
                  
and vpon thy gates. But our papists obiect against vs,
that when the fathers exhort all men and women to read
the scriptures,Rheme▪ testament in prefatio, sect. 15. they speake as pulpit-men agreeably to
their audience, and the peoples default; but not as teachers
in the schoole, making exact and generall rules to
be obserued in all places and times. To which I answere
first, that the truth must be spoken as well in the pulpit as
in the schoole. Secondly, that the doctrine in pulpit is
and ought to be as exact, absolute, and necessarie, as the
doctrine in schoole: The sole and onely difference is or
ought to be this, viz. that the pulpit hath euer the pricke
of exhortation annexed, which the schoole wanteth. For
the preacher may not speake at randon in the pulpit, but
euen there must he haue the girdle of truth about his
loynes. Thirdly, that holy Dauid regarded no such popish
distinction,Psal. 119. v. 9. when asking, whereby a yong man shal clense
his waies? he answereth thus: By studie, meditation, and
keeping of the law of God. Neither the godly men in
Berhaea,Act. 17. v. 11. when they daily searched the scriptures, euen to
examine the doctrine of the Apostles by them. Our papists
obiect likewise,1. Tim. 2. v. 12. that S. Paule will haue women to liue in
silence, and not to chat and prattle of the scriptures.
I answere, that though S. Paule will not permit women to
teach publickely before men; yet doth he neither forbid
them to read the scriptures, nor yet to teach priuately,
when due circumstances doe occurre. For the same ApostleTit. 2. v. 3.
elswhere commaundeth mothers to teach godly
things to their children. So Salomon, the wisest child that
euer was among the sonnes of Adam, one Christ euer excepted,
confesseth plainely and humbly, what doctrine his
mother Bethsheba taught him.Prou. 31. v. 1. So Priscilla, wife to Aquila the
Iew born in Pontus, expounded the scriptures to the Iew
Apollo,
                  Act. 18. v. 26. 2. Tim. 1. v. 5. & 2 Tim. 3. v. 15. borne at Alexandria, a very eloquent man. So Timothie
was throughly instructed in the scriptures by his
mother Eunice, and by his grandmother Lois. By which notable
example it is euident and cleare to euery one, that

neither mothers must forbeare to teach, nor yet young
babes forbeare to learne the holy scriptures.
            
            
               The third Proposition.
               Traditions must be examined by the holy scriptures,
which is the true touchstone of veritie; and then onely admitted,
when they are found to be consonant to the same.
For proofe of this proposition, the very name or word
(Canonicall) is of it selfe sufficient. For (Canon) is a Greek
word, which signifieth a rule, and there upon those bookes
are called the Canonicall scriptures, which are the rule of
our faith. And consequently, whatsoeuer is not consonant
to the scriptures, the same ought to be reiected, as pernitious
and swaruing from the rule of our faith. For this
cause doth the Prophet Esay send vs to the law,Esae. 8. v. 20. and to the
testimonie, there to trie the truth. For this cause doth the
Prophet Malachie exhort the people euer to be mindfullMal. 4. 4.
of the law of Moses. For this cause doth the Prophet Dauid
tell vs, That Gods word is a lanterne to our feet.Psal. 119. v. 105 For
this cause saith S. Peter, That Gods word is a light shining
in darke places,2. Pet. 1. v. 19. vntill the day-starre arise in our hearts.
For this cause did Christ himselfe exhort the Iewes toIohn 5. v. 39.
reade seriously the holy scriptures. For this cause said
Christ, That the Pharisies erred,Matt. 22. v. 29. because they knew not
the scriptures.Act. 17 v. 11. For this cause did the men at Berhaea trie
the truth of S. Paules doctrine by the scriptures. For this
cause doth S. Iohn exhort vs not to beleeue euery spirit,1 Iohn 4. v. 1.
but to trie the spirits, if they be of God. For this cause
doth S. Paule pronounce him accursed that preacheth any
doctrine not contained in the scriptures.Gal. 1, 2. For both S. Austen
and S. Basill doe expound that place of the written word.Aug cont. literas Pet l. li. 3. cap. 6. tom. 7.
And the truth thereof is alreadie prooued, because the
Apostles taught no needfull doctrine, which they did not
after commit to writing.
               S. Cyprian would not yeeld to Stephanus then bishop of
Rome, in the controuersie concerning rebaptization; but

sharpely reprooued him for leaning to tradition,Cyprian epist. ad Pompeium. 74. and demaunded
of him, by what scripture he could prooue his
tradition. For, in his daies it was not ynough to alleadge
tradition for the proofe of any doctrine. And much lesse
was it a rule in Saint Cyprians time to follow the bishop of
Romes definitiue sentence, in matters of faith and doctrin.
Though our sottish and blind papists in these latter dayes
doe admit and reuerence his sentence, euen as the holy
Gospell. See S. Cyprians words in the first proposition.
               VVhen the Arrians would not admit the word (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  )
because it was not found in the scriptures, the fathers of
the counsell did not then alleadge traditions for proofe
thereof; neither did they say, that many things must be
beleeued which are not written: but they answered simply,
That though that word were not expressely written,
yet was it virtually and effectually contained in the scriptures.
This assertion is euident by the testimonie of Saint
Athanasius,
                  Athanas. de decret. nic. synod. tom. 2. prope finē. whose words are these: Sed tamen cognoscat quisquis
est studiosioris animi, has voces tametsi in scripturis non reperiantur,
habere tamen eas eam sententiam quam scripturae volunt. Although
the expresse words be not found in the scripture,
yet haue they that meaning and sence which the scripture
approoueth and intendeth, as euery one that studieth
the scripture seriously, may easily vnderstand.
               
                  Origen in Matt. hom. 25. & hom. 1. in 1. cap. Ier. 
                  Origen giueth counsell to trie all doctrines by the scriptures,
euen as pure gold is tried by the touchstone. His
words are set downe at large in my booke of Motiues,
and they are well worth the reading.
               
                  Tertullian hath these words:Tertull. aduers. praexe. in principe. 
                  Id esse verum, quodcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      primum;
id esse adulterum, quodcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      posterius. VVe must know,
that that it is the truth, whatsoeuer was first; and that
that is counterfeit, whatsoeuer commeth after the first.
               S. Austen
                  Aug. de vint. eccles. cap. 10. non longe ab initio, 10. 7. hath many golden sentences and worthie
testimonies to this end and purpose. One only I will here
recount, where he hath these wordes: Nemo mihi dicat, ô
quid dixit Donatus, aut quid dixit Parmenianus, aut Pontius, aut

quilibet illorum: quia nec Catholicis episcopis consentiendum est,
sicubi forte falluntur, vt contra canonicas dei scripturas aliquid sentiant.
Let no man say to me, oh what said Donatus, or what
said Parmenianus, or Pontius, or any of them; because wee
must not consent euen to Catholicke bishops, if it so fall
out, that they erre in any point, and speake against the canonicall
scriptures.
               Saint Chrysostome,
                  Chryso. in 2. Cor. 7. hom. 13. in fine. surnamed the golden mouthed doctor,
agreeth vniformely vnto the other fathers in many
places of his workes. One onely period shall for the present
suffice, where he hath these golden wordes; Quomodo
autem non absurdum est propter pecunias alijs non credere, sed ipsas
numerare & supputare, prorebus autem amphoribus, aliorum sententiam
sequi simpliciter; presertim, cum habeamus omnium exactissimam
trutinam, & gnomonem, acregulam, diuinarum inquam
legum assertionem. Ideo obsecro & (oro omnes vos, vt relinquatis
quidnam hinc vel illi videatur, de
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      his àscripturishaec etiam iniquirite,
et veras diuitias difcentes eas sectemur, vt & aeterna bona assequamur.
How can it but be absurd, that in money matters
we will not credite others, but will tell the money our
selues; and for all that in affaires of greater importance,
(which concerne the health aud saluation of our soules)
we can be content simply to follow the iudgement and
opinion of others; especially, when wee haue the most
exact ballance, squire and rule of all things, I meane
the plaine testimonie of Gods lawes. I therefore pray and
beseech you all, that you will reiect what this man or that
man thinketh, and search the truth out of the scriptures;
that learning true riches, we may follow them, and so attaine
eternall life. Behold here (gentle reader) a most excellent
and Christian exhortation, a very godly and golden
aduiso, giuen vs by this holy father. If wee will not
(saith he) trust others to tell our money, but for surenesse
will tell it our selues; much lesse should wee trust others,
and much lesse depend vpon their iudgements and sayings,
in matters touching our saluation: but our selues

must learne and know such things, by diligent reading of
the holy scriptures. Neither must we beleeue what this or
that man saith, but what we find to be true, by painefull
studie of the holy scriptures. Now let vs heare attentiuely,
what the best approoued papists teach vs, concerning
this important and most weightie controuersie.
               
                  Franciscus à victoria,
                  Victor. de augm. charitat. relect. 8. pag. 308, a learned schoole-man and Spanish
popish frier, yeelds his opinion in these expresse wordes:
Propter quas (opiniones) nullo modo debeà us discedere, à regula &
synceritate scripturarum. For which opinions we may in no
wise depart from the rule and synceritie of the scriptures.
               Againe,Victor. de sacra. pag. 120. in another place he hath these words: Non est
mihi certum, licet in hoc conueniant omnes, quia in scriptura non habetur.
I doe not thinke it sure and certaine, although all
writers agree thereunto, because it is not to be found in
the holy scriptures.
               
                  Melchior Canus, another learned schoole-doctor and renowned
popish bishop, confirmeth the same doctrine in
these words:Canus de lecis, lib. 3. cap. vlt. 
                  Fatemur non audiendos esse sacerdotes, nisi docuerint
iuxta legem domiui. VVe graunt, that we must not giue
eare or hearken to the priests, except they shall teach vs
according to Gods law.
               Loe, the papists affirme plainely, that no doctrine is
sound, or to be receiued, but that onely which is tried to
be true by Gods word. Neither may we beleeue the doctrin
of any popish priest, vnlesse it be agreeable to Gods
law. Now doubtlesse, if the Pope will be tried and iudged
by this doctrine, which his best doctors haue published to
the world (the spirit of God hauing enforced them thereunto)
we shall soone agree in all controuersies of religion.
And certes, this their doctrine is so certaine and euident,
that the Iesuit Bellarmine singeth the same song with
them; which my selfe could not easily haue beleeued, if
I had not read his owne testimonie in his owne booke.Bellar. de conc. lib. 2. cap. 2. in fine.
These are his expresse words: Sine dubio singuli episcopi errare

possunt, & aliquando errant, & inter se quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      dissentiunt, vt
nesciamus quisnam eorum sequendus sit. It is without all doubt,
that all bishops seuerally may erre, and sometime doe
erre, and doe so disagree among themselues, that we cannot
in the world tell which of them we may safely follow.
Thus you see euen by the Iesuits verdict, that in the popish
Church, all their bishops doe so erre, and sometimes
so dissent one from another, that no papist can tell indeed
which of them it is best to follow. To which doctrine I
will very willingly subscribe, aduising this Iesuit and all
other Iesuited papists to remember well this doctrine, and
not to hang their soules henceforth vpon their iarring and
doting popish fathers; whom (as their deere Iesuit and renowmed
Cardinall Bellarmine telleth them) they may not
safely follow. And least the Iesuit or some for him shall answere
me or say in his defence, That albeit all popish bishops
may erre seuerally, and dissent among themselues,
as is alreadie said; yet can they not erre, when they are
called together in a synode or counsell, and the same confirmed
by the Pope. This is all doubtlesse that posibly
can be said in defence of popish doctrine: And consequently,
if I shall once prooue this to be a rotten foundation,
then must all popish buildings raised vpon the same,
fall downe, and be euen with the ground. Marke (gentle
Reader) my syncere replie, which I shall pithyly and
plainely set downe in this behalfe. VVherein for perspicuitie
sake, I will proceed by way of conclusions.
            
            
               The first Conclusion.
               The Pope was neuer present at the counsels in the East
Churches, by himselfe and in his owne person. This conclusion
is freely confessed by the Iesuit Bellarmine,
                  Bellar. de conc. lib. 1. cap. 19. who alleadgeth
two reasons for the Popes absence: The one
forsooth, because it was not conuenient, that the head
should follow the members: The other, because the emperour
would euer sit in the highest place. Out of whose

words, I must needs note two important points by the
way: The one, that in the auntient Church the highest
place in the counsels, was euer reserued to the emperour:
The other, that the East Churches did neuer acknowledge
the Popes primacie, which he this day arrogantly
challengeth ouer all kingdomes and regalities. To which
twaine, this pleasant adiunct perforce must be annexed,
viz. that our humble father the Pope (who calleth himselfe
hypocritically seruus seruorum dei) would neuer come
to the counsels, because forsooth he could not endure to
see the emperour sitting in the highest place.
            
            
               The second Conclusion.
               The Pope staying at home himselfe, sendeth his legates
to the counsels, to supplie his place, to whom for
all that he cannot commit his authoritie. This conclusion
must needs seeme strange to a great many; but I will
confirme it with the testimonie of such a worthie and renowmed
papist, that all whosoeuer shall once heare or
read it, cannot but giue credit to the same.
               
                  Melchior Canus is the man, from whose pen I receiued
it; the case is euident,Canus lib. 5. de authoritat. cone. cap. 5. pag. 102. these are his words: Decreta quae
à legato contra sedis Apostolicae traditionem approbantur, non habent
Romanae ecclesiae authoritatem; nec aliter se habent, quam si à
concilio siue legatis prodnissent. Sequitur; solidam auctoritatem
quam in confirmandis & fratribus & dogmatibus Petrus habet, in
legatos transferre non potest. The decrees which the legate
shall approoue against the tradition of the Church of
Rome, haue no authoritie from the Church of Rome;
neither are they of any more force, than if they had proceeded
from the counsell without the consent of the legates.
The sound authoritie which Peter hath in confirming
his brethren and decrees, he cannot transferre vnto
his legates. These are the expresse words of Canus, that
worthie bishop, and strong pillar of popish doctrine. Out
of whose words I note first, that decrees of counsels be of

no force, when they haue not the consent of the Popes
legates. Secondly, that the decrees of counsels, euen
when they haue the consent of the legates, are of no force
at all, if the legates shall agree to any thing which is against
the Popes mind. Thirdly, that the Pope cannot
translate or giue his authoritie vnto the legates. And consequently,
that the Pope abuseth the whole world shamefully,
when he calleth together all bishops in the Christian
world, to decide and determine controuersies in religion;
and for all that, will approoue nothing that they
doe or decree, vnlesse it be agreeable to that which himselfe
decreeth apart in his chaire at home.
            
            
               The third Conclusion.
               Generall popish counsels in these our daies are euen
as a nose of waxe; and the decrees thereof are as vncertaine
as the wind. I prooue this conclusion by very strong
and irrefragable reasons. The Iesuit Bellarmine hath these
words: Nos dicimus,
                  Bellar. de concil. lib. 1. cap. 18. to. 1. 
                  concessum episcoporum in concilijs legitimis
esse verum indicum concessum; & corum decreta & leges, necessario
sequendas. VVe say, that the consistorie of bishops in lawfull
counsels, is the true assembly of iudges; and that their
decrees and lawes must be obserued of necessitie.
               But in another place the same Bellarmine singeth another
song in these expresse words: Idem enim est,
                  Bellar. de concil. lib. 2. cap. 11. 
                  siue pontifex
expresse concilium reprobet, siue concilium agat contra pontificis sententiam.
For it is all one, whether the Pope disanull the
counsell expressely, or the counsell doe against the Popes
mind.
               Againe, the same Bellarmine in another place auoucheth,
that the greater part of voices must beare the sway
in counsels. These are his owne words: Non potest fieri,
                  Bellar. de concil. lib. 1. cap. 21. 
                  vt aliquando
ad finem controuersiarū deueniatur, nisi detur locus maiori
parti suffragiorum. It cannot be, that there should euer be
made an end of controuersies, except the greater part of
voices may haue the vpper hand.
               
                  
Againe in another place,Bellarm. de conc. lib. 2. cap. 11. he hath these words; Est autem
verumdecretum concilij, quod fit à maiori parte; alioqui nullum esset
legitimum concilij decretum, cum semper aliqui dissentiant. It is the
true decree of the councell, which hath the consent of the
greater part: for otherwise there should be no lawfull decree
made at all, seeing some doe euermore dissent.
               This notwithstanding, their famous bishop Melchior
Canns,
                  Canus de locis lib. 5. cap. 5. pag. 164. doth roundly tell vs another tale. These are his expresse
wordes. Non ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      quod in humanis conccssionibus fit, plurimum
apud nos sententia praeualet; & paulo post; non enim numero
haec indicantur, sed pondere: pondus autem concilijs dat summi pontificis,
& grauitas & authoritas. Quae si adsit, centum patres satis
sunt, sin desit, nulli sint satis, sint quamlibet plurimi. It is not
therefore with vs, as it is in humane assemblies, where moe
voyces euer doe preuaile. For these matters are not to be
iudged by number, but by weight. And the councels receiue
their weight, from the grauitie and authoritie of
the Pope. Thus writeth our popish bishop Canus. Now
who seeth not, that the decrees of popish councels, are
as vncertaine as the wind? For the Iesuit telleth vs, that
moe voyces must needes preuaile. But Melchior their renowmed
bishop, is of another mind: that be they many,
be they few, what part soeuer the Pope liketh, that
same shall be true. For after the fathers haue fasted long,
prayed, much, consulted grauely, deliberated maturely,
decreed soberly, commanded strictly, and accursed seuerely;
neither others, nor yet themselues can tell, what
shall be of force therein. For all must be as shall best content
the Popes humour, sitting right statelie in his chaire
at Rome.
            
            
               The fourth Conclusion.
               No bishop can in these our dayes haue voices in councels,
but such as will first sweare obedience to the Pope,
and promise to defend his cannon law. This conclusion
though it containe grosse absurdities, yet is it so cleare, as

                  Bellarmine that Iesuitical Cardinall cannot denie the same,Bellarm. de conc. lib. 1. cap. vit.
These be his wordes. Istud iuramentum non tollit episcoporum
libertatem, quae in concilijs necessaria est. Iurant enim se fore obedientes
summo pontifici, quod intilligitur donec pontifex est, & dum iubet
ea quae secundum Deum & sacros canones iubere potest: sed not iurant
se non dicturos quod sentiunt in concilio, vel se no
                        •
                      posituros eum, si
haereticum esse conuincant. This oath taketh not away the libertie
of bishops, which in councels is necessarie. For they
sweare that they will be obedient to the Pope; which is
to be vnderstood, so long as he is Pope, and while he commaundeth
those things, which he may commaund agreeable
to God, and to the holy cannons; but they sweare
not, that they will not speake what they thinke in the
councell, or that they will not depose the Pope if they
prooue him to be an heretique.
               Thus writeth Bellarminus, whose onely testimonie is
most sufficient in all popish affaires: as who is the Popes
sworne and tenderly beloued vassall, and whose bookes
are dedicated to the Pope himselfe. Out of his wordes I
note first, that all clergie men admitted to giue voyces in
councels, are sworne simply wholy to obey the Popes
constitutions.
               Secondly, that the said persons are sworne to beleeue,
that the Pope cannot erre in his iudiciall decrees of faith
and manners; that no councels are of force, without the
Popes confirmation; that councels confirmed by him,
are aproued by the holy Ghost; that he can excommunicate
and depose, all emperours, and empresses, all
Kings and Queenes, all bishops and archbishops in the
Christian world; that he can by his pardons deliuer all
soules out of purgatorie, and goe himselfe to the deuill.
For all these and a thousand like things, are strictly comprised
in his canons, and consequently in their most lamentable
oath.
               Thirdly, that they are sworne to admit his decrees,
who (as they freely grant) may for al that be an heretique.
               
                  
Fourthly, that they are sworne to reuerence and obey
his iudgement in all matters of faith, whom they may
iudge and depose for heresie.
               Fiftly, that their fundamentall article, by which they
make the Pope iudge ouer all controuersies; is quite
ouerthrowne, and turned vpside downe, in this Bellarminus
his explication. For when he saith (VVhile he commaundeth
&c.) he graunteth euery bishop freedome to examine
and iudge, when the Pope commaundeth things
agreeable to God and the canons. VVhich libertie, if the
papists would constantly performe, all true Christians
and perfect Catholikes, would soone agree with them.
For none that beleeue aright, will denie obedience to the
Pope, when he preacheth, teacheth, or commaundeth
any thing which is agreeable to God and holy canons. But
good Christians finding his canons to be disholy, and his
decrees to be against God; doe thinke as Bellarmine here
teacheth them, that they are not bound to obey him.
And that the reader may fully vnderstand the abhomination
of the oath which all popish bishops sweare vnto the
Pope; I will here set down the expresse words, as I find thē
                  verbatim in the Popes owne decretals;Decret. libr. 2. tit. 24. cap. 4. 
                  Ego N. episcopus, ab
hac hora fidelis ero S. Petro, sanctae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Romanae ecclesiae, domino
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      meo
papae N. eius
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      successoribus canonicè intrantibus. Sequitur; papatū
Romanae ecclesiae, & regulas sanctorum patrum adiutor ero, ad defendendum
& retinendum contra omnes homines; sic me Deus adiuuet,
& haec sancta euangelia. I (Iohn Watson) bishop, will be faithfull
from this day forward, to Saint Peter and to the holy
Church of Rome, and to my L. (Boniface) the Pope, and
to his successors elected canonically; and I will be an helper
to keepe and defend against all people, the Popedome
or papall soueraigntie, and the rules of the holy fathers;
so God me helpe, and the holy Gospel.
               Loe here gentle reader, open and flat rebellion is required,
and by euangelicall oath confirmed, of subiects
against their soueraignes. For, the bishops of euery countrie,

are the subiects of the kings of the same countreys;
and yet doe they sweare to defend the Popes vsurped iurisdiction,
and most bloodie tyrannie, against their naturall
dread soueraignes. For they sweare to defend the
Popes vsurped authoritie, against all people, without exception.
VVhich his diabolicall vsurped primacy, (as I
haue prooued at large else where) extendeth it selfe to
the translation of empires, kingdomes, and regalities.
               These conclusions being well marked and remembred,
the answere to the mightie obiection, which is as the
foundation of poperie, will be plaine and easie, viz. that
popish bishops may as well erre, when they are assembled
together in a generall councell, as when they preach,
teach, or write asunder. For first, the Pope himselfe will
not shew his face in any councell, because the emperour
must sit aboue him, as is euident by the first conclusion.
Seconly, when the Pope sendeth his legates to councels
to supplie his place, he doth but delude the world by that
fact; seeing he cannot impart his authoritie vnto them,
as by the second conclusion is apparant. Thirdly, popish
councels and synodes in these after ages, are flexible as
a nose of waxe, and as vncertaine as the weathercocke,
as is clearely proued in the third conclusion. Fourthly,
no bishops of late ages can haue voyces in popish councels,
but such as will first sweare obedience to the Pope,
and promise by oath to defend his vsurped power, and
most execrable canon law, as by the fourth conclusion
will appeare. Fiftly, that decree is true and iust, which is
concluded by the gerater part of the bishops there assembled;
and yet the Pope sitting at Rome in his chaire, will
reiect such decrees at his good pleasure, and define the
sentence of fewer voyces to be of force. This obseruation
is euidently confirmed, by the due proofes of the
third conclusion. Sixtly the decrees of councels must
needs be obeyed, as the papists tell vs; and yet the Pope
may reiect them, and disanull them at his pleasure, euen

dreaming in his chaire at home, or riding abroad on his
white palfrey. This to be so is euident to euery one, that
shall seriously peruse the third conclusion. Yea, our papists
of Rhemes in their commentary vpon the new testament,Rhemes
test. in act. 15. tell vs plainely and roundly; that the determinaon
of councels is needlesse, because the Popes iudgement
alone is infalliable. VVherefore they ad this clause
to salue the Popes proceedings, That councels are called
not for necessitie sake, but for the better contentation of
the weake. I therefore conclude against the popish supposed
bulwarke, that seeing all bishops may erre seuerally,
as the Iesuit Bellarmine hath taught vs; and seeing also
that the constitutions in popish councels are nothing else
in deed, but the bare decrees of one onely bishop, as is
alreadie prooued; it followeth of necessite, and cannot
be denied, that all bishops in the popish Church may erre
egregiously; and that as well iointly as seuerally, as is to
be seene at large in my Golden ballance of triall: to which
treatise I referre the reader for better satisfaction, both
touching the Popes double person, and concerning his
priuate and publike errors, In the interim, I must needs
tell the papists; that a generall councell is aboue the
Pope; that a generall councell hath power to depose the
Pope; that a generall councell did de facto depose Iohn the
12 long sithence, and Iohn the 13 of that name; as I haue
prooued at large by sound popish testimonie, in my Anatomie
of popish tyrannie. And thus haue I prooued, that
the sole and onely scripture inspired from heauen, is the
infalliable rule of truth; and that all traditions must bee
examined by the same, and then addmitted when they
be consonant thereunto, not otherwise: howsoeuer antiquitie
be pretended in that behalfe.
            
            
               The fourth Proposition.
               Popish vnwritten traditions are so vncertaine and
doubtfull,Ratio. prima. that the best learned papists are at great contention

about them, and cannot possibly be accorded
therein. For the proofe of this proposition, it were ynough
to call to mind that great and endlesse strife, which was in
the Church about 1400 yeeres sithence, betweene Victor
then Bishop of Rome and the bishops of Asia. The controuersie
was among them, concerning the keeping of
Easter. Tradition apostolicall was alledged earnestly, and
both sides did stoutly defend the same.
               The same tradition was in controuersie afore Polycarpus
the bishop of Smyrna,Euseb. li. 5. hist. cap. 23. & cap. 24. per totum. and Anicetus the Bishop of Rome.
But neither could Polycarpe perswade Anicetus, nor Anicetus
perswade Polycarpus; albeit they both agreed as deere
friends. The storie is set done at large, by Eusebius a learned
father and most famous historiographer. But Victor
the Bishop of Rome dealt so furiously in that controuersie,
that Ireneus and other bishops of Gallia, did sharply
reprooue him for the same. VVhat need more bee said
for the varietie and vncertaintie of traditious: For first,
the bishops that thought and taught thus diuersly of tradions,
did all of them liue within 200 yeeres after Christ;
at which time the Church was in in good estate, and stayned
with very few or no corruptions at all. Secondly, the
one side doubtlesse, must needs be seduced with false and
vnsound traditions: For apostolicall doctrine was vniforme
and constant, and could not possible bee contrarie
to it selfe. Thirdly, Saint Policarpe, Polycrates, and the other
bishops, did in those dayes make no more reckoning of
the bishop of Romes opinion, than they did of another
mans. Fourthly, they all were so farre from acknowledging
the bishop of Rome, to be the supreme head of the
Church, and that he could not erre; that they all with
vniforme assent affirmed him to defend a grosse errour,
and to hold a false opinion; that they all reputed themselues
his equals, touching gouernment ecclesiasticall:
that they all verie sharpely reprooued him, and with
might and maine withstood his proceedings. VVhereas

this day, if any bishops, magistrates, or other potentates
in the world, (where poperie beareth the sway) should
doe the like; they might all roundly be excommunicated,
and not onely deposed from their iurisdiction, but also be
burnt with fire an faggot for their paines. Fiftly, if Saint
Polycarpe had cause in his time, being the flourishing age of
the Church, to doubt of romish traditions; much more
doubtlesse haue wee cause, at this day to stand in doubt
thereof; in these doolefull dayes I say, in which iniquitie
hath gotten the vpper hand; in which the bishops of
Rome haue brought an huge multitude of errors into the
Church, and seduced a great part of the Christian world.
               Another controuersie touching traditions,Ratio secunda. Chrisost. hom. 47. in mat. col. 405. is for and
about the keeping of Lent. For albeit Saint Chrysostome tel
vs plainely, that Christ did not commaund vs to imitate
his fast, but to learne of him to be humble and meeke in
heart; yet doe the papists this day mordicus defend it, to be
an apostolicall tradition; yea, many of them are so blinded
and besotted with vnsauorie traditions and superstitious
illusions, that they deeme it a greater sinne to eat
flesh in Lent, than to commit adulterie, murder, or periurie.
               Of this vnwritten tradition, falsly supposed apostolical,Euseb. lib. 5. hist. cap. 24.
                  Eusebius Caesariensis, a famous historigrapher of great antiquitie,
writeth in this maner. Non solum de die paschae agiter
controuersia, sed & de ipsa specie ieiunij. Quidam enim putant vno
tantum die obseruari debere ieunium; alij, doubus; alij vero, pluribus;
nonnulli etiam, quadraginta. Quae varietas obseruantiae non
nunc primum, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nostris temporibus coepit, sed multò ante nos: ex
illis vt opinor, qui non simpliciter quod ab initio traditū est, tenentes,
in alium morem, vel per negligentiam, vel per imperitiam, postmodum
dicidêre. The controuersie is not onely touching the
day of Easter, but alos concerning the very king or manner
of fasting. For some thinke, they must onely fast one
day, some two dayes, others moe dayes; and there bee
that thinke, they should fast fourtie. VVhich varietie of

fasting did not now begin first, neither yet in our daies,
but long before our time; I thinke by them, who keeping
not simply what they receiued from the beginning, did
afterward fall to another manner, either of negligence, or
els of ignorance.
               
                  Socrates in like manner reporteth hystorically, that they
differed no lesse in their manner of eating, than they did
in their daies of abstaining. For some (saith he) would eat
no liuing thing; othersome of liuing things, ate onely
fish;Histor. tripart. lib. 9. cap. 38. some together with fish, did eat also birds; but some
ate only bread, and others at night ate all kind of meates
without difference. Yea, he telleth vs in the same place,
that the Romans fast three weekes before Easter, besides
the Sabboth and the Lords day. And that the Illyrians and
Alexandrians do fast six weekes, and yet do they all tearm
their fasts Lent. By which testimonies euery man may easily
perceiue, how doubtfull and vncertaine vnwritten traditions
be.
               Thirdly,Ratio tertia. there was another endlesse controuersie concerning
traditions, betweene the Greeks and the Latins;
whether the Eucharist ought to be celebrated in leauened
or in vnleauened bread.
               Fourthly, Irenaeus a very auntient father, affirmeth out of
Apostolicall tradition;Ratio quarta. Irenae. lib. 2. cap. 39. that Christ was fortie yeeres old,
when he suffered his bitter passion. Papias another father,
saith vpon the like traditiō, that Christ should raign 1000
yeeres after the generall resurrection.Euseb. lib. 3. cap. vlt. Andrad. de trad. lib. 2. p. 126 
                  Basilius another holy
father saith, that Zacharias the sonne of Barachias, slaine betweene
the altar and the temple, was father to S. Iohn the
baptist. These absurdities the papists are this day ashamed
to hold; and yet did these fathers receiue them by Apostolicall
so supposed tradition, as their own famous doctor
Andradius graunteth willingly.
               Fiftly, popish tradition telleth vs,Ratio quinta. that all the bishops
of Rome one after another haue taught succesiuely the
selfesame doctrine with S. Peter. Howbeit their own deere

doctor and religious frier Nicholaus de Lyra, auoucheth
plainely, roundly, and boldly, to the whole world, that
many bishops of Rome haue fallen away from the faith,
and become flat Apostataes. And least this my narration
be thought strange vnto many, that our holy fathers the
Popes should be Atheists or Apostataes, and that their
own deare brethren, in high esteeme among them, would
neuer so write of them; I will deale plainely in this important
point, and after my wonted manner set downe his
owne expresse words.Lyranus in cap. 16. mat. Thus doth he write: Ex quo patet,
quod ecclesia non consistit in hominibus ratione potestatis vel dignitatis,
ecclesiasticae vel secularis; quia multi principes, et summi pontifices,
et alij inscriores, inuenti sunt a side apostatasse. Propter quod
ecclesia consistit in illis personis, in quibus est notitia vera, et confessio
fidei et veritatis. VVhereby it is euident, that the Church
doth not consist in men by reason of power or dignitie,
either ecclesiasticall or secular; because many princes and
Popes, and others of the inferiour sort, are found to
haue beene apostataes, and to haue swarued wholie from
faith. For which cause, the Church consisteth in those persons,
in whom, there is true knowledge, and confession
of the faith and of the truth.
               Thus writeth this learned papist (whom their owne so
supposed martyr sir Thomas Moore called a great clearke, as
he was indeed) whose words are well worthie to be engrauen
in marble with golden letters. For by his iudgement
it is cleare and euident, that not they who sit in
S. Peters chaire, are euer the true and lawfull successors of
S. Peter, but they only and solely that confesse and preach
S. Peters faith and doctrine: as also that their receiued
maxime (vbi Papa, ibi Roma; vbi Roma, ibi ecclesia catholica) is
false, vaine, and friuolous. VVe therefore this day impugne
nothing in popish proceedings, but the selfesame
indeed, which famous popish doctors reproued afore our
time, and that in their publicke writings published freely
to the whole world. VVhich thing, whosoeuer will seriously

ponder as my selfe haue done, that man must perforce
detest and abhorre all popish superstitious trumperie.
But of this argument I haue discoursed at large in my
booke of Motiues.
               Sixtly,Ratio sexta. popish tradition telleth vs, that the blessed virgine
Marie, the true mother of true God and true man,
was conceiued without originall sinne, and that the bishop
of Rome did for that end ordaine a feastiuall day of
her conception, to be kept vpon the eight of December.
But by your leaue,Aquinas p. 3. q. 14. art. 3. ad primum. Bernard. epist. 174. p. 207. 
                  Aquinas their owne Angelicall Doctor
affirmeth resolutely, that she was conceiued in originall
sinne. Yea, their other holy doctor and deare frier Bernard
doth very sharpely reprooue the Cathedrall Church of
Lyons, because they obserued the feastiuitie of the conception
of the blessed virgine; and the calleth that their
practise, the noueltie of presumption, the mother of temeritie,
the sister of superstition, and the daughtet of leuitie.
That done, he addeth these words: Hoc non est virginem
honor are, sed honori detrahere. This is not to giue honour
to the virgine,A. D. 1475. but to take honour from her. Yet Pope
Sixtus the fourth did institute the feast of the conception.
               Seuenthly,Ratio sept. popish tradition telleth vs, that the emperour
Constantine, worthily surnamed the Great, was baptised
at Rome in a font, there remaining to this day, my self
haue seene the same. Howbeit, Hieronymus, Eusebius, Socrates,
Theodoritus, Sozomenus, Cassiodorus, and Pomponius, doe all affirme
very cōstantly, that he was baptised at Nichomedia.
               Eightly,Ratio octaua. popish tradition hath brought flat idolatrie
into the Church, teaching to adore them as saints and
Gods friends, who were known heretickes, and professed
enemies to God and his Church. This to be so, their owne
deare friend, and brother Platina will tell them, when he
affirmeth the dead corps of Hermannus to haue been worshipped
for a saints reliques at Ferrara,Platina in vita Bonifacij octaui, vide Martinum so. onum▪ pag. 237. in append. the space of twentie
yeares together; who for all that was an hereticke, as
the same Platina auoucheth. VVhere two speciall things

are to be obserued seriously: first, the vncertainetie of vnwritten
traditions: secondly, the danger in giuing credit
to the same. Now, it remaineth for the better contentation
of the reader, to make answere to such obiections in
defence of popish traditions, as the papists haue euer in
their mouths, and boast of them, as if they were insoluble.
            
            
               The first Obiection.
               VVe doe not know, which bookes of the scripture
are canonicall, and which are not, but onely by the vnwritten
traditions of the Church: And yet is this a matter
of faith, and very necessarie vnto saluation.
               
                  The answere.
                  This is that mightie obiection, wherein the papists glorie
and boast beyond all measure; and say more rashly
than wisely, that it can neuer be truly answered. I therefore
shall desire the gentle reader to ponder well my
words, and then to iudge of the matter, as right reason
shall prescribe. My answere is this. First, there is great ods
betweene the primitiue Church and the Church of late
daies.Durand. in 3. s. d. 24 quaest. 1. VVhich to be so, the famous popish doctor Durandus
will contest with me. For the Apostles (as Durand saith
wisely) heard Christs doctrine, saw Christs myracles, and
were replenished with the holy ghost; and consequently,
they must needs be fit witnesses of all that Christ did and
taught. But these adiuncts cannot be rightly ascribed to
the late bishops of Rome and their cursed Iesuited brood.
Secondly, the old testament was deliuered by the Iewes,
and confirmed by Christ and his Apostles; and therefore
as the papists admit that tradition, and withall doe reiect
their other manifold vnwritten traditions, which the Iews
in their Talmud affirme to be of Moses;
                     Bellarm. tom. 1. col. 187. euen so doe we receiue
this tradition, and reiect all vnwritten traditions
contrarie to the same. Thirdly, the bookes of the new testament
are but an exposition of the law and the Prophets;Vide Aug. tom. 6. pag. 184.
                     
as I haue alreadie prooued in the first proposition
of this present article: And consequently, it may be discerned
and tried by the same;Act. 17. v. 11. as the godly Bereans tried
S. Paules preaching. Fourthly, when we affirme all things
necessarie for our saluation, to be comprised and contained
in the scriptures; we then speake of them, as they are
acknowledged and agreed vpon, both among the Iewes
for the old Testament, in the which the new is comprehended;
and ioyntly for the old and new, throughout
the Christian world. And so this tradition is not excepted,
but virtually implied in our affirmation. Fiftly, the
scriptures canonicall are discerned from not canonicall
euen of themselues, like as light is discerned from darkenesse,
hardnesse from softnesse, and sweetnesse from bitternesse.Psal.
119. v. 105, 2. Pet. 1. v. 19. Thy word ô Lord (saith the Prophet) is a lanterne
to my feet, and a light vnto my pathes. VVe haue a
right sure word of prophesie (saith S. Peter) whereunto if
ye take heed, as vnto a light that shineth in a darke place,
ye doe well, vntill the day dawne, and the day-starre arise
in your hearts. Yet most true it is, that the faithfull onely
can discerne it.2 Cor. 5. v. 3. For as the Apostle saith, If Christs gospell
be hid, it is hid in them that perish: in whom the God of
this world hath blinded the minds of them which beleeue
not, least the light of the Gospell of the glorie of Christ
should shine vnto them. And the same Apostle elswhere
teacheth vs,1. Cor. 2. v. 15. that the spirituall man iudgeth all things.
VVhich text, two famous papists, Lyranus and Carthusianus
doe expound,1. Ioh. 2. v. 27. of things partaining to our saluation. S. Iohn
is consonant to S. Paule, affirming, that the vnction which
the faithfull haue receiued, doth teach them all things.
Yea, Christ himselfe saith, That his sheepe doe heare his
voice.Ioh. 10. 3. ibid. v. 4. And he addeth, that they follow him, because they
know his voyce. But doubtlesse, if Christs sheepe, that is,
the faithfull and Gods elect people, doe know his voice,
and therefore doe follow him; then by a necessarie consequence,
they can know Christ speaking to them in the

holy scripture, and so can discerne holy writ from prophane
fables or stories, Melchior Canus a famous papist, maketh
this case cleere; his words are set downe in my Golden
ballance.
                  Sixtly, the formall obiect of our faith is veritas prima,
the first veritie,De diuinis nominib. cap. 7. or God himselfe, as Dionysius Areopagita. telleth
vs. Yea, Aquinas that famous papist surnamed their
angelicall doctor, teacheth the selfe same doctrine. Non
enim fides inquit, diuina alicui assentitur, nisi quia est à Deo reuelatum.
                     Aquinas,
2. 2. q. 1. art. 1. 0. For diuine faith (saith Aquinas) will not yeeld assent
to any thing, vnlesse it be reuealed of God. VVhich
truth of doctrine, Saint Austen confirmeth in these golden
wordes;Augustin. in epist. Ioannis, tract. 3. tom. 9. col. 408. 
                     Iam hic videte magnum sacramentum fratres, sonus
verborum nostrorum aures percutit, magister intus est. Nolite putare
quenquam hominem aliquid discere ab homine. Ad monere possumus
per strepitum vocis nostra: si non sit intus qui doceat, inanis fit strepitus
noster. Quam multi hine indocti exituri sunt? quantum ad 
                           〈◊〉
                        
pertinet, omnibus locutus sum, sed quibus vnctio illa intus non loquitur,
quos spiritus sanstus intus non docet, indocti redeunt. Magisteria
forinsecus adiutoria quaedam sunt & admonitiones, Cathedram
in coelo habet qui corda docet. Sequitur; interior Magister est qui docet,
Christus docet, inspiratio ipsius docet. Vbi illius inspiratio & illius
vnctio non est, forinsecus inanit
                           •
                        r perstrepunt verba. Now brethren,
behold here a great sacrament; the sound of our
wordes pierceth your eares, but the master that teacheth
you is within. Thinke not, that man learneth any
thing of man: we (preachers) may admonish by the
sound of wordes; but if he be not within that teacheth, in
vaine is our sound; how many will goe hence vntaught?
For mine owne part, I haue spoken to all; but to whom
that vnction speaketh not inwardly, whom the holy
Ghost teacheth not within, they goe home vntaught, as
they came. The outward teachings are some helpes and
admonitions; but he sitteth in his chaire in heauen, that
teacheth the heart, The master is within that teacheth,
it is Christ that teacheth, it is his inspiration that instructeth.

VVhere his inspiration and his vnction is not, there
the outward noise of words is in vaine: Thus writeth this
auntient and learned father, with many moe wordes to
the like effect. By whose doctrine we may learne sufficiently,
if nothing else were said: that howsoeuer men
teach, how soeuer Paul plant, or Apollo water, yet will no
increase follow, vnlesse God giue the same. I therefore
conclude, that we doe not beleeue this booke or that
booke to be canonicall, because this man or that man, or
the Church saith soe; but that the scripture is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; that
it hath in it selfe that dignity, which is worthy to haue credite;
that the declaration of the Church, doth not make
vs beleeue the scripture, but is only an outward helpe to
bring vs thereunto; and that wee therefore indeed beleeue
the scripture, and this or that booke to be canonicall,
because God doth inwardly teach vs and persuade
our hearts so to beleeue. For certes if wee should beleeue,
that this or that booke is canonicall scripture, because
the Church saith so; then should the formall obiect
of our faith, and the vltimate tearme into which our faith
is resolued, be man, and not prima veritas, or God himselfe,
as Areopagita and Aquinas teach vs. And it will not
helpe the papists to replie out of Saint Augustine, That he
would not haue beleeued the Gospell, vnlesse the authoritie
of the Church had mooued him thereunto. For S.
Austens wordes are these;August. contra epistol. Manich. tom. 6. cap. 5. pag. 79. 
                     Nisi authoritas ecclesiae me commoueret.
I would not haue beleeued the Gospell, if the authoritie
of the Church had not iointly mooued me therunto.
For wee must note, that there is a great difference betweene
mouere and commouere. Mouere is to moue absolutely,
and a part by it selfe; but commouere is to moue respectiuely
and together with another thing. So Saint Austens
meaning is nothing else indeed but that the authoritie of
the Church did outwardly concurre with the inward
motion of the holy Ghost, to bring him to the faith of the
Gospel. Now, Saint Austens meaning is this and and none

other; viz. that he maketh much more account of the
vniuersall Church, than of Manichaeus and his complices;
because the Church did first moue him to heare the Gospel
preached, and to giue some credit to the same. I say
(some credit) because the Churches authoritie did onely
moue him to beleeue the Gospell, fide humana, non fide diuina:
with humane faith, not with faith diuine. For this
diuine faith, with which we Christians doe beleeue the
Gospell, proceedeth not from the outward teaching of
man, but from the inward instruction of the holy Ghost,
as I haue out of the same Austen already prooued. Yea, the
selfe same father declareth in the same chapter, that he
speaketh of himselfe as being a Manichee, not as being
a Christian. What (faith Saint Austen) wouldest thou say
to him, that should answere thee, I doe not beleeue it,
but for the authority of the Church? And this sense is confirmed,
because S. Austen cōfesseth in the very same chapter,
that the authoritie of the Gospel is aboue the authoritie
of the Church.Cap. 5. cont. epist. fundam. And in the chapter aforegoing, after
he hath told vs what kept him in the catholike Church,
and there hath reckoned vp the consent of peoples and
nations; authoritie begun with miracles, nourished with
hope, increased with charitie, established with antiquitie:
succession of priests from Saint Peters seat, and the name
of Catholike; he addeth, that though these things bee
great motiues to keepe him in the vnitie of the Church,
yet must the truth of the scriptures be preferred before
them all. In regard whereof, he promiseth to giue more
credit to Manichaeus than to the Church, and to yeeld vnto
his doctrine, if he shalbe able to prooue it out of the
scripture: In the meane while he must giue him leaue to
preferre the credit of the catholike Church before his
bare wordes, especially, seeing the Church, but not
Manichaeus, was the outward meanes and externall helpe,
that brought him to the faith of the Gospell.
               
            
            
               
               The second Obiection.
               The baptisme of infants is a matter of faith, but not
conteined in the holy scriptures, ergo not all things necessarie
for mans saluation are therein to be found.
               
                  The Answere.
                  I answere, that it is contained in the scriptures, and I
proue it by sundry reasons. The first argument is drawne
from the couenant. For infants being within the couenant,
ought not to be debarred from the signe and seale
thereof.Gen. 17. v. 7. I will establish my couenant betweene me and
thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations, for an
euerlasting couenant, to be God to thee, and to thy seed
after thee.Gen. 15. Againe, you are the children of the Prophets,
and of the couenant which God made to our fathers,Gen. 22. saying
to Abraham, euen in thy seede shall all the families of
the earth be blessed.Act. 3. v. 25. Againe, repent, and be euery one of
you b
                        •
                     ptised in the name of Iesus Christ,Act. 2. v. 38, 39. for the remission
of sinnes, and ye shall receiue the gift of the holy Ghost.
For the promise was made to you, and to your children,
and to all that are a farre off, euen so many as the Lord
our God shall call.Rom. 11. v. 16. Againe, if the first fruits be holy, the
whole lumpe also is holy: And if the roote be holy, the
boughes also.Matt. 19. v. 14. Againe, suffer the yong children, and stay
them not from comming vnto me: for to such belongeth
the kingdome of heauen And where Saint Matthew hath
little children,Luke 18. v. 17. then S. Luke hath, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; infants, which
can neither vnderstand,1. Cor. 7. v. 14. nor come. Againe, your children
are holy yong children therefore must be baptised.
                  The second argument is drawne from the analogie of
the figure of the old testament. For circumcision to which
baptisme succeeded,Coloss 2. v. 11. did pertaine to both ages, as well to
yoong as to old. In whom also yee are circumcised with
circumcisiō made without hands, by putting off the body
of the flesh subiect to sinne, by the circumcision of Christ:
buried with him in baptisme, in whom yee are also risen

againe through the faith of the operation of God, who
raised him vp from the dead. Thus saith Saint Paul: by
whose wordes we may learne sufficiently, that baptisme
did succeed to circumcision, for the same end, vse, and
purpose: viz. that by it we may, putting off the bodie of
sinfull flesh, be buried together with Christ, and rise again
with him through faith.
                  The third argument is drawne, from the practise of the
Church.Mat. 28. v. 19. For the Apostles of our Lord Iesus were commaunded
to baptise all sorts of people withour exception.
Goe therefore, and teach all nations, baptising them
in the name of the father, and of the sonne, and of the holy
Ghost. Againe, we read in the historie Apostolical, that
the whole house of Lydia was baptised,Act. 16. v. 15. neither yong nor
old being excepted.Act. 16. v. 33. Againe, we may find in the acts, that
the keeper of the prison at Philippos was baptised, & all
they of his houshold incontinent.1. Cor. 1. v. 16. Againe in another
place, we may read, that the whole family of Stepha
                           ••
                        s was
baptised, not one at all exempted.
               
               
                  The Obiection.
                  Infants haue no faith, ergo they may not be baptised.
               
               
                  The Answere.
                  I denie the antecedent, because their faith and profession is
this; to be borne of the faithfull, in the vnitie of the
Catholike Church. Againe though they haue not actuall
faith,Mar. 9 v. 42. yet haue they faith fundamentallie, and by inclination.
In which sense our Lord Iesus doth reckon them
among the faithfull, when he saith in this manner; VVhosoeuer
shall offend one of these little ones that beleeue
in me, it is better for him if a milstone were hanged about
his neck, and he were cast into the sea. Infants therefore,
when they are baptized in the Church for faithfull, are
then deemed to beleeue after their manner. VVho, albeit
they haue not faith in act, yet haue they the spirit,

and vertue, or foundation of faith, by Gods operation in
them. Neither ought this thing to seeme strange vnto vs.
For, if the infants of the wicked ones haue infidelitie and
impietie, though not in act yet in inclinatiō by nature, as
writers graunt; then truly may it be said, that the infants
of the faithfull haue faith and pietie, though not in act,
yet in inclination by grace. For grace cannot be of lesse
force through Christ, than nature through the fall of
Adam. for God saith plainely;Gen. 17. v. 7. I will be thy God, and the
God of thy seed after thee.
               
            
            
               The third Obiection.
               VVee beleeue the trinitie of persons in vnitie of substance,
but this is not in the scripture, Ergo.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I denie the assumption; for the trinitie of persons is
plainly auouched in the holy Gospel, where it is thus written;Ioh.
14. v. 26. But the comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom
the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all
things. Thus saith our Lord Iesus. In which words, we
see mention made of three distinct persons; first, of the
Father, which sendeth; secondly, of the holy Ghost,
which is sent; thirdly, of the Sonne, in whose name he is
sent.1. Ioh. 5. v. 7. Againe in another place it is thus written; There
are three which beare recorde in heauen, the Father, the
VVord, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one
Item Matth. 28. verse 19.
               
            
            
               The fourth Obiection.
               It is not to be found in the holy scrpture, that Christ is
consubstantiall, and of the same substance which the Father.
Ergo.
               
               
                  The Answere.
                  The antecedent is false.Zachar. cap. 13. v. 7. For first, in the prophesie of

                     Zacharias I find these wordes; arise O sword, vpon my
shepheard, and vpon the man that is my fellow, saith the
Lord of hostes.Esa. 9. 6. Secondly, in many places of the new testament.Joh.
10. 30. First, in these words; I and my Father are one.
Secondly,Ioh. 10. 38. in these words; If ye beleeue not me, beleeue
the works; that ye may know and beleeue, that the Father
is in me,Phillip. 2. 6. and I in him. Thirdly, in these words; VVho
being in the forme of God,Heb. 1. 3. thought it no robberie to be
equall with God.Io. 1. 2. Fourthly,Mat. 1. 21. & v. 23. in these words; She shall bring
foorth a sonne, and thou shalt call his name Iesus; for he
shall saue his people from their sinnes. For this respect
saith holy Athanasius,
                     Athanas. de decret. Nic. synod. tom. 2. that albeit the words be not expressed
in the scriptures, yet haue they that meaning
which holy writ approoueth, Answere
ô papists, if ye can; if not, repent
for shame, and
yeeld vnto the
truth.
               
            
         
         
            
            The eight Article. Of the impossibilitie
of keeping Gods
commandements, in popish
sense.
            
               TOuching this article, the reader must
seriously obserue with me this adiunct,
(in popish sense) because it is both emphaticall
and of great moment. For I
will not affirme simply and absolutely,
that Gods children can not keepe his
commandements in a godlie sense and
Christian meaning; but this I constantly denie, and at this
presēt intend in God to proue the same effectually against
all Iesuits and Iesuited papists, That none haue kept, do
keepe, or can keepe Gods commaundements in popish
sense and meaning. viz. that none are so pure, holy, and
free from sinne, that they can stand with God in iudgment,
and challenge eternall life, as of debt due vnto
them for their holy life. Marke well gentle reader, my discourse;
for I hope in God to hit the naile on the head,
and to set downe that which will be as heauie to the papists
heart, as a piece of lead.
            The Apostle telleth vs in plaine and very expresse
words, That the best liuers vpon earth are sinners. In multis
enim offendimus omnes. For we all offend in manie things. But
certes,Iacob. 3. v. 2. if it be true, as it is most true indeed, (for S. Iames
being inspired with the holy Ghost cannot lie) That the
holy Apostles committed many sinnes; then doubtlesse it
is not in euerie ones power, to keepe Gods commandements;
neither will it helpe the papists to distinguish after

their wonted manner, of mortall and veniall sinnes.
For, besides that I haue proued alreadie in the sixt Article,
that euery sinne is mortall in it owne proper nature;
both the Greek word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which signifieth the transgression
of the law; and also the Hebrew word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which
signifieth a declining from the right way, doe euidentlie
conuince the same. For it can neuer be trulie
said; that hee performeth and keepeth the law, which
transgresseth the law or swarueth from the same. It is the
truth which S. Paul alledgeth out of the law;Gal. 3. v. 10. Cursed is
euerie one that abideth not in all things which are written
in the book of the law, to doe them. It is also the truth,
which S. Iames saith;lac. 2. v. 10. That whosoeuer keepeth the whole
law, and yet faileth in one point, is become guiltie of all.
To which may be added innumerable texts, both of the
old and new testament, that the best liuers vpon earth
doe sinne, and transgresse Gods commaundements.
Holy Moses telleth vs in the first booke of his Pentatench,
That when God saw that the wickednes of man was great
on the earth,Gen. 6. v. 5. & that all the imaginations of the thoughts
of his heart were only euill continually, then it repented
God that he had made mā on the earth. Iob telleth vs, That
God found no stedfastnes in his Saints;Iob. 15. v. 15. & 35. 5. yea, he saith farther,
That the heauens are not cleane in his sight. And
he addeth these wordes; How much more is man abhominable
and filthie, which drinketh iniquitie like water.
The kingly Prophet saith, that in Gods sight, none
that liueth can be iustified.Psal, 143. v. 2. VVise Salomon saith, that no
man living is able truely to say,Prou. 20. v. 9. he is cleane from sinne.
The same wise man saith in like maner, that the iust man
sinneth many times.Prou. 24. 16. 
               Esay saith, that all our righteousnes
is as filthie clouts.Esa. 64. 6 
               Esdras saith, he was ashamed for his own
sinnes,Esdr. 9. 6. and for the sinnes of the people, because their trespasse
was growne vp vnto heauen.Rom. 3. v. 9. 10. 12. 19. 23. Saint Paul sheweth at
large, that all men are sinners, and that no man is able to
be iustified by his workes. All saith hee, both Iewes and

Gentiles are vnder sinne. There is none righteous, no not
one: they haue all gone out of the way; they haue all
beene made altogether vnprofitable: there is none that
doth good, no not one. Now we know, that whatsoeuer
the law saith, it saith to them which are vnder the law, that
euery mouth may be stopped, and all the world be subiect
to the iudgement of God. There is no difference, for all
hane sinned, and are depriued of the glory of God, and
are iustified freely by his grace, through the redemption
that is in Christ Iesus. Againe in another place, he hath
these words:Rom. 10. v. 3. For they being ignorant of the righteousnesse
of God, & going about to stablish their owne righteousnesse,
haue not submitted themselues to the rightenesse
of God: the case is cleere and euident. For as the
Prophet saith,Psal. 130. v. 3. 4. If God should marke our iniquities, and reward
vs after our deeds, none of vs were able to endure it.
            Now, let vs heare S. Austens graue sentence, concerning
this controuersie.August. de doctrina Christ. lib. 1. ca. 22. to. 3. 
               Diliges inquit, proximum tuum sicut teipsum:
Deum vero ex toto corde, & ex tota anima; & ex tota mente,
vt omnes cogitationes tuas, & omnem vitam, & omnem intellectū in
illū conferas, à quo habes ea ipsa quae confers. Cum autē ait, toto corde,
tota anima, tota mente, nullam vitae nostrae partem reliquit, quae vacare
debeat, & quasi locum dare, vt alia ve velit frui. Thou shalt
loue thy neighbour, saith he, as thy selfe; but God with
thy whole heart, with thy whole soule, and with thy whole
mind; that thou maist cōferre vpon him all thy thoughts,
and all thy life, & all thine vnderstanding, of whom thou
hast receiued the selfe same which thou doest conferre or
giue. But when he saith, with all thy heart, with all thy
soule, with all thy mind, he hath left no part of our life
which may be vacant, and as it were giue place, to haue
fruition of any other thing.
            The same Saint Austen saith againe in another place;
That this commaundement of louing God with all our
heart, cannot be perfecty fulfilled of any man in this life:

These are his wordes;August. de perfect iustit. ratioc. 16. col. 969. tom. 7. 
               In quae plenitudinc charitatis praeceptum
illud implebitur: Diliges dominū Deum tuū ex toto corde tuo, & ex
tota anima tua, & ex tota mente tua. Nam cum est adhuc aliquid
carnalis concupiscentiae, quod vel continendo froenetur, non omnimodo
ex tota anima diligitur Deus. Non enim caro sine anima concupiscit,
quamuis caro concupiscere dicatur, quia carn aliter anima concupiscit.
Tunc erit iustus sine vllo omnino peccato, quia nulla lex erit in mēbris
eius repugnans legi mentis eius, sed prorsus toto corde, tota anima, tota
mente diligit Deum, quod est primum summum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   praeceptum. Cur
ergo non praeciperetur homini ista perfectio, quamuis cam in hac vita
nemo habeat? Non enim rectè curritur, si quo currendum est nesciatur.
In which fulnesse of charitie that commaundement
shall bee fulfilled. Thou shalt loue thy Lord thy God,
with all thy heart, and with all thy soule, and with all thy
mind. For whiles any part of carnall concupiscence is remayning,
which may be suppressed by containing, God
so long is not in euery respect loued with all the soule. For
the flesh coueteth not without the soule, albeit the flesh
be sayd to couet, because the soule coueteth carnally.
Then shall the iust bee without any sinne at all, because
there shall be no law in his members rebelling against the
law of his mind, but he shall loue God wholy with all his
heart, with all his soule, and with all his mind, which is the
first & chiefest commandement. VVhy therefore should
not this perfection be cōmanded vnto man, although no
man can haue it in this life? For they cannot run aright,
who know not whither they should run.
            Out of these words of this holy father, and great learned
writer, I gather these worthy lessons: First, that by
Gods holy commaundement all men are bound to loue
God, with all their heart, with all their soule, and with all
their mind: Secondly, that whosoeuer suffereth any part
of his life to be vacant, and to haue fruition of any other
thing, cannot fulfill this precept of louing God: Thirdly,
that this precept of loue, cannot be perfectly kept in

this life: Fourthly, that originall concupiscence remaining
in the regenerat, is the hinderance and breach of this
commaundement. Fiftly: that this perfection of loue is
lawfully commaunded, albeit none liuing doth or can attaine
vnto it. And consequently, that it is not possible to
any pure mortall man, perfectly to keepe Gods commandements.
            
               Aquinas
the Popes great doctor and canonised saint,
graunteth freely and affirmeth constantly, That the precept
of louing God with the whole heart, cannot be kept
perfectly in this life. These are his owne expresse words:
Respondeo,
               Aquinat. 22. q. 44. art. 6. in corp. 
               quod praceptum aliquod dupliciter potest impleri. Vno
modo perfectè, alio modo imperfectè. Sequitur; intendit Deus per hoc
praeceptum, vt homo Deo totaliter vniatur: quod fiet in patria, quando
Deus erit omnia in omnibus, vt dicitur, 1. Cor. 15. & ideo
plenè & perfectè in patria implebitur hoc praeceptum: In via autem
impletur, sed imperfectè. I answere, that the precept may be
fulfilled two wayes; one way perfectly, another many
vnperfectly. God intendeth by this precept, to haue man
wholy vnited to himselfe; which shall be effected in heauen,
when God shall be all in all. And therefore this
precept shall be fulfilled perfectly and fully in the countrey,
but in the way it is fulfilled vnperfectly. (That is
to say, perfectly in heauen, which is called our countrey;
and vnperfectly on earth, which is tearmed the
way.)
            Out of these golden wordes of the famous schoole-doctour
Aquinas, (whose doctrine two Popes haue authorized
for authenticall) I obserue these points of great
importance. First, that God by commaunding all men
to loue him with their whole hearts, did intend to vnite
all men wholy vnto himselfe; so as no part of their loue
should be left vacant, to be bestowed otherwise. Secondly,
that this precept of louing God as wee are bound,
can be kept perfectly in heauen onely. Thirdly, that it

is not impossible in this life, to keepe Gods commaundements
in a godly sense and meaning; because we may
keepe them in some sort and measure, though not in that
high and perfect degree which the law requireth at our
handes. For our great popish doctour (marke well his
wordes) saith plainely and constantly; In via impletur preceptum,
sed imperfectè. The precept is fulfilled in the way,
(or in this life) but vnperfecty. So that, when the papists
triumphing before the victorie, cry out against vs
with open mouths, That we charge God with impietie,
affirming him to haue commaunded to man things imposible:
they may as well and with as much right and
reason, exclaime against their owne deere doctor Aquinas,
and consequently against their owne holy fathers the
Popes,August. Hunnaeus in epist. ad Pium 5. 
               Vrbanus the fourth, and Innocentus the fift; who haue
commanded and strictly charged to receiue his doctrine
as sent from heauen, concerning both faith and maners.
For my selfe doe here teach the selfe some doctrine with
Aquinas, as his owne expresse wordes very flatly purport.
For my wonted manner is, to confute poperie by the testimonies
of best approoued popish writers.
            
               Bernardus the Popes deere monke and reuerend Abbot,
iumpeth with Aquinas in these expresse wordes;Berner. in cant. serm. 50. tom. 1. col. 931.
               Quomodo ergo iubenda fuit, quae implenda nullo modo erat? Aut si
placet tibi magis de affestuali datum fuisse mandatum, non inde
contendo, dummodo aquiescas & tu mihi, quod minimè in vita ista
ab aliquo hominum possit, vel poterit ad impleri. Quis enim sibi arrogare
id audeat, quod Paulus ipse fatetur non comprehendisse?
nec latuit preceptorem, precepti pondus hominum excedere vires: sed
iudicauit vtile ex hoc ipso suae illos insufficientiae admoncri, & vt scirent
sanè, ad quem iustitiae finem niti pro viribus oporteret. Ergo
mandando impossibilia, non preuaricatores homines fecit, sed humiles,
vt omne os obstruatur, & subditus fiat omnis mundus Deo: quia
ex operibus legis, non iustificabitur omnis caro coram illo. Accipientes
quippe mandatum, & sentientes defectum, clamabimus in

coelum, & miserebitur nostri Deus; & sciemus in illa die, quiae
non ex operibus iustitiae quae fecimus nos, sed ecundum suam misericordiam
saluos not fecit. How then was it commanded, which
by no meanes could be performed? or if thou rather
thinke, that the commaundement was giuen of affectuall
charitie, I will not contend with thee therein; so thou also
wilt yeeld vnto me herein, That no man in this life is
able to keepe and performe the same. For who dareth
to challenge that to himselfe, which Paul confesseth hee
could neuer attaine vnto? neither for all that was the
commander ignorant, that the weight of the commandement
did surpasse the power and reach of man; but he
deemed it a thing profitable for them, that hereby they
should be admonished of their insufficiencie, and might
know to what end of righteousnesse they ought with
their best indeuours to applie themselues. Therefore by
commaunding things impossible, he made not men preuaricatours,
but humble; that euery mouth might bee
stopped, and all the world made subiect vnto God; because
by the workes of the law, no flesh can be iustified
in his sight. But after that we haue receiued the commandement,
and thereby perceiue our owne want, we must
cry vp to heauen, and God will haue mercie on vs; and
then shall we know, that he hath saued vs, not for the
workes of righteousnesse which we haue done, but according
to his owne (free) mercy. Thus writeth their own
deere Abbot Bernardus: out of whose wordes, I obserue
many excellent documents. First, that God hath giuen
vs those commaundements, which we cannot possibly
keepe and performe. Secondly, that God knew right wel,
that it is not in our power to keepe his lawes. Thirdly, that
God commanded to vs impossible things, that we might
therby acknowledge our owne insufficiency, & wholy rely
vpon his fauor, help, & mercy. Fourthly, that we might
hereby know, that our saluation proceedeth of mercie,

and not of the workes of righteousnesse which we haue
done, and wherein the papists seeke merit and iustification.
So then, the doctrine which I now teach, is not my
doctrine onely, but the flat doctrnie of Saint Austen; yea,
and the selfe same doctrine which the best learned papists
haue taught before me.
            That it is not possible for man, to keepe Gods commaundements
perfectly in this life; no other proofe is
needfull, saue onely the Lords Prayer. For in it, the
best liuer vpon earth is taught, to aske forgiuenesse and
pardon for his sinnes: and doubtles where pardon must
be demaunded, there the law is not exactly obserued.
The vsuall practise of all papists,Nota, quod ne veniale quidem peccaium potest in deum referri. Ergo auertit a fine vltimo. Ergo est peccatū mortale. is consectarie hereunto.
For in their ordinarie and daiely masses, as also in their
quotidian auricular confessions, they confesse three seuerall
times their most grieuous sinnes, in these wordes;
Mea culpa, mea culpa, me a maxima culpa. In which publique
daily confession, they must eitheir confesse, that they
deale hypocritically, dissemble damnably, and mocke
God most irreligiously; or els doubtles, that they cannot
keepe Gods commaundements, as they beare the
world in hand they do. Now it remaineth, that I answere
to some popish obiections, which the papists deeme and
repute insoluble.
            
               The first Obiection.
               The young man told Christ,Mat. 29. v. 20. that he had kept all the
commaundements, from his youth vp. VVhom Christ
reprooued not, as though he had not kept them indeed,
but exhorted him to perfection, in selling all his possessions.
               
                  The Answere.
                  I Answere both with Saint Austen and Saint Hierome,
                     
That the young man answered vntrulie, when hee said,
hee had kept all the commaundements. Saint Austen
hath these words;August. epist. 89. col. 264. 
                     Ille quidem tristis, abscessit, qui viderit quemadmodum
illa legis mandata seruauerat. Puto enim quod se arrogantius
quam verius, seruasse responderat. He went away sorrowfull,
who knew how hee had kept the commaundements
of the low. For I thinke, he answered more arrogantlie
then trulie, that he had kept them. Sant Hierome
saith plainlie and roundlie, Mentitur, He lieth. And
the circumstance of the texts going afore and following,
doe purport no lesse vnto vs.
               
            
            
               The second Obiection.
               Saint Paul saith,Rom. 2. v. 13. For note the hearers of the law are
iust with God, but the doers of the law shall be iustified.
               
                  The Answere.
                  Saint Paul meaneth nothing lesse in these words, than
that a man in Gods sight can be iustified his workes: But
he goeth about to conclude all vnder sinne, and so to
haue neede of the glorie of God; because none is able to
performe and keepe the law. For his whole scope and intent
is this; to proue that the Iewes did in vaine boast against
the Gentiles that they had the law, seeing they did
not keepe the same. As if he had said; if ye will be iustified
by the law, ye must performe and keepe the law, which ye
doe not. for not the hearers of the law, but the doers are
iust in Gods sight. I willinglie graunt, and will it not
denie; that if any of you papists can perfectly obserue
and keepe the law, the same papist shall be iustified by the
merit of his workes: but if any such papist could be found,
(which I am sure is impossible) yet should that papist heare
what Saint Paul saith of holy Abraham. For saith he, if Abraham
                     
were iustified by works,Rom. 4. v. 2. he hath glorie, (or whererein
to boast) but not before God.
               
            
            
               The third Obiection.
               If thou wilt enter into life,Mat. 19. v. 17. keepe the commaundements.
               
                  The answere.
                  Our Sauiour Christ doth not shew in this place, how
men doe attaine vnto eternall life; but hee sheweth
what perfect obseruation of Gods law is required of
them, who looke to bee iustified by the workes of
the law. This my answere is cleered, by the question
proposed vnto Christ, which was this; VVhat
good thing shall I doe, that I may haue eternall
life? Christ answered; If thou wilt haue eternall
life by doing good workes, then must thou keepe
Gods commaundements.Vide B. in. 3. cap. ad gal. But this is impossible, as
is alreadie prooued.
               
            
            
               The fourth Obiection.
               Christ saith,Mat. 11. v. 30. My yoke is easie, and my burden is
light.1. Iohn. 5. v. 3. And Saint Iohn saith, his commaundements are
not heauie.
               
                  The Answere.
                  The law of God is impossible to be kept in such perfection,Non lequitur hic de iugo & onere legit, sed Euangeli
                           •
                        .
as the same requireth at our hands, as I haue
alreadie proued. Neuerthelesse, the yoke of Christ is
sweete, and his burden light, to all them which beleeue
in him.Act. 15. 10, 11. For (as Saint Peter saith) The yoke of the law

is such a burden, as neither we, nor our fathers were
able to beare: but we belleeue to be saued by the grace
of our Lord Iesus.Gal. 3. 13. Christ hath taken away the curse
of the law:Rom. 8. 3. Christ hath satisfied for our transgressions
of the law:Col. 2. 14. Christ sent by God in the similitude of sinfull
flesh, blotted out the hand writing that was against
vs, and nailed it vpon the crosse. There is no condemnation
to them which are in Christ Iesus.Rom. 8. 1. Christ is our
iustification, our sanctification, and our redemption.
By faith in Christ, wee doe ouercome the world.1. Cor. 1. 30. Christ
is so mercifull,1. Ioh. 5. 4. that hee refresheth all those which come
vnto him.Mat. 11. v. 28. This being so, wee may trulie say, that in
Christ wee fulfill the law: because he is our righteousnesse,
our sanctification, and our redemption; because
hee hath ouercome death; because hee hath clothed
vs with his righteousnesse;Col. 2. 14. because hee hath couered
our nakednesse with his garments;1. Joh. 5. 4. because in him
wee haue gotten the victorie,Act. 15. 11. ouer hell, death, and
damnation.
                  This is it that Saint Austen saith,August. libr. 1. retract. cap. 19. in these golden
wordes; Omnia ergo mandata tunc facta deputantur, quando
quicquid non fit, ignoseitur. All the commaundements are
then reputed as done, when whatsoeuer is not done, is
(of mercie) forgiuen.
               
            
            
               The first Obiection.
               Saint Hierome saith,Hieron. cont. 
                        •••
                     lag. lib. 3. & 4. He is to be detested as a blasphemer,
that affirmeth God to haue commaunded any impossible
thing.August. serm. 6. de temp tom. 10. And Saint Austen saith, God can neither
commaund things impossible, because he is iust,
neither condemne a man for that which he could not
auoyd, because he is mercifull.
               
                  
                  The Answere.
                  I answere first, that hee is to bee detested as a blasphemer,
that affirmeth God to haue commaunded any
thing vnto man, which was either impossible in it selfe
to be done, or to be done of man as man. I say (impossible
in it selfe) because otherwise, Christ himselfe
could not haue fulfilled the law: which to hold, is
flat blasphemie against the Sonne of God. I say (impossible
to bee done of man, as man;) because otherwise,
the Protoplast Adam could not haue kept the
law: which to hold, is most absurd, and against all learning
and learned men.
                  Secondly, that he is to be detested as a blasphemer,
whosoeuer affirmeth, that any man in particular being
a true beleeuer, cannot keepe and fulfill Gods
commaundements; in him, of whose fulnesse we haue all
receiued,Ioh. 1. 16. and whose righteousnesse is ours, by his free gift
and grace.1. Cor. 1. 30.
                  
                  Thirdly, that Gods commaundements may in
some measure (that is to say, imperfectly) bee kept
euen in this life, of all the regenerate. And this not
my answere, but euen that answere which the famous
papist Aquinas maketh,Aquinas, 22. q. 44. art. 6. ad prim. to the obiection out of Saint
Hierome: whose answere is very sufficient to stop the
mouthes of all papists, seeing his testimonie is to them
as if it were an oracle from Heauen. To Saint Austen
the same answere is very consonant, as both by the
precedent and subsequent words will appeare. And if
there be any papists,Omittatur haec clausula, meo iudicio. whose appetites this answere cannot
satisfie: of those papist I would demaund this one
thing,This is a Dilemma which no papists can auoyd. VVhy infants not baptised before their death,
are iustlie damned for originall sinne, seeing they could
not possibly auoid the same?
                  
                     
He that would know Saint Austens meaning more
fully, both touching this obiection and others of like
qualitie, may reade the same holy Father in his booke
De Corrept. & gratia; and therein find much excellent
matter for his contention in that behalfe.August. de correp. & grat. cap. 12. & 13. tom. 7.
Answere ô papists, if ye can; if not,
repent for shame, and yeeld
vnto the truth.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
            
         
      
   