
      
         
            
            
            A
PREAMBLE
VNTO
AN INCOVNTER
WITH P. R. THE AVTHOR
of the deceitfull Treatise of
Mitigation: Concerning the Romish doctrine both in question of
Rebellion and of Aequiuocation:
            
            By
THOMAS MORTON.
            
               Am I your enemy because I tell you the truth?
               GALAT. 4. 16.
            
            Published by Authoritie.
            
               LONDON,
Printed by Melch. Bradwood for Iohn Bill
and Edmond Weauer.
1608.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONOVRABLE,
and his singular good
Lord,
ROBERT Earle of SALISBVRY,
Principall Secretarie to his Maiestie, &c.
and the most woorthy Chancellar of the
Vniuersity of CAMBRIDGE,
Grace and peace.
            
               THere are not many weeks past (Right
Honourable) since a person, disguised
by these dumbe characters of P. R.
had couertly sent forth a Booke, inscribed,
A Treatise of Mitigation,
which he aduentured to addresse vnto
both the Vniuersities, especially that, wherein, by the
blessing of God, I haue had my education, and whereof this
is the happinesse, that it hath your Lordship Chancellar
and Protector. I therefore esteemed it my dutie in presence

of your Honor, by this Preamble, to sponge out such vile
imputations, wherewith he indeuoured through me (alas)
one of the least of the Prophets to distaine both my
Mother and her Sister the famous Vniuersities; and
those honorable persons vnto whose care and prouidence they
are committed. At the first reading thereof, although (I
confesse) I receiued some such impressions as that I was not
able to imagine that any, professing Diuinity, could be so vtterly
destitute of humanity, as when he clamorously inueigheth
against (as he pretendeth) multiplicitie of falsifications,
he himselfe should most vsually and egregiously falsifie:
yet then, euen in my greatest iealousie of mine own miscariage,
I conceiued a double matter of comfort: first, from
my selfe, that knowing I durst present my supplications vnto
the Iudge of the secret thoughts of all hearts, and iust
Reuenger of all lying wickednesse; I did not doubt but that
being able with true confidence to appeare before God, I
should not greatly feare the censure of man. Secondly, from
my Auersarie, presuming that he that would write in defense
of their Mentall Aequiuocation, would be found
to aequiuocate in writing. But much more was this my diuination
fortified at the reuiew of his Treatise; for euen
as the Greeke Commander, who being in apparance mortally
wounded, demanded of his Souldiers, Numquid tuta
est Ciuitas? numquid clypeus meus integer? Is
the Citie safe? is my shield sound? And being satisfied

in both recouered his health, and afterwards became
victorious: So I likewise, vnder so many ghastly wounds
of a virulent pen, hauing generally inquired and vprightly
answered my selfe, that my cause was safe, and my conscience
sound, and free from any notorious and wilfull falsitie;
I then began more resolutely to confront my Aduersarie
in this Prelude and First assault: and promise (if God
shall be pleased) a more forcible Incounter, after that I
haue discharged my part in another taske of more importance,
namely, in The Answer vnto the misconceiued
Catholike Apologie: which by this calumnious Treatise
of P. R. his Mitigation, as by an aduerse tempest,
hath receiued some interruption. This Preamble (Right
Honourable) as a Suruey of some particulars, which being
vnfolded, may, if not satisfie the expectation, yet at the
least stay the preiudice and precipitation of some, I do humbly
present vnto your Lordship, as vnto a most zealous
Patron of the Truth, a vigilant Discouerer of malignant
practises, a prouident Directer of one of those Vniuersities,
whereunto my Aduersarie presumeth to appeale; submitting
my selfe vnto the equanimitie of your honourable
iudgement; to which, if by this Briefe it be not manifest,
that P. R. hath in this Treatise preuaricated in his whole
cause both in the question of Rebellion and of Aequiuocation,
betraied his Countreys State, disgraced the Romish
Schooles, strangled his owne conscience, I refuse not, that

to the crimes obiected against me by him, this may be added,
That I durst affirme thus much before your Lordship. For
whose continuance of health, increase of honour, accomplishment
of all Spirituall Graces I shall not
cease to pray. Our Lord Iesus preserue
vs to the glorie of his sauing
Grace.
            
               
                  Your Honours
in all Christian dutie
THOMAS MORTON.
            
         
         
            
            A
PREAMBVLATORY
EPISTLE vnto P. R.
the Mitigator.
            
               THere be but two Romish Maladies
(Master P. R.) which in my books of
Discouery and Full Satisfaction might
stand need of your Mitigation: the
one is the vsurped and transcendent
Iurisdiction of the Pope aduanced aboue
all Christian Kingdomes, to the troubling or subuerting
of all Princes and people of contrary Religion;
the other is your professed Art of mentall Equiuocation.
The first of these I haue proued to be (in the Protestant
States) the Damme, and the second the Baud to rebellion:
therefore haue I been by you censured for a false
and slandrous Libeller. But if, as the woman in pleading
of her cause appealed from the Iudge sleeping vnto
the same Iudge better informed, you will giue me
leaue to appeale from P. R. as he is a Passionate Railer,
vnto P. R. as he is a Placable Reasoner; then I am sure
no man shall proue either me a false slanderer, or you a
true Mitigator: because you in your Treatise haue established

such a Papall authority, which (after denunciation
of sentence) may depriue Protestant Kings (in
your opinion Heretikes) of their Kingdomes; making
all such Protestant Princes and all their adherents also
alliable vnto all those penalties, which the Popish Canons,
by you defended, haue awarded against Heretikes,
which are, losse of lands, of honours, and of their
liues; so farre, as to allow that euery man may in such
a case sheath his sword in his brothers throat: not disproouing
your fellowes, who conclude that all this
must be done, when there is sufficient meanes of performance.
And shall not Protestants (except they will
acknowledge themselues to haue deserued a new Massacre)
call this your doctrine execrable and rebellious?
We reade of Petilian a Donatist, who to the end he
might moderate and mitigate the sharpe reproach of
the crueltie of his sect intended against the Orthodoxall
Professors, did make a great boast of courtesie and
humanitie: against whom S. Augustine writeth thus:
Isto modo & miluus,
               Aug. lib. 2. adu. Petil. cap. 83. 
               cùm columbos rapere non potuerit,
columbum se nominat; vbi enim potuistis, & non fecistis?
That is, By this meanes (saith S. Augustine) a Kite, when
he can not seize vpon a Doue, will be a Doue: for, I pray
you, when did you spare vs, being able to hurt vs? The
like boast of other Heretikes, called Rogationists, receiued
the like Answer:August. Ep. 48. ad Vincent. to wit: Nulla bestia, si neminem
vulneret, proptereà mansueta dicitur, si dentes & vngues
non habet: saeuire vos nolle dicitis, ego non posse arbitror;
si autem possetis, quanta faceretis, quandò nihil
potestis, & non cessatis? That is, There is no beast, which
may be called tame, because it doth no hurt when it hath
neither teeth nor talant: You (Rogationists) say you will

not mischieue vs; but I rather thinke you can not: for
how will not you do what possibly you can, seeing you cease
not to be doing, when you can do nothing at all? Are not
these Rogationists and you Romanists equally bent to
like mischiefe? Is not your Defence (P. R.) Miluus &
Columbus, A Kitish Doue? For by the Title pretending
Mitigation and Obedience, it may seem to be a Doue, but
by the Treatise it selfe professing a plaine rebellion, it
proueth a Kite. Whereby we may suspect that in the
capitall characters of your name P. may betoken a Petilian,
and R. a Rogationist. Otherwise, answer your Aduersaries
sincerely vnto this their Interrogatorie; Did
you euer spare vs, being sufficiently able to hurt vs? For
the time past you can not satisfie; for the time to come
you will not ingage your selfe further than your Preface
hath promised, viz. It is not impossible for vs to liue in
subiection. But will you know the best way to prooue
your Aduersarie T. M. slanderous? Then must you
teach your Disciples to cease to be murderous. Your
second, and (as you call it) the speciall part, which is the
Defence of Mentall Equiuocation, is no whit better fortified:
for the maine reason to free it from a lie, is, because
the outward speech, [as I am no Priest] is mixed
with a clause reserued in the minde, [as, To tell it vnto
you.] Wherein againe I appeale from your Position to
your Confession, granting, That there is a mentall Equiuocation,
which no clause of reseruation can saue from a lie.
Which one Confession is sufficient to conuince all
your Mentall Equiuocators to be apparently liers. Hauing
thus obteined my cause in both questions, although
you rage and raue, disgorging your stomacke,
and casting vpon me all the cankred and galfull termes

it could vtter: yet can I not be offended with you, except
only (as Tully spoke in the like case) Quiame nocere
vol
                     •
                  isti: Because you meant to doe me iniurie. After
you had laboured, by disabling my iudgement concerning
the cause, to wound me in the head, you proceed
further, to preiudice my conscience, by pretending
multiplicitie of frauds and falsifications, seeking thereby
(for so I may call it) to stab me at the heart. But know
(P. R.) that your false and calumnious obiections of
falsifications are in this Preamble so farre discouered,
that I may truly thinke the Scripture verified vpon
you,Rom. 2. 1. where it is thus written: Therefore art thou inexcusable,
ô man, whosoeuer thou be, that iudgest; for doing
the same things, by iudging another thou condemnest thy
selfe. Therfore I wish you in the feare of God, so to vse
your iudgement in this life, as still remembring, that
after death you must be called to iudgement.
Our Lord Iesus preserue vs to the glorie
of his sauing Grace.
Farewell.
            
               Yours to warne, and to be warned,
THO. MORTON.
            
         
         
            
            A table of the particular contents, and
Paragraphes of the insuing
Preamble.
            
               FIrst part is concerning the sufficiency of P. R. to vndertake any
challenge. §. 1. pag. 1
               An argument that P. R. his wit was in a slumber in answering to
the point of the sleeping souldiers. §. 2. pag. 2
               An argument of his memory bewraying his free will to lying in the
point of the clause of Reseruation. §. 3. pag. 5
               
                  P. R. his skill in Logicke, prouoking all Vniuersities to laugh at him,
both in the point of Syllogizing, §. 4. pag. 7. And also in diuiding
pag. 12
               
                  P. R. obiecting Greeke and Hebrew texts, and thereby gaining to
himselfe the opinion of rare ignorance. §. 5. pag. 12
               
                  P. R. glorying in a triumphant falshood in his obiection of falsitie
concerning the testimonie of Carerius. §. 6. pag. 15
               
                  P. R. his presumptuous falshood in charging T. M. with falsitie in
allegation of the testimonie of Dolman. §. 7. pag. 18
               
                  P. R. his foure malitious tricks of falshood in obiecting a falsitie
concerning the testimony of Frisingensis. §. 8. pag. 25
               The second part, proouing that P. R. is no sufficient Aduocate for
our English case, deciphering the disposition of both my Aduersaries,
viz. the Moderate Answerer and this Mitigator, by
way of a Dialogue bringing them vpon the stage. §. 9. pag. 30
               The third part sheweth that P. R. hath not performed his challenge
in respect either of his cause or conscience. §. 10. pag. 34
               That the very Title of the booke of Mitigation is ominous and vnluckie
vnto them whom P. R. laboureth thereby to defend.
§. 10. pag. 34
               That P. R. betraieth his whole cause in question of Rebellion, by
many impossibilities of subiection. §. 11. pag. 36. shewing his

sportfull or rather execrable impostureship therein. pag. 39
               That P. R. hath by necessarie consequence ouerthrowne his whole
defence of mentall Aequiuocation. §. 12. pag. 43
               A generall answer to the accusation which P. R. vrgeth concerning
malicious falshoods. §. 13. pag. 49
               The hypocriticall, prodigall, and prodigious ostentation which
P. R. maketh in auouching the integritie of his Romish writers.
§. 14. pag. 50
               Popes falsificatours. pag. 51. num. 57
               A notable spectacle of manifold contradictions of Romish Doctors
in peruerting three testimonies of antiquitie in one controuersie
about Images. pag. 53. as namely the Councell of Eliberis, pag.
53. the Councell of Francford, pag. 55. the Epistle of Epiphanius.
pag. 59
               An instance in a notable Romish falsificatour, to wit, Cardinall
Bellarmine. §. 15. both in slandering his aduersaries, pag. 62
and also in the corrupt allegation of testimonies of Fathers, §.
16. pag. 66. by many examples euen in one controuersie of Purgatorie.
pag. 68
               Another notable Romish falsificator, euen P. R. himselfe. §. 17
pag. 71
               One falshood of his, about the clause of Reseruation. pag. 72
               A second, in turning one Doctor into many Doctors. pag. 72
               A third and fourth in changing condemnation into iustification. pa.
73. num. 82. 83
               A fift, in changing Campian into Bellarmine. pag. 74. num. 84
               A sixt, in changing a deniall into a confession. pag. 75. num. 85
               A seuenth, in changing an interrogation [Haue you any thing to
say to their practise?] into an asseueration, & a manifest noting
an obiection into an hypocriticall dissimulation. pag. 76. nu. 86
               An eight falsitie changing Holinshed into Fox. pag. 79. num. 88
               A ninth, noting falsly a corruption of the English text. pag. 81.
num. 90
               A tenth, eleuenth and twelfth. pag. 82
               A thirteenth falsitie in his claime of vniuersall consent for the doctrine
of Equiuocation. pag. 82. num. 93. wherin he is conuinced
of notorious falshoods by the knowne testimonies of three Iesuits,

as Azorius, pa. 84. num. 96. by Emmanuel Sà and others, pag.
86. num. 98. by Maldonate. pag. 99
               Answers to the particular accusations of falshood which P. R. hath
falsly obiected to T. M. and wherein he hath gloried and insulted
most. pag. 88. §. 18
               First his insultation in the testimonie of Polydor, concerning the
change of Popes names. pag. 89. num. 101
               A second insultation in the testimony of Nauclerus, concerning the
Pope choaked with a flie. pag. 91. num. 104
               A third insultation in the testimonie of Bouchier, de iusta abdicatione,
concerning killing of Tyrants. pag. 95. num. 108
               A fourth, in the testimonie of M. Reinolds. pag. 99. num. 115
               A fift out of Gratian. pag. 103. num. 120
               A sixt also out of Gratian. pag. 106. num. 124
               A seuenth concerning the text of Esay 29. pag. 109. num. 129
               An eighth concerning the testimonie alleged of the Extrauagants.
pag. 109. num. 130
               A ninth in the testimonie of Bellarm. about putting in Illos, and
putting out Hoc. pag. 112. num. 134
               A tenth in the testimonie of Carerius about vero and verè, &c.
pag. 115. num. 138
               An eleuenth in the testimonie of Dolman. pag. 116. num. 139
               A twelfth about the succession of Protestant Princes. pag. 116
num. 140
               A thirteenth in the testimonie of Frisingensis. pag. 117. num. 141
               A fourteenth and most rigorous accusation in the testimonie of
Lambertus Scaffnaburg. pag. 117. num. 142. &c.
               The falshood, foolishnesse, vnfortunatenesse, and impietie of that
Accusation. pag. 120. 121. 123. 124
               A challenge against P. R. §. 19. pag. 126. num. 150. &c.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               A PREAMBLE VNTO
THE INCOVNTER WITH
P. R. in Confutation of his deceitfull
Treatise of MITIGATION.
            
            §. 1.
            1 EVery man reprehending his Aduersarie,
thereby bindeth himselfe to
good behauior: otherwise to reproch
another in his owne guilt, is to throw
dust against the wind, which will reflect
and returne with greater violence
vpon his own face. My Aduersarie
P. R. to make me odious to his
Reader hath plashed me, as it were, with these aspersions, of

                  Asse, Silly fellow, Vnlearned, Not vnderstanding Logike, Shamelesse,
False, Malicious;
                which a man would thinke he could
not haue spoken without presuming of his owne Wit, Learning,
Truth, Modesty, Charity, together with all their complements
in himselfe. In ostentation whereof he offereth himselfe
to the triall of all Diuines, Schooles, Vniuersities, and
euery Reader of his Treatise. But I (alas) what shall I say?
who shall plead my cause? who? though all Diuines should
condemne, Nobilitie disdaine, and Vniuersities hisse me out
of Schooles, yet is there one, vnto whom I dare appeale,
euen P. R. himselfe in his Booke of MITIGATION:
where I finde, that this my most rigorous Aduersarie will

proue my rightfull Aduocate; his wit freeing me from sillinesse,
his learning from ignorance, his modestie from shamelesnesse,
his charitie from malice, his truth from lying. And
though he vilifie me with termes of indignitie and tread vpon
me with his dirtie footings, as men do vpon brasse, I shall not
be greatly offended, being assured that the more he rubbeth,
the brighter I shall appeare both in my cause and conscience
vnto euerie Christian and conscionably affected Reader.
            2 To this purpose I diuide this Preamble into Three Inquiries:
The First is, What sufficiencie and excellencie there is in
P. R. to make so great an insultation as he doth: The Second,
Whether he may be thought a sufficient Proctor in this case
or no: The Third, Whether he hath sufficiently performed
his taske either for the Defense of his cause or Iustification of
his conscience: together with a Challenge against him in
them both.
         
         
            THE FIRST INQVIRIE.
            
               The true Symptomes and Arguments concerning the
sufficiencie and excellencie of the wit, memorie,
learning, charitie, modestie, and truth, of P. R.
by a taste in ech one, euen in such instances,
wherein he glorieth and boasteth
most.
            
            
               
                  An Argument of P. R. his kinde of wit, which may
seeme to haue beene a slumber when he
made his Replie.
               
               § 2.
               3 LOquere vt te videam, that is, Speake friend, that I may see
thee, sayd the Philosopher vnto a yong man; because
(Oratio, being or is ratio) the reason of man can not be outwardly
discerned better than by the mouth, which is the
messenger of the heart. Therfore let vs see P. R. speaking thus:
                  
                  The treatise of Mitigat. Epist. Ded to the Vniuersit. num. 24. 
                  The chiefe proofe of Thomas Morton (to shew our Priests to be
bad Doctors) consisteth in a certaine comparing of them with those
Iewish Priests of the olde law, in Christs time, who taught the souldiers
which watched at the Sepulcher of our Sauiour to say, That
whilest they were sleeping, his Disciples came and stole him away.
[Common sense (sayth Thomas Morton) might haue replied,
How could you tell what was done when you were asleepe?
But mindes inthralled in the opinion of a neuer-erring Priesthood
(which confirmed that answer) could not possibly but
erre with their Priests. Such (alas) is the case of all them &c.]
Doe you see how substantially he hath prooued this matter? Let vs
examine the particulars: First the storie, then the inference.
About the storie S. Matthew recounteth in the 28. Chapter of his
Gospell, how Christ our Sauiour being raised miraculously from
death to life with a great and dreadfull earth-quake and descent of
an Angell, so as the souldiers which kept the Sepulcher were astonished,
and almost dead for feare; some of them ranne and tolde the
Chiefe Priests thereof, who making a consultation with the Elders,
deuised this shift, To giue them store of money, and to bidde
them say, That in the night when they were asleepe his Disciples
came and stole him away: and so they did. And S. Matthew addeth,
That this false bruit ran currant among the Iewes, euen vntill
that time wherein he wrote his Gospell. This is the narration.
What hath Tho. Morton now to say to this against vs? for thereunto
is all his drift. First, he sayth, as you haue heard, That this
deuice was improbable, and against common sense it selfe. Common
sense (sayth hee) might haue replied (to the souldiers)
What could you tell what was done when you were asleepe?
See heere the sharpnesse of Tho. Mortons wit aboue that of the
Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees. But what if one of the souldiers
had replied to him thus? We saw it not when we were asleepe, but
afterward when wee were awakened wee perceiued hee was stollen
away. What reioynder would our Minister make? As for example,
if Tho. Morton were walking with a Communion-booke vnder
his arme thorow a field, and wearied should lie downe to sleepe with
his Booke by his side, and at his awaking should see his Booke gone,
were it against common sense for him to say, That his booke was

stollen from him while he was asleepe? Or is not this an Assertion
fit for one of those Doctours, whereof S. Paul talketh, that vnderstand
not what they say, nor whereof they affirme? But this will
better yet appeare by the second point, which is his inference.
               
               4 The Minister hath only this to reioyne, That his Aduersarie
P. R. hath shewed himselfe, by this his Inference, both
shamelesse and witlesse. Shamelesse, to impute that for an
absurditie vnto me, which he might haue knowen to be the
wise and learned Inference of ancient Fathers, amongst whom
S. Augustine sayth to this Answer of these souldiers thus:Aug. tom. 10. homil. 36. ad finem. 
                  O
mal
                        •
                     , ô pessimi, aut vigilabatis, aut dormiebatis; & quid sit factum
nescitis: impletum est enim quod à Spiritu Sancto multùm antè
per
                  Psal. 20. 
                  Psalmistam praedictum erat, Cogitauerunt consilium, quod
non potuerunt stabilire. That is to say, O euill and most wicked
men, either you were awake or asleepe, and knew not what was
done, &c. intimating this Dilemma; Either were you awake
or asleepe: if awake, then confesse what was done, Christ is risen
out of the graue: if asleepe, then you knew not what was done.
For say,P. R. grosly ignorant in Diuinitie. I pray you, P. R. When Christ by the power of his
Godhead raised himselfe out of the graue, had it beene a good
answer of the souldiers (supposing they had slept) to say, We
know that Christ was stollen out of the graue, when we were asleepe,
because we found him not when we were awake? This
Inference P. R. doth holde for good: whereby my Reader
may ghesse how acceptable a seruant he would haue been vnto
those Iewish Priests, if he had liued in that Synagogue, in
setting on foot that bruit of infidelitie, by perswading the
people, that the souldiers reason was good; the Conclusion
whereof is, Christ did not rise, but was stollen out of the graue:
though, I hope, P. R. his faith is not so farre asleepe, as so to
preiudice the chiefe Article of Christian faith, The resurrection
of Christ from the dead: without which, as the Apostle
S. Paul teacheth,1. Cor. 15. 
                  our preaching is vaine, and faith vaine.
               
               5 Howsoeuer, I am sure he hath shewen himselfe heerin very
witlesse, who knowing that I set downe the maine question in
these words in great letters, for distinction sake, His Disciples
came and stole him away: specifying the persons, His Disciples,
                  
the principall subiect of that question: And could sleeping
souldiers tell what was done of Christs Disciples? As for example,
If I falling asleepe in the field, and hauing twentie shillings
in my purse, one should come and picke my pocket, and
cut my purse; after, I awaking, and conuenting P. R. before
a Magistrate vpon suspition of felonie, should yeeld no other
reason, but that when I was asleepe, sure I am, P. R. came and
cut my purse.P. R. confuted by the Text. Then the Iustice of Peace replieth, How know
you that P. R. did it, you being then asleepe? What reioynder
would P. R. teach Tho. Morton to make? I could haue vexed
P. R. with a more familiar example, if I had beene bent to
scurrilitie. It is sufficient to vnderstand, that as it pleased God
so to infatuate that lying Priesthood, when they thought
themselues most wise, for the greater glory of Christian faith,
as to build their incredulitie vpon no better foundation than a
fained senselesse report of men asleepe: euen so it falleth out
with my Aduersary P. R. who hath bewraied his singular sottishnesse
in the Inference, wherein he meant to giue vs a speciall
Argument of his wit.
            
            
               
                  An Argument of the rare memorie of P. R. bewraying
his free-will to lying.
               
               § 3.
               6 TO make me seeme ridiculously cautelous, as intending
whensoeuer their Equiuocating forgerie was to be spoken
of, to keepe the clause of mentall reseruation vnder a Latine
locke, and not Englished, lest weake ones might learne to
practise that Magicall Art, P. R. opposeth heereunto,Treatis. Mitigat. Ep. Ded to the Vniuersit. num. 21. 
                  
                     He
(meaning Tho. Morton) hath not to my remembrance set downe
the clause of Reseruation in Latine but once thorowout all his
booke, and that in foure words in the second page, the sayd Reseruation
being mentioned in English more perhaps than 
                           〈◊〉
                        
times.
                  
               
               7 If my Reader will be willing for my sake to lose so much
time as to peruse but the places which I haue noted, he shall

finde the clause of Reseruation set downe byAs for those set downe in the Moderate Answer, I am not to answer. 
                  me in English
not aboue
                     See Satisfac. part. 1. c. 17. lit. (a) & lit. (e.) And Part. 3. c. 3. lit. (b) three of foure times thorow my whole Booke, and
in the Treatise professedly written of that subiect of Equiuocation
it is (the thing it selfe challenging so much) but once:
but it is couched in Latine phrase aboue twentie times. See
the Full Satisfact. Part. 3.1. 2. See Satisfact. Part. 3. c. 1. lit. (c) the 3. in chap. 2. the 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. in the chap. 3. the 9. 10. in the chap. 4. the 11. in cha. 5. the 12. 13. 14. in the cha. 7. the 15. 16. 17. 18. in cha. 8. the 19. 20. 21. in the chap. 11. the 22. 23. in the chap. 13. First, 1 
                  Vt quis teneatur illud detegere.
Second, 2 
                  Vt tibidicam. 
                  3 
                  Vt tibi reuelem: in one Chapter.
4 
                  Vt tibi significem. 
                  5 
                  Vt tibi reuelem. 
                  6 
                  Vt tibi narrem.
                  7 
                  Vt narrem tibi. 
                  8 
                  Vt narrem tibi: fiue times in one Chapter.
Againe, 9 
                  Vt tibi significem. 
                  10 
                  Vt tibi significem. 
                  11 
                  Quatenùs
vir longissimè abesse potuit. 
                  12 
                  Vt in commune bonum conferamus.
                  13 
                  Vt alijs largiamur. 
                  14 
                  Vt vobis significemus: and 15 
                  Vt narrem
tibi. 
                  16 
                  Viuit in Purgatorio. 
                  17 
                  Vt tibi reuelem. 
                  18 
                  Vt tibi reuelem;
foure times in one Chap. and 19 
                  Vt dicam vobis. 
                  20 
                  Vt dicam
vobis; vt vobis significem. 
                  21 
                  Vt vobis significem, 
                  22 
                  Abomni
spe obtinendi Rom. Imperium. 
                  23 
                  Admodùm exiguam. Thus
often it is expresly set downe euen in those places whereunto
P. R. himselfe hath shaped such Answers as his want of grace
did permit: so that he could not pretend ignorance heerein.
Wherefore what this his so open lying might portend, I know
not, except he felt his wit wax somewhat blunt, and therefore
meant to deserue the whetstone.
               8 The excellencie of his memorie appeareth in this, that he
could remember foureteene English clauses of the Reseruation,
where there was (I thinke) not aboue foure: but of twenty
Latine clauses he would remember but one. Now seeing that
one instance doth confute a generall assertion, as he that shall
say, There is not any Stew allowed in Rome, is easily confuted
if but one may be prooued to be there: He therefore
wilfully denying that there is any such Latine clause, excepting
only one, must, vpon the euidence of three and twentie
more, be thought to haue made two and twentie lies at once.
And shall we expect, that when he is brought into exigents
and straits of greater importance, that he will speake truth,
who doth lie so lauishly in a matter so needlesse? No, for an
horse is like to stumble in the rough way, who falleth flat of
all foure in the plaine. Next followeth
            
            
               
               
                  An Argument of P. R. his kinde of learning in Logike,
wherein he hath prouoked all Vniuersities in
the world to laugh at him.
               
               § 4.
               9 FOr proofe of his dexteritie in Logike, he taketh vpon
him to discusse an absurd Syllogisme (as he calleth it) of
Tho. Mortons, in this maner. 
                  
                     Treatis. Mitig. cap. 11. pag. 473. & 474. num. 50. 51. 52. 53. 
               
               
                  His Syllogisme (sayth he) is in
these words: [The competencie of God, by whom we sweare, maketh
eury one competent Iudges and Hearers, to whom we sweare. But
by swearing by God, whom we can not deceiue, we religiously protest,
that in swearing we intend not to deceiue. Ergo your deceitfull
Equiuocation is a prophanation of the religious worship of God.]
This Syllogisme I leaue to be discussed by Cambridge Logicians,
where I heare say the man learned his Logike (if he haue any) for
heere he sheweth very little or none at all, no boy being among vs of
foure moneths standing in Logike or Sophistrie, which will not hisse
at this argument, both for forme and matter.—Because
it hath six terminos,—and there should be but three. For it is no
more a Syllogisme than this: viz.
                  
                     q. sup. pag. 475. num. 51 Euery man is a liuing creature:
                  Euery Ox is a foure-footed beast:
                  Ergo euery Asse hoth two long eares. Where you see there
be six termini, as in Tho. Mortons Syllogisme, without connexion
or dependance one of the other. And as much concludeth this as
that.—And now compare this his skill (I pray you) with that brag
of his in the beginning of his Treatise against Equiuocation, when
he sayd to his Aduersary, Dare you appeale to Logike? This is
the Art of Arts, and the high tribunall of reason and trueth it
selfe, which no man in any matter, whether it be case of Humanity
or Diuinity,
                     P. R. his Thrasonicall insultation. 
                     can iustly refuse. Who would not thinke but
that the man were very skilfull in that Art, wherein he presumeth
to giue such a censure?
               
               10 I would gladly doe my Aduersary the credit, as to thinke
that not he himselfe, but rather some of his boyish Sophisters
                  
hath thus canuased that silly Argument, but that thorowout
his whole Booke I finde him so prodigall of his wit, time, and
paper, euery where pleasing himselfe in such superfluous vanities.
Here therefore he calleth that a Syllogisme, which I named
only in a more generall terme a Reason, and not a Syllogisme.
Now there be many formes of reasonings besides Syllogismes;
neither did I, indeed, intend to make an exact and
formall Syllogisme, but only such an Argument, which by
due inference and deduction might prooue my Conclusion
good: and P. R. confesseth of that my Argument, that by a
double Inference the reasoning is made good. I can not see therefore
what cause he had to be more offended at me for deliuering
that in grosse, which being diuided into his parts was
good reasoning; no more than a man may mislike to-pence because
it is not a couple of single pence. As for his example of
a Syllogisme, it can not admit any such Inference to make any
good reasoning: for by what deduction can he make his creature
man and his other creature asse with long eares meet? But
how will P. R. now vse mee vpon this aduantage?
                     Mitig. Epist. Dedic. to the Vniuersities, num. 17. P. R. amplifieth his owne vanitie. 
                  I do shew
him (sayth he) to be a silly Disputer, as that he knoweth not how to
make a Syllogisme, and therefore am forced to send him againe to
Cambridge to reforme his Logike, and to learne more. O good
Sir, deale not so extremly with me, to put me to that trouble,
charge, and shame, but rather vouchsafe (I pray you) to teach
me your selfe, you shall finde me docible I warrant you. P. R.
Mitig. sup. lit. g. pa. 475. num. 53. 
               
               
                  
                     Now then let vs helpe him out to make his foresayd Syllogisme in
forme. It should haue beene thus, if he would haue sayd any thing
in true forme;
                  
                  The competency of God,P. R. frameth a Syllogisme. by whom we sweare, maketh euery
one competent Iudges, to whom we sweare:
                  But in euery oath we sweare by God either expresly or implicatiuely:
                  Ergo in euery oath they are competent Iudges, to whom we
sweare.
                  
                     And then by another inference againe,
                     I spare the examination of this second inferēce, leau
                           •
                        ng this labour to his Sophisters, which will make thē sport. 
                     he might haue argued, That
vnto euery competent and lawfull Iudge we haue confessed before
that a man is bound to answer directly, and to sweare to his intention,

and not only to his owne. Ergo in no oath to whomsoeuer, may
a man equiuocate, which is his principall Proposition. And thus had
his forme of reasoning beene good, according to the rules of Logike.
                  
               
               11 If there had beene either sinew or sappe of Logike in this
Priest, it stood him vpon heere to expresse his best Art, where
he meaneth to play his prize, especially now when so scornfully
he insulteth vpon his Aduersarie, and so confidently appealeth
vnto Vniuersities, as though he would heerupon raise
his Io poean and triumph. Had we not now reason to expect
as absolute a Syllogisme as all his wit, art, and industrie could
inuent? I am not woorthy (I confesse) to enter in comparison
with men of great learning, because I thinke my selfe inferiour
vnto thousands in our owne Kingdome, yet some Logike I
haue learned, and sometime publikely taught; vpon which
little I dare presume to make a generall appeale to Cambridge,
Oxford, Rhemes, Rome, and vnto all Vniuersities, whether of
Protestants or Romanists, whether Christian or Pagan, yea,
euen to his owne hissing boyes and Sophisters, who P. R.
sayth are able to make Syllogismes in one moneth, and challenge
P. R. for this his false Syllogisme, willing (if he dare) that heerupon
wee venture our degrees,The manifold absurdities of his Syllogisme. which wee haue taken in the
Schooles. To come to the point: This Syllogisme can finde
no place either in mood or figure, by reason of foure capitall
faults. First, there be in it fiue termini, as namely, 1 
                  competencie:
                  2 
                  God by whom we sweare: 
                  3 
                  euery one competent Iudges to
whom we sweare: 
                  4 
                  in euery oath: 
                  5 
                  either expresly or implicatiuely:
whereas, according to his owne censure, there should
be but three. Secondly, these words, The competencie, being
part of the Medium, should haue beene repeated in the Minor
proposition, thus: But in euery oath there is a competencie of
God by whom we sweare. Otherwise it is no better than if P. R.
should dispute thus:
               Euery Mitigation of doctrine concerning rebellious positions,
which are imputed vnto vs, will procure vs fauour
of the State:
               But this is the doctrine of rebellious positions imputed vnto
vs:
               
                  
Ergo this doctrine of rebellious positions imputed vnto vs
will procure vs fauour of the State.
               The fault in this Syllogisme is because this word, Mitigation,
which is part of the Medium, is not repeated in the Minor.
Thirdly, there should be but one minus extremum: with this,
We sweare by God, he hath ioyned another in these words, either
expresly or implicatiuely: which words being a part of the
minus extremum, should not haue beene omitted in the Conclusion.
Like as if a man should reason thus:
               Euery penitent Confessarie must receiue absolution:
               But euery Drunkard is a penitent Confessarie, repenting
either of drinking too much, or of drinking too little:
               Ergo, euery Drunkard must receiue absolution.
               The fault of this is the addition to the minus extremum [either
for drinking too much, or too little.] The fourth, the Verbe
and copula [maketh] euery one competent, is altered in the Conclusion
into [Are] competent Iudges: than the which there can
not be a greater absurditie in Syllogismes. As may appeare
by this like example.
               Euery man in framing his last Will and Testament, maketh
his owne Executor:
               But T. B. frameth his last Will and Testament:
               Ergo T. B. is his owne Executor.
               The fault is the changing of the copula or Verbe [maketh] into
[is.] What will now P. R. doe, after that this his montanous
boast of A true Syllogisme hath brought foorth this ridiculous
mouse? It is to be feared, that his hissing Sophisters will turne
him into a Prouerbe, for thus disgracing their College, calling
him P. R. the Syllogizer, when they will note any man so egregiously
absurd, as in his greatest vaunt of skill to bewray
his greatest want. But I may not be so vnthankefull as not to
reforme him, who was so willing to helpe me; thereby to redeeme
him from scorne: and therefore wish him to frame his
Syllogisme thus:
               Euery speech, wherein we sweare by God, either expresly or implicatiuely,
doth by the competencie of God, by whom wee
sweare, make the Iudges competent, vnto whom we sweare:
               
                  
But euery oath is a speech wherein we sweare by God, either expresly
or implicatiuely:
               Ergo, euery oath doth by the competencie of God, by whom we
sweare, make the Iudges competent, to whom we sweare.
               12 But I feare lest I may seeme too much to detract from his
skill in Logike, who hath giuen vs so many tokens of his rare
facultie therein, especially in exact diuiding and subdiuiding; a
principall property of that Art. As for example:
                  
                     Mitigat. chap. 12. num. 4. pag. 485. initio.
                   
                  Wherfore all
our speech, saith he, in this place shal be about the second kind of Equiuocation,
which is false and lying, and thereby also euer vnlawful;
which thogh not properly, yet in a general maner, may be called
Equiuocation,A fond diuision of P. R. as I haue said, for that the hearer is alwayes wrongfully
deceiued or intended to be deceiued by some falsitie, which is
knowen to be such by the speaker, and consequently is plaine lying.
And for that lying also hath beene shewed before to be diuided into
two sorts; the one a materiall lie, when the thing spoken is false in
it selfe, but not so vnderstood by the speaker; the other a formall
lie, when the speaker doth know it, or thinketh it to be false, and yet
speaketh it. This kinde of Aequiuocation, which really is a lie,
must haue also the same subdiuision, so as the one sort thereof may
be called a materiall lying Equiuocation, and the other aformall:
and so much woorse, as a formall lie is in it selfe (which alwayes is
sinne) than a materiall (which often times may be without sinne of
the speaker) by so much is a formall lying Equiuocation worse than
a materiall. 
                  There is no boy (I thinke) in his College, but hee
can analyse the members of this diuision thus:
               
               A lying Equiuocation is that
which is knowen to be such
vnto the speaker. And this
is to be subdiuided, for it
is either
               
                  A materiall lie, which is when
the thing spoken is a lie in it
selfe, But not so vnderstood of
the speaker.
               
               
                  Or, A formall lie, when the
speaker Doth know it, and
thinke it to be false.
               Where he maketh a materiall lie, which is not knowen of the
speaker, to be a species or member of that lying aequiuocation,
which is knowen to the speaker. As if hee should say, Some lier
knoweth what he speaketh, when he knoweth not what he speaketh.
                  
And could any say thus but a lier? Heere indeed is Logike
whereat the boies of our Vniuersities may hisse, and the boies
of his College may blush▪ yea, any rurall boy (if of any meane
capacitie) may laugh, by sight of the like: for his diuision is all
one as if he had sayd thus:
               Euery one of our Priests is shauen
in the crowne, whereof
               Some are sent into England,
and they haue no shauen
crownes.
               Others remaine beyond the
seas, and they are shauen
in the crownes.
               Which diuision if it were true, then might a man conclude by
good Logike, that a man with a shauen crowne hath no shauen
crowne. And yet P. R. our great Logicioner can tell vs,
 that
                        Mitigat. Epist. Ded. vnto the Vniuersit. num. 3. 
                     According to Aristotles obseruation, Prudentis est distinguere:
It appertaineth to a wise and discreet man to distinguish,
whereas the ignorant▪ and the vnlearned doth commonly confound
all without distinction.
                   But my friend P. R. (I must needs say)
is not one of those Ignorants, who confound things without
distinction; but woorse: for he hath taken paines to confound
things by distinguishing. I can not be delighted with these
kinde of taxations, and except it were against such a scornfull
Aduersarie, I would not haue insisted vpon them. My purpose
is only to teach him heereafter to be more serious, who
still multiplieth his vanities, as next appeareth in
            
            
               
                  An Argument of his kinde of skill in Greeke and
Hebrew, whereby he hath gained the opinion
of rare ignorance.
               
               § 5.
               13 YEt againe, to expose me to the scoffe of his Reader,
the conceited Gentleman sayth thus: 
                  
                     Mitigat. cha 2. pag. 88. num. 58. 
                  And yet truly
I can not well pretermit, for ending this Chapter, one little note
more, of rare singularitie in this man aboue others, which I scarse
ouer haue obserued in any of his fellowes, and this is, That the very

first words of Scripture alleged by him in the first page of his booke,
for the poesie of his pamphlet, are falsly alleged, corrupted and
mangled, though they conteine but one only verse of Isay the Prophet;
and then may you imagine, what libertie he will take to himselfe
afterward thorowout his whole Discourse. His sentence or
poesie is this. Isay. 29. vers. 9. But stay your selues and woonder,
they are blinde and make you blinde: which hee would
haue to be vnderstood of vs Catholikes. But let any man reade the
place of Isay it selfe, & he shall finde no such matter either inwords
or sense, but only the word, wonder, to wit; Obstupescite & admiramini,
fluctuate & vacillate, inebriamini & non à vino, monemini
& non ab ebrietate. And according to this are the Greeke
and Hebrew texts also. So as what should mooue T. M. to set
downe so corruptly the very sentence of his booke, and cite the chapter
and verse wherein his fraud may be discried, I know not, except
he obserued not the last clause of the Prophets precept, Mouemini
& non ab ebrietate. And so much for this.
               14 Which is much more than any man of a temperate sense
would haue obiected: for let any man reade the English translation,
and he shall finde the same words expresly set downe.
Seeing therefore that P. R. doth intimate to his Reader, That
I haue forged a new Text, and that the words are by me falsly
alleged, can there be a more false, yea and (if wilfull rashnesse
doe not take the vpper hand of impudent boldnesse) a more
shamelesse cauill than this?
               15 Thus much of the words, Ye are blinde, &c. His next
quarrell is against the sense, he repeating the Latine, yet but
manglingly, and doth not English it, lest (I thinke) his common
Reader might apprehend the sense: or els he left it for
me to translate. Thus then:
                  Isa. 29. Be ye astonished & wonder, wauer
ye and reele, ye are drunke, but not with wine, ye are moued, but
not with drunkennesse: because the Lord hath mingled for you the
spirit of slumber, he will shut your eyes, he will couer your Prophets
and chiefe ones, which see visions, &c. The sense of all is
deliuered by S. Hierome
                  Hierom. Com. in Isa. 29. 
                  in his Comment vpon the same
place: Scitote ergo, &c. Know therefore ye Scribes and Pharisees,
who are the chiefe among the Iewes, for you hearing the Lord▪
                  
and Sauiour would not vnderstand, and haue shut your eyes, that
you should not see: Therefore will God shut your eyes (who are
the Prophets) by whom you receiued the knowledge of God. A
little after:
                  
                     P. R. his arrogancie in vrging the Greeke and Hebrew text. Or according to the Septuagints, he will shut the eyes
of them, who boasted they saw secrets, &c. In all these we heare
of the spirit of slumber, of couering and shutting of eyes, of not
seeing: and can these signifie any thing but a spirituall blindnesse?
Againe, Pagninus translateth the text according to our
English:
                  Pagninus. Excaecati &c. They are blinde, and make you blinde.
And not this only,
                  Pintus. 
                  but their owne late authorized Doct. Pintus,
in his Comment vpon the same place, sayth: In Hebraeo
est in hunc modum, &c. Thus it is in the Hebrew text (sayth he)
Your Priests shall be blinde, and make others blinde.
               16 Let vs conferre circumstances together. First, I am noted
by P. R. to haue forged a text, but am acquitted by the English
Translation, They are blinde, &c. This then is his first
falshood. And next, for his sense he obiecteth the Latine and
Greeke, but by the exposition of S. Hierome both the Greeke
Septuagints and Latine vulgar haue the same sense, to wit,
Shutting vp of eyes, which is to be blinde: which may argue
his second falshood. In the last place he opposeth the
Hebrew text, as different from the English, which by the
iudgement of Pagninus, and Pintus, is almost the same both in
words & sense, wherein is discouered his third falshood. So as
I can not ghesse what mooued P. R. to deale so slanderously
with me, in noting me of fraud and corruption, except it be that
he meant we should recken himselfe in the number of these
Priests thus mentioned in the Text, You are blinde, and make
men blinde: or in the words following, You are drunke but not
with wine: With what then? I pray God I may not say with
malice. In this, both P. R. and I may learne a caution, to
take heed wee doe not peremptorily meddle with Hebrew
texts: for if they say true who know him, as I can say of my
selfe, we are but Alephbetharians in this language.
            
            
               
               
                  An Argument of P. R. his kinde of Charitie, attended
with a triumphant falshood.
               
               § 6.
               17. I Doe not meane to bring in, as tokens heereof, his disgracefull
and reuiling termes, calling mee Asse, Silly
grashopper, Lewd lad: which kinde of Rhetorike the learned
call Caninam eloquentiam, that is, Doggish eloquence, wherein
this fellow hath (I must confesse) a singular gift, which I shall
rather pitie than enuie, till I see it better imployed. In the interim
it can not offend mee to be called Asse in that cause,
wherein I carrie my Sauiour in his Hozanna; nor to be termed
Grashopper in that cause, wherein I may be a plague vnto Aegypt,
I pray God rather for conuersion than destruction: nor
to be named Lad, whilest I carrie a stone in a sling, In nomine
Domini, wherewith a noble and gracious Lad did hit an enemie
of the true worship of God, a vaunting Goliah, in the forehead.
But I haue a better argument of his charitable deuotion
towards me than this. For thus P. R.
                  Treatis. of Mitigat. cha. 6. num. 60. pag. 234. 
                  
                     I let passe as trifles in this
very place (but yet such as shew a guilty minde and meaning) that
he citing the booke of Alexander Carerius, a Doctor of the Canon
law in Padua, which he wrote of late De potestate Romani Pontificis,
putteth in of his owne, contra huius temporis haereticos,
against the heretikes of this time, which are not in the title of that
booke. And then whereas the sayd Author, naming or citing many
other Writers to be of his opinion, doth say, Nuperrime verò
Celsus Mancinus in tract. de Iurib. Princip. &c. and last of
all Celsus Mancinus doth holde the same in a certaine Treatise of
the rights and principalities: this man to frame vnto himselfe some
matter of insultation, turneth verò into verè, and then playeth ridiculously
vpon his owne fiction in these words: Carerius citeth another
called Celsus, by interpretation high or lofty, and therefore
instiles him with Verè Celsus, as truly so named, and so
truly he may be, if we iudge him by the loftinesse of his stile
and Conclusion. So he. And doe you see this follie? Or will you

thinke it rather follie than falshood, that could not discerne betweene
verò and verè? Or not be able to iudge by the contexture
of Carerius his speech it selfe, that it could not be apt construction
be verè if he had lighted vpon a corrupt copie, as he could
not; for that there is but one, and that hath very plainly verò, and
consequently all this Commentarie of Tho. Morton is out of his
owne inuention. And where now is the assurance of his vpright
conscience protested to his Maiestie in his Epistle Dedicatorie?
Where is his simplicitie in Christ Iesus? Where is his naked innocencie?
Can this be ignorance? Can this be done but of purpose,
and consequently by a guiltie conscience? What may the Hearer
beleeue of all he sayth, when euery where he is found intangled
with such foolish treachery? But let vs proceed.
                   Thus farre P. R.
18. It is but a point of Oratory in this man to say he letteth
passe, which notwithstanding he insisteth and dwelleth vpon
as violently and virulently as vpon any one taxation in the
whole booke, and yet the matter, we see, is but only about
trifles, as himselfe sayth, and therefore such, as not only Christian
equitie, but euen common humanitie might haue either
spared: or if I deserued correction, yet with moderate Schoolmasters
to know when to vse a ferula, and when a rod. The
fault obiected is a wrong intituling of a booke, which notwithstanding
the title which P. R. allegeth (being De Pontifice
Romano) might haue born out, because it is the very scope
of that booke: so that my errour therein could haue beene no
more than if in signes which hang in the street, I had taken an
Iuie bush for an Hollie, both which doe equally betoken a
Tauerne. The next excuse might haue beene from a possible
weaknesse of sight in taking verè for verò.
                  A forced and strained calumniation. But this mans charitie
is so hote, that whatsoeuer slip his Aduersarie maketh, it
must rather be falshood than follie. Must it be euen so then
P. R? And shall the Minister finde no more fauourable construction
at the hands of a Priest, than to be pronounced guiltie
of forgerie for such an easie escape, not of a sentence, or
word, or syllable, but for this little element ò? ôthen giue me
leaue to plead for my selfe, and know P. R. that the Booke it
selfe will witnesse against you, which many haue seene in my

hands, and any may see that will. Carerius, then in the Boke
aboue mentioned, printed at Colen, Anno Domini 1601. in 8o.
(and ioyned with another booke of Zecchius De Indulgentijs
& Iubilaeo, which hath the first place in the volume) hath in
the front and beginning of the whole Booke this title followieg:
viz.
               De potestate Romani Pontificis, aduersus impios Politicos, &
nostri temporis haereticos, Authore Alexandro Carerio Patauino.
That is:
               
               A Treatise concerning the authoritie of the Pope of Rome,
against the wicked Politicians and Heretikes of our times, by
Alexander Carerius, &c. Which title is againe repeated
alone in the beginning of Carerius his Tract, after
F. 4. De potestate Romani Pontificis aduersus Politicos
& huius temporis haereticos, &c. A Treatise concerning
the authoritie of the Pope against the politicians and heretikes
of these times. I haue therefore committed no fraud
in the title.
               
               19 The second is of the particle Verè, which is also as plaine
in the place by me alleged out of Carerius lib. 2. cap. 9. pag.
133. about the middest of the page, before the end of that
Chapter, Nuperrimè verè Celsus Mancinus in Tractat. de iuribus
principatuum, &c. Of late truly Celsus Mancinus, &c.
Which the contexture may seeme also to import, because after
that he had recounted sixteene Authours for maintenance
of his Conclusion,A peremptorie falshood of P. R. and comming last vnto Celsus Mancinus,
may well be thought by that particle verè, to haue honoured
Celsus with the note of Truly loftie, that by the excellencie of
the Authour he might haue gained grace and dignitie to his
cause. Where then is the sinceritie of this mans conscience?
Shall excuse him by diuersitie of Editions? Hee will not be
thus excused: For (sayth he) there is but one Edition. What Menippus
(whom the Poets fain to be the man in the moon, beholding
all the infinite corners of the world) could haue made so
peremptorie a negatiue as this? There is but one, that is, there is
no other Edition in the world? seeing that it is free for all Vniuersities
in France, Spaine, Germanie, Italie to print and reprint

all such priuileged books, and yet P. R. dare auouch that
there is but one. Take heed P. R. nay it is past take heed, for you
are alreadie fallen into a whirlpoole: because if there be but
one, then hath P. R. wickedly falsified the Author, by turning
verè into verò (which all men may finde in the Colen Edition,
anno 1601. where it is verè) if there may be another, then hath
he wilfully bolted out this exception, saying, that there is but
one Edition. The guilt of the first must bee needs malice; of
the other, madnesse: wherby (I hope) my Reader may iudge,
that the sinceritie of my conscience heerein hath beene where
it ought, euen in the heart of a Minister of Truth: and that it
is no maruell, if the conscience of my Aduersarie hath beene
(according to his profession) in the heart of an Aequiuocator,
who sayth furthermore, I let that passe, which notwithstanding
euen vpon a wrong sense he prosecuteth in titles and triflels
so curiously, or rather (if desert may speake) so currishly,
and with such spightfull insultations, viz. Where is his naked
innocencie? Where is his vpright conscience? Where is his simplicitie
in Christ Iesus? And is not this a passing treacherie, trow
wee? Yet this also is excusable in respect of many others,
whereof (so much as the nature of a preamble may require) I
shall giue my Reader that taste, which may prepare him for a
sufficient presumption of the rest. But some will say, in so
manifestly impudence how can any argument of modestie
appeare? Beholde
            
            
               
                  An Argument of P. R. his kinde of modestie,
accompanied with a presumptuous
falshood.
               
               § 3.
               
                  TO this my Obiection,
                  See Full Satisfact. part. 1. cha. 13. pag. 39.
                   All Popish Priests 
                        〈…〉
                     
abolish the title of succession in all Protestant Princes, by
a pretended prerogatiue either of Pope or people: producing for
proofe of this Popish doctrine the testimonies of their owne
Doctours, to wit, Reinolds, Stapleton, Symancha. Heereunto.
                     
P. R. taketh two exceptions. The first thus:
                     Treatise of Mitigat. cap. 2. pag. 71. nū. 71. But let vs see
and consider how falsly and calumniously this Makebate doth heerupon
argue in his third Reason, inferring for his Assumption or
Minor Proposition thus: But all Popish Priests vpon this pretended
supremacie and prerogatiue of Pope and people doe
vtterly abolish the title of succession in all Protestant Princes.
Ergo. Wherein to shew him a notable liar, it shall be sufficient
to name all the Protestant Princes that haue had title of succession
in our Country (for thereof he speaketh principally) since
the name of Protestant hath beene heard of in the world, being
three in number, to wit, King Edward the sixt, Queene Elizabeth,
and King Iames that now reigneth, all which were admitted
peaceably to their Crownes aswell by Priests as Catholike people,
who notwithstanding in some of their admissions wanted not
meanes to haue wrought disturbances, as the world knoweth: so as
if one instance only doth truly ouerthrow any generall proposition,
how much more doth this triple instance, not able to be denied, ouerthrow
and cast to ground this vniuersall false assertion of T.
M. which auerreth, That all Popish Priests doe vtterly
abolish the succession of all Protestant Princes? Will he not be
ashamed to see himselfe conuinced of so great and shamelesse ouerlashing?
               
               21 What haue I sayd, which I haue not prooued? From the
Priest Reinolds
                  
                     Full satisfact. part. 1. chap. 13. pag. 39. I reported this testimony, The right of Kings
Christian must depend rather vpon their religion than order of
succession, and therefore all Christians must cut off all hope, lest
any such (speaking of Protestants) may aspire vnto the throne.
Secondly, from M. Stapleton, this: If they doe not withstand
such a succession (speaking of Protestant Kings) what doe the
people els but euen preferre man before God? Thirdly, from Symancha,
this: That if the heire apparent (speaking of Protestants)
be hereticall, then the Catholike Common-wealth may
chuse another, and if the Common-wealth be hereticall (noting
Protestants) then the choice belongeth to the Pope, and so the
kingdome (which was to make way for the Spanish Inuasion
against England, in 88.) may be taken by Catholikes. From
which three testimonies (besides that of Dolman, which followeth)

I made bolde to conclude a generall, That all Romish
Priests are of the same opinion: and am therefore censured
for a notable liar: his reason, Because three Protestant Princes
haue beene peaceably admitted vnto the Crowne, when yet there
wanted no meanes of disturbance. It can not be but that this P.
R. when he calleth any man liar, doth presently licke his
owne lips, as we may perceiue by his strong breath: for first,
I reported not mine owne coniectures, but the expresse positions
of their owne principall Doctors,A calumnious falshood. finding no one of that
side, writing of our English cause, to holde the contrary.
               22 Which is heerein more apparently the generall doctrine
of all their Priests, in as much as this Priest P. R. euen now,
when the case challenged him to answer concerning that doctrine,
yet neither could oppose, of the infinite number of all
his crew, any one Priest who euer set pen to paper to confute
that doctrine, neither durst he in this answer condemne it
himselfe. And therefore where my question is Deiure, that
is, of the doctrine, Whether their Priests thinke it lawfull for
subiects to admit a Protestant Prince, and heire apparent, to
succession, he answereth De facto, that is, of the euents of things
that happened, to wit, That three Protestant Princes haue been
quietly permitted to succeed, giuing his Reader an almes of
a piece of chalke for a morsell of cheese. As for example: It is
a law amongst theeues (no one of them holding the contrary)
not alwayes to robbe, when they may make disturbance, but
then only, when they are in most probable hope to enioy their
prey: so that it falleth out many times, that when they meet
with passengers, they entertaine kinde and courteous talke
with them, and yet dogge them on their way, with purpose
to rob them in some presumed place of aduantage: but then
by the sight of more company of true men they, being frustrate
of their hope, let them passe without any maner of disturbance.
                     P. R. his calumniation manifested by a Simile.
If, notwithstanding such escape, any shall affirme,
that all theeues professe robbery and spoile, whensoeuer their
opportunitie may serue: shall he therefore be termed a slanderer
of theeues, and a notable liar? I know P. R. is wittie, and
can applie this similitude vnto himselfe, whom it most concerneth:

for he who in this place bringeth in a triple instance
of Protestant Princes, who were admitted peaceably to their
Crownes, insinuating that therefore they were willingly admitted
on the Romish part, may be easily confuted by another
triple instance taken from himselfe. 1. Of the now K.
of France,See heereafter §. 12. num. 38. and §. 13. num. 39. 
                  who being K. of Nauarre, was resisted, that he should
not succeed in the kingdome of France, lest being in that disposition
(meaning a Protestant) he might haue altred religion in France.
2. of Q. Elizabeth he hath also sayd, that she was excommunicate
by the Pope,
                  A falshood full of dangerous delusion. (by whose Bull she was also pronounced to be no
Queene) because she had changed religion. Will they not for the
same reason hinder succession, for the which they haue endeuoured
to disturbe a possession▪ 3. The third instance is in
our dread Souereigne K. Iames, P. R. in his Dolman hath held
against his succession to the Crowne foure arguments of exclusion.
Obserue now three singular notes of this mans modestie:
1. He accuseth me to be a slanderer for auouching
a report, prooued true by incontroleable consequence, and
whereunto no instance of any Priest was or could be obiected.
2. He offereth to satisfie a question of Right and iustice with
an instance of fact and euent, as if he would teach vs to reason
thus: Romish Priests do not say Masse publikely in England:
Ergo they think it vtterly vnlawful that Masse should be sayd
publikly in England. 3. He hath so assoiled the question by
a triple instance, that by another triple instance of his own he
is more strictly and dangerously intangled. Let me mention,
for further discouerie of this his delusion, the Breue of Pope
Clemens the 8. commanding that at the death of Q. Elizabeth
none should be suffered to succeed, who was not a professed
Romish Catholike. This M. Garnet confessed at the
Barre, which his confession remaineth in publike Record. If
any shall require a reason why they resisted not his Maiesties
entrance, they can not possibly yeeld any, but only want of
meanes of disturbance. So that I might confesse my selfe very
shamelesse indeed, if I should not blush and sorrow in his
behalfe, to see any man by so presumptuous falshoods to murder
his owne soule.
               
                  
23 Which is yet more visible by the second part of this accusation
which P. R. inferreth thus:
                  Treatis. of Mitigat. chap. 2. num. 35. pag. 72. The obiected falshood out of the testimonie of Doleman answered and confuted. 
                  What or how far this fellow
may be trusted in these his assertiōs may be gathered by the last sentence
of all his discourse in this matter, where he hath these words:
[F. Parsons (in his Dolman) doth pronounce sentence, that
whosoeuer shall cōsent to the succession of a Protestant prince,
is a most grieuous and damnable sinner.] And is it so Sir Thomas?
And will you stand to it & lose your credit, if this be falsly and
calumniously alleged? then if you please, let vs heare the Authors
owne words, viz. And now (saith Doleman part. 1. pag. 216.)
to apply all this to our purpose for England, and for the matter wee
haue in hand, I affirme and hold that for any man to giue his helpe,
consent or assistance towards the making of a King, whom he iudgeth
or beleeueth to be faulty in religion, and consequently would
aduance either no religion, or the wrong, if he were in authority, is
a most grieuous and damnable sinne to him that doth it, of what
side soeuer the truth be, that is preferred. So he. And his reason
is, for that he should sin against his own conscience in furthering such
a King. And is there heere any word peculiar of a Protestant
Prince, or of his successour? nay doth not the Text speake plainely
of making a King, where none is? doth it not speake also indifferently
of all sorts of religion, of what side soeuer the truth be?
How then can this malitious cauilling Minister expect to bee trusted
heereafter, or how may any man thinke that hee speaketh or
writeth out of his conscience, seing him to vse such grosse shifts and
falshoods in so manifest and important a matter? It is no maruell if
he set not his name at large to his booke, as not desirous to haue the
due praise of such desert.
               
               24 Venture my credit, Sir? yes that I will, though I value nothing
to be more pretious among men, and therefore willingly
put it into this affirmatiue ballance concerning the sentence of
Doleman, proouing it true in that sense it hath beene alleged, if
you will put yours in the other, which is the negatiue, our
Reader shall hold the scales, and the euidence of Dolemans
booke shall cast it.
               The subiect of our question is, whether Doleman, one of
the three Romish Priests, doth account it a damnable sinne in

his Catholikes to suffer a Protestant Prince to succeed in the
Crown: after I had proued this to be the Romish doctrine by
the testimony of three Priests, I added this fourth, which was
Doleman. Wherefore wee must examine whether this bee the
iudgement of Doleman or no. It belongeth to mee to prooue
the affirmatiue, to wit, that this was the iudgement of Doleman.
               
               25 The title of that booke is, A conference about the next succession
to the Crowne of England (namely, next after the death
of Q. Elizabeth) and about all such as may pretend a right, whether
within England or without. One of the contents of the first
Chapter is, that Neerenesse of blood may upon iust causes be altered.
And of the sixt Chapter: that, An heire apparent to the
crowne before he be crowned may be iustly put backe. After this he
proceedeth to expresse his iust causes, the principall hee deliuereth
in the ninth chapter, the very place now alleged: The
Contentis this, That one principall cause of excluding any Prince
is diuersitie of Religion. Whereof he resolueth thus:
                  
                     Doleman. part 1. cap. 9. pag. 212. Nothing
can more iustly exclude an heire apparent from his succession, as
want of Religion, nor any cause whatsoeuer iustifie the Common-wealth,
or conscience of particular men, that in this cause should
resist his entrance, than if he find him faulty in this point, which is
the head of all the rest. Where we see, that the person spokē of is
an heire apparent. By which word cannot be meant a successor
by Election, but a successour by naturall descent and right of
inheritance. Of this heire apparent he
                  
                     Doleman pag. 213. 
                  saith further; that as
when a woman is espoused vnto an husband which is an Infidel,
this contract (by the doctrine of the Apostle) may be dissolued:
so is the case of an Infidel pretender vnto the Crowne.
And lest any may doubt who in this case may be held an Infidel,
he addeth that
                  Ib. pag. 214. Seeing there can bee but onely one faith auaileable
vnto saluation, certaine it is that vnto my conscience whosoeuer
beleeueth otherwise than I doe, and standeth wilfully in the
same, is an Infidel, for that he beleeueth not that which in my faith
and conscience is the sole sauing faith. This ground thus laid, he
commeth at last vnto the application before specified, saying:
And now to apply, &c. affirming that, Whosoeuer giueth any

helpe to the making a King, whom he iudgeth to be faulty in Religion,
is a most greeuous and damnable sinner.
               26 One Syllogisme will assoile the whole doubt.
               Euery man is a damnable sinner, who admitteth any Prince
to succeed in the Crowne,Maior. whom hee thinketh faultie in
Religion.
               But euery Romish Catholike thinketh all Protestant Princes
faulty in Religion.Minor.
               
               Ergo, euery Romish Catholike, who admitteth of a Protestant
Prince to succeed in the Crowne, is a damnable
sinner.
               What is there in all this Syllogisme which Doleman alias
Parsons, can denie to be his Assertion? The Maior hee hath
said, He that admitteth of any to the Crowne, whom he thinketh
to be of faulty religion, is a damnable sinner. Is it the Minor?
why, he hath said that, There is but one true Religion. And
Parsons being a Romish Priest must intend that all Protestants
in the iudgement of all Catholikes are of a faulty Religion.
Will hee then denie the Ergo or Conclusion? this were against
the Law of Logicke, and then his Sophisters would deride
him. How then can my assertion be thought slanderous, which
necessary consequence of reason prooueth to bee too true?The idle and ridiculous calumniation of P. R discouered by two Similies. As
for example, Suppose that this P. R. hath promised his Creditour
to pay him foure Nobles, at a certaine time appointed,
at what time his Creditour challengeth him saying, Sir you
are to pay mee twenty six shillings eight pence, according to
the words of your owne promise; by and by P. R. (purging
his choler) answereth, This is falsly and calumniously vrged, was
there any such word of twenty six shillings eight pence in all
my promise? Nay did I not expresly say, that I would pay thee
foure Nobles? What a malitious cauilling Creditor art thou, or
how shall any thinke thou seekest thy debts with good conscience,
seeing thou vsest these shifts and falshoods in a summe of this importance?
Would not by-standers either laugh at him, as at a
lunatike, or else suspect him for a cosening cheater? because he
that promiseth foure Nobles, promiseth twenty six shillings
eight pence, though not in the same literall words, yet in the

reall sense. Or else more pertinently thus: Let vs suppose
this to be a generall doctrine amongst his Catholikes, that no
person borne without England can be accounted lawfull heire
to that kingdome: which
                     Doleman part. 2. cap. 5. pag. 116. 
                  Doleman insinuateth by his particular
obseruation of the same Maxime against the succession of
our dread soueraigne, then the only king of Scotland, and that
some thus libelling were taken, and by some Protestant accused
of treason, for affirming that K. Iames had no right to the
Crown of England: the libeller should answer saying: This accusation
is false and slanderous, I named not K. Iames, but only
said in generall (though particularly I intended K. Iames) that
none borne without England was a iust successor to the crown:See a further answer hereafter in this Preamble.
the Iudge should say, well then thine owne mouth hath
condemned thee, inasmuch as if thou shouldest now say that
there is no king in England, (although none be named) because
the right one, who is K. Iames, is disabled, when euery one is
excluded. It is true, (saith the libeller) by iust consequence,
but yet I named none. Would P. R. if he heard this, pronounce
this fellow vnguiltie? then is he no Mitigator: would he iustifie
his accuser? then am I no liar. For the case is alike, especially
knowing that the scope of that whole booke, called Doleman,
and penned by Parsons a Priest, is only this, to disable
the titles of all Protestants (yea euen K. Iames by name) and
to debarre them all hope of succession in Great Britaine: and
to preferre the Infanta of Spaine before all other pretenders.
This then hath beene but his cauilling malice thus iniuriously
to accuse me of malitious cauilling. There remaineth only
            
            
               
                  An Argument of P. R. his kind of truth, full of
triumphant treachery.
               
               § 8.
               27 THough all the former Arguments of P. R. his wit,
memory, learning, and modesty containe in them the
liuely characters and demonstrations of a liar, yet haue I reserued
to this last place of truth, such an accusation, from whence
                  
                  one would thinke he had gained a triumph saying:
                  
                     Treatise of Mitigat. cap. 6. num. 36. pag. 215. 
                  In the very
next page (saith P. R.) after, he talking of the great and famous
contention that passed betweene Pope Gregory the seuenth, called
Hildebrand, and Henry the fourth Emperor of that name, about
the yeere 1070. he citeth the Historiographer Otto Frisingensis,
with this ordinary title of Our Otto, for that hee writeth that hee
found not any Emperour actually excommunicated or depriued of
his kingdome by any Pope before that time, except (saith he) that
may be esteemed for an Excommunication which was done to Philip
the Emperour by the Bishop of Rome, almost 1400. yeeres agone,
when for a short time hee was inter poenitentes collocatus,
placed by the said Pope amongst those that did penance; as that
also of the Emperour Theodosius, who was sequestred from entring
into the Church by S. Ambrose, for that hee had commanded
a certaine cruell slaughter to be committed in the city of Thessalonica:
both which exceptions this Minister of simple truth
leaueth out of purpose, which is no simplicity, as you see, but yet no
great matter with him, in respect of the other that ensueth, which is,
that he allegeth thisFrisin. l. 6. hist. c. 32. 
                     Frisingensis quite contrary to his own meaning,
as though hee had condemned Pope Gregory the seuenth for
it, whereas he condemneth that cause of the Emperour, and commēdeth
highly the Pope for his constancy in punishing the notorious
faults of the said Henry. Hildebrandus (saith he) semper in
Ecclesiastico rigore constantissimus fuit: Hildebrand was euer
the most constant in defending the rigour of Ecclesiasticall Discipline.
And againe in this very Chapter alleged by T. M. Inter
omnes Sacerdotes & Romanos Pontifices praecipui zeli & authoritatis
fuit: Hee was among all the Priests and Popes that had
beene of the Roman Sea of most principall zeale and authority.
How different is this iudgement of Frisingensis from the censure
of T. M. who now after 500. yeeres past compareth the cause of
Pope Gregory to that of pyrates, theeues and murtherers, and so
citeth our Otto Frisingensis, as though hee had fauoured him in
this impious assertion? Can any thing bee more fraudulently alleged?
is this the assurance of his vpright conscience whereof hee
braggeth to his Maiesty?
               
               28 In the Full Satisfaction Part. 3. Cha. 11. Pa. 28. that which

was intended to be proued was this: That not till a thousand
yeeres after Christ did euer any Prelate or Pope attempt the
deposing of Emperors and depriuing them of their Crownes.
For proofe heereof I brought in the testimony of Otto Frisingensis
from the witnesse of Tolossanus lib. 26. De Repub. cap. 5.
in these words, I reade and reade againe, and finde, That Pope
Hildebrand, in the yeere 1060. was the first Pope, who euer depriued
an Emperor of his regiment. Wherein now haue I wronged
my conscience? Is it because Otto Frisingensis is cited contrarie
to his meaning? If this should be supposed to be true, yet
could it not preiudice my conscience, because I cited not the
Author himselfe,A trecherous falshood. but only Tolossanus a Romish Doctor, who
reported that sentence of Frisingensis. And is not this a fine
treacherie of my Accuser to conceale the Authour, and so eagerly
and bitterly to inueigh against me, who am only the Relater,
and might answer him, That if I be deceiued your owne
Doctor hath deceiued me? This answer I vse heere to demonstrate
the malice of my Accuser, and not (although it
might suffice) to satisfie the point in question, in behalfe
whereof I auouch my Allegation to be true. And why not?
Otto Frisingensis (sayth P. R.) mentioneth ancient examples of
two Emperors, who were excommunicate, both which the Minister
of simple truth leaueth out of purpose. I left them out of purpose
(I confesse) otherwise I should haue beene like to your
selfe in this and other such cauilles, who desire to say much,
though nothing to the purpose. For to what purpose, I pray
you, had this beene, seeing our question was not to shew what
Emperors had beene excommunicated, but who, being excommunicate,
had been deposed from their Royalties? Then
my case is no otherwise, than supposing that P. R. or any
other had beene degraded in any Vniuersitie, and demand being
made concerning the time, when this was done: I should
answer (and that truly) that it was in the dayes of Elizabeth
Queene of England:A dull taxation, as the simile sheweth. presently P. R. after his ordinary maner
of saluation should call me Liar, because I ought to haue told
that he was admonished and excommuned before he was degraded.
So dull and friuolous is his present taxation in a question

of Antiquity, concerning the time when first any Pope
did take vpon him to depose Emperours. Frisingensis sayth
plainly, that Hildebrand was the first: he saith moreouer (commending
him) that Hildebrand was constant in punishing faults.
Say then (good P. R.) seeing both these two are true, can one
of them be a lie? As if when two noble men H. and B. contend
whether of them are of more ancient descent, I should
heare F. an Herald say, that the house of B. is not so ancient
by much: yet is B. (saith the Herald) in his owne person both
in regard of valure and bountie farre more honorable than H.
Then I, purposing to answer to the question, report the Heralds
speech:A Simile. to wit: The house of B. is not, by much, so ancient
as is the house of H. Would P. R. hearing this, presently crie
out, ô notorious and intolerable liar! sayd the Herald so? did he
not commend B. for valour and bountie? Could any by-stander
containe laughter, to heare such a senslesse exception as
this? because that although I omitted the commendation of
bountie, yet did I truly relate the obseruation of Ancientrie,
which was the principall matter in question. I leaue the application
vnto P. R. let H. be Henrie the Emperor, B. the Bishop
of Rome, F, the Herald, Frisingensis, &c. But P. R. is
iealous of his Fathers honor, and therfore will haue it knowen
that he is commended by Frisingensis, and yet could not be ignorant,
that the next witnesse, whom I
                     Full Satisf. part. 3. chap. 11. pag. 28. produced, Claudius
Espencaeus, their owne Romish Bishop, doth plainly auerre,
that Hildebrand was the first Pope, who without any example of
antiquitie made a schisme betweene Emperours and Popes, and by
his example prouoked the Popes following him, to take armes against
Kings excommunicate.
                  A falshood in concealment. This Authour disabling not only
the antiquitie of that rebellious practise of the Pope, but also
condemning the fact it selfe. Therefore hath P. R. by wily silence
made as it were a pocketting of this Author, as of a medlar.
And was not this a piece of fine fraud?
               29 But P. R. is not contented to haue noted me in the former
(as he calleth it) notorious fault, but repeateth it againe, making
himselfe therein in a maner triumphant, saying, that
                  Treatise of Mitigat. chap 6. nū. 39. pa. 217. 
                  Otto Frisingensis commendeth Hildebrand, and yet is brought

in to condemne him. After this againe he insulteth vpon it in
this sort: Truly, if any man can shew me out of all the Catholike
writers that be extant, English or other, that euer any one of them
vsed this shamefull fraud in writing, where no excuse can free them
from malicious and witting falshood, then will I grant that this is
not proper to the Protestant spirit alone.Mark how hainous he maketh his accusation. Hitherto, I must confesse,
that I neuer found it in any, and if I should, though it were
but once, I should holde it for a sufficient argument not to beleeue
him euer after. And this shall suffice for a taste only of M. Mortons
maner of proceeding. For that to prosecute all particulars
would require a whole volume, and by these few you may ghesse at
the mans veine and spirit in writing. 
                  So P. R.
               30 Aristotle telleth vs of one Antiphon, who was of that
weake sight, that whensoeuer he walked he saw his owne image
reflecting vpon him in the aire. What shall we imagine
of this exclamation against shamefull and malicious fraud in
writing, except it had beene spoken in respect of the reflection
of his owne image,Foure excellent tricks of falshood in one. who hath playd me foure malicious
tricks in one page? One is, To lay an imputation of falshood
vpon me, as though I had cunningly pretermitted the examples
of Emperors excommunicate, whereas the question was
only concerning Emperors depriued of their state and dignities.
The second cauill is, Not acknowledging the commendation
of Hildebrand in Otto Frisingensis, when as I intended
not to proue out of this Author the equitie, but only the antiquitie
of that practise. Thirdly, In making me so perniciously
enuious, as to condemne Hildebrand without a witnesse,
when as I produced their owne Bishop Espencaeus to condemne
him. Lastly, In charging me with a wilfull peruerting
of the meaning of the Authour Otto Frisingensis, when as (if it
had been so abused) yet not I but their owne Doctor Tolossanus
was the Author of that report.
               31 The view of all these and other formerly mentioned wilfull
and transparent falsities of P. R. together with some other
the like desperate calumniations to be pointed at in this Preamble,
causeth me iustly to present him with his owne image,
professing vnfainedly, that I neuer found any Writer of any

profession whatsoeuer, who hath vsed such shamefull fraud
in answering. And this, I doubt not, but the Christian Reader
will confesse, when he shall see this transfigured Parson
appeare in his owne likenesse.
            
         
         
            THE SECOND INQVIRIE.
            
               Whether P. R. may be iudged a competent Aduocate for
this cause which he hath assumed: and whether
he hath not beene excepted against by
his owne fellow.
            
            
               § 9.
               32 THis P. R. hath bestowed six or seuen sections in censuring
me and my Aduersary the Moderate Answerer,
concerning whom he writeth thus:
                  
                     Treatise of Mitig. chap. 3. pag. 101. 
                  I must needs say that the
Answerer hath endeuoured to effectuate so much as he promised in
the title of his book, which was, of A iust and moderat Answer, &
in performance thereof hath not only borne on matters temperatly,
as before hath beene shewed, but spared also his Aduersary in many
points, and namely in passing ouer his allegations without note,
or checke.—In the rest the Answerer quitteth himselfe learnedly,
and sheweth much reading in particular, as by the multiplicity
of Authors by him alleged doth well appeare.
               
               33 Say you so P. R.? Did your fellow answer Learnedly? Why
who are you, and where is your abode, tell me?
                     Treatise of Mitig. chap. 3. pag. 92. num. 3. 
                  The Booke
of Tho. Morton was sent me out of England. Then belike this
Mitigator is out of England, who, by the constant and generall
voice, hath his residence at Rome. May it now please him to
heare what this Moderate Answerer (whom he so greatly commended)
hath iudged of such extrauagant persons as hee is,
if peraduenture any such write bookes concerning our English
State? That answerer being pressed with the testimonies
of many forren Iesuites and others, who defended the first
ground of all rebellious positions and practises, was driuen
for a Moderation, to vse this euasion;The Moder. Ans. chap. 2. §. wherefore to purge, &c. 
                  I suppose, (saith he) that

no learned Catholike within this kingdome (yet such can best iudge
of this country cause) doth defend this opinion. Heereby censuring
all Priests without the kingdome lesse fit or sufficient to
meddle in this cause. We see that this Mitigator hath commended
the Moderator for a learned Answerer, and that Moderator
by this his generall censure, hath taken exception vnto
this Mitigator, concluding him to be an Answerer (in his opinion)
insufficient.
               34 If both these should meet vpon one stage to act their dispositions,
they could not but make good sport for the beholders.
As for example (for I will faine nothing in their names,
which shal not be consonant & agreeable to their conditions.)
First then the Moderate Answerer might haue said, P. R.
you haue beene altogether presumptuous to take vpon you
this Answer called the Mitigation, knowing that you shall
but bewray your ignorance, because residing out of England,
you cannot be rightly experienced In this our Countrey cause.
To whom the Mitigator might reioine, saying; Nay I haue not
beene arrogant, but thou hast beene rash and precipitant, for
if thou by thy former answer mightest haue been thought sufficient
for a Replie, what needed such posting to mee beyond
the seas for a supplie of a more exact and learned Reioinder?
Then the Mod. Answerer; Haue patience, I pray you, For
when I perceiued so many of our Authors obiected, al of them
by due consequent giuing Protestants cause of hatred against
vs, as against those that had by our doctrine decreed a depriuing
them of their debts, goods, crownes and liues, whensoeuer
opportunity might serue, I was enforced to vse this answer
for a refuge, taking exceptions to all Authors out of England,
who writ of this English case: and to appeale rather to
other Catholikes,Craft in Titles of books. who being in this kingdome, haue written
nothing heereof. This is the ground of my Moderation, which
not the truth of our cause, but the necessity of the time did exact
at my hands. Whereunto the Mitigator thus: Thou hast
done well, and such hath beene the cause of my commendation
of thy Answer, as thou maist perceiue, for I haue said that
Mitig. supra. 
                  I must need
                        •
                      say that the Answerer hath acquitted himself learnedly.
                  
Not that I could thinke so, but because (thou knowest)
we must commend and iustifie one another, especially in these
times, wherein our malice and madnesse both in doctrine and
practise hath been so fully discouered. And therfore I thought
it necessary also to intitle my Booke a Mitigation, concealing
in my mind this reseruation [To delude my Reader.] Thus it
must be, when we raise a flame of rebellion, which shall not
succeed, then it is policy to cast about vs some holy-water
sprinkle of plausible termes Moderation and Mitigation, as
though we intended to quench that with our water, which we
had rather do with oile. The Moder. I perceiue you are subtile
and therfore willingly yeeld you place to answer my Aduersary,
the rather because I thinke you are troubled with the
disease of some of our Catholike Lawyers, of whom you haue
sayd,Treatis. Mitig. preface to the Reader num. 10. P. R. his disease in so oft writing. 
                  They itch to be doing, and answering M. Atturney. This
was also my disease, but I after found a scratch, and so may
you. Then Mitig. Tush, wee need not care, namelesse are
blamelesse, for thou settest no name vnto thy Moderation,
and I only set downe mute and dumbe characters, which are
as good as nothing, to my Mitigation. Againe, we haue many
great and principall oddes of Protestants, besides railing, viz.
When our Aduersary prooueth any thing by many testimonies
out of our owne Authours, and we are not able to satisfie
the common opinion obiected against vs, then to single out any
allegation of any one of his witnesses, which hee hath produced,
and if thou perceiue him to faile in the manner of alleging,
squeeze euery such answer to make him, at the least,
seeme to be fraudulent: And if thou canst finde him faulty in
one, it is no matter though all the rest of our Authors cited against
vs be neuer so true, we shall wound the cause in his person,
as he doth our persons in the cause. Furthermore bee alwaies
echoing out against him some opprobrious termes, as
Mountbanck,
                  Railing. 
                  Grashopper, Malitious, shamelesse, false, and
what not? The Moderat. I remember I haue often charged
him with slanders when as not hee but my selfe did falsifie;
which he hath discouered, and in a manner silenced me. The
Mitig. We need not feare any such euent, because of our manifold

aduantages:The aduantages the Romish faction hath. For Protestants are licenced to reade any
bookes, and some in curiositie, as Eue, some in doubtfulnesse,
as the Capernaitans; many in presumption, as Balaam, most
for the delight which they finde in an eloquent and inuectory
style of writing (ô mine is excellent!) as Athenians; So
that it cannot be but where so many mice be still nibbling at
the baite, some will daily be catched. But our Professors be
kept secure vnder the locke and key of the vowe of obedience,
or els haue their hearts so stupified with that Opium of implicit
faith and blinde deuotion: that though my aduersarie in
his Answer shall prooue me neuer so monstrously calumnious
and slanderous, yet of our Catholikes few can, and none dare
examine or beleeue any thing against a Priest: this is our sufficiency.
The Moder. You haue forgot an other policy we vse,
which is, though our Aduersary write neuer so methodically
and orderly, yet not to follow him exactly in his course, and
commonly to pretermit those authorities which he bringeth,
and wherein is the chiefe strength of his cause. Mitigat. And
is not this good policie? he that will cunningly put away a
counterfeit piece of coine in stead of currant, must do it apart
from the other money, for if true and counterfeit be compared
together, the good will discouer the bad, and his booke thou
knowest is A Discouerie. Againe, thou maiest perceaue that
when I vse no method my selfe, I challenge him for
                     Mitig. pag. 113. cap. 4. §. 2. num. 15. 
                  want of
method. But why doe we spend time in talke, let vs about
our businesse. I will be writing a Mitigation for securitie of
our Catholikes in England, whilest our fellowes are practizing
rebellion inSee the late Proclamation. 
                  Ireland for the subuersion of Protestants.
Thus, thus it must be. Farewell. In all this there is no more
represented then is too certainly acted by the Romanists,
as in our Incounter vnto P. R. will
more plentifully appeare. It
is time we come
vnto
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD INQVIRIE:
            
               To examine how sufficiently P. R. hath performed his
challenge as well for the equitie of his cause, as for the
integritie of his conscience: His cause, both as
it is premised in the title of his booke,
and as it is discussed in the
Treatise.
            
            
               
                  Of these summarily and in order.
FIRST:
That the title of the Booke of P. R. called A Mitigation,
is very ominous and vnluckie to them, whom
especially he laboureth to
defend.
               
               § 10.
               35 THe subiect of his whole Mitigation is by P. R. thus
propounded in the Title of his booke, viz. 
                  That it is
not impossible for Subiects of different Religion (especially Catholikes
and Protestants) to liue together in dutifull obedience
and subiection vnder the gouernment of his Maiestie of Great
Britaine.
               
               It is not impossible, good: For why? It is not impossible for
2. Reg. 1. 10 
                  fire to descend from heauen, and theExod. 14. 22. people of God to passe
safely thorow the Red sea: It is not impossible for 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  Num. 22. ver. 28. 29. 30. 
                  Asse
to speake reason, and theMatth. 8 29. & alibi. 
                  Diuell to tell truth: It is not impossible
for theIoh. 11. Matt. 9. &c. 
                  dead to be raised to life, and for the Disciples
of our Sauiour by
                  Matt. 21. 21. Marc. 11. 23. &c. 
                  faith to remoue mountaines. Nothing is
impossible with God: who as hee prescribeth the raging Sea
his bounds, which it can not passe, though naturally it affect
an ouerflow and deluge of the whole world; so doth hee by
his gracious prouidence often represse the furie of rebellious
spirits in what profession soeuer; and, notwithstanding they
trauell with mischiefe, yet he keepeth them in an awfull subiection.

And shall now this Mitigation of feares, conceiued by
Protestants against the bloody designments of their Romish
Aduersaries, consist of no better termes then the possibilitie of
things, which are in the ordinarie course of nature impossible?
Though a man taken vpon suspicion of felonie be charged by
his accuser to be most certainly the man, who assaulted him
by the way, might not be thought to satisfie the Iustice, saying,
Sir hee chargeth mee that it was impossible but that I
must haue done this mischiefe; Neuerthelesse I shall prooue
the contrarie, to wit, that it was not impossible, but an other
might haue done it, and not I. Although this Answer might
confute his accuser, who said, It is impossible but that it was you:
yet could it not satisfie the Iustice, because still the answer implieth
as well a possibilitie that he did it, as an impossibilitie
that he did it not. Hath not therefore P. R. their learned Aduocate
merited of his Clients,P. R. a miserable Aduocate for his Catholikes. a Catholike, that is, an vniuersall
fee, who now intending a Mitigation of their punishment,
hath giuen the State so great cause of suspecting their disloyaltie,
as that he dare promise no better assurance in their behalfe,
then only, It is not impossible for them to liue in obedience?
S. Pauls charge concerning temporall obedience is,Rom. 13. 1. 
                  Let euery
soule be subiect to the higher powers; And againe,vers. 5. 
                  We must
be subiect not because of wrath onely, but also for conscience
sake. Wherein he hath prescribed vs not a may but a must;
and thereby inioyned not a possibilitie, but a necessitie of loyall
subiection. But this [It is not impossible to liue in obedience]
is no more by Logicall conuersion then this; It is possible to
liue in obedience. Which so suspicious and imposturous a Title
of his whole booke can minister no more hope to Protestants
of his pretended Mitigation and composition, then an adulterous
woman can satisfie her husband, and mitigate his iealousie
by this maner of submission:Simile. Be contented, good husband,
though I haue committed folly as often as I had presumption
of secrecie and opportunitie to satisfie my lust; yet
now may you bee better perswaded of me, for I protest vnto
you, it is not impossible that I shal liue honestly heerafter. This
case is nothing different from the former. What shall we then

thinke of P. R. but as of the man, who had purposed with
himselfe either to scorne Protestants, or else to betray his
Catholikes? Neuerthelesse as worldly feasters vsually offer
their guestsIoh. 2. 10. 
                  The best wine first, and then that which is worse:
So he hath prefixed in the forehead of his booke this Title
of Mitigation, although prodigious and intolerable (as we
haue heard) yet more plausible than the whole Tract of the
booke it selfe, which teacheth indeed an impossibilitie of all
voluntarie subiection vnto Protestant Princes; insomuch that
after but a summarie view hereof, it will appeare that the title
of his booke and his Treatise are no more proportionable and
agreeable, than the head of an Ape ioyned with the bodie of
a Beare. From the Title we proceed vnto the Treatise, and
manifest
            
            
               
                  That the Mitigator in his Treatise hath betrayed his
whole cause both in the question of Rebellion,
and Aequiuocation.
               
               § 11.
               36 WHen the Apostle S. Iude in his Catholike Epistle,
speaking of men opposite vnto the soundnesse of
faith, exhorteth Christians toVers. 22. 
                  Haue a compassion on some
in putting a difference, And others to saue with feare, pulling them
out of the fire: he teacheth vs likewise a lesson of great discretion,
which is, to distinguish betweene men who are aduerse
vnto vs in Religion.A difference of Romish professours concerning the case of rebellion. So now I write against our Aduersaries,
but not without note of difference and distinction, being verily
perswaded that diuers euen of the zealous amongst them,
partly by the power of the ingraffed law of reason, partly from
a glimpse of the truth of the Gospel, do abhor such doctrines
and practises, as haue beene discouered in the cases of Rebellion
& Aequiuocation. So that my only aime hath alwayes been at
those, who are so inspired with the perswasion of their Priests,
as to beleeue their doctrine in both these specified Articles.
Concerning whose pretended voluntarie obedience, I shall

proue to bee in a maner, a confessed impossibility of dutifull
subiection vnto Protestant Princes; and consequently as sensible
an opposition as was betweene Iewes and Iebusites in one
kingdome, Isaac and Ismael in one house, Iacob and Esau in
one wombe: as by this Treatise of P. R. will directly appeare.
               
                  The First confessed Impossibility.
                  37 We first demand what Soueraigntie our Mitigator will
allow his Maiesty of Great Britaine: and whether there may
be any forren Potentate, whom he would aduance aboue him
in respect of his temporall charge? P. R. resolueth thus:
                     
                        P. R. Treatis▪ in the Preface pag. 24. num. 22. which he applieth to the Pope, pag. 70. 
                     Whether with this Commission in spirituall affaires our Sauior
gaue also immediately and directly, the charge and ouersight of
temporalities in like manner, or rather indirectly and by a certaine
consequence, that is to say, that when the gouernment of spirituall
affaires, to wit, of soules to their eternall blisse and saluation is so
letted and impugned by any temporall gouernours, as the said spirituall
Commission cannot be executed without redresse or remedy,
in such cases, and not otherwise, the said supreame Pastor to haue
authority to proceed also against the said temporall gouernors, for
defence and preseruation of his spirituall charge. Of which question
the Canonists do commonly defend the first part, but Catholike
Diuines for the most part the second: but both parts full agree, that
there is such an authority left by Christ in his Church, for remedy
of vrgent cases.
                     Romish doctrine against the oath of due allegeance vnto Protestant Princes. 
                     Thus farre P. R. See then that by this arguing
hee seeketh to establish a Papall power and ouer-sight euen in
Temporall affaires, whether directly or indirectly it skilleth not,
seeing (that in his opinion) both do agree: But the oath of Allegeance
with Protestants is otherwise: namely, that No forren
personor Potentate hath any such supremacy in Great Britaine.
Therefore the Mitigation of P. R. standeth of no more
possibility, than Pope and no Pope, Kings supremacy and not
supremacy. Which opposites can neuer be reconciled together.
                  
               
               
                  The Second confessed Impossibility.
                  38 Secondly, because hee hath told vs, that there is a Power
                     
ordained against Kings in temporall affaires, it may concerne
vs to vnderstand the first extent thereof, whether against the
goods, or persons, or liues of such Princes as shall resist the spirituall
iurisdiction of Popes? Hee doth deliuer his meaning in
two examples:
                        P. R. Trea. cap. 2. pag. 77. num. 42. Romish doctrine derogatory to the Crowne and dignity of Protestant Princes. 
                     
                        Two Protestant Princes were excommunicated,
censured, molested by the Sea Apostolike, Q. Elizabeth of England,
and K. Henry then of Nauar, now of France: the first of these
two for the violent change of Religion which she made in the Realm
with depriuations and imprisonments of Catholike Bishops, Prelates,
and Clergie, &c. The other for feare hee comming to the
Crowne of France in that disposition, wherein hee then was presumed
to be, should attempt the like change in that great Kingdome,
&c.
                      These examples are both plaine and pregnant, a Protestant
Queene must be depriued for resisting the spirituall iurisdiction
of the Pope, and a Protestant King also must be deposed,
lest peraduenture he may make any resistance. Now wee
see that the same Papall authority is by the lawes of Great
Britaine as expresly excluded, their Religion suppressed, their
Clergy exiled, and Protestants religion (according to former
proceedings) continued. All which doth argue as great an
impossibility of dutifull subiection, as it is for hinderance and sufferance,
change and continuance of the same Religion to be matched
and married together. And could our Mitigator shew
himselfe a more egregious Preuaricator than thus?
               
               
                  The Third confessed Impossibility.
                  39 Because P. R. hath told vs that Protestant Princes haue
beene molested by the Pope, it will be materiall to inquire what
this word Molestation may meane: For a man would thinke it
some qualifying terme, and to import no greater iniuries than
either reuiling the names of Kings, or disgracing their Embassadours,
or damnifying their Merchants, or such like wrongs.
Tush no, for all such like contempts are contemptible, and may
easily be deuoured, but this molestation (according to the discouered
positions and practises of rebellion, whereunto this Mitigator
neither hath or could take any exception) is,The Bull of Pope Pius Quintus. See the Satisfact. part. 1. pag. 51. 
                     Because
the Queene of England hath forbid her Clergie and people to acknowledge

the Romane Church, or obey her decrees, &c. And
because we vnderstand her to bee so obstinate, as not to suffer our
Legates to come into England, &c. We therefore pronounce her
hereticall, anathematizing her and all her adherents, and furthermore
depriue her of her Crowne and dignity, absoluing all her subiects
from the oath of allegeance. So likewise of the K. of France,
Lib. de iusta abdicat. Hen. pag. 370. 
                     Pronouncing him to be depriued of his Regall dignity:
                     
                        Reinolds his Rossaeus, pag. 466. See Satisfact. part. 1. pag. 58. & 40. Romish doctrine bloodily treasonable in the Protestant gouernment. 
                     Because
he is a Caluinist. Vpon this followed the Spanish Inuasion, the
Rebellions in Ireland, the troubles in France, none without an
effected or intended horrible and tragicall blood-shed. All
these with P. R. are but Molestations. So the powder-treason,
an immanity barbarous and matchlesse, which he calleth but
P. R. Treatis. cap. 1. pag. 50. num. 27. 
                     A particular temerarious fact of halfe a score yong Gentlemen,
put in despaire by apprehension of publike persecution, without demerit
of the persecuted, though this also be inexcusable. By which
his so tender touch of so cankred and desperate euils, wee may
well thinke that Nabal by his foolerie neuer deserued better to
be so called, than this booke hath merited in this only respect,
the name of Mitigation: being indeed nothing but an hatching
of a Cockatrices egge, and a close professing of subuerting all
Protestant Princes, whensoeuer they shall seeke the like publike
maintenance of Religion. This Mitigation therfore as yet
affoordeth vs no more possibility of their voluntary obedience,
than to hope that reuerence and violence, Subiection and Rebellion,
pole arctique and antarctique, may be drawne into vnion.
And because this is so plaine, that blindnesse it selfe may
seeme to behold it, therefore doth P. R. cast his Reader into
a sleepe with a dos of his Opium. Let vs see
               
               
                  The Fourth Impossibility, wherein may bee obserued,
A sportfull or rather execrable Impostureship
of P. R.
                  40 Lest Protestants might, from experien
                        •
                     e of former dangers
arme themselues against future designements, P. R.
thought good by 
                        •
                     reoccupation to possesse his Reader with
better hopes, saying:P. R. Treatis. of Mitig. cap. 3. pag. 95. num. 8. 
                     
                        That wee do ascribe power to the Bishop
of Rome in certaine cases to censure▪ excommunicate, and depriue

Princes, wherof is inferred that such & such dangers do ensu: which
finally is nothing else but a [May:] So as the question being de futuris
contingentibus, of things contingent to come (whereof the
Philosopher saith there is no science) all remaineth in vncertainty,
but only the suspition and hatred, which he would raise against vs.
                     
I cannot laugh for wonder and horror to see any Englishman
conceit so basely of the wits and woorth of his Countrey-men,
as to imagine they could bee deluded with so senselesse, so
shamelesse, so pernicious, so impious a Mitigation as this is.
For, to bee perswaded therefore not to labour for preuenting
Insuing dangers, because they be contingent, that is, such as may
happen, what can be more senselesse? For Science properly taken
is a certaine knowledge of conclusions, arising from infallible
demonstrations, as this conclusion, The number of 3. is a
lesse number than 9. from this demonstration, Euery part is
lesse than the whole. And so is the opinion of P. R. good, There
is no science of things contingent, because science standeth vpon
demonstrable principles. But Science in a more common and
large sense is exercised vpon 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, euery thing
which is subiect to mans will: whereupon it is that Physitians
prescribe diets to preuent future diseases; passengers prouide
weapons to defend them from future violence; kingdomes
prouide lawes and officers to auoid future mischiefes: Nay
what is there almost in mankind, considered in it selfe, but case
of contingency? So that all are actions of prouidence directed
for the preuenting of future euils and dangers which may happen.
And is not this then a stupifying receipt, which P. R.
hath propounded, casting the State into a slumber, of not regarding
Insuing dangers, because they may be heereafter? Doth
not nature in beast, reason in man, precept of God teach vs the
contrary law of prouidence, euen therefore to seeke to preuent
Insuing dangers, because they are contingent, and may bee
heereafter?
                  
                  41 It is also most shamelesse, forP. R. Treatis. cap. 2. pag. 77. num. 42. P. R. contradicteth himself.
                      
                     Henry K. of France (saith
P. R.) was excommunicated, censured and 
                           ••
                        lested, lest he should
attempt the change of Religion in his kingdom
                           •
                        
                      And againe (speaking
of the necessity of Papall Iurisdiction ouer Kings) hee

saith thatPreface to the Reader pag. 25. num. 22.
                      
                        If Christ had not left such a remedy to his Church, he
should not haue prouided for the necessity thereof.
                      Concluding
that therefore Popes may impugne temporall Gouernours.
Heere we see hee challengeth a necessary prouidence in the
Popes against Kings, who happily may (de futuris contingentibus)
abuse their authority. And shall Kings therefore
neglect their States, because Popes by Antichristian vsurpation
(de futuris contingentibus) may seeke to subuert and ruinate
their kingdomes, and so make themselues to their enemies no
better than a matter of a May-game?
                  42 I haue also called this Mitigation pernicious. For our Aduersaries
haue taught thatBellar. See Satisfact. part. 1. pag. 56. 
                     Kings must not be suffered to raigne,
when they draw their Subiects vnto heresie. But,
                        Sanders, Creswell, in the same place. 
                     Must bee
rooted out.
                     Sanders ib. pag. 67. 
                     Which must bee done by all meanes possible. Whether
it be asBowchier. 
                     Iehu did Iezabel; or asParsons. 
                     Dauid did Goliah; or as
Reinolds. 
                     Iudith did Holofernes; or asBellar. See all these Satisfact. part. 1. pag. 56. & 57. 
                     A shepheard doth a Wolfe, &c.
                     The Bull of Pope Vrbane against Protestants in Germanie. See Satisfact. pag. 9. and Sander. pag. 67. 
                     And not Kings only, but all the fauourers of heretikes, by what
name so euer they be called, must be destroied. All these their cursed
resolutions P. R. passeth in silence. In all which we heare
prescribed a must for necessary destruction of Kings, and yet
this Mitigator will allow but only a may for their preseruation.
This is fine May-butter which hee hath mixed in this
receipt, or rather deceipt of Mitigation: made thus pleasant
and palitable only that the too credulous patient may bee more
sweetly poisoned, especially knowing that all his fellows haue
professed all violence,Bannes, Creswel, lib. de Iust. Abdicat. Bellar. See Satisf. part. 1. cap. 24. P. R. would flout and delude the State of England.
                      
                     As soone as they shall haue force to resist.
Therefore this Mitigation is but as if P. R. would haue thus
counselled our English State in the last danger, saying; Trouble
not your thoughts (ô King) with diuination vpon that letter,
for peraduenture that Terrible blow doth signifie nothing
else than that there may bee a blowing vp of the Parliament
with fire. And you Officers of his Maiesty what need you to
vse such diligent search vnder the vault, where you see nothing
but billets, vnder which it may be there is hidden many
barrels of powder. Yea and now againe, though the like (if
yet the forge of he
                        •
                      can deuise the like) may be prepared hereafter,
Yet what necessity is there of preuenting insuing dangers?
                     
What is this else than to seeke to catch our State, as a man
would do an horse, offering bread in the one hand, and holding
an halter in the other behind him? Dutifull subiection in
the Preface, and lurking treason in the Treatise. In a word the
impossibility of this Mitigation is no lesse than to thinke that
murderers and murdered can hoast well together.
                  43 Lastly I call it impious, because this profession of their forbearance
of rebellion, vntill they may resist, hath beene prooued
by incontrolable testimonies of
                        See Satisf. part. 1. pag. 185. Allen, Parsons, Martin, &c. 
                     Tertul. Cypr. Athan.
Nazian. Leo, Basil, August. Greg. (besides the confession of
our Aduersaries, Tolossan. Espencae. Barclay) to be contrary to
the discipline of the ancient Catholike Church for a 1000.
yeeres continuance. By all which testimonies the now Romish
faction is so notably condemned, that euen P. R. thought
it the best security of his cause to passe almost euery testimony
(except one) without any particular examination. As yet
therefore we heare them onely pretending that they may performe
obedience, which they professe they must not, whensoeuer
they shall bee able to make a possible resistance. So
hopelesse is this his pretended possibility of subiection.
                  
               
               
                  The last Impossibility in the practise of Aequiuocation.
                  44 The vse of Aequiuocating euen in an oath is taught by
P. R. to be most lawfull, whensoeuer a party is examined before
an vnlawfull Iudge, yea or before a lawfull Iudge examining
vnlawfully. Now what opinion they haue of the Magistrates
and Officers of England their Priests haue told vs (amongst
whom is Parsons himselfe) viz. that
                        See Satisf. part. 1. cap. 27. 
                     It is lawfull in
England for Priests to equiuocate euen in their oaths before Protestant
Magistrates and Officers, &c. To let passe the daily experience
of the professed damnable practise heereof by M.
Garnet and his fellowes. Wherefore this Mitigation standeth
still of as great an impossibility, as it is for cosenage and simplicity,
a lie and truth to harbour in one heart. Hitherto
wee haue spoken of the question of Subiection, onely mentioning
Aequiuocation, as it is in the vs
                        •
                     , a bawd to Rebellion.
Wee are therefore to speake of the nature thereof,

and to consider whether mentall Reseruation bee a lie:
and briefly shew▪
                  
               
            
            
               
                  That P. R. hath flatly ouerthrowen his whole defence
of mentall Aequiuocation. Which is made so
euident, as that no wit of man can
possibly excuse him.
               
               § 12.
               45 SAy (P. R.) what is your mentall Equiuocation?
                     P. R. Trea. Mitig. pag. 321. cap. 8. What Iesuiticall aequiuocation is. 
                  
                     We
restraine our speech to Equiuocation onely, which is mentall
reseruation. To wit, [I am no Priest] so, as I am bound to tell it
vnto you. The first part thereof [I am no Priest] vttered with my
mouth, the latter [viz. To tell it vnto you] is reserued in my mind.
Which Thomas Morton saith is not an hidden truth, but a grosse
lie.
                     Treat. of Mitig. in the same chap.
                      
                     But I say it is a truth, because the speech agreeth with the
mind of the speaker, &c.
                   How now would my Reader heare
this noble Equiuocator confuted? by Fathers? or by his owne
Doctors? or by sensible reasons? This will bee no hard matter
to performe, as I hope (God willing) to auouch in due time.
But heere is offered vnto mee a briefer course, more fit for a
preamble, and for the triumph of truth more glorious; which
is to see (as politicke Achitophel hanged in his owne halter)
so this Doctor of the art of lying confounded by his owne assertion.
I desire euery childe of truth to lend mee attention,
and see
               
                  The whole Treatise of P. R. in defense of Aequiuocation subuerted
by his owne consequence.
               
               46 The sentence of P. R. is to be found in these words:
                  
                     Treatise Mitig. pag. 459. num. 29. 
                  Let
vs come (saith he) to the application of this example against aequiuocation,
which he hath chosen to vse principally about the womans
speech. The woman is asked (saith T. M.) sold you the land for
so much? her answer is, yea for so much, meaning but one half,
& concealing the other, in which dissimulation it is impossible
but that your reserued clause must haue come into her head to

think, but for so much to giue in common: or to signifie vnto
you.
                     Example of aequiuocating in an accursed person. So T. M. teacheth that poore woman to aequiuocate after this
maner of aequiuocation, that is to say, lie: for that now, I suppose, he
hath learned by that which hath beene set downe in our precedent
chap. that to speak an vntruth, or conceale a truth, or vse any aequiuocation,
when we are iustly demanded by our lawfull superior, and
when no iniury or violence is vsed vnto vs, is a grieuous mortall sin
in our Catholike doctrine; and consequently shee being lawfully demanded
by S. Peter in a lawfull cause, touching her owne vow and
promise, No clause of Reseruation could saue her speech from lying,
as our Minister doth foolishly imagine. 
                  So P. R.
               ¶ Know first (gentle Reader) that the last words, viz. [As
our Minister doth foolishly imagine,] doe not betoken that the
consequent going before, viz. [Therefore no clause, &c.] is my
collection, but the quite contrary: for I said that a clause of
Reseruation might aswell haue saued the womans speech from
lying, as the clause which Priests vse can free a Priest: he holdeth
the contrary, because (saith he) shee being lawfully demanded,
&c. no such clause could saue her speech from lying. This
kind of phrase is vsuall in our English tongue. As for example:
a man bringeth a peece of some kind of mettall vnto a
gold-smith, which the bringer thinketh to be good gold: the
gold-smith after touch answereth him saying, Friend, this is
not good gold, as you suppose: which words doe not signifie
that the owner did not suppose it to bee good gold: and the
words, It is not gold, were the words of the gold-smith, and not
of the owner. So heere: which I therefore explane, to make
it appeare that in these words, (And consequently no clause of
reseruation could saue her speech from lying) P. R. hath set down
his owne conclusion. And now we proceed to the maine matter
in hand.
               47 The supposed Aequiuocation of the Woman was this, I
haue sold it but for so much, reseruing in her mind (for ought that
you shall know:) which is agreeable to their owne example of equiuocation
(I am no Priest) meaning (To tell it vnto you) This
latter P. R. hath defended thorow his whole book, and now
of the other hee is inforced by the word of truth to say that

it is a lie: yea, and that, No clause of Reseruation could saue it
from a lie: From whence it shall inuincibly follow, that Priestly
Aequiuocation is a Satanicall lie. These two speeches being
so semblable in themselues, if he shall say they differ, then must
the difference be either in respect of the speakers, or in respect
of the hearers. But first
               
                  The difference of these two kinde of aequiuocations, viz. of that
woman, and these Priests (the one whereof is confessed to be
A lie) can not be in respect of the speakers.
               
               48 She indeed was a woman, and a Priest is a man, but P. R,
knoweth that it is as possible for a Priest, aThat he do not obiect vnto me the woman pope Ioan.
                   man, to lie, as for
a woman to tell a truth. Neither may he obiect, that her lie
was in respect of her vow; for the question in this place is not
about her vow vnto God, whether she had promised to sell
all their possession, and to giue vp the whole price to the Apostles
for the common good of the Church, or no: but it is concerning
her speech vnto man about the summe and proportion
of the sale of their goods, Whether solde you your possessions
for so much? And she answering, But for so much; is (notwithstanding
all supposed clause of Reseruation) condemned
by S. Peter for a Liar. And this is the very case of P. R. for
(if he be a Priest) he hath vowed himselfe to the Order of
Priesthood; and yet being demanded whether he be a Priest
or no, professeth it lawfull for himselfe, by mentall aequiuocation,
sometime to answer, I am no Priest. In the next place
we are to shew▪
               
               
                  That (concerning the nature of a lie) there can be no difference
betweene that aequiuocation of the woman, and this other
of these Priests, in respect of the hearers.
               
               49 The only cloud of words which may hinder the perfect
view of truth for this confession that all Aequiuocation is a lie,
may seeme to be because she is sayd heerby to haue intended
to deceiue S. Peter, being then a competent Iudge, whereas
the Priests admit no aequiuocation except only in examinations
and iudgements incompetent. But P. R. can not obiect

this without grosse and stupid contradiction to himselfe thorowout
his whole Treatise. For our question is not of deceiuing,
or not deceiuing, which is only the effect of lying (as
P. R. also euery where acknowledgeth) but it is about the
speech it selfe, and the very nature of a lie. Now that there
can be no difference heereof in regard of hearers, whether
they be competent Iudges or incompetent, our Mitigator
himselfe will demonstrate vnto vs.
               
                  First from his one exposition of mentall Equiuocation, 
                  Treatise Mitig. cha. 8. num. 55. pag. 344. 
                  I
say (sayth he) that in mentall reseruation the speech agreeth with
the minde of the speaker, for that I truly and really meane that I
am no Priest in that sense I speake it, which may be what pleaseth
me, or that which I list to frame to my selfe: so as I meane I am no
Priest, such as I should be, or such like.
               
               Marke, the truth of Aequiuocation is not suspended vpon
the vnderstanding of the hearer, who may conceiue or misconceiue
the speech, and so might peruert the speakers truth
into a lie, that seeming false to the hearer, I am no Priest, which
in the sense of the speaker (as P. R. resolueth) is by vertue of
reseruation (as To tell it vnto you) a perfect truth. Well then
the supposed aequiuocation of the woman was such a like fancie,
I haue solde it but for so much, to giue it in common, or, Tell
it vnto you. And yet heereof hath P. R. concluded, thatSupra. 
                  No
clause of reseruation could saue her speech from a lie. Consequently
condemning himselfe and all other mentall Aequiuocators
for phantasticall liars.
               50 Secondly, as we heere finde a woman making a lie vnto
S. Peter, a competent Iudge, so do we read that S. Peter made
a lie vnto aMat. 26. 70. 
                  woman, an Examiner incompetent. So that the
difference of hearers doth not alter the nature of the speech.
The reason is that which hath beene already specified, to wit,
because (as is confessed)In the same place, num. 46. pag. 338. 
                  
                     The essence and formalitie of a lie requireth
that the speech disagree from the minde and vnderstanding
of the speaker. And yet againe,In the same place, num. 47. 
                     A false speech is only a lie as it
hath the essentiall point before mentioned of dissenting from the
minde of the speaker. And lastly,In the same place, num. 55. pag. 344. 
                     My speech is truth as it is
truly spoken in my sense, not in the sense of the hearer.
                   By all

which is signified,An euident conuiction of P. R.
                   that it is not the person of the hearer, but
the vnderstanding of the speaker, which maketh a lie formally
a lie: and consequently, as a slander is a slander, so a lie is a
lie, and truth is truth, whether it be vttered vnto man or woman;
whether to Prince or people; to Simon Peter, or to Simon
Magus; yea, whether to Archangell or to Sathan; Iudge
competent or incompetent, it can not free a lying speech from
the nature of a lie. So that seeing (notwithstanding the womans
supposed clause of Reseruation) there was formally a lie
in her Aequiuocation; it consequently followeth, that the
Priests Aequiuocation must be as formally a lie.
               51 Thirdly, in mentall Equiuocation (sayth P. R.) the clause
of Reseruation mixed with the outward speech maketh but
one proposition, which is as true in the minde of the speaker,
as if it were wholly deliuered in the outward speech. As for
example: I am no Priest, mixed with this clause conceiued in
minde, To tell it vnto you, is as true (in the iudgement of P. R.)
as if it had beene without Reseruation fully expressed with
the mouth,A plaine demonstration. saying, I am no Priest, to tell it vnto you. Now then,
say P. R. (for I meane to fetter you with your owne shackles)
The woman, when she sayd to S. Peter, I haue solde it but for so
much, if she had reserued in her minde this clause, To giue it
vnto you: either had it beene by the vertue of Reseruation a
truth, or els (notwithstanding that Reseruation) it had beene
a lie. If the clause of Reseruation might haue made it a truth,
then hath not P. R. sayd true in concluding, that No clause of
Reseruation could saue it from a lie: if contrariwise the tricke of
Reseruation could not saue it from a lie, then doth not the reserued
clause, To tell it vnto you, being mixed with the outward
speech, I am no Priest, make vp one true proposition.
And consequently, it must be concluded of the Priestly Equiuocation,
as is heere by P. R. confessed of the womans, viz.
No clause of Reseruation can saue their speech from a lie. For if
she had sayd vnto S. Peter in plaine words [I haue solde it but
for so much to giue it in common] or such like, this euery one
knoweth had beene a true speech: yet saying, I solde it but for
so much, with mentall reseruation, reseruing in her minde [To

giue in common, or, To tell it vnto you] was notwithstanding
this Reseruation (euen by the iudgement of P. R.) a flat lie.
               52 Let vs,The lying woman and the lying Priests paralleled. for conclusion, parallel both these examples which
are very neere a kinne: for if we doe compare speaker with
speaker, that is, the woman and a Priest, both will be thought
to be Votaries: if outward speech with outward speech, that
is,For, But for so much hath the nature of a negatiue, & is as much as, Not for any more.
                   
                  I haue solde it but for so much, and, I am no Priest, both
are negatiues: if Reseruation with Reseruation, as [To tell it
vnto you] or [To giue vnto you] both are mentall: if the forme
with forme, both equally answerable to the mind of the speaker:
if, finally, end with end, both are to deceiue the hearer.
Wherefore P. R. granting, that No clause of Reseruation could
saue her speech from a lie, must by irrepugnable consequence
be forced to confesse, that his [I am no Priest] vttered by a
Priest, to whomsoeuer it be spoken (notwithstanding any
mentall Reseruation of [To tell it vnto you &c.) is a Satanicall
and damnable lie.
               53 And where is now P. R. his boast of Scriptures, Fathers,
Reasons? where is his challenge of Canonists and Schoole-diuines?
where is his appeale vnto both our Vniuersities?
nay, where is this man P. R. himselfe, the new select Aduocate
for this cause? may he not say heereafter, I was ashamed,
and therefore I hid my selfe? so naked doth his deformitie appeare.
He hath sayd, That his Aduersarie T. M. is like one,
who, when the game is desperate, will notwithstanding play
it out, and see the last man borne. Heere hee himselfe hath
made such a blot as can not but be the vnfallible losse of his
whole game, who being pressed with this example out of
Act. 5. Scripture, is driuen to such a vertigo and giddinesse, that
euen when he would defend his Art of Equiuocating from a
lie, is by consequence from Gods Word forced to confesse an
outward speech, which No clause of Reseruation could saue
from a lie. Whereby his owne Magi (I doubt not) will be
brought to acknowledge, that digitus Dei hic est, this is the
power of Gods truth. Thus being contented, for this present,
to haue my whole cause in both questions, Aequiuocation and
Rebellion so iustifiable, that my Aduersarie his owne confessions

may free me from his imputation of slander; I doe with
better alacritie proceed vnto his next challenge, yeelding
            
            
               
                  A generall Answer to his accusation of malicious
falshoods.
               
               § 13.
               
                  THe summe of all is this: P. R:Treatise Mitig. c. 11. num. 3. pa. 441. 
                  I haue taken Thomas Morton
in so many falsifications of things alleged by him, as before
you haue seene. And the law sayth, Whosoeuer is once euill, is presumed
to be so still, vntill he proue the contrarie.In y• Preface, and elswhere. But he hath bewrayed
euery-where malicious falshoods.
               
               54 From the imputation of malice against the persons of
men, if I should need the testimonie of man, my Aduersaries
may acquit me, who haue acknowledged in me better measures
by their owne experience, as M. D. Wri. M. Const. M.
Ga. I haue halfe iniuried them with halfe naming them: but
I hope they will pardon me this wrong, knowing that it is not
spoken in exprobration to them, but for iustification of my
selfe, forasmuch as selfe-commendation, if forced, is (in the
iudgement of the Apostle) a wise follie. Howsoeuer, I can not
vnderstand,Why we may not malice anie mans person. how any man beholding others with Christian
eyes, should be malicious: for either he perceiueth them wandring
from grace and saluation, which mooueth pitie; or els
discerneth them to be companions with him in the way of
life, which worketh loue. But neither can malice be pitifull,
nor loue malicious. If my Aduersaries shall further persist in
this despightfull obiection of malice, they must giue me leaue
rather to feare Gods denunciation of Woe, than their Wrath.
                  Esa. 5. 20. 
                  Woe vnto them (sayth God) that put light for darknesse, and
darknesse for light, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for sowre.
And if I prooue not their doctrine concerning Rebellion and
Aequiuocation to be as bitter as the water of Meribah, then
let them note me for a man aboue the nature of mankinde malicious.
Otherwise, I must expostulate with them according
to the Apostles example:Gal. 4. 16. 
                  Am I your enemie, because I tell you

the truth? Which truth in my Incounter to the Mitigator (God
willing) I shall shortly auouch.
               Thus from malice the gangrene of a wicked conscience, we
come vnto falshood, theHe that lieth slayeth his owne soule. Sap. 1. 11. cut-throat therof. Concernign which
two things must be discussed: First the protestation P. R. maketh,
in iustifying the sinceritie of all Romish writers, presuming
them to be free from all falshood: Secondly, his accusation
against my selfe, whom he hath notoriously traduced.
Now of both these orderly.
            
            
               
                  P. R. his hypocriticall, prodigall, and indeed prodigious
ostentation, in the auouching of the integritie of
Romish writers, and freeing them from
all note of wilfull falsifications.
               
               § 14.
               55Treatise of Mitigat. pag. 489. chap. 12. num. 11. 
                  IN this then, if you please to insist a while, and let Thomas
Morton bring forth any Catholike authors whatsoeuer,
that wrote against Protestants since these heresies began, that hath
beene taken in this impietie, I meane, that hath set downe in Print
any such falsitie, as can not be excused either by ignorance, ouersight,
negligence, error of print, translation, diuersitie of editions,
or the like, but that it must needs be presumed, that he knew the
vntruth, and yet would set it forth: of this kinde (I say) let him
shew me but one example among all Catholike writers of our time,
and I will in my conscience greatly mistrust, and discredit the Author,
whether it be another or my selfe: But if he shew me two or
three in any writer of this kinde, I shall neuer be able to beleeue
him more. And whereas the number and varietie of Catholike
writers is so great, as the world seeth, it were no great labour
to shew it in some, if that spirit did reigne among them.
               
               56 What if one of his late Authours haue beene found presumptuously
false in any one report, or els any one but in three
points, though this be euen his owne selfe? Doth the man
(who maketh mention of his
                     Mitig. cap. 3. pag. 89. 
                  Interruption by sicknesse) know

what he hath now sayd? whether he spoke this being in his
feauer-fit, or in temper? whether in a dreame, or awake?
whether in his right minde,
                     P. R. his vnluckie ostentation. or in distraction? For sure I am,
that this ostentation will proue in the issue as infortunate vnto
P. R. as euer was boast either by Thraso on the Stage, or by
Goliah in the Campe, or by Gorgias in Schooles: by the
which he must be driuen vnto so miserable and shamefull a
palinodie, as euer heereafter vtterly to discredit his owne
friends, and worke a perpetuall discontent within himselfe, as
presently will fully appeare.
               57 But before I can come to manifest this, I may not denie
euen this my Aduersarie his due commendation of modestie,
who being ashamed (we may thinke) of the Romish frauds
and falsifications of former times, will insist only vpon such
mens examples as haue professedly written of late against
Protestants. It were to be wished, that his fellow Iesuit Costerus
had kept himselfe within the same precincts; but he maketh
a more generall challenge, thus:Costerus Ies. Enchirid. cap. De summo pontif. §. Constat.
                   
                  Nemo hactenùs vel
Princeps, vel Praesul, vel Scriptor fuit, qui mendacij, vel malae fidei
Romanos arguerit: that is: Neuer yet (sayth he) did any
Prince, or Prelate, or Writer accuse the Romanists of falshood.
When he could not be ignorant of that which their owne volume
of Councels hath made obseruable for perpetuall remembrance,Three Popes falsificators.
how three Popes, Sozimus, Boniface, and Celestine,
at the Councell of Carthage in Afrike, did claime a right
of appeales vnto Rome by vertue of a Canon of the Councell
of Nice, as they pretended. And when all the ancient copies of
that Councell had been diligently sought, it appeared by the
testimony of three Patriarks, viz. of Constantinople, Alexandria,
and Antioch,
                  In quibus non erat Canon ille de appellando ad Rom. Pontificem deprehensus. Lindanus Panopl. lib. 4. cap. 89. 
                  That that Canon concerning Appeales to the
Bishop of Rome (as their Lindan speaketh) could not be found in
those Copies: Or, as the Councell it selfe speaketh:Liber Conc. De Actu Conc. Carthag. 6. 
                  Istius
Concilij Africani seu Carthaginensis ducenti tres tribus Papis restiterunt,
& Canonem Concilij in defensionem Primatus sui falsum
esse deprehenderunt. A little after: Concludunt tandem nemini
licere ad Romanum Pontificem prouocare: that is: Two
hundred and three Fathers of the Councell of Carthageresisted the

three Popes, and found, That they suggested a false Canon for defence
of their Primacie. Therefore in the end they concluded,
That it should not be lawfull for any of Afrike to appeale vnto the
Bishop of Rome. Will P. R. beleeue any claimes which Popes
make for Papall iurisdiction, seeing that three Patriarks, and
two hundred and three Bishops, haue conuinced three Popes
of so apparent a falshood as this?Gratian a falsificator. Or what can be sayd for
the defence of Gratian their publike Compiler of the Decrees
of Popes,Concil. Mileuetanū statuit nè quis ad transmatina loca putauerit appellandū: Respondent aliqui cum Gratiano, qui addidit ad hunc Canonem exceptionem, Nisi fortè ad Apostolicam sedem appelletur. Sed haec exceptio non videtur quadrare, Nam praecipuè propter Rom. Ecclesiam Africani statuerant, vt non liceret appellare vltra mare. Bellar. lib. 2. De Rom. Pont. cap. 24. §▪ tertiò. 
                  who (as Cardin. Bellar. witnesseth) citing a Canon
of a Councell of Mileuet, wherein it was decreed that none should
appeale beyond the sea, did ad of himselfe this exception, Except
it be vnto the Apostolike sea of Rome: when as that Councell in
forbidding appeales beyond the sea, did especially intend to forbid
appeales to Rome?
               
               58 Many such like falshoods might be alleged, wherin Popes
and Popish ones haue intangled themselues, and deluded the
world, not in schoole cases of Sic videtur, & non, or in strifes
de stillicidijs, and such trifles: but about the right of Appeales,
yea spirituall and also temporall iurisdictions. But the nature
of a Preamble will not suffer me to pursue old forgeries: and I
must yeeld somthing vnto P. R. his modesty, who to passe ouer
the blemishes of ancient Authors, doth challenge onely an
instance in new writers, whether it bee of his fellowes, or of
himselfe. And I will endeuor to giue him satisfaction in both.
And first tender
               
                  A Satisfaction vnto P. R. his first Motion concerning his fellowes,
who haue intangled themselues in open falsifications.
               
               59 Though it be iust in God, who is iustice it selfe, to impose
this law vpon man, He that offendeth in one is guilty in all: yet
man with man may bee more partiall, than for the guilt of one
testimony to renounce him in all. And P. R. is more mercifull,
therefore he requireth three sensible instances, as it were three

witnesses against any one. And yet this also is horribly vnmercifull
on their part. I wish hee had but named any one,
whose credit he valueth most, that I might haue answered his
challenge in that one. Howsoeuer it wil be no more easie a task
for me to find one falshood in many, then many in one: wherof
I exhibit some examples, and
               
                  First a notable spectacle of their own manifold contradictions in
peruerting three testimonies of antiquity in one controuersie.
               
               
                  The First testimony.
                  60 In the Controuersie about Images the Protestants appeale
vnto antiquity both of Councels and Fathers: the first Councell
is that of Eliberis about the yeere of Grace 305. which
Opponit Caluinus Canonem 36. Conc. Elibertini, in quo sic dicitur, Placuit picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere, nè quod colitur aut adoratur in in parietibus depingatur.] Huic variè respondent Catholici Vasques Ies. de Adorat. l. 2. disp. 5. c. 2. num.. 120. Protestants vrge as forbidding that there should be any Images
in the church. Now let vs trie the spirits of their answerers▪
                     Payua respondet, solùm prohiberi imaginem Dei, quae pingitur ad effigiem Dei repraesentandam. To whom
                      
                     Payua answereth that, They meant only to forbid such an Image
as was made to represent the nature of God. Not so, saith Bellarmine,

                        Bellar. Sed non videtur satisfacere, tùm quia loquitur Conc. de picturis in genere, tùm quia huiusmodi imagines non erant in vsu eo tempore. Bellar. l. 2. Imag. cap. 9. 
                     For such images were not then in vse. The second, they
forbad Images, (saith Sanders) vpon a particular occasion peculiar
to that time: to wit,Nicolaus Sanderus l. 2. de cultu Imag. c. 4. respondet, Concilium illud prohibuisse imagines in templis, quia tempus & locus id require bat: tunc enim periculum erat, nè Gentiles existimarent nostros adorare ligna & lapides. 
                     For feare lest the Heathen seeing
Images in the Churches of Christians might thinke that Christians
worshipped them idolatrously, as did the Heathen. So hee▪
                     
                        Haec solutio bona est. Bellar. l. 2. de Imag. c. 9. §. Nicolaus. Immediately after speaking of the same answer: 
                     This is a good answer, (saith Bellarmine:) although in the same
place he confesse that that same reason of the CanonFateor t
                           •
                        lrationem illam Canonis (nè id quod adoratur & colitur in par
                           ••
                        tibus depingatur) non multùm quadrare huic expositioni▪ 
                        Idem ibidem.
                      
                     agreeth
not much with this exposition. Which is a very charitable defence,
and all one, by interpretation, as if he had said, The answer
is good, but that it is naught. We expect a better. The
third, They were forbid (faith Alanus Copus and others) not

because Christians seemed to commit Idolatrie with those Images,
Alanus Copus in Dialog. l. 5. c. 16. dicit hîc prohiberi imagines, quia ab illis Christianis adorari coeperant, tā
                        quam Dij, & hunc esse sensum; Placuit in ecclesia non esse picturas, nè aliquid in parietibus existens adoretur & colatur vt Deus. In quem sensum accipit istum Canonem B. Iuo in suis Decretis, par. 3. c. 40. Bellarm. quo iam supra. Hanc interpretationem amplectuntur Martinus de Ayala, & Sixtus Senensis Bibl. l. 5. Annot. 
                           •
                        47. Vasques De Adorat. l. 2. disp. 5. c. 2. num. 126. 
                     But because they did so indeed. But,Sed huic etiam expositioni ratio Canonis non omninò quadrat, nam debuisset dici potiùs, Nè id quod pingitur adoretur, quàm, Nè id quod adoratur pingatur. Bellar. quo sup. §. Alanus. And another, Mihi non probatur: Si enim à Patribus illius Concilij zelo religionis ita factum esset, vt omnes imagines etiam in tabulis depictae, aut in materia aliqua sculptae è templis eijcerentur, Gregorium Magnum posteà non latuisset, &c. Vasques quo sup. num. 127. 
                     This exposition
(saith Bellarmine) is not agreeable to the Canon. Therefore
Sanders, Allen, Turrian, and Bellarmine, all foure, resolue vpon
a fourth answer, telling vs that those ImagesAltera interpretatio Alani accomodatior esse videtur, quam sequuntur etiam Sanderus l. 2. Ador. c. 4. & noster Franciscus Turrianus l. 3. de dogmat. charact. Dicunt ergo pro tempore & loco summopere fuisse conueniens, imagines è templis auferre; Imminente enim Gentilium persecutione, quae sanè in Ecclesia Dei adhuc perseuerabat (vt ex multis Canonib. illius Concilij colligitur) oportebat Christianos secum imagines deferre, & occultare, nè in templis ludibrio Gentilium expositae manerent. Id autem fieri non poterat, si in parietibus templi, benè tamen si in tabulis depingerentur, aut in materia aliqua sculperentur, &c. Vasques ibid. num. 128. Another: Huic expositioni aptissim
                           •
                         conuenit ratio Canonis. Bellarm. De Imag. lib. 2. cap. 9. §. Alij ergo dicunt. 
                     were forbid to be
painted vpon wals, lest that in that time of persecution they might
haue beene made a scorne and contempt vnto Infidels. ButCaeterùm secunda illâ interpretatio Canonis 36. mihi non probatur, quòd cum ratione, quam in ipso Canone Concilium expressit, minimè conueniat. Ideò enim dicit, Placult imagines in Ecclesia esse non debere, nè scilicet quod adoratur in parietibus depingatur. Si tamen praedicta interpretatio vera esset, dicere potiùs deberet in hunc modum, Placuit in parietibus Ecclesiae imagines non depingi, nè persecutoribus fidei nostrae ludibrio esse possunt. Vasques ib. nu. 131. 
                     I
cannot allow of this exposition (saith the Iesuit Vasques) because
it agreeth not with the intention of the Canon. Wherefore hee
deuiseth another which wee may call the fift, and which hee
calleth the best, saying:Interpretatio, quae mihi caeteris omnibus praeferenda videtur, haec est, Non prohiberi imagines in tabulis depictas aut in alia materia sculptas, sed solùm in ipsis templi parietibus depingi: iudicat enim Concilium indecens esse, vt id quod colitur parietibus sit affixum, sed debere potius in tabula aut alia materia reuerentèr collocari, nèsplendorem amittat. Vasques lib. 2. De Adorat. disp. 5. cap. 2. num. 132. 
                     They were forbid to be painted on wals,
lest by the decay of the wals they might lose their lustre: but yet
were not forbid to be painted in tables. Which best how good it
may seeme to be, may appeare by their sixt and last answer.

                     Recentiores aliqui pondere illius Concilij quasi oppressi, tā
                        quam optimū effugium elegerunt, authoritatem Concilij ne. gare, quòd prouinciale fuerit 19. Episcoporum tantùm, nec ab vllo summo Pontifice cō
                        firmatum. Existimant verò nullius debere esse authoritatis, quia etiam in multis alijs Canonibus manifestè errauerit, denegans viz. Poenitentiae sacramentum in extrema necessitate propter aliqua angentia crimina: aut, vt alijs placet, Communionem Eucharistiae, id quod errorem etiam intolerabilem esse autumant. Atque hac forsan de causa Canus l. 5. de locis. c. 4. post sextam conclusionem de Conc. Elibertino, inquit, eâ parte, quâ errauit, semper à Catholicis explosum fuisse. Et sanè si aliâ viâ Concilio satisfieri commodè non possit, hoc nobis effugium sufficiat: nec Caluinus contra vniuersalem Ecclesiae definitionem prouinciale Concilium obijcere deberet. Vasques ib. q. sup. num. 121. 
                     Diuers late Diuines (saith the Iesuit) oppressed with this obiection,
taken from the Councell of Eliberis, haue thought it their
best refuge to denie the authority of the Councell, because it was but
prouinciall, and neuer confirmed by the Pope. Which refuge (saith
he) might serue vs in good stead, if a better could not bee found.
And though Bellarmine and Baronius made theEtiam Canus loc. Theol. Bellar. l. 2. Imag. c. 36. Hanc Synodum aiunt erroneam esse, & à nullo Romano Pontifice confirmatam. Baronius Tom. 1. Anno 57. num. 119▪ ob eandem causam quasi propè fines Nouatiani dogmatis Conc. hoc attigisset, paulò liberiùs & acriùs de eo scripsit. Sed ea deinceps Tom. 2. Anno 305. num. 42. valdè mitigat, ita enim de eodem Canone [Lapsos nè quidem in articulo mortis absoluendos] cùm quae ab illis de ea re statuta sunt ab Innocentio Pontifice excusentur, nemo sit qui accusare praesumat. Existimat igitur hanc Synodum legitimam fuisse, atque ab omni errore liberam. Binius De Conc. Comment▪ in hunc Canonem, pag. 245. same Answer,
yet this latter together with Binius confesse and prooue
that, It was a lawfull Councell, and free from all errour. So that
whatsoeuer the occasion of forbidding might haue been, this is
a confessed conclusion of Senensis, thatPopulus Christianus recèns à superst
                           •
                        tione ad Christianismum addu
                           •
                        
                        tus, ad idololatriam nimis pronus erat, idcir
                           •
                        ò omninò vetuit Synodus Elibertina imaginū cultum. Sixtus Senens. Biblio▪ lib. 5. Annot. 247. 
                     The Councell of Eliberis
did absolutely forbid the worship of images. Which one testimony
being so tortured by so distracted and contradictory
Answers, as though they had professed to prooue each other a
liar: it cannot be (especially seeing some of them are confessed
to haue beene oppressed with the force of this obiection) but diuers
of them must incurre (for ought that man can see) the
guilt of wilfull falsification. The like is as manifest in
               
               
                  The Second testimony, from the Councell of Francford.
                  61 Protestants obiect the Councell of Francford, which condemned
(they say) the second Councell of Nice for approouing
the worship of Images: heerupon their Aduersary Surius▪
                     
doth bitterly inueigh against them, calling Protestants

                     Haereticorum nostrorum, qui se Euangelicos dici volunt, incredibilis impudentia in hoc apparet, quòd docere velint in Concilio Francofordensi damnari Conc. Nicaenum secundum: adferunt pro se Decretum Francofordiensis Synodi, quo illorum deplorata mentiendi & quidlibet fingendi libido ita coarguitur, vt mirum sit illos vnquam in cuiusquam boni viri ausos esse prodite conspectum. And a little after.
                      
                     Men of such incredible impudency, and so dissolute lust of lying,
that it is a maruell they dare appeare in the presence of any honest
man. A fearefull crimination. Shall we know the cause?Vbi homines versuti vellent persuadere Lectori Nicaenam secundam de adorandis imaginibus damnatam esse, decretum Francofordiense corruperunt quidem, sed mirabili Dei iudicio, vt illorum impostura omnibus proderetur, obliti sunt Constantinopolin eradere, atque eius loco Nicaeam substituere. &c. A
little after. Sed valeant isti cùm malis suis artibus.
Surius Praef. in Synod. Francofordi.
                      
                     Because
they would craftily perswade men to beleeue that the second
Councell of Nice was condemned in the Councell of Francford for
the point of the worship of Images, when as they corrupted those
Councels, albeit by the maruellous prouidence of God their fraud
is made notorious, for they forgot to race out the name of Constantinople,
and put in stead thereof the Councell of Nice. Was it then
the Synod of Constantinople, that was condemned in the Councell
of Francford, and not the second Synode of Nice?
                     Concilium Francofordiense prouinciale fuit, in quo Episcopi 300, &c. Acta Concilij
Nicaeni secundi in causa imaginum confirmârunt. Paulò post. Ita docuit Alanus Copus, Sanderus, Surius, Suarez. Hactenùs Binius Com. in hanc. Synod. pag 429. Scriptores illi cùm dicunt Synodum 7. in Francofor. Conc. damnatam, non intelligunt Nicaenam secundam, quae verè septima fuit, sed damnabant Ephesinam secundam. Coster. Ies. Enchir. ca. 13. Multi recentiores historici dicunt in Francfordiensi non damnari Synodum de adorandis imaginibus, sed de tollendis, Platina, Blandius, Sabellicus. Bellar. l. 2. De Conc. cap. 8. 
                     No,
(say nine of our Aduersaries together) the second Synode of Nice
was not condemned, but rather confirmed in the Councell of Francford,
by three hundred Bishops there. Now it is like that by these
mens verdict Protestants shall be adiudged vnto the Pillory,
for Surius is the chiefe of that inquest, who hath said, that Protestants
sought by forgerie to corrupt a Councell. Can there
be a more grieuous accusation than this? But behold one Vasques
a Iesuite, as it were another Daniel, ready to acquit the
innocent, saying and proouing thatHuic (sententiae Surij) duo manifestè obstant, vnum est, quòd si Francofor. Synodus de Constantinop. Concilio loqueretur, non diceret [Quam pro adorandis imaginibus fecerunt] ea enim contra imaginum venerationem celebrata est. Loquitur ergò, sicut Historici omnes, de vera septima Synodo Nicaena secunda, quae reue
                           •
                         à pro adorandis imaginibus habita 
                           •
                        uit: alterum est, quod praefatio asserit, vt referunt Authores, Synodum illam, quam abrogauit Concilium Francoford celebratam fuisse in Bithynia, in qua quidem prouincia est Nicaea, non autem Constantinopolis. Vasques l. 2. Imag. c. 4. num. 225. 
                     The sentence of Surius

cannot stand, being contrary vnto all Historians, who affirme that
the second Synod of Nice, and not the Synode of Constantinople, is
mentioned in the Councell. And of Francford Bellarmine more
plainely acknowledgeth that that Synode of Nice was condemned
in the Councell of Francford in this point of the worship
of Images. And therefore can do no lesse butSententiam Alani optarem esse verā, sed suspicor esse falsam, quia &c. Bellar. l. 2. Conc. c. 8 §. Propter hanc. Et paulò post, Videtur igitur mihi in Francoford. Concilio verè reprobatam fuisse Nicaenam secundam. 
                     wish that it were
otherwise. LastlyReuerendis. Cardin. Baronius hanc sententiam veriorem esse iudicat. Binius Comm. in Conc. Francof. pag. 391. col. 1. Baronius also doth agree with Bellarmine.
What will P. R. iudge of those three Iesuites, Sanders, Suarez,
Coster, with their complices, who maintaine that the second
Synode of Nice was confirmed in the Councell of Francford,
wherin (in the opinion of Bellar.) it was condemned? or how
will he censure Surius, who chargeth Protestants with impudency
and forgerie in such degree, as though they were vnwoorthy
the company of men; and when the matter is examined,
by three Iesuites, their opposite Aduersaries, Vasques,
Bellarmine and Baronius, the defense of Protestants is warranted
for true? Will now our P. R. call Surius, Furius, (who
hath published the bodie of Councels) and annihilate all his
credit heereafter?
                  62 But I proceed to their second Answer,Damnauit illa quidem Nicaenam secundam, sed per errorem & materialitèr, eo prorsus modo, quo Synodus Ariminensis damnabat homousion. Nam Author librorum Carolinorum Synodo imposuit per duo mendacia; vnum erat, illam Synodum cultum latriae imaginibus oblatam approbâsse. Bellarm. l. 2. De Conc. c. 8. §. Videtur. Et paulò post. Concilium Francof. quod frequentissimum fuit, errare potuit, & errauit non in iuris sed in facti quaestione: nec mirum est quòd errare potuit, quia non consenserunt legati Romani, vt Magdeburgenses dicunt: Papa autem non modò non consensit, verùm etiam reprobauit illud Concilium, vt patet ex libro Adriani, &c. Bellar. ib. §. Si dicas. Idem sensit illustriss. Cardinalis Baronius, Patres Francof. Concilij mendacijs & imposturis Autorum libri Carolini fuisse deceptos, vt Nicaenam secundam, quasi ipsa imagines cultulatriae, soli Deo debito, colendas sanxisset. Teste Binio, Com. in Conc. Francof. pa. 397. But,
                      
                     Though the Councell
of Francford (say their two Cardinals) did condemne the
Councell of Nice in this point, yet did it erre heerein in a question
not of faith but of fact, for being deceiued by reports of the Author
of those bookes, which are entituled in the name of Charles the
Emperour, they did erroneously thinke that the Councell did allow,
that Images should be worshipped with an honour proper vnto
God. This answer also is so preiudicious to their owne cause,
that their owne Doctors Vasques, Suares, and Binius doe openly

confute it, proouing first that the Councell of Francford
                     Definitio septimae Synodi non minus nota esse potuit Conc. Francofordiensi, quàm Autorib. libri Carolini, siquidem eodem tempore liber ille conscriptus fuit. Vasques Alorat. l. 2. disp. 7. cap. 5. num. 230. 
                     Could not bee deceiued by that information. Secondly,
that the
                        Rursus Concilium Francof. habuit Legatos Adriam Pont. vt tradunt omnes in quaestione praecedenti citati, & ex subscriptionibus cō
                        stat, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         haeretici Centuriatores fatentur. Ibid. num. 232. 
                     Legates of the Pope did subscribe vnto it. Thirdly,
that the contrary answerEgo cum viro doctissimo Francisco Suarez sentio, istam responsionem infirmis niti fundamentis. Binius q. supra.
                      
                     standeth not vpon any sound ground.
And if I shall obiect the answer of Bellarmine, I thinke P. R.
will returne mee no satisfaction: hee to allow the Councell of
Francford thus farre, as to thinke i
                        •
                      did not erre in a question
of right or faith, but only failed in an errour of fact. Tell me in
good earnest P. R. if the Fathers of the Councell of Francford
iudging that the second Councell of Nice, confirmed by the
Pope, did erre in defending Idolatrie, did they erre in faith or
no? if they did, then where was the faith of Bellarmine and
Baronius, who say it did not erre in question of faith? if those
Fathers iudging the Councell of Nice to erre in faith, did not
erre themselues then it is not preiudiciall to faith to think that
The Pope and his Councell may erre in defending Idolatrie,
and consequently heresie, and what not? Therefore yet they
haue not satisfied the Protestants obiection.
                  63 Their last refuge is to contemne it as being only aSi Conc. Francofordiense aliquid contra Synodum septimam (which was Nicaena secunda) statuisset, tamen nullius esset momenti, tum quia Prouinciale non valet contra generale, tum quia non erat à Pontifice Romano approbatum. Bellar. l. 2. De Imag. c. 14. Prouinciall
Councell: and amongst others their Binius teacheth
his fellowes how to wind themselues out of this whirle-poole.
Necessario igitur fatendum est, vel Historicos errâsse, vel aliqua ex parte deprauatos esse, vel certè non de vera, sed de Pseudosynodo loquutos esse. Denique possit quis liberè negare quicquam actum esse in Francof. Synodo siuè pro Imaginibus, si
                           •
                        è contra illas. Binius Tom. 3. Conc. Comment. in Conc. Francof.
                      
                     We must necessarily confesse (saith he) that either our Historians
haue erred, or else the Acts of the Councell haue beene corrupted,
or else that it condemned some other false Councell: or else
freely denie that it maketh neither for vs, nor against vs▪
                      He might
haue added, Or else let vs grant (as we ought) the obiection of
Protestants to be true. To all the other not the equity of the
case, but desperate necessity hath inforced them, as may appeare
by their intestine warre among themselues, one of them
proouing anothers answer to be flatly repugnant vnto the tenor

of the Councel which could not haue been without grosse
falsitie on some part. Wherefore we conclude with the saying
of the Iesuite Suares:Periculosum & temerariū est, acta illius Concilij veluti supposititia & apocrypha reijcere, quia nihil in eis actis, vt nunc extant, reperitur, quod non ad veram religionem stabiliendam valeat. Suares Jes. disp. 49. sect. 3. Teste Binio, in loco suprà citato.
                      
                     It is a dangerous rashnesse to reiect the
Acts of that Councell of Francford as false: And proceed vnto
               
               
                  The Third example.
                  64 Protestants obiect the testimony of the auncient Father
Obijciunt Protestantes nobis Epiphanium, qui in Epistola ad Iohannem Hierosolymitanū sic scribit. Cùm venissem, inquit, ad villam Anablatha, & in Ecclesiam intrâssem, vt orarem, inueni ibi velum pendens in foribus eiusdem Ecclsiae, habens imaginem quasi Christi aut Sancti 
                           •••
                        usda
                           •
                        : cumque vidissem in Ecclesia Christi, contra authoritatem Scripturarum, hominis pendere imaginem, s
                           •
                        idi illud velum, &c. Vasques Jes. lib. 2. de Adorat. disp. 5. cap. 3. num. 136. Bellar. lib. 2. de Triumph. Eccl. cap. 9. §. 
                           •
                        . 
                     Epiphanius, who by his owne report entred into a Church
at Anablatha to pray, and perceiuing a curtaine, wherein was
a Picture as if it had beene the image of Christ, or some Saint, hee
tooke the curtaine and rent it, as being an abuse contrary to the
authority of holy Scriptures. Our Aduersaries are changeable
to answer thereunto. Therefore first Waldensis is bold, and
saith thatHoc fecit Epiphanius propter periculum erroris Anthopomorphitarum, qui Deum corporeum, & membris compactum esse asserebant. Waldens. Tom. 3. tit. 19. cap. 157. Sic quidem Waldensis, qui reprehendit in Epiphanio zelum nimium, & non secundum scientiam. 
                     Epiphanius did this vpon a good zeale, but not according
to knowledge, all for feare of giuing aduantage vnto the Anthropomorphitae.
But Cardinall Bellarmine cuts him short, telling
him, thatVerùm Waldensem textus ipse resutat, non enim erat Dei imago, sed hominis cuiusdam. Ergo non potuit Epiphanius hac occasione motus velum abscindere. Vasq▪ q. sup. disp. 5. c. 3. num. 137. 
                     His answer is confuted by the text. The next is
Vasques the Iesuite, noting Protestants for dullards, who could
not perceiue that the image, which Epiphanius rent,Hinc intelligi potest, quanto 
                           •
                        udioris ingenij fuit Caluinus, & alij, qui hoc nobis testimonium obijciunt. Si enim attentè legatur Epiphanius nè verbum quidem de sanctorum imaginibus habet. Vasques q. sup. c. 3. num. 144. Sed loquitur de imagine hominis prophani, quae in sanctarum imaginum Catalogo ferenda non est. Ibid. cap. 4. num. 148. 
                     Was not
the image of a Saint, but of some prophane man. But Cardinall
Bellarmine will tell him that,Alij dicunt loqui de imagine hominis profani, sed communior & verior solutio est, verba, &c. Bellar. lib. 2. de Triumph. Eccl. cap. 9. 
                     There is a better and more common
answer than this. Sure, for this is naught, forasmuch as their
Senensis hath taught them that Epiphanius in other his Epistles

                     Epiphanius in alia Epistola, quae in actis primae Synodi citatur, Estote, inquit, memores, dilecti filij, nè in Ecclesias imagines inferatis, nec in coemiterijs statuatis. Sixtus Senens. Bibl. l. 5. Annot. 247. 
                     Doth forbid Images to be brought into the Church. We require
therfore a better answer than this. Alphonsus de Castro, to rid
his hands of Epiphanius, numbreth him among those whom
hee callethEpiphanius inter Iconomachos haereticos fuit. Alphons. de Castro haeres. Tit. Image.
                      
                     Iconomachos haereticos, hereticall Image-breakers.
This will not be currant with Vasques, who supposing that it
was the Image of some prophane man, saith thatVelum habens quasi Christi aut Sancti cuiusdam: Illa vox [Quasi] significat hominis profani imaginē ibi pependisse, tanquam esset imago aut Christi aut Sancti alicuius: ideo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         merito fuisse abscissam. Vasques quo supra. cap. 4. num. 149. 
                     Epiphanius
did well to take it away. As yet nothing is said which may giue
satisfaction. Where is that which was called the Common answer?
                     Alanus & Sanderus difficultate oppressi responderunt, verba suposititia esse. Vasques ibid. num. 140. Corrupta est haec Epistola a veteribus Iconoclastris. Costerus Jesuita E
                              ••
                           hi
                              •
                           id. cap. 13. §. Corrupta. Esse quidem supposititia probatur, primò, secundò, tertiò, &c. nonò. Bellar. quo supra.
                      Allen, Sanders, Coster, Bellarmine haue all resolued
to cut the knot, which they cannot vntie, and therefore say,
The Epistle in that part is forged or corrupted by Heretikes. It is
no maruell they be so briefe, for Vasques hath told vs, that
those which answered thusSee in the next number before. 
                     Were oppressed with the difficulty.
Wherefore he concludeth directly,Verba, quae alij suppositia esse putant ad eandem epistolam sine dubio pertinent, nam postquam Epiphanius se excusabat ad Iohannem Hierosol. de erroribus, quos Iohannes in eo notâsset, meritò aliam causam, cur alij de se murmurarent, subiun
                           •
                        it, dicens, Cum venissem Anablatha, &c. Vasques Jes. lib. 2. de Adorat. disp. 5. cap. 3. 
                     That without all doubt
the Epistle is not counterfet. It may bee Bellarmine will not
speake any thing without reason:Hieronymus in Epistola ad Pammachium contra Iohannem Hierosol. Episcopum, totam ferè hanc epistolam Epiphanij à se Latinè factam recitat, & tamen non meminit huius veli. Ergo illa verba supposititia esse videntur. Bellar. l. 2. de Triumph. Eccle. cap. 9. 
                     Hierome (saith he) in his
Epistle vnto Pammachius against Iohn Bishop of Hierusalem, doth
translate almost this whole Epistle into Latine, and yet maketh no
mention of this part of the Epistle concerning this image. Therfore
is this part counterfet. Who would thinke that this great
Rabbi could haue beene ignorant of that which any man may
see, and his owne learned Doctors haue acknowledged, that
Est Epistola Epiphani
                           •
                         ab Hieronymo translata & approbata in haec verba [Cum venissem Anablatha. Senens. l. 5. Bibl. Annot. 247. Haec epistola Epiphanij de velo ponitur inter Epistolas Hieronymi, ordine 60: imò idem Hieronymus in epistolam ad Pammachium huius epistolae mentionem facit. Vasq. quo supra. It is found in the epistle of S. Hierom. ad Ioh. Hierosol. 
                     The Epistle which is translated and approoued by S. Hierome,

hath this part in it concerning the Image [when I was at Anablatha]
Which is euident to them who will read the Epistle of
S. Hierome to Iohn Bishop of Ierusalem: yet doth Senensis instance
in the authority ofCum verò Damascenus dicit (id quod Bellar. obijcit supra) Epistolā Epiphanij esse con
                           •
                        ictā: 
                     Damascene to proue this Epistle a
forged deuice: but Damascene is falsly alleged, saith Vasques:
adding thatNon de hac Epistola ad Iohannem Hierosol. (vt falsò Senensis autumat) sed de epist. ad Theodosium intelligit. Ergò hoc commune & frequens nostrorum effugium mihi non placet, & Hieronymo necesse non fuit in epistola sua ad Pammachium huius veli meminisse, quia Hieronymi institutum erat tantùm de Iohannis Hierosol. erroribus agere. Vasques ibid.
                      
                     This our common refuge, in excepting against the
Epistle as counterfet is no way allowable. Hitherto they haue deliuered
no Answer sufficient. Wee maruell why their great Iesuite
Valentia hath beene so long silent: therefore he,Aut si maximè exploratum sit eam epistolam esse genuinam, respondemus, apud nos Ecclesiae authoritas plus ponderis habet. Greg. Valent. Ies. l. 2. de Idol. c. 7. pag. 719. Vna hirundo non facit ver. Anglo-Rhemens. transl. in non. Test. vide Indicem de Imaginibus.
                      
                     If it
shall appeare that it was the proper Epistle of Epiphanius, yet wee
answer that the Church is of greater authority with vs than Epiphanius.
Whereunto we oppose that which Epiphanius preferred
before any pretence of the Church, when hee said that
the abuse of that image wasCùm vidissem (inquit Epiphanius) contra authoritatem Scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem, &c. Epiphan. vt est ab ist
                              •
                           citatus.
                      
                     contrary to Scriptures.
                  
                  65 In all that hath beene spoken we see many falshoods, and
that in a part of but one controuersie. If P. R. shall desire 500.
of this kinde, I binde my selfe vnto him by a faithfull protestation
in a Moneths warning to satisfie him, whensoeuer hee or
any for him shall exact it. Neither shall I need to borrow oile
for this lampe to make it manifest vnto the world, that in all
their passages in all controuersies of greatest moment when
they are to be discussed by Scriptures, Fathers, and reasons,
there are such crossings, thwartings and contradictions among
them, as though (as the Poet faineth) the teeth of the Dragon
were fallen out of his mouth and metamorphosed into armed
men, presently bent to kill one another. But I will come one
step neerer to P. R. his demand, Offering him
               
            
            
               
               
                  A Satisfaction to his first demand in a particular
instance of a noble Falsificator on his side.
               
               § 15.
               66 P. R. requireth an example of Any one, who hath been
found so grosly false, that in the eie of man hee may
not be acquitted either by Ignorance of translation, &c. Which
demand if it proceed from vnfeinednesse, it seemeth vnto mee
so intolerably reasonable, that now I am driuen to a twofold
trouble in yeelding satisfaction; the one is that I know not
with what one to begin first, the falsificators be so many: the
second is, when I shal begin with any choice one, how to make
an end, so manifold are their falsifications. Therfore in respect
of the falsifiers I would require of P. R. to propound vnto mee
any one of his Doctours, in whom hee hath best assurance of
integritie, whether Greg. de Valentia, Stapleton, Bellarmine,
Coccius, Suarez, Turrian, Campian, Gretzer, Fuerdentius, the
Remish Translat. in their Annotations: or any, I say, of those
which haue beene publikely authorised of their Chruch, and
I will not doubt but to giue him thrice three examples of their
fraud. In the meane time I thinke it requisite to single out of
all such an one as is commended of all: to wit, Cardinall Bellarmine,
that P. R. may not repine, saying: hee hath chosen a
Dauid the least in his fathers house: but confesse that I haue
preferred a Saul, one higher by the head and shoulders than
any of the rest: not a dead man, who cannot interpret his own
meaning, whether he had falsified vpon ignorance, negligence,
&c. but one, which now liuing is able to answer for himselfe,
whose credit P. R. doth tender, and with whom he may consult
to know whether I do him iniury or no. Now to the point.
               
                  First, examples of such kinde of falsities in wilfull slanders,
whereof Cardinall Bellarmine hath beene guilty, as will appeare
euen by the euidence of his owne confession.
               
               67 Let P. R. for a while take Cardinall Bellarmine into secret

confession, and first aske him with what conscience hee hath
charged Caluin with the heresie of thePelagiani docebant non esse in hominibus peccatum originale, & praecipuè in filijs fidelium. Idem docent Caluinus & Bucerus, &c. Bellar. lib. 4. de Eccl. milit. c. 9. §. Pelagiani. 
                  Pelagians, who denied
that there was any originall sinne in infants, especially in the children
of faithfull Christians? For as hee could not bee ignorant
Hic proprius erat Pelagianorum error, negare peccatum originale esse haereditariam naturae nostrae corruptionē. Greg Val. Jes. lib. De orig. pet. c. 2. in initio.
                   
                  That this doctrine of denying originall sinne was (as their owne
L. Iesuite confesseth) the proper heresie of the Pelagians. And
not so only, but saith furthermore thatCaluinus & Lutherus, caeteri
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Protestantes adeò non negârunt originale peccatum, vt illud prodigiosis loquendi modis exagitant, etiam in renatis manere dicunt, &c. Idem Ib. cap. 8. & in Tom. 2. disp. 6. q. 11. punct. 1. §. Quam quaestionem. 
                  Caluin and all other
Protestants are so far from denying originall sinne, that they doe
monstrously extend the nature thereof euen vnto persons regenerat.
I let passe a dozen such criminations cast by him vpon Protestants,
which by the testimonies of his owne Doctors may be
prooued to haue beene lewd and intolerable slanders. I insist
now only vpon such his confessions, whereby it may appeare
he hath been, in his iniuries against his Aduersaries, the greatest
Aduersary to his owne conscience.
               68 First he maketh Protestants guilty of the heresie of
                  Nouatianorum error praecipuus erat, non esse in Ecclesia potestatem reconciliandi homines, nisi per baptismum: Posteà etiam addiderunt, non debere baptizatos inungi chrismate ab Episcopis. Caluinus negat vllum esse Sacramentum poenitentiae praeter Baptisma, Lutherus Poenitentiam reijcit. Bellar. l. 4. De not. Eccle. cap. 9. §. Nouatianorum. The
Nouatians, in taking from the Church all power of reconciling men
vnto God. When as his own Authors note that,
                  Nouatianorum haeresis peccantibus omnem poenitentiae virtutem tollit, dicens eos, qui semel post Baptismum lapsi sunt, nunquam posteà consequi remissionem peccatorum, etiamsi eos poeniteat. Alphon. De castro. lib. 12. haeres. 3. tit. Poenitentia. Omne peccatum lethale post Baptismum commissum irremissibile censuerunt. Vega. l. 13. de Justif. c. 2. pag. 486. In Ioh. 5. 4. Dixit Christus, Noliampliùs peccare, nè deterius aliquid tibi contingat. Ex quo loco probat Pacianus contra Nouatianos, non negandam esse poenitentibus veniam, nec enim dixisse Christum iam noli peccare, quia non sanaberis iterùm, sed, nè deterius aliquid tibi contingat. Maldonat. Jes. Comm. in 
                           •
                        um locum Joh.
                   The heresie of
the Nouatians was this, viz. to deny any man, who should sin after
baptisme, all hope of remission of sins, although he should repent. Yea
and also Bellarmine himself in behalfe of Protestants confesseth
else-where that
                  Dicunt Protestantes in Christianis post Baptismum requiri fidem & poenitentiam, vt iustificentur & remissionem consequantur. Bellar. lib. 3. de Justif. cap. 6, & saepè aliâs.
                   They require repentance and faith in Christians,

that they may be iustified and obtaine remission of sinnes. Nor
this only, but
                  Non de quauis poenitentia inter nos & Protestantes controuersia habetur, potest enim vera poenitentia vel in sola mentis conuersione, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      interna peccati detestatione consistere, vel in externis signis, vt moerore, lachrymis, confessione, corporis afflictatione se prodere, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      de hac re vlla est controuersia. Ipsi aduersarij Caluinus & Chē
                     nitius opera externa laboriosa, vt signa verae poenitentiae internae non reijciunt. Deindè absolutionis ritum aliquem fere omnes agnoscunt. Sed hic est status controuersiae, vtrùm poenitentia signis externis manifestata, accedente ad eam verbo absolutionis, sit Sacramentum propriè dictum. Bellar. lib. 1. de Poenit. cap. 8. §. Vt igitur. There is no difference betweene vs (saith he) and
Protestants about repentance as it is a conuersion vnto God with
detestation of sin, or as it consisteth in outward signes of sorrow, weeping,
confession, and outward chastisements, yea and almost all of
them allow an outward rite of absolution. But the only controuersie
betweene vs is, whether Penance bee properly a Sacrament. The
contradiction is this, to impute vnto Protestants an heresie
which taketh away all maner of Repentance and hope of remission
for sin past, and yet to acknowledge in them a contrary orthodoxall
truth, which is, to professe a necessity of Repentance,
and reconciliation and remission of sinnes.
               69 Againe, he attributeth vnto Caluin the heresie of the Manicheis,
Manichaeorum est (inquit Hieronym.) hominum damnare naturam, & hominum auferre arbitrium, & peccatorum originem non tribuunt Manichaei libero arbitrio, inquit Augustinus. Idem Calunius. Bellar. l. 4. de Not. Eccles. cap. 9. §. 8. Manichaeorum. Who (saith he) did condemne the nature of men, depriuing
them of freewill, and ascribing the originall and beginning of
sin vnto the nature of man, and not vnto his freewill. Seeing hee
hath himselfe obserued that,
                  Iohannes Calunius docet quòd in initio homo habuerit liberum arbitrium, nunc non habet. In hac integritate (inquit) libero pollebat homo arbitrio, quo, si vellet, adipisci posset vitam aeternam. Bellar. l. 1. degrat. primi hominis. §. in eodem principio. Caluine teacheth that man in his
first creation had freewill, whereby in his integrity he might, if hee
would, haue attained vnto eternall life. This contradiction in this
point is no more than this, to charge Caluin with that which
he did not beleeue. Is not this singular falshood? and yet behold
a more notable than this.
               
               70 He accuseth M. Bullinger ofHenricum Bullingerum non puduit scribere tres esse in diuinitate personas non statu sed gradu, non substantiâ sed formâ, non potestate sed specie differentes. Certè personas gradu, formâ, specie differentes, vix Ariani ipsi dicere ausi essent. Bellar. praef. in Contro. de Christo. §. Henricum. 
                  Arianisme, because of this
sentence [Tres sunt, non statu sed gradu, &c.] Notwithstanding
hee knew this was the very sentence ofSic scribit Tertullianus in libro aduersus Praxeam, Tres sunt non statu sed gradu, non substantiâ sed formâ, non potestate sed specie. Greg. Val. Jes. lib. de vinit. & Trinit. c. 9. 
                  Tertullian. And is

therefore else-where expounded as orthodoxall and iustifiable
byTertullianus in libro aduersus Praxeam cùm dixit filium distingui à Patre non statu sed gradu, per gradum intelligit ordinem personarum. Bellar. l. 1. de Christo, c. 10. §. Respondeo secundum. himselfe.
               71 Though P R. require but three examples of falshood, yet
may I not enuie him a further choice, because I know not the
curiositie of his palate. Therefore let him againe consult with
Cardinall Bellar. in another taxation of Protestants, saying in
one place that,Secundùm errorem Caluinistarum (speaking of a Christian soule departing this life) non ad Deum ibat, sed ad inferos, aut alium locum extra coelū, vbi non magis Deus est, quàm hic nobiscum. Bellar. l. 1. de Beat Sanct. cap. 4. paulo post initium.
                   
                  They teach that the soules of faithfull men departing
this life doe not goe directly vnto heauen. In another place he
himselfe together with his fellow Iesuite haue publikely recorded
that it is a commonOctaua obiectio (answering to the obiection of Protestants) sumitur ex 2. Cor. 5. [Si domus terrena nostrae habitationis dissoluitur, habemus domum non manu factam in coelis] rectâ igitur post mortem sinè Purgatorio pij homines transferuntur in coelum. Respondeo &c. Bellar. l. 1. de Imag. c. 8. §. Octaua obiectio. And Obijciunt nobis Protestantes loca Scripturarum & Patrum, in quibus duplex status eorum, qui moriuntur, significatur, impiorum in supplicium aeternum, & iustorum in vitam aeternam. Deinde huiusmodi loca Scripturarum vrgent, quibus determinatè significari videtur, eos qui ex hac vita discedunt in statu gratiae statim recipi ad beatitudinem. vt Apoc. 14. Beati qui moriuntur in Domino, requiescunt à laboribus: Si (inquiunt) omnes beati, tùm nulli in Purgatorij cruciatibus continentur. Greg. Valent. de Purg. c. 8. and the Rhemish Annot in Apoc. 14. 13. 
                  Obiection of Protestants proouing
from Scriptures against the doctrine of Purgatory, that the soules
of the faithfull presently after death goe directly vnto heauen.
               
               72 He resteth not heere, but once againe challengethQuidam antiqui haeretici fuerunt, qui negabant Eucharist
                        •
                     am esse veram carnem Christi, & tantùm esse volebant signum & imaginem corporis Christi. Hanc haeresin refert Theodoretus, eandem docent hoc tempore Zuinglius, Caluines. Bellar. l. 4. de not. Eccl. c. 9. ad finem.
                   
                  Caluine
for (as he calleth it) an ancient heresie alleged by Theodoret,
affirming, that there is only a figure of Christs body in the Eucharist.
And yet in another place affirming bothQuae sententia citatur à Theodoreto in Dialogo, vbi tamen nunc non habetur. Sed nè glorientur Caluinistae sententiam suam valdè antiquam esse, illud est obseruandum, antiquissimos illos haereticos non tàm sacramentum Eucharistiae, quàm mysterium incarnationis oppugnâsse. Bellar. l. 1. de Euchar. c. 1. in initio.
                   
                  That that opinion
is not ancient, nor yet now to be found in Theodoret, and also
that,Docet Caluinus symbola & corpus Christi, licèt inter se loco plurimùm distent, tamen coniuncta esse non solùm ratione signi, quia vnum est signum alterius, sed etiam quia vnà cùm signo Deus exhibet verum Christi corpus & sanguinem, quo animae nostrae alantur ad vitam aeternam. Bellar. ib. §. Secundò docet. 
                  The foresaid doctrine of Caluine doth teach that in the

Eucharist there is to be exhibited vnto the faithfull not only a signe
of Christs body, but also the body and blood it selfe by which mens
soules are nourished vnto eternall life. Or as another Iesuit testifieth
for Caluine,Docet Caluinus corpus Christi ab animis nostris in Eucharistia substantialiter communicari. 
                  That our soules communicate with the body
of Christ substantially. Heere is no more oddes in this accusation,
than ancient and not ancient, heresie and not heresie. All
these contradictions do certainly euince that he hath by publike
imputations slandered those, whom in his conscience hee
did acquit. And shall we thinke that his conscience could bee
sincere in alleging other mens testimonies and witnesses,Greg. Valent. Jes. tom. 4. disp. 6. q. 3. punct. 1. §. Item.
                   who
is found thus perfidiously vniust in exhibiting his owne? I
spare to produce multitudes of this kind which I haue in store,
and will be a debter to P. R. for many of this sort, ready to
pay my debt as soone as this my promise shall be exacted.
            
            
               
                  Some examples of Cardinall Bellarmine his falsifications
in the allegation of testimonies.
               
               § 16.
               SAint Cyprian saith,
                     Cyprianus epist. 10. ad Pomp. Vnde est haec traditio? an ex dominica autoritate descendens, an de Apostolorum mandatis & epistolis? ea enim facienda esse quae scripta sunt testatur Deus. He
                           •
                        reunto Bellarmine.
                   
                  Whence is this tradition? is it deriued
from the Lords authority, or from the precept of the Apostles?
For God willeth that we should do those things which are written.
From whence Protestants conclude, that the Scriptures are of
sufficiencie for our direction in all questions of faith. Bellarmine
answereth, thatRespondeo, Cyprianum haec scripsisse cum errorem suum tueri vellet, & ideo non mirum si more errantium tunc ratiocinaretur. Quare Augustinus contra Donatistas cap. 23. & 
                        •
                     equentibus hanc epistolam meritò refellit. Bellar. lib. 4. de verb. Dei, cap. 11. §. profert Cyprian. &c. 
                  Cyprian spoke this when he thought to defend
an error, and therefore it is no maruell if hee erred in so reasoning,
for the which cause S. Augustine (saith hee) did worthily
refute him. The question is not what errour Cyprian held, but
whether his maner of reasoning frō the sufficiency of scripture
were erroneous, or no. Bellar. pretendeth that S. Augustine
did worthily reprooue him. But whosoeuer shall consult with S.
Augustine in the chap. specified, shall find that this point by

him is excellently commended,Quod Cyprianus monet vt ad fontem recurramus, id est, Apostolorum traditionem, & indè in nostra tempora canalem dirigamus, optimum est, & sine dubitatione faciendū
                     ▪ Traditum est igitur ab Apostolis quòd sit vnus Deus, vnum Baptisma, vna fides, Ephes. 4. August. lib. 5. de Baptismo. cap. 26. 
                  That Cyprian warneth vs
(saith S. August.) to run vnto the fountaine, that is, vnto the tradition
of the Apostles; from thence to deriue a conduit to our times,
it is chiefly good and doubtlesse to be performed.
               
               74 Secondly, Bellarmine to establish the authority of the
Pope, doth giue this prerogatiue to S. Peter, to wit:
                  Vigesima secunda praerogatiua Petri est, quod solus Petrus Episcopus ordinatus fuerit: caeteri autem à Petro. Probatur ex Anacleto Epist. 1. In nouo Testamento &c. à Clemente Alexandrino, à Cypriano lib. 4. Epist. à Leone Sermone 3. de assumptione sua ad Pontificatum &c. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Pontif. Rom. cap. 23. That
S. Peter was the only Bishop, and that other Apostles tooke their
orders from him: which he laboureth to euince from the testimonies
of Anacletus, Clemens Alexand. Eusebius, and Cyprian;
wherein he is refelled by his own Doctours. One saying,
that
                  Nonnulli contendunt caeteros Apostolos eam potestatem iurisdictionis accepisse, id
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      probare conantur ex authoritate Anacleti, Cypriani, Augustini, Leonis, Clementis Alexandrini. Sed reuera non faciunt id quod istius sententiae autores volunt. Franciscus de victoria relect. 2. conclus. 1. §. quod. Indeed those Fathers meane no such thing: Another, that
                  De epistola pontificum Clementis & Anacleti, multa sunt quae manifeste ostendunt illas esse supposititias, quibus nituntur ij, qui plus quàm expedit Sedis Romanae authoritatem amplificant. Cardinal. Cusanus de Concord. Cathol. lib. 3. cap. 2. The Epistles of Anacletus are counterfet, which many vrge more
than is meet to the end they may aduance the authority of the sea
of Rome.
               75 Againe, where Bellarmine citeth the testimony ofExtat apud Platinam forma electionis Hildebrandi in haec verba: Nos sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae &c. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Roman. Pontif. cap. 13. §. Extat, &c. 
                  Platina
for the commendation of Pope Hildebrand: And in another
place finding Platina obiected in the question of confession,
answereth for the disabling of the Author, saying,Being vrged with his testimonie in the case of Romish Confession, by the Decree of Innocentius, he answereth: Sed neque Platina publica authoritate & ex publicis archiuis vitas illas Pontificum scripsit. Bellarm. lib. 3. De Poenit. cap. 13. §. Sed neque.
                   that Platina
had no publike authority to pen the liues of the Popes from
publike records. Which is notably false, Platina himselfe in his
epistle Dedicatory vnto the then Pope writing thus:Tu Theologorum Princeps (maxime Pontifex) non frustrà mandâsti vt res gestas Pontificum scriberem. Platina in Praefat. operis.
                   
                  Thou
(o Prince of Diuines, and chiefe of Bishops) hast commanded mee
to write the liues of the Popes: whose history is therfore greatly

commended by Balbus, as beingQuae Platina de vitis Pontificum scripsit vera sunt existimanda, quippe cum ea ex publicis tabulis scripsit, aliis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      legitimis documentis deprompsit: in quibus res gestae Pontificum historica fide continentur. Hieron Balbus de coronatione. §. Post mortem Constantini, &c. 
                  True, and taken out of
publike monuments. I could furnish P. R. with infinite such
like delusions, and will also whensoeuer my Aduersary shall
renew his demand: for such a multitude of examples I could
bring, that I finde it a greater difficulty for me to subtract, than
to multiplie.
               76 Therefore I will now confine my selfe within the precincts
of but one onely controuersie concerning Purgatory:
where Bellarmine distinguishing of the diuers acception of the
word fire in the writings of ancient Fathers, concludeth that,
Vocatur purgatorium locus quid à, in quo, tanquam in carcere, post hanc vitam purgantur animae, quae in hac plenè purgatae non fuerant. De hac est tota controuersia. Bellar. lib. 1. de purgat. cap. 1. § vocatur. Patres aliqui per ignem non intelligunt ignem purgatorij, sed ignem diuini iudicij, quomodo loquitur Paulus in 1. Cor. 3. cùm ait, vniuscuius
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      opus quale sit ignis probabit. Bellar. lib. 2. de purgat. cap. 1. §. Adde. Apostolus 1. Cor. 3. lgnis probabit] loquitur de igne seueri & iusti iudicij Dei, qui non est ignis purgans & affligens, sed probans & examinans. Bellar. li. 1. de purg. cap. 4. §. Superest. 
                  When the Fathers speake of the fire of the day of doome, when
all the world shall be of a flame, they meane not Purgatory fire,
which soules suffer immediately after death. After this hee
allegeth.Sunt apertissima loca ex patribus, vbi asteritur purgatorium, quorum pauca quaedam afferam. Bellar. lib. 1. de purgat. cap. 6. §. Denide &c. 
                  Most plaine places, (as hee calleth them) out of the
Fathers for proofe of Purgatory. Amongst others (in his first
booke de Purgatorio) S.Vide Ambrosium Serm. 20. in Psal. 118. Ibidem, §. Ambrosius &c. Is in Psal. 118. Serm. 20. Omnes, inquit, oportet transire per flammas, siue Ioannes sit siue Petrus &c. Bellar. lib. 2. de purgat. cap. 1. §. Ambrosius. Et paulò post
                   Ambrose serm. 20. in Psal. 118. for
proofe of Purgatory fire: which hee himselfe confesseth in his
next bookeAmbrosius hoc posteriore loco (speaking of the Psal. 118) videtur per ignem non intelligere purgatorium. Bellar. ibid. §. Adde &c. He vrgeth Hilary 
                  not to be meant of Purgatory. So he dealeth also
with S.Inter apertissima loca. Hilarius in Psal. 118. illud [concupiuit anima mea desiderare iudicia tua] nobis (inquit) est ille ignis obeundus in quo subeunda sunt grauia illa expiandae à peccatis animae supplicia. Bellar. li. 1. de purga. ca. 7. §. Hilarius. Rursus
                   
                  Hilary, vrging his sentence vpon the Psalm. 118.
as an euident place for Purgatory, which by his owne iudgement
Hilarius in Psal. 118. in illa verba: Concupiuit anima &c. vbi insinuat B. Mariam transire debuisse per illum ignem. Bellar. lib. 2. de purgat. cap. 1. §. Idem videtur: Rursus. Aliqui (amongst whom he citeth Hilarie) videntur non intelligere ignem purgatorium vt (answering
to the place aboue mentioned) Hilarius. ibid. §. Adde. 
                  Seemeth not to signifie Purgatory. And yet againe, among

hisSunt apertissima loca in patribus. Bella. lib. 1. de purgat. cap. 6. §. Deinde sunt, Paulo post.
                   
                  manifest places of the Fathers for Purgatory, he allegeth
the testimonies ofVt Origenes homil. 6. in Exod. Saltus fit si quid forte plumbi habent admixtum. 
                  Origen,
                  Et Basilius in Isa. 9. quod depascatur & deuoret ignis purgatorius. 
                  Basil,
                  Et Lactantius lib. 7. cap. 21. perstringentur igne atque comburentur. 
                  Lanctantius,
                  Et Hieronymus in fine Comment. in Isaiam: quorum opera in igne probanda. 
                  Hierom,
                  Ambrosius in Psalm. 36. Non exuremur, tamen vremur, &c. Haec omnia Bellar. lib. 1. de purga. cap. 6. 
                  Ambrose: all which are acknowledged expresly
byOrigenes dixit: Omnes homines excepto Christo, aliquo modo vrendos esse igne conflagrationis diuini iudicij. Et Hilarius vnà cum Ambrosio Origenem sequu
                        •
                     us est. Eodem pertinere videntur quae Basilius annotauit: ad eandem opinionem aparet allusisse Hieronymum, & longe antè Hieronymum quoque Lactantium. Sixtus Senensis Bibliothe. lib. 5. annot. 171. Lactantius lib. 7. cap. 21. perstringentur inquit &c. loquitur de ijs qui in resurrectione sunt igni tradendi. Suarez Iesuita in part. 3. Thom. qu 59. art. 6. disp. 57. sect. 1. §. Ambrosius in Comment. in Psal. 36. consentire videtur cum Origene qui dicit omnes homines, Christo excepto, probandos esse & aliquo modo vrendos igne conflagrationis diuini iudicij. Sixtus Senens. Bibliothe. lib. 5. annot. 171. 
                  Sixtus Senensis, from the euidence of the contexts to
haue spoken only of the fire of the day of iudgement, and consequently
asSee afore numb. 12. 
                  Bellarmine hath taught vs; not of the fire of Purgatory.
Lastly he professeth to confirme the doctrine of purgatory
out of most of thePurgatorium ex Patribus Graecis & Latinis probamus. Bellar. lib. 1. de purgat. cap 6. 
                  Greeke and Latine Fathers. And another
Iesuite saith more largelyOmnes veteres Graeci Patres agnouerunt purgatorium & Scriptis suis luculentissimè prodiderunt. Salmeron Jesuit. Comm. in 1. Cor. 15. disp. 25. in fine.
                   
                  of all the Greeke Fathers:
which is an assertion as false, as peremptory, euen by the confession
of their owne Bishop saying:Legat qui velit Graecorum veterum Commentarios, & nullum, quantum opinor, aut rarissimum de purgatorio sermonem inueniet: Sed neque Latini simul omnes huius rei veritatem conceperunt. Roffens. art. 18. aduers. Lutherum.
                   
                  That there is very rare
mention of Purgatory in the Greeke Fathers; and that the Latine
Fathers did not all at first apprehend the doctrine thereof.
               
               77 If any shall but obserue in this one controuersie the number
of witnesses brought in for the confirmation of this their
new Article in the name of ancient Fathers, which are by confession
of our Aduersaries meerely counterfet. as Clemens his
Constitutions, Clemens Epistles, Athanas. in quaest. Eusebius Emissenus,
Iosephus Ben Gorion, Hieron. in Prouerb. August. ad
fratres in Eremo, the Liturgies of Iames and others: All which
as they are vrged for proofe of Purgatory, so are they reiected

by their own men (I desire to be challenged for proofe heerof)
as forged, or corrupted, or Apocrypha; and indeed no better witnesses
for truth, than the Knights of the post bee fit men for a
Iury. If further he shall mark how true Fathers and Scriptures
are instanced in for proofe of the same Article, whereof (when
I speake of Fathers) most of them (when I speake of Canonicall
scriptures) all of them are found by the iudgement of their
owne Doctors to be tortured, wrested, and forced, as it were,
to say that which they neuer meant. If he, lastly, consider how
almost euery one of them indeuouring the defence of the same
doctrine is in his owne assertions contradicted by himselfe,
which may be in this one controuersie concerning Purgatory,
a late Article of their faith, most plainly discerned.
               78 These obseruations may giue our Reader such a scantling
of their dealing, that we may iustly pronounce P. R. his censure
vpon themselues, Not to be beleeued heereafter. So desperate
hath his demand beene, when he required any one ouertaken
in a triple falsitie, as though he would venture all the credit
of all the Annotations vpon the Remish Testament, all the volumes
of Baronius his Annales, all the monuments of Councels
in their Binius and Surius, all the disputes of Bellarmine, of
Greg. de Valentia, of Coccius, and all other their late Doctors,
vpon (as I may so call it) only tray trippe, a triple falsitie, and
then neuer to be credited againe. I am perswaded that no Protestant,
who hath beene conuersant in reading and examining
their Authors, but he will stand astonished to heare this grant
our Mitigator maketh, as being (as I haue said) intolerably
disaduantagious vnto the Romish part: but he will easily cease
to maruell when he perceiueth by whom it is made, to wit, P.
R. the Authour of the booke of Mitigation, who himselfe is
guilty of thrice three palpable falsities, so that none shall heerafter
need to wonder why hee hath beene so lauish in hazzarding
other mens credits, seeing he is so desperately prodigall
of his owne. Let vs draw neere vnto him to shew this, for hee
calleth vs vnto him.
            
            
               
               
                  A Satisfaction vnto P. R. his second demaund
concerning himselfe, in the discouerie of his
owne not orious falshoods, inforcing him by
vertue of his owne promise neuer
heereafter to credit
himselfe.
               
               § 17.
               79 P. R. amongst others is bold to insert himselfe: 
                  Pref. to the Reader pa. 28. num. 25.
                   If any
(saith he) hath set down in Print any such falsity, so that
it must needes bee presumed that hee knew the vntruth, and
yet would set it foorth: I will in my conscience greatly discredit that
Author, whether it be another or my selfe, if two or three such falsities
may be shewen. 
                  So he.
               
               Our Mitigator would seeme to haue a conscience, and so
I doubt not but he hath; but so miserable, as (if it be lawfull to
iudge by probabilities) it were a kind of happinesse for him to
haue no conscience at all. Let our Reader witnesse betweene
mee and him according to the euidence of testimonies which
shall bee brought against him; most of them shall bee so apparent,
that any one vnderstanding English may presently discerne
them. I will not vrge him with his own contradiction,
who in his preface to his Reader saith,Pref. to the Reader num. 25. pag. 28. 
                  I returne to the Treatise
of T. M. for more of his name we cannot yet find out. And
yet had in his Epistle Dedicatorie vnto both the Vniuersities,
which is set before the Preface, mentioned T. M. in his expresse
nameEpist. Ded. num. 5. & nū. 25. and again, num. 25. and num. 28. 
                  Thomas Morton, fiue seuerall times. But this fault
were very pardonable, were it not in him who will thinke no
fault pardonable in his aduersary: neuerthelesse I hold it excusable
by the vertue of this common Prouerbe: Cart before the
Horse, as we say. I therefore note not this for a falsity, because
a lie is onely then, when the tongue or pen goeth against the
mind and wit of the speaker or writer. But in this contradiction
I thinke rather that P. R. his pen runne before his wit,
and so will hee excuse himselfe, except hee had rather bee accounted

lyingly witty, than witlesly rash. Other such like
stumblings I ouerpasse. I come to note such his falles, as may
seeme to bee recouerable by no excuse.
               
                  One falshood of P. R.
                  80 Let that be first which ISee aboue §. 3. num. 6. 7. 8. &c. haue already mentioned, where
peremptorily he affirmed that the Clause of reseruation was not
by me set downe in Latine throughout my whole Treatise against
Aequiuocation aboue once: whereto the Reader may answer for
me that it is set downe in Latine aboue twenty times. What
excuse can he pretend? ignorance, ouersight, negligence? why,
the booke was present before his eies, euen in those places
which he particularly discussed. Could that errour be by errour
of Print, diuersitie of translation, or difference of Editions?
(for these are all the pretences which he will allow) not one of
all these (he knoweth) can redeeme him from guilt: and therfore
I may pronounce against him in his own words: He must
needs be presumed to haue known the vntruth of his assertion, and
yet would set it foorth. And therefore by this one example may
learne heereafter to mistrust himselfe.
                  
               
               
                  A Second falshood.
                  81 Where I writ of my Aduersary the Moderate Answerer
thus:Full satisfaction Epist. to the seduced brethren. 
                     He (say I) wilfully seating himselfe in the chaire of those
Doctours, whom the Apostle describeth, saying [They will be Doctors,
and yet vnderstand not what they say, nor whereof they affirme.]
By which particle, [He,] euen the vulgar Reader may
vnderstand that I described but one, which was, my Aduersarie
the Moderate Answerer, who vsed to satisfie obiected testimonies,
saying: If this be these mens opinions, and neuer inquired
what their opinions were. Therfore I iudged him to be
a Doctor of that chaire signified by the Apostle: where the
Doctour faith, he knoweth not what. This my application vnto
only that one, our P. R. setteth on his owne tenters, and
stretcheth it vnto all, saying,Treatis. Mitigat. Epist. Dedic. num. 23. 
                     But whether this description of
fond presumptuous Doctors doth agree vnto our Catholike Priests
or to Protestants, will appeare, &c. And againe, Now let vs see

how he goeth about to prooue our Priests such bad Doctours, &c.
Which he did to make me seeme so presumptuous, as to think
all Romish Doctors vnlearned, which had been (I confesse) an
odious presumption. Let them be as greatly learned as they
are, or else as they would seeme to bee, yet must there be a con,
I meane an heart zealous of the truth, to be ioined with science
to make vp a perfect conscience, which is the true Doctour indeed:
otherwise wee know, thatGen. 3. 1. 
                     The Serpent by being the
most subtile of all the beasts in the field, will deserue no better
commendation, than to be accounted the skilfullest Seducer.
Of which kind P. R. will prooue himselfe to be; for what excuse
may he now vse to free himselfe from falshood? Editions?
Translations? Prints? Heere is only one Edition, and that only
in English. Will he say, that it was an error of ignorance, ouersight,
negligence? So might some peraduenture iudge of it, who
doe not obserue that hee is euery-where ouer-diligent to
draw vpon me an imputation of arrogancy and malice.
                  
               
               
                  A Third falshood.
                  82 Where the Moderate Answerer, to proue the doctrine of
Protestants rebellious, obiected vnto mee the positions of
Goodman, I made this answer,See Full satisfact. Part. 2. chap. 3. pag. 103. 
                     If I should iustifie Goodman, although
your examples might excuse him, my heart should condemn
my selfe. Signifying, that although Goodman were gracelesse
in his conclusions, yet compared with the heinous practises
of Romish Priests, might (but as Tyre and Sydon in respect
of Capernaum and Bethsaida, that is, as the lesse sinner
in respect of the greater) be thought excusable. And I added
also heerunto these words, Let vs leaue Goodman as a man who
by his false and wicked positions hath falsified his name. Yet P. R.
aduentureth to say thus;Treatise of Mitig. cap 3. num. 14. pag. 100. 
                     Hee (meaning Tho. Morton) doth
particularly iustifie Goodman. What falsitie shall we call this,
where an accusation is laid against mee for iustifying that man,
whose positions I call false and wicked; whose person I hold
vnworthy of the name of a good man; whom, I say, I cannot iustifie
without condemnation of mine owne soule? What excuse now
shall P. R. make? shall it be edition, print, translation? there is

no difference in these kindes. Was it negligence or ignorance?
the words are plaine and all in English. Wherfore if my speech
concerning Goodman bee a iustification, then may not P. R.
be offended to be iustified by me in like terms, thus: If I should
iustifie P. R. his accusations, or thinke that he writ with a good
conscience (although the example of some libelling spirit
might excuse him in this kind) my heart should condemne my
selfe: and therefore I passe him ouer as one who is not worthy
of any name, except P. R. which may signifie Perfidiae Reus,
that is, a man guilty of perfidiousnesse, his positions are so rebellious,
and his accusations so false and calumnious. Whereof
he will giue vs many examples.
               
               
                  A Fourth falshood.
                  83 The Moderate Answerer obiected also the examples of
Knox and Buchanan as Doctors and Actors of the rebellion in
Scotland. My Answer was, thatSee Full Satisfact. Part. 2. cap. 4. pag. 107. 
                     Their seditious doctrine was
condemned in Scotland, noting them to haue beene worthy of
all condemnation. Neuerthelesse P. R. doth obiect, thatTreatise of Mitig. cap. 3. num. 14. pag. 100. 
                     He
(meaning Tho. Morton) taketh vpon him a iustification of all
Protestants for rebelling against their Princes in any Countrey
whatsoeuer, but more particularly some in England, and others as
Knox and Buchanan, and the like Ministers in Scotland, turning
vpside downe the States against their Soueraignes. This is no
more, than if an Italian obiecting vnto mee that wee haue
theeues in England, and I should answer, It is true we haue so:
but yet so farre is theft from being tolerable in our State, that
when theeues are catched, they are foorthwith condemned
and hanged: and then the Italian should challenge mee that in
thus answering I iustified theeues. The crimination of P. R.
is altogether alike, and consequently he must needs bee presumed
to haue knowen the vntruth, and to haue obiected this for
the preiudice of my conscience, to the strangling of his owne.
               
               
                  A Fift falshood.
                  84 In my book ofSee Full Satisfact. Part. 1. chap. 7. pag. 20. 
                     Satisfaction I had this passage, concerning
an obiection against some Protestants, answering, Deny Christs

to be God? God forbid! but to be God of God onely in a particular
sense, this indeed they doe. But can you finde no more Protestants
of this opinion, (to wit, besides M. Willet, and D. Fulke?) Your
Iesuit reckoneth vp Caluin and Beza, and I thinke he saith truely.
I would either he or you did as truly vnderstand them. But yet we
wish to heare what your Doctors thinke of this Protestants opinion:
your Campian calleth it monstrous, &c. A little after I added;
This doctrine, Doth (in the iudgement of your famous Bellarmine)
seeme Catholicall: because they deny not the sonne to
be from the father; but they deny the essence of the Godhead
to haue any generation. Hence P. R. inferreth and inforceth
thus:Treatise Mitig. ca. 6. num. 53. & num. 54. pa. 230. 
                     
                        Thomas Morton saith that Bellarmine reckoneth vp Caluine
and Beza to be of that opinion. And who would not thinke
vpon this Assertion of T. M. but that Cardinall Bellarmine were
contrary to himselfe, accusing Caluine, and yet iustifying his doctrine?
You see how many sleights are vsed heere in deceiuing the
Reader.
                      As though I had endeuored to make Bellarmine contrary
to himselfe, when as against the Iesuit Campian accusing
Caluin and Beza, I opposed Bellarmine the greatest champion
among the Iesuites as to be contrary vnto the other for defense
of Caluins doctrine: manifesting this difference of Campian
and Bellarmine, in these distinct letters r, s, z. Yet this Falsificator
to make me seeme to haue vsed sleights as falsly heerein
to make Bellarmine seeme contrary to himselfe, hath with his
owne nimble sleight confounded the different testimonies of
Campian and Bellarmine, who were produced as contrary one
to another. What excuse may be admitted in this place? ignorance,
negligence? &c. Why P. R. looketh vpon the place,
and vnderstandeth English: and yet falsly obiecteth a sleight
of deceiuing my hearer, himselfe by a fine sleight abusing both
me and the hearer. The only excuse (I feare) must be that hee
beheld the place with a squint-eid malice, which can neuer
rightly discerne the truth.
               
               
                  A Sixt falsitie of P. R.
                  85 Heere P. R. rangeth at large, saying, that
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        um. 
                           〈◊〉
                         pag. 113. 
                     Thomas Morton
framed a second part of his book for iustification of Protest
                           •…
                        
                        
yet in effect he confesseth all that his Aduersary opposeth. Let P.
R. learne what this meaneth, Litera occidit, and then let him
come to be tried by my Booke, and almost a childe may discerne
that in this one obiection hee hath giuen his conscience
many a mortall wound.Many falsehoods in one. 
                     In effect confessed all that was opposed?
What is there almost of all that was opposed by the Mod. Answ.
(excepting the examples of Knox, Buchanan, Goodman, Munster,
which all I iustly condemned) which was not directlie
confuted? for in the part. 2. of the Full Satisfact. cap. 1. it was
prooued out of Bellarmine to bee the generall doctrine of Protestants,
that, Spirituall men haue no authority to depriue Princes
of their kingdomes. In the cap. 5. is set downe the expresse doctrine
of Caluine and Beza, condemning all rebellious doctrine.
In the chapter 6. are produced two Romish Historians
acquitting the Protestants in France from suspition of rebellion.
In the cap. 10. the Moderate Answerer is prooued to
be impudently false for alleging only dumbe Authors to make
Luther guilty of the losse of Rhodes and Hungarie, which then
fell into the paw of the Turke: where I, from their owne Historians,
did euince that Adrian the Pope was chargeable for
that great losse in Christendome, which was without any witnesse
or coniecture obiected against Luther by that Moderate
Answerer. In the cap. 11. my Aduersary would needs accuse
Luther to bee of the same opinion with Munster, who
raised horrible rebellions in Germany, which is so notorious a
slander, that their owne Doctors (as I haue shewed) haue acquitted
Luther, confessing that Luther writ against those turbulent
spirits, and taught all Christians to arme themselues against
that rebellious crew, and to put them to death. These and many
such confutations I vsed against the Moderate Answerer, conuincing
him of notorious ignorance and falshood. And can
now P. R. call a Confutation a Confession without a grosse abuse
of the confidence of his Reader, and his own conscience?
               
               
                  A Seuenth falsitie.
                  86 In the Full Satisfact. part. 2. chap. 5. the Moderate Answerer
did obiect thus;
                        Full Satisf. part. 2. cap. 5. pag. 107. 
                     
                        Caluine and Beza and the rest of that

holy Synod say, that the Kings and Queenes, their children, posterity,
and all Magistrates must be put to death. And so euery Protestant
must be more than a Pope. This hee deliuered without
iust witnesse, and this I confuted from the direct and expresse
doctrines of Caluine and Beza. And after a long iustification
of them concerning their doctrine, at the length in the chap. 7.
pag. 119. I concluded thus; Wee haue heard of their opinions,
haue you any thing to except against their practise? Which question
was not made in way of deniall, as though my Aduersary
would not charge Caluine and Beza with any practise of rebellion;
but after the maner of art and common speech, by
way of Transition, to shew more orderly and emphatically
what was by the Moderate Answerer obiected against their
practise, which is set downe immediately after. And yet P. R.
maketh this one of his instances, and proofes of my fraudulent
dealings. Heere I would charge my Christian Reader in the
obligation of truth it selfe to giue him audience, for his clamor
is vehement, and his accusation may seeme to bee important.Thus then P. R.
                     Treatis. Mitig. c. 4. num. 42. pag. 131. 
                     And hauing said thus, hee (Tho. Morton)
passeth yet further, adding a second prouocation about practise, in
these words: 
                     We haue heard of their opinion (to wit, of Caluine
and Beza) haue you any thing to except against their practise?
And this demand he made, when he knew and had seene his
Aduersaries many and most grieuous accusations against them in
that kind,
                        Mod. Answ. c. 9. 
                        not only for mouing that people of Geneua to open rebellion
against their Lord and Prince the Bishop, but also the people
of France, against their King and Soueraigne, citing good authorities
for the same, saying: Caluine and Beza armed the Subiects
against their Prince of Geneua, and (as Caluiue himselfe, Doctor
Suttcliffe, and the Bishop of Canterbury be witnesses) deposed
their Soueraigne from his Temporall right, and euer after continued
in that state of rebellion. They celebrated also a Councell,
wherein was concluded that K. Francis the Second, then
king of France, his wife the Queene, his children, Queene mother,
&c. should be destroied. And his quotations for these things
are: Beza lib. de iure Migistrat. Suttcliff. answ. to Suppl. and
Suruey. Caluin in Epist. Pet. Far. orat. cont. Sect. defens. reg.

& relig. &c. All which being seene by our Minister, he demandeth
notwithstanding, as you haue heard, with this hypocrisie,
Haue you any thing to except against their practise? as though
there were nothing at all not only not to be accused or reprehended
in them, but not so much as to be excepted against. And is not this
notable dissimulation in a matter so cleere and euident? Who can
beleeue this Minister heereafter?
                     
                  
                  87 Nay is there any but will rather beleeue mee heereafter
when he shall see me abused by so intolerable impudency as I
am perswaded he neuer heard of heeretofore? For I am accused
to haue vsed that interrogation [Haue you any thing to say
vnto their practise?] in dissimulation, as though I would haue
concealed my Aduersaries obiection against Caluin and Beza,
in pretence that nothing at all were not onely not to bee accused or
reprehended, but not so much as to be excepted against. Wherunto
I haue only this to answer, that there is nothing in all this
obiection which hath not beene both literally expressed by
me, and also particularly confuted. Let vs compare the obiection
as it is repeated by P. R. and see if there bee any thing
which I haue pretermitted. First these words, Caluin and Beza
armed Subiects against their Prince of Geneua: theseThe Full Satisfaction part. 2. cap. 7. pag. 119 I haue
verbatim expressed, except only that for At Geneua, I haue Of
Geneua. Can there be any falshood in the particle Of? In the
next words, And as Caluin himselfe, Doctor Suttcliffe and the
Bishop of Canterbury bee witnesses, deposed their Soueraigne from
his temporall right, and euer after continued in that state of rebellion.
And this
                        Satisf. part. 2. cap. 7. pag. 119. hath beene by me repeated also verbatim, excepting
that for continued, I said continue. And can P. R. suspect
any hypocrisie in the letter d? The next, They celebrated
a Councell, wherein was concluded that K. Francis the Second,
the king of France, his wife the Queene, his children, Queene-Mother
should be destroied. This obiection also hath beene set
downe in these words:
                        Satisf. part. 2. cap. 4. pag. 107 
                     Caluin and Beza and the rest of the
holy Synod say that the Kings and Queenes of France, their children,
posterity and all Magistrates must be put to death, and so euery
Protestant must be more than a Pope. Heere is more propounded
than this my rigid Aduersary hath noted, namely,

                     Euery Protestant shall so be a Pope. Shall hee feare any ambush
in this clause? Lastly the testimonies which are heere repeated,
Satisf. pag. 119. Beza de iure magist. Suttcliff. Arch. Can. Caluin, And pag. 111. P. Frarer. were by me particularly both noted, and answered: and
most of these P. R. himselfe (that wee may know he was not
ignorant heereof) hath particularly discussed. Vnder what
visard then could he call a perfect manifestation of this obiection
a dissimulation? or a full answer vnto euery obiected exception
a concealement, as though nothing had beene reprehended?
or a particular repetition and satisfaction to all, an hypocriticall
dealing, as though there had beene nothing obiected at
all? Sure I am, it had beene more for the credit of P. R. if hee
had plaid the hypocrite in this taxation, to vse some colourable
slander, and not to haue laid himselfe so nakedly shamefull
in this kind, that very boyes, by comparing these places, may
see his deformitie. But O the impotency of malice! it is not
vnlike vnto the blindnesse of the Sodomites, who after that
they had seen Lots house, yet groped for the doore. So P. R. a litle
afterTract. Mitigat. c. 4. n. 42. pag. 132. discusseth some of my Answers, to this obiection
of Practise, and yet now will not acknowledge the beginning.
               
               
                  An eight falsitie of P. R.
                  88 To the
                        Satisfaction part. 2. cap. 3. pag. 102. 
                     Moderate Answerer obiecting the Commotion
of Wiat in Norfolke, in the dayes of Q. Mary, which my friend
P. R. hath obserued, & therby (to make me one of his incorporation)
would conclude me a double Liar. Let vs heare him.
Treatise Mitig. cap. 4. num. 36. & 37. pag. 128. 
                     To that then of Sir Thomas Wiat, the Duke of Suffolke, and others,
he answereth diuersly. 
                     
                        First, The History relateth (saith
he) the pretence of Sir Th
                           •
                        mas Wiat thus: A Proclamation
against the Queenes mariage, desiring all English-men to ioyn
for defence of the Realme, &c. Then that in Queene Maries
Oration against Wiat there is not to be found (sayth he) any
scruple concerning the cause of Religion. Thirdly, that no
Minister of the Gospell was brought in question as a Commotioner
in that cause. Lastly, if intent might answer for Protestants
accused in that name, then is it plaine, that it was not
Religion; if for Wiat and his fellowes, it is plaine, that it was
not against the Queene or State, but for both. 
                     So he. In all

which different clauses of Answer, consider if any one be in it selfe
true: for as for the first and second, though Wiat pretendeth in
his Proclamation the sayd mariage with Spaine to be the chiefe
cause, yet not alone, but that the Queen and Counsell (saith Fox)
would also by this mariage, as he affirmed, bring vpon the realme
miserable seruitude, and establish Popish religion. ¶ And the
same Fox relateth Queene Maries words in her Oration thus:
                     Fox anno 1554. pag. 1289.
                     That the matter of the marriage is but a Spanish cloake (saith
she) to couer their pretenced purpose against our religion. 
                     So
as in these two points the Minister lieth openly, but more in the
last, That Wiats attempt was not against Queene Mary or the
State, but for both: For that Q. Marie in the same Oration, as
both Fox and Hollinshed doe ioyntly relate, affirmed Wiats answer
to haue beene to Sir Edward Hastings and Sir Tho. Cornwallis,
sent from her vnto them, which he also at his arraignment
confessed, That he and his would haue the gouernance of her
person, the keeping of the Tower, and the placing of her
Counsellers.
                  89 The first lie he noteth, is in relating of the Oration of Q.
Marie, wherein I sayd there was no scruple concerning Religion:
and I cited for witnesse Hollinshed. This Authour (as we
may perceiue) P. R. hath examined, and could finde nothing
in him against me for this first point touching Q. Maries Oration:
therefore he seeketh other euidence, and bringeth against
me the testimonie of M. Fox, wherein there is mention
of Religion. What therefore? Therfore I am by him condemned
for a liar. Nay, but rather by this opposing M. Fox
P. R. hath wilily imitated the fraud of a fox, which creature,
men say, doth vsually prey furthest from home. So likewise
P. R. if he would haue proued me a liar, should haue done
it out of Hollinsheds relation of Q. Maries Oration, which was
the witnesse whom I produced: but he wanting cause of reproofe
heerein, doth therefore range further to conuince me
of lying by the testimony which I mentioned not. But whereas
this Mitigator hath sayd, ThatTreatise Mitig. pag. 92. P. R. confuted by himselfe. 
                     Aduertisement was giuen
him, that this Minister T. M. was Chaplaine vnto my L. of Canturbury
(and vpon this Aduertisement doth note me for his

Graces Chaplaine) when he shall be more certainly informed
that the Minister was neuer Chaplaine to his Grace, I would
but know whether he will giue his Reader leaue to call him a
Liar, or no. For, if, because he was deceiued in his Aduertisement,
he will be iudged a liar, then can not he (a liar) be a fit
man to charge another of vntruth: if he will auouch his owne
truth and sinceritie, because he reported nothing not whereof
by his Aduertiser he had been informed, then am I no liar,
who haue sayd no more than whereunto my Authour Hollinshed
did direct me. So that my Aduersarie is now chargeable
by an argument à paribus, either to acquit me, or els to
condemne himselfe. We may suffer professors of the feats of
Legerdemaine to delude the beholders, to conuey one mans
ring into another mans pocket, & then call him a cosener; but
for vs Diuines to play such tricks, as he hath done, changing
Hollinshed into M. Fox, and then to tax me for falshood, is a
deuice inexcusable. His second exception is of no better moment,
because euen that purpose of Wiat, To keepe the Tower,
wanted not the supposed intention, which was, The preseruation
of the Queene and State: yet so farre was it from me
to iustifie any such rebellious action, that I (according to the
maner of Schooles, vsing argumento ad hominem) obiected
this to our Romish Aduersaries, only, that they, by accusing
of Wiat, (who professed a good intent) might learne to condemne
themselues, whose only ground of Rebellion is pretence
of a Catholike intent; the rather, because a good intent
destitute of precept and commandement of God, is but (as
the Apostle teacheth)Rom. 3. 8. 
                     a damnable good. Wherefore the two
lies which P. R. would haue bestowed vpon me, he by vertue
of his place and patent may keepe to himselfe.
               
               
                  A ninth falshood of P. R.
                  90 A ninth falshood may be accounted, his peremptorie reprehension
of our English Translation vpon that of Esa. 29.
They are blinde &c. as dissenting from the Latine, Greeke, and
Hebrew, both in words and sense. In which censure heSee aboue §. 5. num. 15. & 16. hath

beene conuinced of a grosse falshood in both, by the iudgement
of his owne Doctors.
               
               
                  A tenth falsitie of P. R.
                  91 For a tenth take his wilfullSee aboue §. 6. num. 17. & 18. falshood in pressing one only
Edition of Carerius, thereby accusing me of falshood in corrupting
that Authour: whereas the Collen Edition hath iustified
me, and discouered this disposition of P. R. to haue been
willing that I should rather be condemned rashly than iustly
acquitted.
               
               
                  An eleuenth and twelfth fraud of P. R.
                  92 For an eleuenth may be remembred his vniustSee aboue §▪ 7. num. 21. crimination,
in noting me as a notable liar for affirming that, which his
owne triple instance doth euidently euince. We maySee aboue §. 8. num. 28. adde
for a twelfth his obiection of the Authour Frisingensis; wherein,
that he might prooue me a Falsificator, he doth himselfe
play foure excellent feats of falshood.
               
               
                  A thirteenth new and noble falshood.
                  93 I may not deale niggardly with P. R. especially in recounting
vnto him his owne, and therefore to his former dozzen
adde one other for aduantage, yet such an one as whereat most
of the former, although otherwise very impudent, may seeme
to blush. P. R. pleadeth for their mentall Aequiuocation,
(which I haue truly called the Baud or Broker of their Rebellon)
after this maner: 
                     Treatise Mitig. cap. 7. num. 8. pag. 279. 
                     The Minister himselfe (sayth he) doth
in effect confesse heere in his second Treatise, that for the space of
the last 400 yeeres the doctrine of Equiuocation hath beene receiued
for true in our Schooles, and consequently practised thorowout
all Christendome &c. And againe:
                        Ib. num. 12. pag. 281. How can a doctrine so vgly
and abominable (as T. M. calleth it) be receiued so generally thorowout
the Christian world, that is to say, The doctrine of all
Schooles, Chaires, Vniuersities, Casuists, Lawyers both Canon
and Ciuill, Diuines both Scholasticall and Positiue approouing
the same? And a little after: Was there none at the first admittance
of it to stand for the truth, and reason to the contrary in any
Prouince or State, in any place or time, within the compasse of 400
yeeres? And yet againe:
                        Ib. num. 15. pag. 284. 
                              •
                           
                         Seeing it hath beene admitted so long

time in Christendome, as our Aduersaries doe confesse, and that it
hath beene receiued so vniuersally and generally both by Prelates
and people; and if it haue beene so publikely taught by all learned
men, and contradicted by none, it ought to be a great argument to
discreet men, that it hath some ground of truth.
                  
                  It seemeth to me, that P. R. after that by custome of falsifying
he had cast himselfe into such a slumber, that he had little
sense of lying; now at length he may be thought to be fallen
into a dead sleepe, and to haue cast away all conscience of
truth: as may appeare by these so large and lauish assertions.
The summary points are two:
                  94 The first is in peruerting my confession. The Minister
himselfe (sayth P. R.) doth in effect confesse heere in his second
Treatise, That for the space of the last 400 yeeres the doctrine of
Aequiuocation hath beene receiued for true in Schooles, and consequently
practised thorowout all Christendome, and generally receiued
of all Chaires, Vniuersities, Schooles, Diuines, Casuists,
&c. Is it euen so P. R? Can you extract such a generall consequent
out of the confession of the Minister? Did he euer acknowledge
your mentall Aequiuocation so vniuersall, as you
make it, of all Vniuersities, Schooles, Diuines, Casuists? Nay
did not he
                        Satisf. Part. 3. cap. 12. confute this your assertion of generalitie by the
expresse sentence of your owne Doctour Genesius Sepulueda?
His words are these:Genesius in Theoph. cap. 6. 
                     This maner of aequiuocating is against the
authoritie of most ancient and chiefe Theologers or Diuines (meaning
the Schoole-Diuines) and none before Gabriel (a Schooleman)
taught it. Is this to confesse a generallitie? Or, could it
be called then vniuersall, when but one man set it first abroch?
Other testimonies of Genesius against Equiuocating P. R. did
seriously examine, and nimbly ouerskip this.
                  95 Againe, I neuer sayd that all Romish Priests were guiltie
of this part of perfidious doctrine of mentall Aequiuocation:
but proued, that not aboue 400 yeeres since mentall Equiuocation
was heard of euen in Romish schooles, and that the first
that is read of to haue defended it was Gabriel Biel a leud Sophister,
after it was entertained by Syluester and Angelus, and
some other few such Glozers, but was not then general among

them. We see therefore that P. R. his consequent is from a
confession of a few particulars to inferre a generall conclusion▪
                     All Diuines, All Casuists, &c. The lamenesse of this consequent
I shall make appeare by a like example,P. R. confuted by a Simile. thus: Let me
affirme with some Historians, that not aboue an hundred yeres
agoe (or thereabout) the Neapolitane disease, commonly called
the French pocks, tooke possession in Christendome, since
which time some parties haue beene miserably afflicted therewith.
Vpon this Assertion, by the consequent of our Mitigator,
it must follow, That since these hundred yeeres haue all
Cities, Townes, Villages, Schooles, People, Priests in Christendome,
yea euen our Mitigatour himselfe, become such
a kinde of Neapolitanes. And why may not this example fit?
Sure I am, that mentall Equiuocating, whomsoeuer it infecteth,
is nothing els than a pocke and pestilence in the soule.
We leaue this falshood taken from consequent, and seeke out
a more sensible proofe of his palpable falsitie than this.
               
               
                  P. R. his Aequiuocation proued a lie, and himselfe a Falsifier,
by the confessions of three Iesuits.
                  96 The second falsitie is in his plaine asseueration, That mentall
aequiuocation (for heereupon only we dispute) hath beene
vniuersally receiued of all Prelates and People in Christendome,
and not contradicted by any. Let vs first vnderstand what kinde
of aequiuocation P. R. doth defend. 
                     Treatise Mitig. cap. 12. num. 3. pag. 484. 
                     Mentall aequiuocation is
when any speech hath or may haue a double sense, not by any double
signification or composition of words themselues, but only by some
reseruation in the speaker, whereby his meaning is made different
from that sense, which the words that are vttered do beare without
that reseruation. 
                     This kinde of aequiuocation P. R. imbraceth,
and therunto he saith, There hath beene no one which hath
made contradiction.
               
               
                  The first witnesse conuincing this Mitigation of falshood is
Azorius a learned Iesuit.
                  97 This Azorius a great Casuist, in his booke of Morall Institution,
printed at Rome Anno 1600 by licence of his Superiours

(as the title signifieth) doth discusse this point of aequiuocation,
and his resolution is, That
                     Meo tamen iudicio illi regulam ad plura extendunt, & trahunt, quàm par sit, & quàm Nauarrus, Syluester, & Angelus voluerint. Nihil n. tàm falsum esse potest, quod non queat ab omni mendacio liberari, si aliquid arbitratu nostro mente tacitū retineamus. Possemus enim quicquid à nobis petitur, quamuis id apud nos habeamus, diffiteri nos habere, intelligentes, vt demus: quicquid fecerimus, quicquid viderimus, quicquid cogitauerimus, decreuerimus, de eo rogati, possemus absque mendacio dicere, Non fecimus, non vidimus, non cogitauimus, non decreuimus, eo nimirùm sensu, vt tibi dicamus, vel, quod tibi dicere debeamus. Quarè mihi aliud videtur, quod quibusdam regulis subiectis breuitèr perstringam. Az
                              •
                           r. Jes. Insti. Moral. part. 1. lib. 11. cap. 4. § Meo tamen. pag. 1335. Romae cùm priuilegio. Anno 1600. Superiorum permissu. there is nothing so false (saith
he) which may not be freed from a lie if we may keepe something secret
in our mindes, for by this meanes when any thing is asked of vs,
we may deny that we haue it (although indeed we haue it) vnderstanding
in our minds [that we may giue it.] Whatsoeuer we haue
done, seene, thought, or decreed, being demanded thereof, we may
by this meanes answer without a lie that we haue not done, nor
seene, nor thought, nor decreed, namely, in that sense [that we may
tell it vnto you.] But I am of another opinion, which I will manifest
by certeine rules. His fift rule doth hit the naile on the head,
which is this.
                     Quinta regula: Si reuerà verba, quibus vtimur, significatione suâ & communi hominum vsu ambigua non sunt, nec habent nisi vnum tantummodò sensum, ea vsurpare debemus eo sensu, quem reddūt, nec licet nobis, etiam si contra ius fas
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         omne interrogemur, aliquid mentis cogitatione concipiendo in aliud detorquere; nunquam enim fas est mentiri: at is mentitur, qui verba alitér accipit, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ipsa significant. Azor. Jes. quo supra, in fine cap.
                      The fift rule: If the words we vse are not according
to their common signification among men, ambiguous or doubtfull,
and haue only one sense, we ought to vse them in that sense
which they haue in themselues: neither is it lawful for vs, although
we be examined against right and iustice, to detort or turne our
speech by our inward conceit of minde, because it is not lawfull for
vs to lie: but he doth lie who vnderstandeth his speeches otherwise
than they do signifie in themselues. The difference between our
Mitigator and this Iesuit is no more than this: First, P. R. defendeth
an aequiuocation which is when the speech hath no
double sense in the outward words themselues, but only in some secret
reseruation in the minde of the speaker. But Azorius saith,
That we ought not to vse any sense of speech which is not in the
words themselues, but only in the inward thought of him that speaketh.
Secondly, P. R. mainteineth, That his mentall reseruation
is a truth: but Azorius concludeth, That it is a lie. And
can there be a greater contradiction than this? How then

could our Mitigator affirme, That mentall aequiuocation is
defended of Casuists and Doctors, and contradicted by none? Hath
he any shadow of excuse by ignorance of the Authour and
place? No, for he hath
                     Treatise Mitigat. pag. 355. & 420. & 429. & 450. 
                     alleged this Author, vpon this question
of aequiuocation, foure times; and the place was particularly
obiected in my Confutation therof: or els be helped by
difference of Translation or Edition? He wil not pretend this;
therefore can no euasion serue him, except hee will answer,
That he thought good in citing Authors for defense of aequiuocation
to aequiuocate. Whence any may discerne what
credit such wretched Aequiuocators may deserue.
                  
               
               
                  A second witnesse conuincing P. R. of falshood.
                  98 When I had
                        Satisf. part. 1. ca. 26. in the beginning. obiected against the Romanists that popish
Priests (yet not saying that all of them held this opinion) are
guilty of this perfidiousnesse of violating an oath by mentall
equiuocation: my first Aduersary, called the Moderate Answerer,
that he might a little qualifie the hatefulnesse of that equiuocating
sect: did tell vs that
                        Mod. Answ. cap. 10. 
                     A Iesuit famous amongst the
Casuists, Emanuel Sà in his Aphorismes writeth of this matter
in these words: Quidam dicunt, &c. Some there bee who say
that he who is not bound to answer vnto the intention of the examiner,
may answer by reseruation of some thing in his owne minde, to
wit, [that it is not so, viz. that I must tell it vnto you] although others
do not admit this maner of answering, and peraduenture vpon
better reason than the former. Whereby it is manifest (saith
that Moderate Answerer) that all Catholikes do not allow of aequiuocation.
Thus farre hee: confessing heereby that diuers
Catholike Authours haue contradicted this equiuocating forgerie,
which P. R. hath auouched no Catholike writer did euer
contradict. Is it possible that my Aduersary can free himselfe
from a falsitie corroding the conscience? The Edition is but
one, the translation is the same, the place was well knowen,
being obiected by the Moderate Answerer, whom hee hath
commended as a learned performer and is furthermore repeated
in my booke ofPart. 1. c. 27. pag. 89. 
                     Satisfaction, which hee hath laboured to
confute. Say then Sir Mitigatour, will you thinke this Moderate

Answer to be true or no;A dilemma. take heed what you say, you
haue a Woolfe by the eares (according to the prouerbe) if you
hold him, hee will bite your hands, if you let him goe hee will
flie in your face. Say therfore: was that answer of your fellow
true, wherin it is said, that diuers Catholikes do not allow of this
doctrine of aequiuocation? Then are you a false Proctor, for this
your wilfull assertion, to wit, Not one Catholike Doctour doth
contradict it. Or will you say that Answer was vntrue? then
must you be iudged a false sycophant, for approouing that for
A iust and Moderate Answer, wherein the Author hath acquitted
himselfe learnedly, and yet do thinke it to be vntrue.
                  
               
               
                  The third witnesse conuincing P. R. of falshood.
                  99 Maldonat a principall Iesuit and Casuist resolueth thus;
Maldonat. cō. in Luc. vlt. vers. 28. 
                     Whosoeuer doth endeuor by faining to deceiue another, although
he intend to signifie something else, yet, doubtlesse, he lieth. This testimony

                        Satisf. part. 3 cap. 4. pa. 59. I vsed for confutation of this vile art. Which P. R.
could not be ignorant of, becauseTreat. Mitig. ca. 14. nū. 4. pa. 409. 510. hee endeuoured to satisfie
other testimonies, as of Genesius and Sotus. But this Authour
Maldonat specified in the same place, P. R. (as a weaker Aduersary
will doe his ouermatch) did willingly pretermit. But
what now will follow of all this? what will P. R. obiect? Let
vs but heare what hath been said, and then he shall know what
may be said. He claimed an vniuersall approbation of mentall Equiuocation
from the consent of all Vniuersities, Diuines and Casuists,
&c. no one contradicting that doctrine. He hath also said,
thatTreat. Mitig. ca. 1. num. 38. pag. 74. 
                     A generall Proposition is such, that if any one instance may
be giuen to the contrary, the whole is ouerthrowen. Now haue I
instanced vnto his generall of All Vniuersities, all Prelates, all
Casuists, all people, in three famous Iesuists and Casuists, Azorius,
Sà, Maldonate, and in the confession of his fellow the
Moderate Answerer, acknowledging that diuers Catholikes do
not approoue their mentall reseruation: all from direct testimonies
of these Authors certainely knowen vnto this Mitigator.
And therefore must conclude, that seeing any one knowen instance
may ouerthrow a whole generall, our Mitigator by these
foure seuerall knowen instances is to be accounted a foure-fold
                     
falsificator. I haue exceeded the proportion of our Mitigators
demand, who hath required but two or three instances in any,
though in himself, of vnsatisfiable falshoods, I haue offerd him
thirteene, as many as I could well bundle vp in this briefe Preamble,
reseruing the rest for the exact Incounter, when I doubt
not, but vpon the discouery of his vnconscionable deprauations
he will wish that his braines had beene a-sleepe, when hee
framed this Mitigation, rather than his fraudulent and malicious
disposition should be discouered. Wherof there will be yet
more proofe in his calumniations following: wherunto I now
addressemy Satisfaction in
               
            
            
               
                  An Answer to the Accusations of falshood, which the
Mitigator hath obiected to his Aduersary Th. Morton,
singling out of many, not such which might seeme vnto
me most easilie answered: but those which P. R.
hath most vehemently pressed and vrged,
as by his insolent insultations
will appeare.
               
               § 18.
               100. ALthough the discouered calumnious spirit of P. R.
might so preiudice the credit of his other taxations,
that, in the opinion of any religious Reader, I might seeme to
be absolued euen before I be accused; yet considering that in
slander, as in a bodily hurt Etsi vulnus sanetur, cicatrix manet
tamen Though the wound be cured, yet the scarre doth remaine:
and that it was no sufficient iustification for the one thiefe vpon
the Crosse to tell his fellow, saying:Luc. 23. 
                  Thou also art in the
same condemnation: Therefore doe I willingly addresse my Apologie
and defence against his calumniations, especially such
wherein he insisteth and insulteth most; wherunto I shall giue
(I hope) such satisfaction, as that not only the wound of slander
may be cured, but euen also the suspicious scarre of imputation
may be wiped away.
               
                  The first obiected falsification,
whereupon he maketh
this insultation:
 It is a malicious lie of the Minister,
hauing neither simplicitie
nor truth, but of a lost conscience
by manifest and malicious
calumniations.
               
               101 P. R. beginneth thus: 
                  Treatise Mitig. epist. dedic. num. 18. & 19. 
                  He (Tho. Morton) laieth before
his Maiesty a certaine obseruation about Popes names, as full
fraught with malice and deceitfulnesse, as the former with vanity:
and he layeth the obseruation vpon Polydore Virgil, though citing
no place for it. Polydore obserueth (saith hee) that the
Popes a long time in their election had their names changed
by Antiphrasis, viz. the elected if he were by naturall disposition
fearefull, was named Leo, if cruell, Clement, if vnciuill Vrbanus,
if wicked Pius, if couetous Bonifacius, if in all behauior
intolerable, Innocentius. And with this hee thinketh to haue laid
downe an obseruation of importance. But why had he not adioined
also, that if he were carelesse of his flocke, then Gregory must bee
his name, which importeth a vigilant Pastor? But now let the iudicious
Reader obserue the malice and falshood of this obseruation,
and thereby iudge whether the Authour thereof bee a Minister of
simple truth, or no. Polydore saith onely that sometimes Popes
as other Princes in like maner haue had names that haue beene
different, or rather contrary to their nature and maners, which is
an ordinary case, if we examine the signification of men and womens
names; but that Popes names were changed of purpose by Antiphrasis,
or contrary speech to couer their defects, as heere is set
downe, this is a malicious lie of the Minister, and hath neither simplicity
nor truth in it: for that all these names heere mentioned of
Leo, Clemens, Vrbanus, Pius, Bonifacius, Innocentius and
Gregory were chosen by the Popes that tooke them for the great
reuerence and estimation they had of certaine excellent men of that
name, that went before them, as also for the good abodement of their
future gouernment, and to be stirred vp the more by the memory of
those names to the vertues signified by them: but especially for the
honour and imitation of the first Popes that bare those names.
               
               
                  
                  The Answer.
                  102 The first note of falshood he intimateth to be, because I
laid my obseruation vpon Polydore, citing no place for it. Would
not his preiudicate Reader now thinke that I had fraudulently
suggested a testimonie in the name of Polydore, which cannot
be found; and in the guiltinesse heereof to haue cited no place?
But heere I make a Nouerint vniuersi, to giue euery Reader to
vnderstand, that the sentence which I reported vpon my memory
is certainly extant in the ancient Editions of Polydore,
lib. 4. Inuent. ca. 10. in these words, Primus honos, &c. which
sentence because it doth not a little offend the superstitious
Romanists, therfore An. Dom. 1572. by the authority of Pope
Pius Quin. it is commanded in these words [Ind. Expurg. Belg. pag. 195. 
                     Vsque ad, aliud sibi
nomen aptaret, Deleatur] that is, faire and cleane to bee blotted
out. Can then this be ought but a transcendent impudency to
blame me for not citing that testimony, which his Pope, lest
it should be cited hath vtterly razed out? Hee seeth his Pope
pulling out a mans tongue, and then would compell mee to
looke whether I can find it in his mouth: but although they
haue made Polydore by their Index expurgatorius, almost in euery
page dumbe, not suffering him to beare witnesse against
the pride of Popes, the licentiousnesse of Monkes, the superstitions
of their Church, the nouelties of their manifold traditions
and inuentions; yet our ancient Polydore now dwelling amongst
Protestants (Printed An. 1570. Basileae) hath a tongue
which will tell tales, saying plainely that,Primus honos Romano Pontifici habetur, vt si minùs pulchro honestetur no mine, e
                           •
                        statim creato liceat illud mutare Verbi gratia, non extra iocum dictū sit, Si homo maleficus anteà fortè fuerit, vt Bonifacius appelletur: si timidus, Leo: si rusticus, Vrbanus: si improbus, Innocentus: si ferox, Clemens: si malè audiuerit, Benedictus: vt saltem nomine Pontifex ornamē
                        to sit dignitati. Eius autem rei auctor fuisse dicitur Sergius secundus, cui cum Os porci diceretur, ad obscoen
                           •
                         nominis vocem tollendā, datum est, vt aliud sibi nomē aptaret. Polyd. lib. 4. de Inu. rerū, c. 10. 
                     This is the first honour
which is giuen vnto the Pope of Rome, that if peraduenture
his name (before election) be somewhat vnseemely, he may change
it as soone as he is created. As for example, (which may not bee
spoken without a iest) if peraduenture hee had beene before (his
creation) a wicked man, that then he should be called Bonifacius,
that is, a good doer: if fearefull, then Leo, that is, a Lion: if rusticall,
then Vrbanus, that is, ciuill: if vngodly, then Innocentius,
that is, innocent: if furious, then Clemens, that is, gentle: if infamous,
then Benedictus, that is, a man of a good report, should
be his name. The first Author of this change of names (which was

                     Anno 1052.) was Pope Sergius Secundus, whose proper name was
Hogs-face: who, that he might auoid the ignominy of his own name,
was permitted to chuse another.
                  
                  103 Obserue now what I haue reported from Polydore, viz.
that Popes names were changed by antiphrase, or contrary speech,
to couer their defects. And this is no whit different from the
testimony of Polydore, who saith, that If the Pope were before
his creation wicked, he did take the name of godly vpon him: if rigorous,
then gentle, &c. Which kind of alteration of names is
not vnlike a Gregorian, (as some call it) or artificiall couer for
a baldhead. Let therefore the iudicious Reader iudge from
what spirit, whether of ignorance or malice, haue proceeded
these slanderous inuectiues, calling my true relation malice and
falshood: and againe, a malicious lie of the Minister, which hath
neither simplicity nor truth in it. It is no rare thing for women
of suspected conuersation, lest they should bee called by their
proper names, to miscall honest Matrons first. Peraduenture
P. R. vseth the same art in naming me a Liar. But I had rather
interpret his meaning in the best part, to imagine that hee
might meane by his owne open and false detraction to proue
me his Aduersary, to be A Minister of simple truth.
                  
                  A second obiection of falshood,
whereupon hee
insulteth thus: This false Lad setteth downe his
owne fiction: and is not this perfidious
dealing? can any excuse
him from falshood and malice in
so open treachery?
                  
                  104 P. R. groweth yet hotter, and casteth coales about him,
thus;
                     Treatise Mitig. ca. 2. n. 46. pa. 79. 
                     He (viz. Tho. Morton) hath these words: Pope Adrian
being guiltie of like seditious practise against the Emperour
Henry the Second, was choaked with a 
                              •
                           lie. And in his quotation
citeth Nauclerus for it, Generatione 139. which should bee
39. for that Nauclerus hath nothing neere so many generations in
that part; and in stead of Henry the Second, hee should haue said
Fredericke the First of that name, for that Henry the Second
was before the time of our conquest, and almost two hundred yeers
before Adrian the fourth our English Pope, of whom we now speak,

who liued in the time of King Stephen and King Henry the Second
of England, and was an holy man, and accounted the Apostle
of Noruegia for conuerting the same vnto our Christian faith, before
he was Pope, and all Authours do write honourably of him▪
and so doth Nauclerus affirme: and therefore though hee make
mention of such a fable related by Vrspergensis that was a schismaticall
writer in those daies (who also doth not absolutely auouch
it, but with this temperament, vt fertur, as the report goeth) yet
doth the same Nauclerus reiect the same as false, and confuteth it
by the testimonies of all other writers, especially of Italy that liued
with him, and thereby knew best both his life and death. And yet
all this notwithstanding will this false Lad T. M. needs set downe
this history as true, affirming it for such, and neuer so much as giuing
his Reader to vnderstand, that any other denied the same, or
that the only Authour himselfe of this fiction doubted therof. And
is not this perfidious dealing? or can any man excuse him from falshood
and malice in this open treacherie?
                  
               
               
                  The Answer.
                  105 Not so Sir, both because (as I truly protest) I did not write
this out of the Author himselfe, which I had neuer seene, but
from collection out of some other booke: yet in the relation
it selfe there appeareth no shadow of malicious falshood. First,
there could not be malice in misquotation of the Generation,
as an 139. for 39.His Cauill compared. which neither added nor detracted anything
from the matter it selfe, no more than to say Peter is 10. or an
100. yeeres of age doth conuince a man of fraud who intendeth
only to prooue that Peter is a man. And whosoeuer shall
obiect error of quotation, he may be quoted for one that is ignorant
either what it is to write, or transcribe, or to print; for all
these are subiect vnto misquotations. Now if there bee a fault
in a peece of cloth, must we necessarily iudge that the spinner
was to blame?
                  Secondly, what skilleth it whether it was Henry an Emperour,
or Fredericke an Emperour, that was excommunicated
by the Pope, when as the intended conclusion was onely this,
that Adrian the Pope did excommunicate an Emperour, and

conspired against him? no more than if, when one should bee
examined of murder, the accuser should say that the mortall
wound was giuen with the right hand; and the party accused
should gainesay it, proouing it was done with the left hand;
could this difference be of any moment, when the maine question
is, whether this man committed the murder, or no? in all
this there is error (I confesse) but yet no falshood.
                  Thirdly, if where one only witnesse is required, I should
say vnto N. you told me (I think) that A. did conspire against
F. and died miserably. No (quoth N.) I did not: but heere is
my brother V. that said something to this purpose. In all this
we discerne only an errour in misciting the Authour (N) but
no falshood for want of a witnesse. So heere, where V. that is,
the Abbat of Vrspurg was ready to say that which N. that is,
Nauclerus was vnwilling to affirme, concerning the conspiracie
of A. that is, the Pope Adrian against F. that is Fredericke
the Emperour. O but Abbas Vrspurgensis did say onely, fertur,
that is, It is so reported: and this a man may say of a fable.
But I pray you Sir, what is there in Historiographers of after
times but only case of report? So that whosoeuer shall cite any
Historian who was not 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, an eie-witnesse himselfe
of that which he writeth; doth in citing him confesse that
he speaketh but vpon report: yet euen this word [fertur] that
is, [It is so said, or, It is reported, or, The same is, &c.] doth not
necessarily betoken doubtfulnesse in him that vttereth it:
which your owne IesuitPosterior Caietani coniectura, quia Gregor. magnus in homilia de amissa drachma non fuit aufus hos libros B. Dionysij asserere, & tantum ambiguè loquitur vtēs voce [fertur:] respōdeo sic loqui non quia ipse dubitauerat qui in Graecia eius libros legerat, &c. Del Rio vi
                              •
                           d. Areopa. cap. 6. §. Posterior. pag. 29. 
                     Del Rio would haue his Reader to
obserue in a certaine sentence of S. Gregory.
                  
                  106 The only colour of iust exception hee can bring, is this:
Because (saith he) Nauclerus reiecteth it to be false, and confuteth
it by all writers, especially of Italy. And what then? Notwithstanding
will this false Lad T. M. needs set it downe as true. If
age make diseases desperate, it is better be a lad then (that I
may so say) a dad in falshood; for by how much more any is a
father in lying, the more neere hee is in degree of kindred vnto
the father of lies, in which line of descent I feare P. R. will appeare
to be. For Nauclerus endeth his censure thus: Verùm
cùm multi Itali nullam de hoc mentionem faciunt, &c. hec & alia

ambiguum me reddunt quid potiùs eligendum quid
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         credendū sit.
Scribimus enim res gestas affectu nonnunquam plus quàm veritatis
amore ducti. He saith not that Italians denied this maner of
death, but that they make no mention of it: neither can Nauclerus
be said to haue confuted that which he left as doubtfull,
saying, I know not whether part to beleeue. As for the truth of the
story (for this is it which we should contend for) wee oppose
the Abbat Vrspergensis vnto Nauclerus. But it is obiected, Vrspergensis
was an enemie to the Pope. Well; and it may be answered,
that the Monke Nauclerus was a friend to the Pope.
And therefore we may know that as the bodily sight may bee
hindered aswell by hot rheume as by colde, so falleth it out in
passions of the mind, that loue may beget as blind commendation
as hatred may a blind detraction.
                  107 But why should it be thought a matter incredible that
such a dismall, and as it were disastrous end should befall a
Pope? For, I feare, this is the only thing which so greatly offendeth
the cholericke old man. Wherfore I entreat his patience
(if yet there can be patience in so extreame malignity) to vnderstand
what his owne Doctours haue written concerning
the death of diuers Popes.
                     Ioan. de turre 
                           〈◊〉
                        . lib. de sum. Eccles. de Anastati
                           •
                        . Idē habet Platina: Supplementum Cronicho. & liber Pontificalis in decret. Anastasi secundi. Benè legitur Anastasium diuino
nutu percussum interijsse: that Anastasius was strooke with the
hand of God and perished. Their last Chronologer Binius, highly
priuiledged, telleth vs, that
                     Binius in tom. 3. conc. pag. 1054. anno Dom. 912. Binius quo supra pag. 160. Ioannes decimus, quem infamis foemina
infami opere in solium Petri intrusit, per impudicam Theodorae
filiam ceruiciali suffocatus obijt: that is, Pope Iohn the tenth,
whom an infamous woman by a l
                        •
                     wd practise, did thrust into Peters
chaire, afterward by the vnchaste daughter of Theodora hee was
choaked or strangled with a pillow. Again, of Iohn the twelfth, he
citeth one whom he calleth an Aduersary to this Pope, reporting
                     The dismall ends of diuers Popes. Ioannem duodecimum quadam nocte, dum se cum alterius
vxore oblectaret, in temporibus à diabolo percussum & inter paucos
dies mortuum esse: huius historiae veritatem non controuerto:
How this Pope one night in the midst of his dalliance with another
mans wife was stroke in the head by the Diuell and shortly after died.
A little after; I doe not contend about the truth of this question.
What is now awanting but that an example of one Pope

be produced, vpon whom the vengeance of God seazed because
of his rebellious opposition against temporall Lords?
This
                     Binius cir
                           •
                        . Ann. Domin. 1198. pa. 1441. Vrbanus Tertius (inquit Abbas Vrspergeniss) quem multi
Turbanum appellabant, eò quòd in odium Imperatoris turbaret
Ecclesiam, nutu Dei percussus interijt: Pope Vrbane the third,
(saith Abbas Vrspergensis) commonly called Turbane, because
in hatred of the Emperour he troubled the Church, was strooke by
God and perished. So little cause could I haue to wound my Aduersaries
with forged inuentions, being thus sufficiently furnished
and prepared to confound them with true and plain confessed
testimonies.
                  
                  A third obiection of falshood,
whereupon he
thus insulteth: With such wee are forced to deale,
that haue no conscience at all in
cosenage.
                  
                  108 P. R. doth further charge me thus;
                     Treatise Mitig. ca. 2. n. 47. p. 80. 
                     And another like
tricke he plaieth some few pages before this, again citing out of Doctour
Bouchiers booke De iusta abdicatione, these words: Tyrannum
occidere honestum est, quod cuiuis impunè facere permittitur;
quod excommuni consensu dico: and then he Englisheth
the same thus: Any man may lawfully murder a tyrant; which I
defend, saith he, by common consent. But hee that shall read the
place in the Authour himselfe shall find that hee holdeth the very
contrary, to wit, that a priuate man may not kill a tyrant that is not
first iudged and declared to bee a publike enemy by the Commonwealth:
and he prooueth the same at large: first out of Scriptures,
and by the decree of the generall Councel of Constance: his words be
these: Neque verò eo iure quod ad regnum habet nisi per publicum
iudicium spoliari potest, &c. Neither can a tyrant be depriued
of that right which he hath to a kingdome but onely by publike
iudgement: yea further also, so long as that right of kingdome
remaineth, his person must be held for sacred; wherof ensueth, that
no right remaineth to any priuate man against his life: and albeit
any priuate man should bring foorth neuer so many priuate iniuries
done by the said tyrant against him; as that hee had whipped him
with iron rods, oppressed him, afflicted him, yet in this case must hee
haue patience, according to the admonition of S. Peter 1. 2. That

we must be obedient not only vnto good & modest lords, but also vnto
those that be disorderly, & that this is grace when a man for Gods
cause doth sustain & beare with patience iniuries vniustly done vnto
him, &c. And a little after P. R. thus
                        
                           Mitig. ib. n. 48. pa. 81. Let the Reader consider
the malicious falshood of this Minister T. M. who in alleging
that little sentence before mentioned, about killing of a tyrant, stroke
out the words of most importance: quem hostem Respub. iudicauerit;
whom the common-wealth shall iudge for a publike enemie:
and adding that other clause, which I say by common consent,
which is not there to be found. And with such people we are
forced to deale, that haue no conscience at all in cosenage, &c.
                     So. P. R.
               
               
                  The Answer.
                  110 The Accusation is grieuous, viz. Malicious cosenage; the
Matter is hainous, viz. Killing of Kings; my Aduersarie is serious
and vrgent, saying, Consider &c. and the issue important:
which will be either a branding me for a notorious Slanderer,
or else my Aduersarie for a toxicall and pestilent Mitigator.
In thy examination and censure hereof (Christian Reader)
I require only iustice.
                     Bouchier lib. 3. de Abdicat. Hen. 3. cap. 16. pag. 267. Bouchier in the place controuerted,
doth make a double consideration of a Tyrant; one is, as
he doth iniurie vnto any priuate man [Qui iusta potestate ad
priuatorum iniurias abutitur.] In this case he resolueth, That
à priuato occidi proptereà non licet: That is, It is not lawfull for
any priuate man to kill him. The second consideration of a Tyrant
is, as he doth commit any publike iniurie, whether the
case concerne Religion or the ciuill State, whereof he doth
determine thus: Qui inreligionem ac patriam tyrannidem exerceat,
hunc occidere respub. possit &c. That is, The Commonwealth
may kill him, who shall tyrannize and iniurie the religion,
and the countrey: it is so manifest that none can doubt of it, but
such as are destitute of common sense: for if the people may arme
themselues against any noisome beast, which may indanger the
common safetie; then much more against such a Tyrant, who is
woorse than any beast. But who may attempt the execution
heereof? It followeth in the place by me formerly alleged:
                     
Priuato cuiuis Tyrannum, quem hostem Resp. iudicauerit, occidere
licitum est. That is, It is lawfull for euery priuate man to
kill him, whom the Common-wealth shall iudge to be a Tyrant.
We see now that Bouchier hath defended, both that No priuate
man may kill a Tyrant for iniurie against priuate men, and
also, that Any priuate man may kill a Tyrant for common iniuries.
                  111 I haue alleged the latter, P. R. hath opposed the former;
both of vs haue affirmed a truth: where then is the falshood?
This must be imputed to him who reporteth a truth, but not
truly, that is, to a false purpose: wherof our Reader may easily
iudge: for I haue obiected the testimonie of Bouchier, affirming,
that in the case of common iniuries, whether in matter of
Religion or State, euery priuate man is licensed to kill a Tyrant:
and Bouchiers words auouch no lesse. P. R. opposeth
the other negatiue testimonie of Bouchier, denying, that in
priuate iniuries any priuate man may murder a Tyrant: and
doth he therby conuince me of falshood? Nay rather doth he
not seeke to iniurie me with falshood? For my whole Treatise
of Discouerie intendeth only the publike, and neuer medleth
with priuate occasions.
                  112 This will be plaine by example. The common rule of
humanitie teacheth, that the Father, being but an Esquire,
may in priuate conuents and meetings haue place aboue his
sonne, though a Knight; but in places of publike resort, the
Knight,P. R. con
                           •
                        uted by a Simile. though a sonne, is preferred before his Father. Heere
be two considerations of the sonne and the father; the one is
in respect of priuate, the other in regard of publike occasions.
This Assertion of ciuility standing thus: Suppose my first Aduersarie
the Moderate Answerer should auerre that T. M. saith
that any sonne, being a Knight, may take place of his father,
being but an Esquire: then my second Aduersarie P. R. hearing
this, should oppose and say, It is false which thou allegest,
for T. M. sayth the contrary, viz. That any Father, being
an Esquire, may priuately take place of his sonne, though
he be a Knight. Can this his taxation of falshood be thought
true? It is not altogether impertinent? For the assertions of
T. M. were two: the first, That any such sonne must be preferred

in publike: the second, That any such father must be
preferred in priuate. And are these contrary? Are they not
both true? And can one truth shoulder out another? The
falshood therefore resteth in the Pleader, who sayd, That the
allegation was false.
                  Wee reade in the Gospell this command of our Sauiour:
Matth 23 2. 
                     The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chaire: whatsoeuer they
bid you obserue, that obserue and doe: but after their works doe
not, &c. Here we heare vs charged To do, and Not to do as the
Pharisees. And are these contrary? No: for the [Doe] is a
commanding to follow their godly doctrine; the [Doe not] is
a forbidding to imitate their vngodly life.
                  113 A second crime is in adding (as he sayth) of this clause
[Which I say by common consent.] Looke in the Cha. 15. where
the ground of this Position is layed, That it is lawfull to kill a
Tyrant, he affirmeth it, saying, Mirum est quàm magnum affirmando
consen
                           •
                        um habeat. That is, It is maruellous what a great
consent this hath. Then come to the 16. Chap. vpon the point
now in question, he hath sayd, He that denieth this, is distitute
of common sense. If therefore maruellous consent according to
common sense may be thought more than equiualent vnto a
common consent, then is my Aduersarie vnconscionably contentious
to accuse me, as saying too much, where I had warrant
to haue sayd more.
                  114 It may be, that the striking out of the words of importance
Whom the Common-wealth shall iudge to be a publike enemie]
may somewhat preiudice my conscience. None can imagine
this, but he that is not acquainted with the Authour,In publicis notorij
                           •
                        
                        
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         criminibus tanto alitèr id fieri debet, quā
                        to damnata ea per se publico praeconio, ac naturae sensu esse solent, vt August. de Cain & Abel, Euidentia criminis non eget clamore accusationis. Si latrones, si bestiae, cùm irruu
                           •
                        t, omni iure expugnantur, cur non tyrānus quouis latrone & bestiâ deterior? Duplex poenae genus, positiuae vnū, priuatiuae alterum: quaepositiua est, formulam expectare debet; in priuatiua certè alitèr se res habet, quod pertecto scelere, vele tra nonum iudicium vim habere inter Theologos confessam sit. Then cap. 3. Praeueniri iudic um Ecclesiae posse specialis probatio, vt Deut. 13. Statim interficies, ac sit primùm manus tua supra eum, vt Phinees scortum, Num. 25. ari epto pugione consodit. Sic Mattathias se gessit aduersus Israëlitam idololatram, 1. Machab. 2. Tales alij Israëlitis liberatores Othoniel, Aiod, Barach. And a little after would prooue this out of the Councell of Lateran, out of the Decree of Pop. Gelasius. And in the former Chap. Ecclesiae iudicium non est, nisi celebri illo Apostolicae fedis theatro, nec reipnisi in plenis & liberis comitijs esse potest. In the end of the Chapter after Chap. 5. Expectandi iudicij causas omnes in Henrico praeclusas esse. After in Chap. 23. Frater Iacobus Clemens, non ita pridem Sacerdos factus—post celebratū Missae sacrificium Henricum cultello, vt Aeglonem Moabitem alter Aiod im
                           •
                         etiam fortitèr in abdomine traijcit. Nihil iam vt fit quod Iudithae Holophernē, aut Dauidis Goliathum obtruncantis, aut Samsonis maxiliâ Asini mille viros inter ficientis historias admiremur, quia maiora his vidimus, & clamore meritò debeamus, Dextra Domini fecit virtutem, &c. Thus much Bouchier.
                      who

spendeth a whole Chapter in prouing this Position; Praeuenire
iudicum vrgente negotio posse. That is, That the case may
be so vrgent, that the publike iudgement (against such a publike
tyrant) need not be expected, because where the crime is notorious,
it is sufficiently condemned without further iudgement: for if
theeues and beasts (sayth he) when they suddenly assault vs, may
be resisted without iudiciall proceeding; then much more a tyrant,
who is woorse than any beast. And this doctrine he assumeth to
proue necessarie both in case Temporall, when the King doth
iniurie the Countrey, and in Ecclesiasticall transgression, when
he offendeth publikely against Religion: particularly instancing
in Henry 3. King of France, who was murdered by Iacob
Clemens a Frier, before any publike iudgement of the Kingdome,
which hee ascribeth to a Parliament, or els of the
Church, which he attributeth to the Popes Consistorie. And
yet he magnifieth the murderer (a priuate man) and extolleth
him aboue those who are recorded in holy Writ, not vpon
their priuate spirit, but by diuine inspiration to haue accomplished
noble attempts. Heere, heere is matter indeed, whereby
to decypher my Aduersarie to be no better than a painted
Sepulcher, who is outwardly gaily adorned with the titles
of Moderation and Mitigation: but inwardly (by holding
Boucheirs doctrine) full of dead mens bones, I meane the dead
bodies of Protestants: But how dead? Euen (as S. Hierome
speaketh in the like case) Voto occidunt, cùm gladio nequ
                           •
                        ant.
That is, They wish them to be killed, whom they can not kill as they
wish. But this I reserue vnto my Incounter. I proceed to the
next.
                  A fourth Obiection of falshood,
wherin hee insulteth thus: This testimonie is egregiously
abused, &c.
                  
                  115Treatise Mitig. cap. 2. num. 26. pag. 68. 
                     His fourth and last place is out of M. William Reinolds
in his booke De iusta Reip. auctoritate, &c. whom he abuseth 
                           •
                        
                        gregiously,
both in ascribing to him that which is not his, and in deliuering
the same corruptedly: and by a little you may learn much,
Ex vngue leonem His words he citeth thus: Rex humana creatura
est, quia ab hominibus constituta: and Englisheth in this

maner: A King is but a creature of mans creation. Where you
see first, that in the translation hee addeth [but] and [mans
creation] of himselfe: for that the Latine hath no such but, nor
creation, but constitution. Secondly, these words are not the
words of M. Reinolds, but only cited by him out of S. Peter. And
thirdly, they are alleged heere by T. M. to a quite contrary sense
from the whole discourse and meaning of the Author, which was to
exalt and magnifie the authoritie of Princes, as descending from
God; and not to debase the same, as he is calumniated. For proofe
heereof whosoeuer will looke vpon the booke and place it selfe, before
mentioned, shall finde that M. Reinolds purpose therein is to
prooue, That albeit earthly principalitie, power and authoritie, be
called by the Apostle, humana creatura: yet that it is originally
from God, and by his commandement to be obeyed. His words are
these: Hinc enim est, &c. Hence it is, that albeit the Apostle doe
call all earthly principalitie a humane creature, for that it is placed
in certaine men (from the beginning) by suffrages of the people,
yet election of Princes doth flow from the law of nature, which
God created; and from the vse of reason, which God powred into
man, and which is a little beame of diuine light drawen from that
infinite brightnesse of Almighty God: therefore doth the Apostle
S. Paul pronounce, That there is no power but from God, and
that he which resisteth this power, resisteth God himselfe.
                     
So M. Reinolds.
                  
               
               
                  The Answer.
                  116 This Allegation is, of all which yet I haue found, most
obnoxious and alliable vnto taxation; which (God knoweth
that I lie not) I receiued from suggestion, as the Author thereof
R. C. can witnesse. For at that time I had not that Rosaeus,
aliâs Reinolds, neither by that present importunitie of occasions
could seeke after him: which, I confesse, is greatly exorbitant:
for I receiued it as a testimony debasing the authoritie
of Kings: Vpon which presumption (if true) it could be no
falshood in me to insert the particle But, especially being acquainted
with the doctrine of Card. Bellarmine, who, that he
may disable the authoritie of a King in comparison of the dignitie
of a Pope, doth defend, That Kings, being chosen by men,

are not immediatly created by God: and yet, The Pope, elected by
Cardinals, hath his authoritie immediatly from God. What is
this els, but in a certeine degree to distinguish the creation of
a King and creation of a Pope, the one as mans immediate creature,
the other as Gods? And may it not be lawfull for any
thus to repeate this comparison of Bellarmine, saying thus:
Kings (after the doctrine of Bellarmine) haue their authoritie
immediatly But from man, and that the Pope hath his immediatly
from God? Is the Interiection But in this repetition like a
theefe by the way to seduce and robbe, and is not rather as a
true man to direct thee?
                  117 Let P. R. imagine,P. R. reprooued by a Simile. that a boy in any of their Colleges
should be so refractary, as knowing himselfe to descend from
gentry, he should denie obedience to his Superior, because he
thinketh him but of base parentage: the boy is brought before
P. R. his Accuser allegeth, That hee had gloried in his
owne gentilitie, and sayd that his Superiour was But basely
borne. Will he thinke the accusation is false, because of the addition
of But? No verily, but is by it made more plain & true,
which is generall in all speeches of abasement: the But is (as I
may so say) a Butte which hath infixed in it the marke and
scope of the whole speech. Thus much for my addition But.
                  
                  118 Furthermore, this I dare aduenture to say in behalfe of
my Suggestor, That though that place alleged doe not agree
vnto the collection, yet the scope of that Chapter and the next
following doth imply as much, proouing that a King may be
deposed by the people. Which doctrine hee there applieth
vnto our English State, and by name to our late Souereigne
Q. Elizabeth: which indeed is to account a King nought els
but an humane creature.
                  119 I know that P. R. may possibly insist, That he cited the
text of S. Peter, 1. Pet. 2. who calleth a King or Gouernour
constituted by man, Humanam creaturam, An humane creature.
And then how could these words be reprehensible in
M. R. which are warrantable by S. Peter? Wee must vnderstand,
That the same speech may differ from it selfe by the diuers
intention of the speakers. The faithfull Disciples of our

Sauiour did often salute Christ with Haile Master: we reade
also of the malicious Iewes saying likewise Haile Master: but
the Disciples in reuerence, the Iewes to scorne him. Looke
to the words, heere is not 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , nothing can be more the same;
looke to the sense and intention it is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , nothing can be more
repugnant. Simon Peter maketh this confession of Christ:
                     Matth. 16. 
                     Thou art Christ the Sonne of the liuing God. The Diuell likewise
maketh this confession of Christ,
                     Marc. 5. 7. 
                     Thou art the Sonne of
the Most High. The same confession in the sense of words,
but not in the intention of the speakers: for Peter confessed,
that he might confirm others in the faith; and the Diuel did it,
that he being priuileged to preach, might seduce mē from the
truth. And so it might haue been presumed, that M. Reinolds
vsed S. Peters words, but not in S. Peters sense; which was to
dignifie such an humane creature, as to teach the orde
                        •
                     er man
in all temporall condition [subditi estote] to be subiect: but in
his owne sense which followeth in the next Chapter, to abase
that humane ordinance, teaching Subiects to depose their
Princes. What is the difference? The generall scope of S. Peter
is subiection, the aime of M. Reinolds is rebellion. This is
heereby most plaine, because S. Peter writ his sentence in the
dayes of Nero a most cruell and sauage Tyrant, and notwithstanding
doth not incite Christian people or others to betake
themselues vnto armes to depose Nero. But M. Reinolds holdeth
it to beReinolds in his Rosaeo. cap. 2. pag. 62. speaking of such Tyrants not as are inuaders of a coū
                        trey, but those who haue beene iustly possessed of their Kingdomes. 
                     naturam generosiorem,. i. a more generous & noble
disposition, to kill Tyrants. Amongst whom he recounteth for
England, K.
                     Pag 135. Traiterous doctrine. 
                     Henry the Eight. By al which it may appeare, that
though not the place alleged, yet the scope of his whole booke
doth conuince him of rebellious doctrine: as will more largely
appeare in the Incounter. In the interim, let euery Christian
learne, that that Gouernour whom S. Peter calleth a creature
of man, S. Paul callethRom. 13. Apostolicall doctrine of subiection. 
                     the ordinance of God: and both of
them, after that Kings be once established by consent of the
Common-wealth, doe require in all temporall causes an vnuiolable
subiection vnto them without violent resistance, teaching
that they are more than mans creatures, because he that
resisteth them resisteth the ordinance of God.
                  
                     The fift obiection of falshood,
whereupon hee
insulteth thus: Consider, I pray you, how may frauds
and falshoods there be in one little
quotation.
                  
                  120 P. R. preferreth another indictment against mee, thus;
                     Treatise Mitig. cap. 2. num 49. pag. 82. 
                     But will you heare a case or two more out of the Canon law, how
dexterous Sir Tho▪ is in corrupting that which he loueth not, nor
seemeth well to vnderstand. You may read in the 4. page of this his
pamphlet (the Discouery) an ancient decree (for so he calleth it)
alleged by him out of Gratian in the glosse, determining that though
a man haue sworne to pay money to one that is excommunicated,
yet is he not bound to pay the same, and he allegeth the Latine text
thus: Si iuraui me soluturum alicui pecuniam, qui excommunicatur,
non teneor ei soluere: If I haue sworne to pay money to
any man that is excommunicated, I am not bound to pay it, adding
this reason: Quia qualiter cunque possumus, debemus vexare
malos, vt cessent a malo: We ought to vex euill mē by what means
so euer we may, to the end they may cease from doing euill. In the
allegation of which little text, a man would hardly beleeue how
many false trickes there be, to make Catholike doctrine to seeme odious
and absurd. For first, these words not being found in any
text of law or decision of any Pope or Councell, but only in the glosse
or Commentary, they make not any ancient or modern decree, as the
Minister falsly auoucheth, but rather shew the opinion of him who
writeth the Commentary: if his words were, as heere they are alleged.
The causes. First, the words of the glosse containe onely an
obiection in these words: What if I haue sworne to pay money to any
person, or haue promised the same vnder some forfeiture, and in the
meane space he, to whom I made the promise, be excommunicated,
am I bound to pay the same, or not? This is his question, and then he
argueth it on both sides: but his resolution is in these words, I doe
beleeue the truer opinion to be, that albeit he that is so excōmunicated,
do leese the right to demand his money, yet is the other bound
to pay it him. And for this he citeth diuers lawes and reasons. So
heere our Minister not of ignorance, but of falshood taketh the obiection
for the resolution. The second deceit is wilfull leauing out
of the first words of the Authour, Sed quid dices si iuraui? which

plainly shew an obiection. Thirdly he allegeth, Quia qualitercun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           
&c. for a reason of the resolution, which is made against that reason.
Fourthly the true resolution of the Commentator is vtterly
concealed, and the contrary determination put downe for an ancient
decree. Consider, I pray you, how many frauds and falshoods there
be in one little quotation.
                  
               
               
                  The Answer.
                  121 My Aduersary P. R. may satisfie himselfe for me, who a
little after concerning this same allegation of this Author hath
said that
                        Mitig. pa. 84. num. 52., It may seeme to import that hee (T. M.) scarce read
the bookes themselues, but cited the same out of some other mans
notes. Heere, we see, in his vehement crimination of malicious
falshood, he hath inserted a charitable and true diuination
of my integrity. I am glad to see in the mingling of a pound of
worme-wood, and ten ounces of gall, hee had the grace to let
fall this dram of sugar, and that so seasonably: For the truth is
that I tooke vp these allegations of Gratian vpon credit, and
therefore returne these peeces vnto him, of whom I receiued
them: who is to prooue them currant, and to satisfie for himselfe.
                  122 Thus then he:
                     
                        M. Stock, a learned Preacher in London answereth for himselfe. This allegation, with some others, I Ric.
St. brought vnto the Author of the Discouery, which P. R. challengeth
to be maliciously cited, partly for that the words of the
glosse were only set downe, when the decree is mentioned: wherein
I conceiue P. R. complaineth no otherwise, than one, who being
smitten with the scabbard, should complaine that he was not struck
with the sword: So he, because T. M. talked of the decree, and vrged
only the glosse. For the decree is far more plaine against them
than the glosse, Nos sanctorum praedestinatorum statuta tenentes,
eos, qui excommunicatis fidelitate aut Sacramento constricti
sunt, apostolica authoritate à iuramento absoluimus: &
nè sibi fidelitatem obseruent, omnibus modis prohibemus,
quousque ipsi ad satisfactionem veniant. This is the decree,
which in the generall carrieth as much or more, as is set downe
by him, and so cleereth him from any malice in this point. Besides,
in the very glosse it selfe, (though it was not so fullie

brought to his hand) is set downe not by way of obiection, but of a
resolute conclusion. For after the obiection and answer the conclusion
is: Probabiliter dici potest, quòd excommunicato non sit
soluendum, cum nemo debeat participare cum eo. Yea and
further, that in this he was not led by malice, is prooued thus: because
he left out another more waighty allegation which was deliuered
him with this, namely, out of Greg. Decret. lib. 5. Tit. c. 16.
Absolutos se nouerint à debito fidelitatis, dominij, & totius obsequij,
quicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         lapsus manifeste in haeresin aliquo pacto quacun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
firmitate vallato tenebantur astricti. Now the glosse particularly
and expresly for the present purpose hath it thus: Ergo si
sub poena aliquis tenetur soluere certa die, & non soluat, non
incidit in poenam: & eodem modo si per iuramentum, quod
& verum est argumentum quòd Papa potest absoluere laicum
à iuramento fidelitatis, quoniam ad ipsum spectat interpretatio
iuramenti: in illa autem obligatione & iuramento tacitè
subintelligitur, si talis permanserit, cui communicare liceat.
Which decree and Glosse doth a great deale more strongly smell of
that impietie, teaching that a man is not bound in such a case to pay
his debt: and yeelding to the Pope a power of absoluing men from
such like obligations. Thus farre R. S.
                  123 By which Answer of R. S. wee may perceiue that the tenor
of the Popes Canon in the outward letter doth denie the
paiment of debts: and the glosse it selfe concludeth a probability
of non paiment, which being applied by Romish Priests vnto
Protestants in the name of Excommunicats, it is but an hazzard
whether Protestants (except it bee by the vigour of
law) shall recouer their debts. Which I prooued in the next
testimonie out of their Cardinall Tollet, expounding the forme
Canon. I prooued that their ordinary Tenet is in that case,
Non tenentur reddere rē verbis contractam. Card. Tollet lib 1. Instruct. Sacerd. ca. 13. § Sextus in his last edition. An vndoubted argument of the Autors sincerity. 
                     Not to pay any debt, which consisteth only in promise. Wherein
my Reader may discerne an argument of my sincerity, because
I would not allege the Canons in their generality of not paying
any debt, though it might haue made my Aduersaies more
odious; but chose rather the Comment. of Tollet, in the restraint
and limitation for not paying debt of onely promise. This
my intire, and in a maner partiall dealing in behalfe of my Aduersaries,

                     P. R. could not be ignorant of, and yet spared not to
spot me with his cōmon note of maliciousnes. There followeth▪
                  
                  A sixt obiection of
falshood, with
this insultation: Let the iudicious Reader consider how many
false trickes and corruptions this crafty
Minister hath vsed.
                  
                  124. P. R. hath another Article against me, thus;
                     
                        Mitig. cap. 
                           •
                        . num. 52▪ 53. 54. 55▪ 56. 57. pag. 84. 
                     In the sixt
page of his Discouery he hath this grieuous accusatione out of the
C
                           ••
                        on law against vs. Haeretici
                              ••
                           ly 
                              〈…〉
                            dicuntur,
sed in 
                              〈◊〉
                            legem, 
                              〈…〉
                            super eos, vt 
                              •
                           und
                              ••
                            fanguinem
ipsorum. And then he quoteth thus: apud Grat. gloss. in
decret. li
                              ••
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                            ex De
                              •
                           re
                              •
                           . Gregor. 9. caus. 22. q. & cap. Legi.
Which distructed kind of quotation; s
                           •
                        parating the first and last
words, that should haue 
                           〈◊〉
                         together, 
                           〈◊〉
                         to import that hee

                           〈…〉
                         the book as themselues, but 
                           〈◊〉
                         the same out of so
                           •
                        e other

                           〈…〉
                        ; but that fault were easily pardoned, if he vsed no
greater fraud in the thing it selfe. For first he Englisheth the words
in th
                           •••
                         maner: Heretikes may not bee termed either 
                              〈◊〉
                           ,
or kindred, but according to the old law, thy hand must bee against
them to spill their bloud. And then in the margi
                           •
                         h
                           ••
                         setteth
downe this speciall printed note. The professed bloody massacre
against the Protestants, without distinction of 
                              •
                           ixe or
kindred. And what can be more 
                           〈◊〉
                         vrged than this? Now
then let vs see how many false trickes and shifts fit for a Protestant
Minister, do lie lurking in this short citation. First this glosse or
Commentary of the Canon law, is vpon a Canon beginning. Si quis,
which Canon is taken out of the third Councell of Carthage, &c.
Secondly, he hath left out the beginning of the glosse. Thirdly, hee
addeth these words, vt fundas sanguinem, which the glosse hath
not. And now let the iudicious Reader consider how many corruptions
this crafty Minister hath vsed to bring foorth to his purpose
this one little distracted text for proofe of professed bloudy massacres
intended by vs against Protestants. Wherein lastly he peruerteth
the very words of God himselfe in the Law, by translating, vs
fundas fanguinem ipsorum, spill their blood, instead of, slied
their blood: as though God were a blood-spill
                           ••
                        , or 
                           〈◊〉
                        
the 
                           〈◊〉
                         to be vniustly done by others. By this one (of 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
but one) you 
                           〈…〉
                         &c. 
                     Thus
farre P. R.
               
               
                  The Answer.
                  125 To the allegation of this place of Gratiam, R. S. doth owe
you an answer, which hee hath performed in these wordes:
                     M. Stock. This second place also I brought (saith hee) vnto T. M. the
whole being no otherwise distractedly quoted, then the glosse,
whence I had it, warranted by me: So that of P. R. reprooue me, he
must chocke his glossary: for when the glosse had set down the first
part, he quoted for the latter, causa 23. q. 8. cap. legi, meaning
in the decrees where it is, Sit manus tua super eos, vt fundas sanguinem
ipsorum.
                  
                  126 So hath he satisfied for his allegation. It remaineth that
I likewise iustifie both my collection and translation. For the
first, I would demand of P. R. if, Romish ones applying this
Canon of Murdering their kindred, &c. against Protestants,
when the Pope shall iudicially denounce them Heretikes,
whether it may bee called a massacre, or no? I haue now my
Mitigator vpon a Logicke 
                        •
                     acke, either he must say that it is
no bloudy massacre,A dile
                           •
                        ma. but Catholike iustice: and then what
shall his Reader thinke vpon his Mitigation otherwise than a
Iudas his lips in be traying his Master? If he shall hold it an execrable
mischiefe, then how shall he iustifie the application of
this canon, when the Pope shall extend it against Protestants?
He cannot answer directly, but hee must manifest himselfe either
a Traitor to his Country, or a preuaricator to his cause.
                  127 His other censure is vpon my interpretation, Vt fundas
sanguinem, to spill their blood, in stead (saith he) of shed their blood.
Why so? because otherwise, (the man may seeme to haue some
pious and religious deuotion in him) God should be said to be a
blood-spiller. And must it therefore be rather translated, shed?
why, so God should bee said to bee a blood-shedder. I maruell
what new Dictionary (for he is altogether verbal) P. R. doth
follow. I hope that so profound a Clerke will not want a reason
of his subtilty: let vs heare him. To spill blood (saith hee)
doth signifie an vniust deed. Is this it? as though shedding of blood
might not likewise signify an vniust deed. Let him consult with

their own Remish translation, Rom. 3. 15. Their feet (viz. of the
wicked) are swift to shed blood. And Act. 22. 20. When the blood
of the Martyr Stephen was shed. And Apoc. 16. 6. They haue
shed the blood of the Saints, therefore hast thou giuen them blood
to drinke. And Luc. 11. 50. That the bloud of the Prophets shed
from the beginning of the world may bee required of this generation.
                     
                        P. R. his babish foolery.
Will P. R. haue the face to say, that the blood of the Martyr
Stephen, and of the Prophets by the Iewes, or of the blood
of Saints by the Heathen was shed iustly? Againe, the Rhemists
Mark. 2. 22. No man putteth new wine into old bottles, otherwise;
the wine breaketh the bottles, and the wine will be shed. This
is spoken of the wine, which being shed perisheth. So is it
vulgarly vsed, [drinke is spilt, and drinke is shed.] Now then
what a notable Critick haue I met withall, whom euery goodwife
is able to conuince of idle dottage? But this is a man priuiledged
to send me to the Vniuersitie to make a Syllogisme,
whom I may more iustly send vnto an Ale-house to learne
English.
                  128 The last point, which is obseruable in our Mitigator, is,
that he affirmeth this Canon to haue beene decreed in the 3.
Councell of Carthage,
                     Reade Surius vpon that Councel. tom. 1. Conc.
                      where no such thing can be found.
Therefore must his owne termes of falshood, fraud, treacherie,
reuerberate vpon himselfe. And yet againe we may consider
how zealous P. R. is in authorizing that Canon, and in vrging
the text of Scripture, saying, If thy brother; or friend, or wife
will goe about to destroy the truth, let thy hand be vpon him. To
what end must all this be, but that Protestants, being in their
opinion heretikes, may haue all the penalties which are awarded
against heretikes executed vpon them (as Bouchier and others
defend) before, or at least (as P. R. holdeth) after denunciation
of sentence? And consequently Protestants may be, by these
Romishones, without exception of sex, or kindred, or friendship,
as it was by execution in the cruell Massacre in
                        See Thuanus hist. lib. 52. 
                     France,
and by intention in the Powder-treason, vtterly consumed at
once. Which being performed, theThis I shall proue in the Incounter out of Bouchier.
                      Conspiracie shal be called
an holy League the Actour a zealous Ahod, the Act a Sacrifice.
All which proceedeth from a false and perfidious application

both of the Scripture, and of the Canon. For the law of Deuteronomy
mentioneth such transgressions, Who shall intice thee,
saying, Let vs go and serue other gods, which thou hast not knowen,
nor thy fathers before thee. And the Canon was directed only
against such heretikes, who did ruinate the foundation of
Christian faith. But Protestants are so farre from idolatrie,
that for feare thereof, they haue (in the dayes of Q. Marie)
yeelded their bodies to the fire; so farre from heresie, that
they are ready to seale euery fundamental Article of faith with
their blood.
                  A seuenth obiection of
falshood, wherein he
insulteth, saying: Seeing hee hath corrupted a text of
Scripture, you may thinke what libertie
hee will take afterward thorowout
his whole booke.
                  
                  129 ISee aboue §. 5. pag. 12. haue already answered vnto this calumniation, shewing,
that both the English text, the Latine Commentaries, the
Hebrew Originall, and the confession of their owne Doctour
doe free me from all suspition of corruption: wherein our Reader
may imagine, whether P. R. by obiecting the Hebrew
text, hath not deserued the title of an êbrition.
                  An eighth obiection of falshood,
wherin he insulteth in this maner: Thus much for his varietie
of corruptions in this
little sentence.
                  
                  130 P. R. pretermitting (as his maner is) such points wherein
he saw the Romish Arguments most forcibly confuted, insisteth
only vpon such, wherein hee thinketh his abilitie will
serue to make some sensible resistance. Therefore hee sayth:
                     
                        Treatise Mitig. cha. 5. num. 43. pag. 174. Extr
                           ••
                        . com. de mai. & obed. § vnā Sanctam. 
                     To the end you may see his Talent (in deducing proofs out of
Romish Writers) wee shall examine only the third Reason in this
place, which he declareth in these words: Except, sayth the Romish
pretence, there were a way of deposing Apostata Princes,
God had not prouided sufficiently for his Church. And
for this he citeth the Constitution extrauagant of Pope Bonifacius,
and sayth, This obiection is in your extrauagants, and so
it may be called, because it rangeth extra, that is, without the

bonds of Gods ordinance, &c. But as in all his other citations
generally hee is neuer lightly true and sincere in all points, no not
thrice (I thinke verily) thorowout all this lying booke of his, so neither
heere: and it would require a great volume alone to examine
only some part of his leaues about this point of his shifts and corruptions,
they are so many and thick, and craftily huddled vp together.
As for example heere: First, this sentence is not in the Popes
Extrauagant at all, but only in a certeine addition to the ordinarie
Glosse or Commentarie of Io. Picard, which addition was made
by Petrus Bertrandus a late Writer. Secondly, this Comment
sayth nothing of deposing of Apostata Princes, but only affirming
the foresayd opinion of Canonists to be true, That Christ was
Lord absolutely in this life ouer all, not only in spirituall authority,
but in temporall also: he inferreth thereby, That Christ
should not haue sufficiently prouided for the gouernment of his
Church and Kingdome vpon earth,Addit. ad Com. Extra. de Ma
                              •
                           . in c. 1. ad finē. 
                        Nisi vnicum post setalem
Vicarium reliquisset, qui haec omnia posset: except he had left
some such one Substitute or Vicar after him, as should be able to
performe all these things, to wit, as belong both to spirituall and
temporall power, according as necessitie shall require. Which latter
clause you see that T. M. hath cut off, as he added the other
of Apostata Princes. And thus much for his variety of corruptions
in this little sentence. Now to the thing it selfe. 
                     So farre P. R.
               
               
                  The Answer.
                  131 If I had not purposed to set downe little sentences, I am
sure my Aduersarie his sentences and censures could not haue
beene so great: where breuity (which I thought would be
most gratefull to any iudicious Reader) is inuerted vpon me
by a calumnious Aduersary as most preiudiciall to my cause.
First, for citing the Extrauagants of the Pope, whereby an ingenuous
Reader would haue vnderstood a figure Synecdoche,
where the part is put for the whole; as when wee say, This
man shall not come vnder my roofe; meaning by roofe, which
is but a part of the house, the whole house it selfe: So heere by
Extrauagant might haue been meant the whole body of these
Constitutions, which conteine both Extrauagants and Glosses:
                     
which is heerein, found to be most consonant, because Pope
Gregor. 13. ad futurā rei memoriam. Reliquum est vt eiusdē Decreti vnà cum Annotationibus praedictis tàm abs
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Glossis, quàm ipsum totum cùm Glossis, Sextumque & Clementinas simul & extrauagantes à dilecto filies S. F. recognoscenda omnia & approbanda &c. imprimi & impressa diuulgari iusse
                           •
                        imus, ac ad maiorem Christi fidelium vbi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         commo
                           •
                        antium commoditatem, hoc 
                           〈◊〉
                         Canonici corpus fideliter & incorrup
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
exemplar Rom
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , imprimi possit. Nos opportunè prouidere volentes, vt hoc ius Canonicum sic expurgatum ad omnes vbi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Christi fideles sartum tectum perueniat, ac ne cuiquam liceat e
                           •
                        dem operi quicquam addere, vel immutare, aut inuertere, nullauè interpretamenta adiungere, &c. 
                     Gregory 13. hath ratified the foresayd Glosse and Annotations
with priuilege and authority equiualent and answerable
to the authoritie of the Decretat
                           •
                        
                      and Extrauagants themselues.
If, hearing one of P. R. his scholars make a Syllogisme,
like that which P. R. himselfe framed, which hath neither
mood not figure, & this likewise had been approued by him,
some should presently say to the boy, Sirra, this is P. R. his
Syllogisme; I do not thinke that P. R. would call him a lier.
                  132 To the second P. R. might haue answered for me, That
the words, Apostata Princes, were not my Addition, but the
obiections of my Aduersary the Moderate Answerer, as may
appeare by P. R. his owne relation. And when I sayd, That
the same obiection was in the extrauagants, I could not think that
any Aduersary euer could haue beene either by reason of ignorance
so sottish, or by malice so peruerse, as to exact, that the
obiection be found in the place 
                        〈…〉
                      for so there
should be no end of cauilling, but be contented to finde it in
the true sense: which sense euen this my Accuser doth plainly
acknowledge, laying (as we haue heard) this same Extrauagant
as the ground of Gods prouidence in the Pope (his supposed
Vicar of Christ) by whose power spirituall and temporall,
any Prince, extirpating Christian religion, may be remooued:
which is no more than I sayd was contained in the Extrauagants.
But such is the malignity of this Mitigator, that
he will not allow in his Aduersarie, which he practisethTreatise Mitig. ca. 2. n. 55. pag. 86. himselfe:
and not he only, but euen the known canons of his Popes
are guilty (if it be a guilt) of the same, citing the text of Deut.

                           •
                        3. 6. 
                           〈◊〉
                        : If thy brother, or friend, or wife go about to depra
                           ••
                        
                        
                           〈…〉
                         thy hand be vpon him▪
                      Wheras the text is, If they intice

thee saying,
                     
                        P. R. his accusation redounding vpon his Popes. 
                     let vs goe serue strange Gods, &c. But these
words, Depraue the truth, &c. are not to be found; yet because
they containe the true sense I should thinke it impiety either in
another or in my selfe, to note (as he doth me) his Canons, and
consequently his Popes of lying shifts and corruptions.
                  
                  133 The last shift he findeth fault with, is for cutting off the
clause, Nisi vnicum. What needed any addition of that which
was sufficiently expressed in my Aduersaries obiection, and by
me acknowledged to bee contained in the Extrauagants, as
we haue heard? If there bee any shift in my citation, I must
confesse it thus: viz. the not adding these words of that glosse,
Iesus de iure naturali in Imperatorem, & quascunque alios depositionis
sententiam ferre potuisset, & damnationis, & quascunque
alias, &c. & eadem ratione vicarius eius potest. That is, As Iesus
by his naturall right might enter into iudgement, and pronounce
sentence of deposing an Emperour, or any other person: So may
(meaning the Pope) Christs vicar also. This is the Popish
glosse, and the ground of those Romish & rebellious positions,
which I did discouer, and which prooueth our Mitigatour an
excellent shifter, who saith that heere was nothing said of deposing
Apostata Princes,
                     A fond cauill. to the end his Reader might conceiue
my Answer to haue beene altogether impertinent. But I pray
you P. R. can Apostata Princes be excepted, where All Princes
and Emperonrs are included? But I will not vrge against my
selfe the former omission of the foresaid sentence of the glosse.
I know P. R. will too easily pardon me this fault.
                  A ninth obiection of falshood,
therein insulting
thus:
A witting and a manifest lie, and cosenage.
His Latine words were
perfidiously alleged.
                  
                  134 P. R. obiecteth thus: 
                     Treatise Mitig. cap. 6. num. 55. pag. 231. 
                     He (Thomas Morton) allegeth the
words of Bellarmine thus: Dum rem ipsam excutio, non facilè
audeo pronunciare illos in errore fuisse, While I do examine well
the thing it selfe, I dare not presume to pronounce them to haue
beene in error, to wit, Caluin and Beza; whereas Bellarmines
words are, Dum rem ipsam excutio, & Caluini sententias diligenter
considero, non facilè audeo pronuntiare illum in hoc

errore fuisse. While I examine the matter it selfe, and diligently
consider Caluins opinions, I do not easily presume to pronounce him
to haue beene in this error: to wit, in the particular error or heresie
of the Autotheans, set downe and confuted by 
                           
                              ••
                           enebrard, and
in his sense condemned expresly by the ancient Catholike Church,
for denying Christ to bee and to haue his essence from the Father:
but yet though in some sense it seemeth to Bellarmine, that Caluin
may be excused in this priuate and particular meaning of his, yet
not absolutely, as T. M. would haue his Reader to thinke, by striking
out cunningly the particle hoc (this error) and leauing the
word Errour in common, as though Bellarmine had excused him
from all kind of error, which is most false, for that presently after he
both impugneth of purpose, and confuteth by many arguments his
maner of speech as hereticall in this behalfe. And againe. So is
his cosenage heerein in striking out hoc out of Bellarmines words:
so, for the same purpose he turneth illum into illos: which he could
not do but wittingly and of purpose, and yet the man forsooth will
not equiuocate for the world, and yet will he lie for much lesse, as
you see. 
                     Thus P. R.
               
               
                  The Answer.
                  135 He would not wittingly lie for all the world, who would
not for all the world equiuocate, lest hee might he, as I feare
he doth, who calleth this lapse of words [Errore and illos] a
perfidious cosenage. For if I had been of so diuellish a disposition
as to seek to cosen my Reader, then sure (according to the malice
of the Diuell, who seeketh whom he may deuour, that is, to
deuoure all) I should not haue left that Latine sentence vntranslated,
but would haue Englished it, that by the Latin and
English as by a double net my cosenage might haue beene, for
the number of the seduced, farre more succesfull: which considerations,
I hope, may free me from wilfull falshood.
                  136 That there is also no falshood at all, the matter it selfe
will shew. For our dispute was onely concerning this one suspected
error of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which many Iesuites and others,
condemned as a Paradox, a blasphemy, an atheisme: against
whom I opposed Bellarmine to acquit Caluin ab errore, that

is,A stupid cauill. 
                     from error, (which is all one as if I had said This error) which
is the proper and only matter in question. Let P. R. procure
a suspected fellow to bee arraigned at the barre, whom the
Iudge knoweth to be a drunkard, a prophane swearer, and a
person adulterous: but the inditement preferred against him is
only cōcerning felony: the witnesses are brought forth all circumstances
are examined: in the end the Iudge perceiuing the
presumptions to be friuolous, shall giue this iudgement, saying,
Now that I haue heard the matter examined, I finde no
fault in the man. By and by P. R. shall stand vp, saying, O
Iudge thou knowest him to be a drunkard, a blasphemer and
a lewd liuer, and canst thou find no fault with him? thou shouldest
haue said, I find not this fault of felony in him; and therefore
thou hast deliuered a perfidious and a cosening sentence. Againe,
when our Sauiour Christ said to his Disciples,Matt. 26. 42. 
                     Pray,
&c. for the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weake; would the Diuinity
of P. R. correct the speech, and say, though it bee spoken
of mankind, yet it is too generally deliuered, because there
is a flesh of beasts, and a spirit of Diuels: and therefore should
be more expresly set downe, This kind of flesh, and this kinde of
spirit? P. R. sitteth at his table, and when he seeth two sorts of
bread, fine manchet, and courser; and expressing that hee desireth
rather the meaner kinde, should say to one of his seruitors
a Sophister, Sirra, giue me the courses bread: would hee
(for want of mentioning This bread no the Table) allow his Sophister
to runne into the stable, and bring him an horse loafe?
Would he not rather whip him, for his insolency, if he would
not; or for his follie, if he could not perceiue that when a man
speaketh of This kinde of bread, which is before his face, it is
all one as if he had said, of this bread? Such is my case, concerning
which (as I professe) I could not be so absurdly subtle, as
willingly to conceale hoc, so am I perswaded, that no aduersarie
(I only except P. R.) could be so peruersly grosse, as to exact
a particle Hoc, i. This, knowing that the matter in question
was particularly de hoc e
                           •
                        none, of this only error.
                  137 Although this last taxation be very idle,Another friuolous cauill. yet this second
is (if I may so say) more friuolous, illos for illum, that is,

                     them in steed of him. If Bellarmine iustifie Caluin for this opinion
of Autotheos, doth he not likewise therein iustifie all other
Protestants, which are of the same opinion? For if I condemne
P. R. for a gracelesse Sophister, because of his defense
of mentall equiuocation, do I not therein condemne all others,
who are professed Aequiuocators? This is true, will P. R. say,
yet the Authors word illum, should not haue beene changed
into illos. This Aduersary, we see, is rigorous, I will appeale
therefore vnto another Aduersary, whom I find more ingenuous,
euen Bellarmine himselfe; who in the place alleged, after
that he had said of Caluin, I dare not say that he was in this error
doth in the same Chapter iustifie Beza also, and more expresly
Simlerus, another Protestant, saying, Non video cur haec sententia
Catholica dicenda non sit, that is, I see no cause why this sentence
should not be thought Catholicall: iustifying not only illum,
that is, Caluin, but also Beza and Simlerus, which will make
illos, euen in that opinion, which Campian, the Rhemists, their
Genebrard, and others haue calumniously and wickedly called
a Paradox, an Heresie, a Blasphemy, an Atheisme. Such is the
blindnesse of their malice, which (God willing) I shall shew
more fully in the Incounter.
                  
                  A tenth obiection of falshood,
with this insultation:
Is not this rather falshood than folly?
where is his naked innocency?
where is his vpright conscience?
where is his simplicity in
Christ Iesus?
                     
                  
                  138 The matter is only for changing a title of the booke of
Carerius, and altering the word verò into verè: but trifles (saith
P. R.) yet such as bewray a guilty minde and meaning. But I haue
See aboue §. 6. pag. 1
                           •
                        . shewed euidently, that I neither altered the title, nor the
text, so that P. R. standeth chargeable to his Reader to satisfie
for his owne mind and meaning, which must haue beene either
giddily rash, or gracelesly false.
                  
                     An eleuenth obiection of
falshood, with this insultation: How can this malicious cauilling Minister
expect to bee trusted heereafter?
or how may any thinke, that
he writeth from his conscience, seeing
him vse such grosse shifts and
falshoods in so important a matter?
                  
                  139 ISee aboue §. 7. pag. 22. nū. 23. 24. 25. &c. haue discussed this obiection already: the point is
concerning the testimony of Doleman, because it was not cited
in the very literall words, although (as I haue manifestly
euinced) it was deliuered according to the reall and demonstratiue
sense. And if such accusations might preuaile, then
might P. R. (but I hope he will not be so blasphemous) accuse
the diuine Oracles of God,An impious cauill. the holy Scriptures, where the Apostles
citing the testimonies of the old Testament, doe not
commonly allege the words, but the sense: As Ephes. 5. 14.
Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall giue thee light. The words [He saith] signifie
God speaking in Scripture, yet not by manifestation of
words, but by collection and comprehension of sense. There
be many such like places, as Heb. 1. 1. Heb. 3. 5. Act. 10. 43.
Nay himselfe and their owne Popish Canon (asSee a little before in this §. num. 132. hath beene
shewen) haue alleged the text of Deuteronomie, but not according
to expresse words, although not disagreeable from
the true sense. And may Popes thus presume in alleging of
Gods truth, and may not man make as bold with mans testimonie,
so that still there be no deprauation of the true sense?
                  A twelfth obiection of
falshood, wherupon
he thus insulteth: Consider how falsly and calumniously
this Make-bate doth reason: will
hee not bee ashamed to see himselfe
condemned of so great ouerlashing?
                  
                  140 The question is about the hinderance of the due succession
of a Protestant prince vnto his crowne: This P. R. indeuoured
to condemne by a triple instance, andSee aboue §. 7. pag. 19. nū. 21, &c. hath himselfe
beene confuted both by his owne Doctours, and also by a triple
instance taken from himselfe.
                  
                     A thirteenth obiection of
falshood, with this spightfull
insultation: Hee allegeth Frisingensis quite
contrary to his owne meaning. Is this the assurance of his
vpright conscience, whereof
he braggeth so much?
                  
                  141 In this cauill about the testimonie of Frisingensis P. R.
hath played foure treacherous parts, that he might (though
falsly) conuince me of one: as hath beene alreadySee aboue §. 8. prooued.
Yet in this, together with that which followeth, he triumpheth
more than of any taxation he hath in the whole booke.
                  A foureteenth and most rigorous
obiection of falshood,
with this insultation: It is a fraud and impudencie, or
rather impudent impietie, a
slandrous obiection, shamelesse
dealing. Will euer any man
credit T. M. heereafter?
                  
                  142 
                        I am ready to heare this grand crimination of P. R.
who beginneth thus:
                        Treat. Mitig. ca 6. num 37. pag. 215. But the next fraud or impudencie, or
rather impudent impietie, is that which insueth within foure lines
after, in these words: Pope Gregorie the seuenth (sayth your
Chronologer) was excommunicate of the Bishops of Italie,
for that he had defamed the Apostolike See by Symonie, and
other capitall crimes. And then citeth for proofe heereof, Lambertus
Scaffnaburg. Anno 1077. As if this our Chronographer
had related this as a thing of truth, or that it were approoued
by him, and not rather a slanderous obiection cast out by his Aduersaries
that followed the part of Henrie the Emper
                           •
                        r. Let any
man reade the place and yeere heere cited, and if hee be a modest
man he will blush at such shamelesse dealing. For that no Author
of that time doth more earnestly defend the cause and vertuous
life of Pope Hildebrand,
                        
                           La. S
                                 •
                              aff. hist Germ. ann. 1077. sub fin. then this man, whose words are: Sed apud
omnes sanum aliquid sapientes luce clarius constabat falsa
esse quae dicebantur: Nam & Papa tàm eximiè támque Apostolicè
vitam instituebat, &c. But with all men of sound wisedome
it was more cleere then the Sunne, that the things which
were spoken against Pope Hildebrand were false, for that th

Pope did lead an excellent and Apostolike life, as the sublimitie of
his conuersation did admit no least spot of wicked rumour against
him, he li
                           •
                        ing in that great citie and open concourse of men, it could
not haue beene hidden, if he had committed any vnlawfull thing in
his life: and moreouer the signes and miracles, which by his prayers
were often-times done, and his most feruent zeale for God in
defence of Ecclesiasticall lawes did sufficiently defend him against
the poisoned tongues of his detractors. And againe: Hildebrandi
constantia & inuictus aduersus auaritiam animus omnia excludebat
argumenta humanae fallaciae: The constancie of Pope
Hildebrand and his inuincible minde against the corruption of auarice,
did exclude all arguments of humane fallacie and deceit.
So Lambertus. And now let the reader consider with what conscience
and fidelitie T. M. hath cited him for condemnation of Pope
Hildebrand. Hee relateth indeed what certaine noblemen, captaines,
and others, that came with the Emperour to the castle of
Canusium, and would not haue had him made peace with the Pope
in that place, saide in their rage afterwards, for that against their
counsell he had submitted himselfe vnto the said Pope: and when a
certaine Bishop named Eppo was sent to their campe by the Pope
and Emperour to enforme them of the agreement and submission
made;
                           Lamb. vbi
                              •
                           sup. 
                        Fremere omnes (saith this story) & insanire, verbis &
manibus coeperunt, Apostolicae legationi irrisorijs exclamationibus
obstrepere, conuicia & maledicta turpissima quaecun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           
furor suggessisset, irrogare. All of them began to fret and wax
fierce both in words and casting their hands, and with scornefull
outcries to contradict this holy Apostolical legation sent vnto them,
and to cast vpon the Pope all the most foule reproches and maledictions
that furie could suggest vnto them. Thus saith Lambertus,
and setteth downe the particular slanderous reproches heere cited
by T. M. which he approoueth not, but condemneth, as you haue
heard, and highly commendeth not onely the vertue but also the
sanctitie of the Pope. And will euer any man credit T. M. any more
in any thing that he alledgeth, when this consciencelesse falsification
is once discouered in him? yea though it were but once
thorowout his whole booke, it were sufficient to prooue that he dealeth
not out of any faith or conscience at all. If an enemie would discredit

both Christ, and Christian religion, and say, your own Euangelists
doe recount foule things against him (as heere this Minister
saith our Historiographer doth of Pope Gregorie) and namely
that he was accused by the Scribes and Pharisees for casting out
Diuels by the power of Beelzebub, for deceiuing the people, for
denying tribute to be paid to Caesar, for moouing sedition, and other
like crimes, which our Euangelists doe recount indeed, but do condemne
them as false and calumnious; were not this as good and as
faithfull a maner of reasoning, as this other of Thomas Morton
out of Lambertus and Frisingensis against Pope Hildebrand,
who is by them both most highly commended as you heard, and his
aduersaries condemned? Truly if any man can shew me out of all the
Catholike writers that be extant, English or other, that euer any
of them vsed this shamefull fraud in writing, where no excuse can
free them from malicious and witting falshood, then will I grant
that this is not proper to the Protestant spirit alone. Hitherto I
must confesse that I neuer found it in any, and if I should, though it
were but once, I should hold it for a sufficient argument not to beleeue
him euer after. And this shall suffice for a taste onely of M.
Mortons maner of proceeding, for that to prosecute all particulars
would require a whole volume, and by this few you may guesse at
the mans veine and spirit in writing. 
                     Hitherto P. R.
               
               
                  The Answer.
                  143 Thou seest (Christian Reader) I haue had patience to
heare my indictment deliuered vnto the full, and suffered
my Aduersarie without any interruption to say so much in
this accusation, as that by this time he may seeme to haue run
himselfe out of breath. For what could either the dexteritie of
Art, or the violence of passion force more, then to note his Aduersarie
of so shamelesse falshood, as to be without comparison
maliciously fraudulent, and vtterly vnwoorthy to be credited
euer any more in any thing that he alleadgeth? Now therefore I
turne my selfe vnto thee (good Reader) as to my Iudge, who
may seeme by this time to exact of mee an Answer; and of
whom I must desire and expect a iust censure. Vouchsafe
therefore (I pray thee) an intentiue examination, and I dare

presume thou wilt acknowledge this Accusation to be both
so false and foolish, and vnfortunate to his cause, and indeed
blasphemous, as though he had studied to be either faithlesse,
or fond, or vnlucky, or impious.
               
               
                  I. The falsitie of this crimination.
                  144 In the beginning I am charged with impudent impietie
for citing Lambert Scaffnaburg to affirme that The Bishops of
Italy did excommunicate Pope Gregorie for capitall crimes. But
why is this impudency? As if (saith P. R.) this our Chronographer
had related this as a thing of trueth, or that it were approoued
of him, and not rather as a slanderous obiection cast out by his Aduersaries
that followed the part of Henrie the Emperor, &c. The
point now in question is, whether this Author Lambertus
Scaffnaburg did thinke that those Bishops of Italy had condemned
this Pope Gregory (for whether they did it iustly or vniustly
is the second question) for such crimes or no; I haue affirmed
that Lambertus Scaffnaburg was of this opinion: but
P. R. denieth it, calling my assertion an impudent impietie. Let
vs be iudged by the euidence of the Author himselfe: who in
the place alledged hath these words: Postquamper Italiam fama
percrebuisset, &c. After that the fame was spred abroad
thorowout Italy, that K. Henry had set his foote in their coasts;
[certatim omnes Italiae Episcopi, &c] All the Bishops of Italy did
flocke by troupes vnto him, receiuing him with all honour woorthie
the magnificence of such a person, and within a few daies after an
armie of an infinite multitude was gathered vnto him: for from
the first time that he was King, they longed for his comming into
Italy, because at this time Italy was pestered with theeuery. And
what els? It followeth a little after. Besides, they (viz. the Bishops
and people) did congratulate his comming, because it was
reported that he came with a resolute courage to depose (Gregory)
the Pope. Heere we see it granted by Lambert that All the
Bishops of Italy were desirous to haue this Pope Gregory deposed.
But after all this the Emperour goeth to Rome, seeketh
absolution of the Pope, returneth backe againe, and the Bishop
Eppo is sent after to signifie to the Italians this submission

to the Pope. What now? Now followeth the testimony which
was alledged: Qui cùm causam Italis exposuisset, &c. When
Eppo had told his message to the Italians, all of them began to rage
and fret, &c. casting vpon the Pope all opprobrious reproches,
whom all the Bishops of Italy had before iustly excommunicated,
because by Simonie he had defiled the sea Apostolike. Could this
Chronologer but acknowledge that the Pope had beene excommunicated
by the Bishops of Italy, who (as he confessed
in the beginning) did reioice at the comming of the Emperour,
because he came with a resolution to depose the Pope? Which is a
thing so notoriously knowne, that neuer Author did denie it:
Insomuch that Bimus their last and best authorized Compiler
of the Councels, an Author wholly deuoted to that Sea of
Rome, confesseth thatBinius tom. 3. Conc. pag. 1281. Anno 1076. (viz. the yeere before
this happened, which hath beene related out of Lambert)
In the Councell of Papia, a city in Italy, the Bishops gathered
themselues together, and excommunicated the Pope. Although
he call that Councell, Conciliabulum, and the Bishops Schismaticos,
Schismatikes, as peraduenture Lambert also did esteeme
them; yet this trueth is acknowledged of all, that The Bishops
of Italy did excommunicate this Pope. Which is all that either
hath, or needed to haue been said. And could this deserue so rigorous
a censure of impudent impietie, and whatsoeuer bitternesse
the gall of this man could vent out? I proceed to the second
point, which is
               
               
                  II. The foolishnesse of his Accusation.
                  145 That being granted, which neuer any Historian did denie,
that The Bishops of Italie did excommunicate Gregorie, aliâs
Hildebrand, and sought by the power of the Emperor Henrie
to haue him deposed: the sottishnesse of the second obiection
will bewray it selfe at the first hearing, to wit, The Authour
Lambertus condemneth such proceedings against the
Pope, and highly commendeth not only the vertue, but also the
sanctitie of the Pope: And therefore will any man credit T. M.
any more? Yes, I hope, any who shall rightly discerne the reason
of my allegation. For my proofe, taken from the testimonie

of this Lambertus, consisteth not in his censure of commending,
or of discommending the proceedings of the Italian
Bishops against the Pope, but in the iudgement of those Italian
Bishops, who all (as Lambertus confesseth) wished that
that Pope might be deposed. A collection vsed of all men in
the citing of all Chronologers, knowing that the proper office
of an Historian is to be a witnesse of things done, and not a
Iudge. For if any fauourite of my Mitigator should report,
saying thus, That P. R. (I doe but suppose this) was expelled
out of a College of Oxford by the Fellowes, who did censure
him for some misdemeanour; but yet I thinke (saith his fauourite)
that the Fellowes did him wrong: For I haue heard
him to haue beene accounted by others of very commendable
conuersation. Then presently some by-stander should
make bold to giue out that the Felowes of a College in Oxford
did so censure P. R. and name his Author; could any say that
he had abused that testimonie, because he gaue more credit to
the wisdome of those Fellowes who expelled him, than to the
contrarie coniecture of the reporter? Shall that by-stander
be therefore thought euer after vnworthie of all credit?
                  
                  146 Whosoeuer of his faction shall read the late Catholike
Apologie (as it is intituled) out of Protestant writers, hee will
wish P. R. had beene a newly professed Pythagorean, to
whom a fiue yeeres silence had beene inioined: for Protestant
Authours are there cited, as confessing (but how truly we are
not heere to dispute) that some Fathers 400. yeeres after
Christ haue held some Romish positions: notwithstanding
the same Protestant Authours doe condemne those positions
as vtterly superstitious. In which allegations the Apologists
are contented to receiue from Protestants a confession of so
much antiquitie of some Romish Doctrine; and yet oftentimes
doe not acknowledge or regard the iudgement of the
cited Authors in condemning such opinions. Will now P. R.
permit vs to answer these Apologists after his example, saying,
ô impudent impietie, and malicious falshood! Will you cite Protestants
for confessing such Doctrines as ancient, which they
condemne to haue beene superstitious? I would wish P. R.
                     
to call his fiue wits into one Senate, and after due deliberation
to shape me an answer▪ I feare he will be driuen to a non plus:
For either must he teach vs to confute their Apologists, and
to note them to haue beene fraudulent disputers; or else confesse
himselfe to haue plaid the part of an idle, impudent, and
an intolerable accuser.
               
               
                  III. The vnfortunatenesse of this his declamatorie calumniation.
                  147 P. R. will not haue his Reader to count otherwise of this
Pope Gregorie, aliàs Hildebrand, than of a man commendable,
not only for vertue, but also for sanctitie: as if he had said,
not only for a good man, but also for a godly: wherein it may
be that P. R. hath beene not only not acute, but also absurd:
For as easily may godlinesse be separated from goodnesse, as
sanctitie from any perfect vertue. But to the matter. As it is
written, Oportet haereses esse, there must be heresies, so is it implied
that there must be contradictions, but to this end, that the
truth may be victorious; which I hope will be verified in this
present example of Pope Gregorie, who may be vnto vs (if
wee beleeue the Romish historians) a mirrour of all impietie.
                  
                     First, Cardinall Benno liuing in his time, set foorth his life,
and writeth that
                     Benno hist. de vita Greg. He entred into the Popedome by force: that he
suborned a man to murther the Emperour, when he was at diuine
seruice: that hee cast the Eucharist into the fire: that hee was a
Necromancer; and a contemner of religion.
                  
                     Secondly, the Abbat Vrspergensis writeth,
                     Vrsperg. an. 1080. That he was an
vsurper of the sea of Rome, not appointed by God, but intruded
by fraud and money; a disturber of the Empire; a subuerter of
the Church.
                  
                     Thirdly, Sigebertus Gimblacensis, a Monke, writeth that
                     Sigeb An. 1074. & anno 1085. Hildebrand troubled the States of Christendome; raised vp the
Saxons against their liege Prince; discharged subiects from their
oth of fidelitie; and caused Rodulph the Duke of Burgundie to
proclaime himselfe Emperour. After reporting from a writing
found after his death in exile thus; We giue you to wit who haue
the care of soules, that Pope Hildebrand, aliàs Gregorie, being

at the point of death, called vnto him one of the Cardinals, whom
he did specially affect, confessing to him that he had greatly offended
God and his Church in the abuse of his pastorall charge, and
by the perswasion of the Diuell raised hatred and wrath against
mankinde. If three witnesses be not sufficient against a Pope,
of whom one is a Monke, an other an Abbat, the third a Cardinall,
let vs further vnderstand that
                  
                  Fourthly, Seuerinus Binius in his new editions of the Councels,
Binius conc. tom. 3. pag. 1281. and pag. 1191. Although he call them not Concilia but Conciliabula.
                      confesseth that the Bishops in a Councell At Woormes,
Anno 1076. declared that Gregorie was to bee deposed: And that
The Councell at Papia Anno 1076. did excommunicate him:
And that The Councell of Bishops at Brixia did depose him: the
Acts of which Councell, as they are recited by Vrspergensis,
shew these causes;
                     See a little before out of the testimony of Vrsper. lit. z.
                      
                     Because he was an vsurper of the Sea, &c.
And The Councell at Mentz Anno 1085. declared him to bee
iustly deposed. Thus we see that P. R. by denying one Councell
of Bishops of Italie in Papia to haue opposed themselues
against this Gregorie, hath, contrarie to his desire, gained with
that one of Papia three other Councels, one of Brixia, another
of Woormes, the last of Mentz. So vnluckie hath hee beene
(to vse his owne Simile) in a lost game to see the last man borne.
I must yeeld him therefore the priuilege of a loser, which is
to fret, and rage, and raile, and to call mee malicious. The
matter were lesse hainous in him to haue beene onely slanderous
against man, if he were not also, in a sort, blasphemous against
the Gospell of Christ.
               
               
                  IIII. His blasphemie.
                  148 If any man (saith he) would discredit both Christ and Christian
Religion, and say our Euangelists did recount foule things against
him (as heere this Minister saith our Historiographer doth
of Pope Gregorie) and namely that he was accused of the Scribes
and Phariseis for casting out Diuels by the power of Belzebub,
for deceiuing the people, for moouing sedition, &c. and the like
crimes, which our Euangelists doe recount indeed, but doe condemne
them also as false and calumnious: were not this as good
a maner of reasoning as this of Tho. Mortons out of Lambertus

                     against Pope Hildebrand, who is by them so highly commended,
as you haue heard, and his aduersaries condemned? Thus P. R.
Thomas Morton will tell you that your maner of reasoning is
not so good. For suppose that T. M. in his reasoning had
beene guiltie of some errour, yet this your comparison cannot
be free from blasphemie; the consequence whereof is this:
It is like impietie in T. M. in citing the witnesse of Lambert,
concerning the opposition of the Bishops of Italie, which
Lambert condemned; and to giue more credit vnto them
condemning the Pope, than vnto Lambert condemning those
Bishops: As it is for a man reading the Gospell, where it is
recorded that the Scribes and Phariseis opposed themselues against
Christ, to beleeue rather those Scribes and Phariseis,
condemning Christ, than to giue credit vnto the Euangelists,
condemning the Phariseis. Whosoeuer shall exactly examine
the Analogie of this comparison, must needs acknowledge
it to be in a maner blasphemous. For either must Christ
the sonne of God be compared with Pope Gregorie, a sinfull
man, and (as some iudge) the man of sinne, as though it were
a like impudencie to say that Gregorie, a sinner, might no
more iustly be condemned of the Italian Bishops, than Christ,
who was righteousnesse it selfe, of the Scribes and Phariseis,
which in the schoole of Christianitie must necessarily be iudged
a blasphemie. Or else the likenesse consisteth in the comparison
of the reporters, matching the holy Euangelists and
their Monks Frisingensis and Lambertus together, to thinke it
no lesse impietie not to beleeue rather these two Monks condemning
the Italian Bishops (who they say were aduersaries to
the Pope) than those Bishops, though condemned by the
Monks; then it is not to beleeue rather the Euangelists condemning
the Scribes and Phariseis (who were enemies vnto
Christ) than the same Scribes and Phariseis, though condemned
by the Euangelists. But to compare in like beleefe the
holy Euangelists who were Calami Spiritus sancti (as S. Hierome
calleth them) that is, The pens of the holy Ghost, and could
not erre, and the reports of superstitious Monks, who, almost,
could not but erre, is an inference altogether impious.
                  
                     
146 But if P. R. (as I hope hee will) wish his consequent to
be rather prooued ridiculous than so sacrilegious, then let him
vnderstand the dissimilitude and vnlikenesse of his comparison.
For first the iudgement of those Historiographers, Frisingensis
and Lambertus, two Monks, in condemning those Italian
Bishops is different from the iudgment of Sigebert a Monke,
of Vrspergensis an Abbat, of Benno a Cardinall: but the Euangelicall
Historiographers doe all of them fully consent together;
therefore hee not acknowledging the Euangelists condemnation
of the Scribes and Pharisies, and that Lambertus
his condemnation of the Italian Bishops, are nothing alike.
                  Secondly the Pharisies were of different profession vnto
the Euangelists, the Italian Bishops were of the same religion
with the obiected Historians: therefore to credit the Pharisies
against the Euangelists, and to credit Bishops against Monks,
cannot bee proportionable, But why doe I trouble my selfe
with these my Aduersaries madling conceits? I hasten, for conclusion
to
               
            
            
               
                  A challenge against P. R. the Mitigator.
               
               § 19.
               150 THe challenge which P. R. hath made is peremptory;
vz.Treat. of Mitig. 1. cap. 3. num. 4. pag. 92. 
                  The Replie of T. M. is full of words, without
substance: of flourish, without truth: of fraud without reall dealing.
But what if this vaunt be but the wind of a swolne bladder,
the fancy of an idle braine, the Rhetoricke of a voluble
and lauish tongue, whereby T. M. is calumniously traduced?
what amends will P. R. make?Treat. Mitiga. cap. 3. num. 3. pag. 92. 
                  If I prooue not (saith P. R.) that
T. M. hath dealt fraudulently against his conscience, by multiplicity
of examples, let me be thought to haue done him iniury. This is
an excellent and Priestly discharge, he will exact of his iniurious
Aduersaries, I doubt not, a satisfaction reall; or if not that,
yet a verball confession: or at least the contritiō of the hart. But
you see what amends I may expect from his fatherhood, viz.
when he hath iniuried me, he will be content to be thought to
haue done me an iniury; heereby affoording me only the comfort

to thinke, that being iniuried, I may bee thought to be iniuried.
This man when he hath offended, is like to prooue a
deuout penitent, who is lame of his hands, not yeelding any
reall satisfaction; dumbe in speech, not making any confession;
yea and euen, in a manner, dead also without all sense of
sinne by contrition, not so much as thinking vpon the fault
himselfe, will only be content by others to bee thought to haue
done an iniurie. By this profession P. R. may defraud a whole
College by false accounts, and discharge himselfe, saying;
My Masters, be it known vnto you, I may be lawfully thought
to haue deceiued you. Is this a Catholike Mitigation?
               
               151 As for the integrity of my conscience, I doe auow, that
if I haue not in the ielousie of mine infirmity done that, which
no one (to my knowledge) hath done this many ages, to wit,
reuiewed some of mine owne books, and examined them, not
as an Author, but as a censurer, discouering such my escapes,
as I could at any time find, and publishing them in print with
open Animaduersions, to the end that mine owne correction
might be my Readers direction:
               If I haue not earnestly desired, and, by the law of Loue,
challenged of my friends strict iustice, in nothing such deprauations,
as might any where occur, and (lest they should suspect
their reprehensions to become lesse acceptable vnto mee) if I
haue not professed it to bee my greatest offence, not to bee in
that maner offended: If I haue beene euer so peruersly obstinate,
as not willing to be reformed by any Aduersary:
               Againe, although I cannot but chuse to be strucke rather of
a friend who woundeth, that he may heale, than of an enemy
who intendeth only to hurt; a friendly animaduersion being as
an antidote, which is a reprehending of me, lest that I might be
reprehensible: & the taxation of an enemy being as a toxicum
calūniously poisoning whatsoeuer deserued good: yet, if I haue
euer beene so wickedly peruerse, as not, (whensoeuer iustly)
to be willingly reprooued by any Aduersary, turning, as venome
into treacle, his deformation into reformation:
               If in my ordinary course of life any can charge mee with a
bent to this vice of falsifying, although it were for hope of

whatsoeuer aduantage: Then (not to adde, If it be not almost
impossible for any man citing foure or fiue hundred testimonies,
as factors in their accounts, by chance to erre in some
particulars, without note of fraud or cosenage) then, I say, I
will confesse my selfe worthy of all the criminations of frauds,
trickes, deceits, cosenages, and whatsoeuer opprobrious imputations
P. R. either hath or can fasten vpon me.
               152 Concerning the disposition of my Aduersary. If hee bee
not manifested to haue so behaued himselfe in termes so despightfully
malignant, as if the capitall letters of his name P.
R. did iustly betoken Princeps Rabularum:
               
               If not so dotingly vaine in ostentation of his owne wit and
learning, as if P. R. did truely signifie Phormio Romanista:
               
               If not in defense of his cause, in both the questions of Rebellion
and Aequiuocation, so dissolute, as if P. R. might bee worthily
interpreted Praeuaricator Rasus:
               
               If not in his criminations & obiections of falsifications so vnconscionably
and impudently vniust, as if P. R. might certainly
deserue the interpretation of Perfidiae Reus; as partly in this
Preamble, and more in the Incounter may be obserued: Then
will I assume all his odious attributes, as proper vnto my selfe:
               153 Lastly, for the cause. If I doe not auouch the discouery of
Romish positions and practises of Rebellion to bee iust:
               If I proue not the Treatise of Mitig. to be like an Apothecaries
box of poison, with the outward inscription of Antidote:
               
               If I manifest not his specious and glozing reasons for
defense of their Mentall aequiuocation, to bee no better than the
apples of Sodome, which vanish into ashes at the first touch:
               If, lastly, I shew not that the chiefest aduantage of Romish
Aduersaries, doth consist in falsifications; all which this Preamble
hath but touched, and the Incounter (God willing) must
handle: Then let my Treatises be purged with fire, and my
selfe challenged to a recantation. But these things being, by
Gods grace, directly performed, the fruit therof wil be (Christian
Reader) to establish thee both in truth of speech, and dutifull
allegeance, and to put my Aduersary P. R. (I hope) vnto
silence, I pray God, to repentance.
               Gloria Deo.
               
            
         
      
   