
      
         
            
            
            THE ADMIRABLE DELIVERANCE of 266. Chriſtians by Iohn Reynard Engliſhman from the captiuitie of the Turkes, who had beene Gally ſlaues many yeares in Alexandria.
            
            The number of the ſeuerall Nations that were captiues follow in the next page.
            LONDON Printed by Thomas Dawſon, and are to be ſold at the little ſhop at the Exchange 1608.
         
         
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        Engliſhmen
                     
                     03
                     266
                  
                  
                     
                        Scotts,
                     
                     12
                  
                  
                     
                        Iriſhmen.
                     
                     10
                  
                  
                     
                        Frenchmen,
                     
                     18
                  
                  
                     
                        Spaniardes.
                     
                     26
                  
                  
                     
                        Venetians.
                     
                     14
                  
                  
                     
                        Genowayes.
                     
                     19
                  
                  
                     
                        Portugalls.
                     
                     35
                  
                  
                     
                        Hollanders.
                     
                     21
                  
                  
                     
                        High Allmaynes.
                     
                     08
                  
                  
                     
                        Polanders.
                     
                     23
                  
                  
                     
                        Danes.
                     
                     01
                  
                  
                     
                        Greekes.
                     
                     39
                  
                  
                     
                        Muſcouites.
                     
                     18
                  
                  
                     
                        Hungarians.
                     
                     19
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            IOHN REYNARDS DEliuerance from the captiuity of the Turkes, and his ſetting free of 266. Chriſtians that were Gally Slaues.
            
               OF ſuch honor (amongſt all nations) hath the trade of Marchandizing béen euer accōpted that Commerce (euer in the hotteſt flames of Warre againſt one another,) could finde no better, or fayrer meanes to vnite them in amitie, and to ioyne thē (as it were in wedlock) then by Commerce and Negotiation. This is that chayne which bindes Kingdomes in Leagues, begetts loue betwéene princes farre remoued aſunder, and teacheth nations, different in qualitie, in colour, in religion,) to deale faithfully together as brethren. Traffique (to ſpeake of our owne country) hath increaſed and ſtrengthened our Nauy, which is a ſecond wall (beſides that girdle of the Sea that encompaſſeth her body) to defend our Iland. It is the bréeder, and onely bringer vp of good Mariners, ſkilfull Pilots and cunning Nauigators, who to a ſtate are as neceſſary in peace as

huſbandmen for the tillage, and in warre, as ſeruiceable as ſo many Captaines for the field. Traffique is the carier abroad of our owne home-ſpun commodities, and a bringer in of the fruites of forraine kingdomes, by which meanes the Merchant and Cittizen grow vp to wealth, and the tradeſeman that liues by the hardnes of his hand, is ſtill kept and mainteyned in good doings. There is no coaſt be it neuer ſo dangerous, left vnſought no language (be it neuer ſo barbarous or hard to learne) left vnſtudied, no people (neuer ſo wilde) left vnuētured vpon, nor any treaſure of the earth or curious worke of man left vnpurchaſed, only for this end, to do honor to our country, & to heape riches to our ſelues, both which benefits do only ſpring out of our Trading to forraine ſhores.
            For this cauſe therefore (A peace being concluded beweene the two greaf and opulent kingdomes of England and Spaine) an engliſh Ship (called the Three halfe Moones) being manned with eight and thirty Mariners and brauely armed with munition, was rigd, victualled, and readie furniſhed to take her voyage to Spayne. The Gods of the Sea (the windes) knowing her intent, prepared themſelues, to goe along with her, and making the waues ready it becomed this Ship to hoiſt vp ſailes & come on, So that wc a merry gale ſhee tooke her leaue at Portſmouth, bending her courſe towards Siuill, the greateſt Cittie in Spaine. Gallantly did ſhee for many dayes beare vp her head, and daunced euen on the top

of the billowes: her maſts ſtoode vp ſtiftly and went away like ſo many trées moued by enchantmēt, whilſt the big bellied ſayles made haſt to fly after (bluſtring and puffing either in ſcorne or in anger) yet could neuer ouer-take them: or rather as louers roming after young damoſels at barlibreake, they tooke delight to ſee them make away before, and of purpoſe ſuffered them to vſe that aduantage. But (alacke!) howe ſoone does the happineſſe of this world alter? In this brauery had ſhée not caried her ſelfe long, but entring into the Sraights, Neptune grew angry with her, or els enuying her glory, ſent eight gallies of the Turkes to beſet her round. Now or neuer was both the courage and the cunning of the Mariner to bee ſhewed, for either he muſt by the wings of his ſailes fly away and ſo ſaue himſelfe, or manfully ſtand to it, and preſerue all from danger or gloriouſly to ſuffer all to periſh. Of flight was there no hope, for the windes & waues (that before were their freinds and tempted them to ſet forth) grew now trecherous and conſpired their deſtruction. Nothing therefore tebut the miraculous power of heauen, and their owne reſolutions is on their ſide: euery man hereupon cals vp his ſpirits, and as the ſuddaynes of the deadly ſtorme would allow them, did comfort one another. It was a goodly ſight to behold how to the very face of danger they did defie danger, and howe in the midſt of an ouerthrow which had round beſet them, they wiſely and ſtoutly laboured to worke out a ſafetie, nothing

could bée heard but noyſe and confuſion, and yet euen in that wilde diſorder was there to bée ſeene an excellent method of pollicie. Their roming vp and down ſhewed as if they had bin all frantick, yet like ſo many dancers, that ſometimes are here and anon antickly leape thither, fetching tournings and windings with ſtrange and buſie action, they cloſed vp euery worke with a ſwéete and muſicall preparation.
            For after the cloſe fights were made ready aboue and that the deuiliſh mouthes of their ordināce were opening to ſpit hell fire out of the bellie of the Ship: vp comes the Maiſter (whoſe name was Groue) armed with ſword and target, wauing his bright blade about his head in defiance of his barbarous and bloudy enemies: his very lookes were able to fright death from his company, and ſo wel did his courage become him, that it ſerued better then all their warlike muſicke to hearten vp the reſt: cloſe by his ſide (as vowed partners in all fortune good or badde whatſoeuer) ſtoode the Owner, the Maiſters mate, Boteſwayne, Purſer and the reſt of the Mariners. All of them armed, all of them full of valor, al of them full of braues: they ſhewed on the top of the hatches, like ſo many well garded battlemēts on the walls of a beſieged citty, euery man encoraging his next neighbor, to fight valiantly becauſe they were Engliſhmen and to die honorably (becauſe they were Chriſtians) rather then ſtoope to the baſecaptiuitie of thoſe, that were Chriſts profeſſed and open enemies.
            
               
As the Engliſhmen were thus buſie to defend thē
               ſelues on the one ſide, ſo were the Turkes actiue in their Gallies on the other ſide, their Semytaries gliſtred in the Sun, their ſteeele targetts receaued the fire of his beames vpon them, and beat it backe to dazle the eyes of them whom they aſſailed: Showers of muſketts with bullets chargd ſtood ready to bee powred downe, ſome were preparing to toſſe balls of wilde fire, as if the Sea had bin their tennys court, others with bulles pizzells in their hands walkt vp & downe betweene the Rowers, ſomtimes encoraging ſometimes threatning, ſometimes ſtriking the miſerable gally ſlaues, becauſe they ſhould be nimble at ye oare who for feare of blowes more then of preſent death, tugd with their armes, till the Sinewes of them were ready to cracke with ſwelling, & till their eie-balls in ſtead of bullets did almoſt fly out of their heades.
            At length the drummes, trumpets, & fifes ſtrake vp their deadly conſort on either ſide: preſently does ye demy canon & culuering ſtriue to drownd that noiſe whilſt the Sea, roares of purpoſe, to drowne the noiſe of both. In this conflict, of three elements, (Aire water and fire) Iohn Raynard (the Gonner) ſo liuely. & ſo ſtoutly be haued hinſelfe, in diſcharging his ordnance of their great bellies, that at length fire ſeemed to haue the maiſtry, for ſo thickly did his bulletts fly abroad, & were wrapt vp in ſuch cloudes of lightning, yt the ſea ſhewd as if it had bin al in flames, whilſt the

Gallies of the Turkes aſwell as the Engliſh Shippe, could hardly but by the grones and ſhowtes of men beene fownd out where about in the Sea they houered. Many Turkes and many gally ſlaues did in this battaile looſe their liues, and end their Captiuitie: but thoſe who ſuruiued doubling their ſpirits at the horror of the dāger with which they were inuironed fell vpon the Engliſh Shippe in ſuch ſtormes of haileſhot, which ſtill like hammers on an Anuill) lay beating on the ribs of it, that at length, the Sea offred in many places to breake into her, and to get the conqueſt, of which glory the Turkes being enuious, came flying with the force of all thoſe wodden wings that bore them vp, and of purpoſe to board her. But at this ſtirring feaſt, Neptune was made drunke wc the bloud both of Chriſtians and Turkes mingled to gether. Here came the gallyes and the Ship to grapling, looke howe a companie of howndes, hang vppon a goodly Stagge, when with their noiſe they ring out his death, So hang theſe Gallies, vppon the bodie of her: nothing of her coulde bee ſeene for Smoke and fire, ſhee was halfe choked with the flames and halfe ſtifled in the waters. Yet as you ſhall often ſee a Bull, when his ſtrength ſeemeth to bee all ſpent, and that he is readie to faint and fall on his knees, caſtes vp on a ſuddaine his ſurly head, and brauely renewes a freſh and more feirce encounter: So did this ſhip breake from the Gallyes, like a luſtie Beare from ſo manie dogs or

rather like an inuineible Lion from ſo manie beares. The Turkes leapd out of their veſſells, and like ratts nimbly climed vp to the taclings of the ſhip, But the Engliſh Mariners, ſo laid about them with ſwords, browne bills, haluebeards, and morris pikes, that in ſo tragicall an act it was halfe a comedie to behold what tumbling tricks the Turkes made into the ſea backwards. Some of them catching hold of the vpper deckes, had their hands ſtrick off, and ſo for euer loſt their feeling, other claſping their armes about a cable, to fling their bodyes into the ſhip, loſt their heads, & ſo knew not which way to goe though it lay before them. In this terrible inſurrection in Neptunes kingdome it was hard to tell for a great while who ſhould bée the winners, albeit how ſoeuer they ſped, both were certaine to bee looſers, for the Turks would not giue ouer, & the Engliſh ſcorned to yéelde, the Owner, Maiſter and Boteſwayne cryed out brauely and with lowd luſty ſpirits let vs all reſolue to die, but not a man bée ſo baſe as to yéeld to a-Turke: eſpecially did the Boteſwayne ſhew the noble courage of a Mariner, both in directing without feare, and in beſtowing blowes in ſcorne of danger, which hard almes whilſt hee was dealing amongſt the Miſcreants, a ſhot was ſent from a gally as a meſſenger of his death, & ther by a ſpoiler (though not a conqueror) of his valour, for it brake (with the vielent ſtroke it gaue) his whiſtle in ſunder, & left him an the hatches with theſe laſt words in his mouth,

Fight it out as you are Chriſtians, and win honor by death.
            His fall did not abate but whetted their ſtomackes to a ſharper reueng, onely the maiſters mate, ſhewed himſelfe not worthie of that name, or to bée mate to ſo noble a maiſter as he was, for cowardly he cried, yeeld, yeeld, pulling in his arme from ſtriking in the hotteſt of the ſkirmiſh.
            What cittie is not ouer come by ye tyrany of Time, or the oppreſſion of aſſaults? what ſhoares though neuer ſo high can beat back the ſea, when he ſwelles vp infury? what caſtles of flynt or marble are not ſhaken wt the continuall thunder of the Canon? So was this poore Engliſh ſhip: whilſt her ribs held out, and were vnbroken, her Mariners held out and had their hearts ſound. But when they felt her ſhrinke vnder them that ſhould beare them vp in all ſtormes and that ſuch numbers of Turkes did ſo oppreſſe them with thronging in, and with beating them downe, when they had ſcarce féete able to ſtande, then euen then did they not yéelde, but yet then were they taken.
            Glad was the Turke that (though in this ſtorme it rayned down bloud ſo faſt) he was wet no farther: hee looked vpon his ill gotten commodity with a dull & heauie eye, for the foote of his account ſhewed him that his gaines of this voyage woulde not anſwere the treble part of his loſſes: Inraged at which, emptying the wetherbeaten and the mangled ſhip both of

men, and of ſuch things as were woorth the cariage, the one he tooke home with him to enrich the number of his ſpoiles, the other were condemned to the Gallies.
            Néere to the cittie of Alexandria, (being a hauen towne) & vnder the Turkes dominion) is a Road, defended by ſtrong walles, wher the gallies are drawn vp on ſhore euery yeare in the winter ſeaſon, and are there trimmed & layd vp againſt the Spring. In this Roade ſtandes a priſon where all thoſe that ſerue in thoſe gallies of Alexandria, are kept as captiues, ſo long as the ſeas bée rough and not paſſable for their Turkiſh veſſels: hither were theſe Chrſtians brought the firſt villany and indignitie that was done vnto them, was the ſhauing off of all the hayre both of heade and beard, thereby to rob them of thoſe ornaments which all Chriſtians make much of, becauſe they beſt become them.
            It is well knowne to all nations in Chriſtendome (by the wofull experience of thoſe wretches that haue felt it) what miſerie men endure in this thraldome vnder the Turke. Their lodging is the cold earth, their diet, courſe bread and (ſometimes) ſtinking water, for if they ſhoulde taſte of the cleere Springe, their drinke were as good as the Turkes, who neuer taſt wine: their apparell, thin and courſe canuas, their ſtockings and ſhooes, heauie bolts and cold Irons, the exerciſe to put life into them, or to catch them a heate, is at the pleaſure of a prowd and

dogged Turke for the leaſt fault, nay for none at all, but onely to feede his humor, to receiue a hundred baſtinadoes on the rim of the bellie with a bulls dried péezle, at one time, and within a day after two hundred ſtripes on the backe.
            In this moſt lamentable eſtate did theſe Chriſtians continue, but it was not long ere the Maſter and Owner by the good meanes of freindes were redéemed from this ſlauery: the reſt lying by it, ſoone were ſtarued to death, others with cold, and blowes breathed out their laſt.
            But Iohn Reynard, (the gonner) being enabled by the prouidence and will of God to endure this affliction with a ſtronger heart then others coulde out liued moſt of his fellowes, onely to bée (as it after fell out) a preſeruation of his owne life, with many other Chriſtians. For hauing ſome skill in the trade of a barber, hée did by that meanes ſhift now and then for victuals and mended his hard dyet, wherupon growing (after a long impriſonment) into fauour with the Keeper of the Chriſtians that were gally ſlaues, hee ſo behaued himſelfe, that at length hee got libertie to goe in and out to the Roade at his pleaſure, paying a certaine ſtipend to the Keeper, & wearing a locke about his legge: and this libertie did ſixe more likewiſe purchaſe vpon like ſufferance, who by reaſon of long impriſonmēt, were neuer ſuſpected to ſtart aſide, or that they had in their boſomes euer any thought to workethe Turkes any miſcheife, with

whom they had ſtayed ſo long, that in a maner they were as brothers familiar together.
            But the wrath of winter driuing all the Gallies into harbor, by which meanes they lay there vnrigd and diſfurniſhed of al their properties which ſet them forth: the Maiſters, Captaines, and officers of the Gallies, retiring likewiſe either to their priuate affayres, or to ſome other imployment of the State: behold there remayned (at this ſeaſon and parte of the yeare) in this priſon of the Road, 266. Chriſtian priſoners, who were of fiftéene ſeuerall nations, and all of them taken and made ſlaues to the Turke.
            
            Amongſt which there were (at this time) but onely thrée Engliſhmen, & of thē was this Iohn Reynard one: who hauing worne out the miſerie of 13. or 14. yeares ſeruitude vnder ſo barbarous a tyrant, beganne (as hee full often had done before) to call to minde the happines and fréedome of his owne countrey, which comparing to his preſent ſtate, he wept to remember the one, and gat vp his manly courage and caſt in his thoughts how to ſhake off the other.
            Not farre from the Roade, ſomewhat néere to one ſide of the Citty, was a victualing houſe which one Peter Vnticaro had hired, paying alſo a certaine fee for his libertie to the keeper of the Roade, this Peter Vnticaro being a Spaniard borne, and a chriſtian, had beene priſoner vnder the Turkes by the ſpace of 30. years, yet neuer (though many times the forelock of occaſion was thruſt into his hands did he

practiſe any means for his enlargement, but liued ſo quietly & ſo contētedly in outward appearāce as if he had forgotten that he was borne amongſt chriſtians, or yt hee euer deſired to be buried amongſt them. Notwithſtanding which, did Iohn Reynard open his intent to this Spaniard, who cōſented to put it in act, & within few daies after a third perſon (of their fellow priſoners) was drawne into the conſpiracy: which there ſo often as they could without ſuſpition held conference to gether, laide ſeuerall plots for their eſcape and at the end of ſeuen weekes or there abouts, their councels had fully begot the meanes of their preſent deliuery. Fiue more therefore are made acquainted with the buſineſſe to all whom libertie being ſweete, (eſpecially out of ſo baſe and in famous a ſlauery,) theſe eight reſolued (in three nights following) to free not onely themſelues but all the reſt of the Chriſtians that were in priſon. In yt priſon doe theſe eight meete (at a time conuenient) and there did Reynard & Vntecaro deliuer to all the reſt what was intended: euery man was glad of the newes, euery man vowed to aſſiſt them, & in the action to win freedome or to end their liues. Upon this confident truſt put ech vpon other, Reynard and Peter ſecretly furniſhed them with files, which they had as ſecretly prouided for the purpoſe, charging euery perſon to beſtir himſelfe nimbly, and to haue his heeles at liberty from ſhackles by ſuch an hower of ye following euening.
            
               
The night approching, Reynard and Vnticaro with the other ſix, being at the ſpaniards houſe, ſpent their time merrily, to blind the eies of ſuſpition, till darkenes had taken hold of the world, at which time Peter Vnticaro was ſent to the Maiſter of the Road in name of one of the Maiſters of the Cittie, with whom the keeper of the Road was acquainted and at whoſe requeſt he would gladly come: who deſired him to meete the other at peters houſe preſently, promiſing to bring him backe againe to the Roade.
            The keeper vpon deliuery of this meſſage, agreed to goe with Vnticaro, commanding the warders not to barre the gate, becauſe his retourne ſhoulde be ſpeedie.
            In the meane ſeaſon had the other ſeuen who ſtaied in Peters houſe, furniſhed themſelues with ſuch weapons as the time and place did afford them, amongſt whom Iohn Reynard had gotten an old ruſty ſword blade, without either hilt or pummel, which not with ſtanding by bending the hand-end of the ſword in ſtead of a pummell, to ſerue his turne, the other had ſpitts and glaues &c.
            The keeper of the Road being with Vnticaro entred into the houſe, the lights were of purpoſe put out and no noiſe of any liuing creature to be heard: At which the keeper of the Roade being aſtoniſhed, and ſuſpecting ſome villanie, ſtept backe, but Iohn Reynard hauing hid himſelfe in a corner next to the dore, ſtept forth vnto him and ſtopped his paſſage, who

perceiuing it to be Iohn Reynard, and that he was armde (as he might wel feare) for miſcheife, ſaid thus O Reynard what haue I deſerued at thy hands, that thou ſeekeſt my death. Marrie this haſt thou deſerued (quoth Reynard) and ſtrucke him on the head, that he cleft his ſkull, thou haſt bin a ſucker of much Chriſtian bloud, and therefore die like a villaine, no ſooner was his hands lifted vp to giue his fatall blowe, but the reſt (being at his elbow) came forward, & quickly diſpatched him, cutting of his head and ſo mangled him that he could not be knowne.
            This prologue to the Tragedie going off ſo well, heauē was by this time hung al ouer with black to ad a grace to that which was to be acted: no time therefore doe they looſe, but ſteale ſoftly and yet reſolutely to the Road, where entring they found ſire warders onely, who aſked who is there: All friends replied yt-other & were let in, But inſtead of welcomes blowes were giuen and the ſixe warders in a ſhort time left dead on the floore.
            Upon this, (taking their enemies weapons to defend themſelues,) were the gates preſently barred vp ſtrongly and the mouth of a Canon planted full vpon it, readie charged and one appointed with a linſtocke to giue fire if any aſſalt were made vpon them. Then entered they into the Iaylors lodge where they found the keyes both of the Fortres and of the priſon, by his bedſide, and in his chamber were they armed, with better weapons. In this lodge of the keepers,

founde they likewiſe a cheſt, which Vnticaro and one or two more opening, found well lined with Duckets: the Spaniard and ſome others neglecting the buſines in hand, ſtuft their boſomes and pockets with this golde, but Reynard diſſwaded them from that couetouſneſſe which was likely to bee the ouerthrowe of them all, wiſhing them to prouide for their liberty which ſhoulde retourne to the honour of God and of their countries, rather then to ſell their liues yea perhaps their ſoules for the treaſure of Infidelles. But the Spaniard and his companions liked the colour of the Duckets better then Iohn Reynards doctrine, and therfore they haſtned away to the priſon, whoſe dores being opened, It appeared that they with their files had plied their worke aſwell within, as the other had with their weapōs abroad for euery mans legges were deliuered from his Irons: whereupon hauing firſt put certaine warders (that were to looke to the priſon) to ſilence for euer ſpeaking more, they all fell roundly to labour, ſome to ramming vp the gates, ſome to launch out a certaine Gally which was the beſt in all the Roade, and was called the Captaine of Alexandria, ſome caried maſtes, others fetched Sayles, others laide in oares, all of them were buſie, all of them ſweat hard, yet none of them were weary.
            In killing thoſe Turkes that were warders

about the priſon, eight other Turkes hearing a noiſe, and ſuſpecting miſcheife, got vp to the top of the priſon, betwéene whom and the priſoners, (who coulde not come neare them but by ladders) was a hot ſkirmiſh. Some were wounded on both ſides, ſome ſlaine outright. Iohn Reynard was thrice ſhot through his apparrell but not hurt: Peter Vnticaro and the reſt that ſhared in the Duckets being not able to cary their bodies in this danger, by reaſon of the gold about them, which wearied them with the weight were there firſt mortally wounded, and afterwere ſtricken down dead.
            Amongſt the Turkes was one thruſt through, who falling from the toppe of the priſon wall, made ſo horrible a noyſe that the Turkes who dwelt within hearing (for here and there ſtoode a houſe or two ſcattring) came to take him vp ere he was ful dead, and by him vnderſtood, how the Gally ſlaues were reckoning with the Turkes about their ranſome without paying any thing but cracked crownes towards it: hereupon they raiſed both that part of Alexandria which lay on the weſt ſide of the Roade, and a Caſtle which was at the ende of the Cittie next to the Roade, alſo another fortreſſe which lay on the other ſide of the Roade.
            
            The Allarum thus on euery ſide being giuen, danger and death did round about beſet the

poore Chriſtians: there was but one onely paſſage to eſcape foorth, and that lay betweene the very iawes of deſtruction: yet not withſtanding no mans heart failed him, the nearer death came towardes this companie of wretches, the leſſe ſeemed they to care for his threatnings, for the Roade is ſtill repleniſhed with luſty Souldiers, with ſtout labourers and with tough Mariners, all whoſe handes are full of helping one another in this great worke of life and death, ſome to victuall the gally that muſt ſaue them, others to hang vp the tacklinges, others to line it with ſhot for defence againſt enemies, but the moſt part were buſie in keeping the Turkes from the wall of the Roade. In the end all things being in a readines, euery man leaped into the Gally ioyfully, hoiſted vp ſailes luſtily, and lanched into the Seas merrily, ſubmitting their liues, and fortunes to the mercy of him, that commands both ſea and land.
            The veſſell flotes on the waues like a goodly pageant, ſhee flies away by the helpe of oares as if ſhee had borrowed ſo many winges, and in a moment is ſhee gotten ſafe out of the Road, but hauing eſcaped one danger, ſhée encounters a greater, for now on both ſides of her, doe the two Caſtles ſende out their vengeance: the Canons roare, and ſhoote to ſinke them, the waues watch that aduantage and gape to deuoure

them: fortie and fiue bullets, (dreadfull as thunder) fell about theſe Chriſtians eares, yet not one of them bruiſed their heades: they came out of the Roade ſafely, and went from the danger of the Caſtles ſecurely, for ioy whereof, they gaue a luſty ſhout, that ecchoed and rebounded backe againe betweene the cloudes and the ſhore.
            On they went, and though the windes beganne to grow angry, and to threaten ſtormes, yet with cheerefull hearts did they chooſe rather to periſh in the eye of heauen, and by the hand of God, then to bee fetched backe againe and beare the yoake of Infidelles. For caſting their eyes backe, they might beholde the Turkes, (for by this time the ſunne was a good way on his forenoones iourney) comming downe to the Sea-ſide in ſwarmes like locuſts to deuoure a country: all of them laying their handes to launch out Gallies, and follow the Chriſtians. But ſuch a ſpirite of rage, madneſſe, diſorder, and feare, fell vppon them, that what one ſet forwarde, three hindred. And as in a Cittie fired in the night time, men are ſo aſtoniſhed, that they ſcarce can finde the common wayes by which they may ſaue themſelues, no more could the Turkes in this wilde & giddy tumult, know how to furder themſelues. After much labour therefore, and nothing proſpering, after much

crying out vpon Mahomet, and more curſing the Chriſtians, they quieted there ſpleenes, & looked about them how to make good what was in this battaile and battery of the Chriſtians defaced, whileſt in the meane time, ye poore Captiues, were both out of their ſight, & out of their Iuriſdiction.
            For away went they rowndly, one companie ſtill and anon leaping to the oare, as another felt themſelues wearie. All their prayers being powred out, that the hand of heauen woulde ſo guide them, that they might land vppon ſome Chriſtian ſhore. A long time did they thus wander in thoſe incertaine pathes of the Sea, the windes ſometime blowing gently on their faces and ſometimes angerly: In ſo much that at length, victuals began to fayle them, And then Famine (a more curſed enemie then him from whom they eſcaped, yea then death it ſelfe) opened her vnwholeſome iawes, and with her ſtinking breath blaſted their chéekes, by which meanes in 28. dayes, (wherein they were toſſed vp & downe from billow to billow) their dyed for want of bread eight perſons, to the aſtoniſhment of all the reſt, that looked ſtill for their tourne, and to bée flung ouer board after their fellowes.
            But with a more mercifull eye (when hee beheld how patiently they endured his trialls) did God looke downe vpon them. And on the 29. day after they ſet from Alexandria, they fell vpon the

               Iland of Candy, & ſo put in at Gallipolie, where the Abbot and Monkes of the place gaue them good entertainement, warmed them, and gaue them foode, not ſuffering them to depart till they had refreſhed their bodies & had gathered ſtrength to proceed on their Iourney. The ſword wt which Iohn Reynard, had ſlaine the Turkiſh Iaylor, did they hang vp for a monument, in remembrance that by ſo weake an inſtrument ſo many Chriſtians were deliuered from ſo barbarous a thraldome
            From hence they ſayled alongſt the coaſt till they ariued at Tarento, where they ſold their Gally, deuided the mony amongſt themſelues, euery man hauing a part of it to relieue them: for ſo hardly were they purſued by the Turkiſh Gallyes, that often times they came to that place at night, from whence the Chriſtians went away but the morning before. So that it behoued them to vſe all the dilligent ſpeede they could, and not to tary long in one country, From Tarento therefore do they trauaile by land to Naples, & there did they ſeperate thēſelues & breake companie, euery man ſhaping his beſt courſe to get to his owne home.
            
               Iohn Reynard tooke his Iourney to Rome, where he found good and freindly entertainement at the hands of an Engliſh man, by whoſe meanes the Pope gaue him a liberall reward, and ſent him with Commendatorie letters to the King of
               
               Spaine, who for that worthy exployt vpon the Turkes gaue him in fee 20. pence by the day. But the loue of his owne country calling him from thence hee forſooke Spayne, and his preferment there, and retourned to England. ⸫
            
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ The Copie of the Certificat for Iohn Reynard and his companie, made by the Pryor and the Brethren of Gallipoly, where they firſt landed.
            
            
               WE the Prior and Fathers of the Couent of the Amerciates of the citie of Gallipoly, of the order of Preachers, doe teſtifie that vpon the ninteenth of Ianuarie, there came into the ſaid citie a certaine Gally from Alexandria, taken from the Turkes with two hundred fiftie and eight Chriſtians, whereof was principall Maiſter Iohn Reynard an Engliſh man a Gunner, and one of the chiefeſt that did accompliſh that great worke, whereby ſo many chriſtians haue recouered their libertie. In token and remembrance whereof, vpon our carneſt requeſt to the ſame Iohn Reynard, he hath left here an old ſword wherewith he ſlew the keeper of the priſon: which ſword wee doe as a monument and memoriall of ſo worthy a deed hang vp in the chiefe place of our Couent houſe. And for becauſe all things aforeſaid are ſuch as we will teſtifie to be true, as they are orderly paſſed, and haue therefore good credit that ſo much as is aboue

expreſſed is true, and for the more faith thereof, we the Prior and Fathers aforeſaid haue ratified and ſubſcribed theſe Preſents. Geuen in Gallipoly.
            
               
                  
                     I Frier Vincent Barba Prior of the ſame place, confirme the premiſes as they are aboue written.
                     I Frier Albert Damaro of Gallipoly Subprior, confirme as much.
                     I Frier Anthony Celleler of Galli, confirme as aforeſaid.
                     I Frier Bartilmew of Gallipoly, confirme as aboueſaid.
                     I Frier Francis of Gallipoly, confirme aſmuch.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The Biſhop of Rome his Letters in the behalfe of Iohn Reynard.
            
               BE it knowne vnto all men to whome this writing ſhall come, that the bringer heereof Iohn Reynard Engliſhman a Gunner, after hee had ſerued Captiue in the Turkes Gallies by the ſpace of fourteene yeares, at length thorow God his helpe taking good oportunitie the third of Ianuary, ſlew the keeper of the priſon, whom he firſt ſtrooke on the face, together with foure and twenty other Turkes, by the aſsiſtance of his fellow priſoners, and with two hundred ſixty ſix Chriſtians, (of whoſe liberty hee was the author) launched from Alexandria, and from thence arriued firſt at Gallipoly in Candie, and afterwards at Tarento in Apulia: the written teſtimony and credit of which things as alſo of others, the ſame Iohn Reynard hath in publike tables from Naples.
            Some few daies ſince he came to Rome. and is now determined to take his iourney to the Spaniſh Court, hoping there to obtaine ſome reliefe toward

his liuing, wherefore the poore diſtreſſed man humbly beſeecheth, and we in his behalfe, do in the bowels of Chriſt deſire you, that taking compaſsion of his former captiuitie and preſent penurie, you doe not onely freely ſuffer him to paſſe throughout all your cities and townes, but alſo ſuccour him with your charitable almes, the reward whereof you ſhall hereafter moſt aſſuredly receiue, which we hope you will afford to him, whom with tender affection of pitty we commend vnto you. At Rome.
            
               
                  
                     Thomas Grolos Engliſhman Biſhop of Aſtraphen.
                     Richard Silleun Prior Angliae.
                     Andreas Ludouicus, Regiſter to our Soueraigne Lord the Pope,which for the greater credite of the premiſes, haue ſet my ſeale to theſe preſents.
                  
               
               At Rome the day and yeare aboue written.
               
               Mauricus Clenotus, the Gouernour and keeper of the Engliſh hoſpitall in the Citie.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The King of Spaine his Letters to the Lieuetenant, for the placing of Iohn Reynard in the office of a Gunner, &c.
            
            
               TO the illuſtrious Prince, Veſpaſian Gonſaga Colona, our Lieuetenant and Captaine Generall of our Realme of Valentia. Hauing conſideration that Iohn Reynard Engliſhman, hath ſerued vs, and was one of the moſt principall which tooke away from the Turkes a certaine Gallie, which they haue brought to Tarento, wherein were two hundred, fiftie, and eight Chriſtian captiues:
            Wee licence him to practiſe, and giue him the office of a Gunner, and haue ordained that hee goe to our ſaide Realme, there to ſerue in the ſaide office in the Gallies, which by our commaundement is lately made. And wee doe commaund, that you cauſe to bee payd to him eight Duckats pay a Moneth, for the time that hee ſhall ſerue in the ſaide Gallies as a Gunner, or till wee can otherwiſe prouide

for him, the ſaide eight Duckats monethly of the money which is alreadie of our prouiſion preſent and to come, and to haue regarde of thoſe which come with him. From Eſcuriall.
            
               I the King. Iuan del Gado.
                And vnder that a confirmation of the Counſell.
            
         
      
   