
      
         
            
            
            A Moſt true Relation of a very dreadfull Earth-quake, with the Lamentable effectes thereof, Which began vpon the 8. of DECEMBER 1612. and yet continueth moſt fearefull in Munſter in Germanie.
            
            
               READE AND TREMBLE.
            
            Tranſlated out of Dutch by Charles Demetrius, Publike Notarie in London. And Printed at Rotterdame in Holland, at the Signe of the White Gray-hound.
            
            
               depiction of comet sighting
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               A MOST TRVE Relation of a very dreadfull Earth-quake, with the lamentable effects thereof, which began vpon the eight of December this preſent yeare 1612. and yet continueth most fearefull in Munſter in Germanie.
               
                  HOw happie was Adam (our Father) to haue the world (then vnſpotted) his Kingdome, Paradiſe his Pallace, all creatures vpon Earth his Subiects, God himſelfe his Protector, good Angels his councellors, Sunne, Moone and Starres his Bookes of contemplation, and Eden his Garden of plentie and pleaſure, where hee had all things that were

good, and was in daunger of nothing that was euill. But how wretched was hee for diſobeying his Creators commandement, to looſe all this happineſſe, and in that Treaſon of his to condemne all his poſteritie? How miſerable are the Sonnes become by the Fathers fall? How bleſſed had they beene, if hee had ſtood? For reckon vp their loſſes: the World that ſhould haue beene their Paradi
                     •
                  e is now their Priſon. Mans protector (God) hath giuen him ouer: Angels (that then were his equals) are now farre aboue him, All creatures that were his Subiects, rebell at their Lord and Maſter▪ a little Bee dares ſting him, the ſmalleſt Gnatte is ready to choake him: The earth brings foorth Bryers and Brambles to ſcratch him, poyſons to kill him, Serpents to deuour him, yea the heauens themſelues emptie their ful Quiuers of dreadful vengeance, ſhooting tempeſts of Hayle, Ice, Snowe, Waters, Windes, Thunder and Lightning, vpon his miſerable and ſinfull head. That which hath a Sunne placed in it to giue him heate, foode and life, powres vppon him her Vyols of wrath: That which was made firme for his footing, and to beare vp Kingdomes, Cities, and all the creatures in the World, now ſhakes, and opens her entrailes to ſwallow him in that wombe, where firſt hee was begotten.
               
                  Shall I drawe before your eyes a liuely Picture, to make you ſee theſe things? Alacke! we write our paſſed puniſhments vpon the breſt of Time, and when his backe is turned, it is like Childrens bookes claſped vp, wee forget what leſſons we reade there. We are all like Zenophantus, that could doe nothing but laugh: yea, our eſcaped miſeries are but our mockeries; for (as dull beaſts doe) we feele ſtripes to day, but forget the ſmarting to morrow; growing fat with afflictions as Aſſes doe with blowes, and the more beaten, the harder our hearts are, like yron, lying vnder the hammer.
               Since then we neuer feare Ship wracke, but when we ſee our Veſſels ready to Split vpon Rockes, and that wee thinke neuer to fall, but when the Axe is laide to the roote; Since no rodde can terrifie but what is preſently held ouer vs; O yee Worldlings, (vnleſſe your boſomes bee as cold as your Charitie is) I ſhall melt you all into Water, and ſtartle your Soules out of their deadly ſlumbers, vnleſſe they bee as dull and heauie as your ſinnes are, by ratling in your eares the Thunder of Diuine vengeance, whoſe noyſe doth now at this very inſtant terrifie vs your diſconſolate Neighbours.
            
            
               
               The Earth-quake in Munſter, with other fearefull Prodigies ſeene in the Ayre.
               
                  MVnſter is a Citie, ſituate in Weſtphalia, a part of the lower Germany: It ſtands vpon a hill, fauoured by Heauen for ſweete and wholeſome ayre, and wanting nothing which the Prouinces, adioyning to it, doe plentifully enioy. It is rich in people, and the people rich in pleaſures, and therefore in ſinne, no windes being able to wey downe the full eares of their pride, but the breath of his noſethrils which can make Princes to bow beneath his foot ſtoole.
               In this Citie (ſwelling with the abundance which her owne wombe beares and brings forth:) when her head lay in the ſoft lappe of

eaſe, when Peace ſate at her Gates, Freedome walked in her Streetes, and when ſecuritie laide all the Inhabitants vpon their wanton Pillowes. Behold, the Reuealer and Reuenger of all cloſe and hidden impietie ſuddenly ſnatched out his Sword, and (ſmiting at them) made their loftieſt Pinnacles to tremble. For vpon the eight day of December (now laſt) a vniuerſall Earth-quake ſhooke the deepeſt foundations of the ſtrongeſt buildings; Churches and Steeples reeled in the Ayre like Shippes (in ſtormes) beaten vpon the Waues, and in a moment, their higheſt Battlements came tumbling to the Earth. Towers of Flint & Marble cannot reſiſt this batterie. The wrath of ten thouſand Canons cannot confound ſo quickly, for whole ſtreetes of Houſes ſtand tottering▪ and whole ſtreetes of Houſes fall. Safetie hath no Walles to dwell in, no corner to flie to. Men, Women and Children are with the terror throwne to the Earth, and as there they lie, their owne Buildings fall on them, and grinde them into duſt. If any haue ſo much heart left, as to lift vp his hands to Heauen, he is preſently ſtruck dead by Thunder and Lightning, which rage with ſuch terrible furie, ouer all the poore deſolately ruined Citie▪ As if GOD in anger had ſwore to make this an example to other places of his Judgement, as hee did his holy Citie Jeruſalem, not to leaue one ſtone ſtanding vpon another.
               
                  Armies of fiery clouds thus fight againſt theſe wretched people in the Ayre: thunder frights their ſoules, and aſtoniſheth their hearing, the ground trembles vnder them, and becauſe euery Sence ſhould be puniſhed, according to his offences, the eye that once ſcorned to looke vp ſo high as heauen, is now forced full of teares, from thence to begge one droppe of mercy, but in ſtead of that, it beholdeth a blazing & direfull Comet: The Stars that are the glorious Scutcheons of the Creator, and ſtucke as candles in heauen to light man in the night, becauſ
                     •
                   he ſhould worke no wickedneſſe in darkneſſe, are now changed into prodigious, dreadfull, and fiery Meteors. They are out of that celeſtiall order which the Great Generall aboue placed them in: And like a Kingdome in ciuill vprores threaten nothing but plagues, miſchiefe to the world and confuſion. Miſery is euer borne with a twinne. Theſe prodigies come not alone, but other ſtrange and horrid apparitions flie vp and downe the Ayre: No time being free, as if night and day contended together, which of them ſhould afflict and inſult ouer a wretched downe-trodden Citie, with ſharpeſt tyrannie: For the Earthquake, with Thunder and lightning doth twice euery day (at diſtinct times) ſhake, diſioynt, and beate to the ground the howſes, and kill the people, and when night ſhould lend them reſt to their calamities, they

are kept waking by theſe ſecond allarms in the Element. Not farre from Munſter ſtandeth a Caſtell called Bileuelt, ſtrongly built vpon a mightie rocke, and this Fort (for all it ſeemed to be impregnable) hath beene ſhaken by the battry of this Earthquake, and ſuch a breach made into the very Rocke it ſelfe, that the Caſtell is ſunke beneath his ſetled and firſt foundation more than the depth of two mens height: That which remaineth vndeuoured in this ſtony and craggy Gulfe, aboue ground, 
                     •
                  eeling, wauing, and tottering too and fro, as eaſily (when the blow is giuen) as you ſee ſtanding corne ſhaken by ſome mightie wind. Thus the poore people liue in this citie, thus they periſh: but leauing them a while.
               Into whoſe boſome ſhall I poure the riuer of my teares? Into my countries? ſhe is ouerwhelmed already in the torrent of her owne ſorrowes: Shall I ſigh my lamentations vp into Ayre? She is frighted with the vnuſuall prodigies which the wrath of her Maker ſtickes vpon her beauty: will men heare me? Sinne hardens their hearts, and they are more ſenſeleſſe than Rockes: to the Rockes, Mountaines, and Hilles then breath I out my Tragicall condolements: Alas, they tremble too, as readie to feele the generall diſſolution: Let me open therefore the mangled booke of thy Ruines onely (O thou my inexpreſſibly dilacerated countrey) becauſe in theſe

leaues are written the blotted Stories of thy downefall.
               Why art thou (aboue all thy fellowes) marked out and drawne to the ſlaughter? Is it becauſe thy iniquities exceede the reſt, as thy puniſhments do? Or is it becauſe God is but angrie as a father, (chaſtiſing any one yt is next his hand) not in a particular quarrell to yt one, but to make theſe ſtripes giuen to him, ſtartle all the reſt, and ſo to keepe them in feare of correctiō. Or ſhal I let flie none of theſe arrowes but ſhooting at Rouers in another bow, ſhal I with the Naturaliſt & ſearcher of ſecrets, conclude that theſe Earth frauers haue their ſhakings from the ordinarie diſtemperature of Winds, ſtealing into the bowels of the earth, and there (with rombling, toſſing & ſtragling to acquire vent & paſſage) they open yt Cauernes of the maſſie foundation, and ſo tumble down all waightie matter yt compreſſeth their violence? Shall theſe Crutches ſerue for my beliefe to leane vpon? No, let the Lame & halting Heathen (that neuer trode in y• right path of his Creation) hold vp his knowledge by that weak ſtaffe. Let him ſuppoſe that the wheeles of this great Vniuerſe are ſet a going by the ſubtile workemanſhip of Nature, & that their motions ſhall grow flow, and weaken according as ſhe her ſelfe waxeth old and decaying.
               But if I (that am a Chriſtian) can read that there is a God (who controlles Nature,)

a God that made the Sunne to ſhine by day, a Moone by night, with Starres in the firmament not ſo much to beautify that Roofe, as to ſerue the vſe of man. And that thoſe officers of light, (thoſe celeſtial torchbearers) are appointed to keep a decent, ſetled & vnchangeable orderly courſe, if I can alſo read that the ſame Omni-ſufficiently-ſkilfull Enginer, is at all times furniſhed with Thunder, Lightning & Tempeſt, (the Artillerie of his vengeance:) The naturall Philoſopher ſhall pardon me, if I thinke (and ſo wiſh all Chriſtians to bee of this opinion) that as in our Earthly or Lunarie bodies, accidentall violent diſeaſes are fore-runners of languiſhing Sicknes, or Imminent Death, So when thoſe heauenly bodies are out of tune, diſtempered, & diſtracted, they are predictions of ſome fatall, fearefull, & portentious calamities, aſſuredly threatning ſome particular Nation, not ſhot from an ordinarie, but a ſupernaturall hand. And I doe farther thinke that if the omnipotent Thunderer could locke vp ſufficient ſtore of Waters to drowne all the world, as by his word (giuen ſince) he hath ſworn to deſtroy it with fire, ſure it is that his opening of the ſame Sluces now (which ouer-flow and ſwallow vp our corne fields in their mercileſſe inundations) are but to ſhewe vs the old whip which hee then held in his hands, when firſt he gaue correction, as theſe tearings of the Element, with fires darted

from his lightning vpon one eſpeciall citie, are meere Items to put vs in minde of that dreadfull laſt blow, which ſhall paſh the world in pieces in her vniuerſall conſummation.
               No no, It is an extraordinarie Finger, that points out where ſuch Tempeſts ſhall fall. The Lord of Hoſtes hath ſome great Battle to bee fought, and hée doeth now but leuie his forces: The Judge of all Kingdomes is to arraigne the ſinnes of ſome one people, and theſe are now but the ſummons ſent from his court to warne their appearance. You neuer ſhall ſee theſe gentle Laſhes vppon the outward fleſh of a few, but bee aſſured they are Flagella Dei, his Rods which hee ties vp in bundels againſt ſome more terrible execution.
               I ſhould here weepe mine eyes into Inke, to ſet downe the deplorable condition of my countrey, if I ſaw her onely tyed to the Stake of theſe afflictions? But is Germanie in a flame, and doe other Nations ſtand a loofe off, warming their handes by her fires? Not ſo, Denmarke our next neighbour, with France, England, Scotland, Ireland, and many other Maritime Kingdoms, haue eaten of this ſowre Grape as well as Germanie: they (as we) ſit ſtill on the weather beaten ſhores, increaſing the wrathfull Seas with Waters ſhowring from their eyes, for their freſh bleeding and neuer to be forgotten Irrecuperable loſſes.
               
                  Awaken therfore (O you ſeuenteene daughters of Belgial) you that are rich in Poſſeſſions, glorious in beautie, princely in ornaments, leaue liſtning to the charms of your light and wanton inſtruments, and let the cries of vs your poore Neighbors force you to lift vp your eyes to heauen. Thinke not, though you ſtand higher than vs, that you ſtand ſnrer, for the ſame Arme that hath ſhooke our ſtrong Battlements, can as ſuddenly crumble yours into duſt, your amendement may ſue out our generall Pardon. Looke vpon your feete then and bluſh (for all your gay Fethers) at your deformitie. Your ancient and nobleſt vertues haue you turned into Sordid and moſt ugly abhominations, Peace hath made you proude, pride hath made you ambitious, ambitiō warlike, and Warre bloudie and inſolent. Your induſtrie ſo admired throughout the World, and ſo commendable at home, is now like a Spiders Loome, curiouſly wrought but to no good purpoſe.
               Sloth ſits in your gates, and wantonneſſe lies dallying in your chambers: temperance in diet is growne to ſurfeting, and thoſe ſurfets breed oathes and quarrels. All your good deeds may be ingrauen within a ring of gold, but your bad-ones ſtretch beyond all dimenſion. Theſe are the trees of your glories: but note I pray how the fruits haue beene blaſted. The Spaniard hath marched with ſwords of

fire, vpō the harts of your proudeſt cities, your marriage-beds haue ſuffered deturpation, and felt the hot luſt of ſtrangers, your faireſt Froes haue beene rauiſhed of their honours by the mercenary ſouldier: yea the Dutch themſelues haue (like Vipers) eaten out the belly that brought them forth, Inhabitants of cities haue made their owne cities deſolate, and beaten downe thoſe walles that ſhould haue defended their families: Fathers haue murdered ſons, ſonnes fathers, and kinred made triumphes at the deflowring of their Neeces. Your goodly ſtreets (O you Belgians) haue beene turned into Church-yards, and your ſumptuous State-Houſes into ſhambles and graues, yet theſe Drummes cannot wake you.
               O would to God therefore (you my countrimen the Dutch Nation,▪ as you are now held valiant & warlike both by ſeas & land that you had in you leſſe courage, for it is only boldneſſe that makes man wicked. Or would to God that as you haue drawne your ſwords againſt the boſome of your country, you had likewiſe vnſheathed them againſt the ſins of your country, thē happily had not we drunk of this bitter cup of calamities, then happily (which heauen auert) God will not phiſicke you with the ſame ſtrong potion. But becauſe our fals may make you looke to your footing, Behold how your country lies once more bleeding, ſtrucke by the ſame hand of heauen.
            
            
               
               Other fearefull Examples, vpon ſome ſwallowed (in their Cups) within the bowels of the Earth: with other terrible and aſhoniſhing Accidents.
               
                  THE firſt part of this Germaine-Tragedie is acted, the ſecond (full of Bloud and Horror) ſhall now be plainly ſhewed. It beginnes with a Marriage, but ends in Murder: Banquets, and full Cuppes of Wine lay the Cloath, but ſhrikes and diſmall crying take away the Table.
               Know therefore, that in a Towne of Germany called Sybellen, a rich young man, (of the age of two and twenty yeares) called by the name of Antiochus, hapned to be marryed to a Gentlemans Daughter of the ſame towne. The Nuptiall being (according to the cuſtome of the Country) orderly celebrated in the Church, home the marryed couple come, accompanyed with kinſfolke, friends, and acquaintance, who are all inuited to the ſolemnization of ſo happy a day.
               
                  The knot being now tyed, which to Louers is ſo welcome, Muſicke is called for, to ſtirre vp their bloud and youthfull Spirits. Daunces hauing wearyed them, they all ſit downe at the Bridall-Table, where Plentie her ſelfe could not haue inuented one diſh more to furniſh out the feaſt.
               At the table (after the Dutch faſhion) they ſit long, and drinke hard, and being cloyed with Glaſſes of Sugar and Rheniſh, whoſe poyſon goes downe ſmoothly, they fall againe to their Lauoltaes: and in ths manner doe they for three or foure dayes together, renew good cheere, their carowſing, and their dauncing.
               And (as it commonly happens at ſuch meetings) it being famed abroad that two wealthy perſons were marryed, a number of poore and aged people ſwarmed about the gates of the Bride-houſe: But whether it were the couetouſneſſe of the Parents, the pride of the Bridegroome and Bride, or the neglect of Seruants, or whether it was Gods will to harden all their hearts, onely to ſhew ſome puniſhment on ſuch as are vncharitable, to expreſſe his deteſtation of that ſinne: or elſe whether hee ſuffered them to drowne themſelues in Wine, Belly-cheere and Pleaſures, of purpoſe to lay his iudgement vpon ſenſuall

and luxurious Diues, whilſt he ſuffered poore Lazarus to begge crummes at his Gate▪ yet to haue none: but ſure it is, that commandement was giuen, that no meates which came from the Wedding-Table, ſhould not onely not be giuen to the Beggars, but that rather they ſhould be all beaten with cudgels from the gates, which was done accordingly. And ſo the Beggars being as vncharitable in their prayers, as the other were cold in their almes, went away with hungry Bellyes, but their mouthes full of curſes, which they ſp
                     •
                  tefully ſpit forth againſt the Houſe, the Owners, the Bridegroome, Bride, Seruants, and Gueſts.
               But their▪breath had no power to hurt them, it was God that was to take the quarrell in hand, not for any loue to ſuch wicked and licentious idle Caterpillers, againſt whom he often hardens peoples hearts, to puniſh their abhominable liuing, but to reuenge himſelfe vpon them, who in their fulneſſe deſpiſe thoſe poore members that begge bread in the Name of his Sonne Jeſus Chriſt. Yet he ſtrikes them not preſently, becauſe they ſhould haue time giuen them to bethinke themſelues, and to remember the needy. But the hearts of them all being frozen vp, and pitty not enduring in ſo colde and comfortleſſe a lodging:

Behold, all at their plenteous and Epicurean voluptuous tables, fall to drinking, ſwilling, and carowſing deepe healths, which ſwimme from lip to lip in oaths, in curſing and in quarrels: the Wine (ordayned by God for mans nouriſhment) waſhing the ground, the earth being made drunken with her owne fruits: and the delicate meates (whoſe ſcraps the hungry beggar would haue beene glad of) were throwne in ſinfull meriment, in one anothers faces, and then ſpitefully trodden in mockery vnder their feete.
               At this impiety the fire of Gods indignation being kindled, he made the earth to cleaue, and to ſwallow thoſe that deuoured the bleſſings of it: her wombe opened like an inſatiable Graue, and in the ſame were they (All) buryed aliue.
               The terror of this ſtrucke them halfe dead with aſtoniſhment that eſcaped the blow: yet afterwards euen they accounted them happy that were ſo taken away, when they felt the ſharpneſſe of thoſe miſeries which preſently Heauen threw vpon them. For ſodainely, the Day loſt his light, the Sunne hid his head, as aſhamed, or rather deteſting to looke vpon ſuch wretches: and in ſtead of his comfortable brightneſſe, a melancholy, pitchie, glutinous, and ſtincking, miſty darkneſſe couered

all the place: fearefull to behold, and yet the more fearefull, becauſe nothing could be ſeene. And this blacke Image of Hell and Night ſtood before them by the ſpace of fiue dayes. At whoſe end (albeit no man thought that God would euer haue ſaid once more, Let there be Light) yet the Light appeared: but how? Not to cheere vp their afflicted Spirits, but as it did to Adam, to diſcouer both their Sinne, their Shame, and a further Puniſhment. For the Day was onely ſhowne to them to vexe them the more with ſight of ſo deare a loſſe, and to make them know how powerfull he was that could take it from them.
               And againe, to manifeſt that power, he ſtrucke the Heauens blinde againe, and in ſtead of light to glad them, rayned downe ſhowres of Fire mixed with Bloud. And then to ſhake the World with beliefe and feare, that her laſt and moſt diſmall day was come, an Earthquake (no leſſe dreadfull then the former) both increaſed their miſeries▪ and ended them: for God (according to his diuine promiſe and property) being neuer angry long, was ſatiſfied with this their puniſhment, and reſtored vnto them that which they were in deſpaire neuer to haue ſeene, that is to ſay, light and life.
               Onely let not this be vnremembred, that

as the Land felt the ſtrength of his arme and trembled, ſo did the waters, for the ſtorme of his wrath powred downe it ſelfe vpon the neighbouring Seas, ſo that many▪ Shippes were vtterly caſt away, the Goods loſt, and the People in them drowned: No Pilot in the World (how ſkilfull ſoeuer) being able to ouercome a Tempeſt, when Hee who once made all this World an Ocean, commaunds the Waues to execute his diſpleaſure.
               Of which Tragicall fury of the Billowes this is one memorable and notorious proofe, (to be lamented in more wordes then I ſet it downe in letters) that amongſt thoſe numbers of dead carkaſes which the Sea (as vnwilling to beare ſuch vnnaturall and ignoble Burdens) paide backe againe vpon the Shoare, a dead Woman was one, about whoſe body were found tyed (as it ſeemed in the heat and height of the Tempeſt) ſeauen Children, ſhe her ſelfe being great with the eight.
               Thus haue you heard a true report of the Almighties Anger and his Mercy, his Power both by Sea and Land: let vs therefore (whoſe liues and poſſeſſions he might haue confiſcated in his iuſt indignation, yet hath ſpared them) fall vpon our knees with thanks for his deliuerance, and bringing vs ſafe

through this Red▪Sea of troubles, in which (if it had pleaſed him) we might with the reſt haue beene for euer confounded. For our hearts (made ſo by our ſinnes) are hardened, (not onely one againſt another, but againſt him) as much as theirs were, or euer Pharaohs was. Open the Cloſet of euery mans conſcience, and you ſhall finde a Booke there, all blotted, and written full of impieties, blacker then the incke: yet ſo marble-breaſted are we, that (like fooles going laughing to the ſtockes) we are inſenſible of our owne harmes.
               The Vine (vntimely cut) weepes away her ſtrength at the wound, but no miſery that cuts vs (earely or late) can make vs weepe for our ſinnes. Sinne and we are as inſeparable as trechery is from the Soule of a Turke, or blackenes from the cheekes of an Ethiope. Wee feele the ſmarting paine of a ſlight blow, it angers vs: nay, the loſſe of a little bloud makes vs cry out, and almoſt ſtarke mad for the feare of approaching death: but if our ſoules be buffeted, we laugh at it: if they be ſhattered in pieces, rent, and ruined, we ſtirre not at that: Her ill dayes we write downe in no Kalender, for we thinke there are not any can hurt her. Swallowes would not come within Thebes, becauſe the wals were ſo often▪ beſieged: but wretched man

puts on wings to flye to thoſe Cities, which are moſt ſhaken with vices. The more rotten the hart of this Worlds Kingdome is, by feeding on ſweet and bewitching pleaſures, the more we dote (like fond Louers) vpon it.
               To ſet downe our ſinnes, is as infinite a taſke as to paint our thoughts: it is a chaine reaching downe as low beneath vs, as the glories of heauen are aboue vs. To ſet downe our ſinnes at full, we had need to ſtudy a new Arithmeticke: to be as long-liude as the Hart when we ſit to doe it: to turne the Sea into Incke when we write the Figures: to binde vp a Booke with as many Leaues as are rent by Autumne: and to haue the Sands of the Ocean for Compters, yet all theſe helpes are not able to caſt vp the Summe. For we are ſtill at difference with God, yet is he loath to fall out with vs: we owe him Millions, yet pay him not a Mite: He loues vs as the Apple of his Eye, yet we caſt his loue at our feete: he ſings ſweet Notes of mercy in our Eares, and they make vs preſume: he then ſhakes his Iron Mace of Juſtice at vs, and then wee deſpaire. So that his patience and our wickedneſſe, our prouocation and his tender-hartedneſſe, are no more tunable together then Lute-ſtrings of a Wolfe and a Lambe, which neuer agree in Muſicke.
               
                  If then the number of our bad deeds ſwels to a heape ſo great, how can wee at Gods hands but looke for as great, and as many puniſhments? If a debter owe vs money, we looke to haue all, we ſpare not him, we vexe him, we plucke out his throate for our owne: Why ſhould not God (then) handle vs ſo? Yet he reckons ſeldome, and forgiues much: when he ſees vs waſting the Talents he truſts vs with, and too too lauiſhly conſuming them, then, then, we muſt be ſure to pay for all.
               Euery man hath by himſelfe an accompt to make vp: euery Nation runnes in Arerages, yea, the World it ſelfe is behinde hand with his Lord and Maker. The Audit day is ſet downe in his euerlaſting Reportary, (knowne to man that it muſt come, but knowne to the King of Heauen onely when it ſhall come:) for when eyther we (by our ſelues) perſonally, or any Nation particularly, or the world in generally is to be ſummoned to make his reſt euen, lyes hid in a Booke which none can vnclaſpe. All of vs therefore had neede to be in readines becauſe the hower is vncertaine when he will call.
               How vnſpeakable then is the Mercy of our Sauiour? how indemenſiue is his bounty? that our offences being as innumerable as the torments of hell, and our leaſt deſeruing them

all, yet he whips vs but with ſilken rods, and giues vs fillops when he might daſh vs in pieces? We are all his flocke, and all haue gone aſtray, yet he ſtrikes but one to warne the reſt. For the Diuell (like the Teumeſian Foxe) ouer takes and teares all that he hunts, but he that ſaued the Prophet in the belly of the great Leuiathan of the ſea, can and doth deliuer vs when we are held faſt betweene his pawes.
               O my deare Country of Germany, this is not the firſt warning that thou haſt had from Heauen to amend thy wickedneſſe. Many a Trumpet haue the Angels from aboue ſounded in thine Eare to awake thee: but ſeeing thou wilt not liſten to the ſong of the Larke, thou art inforced to hearken to the hoarſneſſe of the Screech-owle. Thou haſt longed for the fleſh-pots of Egypt, when thou feddeſt vpon Quailes and Manna: and that is the cauſe that thou art worthily afflicted, and compelled in ſtead of rich Wines, to drinke thine owne teares: and for thy full banquets, to eate the bread of thine owne, and thy childrens ſorrow. Leaſt therefore that this thy preſent calamity be but vnto thee as a fearefull dreame, and leaſt thou ſhouldſt write this freſh and bleeding miſery in water, when it is moſt fit to be engrauen in leaues of Adamant, or rather printed in the palmes of thy hands to be euer in thine

eyes, I intreate thee to looke backe vpon the woes which thou haſt borne in ages paſt: Remember ſome ſorrowes of thy younger dayes: though the wounds be cloſed vp, yet behold the ſcars, and in beholding them, weepe that thou ſhouldſt ſo incenſe Heauen to ſtrike, and yet reioyce that the puniſhment is ſo gentle. Amongſt many therefore of the rods, with which thou haſt beene beaten, I will onely ſhew thee three, and theſe are they.
               In the yeare 1346. (vpon the Regall of S. Catharine) the Citie of Baſill, being one of the nobleſt buildings in Germany, and for the brauery of it called Regnopoli (the Kingly Citie) was (as Munſter is at this preſent) ſhaken with an Earth-quake: which was ſo violent, that by force thereof a great part of the Cathedrall Church (or Summum Templum) fell downe: and a magnificent Palace adioyning to that Temple drowned her loftieſt Pynnacles in the Riuer Rhyne, vpon which that renowned City ſtands.
               And againe in the yeare 1356. on the day of S. Luke, another Earth-quake did not onely ſhake and ſearch the foundations of all Germany, but (for many times one after another) toſſed the foreſaid Citie of Baſill, caſting downe her Towers, Churches, Palaces, and Wals, and murdring in their ruines, aboue one hundred

perſons, and with the fall of ſtones and timber, ſtriking infinite numbers lame. Yet the rage of it was not ſatiſfied thus: for by the ſhaking in pieces of houſes that had fires in them, a lamentable deſtruction fell vpon the whole Citie: inſomuch (the flames being exceeding great, and not able any wayes to be quenched) men, women, and children ſtood afarre off, wringing their hands, to ſee their riches, their dowries, and patrimonies ſwallowed vp in flames, which burned day and night, and in their greedy and mercileſſe fury conſumed (beſides the Citie of Baſill) theſe places alſo: viz. Schouuenberg, Vuartenberg, Reichenſtein, Angenſtein, Berenfelſs, Pleffingen, Scholberg, Froburg, and many others, as by a Letter ſent to Sebaſtian Munſter, (by Bonif: Amerbachius) is to be ſeene in his deſcription of Germany.
               
               The ſame Authour ſets downe likewiſe, the ſad remembrance of a miſery which fell in Auguſt 1545. vpon Mechlyn in Brabant, where God thundred firſt ſo terribly on the buildings and the ſinnes of the people, that Mechlyn ſhooke and trembled to her very foundations. That dreadfull voice of Thunder being quiet, a darkneſſe followed, with a moſt horrible ſtench of Brimſtone, more terrifying the Inhabitants then the Thunder did. And that

miſery being likewiſe remoued from them, as bad or worſe ſucceeded: for the Clouds opening their reuenging boſomes, threw downe ſuch fearefull Lightning, that men expected when the whole frame of Heauen would haue melted. And (to increaſe that terror) the flaſhes brake into a Tower that was ſtored with eight hundred Barrels of Gun-powder, which taking fire, blew vp a great part of the Tower in a moment: Stones, Timber, and mens quarters flying vp into the Ayre, and many whole carkaſes found dead the next morning. No Church ſtood vndefaced, no houſe vnruined, no man but vndone by it.
               At the ſame time three men ſitting at Cards were ſtrucke dead, whilſt the woman that went into the Cellar to fetch them drinke eſcaped aliue: yet diſmayed no doubt, but not ſo much terrified as he was, who in the heate of thoſe diuine puniſhments, fled and hid himſelfe in a caue by the ſpace of three dayes: from whence being driuen out by Famine (for no force elſe could haue made him aduenture to the light) he with faint voyce, and trembling ioynts aſked aloud, If the world ſtood ſtill or not. Thus Munſter.
               
               And thus farre hauing led thee backe to looke vpon thy ancient ruines, I wiſh thee the full fruit of all thoſe Prayers, which the

Country round about, (terrified by thy miſeries, and pittying them) doe daily poure out in their Churches, commanded thereunto by their Rulers. And with their Prayers doe I mingle mine, that it would pleaſe God to deliuer not onely this our Country from his heauie puniſhments laid vpon it for the ſinnes of the people in it: but alſo that he would call home thoſe angry meſſengers of his wrath, whoſe ſtormy rage hath afflicted England, France, and other neighbouring Nations, to the vndoing of thouſands, in their goods, and leauing many Widowes and fatherleſſe children, by loſſe of their huſbands liues.
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   