
      
         
            
            
            THE
SPECVLATION
of Vsurie.
            
            Psalm. 15. 1, 5.
            Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle?
He that giueth not his mony
vnto vsurie, nor taketh rewarde
against the innocent.
            Basilius in Psal. 14.
            Animalia pariendo desinunt, cum foetus
ipsorum parere incipiunt; argentum
vero foeneratoris tam antiquum quam
nouum parit.
            LONDON
Printed by Valentine
Symmes.
1596
         
         
            
            
            To the right Worshipfull
sir Thomas Egerton knight,
the worthie master of the
Rolles.
            
               TRuly wrote the elect vessel of our Lord
Iesus,1. Cor. 10. v. 11. that vpon vs are come the ends
of the world. For as Christ tolde vs,
we see,Matth. 24. v. 12. that in this last age Charitie
waxeth cold, that iniquitie hath gotten
the vpper hand. Now pietie is deemed
follie; now scurrilitie is reputed
brauerie; now fidelitie is iudged vanitie;
now periurie is thought skilfull pollicie; now charitie is
termed hypocrisie; now deceitful dealing is highly commended,
and treason practised euery where;2. Sam. 17. v. 1
                     •
                  
                now craftie Achitophels
are much esteemed, and faithfull Chusaies little or nothing at
all regarded.Psal. 12. v. 1. Now haue wee neede to exclame with Gods annointed
Prophet, Help Lord, for good and godly men do perish
and decay; nowe faith and trueth from worldly men is parted
cleane away. Now, now, is nothing more frequent with the
rich men of this world, than to writhe about the neckes of their
poore neighbours, and to impouerish them with the filthie lucre
of Vsurie. Which Vsurie is this day amiably embraced of innumerable;
and so magnified of many, that they blush not wiih brasen
faces to defend it, and to terme it a lawfull contract. Yea,
some are so rauished with this kind of impietie, that they haue
sold their inheritance, and thereby prouided a stocke of money;
which they lend out continually for this filthie lucre, to the vtter
vndoing of their honest needie neighbours. In regard hereof,
that all Vsurers may behold the turpitude of their dishonest
lucre, and once haue true internall remorce for the same (if it
wil please our merciful God to bestow it on them) I haue according
to the measure of my smal talent, imploied seriously my earnest
study, care, and industrie, in compiling this succinct and
plaine Treatise. Your Worships zeale in Gods true religion;



your painefull seruice in her Maiesties affaires; your cheerefull
countenance towards all loyall subiects; your sincere proceeding
in all maner of iustice, aswel in the behalfe of the poorest
as of the rich; your rare great affection to all painefull labourers
in Christs vineyard; and especially your wonderfull
kindnesse, your vnspeakeable curtesies, and other your manifold
benefites towards my seely selfe the meanest of many thousands;
haue worthily deserued farre better things, both of others and
at my hands. Your worship I know, delighteth not to heare these
commendations, though in deede (absit verbo adulatio) they
be farre inferiour to your condigne deserts. For as it is truely
said, they are best worthie of true praise, that least desire the
same. I therefore, though not able to render condigne compensation
for your manifold goodnes to me wards; do humbly present
vnto your Worship, that which I may, and as I can; that is,
this my vnpolished Speculation, as an infallible argument of my
ready gratefull minde, if power were correspondent vnto will.
Accept the gift I pray you heartily in good part, as if it were a
better thing: so commending your Worship, and all your actions,
words, and thoughts to the grace of our good God, I humbly
take my leaue. From my study this 18. of March 1595.
            
               Your Worships euer to command,
THOMAS BELL.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧Of the essence, nature, and
definition of Vsurie.
            
               The first Chapter.
               
                  BEfore I come to the precise description
or definition of Vssurie, I must require
thee (gentle reader) to obserue two things
with mee. First, that it is one thing to 
speake of vsurie it selfe, an other thing
to speake of the sinne of it. Secondly,
that these words are fitly and plainely distinguished
in the Latine tongue;A distinction very necessary to be obserued. to wit, cōmodatum, locatum,
and mutuum, which are confounded in our English tongue, and
taken onely for loane or the thing that is lent. When therfore
and so often as I shall speake of loane or the thing lent, my
meaning euer is to speake of that loane, or of that thing lent,
which is called in latine mutuum. which I heere admonish
once for all; to auoid confusion and tedious repetition, in this
my discourse following.
               The sinne of vsurie,The definition of vsurie. is the exacting, intending, or receiuing
of the vsurie, or of that gaine which is giuen for the loane.
Usurie it selfe is that gaine, which is exacted or principally intended
for the loane of our money, or of other things estimable
with money.
               I say first, (exacted,) because a thing giuen voluntarily 
in the way of gratitude,A deformed adiunct. is not vsurie; neither doth it make the
receiuer to be an vsurer, if it haue not a deformed adiunct.
               I say secondly, (principally intended) because gaine intended 
secondarily doth not make vsurie, nor him that desireth
it to be an vsurer; though the principal intention of it be inough
for mentall vsurie, as shall appeare hereafter.
               I say thirdly, (of money, or things estimable with money)
because vsurie may be aswell committed in other things as in
money, although many of the vulgar sort, and some also that
otherwise bee learned; seeme not so to conceiue the matter.
This definition of vsurie, may be euidently prooued out of the
holy Scriptures in the olde and newe Testament; as also
by the vniforme consent of the ancient Fathers, and by



the constitutions made in councels of best approoued antiquitie.
Which thing shal be prooued copiously, in the next Chapter
following.
            
            
               Of the deformitie and great sinne of Vsurie.
Chap. 2.
               WHen I consider Gods holy will reuealed in his sacred
word, the manifold testimonies of the ancient fathers,
and the decrees of approoued Synods; I cannot but admire
the condition of many in these our daies; who are so farre from
condemning vsurie, that they doe not onely practise it, but
without blushing defend the same, as an honest and lawfull
thing. I will therefore by Gods holy assistance, so discouer the
curpitude of filthie vsurie by three seueral testimonies; as euery
childe may with facilitie, behold how grieuous a sinne it is.
               
                  The first distinction, of the testimonie of the
holy Scriptures.
                  
                     THe first place of my first proofe, is taken out of the booke
of Exodus in these words:
                     Exod. 22. v. 25. If thou lend money to my
people, that is, to the poore with thee, thou shalt not bee
an vsurer to him: ye shall not oppresse him with vsurie.
                  
                     The second place is conteined in Leuiticus, in these expresse
words:
                     Leuit. 25. v. 35. 36. If thy brother be impouerished, and fallen in decay
with thee, thou shalt relieue him: thou shalt take no vsurie
of him, nor vantage, but thou shalt feare thy God, that
thy brother may liue with thee.
                  
                     The third place is taken out of the Psalmes,
                     Psal. 15. v. 1. 5. 
                     and these are
the words: Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, who
shall rest in thine holy mountaine? he that giueth not his
mony vnto vsurie, nor taketh reward against the innocent.
                  
                     The fourth place is in the Prophet Ezechiel,
                     Ezek. 18. v. 13. 
                     who writeth
in this maner (He that) hath giuen foorth vpon vsurie, or
hath taken increase, shall he liue? he shall not liue; seeing
he hath done al these abhominations, he shal die the death,
and his blood shall be vpon him.
                  
                     The fift and last place,
                     Luke 
                           •
                        . v. 35. 
                     is taken out of the holy Gospel, in
these expresse words: Wherfore loue ye your enemies, & do



good, and lend, not hoping for any gaine, and your reward
shalbe great, and ye shalbe the children of the most High.
                  Out of these texts I note first, that vsurie is a very great sin,
as which is not only against charitie, but against iustice also.
                  I note secondly, that no vsurer loueth or feareth God, but 
seeketh the destruccion of his Christian brother.
                  I note thirdly, that it is not onely vnlawfull to take or require 
vsury, but also to wish or desire vsury in our hearts.
                  I note fourthly, that vsurers cannot dwell in Gods house,
but that their blood must be vpon them, and they perish euerlastingly.
These annotations are effectually contained in the
textes of sacred Scripture alreadie rehearsed. Whosoeuer
will peruse them seriously, cannot but conceiue it to be so.
               
               
                  The second distinction, of the testimonie of
ancient Councils.
                  THe ancient councill Elebe
                        •
                     tine of some called Granado,
decreed against vsurie, aboue one thousand, two hundred,
and sixtie yeeres sithence, in the yeere of our Lord God 325.
the words are these;Conc. Eleber. can. 20. 
                     Si quis clericorum detectus fuerit vsuras
accipere placuit degradari & abstinere. Si quis etiam laicus
accepisse probatur vsuras, & promiserit correptus, se iam
cessaturum nec vlterius exacturum, placetei veniam tribui, si
verò in ea iniquitate durauerit, ab ecclesia sciat se esse proijciendum
If any of the cleargie shall be conuinced to take vsurie,
then we decree that he shall not onely surcease, but withall
he degraded (for his wicked fact.) Yea if a lay man who is
knowen to take vsurie, shal after admonition giue it ouer, and
deale no longer therewith, the councill is content to pardon
him. But if that lay man shall continue in that iniquitie, let
him know that the church will excommunicate him, (and deliuer
him vp to satan, as the apostle terms it.) By these words
of this holy and ancient council
                        •
                      we may see euidently,Joe, vsurie is flat iniquitie in all sorts of people. that vsury
is a grieuous sinne in al sorts of people; and that lay persons,
who would not surcease from taking vsurie, were punished
with excommunication, the most terrible and feareful punishment
that can in this life happen 
                        •
                     nto man.
                  The famous council of Nice, which was holden in the yere
of our Lord God 327. vtterly condemneth vsurie, as a thing



prohibited by the expresse word of God. These are the words;
Quoniam multi clerici auaririae causa t
                           •
                        rpia lucra sectantes,
                     Conc. Nicen. can. 18.
                     obliti sunt diuini praecepti (quo dictum est: qui pecuntam suam
non dedit ad vsuram) foenerantes centesimas exigunt, statuit hoc
sanctum concilium, vt si quis innentus fuerit, post hanc definitionem
vsuras accipere, vel ex quolibet tali negotio turpia lucra
sectari, veletiam species frumentorum ad septuplum dare: omnis
qui tale aliquid conatus fuerit ad quaestum, deijciatur a clero,
& alienus ab ecclesiasticohabeatur gradú. Because many of the
cleargie,Behold, vsurie is directly against Gods commandement. while they are couetous and folow after filthy gaine,
do forget Gods holy precept (which pronounceth him blessed
that hath not giuen his money vnto vsurie,) and giuing foorth
vpon vsurie, require the hundred part; this holy councell decreeth,
that if any be found after this constitution, to take vsury,
or to followe vnhonest gaine of any such marchandise, or els to
giue to the seuenth part their kinds of corne; let euery one that
shall attempt any such thing for gaine, bee cast out from the
cleargie, and be remooued from ecclesiasticall function.
                  
                      Out of these wordes I note first, that vsurie is here pronounced
to bee against Gods word, as it was before by the
councell Elebertine.
                  
                  
                      I note secondly, that this holy Synod assigned sharpe punishment,
for such as receiued vsurie.
                  
                      I note thirdly, that the Fathers of this councell, terme
vsurie an vnhonest and filthie gaine.
                  
                      I note fourthly, that this sacred Synod acknowledgeth vsurie
not onely in money, but euen in corne and other things.
                  The ancient councell of Arles the first,Conc. 1. celebrated about the
same time,Arelat. with the former Synods, taught the selfe same doctrine
in these wordes;can. 12. 
                     de ministris qui foenerantur, placuit, eos
iuxta formam diuinitus datam, a communione abstinere. concerning
the ministers which are vsurers, we decree that they shall
absteine from the holy Communion, euen as it is appointed by
God. Lo, God himselfe doth so lothe and detest vsurie, that he
will haue no vsurers to receiue his holy Communion.
                  The third councell of Carthage,
                     Conc. 3. which was holden in the
yeere of our Lord, 400.Carthag. condemneth vsurie as the other councels
did before it.can. 16.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The third distinction, of the testimonie of the auncient
fathers.
                  VSurie is so condemned by all approoued writers of antiquitie;
as no one auncient father can be named, who euer
wrote one worde in defence of it: neuerthelesse, very many of
the holy fathers, haue in large maner discouered that filthy lucre;
of which number, I will now content my selfe with a few.
                  
                     Lactantius Firmianus of this matter writeth in this maner;Lactantius lib. 6. diuinar. intit. cap. 18.
                     Pecuniae, si quam crediderit, non accipiet vsuram; vt & beneficium
sit incolume quod succurrit necessitati, & abstineat se
prorsus alieno. in hoc enim genere officij debet suo esse contentus,
quem oportet ne proprio quidem parcere, vt bonum faciat; plus
autem accipere quam dederit, iniustum est quod qui facit, insidiatur
quodammodo, vt ex alterius necessitate praedetur: If a
man lend any money, he must not take vsurie for the same; aswell
to make the benefit safe and sound which relieueth necessitie,
as to keepe himselfe free from another mans goods. for
in this kinde of seruice, he must be content with his owne; who
is bound not to spare his owne, that so he may doe good; but
to take more then he gaue,Usuris is flat theft and 
                           ••
                        
                        to
                           ••
                        ion. is a thing vniust. which who so doth,
worketh by deceit, that so he may make a pray of another mans
necessitie. Out of these golden words of this auncient writer,
who liued aboue 1200. yeeres agoe, I note first, that whosoeuer 
taketh vsurie, taketh another mans right from him.
                  I note secondly, that to receiue more then was giuen, is vsurie 
and iniustice. and consequently, that all surplussage which
we take for the loane, is another mans and not our owne.
                  I note thirdly, that all vsurers deale deceitfully, and make a 
pray of their neighbours miserie.
                  
                     Saint Basill,
                     Basilius in Psal. 14. ser. 
                           •
                        , tom. 1. reputed so excellent a diuine that he was surnamed
(magnus) the great, doeth so liuely paint out vsurers in
their deserued colours; as all hearts that are not of flint or iron
wil be mollified with one only recitall of the same: these therefore
are his wordes; Nam Ezechiel in maximis ponit malis foenus,
& plus quàm sortem accipere, & lex illud luculenter prohibet.
Sequitur auarus autem videns inopem necessitate coactum
ad genua sua supplicem procumbentem, ecquid non abiectum



facientem? quid non loquentem? non miseretur illius,
vtut praeter decorum se supplicem exhibeat, communem non cogitat
naturam, humilibus supplicationibus nihil cedit, sed immobilis
implacabilisque consistens, & nec precibus vincitur nec
lachrymis mollitur, sed negando perseuerat: iurat insuper atque
protestatur sese omnino carere pecunia, & quaerere si quem
ipse faeneratorem inueniat, ac mendacio fidem per iur amentum
faciens, iniquae & inhumanae mercaturae impudens periurium
addit; postquam vero conspicit miserum illum meminisse faenor i
                           •
                        
poeturamque sortis vltro offerentem, supercilium remittere ac
subridere incipit; tunc demum amicitiae paternae recordatur, &
familiarem & amicum appellat. videamus inquit, si quid nobis
restat depositi argenti: est n. amic
                           •
                         hominis depositum quoddam
apud nos, vnde quaestum ille facit, grauéque foenus nobis imposuit.
nos vero ex hoc detrahemus, longéque minore tibi dabimus.
For (the Prophet Ezechiel) placeth vsurie and all that
is more then the principall, amongst the greatest sinnes; and
the Law doth expresly forbid the same. But the couetous man
seeing the poore man enforced with necessitie, fallen prostrate
at his feete, making humble sute vnto him, abacing himselfe
in all kinde of seruilitie, doeth not for all that extend any compassion
towards him, howesoeuer hee submit him selfe more
then seemely order would require; he remembreth not the nature
common to them both,Beholde the expresse practise of vsurers. this day in England. he giueth no place to humble request,
he remaineth immoueable and implacable, he is neither
ouercome with prayers, nor mollified with teares▪ but still
continueth in deniall. Besides this he sweareth and protesteth
that hee hath no money at all, but that himselfe seeketh, where
to finde an vsurer; and so swearing falshood to be trueth, he addeth
impudent periurie to naughtie and cruell merchandise:
yet so soone as the silly poore man maketh mention of vsurie,
and willingly offereth the ouerplus aboue the principall, he abateth
his sowre councenance, and beginneth to smile; then at
the length hee remembreth paternall amitie, and calleth him
neighbour and friend. let vs see sayth he, if there remaine any
money,O wicked greedines ioyned with falsehood and hypocrisie. of that which was left in our hands. For a friend of
mine left a piece of money with me, whereof he vseth to make
a gaine, and hath imposed a great interest vpon vs; yet wee



will subtract a piece of it, and let you haue it farre better
cheape.
                  Out of these wordes of this holy, learned, and auncient father,
I note first, that vsurie is prooued out of holy writ, to be 
one of the greatest sinnes. So sayth S. Basill, so sayth the holy
Prophet Ezechiel.
                  I note secondly, that vsurers are vnmercifull and very cruell 
men, that they take pleasure in the miserie of the poore, and
will haue no compassion on them.
                  I note thirdly, that vsurers be lyars and periured persons; 
as who by ioyning periurie to leasing, seeke to increase their
sauage and brutish dealing.
                  I note fourthly, that howsoeuer vsurers protest and sweare 
that they haue no money; yet so soone as excessiue filthy gaine
is promised by their needy neighbours, they graunt they haue
inough in store: neuerthelesse, to hide their guilefully painted
hypocrisie, they say it is their friends, and not their owne.
                  
                     Saint Ambrose doeth no lesse exclaime against vsurie,
then you haue heard already out of Saint Basil. Yea, he handleth
no other matter throughout many Chapters of a large
booke; some fewe wordes onely I will alledge, by which the
Reader may haue an indifferent coniecture of the rest: these
are the wordes;Ambrosius libr. dd Tobis, caa. 3. tom. 4. 
                     Numeratur pecunia, addicitur libertas, absoluitur
miser minore debito, minore ligatur. Talia sunt vestra
diuites beneficia: minus datis, & plus exigitis. Talis humanitas,
vt spolietis etiā dum subuenitis: foecundus vobis etiā pauper est
ad qu
                           •
                        stum Vsurarius est egenus cogentibus vobis habet quod
reddaet, quod impendat, non habet. Misericordes plane viri quem
alij absoluitis, vobis addicitis. vsuras soluit, qui victu indiget;
an quicquam grauius? ille medicamentum quaerit, vos offertis
venenum. Panem implorat, gladium porrigitis: libertatem
obsecrat, seruitutem irrogatis. absolutionem praecatur,
informis laquie nodum stringitis. Money is tolde, libertie
is solde, the silly poore man is quit of the lesse debt, and fast
boūd to the greater. Such (O rich men) are your benefits, you
giue lesse,O intollerable iniquitie. and exact more; such is your humanitie, that while
you seeme to helpe a man, you spoyle him vtterly. Your profit
is wrought, euen by the poore man vnto your gaine. the vsurer



is needie. by your exaction hee hath something to restore, but
plaine nothing to bestowe. You are doubtlesse mercifull men.
whom you make free to others, those you make bondmen to
your selues. hee payeth vsurie, that hath not whereon to liue.
can any thing be a more grieuous sinne? hee seeketh for a medicine,
you giue him poyson. he asketh bread, you giue him a
sword. he prayeth to haue libertie, you bring him into seruilitie.
he desireth to be loosed, you tye a knot on the corde.
                  
                     Saint Chrysostome reputeth the vsurer,Chrysost. in cap. 21. Mat. hom. 38. tom. 2. p. 999. for the most cruell
and abiect caitife in the world, thus doeth he write; Qui autem
comparat rem, vt illam ipsam integram & immutatam dando
lucaretur; ille est mereator, qui de templo Dei eijcitur. vnde, super
omnes mercatores plus maledictus est vsurarius. si. n. qui
rem comparatam vendit, mercator est & maledictus; quantò magis
maledictus erit, qui non comparatam pecuniam. sed a Deo
donatam sibi, dat ad vsuram? secundò, quia mercator dat rem,
vt iam illam non repetat; iste autem postquam foenerauerit, &
sua iterum repetit, & alienae tollit cum suis. Hee that prouideth
a thing to gaine, by giuing it entire and vnchaunged, is
that merchant that is cast out of the temple of God.A fine epithiton for the vsurer. Wherefore
more accursed is the vsurer then all merchants in the
world. for if he that selleth the thing he hath, be a merchant,
and accursed; how much more shall he be accursed, that giueth
to vsurie not the money he hath gotten, but that which God
gaue him. againe, because the merchant giueth the thing neuer
henceforth to receiue it againe; but the vsurer after he hath
lent his money, both taketh his owne againe, and other mens
with his owne.
                  
                     S. Augustine is in this point as in all other things,August. in psa. 36. conc. 3. briefe,
pithy, and sweete: these are his words; Nolo sitis foeneratores,
& ideo nolo, quia Deus non vult: nam si ego nolo, & Deus vult,
agite. si autem Deus non vult, etiamsi ego vellem, malo suo ageret
qui ageret. Vnde apparet Deum hoc nolle. Dictum est alio loco,
qui pecuniam suam non dedit ad vsuram. Et quàm detestabile
sit, & quàm odiosum, quàm execrandum, puto quia &
ipsi foeneratores nouerunt. I will not haue you to be vsurers,
and therefore will not I, because God wil not. for though I
will not, yet if God wil, yee may doe it. but if God will not



then although I would, yet should he do it to his own harme,
that would do it. But how do we know, that God wil it not:
because it is said in another place; He that hath not giuen his
mony to vsurie. Now how detestable, how odious & execrable
a thing it is, I thinke the vsurers themselues do know.
                  S. Hierome the most excellent and skilfull clarke, is in this
point consonant to the rest,Hieron. libr. 6. in 18. cap. Ezee. these are his expresse words; Respondeat
nobis breuiter foenerator misericors, vtrum habenti dederit,
an non habenti Si habenti, vtique dare non debuerat, sed dedit
quasi non habenti. Ergo quare plus exigit quasi ab habente?
alij pro pecuniae foenerata, solent munuscula accipere diuersi generis;
& non intelligunt vsuram appellari, & superabundantiam,
quicquid illud est, si ab eo quod dederint plus acceperint▪
                      Let
the merciful vsurer 
                        〈◊〉
                      answere me, whether he lent to him
that had, or to him that wanted: If to him that had, he doubtles
should not haue done it; but he gaue it as to one that had
not, therefore why doth he exact more, as of one that hath? Others
for lent money vse to take gifts of another kind; and they
vnderstand not that vsurie is termed that surplusage or ouerplus
whatsoeuer it be that they take more than they gaue. To
these Fathers, the testimonie of S. Bernard Guerricus shall
be added for a complement;Bernard. Gue
                           ••
                        . in epist. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . in fine oper. Bernas. Clareuall. these are his words: melius est grauem
pati famen, quàm patrimonii venditionem: sed melius est
partem vendere, quàm se vsuris subiicere. Quid est vsura? venenum
patrimonii. Quid est vsura legis? latropraecedens quod
intendit: it is better to suffer great famine, then to sell thy patrimonie,
yet is it better for thee to sel a peece of it, then to liue
in the bondage of vsury. What is vsurie? The poison of our patrimony.
What is the vsurie of the law? A thiefe going before
that that he intends to do. S. Bernard Clareuallensis compareth
vsurers with theeues and hypocrites, and saith, that they
be vnworthy the name of Christians;Bernat. epist. 322 these are the words: Sicubi
desunt Iudaei peius iudaizare dolemus christianos foeneratores,
si tamen christianos & non magis baptizatos Iudaeos conuenit
appellari: if the Iewes be wanting in any place, christians
that be vsurers (a pitifull case) are found to surpasse them in
Iudaisme; if it be that we may terme them Christians, and
not rather baptized Iewes.
               
            
            
               
               Of the difference betweene Viurie and other lawful
contracts of lending. Chap. 3.
               FOr the exact vnderstanding of this chapter wee must obserue
 first, how commodatum differeth from locatum: commodatum
is, when we lend a thing to a certaine day, not requiring
any price or consideration for the loane.
               
                   We must obserue secondly, that locatum is, when we lend
a thing to a certain day, requiring a certain price or consideration
for the same.
               
                   We must obserue thirdly, that as I saide in the beginning
of the first chapter these three wordes, commodatum, locatum,
& mutuum, are confounded in our vulgar tongue, and that mutuum
is euen as locatum,
                  The difference betweene mutuum and locatum.
                   when we lend a thing to a certaine
day, requiring a certaine price or consideration for the same.
But the difference is this, because in locato, we keepe still the
dominion and proprietie of the thing which wee lend; but in
mutuo, the dominion and proprietie of the thing lent, 
                     〈◊〉
                   translated
from vs to him that borroweth the same. This obseruation
ought neuer to be forgotten.
               
                   We must obserue fourthly, that of things some be consumptible,
and some inconsumptible: inconsumptible things
are those, in which we can separate the vse from the dominion
and proprietie of the thing: consumptible things are those, in
which the dominion is transferred together with the vse.
Whereupon it commeth, that when wee lend thinges inconsumptible
with the vse;Things consumptible and things inconsumptible. as our horses, our oxen, our kine, our
sheepe, and such like; we may take competently for the loane,
vse, or increase of the same; because after the loane of such
things, the dominion and propriety of the same, stil remaineth
in our selues. Contrariwise it falleth out, in things consumptible
with the vse; because the dominion and proprietie of such
things which before was in our selues, passeth from vs to the
borrowers, ipso facto with the loane thereof. Such things are
mony, wine, a
                     •
                  e, beere, bread, oile, corne, and the like. For in
these things it is impossible to separate the vse from the dominion
of the thing it selfe: and consequently, whensoeuer ye lend
me any such thing, ipso facto yee change the propertie of the
thing, and make me the owner and lord of the same.
               
                  
We must obserue fiftly, that money is a thing which of it 
owne nature is barraine and fruitlesse, and so can neuer yeeld
any commoditie, vnlesse it be by the industrie of man.
               We must obserue sixtly, that we may speake of mony two 
maner of waies; to wit, materially and formally. It is taken
formally, when it is vsed according to the first institution, for
honest and necessarie permutation,Formally and materially. as the rule and measure of
things to be solde. And when mony thus taken is lent, the dominion
& propriety is euer altered with the loane. It is taken
materially: when it is lent to be giuen for a pledge, for ostentation,
& other like intents, so as the selfesame numero must be
restored. The vse and commoditie of these obseruations & distinctions,
wil appeare throughout the chapters folowing.
            
            
               Of the obiect of vsurie, that is, of the matter and
things in which vsurie is committed.
Chap. 4.
               MAny thinke that vsurie consisteth in the loane of mony only;
but they are grosely deceiued, in that their imagination.
For it chanceth so often as any thing is taken for the loane
in what kind of things soeuer. This I will proue manifestly,
as well by the scriptures, as by the holy fathers.
               Touching the Scripture,Ezech. 18. v. 17. the first place is in Ezechiel, in
these wordes; Neither hath receiued vsurie nor increase:
where the word (increase) may be supplied as well to other
things as to mony.
               The second place maketh this matter a little plainer,Leuit. 25. v. 37. these
are the words; Thou shalt not giue him thy mony to vsurie,
nor lend him thy vitailes for increase. Loe, not only the
increase of money, but of vittailes also is prohibited.
               The third place is in Deuteronomie,
                  Deut. 23. v. 19. so plaine and so euident,
as no man be he neuer so subtile, can by any colour auoid
the same: these are the words; Thou shalt not giue to vsury
to thy brother; as vsurie of money, vsury of meate, vsury of
any thing that is put to vsurie.
               
               Concerning the fathers,Hier. in 18. cap. Ezech. libr. 6. 
                  S. Hierom writeth in this maner,
Putant quidam vsuram tantum esse in pecunia: quod praeuidens
scriptura diuina, omni rei aufert super abundantiam: vt plus



non recipias, quam dedisti. Solent in agris frumenti, & milij,
vini, & olei caeter arumque specierum vsurae exigi, siue vt appellat
sermo diuinus abundantiae. Some men thinke that vsury
is only in mony; which the holy scripture foreseeing, takes
away the superabendance of euery thing; that thou receiue no
more then that which thou gauest. They are woont to exact
vsury, or as holie Writ termeth it, ouerplus, of corne, millet,
wine,Vsurie is onely in things consumptible with the vse. oile, and other things. Behold here, how vsurie is in al
such thinges, as are consumptible with the vse. For in other
things vsurie can haue no place. Let the Reader marke well
my words, and vnderstand and perfectly what I say.
               
                  S. Austen hath these wordes,August in psal. 36. conc. 3. 
                  Non pecuniam solam sed aliquid
plus quam dedisli, siue illud triticum sit, siue vinum, siue oleum,
siue quodlibet aliud, si plus quam dedisti expectas accipere,
foeneratores. If thou expect to receiue more then thou gauest,
not only mony, but any thing more then thou didst giue,
whether it be wheat, or wine, or oile, or whatsoeuer else, thou
art an vsurer. Thus writes this holy & learned father, whose
words are so plaine, as no glose is needfull for the same.
               
                  S. Ambrose writeth in this maner;Ambros. libr. de Tob. cap. 14. 
                  Et esca vsura est, & vestis
vsura est, & quodeunque sorti accedit. vsura est. Quod velis
ei nomen imponas. vsura est. Si licitum est, cur vocabulum refugis?
cur velamen obtexis? si illsicitum est, cur incrementum requiris?
quod peius est, hoc vitium plurimorium est, & maxime
diuitum quibus hoc nomine instruuntur cellaria. Both meat
is vsurie, and thy garment is vsurie, and it is vsurie, whatsoeuer
is more than the principalll. Giue it what name thou wilt,
it is vsury. If it be lawfull, why dost thou refuse the name?
why dost thou hide it with a vaile: if it be vnlawfull, why dost
thou require more then thou gaues? And which is worse, many
haue this fault, specially rich men, whose storehouses are
furnished with the name. Lo, not only mony, but meat, come,
garments, and what things else soeuer, is flat vsury; if anie
thing aboue the principall be exacted for the loane.
            
            
               Of the seueral kinds of Vsurie, and their proper
adiuncts. Chap. 5.
               THere be two kinds of vsurie,Vsurie mental and reall to wit, mentall vsurie, and vsurie
reall.
               
                  
Mentall vsurie is, when one wisheth or expecteth ouerplus
for the loane, but doeth not exact the same by any externall
word or couenant. This kind is not subiect to restitution.
               Reall vsurie is of two sorts, to wit, manifest, and palliate:
manifest vsurie reall is, when surplussage is exacted for
the loane, by expresse words of couenant: and this kind is not
only a damnable sinne, but also bindeth to restitution.
               Palliate vsurie reall is, when more then the principall is
exacted for the loane, yet not by expresse and plaine termes,
but in a secret and bid kind of bargaining. This palliate vsurie
is a very detestable sinne, and bindeth the receiuer to restitution,
although it be this day frequent (alas for pitie) in all
kind of bargaining.Note this point well. For, howe often soeuer the seller selleth
better cheape, because he receiueth the money before hand; or
dearer, because he forbeareth his money till a day; so often
doubtlesse is this palliate vsurie committed, and the ouerplus
indeede exacted for the loane of the money. Prouided euer,
vnlesse the day be to his hinderance.
               The example of the former, to wit, when things are solde
better cheape for hauing the money before hand.
               An honest poore neighbour being in great distresse, commeth
to a rich couetous miser, & desireth to borrow some money
for a time.The craftie dealing of the vsurer. Wel (saith the couetous man) you want mony,
but you haue that which I would buy, and if not, you may
prouide it to serue my turne. What shall I giue you for so
many bushelles of corne, to be deliuered at such a day, and you
shal haue present money to serue your neede? and because the
poore man must needs haue money in hand, such is his necessitie,
the rich man, (though he will not in precise termes exact
more money and manifest vsurie, because he would not be
reputed an vsurer) yet doth he enforce his poore neighbour,
on whome he ought by Gods lawes to haue compassion, to
sell his goods at vnder value, and that he doth indeede for the
very lone of his mony. For first the poore man might as well 
haue giuen him more mony in the kind, as for to prouide him
come at his day and rated price.
               2 Secondlie, the poore manwould not haue beene bound 
to prouide corne at his day and price to his great losse and domage,
if by any reasonable meane, he could haue prouided mony
in his need.
               
                  
3 Thirdly the ouerplus of the corne indeed,Note that this corne is vsualy bought of them, that haue none to deliuer, which is too too abominable. was onely eracted
for the loane of the money (fle vppon al craftie vsurie.)
For otherwise, he should and would haue granted the lone of
the money freely, vntil the day in which he shoul
                     •
                   receiue the
corne. And withal he ought to haue taken the corne by the current
price of the market, and not as his couetous mind did designe.
Some couetous wretches deale more subtil it, but no
lesse wickedlie. For example, a poore man came n
                     •
                  t long sithence,
to a rich man, whom my selfe know, and his vsual maner
of dealing, (the man shal here be nameles, though neither
before God nor the world blameles) and desiredt a borrow,
33. s 4. d. You haue a mare quoth th
                     •
                  e rich man, I wil giue ye
so much for her: alas, saith the poore man, I may not forgoe
her, for she is the best part of my poore liuing. Wel, the rich
man concluded,What heart wil not lament such dealing? he would buy the mare for fiue nobls, & sel her
againe to the poore man for seuen nobles, with a yeere day for
the payment, in which bargaine the poore man gaue no vsury,
saue only two nobles for the loane of fiue: for which increase of
money, the poore man kept still his owne mare in his owne
hand:1. Ioan. 3. v. 17. but alas, how did this rich man loue his poore 
                     •
                  eighbor
as himselfe? I wil say no more herein, but that which Christs
Apostle said before me: he that seeth his brother neede, and
shutteth vp his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth
the loue of God in him? this vsurer departed out of this
life, euen while I wrote these things, whose sodain death with
the circumstances thereof, may be a warning to all numerciful
vsurers: the example of the latter, to wit, when thngs are
sold dearer, for want of present payment.
               A poore man commeth to his rich neighbour,God help the poore, and comforteth them in their miserie. to buy such
things as he hath present neede to vse, here the richer sort, specially
the marchants, take great pleasure in oppressing the
poore, in their most pittiful neede. Wil yee buy of mee, saith
the rich man, for present money, or to a certaine day? and whē
the poore man answereth, that he must needs haue it til a day:
then the rich man valueth his wares at such an high price, as
he extorteth most grieuous vsurie for the loane: for the forhearance
of the money, is the sole cause of the surplussage in the
price.
               
                  
                  The first obiection.
                  IF two rich men haue this yeere diuers opinions, concerning
the price of corne, and he that thinketh it wil be dearer
the next yeare, shall giue to him that thinketh it wil be cheaper
xx. pounds presentlie for 
                        〈◊〉
                      much corne to be deliuered
then, as he ran now buy for 
                        〈…〉
                     , that kind of dealing is
no vsurie at all, albeit the corne▪ nay then perhaps be sold for
xxx. pounds: therefore it seemeth lawful to sel corne at a lesser
price, for the paiment of money before hand.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  1 I say first, that vsurie is neuer committed, (as is already
proued) saue then onelie, when ouerplus is exacted for the
loane.
                  2 I say secondly, that in the case proper 
                        ••
                     ded in the obiection,
there is no loane of money at 
                        〈◊〉
                     , neither expressed, nor yet
palliate: the reason is this, because as well the buyer as the
seller, exposeth himselfe to a meere 
                        •••
                     uall euent: for whether
corn wil then be cheaper or dearer, neither of thē twain can tell.
                  3 I say thirdly, that if he who receiueth the money, were in
present necessitie, and yeelded to sell the corne onelie or principally
for the vse of the money, the buyer 
                        〈◊〉
                      the same at
his hands, then were that kind of dealing vsurie indeede,A great disparitie, of a farre different contract. howsheuer
the euent should afterward fall out: but when neither
the seller respecteth the vse of the mony, nor the buier extorteth
any thing for the loane of the same, as in this casual bargaine,
but both the parties stand vpon their prouidence 
                        •
                     niectures, &
politicke diuinacions, then doubtles, the formal reason of vsurie
ceaseth, and the buying with the sale becommeth a lawfull
contract.
               
               
                  The second obiection.
                  It is good reason, it cannot be denied that if my neighbour
can gaine fiue pounds by the vse of my twentie pounds, then
that he shal giue me three pounds for the loane thereof, for the
delay and non-payment of my money, is the onelie and sole
cause of his gaine.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I say first, that howsoeuer the gaine fal out, yet may nothing
be exacted for the loan, because god himself hath so appointed.
                  
                     
2 I say secondly, that the greater part of people are so farre
from gaining thereby, as they are vtterly impouerished by the
same.
                  3▪ I say thirdly, that by the loane of money the propertie
thereof is altered, and the dominion translated to the borrower,
and consequentlie, that when the le
                        •
                     der extorteth
anie thing for the vse thereof,Melancth. in definit. theolog. 
                     ipso facto. he robbeth the borrower
and despoyleth him of his lawfull goods: this among the
latter writers hath Melancthon well obserued to his immortall
fame.
                  4▪ I say fourthly, that money is a thing so barren and vnfruitfull
of it owne nature, as is cannot yeelde any commoditie
without the industrie of man:Money is not fruitfull at it selfe. and consequentlie, since the
whole fruit thereof preceedeth from mans laborious trauel, to
exact anything for the vse thereof, must needs be flat extortion.
               
               
                  The third obiection.
                  MAny 
                        〈◊〉
                      able 
                        〈◊〉
                      are often greatly damni
                        •
                     ie
                        •
                     
by lending their money, and therefore it is good reason,
that they should haue some consideration for the same.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I answere that no consideration can iustly be exacted,No consideration for the loane. for or
in respect of the loane. Neuerthelesse, in certaine cases 
                        ••••
                     
                     plus
may verie lawfully, both bee giuen and required, which
cases shalbe made manifest, in the next chapter following.
               
            
            
               Of the gaine ceasing, and losse insuing, by the
loane of money. Chap. 6.
               THere be two things, to wit, the gaine that ceaseth and the
domage or losse that insueth to the londer, by reason of either
of which 
                     ••
                  aine, surplussage may be required, and that
without anie vsurie at al ithe reason hereof is euident, because
gaine ceasing & losse insuing for the loane of mony, are things
essentialy and really distinguished, from the loane of the same:
the example of the former,Lucrum cessans. I haue in ready mony an hundred
pounds which I purpose presentlie to bestow in corne for honest
and lawful gaine. Now it so falleth out, that my neighbor
is very vrgent to borrow this hundred pounds of me, to whom



I condescend to lend it with mine owne hinderance, yet vpon
this condition, that he giue me so much ouerplus, as woulde
be the iust gaine, that ceaseth by reason of the loane: this kind
of ouerplus is no vsurie, because it is not exacted for the loane,
but for the gaine that ceaseth thereupon: yet in this case two
things must be required; first that I intend in true meaning, to 
bestow my mony, as is already said, and thereby to seek honest
& lawful gaine: secondly that I exact no more ouerplus, then 
that that is trulie deemed,Marke w
                        •
                     ll my words, and iudge th
                        ••
                      of accordingly to be my surceasing gain, the value
of which gaine ought to be esteemed by indifferent men, which
are expert in that kind of trade: for if I either exact more then
the gaine ceasing, or in truth intend not to expose my mony for
lawful gaine, in way of honest bargaining, then is the exacting
of such surplussage, become palliate vsurie indeede. By
reason of this surceasing gaine,
                     
                        •
                      graue aduise to the seller of any thing. marchant men and other honest
bargainers, may sundry times exact a greater price, when they
sell their marchandise or goods to a certaine day: but heere I
must require al marchants and other, especially the richer sort
to marke well what I say: for although the seller may euer
exact ouerplus for his truely surceasing gaine, yet may he not
euer extort ouerplus, when he selles to a day: the reason hereof
is euident, because to sel to a day, doth not euer preiudice or
hinder his lawfull gaine, and so the formall reason of exacting
ouerplus in this case lieth dead: for if the buier bring the money
so soone, as the seller can and meaneth to bestow the same
for honest gaine; then to exact any higher price for the day, is
palliate vsury indeed. The example of the latter: I haue a sum
of money which▪ I am to bestowe in the necessarie reparation
of my house, and that now in the summer season: for if I shall
let my house stay til the winter season,Damnum emergens. it wil not only be hurtful,
but also 
                     〈◊〉
                   chargeable to me 
                     •
                   in the meane time my
distressed neighbour commeth to me, and in pittifull manner
desireth to borrow my money, whose neede▪ I cannot relieue
but with mine owne losse,The iugement of men indifferent. as is alreadie saide: in this case,
to exact so much as amounteth to my losse, is no vsurie at all,
for the ouerplus is not extorted, by reason of the loane; yet
more may not be exacted then is or would bee deemed the iust
losse, by the iudgement of indifferent men.
               
                  
                  The difficultie.
                  THe debters do often disappoint their creditors, and wil not
bring their money at the day assigned, in respect of which
danger, it seemeth that a man may exact some reasonable ouerplus,
and so value his saleable things at an higher price.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I answer,To redeeme a mans vexation. that the seller may value his things at an higher
price, when in true meaning he doubteth of the payment, because
so to deale is but a prudent prouiso, to redeeme his iust
vexation: yet here is to be obserued, that the creditors must alwaies
giue the ouerplus backe againe, when the debters pay
the money in due time.
               
            
            
               That vsurie is flat theft, prohibited by the eight
commandement, and also that it bindeth to
restitution. Chap. 7.
               ALl as w
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  lde as late Writers agree in this,The true meaning of the 8. commandement. that 
                     •
                  y the
eight commandement is not only prohibited theft, but robberie
also extortion, deceit, and al maner of dealings, by which
we vniustly take or possesse another mans goods, this case is
so plaine, as no ancient father or approued latter writer, can be
alledged to the contrarie: for the definition of theft maketh the
case euident, which by vniforme consent of al writers is this:
Furtū est acceptio vel occupatio rei a lienae, iruito domino, theft
is the taking or vsing an other mans goodes agaisnt his will.
So then sith the surplussage in vsurie is another mans goods,
and vniustly extorted as is alreadie proued, it followeth of necessitie,
that vsurie is flat theft and manifest 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Now that
al vsurers are bound to restitution, it is a thing so consectarie
vpon the ground alreadie laied, as none either learning or reason
can denie the same: for the vertue of iustice (as the verie
ethnike Philo
                     •
                  ophers tell vs) est reddere cuiquam quod suum
est,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      19. v. l. is to giue to euerie man that which is his owne: therefore
said good Zaccheus, that if he had done wrong to any man, hee
would restore it foure folde:Iob, 2, v, 13. therefore willed holy Tobias to
restore the kid, that he heard bleating in his house: therfore cō
                  manded
the lawe of Moses, that if any man did hurt field or



vineyard, or put in his beast to feede in another mans fielde, the
same should make recompence of his own field,Exod. 22. v. 
                        •
                     . and of the best
of his owne vineyard: therefore did the same law commande,
that when anie mans corne or other goods was destroied by
fire: he that kindled the fire should make full restitution: therefore
said S. Augustine wisely and grauely,Exod. 22. v. 6. 
                  Non dimittitur
peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum: the sinne is neuer forgiuen,
vntil that which is wrongfully taken away, be restored again,
and the reason hereof is euident, which S. Augustine wel obserued:
Aug. Ma
                        •••
                     . epist. 54. to wit, that when a man will not restore things wrongfully
taken from his neighbour, when he is able so to doe, that
man cannot be truely penitent, and so neither can he attaine remission
at Gods hands. I say (when he is able) because if an
vsurer, theefe, extortioner, or other deceitfull dealer, be so farre
wasted and become so beggerlie, that he hath not wherewith to
make restitution in part or in al, then it is inough for such a one
to aske God mercie, and to haue a willing mind to make restitution,
when he commeth ad pinquiorem fortuna, and is able
so to doe.
               Hereupon I infer first,The first corollarie. that all vsurers, as also the children
or heyres of vsurers, who possesse any lands, tenements, or
goods, gotten or bought with the gaine of vsurie, are bound to
make restitution for the same: which if it were duelie and truely
put in execution, many that now a daies are reputed rich,
would be as poore as their need
                     •
                  e neighbours: but how riche
soeuer such seeme in their owne conceits, or howsoeuer they
be esteemed by the eies of the world, yet are they most beggarly
indeede, and will one day be so found, before the tribunall
seate of our Lord Iesus.
               I infer secondly,The second corollarie. that all iudges & lawyers, who for bribes,
friendship, or other worldly respects, do wittingly and willingly
further euil causes, and by their pleading or sentence do debar
poore men, from their lawful title to lands or goodes, are
bound to make restitution for the same.
               I infer thirdly,The third corollarie. that al iustices of the peace, baylifes, constables,
and other officers, who by reason of bribes or any other
sinister respects, doe fauour the rich and mightie men against
iustice, and thereupon do oppresse the poore and needy sort, are



strictly bound to make restitution, for all iniuries and iniustice
done in that behalfe.
               I inferre fourthlie,The 
                        •
                     ourth corollarie. that al marchants, artificers, and others
that vse to buy and sell, who in their marchandise, occupations,
or in buying and selling, vse any fraud or deceit, are bound
to make restitution, for al their deceitfully gotten goods.
               I inferre fiftlie,The fift corollarie. that whosoeuer get their neighbours goods
fraudulently, by carding, dicing, shooting, or other disporte
whatsoeuer, are bound to make restitution for the same.
               I inferre sixtly,The sixt corollarie. that whosoeuer will not make restitution of
goods vniustly gottē, and for iniuries done to his poore neighbours,
can not be the child of God.
            
            
               Of the obiections made in defence of vsurie.
Chap. 8.
               
                  The first obiection of the etymology of the word.
                  VSurie in the originall, and sacred hebrewe tongue, doth
signifie nipping or byting: which etymologie doth flatly
insinuate vnto vs, that so often as our neighbor doth gaine by
taking our money to vsurie, so often is vsury lawful and no sin
at al: yea, when our neighbour gaineth by giuing vsurie, hee
cannot doubtles be oppressed by the same: and yet is oppression
the sole and onely cause, why vsurie is prohibited by
Gods law.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  
                      I say first, that vsurie is called in Greeke 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      bringing
forth or increase, comming of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which is to giue to vsurie
or increase: and it is fitly so tearmed, because it multiplieth
or breedeth beyond al measure, for I heard of one that began
but with a shilling, and lent it for a penie in the weeke, and
so became verie rich in a few yeares. I heard of another, that
lent a hundred pounds for ten the first yeare, for xx. the second
yeare, for xxx. the third yeere, for xl. the fourth yeare, for 50.
the fift yeare, so that when he had payed the principall, hee remained
50. pounds indebted yearely for the same. But this
matter is so runningly handled now a dayes,They must 
                           〈◊〉
                         wares, that know not how to vse them. that the greatest
vsurers indeede, would be thought no vsurers at all. For whē
one commeth to borrow money on them, they say they haue
none, but yet they will let them haue wares, and procure a



friend to buy the same, againe for readie money: which palliat
vsurie, hath made some that I know, to sell their whole inheritance.
I heard of another poore man, who came to a rich cormorant
to borrow money, but receiued this answere, I haue
no money to lend (quoth the rich man) but thou hast a good
mare, for which I will giue thee fiue nobles, and so thou shalt
haue money to doe thy needes: alas quoth the poore man
I am not able to spare my mare, because shee is the greatest
part of my poore liuing, wel saith the rich man, thou shalt presently
haue her againe til a day, if thou wilt enter into bond, to
giue me seauen nobles for her: to which lamentable extortion,
the poore man was inforced to yeeld. The fact is notorious, my
selfe knew both the parties right well, as I said before, this vsurer
to the ensample of al others hath lately made a miserable
ende.
                  I say secondly, that in Hebrew it is called Neshech of the 
roote Nashach,
                     Leui. 25. 
                           •
                        . 36, 37 which doeth signifie to bite, and that very fitly,
because it biteth poore men pittifully, and as it were gnaweth
al their silly substance from them.
                  I say thirdly, that the gaine of the borrower, cannot make vsurie 
without biting: the reason is manifest, because biting is
included in the formal cause thereof: for as it is alreadie proued,
in things consumptible with the vse, the dominion thereof
is translated by the loane. & to exact surplussage for the vse of
a mans owne, is meere iniustice and flat extortion. For example,
if a rich Landlord should borrow of his poore tenant tenne
pounds, & would not repay the same thankfully, neither at all
without some gaine, if then the tenant not able without greater
domage to recouer his money, should giue to his landlord 40.
shillings for the peaceable payment thereof, in such a case the
exacting of 40. shillings were mere iniustice and flat extortion:
This ob
                           •••
                        ct must be remembred. and yet for al that, the poore tenant should gaine by giuing
the 40. shillings: ad hereunto that money of it owne nature is
fruitles, and would yeeld no gaine at all without the industrie
of man, that imployeth it to vse.
               
               
                  The second obiection.
                  God himselfe allowed vsurie in the Iewes,Deut. 23. 
                           •
                        0, when they took

                        •
                     surie of strangers onelie, but not one of an other. Vsurie



therefore is not simply euil, for God neuer approueth sinne.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  
                      I say first, that as one Iew might not take vsurie of another,
because they were al brethren, no more may one christian of another,
as who are al brethren created by one and the same father,
redeemed by one and the same sonne, sanctified by one &
the same holy Ghost, three persons and one God: and therefore
do we al ioyntlie pray, Our father which art in heauen.
                  
                  
                      I say secondly, that God dispensed with the Iewes for the
hardnes of their hearts, that they might by vsury oppresse strā
                     gers,
that is to say, the Amalechites and Ammorites, Gods
enimies and theirs, because they had iustly deserued to be dispossessed,
D
                           ••
                        ine dispensation. not onely of their goods, but of their liues also: for
God the eternal law maker is not so tied to his law, but that
he may at his good will and pleasure dispence with the same:
and therefore said Christ himselfe, to the Pharises, when they
charged his disciples with the breach of the sabboth,Matt. 12. v. 8. that the
sonne of man is Lord, euen of the saboth, and according to the
common receiued axiome, priuilegium paucorum non facit
legem communem, a priueledge granted to some few, cannot establish
a common law:Ambr. in libr. de Tobia ca. 14. yea, S. Ambrose sheweth in a large
discourse, that the taking vsurie of the Amalechites and
Ammorites, cannot make vsurie lawfull amongst vs christians;
who so listeth may reade his words in his learned booke
de Tobia.
                  
               
               
                  The third obiection.
                  IT is lawfull for to take increase of money for the deliuerie
of money at such a time in such a place: for example, I may
take ouerplus in gold at Paris, to deliuer gold at Lions, Genua,
Millan, or Rome: for this is daily practised and neuer reproued
by any learned writer. I may therefore in like maner,
for the deliuerie of present money in Ianuary, receiue increase
of money in december, and not thereby sinne at all.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I answere, that in these two cases great disparitie may bee
found. For in your deliuerie of present money, increase is exacted
only and solely for the loane. But in the other deliuerie,
increase is required for assecuration sake: that is to say, the



partie that deliuereth money or gold at Paris, is in feare to
fall among theeues, and so to be dispoiled of all he hath: in regard
whereof he commeth to a banker, who partly of charitie,
and partly to get an honest liuing, keepeth seruants at Milan,
Lions, and Genua, with a stocke of mony in euery place. To
this banker the traueller giueth a competent consideration,
that he may haue his ticket to receiue so much mony, when he
comes to such a place, or to his iourneis end. Which increase
this banker taketh not for the loane of his money (for hee may
rather be said to borrow then to lend) but for the safe deliuerie
of my mony at such a place, and for the charges he is at, by keping
seruants to that only end. Which thing is so farre from
being vsurie, that it is a very commendable and charitable act.
Yea in those countries where these bankes be allowed, al vsurie
is vtterly condemned. And such as die knowen vsurers
without satisfaction to the parties damnified, cannot be buried
among other christians.
               
               
                  The fourth obiection.
                  IF a man giue an hundred crownes in hand, hee may haue
for the same out of the bankes at Rome, at Genua, and at other
places, twelue crownes yeerly for the terme of his life; or
ten crownes yeerely to him and his assignes for euer. Which
increase is giuen for paying the money before hand: and yet
no learned man did euer reprooue this kind of dealing, but rather
hath highly commended the same.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I answer, that in these kinds of banks, there is no vsury at
all committed, the reason hereof is this; because these bankers
haue lands in fee simple, out of which they graunt for so much
in hand, either a yeerely rent of so many crownes for euer, or
at least for terme of life. Which to do is a lawful contract, as
which is nothing else but to sell for an hundred crownes in
hand, the yeerely rent of ten crownes for euer. And the same
thing may be proportionably verified, in all other like bankes
and contracts.
               
            
            
               
               Of certaine doubts or difficult questions, tending
to the perspicuous explication of
Vsurie. Cha. 9.
               
                  The first question.
                  THere is in sundrie countries, a banke called mons pietatis,
the mountaine of pietie. This mount or banke was founded
by certain deuout persons, so then and this day esteemed,
for the honest help of poore and needy folke. And this mons pietatis
is virtually practised,
                        
                           〈…〉
                         no vsurie. in many famous vniuersities. The
case thus standeth; certaine men hauing a charitable care howe
to prouide for the poorer sort, that they might borrow money
in their neede, and not bee oppressed with vsury, gaue great
summes of money to be kept in a banke, and appointed certaine
chosen seruants, for the giuing out, and the taking in of
the said money. Which seruants haue in charge, to lend to
poore folkes such summes of mony as they neede,
                        
                           •
                         prouident cautele and prouiso. vnto a very
reasonable day. Yet, lest the mount should in time be spent and
consumed, they haue prouidently made this double prouiso,
 First, that they which borrow the mony, shal deliuer some sufficient
pledge for the repayment of the same, at the day or
 daies appointed. Secondly, that they which borrow the money
shall giue some competent consideration to the saide seruants,
who continually attend for the deliuerie and receiuing
of the money. Now would I know, why this kind of dealing
is not vsurie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I answer, that here I behold great charitie, but vsurie I
can find none. For nothing at all is taken for the loane of the
mony, but for the necessarie maintenance of the seruants, who
attend continually for the conuenient helpe of the borrowers.
To which consideration, if the borrowers shoulde not yeelde,
neither could the banke 
                        ••
                     dure, neither the pledges be kept in
safetie and good order. For the pledges or guages are of sundry
sortes, and oftentimes can not be kept, without both cost
and care. Mary if they take aboue measure, I grant that it is
hard dealing, and contrarie to the true meaning of the founders.
               
               
                  
                  The second question.
                  You said before, that it is not vsurie, when one taketh consideration
for his gaine ceasing: which if it be so, then may all
vsurers be excused, for whē the vsurer lendeth out his money,
that gaine doubtles ceaseth, which he might make thereupon.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I say first, that rich men, who haue great store of mony, are
bound by Gods lawes, not onely to lend their money without
gaine, but also to giue it freely, for the necessary reliefe of their
honest poore neighbours:1. Ioan. 3. v. 1
                           •
                        . for as S. Iohn saith, he that hath
the wealth of this world, and knoweth his brothers neede, and
shutteth vp his bowelles from him, in that man dwelleth not
the loue of God. When thou commest to the Church to pray
saith S. Chrysostome,
                     Chrysost. hom. 9 in Matth. bring thy reward in thy hand: giue to
them that want, and aske of him that hath, that thy prayer may
be commended with good works: the hand of the poore faith
Rauennus is the treasure of Christ,Ra
                           •
                        en▪
                      and what the poore receiueth,
that Christ accepteth, which saying our Sauiour Christ
cōfirmeth in the gospel, telling vs,Matth. 10. v. 4
                           •
                        . that if one giue but a cup of
cold water to the poore for his sake, it shal not be vnrewarded:
why saith S. Basill,
                     Basilius. is one made rich and another poore, but
that God will reward the fidelitie of the one, and the patience
of the other▪ It is the bread of the hungrie which thou hast,
the coate of the naked, which thou lockest vp, the shooe of the
barefooted, which thou holdest, the mony of the needie, which
thou possessest, wherfore thou killest so many as thou canst relieue
and wilt not.Amb
                           •
                        . This saith S. Ambrose, is to kill a man, to
denie to help him in his need: beware le
                        ••
                      thou shut vp in thy
bagges, the life of the poore: wilt thou be a fine marchant and
rich vsurer,August. saith S. Austen? thē giue that thou canst not keep,
to receiue that thou canst not lose, giue a little to receiue much:
giue temporall possession, to attaine eternal saluation. I neuer
read of any man saith S. Hierome,
                     Hier. that made an ill end, who
in his life time, cherefully exercised the works of charitie. And
Christs holy Apostle confirmeth al this,Iac. 1. v. 27. when he pronounceth
it to be the pure and vndefiled religion before God, to rel
                        •
                     eue
the fatherlesse and widdowes in their necessitie, 
                        〈◊〉
                      cruell vsurers,
then, are of a new no religion, and god wil one day vomit



them out of his mouth:Note wel this point. for the which cause such vsurers as
will not make restitution before their death, of al goodes gotten

                        〈◊〉
                      vsurie, cannot be 
                        〈◊〉
                      in many christian countries
to be buried in christian mans buriall, for such sharpe punishment
seemeth detested vsurie to deserue.
                  
                      I say secondly, that when ouerplus is taken for game truely
ceasing, no vsurie is or can be committed, albe it the partie that
taketh the ouerplus being a rich man may sinne grieuously against
the rule of charitie. I say (truely ceasing) because marchants
and other bargainers, do of
                        ••
                     , fain to cease, when there
is no such true ceasing at al.
                  
                      I say thirdly, that the notorious vsurers, who will no way
employ their money, but to get gaine by the loane thereof, (of
which sort are they, that haue sold their lands to get money to
lend for gaine) can neuer truely pretend the ceasing of gaine,
for since money is fruitles of it owne nature, as is alreadie
said, there can no gaine truely cease to him thereby, who neuer
meant to put it to honest vse.
                  
                      I say fourthly, that other rich men, who vse honest bargaining
for honest gaine, cannot for al that truely pretend the ceasing
of gaine, when they lend money to their needie neighbors,
at such time and times, as they neither would nor could bestow
the same, during the time of such their loane.
               
               
                  The third question.
                  What say you to those marchant men, that sell their wares
continually for more when they giue a day, and take lesse when
they receiue money in hand: for this is a thing most common
nowadayes, not onlie with marchants and mercers, but euen
amongst al other bargainers.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  
                      I say first, that albeit the greater part self dearer for the day,
(the mane is the pittie) yet god be thanked for it, many well disposed
persons, (of whom my selfe and wel acquainted with
some) are so farre from that kind of dealing, as they vtterly abhorre
and detest the same.
                  
                      I say secondly, that when the forbearance of the money till
such a day, is truely and without fraude preiudicial to the seller,
because he cannot vse his money in due time, then for that



end, and in that respect, he may take 
                        〈…〉
                     , for his lawful

                        〈◊〉
                      game: but when his money is so paid, and in
such time, as the seller is no way damnified thereby, thē and in
such a case, he can take nothing for the day, without the crime
of vsurie.
               
               
                  The fourth question
                  What say you to those merchants and others, who are so
rich, that they haue alwayes good store of gold and money locked
vp in their coffers, and yet sel dearer to the day, & to those
who though they be not so rich, yet neede they not the money,
before the day, and yet for al that sell their wares and goods
dearer for the day.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I say first to the former sort, that they are not only vsurers,
but also extortioners, and cruel murderers of their christian
neighbours: neither is this my bare doome, but the flat iudgement
of Christ himselfe, and of al the holy fathers.
                  I say secondly to the latter sort, that they are tangled with 
the c
                        ••
                     nes of vsurie, and consequently bound to restitution.
               
               
                  The first question.
                  Is it vsurie to lend our kine or sheep after a competent rate,
and to receiue the stocke againe.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I say first, that kine and sheepe ve things fruitfull of their 
owne nature, and therefore may be lent out for gaine, and that
without vsurie or other iniustice at all.
                  I say secondly, that when kine, shrepe or other cattell, are 
lent out or set ouer for gaine, with couenant in bond to restore
the principall, or the iust price thereof, what euent soeuer
befall, then the gaine takē in that order, and with those cricumstances
is flat vsurie,He that hath no horse can lose Horse. it cannot be denied: the reason heereof is
euident, because ouer and besids the ouerplus taken for the fertalitie
of the rattel, the lender requireth securitie for the principall,
and thatby reason of the loane, and consequently the dominion
of the principall is translated, which is the formall reason
of vsurie: for when anything perisheth it perisheth to the
owner, and not to him that hath no title thereunto.
                  I say thirdly, that he, who lendeth or setteth ouer to his 


                     
poore neighbours, kine, sheepe, or other cattel, after a reasonable
and competente rate, without couenant or bond to deliuer
the principal againe, in as good case, state, and order as it was
receiued, both a very charitable art, but committeth no vsurie
at al.
               
               
                  The replie.
                  Mary li
                        •
                     , if this he so, then must I be at great charges, and
sustein no final losses at his hands, who hired my horses, sheep
or kine, and so for doing good to my neighbour, be vtterly impouerished
my selfe, but I wil none of that, I thanke you.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I answer, that the case is farre otherwise: for if your goods
be hurt or miscaried any way, by the negligence or default of
him that borroweth or hireth them, then both in conscience and
by the course of the common law, he is bound to make satisfaction
for the same: and thus much you may draw into couenant
if you lift, without 
                        〈◊〉
                      suspition of vsurie at all: but if 
                        〈…〉
                     
your horse, kine, or sheep; and do to them that which an honest
man ought to do, then if they die, or otherwise miscarrie,
your selfe must stand to the losse, and not I, for the goods are
yours, and not mine, they must perish to you the owner, & not
to me the hirer: if you defend the contrarie, you fall into the
flat case of vsurie.
               
               
                  The sixth question.
                  A friend of mine gaue me an hundred and twentie pounds
freely, so as I must neuer pay the principall againe, but yet
with this prowish, that I must giue to him during his naturall
life, twentie pounds by yeere. Now would I know if this be
vsurie.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I answere that it is no vsurie indeede,The cont
                           •
                        nes called in latin, 
                           〈◊〉
                        . but a verie lawfull
contract or bargaine, termed of the Latines, do vt des: the reason
is euident, because here is nothing taken for the loane: ouer
and besides this, it is a meere 
                        〈◊〉
                      contract, putting the receiuer
in farre better state, then he was before: for the giuer
may die the next day, and so the receiuer haue the principal for
nothing at all. Againe, if the giuer should liue as long as the
common sort of men do, yet could the receiuer be at no losse,



vnlesse his owne negligence were in default.
               
               
                  The replie.
                  Then it is no vsury if I lend my neighbor twenty pounds,
vpon this condition, that he shal giue me thirtie pounds, if I
be liuing at the end of the halfe yere, and if I die before, he shal
be bound onely to pay the twentie pounds againe: indeede many
good men vse this kind of dealing, and I am glad to heare
you say, it is no vsurie.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I say first, that you seeme to interpret my instruction according 
to your owne best liking.
                  I say secondly, that there is great disparitie, in these two proposed 
cases: for in the former, the principal must neuer return
to the giuer, neither is there anie thing exacted, in respect of
the loane: but in the latter, the principall must euer be restored,
and that which is exacted, is in respect of the loane, for no
other consideration can be yeelded: and therefore this filthie
lucre, is detestable palliate vsurie.
                  I say thirdly, that the dealing is plaine diabolicall, howsoeuer 
the worldlings esteeme thereof: yea, the practitioners
are so far from being good men, that they are thereby become
the cat
                        •
                     hpolles of satan:Ambr. in libr. de Tobia. for as S. Ambrose hath wel concluded
out of the holy writ, if they be blessed that giue not their
money to vsurie, as the holy Prophet of God auoucheth plainly
then doubtles are they accursed,Psal. 15. that practise vsurie and reioyce
therein.
               
               
                  The seuenth question.
                  It was euer thought lawfull, to set ouer the portions of infants
for gaine, neither to this day hath any learned man reproued
the same: what therefore must be thinke therof?
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I say first that many things haue beene often by learned men 
reproued, which were seldome or neuer wholly reformed.
                  I say secondly, that the least sinne may not be committed, to 
gaine the whole world vnto vs: for as the learned men haue
collected out of S. Paul,
                     Rom. 3. v. 
                           •
                        . 
                     non sunt facienda mala, vt inde eue
                        
                           •
                        iant
bona: euill may not be done, that good may come thereupon.
We may not steale from a rich man, for the reliefe of



the poore: the causes and cases of infants and poore folks, are
to be fauoured indeede, but yet euer with iustice, and neuer
with sinne:The portions of infants. and therefore we must iudge of lending or setting
ouer the ouerplus of infants, euen as we doe of other things,
that is to say, if the portions be in mony, then to take any thing
for the loane, as the maintenance of the infants, or some consideration
to that end, is flat vsurie indeede: if the portions be in
lands, or other goods that be fruitfull of their owne nature; thē
competent consideration may be had, for the increase of the
same. Alwaies prouided, that if the goods miscarrie without
the negligence or other default of the borrower, that then as is
alreadie said, they perish or miscarrie to the lender, who onelie
and solely hath the dominion thereof.
               
               
                  The replie.
                  If the poore infants may haue nothing, in consideration of
the vse of their portions, then wil their portions often be consumed,
or at left much wasted, euen during their non-age and
minoritie.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  Neither law,By the way of gratitude, but not of compulsion. conscience, nor reason, doth or can make a man
in worse condition for bestowing a benefit, then he was before
the gift thereof: and therfore, as he might afore accept of a free
donation, so may be much more after his good deseres, receiue
that which is freely giuen him, in the way of gratitude. My answere
now is, that since, as the common prouerbe saith, (one
good turne deserueth another) and since ingratitude as wel by
the law of nature, as by the lawe diuine, is reproued for a grieuous
sinne, it followeth consequently, that whosoeuer reapeth
commoditie by taking an infant, with his portion, and will not
to his power make thankfull conspensation for the same, may
iustly be condemned of ingratitude: yet as he is to be condemned
of ingratitude, if he render not thankfully of his owne accord,
so if he be compelled by bond of couenant thereunto, then
by and by is committed the sinne of vsurie: yet in things fruitful
some consideration may be had, according to the true sence
alreadie touched.
               
               
                  The eight question.
                  If vsury be so grieuous a sin, what shall we say to the lawes
of this Realme, that this day approue and allow the same:
               
               
                  
                  The answere.
                  I say first, that they who seeke thus to defend their abhominable 
vsury, commit no small trespasse against the Queenes
most excellent maiesty, & the godly setled laws of this realme.
                  I say secondly, that the lawes of this realme do not approue 
vsurie for good, but barely tolerate the same punishment in
some degree, so to auoid and eschew a greater euil. I proue it
by a double reason: first because the common law doth punish 
al vsurers, that take aboue ten in y• hundreth: secondly because 
the common law referreth al vsurers from the highest to the
lowest, to be punished by ye ecclesiasticall cēsures of the church:
Where the least vsurie may this day be sharplie punished in
this Realme of England, if due information be made thereof:
and if such faults in some places at sometimes,Good lawes are somtimes slowly put in execution. passe vnpunished
after information giuen, (of which kind of dealing and the
like, the poore people make pittifull complaints God wot)
that truely must bee imputed to the iniquitie of the inferiour
Magistrates, who now and then are corrupted with flatterie,
friendship, or gifts, and not to the iust and godly lawes of this
Realme.
               
               
                  The replie.
                  Sundrie learned men do hold, that the ciuill Magistrate is
appointed by God to punish male factours, and therefore may
not tollerate or leaue any sinne vnpunished.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I answere, that albeit some otherwise learned indeede, doe
hold the contrarie opinion, yet do I repute it for an vndoubted
truth, that Kings, Queenes, absolute Princes, and independent
Magistrates, may in certaine cases vpon godly considerations,
either tollerate sinne vnpunished, or pardon malefactours:
for otherwise we must not onely condenme her excellent
maiestie,Note the practise of al christendome. that now happilie raigneth ouer vs, but also all
her most noble progenitors, yea and al other kings at al times
in al ages, throughout al the christian world: for when was the
King, and where is the kingdome, in which kings vpon good
causes, haue not pardoned malefactors & the time cannot be named,
the kingdome is vnknowne. Now for the exact handling
of this point, (because it is not onelie perti
                        •
                     ent to my present



theame, but necessarie also for many other respects) I thinke
it to the purpose, to lay downe some strong foundations in
that behalfe.The first foundation. First, this is a constant maxime, approued by vniforme
consent of all learned diuines; cessante fine legis cessat
lex ipsa; when the finall cause or ende for which the law was
made, ceaseth, then doth the law euen of necessitie also cease.
This foundation is grounded vpon the holie Scripture in the
15. of the Acts. Whereby the flat decree and setled law of the
Apostles,Act. 15. v. 28. 19. we are bound to abstaine from bloud and strangled
meates. This notwithstanding, no man hath this day anie
scruple of conscience to eate the same: and yet hereof no other
sound reason can be yeelded, saue onely that the end for which
that law was made, did long sithence cease. For euen at that
time there was no precise necessitie to abstain from bloud and
strangled meates.Let this point be welmarked But this law was only made in respect of
the state of that time, that the Gentiles and the Iewes might
liue more peaceably together, and thereby auoyde al occasion
of quarrelling. And therefore as soone as that end ceased, this
law also ceased with it; and so we this day are freed from the
same. Yea this maxime is euident lumine naturali, euen by
natural reason. For euerie law is made for some end; which
end how ofte soeuer it may be accomplished without the law,
so often the execution of the law is needelesse.
                  Secondly,The second foundation. we must hold this for a constant foundation, that
albeit the ciuil magistrate be commaunded to punish malefactors;
yet is neither the kinde of the punishment, nor the quantity
thereof taxed by the law of God; but it still abideth indifferent,
to be determined by the supreme ciuill magistrate. For
although there were speciall punishment prescribed in the indiciall
law of Moses,
                     The vsuall punishment of malefactors may bee changed. for transgressors of the sabboth, for adulterers,
for murderers and such like; yet neither by the lawe
moral, neither by the law of the new testament, to which laws
only we christians are this day bound, is any such punishment
determined. And therefore the ciuil magistrate (if it so seeme
good vnto him) may change the vsual punishment of theeues,
(which with vs is to be hanged) and cause them to be cast into
the bottome of the sea, with milstones about their necks. And
the same may be said, of the punishmēt for other malefactors.
                  
                     
Thirdly,The third foundation. we must repute this for an vndoubted foundation,
that the end for which Gods lawe appointeth malefactors to
be punished, is the publike peace and good of the whole common-weale.
For this is so euident by the course of the whole
scripture, as it can neither with learning nor reason be denied.
                  Out of these three foundations thus firmly stablished,The first corollarie. these
two corollaries may euidently be inferred. First, that whensoeuer
any member of the common-weale committeth any capitall
crime, for which he ought to die by the lawe, whose life
notwithstanding is more profitable to the weale publike, than
his death, in such a case the prince may pardon such a malefactor,

                        〈…〉
                      thereby sinne at all. Which thing christian princes
seeme to respect, when in the time of warres they set such
felons at libertie as are able to doe seruice in defence of the
realm.The second corollarie. Secondly, that when any malefactor is so mightie or so
strongly seated, that the prince cannot without probable daunger
of his royal persm, or great domage to the commonweale
punish the said malefactor; in such a case the prince may tollerate
such a malefactor vnpunished, and not thereby sin at all.
These foundations and these illations once well vnderstoode
and marked, this important controuersie can not but be manifest:
neuertheles I wil adioyne certaine sound reasons herevnto
for the better confirmation of the same.
               
               
                  The first reason.
                  It is a common atiome receiued of all as wel Ciuilians as
Diuines;The first reason. 
                     quod lex ron obligat vitra intentionem legislatoris,
that the law doth not binde a man beyond the intention of the
law-maker. Whereupon I inferre first, that the ciuill magistrate 
may dis
                        ••
                     sre, with his owne law. I inferre secondly,
that the prince being Gods minister, may tollerate or pardon
malefactors; when and so often as such tolleration or pardoning
tendeth to the common good of the publike weale. The
reason is euident, because the intention of God the supreame
law-maker, was euen that and none other, when he appointed
his ministers to punish malefactors.
               
               
                  The second reason.
                  Prodigalitie is a great sinne,The second reason. condemned aswell in philoso
                     
                        ••
                     
                     
                        〈…〉
                     , it neither will nor can be denied. It is the



                     
                        〈◊〉
                      extreme, of the vertu liberalitie. This notwithstanding,
al christian kings, as far as I can learne, haue euer tolerated
ye same unpunished at least in some degree; neither were
they for such tolerations reproued at anie time, by any ancient
approued writer or learned father whosoeuer. Which doubtlesse
is and ought to be so deputed, an argumental no small
importance. For although emperours, kings, 
                        〈…〉
                      do
sin aswel as others of meaner calling yet neither
haue they, neither euer can they liue vnreprooued, if at anie

                        〈◊〉
                      they 
                        〈…〉
                      either by stablishing 
                        〈…〉
                     
lawes publikely; or by suffering their 
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈…〉
                      of
Gods lawes dissolutely:Matth. 3. v. 9. For God 
                        〈…〉
                      of
stones to Abraham, and neither is he, nor euer 
                        〈◊〉
                      he be destitute
of faithful couragious seruants, who wil constantly and
without all leare,Esai. 2. v. 6. reproue al such as 
                        〈◊〉
                      his holy law
                        •
                     .
He hath watch men on the walles of his Ierusalem, who will
reproue sin 
                        〈…〉
                     
He is not without his Elias,
                     1. Reg. 18. v. 18. that will stoutly reprooue at wicked
Achabs. He hath in store a Danie 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      al naughtie
iudges,Dan. 13. v. 61. and to acquit his faithfull Susannes. He will find
a prophe
                        •••
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      out against 
                        •
                     ool any, and to teach euery Ierobo
                           •
                        n his duely. He can and will prouide another Iohn Baptist,
                     Matt. 14. v. 4. to speake boldly to all bloody Herods. And yet in so many
hundred yeeres, such tollerations haue not beene reproued
to my knowledge, by any learned writer.
               
               
                  The third reason.
                  It is a generall axiome,The third reason. receiued not only indiuinitie, but
in philosophie also, ex 
                           〈◊〉
                         mali
                           •
                         mique eligend
                           •
                        m, of 
                        〈…〉
                     
the lesser is to be chosen. And to spea
                        •••
                      more plaindey,
that which is often sin,Marke well this point. if it be absolutely considered; the same
done respectfully, wil be no sin at al. For example sake, murder
is against the law diuine, and yet to kill one neighbour in
our owne defence, both is and euer was reputed lawfull. S
                        •
                     t
for a man to cut off his arme or leg, lest the whole body put
                        ••
                     efie
or perish is a very lawful thing. Which thing all 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
kings seeme to respect, when they in sundry cases, tolerate 
                        〈◊〉
                     
vnpunished: for they thinke that 
                        〈…〉
                     
their realmes by punishing, than by 
                        〈…〉
                     


                     
in such cases. Yea, if kings should at all times punish all malefactors,
the church of God should often thereby want many
most excellent and profitable members. For which respect our
Sauour himselfe telleth vs, that when the 
                        •
                     ares can not be seuer

                        〈◊〉
                      the good corne, vnles both be pulled vp together,
then may they tolerate the tares or weeds with the good corn
euen 
                        〈◊〉
                      the haruest:Matth. 13. v. 30. as if he had said; when the wicked can not
be punished, but with great domage to the good; then may the
magistr
                        •
                     t tolerate such malefactors vnpunished, and not therby
sinne at all.
               
               
                  The fourth reason which is insoluble and
irrefringible.
                  The blessed man Moses so highly renowmed in holy writ,The fourth reason.
and so great in the fauor of God, pardoned great malefactors,
in the heinous crime of diuorce. And this hee did to auoide a
greater euill, that is, lest they vpon euery light cause shoulde
poyson those wiues, whome they did not loue. For that such
light diuorcement was onely permitted, but neither by God
nor Moses approoues, I will demonstrate by these important
reasons. First, because these are Christs owne words; Moses
                     
because of the hardnes of your hearts,Matth. 19. v. 8. suffered you to put away
your wiues, but from the beginning it was not so. Secondly,
because the marriage after such light diuorce, was indeede
vnlawfull by the law.Rom. 7. v. 1, 2, 3. For thus writeth S. Paul, know
ye not brethren (for I speake to them that know the law) that
the law hath dominion ouer the man, as long as he liueth? for
y• woman which is in subiection to a man, is bound by the law
to the man, while he liueth; but if the man be dead, she is deliuered
from the law of the man. So then, if while the man liueth
she take another man, she shalbe called an adultresse. Out
of these words I note first, that marriage cannot be dissolued,
                     
                        ••
                     ring the life of the former husband. I note secondly, that 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      was so euen in Moses law, because S. Paul saith he speasath
to them that know the law, I note thirdly, that to be ma
                     
                        ••
                     d 
after diuorce for a light cause, during y• life of the former
husband, is 
                        〈◊〉
                      and flat adultery. I therfore conclude, that
at idlerate sinne vnpunished vpon good cause, is 
                        〈◊〉
                      at all.

                        〈◊〉
                      this mine assertion of diuorce, is not only grounded vpon



the scriptures, but also confirmed by the best approued fathers,
and eke by the late writers of this our age.
               
               
                  The fift reason.
                  We haue many examples in the holy scriptures,The fift reason. of blessed
kings who haue often pardoned malefactours, and to this day
were neuer reproued for the same: King Dauid a man full of
the holy ghost, pardoned wicked Nabal at the petition of his
vertuous wife Abigail.
                     1. Reg. 25. 35. The same king Dauid pardned Abner,
who rebelled against him for the house of Saule: the same
king Dauid tollerated Ioab in his naughtie dealings,2. Reg. 3. 6, 22. albeit be
was more then a little offended with his manners: the same
king Dauid tollerated cursed Shemei,
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Reg. 3. though he commanded
his son Salomon doe executian on them both,3. Reg. 2. v, 8, 9. after that himselfe
was dead.
               
               
                  The sixth reason out of Saint Austen.
                  Saint Austen saith plainely,The sixt reason. that the church doth tollerate
many euills,Aug. epist. 119. which she doth not approue: and the same saine
Austen in his epistle to Macedonius, proueth by the ensample
of Christ, that not onely secular magistrate may giue pardon
to offenders, but also that clergie men may require the same at
their hands:Aug. epist. 54. ad Macedon. Ioan. 8. v. 11. our Lord saith he, made sute that the woman taken
in adultery, should not be stoned, and by that fact commended
to vs the office of intercession: yea, Saint Austen was
greatly offended with the Magistrates of Africa, if at anie
time they denied his request therein: the difference is onely in
this, that we must do that by prayer, which he did by terrourr
for he was the Lord, & we are his seruants: this and many other
reasons S. Austen vseth, which whoso listeth may reade
at large, in that lerned epistle which he wrote to Macedonius.
Hereunto agreeth S. Paules intercession vnto Philemon,
                     Paulus ad Philemonem. for
Onesimus his seruant.
               
               
                  The seuenth reason out of S. Ioseph his holy fact.
                  The blessed virgin Marie,The seuenth reason. was found to be with childe b
                        •
                     t
the holy ghost, before Ioseph & she came together: wherefore
Ioseph bicause he was a iust man & would not put hir to ope
                        •
                     
shame,Matth. 1. v. 19. was minded to put her away priuily: thus recordeth 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                      holy scripture. Out of the which words I note first, that Ioseph
                      knew the holy virgin to be with childe. I note secondly,



that he knew himselfe not to be the father of the childe. I note
thirdly, that Ioseph knewe no other, but that Mary his wife 
was an adultresse. I note fourthly, that he thought to haue put 
her away secretly, so to keepe her from shame and punishment.
I note fiftly, that Ioseph was euen then iust, when he sought 
to keepe her from shame, although in his iudgement she deserued
death by the law.
               
               
                  The first obiection.
                  No inferiour, hath power to alter the law of his superiour,
and therefore man can not pardon or tollerate malefactours,
whom God appointeth to be punished.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I say first, that precepts deliuered to vs in holy writ, are 
of two sorts some affirmatiue, othersome negatiue: the negatiue
binde vs at al times, euerie houre, and in euerie place,
but the affirmatiue, though they be euer apt to binde,Precepta sunt duplicis generis. yet doe
they not actually kinde vs, saue then onely, when the due circumstances
of time, place, and persons do occurre: hereupon it
comes, that it is neuer lawfull to steale, neuer lawfull to commit
adulterie, neither lawfull to beare false witnesse, neither at
any time nor in any place: the reason hereof is this, because
these be precepts negatiue. This notwithstanding, it is sometime
lawful to omit the precepts affirmatiue: for example sake,
it is lawful sometime to smite him that smiteth vs, and yet it is
Gods commandement,Matth. 5. v. 39. 40, 41, 42. that whose shal smite thee on the right
cheeke, to him thou turne the other also. Againe, it is Gods
commandement to giue him thy cloake, that wil sue thee at the 
law, & take away thy coat, and yet maiest thou at sundry times
for sundrie respects, denie him both thy coate and thy cloake:
thirdly, it is Gods commaundement to goe with him miles 
twaine, that wil compel thee to go one, and yet maiest thou
sundrie times denie, to go with him either more or lesse: fourthly,
it is Gods commaundement neuer to turne away from him,
that would borrow money or other goods of thee; & yet maiest
thou sundrie times for good respects deny to lend thy mony or
other things: fiftly it is Gods commandement not to aske thy 
goods againe, of him that taketh them away from thee; and

                        •
                     et doth euerie man know,Luc. 6. v. 30. that we may sundrie times not only



aske our goods again, which are vniustly taken from vs, but
 euen with sute of law, seek to recouer ye same: sixtly, it is Gods
commandement to confesse our faith openly, as a thing most
necessary to saluation:Rom. 10. v. 10. and yet we are not bound to confesse our
faith openly and vocally, at al times and in euerie place, but
where and when the glorie of God, or the vtilitie of our neighbour,
shal so require: for example sake, then we are bound to
confesse our faith vocally,The like may be saide of praying alwaies. when by our silence and taciturnity
they that demand vs of our faith, would either beleeue that we
had no faith,Luc. 18. 1. or that our faith were not the true faith, or otherr
would thereby be altered from the faith, and so forsake the euerliuing
God. Al which and other the like, haue this only
ground and foundation, to wit, that they bee precepts affirmatiue,
which neither binde vs at all times nor in all places. For
precepts affirmatiue to vse schoole tearmes:Modus loquendi scholarum. 
                     obligant semper,
sed non ad semper.
                  
                  
                      I say secondly, that the ciuil magistrate, had authoritie, to
mitigate many punishments ordained for malefactors, euen in
the time of the old testament: for though he were appointed
to punish them that vsed false weights and measures,Deut. 25. 13, 14, 2, 3. yet was
the punishment to be determined, euen at his owne discretion.
Againe, when the wicked was worthie to be beaten, the iudge
might designe him to haue many or few stripes, according to
the qualitie or quantitie of his trespasse:Leuit. 25. 53. thirdly, he that solde
himselfe to another man, might iustly be afflicted, but yet how
and in what measure that shuld be done, was to be determined
by the ciuill magistrate.
                  
                      Thirdly, that by the law of the new Testament, the Prince
is only 
                        •
                     harged in general termes, to punish malefactors, for
the com
                        ••
                     n good of his faithful people, in regard wherof, he
may lawfully cease frō punishing them, when the common intended
good of his subiects, cānot or will not insue thereupon.
               
               
                  The second obiection.
                  
                     Achab was punished with death,
                        
                           •
                        . Reg 20. because he granted pardō
to Benhadad king of Ara
                           ••
                        .
                     1. Sam. 28. King Saul was deposed from his
kingdome,1. Sam. 15. because he spotted Agag king of the Amalekites.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  
                      I say first, that Achab was precisely designed, to do executi
                        •••
                     


                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      vpm Benhadad,Vbi supra. and so was also Saul appointed in precise
termes, to put to death king Agag. Secondly, that in the new 
testament Princes haue no such speciall commandement, but
are only charged in generall to punish malefactors. Thirdly,
that affirmatiue precepts bind not in euerie season, but when
the due circumstances, of time, place, persons, and the good of
the common weale shal so require, as is alreadie proued: for
otherwise,In epist. ad Philemonem. I see not how S. Paul can be excused, who made
earnest sute to Philemon, not to punish his seruāt Onesimus,
who vniustly had departed from him: and the like may be said
of S. Austen, who so often made intercession to the princes of
Affrica, to pardon the Donatists, and Circumcellions, who
did not onely disturbe religion, but also spoiled the christians of
their lawful goods: yea, it was y• vsual custome of the Iewes,
as the Gospel beareth record, to set some one prisoner at libertie
euerie Easter; which custome I find not reprooued, in anie
place of holy Writ: yea, the sinne is vsually practiced, in euery
Christian Parliament. I say fourthly, that it is so cleare 
by S. Paul, that malefactors may sometime be pardoned, as
it is without al crime and reason, to denie the same: for what
can be 
                        〈◊〉
                      offence, then such fornicatiō as is not once named
among the Gentiles, to wit; that one should haue his fathers
wife.1 Cor. 5. v. 1. And yet when the partie that did this horrible fact,
seemed to giue signes of true remorse, then S. Paul himselfe
both pardoned him,2. Cor. 2. 8, 9, 10. & willed the Corinthians to do the same.
So did the fathers of the Elebertine councill,Conc. Eleb. can. 20. pardon the vsurers
of the Last al sort, who promised to surcease from vsurie,
and to deale no longer therewith, which counsel was holden
aboue 1200. yeares ago.
               
               
                  The replie.
                  Saint Paul did not pardon the crime of fornication, but did
speedely excommunicate the incestuous person for the same,
whose pardon was nothing else, but a relaxation of that seuere
correction, which hee had imposed vpon him, for his deformed
fact.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I say first, that the ciuill magistrates among the Corinthins,
                     
ought to haue put to death the incestuous person, vnlesse



we grant indeede, that Princes may sometime pardon malefactors.
                  
                      I say secondly, that if Princes might not in some respects at
some times, pardon malefactors without offence, S. Paul who
knew gods minde better then any this day liuing vpon the face
of the earth, would neuer haue requested the Corinthians so to
do, but would haue charged them to cut off, and to haue taken
such a fellow out of the way.
                  
                      I say thirdly, that as S. Paul first excommunicated the persō
afterwards he receiued to mercie, euen so do Princes first punish
malefactors by imprisonment, attaignment, &c. whom aftherward
they pardon.
                  
                      I say fourthly, that S. Peter smot Aananias and Saphira,
his wife with sodain death, for their hypocrisie & deceitful dealing,
and yet did S. Paul pardon the incestuous Corinthian,
Whereby we haue to vnderstand, that Princes may pardon
malefactors, when it seemes expedient for the common weale
I therefore now conclude, that (in my iudgement) they want
due consideration, who denie that Princes may pardon malefactors,
and I heartily wish and earnestly pray, that al such as
do not or wil not condescend thereunto,A verie reasonable request. would take the paines
soundly and directly to solue such reasons and authorities, as
I haue made in that behalfe. Which, (if anie such can be
yeelded) I shall no sooner vnderstand, then I wil willingly
with heartie thanks, subscribe vnto the same.
               
               
                  The ninth question.
                  Some politike persons wil lend their mony as they say grati
                           •
                        
                     
and without any gaine for the loane, yet the borrowers must
this do, or else they can haue no mony at all: that is forsayth,
they must make a lease of a peece of ground, worth 20. or 30.
pounds by the yeere, which lease must be to the vse of the creditour,
for paying twelue pence or two shillings or such a
trifle yeerely, so long as the lent mony is in their hands. Now
would I knowe, if this be vsurie or no: it seemeth vsurie 
                        〈◊〉
                     
seme, and to othersome it is thought otherwise, because th
                        •
                     
ground indeede, is set ouer for a yeerely rent.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  
                      I say first, that this is most execrable palliate vsurie, and



proue it, because the iust rent of the ground is cut off, for the
sole and onely loane of the money.
                  I say secondly, that if the borrowers woulde make earnest 
complaint hereof, to the zealous executors of her maiesties
lawes, then doubtles would these cruel vsurers, these murderers
of their honest needie neighbours, he sharply punished according
to their deserts.
                  I say thirdly, that the like deceitfull dealing, is this daie 
common to our symonists,Symonie is the ruine of Christs church and bringeth the greatest ruine that
can be to the church of God: for blinde bussards and idle lubbards
possesse the fat liuings, and worthie learned men in the
Vniuersities can get no preferment at al. Now the patrons
either prefer such as wil giue them money, or else the vnworthie
persons whom they prefer to the liuings, must make them
a lease of a great part of the tithes, for a yeerely rent of no value:
but I hope our good Byshopes, (who of late dayes God
be thanked, are farre better then they haue beene) will shortly
looke more warily to this matter. My selfe know sundrie in
the North parts, who are parsons of fat liuings, and yet so vtterlie
vnlearned as they can scarsely reade the English bible.
Others I know to be so poore, by comming to their benefices
by symonie, as they haue not wherwith to buy them books for
their studies: by meanes hereof the people liue in ignorance,
poperie is fostered still, the weake are scandalized, and the free
passage of Christs gospel is more then a little hindered.
               
               
                  The tenth question.
                  A certaine man lately deceased, gaue to the chamber of a
Cittie in this land, one hundred pounds in money, which sum
he gaue with this limitation and condition, to wit, that the said
citie should, in consideration therof, giue eight pounds yearely
to a preacher for euer. Now would I know, if this bee the
sinne of vsurie: for to find a preacher is a worke of charitie.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I answer, that this Citie, if it haue lands in fee simple (as I
said before of banks) out of which it granteth a perpetual rent
of eight pounds by the yeare, for the hundred pounds paid in
hand,Marke these words well. then it makes a lawful contract and committes no vsury
at all: but if the same citie haue no yeerely reuenewes, out of



which it paieth the said summe, then is it flat vsurie giuen only
for the leane: note what was said before of the portions of infants
during their non-age and minoritie: for euil deedes are
not therefore good, because good followeth thereupon.
               
               
                  The eleuenth question
                  Some deuout persons giue at their death, certaine summes
of money to towneships, out of which they appoint something
to be giuen yeerely, partly for the reliefe of poore folks, and
partly for the maintenance of the common highwayes, which
gifts haue euer beene reputed the works of pietie, and neuer
once deemed to smell of vsurie. I would therefore know, what
is to be said therein.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  
                      I say first, with Christs Apostle, that such donours had indeede
a kind of zeale,Rom. 10. v. 10. but not grounded vpon knowledge, a
good worke indeede is done, but not by a lawful meane.
                  
                      I say secondly, that the answere to the question aforegoing,
is the flat resolution hereof.
                  
                      I say thirdly, that it is flat vsurie, because whatsoeuer is allotted
to the poore or high wayes, is onely giuen for the loane
of the money, if the case be wel marked this cannot be denied.
               
               
                  The twelfth question.
                  What must the heires, and such as possesse the lands and
goods of vsurers do? and what are they bound vnto?
               
               
                  The answere.
                  
                      I say first, that the heires, and such as haue the lands and
goods of vsurers by discent or donation, stand bound in solidum
and totally, to make restitution for the vsurie, so far forth
as the lands and goods will extend.
                  
                      I say secondly, that others who haue bought lands or goods
of vsurers, and pa
                        •
                     ed the iust value thereof for them, are not
bound to restitution: yet if either such goods and lands remain
in their proper kind, as they were gotten by vsurie, or were
bought at an vnder value, then as wel the things that remain
in their proper kind, as the ouerplus by which the buyer is inriched,
must be restored to him or them that were oppressed
with the vsurie: and if he or they cannot be knowne, so much
must be giuen to the poore:Matth. 25. v. 40. for in such cases the poore succeede



in Christs roome,Psal. 14. v. 1. the 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  The thirteen 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  If an 
                        〈◊〉
                      buy an horse 
                        〈…〉
                      vsury, and
giue or sel the same horse to another man, what is that man
bound to do, who hath the horse by free donation, or by way of
sale?
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I say first, that if the vsurer left not goods sufficient for restitution,
then is he that had the horse gratis, bound to restore
him to the oppressed partie.
                  I say secondly, that he that bought the horse bona fide, and 
gaue the iust price for the same, is not bound so any restitution.
                  I say thirdly, that the man who bought the horse mala fide, is 
doubtles bound to restitution. First, because hee concurred
to an vnlawfull act. Againe, for that he bought the horse at an
vnder value, & so made the partie impotēt in way of restitutiō.
               
               
                  The replie.
                  By this it seemeth, that they who eate of stolen mutt
                        •••
                      are
bound to restitution, although they know nothing, of the vnlawful
taking thereof.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  I say first, that they onely are not bound to restitution, who 
eate of stollen mutton, but euen they also who eate of stollen
venison.
                  I say secondly, that they who eate thereof and are priuie to 
the stealing, are not onely bound to restitution, but withal are
guiltie of a greeuous crime.
                  I say thirdly, that they who eate thereof, bona fide, are indeede 
free from sinne in respect of that eating, although they
remaine bound in way of ciuill satisfaction.
               
               
                  The fourteenth question.
                  What if a partie damnified, will freely remit the 
                        •
                     estitution
of the surplussage vniustly taken?
               
               
                  The answere
                  I answere, that so soone as the partie grieued granteth relaxation,
the vsurer is by and by freed from all restitution, although
he be not free from sinne, by reason of his impenitent
heart that will not giue to euerie man his owne.
                  
                     
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  THus 
                        〈…〉
                      and
painful 
                        〈…〉
                      paint out fitly in her 
                        〈◊〉
                      colours, the deformed
 and impudent ladie Vsurie. First I haue shewed exactly,
 the essence, nature, and definition of vsurie: secondly the
 heinous sinne and irksome deformitie of the same: thirdly the
difference betweene vsurie, and other lawful contracts of lending:
 fourthly, the obiect of vsurie, and things in which it is
 committed: fiftly the seuerall kindes of vsurie, and their proper
 adiuncts: sixtly, the gaine ceasing, and losse insuing by and
 through the loane of mony; seauenthly, that vsury is flat theft,
 and also that it bindeth to restitution. Eightly, I haue solued
 sundrie important obiections, made in defence of vsury. Ninthly,
I haue proposed certaine difficult questions, with euident
and plaine resolutions of the same: by which my labour if thou
canst reape any emolument, then see thou be thankfull to God
for the 
                        〈◊〉
                     , the principal workman of euery good worke:
to whom with the Sonne and the holy ghost,
be all 
                        〈…〉
                     , and glory now

                        〈◊〉
                      euer, Amen.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  
               
            
         
      
   