
      
         
            
            
            A VVatch-vvoord to Englande To beware of traytours and tretcherous practises, which haue beene the ouerthrowe of many famous Kingdomes and common weales.
            
               ❧Written by a faithfull affected freend to his Country: who desireth God long to blesse it from Traytours, and their secret conspiracyes.
            Séene and allowed, according to the order appointed in the Quéenes Iniunctions.
            
               Iosua. 1. verse. 5.
            
            ¶ Take a good hart, and be strong, feare not, I say feare not: because that I which am the Lord thy God will be with thee in all thine affayres.
            
            LONDON Printed for Thomas Hacket, and are to be solde at his shop in Lumberd streete, vnder the signe of the Popes head. 1584.
         
         
            
            
            
               ANglia quae gestatregni 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   faelix.
               Est pagina hac oculis forma notata tuis.
               Anglorum clypeos, Insignia Martia cernis.
               Aptatur meritis digna corona bonis.
            
            
               
                  E R
               
            
         
         
            
            In laudem Elyzabethae Reginae.
            
               TVrba maligna papae tibiterra Britanna minatur;
               Non minus illa ferox Elyzabetha tibi.
               Insidijs vnaes saeuis elapsa tyranni,
               Te magijs, ferro, sortibus atque tetris
               Tollere conatus serpens: sed quid furor ardens
               Profuit? es Christi, qui tuus vnus erat.
               Ingenium, pietas, virtus te ex omnibus vnam
               Esse docent, in quam nil potuere mali.
               Exemplis varijs opere hoc est res manifesta,
               In quo 
                     •
                  udantur facta nefanda virûm;
               
                  Elyzabetha Deo fidas (vt coeperis) vni;
               Hostes contundet, teque tuosque teget.
            
            
               R. W.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧To the high, mightie, and right excellent Princesse, Elyzabeth, by the grace of God, of England, Fraunce and Ireland Queene, defendresse of the true, auncient, Catholique and Apostolique Faith, &c. A. M. her Maiesties most humble Subiect and Seruaunt wisheth continuall felicitie in this world, and in the world to come.
            
               
                  THe consideration of your rare and incomparable Vertues, which are such Iewelles of estimation in the eyes and eares of your faithfull Subiectes, and the care how to continue and enioye them long, which is the study and practise of all them that truely honour you; hath constrayned me at this tyme (right excellent and famous Queene) to exceede the boundes of ordinarie loue, which is onelie but to please the eye, and to wade into the depth of intire affection, wherewith the heart may be oftentimes quieted, but hardly throughlie satisfied, by reason

the conceite taketh so deepe an impression, and euery cause concerneth it so neerely, as, what with hazard of perill, and feare to forgoe, affection is so vehement, as nothing can goe beyond it.
            Let then (most noble Queene) this my poore affection, carie that credite in your Princely minde, as your nature affoordeth to euerie louing Subiect, and let such account be helde of my earnest intent, as both the waightinesse of the cause, and circumstaunces of the whole considered, shall delyuer reason. I (in the meane time) shall continue in prayer, that long this Land may be partaker of your gratious presence, and the good will of euery true Subiect may be thankefully entertayned.
            
               Your Highnesse obedient Subiect and Seruaunt.
A. M.
            
         
         
            
            To the right Honourable Master Thomas Pullison, Lord Mayor elected of the famous Cittie of London, and to the worshipfull Maister Stephen Slanie, and Maister Henrie Billingsley, Sheriffes of the same Cittie, with all the rest of their vvorshipfull Brethren.
            
            
               
                  WE finde it by common experience (right Honorable and Worshipfull) and the effectes are too much seene and proued amongst vs, that as there are many dangerous diseases, which happen to a mans body, wherof some are so hurtfull to the same, and worke by such outragious meanes; as they not onely threaten great hazard of death to the body, but at length (after many calme showers) doo vtterly waste and depriue it of lyfe. So in a kingdome or common wealth, which maye by A comparison betweene a mans body and a common wealth. comparison very well be resembled to a mans body, there often chaunceth very sore and doubtfull sicknesses, which growe in tyme to such forcible and extreame occasions: as they not onely daunger the perishing of the most part, but in conclusion worke the vtter ruine and destruction of the whole. Yet when the body is offended by sicknesse, the freendes of the diseased party do dilligently enquire after Phisitions:

then what medicines his Arte can deuise, or what wholsome potions good councell can minister, are presently prepared for ease of his vexation.
            In like manner, in any common wealth, that is thus touched with any disease that foresheweth peryll: All men are bound in duetie to defend their Countrie. euery one that is faithfully affected to the same, or imploy theyr liues (as they ought) for the benefite thereof, are bound with heedfull care to seeke remedy for such malladies, yea, it is a principall article of theyr duety, to let slip no occasion that may be iudged helpfull in such a case. For if freendshippe cause men for theyr priuate familiars sake, to trauayle in knowledge of the cause of his infirmity, and then to prouide such apt necessaries, as may yeelde hope to qualifie his agony, and restore him to his former health: much more ought duety to be effectuall in such men, as make estimation of theyr Country and common wealth, at what tyme any troublesome annoyaunce dooth mollest it, or any daunger whatsoeuer may be thought towards it: to shew themselues earnest and forward in search of the greefe, and then to apply such due and necessary medicines, as may expell the very thought of threatned daunger.
            The excellent Historiographer Herodotus sheweth Herodotus in his Booke called Clio, which is the first Booke of his Story. vs a notable example, how the Babilonians made this lawe amongst them, that when so euer any man fell sicke within their dominions, he should presently be brought into the market place, & there be laid on his bed: to the intent that he might demaūd of euery one that came to him, whether they had beene troubled with the lyke disease or no, and by what means they recouered theyr health, that he might by knowledge

thereofattayne to the same. And by the same lawe lykewise, euery man that came to him was bound, both to aske the man what sicknesse he had: and also to shew him (if it lay in him to doo it) what might soonest delyuer him from that state. By which example, euery one that beareth a true & faithful zeale to his Countrie, and earnestly tendereth the health and wealth thereof: when so euer he seeth the body thereof (which lyeth open before all mens eyes) to be infected or touched with any infirmitie, and can eyther by experience or otherwise delyuer, what in his conceit may be imagined auayleable: he is boūd in conscience to expresse it, and great is the penaltie if he conceale it. For in helping the whole body, he hath benefite therof himselfe, in that he is a member The whole hody being out of quiet, the members must needes fare the wurse. thereof: for let the body be sicke, the members must needes be partakers of the greefe, and at what tyme it findeth health againe, the members lykewise haue comfort by the releefe. The consideration of these precedentes (right Honourable and Worshipfull) with the earnest care, zeale and loue I beare to my Countrie, which I see (for the happy and flourishing estate therof, and for the maintenaunce of Gods true Religion, and defence of his Church and congregation) wanteth no enimies to pursue the daunger of it, nor coullorable freendes that seeke to betraye it to spoyle, which could they as easilie accomplishe, as they willinglie put in practise, and had not GOD more care of his chosen, then their malicious stomackes can affoord: God knowes the heauie burden should lye on our necks, which I pray God they neuer liue to lay on, nor we 
                  •
               o feele.
            
               
But as the marke is easilie seene, which they so mightilie and continuallie ayme at, and for that The marke that these Traytours ayme at, may be easily discerned. God (praysed be his name therefore) hath hytherto preuented all their trayterous attempts, turning their daggers into their owne bosomes, and causing them to fall into the pitte they made for others: so is it expedient for vs to continue in prayer, that it may please him long to vouchsafe that prouidēt care ouer vs, and that we lykewise applie our owne duetifull wisdome and pollicie, to vphold that plant by whose meanes we prosper, and preuent their deuises, who would robbe vs of so high a treasure.
            It is our dread and soueraigne Lady, whose shyning vertues fret the polluted eyes of these vnnaturall Subiectes: whose heroicall gouernement (which no Realme in the world is able to match for peaceable continuaunce) that sticketh lyke sharpe needles in their venoumed and disdainefull stomackes; and it is the rare president of her famous lyfe, her Christian zeale, and aboundaunce of all excellent giftes, which woorthelie winneth the heartes of her true Subiectes, and inflameth them with desire of her long prosperitie, that calling their barbarous conceite into question, thundreth such Maiestie into their deceyued eares, as they pollishe theyr tongues to depraue, spare no penne-worke to slaunder, whette their weapons, and deuise all tretcheries that lost and forsaken mindes can doo, to extinguishe the lyght of that Sunne, whereon their seared-consciences wyll not suffer them to looke, and to deface that perfect Emeralde, which the more they seeke to blemishe with the oyle of venemous reportes, the more perfect

it sheweth it selfe in beautie.
            I neede not report vnto you, for that your wisedomes The prosperity of the Prince, is the safety of her Kingdome. and iudgementes are verie well acquainted therewith, that the prosperitie of the Prince, is the assured safetie of the whole Kingdome and common wealth, and the least motion of greefe that toucheth her, concerneth the whole state ingenerall; by reason that her Highnesse is the most louing Mother and Nurse of all her good Subiectes, and is lykewise the husband of the common weale, maried to the Realme, and the same by ceremony of Ring as solemnly signified, as any other mariage.
            Can we then that are her Maiesties chyldren, her true and faithfull subiectes endure to see our mother wronged, her authoritie defamed, her lyfe endaungered: and shall we not thinke the same concerneth vs? Can we see proud reprobates seeke to seuer the knot of loue and agreement, which hath beene iustly and lawfully vnited betweene her and vs, to yeelde our liues in slauerie and seruitude to an vsurping tyrant: and shall not the breach of this bonde of sacred wedlocke, mooue vs to regard how highly it harmeth vs? Nature causeth the chylde to worke all policies he may for his Mothers defence, and the estimation of that holy league of loue, is of force to compell the faithfull, to maintaine and continue it.
            The case then touching vs so neerelie as it dooth, The eare of the Princes safetie concerneth the verie meanest Subiect, much more the Magistrate, to whome she hath giuen office of honour. the verie meanest subiect is bound for his Princes defence, much more they whome God hath called to office of Magistracie and bearing rule: their care ought to be both night and daye, how to set downe

good lawes and orders, to be vigilant and carefull in dilligent search and enquirie, to bring such stubborne and gracelesse men to open lyght, who spurne at her Maiestie, that hath put the Sworde in your handes of honour and authoritie, and trying theyr deedes to be contrarie to the duetie of good Subiectes, to let them be soone cutte off by the sword of Iustice.
            And if I maye (without offence) speake one word to your Honour and VVorshippes, not by waye of teaching, but for vnlading some part of the burden of true loue I beare to my Countrie: I would desire you to haue an especiall eye to the Cittie of London, for it is a receptacle to many of these bad people, and many fauourers & freends they haue in the Cittie, who bearing the countenaunce of good and honest Subiectes, are neuerthelesse but hollowe hearted, and giue aide and releefe to such as seeke the ruine of the whole state.
            Your Honour and VVorships shall notablie witnesse the loue you beare to God and his Church, and the zeale, affection and duetie you owe to her Maiestie: in being respectiue to this especiall cause, for it is high tyme, the enimies are nowe growne so bolde and full of mischeefe, as if such as are in authority doo not laye too theyr helping handes to represse them, they will in tyme beso wylde, as they will be past bridleling.
            This shall be therefore my last request vnto you, that the premisses considered, the effect may be put in execution: and when you haue perused this smal

worke, I doubt not but you will thinke my request honest and lawfull, and expedient to be redressed to the vttermost of your powers. Thus wishing prosperous successe to all you goe about, that may set foorth Gods glory, and be to her Maiesties defence from her enimies: I humbly take my leaue.
            
               Your Honours and Worships well-willer.
A. M.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A VVatch-vvoord to England.
            
               
                  THE state of this Realme considered, and specially such accidentes touching the same, as late troubles haue ministred, doo make it dailie more and more euident, how precious and how déere a Iewell is the safety of the Quéenes The safetie of her Maiestie, a thing most pretious to all good Subiectes. most excellent Maiestie, our most louing and beloued Soueraigne Ladie. Compare the time of her most noble and gratious gouernment, with the times and ages long since past and gone, and especiallie with the miserable and dangerous daies, immediatlie precéeding her most happie, princelie and comfortable raigne: call to mind the weaknes and perils wherin the common weale stoode, before the comming of her highnes to the Crowne: weigh the infinite benefites, bothe bodilie and ghostlie that the whole Realme hath, and all her Subiects both haue had, and doo enioy by her meanes: thinke vpon the gréeuous and vnspeakable miseries, that we all shall be like to sustaine by the losse of her vnualuable presence. It shalbe plaine, that he is wilfullie blind that cannot sée: he is wickedlie malicious that will not acknowledge: he is obstinatelie stone harted, that wil not with sorrowe and trembling déepelie imprint in carefull

hart, those motions and thoughts, that such consideration shall lay before him. Remember the quiet of conscience, the comfort of true seruing of GOD, the fréedome of the The Queens Maiesties gouernement, ought with heedefull care to be considered. Realme, the deliuerance of soules from foreine thraldom, the escape of the heauie yoake of straunge Dominion, the recouerie of wealth, the benefit of peace, the common and equall distribution of Iustice, the familiar cherishing of Nobilitie, the good preseruing and loue of the Commonaltie, the mutuall and tender kindnes at home, the amitie and awe abroade, the swéete enioying of all these happie commodities: match héerewith the danger and feare of loosing them, how can it then be, but that the minde shalbe meruailouslie distracted? Great and full of diuersities are the fittes of a passioned Louer: but yet greatest where reason rulest least. Farre greater to a good minde must be the panges of consideration in this case: but yet greatest where reason ruleth most. The sillie Louer is transported (as they complaine poore soules in their ditties) sometime with ioy of his enioying, sometime with feare of his foregoing, there is no meane or order of his excessiue affection: and all is because the abused creature hath set his felicity in a wrong conceite. But if such vaine, short, repentable, and féeble delight of fancie, haue such force vpon the minde of man: howe much more ought the déepe, wise, naturall, and true impression of the eternall comfort of the soule, the good and safe estate, both of the common weale, and of the priuate hauiour of himselfe, and of those thinges and persons that he holdeth dearest, yea, and of his posteritie for euer, worke more mighty, violent, & continuall effects in the mind of an honest good man, that setteth his thoughtes vpon iust and assured groundes? All these contemplations cannot but fill a good Christians, and a good Subiects eie with sight and knowledge, how vnestimable a treasure our noble and vertuous Quéene Elizabeth is to the Realme of England, and the same cannot but The Queens Maiestie, a Iuell of most high estimation, to the Realme of England. Res est solliciti plena timoris amor.
                pierce his heart with strong feare & care for her preseruation, so farre as surely it were able (as in the dumbe borne

sonne of Cresus) breake the stringes of a tyed tongue, to drawe spéeche out of the most barbarous and rudest Subiect: to crie out at her Highnesse peryll, and with such noyse as he is able to make, though it were but as a Goose of the Capitole, to giue warning to the watchmen of the Tower of our safetie. This hath mooued me to forget how vnskylfull and how vnapt I am, to treate of matters so farre aboue me: and only to remember, how méet it is for all men to thinke of those things that touch them so néerely, & when they haue from point to point made due examination of them, to ring out the larum bell of good councell to their Country, or giue them some watch-word of passed perils, wherby they may the better preuent imminent extremities: wherein they may both manifest the care they haue of theyr Princes safetie, as also the vnfeined affection they beare to theyr Countrie. It hath béene, and yet remayneth extant to be séene, the many and sundrie disordered attemptes, which haue threatned daunger to her Maiesties most royall person, and perill to the whole state ingenerall, whereby many good mindes haue béene greatlie discomforted, and those bad spirites, which haue thirsted and laboured in these vnduetifull actions, haue béene encouraged to runne on in their disloyall determinations. A thing much to be lamented, that in the Sun-shine of so many happy blessinges, whereof this Realme (so long The Realme of England neuer so long tyme together, more godly and quietly gouerned. time together) neuer héeretofore tasted, such wicked and malitious natures should bréede amongst vs, both to ouerthrowe our selues, and the quietnesse of a number well affected. It is good for such wilfull heads to take héede in time, and that the ouerthrowe of such seditious practises (wherewith this Realme from time to time hath béen too much troubled) may remaine for a warning to them: and in middest of their secret confederacies to remember this, that to exalt their hearts against Gods annointed, is the verie ready way to bring themselues to confusion. The onely roote and originall of such vnnaturall humours in men, is Treason, which of all other things is most odious

in the sight of God, and amongst men hath least prosperous successe: for proofe whereof, and because this Watch-word may the more déepelie enter the thoughts and cogitations of them, to whose handes it shall happen, it shall not be much amisse for mée to make repetition of former tretcherous practises, and withall to declare their end and successe, which happilie may cause some men to alter their bad affections, and séeing the accidentes that hath héeretofore chaunced in their owne Countrie, they may forsake those contrarie natures whereby they are gouerned, and so in time shew themselues more vehement in duetie.
            
               In the raigne of King Richard the first.
               
               THere was one William Fitz Osbert a Cittizen of London, 
                  William Fitz Osbert got him a trayterous cō
                     pany, and rebelled against the King. 1196. a man but of poore and meane degrée, yet endued with a quicke witte and an eloquent tongue (as many of these secrete perswaders are) he perswaded the people to séeke liberty and fréedome, and so prouided himselfe of two and fiftie thousand Londoners to rise against the King. And to maintaine his traiterous enterprise, he tooke the Stéeple of Bowe Church in Chepe, and fortified it with Munition and victualles: but in the end the Church was assaulted by the Cittizens, and William with his Complices were taken, and so brought to the Archbishoppe in the Tower, where he was condemned, & by the héeles drawne from thence to a place called the Elmes, where he was hanged with nine of his fellowes.
            
            
               In the raigne of King Henry the thirde.
               
               KIng Henrie the third lying at UUoodstocke, a Scholler A Scholler of Oxford attempted to kyll the King. 1239. of Oxforde fayning himselfe mad, enterprised to haue

slaine the King in his Chamber: but he was taken, and after long imprisonment, was torne in péeces with horsses at Couentrie.
               
            
            
               In the raigne of King Edward the second.
               
               THere was one Iohn Poydras, a Tanners sonne of Excester, who in diuers places of England named himselfe Iohn Poydras, a Tanners sonne of Excester, claimed to be King. 1316. the Sonne of King Edward the first, and saide, that by a false Nurse he was stollen foorth of his Cradle, and Edward that then was King put in his place: but shortly after he was conuict of his vntrueth, when he confessed, that he did it by the motion of a familiar spirite, which he had in his house in the likenesse of a Catte, whome he had serued for thrée yéeres (as all Traitours els forget God, and serue the deuill) but for this his seruice, he was not long after hanged at North-hampton.
               
               
                  Edward de Bruis the King of Scottes Brother, who for Edward de Bruis for vniustly crow ning himselfe King of Ireland, was beheaded. 1317. the space of thrée yéeres had assaulted Ireland, and vniustly vsurping the King of Englands title, crowned himself King thereof: was at length taken by the King of Englands subiectes, and was beheaded at Dundalke.
               
               The Towne of Bervvicke was betrayed to the Scots, They that betraied the Towne of Berwick, were hanged for theyr labour. 1317. through the Treason of Peter Spalding, and other English men: whome the King of Scottes (in reward of their tretcherie) caused to be hanged, for being Traitours to their owne Countrie.
               
                  Thomas Earle of Lancaster, hauing prouided himselfe of a great number of his confederacie, rebelled against Thomas Earle of Lancaster beheaded, for rebelling against the King: and many of his confederates executed. 1321. King Edward the second, wherevppon the King pursued the Rebelles, and at Borowbridge the saide Earle of Lancaster, with Lordes, Knightes and other, to the number of thrée score and fiue were taken. All these were condemned by the iudgement of Andrew Herkeley Earle of Carlile, and on the two and twentie of March following, Thomas
                  
Earle of Lancaster was beheaded, and Warin de Lile, William Tochet, Thomas Manduit, Henrie Bradbourne, William Fitzwilliam the younger, and William de Cheyney Barons, were hanged and quartered at Pomfret. Iohn Mowbray, Roger Clifford, and Goceline Deynvile, were drawne and quartered at Yorke. Bartholmew Badlesmere at Canterburie. Henrie de Mountfort, and Henrie Willington at Bristow. Iohn Clifford and Roger Elinbrough at Glocester. William Kerdife and Henrie Chies at London. Frances de Aldham at VVindsore. Thomas Culpeper at VVinchelsea. The rest of their complices were bestowed in diuers prisons.
               
                  Andrew Herkeley Earle of Carlile, vnder colour of Andrew Herkeley Earle of Carlile hanged and quartered. 1322. peace, feigned a mariage, which by the King & his Nobles was reputed for Treason: wherevpon he was apprehended by his trustie fréend Sir Anthonie de Lucy, and afterward was disgraded of the Earledome, by the taking the swoord from him, and cutting off his spurres, then was he hanged and quartred at Carlile, his head being sent to London, and his quarters to foure partes of the land.
               
                  Hugh Spencer the elder, and Hugh Spencer his sonne, The two Spencers very trouble some traytors to the Realme: in the ende had theyr iust deserts. 1326. were verie troublesome persons to the Realme, and caused many seditious treasons to arise daily: but the Father was taken at Bristowe, where he was drawne to the Gallowes in his Armour, and so hanged, then was he taken downe and beheaded, and his body hanged vp againe, and after foure daies his body was cutte in péeces, and cast to the Dogges to be eaten, but his head was sent to Winchester. Hugh Spencer his sonne was brought to Hereforde, where he was condemned without aunswere, and was drawne and hanged vpon a paire of Gallowes thirtie foote hie, and afterward was headed and quartered. Simon Reading and Robert Baldocke, Bishoppe of Norvvich, and the Kinges Chauncelour, who were pertakers with them in their traiterous rebellions: the saide Simon Reading was drawne and hanged on the same Gallowes, but ten foote lower, and Robert Baldocke died in Newgate with

many tormentes. And many of their confederates were executed in other places, so that but fewe of them escaped without punishment.
            
            
               In the raygne of King Edward the thirde.
               
               
                  ROger Mortimer, for consenting to the murthering of Roger Mortimer, and others executed, for consenting to the murdering of the Kings Father. 1330. the Kings Father, and many other notorious treasons, was condemned at VVestminster in the presence of the whole Parliament, and afterward was drawne to the Elmes and hanged on the common Gallowes, where he hanged two dayes and two nightes by the Kinges commaundement: there were hanged with him, Sir Simon de Burford Knight, Sir William Burford that was Iustice, and Iohn Deuerel Esquier, who was desirous to haue made open confession of the Kinges Fathers cruell death, but he could not be suffered.
               The Londoners sought to kill Iohn of Gaunt the Kings The Mayor and Aldermen of London deposed, because the Londoners sought to kyll the Kinges Sonne. 1377. Sonne, Duke of Lancaster, for a word which he had spoken against their Bishoppe: wherevpon the King deposed the Mayor and Aldermen of London, and appointed other in their places, and Sir Iohn Minsterwoorth Knight, with others, were drawne and hanged for the same.
            
            
               In the raigne of King Richard the seconde.
               
               BY the wicked perswasions of Iohn Ball a seditious The Commons of Kent & Essex, rebelled against the King, theyr Captaines being Iacke Strawe and Watte Tyler. 1381. Préest, the Commons of Kent and Essex rebelled against the King, chusing for their Captaines in their rebellion, Watte Tiler and Iacke Strawe. They came to Blacke Heath, and so on to London, and entred the Cittie on Corpus Christi day, where they destroyed many goodly places of the Nobles and others, as the Sauoy, Saint Iohns
                  
by Smithféeld, the Manour of Highburie by Yseldon, and the Temple, where the Prentises of the Lawe were lodged for the increase of their Studie. They tooke out of the Tower of London (where the King was then lodged) Simon Sudburie Archbishop of Canterburie, Lord Chauncelour of England, Robert Halles Priour of Saint Iohns, and Treasorer of England, William Apelton a Frier Minor the Kinges Confessour, and Iohn Legge a Seriant of the Kinges, and beheaded them all on the Tower Hyll. They beheaded diuers other in many places, as Sir Iohn Cauendishe Lord chéefe Iustice of England, the Priour of S. Edmundes-burie, and other. Richard Lions a famous Lapidary of London, was drawne out of his house, and beheaded in Chepe. They beheaded all men of Lawe, as well Prentises and vtter Barresters, as Iustices and all Iurers that they might get into their hands. They spared none whome they thought to be learned, were it neuer so lyttle, especiallie if they found any to haue pen and inke, they pulled off his hoode, and cried out all with one voice, hale him into the stréetes, and cut off his head. The King to pacifie their The King offereth the rebelles peace, furie offered them peace, on condition they would cease from burning of houses and slaughter of men, which the Essex men tooke, and returned home, but the Kentish men remained burning and killing styll, as before. Wherevpon the King sendeth Sir Iohn Newton Knight to Wat Tiler their Captaine, to intreate him to come talke with him about The King sent to Wat Tyler. his owne demaundes: the Knight hauing doone his message, Wat Tiler mallepartlie aunswered, that he would come at his owne pleasure, neuerthelesse, he followed softlie after the Knight, and when he came néere Smithféeld, where the King tarried his comming, the same Knight was sent againe to méet him, and vnderstand his requests. Wat Tiler séeing the Knight come néere vnto him on horse backe, proudlie saide, it had become him better to be on Note the pride of a traytour. foote in his presence: the Knight aunswered, that it was no harme, sith himselfe was also on horsebacke, therewith Wat Tiler drew his Dagger, and offering to strike, called

the Knight Traiteur, wherevpon the Knight drew his dagger too, and aunswered him that he lyed. The King séeing the Knight in daunger, commaunded him to alight on foote, and to deliuer his Dagger to Watte Tyler, whose proude minde would not be so pacified, but would néedes run on the Knight: wherevppon there came to the King William Walwoorth the Mayor of London, and many other Knightes and Esquiers, who affirmed that it would be a shamefull reproch, if they should suffer the Knight to be murdred. At last the King commaunded the Mayor to arrest the Rebell, which Mayor being a man of verie valiaunt Wat Tyler arrested by the Mayor of London, and afterward slaine. courage, arrested Wat Tyler on the head with such a mighty stroke, as he caused him to fall downe greatly astonied, then a number more enuironed the Rebell round about, and gaue him so many woundes, as he had no life left in him, &c. Iacke Strawe being likewise taken, when at London he should lose his head, by the iudgement of the Maior, confessed as followeth.
               The same time (sayth he) that we came to Black Heath, The confession of Iacke Strawe. when we sent for the King, we purposed to haue murdred all Knightes, Esquiers, and Gentlemen that should haue come with him, and to haue led the King (royallie vsed) vp and downe, that with the sight of him, all men (especiallie the common people) might haue come vnto vs the more boldlie. And when we had prouided our selues of a sufficient multitude, we would haue suddenlie put to death in euerie Countrie, the Lordes and Maisters of the common people, in whome might appeare to be eyther councell or resistaunce against vs. And speciallie we would haue kylled the Knightes of Saint Iohns, lastlie, we would haue kylled the King himselfe, and all men that had béene of any possession, Bishoppes, Monkes, Chanons, Parsons: to be bréefe, we would haue dispatched all such, onelie begging Friers should haue liued, that might haue suffised for ministring the Sacraments through the whole Realme. And we would haue made Kings at our pleasure, as Wat Tiler in Kent, and in euerie Shiere one: but because this our

purpose was hindred by the Archbishoppe, we studied how we might shortlie bring him to his ende. Against the same daye that Watte Tyler was kylled, we purposed that euening (because the poore people of London séemed to fauour vs) to sette fire in foure corners of the Cittie, so to haue burnt it, and to haue deuided the ritches at our pleasure amongst vs. He added, that these thinges they purposed to haue doone, as God should helpe him at the ende of his life. After this his confession, he was beheaded, and his head set on London Bridge, by Watte Tylers, and many other.
               When these Rebelles burned the Sauoy, one of them One of the Rebelles cast into the fire by his fellowes. tooke a goodlie Siluer péece, and hid it in his bosome, but an other had spied him, and tolde his fellowes, who hurled him and the péece of Plate together into the fire.
               Two and thirtie of them entring the Seller of the Sauoy, 
                  Two and thirtie of the Rebelles mured vp in a Seller. drunke so much of swéete wines, that they were not able to come out againe, but were shutte in with wood and stones that mured vp the doore: they called and cried seuen dayes after, and were heard of many, but none came to helpe them, so they died there.
               After a number had sacked the new Temple, what with labour and excéeding drinking of white Wine, they laye The Rebelles murder one an other. downe vnder the walles and houses, and were slaine lyke Swine: hatred and contention so arose amongst them, as they cruellie murdered one an other, and others also made quicke dispatch of them, thus the iust iudgement of GOD brought the Traytors to their deserued end.
               
                  Iohn Ball Priest, who encouraged these traytors in their Iohn Ball Priest, the comforter of the Rebelles, hanged 1382. rebellion, was brought to Saint Albones, and there before the King was hanged and quartered: he would not aske the King forgiuenesse (as all traytors doo the like) but vtterlie despised him.
               The principall leaders of the Commons in rebellion, were Wat Tyler, Iack Strawe, Iohn Kirkbie, Allen Threder, 
                  The names of the Rebelles that would haue made themselues Kinges. 
                  Thomas Scot, and Ralphe Rugge: these with other were leaders of the Kentishe and Essex men. At Mildenhall and Burie in Suffolke, was Robert Westbrome, that made

himselfe King, and was most famous after Iohn Wraw: who being Priest would not set crowne vpon crowne, but left the name and crowne to the saide Robert.
               
               At Norvvich, Iohn Leicester a Dyer, exercised the name and power of a King: tyll he was taken and hanged for his paines, and so were most of them in many places.
               
                  Iohn Wraw, who was leader of them that rose at Mildenhall 
                  Iohn Wrawe one of the leaders of Rebels, hanged. 1383. and Burie, was drawne and hanged, though many thought he should haue béene redéemed with money.
            
            
               In the raigne of King Henry the fourth.
               
               KIng Henrie the fourth enioying the Crowne of England, and kéeping his Christmasse in his Castell at The Noble men rebelled against King Henrie the fourth, and priuilie conspired to murder him. 1399. 
                  Windsore, Iohn Holland late Duke of Excester and Earle of Huntington, Thomas late Duke of Surrie and Earle of Kent, Edward late Duke of Aumerle and Earle of Rutland, sonne to the Duke of Yorke, Iohn Montacute Earle of Salisburie, Thomas Spencer Earle of Glocester, Sir Ralphe Lumley, Sir Thomas Blunt, Sir Benedic Cely Knights, with other that ioyned with them, conspired against King Henrie, and appointed priuilie to murder him, vnder the couller of Iusting and other Pastimes pretended. But the King vnderstanding of theyr pretence by the Mayor of London, left VVindsore, and came in his company to London, so that they missed of him when they came to VVindsore, where they entred the Castell with foure hundred men. When they sawe how they were deceyued, they came to Sunning, where the Quéen that was wife to King Richard deposed lay, where they perswaded the houshold, that King Richard, who before was deposed from his aucthoritie, and kept prisoner in Pomfret Castel, was as then escaped out of prison, and they would goe to him. From thence they went to Wallingford, afterward to Abington, warning the people to take

Armes vppon them, and to goe méete their olde King Richard. Then they came to Circester, where they bruted that King Richard was in company with them, and to make their words of the better credite, they had gotten a Chaplaine of King Richards called Madeleine, so like him in all proportion and fauour, as the one could hardlie he knowne from the other. This Chaplaine they had put in The people of the Towne fought against the Rebelles, and tooke the cheefest of them, and beheaded them. Armour, with a Crowne on his Helmette, that all men might take him for King Richard: but the people of the Towne remembring their duetie to their Prince, mislyked of their procéedings, wherevpon they fought against them, and at length tooke the chéefest of them, and led them to the Abbay there, where they put them in a fayre chamber vnder safe custodie. Then the Lordes séeing the people so vehement in duetie to their King, stoode in great feare, and imagined by what meanes they might escape foorth of their handes, so they caused some of their seruauntes to set fire on certaine houses in the Towne, thinking the people would haue such regard to slake the fire, as they would be glad to forsake them: but it chaunced farre contrarie, for the people then increased more and more in rage against them, and drew them by violence into the Market place, where they beheaded the Duke of Excester and the Earle of Salisburie, and six and twentie of their attendants were led to Oxforde, where they were beheaded in the Castell, also Sir Thomas Blunt Knight was beheaded with them. The wéeke next following, Thomas Spencer Earle of Glocester was beheaded at Bristowe, and at the same tyme, Iohn Holland Earle of Huntington, and brother to King Richard on the Mothers side, was beheaded at Plashie in Essex, and at London was beheaded Sir Barnard Brocas, Iohn Madeleine the Priest that was so like King Richard, and an other Priest called VVilliam Feribe, and thus the traytors sped for rebelling against their King.
               There was found in the Kinges bedde cloathes, an yron with thrée sharpe pikes, slender and round standing vpright, King Henrie escapeth a great daunger. 1401. layde there by some traytour, that when the King

should haue layde him downe, he might haue thrust himselfe vppon them: but by Gods assistaunce he escaped that trayterous deuise.
               A Priest of VVarwicke, who conspired against King A Priest, a Prior, and a Doctor of Diuinitie being a Gray Frier, were all executed for treason. 1403. 
                  Henrie, was drawne, hanged, and quartered. Also VValter VValdocke Priour of Laude in Leicester sheyre, for trayterous spéeches against the King, was hanged and headed. Moreouer, one Richard Friseby, Doctour of Diuinitie, auouched, that in the quarrell of King Richard, (who was deposed for his euill gouernement, and was likewise dead) he would fight against any man, euen to the death: for which traiterous wordes, he was condemned, drawne and hanged in his religious habite and wéede. And not long after Sir Roger Claringdon Knight, with him an Esquier and a Yeoman were beheaded, and eight Gray Friers hanged and headed at London, and two at Leicester, all of them executed for trayterous wordes against the King.
               
                  Thomas Percy Earle of Worcester, Sir Richard Vernon, 
                  The Earle of Worcester, Sir Richard Vernon, and the Baron of Kindertō beheaded, for rebelling against the king. 1404. the Baron of Kinderton, with diuers other rebellious persons, put themselues in Armes against the King, néere vnto Shrewesburie, in a place called Olde Feeld, alias Bull Feeld: but the Earle of vvorcester, the Baron of Kinderton, and Sir Richard Vernon, were taken and beheaded at Shrewesburie.
               
               
                  Henrie Percie Earle of Northumberland, Richard Scrope Archbishop of Yorke, Thomas Mowbray Earle Marshall, Thomas Lord Bardolphe and other, conspired against the King, and caused the Cittizens of Yorke to take part The Archbishop of Yorke, and the Earle Marshall beheaded, for rebelling against the King. 1406. with them in their rebellion: but the Kinges power following them, forced the Earle of Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolphe to take their flight into Scotland, but the Archbishop of Yorke and the Earle Marshall were taken, and beheaded at Yorke.
               
               A Squire of VVales named Rice ap Dee, who had A Welch Rebell executed. 1412. long tyme rebelled against the King, was brought to London, and there was drawne, hanged and quartered.
            
            
               
               In the raigne of King Henrie the fift.
               
               THe King kéeping his Christmasse at his Manour of Eltham 
                  A secrete conspiracie against the King, according as it is set downe by I. Stowe. seuen miles from London, was giuen to vnderstand that certaine had conspired against him, eyther to haue taken, or suddenlie haue slaine him and his brethren on Twelfth day at night: wherevpon the King sent word to the Mayor of London, that he should arrest all suspicious persons. The Maior foorthwith caused euery Alderman in his Warde to kéepe great watch, and about ten of the clock at night went himselfe with a strong power, to the signe of the Axe without Bishops gate, where he apprehended the man of the house, named Iohn Burgate Carpenter, and seuen other, and sent them to Eltham: where they confessed before the King, that they were confederat with Sir Iohn Oldcastel, to fight against him and his Lords in S. Gyles Féeld aboue Holbourne. On the morrowe after Twelfth day, the King remooued priuilie to UUestminster, and with King Henrie kept the Feeld by Saint Giles aboue Holbourne. a great Armie kept the Féeld by Saint Gyles, for he was warned that Sir Iohn Oldcastell, and Sir Roger Acton, would be in the same Féeld on the next daye following, with fiue & twentie thousand people: and the same night were taken more then foure score men in Armour of the same faction. Also the King being tolde of an Ambushment in Harengay Parke, sent thither certaine Lordes, who tooke many of them: among whome was one VVilliam Murle, a ritch Mault man or Brewer of Dunstable, who had his two horsses trapped with golde following him, and a payre of gylt Spurres in his bosome, for he thought to haue béene made Knight on the morrowe. The twelfth day of Ianuarie, thrée score and nine of them were condemned of treason at VVestminster, and on the morrowe after, seuen and thirtie of them were drawne from the Tower of London to Newgate, and so to Saint Gyles, and

there in a place called Fickettes féeld, were all hanged, Many of the Rebelles hanged & burnt in Fickets feeld, and others executed soone after, for the same offence. 1414. and seuen of them burnt gallowes and all. The ninetenth day of Ianuarie were drawne and hanged Sir Iohn Beuerley Priest, Iohn Burgate Carpenter, a text writer in Saint Iohns stréete, and a Glouer on London Bridge, and shortlie after Sir Roger Acton Knight was taken, who on the tenth of Februarie was drawne, hanged and buried vnder the gallowes.
               On the last of Iulie was discouered a great conspiracie against the King by thrée Lordes, in whome aboue all the Three Noble men, whome the King best trusted and made great account of, conspyred his death. 1416. rest he reposed greatest trust and confidence: the chéefest of them was Henrie Scrope Lord Treasorer, the second was Richard Earle of Cambridge, brother to Edwarde Duke of Yorke, and the third was Sir Thomas Grey a Knight of the North. These thrée had caused Edmund Earle of March to sweare vppon a Booke, not to disclose their councell, and then they tolde him, that they intended to kyll the King, and to make the saide Edmund King, the which if he refused to take vpon him, they would likewise kyll him. The Earle prayed them to giue him one houres space, to take aduisement what he were best to doo, which being graunted him, the Earle went secretlie and told the King thereof, who caused them foorthwith to be apprehended and brought before him, where they confessed the treason: for the which, on the sixt of August they were arreigned in the Kinges presence, and the same day all thrée beheaded. The Earle was buried head and all: but the other two headdes were sent the one to Yorke, and the other to New Castell vpon Tine to be set vp.
               
                  Iohn Bennet Woolman, who had scattered about London 
                  Iohn Bennet, executed for scattering seditious Lybelles in London. 1417. diuers Scedules full of sedition, was drawne, hanged, and beheaded on Michaelmas daye: and the eight daye of October, a Parchment-maker of Trylmell stréete, was drawne, hanged and headed, for harbouring Sir Iohn Oldcastell, contrarie to the Kinges commaundement.
            
            
               
               In the raigne of King Henrie the sixt.
               
               AT Abington were gathered together a great many William Mandeuill, Captaine of a lewde company of rebellious persons at Abingtō, executed there, and others of his company in diuers other places. 1433. of lewde and rebellious persons, who sought to make a great vprore in the Realme: but the Lord Protector rode thether with his company, and arrested there the Bayliffe of the Towne, named William Mandeuill a Weauer, who was appointed for their Captaine, and he had named himselfe Iacke Sharpe of Wigmers Lande in Wales. When he was examined, he confessed that he meant to haue doone many mischéefes, especiallie against Priests, so that he would haue made their heads as cheape as Shéepes heads, that is to saye, thrée for a penny, or as some write ten for a penny: he was drawne, hanged, and headed at Abington, and his head was sent to London and set on the Bridge, the rest of his company were executed in diuers other places, for example to other.
               The thirtéenth day of Iulie following, one Richard Russell 
                  Richard Russell executed. Wooll-man, was drawne, hanged, and quartered: for that he would haue made Dukes and Carles at his owne pleasure.
               
                  Roger Bolingbrooke a great Astronomer, with Thomas Southwell a Chanon of Saint Stephens Chappell at Conspiratours of the Kings death by Necromancy. 
                  VVestminster, were taken as conspiratours of the Kinges death: for it was saide, that the same Roger should labour to consume the Kinges person by waye of Necromancie, and the saide Thomas should say Masses in the Lodge of Harnesey Parke beside London, vppon certaine Instruments, with the which the saide Roger should vse his craft of Necromancie against the Faith, and was assenting to the saide Roger in all his workes. And the fiue and twentie day of Iulie being Sunday, Roger Bolingbrooke with all his Instruments of Necromancie, that is to say, a painted Chayre wherein he was wunt to sit, vpon the fowre

corners of which Chayre stoode fowre swordes, and vpon euerie sworde an Image of Copper hanging, with many other Instrumentes beside: he stoode on a high Scaffolde before Paules Crosse, holding a sworde in his right hand, and a Scepter in his left, arrayed in a meruailous strange attire, and after the Sermon was doone, by Maister Lawe Bishoppe of Rochester, he abiured all Articles belonging to the Arte of Necromancie, or against the Faith. Afterward, these two were condemned of Treason, Thomas South well died in the Tower of London, but Roger Bolingbrooke 
                  Roger Bolingbrook executed. 1442. was drawne from the Tower to Tiborne, and there hanged and quartered.
               
                  Iohn Dauid seruaunt to William Catur, an Armorer A Combate betweene a Maister and his seruaunt, who appeached him of treason. 1447. dwelling in Saint Dunstones Parishe in Fléetstréete, appeached his Maister of Treason: and a day being assigned for them to fight a Combate together in Smithféeld, the Maister was there slaine by his saide seruaunt.
               The Duke of Glocester being arrested by the Lord Beaumont 
                  The Duke of Glocester arrested, died soone after, but fiue of his men were hanged, and after pardoned. 1448. high Cōstable, the Duke of Buckingham, & the Duke of Sommerset, & other, for speciall matters, within few daies after he died with sorrow: but two & thirty of his principal seruauntes being sent to diuers prisons, fiue of them were arraigned and condemned at London, whose names were Sir Roger Chamberlain Knight, Middleton, Herbert, and Arteyse Esquiers, and Richard Nedham Gentleman, all which fiue were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and there hanged, but they were let downe quicklie, stript naked, marked with a knife to be quartred, and then a charter was shewed them for their liues: but the Yeoman of the Crowne had their liuelode, and the hangman had their cloathes.
               
                  Thomas Thany, otherwise called Blew beard a Fuller, Blew beard hanged for raising rebellion. 1450. was taken beside Canterburie for raysing a rebellion: who afterward was hanged and quartered.
               The Commons of Kent arose against the King, hauing to their Captaine Iacke Cade who named himselfe Mortimer, 
                  The Commons of Kent rebelled, Iacke Cade being their Captaine. 1451. Couzin to the Duke of Yorke, and of some he was

called Iohn Amend all: this Captaine and his company came to Blacke Heath, and there kept the Féeld more then a moneth, pilling and spoyling the Countrie round about. At length the Kinges Proclamation going abroad against the Rebelles, Iacke Cade was taken by a Gentleman of Kent named Alexander Eden, in a Garden in Sussex, there was he slaine at Hothféeld, afterward brought in a Cart to London, where he was quartered, his head set on London Bridge, and his quarters sent to diuers places in Kent: eight men were executed at Canterburie for the same offence, and in other Townes of Kent and Sussex was doone the lyke execution.
            
            
               In the raygne of King Edward the fourth.
               
               
                  WAlter Walker, a Grocer that dwelt in Chepe, for Walter Walker beheaded for wordes against the King. 1461. certaine wordes that he spake touching King Edward, was beheaded in Smithféeld on the twelfth day of March.
               
                  Nicholas Faunt Mayor of Canterburie, Spicing, Quintin and other, were hanged and headed at Canterburie, for rebelling The Mayor of Canterbury and other executed for rebellion. against King Edward: the heads of Spicing and Quintin were set on Algate of London.
               
               
                  Thomas the Bastard Faulconbridge, who tooke parte The Bastarde Faulconbridge lost his head. 1472. with the Rebelles in Kent against the King, was taken at Southhampton, and was beheaded at the Castell of Mildeham in Yorkeshiere, his head was sent to London, and there set on the Bridge.
               
                  Thomas Burdet an Esquier of Warwickeshiere, sonne to Sir Nicholas Burdet, for speaking of Treasonable Thomas Burdet beheaded for treason. 1478. wordes against the King: was condemned of Treason, drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and there beheaded.
            
            
               
               In the raigne of King Edward the fift.
               
               TO set downe the troublesome accidentes happening in this Kinges raigne, would require a verie large discourse, & growe to greater quantitie then the scope that I haue intended: beside, for that troubles did still follow one in an others necke, both in his life time, as also after his death, by reason he left two Sonnes, who were so young in yéeres, as they could not take the gouernment vpon them, I will therefore referre you to the Chronicles, which at large will certifie you of that, which I am loth héere to rehearse: yet it shall not be a misse to report vnto you, howe the King lying on his death bedde, desired to pacifie and set in good agréement, those that had long time béene heauie enimies, especiallie the Lord Marques Dorset, the Quéens The Lord Marques Dorset, and the Lord Hastings, great enimies. Sonne by her first Husband, and William the Lorde Hastinges, a Noble man then Lord Chamberlaine: and for his Highnesse would gladlie sée all enmitie ceased before he died, he called them into his Chamber, when lyfting himselfe vp, and being vp helde with pillowes, he vttered to them a woorthy Oration, which Oration, for that it sheweth notable examples to vnsteadie and wilfull heads, and deliuereth good councell to all ingenerall, I haue béene so bolde to insert it héere, to shew the Princelie aduise of so noble a King, as also to giue some light of the troubles in those dayes.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           The Oration of the King, which he spake lying on his death bedde.
                           MY Lordes, my déere Kinsemen & alyes, in what plight I lie you sée, and I féele, by which the lesse while I looke to liue with you, the more déepelie am I mooued to Note the care of a Prince for his Countrie. care in what case I leaue you: for such as I leaue you, such

be my children like to finde you. Which if they should (as God forbid) finde you at variaunce, might hap to fall themselues at warre, ere their discretion would serue to set you at peace. Ye sée their youth, of which I recken the onelie suretie to rest in your concorde, for it suffiseth not that all you loue them, if eche of you hate other: if they were men, your faithfulnesse happilie would suffise, but childehoodde must be maintained by mens aucthoritie, and slipper youth vnder-propped with elder councell, which neither they can haue, but ye giue it, nor ye giue it, if ye grée not. For where eche laboureth to breake that the other maketh, and for hatred of eche others person, impugneth eche others councell: there must it néeds be long ere any good conclusion goe forward. And also while either partie laboureth to be chéefe, The daunger where flattery is more esteemed, then true and faithful dealing. flatterie shall haue more place then plaine and faithfull aduise, of which must néedes ensue the euill bringing vp of the Prince, whose minde in tender youth infected, shall readilie fal to mischéefe & riot, and draw downe with his noble Realme to ruine: but if Grace turne him to wisedome, which if God send, then they that by euill meanes before pleased him best, shall after fall furthest out of fauour, so that euer at length euill driftes drawe to naught, and good A speciall note for all traitours. plaine waies prosper. Great variaunce hath there long béene betwéene you, not alway for great causes: sometime a thing right well intended, our misse construction turneth vnto wurse, or a small displeasure doone vs, either our own affectiō, or euill tongues agréeueth: but this I wot well, ye neuer had so great cause of hatred, as ye haue of loue. That we be all men, that we be Christian men, this shall I leaue for Preachers to tell ye: and yet I wot nere, whether any Preachers wordes ought more to mooue ye, then his that is by and by going to the place that they all preach of. But this shall I desire you to remember, that the one part of you is of my blood, the other of my alyes, and eche of you with other either of kindred or affinitie, which Spirituall kindred of affinitie (if the Sacraments of Christes Church beare that weight with vs, as would God they did) should

no lesse mooue vs to charitie, then the respect of fleshly consanguinitie. Our Lord forbid, that you loue together the wurse, for the selfe cause you ought to loue the better: and yet it happeneth, and no where finde we so deadlie debate, as among them, who by nature and lawe ought most to agrée together.
                           Such a pestilent Serpent is ambition, and desire of Ambition a pestilent and deadly Serpent, whose infection where he commeth, turneth all to mischeefe. vaineglorie and soueraigntie, which among States where he once entreth, créepeth so farre foorth, till with deuision and variaunce he turneth all to mischéefe: first longing to be best, afterward equall with the best, and at last chéefe & aboue the best. Of which immoderate appetite of worship, and thereby of debate and discention, what losse, what sorrowe, what trouble hath within these fewe yéeres growne in this Realme, I praye God as well forgette, as we well remember: which thinges if I could as well haue foreséen, as I haue with my more paine then pleasure prooued, by Gods blessed Lady (for that was euer his oath) I would neuer haue wunne the courtesie of mennes knées, with the losse of so many heads. But séeing thinges past cannot The remembraunce of misfortunes past, ought to teach vs to be fearefull of the lyke. be called againe, much ought we the more beware, by what occasion we haue taken so great hurt before, that we est soones fall not in that occasion againe. Nowe is all these gréefes past, and all is (God be thanked) quiet, and likely right well to prosper in wealthfull peace vnder your Couzins my children, if God send them life, and you loue: of which two thinges, the lesse losse were they, by whome though God did his pleasure, yet should the Realme alway finde Kinges, and peraduenture as good Kinges. But if you among your selues in a Childes raigne fall at debate, A good note for this present tyme of peace. many a good man shall perishe, and happilie he too, ere this Land finde peace againe. Wherefore in these last wordes that euer I looke to speake with you, I exhort you and require you all, for the loue that you haue euer borne to me, for the loue that I haue euer borne to you, for the loue that our Lord beareth vnto vs all, from this time foreward all gréefes forgotten, eche of you loue other: which I verilie

trust you will, if you any thing regard, either God or your King, affinitie or kindred, this Realme your owne Countrie, or your owne suretie.
                        
                     
                  
               
               And therewithall the King enduring no longer to sitte vp, laide him downe on his right side, his face towardes them: and none was there present that could refraine from wéeping. But the Lordes recomforting him with as good wordes as they could, and aunswering for the time as they thought to stand with his pleasure, there in his presence (as by their wordes appeared) eche forgaue other, and ioyned their handes together, when (as it after appeared by their déedes) their heartes were farre a sunder.
               The young King (after the decease of his Father) came towardes London, when the Duke of Glocester his Unckle began greatlie to thirst for the kingdome, and wexed very enuious that so young a Prince should reigne: whervpon he depriued the young King of them that were néerest about him, and whome he thought would hinder his aspiring minde. First Sir Anthonie Wooduile Lord Riuers, 
                  The Lord Riuers put in warde. and brother to the Quéene, who had the gouernaunce and ordering of the young King, he caused to put him in duraunce, and afterward euen in the Kinges presence, he procured a quarrell to be picked with the Lord Richard Grey, the Kings other Brother by the Mother, and arrested him and Sir Thomas Vaughan Knight, and so farre The Duke of Glocester caused the Lord Riuers, the Lord Grey, and Sir Thomas Vaughan to be beheaded. procéeded he in his determination, by the aide of the Duke of Buckingham and others, as the Lord Riuers, the Lord Grey & Sir Thomas Vaughan were sent into the North partes to sundrie prisons, but afterward were all beheaded at Pomfret. Then did he take vpon him the gouernance of the young King, and was called the Lord Protectour: when hauing the King in his custodie, he could not be yet contented, except he had the other brother too, and therefore by meanes of the Lord Cardinall, he preuailed in his purpose, and brought the other Childe to the King his Brother into the Bishops Pallace at Paules, and from thence

through the Cittie honourablie into the Tower, out of The young King and his Brother brought to the Tower. the which after that day they neuer came abroade. When the Protector had both the Children thus in his custody, he opened his intent more boldly, both to certaine other men, as also chéefelie to the Duke of Buckingham, that he would néedes be King himselfe in all the haste, and he should haue the Dukes aide to make him King, besides, the Protectors onelie lawfull Sonne should marie the Dukes daughter, and that the Protectour should graunt him the quiet possession of the Earledome of Hertforde, and beside these requestes of the Duke, the Protectour promised him of his owne minde a great quantitie of the Kings Treasure, and of his houshold stuffe.
               In bréefe, the Protectour taketh vpon him to be King, The Protector crowned King, by the name of King Richard the third. and so preuailed that he was crowned King: but when he remembred that his two Nephewes were liuing in the Tower, and one of them the right King in déede, he perswaded himselfe (as verie well he might) that men would account him to haue no right to the Realme, therefore he thought to dispatch them out of the way, as though the killing of his kinsemen could amend his cause, & make him a kindlie King. Upon this he sent one Iohn Greene whome King Richard sendeth to haue the two young Princes put to death in the Tower. he specially trusted, to Sir Robert Brakenburie Constable of the Tower, with a letter & credence also, that the same Sir Robert should in any wise put the two Chyldren to death: but when Iohn Greene had doone his errand to Sir Robert, he plainlie aunswered, that by no meanes he would put them to death. When King Richard perceyued he could not preuaile that way, he brake the matter to Sir Iames Tirrell, whome he found verie tractable to his intent, wherefore he sent him on the morrowe with a Letter to Sir Robert Brakenburie, by which Letter he was commaunded to delyuer to Sir Iames all the keies of the Tower for one night, to the ende he might there accomplish the Kinges pleasure, in such thinges as he had giuen him commaundement. After which Letter deliuered, and the keies receiued, Sir Iames appointed the night ensuing

to destroy the two young Princes, deuising before and preparing the meanes.
               The Prince so soone as the Protectour had lefte that name, and tooke vpon himselfe to be King, was thereof infourmed, The young Prince informed that his Vnckle would be King, and his aunswere to the same. that he should not reigne, but his Unckle would haue the Crowne. At which wordes the Prince being greatlie abashed, fetching a heauie sigh, saide: Alas, I would mine Unckle would let me haue my life yet, though I loose my kingdome. Then he that tolde him the tale, vsed him with good wordes, and put him in the best comfort he could: But foorthwith was the Prince and his Brother both shut vp, and all other remooued from them, onelie one The Prince & his Brother shut vp close prisoners. 
                  Blacke Will, or Willam Slaughter excepted, who was set to serue them and sée them sure. After which time, the Prince neuer tied his pointes, nor did any thing of himself, but with the young babe his Brother lingred in thought and heauines, till this traiterous death deliuered them out of that wretched estate. For Sir Iames Tirrell deuised that Sir Iames appointed who should murder the Princes. they should be murdered in their beds: to the execution whereof he appointed Myles Forrest, one of the foure that kept them, a fellowe fleshed in murder before time, and to him he ioyned Iohn Dighton his owne horse-kéeper, a big, broad, square, strong knaue.
               Then all the other being remooued from them, this Myles Forrest and Iohn Dighton, about midnight (the sielie Children lying in their beddes) came into the Chamber, and suddenlie lapped them vp amongst the cloathes: and they had so bewrapped them and intangled them, kéeping downe by force the fetherbed and pillowes harde vnto their mouthes, that within a while, smoothered and stifled, their breath failing them, they gaue vp to God their innocent The young King and his Brother murdered. soules into the ioies of Heauen, leauing to the tormentors their bodies dead in the bedde. Which after that the cruell wretches perceiued, first by strugling with the paines of death, and after long lying still to be throughlie dead, they laide their bodies naked vpon the bedde, and fetched Sir Iames to sée them: who vpon the sight of them,

caused those murderers to burie them at the staire foote, méetlie déepe in the ground, vnder a great heape of stones. Then rode Sir Iames in great haste to King Richard, and King Richard thanketh Syr Iames for murdering the Princes. shewed him all the manner of the murder, who gaue him great thankes, and (as some say) there made him Knight: but he allowed not their burying in so vile a corner, saying, that he would haue them buried in a better place, because they were a Kinges sonnes. Upon this, as it is reported, a Priest belonging to Sir Robert Brakenburie, tooke vp the bodies againe, and secretlie enterred them in such a place, as by the occasion of his death, who onelie knew it, could neuer since come to light. Uerie troth it is, and well knowne, that at such time as Sir Iames Tirrell was in the Tower, for treason committed against the most famous Prince King Henrie the seuenth, both Dighton and he were examined, and they confessed the murder in manner aboue written, but whether the bodies were remooued they could nothing tell.
               And thus were these two noble Princes, these innocent tender children, borne of a most royall blood, brought vp in great wealth, likelie long to liue, reigne and rule in the Realme, shortlie shut vp in prison, and priuilie thus murdered, their bodies cast God knowes where, by the cruell ambition of their vnnaturall Unckle, and his despightfull tormentors. Which thinges on euerie part well pondered, God neuer gaue this Realme a more notable example, neither in what vncertainty standeth this worldlie weale, or what mischéefe worketh the proude enterprises of an high heart, or finallie, what wretched end ensueth such vnnaturall Myles Forrest rotted in peeces to death. crueltie. For first to begin with the bloody actors of this murder, Myles Forrest at saint Martins péece-meale rotted away. Dighton yet walketh (as are mine Authors Dighton in good forwardnes to be hanged. wordes at that time) in good possibilitie to be hanged ere he die. Sir Iames Tirrell died at the Tower Hill, being Syr Iames Tyrrel beheaded for treason. beheaded for treason. King Richard himselfe was afterward slaine in the féeld, hacked and hewed at his enimies handes, harried on horsebacke dead, his heaire in despight King Richard himselfe slaine in the feeld.
                  
torne and tugged like a curre Dogge. In his life time, by credible report of such as were secrete with his Chamberlaine, after this abhominable déede was doone, he neuer was quiet in his minde: he neuer thought himselfe sure, where he went abroade, he still priuilie looked about him, his body was secretly fenced, his hand euer vpon his Dagger, his countenaunce and manners like one alwaies ready to strike againe, sore wearied with care and watch, he rather slumbred then slept, troubled with fearful dreames, suddenlie sometime he sterted vp, leapt out of his bed, and ran about the Chamber, so was his restlesse heart continuallie tossed and tumbled, with the tedious impression and stormie remembraunce of his abhominable déede. A notable example doublesse, to all such as take like enterprise in hand, that cannot be contented to liue within compasse of duetie, but their aspiring thoughts must stretch furder, then either their habillitie will serue them, or God suffer them. The seate of a Prince is a place of great Maiesty, and none but such as GOD hath appointed, can containe themselues in that Royall roome: then if they wilfullie couet that place, for which both reason and duetie sayth, they are farre vnfit, such is the iustice of him, by whome Kinges rule, and Princes swaie their Soueraigntie, as the pleasure they thought to haue in that high Office, is a verie dagger to their hearts, and such an eating woorme to their consciences, as by this example before you maye plainlie perceiue. Let Princes therefore be honoured and feared as they ought, and let Subiectes liue in true and faithfull obedience to them, because it is a chéefe and an especiall article of their duetie.
            
            
               In the raigne of King Henrie the seuenth.
               
               ON the two and twentith day of Februarie, were arraigned Certaine persons executed for making seditious & slaunderous Lybelles against the King. 1494. in the Guild Hall of London foure persons, to

wit, Thomas Bagnall, Iohn Scot, Iohn Heth, and Iohn Kennington, who were Sanctuarie men of Saint Martins le Graund in London, and latelie before were taken out of the saide Sanctuarie, for forging of seditious Billes, to the slaunder of the King & some of his Councel: for which, thrée of them were adiudged to die, so on the fiue and twentie day of Februarie, the saide thrée persons, with a Flemming and a Yeoman of the Crowne, were all fiue executed at Tiborne.
               
                  Pierce or Perkin Werbecke, a Flemming borne, by the Peter Werbecke a Flemming, named himselfe King Edwardes second Sonne: for which diuers of his company were executed in sundry places. 1497. councell of Margaret Dutches of Burgoigne, named himselfe Richard of Yorke, King Edwardes second Sonne: he and his company arriued at Deale in Kent, where when they perceiued they could haue no comfort of the Countrie in their rebellion, they withdrewe themselues to their Ships againe. But the Mayor of Sandwich encountred with them, and tooke aliue of them one hundred, thrée score and nine persons, among the which were fiue Captaines, Mountford, Corbette, Whitbelt, Quintine and Gemine. And on the twelfth of Iulie, Iohn Peche Esquier and Sherife of Kent, brought vnto London Bridge these hundred thrée score and nine personnes, where the Sherifes of London receiued them, and conueied them in Cartes and long ropes to the Tower of London, and to Newgate. Not long after, a hundred and fiftie of them were hanged in Kent, Essox, Sussex and Norfolke, the residue were executed at Tiborne, and Wapping in the Wose beside London.
               
               A Commotion was made by the Commons of Cornevvall, who vnder the leading of Iames Tuchet of Audley, 
                  A commotion against the King by the commons of Cornewall, vnder the conduct of the Lord Audley, and Michael Ioseph a Blacke Smith. 1498. Lord of Audley, with Michael Ioseph, a Horse Farrer or Blacksmith of Bodman, and other, came to Blacke heath, where the King mette with them, and discomfited the Rebelles, taking their Captaines: and there were slaine of the Rebelles about thrée hundred, and a thousand and fiue hundred of them taken, the King gaue to them that tooke them their goodes. The Lord Audley was beheaded on the Tower hyll, and the Blacke Smith, and Flamoke a

Lawier were hanged, headed and quartered at Tiborne.
               A Shoomakers sonne in Bishoppes gate stréete of London, was hanged at Saint Thomas Watrings on Shroue A Shoomakers sonne hanged, for fayning him selfe to be the Earle of Warwicke. 1499. Tuesdaie, for naming himselfe to be Edward Earle of VVarwicke, Sonne to George Duke of Clarence: which Edward Earle of VVarvvicke was then (and had béene all the raigne of this King) kept secret prisoner in the Tower of London.
               
               The aforenamed Perkin Werbeck, that named himselfe Perkin Werbeck hanged. 1500. King Edwardes Sonne, and Iohn a Water Maior of Corfe, were executed at Tiborne.
            
            
               
                  In the raigne of King Henrie the eight, of famous memorie.
               
                  EDward Duke of Buckingham was accused of high treason, Edward Duke of Buckingham cō
                     demned for treason, & beheaded 1522. for which he was apprehended and sent to the Tower of London on the sixtéenth day of Aprill, before which time the Dukes Chauncellour was taken, who had confessed matter of high treason concerning the Kinges person. Shortlie after the Duke was arraigned at VVestminster, where were brought against him as witnesses, Sir Gilbert Perke his Chauncellour, Iohn de la Court his Confessour, Charles Kneuet Esquier, and a Monke, Priour of Henton. In the end he was found guiltie, and had iudgement to be drawne, hanged and quartered: so on the seuenth day of Maie following, the saide Edward Duke of Buckingham, Earle of Hereford, Stafford and Northhampton, was beheaded on the Tower hyll: such is the ende of ambition, the credite of false Prophecies, and of euill life.
               In December, at the Cittie of Couentrie, Frauncis Phillip, 
                  Conspiracie at Couentrie, to haue taken the Castell of Killingwoorth, and to make warre against the King. 1524. Schoolemaister to the Kinges Henxmen, Christopher Pickering Clarke of the Kinges Larder, and Anthonie Manuile Gentleman, intended to haue taken the Kinges Treasure of his Subsedie, as the Collectours of the same came towardes London, and therewith they intended to

haue raysed men, and to haue taken the Castell of Killingvvoorth, and then to haue made battaile against the King: for the which, they were drawne, hanged and quartered at Tiborne the eleuenth of February, the rest of their conspiracie were executed at Couentrie.
               
               
                  Elizabeth Barton the holie Maide of Kent, and diuerse The holy Mayde of Kent & other executed. 1535. other of her faction, were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, & there hanged and headed, &c. for sundrie conspiracies by them committed, in the matter of diuorce betwéene the Kinges Maiestie, and Quéene Katherine.
               
               The nine and twentie day of Aprill, the Priour of the Certaine Charterhouse Monks, and other executed for treason. 1536. 
                  Charterhouse at London, the Priour of Beuall, the Priour of Exham, Reinoldes a Brother of Sion, & Iohn Haile Uicare of Thistlewoorth, were all condemned of high treason: so the fourth day of Maie following, they were drawne, hanged and quartered at Tiborne, their heads and quarters set on the Gates of the Cittie, all sauing one quarter, which was set on the Charterhouse at London.
               
               The eightéene day of Iune, thrée Monkes of the Charterhouse 
                  Charterhouse Monkes executed for treason. at London, named Exmewe, Middlemore, and Nidigate, were drawne to Tiborne, and there hanged and quartered for treason.
               The two and twentie day of Iune, Doctor Iohn Fisher 
                  Bishop Fisher & Syr Thomas More beheaded. 1536. was beheaded on the Tower hyll, and his head was set on London Bridge: and the sixt of Iulie following, Sir Thomas More was beheaded on the Tower hyll, for denying the Kinges supremacie.
               
                  Thomas Fitz-garret, Sonne and heyre to the Earle of The Earle of Kyldare and fiue of his Vnckles executed. 
                  Kildare, was beheaded, & fiue of his Unckles were drawne to Tiborne, and there hanged and quartered for treason. In the same Moneth, which was Februarie, Nicholas 
                  Rebellion in Yorkeshiere. 
                  Musgraue, Thomas Gylbie and other, stirred a new rebellion, and besieged the Cittie of Carlile, from whence they were driuen, and many of them taken and put to death. Also the same moneth, Sir Frauncis Bigot, Sir Robert 
                  An other conspiracie. 
                  Constable, and other began a conspiracie, and for the same were attainted.
               
                  
The nine and twenty day of March, twelue men of Lincolne 
                  Lincolneshier rebelles executed at Tiborne. 1537, were drawne to Tiborne, & there hanged and quartered, for the rebellion in Lincolneshiere: fiue were Priestes, and seuen were Lay men, one was an Abbot, a Suffragan, Doctour Mackerell, an other was the Uicar of Louthe in Lincolneshiere, and two Priests.
               In Aprill, through certaine Commissions sent into A commotion in Sommersetshiere, and diuers of them executed, 1538. Sommersetshiere to take vp Corne, the people began to make an iusurrection, which was by Maister Pawlet and others alayed: the beginners thereof to the number of thrée score were condemned, whereof fouretéene were hanged and quartered, one of them was a woman.
               Frier Forrest was hanged by the middle in a chaine of Frier Forrest hanged & burnt. 1539. yron, and then burnt in Smithféeld, for denying the King to be supreame head of the Church, and with him was burnt the Image of Daruel Gatherine of Wales.
               
               
                  Hugh Ferringdon Abbot of Reading, and two Priests Abbots of Reading and Glastē
                     burie executed. 1540. named Ruge and Onion, for denying the Kinges supremacie, were hanged and quartered at Reading: the same day was the Abbot of Glastenburie Richard Whitting, hanged and quartered on Torre hill beside his Monasterie, for the same cause.
               
                  Thomas Lord Cromwell Earle of Essex, being in the Councell Chamber, was suddenlie apprehended and committed The Lord Cromwell beheaded. to the Tower of London: the nine and twentie day of Iulie following, he was attainted by Parliament of heresie and treason, and the eight and twentie day of Iulie he was beheaded on the Tower hill, with the Lord Walter Hungerford of Heitisburie.
               
               
                  Rober Barnes, Thomas Gerrard and William Ierome 
                  Six Priests, three burnt, and three hanged. Priestes, were burnt in Smithféed: and the same day Thomas Abel, Edward Powel and Richard Fetherstone, were hanged and quartered, for denying the Kinges supremacie.
               
                  Laurance Cooke a Priour of Dancalfe, William Horne 
                  Seuen executed at Tyborne for treason. 1541. a lay Brother of the Charterhouse, Giles Horne Gentleman, Clement Philpot, Edmond Bromham, Darby Kenham,
                  
                  Robert Bird, and Iaruis Carrowe, were all put to death for treason.
               In Aprill certaine persons beganne a new rebellion in A new rebellion in Yorkeshiere. Yorkeshiere, who were shortly after taken and put to execution in diuers places: of which Leigh a Gentleman, Tatarsal a Clothyer, and Thorneton a Yeoman, were put to death at London. Sir Iohn Neuell Knight, and ten persons more, were put to death at Yorke.
               
               The Lord Leonard Grey being endighted of certaine The Lord Leonard Grey beheaded. points of treason, by him committed, and was alleadged against him, was arraigned at Westminster: but he discharged the Iurie, and confessed the endightment, wherevppon he had iudgement, and was beheaded on the Tower hyll on Saint Peters euen.
               The first day of Iulie a Welch minstrell was hanged A Welch minstrell hanged. 1542. and quartered for singing of Songs, which were interpreted to be prophecying against the King.
               
                  Germaine Gardner, and Larke Parson of Chelsea, were Germaine Gardner and other executed. 1544. executed at Tiborne for denying the Kinges supremacie, with them was executed for other offences one Singleton: and shortlie after, Ashbie was executed for the supremacie.
            
            
               In the raigne of the noble Prince King Edward the sixt.
               
               IN the month of Maie, by meanes of a Proclamation for A commotion in Sommersetshiere 
                        〈◊◊◊〉
                     
                   enclosures, the commons of Sommersetshiere and 
                     〈…〉
                   made a commotion: but Sir Willam Herberd slew and executed many of the rebelles.
               Also the commons of Cornewall and Deuonshiere rose Commotion in Cornewall and Deuonshiere. against the Noblemen and Gentlemen, and besieged the Cittie of Excester, which was valiantlie defended. Against these Rebelles was sent Iohn Lord Russell, Lord priuie Seale, with a number of Soldiours, who entred the Cittie of Excester the fift day of August, where they slewe and

tooke prisoners of the Rebelles more then foure thousand, and after hanged diuerse of them in the Town and Countrie about.
               Diuers persons were apprehended as aiders of the foresaid Certaine executed for ayding the Rebelles. Rebels, of the which one was hanged within Algate, and an other at the Bridge foote toward Southwarke, both on Marie Magdalens day.
               The Rebelles in Norfolke and Suffolke encamped them The Rebelles in Norfolke and Susfolke encamped themselues. selues at Mount Surrey, in a wood called Saint Nicholas Wood, néere vnto Norvvich, against whome, Sir Iohn Dudley Earle of VVarvvicke, went with an Armie, where, both he and a great number of Gentlemen méeting with the Rebelles, were in such daunger, as they thought all to haue died in that place. But God that confoundeth the purpose of Rebelles, brought it so to passe, that as well there as in all other places, they were partlie by power constrained, partlie by promise of their pardon, perswaded to submit themselues to their Prince. The Earle of Warvvicke 
                  Robert Ket Captaine of the Rebelles taken, and many of them slaine and executed. entred the Cittie of Norwich the seuen and twentie day of August, when he had slaine aboue fiue thousand of the Rebelles, and taken their chéefe Captaine Robert Ket of VVindham Tanner, who might dispend in landes fiftie poundes by yéere, and was woorth in mooueables aboue a thousand Markes, and when he had put to execution diuers of the Rebelles, in sundrie places about Norwich, he returned.
               About this time also, a commotion began at Semer in the North-riding of Yorkeshiere, and continued in the East-riding, 
                  Commotion in Yorkeshiere. & there ended: the principall raisers whereof were William Ombler of East-hesterton Yeoman, Thomas Dale parish Clarke of Semer, and Steuenson of Semer. They being preuented by the Lord President from rising at Wintringham, they drewe to a place at Semer by the Sea coast, and there by night rode to the Beacon at Staxton, and set it on fire, and so gathered together a rude route. Then they went to Maister Whites house, and tooke him, and Clopton his wiues brother, Sauadge a merchant of Yorke,
                  
and Berie seruaunt to Sir Walter Mildmay, which foure they murdered a mile from Semer, and there left them naked, their number increasing to thrée thousand. On the one and twentie day of August the Kinges pardon was offered, The Rebelles refusing the Kings Pardon, were shortlie after executed at Yorke. which Ombler and other refused: who were shortlie after taken and brought to Yorke, where Thomas Dale and other were executed the one and twentie of September.
               The seuen and twentie day of Ianuarie, Humfrey A, 
                  Captaines of the Deuonshiere rebelles executed. 
                  rundell Esquier, Thomas Holmes, Winslowe and Berie. Captaines of the Rebelles in Deuonshiere, were hanged and quartered at Tiborne.
               The tenth of Februarie, one Bell a Suffolke man, was Bell a Suffolke Rebell executed. 1550. hanged and quartered at Tiborne, for moouing a new rebellion in Suffolke and Essex.
               
               
                  Richard Lion, Goddard, Gorran, and Richard Ireland, 
                  Rebelles of Kent executed. 1551. were executed the fouretéenth day of Maie, for attempting a new rebellion in Kent.
               
            
            
               In the raigne of Queene Marie.
               
               
                  WIlliam Constable alias Fetherstone, who caused Letters to be cast abroad, that King Edward was aliue, A Millers sonne fayning himselfe to be King Edward, executed. 1556. and to some he had shewed himselfe to be King Edward, was arraigned at the Guild Hall of London, hauing béene once before whipped for the same behauiour, and deliuered: but now he was condemned, and the thirtéenth daye of March he was drawne, hanged and quartered at Tiborne.
               One Clober, who sometime kept a Schoole at Dys in Foure Rebelles executed at Saint Edmundsburie. 1557. 
                  Norfolke, with thrée brethren whose names were Lincoln, made a conspiracie: and being driuen to flight, one Maister Shirman pursued, and tooke him at a Towne called Eye in Suffolke, where he was kept in prison till the next Sessions at Saint Edmundsburie, whether his thrée mates

being brought to him, they were altogether drawne, hanged and quartered.
               Quéene Marie deceassing, Elizabeth, our most gratious and soueraigne Ladie, second Daughter to the noble and victorious Prince King Henrie the eight, to the great comfort of England enioyed her lawfull, right and iust title, being proclaimed Quéene of England, Fraunce and Ireland, defender of the Faith, &c. Now ceased the time of greuous vexation both in soule and body, and the swéete comfort that euerie godlie minde desired, did shewe it selfe shining in glorie and maiestie: the greater cause haue we therefore to loue and honour that gratious Ladie, who brought with her such aboundaunce of happines, as neither tongue can woorthelie expresse it, nor any pen sufficientlie set it downe. Thankes be to God who preserued her Grace so woonderfullie, in the time of many threatned troubles and daungers, which by his prouidence she happilie escaped, to our no small ioye and perfect consolation: which troublesome time of her Graces suffering, I haue héerto annexed, according as it is set downe by that woorthy man Maister Iohn Fox in his Actes and Monuments, the remembrance whereof, may whet vs to be more duetifull vnto her, then a number are, and reioyce in God for our deliueraunce by her admirable patience.
            
            
               ¶ The myraculous preseruation of Lady Elizabeth, now our most dread and grations Queene of England, from extreme calamitie and daunger of life, in the time of Queene Marie her Sister.
               
                  BUt when all hath béene saide and told, what The blessed protection of almighty God, in preseruing the Lady Elizabeth, in her manifold daungers and troubles. soeuer can be recited, touching the admirable working of Gods present hand, in defending and deliuering any one person out of thraldome; neuer was there since the memorie

of our Fathers, any example to be shewed, wherein the Lordes mightie power hath more admirablie and blessedly shewen it selfe, to the glorie of his owne name, to the comfort of all good hearts, and to the publique felicitie of this whole Realme, then in the miraculous custodie and outscape of this our soueraigne Ladie, now Quéene, then Ladie Elizabeth, in the straite time of Quéene Marie her Sister. In which storie we haue first to consider, in what extreme miserie, sicknesse, feare and perill her Highnesse was: into what care, what trouble of minde, and what The troubles of Lady Elizabeth in Queene Maries tyme. daunger of death she was brought. First with great routes & bands of Armed men (and happy was he that might haue the carrying of her) being fetcht vp as the greatest traitour in the world, clapt in the Tower, and againe tossed from thence, from house to house, from prison to prison, from post to piller, at length also prisoner in her owne house, and garded with a sort of cutthroates, which euer gaped for the spoile, whereby they might be fingering on somewhat.
               Secondlie to consider againe we haue, all this notwithstanding, how strangely, or rather miraculouslie from daū
                  ger she was deliuered: what fauour and grace she found with the Almightie, who when all helpe of man and hope of recouerie was past, stretched out his mightie protection, and preserued her Highnes, and placed her in this Princelie seate of rest and quietnesse, wherin now she sitteth, and long may she sit, the Lord of his glorious mercie graunt we beséech him. In which storie, if I should set foorth at large and at full, all the particulers and circumstaunces therevnto belonging, and as iust occasion of the historie requireth, besides the importunate length of the storie discoursed: peraduenture it might mooue offence to some being yet aliue, and trueth might gette me hatred. Yet notwithstanding, I intend (by the grace of Christe) therein to vse such breuitie and moderation, as both may be to the glorie of God, the discharge of the storie, the profite of the Reader, and hurt to none, suppressing the names of some, whome héere although I could receite, yet I thought not to

be more cruell in hurting their name, then the Quéene hath béene mercifull in pardoning their liues.
               Therefore now to enter into the discourse of this tragicall matter, first héere is to be noted, that Quéene Marie 
                  The historie of Lady Elizabeth. when she was first Quéen, before she was crowned, would goe no whether, but would haue her by the hand, and send for her to dinner and supper: but after she was crowned, she neuer dined nor supped with her, but kept her aloofe from her, &c. After this it happened, immediatly vpon the rising of Sir Thomas Wiat, that the Ladie Elizabeth and the Lord Courtney, were charged with false suspition of Sir Thomas Wiats rising. Wherevpon Quéene Marie, whether for that surmise, or for what other cause I knowe not, being offended with the Ladie Elizabeth her Sister, at that time lying in her house at Ashridge, the next daye after the rising of Wiat, sent to her thrée of her Counsaylours, to wit, Sir Richard Southwell, Sir Edward Hastings, then Maister of the Horse, and Sir Thomas Cornewalles, 
                  Sir Richard Southwell. Sir Edward Hastinges, and Sir Thomas Cornwalles sent to fetch vp Lady Elizabeth. with their retinue and troupe of Horsemen, to the number of two hundred and fiftie. Who at their suddaine and vnprouided comming, found her at the same time sore sicke in her bedde, and verie weake & féeble of body. Whether when they came, ascending vp to her Graces priuie Chamber, they willed one of her Ladies, whome they met, to declare vnto her Grace, that there were certaine come from the Court, which had a message from the Quéene. Her Grace hauing knowledge thereof, was right glad of their comming: howbeit being then verie sicke, and the night farre spent (which was at ten of the clock) she requested them by the messenger, that they would resort thither in the morning. To this they aunswered, and by the same messenger sent word againe, that they must néedes sée her, & would so doo, in what case so euer she were. Wherat the The vnmannerlinesse of the Knights. Lady being agast, went to shew her Grace their wordes: but they hastilie following her, came rushing as soone as she into her Graces chamber, vnbidden. At whose so sudden comming into her chamber, her Grace being not a litle

amazed, saide vnto them: Is the haste such, that it might not haue pleased you to come to morrowe in the morning? They made answer, that they were right sorie to sée her in that case. And I (quoth she) am not glad to sée you héere at this time of the night. Whervnto they answered, that they came from the Quéene to doo their message & duety: which was to this effect, that the Quéenes pleasure was, that she should be at London the seuenth day of that present month. Wherevnto she saide: Certes, no creature more glad then I to come to her Maiestie, being right sorie that I am not in case at this time to waite on her, as you your selues doo sée, and can well testifie. In déed we sée it true (quoth they) that you doo say, for which we are verie sorie. Albeit we let A straite Commission from the Queen, to bring the Lady Elizabeth either quick or dead. you vnderstand, that our Commission is such, and so strayneth vs, that we must néedes bring you with vs, either quicke or dead. Whereat she being amazed, sorrowfullie saide, that their Commission was verie sore: but yet notwithstanding she hoped it to be otherwise, & not so straite. Yes verelie said they. Whervpon they called for two Phisitions, Doctor Owen and Doctor Wendie, and demaūded of them, whether she might be remooued from thence with life, or no. Whose aunswer and iudgement was, that there was no impediment to their iudgement, to the contrarie, but that she might trauaile without daunger of life. In conclusion, they willed her to prepare against the morning, The gentlenesse of Queene Marie to send her horse Lytter to bring her Sister to trouble. at nine of the clocke to goe with them, declaring that they had brought with them the Quéenes Litter for her. After much talke, the messengers declaring how there was no prolonging of times and daies, so departed to their Chamber, being entertained and chéered as appertained to their worshippes. On the next morrowe at the time prescribed, they had her foorth as she was, verie faint and féeble, and in such case, that she was ready to swound thrée or foure times betwéene them. What should I speake héere that cannot well be expressed? What an heauie house there was, to behold the vnreuerent and dolefull dealing of these men, but especially the carefull feare and captiuity of their

innocent Ladie and Mistresse.
               Now to procéede in her iourney from Ashridge, all sicke in a Litter, she came to Redborne, where she was garded Lady Elizabeth taketh her iourney toward the Queene. all night. From thence to S. Albones, to Sir Ralphe Rowlets house, where she taried that night, both féeble in body, and comfortles in minde. From that place they passed to Maister Doddes house at Mymmes, where also they remained that night: and so from thence she came to Highgate, where she being verie sicke, taried that night and the next day. During which time of her abode there, came many Pursuiuants & Messengers from the Court: but for what purpose I cannot tell. From that place she was conueied to the Court, where by the way came to méete her many Gentlemen, to accompany her Highnesse, which were verie sorie to sée her in that case: but especiallie a great multitude Lady Elizabeth brought vp to London. of people there were standing by the way, who then flocking about her Litter, lamented and bewailed greatlie her estate. Now when she came to the Court, her Grace was there straite waies shut vp, and kept as close prisoner a fortnight, which was till Palme Sundaie, séeing neither King nor Quéene, nor Lord nor fréend all that time, but onelie then the Lord Chamberlaine, Sir Iohn Gage, & the Uicechamberlaine, who were attendaunt vnto the doores. About which time Sir William Sentlowe was called before the Councel, to whose charge was laide, that he knew of Wiats rebellion. Which he stoutlie denied, protesting Sir William Sentlowe cōmitted to the Tower. that he was a true man both to God and his Prince, defying all Traitours and Rebelles: but being straitly examined, he was in conclusion committed to the Tower.
               The Friday before Palme Sunday, the Bishoppe of Winchester, with ninetéene other of the Councel, who shall be héere namelesse, came vnto her Grace from the Quéens Lady Elizabeth charged with Sir Thomas Wiats conspiracie. Maiesty, and burdened her with Wiats conspiracie: which she vtterlie denied, affirming that she was altogether guiltlesse therein. They being not contented with this, Lady Elizabeth charged with the busines of Sir Peter Carew. charged her Grace with businesse made by Sir Peter Carew, and the rest of the Gentlemen of the West countrey:

which she also vtterly denying, cleared her innocencie therin. In conclusion, after long debating of matters, they declared vnto her, that was the Quéenes will and pleasure Lady Elizabeth threatned to goe to the Tower, that she should go vnto the Tower, while the matter were furder tried and examined. Whereat she being agast, said. That she trusted the Quéens Maiesty would be more gratious Lady vnto her, and that her Highnesse would not otherwise conceiue of her, but that she was a true woman: declaring furthermore to the Lords, that she was innocent Lady Elizabeth purgeth her selfe to the Lordes. in all those matters wherewith they had burdened her, and desired them therefore to be a furder meane to the Quéene her Sister, that she being a true woman in thought, worde and déede towardes her Maiestie, might not be committed to so notorious & dolefull a place, protesting that she would request no mercie at her hand, if she should be prooued to haue consented vnto any such kinde of matter, as they had laide vnto her charge. And therefore in fine, desired their Lordshippes to thinke of her what she was, and that she might not so extremelie be dealt withall for her trueth. Wherevnto the Lordes aunswered againe, that there was no remedie, for that the Quéenes Maiestie was fullie determined, that she should goe vnto the Tower: wherwith the Lordes departed with their cappes hanging ouer their eyes. But not long after, within the space of an howre or more, came fowre of the foresaide Lords of the Councell, which were ye Lord Treasurer, the Bishop of Winchester, the Lord Steward, & the Earle of Sussex, with the Garde, who warding the next Chamber to her, secluded all her Gentlemen and Yeomen, Ladies and Gentlewomen: sauing Lady Elizabeths seruaunts remooued from her. that for one Gentlemen Usher, thrée Gentlewomen, and two Groomes of her Chamber, were appointed thrée other men of the Quéenes, and thrée waiting Women, to The Queenes men and women attendaunt vppon the Lady Elizabeth. giue attendance vpon her, that none should haue accesse to her Grace. At which time, there was an hundred of Northen Soldiours in white coates, watching and warding about the Gardens all that night, a great fire being made in the middest of the Hall, and two certaine Lordes watching

there also, with their band and company.
               Upon Saturday following, two Lords of the Counsaile, (the one was the Earle of Sussex, the other shalbe namelesse) came and certified her Grace, that foorthwith she must goe vnto the Tower, the Barge being prepared for her, and the tide now ready, which tarieth for no body. In heauie moode her Grace requested the Lordes, that she might tarie one other tide, trusting that the next would be better and more comfortable: but one of the Lordes replied, that neither tide nor time was to be delaied. And when her Grace requested him, that she might be suffered to write to the Quéenes Maiestie: he answered that he durst The hard dealing of a certaine Lord with the Lady Elizabeth. not permitte that, adding, that in his iudgement, it would rather hurt then profite her Grace in so dooing. But the other Lord more courteous and fauourable (who was the The Earle of Sussex gentle to the Lady Elizabeth. Earle of Sussex) knéeling downe, tolde her Grace that she should haue libertie to write, and as he was a true man he would deliuer it to the Quéenes Highnesse, and bring an aunswere of the same, whatsoeuer came thereof. Wherevpon she wrote: albeit she could in no case be suffered to Lady Elizabeth writeth to the Queene, but it would not serue. speake with the Quéene, to her great discomfort, being no offender against the Quéenes Maiestie. And thus the time and tide passed away for that season, they priuilie appointing al things ready, that she should go the next tide, which fell about midnight: but for feare she should be taken by the waie, they durst not. So they staied tyll the next day, being Palme Sunday, when about nine of the clocke these two returned againe, declaring that it was time for her Grace to depart: She aunswering, if there be no remedy, I must be content, willing the Lords to goe on before. Being come foorth into the garden, she did cast vp her eies toward the windowe, thinking to haue séene the Quéene, which she could not. Whereat she saide: She meruailed much what the Nobilitie of the Realme meant, which in that sort would suffer her to be ledde into captiuitie, the Lord knewe whether, for she did not? In the meane time commaundement was giuen in all London, that euery one

should kéepe the Church, and carie their Palmes, while (in the meane season) she might be conueied without all recourse of people into the Tower. After all this, she tooke her Barge with the foresaide Lordes, thrée of the Quéenes Lady Elizabeth sent to the Tower. Gentlewomen, and thrée of her owne, her Gentleman Usher, and two of her Groomes, lying and houering vpon the water a certaine space, for that they could not shoot the Bridge, the Barge men being verie vnwilling to shoot the same so soone as they did, because of the daunger thereof: for the sterne of the Barge strooke vpon the ground, the fall was so bigge, and the water was so shallowe, that the Barge being vnder the bridge, there staied againe a while. At landing, she first staied, & denied to land at those staires, where all traitours and offendors customablie vse to land, neither well could she, vnlesse she would goe ouer her shooes. The Lordes were gone out of the Barge before, and asked why she came not? One of the Lordes went back againe to her, and brought word she would not come. Then saide one of the Lordes, which shalbe namelesse, that she should not chuse, and because it rained, he offered to her his cloake, which she (putting it backe with her hand with a good dashe) refused. So she comming out, hauing one foot vpon the staire, saide: Héere landeth as true a Subiect (being prisoner) as euer landed at these staires, and before thée The wordes of Lady Elizabeth entring the Tower. O God I speake it, hauing no other fréends but thée alone. To whome the same Lord aunswered againe, that if it were so, it was the better for her. At her landing, there was a great multitude of their seruaunts and Warders standing in their order. What néeded all this (saide she.) It is the vse (saide some) so to be, when any prisoner came thither. And if it be for my cause (saide she) I beséech you that they may be dismissed. Whereat the poore men knéeled downe, and with one voice desired GOD to preserue her Grace: but the next day they were (therefore) released of their olde coates. After this, passing a little furder, she sate downe vpon a colde stone, and there rested her selfe. To whom the Lieuetenant then being, said: Madame, you

were best to come out of the raine, for you sit vnholsomely. She then replying, aunswered againe: Better sitting héere then in a wurse place, for God knoweth, I know not whether you will bring me. With that her gentleman Usher wept, she demaunding of him what he meant, to vse her so vncomfortablie, séeing she tooke him to be her comforter, and not to dismay her, especiallie for that she knewe her trueth to be such, that no man should haue cause to wéepe for her: but foorth she went into the prison. The doores were locked and bolted vpon her, which did not a little discomfort and dismay her Grace, at what time she called to her gentlewoman for her Booke. Desiring God not to suffer The christian prayer of Lady Elizabeth. her to build her foundation vpon the sandes, but vpon the rocke, whereby all blastes of blustring weather should haue no power against her. The doores being thus locked, and she close shut vp, the Lordes had great conference how to kéepe warde and watch, euerie man declaring his opinion in that behalfe, agréeing straitlie and circumspectlie to kéepe her. Then one of them, which was the Lord of The Lord of Sussex speaketh for Lady Elizabeth. 
                  Sussex, swearing, saide: My Lordes let vs take héede, and doo no more then our Commission will beare vs, whatsoeuer shall happen héereafter. And further, let vs consider that she was the King our Maisters Daughter, and therefore let vs vse such dealing, that we may aunswere vnto it heereafter, if it shall so happen, for iust dealing (quoth he) is alwaies aunswerable. Wherevnto the other Lordes agreede that it was well saide of him, and therevpon departed. Being in the Tower, within two daies commaundement was, that she should haue Masse within her house: one Maister Young was then her Chaplaine, and because there was none of her men so well learned, to helpe the Priest to saye Masse, the Masse staied for that day. The next day two of her Yeomen, who had gone long to schoole before, and were learned, had two Abcies prouided and deliuered them, so that vpon the Abcies they should helpe the Priest. One of the saide Yeomen, holding the Abcie in his hand, pretending ignoraunce at Kirieleyson, set the Priest,

making as though he could aunswer no furder.
               It would make a pittifull and a straunge storie, héere by the way to touch and recite, what examinations and rackinges of poore men there were, to finde out that knife that should cut her throat: what gaping among my Lords of the Clergie, to sée the day when they might wash their goodlie white Rochets in her innocent blood. But especiallie the Bishop of Winchester Stephen Gardiner, then Lord Chaū
                  cellour, The Bishop of Winchester enimie to Lady Elizabeth. ruler of the roste, who then within fewe dayes after came vnto her, with diuers other of the Councell, and examined her of the talke that was at Ashridge, betwixt her and Sir Iames Acroft, concerning her remoouing from thence to Dunnington Castell, requiring her to declare what she meant thereby? At the first, she being so suddenlie asked, did not wel remember any such house: but within a while, well aduising her selfe, she said. In deede (quoth she) I doo now remember that I haue such a Place, but I neuer lay in it in all my life: and as for any that hath mooued me therevnto, I doo not remember. Then to enforce Lady Elizabeth examined by the Bishop of Winchester. the matter, they brought foorth Sir Iames Acroft: the Bishop of Winchester demaunded of her, what she saide to that man? She aunswered, that she had little to say to him, or to ye rest that were then prisoners in the Tower. But my Lords (quoth she) you doo examine euerie meane prisoner of me, wherein me thinkes you doo me great iniurie. If they haue doone euill, & offended the Quéenes Maiestie, let them aunswer to it accordingly: I beseech you my Lords, ioine not me in this sort with any of these offendours. And as concerning my going to Dunnington Castell, I doo remember that Maister Hobby and mine Officers, and you Sir Iames Acroft had such talke: but what is that to she purpose (my Lords) but that I may go to mine owne houses at all times? The Lord of Arundel knéeling downe, The freendlie speech of the Earle of Arundel to Lady Elizabeth. saide: Your Grace sayth true, and certainlie we are verie sorie, that we haue so troubled you about so vaine matters. She then saide: My Lords, you doo sift me verie narowly, but well I am assured, you shall doo no more to me then

God hath appointed, and so God forgiue you all. At their departure, Sir Iames Acroft knéeled downe, declaring that he was verie sorie to sée the daye, in which he should be brought as a witnesse against her Grace. But I assure your Grace (said he) I haue béene meruailouslie tossed and Sir Iames Acroft examined touching the Lady Elizabeth. examined touching your Highnesse, which the Lord knoweth is very straunge to me. For I take God to record before all your Honours, I doo not knowe any thing of that crime that you haue laide to my charge, and will thervpon take my death, if I should be driuen to so straite a triall.
               That day or there about, diuers of her owne Officers, These were not the Officers of the Tower, but such as went in white & greene. who had made prouision for her diet, brought the same to the vtter gate of the Tower, the common rasall soldiours receiuing it: which was no small gréefe to the gentlemen, the bringers therof, wherfore they required to speake with the Lord Chamberlaine, being then Constable of the Tower. Who, comming before his presence, declared vnto his Lordship, that they were much afraid to bring her Graces diet, and deliuer it to such common & desperate persons, as they were which did receiue it: beséeching his Honour to consider her Grace, and to giue such order, that her viands might at all times be brought in by them, which were appointed therevnto. Yea Sirs (saide he) who appointed you this office? They aunswered, her Graces Councel. Councel (quoth he?) There is none of them whith hath to doo, Lady Elizabeths seruaunts restrained from bringing her diet to the Tower. either in that case, or any els within this place: and I assure you, for that she is a prisoner, she shalbe serued with the Lieuetenaunts men, as other prisoners are. Whereat the gentlemen saide, that they trusted for more fauour at his hands, considering her personage, saying: that they mistrusted Displeasure betweene the Lord Chamberlaine. and the Lady Elizabeths men. not, but that the Queene & her Councell would be better to her Grace then so, and therewith shewed themselues to be offended, at the vngratefull words of the Lord Chamberlaine, towards their Lady and Mistresse. At this he swore by God, striking himselfe vpon the breast, that if they did either frowne or shrug at him, he would set them where they should sée neither Sunne nor Moone. Thus taking

their leaue, they desired God to bring him into a better minde towards her Grace, and departed from him. Upon occasion whereof, her Graces Officers made great sute vnto the Queenes Councell, that some might be appointed to bring her diet vnto her, and that it might no more be deliuered vnto the common soldiours of the Tower. Which being reasonablie considered, was by them graunted, and therevppon were appointed one of her Gentlemen her Clerke of her Kitchin, and her two Purueiours to bring in her prouision once a day: all which was doone, the warders euer waiting vpon the bringers thereof. The Lord Chamberlaine himselfe being alwaies with them, circumspectlie and narrowlie watched and searched what they brought, & gaue héede that they should haue no talke with any of her Graces waiting seruaunts, and so warded them both in and out. At the saide sute of her Officers, were sent by the commaundement of the Councell, to waite vppon her Grace, two Yeomen of her Chamber, one of her Lady Elizabeths wayting men in the Tower. Robes, two of her Pantrie and Ewrie, one of her Buttry, an other of her Seller, two of her Kitchin, and one of her Larder, all which continued with her the time of her trouble.
               Heere the Constable, being at the first not verie well pleased, with the comming in of such a company against his will, would haue had his men to haue serued still with her Graces men: which her seruaunts at no hand would suffer, desiring his Lordship to be contented, for that order was taken, that no stranger should come within their Offices. At which aunswer being sore displeased, he brake out into these threatning words: Well (saide he) I wil handle ye well enough. Then went he into the Kitchin, and there would néedes haue his meat rosted with her Graces meat, Variaunce betweene the Lord Chamberlaine & Lady Elizabeths seruaunts. and saide that his Cooke should come thither and dresse it. To that her Graces Cooke aunswered: My Lord, I will neuer suffer any straunger to come about her diet, but her owne sworne men so long as I liue. He saide, they should: But the Cooke saide, his Lordshippe should pardon him for

that matter. Thus did he trouble her poore seruaunts very stoutlie: though afterwardes he were otherwise aduised, & they more courteouslie vsed at his hands. And good cause why, for he had good chéere, & fared of the best, & her Grace paid wel for it: wherfore he vsed himselfe afterward more reuerentlie toward her Grace. After this sort, hauing béen a whole moneth there in close prison, and being verie euill at ease therewithall: she sent for the Lord Chamberlaine and the Lord Shandoyes, to come & speake with her. Who comming, she requested of them, that she might haue libertie to walke in some place, for that she felt her selfe not well. To the which they aunswered, that they were right sory that they could not satisfie her Graces request, for that Lady Elizabeth denied the lybertie of the Tower. they had commaundement to the contrarie, which they durst not in any wise breake. Furthermore, she desired of them, if that could not be graunted, that she might walke but into the Quéenes lodging. No nor yet that (they aunswered) could by any meanes be obtained, without a furder sute to the Quéene and her Councell. Well (saide she) my Lordes, if the matter be so hard, that they must be sued vnto for so small a thing, and that fréendshippe be so straite: God comfort me, and so they departed, she remaining in her olde dungeon still, without any kinde of comfort, but onelie God.
               The next day after, the Lord Shandoyes came againe vnto her Grace, declaring vnto her that he had sued vnto the Councell for furder libertie. Some of them consented thervnto, diuers other dissented, for that there were so many prisoners in the Tower. But in conclusion, they did all agrée, that her Grace might walke into those lodginges, so that he & the Lord Chamberlaine, and thrée of the Quéenes gentlewomen did accompany her, the windowes being shutte, and she not suffred to looke out at any of them: wherewith she contented her selfe, and gaue him thankes for his good will in that behalfe. Afterwardes there was Lybertie graunted to Lady Elizabeth to walke in a garden. libertie graunted to her Grace to walke in a little garden, the doores and gates being shutte vp: which notwithstanding

was as much discomfort vnto her, as the walke in the garden was pleasant and acceptable. At which times of her walking there, the prisoners on that side were straightlie commaunded, not to speake or looke out at the windowes into the garden, till her Grace were gone out againe, hauing (in consideration therof) their kéepers waiting vppon them for that time. Thus her Grace with this small libertie contented her selfe in God, to whome be praise therefore.
               During this time, there vsed a little boie, a mans childe in the Tower, to resort to their chambers, and many times to bring her Grace flowers, which likewise he did to the other prisoners that were there. Wherevpon naughtie and suspicious heads, thinking to make & wring out some Suspicious heads. matter thereof, called on a time the childe vnto them, promising him Figges and Apples, and asking of him when he had béene with the Earle of Deuonshiere, not ignorant of the childes wunted frequenting vnto him. The boye aunswered, that he would goe by and by thether. Further, A young childe examined for bringing flowers to Lady Elizabeth. they demaunded of him, when he was with the Lady Elizabethes Grace. He aunswered: euerie day. Furthermore they demaunded of him, What the Lord of Deuonshiere sent by him to her Grace. The childe said, I will goe know what he will giue me to carrie to her. Such was the discretion of the child, being yet but foure yéeres of age. This same is a craftie boie (quoth the Lord Chamberlaine) How say you my Lord Shandoyes? I praie you my Lord (quoth the boie) giue me the Figges you promised me. No marie (quoth he) thou shalt be wipped, if thou come any more to the Lady Elizabeth, or to the Lord Courtney. The boie aunswered: I will bring my Lady my Mistresse more flowers. Whervpon the childes father was commaunded, to permitte the boie no more to come vp into their chambers. The next day as her Grace was walking in the garden, the childe péeping in at a little hole in the doore, cried vnto her, saying: Mistresse, I can bring you no more flowers. Whereat she smiled, but saide nothing, vnderstanding

thereby what they had doone. Wherefore, afterwards the L. Chamberlaine rebuked highlie his Father, cōmaunding him to put him out of the house. Alas poore Infaunt, (quoth the Father.) It is a craftie knaue (quoth the Lord Chamberlaine:) but let me sée him héere no more.
               The fift day of Maie, the Constable was discharged of The Constable of the Tower discharged of his Office, and Sir Henrie Benifield with his cōpany placed about the Lady Elizabeth. his Office of the Tower, and one Sir Henrie Benifield placed in his roome, a man vnknowne to her Grace, and therefore the more feared: which so sudden mutation was vnto her no little amaze. He brought with him an hundred Soldiours in blew coates, wherewith she was meruailouslie discomforted, and demaunded of such as were about her, whether the Ladie Ianes Scaffold were taken away or Lady Elizabeth both in great feare and doubt of her lyfe. no, fearing by reason of their comming, least she should haue plaied her part. To whome aunswere was made, that the Scaffold was taken away, and that her Grace néeded not to doubt of any such tirannie: for God would not suffer any such treason against her person. Wherewith being contented, but not altogether satisfied, she asked what Sir Henrie Benifield was? And whether he were of the Lady Elizabeth in doubt of Sir Henry Benifield. conscience or no, that if her murdering were secretlie committed to his charge, he would sée the execution thereof. She was aunswered, that they were ignorant what manner of man he was: howbeit they perswaded her, that God would not suffer such wickednesse to procéede. Well (quoth she) God graunt it be so: for thou O God canst mollifie all Lady Elizabeths prayer. such tirannous hearts, and disappoint all such cruell purposes. And I beséech thée to heare me thy creature, which am thy seruaunt and at thy commaundement, trusting by thy grace euer so to remaine. About which time it was spread abroade, that her Grace should be carried from thence, by this new iollie Captaine and his Soldiours, but whether, it could not be learned: which was vnto her a great gréefe, especiallie for that such a companie was appointed to her garde, requesting rather to continue there still, then to be led thence with such a sort of rascalles. At last plaine aunswere was made by the Lord Shandoyes,
                  
that there was no remedie, but from thence she must néeds depart to the Manour of Woodstocke, as he thought. Being demaunded of her, for what cause: for that (quoth he) the Tower is like further to be furnished. She being destrous to know what he meant thereby, demaunded, wherwith: with such matter as the Quéene and the Councell were determined in that behalfe, wherof he had no knowledge, and so departed. In conclusion, on Trinitie Sunday, being the ninetéene day of Maie, she was remooued from the Tower, the Lord Treasurer being then there for the lading of her Cartes, and discharging the place of the same: where Sir Henrie Benifield (being appointed her Gaoler) did receiue her with a company of rakehelles to garde her, beside the Lord of Darbyes band, wafting in the Countrie about for the Moone-shine in the water. Unto Lady Elizabeth remooueth from the Tower to Woodstocke. whome at length came my Lord of Tame, ioyned in Commission with the saide Sir Henrie, for the safe guiding of her to prison: and they together conueied her Grace to Woodstocke, as héereafter followeth.
               The first day they conducted her to Richmond, where she Lady Elizabeth secluded from her seruaunts. continued all night, being restrained of her owne men, which were lodged in out Chambers, and Sir Henrie Benifieldes Soldiours appointed in their roomes, to giue attendaunce on her personne. Whereat she being meruailouslie dismaied, thinking verilie some secrete mischéefe to Lady Elizabeth in dispayre of her selfe. be working towardes her: called her Gentleman Usher, and desired him with the rest of his company, to pray for her, for this night (quoth she) I thinke to die. Wherewith he being stricken to the heart, saide: God forbid that any such wickednesse should be pretended against your Grace. So comforting her as well as he could, at last he burst into teares, & went from her downe into the Court, wher were walking the Lord of Tame and Sir Henry Benefield. Then he cōming to the Lord of Tame (who had proffered to him much fréendshippe) desired to speake with him a word or two: vnto whom he familiarlie said, he should with all his heart. Which when Sir Henrie (standing by) heard, he asked

what the matter was? To whome the Gentleman Usher aunswered: No great matter Sir (saide he) but to speake with my Lord a woord or two. Then when the Lord of Tame came to him, he spake on this wise. My Lord (quoth he) you haue béene alwaies my good Lord, and so I Lady Elizabeths Vsher talketh with the Lord of Tame. beséech you to remaine. The cause why I come to you at this time, is to desire your Honour, fréendlie to declare to me, whether any daunger is meant to my Mistresse this night, or no, that I and my poore fellowes may take such part as shall please God to appoint: for certainlie we will rather die, then she should secretlie and innocentlie miscarie. Marie (saide the Lord of Tame) God forbidde that any The gentle heart of the Lord of Tame to Lady Elizabeth. such wicked purpose should be wrought: and rather then it should be so, I with my men are ready to die at her foote also. And so (praised be God) they passed that dolefull night with no little heauinesse of heart.
               Afterward, passing ouer the water at Richmond, going towards VVindsor, her Grace espied certaine of her poore seruants stāding on the other side, which were verie desirous to sée her. Whome when she behelde, turning to one of her men standing by, she saide: Yonder I sée certaine of my men, goe to them, and say these wordes from me: Tanquam ouis. So she passing forward to VVindsore, was lodged 
                     Tanquam ouis. Like a sheepe to to the slaughter. there that night in the Deane of VVindsores house: a place in déede more méet for a Priest then a Princesse. And from thence her Grace was garded and brought the next night to Maister Dormers house, where much people standing Lady Elizabeth honourablie receiued, and beloued of the people by the waie, some presented to her one gift, and some an other, so that Sir Henrie was greatlie mooued therewith, and troubled the poore people verie sore, for shewing their louing hearts in such a manner, calling them Rebels and Traitours, with such like vile wordes. Beside, as he passed through the Uillages, the Townsemen rang the Belles, as being ioyfull of her comming, thinking verilie it had béene otherwise then it was in déede, as the sequell prooued after to the said poore men. For immediatlie the said Sir Henrie hearing the same, sent his Soldiours thether, who apprehended

some of the Ringers, setting them in the stockes, and otherwise vncourteouslie misusing othersome for their good willes. On the next morrowe her Grace passing from The gentle entertainement of Lady Elizabeth, at the Lord of Tames house. Maister Dormers (where for the time of her abode there, was a straite watche kept) came to the Lord of Tames house, where she laie all that night, being verie Princelie entertained, both of Knightes and Ladies, gentlemen and gentlewomen. Whereat Sir Henrie Benifield grunted, and was highlie offended, saying vnto them: That they Sir Henrie Benifield grudged at the gentle entertainement of Lady Elizabeth. The rude and vngentle behauiour of Sir Henrie Benifield. could not tel what they did, and were not able to aunswer their dooinges in that behalfe. Letting them to vnderstand, that she was the Quéenes Maiesties prisoner, and no otherwise: aduising them therefore to take héede, and beware of afterclappes. Wherevnto the Lord of Tame aunswered on this wise: That he was well aduised of his dooinges, being ioyned in Commission as well as he, adding with warrant, that her Grace might & should in his house be merie. The next day, as she should take her iorney from Kichmond toward VVoodstocke, the Lord of Tame with an other Gentleman being at the Tables, playing and dropping vye Crownes, the Lady Elizabeth passing by, staied and saide, she would sée the game plaide out, which Sir Henrie Benifield would scarce permit. The game running long about, and they playing drop vye Crownes: Come on (sayth he.) I will tarie (sayth she) and will sée this game out. After this Sir Henrie went vp into a Chamber, where was appointed for her Grace a Chayre, two Cushions, and a foote Carpet, very faire and Princelike: wherein presumptuouslie he sate, and called one Barwicke his man to pull off his Bootes. Which as soone as it was knowne among the Ladies and Gentles, euerie one mused thereat, and laughed him to scorne, obseruing his vndiscrete manners in that behalfe, as they might verie wel. When Supper was doon, he called my Lord, & willed him that all the Ladies and gentlemen should withdraw them selues euerie one to his lodging: meruailing much that he would permit there such a company, considering so great a

charge committed to him. Sir Henry (quoth my Lord) content your selfe, all shall be voided, your men and all. Nay, my Soldiours (quoth Sir Henrie) shall watch all night. The Lord of Tame aunswered: it shall not néede. Well (saide he) néede or néede not, they shall so doo: mistrusting belike the company, which God knoweth was without cause.
               The next daie her Grace tooke her iourney from thence Lady Elizabeth, commeth to Woodstocke. to Woodstocke, where she was inclosed, as before in the Tower of London: the Soldiours garding and warding both within and without the walles, euery day to the number of thrée score, and in the night without the walles fortie, during the time of her imprisonment there. At length, The strait watch kept at Woodstocke. she had gardens appointed for her to walke in, which was verie comfortable to her Grace: but alwaies when she did recreate her selfe therein, the doores were fast locked vp, and in as straite manner as they were in the Tower, being at least fiue or six lockes betwéene her lodging and her walkes, Sir Henrie himself kéeping the keies, and trusting no man therewith. Wherevpon she called him her Gaoler: and he knéeling downe, desired her Grace not to call him so, for he was appointed there to be one of her Officers. From such Officers (quoth she) good Lord deliuer me.
               And now by the way as digressing, or rather refreshing the Reader, if it be lawfull in so serious a storie to recite a A merie storie concerning the straite keeping of the Lady Elizabeth. matter incident, and yet not impertinent to the same, occasion héere mooueth, or rather enforceth me, to touch bréeflie what happened in the same place and time by a merie conceited man, being then about her Grace. Who noting the straite and straunge kéeping of his Lady & Mistresse by the said Sir Henrie Benifield, with so many locks & doores, with such watch and warde about her, as was strange and wunderful: espied a Goate in the warde where her Grace was, and whether to refreshe her oppressed minde, or to notifie her straite handling by Sir Henrie, either els both, he tooke it vppon his necke, and followed her Grace therewith, as she was going into her lodging. Which when she

sawe, she asked him what he would doo with it, willing to let it alone. Unto whome the same partie aunswered: No by saint Marie (if it like your Grace) will I not, for I cannot tell whether he be one of the Quéenes fréendes or no, I will carrie him to Sir Henrie Benifield (God willing) to knowe what he is. So leauing her Grace, he went with the Goate on his necke, and carried it to Sir Henrie Benifield: who when he sawe him comming with it, asked him halfe angerlie what he had there? Unto whome the partie The straitnesse of Sir Henrie Benifield merily noted. aunswered, saying: Sir (quoth he) I cannot tell what he is, I praie you examine him, for I found him in the place where my Ladies Grace was walking, & what talke they haue had I cannot tell, for I vnderstand him not, but he should séeme to me to be some straunger, and I thinke verilie a Welch man, for he hath a white fréese coate on his backe. And for so much as I being the Quéenes subiect, and perceiuing the straite charge committed to you of her kéeping, that no straunger should haue accesse vnto her without sufficient licence: I haue héere found a stranger (what he is I cannot tell) in place where her Grace was walking, and therfore for the necessarie discharge of my duety, I thought it good to bring the saide straunger to you, to examine as you sée cause: and so he let him downe. At which wordes Sir Henrie séemed much displeased, and saide: Well, well, you will neuer leaue this géere I sée, and so they departed.
               Now to returne to the matter from whence we haue digressed, Lady Elizabeth, with much adoo, suffered to write to the Queene. after her Grace had béene there a time, she made sute to the Councell, that she might be suffered to write to the Quéene: which at last was permitted. So that Sir Henrie brought her pen, inke and paper, and standing by her while she wrote (which he straitlie obserued) alwayes she being wearie, he would carrie away her Letters, and bring them againe when she called for them. In the finishing therof, he would haue béen messenger to the Quéene of the same, whose request her Grace denied, saying: One of her owne men should carrie them, and that she would

neither trust him, nor none of his therein. Then he aunswering againe, saide: None of them durst be so bolde (he trowed) to carie her Letters, being in that case. Yes (quoth she) I am assured I haue none so dishonest, that would denie my request in that behalfe, but will be as willing to serue me now, as before. Well (saide he) my Commission The cruell dealing of Sir Henrie Benifield to the Lady Elizabeth, reproued. is to the contrarie, and I may not so suffer it. Her Grace replying againe, saide: You charge me verie often with your Commission, I praye God you may iustlie aunswere the cruell dealing you vse towardes me. Then he knéeling downe, desired her Grace to thinke and consider, how he was a seruaunt, and put in trust by the Quéene to serue her Maiestie: protesting that if the case were hers, he would as willinglie serue her Grace, as nowe he did the Quéenes highnesse. For the which his aunswer, her Grace thanked him, desiring of God, that she might neuer haue néede of such seruauntes as he was: declaring further to him, that his dooinges towards her were not good nor aunswerable, but more then all the fréends he had would stand by. To whome Sir Henrie replied and saide: That there was no remedie but his dooinges must be aunswered, and so they should, trusting to make good account thereof. The cause which mooued her Grace so to saye, was, for that he would not permitte her Letters to be carried foure or fiue daies after the writing therof. But in fine, he was content The Letters of Lady Elizabeth carried to the Queene. to send for her gentleman from the Towne of Woodstocke, demaunding of him, whether he durst enterprise the carriage of her Graces Letters to the Quéene, or no: and he aunswered, yea Sir that I dare, and wil with all my hart. Wherevpon Sir Henrie (halfe against his stomacke) tooke them vnto him. Then about the eight day of Iune, came downe Doctour Owen and Doctour Wendie, sent by the Doctor Owen & Doctor Wendie, Queene Maries Phisitions sent to Lady Elizabeth. Quéene to her Grace, for that she was sicklie: who ministring to her, and letting her blood, tarried there and attended on her Grace fiue or sixe dayes. Then she being well amended, they returned againe to the Court, making their good report to the Quéene and the Councell, of her Graces

behauiour and humblenesse towardes the Quéenes Highnesse. Which her Maiestie hearing, tooke verie thankefullie: but the Bishoppes therat repined, looked blacke in the The popish Prelates repined against the Lady Elizabeth. mouth, and tolde the Quéene, they meruailed that she submitted not her selfe to her Maiesties mercie, considering that she had offended her Highnesse. About this time, her Grace was requested by a secrete fréend, to submit her self Lady Elizabeth requested to submit her selfe to the Queene. to the Quéenes Maiestie, which would be very well taken, and to her Grace great quiet and commodity: vnto whom she aunswered: That she would neuer submitte her selfe to them whome she neuer offended. For (quoth she) if I haue offended and am guiltie, I then craue no mercie but the lawe: which I am certaine (quoth she) I should haue had ere this, if it could be prooued by me. For I knowe my selfe (I thanke God) to be out of the daunger thereof, wishing that I were as cléere out of the perill of mine enimies: and then I am assured, I should not be so locked and bolted vp within walles & doores, as I am, God giue them a better minde when it pleaseth him.
               About this time, was there a great consulting among Councell of the Papists, to marie the Lady Elizabeth to a Spaniard. the Bishoppes and gentlemen, touching a mariage for her Grace, which some of the Spaniardes wished to be with some Stranger, that she might go out of the Realme with her portion: some saying one thing, and some an other. A Lord (who shall be heere namelesse) being there, at last Wicked councell giuen against Lady Elizabeth. saide: That the King should neuer haue any quiet Common wealth in England, vnlesse her head were stricken from her shoulders. Wherevnto the Spaniardes aunswered, saying: God forbid that the King their Maister should haue that minde, to consent to such a mischéefe. This was the courteous aunswere of the Spaniards to the Englishe 
                  Spaniardes more fauourable to Lady Elizabeth, then some English men. 
                  men, speaking after that sort against their owne Country. From that day the Spaniardes neuer left off their good perswasions to the King, that the like honour he should neuer obtaine, as he should in deliuering Lady Elizabethes Grace out of prison: whereby at length she was happilie released from the same. Héere is a plaine and euident example,

of the good clemencie and nature of the King and his Councellers towardes her Grace, praised be God therefore, who mooued their heartes therein. Then héerevpon, she was sent for shortlie after, to come to Hampton Court.
               
               But before her remoouing from VVoodstocke, we will a little stay, to declare in what dangers her life was, during this time she there remained. First thorowe fire, which began to kindle betwéene the boordes and seeling, vnder the Lady Elizabeth, in daunger of fyre. Chamber where she laie: whether by a sparke of fire gotten into a creuis, or whether of purpose by some that meant her no good, the Lord dooth knowe. Neuerthelesse, a woorshipfull Knight of Oxfordshiere, which was there ioyned the same time with Sir Henrie Benifield, in kéeping that Lady (who then tooke vp the boordes and quenched the fire) verilie supposed it to be doon of purpose. Furthermore it is thought, and also affirmed (if it be true) of one Paule Peny a kéeper of VVoodstocke, a notorious Lady Elizabeth, in daunger of kylling. Ruffian, and a butcherlie wretch, that was appointed to kill the Lady Elizabeth: who both sawe the man, being often in her sight, and also knewe thereof. An other time one of the priuie Chamber, a great man about the Quéene, An other conspiracie of murder against Lady Elizabeth. and chéefe darling of Stephen Gardiner, named Maister Iames Basset, came to Blandenbridge a mile from UUoodstocke, with twentie or thirtie priuie coates, and sent for Sir Henrie Benifield to come and speake with him. But as God would, who disposed all thinges after the purpose of his owne will, so it happened, that a little before, the saide Sir Henrie Benifield was sent for by a Poste to the Councell, leauing straite worde behinde him with his brother, that no man whatsoeuer he were, though comming with a Bill of the Quéenes hand, or any other warrant, should haue accesse to her before his returne againe. By reason whereof so it fell out, that Sir Henrie Benifieldes brother comming to him at the Bridge, would suffer him in no case to approch in: who otherwise (as it is supposed) was appointed violentlie to murder the innocent Lady.
               
                  
At what time likewise that the Lady Elizabeth was in Lady Elizabeth preserued by the Lordes prouidence, from execution in the Tower. the Tower, a Writ came downe subscribed with certaine handes of the Councell, for her execution: which if it were certaine as it is reported, Winchester (do doubt) was deuiser of that mischeuous drift. And doubtlesse the same Achitophell had brought his impious purpose that day to passe, had not the fatherlie prouidence of Almightie God (who is alwaies stronger then the deuill) styrred vp Maister Bridges, Lieuetenaunt the same time of the Tower, to come in haste to the Quéene, to giue certificate therof, and to know further her consent for her Sisters death. Wherevppon it followed, that all that deuise was disappointed, and VVinchesters 
                  Winchesters platforme ouerthrowne. deuillishe platforme (which he saide he had cast through the Lordes goodnesse) came to no effect. Where moreouer is to be noted, that during the imprisonment of this Lady and Princesse, one Maister Edmund Tremaine was on the Racke, and Maister Smithwike, and diuers other in the Tower were examined, and diuers offers made them, to accuse the guiltlesse Lady, being in her captiuitie. Howbeit all that notwitstanding, no matter could be prooued by all examinations, as she the same time lying at Woodstocke, had certaine intelligence, by the meanes of one Iohn Gayer: who vnder a coullorable pretence of a Letter to Mistresse Cleue from her Father, was let in, and so gaue them secretlie to vnderstande of all this matter. Wherevppon the Lady Elizabeth, at her departing out from VVoodstocke, wrote these Uerses with her Diamond in a glasse windowe.

                     Much suspected by me: Verses written by Lady Elizabeth in the glasse windowe.
                     
                     Nothing prooued can be.
                     
                        Quod Elizabeth prisoner.
                     
                  
               
               And thus much touching the troubles of Lady Elizabeth at VVoodstocke. Wherevnto this is more to be added, that during the same time, the Lord of Tame had laboured to the Quéene, and became suretie for her, to haue

her from vvoodstocke to his house, and had obtained his graunt thereof: wherevpon preparation was made accordinglie, and all thinges ready in expectation of her comming. Lady Elizabeth not suffered to come to the Lord of Tames house. But thorowe the procurement either of Sir Henry Benifield, or by the dooing of vvinchester her mortall enimie, Letters came ouer night to the contrarie, whereby her iourney was staide. Thus this woorthy Lady oppressed with continual sorrowe, could not be permitted to haue recourse to any fréendes she had: but still in the handes of her enimies was left desolate, and vtterlie destitute of all that might refreshe a dolefull heart, fraught full of terror and thraldome. Wherevpon no meruaile, if she hearing vpon a time out of her garden at vvoodstocke, a certaine Lady Elizabeth wisheth her selfe to be a Milke maide. Milke maide singing pleasauntly, wished her selfe to be a Milke maide as she was, saying: That her case was better, and life more merier, then hers was, in that state as she was.
               Now after these thinges thus declared, to procéede further where we left before, Sir Henrie Benifield and his Soldiors, with the Lord of Tame, and Sir Ralphe Chamberlaine garding and wayting vppon her: The first night from vvoodstocke, she came to Ricotte. In which iourney such a mightie winde did blowe, that her seruauntes were faine to holde downe her cloathes about her: in so much, that her Hood was twise or thrise blowne from her head. Whervpon she desirous to returne to a gentlemans house there néere, could not be suffered by Sir Henrie Benifield so to doo: but was constrained vnder a hedge, to trim her head as well as she could. After this, they iourneied the next night to Maister Dormers, and so to Colbrooke, where she laye all that night at the George. And by the way comming to Colbrooke, certaine of her Graces Gentlemen and Yeomen mette her, to the number of thrée score, much to all their comfortes, who had not séene her Grace of long season before: notwithstanding, they were commaunded in the Quéenes name immediatlie to depart the Towne, to both their and her Graces no little heauines, who could not

be suffered once to speake with them. So that night all her men were taken from her, sauing her gentleman Usher, three gentlewomen, two Groomes, and one of her Wardroppe, the Soldiours watching and warding round about the house, and she close shut vp within her prison. The next day following, her Grace entred Hampton Court on the backe side, into the Princes lodging, the doores being shut to her, and she garded with Soldiours as before, lay there a fortnight at the least, or euer any had recourse vnto her. At length came the Lord William Haward, who meruailous honourablie vsed her Grace: whereat she tooke much The Lord William Haward gentle and fauourable to Lady Elizabeth. comfort, and requested him to be a meane, that she might speake with some of the Councell. To whome (not long after) came the Bishop of vvinchester, the Lord of Arundell, the Lord of Shrewesburie, and Secretarie Peter, who with great humilitie humbled themselues to her Grace. She againe likewise saluting them, said. My Lords (quoth she) I am glad to sée you: for me thinkes I haue béen kept a great while from you desolately alone. Wherefore I would desire you, to be a meane to the King and Quéenes Maiesties, that I may be deliuered from prison, wherein I haue béene kept a long space, as to you my Lordes it is not vnknowne. When she had spoken, Stephen Gardiner the Bishoppe of vvinchester knéeled downe, and requested Lady Elizabeth requested by Winchester, to submit her selfe to the Queenes mercie. that she would submit herselfe to the Quéens Grace, and in so dooing, he had no doubt but her Maiestie would be good vnto her. She making aunswer: That rather then she would so doo, she would lie in prison all the dayes of her life, adding: That she craued no mercie at her Maiesties Lady Elizabeth standeth to be tryed by the lawe. hand, but rather desired the lawe, if euer she had offended her Maiestie, in woord, thought, or déede. And besides this, in yéelding (quoth she) I should speake against my selfe, and confesse my selfe to be an offendour, which neuer was towards her Maiestie: by occasion whereof, the King and Quéene might euer héereafter conceiue of me an euill opinion. And therefore I say my Lords, it were better for me to lie in prison for the trueth, then to be abroad and suspected

of my Prince. And so they departed, promising to declare her message to the Quéene.
               On the next day, the Bishop of VVinchester came againe vnto her Grace, and knéeling downe, declared that the Talke againe betweene Winchester and Lady Elizabeth. Quéene meruailed, that she would so stoutlie vse her selfe, not confessing to haue offended: so that it should séeme, the Quéenes Maiestie wrongfullie to haue imprisoned her Grace. Nay (quoth the Lady Elizabeth) it pleaseth her to punish me as she thinketh good. Well (quoth Gardiner) her Maiesty willeth me to tell you, that you must tell an other tale, ere that you be set at libertie. Her Grace aunswered, Lady Elizabeth denieth to confesse any fault doone to the Queene. that she had as liefe be in prison with honestie and trueth, as to be abroade suspected of her Maiestie: and this that I haue saide, I will (saide she) stand vnto, for I will neuer belye my selfe. VVinchester againe knéeled downe, and said: Then your Grace hath the vauntage of me and other of the Lordes, for your so long and wrong imprisonment. What vauntage I haue (quoth she) you know, taking God to record, I séeke no aduauntage at your hands, for your so dealing with me: but God forgiue you and me also. With that the rest knéeled downe, desiring her Grace that all might be forgotten, and so departed, she being fast locked vp againe. A seuen-night after, the Quéene sent for her Lady Elizabeth sent for to the Queene. Grace at ten a clocke in the night, to speake with her: for she had not séene her in two yéeres before. Yet for all that she was amazed at the so sudden sending for, thinking it had béene wurse for her then afterwardes it prooued: and desired her gentlemen and gentlewomen to praye for her, for that she could not tell whether euer she should sée them againe or no. At which time Sir Henrie Benifield, with Mistresse Clarencius comming, her Grace was brought into the garden, vnto a stayres foote that went into the Quéenes lodging, her Graces gentlewomen waiting on her, her gentleman Usher and her Groomes going before with Torches: where her gentlemen and gentlewomen being commaunded to staie, all sauing one Woman, Mistresse Clarencius conducted her to the Quéenes bed Chamber,

where her Maiestie was. At the sight of whome her Grace knéeled downe, & desired God to preserue her Maiestie, not mistrusting but that she should trie her selfe as Lady Elizabeth, brought to the Queenes bed Chamber. true a subiect towardes her Maiestie, as euer did any, and desired her Maiestie euen so to iudge of her, and saide: that she should not finde her to the contrarie, whatsoeuer report otherwise had gone of her. To whome the Quéene aunswered: Talke betweene the Queene and Lady Elizabeth. You will not confesse your offence, but stande stoutlie to your trueth: I praie God it may so fall out. If it dooth not (quoth the Lady Elizabeth) I request neither fauour nor pardon at your Maiesties handes. Well (saide the Quéene) you still stiflie perseuer in your trueth: belike you will not confesse but that you haue béene wrongfullie punished. I must not saye so (it it please your Maiestie, quoth she) to you. Why then (saide the Quéene) belike you will to other. No, if it please your Maiestie (quoth she) I haue borne the burden, and must beare it. I humbly Small comfort at the Queens hand toward her Sister beséech your Maiestie to haue a good opinion of me, and to thinke me to be your true Subiect, not onelie from the beginning hitherto, but for euer, as long as lyfe lasteth. And so they departed with verie fewe comfortable wordes of the Quéene in Englishe: but what she saide in Spanishe, God knoweth. It is thought that King Phillip was there King Phillip thought to be a freend to Lady Elizabeth. behinde a cloath, and not séene, and that he shewed himselfe a verie fréend in that matter, &c. Thus her Grace departing, went to her lodging againe, and the seuenight after was deliuered of Sir Henrie Benifield her Goaler (as she Lady Elizabeth, by Gods prouidence set at lybertie. tearmed him) and his Soldiours, and so her Grace being set at libertie from imprisonment, went into the Country, and had appointed to goe with her Sir Thomas Pope, 
                  Sir Henrie Benifield discharged. one of Quéene Maries Counsaylors, and one of her gentlemen Ushers, Maister Gage. And thus straitlie was she looked too all Quéene Maries time: and this is the discourse of her Highnesse imprisonment.
               Then there came to Lamheyre Maister Ierningham, and Maister Norris gentleman Usher, Quéene Maries men, who tooke away from her Grace Mistresse Ashley to

the Fleete, and three other of her gentlewomen to the Mistresse Ashley sent to the Fleet. Tower: which was no little trouble to her Grace, saying, that she thought they would fetch away all at the end. Three gentlewomen of Lady Elizabeths sent to the Tower. But God he praised, shortlie after was fetched away Gardiner, by occasion of whose oportune decease, the life of this excellent Princesse, the wealth of all England, was preserued. Note the wonderfull working of the Lordes prouidence, in sauing of Lady Elizabeth. For this is credible to be supposed, that the saide wicked Gardiner of VVinchester, had long laboured his wits, and to this onelie most principall marke bent all his deuises: to bring this our happie and deere Soueraigne out of the waie, as both by his wordes and dailie dooinges Lady Elizabeth, delyuered by the death of Stephen Gardiner. sufficientlie appeared. But such was the gratious and fauourable prouidence of the Lord, to the preseruation not onelie of her Royall Maiestie, but also the miserable and wofull state of this whole Iland, and poore Subiects of the same, whereby the proude platformes, and peeuishe practises of this wretched Achitophell preuailed not: but contrarywise both he, and all the snares and trappes of his pernitious councell laide against an other, were turned to a nette to catch himselfe, according to the Prouerbe: Malum consilium consultori pessimum. After the death of this How the Lord heere beganne to worke for Lady Elizabeth. 
                  Gardiner, followed the death also and dropping awaie of other her enimies, wherby by little and little her ieopardie decreased, feare deminished, hope of comfort beganne to appeare as out of a darke clowde. And albeit her Grace (as yet) had no full assuraunce of perfect safetie, yet more gentle entertainement did dailie growe vnto her, tyll at length to the moneth of Nouember, & seuentéene day of the same, thrée yéeres after the death of Stephen Gardiner, followed the death of Quéene Marie. After whose deceasse, succeeded her foresaide Sister Lady Elizabeth into her Lady Elizabeth proclaymed Queene, the same day that Queene Marie died. right of the Crowne of England, who after so long restraintment, so great daungers escaped, such blustering storms ouerblowne, so many iniuries digested and wrongs susteined, by the mightie protection of our mercifull God, to our no small comfort and commoditie, hath beene exalted and erected out of thrall to libertie, out of daunger to

peace and quietnesse, from dread to dignitie, from miserie to Maiestie, from mourning to ruling: breefelie, of a prisoner made a Princesse, and placed in her throne Royall, proclaimed now Queene, with as many glad heartes of The Lord make England thankefull to him, for his great benefites. her Subiectes, as euer was any King or Queene in this Realme before her, or euer shall be (I dare saye) heereafter, the Lord long holde his hand ouer her, and send her to rule many and happy yeeres I beseech him. Amen.
               
               In this pittifull and rufull Historie, thou hast (O England) three especiall thinges to consider. First, the hardnesse of the time then being, and the vnmercifulnesse of those mens hearts, who prepared all their deuillishe pollicies, Consideration of the hardnesse of the time then, and the cruell dealing against Lady Elizabeth. and inuented a world of wyles and deceites, whereby they might gaine oportunitie to destroy this woorthy and famous Lady, whose innocencie could not appease their blood thirstinesse, nor whose vertues could not asswage their cruell dealing: but euen as the wicked Iewes cried death against our Sauiour, euen so these vnnaturall men did their vttermost against this Noble Lady. Secondlie, thou art to note her woonderfull patience, her assured trust Consideration of the wonderfull patience of Lady Elizabeth. in God, who neuer fayled her: and euen when death was most of all threatned to her, and that many occasions was giuen for her to doubt the same, her patience was not any iote the more mooued, but being confident in God, to whom she referred the state of her innocencie, and extremitie of their rigorous intentes, she passed through all those agonies with a cheerefull and vndaunted heart, and their practises to feare her was not so horrible, but her patience in suffering was as admirable. Thirdlie, thou must remember, Consideration of the present helpe of God at all times to Lady Elizabeth. the ready working hand of God for her in all her daungers, how gratiouslie he preuented their deuises, and had such an especiall care ouer his Daughter, as no extremitie whatsoeuer could preuaile against her. For which exceeding loue towardes thee, how highlie thou art bound to his heauenlie Maiestie, the manifold happy blessinges thou hast and doost receiue by her, can sufficientlie tell thee. But as I haue heeretofore giuen thee to vnderstand, the

punishment of Treason and tretcherous practises, in the raignes of the Kinges before passed: so likewise I must craue leaue a little, to speake of such matters as hath happened since the raigne of our Soueraigne Lady and Quéene, and then will we procéede on with the rest of our intent.
            
            
               ¶ Since the raigne of our most gratious and Soueraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth.
               THe fourth and fift day of Ianuarie, did suffer at Durham to the number of thrée score and six Constables and Rebelles executed at Durham. 1570. other, who were pertakers in the rebellion in the North, with the Lordes of Westmerland and Northumberland: amongst whome an Alderman of the Towne, and a Priest called Plometree were the most notable. Then Sir George Bowes Marshall, finding many to be faultors in the foresaide rebellion, did sée them executed in euerie markette Towne and other places, betwixt Newcastell and Wetherbie, about thrée score miles in length, and fortie miles in breadth.
               On good Fridaie, the seuen and twentie daie of March, Simon Digbie of Askew, Iohn Fulthorp of Isilbecke in the Rebelles executed at Yorke. Countie of Yorke Esquiers, Robert Peneman of Stokesley, Thomas Bishoppe the younger of Poklinton in the same Countie of Yorke Gentlemen, were drawne from the Castell of Yorke, to the place of execution called Knaues-myre, halfe a mile without the Cittie of Yorke, and there hanged, headed and quartered: their foure heads were set on the foure principall gates of the Cittie, with foure of their quarters, the other quarters were set in diuers places of the Countrie: Oscolph Clesbe was with them drawne to the gallowes, and returned againe to the Castell.
               One Hillyard the Earle of Northumberlands man, and Rebelles executed at Berwicke. a vagraunt person named William Godswher, were taken

among the other rebelles, and were brought to Bervvicke, where they were executed the foure and twentie day of Maie.
               The seuen and twentie day of Maie, Thomas Norton 
                  The Nortons executed. and Christopher Norton of Yorkeshiere, being both condemned of high treason, for the late rebellion in the North: were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and there hanged, headed and quartered.
               A conspiracie was made by certaine Gentlemen and other, in the Countie of Norfolke, whose purpose was on Conspiracie in Norfolke. Midsommer day, at Harlestone Fayre, with sound of Trū
                  pet and Drum, to haue raysed a number, and then to proclaime their deuillishe pretence against Straungers and other. This matter was vttered by Thomas Kete one of the conspiracie, vnto Iohn Kensey, who foorthwith sent the same Kete with a Constable to the next Iustice, before whome and other Iustices, he opened the whole matter. Whereupon, Maister Dreugh Drewrie immediatlie apprehended Iohn Throckmorton, and after him many Gentlemen of the Cittie of Norwich, and the Countie of Norfolke, who were all committed to prison. And at the next Sessions of Gaole deliuerie at the Castell of Norwich, the seuentéene of Iulie, before Sir Robert Catlin Knight, Lord cheefe Iustice, Maister Gilbert Gerrard, the Queenes Attourney generall, and other Iustices, ten of them were endighted of high Treason, and some others of contempt, diuers of them were condemned, and had iudgement the one and twentie of August, and afterward thrée of them were hanged, bowelled and quartered, which were Iohn Throckmorton of Norvvich Gentleman, who stoode mute at his arraignement, but at the gallowes, confessed himselfe to be the chéefe conspiratour, and that none had deserued to die but he, for that he had procured them. With him was executed Thomas Brooke of Rolsebie Gentleman, the thirtie day of August, and George Redman of Cringlefoord Gentleman, was likewise executed the second day of September.
               
                  
The eight day of August, Iohn Felton, who before had Iohn Felton executed in Paules Churchyard in London. 1571. béen condemned in the Guild Hall of London, for hanging a Bull at the gate of the Bishoppe of Londons Pallace, was drawne from Newgate into Paules Churchyarde, and there hanged on a gallowes newe set vp that morning, before the Bishops Pallace gate: and being cut downe aliue, he was bowelled and quartered.
               The first day of Iune, Iohn Storie a Doctor of the Cannon Doctour Storie executed at Tyborne. 1572. Lawe, who had béene a great persecutour of Gods flocke in the raigne of Quéene Marie, hauing béene before condenmed of high treason: was drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, his head set on London Bridge, and his quarters on the gates of the Cittie.
               The eleuenth day of Februarie, Kenelme Barney, and Kenelme Barney, Edward Mather, and Henry Rolfe executed for treason. 
                  Edward Mather, were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and Henrie Rolfe from the Marshalsea in Southwarke, to the same place of execution: where they were all thrée hanged, bowelled and quartered for treason. Barney and Mather for conspiracie, and Rolfe for counterfeiting the Quéenes Maiesties hand.
               The sixtéenth of Ianuarie, the Lord Thomas Haward, Duke of Norfolke, was arraigned in VVestminster Hall, The Duke of Norfolke condemned for high treason, and beheaded on the Tower hyll. before George Lord Talbot, Earle of Shrewesburie, high Steward of England for that day: and there by his Péeres found guilty of high treason, and had iudgement accordinglie. So on the second day of Iune following, in the morning betwéene the houres of seuen and eight, the said Thomas Haward Duke of Norfolke, was beheaded on a Scaffolde set vp on the Tower hill.
               The two and twentie day of August, Thomas Percie 
                  The Earle of Northumberland beheaded at Yorke for high treason. Earle of Northumberland, late of Topcliffe, who had béene before attainted by Parliament of high treason, as being one of the principall conspiratours in the late rebellion in the North, and now brought out of Scotland, whether he had fledde: was beheaded at Yorke, about two of the clocke in the after noone, on a newe Scaffolde, set vp for

that purpose in the Market place.
               The eight and twentie day of Nouember, Iohn Hall Gentleman, and Oswalde Wilkinson late of Yorke, and Iohn Hall and Oswald Wilkinson executed. 1573. Gaoler of Yorke Castell, being before arraigned and condemned of high treason: were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered.
               The sixtéene day of Iune, Thomas Woodhouse a Priest Thomas Woodhouse executed. 1574. of Lincolneshiere, who had béen long prisoner in the Fléet, was arraigned in the Guild hall of London, and there condemned of high treason: who had iudgement to be hanged and quartered, and was executed at Tiborne the ninetéene day of Iune.
               
                  Cuthbert Mayne, being condemned of high treason, the Cuthbert Mayne executed. 1577. thirtie day of Nouember, was drawne, hanged and quartered at Lawnceston, in the prouince of Cornewall.
               The third day of Februarie, earlie in the morning, Iohn 
                  Iohn Nelson executed. 
                  Nelson, being condemned of high treason against her Maiestie: was drawne from Newgate to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered.
               The seuentéene day of Februarie, one named Thomas 
                  Thomas Sherwood executed. 1578. 
                  Sherwood, hauing béen before condemned of high treason, was drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and was there hanged, bowelled and quartered.
               
                  William Lacie, and one Kirkman a Priest, being condemned William Lacie & Kirkman executed at Yorke. of high treason, were drawne, hanged and quartered at Yorke.
               
               
                  Euerard Haunse alias Ducket, an obstinate and a wicked Euerard Haunse executed. Traitour, hauing béene condemned of high treason, was drawne from Newgate to Tiborne, and there hanged and quartered, according to his iudgement.
               The first day of December, Edmund Campion Iesuite, Edmund Campion, Ralphe Sherwin, and Alexander Briant executed. 1581. 
                  Ralphe Sherwin, & Alexander Briant Seminarie Priests, were, drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, where they were hanged, and afterward were bowelled and quartered for high treason.
               On Monday the eight and twentie day of Maie, Thomas 
                  Thomas Foord, Iohn Shert, and Robert Iohnson executed.
                  
                  Foord, Iohn Shert, and Robert Iohnson Priests, who were copartners with Campion in his traiterous enterprises, were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, where they were hanged, bowelled and quartered for high treason.
               On wednesday following, being the thirtie day of May, Luke Kirbie, William Filbie, Thomas Cottā, and Lauraunce Richardson. 1582. 
                  Luke Kirbie, William Filbie, Thomas Cottam, and Lauraunce Richardson, who were likewise of Campions confederacie: were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered for high treason.
               
                  Iohn Slade and Iohn Bodye, two obstinate and notorious Iohn Slade, and Iohn Body executed. Traitours, being condemned of high treason: Iohn Slade was drawne, hanged and quartered at VVinchester, on Wednesdaye being the third daye of October, and Iohn Bodye executed in like manner at Andouer on the Saturdaye following.
               
                  Edward Arden Esquier, being condemned of high treason, Edward Arden executed in Smithfield. 1583. was drawne from Newgate into Smithfield, where he was hanged, bowelled and quartered. And Iohn Sommeruile, who should haue béene executed with him, being condemned for the same offence, destroyed himselfe in Newgate the day before.
               
                  William Carter, a Stationer by Occupation, for printing William Carter executed. of traiterous Bookes and other notorious offences, was drawne from Newgate to Tiborne, where he was hanged bowelled and quartered.
               On Wednesday being the twelfth day of February, Haddocke, 
                  Haddock, Fenne, Hemerfoord, Nutter and Mū
                     den executed. 
                  Fenne, Hemerfoord, Munden and Nutter, were all fiue drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, where they were hanged, bowelled & quartered for high treason.
               
                  Fraunces Throckmorton Esquier, for diuers traiterous Frances Throckmorton executed. 1584. practises attempted against the Quéenes Maiestie, was arraigned and condemned in the Guild hall of London, and afterward on the tenth day of Iulie, he was drawne from the Sessions house in London to Tiborne, where he was hanged, bowelled and quartered.
               
                  
Héere maiest thou O England (as in a Glasse) behold the successe of treason from time to time, by these so many and sundrie examples héere offered vnto thée, whereof full many remaine freshe and quicke in remembrance, thou maist discerne, how God, who placeth Kinges and Princes in their seates and Signories, and by whose appointment they haue their ruling on earth: dooth sharply chastise such wicked braunches, as deale otherwise then beséemes them with their Princes and Gouernours. Be their mindes God sharply scourgeth al traitours, who practise any euyll against their Prince. neuer so hautie, be their deuises neuer so subtill, yea, and let them worke neuer so closelie: his eye discerneth them, and séeing their secrete intentions is against them whome he hath annointed, he bringeth them and their practises to open view, that the world maye sée their vnduetifull dealing, and by the punishment which he woorthelie imputeth to such offendours, the rest may learne and dispose themselues to better gouernement. But let me England come a lyttle néerer thée, and order the matter so, as thou mayst finde thy selfe touched in déede. Perhappes thou wilt saye these thinges are doone and past, and they were but a certaine fewe that thus haue offended, and being iustly scourged for their misdemeanours, they are now quite worne out of remembraunce, in hope there remaineth none such as they haue béene. Alas, canst thou thus blindlie ouerthrowe thy selfe in conceite? Doost thou not consider, that England hath beene greatly endaungered by traiterous practises. all these euill impes haue béene of thine owne bréeding, and that thou hast fostred such Children, as haue pierced into thy bowelles, shaken all thy sinewes, yea, and almost haue wrung the verie marowe out of thy ioyntes, whereby thou hast béene so féebled, and thy strength so farre decaied, as without Gods great mercie thou hadst béene vnable euer to arise againe? And cannot these irking occasions yet make thée mindful of thy good? Cannot these bitter passions cause thée to look better to thy children? To traine them vp in more awe of God, in better affection to their Prince, and in more effectuall loue (then they yet shew) to

thy selfe? If thy children be so vnnatural, as to make their mother smart, thou shalt but shew thy selfe naturall in ministring correction: for better they wéepe then thou bléede, so shall they in time finde it to their benefite, and thou thy selfe liue to be a happy mother. But if thou séeke that state The cause of an euyll cut off, the effect can take no place. of quietnesse, and art desirous to weede out such badde plantes as trouble thy whole Soyle: thou must looke into the dealinges of thy Children more heedefullie then thou doost, and spying where the inconuenience lyeth, rather slippe off that braunch suddenlie, then hazard the perishing of the whole body, and then thou shalt take an vndoubted good course: then treason and tretcherous practises will neuer be so rife, and such queazie stomackes as cannot brooke necessarie councell, but follow euerie disordered humour, will be glad to call themselues home againe, and liue within compasse of duetie and modestie.
               But whence grow these daungerous practises? And who are they that set foote in these traiterous attempts? Alas it is soone seene, by reason the open apparaunce from time to time, dooth make it euident. There is no one that repineth No greater enimies to the safetie of England, then Papists. at her Maiesties safety, no one that lifteth at the wel setled gouernement of this Realme, nor any one more ready to pul down the chéefe piller of our happines: but either he is a Papist, or else meruailously addicted that way. And haue we not good cause so to perswade our selues, when we sée it dailie before our eyes, that they are men of that coate, and either haue receiued encouragement amongst their fellowes beyond Seas, or else haue béene imboldened by such as secretly flippe ouer into the Realme, to follow that traiterous intent which they long time haue practised. And then when God reuealeth their wicked spirites, and bringeth them into the lyght that they may be example to The common speech of Traytours at theyr death. other: then they crie out, I am a Catholique, I will dye in the Catholique cause, and thus vnder shewe of Religion, they would deceiue the world with their horrible treasons. It is now hie time therfore, when Traitors themselues haue giuen warning of their owne treasons, to

search the confederacie, yea, and as Miners followe the signes euerie way as they spread in the ground, till they be guided to the trunke or body of the Mettall: so to followe the apparaunces of suspitions and likelyhoods, tyll it appeare plainlie what light made the shaddowe, or what fire made the smoke. It is not good tarying, tyll the flame mounting in the ayre aboue the house toppe, the principals and pillers consumed, and eche part so imbraced with fire, that no aide dare approche: doo plainlie declare, the whole building past hope of recouerie. Fires oftentimes negligentlie raked vp, sticks endes not throughly quenched, embers not regarded, a candles ende not looked vnto: haue brought many an honest man to pittifull calamitie. I like therefore better the honest wisedome of those, that studie It is the duety of euerie good subiect, to haue a speciall care of the safety of his Prince. how the Quéenes Maiestie our most gratious Ladie may stand and not fall, then the reaching pollicie of those, that deuise how themselues may stand when the Queene is fallen. God preserue her Highnesse long, for her falling would make a Sampsons poste with vs all: yea, and rightlie a Sampsons poste, for no doubt it would broose them too, that be busiest to pull it downe. But now (England) I will be so bolde as to emblazon the Papists a little better, that thou maist be the more héedfull to them, and giue no credite to their secrete perswasions, and according as a woorthy learned man, hath héeretofore painted them foorth in notable conclusions: euen so since the time, place & matter requireth it so fitlie, it shall not be a misse héere to remember thée of the verie same conclusions, and surelie all true Christians, and all true Englishe subiectes ought to beléeue, and may well knowe, that these are verie true and vndoubted conclusions.
               First that euerie Papist, that is to saye, euerie one that The first conclusion, of such as hold al the Popes doctrine to be true. beléeueth all the Popes doctrine, to be true: is an enimie and traytour, against the Maiestie and honour of God, against the Crownes and dignities of all Kinges and temporall Princes, and against the wealth and safetie of all ciuill Kingdomes, policies, and Common weales.
               
                  
Secondlie, that euerie such English Papist is a traitour The second conclusion, of such as expect theyr Golden day. to the Quéene of England, and hateth her life, wisheth the alteration of her gouernement, and liueth in hope of an other world: which euen by an ordinarie by-word, it is said themselues doo call their Golden day.
               
               Thirdlie, that euerie such Englishe Papist is a speciall The third conclusion, of such as would ouerthrow theys Countrey, for theyr Idolatrous Religion. traitour to the Realme of England, and hath no regard into what slauerie, subiection to forreine tirannie, dishonour or other miserie it be throwne: so that their false, Idolatrous and superstitious religion be restored, with liberty to spoile and murder, without respect of dignitie, age, sexe, learning, reuerence, honestie or nature.
               Fourthlie, that no clemencie, gentlenesse, benefits, or louing The fourth conclusion, of such as can not be wun to loue her Maiestie. dealing, can win a Papist, while he continueth a Papist, to loue her Maiestie, how much so euer he dissemble, nor bring them to ascribe their safetie to any her benefites, nor to any praise of her owne goodnesse: but either to their owne dissimulation, practise, and falsehood, which some call cunning, or to the holinesse of their cause, for whome God forsooth so prouideth, as his annointed ones may not possiblie by Lawe, or at least execution of Lawe, be touched. Where in déede, if they continue styll vnpunished, it must be thought that GOD so purueyeth, because the punishments of this world are not sufficient for them: but yet in the meane time it serueth to make them vnexcusable, by whose default so daungerous Woolues remayne in the flocke.
               Item, that Papistry hath this propertie of heresies, contrarie to the nature of Gods trueth: that is, to be throwne The fift conclusion, of the property of papistry. downe with aduersitie, and to flourishe with indulgence and lenitie.
               Item, that as it is reason, that the owner of a shéepbiter The sixt conclusion, of such Papistes as are mur derers of Gods flocke. Mastife, knowing his dogges qualitie: should either hang vp his dogge, or pay for the shéepe that his dogge worrieth. So those that haue notorious Shéepbiters, murderers of Gods flocke, in their custody and power, must make their account, either to hang vp or otherwise dispatche their

curres: or else to aunswer to God for the blood of his shéep, both such as they haue destroyed, and such as they may destroie by any possibilitie héereafter.
               Item, that all aduises to great personages, to perswade The seuenth conclusion, of the causes of supplan ting assured safetie. neutralitie, or an entertaining of contrarie sides in Religion, with vncertainty of countenaunce and fauour: is the waie to supplant assured safetie, to make sure enimies and vnsure fréendes, to lye open to parasites and traitours, to be vnknowne to other, and to be vnable to discerne what other be to them.
               Item, that timerous policie is the wurst policie that The eight conclusion, how tymerous policie is wurst, in a good cause. may be, whatsoeuer the cause be, good or bad, and wurst of all it is in best causes. Wherein as her Maiestie hath neither want of constaunt magnanimitie, nor cause of feare: so is it méete that her enimies haue no stomacke to contemne her, nor by excesse of clemencie, to misconstrue her goodnesse as lacke of daring.
               Item, that by the great nouelties and alterations of The ninth conclusiō, of zealous boldnesse in seruing the Queen. times, that haue happened within our memorie, there is risen a cōmon policie among the people, to ioyne to strong and safe sides, whereby they are aliened from the fearefull: and therefore it is to be prouided, that there be a boldnesse of safetie, to serue the Quéenes Maiestie truelie and zealouslie, and an assurednesse of daunger to her enimies.
               Item, by boldnesse, and sharpe execution vpon enimies, The tenth conclusion, that boldnesse dooth encourage the freendes. the fréendes are encouraged: and contrariwise, if the daū
                  gerous traitour be not remooued, the true Subiect may be left in perill, and thereby the rest of good Subiects disabled, or at least discouraged to venter so farre againe, and the fréedome of consultation (in the meane time) for preseruing the Prince, impeached.
               Item, that it is as truelie saide: Improbum hominem 
                  The eleuenth conclusion, of the daunger in medling with a naughty man. 
                  praestat non accusasse quam absoluere. It is better not to meddle with a daungerous naughtie man, then to let him goe: for what were it else, but to set an house on fire, and run away by the light.
               
                  
Item, that occasions and 
                     ••
                  tte oportunities ouer slipped, The twelfth conclusion, of tyme. are not recouerable.
               Item, that many times it is as small an offence, to giue The thirteenth conclusion, as good the killing a true mā as sparing a traitour. a warrant to kill a true man: as to pardon a murderer or a traitour: as a wise Shéepheard will rather giue leaue to a Hunter, to kill the best Lambe in his flocke, then to let goe a Fore or a Woolfe.
               Item, that the liues of Kinges and Princes, are the The foureteenth conclusion, that the life of a king, is the lyfe of his kingdome. liues and soules of their Kingdoms and Common weales, whereby they are to consider, that in being prodigall of their owne safeties, in excesse of clemencie to traitours, or in securitie of exposing their personnes to perilles: Largiuntur ex alieno, they be liberall of that, which is not their owne to giue.
               Item, that no Traitour is more perillous, then he that The fifteenth conclusion, the most perillous traytour. wresteth the Lawe, to raise an vnderminer of the Princes Crowne, to her daunger.
               Item, that he is iustlie to be suspected, that shall practise The sixteenth conclusion, of such as stand against the Princes defence. with any vaine deuise of pacification, or coullored clemencie, to rebate or blunt the edge of the Princes sword, or so to tye it in the scabberd, that it may not be drawne for her defence: as if such qualifiers, hiders and cloakers, should séeke to abuse that most reuerend and holie figure of Maiestie to no good end, or other end then God ordained it.
               Item, that God cannot well take it, if he be lesse zealouslie serued then the deuill, that there be lesse feruencie The seuenteenth conclusion, when God is lesse serued then the deuill. shewed by truelie learned Princes, for auauncing of Gods honour against his enimies: then hath béen by abused and deceiued Princes, for setting vp of the kingdome of the deuill and Antichrist.
               Item, that Gods commaundements of placabilitie and The eighteenth conclusiō, that no attempt against her Maiestie, ought to be accounted a priuate cause. forgiuenesse, extend to our owne enimies, but not to his enimies, against reuenge of priuate displeasures, and not against seueritie and sharpe execution, in cases of Gods honour and Common weales: wherein is alwayes to be noted, that the Prince is so not a priuate but a publique person, as no attempt against her Maiesties safetie, can or

ought to be accounted a priuate cause.
               The full proofe and large explication of these conclusions, though it be easie, as a thing which not onelie all conueniencie of reason affirmeth, but also daylie experience laieth before all mens eyes, that haue a frée consideration, not accombred with corrupt zeale and affection: so yet surelie were it a méete thing to be handled by some man, as could adde thereto such ornamentes of spéeche, such strength of eloquence, and pith of perswasion, as might not onelie be vnderstoode and beléeued, but be felt and mooue. Héere any most excellent Orators speciall vertues might be well imployed. A fit argument sure it were to shewe wit and knowledge, but speciallie trueth & good meaning. But tyll some fit person shall take it in hand, to bestowe his more profitable trauaile that waie: let vs yet for vnlading of some of the aboundaunce of intire deuotion for Gods trueth, for her most excellent Maiestie, and our Countrie, haue some remembraunce of the particularities thereof.
               For the first article that defineth Papistes, that accuseth The meaning and proofe of the first conclusion. them of treason to God, to Kinges, and to Realmes: if it be well weied, it cannot but quicklie be séen for vndoubted trueth. Though it be true, that euerie one that holdeth any one error, or article of doctrine that the Pope teacheth, varying from the word of God, is in that article a Papist, as for example, the heresie of Transubstantiation, the blasphemie of popishe Masse, or any such other: yet count I not euerie such a one wholie a Papist within compasse of this article, that is, vnder the title of a traiterous Papist. But such a one as holdeth all the Popes doctrine to be true, that Not all Papistes are traitours. the Romane Church erreth not, that it hath rightfully such superioritie and primacie in others Kingdomes and Dioceses, Note this England. as it hath proudlie claimed and vsurped, and that Christians are bound to referre their faith vnto it, and to hang vpon the Popes determinations. Many men otherwise good and honest Subiectes, are not purged of all errors, wherewith Rome hath infected them, and must haue

their time to be better instructed. But those that are perfect Papistes, that publishe the Pope to be head of the Church (which yet in déede is no member of the true Which Papistes are traytours. Church) and would haue vs with an implicite and bonde faith, to depend vpon that Sea, and for that reason will refuse by all meanes, to confesse the right of Princes in their Kingdomes ouer all their Subiectes: they be perfect traytours in déede, yea, and the learned sort of them be wilfull Heretikes and Traitours. For though in the darke Learned Papists wilfull traitours. times, when controuersies of Religion were not brought into searching, the streame of error carried men away without doubting: yet since that by debating, the light hath béene euidentlie opened, and men haue sought and throughlie examined the matter, there is no learned Papist, but he knoweth that he maintaineth error, and in defending and spreading the same, he defendeth & spreadeth, and so directlie, aduisedlie, wilfullie and maliciouslie, putteth in execution to his vttermost power, high treasons against God, against Kinges and their Kingdomes. Against God I call them treasons, though our Lawe, the iudge of ciuill treasons in England, haue no such name, because the Treason, offence against Maiesty. nature of the offence so properlie receiueth that tytle, and also the vsuall name of high treason in Iure gentium, in the common lawe of Nations, and in other languages, dooth so plainelie expresse it. High treasons are in their true nature, offences against high Maiestie, that is, either to the destruction of the persons, or deniall and defacement of the iust dignities and authorities, of those that beare the name of Maiestie, and to whome the highest duetie of obedience, faith and alleageaunce extendeth. And therfore is treason called Crimen lesae Maiestatis, the crime of violating or abating Maiestie. Greater Maiestie then the Maiestie of God cannot be: therefore higher and verier treasons then against God cannot be. His person cannot be destroyed, or Treason against God. touched: but his dignitie, honour, glorie and authoritie may be slaundered and blasphemed, and his Subiects, who are mortall men, may be withdrawne from their due obedience,

and drawne into rebellion against him. And this I say is high treason to God, to violate or abate the Maiestie of God: and this doo Papists. For though God be King of Papists violate the Maiestie of God, which is high treason against him. the whole world, and so is rightlie called the Lord by vniuersall name, yea, euen of deuilles: yet is his Church his more proper and certaine kingdome, whereby he is more restrainedlie and aplie called our King and our Father, and so more fitlie called our head in respect of the body, which is his Church, and not the rest of the world. In this Kingdome his highest dignitie is to be the onelie head therof, which the Papistes take from him, and deriue it to their Pope. And though with gloses they excuse it, that their Popes take it not from God, but vse it vnder God, as his Uicares: yet must they be admonished, that without sufficient deputation, and warrant from the King him selfe, (which the Pope hath not) the Subiect to thrust him selfe into the gouernance of the kingdome, is high treason, where he that being a straunger would séeke to conquere it, were but an enimie. And so is it rightlie to be saide, that The Pope an high Traitour against God, and the Turke but an enimie. the Turke is to God an enimie, and the Pope is to God a traitour, and all his adherents are principall traitours: for treason admitteth no accessaries.
               But now let vs come to that part, which toucheth men Papists Traitours to Kinges and Kingdomes. more néerelie then any loue of God. Let vs now sée how they be traytours to Kinges and Kingdomes. If we haue minde to sée that Papistes, which holde all the Popes doctrine to be true, are traytours in déede to Kings and Kingdomes: it behooueth vs to call to minde what are the Popes doctrines, dooinges and practises concerning the Crownes of Kinges, and states of Kingdomes. Popes haue challenged, and Papistes (that affirme the Popes to be frée from error, their doctrine to be true, and their authoritie to be lawfull) doo also holde, that it is their due which Traiterous doctrines of Popes for Kinges and Kingdomes. they challenge, that is: To haue authority of both Swords, Spirituall and Temporall, the one in exercise, the other in power: To haue the disposition of all the Crownes of Christian Princes: To haue the iudgement of deciding,

to whome the right of any kingdome belongeth: To haue power for disobedience to him, or by his discretiō, to transferre the Crownes of Kinges to whome he will: To haue lawfull power, to giue Kingdomes to prey, spoyle and conquest, to such as can inuade and possesse them: To haue power to assoyle and discharge Christian subiectes, from faith and alleageaunce to theyr lawful and naturall Soueraigne Lordes, Kinges and Princes: To haue power to giue leaue, yea, commaundement, blessing, reward, forgiuenesse of sinnes, and Heauen it selfe, to Subiects to rebell The Pope will giue heauen to Subiectes, to rebell against their Prince. against theyr Prince, to depose the Prince, disherite and destroy him: That there is of common right, and by the méere lawe of God, reserued to the Pope a speciall subiection, resorte, appellation, and obedience of one great part of all Princes Subiectes, yea, and of all Subiectes of all Princes in one great part of theyr causes. Be not these heinous treasons? And these cannot be denied, to be the naturall and verie treasons of all Papists, that is to say, of all that depend vpon credite of the Pope, that holde him for Gods Uicar, for Peters successor, for whome Christ prayed, that his faith should not fayle, that applie to him this title: Ad quem perfidia non potest accedere, to whome falsehood cannot reach, that holde him for a constant Rocke, an assured Preacher of trueth, an Apostolicall man, if he be not some other thing then a man, to whome our beléefe is bounden: with such other false tytles, wherewith Popes themselues, haue garnished themselues, and theyr Parasites haue ouerloden them.
               Consider the ordinarie practise of Popes and Papistes according to these doctrines, and then you shall sée, that Traiterous dooinges of Papistes against Kinges & Kingdomes: speciall matter for England to marke. from the most high treason, which the Pope committed against his Soueraigne Lord the Emperour: the renting and destructiō of the Empire: all the victories and successes of the Saracens and Turkes against Christendome: all the tearing away of most noble and large Kingdomes and prouinces, from the body of Christianitie: all the subduing and thralling of infinite Christian soules, to Mahomet and

the Deuill: all the deposinges, murderinges, turmoylings, ciuill warres, debates betwéene Christian Princes, shedding of Christian blood, indignities and oppressions of Christian Kinges and Emperours, conquestes, rebellions and mischéefes, for these fiue hundred yéeres and aboue: are wholly and chéefely to be imputed to the treasons of Popes and Papistes. All Grecia (sometime most noble and learned) yet lamentably rueth it. All Affrica, the mother of most constaunt Martyres, féeleth it. The Germane Emperours, with most heinous reproches, and fowle treading on theyr neckes, may not forget it. The Kinges of Fraunce and Spaine, both at home in their natiue Kingdomes, and abroad, as well in Naples, Sicilie, Lombardie, as in other territories of Italie and of the Empire, haue sharply felt it. The Lordes and States of Italie, haue béene daylie and long shaken with it. The Kinges of England haue béene poysoned, whipped, beaten with rods, murdered, deposed, the Land giuen in conquest, interdited, made tributarie, robbed, pylled and scraped of theyr treasure, brought into slauishe subiection, depriued of honour and estimation, euerie way most villainously abused. To let passe the elder times and further Realmes, let vs speake of deposing of olde Emperours, erecting of newe, setting the Sonne against the Father, the Subiect against his Lord, making them come bare footed, themselues with theyr wiues and children long waighting with submission Behold the horrible pride and villainous dealing of Popes & Papistes, and slauerie of Princes. in colde frostes, treading on theyr neckes, spurning of their Crownes, & a thousand such abhominable prides of Popes, and slaueries of Princes. Let vs deale but with our selues, and with our owne féeling, knowledge and memorie. The accursing of King Iohn: the receyuing him vassaill: the making his Realme subiect and feudatorie to the Example of the Popes & Papistes dealing with King Iohn. Pope: the arming his Subiects against him: the poysoning of him at length: the giuing the Land to the French Kinges sonne: the inuading thereof by the Dolphin of Fraunce: his so long possessing a great part of it: the rebellion of the Barons to take the French mens part: all

the mischéefes that fell in all this whyle, were they not the good workes of Popes and Papistes? The great deuision of the two noble houses of Lancaster and Yorke, which cost The great deuision between the two noble houses of Lancaster and Yorke, caused by the Popish Clergy and Papistes. so much Englishe blood, that there remayneth no house of high or meane Nobilitie, that hath not smarted for it. So many foughten fieldes within the Realme, so long and so great vncertaintie, which side were true men and which were Traitours, and for how many dayes or howres they should be so estéemed: such desolation and miseries, to whome are they to be imputed, but to the Popishe Clergie and Papists, and among other to Thomas Arundell Archbishoppe of Canterburie, that trayterouslie practised the deposing of his lawfull Soueraigne Lord King Richard the Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, practised the deposing of King Richard the second. second? But come yet to later times. Howe was the Quéenes Maiesties most noble Father, assaulted by the Pope and Papistes? His Realme was interdited, and giuen away to him that could catch it. Legates, and one notable English traitour, were sent about to perswade Christian Princes, to inuade England, to destroye and depose King Henry the eight, assaulted by the Pope and Papistes. King Henrie, and to take the Realme in reward for their labour. When Charles the late Emperour was setting forward against the Turke, Cardinall Poole being sent by the Pope, made a solemne Oration to him, which is yet extant in print: to perswade the Emperour, to turne his prepared power from inuading the Turke, and to bend it against King Henrie the eight, as one wurse then any Turke. What turmoile was then raised by the Northren Rebelles against him, whereof some by his clemencie (a good example) haue liued to this day to raise a new rebellion? How troubled they her Maiesties most excellent Brother with vnhappy seditions? How vexed they, and King Edward the sixt vexed by the Papistes. how endaungered they the Realme, and the Quéenes own person in her Sisters time, as in the Storie before rehearsed you may reade at large? What might Charles the Emperour haue doone, for recouery and enlarging of Christendome, if his force that way intended, had not by the Popes practise béene peruerted sundrie wayes and times,

to 
                     •••
                  in shedding of christian blood, and wasting of Christendome, and to the ouerthrowe of his victorious course? What tempests hath the late conspiracie of Trent blowne The conspiracie of the late Coū
                     cell of Trent. vp in Christendome, that cannot yet be quieted: and all because the Pope hath instilled an opinion into his Papistes, that Princes, if he dispence with them, are not bounde to The Pope teacheth to keepe no faith. kéepe faith and promise, no, not the word of a King, wherby no peace can be assured? Whereof yet ryseth one good admonition, to trust them no more, and to be well ware of them, and speciallie to thinke of this one particular: that wicked persons, who haue giuen occasion of daungerous rebellions against the Quéenes Maiestie, their chéefe and onelie succour and refuge, will neuer be withholden by any respect, from attempting, or procuring to be attempted, any most high and heinous treason and mischéefe, against our Soueraigne Ladies safetie, if an auauntageable oportunitie may serue them, so long as such persons are infected with Papistrie, and can thinke the Pope able to pardon, or rather willing to reward them, yea, so farre as they shall suppose themselues, not onely to winne the Kingdome of England therby, but also the kingdome of Heauen. It is perillous to thinke what traiterous rage may doo, being armed with drunken superstition. It is a sore thing to consider the impotencie of ambition, specially when it is ioyned with the furie of reasonlesse loue. The The whoore of Rome an actuall dealer in all wicked practises against Kinges & Kingdomes. common experience is, how daungerous those knottes of théeues be, where there is a woman in the company. Thus is it plaine, that for as much as the Pope claymeth such wrongful vsurpation and tiranny, ouer Kings & Realmes, and sith Papists holde that he sayth true, and claymeth but his right, and cannot erre in discerning it: all such Papists are Traitours to all Kinges and Kingdomes.
               As for the second Conclusion, which accuseth Englishe Papistes of treason to the Quéenes Maiestie: it is sufficientlie The second conclusion, prouing Englishe Papistes traytours to the Queene. prooued, for that it is a perticular within a generall, included in the former. Yet for the speciall confirmation of it, it hath certaine priuate and seuerall reasons.

It is well knowne, and you haue read the whole discourse before, how they sought her Graces death in her Sisters time, what practises, what fetches were vsed for it, what examinations, what searchinges, were to finde couller of her destruction: yea, how farre without couller they procéeded, if God had not miraculouslie kept her, to the preseruation of this Realme, and the comfort of all Christendome. But to make some demonstration of their hatred to her Maiestie by reason, & after to discend to the examples and practises: let vs examine the causes.
               Whereas the Papistes holde, that the Pope is head of Papists that hold the Pope head of the Church in England, are traytours to her Maiestie. Gods vniuersall Church, and that such authoritie as the Quéene claimeth in England, ouer Ecclesiasticall persons and in Ecclesiasticall causes, as due to her Highnesse in right of her Crowne, is not due to her, but belonging to the Pope: in so saying, they must saye that her Maiestie claymeth an vniust tyrannicall power. And who so euer shall so saye, though not in the same sillables: is an vniust and an errant traitour, and cannot loue her that hath pul led him downe whome they call head of their Church.
               Where the Pope hath accurssed the Quéenes Maiestie as an Heretique and Scismatique, all those Papists which Papistes that hold the Popes excommunication against the Queene lawfull, are traytours. suppose, that the Pope hauing the disposition of Gods sentence, and the thunderbolte of excōmunication in his hand, cannot erre: doo also suppose that the Quéenes Highnesse, (our Quéene Elizabeth I meane) is not lawfull Quéene of England, (as many of them haue not spared to saye) for so must all Papistes holde, that holde the Pope to say true, for the Pope dooth not so accept her. And Papistes haue published, that Gospellers, whome they call Heretiques, ought not to haue any office among Gods people, much lesse a Kingdome. And this point is well to be considered, that they which take from the Quéenes Maiestie, the Supremacie ouer Ecclesiastical persons and causes: doo transferre the same iurisdiction to the Pope, for they neuer yet vouchsafed to giue it to any other. And yet I am sure, that after so many examples of Bées and Beastes and other

thinges, they will not nowe haue any perticular Church headlesse, and destitute of a supreme Gouernour: either vniuersal like a Monarch as they would haue it, or speciall vnder God of eche Kingdome or Dominion, as Gods good disposition hath forced it. If then the Pope haue (in their opinion) any Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction in England, he must The Pope cannot excommunicate in England, vnlesse he had iust authoritie so to doo. haue I us excommunicandi, lawfull power and authority to excōmunicate in England: without which the Ecclesiasticall power cannot stand. Which power if he iustlie haue, & hath excommunicated and accurssed her Maiestie, either by especiall name (as he dooth) or generallie vnder tytle of Heretiques, of which sort he estéemeth her: then hath he therin doone Pro suo iure as he might lawfullie doo. And this being so supposed true, then is it good to consider what is taken for Gods lawe, and the lawe Ecclesiasticall De vitandis excommunicatis, for shunning of excommunicate Papistes drawe obedience from the Queene. and accurssed persons, which yéeld not to any repentaunt submission, or reconciliation to the Church. Forsooth, that euery christian on paine of excōmunication De iure (wherin to dye, is thought to dye in state of damnation) is bound to withdrawe from such accurssed persons not repenting, all fréendlie or louing company and countenaunce, all ayde and reléefe, all seruice and obedience. Which dooing, for Papistes meritorious treason. these good Subiectes of England, to put in execution toward the Quéene, were a verie meritorious acte. But what dooth it merite? The iust paines of treason, for breaking their due alleageaunce, and eternall damnation (if they repent not) for resisting Gods lawfull ordinaunce. This géere goeth sore, it is verie euident and plaine, that by necessarie consequence, to this confession of trayterousnesse they must be driuen, if they will continue Papistes, that is, will affirme the Popes sentences not to erre, or will giue the Pope any spirituall iurisdiction in England. But such salues are not vnlyke to come out of his shoppe, that dispenseth with breach of faith, yea, that openlie proclaymeth, that there is no faith to be kept with Christs fréends and his aduersaries. His shoppe that can send out badges,

with leaue to sweare and vnsweare, with so lyberall permission, as to saye: Giue me thy heart and it suffyseth. And well may it suffise, for the heart will carrie the hand too, when oportunitie serueth, and when their Golden day approcheth, of which they make so great account. Such fellowes would be well looked on. And because they cannot gette her Highnesse to ceasse to be their lawfull Quéene, themselues haue ceassed to be her actuall Subiectes. Because they cannot shifte her Maiestie from her Crowne, they haue shifted themselues out of her Highnesse Dominions, and are fled beyond the Seas. Some being there, send hyther their hereticall, seditious & traiterous Bookes: Seditious writers that send theyr trayterous Lybelles into England. yet licenced there, against good president of Princes, and against the example of her Maiesties demeanour toward the same Princes, which by themselues or their Officers, rather ought to haue restrained such dooings, then to leaue so shrewd occasion, of taking harme themselues by the like. In these Bookes her right is impugned: her faith is defamed: her gouernement is discredited: her honour is touched: The circūstances of those trayterous Bookes. her Maiestie is many wayes violated and abated: the Religion that her Highnesse holdeth and publisheth, is called Scismaticall, Hereticall, Deuillish, and with as many yll fauoured names as they can rehearse, being yet in such eloquence perfect Oratours. The Preachers and professours of the Religion, that her Highnesse setteth foorth and professeth, are tearmed wurse then Infidels: her tytle of Supremacie ouer all her Subiectes, is defaced for an vsurped and vndue name, and her Subiectes hearts alienated and perswade to grudge against her. These wicked and trayterous Pamphlettes want no fauourers to spread These trayterous Bookes want no fauourers to spread them abroad, and to credit them with what cōmendations they may. them abroade, nor doo they that disperse them lacke any boldnesse, to reade them in audiences & in corners: where they commend them, defend them, giue them great prayses for learning and substantialnesse, as matters vnaunswerable, when God he knowes there is no such surpassing excellencie in them, as they that haue the spurres yet sticking in theyr sides, and haue béene broken winded with

ouer gallopping them, yea, they that are of their owne faction haue not béen ashamed to speake it, how notablie they haue béen wounded by many of her Maiesties learned subiectes. Neuerthelesse, they continue writing still, and all pretences that both the Pope and Papistes can deuise, are daily and hourely spread abroad in the Realme, to weaken the good willes of her Maiesties Subiects toward her, and by all false and vaine coullers they can imagine, they practise how to drawe more subiectes to take their parts. But in the meane time, as God gathereth his glorie out of all things, yea, euen out of sinnes: so England, out of this great The euyll dealing of Papistes, a good lesson for England. euill thou maist gather some good, a good example and good lesson for thée to learne, that Papistrie is treason, and he that is infected with treason is a traitour, and so prouide against them héerafter. Let them folow what humours they please, doo thou in the meane time take a contrarie course. Where they looke for an other time, doo thou endeuour to maintaine this time: Where they reach with expectation to altering of gouernement, doo thou bend all thy force, policie and meanes of seruice, to the defence of this estate: Where they pray for change, specially of Quéenes, do thou pray for the long and happy continuaunce of her Highnesse raigne: Where they hide rebellious stomackes, doo thou and thy Children shewe true and faithfull hearts: Where they desire, that her Maiestie and her Councell may be deceiued, with flattering & erronious pretence of policie, and couller of clemency, that vnder ye shadowe they may lurke, and be nourished as serpent in bosome, doo thou praye to God to giue iudgement to discerne them, to search the bottome of their treasons, that they may be shaken out, & vsed as daungerous vipers: Where their trust is in the Pope, and popish treasons and conspiracies, let thy confidence be in God and his prouidence, not shrinking from the same with thy best courage and prudence: Where they will not sticke to vse all subtill vndermininges, and will not lose the vauntage of times, that they may one daye triumph in cruel violence, doo thou pray, that on this part be vsed all

good policies, that Gods offered meanes and good oportunitie be not refused and ouerslipped, that God rent not the Kingdome from his annointed, for sparing of his enimies: but that it maye long flourishe in the handes of his most noble and vertuous handmaid, our most excellent and gratious Soueraigne Lady. Thus is it euident by reasons and examples, what hearts Papistes beare to her Maiestie.
               The third Conclusion, that such Englishe Papistes are traitours to the Realme of England, &c. hath receiued two The third conclusion proouing English papistes, traytours to the Realme of England. prooues already: the one in the general treasons of all Papistes to all Realmes, wherein England and Englishe Papistes are included, the other in their traiterous mindes to the Quéenes Maiesties person and dignitie, which is the highest treason that can be to the Realme of England. Yet are there some other perticular dooinges more speciallie to enforce it, namelie the experience that hath béene, of their casting away the care of their Countrie, and all other naturall affections: to the ende with all immanitie, and outragious vnnaturall crueltie, to torment Englishe Christians, and to subiect the Realme to forreine power, for their false religions sake. I am assured there are enow, and too many that can remember, both that they haue read in credible Histories, and séene in lamentable experience: howe the Papistes haue shewed themselues so addicted to their The Papistes reuerence to theyr Pope, hath made them carelesse of theyr Prince and Countrie. superstition, and so captiued to an vndue reuerence of their tyrannous Pope, that they haue for it reiected the care of Countrie, and of those to whome naturall duetie bounde them.
               It is certaine, that that Englishe man which can be contented for Papistrie, to rayse or fauour rebellion in our Countrie: to ioyne in conspiracie with Straungers, to helpe to inuade and spoyle our Countrie: to conuey the Crowne of our Country to a forreiner: to agrée with them in faction, that offer our Countrie to prey, spoyle and conquest: to submitte his faith to that Potentate, that hath accurssed and giuen our Countrie, their soules to the Deuill,

and their bodies, landes and possessions to them that can catch them: to beléeue or fauour them, that spreade all vile dishonours against our Countrie: to lyke well of his dooings, and to holde that he dooth no more then he lawfully may doo, which being an Alien, a forreine Bishop, shall take vppon him to extend his curse to the Prince of our Countrie, and all the people thereof, and that he hath power to discharge the Subiectes of the Realme from their faith and alleageaunce, and hath authoritie to binde their obedience to whome he will, and is able to giue Heauen to rebelles, that shall venter their liues in wasting and Such an one as alloweth of all these wicked causes, must needes be a traytour to his Countrie. destroying our Countrie: He, I saye, that can yéelde his consent to these dooinges and thinkinges, must néedes be a Traitour to his Countrie. And such a one is euerie such English Papist as I haue described, and can be none other if he holde the Pope for a true teacher, and haue good opinion of the Popes doctrine and examples.
               That clemencie and gentlenesse cannot reclayme them from trayterous mindes, while they continue in Papistrie, Clemencie cannot win a Papist whyle he continueth a Papist: speciall examples for England to remember. is as plaine and as true a fourme of spéeche: as if a man should saye, they must néedes be traytours, so long as they remaine full of treason, for treason and Papistrie are vnseperable whyle they be kept vnder, euen as crueltie and Papistrie are vnseperable when they are gotten aboue. Surelie, he that regardeth not the highest duetie, will neuer regard the meanest. The duetie of the loue or feare of God, cannot holde a Papist from blasphemie against God. The duetie of faith and alleageaunce to his Prince, cannot kéepe a Papist from treason to his Prince. The duetie of déere loue to his naturall Countrie, cannot withdrawe a Papist from assenting to, yea, and procuring the spoyle, destruction, bondage, and alienation of his Countrie, as I haue already prooued. The duetie of kinde and naturall pittie, cannot staye a Papist from murdering the féeble sexe, nor the sielie tender infancie, nor reuerend eldest age. The duetie of familiaritie in youth, of fréendshippe in grauer yéeres, of continuall

societie during all the life passed, with heapes of mutuall commodities, cannot pull backe a Papist from immanitie of Sacrificing his déerest fréendes. The duetie of honour of Children to Parentes, or loue of Parentes to Children, remooueth not a Papist from vnnaturall crueltie. The duetie of intire loue and fellowshippe betwéene man and wife, holdeth no place in the heart of a Papist. No duetie of kindred, no estimation of Learning and Uertue, no good respect, that mooueth good men to loue and compassion, once toucheth a stubborne Papist.
               All these dueties we haue séene broken, yea, neglected All dueties of loue, kindred and nature broken by Papistes. and throwne awaie by Papistes. And is there hope that clemencie can so farre winne them, as to holde them in trueth to the Prince, from whome they receyue it: if oportunitie serue to bring them out of her daunger, or her Highnesse into their daunger, which God forbidde? But let vs sée a little of their thankefulnesse. Did euer those Papistes, whose liues were saued by good Bishop Cranmers 
                  Example of the Papistes thankefulnes to Bishop Cranmer. meanes, who were brought vp, who were defended, who were auaunced, who were shielded from harme and perill by him: once requite him with one droppe of kindnesse? And yet they spake him fayre in his prosperitie. Auailed the great liberalitie of King Henrie the eight, to rayse vp any kinde remembraunce in Papistes, that were great in Quéene Maries dayes: to staye them Example of the Papistes kindnes toward her Maiestie, for the great lyberalitie of her most noble Father. from the assenting to the captiuitie and daunger, and séeking the blood of his most noble Daughter, our most gratious Soueraigne Lady? And yet during King Henries raigne, they shewed a seruiceable face: as if they would haue spent their bloods, to kéepe wrong from him and his, and did serue against Papistrie it selfe, till their treason and Papistrie was ripe to be aduaunced. A number lyke examples of their gentlenesse and kindnesse might be alleadged, but because I would be bréefe, these fewe shall serue at this time.
               
                  
Of like trueth it is, that Papistrie being an Heresie, or rather a bondle made vp of an infinite number of Heresies: must néedes haue the propertie of Heresie, to flourishe Papistrie increaseth and flourisheth by lenitie. with indulgence and lenitie. We sée the lyke example in the sect of Arrians, which vnder hereticall Emperours excéedinglie increased: and being once condemned and restrained by punishment, hath worne away to a fewe. So farre as King Henrie the eight went in reforming Religion, which was to abolishe the primacie of Rome out of this Realme (a noble conquest) with certaine grosse Idolatries: did not the seueritie of his Lawes, the awe of his person, and the dread of due execution, so holde downe those partes of Papistrie which he suppressed, that they durst not once shewe themselues in his dayes? And yet in the same time, the gréeuous lawe of sixe Articles made against Gods trueth, and sinisterlie procured by the Popish Clergie, nor yet the earnest inquirie, nor cruell executing of it by Bishoppes and other, could holde downe the trueth of the Gospell: but that it brake out more and more vpon them.
               The reason is, that Papistry and Christian trueth haue Christian trueth respecteth Heauen, and Papistry the world. two seuerall endes: trueth respecteth Heauen, and Papistrie the world. Whereby their aduentures and enterprises are commonlie diuers: the Papist dare boldlie set vpon any mischéefe, where he hath hope to auaunce his falsehood: the Christian dare constauntlie abide any torment, to giue witnesse of Gods trueth. And such qualitie of Gods trueth haue the auncient Fathers described, when one of them calleth the blood of Martyres: The water to water Gods Garden, an other sayth: That they encrease with cutting downe, and other in other manner haue expressed the same meaning.
               But now being vnder a Christian Prince in dayes of rest (blessed be almightie God, and long preserued be her Maiestie the instrument of it) as it is not méete that Gods Church, after Iulian the Apostataes manner, be persecuted

to make it increase, but holden downe with good discipline for manners, that it growe not wilde and runne into wantonnesse: so is not the Church of the Deuill to be maintained and multiplied with indulgence, winking and slacknesse of correction, but with good seueritie to be restrained, that it growe not to such ranknesse, as to choke the true Church in déede. Mercie may haue her excesse, Too much clemencie may be great crueltie. and clemencie may be great crueltie, when it ouerfloweth to the good mens daunger.
               The other Conclusions that followe, haue great difference from these whereof I haue made some explication, yet haue I not made so large an explication, as trueth is well and easilie able to furnishe, neither can I so well make it, as the expedience of the cause asketh, to giue the vauntage of eloquence to the goodnesse of the matter, to helpe to drawe it into credite, and effect of well moouing. But being as it is, rude and true, great cunning and finenesse is the lesse néedefull: where those (for whome it is intended) are so wise, as it is farre more easie for naked troth to enforme them, then for any gaie spéeche to leads them.
               As for the other Conclusions that followe: I neither haue nor will wade so farre in them, because they are matters of consultation and meditation. The effect thereof, which is the safe preseruation of the Quéenes royall Maiestie and the Realme, the auoiding of daungers that threaten the same, the establishing of assurednesse, boldnesse, courage, and fréedome of her Highnesse most good Councellours and Subiectes, the taking auauntage of oportunitie and occasions, the wéeding out of deceiuers and vnderminers, the defence of her Maiesties honour and dignity, the meanes to aunswer their charge toward God, and namelie, in dealing with men as they be affectioned to or against God.
               The effect I saye of these other Conclusions, I knowe doo continuallie busie her Maiestie and her most honourable

Counsailours, in thinking on them, and prouiding for them: therefore it shall no furder occupie me and other meane Subiectes, then in prayer and readinesse to serue, as her Maiestie and her Councell shall sée fitte to imploy vs. It shall suffise me, and so ought it to content all other, to knowe as we doo knowe, what a wise Prince we haue, what good Councell she hath chosen, how well they haue gouerned, what fruite we haue had of it: so as nothing is left to vs, but to giue thankes, to beware that our sinnes giue not the occasion of losse and chaunge, to serue duetifullie, and to pray deuoutlie.
            
            
               The Conclusion.
               
                  THus haue I England bréefelie collected such matters héere together, as if thou héedfullie marke, thou mayst make great profite of them. And in trueth great néede thou hast to be carefull of them, for Papistes were neuer bolder, nor treason put more in practise, then it hath béene of late dayes.
               Remember that cruell murder in Fraunce at the mariage, when the famous Admirall Shatilion, was so vnnaturallie murdered. Remember the late and horrible murder of the noble Prince of Orange: and let these teach thée to be more circumspecte to that daungerous broode.
               I could wade into furder matters, as to tell thée of many other crimes and offences, which thou hast meruailous

néede to looke vnto: but because I entended this present purpose in this Watchwoord, I referre the rest to my other Booke called the Court of Conscience, which A Booke called the Court of Conscience, which I entend (God aiding me) to publish verie shortly. thou shalt shortlie receyue from me. And I dare awarrant thée, that thou neuer readst not such a Booke in all thy life, both for the circumstances of the matter, and the woorthinesse of the whole in generall: but tyll it come, that thou thy selfe mayst iudge of it, I will bréefelie desire thée to ioyne in prayer with me, for the good successe of all happinesse, that may please God to send thée.
               Let vs praye, that we may sée when those that shall wrest or procure to chaunge Lawe, to erect the courage of any daungerous Uiper to such endes, or to any aspiring hope of preuenting and vndermining, vnder what couller, name, pretence, or otherwise, or to the safegarde of their persons that haue so attempted: that they maye be declared, and executed as enimies to the state, and to the Quéenes safetie.
               Let vs praye, that we may sée such Lawes prouided for her Highnesse preseruation, and the same so executed God graunt that such Papistes as be enimies to her Maiestie and the Realme, may be quickly cutte off. without restraint or slackenesse for any respect: as the hope of Papistes, such as be enimies to God, the Quéene and the Realme, may (if they repent not) be cutte off for euer.
               Let vs praye to liue to sée, that none may haue place, Office, or accesse into her Maiesties Court nor household, no, nor once into her presence: that shall not be knowne to fauour both God and her, so farre as any circumspection or policie can prouide it.
               Let vs praye, that no Office of dignitie, Lawe or Iustice, may be in their handes, who doo not fauour the Lawe of God, and acknowledge her Maiesties right, that is head of Lawe and Iustice in this Realme.
               Let vs praye, that her Maiestie and her Councell may haue such particular knowledge of men, that those that haue well deserued, yea, haue and yet doo hazard their

liues in her Maiesties defence, and haue vtterlie wasted themselues and their fréendes in her Maiesties seruice, yet remaining vnrecompenced: that they maye not loose the benefite of their labours, that no euill tongue maye raise slaunder to their discredite, but that they maye according to their good seruice, be effectuallie and duelie rewarded, the onelie meane to encourage other to earnest taking of paines.
               Let vs praye, that all such as be her Maiesties enimies may be weakened, and her faithfull fréendes and well-willers strengthened: that all auauntages may be vsed for her safetie, and all subtill deuises and practises may be supplanted.
               We trust it will be so, for God hath not drawne these late mischéefes into lyght for nothing. But before all thinges, let vs praye to GOD to sende vs true repentaunce, more ioyfull and effectuall receyuing of his Gospell, and more and more vertuous ensuing it: least as we lost our best King with liuing yll, wee loose our best Quéene with liuing wurse.
               And that therewith it may please him, to direct all the dooinges of her Maiestie and her Councell, to procéede in their good aduauncing his glorie, and preseruation of the estate: which without ielous circumspection, for preseruing the Quéenes most royall personne, can not be doone. And that such good meanes and prouisions, as GOD offereth to that ende, be not refused or neglected: which were to tempt GOD, to forsake his cause, to betraie our noble Prince, and to giue away, or rather cast away the Realme.
               These be the daylie and nightlie prayers of good Subiectes, and while we busie our selues with these prayers, we doo, after our principall confidence in Gods goodnesse, rest our selues vppon the trust of her Maiestie, and her most honourable Councell: for whome we prayse God, and to them we referre the guiding of vs and ours, readie

to followe them when we are commaunded, with the vttermost of our power and perill, knowing how they spare not their vttermost endeuour and perill, with susteining the most vnpleasaunt life (God knowes) that may be, for our sakes, for our quiet, profits and defence.
            
            FINIS.
            God long preserue and blesse our Queene Elizabeth, and confound all her enimies. Honos alit Artes. A. M.
            
            
         
      
   