
      
         
            
            
            THE
TRIVMPHES
of re-vnited
BRITANIA.
            
            Performed at the coſt and charges of the
Right Worſhip: Company of the Merchant-Taylors,
in honor of Sir Leonard Holliday kni:
to ſolemnize his entrance as Lorde Mayor of
the Citty of London, on Tueſday the 29. of
October. 1605.
            Deuiſed and Written by A. Mundy, Cittizen
and Draper of London.
            Printed at London by W. Jaggard.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The triumphes of
re-vnited Brytannia.
            
               BEcauſe our preſent conceit,
reacheth vnto the antiquitie
of Brytaine, which (in many

                  •
               indes) hath carried as many
and variable opinions: I
thought it not vnneceſſary,
(being thereto earneſtly ſolicited)
to ſpeake ſomewhat
concerning the eſtate of this our Countrey, euen
from the very firſt originall, vntil her honourable
attaining the name of Brytannia, and then laſtlye
how ſhe became to be called England. Moſt Writers
do agree, that after the Deluge,A
                     〈…〉
                  oment
                     〈…〉
                   lib. 
                     〈…〉
                  de 
                     〈…〉
                  . 
               Noah was the
ſole Monarch of all the World, and that hee deuided
the dominion of the whole earth to his three
ſonnes: all Europe with the Iſles therto belonging
(wherein this our Iſle of Brytaine was one among
the reſt) fell to the lot and poſſeſsion of Iaphet his
third ſonne. Samothes the ſixt ſonne of Iaphet,
               Wolfangus Lazius. called
by Moſes Meſech, by others Dys, had for his portion
the whole contrey lying between the Ryner of
Rhene and the Pyrenian mountains, where he founded
his kingdome of Celtica
               I Bale cent. 1 ouer his people called

               Celtae, which name, by the opinion of Bale our
Countrey man, was indifferent to them of Gallia,
and vs of this Iſle of Britaine. This Samothes being
the firſt King ouer theſe people, of him came lineally
theſe kings following: Magus, Sarron, Bruis
and Bardus, all ruling ſeuerally ouer the Celts and
Brytons, who were not then ſo called, but Samotheans,
after the name of Samothes. Of Bardus, whoe,
according to Beroſus, was very famous for inuenting
of Muſicke and Duties, came an order of philoſophicall Poets or Heralds, called Bardi, after his
owne name, whoſe excellent qualities were of ſuch
power, as they coulde enforce armies of Enemies
ready to fight fierce battell, to ſtand at a gaze, and
forbeare their cruell intent, vntil theſe Bardes lefte
ſinging, and went out of the battel: According to
Lucane. lib. 1.

                  Vos quoque quifortes animas belloque peremptas,
                  Laudius in longum vates dimittitis aeuum,
                  Plurima ſecuri fudiſtis carmina Bardi.
               
Many of theſe Bards lined among the Britans,
               I. Bale ſcript. Brit cent. 2 I P
                     ••
                  ſe. defēſ hiſt. Brit. Ca
                     〈…〉
                   de ant 
                     •
                  ant lib. 1 John Leland 
                     〈…〉
                  . ant▪ di
                     •
                  t. before
the birth of Chriſt, as Plenid
                     •
                  us and Oronius.
Since then, Thaleſtine, the two Merlins, Melkin,
Elaskirion and others. Among the Welſhmen nowe
of late daies, Dauid Die, Iollo Gough, Dauid ap-Williams,
and diuers others remayning yet amongeſt
them, and called in their owne language Bardhes.
            
            Thus continued the name of Samothes the ſpace
of 310.Neptune for his many ſhips call
                     •
                  d king or god of the Seas, and in regard of his great skil in Nauigation. yeares, ti'l Neptune put his ſon Albion the
Gyant in poſſeſsion of this land, who ſubduing the
Samotheans, called this Iland Albion after his owne
name. Concerning the comming hither of Danaus
               
50. daughters, and that one of them ſhoulde
be called Albina, and ſo the land to bee named by
her: Firſt, not any one of them was ſo named, neither
do I thinke the ſtorie ſo authentical, but doe
hold Albions name for the trueſt.
            The Country thus peopled with Giantes, and
continuing after the name of Albion for 600. years:
Brute, (being directed by a viſion in his ſleepe, to
finde out a country ſcituated in the Weſt) with the
remaines of his Troyan folowers, arriued and Landed
at the hauen now called Totnes, the yeare of the
world, 2850. after the deſtruction of Troy, 66. before
the building of Rome 368. and 1116. before
Chriſts natiuity. He, ſearching the land ouer from
ſide to ſide, found it to be very fertile, and inhabited
by vnciuil, monſtrous huge men of ſtature, tearmed
Grants, whom he with his bolde and reſolued
companions ſlew and deſtroyed. One of them named
Goemagot or Gogmagog, exceeding the reſt in
ſtrength and courag, Brute cauſed Corineus, one
of his confederates, to wraſtle with the ſaid Goemagot
at a place beſide Douer, where the Grant
hapned to break a tib in the ſide of Corineus, which
ſo ſharply incenſed him, that redoubling his power
to win the victory, he threw him headlong downe
from off one of the Rocks, which place was after
called Gogmagogs leape The Gyant being thus diſpatched,
in reward of this honourable piece of ſeruice,
Brute gaue vnto Corineus a part of his lande,
which according to his name, was, and yet is vnto
this day, caled Cornwall.
            
            
               
               Brute thus hauing the whole Land in his owne
quiet poſſeſsion, began to build a citty, neer to the
ſide of the Riuer Thameſis, in the ſecond yeare of
his raign, which he named Troynouant, or as Humfrey
Lhoyd ſaith,G
                     •
                  l. Mon. 
               Troinewith; which is, newe Troy:
in remembrance of that famous citty Troy, whence
hee and his people (for the greater part) were deſcended.
Now beganne he to aiter the name of the
Iland, and according to his owne name, called it
Brytaine, and cauſed all the inhabitantes to bee named
Brytons, for a perpetuall memory, that he was
the firſt bringer of them into this land. In this time
he had by his wife faire Innogen, daughter to King
Pandraſus king of the Greeks, three worthy ſonnes,
the firſt named Locrine, the ſecond Camber, and the
third Albanact, to which three (not long before his
death) he deuided his whole kingdome in ſeuerall
partitions, giuing to Locrine all that part which we
know beſt by the name of England, then tearmed
by him Loegria or Logres. To Camber he limitted
the Countrey of Wales, called Cambria after his
name, and demded from Loegria by the riuer of Sauerne.
To Albanact his third ſonne, he appointed
al the North part of the Ile, lying beyond the Riuer
of Humber, then called Albania, now Scotland;
and to that Riuer then Albania did reach. But ſince
that time, the limits of Loegria were enlarged, firſt
by the proweſſe of the Romanes, then by our owne
conqueſts, that the Tvvede on the one ſide, and
the Solue on the other, were taken for the principal

boundes betweene vs and Scotland.
            
            After Brute, I finde not any other alteration of
our Countryes name, vntill the raign of King Ecbert,
who about the yeare of Grace 800. and the
firſt of his raigne, gaue foorth an eſpeciall Edict,
dated at Wincheſter: that it ſhoulde be named Angles
Land, or Angellandt, for which (in our time)
we do pronounce it England. Nor can Hengyſt the
Saxon be the Father of this latter name, for Ecbert,
becauſe his anceſtors deſcended from the Angles,
one of the ſixe Nations that came with the Saxons
into Britaine, (for they were not all of one, but of
diuers Countries, viz: Angles, Saxons, Germains,
Switzers, Norvvegians, Iutes, otherwiſe tearmed
Iutons, Vites, Gothes, or Getes and Vandales, and all
comprehended vnder the name of Saxons, beca
                  〈…〉
               
of Hengiſt the Saxon and his company, that firſt
arriued here before any of the other) and thereto
hauing now the Monarchy and preheminence, in
manner of this whole Iſland, called the ſame after
the name of the country, from whence he deriued
his originall. So that neither Hengiſt, nor anye
Qu. named Angla, or deriuation ab Angulo, is to
be allowed before this ſounde and ſure authoritye.
Thus much briefely concerning the names of our
Countrey, now come wee to diſcourſe the whole
frame and body of our deuiſe, in this ſolemne triumph
of re-vnited Brytannia.
            
            
               
               The Shippe called the
Royall EXCHANGE.
               
                  Maiſter.
                  All hayle faire London, to behold thy Towers,
                  
                     After our voyage long and dangerous:
                  Is Seamens comfort, thankes vnto thoſe powers.
                  That in all perils haue preſerued vs.
                  Our Royall Exchange hath made a rich returne,
                  Laden with Spices, Silkes, and Indico,
                  
                  Our wines that for our abſence long did mourne,
                  Now find releaſe from all their former woe.
               
               
                  Mate.
                  Maiſter good newes, our Owner, as I heare,
                  Is this day ſworne in Londons Maioralty:
               
               
                  Boy.
                  Maiſter tis true, for, ſee what troupes appeare,
                  Of Cittizens, to beare him company.
                  Harke how the Drums and Trumpets cheerely ſound,
                  To ſolemnize the triumph of this day,
                  Shall we do nothing, but be idle found,
                  On ſuch a generall mirthfull Holyday?
               
               
                  Maiſter.
                  Take of our Pepper, of our Cloues and Mace,
                  
                  And liberally beſtow them round about,
                  Tis our ſhips luggage, and in ſuch a caſe,
                  I know our Owner meanes to beare vs out.
                  Then, in his honor: And that company,
                  Whoſe loue and bounty this day doth declare,
                  Hurle Boy, hurle Mate. And Gunner, ſee you ply
                  Your Ordinance, and of fireworkes make no ſpare,
                  To adde the very vttermoſt we may,
                  To make this vp a cheerefull Holi-day.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               The Lyon, and the Camell.
               ON the Lyon and Camell, we doe figuratiuely
perſonate Neptune and his Queene Amphitrita,
who firſt ſeated their ſonne Albion in
this land. And in them we figure Poetically, that
as they then triumphed in their ſonnes happy fortune,
ſo now they cannot chuſe but do the like, ſeeing
what happy ſucceſſe hath thereon enſued, to renowne
this Countrey from time to time. And as
times haue altred former harſhe inciuilities, bringing
the ſtate to more perfect ſhape of Maieſtie,
ſo (as occaſion ſerues) do they likewiſe laye their
borrowed formes aſide, and ſpeak according to the
nature of the preſent buſines in hand, without any
imputation of groſneſſe or error, conſidering the
lawes of Poeſie grants ſuch allowance and libertye.
Corineus and Goemagot, appearing in the ſhape and
proportion of huge Giants, for the more grace &
beauty of the ſhow, we place as guides to Britaniaes
mount, and being fetterd vnto it in chaines of
golde, they ſ
                     •
                  eme (as it were) to drawe the whole
frame, ſhewing much enuy and contention, whoe
ſhall exceed moſt in duty and ſeruice.
            
            
               The Pageant.
               ON a Mount triangular, as the Iſland of Britayne
it ſelfe is deſcribed to bee, we ſeate in
the Supreame place, vnder the ſhape

of a fayre and beautifull Nymph, Britania hir ſelfe
accoſted with Brutes deuided kingdoms, in the like
female repreſentations, Loegria, Cambria, and Albania.
Brytania ſpeaking to Brute her Conqueror,
(who is ſeated ſomwhat lower, in the habite of an
aduenturous warlike Troyan) tels him, that ſhe had
ſtill continued her name of Albion, but for his conqueſt
of her virgine honour, which ſince it was by
heauen ſo appointed, ſhe reckons it to be the very
beſt of her fortunes. Brute ſhewes her, what height
of happineſſe ſhe hath attained vnto by his victorie,
being before a vaſt Wildernes, inhabited by
Giantes, and a meere den of Monſters: Goemagot
and his barbarous brood, being quite ſubdued, his
ciuill followers, firſt taught her modeſt manners,
and the meanes how to raigne as an Imperial lady,
building his Troya noua by the riuer Thameſis, and
beautifieng his land with other Citties beſide. But
then the three Virgin kingdomes ſeeme to reproue
him, for his ouermuch fond loue to his ſons, and
deuiding her (who was one ſole Monarchy) into
three ſeueral eſtates, the hurt and inconuenience
whereon enſuing, each one of them modeſtly deliuered
vnto him. He ſtaies their further progres
in reproofe, by his and their now preſent reuyued
condition, beeing raiſed againe by the powerfull
vertue of Poesie (after ſuch length of time) to behold
Britaniaes former Felicity againe, and that
the ſame Albania, where Humber ſlew his ſon Albanact,
had bred a ſecond Brute, by the bleſſed mariage
of Margaret, eldeſt daughter to king Henrie
                  
the ſeauenth, to Iames the fourth king of Scotland,
of whom our ſecond Brute (Royall king Iames) is
truely and rightfully deſcended: by whoſe happye
comming to the Crowne, England, Wales, & Scotland,
by the firſt Brute ſeuered and diuided, is in our
ſecond Brute re-united, and made one happy Britania
again: Peace and quietneſſe bringing that to
paſſe, which warre nor any other meanes could attaine
vnto. For ioy of which ſacred Vnion and combination,
L
                        •
                     crine, Camber, and Albanact, figured
there alſo in their antique eſtates, deliuer vp theyr
Crownes and Scepters, applauding the day of this
long-wiſht coniunction, and Troya-noua (now London)
incites fair Thameſis, and the riuers that bounded
the ſeuered kingdoms, (perſonated in faire and
beautifull Nymphs) to ſing Paeans and ſongs of tryumph,
in honor of our ſecond Brute, Royall King
Iames. Thameſis, as Queene of all Britaines riuers,
begins the triumphal courſe of ſolemne reioyſing.
Next her, Sauerne, that took her name of Sabrina,
begotten by Locrine on faire Elſtrid, and both mother
and daughter were drowned in that riuer, by
Guendolenaes command, the wife to Locrine, dooth
the like. Laſtly, Humber, whoſe name was deriued
from Humber king of the Scythians, who being purſued
by Locrine and Camber, in reuenge of theyr
Brothers death, was inforced to leap into that Ryuer,
and there drowned himſelfe, of whom I finde
theſe verſes written.

                     Dum fugit obſtat ei flumen ſubmergitur illic,
                     Deque ſuo tribuit nomine aquae.
                  
                  
What further may be required, to expreſſe Britaniaes
triumph more perfectly to the life, with al the
other perſonages her ſeruants and attendantes, is
more at large let downe in the ſeuerall ſpeeches,
which I haue hereto annexed as moſt meet & conuenient.
               
                  The ſpeeches deliuered by the ſeuerall children,
according to their degrees of ſeating
in the PAGEANT.
                  
                     Britannia.
                     I that ſometime was termed Albion,
                     
                     After the name of Neptunes valiant Sonne:
                     
                        Albion the Gyant, and ſo had ſtill held on,
                     But that my conqueſt, firſt by thee begun,
                     Hath in fames Chronicle ſuch honor woon,
                     That thy firſt ſetting from Albania,
                        Albania in Greece.
                     
                     Crownd me thy virgin Queene Britania.
                     
                  
                  
                     BRVTE.
                     
                        Wherein, recount thy height of happineſſe,
                        Thou that before my honord victorie,
                        Wert as a baſe and oregrowne wildernes,
                        Peopled With men of inciuility,
                        Huge and ſtearne Gyants, keeping company
                        With ſauage monſters, thus was Albion then,
                        Till I firſt furniſht thee with ciuill men.
                     
                     
                        
                           Goentagot, and all his barbarous brood,
                        (When he was foyld by Corineus hand,)
                        Were quite ſubdued, and not one withſtood
                        My quiet prograce ouer all thy land,
                        But, as ſole Conqueror, I did commaund:
                        And then from Albion did I change thy name,
                        To Brutes Britania, ſtill to hold the ſame.
                     
                     
                        
                        Then built I my New Troy, in memorie
                        Of whence I came, by Thaneſis faire ſide,
                        And nature giuing me poſterity,
                        Three worthy ſonnes, not long before I died,
                        My kingdome to them three I did deuide.
                        And as in three parts I had ſet it downe,
                        Each namde his ſeat, and each did weare a Crowne.
                     
                  
                  
                     LOEGRIA.
                     But ſhe whom thou hadſt made one Monarchy
                     To be ſo ſeuerd, to thy ſonnes might ſhew
                     Some ſigne of loue, to her ſmall courteſie,
                     When three poſſeſſe what one did ſolie owe,
                     It makes more waies to harme then many know.
                     And ſo proou'd that deuiſion of the land,
                     It brought in warie that helliſh fierbrand.
                  
                  
                     CAMBRIA.
                     The king of Hunnes entred Albania,
                     
                     Slew Albanact thy Sonne, and there bare ſway,
                     Till Locrine roſe with valiant Cambria,
                     
                     And to reuendge their Brothers death made way,
                     Which inſtantly they did without delay,
                     And made that Riuer beare the proud kings name,
                     That thus intruded, drownd him in the ſame.
                  
                  
                     ALBANIA.
                     Faire Elſtrid taken in that fatall fight,
                     And Locrines loue to her, wrong to his wife,
                     Duke Corineus daughter, deare delight,
                     That 
                           •
                        eft both her and Locrine of his life,
                     Opened a gap to much more diſmall ſtrife,
                     Of all which heauy haps there had bin none,
                     Had Brute left me one gouernor alone.
                  
                  
                     BRVTE.
                     
                        See, after ſo long ſlumbring in our toombes
                        Such multitudes of yeares, rich poeſie
                        That does reuiue vs to fill vp theſe roomes
                        
                           
And tell our former ages Hiſtorie,
                        (The better to record Brutes memorie,)
                        Turnes now our accents to another key,
                        To tell olde Britaines new borne happy day.
                     
                     
                        That ſeperation of her ſinewed ſtrength,
                        Weeping ſo many hundred yeeres of woes
                        Whereto that learned Barde dated long length
                        Before thoſe vlcerd wounds againe could cloſe,Merlyn, who proph
                                 〈…〉
                              d herof long agoe.
                        
                        And reach vnto their former firſt diſpoſe.
                        Hath run his courſe thorough times 
                              •
                           andie glaſſe,
                        And brought the former happines that was.
                     
                     
                        
                           Albania, Scotland, where my ſonne was ſlaine
                        And where my follies wretchednes began,
                        Hath bred another Brute, that giues againe
                        to Britaine her firſt name, he is the man
                        On whoſe faire birth our elder wits did ſcan,
                        Which Prophet-like ſeuenth Henry did forſee,
                        Of whoſe faire childe comes Britaines vnitie.
                     
                     
                        And what fierce war by no meanes could effect,
                        To re-vnite thoſe ſundred lands in one,
                        The hand of heauen did peacefully elect
                        By mildeſt grace, to ſeat on Britaines throne
                        This ſecond Brute, then whom there elſe was none.
                        
                           Wales, England, Scotland, ſeuerd firſt by me:
                        To knit againe in bleſſed vnity.
                     
                     
                        For this Britannia tides in triumph thus,
                        For this theſe Siſter-kingdomes now ſhake hands,
                        
                           Brutes Troy, (now London) lookes moſt amorous
                        And ſtands on tiptoe, telling forraine lands,
                        
                           
So long as Seas beare ſhips, or ſhores haue ſands:
                        So long ſhall we in true deuotion pray,
                        And praiſe high heauen for that moſt happy day.
                     
                  
                  
                     LOCRINE.
                     
                        England, that firſt was cald Loegria,
                     
                     After my name, when I commanded heere:
                     Giues backe hir due vnto Britannia,
                     
                     And doth her true borne ſonne in right prefer,
                     Before deuided rule, irreguler.
                     Wiſhing my brethren in like ſort reſigne,
                     A ſacred vnion once more to combine.
                  
                  
                     CAMBER.
                     I yeelded long ago, and dyd in heart,
                     Allow Britanniaes firſt created name,
                     My true borne Brutes haue euer tooke her part
                     And to their laſt houre will maintaine the ſame.
                  
                  
                     ALBANACT.
                     It is no meruaile though you gladly yeeld,
                     When the all-ruling power doth ſo commaund,
                     I bring that Monarch now into the field,
                     With peace and plenty in his ſacred hand,
                     To make Britannia one vnited land:
                     And when I brought him, after times will ſay
                     It was Britanniaes happy Holi-day.
                  
                  
                     
                     Troya Nova.
                     Then you faire Swans in Thameſis that ſwim,
                     And you c
                           〈…〉
                        o
                           •
                        ſe N
                              •
                           mphes that do delight to plaie
                     On Humber and 
                           〈…〉
                        e Saue
                              •
                           ne, welcome him
                     In Canz
                              〈…〉
                           
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        gges and many a Roun-delay
                     that from the North brought you this bleſſed day.
                     And in one tuneful, harmonie lets ſing,
                     Welcome King Iames, welcome bright Britaines King.
                     
                  
                  
                     Thameſis.
                     I that am Queene of all Britanniaes ſtreames,
                     The Oceans darling and endeard delight,
                     that want on daily with the Sunnes guilt beames
                     and ore my boſome ſuffer daie and night,
                     Faire flotes of ſhips to ſaile in goodlie ſight:
                     Vnto my ſecond Brute ſhall homelie ſing,
                     Welcome King Iames, welcome great Britaines King.
                     
                  
                  
                     Savarne.
                     Faire Elſtrids and Sabrinaes fatall graue,
                     (Whereby the name of Sauerne fell to me:)
                     When Locrines Quendoline in anger gaue,
                     My wombe to be their diſmall tragedie,
                     Whereof my Nymphes (as yet) talke mournfullie,
                     Vnto my ſecond Brute do likewiſe ſing,
                     Welcome King Iames, welcome great Britaines King.
                     
                  
                  
                     HVMBER.
                     Proud Scithians Humber that ſlew Albanact,
                     
                     Whoſe brethren foreſt him to a ſhamefull flight,
                     When in my watrie armes his lite I wrackt,
                     I tooke his name, and kept it as my right,
                     For which my Nymphes ſtill dauncing in delight,
                     With me theſe Peans and ſweet Canzoni ſing,
                     Welcome King Iames, our ſecond Brute and king.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
               The Chariot.
               
                  Pheme
                  Riding before it.
                  
                     FAME that attends on Britaines Monarchy,
                     Thus revnited to one ſtate againe,
                     Vſhers this Chariot of true dignity,
                     Wherein ſeauen kings that did in England raigne,
                     Theſe Royall vertues in their ſhields containe,
                     Expreſsing what great grace each Maieſty,
                     Gaue to the Marchant-Taylors Company
                  
                  
                     When they were firſt a Guilde, and bare the ſtile
                     Of Tayiors, and of Armorers beſide
                     Of the Linnen armorie: for no little while
                     Were they ſo knowne, and daily did prouide,
                     Thoſe coats of armes that quaild our ſoe-mens pride
                     When Englands bent-Bow, and the gray-goos wing
                     Our many victories abroad did ſing.
                  
                  
                     From this employment for the States defence,
                     Their ancient tytle firſt vnto them came,
                     and then their following care and dilligence,
                     Squarde them the way to order well and frame,
                     all meanes to keepe their Guilde in honeſt fame.
                     Now gratious vertues vnto you I leaue,
                     What further fortunes Time did them bequeath.
                  
               
               
                  Tape
                        •
                     notes.
                  EDward the third, whoſe Noble name I beare,
                  Hearing the Loue and royall amity,
                  
                     
That good report gaue of them euery where,
                  Preſeruing peace and kinde ſocitie,
                  In his firſt yeare vnto this Companie,
                  He gaue this Charter to confirme their Guilde:
                  And they 
                        〈…〉
                     oyd it, as his Highneſſe wilde.
               
               
                  EROS.
                  To build this body on a ſtronger frame,
                  
                     Richard the ſecond gaue authoritie,
                  A Mayſter and foure keepers they ſhould name,
                  and full elect to ſway their myſterie,
                  Granting them power to haue a Lyuerie,
                  and hold a Feaſt on ſaint Iohn Baptiſt day,
                  Yearelie for euer, as they do and may.
               
               
                  Eleutheriotes.
                  To fortifie a worke ſo well begun,
                  Henrie the fourth did liberally create:
                  (Beſide the former fouours to them doone,)
                  Their Guilde a Brother-hood incorporate,
                  And thought it no diſgrace to his high ſtate,
                  To weare the Clothing of the Companie,
                  A moſt Maieſtike royall courteſie.
               
               
                  Sophroſyne.
                  
                     Henry the fift my war-like Lord maintainde
                  His fathers loue to this ſocyetie,
               
               
                  AGNITES.
                  Of my ſixt Henry they as freely gainde,
                  all former graunts in ſelf-ſame qualitie,
                  He wore their clothing, milde and graciouſly:
                  For Princes looſe no part of dignity,
                  In beeing affable, it addes to Maieſty.
               
               
                  
                  Hypomone.
                  Thus long a Mayſter and foure keepers ſtood.
                  Till my fourth Edward changde the keepers name
                  To Wardens: for the ſtrength of Brother-hood,
                  And thus at firſt Mayſter and Wardens came.
               
               
                  Epimeleia.
                  And for they traded, as no men did more,
                  With forren Realmes, by clothes and Merchandize,
                  Returning hither other Countries ſtore,
                  Of what might beſt be our commodities,
                  Henry the ſeuenth a gracious king, and wiſe,
                  To Merchant-Taylors did exchange their name:
                  Since when, with credite they haue kept the ſame.
               
               
                  PHEME.
                  But ſacred Lady, deigne me ſo much grace,
                  As tell me, why that ſeat is vnſupplied▪
                  
                  Being the moſt eminent and chiefeſt place,
                  With State, with Crowne and Scepter dignified?
               
               
                  Epimeleia.
                  Haue our diſcourſes (Pheme) let thee know,
                  That ſeauen Kings haue borne free brethrens name,
                  Of this Societie, and may not time beſtow
                  an eight, when Heauen ſhall ſo appoint the ſame?
               
               
                  PHEME.
                  
                     I finde recorded in my Regiſter,
                     Seauen Kings haue honord this Society:
                     
                        
Fourteene great Dukes did willingly prefer,
                     Their loue and kindneſſe to this Company,
                     Threeſcore eight Lords declarde like amitie,
                     tearming themſelues all brethren of this band,
                     The verie worthieſt Lordes in all the Land.
                  
                  
                     Three Dukes, three Earles, foure Lords of Noble name
                     all in one yeare did ioyne in Brother-hood:
                  
                  IN the yeare 1390. Edward Duke of Yorke. Thomas,
Duke of Gloceſter. Henry Duke of Hereford
and Earle of Darby, vvho afterward vvas K. Henry
the fourth. Edvvard, Earle of Rutlande. Thomas
Earle of Warvvick. Iohn Holland, Earle of Huntingdon. Iohn, Lord Ros
                        •
                     . Rafe Lord Nevill. Thomas L.
Furniuall. Reignald, Lord Gray of Rithin.
                  
                     I finde beſide great Lords from France there came
                     To hold like league, and do them any good:
                  
                  Gaylard, Lord Danuers. Barard, Lord Delamote, Barard, Lord Montferrant, &c.
                  
                     Yet no imbaſing to their heigth in bloud:
                     For they accounted honor then moſt hie,
                     When it was held vp by communitie.
                  
                  
                     Of Biſhops, Knights and Deanes, to thoſe before,
                     (Not ſpoke in vaunt▪ or any ſpirit of pride)
                     My Records could affoord as many more▪
                     
                     All Brethren, Marchant-Taylors ſignified
                     That liu'de in loue with them, and when they dide
                     Left me their names, to aftertimes to tell,
                     Thus then they did, and thought it good and well.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Neptune on the Lyon.
                  
                     MY borrowed name of Neptune now I leaue,
                     the like doth Amphitrita my faire Queene,
                     And worthy Lord, grant fauour to receiue
                     What in theſe myſteries we ſeeme to meane,
                     
                        Britanniaes glorie hath beene heard and ſeene,
                     Reuiu'de from her old Chaos of diſtreſſe,
                     and now vnited in firme happineſſe.
                  
                  
                     Bleſt be that ſecond Brute Iames our dread king,
                     that ſet this wreath of Vnion on her head,
                     Whoſe verie name did heauenlie comfort bring,
                     When in deſpaire our hopes lay drooping dead,
                     When comfort from moſt harts was gon and fled,
                     Immediatlie the trumpets toong did ſay,
                     God ſaue king Iames: Oh twas a happie daie.
                  
               
               
                  Amphitrita.
                  
                     OVr lateſt Phaenix whoſe dead cinders ſhine,
                     In Angels ſpheres, ſhe, like a mother milde,
                     yeelding to Nature, did her right reſigne
                     To times true heyre, her God-ſon, and lou'de childe,
                     When giddy expectation was beguilde:
                     And Scotland yeelded out of Teudors race,
                     a true borne bud, to ſit in Teudors place.
                  
                  
                     Which ſeat to him and his, heauen euer bleſſe,
                     that we nere want a Roſe of Teudors tree,
                     to maintaine Britaines future happineſſe,
                     to the worldes end in true tranquilitie.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Neptune.
                  
                     Sir Leonard Holiday, now vnto thee,
                     My loue in ſome meane meaſure let me ſhew,
                     S
                           •
                        nce heauen hath cald thee to this dignity,
                     Which (then my ſelfe) farre better thou d
                           〈…〉
                        eſt know,
                     I make no doubt thou wilt thy time beſtow,
                     A
                           〈…〉
                        s ſo great a Subiects place as this,
                     To gouerne iuſtlie, and amend each miſſe.
                  
                  
                     Bethink thee how on that high Holyday,
                     
                     Which beares Gods Champion, th'Arch-angels name,
                     When conquering Sathan in a glorious fray,
                     
                        Michaell Hels-monſter nobly ouercame,
                     And now a ſacred Saboath being the ſame,
                     A free and full election on all parts,
                     Made choiſe of thee, both with their hands and harts.
                  
                  
                     Albeit this day is vſuall euery yeare,
                     For new election of a Magiſtrate,
                     Yet, now to me ſome inſtance doth appeare,
                     Worth note, which to my ſelfe I thus relate,
                     
                        Holyday, cald on Holyday to ſtate,
                     Requiers methinks a yeare of Holydayes,
                     
                     To be diſpoſd in good and vertuous wayes.
                  
                  
                     For I account tis a Lords Holyday,
                     
                     When Iuſtice ſhines in perfect Maieſty,
                     When as the poor can to the rich man ſay,
                     The Maieſtrate hath giuen vs equity,
                     And lent no eare to partiality,
                     When ſinne is puniſht, lewdnes beares no ſway:
                     All that day long, each day is Holyday.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     When good prouiſion for the poore is made,
                     Sloth ſet to labour, vice curbd euery where,
                     When through the Citty euery honeſt trade,
                     Stands not of might or inſolence in feare,
                     But Iuſtice in their goodneſſe does them beare:
                     then, as before, in ſafety I may ſaie:
                     All that yeare long, each daie is Holliday.
                     
                  
                  
                     Now in behalfe of that Societie,
                     Whereof thou bear'ſt a louing brothers name,
                     What hath bin doon this day to dignifie,
                     they pray thee kindly to accept the ſame,
                     More circumſtance I ſhall not need to frame:
                     But from the Marchant-Taylors this I ſay,
                     They wiſh all good to Leonard Holliday.
                     
                  
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   