
      
         
            
            
            Sidero-Thriambos.
Or
Steele and Iron Triumphing.
Applauding the aduancement of Sir Sebaſtian
Haruey, Knight, to the dignitie
of Lord Maior of London.
Taking his oath in the ſame authoritie at
Weſtminſter, on Thurſday, being the 29.
day of October. 1618.
Performed in hearty loue to him, and at the
charges of his kinde Brethren, the right Worſhipfull
Company of Ironmongers.
Deuiſed and written by A. M. Citizen
and Draper of London.
            
            
               LONDON,
Printed by NICHOLAS OKES, dwelling
in Foſter-lane. 1618.
         
         
            
            
            To the Maiſter, Wardens, and
whole Aſsiſtant body of the Ironmongers
Worſhipfull Society.
            
               
                  GEntlemen, 
            
            the truſt by you repoſed
in me, I hope you finde
to be faithfully performed on
my behalfe, in the deſpight of
enuy, and calumnious imputations.
What the whole ſcope of the deuiſes aymed
at, and were ordered according to your direction:
are briefly ſet downe in this Booke, which
I dedicate the rather to your Worſhips, becauſe
yours being the charge; what honour remayneth
(next to his, for whom you intended
the ſolemne daies Triumph) ought in reaſon to
returne to you. And ſo (in diſcharge of mine
owne duty) I commend both my ſelfe and ſeruice
to your fauourable acceptation.
            
               Your Worſhips to be commanded,
A. M.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Sidero-Thriambos.
            
               The Triumphes of Steele
and Iron.
               
                  THis famous and
moſt Honorable
Citie of London,
hauing (for many
hundred yeares)
had the Royall
preheminence, to
make choyce of
her chiefe Magiſtrate, by the title of Lord
Maior, and two Sheireffes, as his worthy
Aſsiſtants in Office for the yeares authority,
vnder the higheſt and ſupreme

power, enioying the ſame by free voice &
ſufferages of publick election, in the Guild-Hall
of London. Now in this inſtant yeare
1618. Sir Sebaſtian Haruey, Knight, and
Aldermam of this Noble City, and free
of the Right Worſhipfull Company of
Ironmongers, being choſen into that great
and gracefull dignity; his affectionate &
kinde Brethren (according to ancient and
precedent cuſtome, obſerued to many
more Lord Maiors of the ſame Society)
did thus tender their willing and hearty
ſeruice to him, vpon the day of his inauguration,
when (paſsing by Barge with
the other Aldermen his Brethren) hee
went to take his Oath at Weſtminſter, on
Thurſday the 29. of October.
               The firſt deuiſe, preſenting it ſelfe for
his Honors ſeruice, is an imaginary Iſland,
tearmed Lemnos, very ingeniouſly and
artificially fitted, ſutable to the dayes ſolemnity.
And, becauſe fauourable conceit,
muſt needs ſupply the defect of impoſsible
performance, eſpecially in ſo ſlender

a compaſſe: let the Iſle it ſelfe be ſwallowed
vp in the apparance of a goodly
Myne, aptly ſeated in the midſt thereof.
Therein Mulciber, the God of Mynes and
Mettals (eſpecially ſuch as conſiſt of Steele
& Iron) ſheweth his perſonall attendance,
with diuers of his one-eyed Cyclops about
him, forming from the Mynes Oare, Gads
of Steele, Barres of Iron, & other ſuch like
matters out of the Mettals, for vſe of the
Ironmongers Societie, who are as Lords &
Maiſters of the ſayd Myne, and therefore
it is called the Ironmongers Myne. Theſe
feigned Cyclops, ſuted according to their
ſeruice and diligence (each with his Hammer
buſily imployed, while others attend
the Fire and Bellowes) are nimble and
dexterious youthes, ſuch, as to the continuall
fall of their Hammers, in ſweet Muſicall
voyces, and delicate variety of pleaſing
changes; doe out-weare their worke
merrily, as accounting no toyle tedious,
thus beſtowed in the Societies ſeruice:
cloſing vp euery Stanza with Acier Dure,
                  
the worde or Motto belonging to the
Companie.
               This Iſle or Myne being ſeated quadrangle-wiſe,
at the foure corners ſit foure
beautifull Nymphes or Graces; being named
Chruſos, Argurion, Calcos and Sideros,
figuring the foure ages of the world, and
habited according to their true Carracters
and natures. The Golden-Age, the Siluer-Age,
and the Brazen-Age, hauing formerly
triumphed, according to their ſeuerall
turnes and times of eminency: doe
now giue way to the Iron-Age (wherein
wee liue) to haue her degree of ſoueraignty,
as holding chiefe predominance in this
daies Triumph. For, ſhe being ſole Commandreſſe,
in Mettals of moſt vſuall imployment;
affordeth out of her bounteous
Myne, all kinds of Martiall and Military
weapons, honouring with them
Armes and Souldiers. Likewiſe, for Tillage
and Husbandry, thoſe inſtruments
beſt agreeing therewith: becauſe it is the
ſuſtentation of life, and ſupporter of all other

manuary Trades. Being not vnmindfull
alſo, of Nauigation & Cōmerce with
forraigne Nations, which can haue no
conſiſtence, but by her helpe.
               Beſide, the Companies Creaſt, of two
Lizzards, linked together with a Golden
Terret (which in their Coate of Armes,
is placed in the Cheueron) ſtands fairely
figured vpon the Myne. Aboue them all
is Iupiter, mounted vpon his Royall Eagle,
with his three-forked Thunderbolt in his
hand, made in the Iſle of Lemnos by Mulciber.
He is alſo clad in a faire Armour, intended
for the ſeruice of Mars▪
                   but now
beſtowne on him, as an honourable preſent
by Mulciber, becauſe hee ſo graciouſly
vouchſafed, to bee perſonally preſent in
this Triumph, as Patron of all their pains,
and protector from foule-mouthed ſlander
and detraction.
               This deuiſe is drawne by two goodly
Eſtridges, as being ſupporters of the Sooieties
Armes, and therefore aptly alluded as
Guides to Mulcibers Myne, befitting none

other ſo well as that: for, naturally they
dige
                     ••
                   both Steele and Iron, as is auouched
by many credible Authors.
               One other Millitary Engine alſo, ſeeming
to be forged in the ſame Myne, is appointed
to the ſecond place, which is a fair
and goodly Cannon, ſtrongly mounted
vpon her Carriage, with all neceſſarie furniſhment,
for charging and diſcharging,
by her, as alſo diuerſe Chambers, to bee
ſhot off as occaſion ſerueth, and as the
Maiſter Gunner and his Mate (there preſent)
pleaſe to giue direction, or performe
the ſeruice in their owne perſons.
               Certaine gallant Knights in Armour,
well mounted on their Courſers for ſeruice,
and readily prepared with their Petronells;
haue the charge or guiding of
this Cannon▪ beſides a braue troupe of
Musketiers. This was firſt imployed on
the water, in the mornings ſeruice, and
afterward helpeth the dayes further Triumph.
            
            
               
               The Speeches betweene the Maiſter Gunner
and his Mate, at the Cannon.
               
                  Maiſt.
                  Where are you Mate?
                  
               
               
                  Mate.
                  Here Sir, at hand,
                  To doe what ere the Maiſter ſhall command.
               
               
                  Maiſt.
                  This goodly Canon, forged for this day
                  In Lemnos, where great Mulciber beares ſway,
                  Hee and his Cyclops vſing all their skill,
                  To frame it in beſt forme, and for good will
                  They beare vnto that ancient Company,
                  For whom their Hammers walke continually,
                  Still to ſupply them from their plenteous Myne
                  
                  With Steele and Iron: which as they refine
                  From the earths Oare; So to all Lands they ſend,
                  And all Artes elſe do bounteouſly befrend.
                  Becauſe, where Steele and Iron goe to wrack:
                  Thoſe Lands doe feele a lamentable lack.
                  Now Mate, thou ſeeſt, this is a Iouiall day,
                  And euery Trade triumphes as beſt it may,
                  (By yearly cuſtome) gladly to expreſſe,
                  Their free affection, in full chearfulneſſe.
                  Be not we idle then, Seeing to our charge,
                  This Cannon is committed: But at large
                  Declare our dilligence. Our Gunners Arte,
                  In this Triumphall day muſt beare a part.
                  Fall to thy paines.
               
               
                  
                  Mate.
                  Maiſter, with all my heart.
                  And no men ſhall deliuer (more then we)
                  How much we honour this dayes dignity.All this hee ſpeaketh anſwerable to his action.
                  
                  Firſt then, Ile Spunge her, as ſhe ought to be,
                  Then Lade her, to Report her luſtily.
                  Next Ramme her. Now this Bullet paſſeth in,
                  Which Ramd againe, lowder Report ſhall win.
                  And ſhooting not Point blanck, but out at length:
                  Ile mount her higher on her Carriage ſtrength.
                  Now I haue done Sir.
               
               
                  Maiſter.
                  Then will I giue Fire;
                  And may all ſpeed no worſe then we deſire.
               
            
            
               Next followeth a ſiluer Leopard, thickly
beſpotted with blacke Pellets, being
the Creaſt of the Lord Maiors Armes. Vpon
the Leopard rideth an ancient Brittiſh
Barde; For Bardes were eſteemed as Poets
or Propheticall Sooth-ſayers, and (in thoſe
reuerend times) held in no meane admiration
and honour. Hee guideth the way to
the Mount of Fame, being a Pageant, and
aptly alluding to the other deuiſe; but in
a more morrall and ſignificant manner.
For therein is figured, a modell of Londons
                  
happy Gouernement, in that ſupreame
dignity of the Maioraltie. Being a true
type of that moſt ſacred Maieſty, by whoſe
gracious fauour it is beſt ſupported, and
borroweth (from thence) all beames of
true light and ſplendor.
               In the moſt eminent place ſitteth Fame,
ſeeming as if ſhee ſounded her Golden
Trumpet, the Banner whereof, is plentifully
powdred with Tongues, Eyes and
Eares: implying, that all tongues ſhould
be ſilent, all eyes and eares wide open,
when Fame filleth the world with her ſacred
memories.
               This day, ſhee ſeemeth to preſent the
new ſworne Lord Maior to Soueraigne
Maieſty, whoſe Lieutenant and lawfull
Deputy hee is now inueſted for London.
Shee ſheweth him, what other gracious
perſonages ſhee hath there attending her,
for more honourable ſolemnity of this
generall Triumph; preſaging a happy and
ſucceſſefull courſe to his yeare of gouernment.
By her is figured a goodly Shippe,

whereby ſhe conueighes all beatitudes of
Kingdomes, Cities and Nations, to the
furtheſt remoate Countries. Intimating
thereby, how the Magiſtrate may honour
his Prince, in that high truſt and care committed
to him, and ſupplying the State
ſtill with all needfull occaſions, as by
Trafficke and Commerce are continually
required.
               
                  Expectation (ſitting ſomewhat lower on
Fames right hand) intimateth to him, that
there will be more then ordinary matter
expecte from him▪ in regard, that hee is
now mounted like a Beacon on an Hill,
to flame forth brightly, and not to burne
dimly. Whereof Hope (ſitting on the other
ſide) ſeemeth to giue a gracious perſwaſion.
In regarde, that his worthy Father
did formerly ſupply the ſame place,
and left ſuch ſenſible inſtructions to his
Sonne, as cannot but edge his temper the
more keenely, and quicken his ſpirits the
more induſtriouſly. Becauſe it is no commō
thing, for a Son, to ſucceed his Father

in ſuch eminencie, and therefore bindeth
him to the more ſerious obſeruance.
               Wherein to encourage him the more,
ſhee ſheweth him all thoſe ſacred Vertues,
that gaue his Father comfort in his Magiſtracie,
Iuſtice and Fortitude, who will as
forwardly further him; treading downe
thoſe vile Incendiaries, Ambition, Treaſon,
and Hoſtility, which ſeeke the ſubuerſion
of all eſtates, by Bribing, Corruption,
and ſmoothing Inſinuation, or elſe by open
Fire and Sword. But becauſe this yeare
may be the better ſecured, againſt all their
violences and treacherous attempts; they
ſit gyued, and manacled together in Iron
ſhackles, purpoſely made and ſent from
the Ironmongers Myne, to binde ſuch baſe
villaines to their better behauiour.
               Now, becauſe Fame cannot endure, that
any part of her Mount ſhould bee vnfitly
furniſhed: In a degree more backward, &
ſomewhat lower then her Seat, ſit her two
ſober Siſters, Feare and Modeſty; both vailed,
but ſo ſharpe-ſighted, that they can

diſcerne through the darkeſt obſcurities,
when any diſorder threatneth danger to
Maieſty, or to his carefull Deputie. When
any ſuch inconuenience happeneth, forthwith
they informe Vigilancy & Prouidence,
ſitting next to them. Who hearing the Larum
and ſtriking clock in the Caſtle: they
awake Care the Sentinell, to ring the Bell in
the Watch-Tower, which calleth vp Courage
& Councel, that euery one may haue imploimēt,
for ſafe preſeruing the Moūt of Fame.
               
               For better vnderſtanding the true morality
of this deuiſe, the perſonages haue all
Emblemes and Properties in their hands,
& ſo neere them, that the weakeſt capacity
may take knowledge of thē; which courſe
in ſuch ſolemne Triumphes hath alwaies
beene allowed of beſt obſeruation: both
for auoiding trouble to the Magiſtrate, by
tedious and impertinent ſpeeches, and deuouring
the time, which craueth diligent
expedition.
               Concerning our Brittiſh Barde, raiſed to
bee our Speaker, by ſacred power of the

                  Muſes, hee reuoluing ouer his ancient volumes,
concerning the courſe of times;
findeth, that in this yeare of 1618. the letter
H. ſhall haue predominance in three diſtinct
perſons, as eminent Gouernours, &
namely in the City of London, viz. the L.
Maior, and both the Shieriffes. And if his
predicting opinion doth not beguile it
ſelfe, he ſaith that their names, will be Haruey,
Herne and Hamarſley, for ſo the booke
of Fate hath concluded of them, againſt
which can be no contradiction. Whereupon
making triall of his diuination hy his
ſtaffe (which vſually directed him in all
ſuch courſes) as hee ſpeaketh to the Lord
Maior; he ſmiteth the Staffe vpon his foot,
& ſuddenly iſſueth forth the three ſeuerall
letters of H. apparantly to be diſcerned of
all. So, finding his iudgement to be fallen
out true, & that the perſons figured by
thoſe three letters are alſo there preſent: he
proceedeth on in the reſt of his Speech,
which according to the Brittiſh garbe, and
as then he vttered it, is here ſet downe.
            
            
               
               The Bardes firſt ſpeech, deliuered
to my Lord Mayor, at his going
to Saint Paules Church
in the afternoone.
               BLithe and bonny bin yee aw,
               And meckle bliſſings ſtill be faw
               Vpon ſo faire and gudly meany,
               As thilke like, nere ſawe I eny.
               A Brittiſh Barde, that long hath ſlept,
               And in his Graue would ſtill ha kept:
               But that the ſpirit of Poeſie
               (Which haudeth higheſt Soueraigntie)
               Hath raiſde me from my ſilent reſt,
               To make ene in this Iouiall Feaſte.
               Aw for your ſeke, moſt worthy man,
               (Lowting as lowly as I can)
               To creue your fauour, that I may,
               For your Society ſomewhat ſey,
               Of thilke their buxome looue to you▪
               
               Which they preſent but as your due.
               As often they haue done befere,
               To mickle of their Bretheren mere.
               Among wha was your Fether one,
               Which this high charge did vndergone.
               O, let me ſey it to your fece,
               It is a ſigne of ſpeciall grece,
               
                  
                  
                     •
                  ee to ſupply your Fethers plece:
               In ſike an encient femous Citty,
               Vnder yer King, chiefe Deputie.
               And let me tell yee ey thing mere,
               Of Records haue I read good ſtere;
               Yet neere could find the like befere,
               As now hath hapt. Thilke dignitie,
               Of Meire and Shrieffes authoritie,
               Whilke London yearely greants to three▪
               
               Eyne letter H beginnes them aw,
               And in ſo ſoote concordance faw:
               
                  That Heruey, Herne and Hemerſley,
               Maken ey pleaſing Sympheny.
               Eyne Enegreme ilke neme mey bliſſe,
               
                  With Honor, Heale and Happineſſe.
               
                  Honor to be ſele Steffe and ſtey,
               
                  Heale to vphaude all eirie wey,
               And Happineſſe ſa to attend.
               Yer yeare may heue a happy end.
               Thaeſe Shewes and Emblems ta expreſſe,
               Mayne trouble yee with tediouſnes.
               And ay, wha wud na way offend,
               Yer kenning of them doe commend
               Vntill thilke Buke, whilke ſpeeks them aw,
               Mere large than to my lot does faw.
               
                  Sa, Honor, Heale and Happineſſe,
               Giue aw yer actions gud ſucceſſe.
            
            
               
               At night at my Lords Houſe.
               THilke eye of day, whilke grec'de our ſpart,
               Being claſed vp, mekes his reſarte
               Till vnder-dwellers. Seble-night,
               Was gledly lengthen ant delight:
               But ſtandeth fearefull of offending,
               Becauſe aw ioyes mun heue an ending.
               Not, that we deſire to lieue yee,
               But for yar awne heme mun receiue yee.
               And, thereto maken bauide intiuſion,
               Was claſe vp aw with rude confuſion.
               Whilke fare my Leard, my perting is,
               Wiſbing yee mickle yeares of bliſſe,
               
                  That Iuſtice, Zeale and Payetie,
               Mayne ſhine in yee with Meieſty,
               That he wha puts yee in thilke truſt,
               Mey finde yer rule ſa true and iuſt,
               That efter times may talke, and ſey
               
                  Whan Heruey, Herne and Hemerſley
               As Meire and Sheriffes did beare ſwey:
               
                  True Honor, Helth and Heppineſſe,
               Thilke yeare did their endeauours bliſſe.
               Yer Bretherens loue I mun commend
               To yer acceptance, ſa I end.
               FINIS.
               
               
            
         
      
   