
      
         
            
               
               
THOMAS BELS MOTIVES: CONCERNING ROMISH FAITH AND RELIGION.
            Exod. cap. 8. vers. 19. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
            
            
            
               Printed by Iohn Legate, printer to the Vniversitie of Cambridge. 1593.
            And are to be sold at the signe of the Sunne in Paules Churchyard in London.
            
            
         
         
            
            
               TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE MY very good Lordes, the Lordes of her MaIESTIES MOST HONOVRABLE PRIVIE COVNSELL.
            
            
               IF Tertullian (right honourable) erred montanizing: if Cyprian rebaptizing: if Origen corporizing; if Nazianzen angelizing; if Eusebius arrianizing; if Hieronymus monogamizing; if Ambrose millenizing; if S. Paul gentilizing; if Augustine retracted many things; if Aquinas, Navarrus, Victoria, and many others best learned papists, haue often changed their opinions; if all this I say, be true, as true it is indeed: it will not I trust, (for it can not iustly I wote) be imputed as blame-worthy: that I vpon better advise submit my selfe to my vndoubted Soveraigne, most gracious and bountifull Queene Elizabetb: that I recognize mine errours, that Ireclaime my former vnsoundly conceived opinions, as best learned writers have done before me. Which alteration he hath mercifully and wonderfully wrought in me, (qui attingit à fine ad finem fortiter, & disponit omnia 
               Sapient. 8. 1. 
               suaviter;) Our mercifull God, I meane, who hath of late revealed in time, that which in his eternall purpose, he ordained before the worlde was made. For our good God, who according to his common course of proceeding, directeth things inferiour by superiour, and vseth humane meanes in producing visible externall effects: first inclined my heart to peruse more seriously, some learned papists before studied; and that done, to provide and revolve other most renowmed papists, which before I had neither read nor seene. By meanes whereof God illuminating mine vnderstanding, I haue by litle and little perceived the popes owne doctours, to impugne his Romish religion, and so detested all popish faction. As who at this houre (God be thanked for it,) beholde as in a glasse of christall, the false, erroneous, and execrable doctrine of the Church of Rome. And because omne bonum est sui diffusivum, as saith Areopagita: neither Dionys. Ar
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ pag. de divinis nominibus, c. 4 can I with safe conscience hide that light vnder abushell, which God of

his great mercy hath bestowedon me, no doubt as well for the benefite of others as of my selfe: I haue thought it worth the labour to set downe my chiefest motives, by which and through which next vnder God, I was perswade to renounce the Romish faith and religion: as who per swade my selfe constantly, that what soever papist in the whole world, shall with an indifferent iudgement peruse the same, having are solved mind to embrace the truth when it appeareth: that selfe same papist will vtterly renounce with me, the false, erroneous, & execrable doctrine of the Church of Rome. For I will proove the saide Romish doctrine by Gods holy assistance, to be of such qualitie as is already said; not onely by scriptures, authorities, and reasons, (though such proofes I purpose to vse:) but (which is most forceable against papistes,) by the evident testimonies of best learned papists, and who are of best account: even in the Church of Rome. And consequently, that great learned men of all ages since popery began, yea, in the very altitude of popedome and in the Church of Rome: have approoved, holden, and defended, weighty and important points of doctrine: contrary to the doctrine of the Church of Rome. Which thing so soone as I once vnderstood, my mind and will was by and by alienated from the Church of Rome. This rare methodicall discourse (my right honourable good Lordes all,) as in which papistry is effectually confuted and confounded by papistry it selfe: I have presumed to dedicate vnto your honours, for two especiall consider ations. First, that so I might exhibite some signe of a gratefull and dutifull mind, for your Lordships most honourable countenances and rare great good willes towards me. Secondly, because this my discourse, will not want many potent and mightie adversaries; and so stand need of honourable, wise, and grave patrons, for the honest and lawfull approbation of the same. The Almighty graunt vnto your Lordships many ioyfull and happy yeres, with much increase of zeale in true religion: to his eternall glory, the faithfull service of her Maiestie, and the common good of our native countrey most noble England, Amen. From Cambridge the third of November, 1593.
            
            
               Your Lordships in all dutifull manner, THOMAS BELL.
            
         
         
            
            
               The Preface generall to the Christian Reader.
            
               ALbeit I will not now dispute, whether the Bishops of Rome be that Antichrist, of whome the Apostle speaketh 2. Thess. 2. v. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. to the Thessalonians, or no? (notwithstanding the affirmative be the iudgement of sundry great learned men;) yet dare I, and doe I boldly avouch, that Bishops of Rome have for many yeres past, bene the precursors and fore-runners of that very Antichrist, whereof mention is alreadie made: which to hold and thinke, many weightie and important reasons have mooved me. For first, 1 who but Antichrist, or his precursor, will either ascribe, or suffer to be ascribed unto him: such power of maiestie, and titles of Deietic, as are proper and peculiar to God aloue? And yet is this to be verified of the pope undoubtedlie, by the popes owne doctrine, and his popish doctors. The pope (if we will beleeve him) telleth us: that God, when he instituted two great lights in the firmament: to wit, the Sunne and the Moone: signified thereby, the autoritie of popes and of kings: giving us to understand, that the pope is as farre above a king in authoritie, as is the Sunne above the Moone in excellencie: yea, he addeth further; that Kings and Emperors have no power, to draw the sword against popish bishops & priestes: as who forsooth, are not subiect to their iurisdiction. And least I should be thought, to father untruthes upon the pope: I will (which is my wonted manner throughout my whole booke,) alledge his owne wordes, which are these: Ad firmamentum 
               Greg. 9. lib. 1. decret. tit. 33. cap. 6. 
               coeli, hoc est, universalis ecclesiae, fecit Deus duo magna luminaria, id est, duas instituit dignitates, quae sunt, Pontificalis autoritas, & Regalis potestas: sed illa, quae praeest diebus, id est, spiritualibus, maior est: quae vero carnalibus, minor: ut, quanta est inter solem & lunam, tanta inter Pontifices & Reges differentia cognoscatur. To the firmament of heaven, that is, of the universall Church, God made two great lightes: to wit, ordeined two great dignities, which are the authoritie of the Pope, and the power of the King: but that power, which ruleth spiritual things, is greater: and that which ruleth things carnal, is lesser: that so great difference may be knowen betweene Popes and kings, as is betweene the sunne and the moone. The popish glosse in the same place, setteth downe Glossa. ibid. precisely, how farre the King is inferiour to the Pope, in these words: Restat, ut Pontificalis dignitas quadragesies septies sit maior regali dignitate. It therefore remaineth, that the pontificality of the Pope is seven & fourtie times greater, then is the regalitie of the king. Pope Gregory Gregor. ubi supra. saith further, in this expresse maner: Intelligendum non est, quòd Rex vel Imperator super bonos & malos gladii acceperit potestatem; sed in eos solummodò, qui utentes gladio eius sunt iurisdictioni commissi. We must not understand, that the King or Emperour hath receiued power of the sworde

over the good and the evill; but onely over them, who using the sword are committed to his iurisdiction. Behold, how the Scripture is tossed and wrested: to take from kings, that power which God hath given them. The popish parasites, the glossators of the Canons, ascribe more magnificall and plaine divine titles unto the Pope; even such as no way can be denied, to be proper and peculiar to God alone. These are their expresse words: Sic (Papa) dicitur habere coeleste arbitrium, & ideò 
               Glossat. lib. 1. decretat. tit. 7. cap. 3. 
               etiam naturam rerum immutat, substantialia unius rei applicando alij; & de nihilo potest aliquid facere. So the pope is said to have celestial arbitremēt, and therefore doeth he alter the nature of things, by application of the substantiall partes of one thing to another; & he can make of nothing something. Thus verily do they write, and yet no greater blasphemy can be uttered. Ioannes Gerson, though otherwise a great papist, maketh rehearsal of intollerable dignities, and titles ascribed to the pope; which notwithstanding the pope himselfe hath acknowledged as pertaining to him, but the said Gerson them reprooveth & derideth. These be his expresse words: Consurgit ex adver so blandiens & 
               Gerson. de potestat. eccles. consider. 12. part. 3. 
               subdola adulatio; & ad aures Ecclesiasticorum praecipuè summi Pontificis insusurrans; ô quanta quanta est sublimitas ecclesiasticae potestatis tuae? quonians sicut Christo collata est omnis potest as in coelo & in terra, sic eam Christus omnim Petro suisque successoribus dereliquit. Vnde nec Constantinus quicquam Sylvestro papae contulit, quod non esset priùs suum; sedreddidit iniustè detentum. Porrò, sicut non est potest as nisià Deo, sicnec aliqua temporalis velecclesiastica, imperialis, velregalis, nisià Papa: in cuius foemore scripsit Christus, Rex regum, Dominus dominantium; de cuius potestate disputare, instar sacrilegij est; cui neque quisquam dicere potest, cur ita facis? mentior si non inveniantur haec scripta, ab illis etiam qui sapientes sunt in oculis suis. There starteth up on the contrarie side faire-spoken and craftie adulation: whispering in the eares of Clergie men, especially of the pope; Oh how great, how great is the Maiestie of thine Ecclesiasticall power? for as all povver vvas given to Christ, in heaven and on earth; So Christ left all the same power, to Peter and his Successours. VVherefore the Emperour Constantine gave nothing to Pope Sylvester, which was not his owne before; but onely restored that, which was uniustly deteined from him. Further, as there is no power but of God, so is there neither any temporall or Ecclesiasticall, Imperiall or Regall, but of the Pope; in vvhose thigh Christ hath vvritten, the King of Kinges, and Lord of Lordes; of whose power to dispute, is as meere sacriledge; to whome no man may say, VVhy doest thou so? I am a lyar, if these thinges be not written: even of them, who are vvise in their owne conceites. These are Doctor Gersons wordes: vvho though he vvere a great Papist, yet could he not digest these Antichristian blasphemies, neither hide or conceale them vvithin his

breast. Neverthelesse Pope Bonifacius did not onely acknovvledge them, but vvith great pleasure practised the same, as vvitnesseth the said Gerson in these vvordes: Hanc existimationem habuisse, visus est Bonifacius 
               Gerson ubi supra. 
               octavus in quadam decretali: putatur ab alijs, depositio unius Regis Franciae per Papam Zachariam hic esse fundata; tanquam Papa sit, qui trasferre possit Reges & regna. Pope Bonifacius the eight of that name, seemeth in a certaine decretall, to have had this opinion of his ovvn authoritie. Others thinke, that the deposition of (Childericus) the French King by Pope Zacharias, vvas grounded in this (Antichristian and godlesse conceit:) as if for soothe the Pope vvere he, that coulde depose Princes, and translate their kingdomes. And our Iesuite Bellarminus, is so farre from blushing at this most detestable fact of Pope Zacharie: that he yeeldeth the reason si dijs placet, for the iustification thereof. Childericum (inquit) deposuit Papa, & in eius 
               Bellarminus de Rom. Pont. lib. 5. cap. 8 
               locum Pipinum Caroli magni patrem Regem creari iussit: cuius causa fuit, quia propter socordiam Childerici, & Religioni, & Regno in Gallia, extrema ruina imminere videbatur. The Pope (saith our Iesuite) deposed Childericus, and commaunded to place Pipinus father to Charles the great, in his throne. The cause vvhereof was this; because forsooth through the negligent governement of Childericus, the Kingdome and Religion of Fraunce seemed to be in great daunger. Thus saith the Popes vassall; out of vvhose vvordes I gather first, that so much may be truely verified of Popes, as Gerson hath avovvched. 1
            
            I gather secondly, that the Pope chalengeth both svvordes, and himselfe to be not onely universall Bishoppe, but universall King 2 also over all the vvorld.
            I gather thirdly, that the Iesuites (hovvsoever they dissemble by their fondly imagined aequivocation,) thinke of our most gratious 3 Soveraigne Queene Elizabeth, and meane to doe vvith her most excellent Maiestie, as the Pope thought and did vvith Childericus; and for that end saltem secundariò, are so many Iesuites sent seditiously into Secundò principalitèr. this land.
            Secondly, my L. Abbot their ovvne deare Bernard, savve in his time such tyrannie and Antichristian dealing in the Church of Rome, as hee vvas thereby and therevvith enforced to exclame in these wordes: Tempus faciendinunc, quia dissipaverunt legem. bestia illa de Apocalypsi, 
               Bernar. ad Gaufridum, epist. 125. 
               cui datum est os loquens blasphemias, & bellum gerere cum Sanctis, Petri Cathedram occupat, tanquam Leo paratus ad praedam. It is novve high time to doe good, for they have troden under foote Gods Lavve. That beast mentioned in the Revelation, to vvhome vvas given a mouth speaking blasphemies, and to make vvarres vvith the Saintes: sitteth in the chaire of Peter, as a Lyon ready to take his praye.
            
               
Thirdly, the Pope doeth not onely take upon him, to depose kings and Emperours him selfe; but he avovvcheth further, that Subiectes 3 may and are bounden to depose their dread Soveraignes, vvhensoever they decline to infidelity: which certes is by popish interpretation, vvhen any King or Queene embraceth syncerely the holy Gospell of Christ, and denyeth Romish poperie. For thus vvriteth Bellarminus, vvhose doctrine the Pope hath lately approoved; At si isti ijdem principes conantur avertere populum a fide, omnium consensu possunt 
               Robertus Bellarminus lib. 5. de Rom. Pontif. cap. 7. & debent privari suo dominio. But if these Princes goe about, to avert the people from the faith (of the Church of Rome:) then by the consent of all, they may and must be dispossessed, of their Scepters and Regalities.
            Againe, in the second Chapter he saith thus: Quòd si Christiani olim 
               Bellarm. cod. cap. 
               non deposuerunt Neronem, & Diocletianum, & Iulianum apostatam, ac Valentem Arianum, & similes; id fuit, quia deerant vires temporales Christianis. If the Christians in times past, deposed not Nero, Diocletian, Iulian, Valens, and such like Emperours; the cause thereof was, for that they wanted povver and force, and vvere not strong ynough for that attempt. Againe, a little after he hath these vvordes: At non tenentur Christiani, immò nec debent cum evidenti periculo religionis, toler are Regem 
               Bellarm. cap. codem. 
               infidelom. But Christians are not bounde to tolerate a King, that is an Infidell, (or not a Papist;) nay, they must not tolerate such a one, vvith the evident daunger of Religion. And our said Iesuite yeeldeth this reason hereof; because forsooth saith he, De iure humanoest, quod hunc aut illum habeamus Regem. For it is by the Lavve of man, that vve Bellarm. ubi supra. have this or that man to our King. This is the doctrine of our Popes, and lately hatched Iesuites: out of vvhich most disloyall and unchristian assertion;
            I inferre first, that the Pope and Iesuites vvould most vvillingly, deprive our most gratious Soveraigne of her Royall throne and Regalitie; 1 if they vvere of force and povver so to doe.
            I inferre secōdly, that our Iesuite doth here approve peremptorily. 2
            
            First, the diabolical excommunication of Pope Pius.
            Secondly, the disloyal fact of Murton, vvho brought the same into this Realme.
            Thirdly, the publishing thereof by Felton.
            Fourthly, the practising of the curse by Sanders, Fitz-morice, Ballard, and others their seditious complices.
            Fiftly, the renevving of the print, and dispersing of the copies in Rome, by our Iesuites, Persons, and Campion; as a compendious preparative, for their commodious entrance into this land.
            I inferre thirdly, that all subiects are by this doctrine, stirred up and encouraged to manifest rebellion; & to have no scruple of conscience 3
               
therein. The reason hereof is evident, because if kinges receive their authoritie frō man, as this Iesuit auoucheth: then may kings indeed be displaced by man, as Romish parasites, and irreligious politikes beare the world in hand. yet Salomon the vvise replenished vvith holie inspiration, teacheth vs another doctrine: Per me inquit, reges regnant, 
               Prou. c. 8. 15. & legum conditores iusta decernunt. per me principes imperant, & potentes decernunt iustitiam. By mee (saith God in Salōmon) kings reigne, and princes decree iustice. By me princes rule, and all nobles, and iudges of the earth. And the Apostle saith: Omnts anima potestatibus 
               Rom. c. 13. v. 1. 
               sublimioribus subdita sit: non est enim potestas nisia Deo. Let everie soule bee subiect to higher powers: for ther is no power but of God. But hereof more at large, in the sixt chapter and third conclusion of the second booke. Fourthlie, Sylvester Pryeras that great popish Thomist, telleth 4 vs roundlie and malepertlie: that empires and regalities are not from God immediatlie, but from God by meanes of the pope. And he saith further, that royall power is so subordinate to poperie, or papacie: as is the Moone vnto the Sunne. These are his owne wordes: Nec obstat, quod potestas imperialis est a deo concessa secundum multa 
               Sylvest. de papa. para. 2. 
               iura: quia est a Deo, mediante papa: quia eam concedit non vt homo, sed vt vicarius Det. Nec sunt sic distinctae potestates, spiritualis scilicet & temporalis: quin vna alteri subalternetur, ad instar lunae & solis: nec sunt distinctae, quasi semper sint in diversis: sed quia sunt ordinatae ad distincta, scilicet spiritualia & temporalia: & in vno eodem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   summo pontifiee, est vtraque in summo. It skilleth not, that manie lawes affirme imperiall power to be of God. For it is from God, the Pope being the meane, who graunteth it not as man, but as the vicar of God. Neither are the two powers, (the spirituall and the temporall,) so distinct: but that they remaine subordinate the one to the other, after the resemblance of the sunne & moone. neither are they distinct as being alwaies in diuerse subiects, but as ordeined to distinct thinges, spiritual and temporall. For they both are in one and the selfe same pope, even in the highest degree. Fiftlie, such as is the ruler of the citie, (saith Bellarminus our Iesuit,) 5 such are the inhabitants thereof: But pope Boniface the eight entred Bellar. derom. pontif. lib. 5. cap. 7. into his popedome as a Foxe, reigned in it as a woolfe, and died out of it as a dogge, as I haue proved in my 2. booke, in the 3. chapter & second conclusion: ergo all the citizens of Rome in his time began as foxes, continued as wolves, and ended their daies as dogges: and consequentlie, the whole church of Rome during the time of Pope Boniface: was wicked, diabolicall, and meere antichristian. what shall I say of kissing the popes foote? of bearing the pope vpon mens shoulders? of the popes dispensing with the law humane, the lawe of nature, and the law divine? these may suffice, to teach vs to walke warelie, to looke about vs withall circumspection, to be verie carefull what doctrine we embrace: and ever to set before our eies, the

admonitions and premonitions of our sauiour Iesus Christ. Attendite, inquit Dominus, a fermento Pharisaeorum quodest hypocrisis. Beware saith our Lord, of the leven of the Pharises, that is, their false doctrine, infected Luc. 12. 2. and infatuated vvith the traditions of men: as it is expounded in another place of the gospel. VVe must therefore here observe, that in the scribes and Pharisees rested in those daies the ordinarie externall face, power, regiment, and iurisdiction of the church. For so saith our saviour, in another place of the gospell: In cathedra Mosis 
               Mat. 16. 13. 
               sedent Scribae & Pharisaei: omnia ergo quaecunque praeceperint vobis servare, servate & facite. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in the chaire of Moses: therefore, whatsoever they shall commaund you to keepe, that keepe Mat. 23. 3. and doe. VVherefore since our Lord commaundeth vs, to beware of the hypocriticall doctrine of the Pharisees, who had the primacie in the visible Church of that age: and since Christ commaunded this for no other end, but because they had corrupted the sacred & pure word of God, with the mixture of their owne foolish traditions: for that Christ obiected against them, saying: Quare & vostransgredimini mandatum Dei, propter traditiouem vestram: why doe you trāsgresse Gods commaundement, for the accomplishment of your own Mat. 15. 3. tradition? and in another place: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : But in vaine doe they worship mee, teaching Mat. 15. 9. doctrines the commaundements of men: since I say, our saviour thus commaundeth vs: it followeth, that we must refuse, reiect, and contemne, all prelates, all bishops, all priestes, and all whosoever have anie administration in the church, by what name or title soever they be called: if they deliver to vs the word of God impurelie, or mixed with traditions of men: and consequentlie, that we must reiect and renounce, the pope, and all the rable of popish cleargie-men: as who do either not deliver the word of God at all, or at least so mingled, so pestered, so corrupted, so adulterated with mans traditions: as no part there of remaineth sound, pure, and intire. It then standeth vs vpon, to employ our whole care, studie, and industrie, that we may liue secure from the leaven of these Pharisees: that is, of these popes and popish vassalles: who in steede of christian doctrine, doe hypocriticallie deliver vnto vs, yea with threats of fire and faggot enforce vpon vs, the present poison of our soules. For if he that sitteth in Peters chaire be Antichrist, as vvitnesseth their owne Bernard: if the bishops of Rome have written in their thighes, the king of kinges and Lord of Lords, as their Gerson avoucheth: if all power asvvell civill as ecclesiasticall be chalenged of popes, as their Silvester affirmeth: if popes can place and displace kinges and Emperours, and dispossesse them of their regalities, and royall seats, as their Iesuit Bellarmine boasteth: if the bishops of Rome be as farre above kinges in auctoritie, as is the Sunne above the Moone in excellencie, as pope Gregorie

teacheth: if no king can draw the sword against any of his subiects, being cleargie-men without the popes good licence and favour, as the said Gregorie telleth vs: if the pope bee taken to be greater then any king by seaven and fourtie fold, as the popish glosse proclaimeth, nay, if the pope applie the substantial parts of one subiect to another: if the pope take vpon him to make of nothing somthing, as affirmeth another glosse: then doubtles doth it necessarilie follow, that if the pope be not that Antichrist, whereof S. Paul. speaketh to the Thessalonians: yet is he perforce that Antichrist, where of Saint Iohn writeth in these wordes: Omnis spiritus qui solvit Iesum, ex Deo non est: & hic est antichristus, de quo audistis quoniam venit, & iam in mundo est. Everie spirit that dissolveth Iesus, is not of God: and this is Antichrist, of 1. Ioh. 4. 3. whom you haue heard, that he is alreadie come, and is even now in the world. For not onely they dissolve Iesus, that denie his divinity, or his humanitie, or the hypostaticall vnion of the same: but they also that derogate in anie point from the office auctoritie, and power of Christ, (who is our eternal king, our head, our prophet, our priest:) and in like maner, all they that by any meanes depresse or obscure the same: as doe the papistes, in innumerable particulars: to wit, in their reall inherent iustice, in their condigne merites of workes, in their congruent dispositions, in their massing sacrifice, in their carnall presence, in their accidents without subiectes, in their lordlie papall primacie, in their purgatorie-purifications, in their satisfactorie supplements, in their disholie supererogations, in their pharisaical flagellations: & in many other like superstitiōs, fondly reputed holines. these things are partly proved already: but more fully & exactly, throughout the whole discourse following, pervse it therfore gē
               tle reader willingly, marke it attentively, iudge of it friendly, condemne nothing rashly, revolve the authorities seriously, approove the trueth constantly, reiect falshood zealously; and if thou shalt perceiue thyselfe, to reape any spirituall commoditie by this my labour: then vouchsafe to commend me in thy heartie praiers, to the father of all mercie: to vvhom vvith the sonne and the holie ghost, be all honour, povver, glorie, and dominion, novv and evermore,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            The preface speciall, to the simply seduced Papistes.
            
               LIke as the soule surmounteth the body, in originall dignity; so doe the diseases of the soule exceed the diseases of the body, in all impiety. And consequently, greater consideratiō ought to be had in providing remedies for the soule, then for the body. Neverthelesse so it is, that none will or can in deed provide a remedy for that sore, whereof he hath no feeling or intelligence at all. In regard whereof, especially because papistry is of papistes reputed no disease or sore; I haue imployed that small talent, which God of his meere mercy hath bestowed on me, to the end that all papistes who shall seriously peruse this my briefe discourse; may with all facilitie perceiue such to be grievous diseases of the soule, as heretofore they deemed to be none. But as they that are ignorant of their disease, neither doe nor can provide a soveraigne remedie for the same: in like manner, neither can they at any time be perfectly cured, who though they knowe both the disease and the medicine for the same, yet will they not apply that medecine vnto their sore. Euen so in the subiect matter: that papist who will not once read this short volume, which unfoldeth the abomination and manifold deformities of popery: and that by most lively and euident demonstration, deduced out of the bowels of popery it selfe: must perforce still remaine in the agonie of his said disease. Againe, if any papist shall read it, but with a resolved mind to contradict it, and so either rashly to contemne it, or without iust triall to discredit it: Such a papist (as many I feare will be found by sinister perswasion of seditious seminaries,) can not for want of due application, attaine the expected effect otherwise correspondent thereunto. And that thou beloued papist whosoeuer thou art, maist with more alacrity read this little booke; I do assure thee, that my proceeding in the discovery of popish

superstitions, vanities, enormities, falshoods, dissentions, errours, heresies, and blasphemies, is such and so sincere; as upon a salvo conducto (as they tearm it) granted from any king christian, and license procured of my gracious dread soveraigne; I am and will be most willing, to repaire into any province in Christendom; there to give an account, and to make triall of the same. Let therefore no popish censurers, comminations, or excommunications, terrifie thee from beholding the dangerous wounds of thy soule. Let no sinister perswasions, of such as are wedded to their own imaginations, disswade thee from the reading of this discourse. Let no wilfull conceit so take place in thine heart, as thou wilt rashly condemne it, before thou make due triall therof. Call to mind for Iesus Christ his sake, and for the salvation of thine owne soule; that thou art not this day more zealously affected to Popery, then I my selfe was of late yeres. Adde hereunto for Gods loue, that the perfect and exact knowledge of poperie, which I haue attained by Gods grace and painfull studie; hath so lively set before mine eyes the popish enormities, superstitions, absurdities, errours, impieties, and blasphemies; as upon the due consideration thereof, I could not but loath, detest, and abhorre all papistry; and stand at open defiance with the same. Especially, because at length I perfitly understood, that papistry in all ages, had civill warres against it self. Which thing is made so cleare and manifest by this little book, as more shall not need to be wished. I haue charitably and faithfully penned it, principally and chiefly for thy sake. And I nothing doubt but through the power of God, it will so sufficiently perswade thee, to use the ordinary meanes of thy salvation; that is, humbly to read the holy scriptures, which hath not heretofore bene thy custome; diligently to frequent godly sermons, which are nowe common in this Realme, God be thanked: and often to conferre with zealous preachers, for thy better instruction and sound confirmation; as thou wilt shortly be a greater enemy to popery, then thou wast before a friend thereunto. For in this small volume thou shalt perceive evidently, that not only popish monkes, fryers, and Iesuites; but also their schoolemen, their Summists, their Canonistes, their Thomistes, their Scotists, their Abbots, their Byshops, their Archbishoppes, their Cardinals, yea, and their greatest popes themselues, haue all in their domesticall dissentions and ciuill warres, so battered and made equall with the ground, the bulwarkes of their popery; as no forraine enemy shall henceforth need, either to stand in feare of their fortresses, or to make assaults against the

same. So surceasing to speak of their muttering upon beads; their praiers in straunge tongues; their consecrations of bells, Churches, altars, chalices, patines, corporals, copes, vestments, albes, girdles, tunicles, chesibles, miters; their exorcismes or incantations ouer oyles, chrismes, ashes, palmes, candles, salt, water, bread; their sacrificing upon such altars, in such Churches, before such relikes; to which their sacrifices such sanctimony and merits are ascribed, as that seminary is deemed best disposed for English long intended invasion; who hath occupied himselfe most busily, in that their superstitious kind of doting; their reservations of their bread-gods, often putrified, and now and then of myse devoured; their idolatricall adoration of reliques, especially of their so termed vultus sanctus: surceasing I say, from speaking of these and like popish deliraments, and instantly wishing thy christian conversion in Christ Iesus, I bid thee heartily fare-well.
         
         
            
            
               The names of the auncient writers and holie fathers, alledged in the treatise follovving.
            
               DIonysius Areopagita.
               Irenaeus.
               Tertullianus.
               Origenes:
               Cyprianus.
               Iustinus.
               Lactantius.
               Athanasius.
               Hilarius.
               Eusebius Caesariensis.
               Basilius.
               Ambrosius.
               Hieronymus.
               Augustinus.
               Chrysostomus.
               Beda.
               Euthymius.
               Ruffinus.
               Platina.
            
            
               The names of popish vvriters alledged in this volume, who all are of great estimation amongest the papistes, and highlie renowmed in the church of Rome.
            
            
               Popes, or Bishops of Rome.
               Clemens.
               Gregorius magnus.
               Adrianus.
               Innocentius.
            
            
               Cardinalles, to the popes or Bishops of Rome.
               Caietanus.
               Turrecremata.
            
            
               These were popish archbishops of great learning.
               Antonius.
               Panormitanus.
            
            
               Popish Bishops excellentlie wel learned.
               Ioannes Roffensis.
               Ambrosius Catharinus.
               Melchior Canus.
            
            
               Popish Abbots.
               Rupertus.
               Bernardus.
            
            
               Popish Canonistes.
               Gratianus.
               Angelus.
               Navarrus.
               Covarruvias.
            
            
               Popish summistes.
               Sylvester.
               Fumus.
            
            
               These were popish monkes or Popish friers.
               Alphonsus.
               Victoria.
               Dionys. Carth.
               Carranza.
               Ioseph. Ang.
               Bellarminus.
            
            
               Popish scholemen.
               Lombardus.
               Albertus.
               Alensis.
               Richardus.
               
                  
Bonaventura.
               Aquinas.
               Durandus.
               Dom. Soto.
               Paludanus.
               Mayro.
            
            
               Popish writers, who though they were not equal in dignitie, yet not inferiour in learning to the rest.
               Lyranus.
               Gersonus.
               Almaynus.
               Cusanus.
               Abulensis.
               Viguerius.
               Snoygoudanus.
               Burgensis.
               Ben. Arias.
               Matthias Thoring.
               Ioan. de Combis.
               Bryto.
            
            
               These were popish Synodes.
               Conc. Constantinopolitanum. 6.
               Conc. Constantinop. 8.
               Conc. Basiliense.
               Conc. Lateranense. 1.
               Conc. Later. 2.
               Conc. Tridentinum.
            
            
               Catholike Councels.
               Concilium Nicaenum.
               Conc. Chalcedonense.
            
            
               Popish constitutions, or bookes equall with popish synodes.
               Decreta.
               Decretalia.
               Liber sextus.
               Missale Romanum.
            
            
               Popish commentaries of great accompt in the Romish Church.
               Glossa decretalium.
               Glossa decretorum.
               Glossa ordinaria.
               Glossa interlinialis.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST BOOKE CONTEINING CERTAINE preambles for the better satisfac
               tion of the simplie seduced Papistes; as also that the motyues in the other booke following may be read with greater profite.
            
               The first Preamble.
               
                  IN the church of Rome for many yeares together, were learned and godly byshops, vvho lived orderly; preached the vvord of God sincerely, and fed their flocke carefully: but in successe of time, by litle and litle the Romish bishops did degenerat from the godly life and holie doctrine of their auncestors, and became vvolues vnto their flocks, tirants vnto the vvorld. This is prooved at large by the testimonies of approved popish doctors, in the second booke and third chapter in the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. conclusions. The great popish scholeman and Spanish Frier Victoria, vvriteth in this manner; by litle and litle, not all at once, vve vvere brought to this in ordinat course, and to this so miserable state, that novv vve are neither able to endure our griefs, nor such remedies as the church of Rome assigneth for the same. but if vve had this day such good bishops or Popes, as Clemens, Linus and Sylvester vvere, then might vvee commit all things safely vnto them: but alas to say the best of them, because I vvould not vvillingly reproove them, the Popes novv are farre inferiours to the auncient bishops of Rome. Read Victoria his ovvne vvordes, in the fourth conclusion of the fift chapter: in vvhich chapter the reader shall find much other vvorthie matter to the like effect; as that the dissolute practise of the church of Rome is novv so intollerable, that the vvorld is not able to endure it; that not onely the simple sort, but even the best of all are greatlie scandalized therevvith; that none seeke for dispensations, vvhether it be for mariages, or for irregularities, or for spirituall

benefices, but they roundlie obteine their suites; that not so manie keepe the lavve, as are dispensed to breake the lavv: adde hereunto the seventh preamble for more perspicuitie.
            
            
               
                  The 2. Preamble.
               
               BLinde Byardes, that neither had anie thing neither knevv anie thing, desirous to speake placentia, and to flatter the Popes for their ovvne preferment, began to vvrite glosses vpon the popish lavve, and therein to ascribe lordlie and more then royall titles to the Pope: so doubtles saith their religious Frier Victoria. Reade his vvordes in the sixt chapter, and third conclusion. So then through ignorance and povertie, our holie father aspired to his tyrannie.
            
            
               
                  The 3. Preamble.
               
               THe Pope hath no povver coactive over anie king, but is the Emperours subiect, and ovveth him obedience: Pope Gregorie surnamed the great, doth confesse no lesse, read the sixt Chapter.
            
            
               
                  The 4. Preamble.
               
               POpe Iohn vvas enforced to recant his false doctrine, before the king and the learned at Paris. Read the third chapter, and the fift conclusion. ergo Peters faith failed in the Pope.
            
            
               
                  The 5. Preamble.
               
               THe Pope in S. Cyprians time, vvas esteemed but as fellovv and companion to other bishops: for vvhich cause S. Cyprian contemned his opinion, and reiected his determination, though set dovvne by the consent of a provinciall councell: vvhich doubtles S. Cyprian vvould never have done, if hee had acknovvledged or graunted anie such authoritie to the Pope, as the Pope this day chalengeth to himselfe. Nay S. Cyprian thought himselfe everie vvay the Popes equall, and the African counsel to be of as good authoritie, as the Italian or Romish sinode, and therfore reprooved the Pope verie sharplie both of pride and ignorance. read the third chapter and last conclusion.
            
            
               
                  The 6. Preamble.
               
               ALl the Apostles had not onely the same povver and auctoritie, but iurisdiction also, as vvholly, largely, effectually, and in all

respectes as Peter had. Read the sixt chapter and first conclusion.
            
            
               
                  The 7. Preamble.
               
               POpish purgatorie vvas invented by Popes and Popish parasites, neither vvas it ever admitted, liked, or beleeved of the greeke church vntil this day. Read the 7. chapter and 2. conclusion. and here I vvill alleage the verie vvordes of our Roffensis sometime bishop of Rochester, a man so renovvmed not in England onely, but through out the vvorld amongst papists, as his vvords may carie credit sufficient vvith them. thus he vvriteth, I vvil not alter or change one vvord.
               
                  Sed & graecis adhunc vsque diē, non est creditū purgatoriū esse. legat qui velit Graecorum veterum commentarios, & nullum quantum opinor, 
                  Roffensis cont. assertion: Luther. art. 18. prope initium. 
                  aut quam rarissimum de purgatorio sermonem inveniet. sedneque latini simul omnes ac sensim, huius rei veritatem conceperunt. & paulo post; nō absque maxima sancti spiritus dispensatione factum est, quod post tot annorum curricula purgatorij fides, & indulgentiarum vsus ab Orthodoxis generatim sit receptus, quumdiis nulla fuer at de purgatorio cura, nemo quaesivit indulgentias. nam ex illo pendet omnis indulgentiarum existimatio. si tollas purgatorium, quorsum indulgentijs opus erit? his enim si nullum fuerit purgatorium, nihil indigebimus. contemplantes igitur aliquandiu purgatorium incognitum fuisse. deinde quibusdam pedetentim, partim ex revelationibus, partim ex scripturis fuisse creditum, atque ita tandem generatim eius fidem ab orthodoxa ecclesia fuisse receptissimam, facillime rationem aliquam indulgentiarum intelligimus. quum itaque purgatorium tam sero cognitum ac receptum ecclesiae fuerit vniversae, quis iam de indulgentijs mirari potest, quod in principio nascentis ecclesiae nullus fuerat earum vsus? caeperunt igitur indulgentiae, postquam ad purgatorij cruciatus aliquandiu trepidatum er at.
               
               The Greekes to this day, do not beleeue that there is a purgatorie. read vvho vvil the commentaries of the auncient Grecians, and he shal find either verie seldome mention of purgatorie, or none at all. for neither did the Latine Church conceive the veritie of this matter at one time, but by leisure. neither vvas it done vvithout the great dispensation of the holy ghost, that after so manie yeares Catholikes both beleeved purgatorie, and received the vse of pardons generallie. so long as there vvas no care of purgatorie, no mā sought for pardons. for of it dependeth all the estimation, that vve have of pardons. if thou take avvay purgatorie, to vvhat end shall

vve neede pardons? for if their be no purgatorie, vve shall neede no pardons: considering therfore hovv long purgatorie vvas vnknown, then that it vvas beleeved of some by litle and litle, partly by revelations, and partly by the Scriptures, and so at the last beleeved generally of the vvhole church, vve do easilie vnderstand the cause of perdons. since therefore purgatorie vvas so lately knovven and received of the vniversal church, vvho can novv admire pardons, that there vvas no vse of them in the primitiue Church. pardons therefore began after the people stood in some feare of purgatory. these are the vvords, of this popish bishop. vvhich vvordes, if they be vvel marked vvith all the circumstances, are able vvithout more adoe, to persvvade anie man to detest the Romish religion, for vvhich cause I have alleaged them at large.
               1 First therefore vvee learne here, that the greeke church never beleeved purgatorie to this day.
               2 Secondly, that the Latine church and church of Rome did not beleeve the said purgatorie, for manie hundreds of yeares after S. Peters death, vvhose successor the pope boasteth himself to be.
               3 Thirdlie, that this purgatorie vvas not beleeved of all the latine church at one and the same time, but by litle and litle. vvhere note by the vvay, that poperie crept into the church by litle and litle, & not all at one time. vvhich is a point that galleth the papistes, more then a litle I vveene.
               4 Fourthly, that purgatorie vvas beleeved in the latter daies, by speciall revelation of the holie ghost.
               5 Fiftlie, that pardons came not vp, till purgatorie vvas found out. for in purgatorie resteth the life of pardons, as vvhich there being no purgatorie, are not worth a straw.
               6 Sixtly, that purgatorie vvas a long time vnknovven.
               7 Seventhly, that purgatorie could not be found in the scriptures, of a long time.
               8 Eightlie, that it vvas not vvholie found out by the scriptures, but partlie by revelations.
               9 Ninthly, that pardons vvere not heard of or knovven to the primitive church.
               10 Tenthly, that then pardons began when men began to feare the paines of purgatorie,
               Behold novv gentle reader, vvhat a vvorthie fisher vvas my popish Lord of Rochester? hee hath caught vvith his net at one draughtten goodly fishes, that is to say, ten vvorthy observations for Christian aedification. Further then this, out of the seventh and eight observations, I gather three special documents by a necessarie and irrefragable consecution. First, that the second booke of the Machabees is not Canonical, or penned by the holie ghost. For if that booke vvere of canonicall authoritie, vvhich the papistes

purgatorie could not but haue bene knovven, so soon as that booke vvas knovvn, vvhich yet Roffensis denieth. The reason is evidēt, because purgatorie is verie effectuallie & plainlie conteined therin.
               Secondlie, that the Church of Rome (for of that church speaketh the Bishop) reputeth the vvorkes of God vnperfect, albeit Moyses avoucheth the contrarie. Dei, inquit, perfecta sunt opera. The vvorkes Deut. cap. 2. vers. 4. of God, saith he, are perfect. I prooue this, because as the Bishop saith, the scriptures made purgatorie knovven to the church, but vnperfectlie: yet the truth is, that if God make purgatorie knovven by the scriptures, then purgatorie is made knovven perfectlie by them, or else Gods vvorks, that is, the holie scriptures, must be vnperfect. but I vvil rather beleeue Moyses the holie prophet of God, then my lord our fisher, though the popes canonized martir.
               Thirdlie, this Bishop for this his doctrine, must either come againe to retract his opinion, or else wil he nil he, condemne the pope and church of Rome. This I wil proove, by a most plaine and evident demonstration. For the better vnderstanding vvherof, I shal desire the gentle reader to observe three thinges vvith me.
               First, that the church of Rome preacheth novv and did in this Bishops time, that the bookes of Machabees are canonicall scripture, and penned by the holie ghost.
               Secondlie, that the church of Rome neither beleeued nor knevv purgatorie, for manie years together after the receite of holie scripture, and these bookes of Machabees.
               Thirdlie, that purgatorie is effectuallie and plainely conteined in the second booke of Machabees by popish estimation, in that their Latine vulgata edition, vvhich their tridentine councell hath most straitlie charged all chistendome to observe, as all papistes now a daies repute the same a stable bulwarke for their purgatorie. the wordes are these: sancta ergo & salubris est cogitatio pro defunctis exorare, vt à peccatis solvantur, it is therefore a good and godlie consideration 2. Machab. cap. 12. vers. 26. to pray for the dead, that they may bee cleansed from their sinnes. these wordes are so plaine and so easie, as not onelie the vvhole church, but my lord Bishop, yea and euerie scholer that but meanlie knoweth the latine tongue, must needes vnderstand the same. And consequentlie must needes knovv purgatorie by them, if hee can vse anie discourse at all, as my lord of Rochester could doe right well. vpon these observations then I inferre first, that the church of Rome not knowing purgatorie for manie yeares, after she had received the scriptures, in which purgatorie was so plainlie and effectuallie conteined as they now graunt, did not repute the bookes of Machabees for canonicall scriptures, and consequentlie did not beleeue purgatorie mentioned therein. For this indeed is most true, of the old and good church of Rome, as Roffensis hath proved against

his vvill.
               I inferre secondlie, that the church of God never had or can haue other scriptures or other faith, then the apostles had, and beleeved in their time. For the latter church neuer had nor ever shall haue authoritie, to coine anie new scriptures or nevv faith. The church of Rome therefore taught most wicked doctrine in my L. Bishops time, vvhich he well perceiued and acknowledged in his ovvne conscience, or els was in that point infatuated & become a verie foole, according to this saying of the Gospel,
               
                  Confiteor tibi pater domine coeli & terrae, quia abscondisti haec à sapientibus 
                  Matt. cap. 11. vers. 25. 
                  & prudentibus, & revelasti ea parvulis.
               
               I giue thee thankes, O Father Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and men of vnderstanding, and reuealed them vnto babes.
            
            
               
                  The 8. Preamble.
               
               ALbeit the papistes doe reproue others bitterlie, when they reiect some authotities, though vpon important and grounded reasons, yet themselves with all libertie reiect & contemne authorities at their pleasures. They reiect the fourth booke of Esaias, as Bellar. lib. 1. de verbo dei. cap. 4. Bellarminus confesseth. They reiect the last clause of the Lords praier, as Arius Montanus witnesseth. They reiect the 65. canon of the Apostles, as graunteth Bellarminus in these wordes: Respondeo canonem 
                  Aries Montanus in cap. 6. Matt. Bellar. lib. 2. de Rom. Pont. cap. 27. 
                  istum supposititium videri, solum. n. quinquaginta canones apostolorum ecclesia recipit. I answere that this canon is a counterfaite, for the church (of Rome) receiveth onelie 50. canons of the apostles. Marke gentle reader, that this canon reproveth the practise of the Church of Rome, and so the church, si dijs placet, will not receiue it. They reiect the sixt generall councell, because forsooth it prescribeth limits to the bishop of Rome, and denieth his vsurped iurisdiction. That they reiect this solemne and vniuersall councel, Bellarminus auoucheth stoutlie: but pope Adrian reputed a most graue vvriter by the learned papists, received and reverenced the said councell. Bellar. vbi sup. for these are his vvords, cited in their ovvne canon lavve: Sextam synodum sanctā cum om nibus canonibus suis recipio. I receiue the sixt holie Dist. 16. cap. 6. synode, vvith all the canons thereof. Loe, the Pope himselfe and their ovvne canon lavv, confirme this councel to be of good autoritie. Reade the next chapter in the said canon lavy, for there is large matter vttered for the approbation, of the same. They reiect that part of the councell of Constance, vvhich Pope Martin vvould not allovv. And vvhy vvould not hee allovv that part, as vvell as he approued the other parts? because for sooth it denieth the Popes authoritie, to be aboue the councel. but because I vvill not rip vp Bellar. lib. 2. de conciliis, cap. 19.
                  
popish licentious libertie to the bottome, I vvill rest vvith recitall of that onelie libertie, vvhich Bellarminus vseth in defense of popish masse: these are his vvordes; Porro epistolae duae quae circumferuntur 
                  Bellar. lib. 2. de Missa. cap. 16. 
                  de hac re, Damasi ad Hieronymum & Hieronymi ad Damasum, supposititiae sunt. Furthermore the tvvo epistles vvhich are carried about, of Damasus to Hierome, and of Hierome to Damasus, are counterfaite. But the absurdest Epistles, Canons, and vvritinges that euer vvere or can be, are verie authentical vvith them, and most currant, so they make for our holie father the pope his vsurped iurisdiction. For proofe of this point, I vvil content my selfe vvith tvvo examples for brevitie sake. For by them and the disproofe thereof, the reader may haue a sufficient coniecture of the rest. The former example, Epist. 1. Clementis ad Jacobum fratrem dom. 1. concil. is taken out of S. Clements epistle to S. Iames. in this and the other epistles follovving put forth in the name of S. Clement, is commended vnto vs, auricular confession, the sacrifice of the masse, the subiection of kinges to bishops, the primacie of S. Peter and such like, for vvhich respectes the said epistles are currant and authenticall amongst the papistes. but magna est veritas & praevalet, great is 3. Esd. cap. 4. vers. 42. the truth and it preuaileth, for the verie vvordes of the epistle betray and bevvray the same, and make it manifest vnto all the world, that it is a counterfait. These therefore are the vvordes: Clemens Iacobo domino, episcopo episcoporum regenti Hebraeorum sanctam ecclesiam Hirosolymis, sed & omnes ecclesias quae vbique Dei providētia fundatae sunt, cum patribus & diaconibus, & caeteris omnibus patribus, pax tibi sit semper. Clement to lord Iames the bishop of bishops, that governeth the holy church of the Hebrevves at Hierusalem, as also that governeth all churches founded by Gods providēce throughout the vvorld, vvith the fathers and deacons, and all other fathers, peace be to thee alvvaie. Novv gentle reader thou hast heard the vvords, and so beholdest no doubt the vanitie thereof: for if S. Iames vvere not only bishop of Hierusalem, but the bishop of bishops, and the governor of all Churches in the christian vvorld, as this epistle affirmeth; then doubtles vvas S. Iames the pope and supreme head of the church, & not S. Peter; and yet doth the selfe same epistle avouch, that S. Peter vvas the head of the church, and that S. Peter lying sicke in his bed called S. Clement vnto him, and told him that his houre of death vvas at hand, and that therefore he appointed the said Clement to be his successour, and to sit in his chaire at Rome. But S. Iames succeeded Christ himselfe at Hierusalem, vvho vvas indeede the head of holie Church: and therefore S. Iames should rather be Pope then S. Clement, if there vvere indeed anie such pope at all. the latter example is taken out of that vvorke vvhich is fathered vpon S. Augustine, of true and false repentance. vvhich booke, because it seemeth to approove confession of sinnes to priests, is good and authenticall

vvith papistes; but as God vvould haue it, the selfe same booke confuteth it selfe so plainlie, as none vvith reason can esteeme it worth a straw. For in that verie booke the author thereof (who soeuer Aug. dever. & fals. poenit. cap. 17. he were) alleageth S. Austens opinion, and confuteth the same. These are the wordes: quod quam vis licet de eius salute Augustinus potuit dubitare, credo quidemilli qui dixit; quacunque hora peccator ingemuerit, & conversus fuerit, vita viuet. because although S. Augustine doubted of his saluation, yet do I beleeue him that said: at what houre Ezech. 33. soeuer a sinner shall repent and be converted, hee shall live. These are the wordes of this vvriter, which doubtlesse cannot be S. Augustines, because S. Austen would never speake of him selfe as of a strange third person, and purposelie confute himselfe, as this author confuteth Augustine. Besides this, S. Augustine in his bookes of confession doth vtterlie condemne confession of sinnes vnto Priestes, as I haue prooved in the chapter of auricular confession, but alas, the Papistes as they haue but one onelie place of the Machabees for their forged pugatorie, so haue they but onelie this place of S. Augustine for their popish confession. And therefore no marveile if they invent poore & miserable shifts, to have them both reputed authentical if it would be.
            
            
               
                  The 9. Preamble.
               
               THe cheefest and principall thing that seduceth and maketh so manie wilfull papistes, is this (gentle reader) for certaintie. when so ever anie one of what degree, calling, or condition soever, shall become a papist and yeeld himselfe to the slanedome of popish religion, that person must bye and bye prosesse ipso facto, to beleeue and imbrace all the popes decrees of faith and maners, as the verie selfe decrees of the holie ghost, and also to obey his ordinances and censures, as the lawes of God and not of man: their reason whereof is, because as they say, the holie Ghost doth so direct, couduct, and guide the Popes tongue and pen, that he can neither define, commaund, or write anie thing in iudiciall and difinitiue maner, but it must perforce proceed from the holie ghost: out of which falslie supposed ground, two most pernicious euils follow of necessitie. The one, that whensoeuer anie difficultie, doubt, or controversie ariseth about anie matter of religion, then by and by the Papistes consider first of all what the pope holdeth (whether it be in the decrees, decretals, the sixt booke, Clementines, extravagants) and that done, they will coine one distinction or other, by which they vvill racke the meaning of the question, difficultie, reason, father, or scripture propounded, to agree with that which the pope holdeth. For they wil neuer examine the popes decrees by the scriptures,

fathers or coūcels: but the fathers, or councels, & scriptures, See the 13. orticle of dissention, cap. 8. and the words of Couarruvias in the 5. chap. & 1. conclusion. by the Popes faith, constitutions, & practise. for if anie can once say, the Church, that is, the pope holdeth so, then is the controversie at an end, he shall be demed an heretike that proceedeth one iot further. for their canon law hath made it sacriledge, to dispute, of the popes power. Read the first chapter. the other, that none may or dare reade, either the scriptures trāslated into their vulgar tongue, or any expositours vpon the latine Bible, or anie booke of controversies, or anie writer whosoeuer in anie matter of religion, popish writers onelie excepted, vnlesse they first haue a licence from the pope: which license is neuer graunted, but to special persons & vpon speciall considerations. And out of this sharpe, vnchristian, and diabolical prohibition, issueth the third euill; to wit, that not one papist among ten thousand knoweth anie thing perteining to religion, save onely a few special pointes of popish doctrine. For they are taught, that to beleeve as the fable of the Colier teacheth them, is sufficient: the devil as cardinall Hosius reporteth, disputed with a poore colier, asking him how he beleeved, I beleeue, said the colier, as the church beleeueth: then the deuill demaunding how the Church beleeued, the colier answered in this maner: I beleeue as the church beleeueth, and the church beleeueth as I beleeue, & there he rested, and would not remoue one iote. At the same stay are all papistes this day, who beleeue as the church of Rome beleeueth, though they cannot tell how it beleeueth, but onelie in a generall and grosse maner, and so they often times beleeue they know not what. Marrie our English papistes for feare of the statute, dare not stand vpon this beleefe, (though it be their staie indeed,) but flee to another bulwarke as they deeme it, to wit, it is against my conscience, when yet in verie deede, they can no more tell what conscience is, then they know what the romish church beleeveth.
            
            
               
                  The 10. Preamble.
               
               THe religion this day established by godlie lawes in this realme of England, is the aunciēt, christian, catholike, and apostolike doctrine, which was taught by Christ and his apostles, practised in the primitive church, & euer continued in the heartes of the faithfull vntill this houre, and shal no doubt to the worlds end. And though the common people for the greater part, call it the new religion: yet is that a meere childish vanitie, and the popish doctrine the new religion in verie deed. For the old Romish religion, is this day holden and observed in this Realme. which thing is proued at large, These Capuchenes are yet in Rome. throughout my second booke: for example, the profession of the romish Capuchenes is not a new profession in religion, but the

old franciscan profession newlie reformed: and therefore doe they terme themselues the reformed franciscanes, which yet the other corrupt, and dissolute franciscans will not acknowlege, and euen so in our case, the religion now established in England, is not a religion opposite to the first old Romish religion, but the old Romish religion newlie reformed, and purged from the corruptions and abuses crept into the same. From which auncient and pure religion the pope and his adherents are departed, like as the franciscans are also gone from their old popish franciscan profession.
            
            
               
                  The 11. Preamble.
               
               THe ignorant papistes (that is, all papistes or verie few excepted) doe greatlie loth and abhorre the christian catholike religion, now established in this land by godlie lawes in a godlie maner. And this they doe vppon a ground falslie so supposed, by reason of their ignorance therein. their falslie conceiued ground is, that our religion contemneth good workes, and iustifieth the most wicked liuers vpon earth: which if it were as they imagine, then were it indeede a great motiue to dislike of our religion. But gentle reader, it is a most notorious slaunder doubtlesse, as I shal evidentlie proue vnto thee. Hieronymus Zanchius writeth thus: Primi affectus 
                  Zanch. de natur. dei lib. 5. cap. 2. part. 2. q. 6. 
                  regenerationis ac spiritus, sunt amor iustitiae, legis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      divinae, & odium peccati: The first affects or fruites of regeneration and of the spirit, are loue of iustice, and of the law divine, and hatred of sinne: and a litle after he saith thus; Fily Dei & diligunt & faciunt iustitiam, filii autem diaboli, & amant & faciunt peccatum. The children of God both love and doe iustice, but the children of the deuil both loue and do sinne. and againe, Manifestum fit studium bonorum operum effectum esse preaestinationis: It is manifest, that studie to liue well, and to doe good workes, is the effect of predestination: and an hundred such like places the same author hath, which I let passe for brevitie sake. neither doth anie other of the learned amongest vs: hold contrary to this doctrine. nay all the pulpets God be thanked, found out and extoll the praise of good workes, yea which is more to be admired of the papistes, who thinke so baselie of our religion, wee affirme the good workes of the regenerate to be so acceptable in Gods sight, that he will not suffer the least therof to be vnrewarded. & further we teach & affirm in our religion, that the regenerat & childrē of God cā not cōtinue in gods favour, vnles they detest sin, striue against the concupiscence of the flesh, & do good works. yet further we auouch cōstantlie, that none cā beleeùe truly in Christ, which doth not love Christ, & which doth not emploie his whole care, studie, & industrie, to doe the will of Christ, and to keepe his commaundements. And that this is the faith and

doctrine of the Church of England verie manie God be thanked for it, haue left to their posteritie livelie testimonies of the same: wherof I will onelie name one, who as hee did inwardlie in his heart beleeue the gospell, so did he outwardlie in his life professe it, and after his death confirme the same, with a most charitable and christian testimonie of immortall memorie. I speake of that honourable and zealous christian Sir VValter Mildmey, the late foūder of a most famous colledge in the vniuersitie of Cambridge, which he tearmed not after his owne name (as the greater part vseth,) but Emanuell, that is, God with vs: giuing vs to vnderstand therby, that as hee beleeued and loued God, so he would testify the same to al posterities by that, worthie act, as by the effect and fruite of a liuelie faith. Now then how doe we differ from the papistes herein? Zanchius shall answere. Atque hic est vnus ex praecipuis vsibus bonorumoperum, quod ijs non tanquam 
                  Zanch vti supra. 
                  salutis causis, sadtanquā effectis predestinationis & fidei, tum nos, tum proximi, certiores fimus nostrae electionis, eoque & salutis. And this is one of the chiefest vses of good works, that both wee and our neighbours are assured by them of our election and salvation, not as by the causes of salvation, but as by the effectes of predestination and of faith. But the papistes will say: if good woorkes cannot merite glorie nor iustifie: wherefore then must we do them? I answere, that we must liue well and doe good workes, for the loue and dutie we owe to God, and because so is his holie will and good pleasure. so saith the Apostle, in these words, ipsius enim sumus factura, creati in Christo Iesu in operibus bonis, quae preparavit Deus vt in illis ambulemus. for wee are his workemanship created in Christ Iesus vnto good workes, which God hath ordained that we should walke in them. so then, we thinke as reuerentlie and esteem as worthilie of good works, as doth anie papist in the world. for we grant that none can be saued or sanctified without good workes: and further, that none is truelie iustified which hath not good works: & yet for all that do we constantly affirme, and that by the authoritie of holie writte, that no man is or can be iustifyed, by vertue of his good works: & the error of the Papistes consisteth in this, that they do not distinguish betweene sanctification and iustificatiō. the truth of our doctrine (which is the verity grounded in the sacred scriptures,) is this, that sanctificatiō & iustificatió, are inseparably vnited in one & the same subiect, in eodē instanti tëporis nōnaturae, as the scholes speake, that is: we are freelie iustified & sanctifyed also in the same instāt of time, but first iustified in prioritie of nature: for example, fire and the heate are both at one and the same time, though fire be before in prioritie of nature: that is, though fire goe before: as the cause of euerie thing is before the effect of the same, and as fire is not before heate in time, and yet the cause of that heate, so is our iustification not before our sanctification, or our inherent

iustice in time, and yet is it the cause of our sanctification, of our inherent iustice, and of all the good workes we doe: which thing if the papistes would once seriouslie observe, they would not differ from our opinion in this behalfe, vnlesse they haue fullie resolved, to oppose themselves desperatlie against the truth.
            
            
               
                  The 12. Preamble.
               
               VVHo so euer will but euen superficiallie consider the vncertaintie of popish doctrine, shall thereby without further discourse find svfficient matter to abhorre and detest the same, as most friuolous, most ridiculous, most irreligious. For example, in the sacrament of the altar as they terme it: if certaine questions be propounded vnto them, the best learned know not what to answere, but so simply and so sottishly, as euerie child may espie the follie of their doctrine. If anie papist can truely and without blushing say the contrarie, let the same be notifyed by his ansvvere, to these my briefe demaundes. 1. First, I demaund how they excuse the people that adore with diuine worship, the thing eleuated ouer the priestes head at Masse, from idolatrie, from heresie, from false beleefe. For if either the Priest want intention to consecrate (vvhich often chaunceth by reason of vvandering imaginations,) or of purpose meaneth not to consecrate, or of negligence omitteth any vvord of consecration, then by popish religion the thing adored, is but pure bread, & so the adorers thereof become idolaters, vvorshipping a peece of bread for Cap. dubium de haeret. Nauarr. cap. 11. parag. 18. Barthol. fumus de haeres. parag, 17. the euerliuing God. And if the people either refuse to adore, or doubt if they may adore, they are deemed heretiques ipso facto for their pains, because as the Popes disholie canons tell vs, he that but doubteth of Romish definitions, concerning faith and maners, is an heretike.
               2 Secondlie, I demaund what it is that the priest receiueth and deliuereth to the communicants, when he hauing 40. breads before him, supposeth them to be but 38. or 39. and so intendeth to consecrate no more? for beyond the priestes intention, consecration cannot extend, as all wise Papistes graunt, neither is his intention more limited to one bread then to an other, and therfore can no more consecrate one bread then another.
               3 Thirdlie, I demaund which part of the host as they terme it, is the popish made God, when the sacrificer intendeth indefinitelie to consecrate the one halfe of the said host, and how there in adoring they can avoid idolatrie.
               4 Fourthly, I demaund howe many gods, or how many times God is made in one and the same hoste, in and at that Masse, when all the newly made priestes doe consecrate, in their Romish Church Latheran? for they are all appointed to consecrate, they doe all pronounce the wordes, they are all bounden to have intention, and yet when the principall author, to wit, the Bishop, is at the last sillable, some of the rest be

in the middest, some in the beginning, some in one place, some in another, never a one jumping with other in that instant, in which they should their bread-god make: for of this matter are three solemne dissonant opinions, amongest the great Romish Rabbins. Pope Innocentius Iosephus Angles, in 4. s. q. 7. de Eucharist. 8. diffic. holdeth, that all doe consecrate: Durandus avowcheth that that Priest onely consecratetth, which with greatest speed first commeth to the end: but Cardinall Caietan hath another consideration.
               5 Fifthly, I demaund concerning their wordes of consecration, what is in the priestes hand when he hath uttered all the wordes save one? if they answere the bodie of Christ, then doeth it followe, that the principall worde of their consecration is needlesse, that their wordes of consecration be uncerten, and that their consecratorie wordes so called, be not causative of their falsly supposed effect: if they say it is pure bread, or bread in substance but altered in qualitie, then doeth it followe necessarily, that the consecration consisteth of the last word onely, and that all the rest are meere extrinsecall to their imagined transubstantiation: if they say it is neither Christes bodie, nor bread, but an unknowen substance, or as they tearme it sometime, individuum vagum, we may truely tell them, that their certentie of their idolatrous sacrament, is as uncerten as the weather-cocke.
               6 Sixtly, I demaund of them how Christes natural bodie being large, is contained in around cake being little, since Christes bodie is a true organicall bodie, which hath divers partes every one distant from another: if they say that Christes bodie is there without dimensions, their owne angelicall, and famous Doctor Aquinas is against them: if they say, that though it can not be so by naturall power, yet can God miraculously Aquinas. p. 3. q. 76. art. 4. bring so much to passe: to that I answere, that so to say can not serve their turne, for by the confession of all learned men, yea, even of all popish schoole-men and Doctors, there be many things which God can not doe, or rather many things which can no way be done: for example, God can not sinne, God can not make time past not to be past, God can not make that a blind man remaining blinde, do not want his sight, though he can give sight to the blind: God can not make that a dead man remaining dead, have life, though he can restore life to the dead: in fine, God can do nothing that implyeth contradiction: and yet doeth not this want of doing argue impotencie in God, who is omnipotent; but defect in the thing that should be done. Nowe so it is, that this imagined being of Christes body in a little round cake implyeth in it selfe contradiction, & consequently, can not possibly be done. For example, no power can bring to passe, that a bodie being sixe cubits long, and two cubits broad, remaining still so long and broad, shall be contained in another body, being onely three cubits long, and one cubite broad: and the reason hereof is, because so to conteine, and be conteined, implyeth

contradiction. And this is the case novv put, of Christes bodie in the round popish cake. Let all the papistes in England or els where solve this reason, and I will be their bondman. And if they can not solve it, (which indeede is impossible to be done,) then must they perforce confesse vvhich they vvould not, that their doctrine is ridiculous, impossible, and execrable.
               Seventhlie, I demaund hovv they can defend Christes bodie from being broken and devided, when they breake and devide their round cakes, since by their doctrine Christes bodie is reallie conteined in the same?
               Eightly, I demaund hovv they can distinguish division of the bread from consecration of the same, or hovv they can denie it to be of equall force vvith consecration thereof? for by consecration of one bread, Christes bodie is but in one place: but by division of one bread, his bodie is locallie in manie places at once.
            
            Here endeth the first Booke.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND BOOK: VVherein are confuted the principall groundes of all Romish religion.
            
               
                  CAP. I. Of the principall groundes of all Romish faith and religion.
               
                  TVVO thinges there be which mightily keepe all Papistes in a certaine externall uniformitie of Religion: as all, whosoever deepely ponder the same, must perforce acknowledge with me. Th'one is the severe punishment & sharpe tortures, executed upon all persons whatsoever without exception, of what degree, state, or condition soever, that doe but once whisper against the least jote of Popish religion: for better successe and Cap. Quicunque de haeret. lib. 6. more free passage of the said Romish religion, the laicall people are prohibited by Popish canon law, under paine of excommunication, not to reason at all in matters of faith; and the learned not to examine or discusse, howe farre the Popes power doeth extend; whatsoever or howsoever, he appoint them to beleeve: which their owne Popish fryer Franciscus a Victoria did not dissemble, when out of their owne Canon lawe, he uttered these expresse wordes.
               
                  Non spectat ad subditos determinare aut examinare, quid possit 
                  Victor. relect. 4. de potest. Papae, & concilij, proposit. 16. 
                  Papa, aut quid non possit, & quomodo teneantur parere vel non, quia sacrilegium est disputare de potentia Principis, & praecipuè Papae.
               
               It belongeth not to Popish vassals, to determine or examine what the Pope may doe, or what he may not doe. For his lawe hath made it sacriledge, to dispute of the Popes power: yea, this their irreligious manner of proceeding is executed in such strict sort, as neither any of the laytie nor of the Clergie, can under Pius 4. in bulla synod. Trident. paine of Popish excommunication, reade either the Olde or New Testament, translated into the vulgar tongue, or any other booke of controversie, or Divinitie, set forth by any not professed vassall

vnto the pope, vnlesse such person or persons be specially licensed from the pope thereunto. All which is confirmed by daily practise of the Romish church: in so much, as if anie vtter anie one vvord, that may any vvay sound or be racked to the dislike of popish doctrine, that man shal bye and bye be castinto their disholie inquisition, and shortlie after be burnt with fire & faggot, vnlesse he both svveare and subscribe to euerie article, of their erroneous romish religion. And further, vnlesse hee also protest by oath, to disclose vvhom soeuer he knovveth then, or shall knovv aftervvard, to hold anie opinion against the said romish religion. Nay, though a man be neuer so sound a papist, yet if he be but found in companie vvith his deare frend, vvho in affection is opposite to the romish religion, that selfe sound papist shal be put into the inquisition, and there abide vvith hard vsage, vntil he pay the last farthing▪ this to be so, M. Massey of Audforth in Cheshire must vvitnesse vvith me, vvho is this day in Chester gaole for his vvilfull seditious behaviour: for he (though at that time fled into Italy for popish zeale,) vvas yet thrust into the romish inquisition vvith yong master Dutton novv his sonin lavv: vvhere hovv long they remained, vvhat vvas their intertainement, to vvhat they did svveare, and so forth, before they vvere dismissed, atatom habent, let them ansvvere for themselues, they are yet liuing: it is needelesse for mee to tell their tale. One Aldcorne likevvise a citizen of Yorke, vvas cast into the laid Romish disholie inquisition, vpon a verie light or rather no suspicion, and there vsed verie hardly a long tyme, though hee vvere in deede a Papist, and had no language saue onelie his vulgare Englishe tongue. This man is yet liuinge in Yorke, let him say if it be not as I doe vvrite. I my selfe was a mean for his dispatch, and so am notignorant of his case. A thing more strange then the rest: If one passe by an image, or their house of inquisition (which they terme the holy house) and doe not reverence thereunto, it is ynough to cast that man into the said disholy prison. which kinde of sharpe correction, if it were upon just causes executed within her Maiesties Dominions, shortly fewe or no disloyal subiectes, would be found in England. Neither is this my bare opinion, but the constant resolution of that most grave, wise, learned, and holy father S. Augustine, who though sometime he had bene of the conttarie opinion, was neverthelesse taught by long experience to acknowledge it: these ate his expresse wordes.
               
                  Donatistae nimiùm inquieti sunt, quos per ordinatas à Deo potestates 
                  Aug. epist. 48, ad Vincent, Tom. 2. 
                  cohiberi at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      corrigi mihi non videtur inutile: nam de multorum iam correctione gaudemus, qui tàm ver acitèr unitatem Catholitam tenent,
                  
                  atque defendunt, & à pristino-errore se liberatos esse laetantur, vt eos cum magna gratulatione miremur. qui tamen ne scio qua vi consuetudinis nullo modo mutari in melius cogitarent, nisihoc terrore perculsi. & paulopost: nam mea primitus sententia er at, neminem ad vnitatem christianā esse cogendum, verbo esse agendum, di sput atione pugnandum, ratione vincenaum, ne fictos catholicos haberemus, quos apertos haereticos noveramus. Sedhaec opinio mea non contradicentium verbis, sed demonstr antium super abatur exemplis nam primò mihi opponebatur civitas mea, quae cum tot a esset in parte Donati, ad vnitatem catholicam timore legum imperialium conver saest.
               
               The Donatistes are to to vnquiet, and therefore I thinke it convenient, that they be restreined and corrected by povvers ordeined of God. for wee alreadie haue ioy of manie, by reason of their correction, who keepe and defend catholike vnitie so sincerely, and A point worthie to be wel considered, as which greatly respecteth our case in England. so reioise, that they are deliuered from their olde errour, as wee with great congratulation doe admire them vvho for all that I know not by what force of custome, would never once thinke of reforming them selues, but onelie through this feare and terrour. My former opinion vvas, that none should be constrained to christian vnitie, that vve should strive with the word, contend with disputation, and ouercome vvith reason: least vvee should have them counterfait catholikes, whom vvee had knovven to be open heretikes. But this my opinion vvas over ruled not vvith vvords of contradiction, but vvith examples of demonstration. For first of al mine ovvne citie vvas obiected vnto mee, vvhich standing vvhollie vpon Donatistes, vvas for all that brought to catholike vnitie, by sharpe imperiall lavves. Thus farre S. Augustine.
               The other thing is a point of so great importance, as none can be more. for if it vvere true, as the papistes vvith tooth and naile avouch it to be, then vvere all other religions false, & theirs onely true: for there is but one God, one faith, one baptisme, one religion; yet if it be false, as false it is indeede, (vvhich by the povver of God I shall prooue by euident demonstration, and that euen by the testimonies of the best learned popish doctours:) then must their religion of necessitie be naught, hovv soeuer others be. this great and vveightie point is, that the Pope can not erre in his definitive sentence, vvhether he define concerning faith or maners. For (say they) Christ committed his church to saint Peter, praying that his faith should neuer faile: and consequentlie, hee prayed that the Pope as Pope should never erre, because the Pope is Saint Peters successour, and Christes vicar generall vpon earth. I say, the pope as pope vvith reduplication in vvay of my sincere

dealing with the papistes, because by the vniforme consent of all learned papistes Albertus Pighius onely excepted: the Pope in his owne private person may be a Iudas, a fornicator, a simonist, an homicide, an vsurer, an atheist, an heretike: and for his manifold iniquities be damned into hell. that this is the doctrine of all papistes, as well concerning the popes priuate person, as touching his iudiciall definitions, is confessed by Robertus Bellarminus, Bartholomeus Carranza, Melchior Cauus, Dominicus Soto, Thomas Aquinas, Antoninus, Caietanus, Covarruvias, and others: but that the pope as pope and publique person can erre, that all the saide papistes vvith their complices constantlie denie: as which one onlie point once cofeffed, would vtterlie confound them, and make frustrate their vvhole religion. For in all difficulties, doubtes, and distresses, the papistes haue euer recourse vnto this point, as vnto the diuine oracle of great god Apollo: that is to say, the church of Rome teacheth soe: ergo we must beleeue so. This point, as it God grant that others may perceiue it, as I hauedone. maketh manie others to be papistes, so made it my selfe one, and kept me one, vntill by Gods holie inspiration, I perceiued the absurditie thereof. This point therefore shall by Gods helpe, be so effectuallie proued throughout the chapters following: as if anie papist in England, or elswhere in Europe, (I speake a bigge word for the confidence I haue in the iustice and veritie of the cause,) can trulie and substantially confute the same: I vvill once againe imbrace his religion, which notwithstanding, I abhorre & detest as the poison of my soule. And my proceedings throughout this whole treatise shal be such, and so sincere: as if I can be conuinced by the adversarie, either to alledge anie vvriter corruptlie, or to quote anie place guilefullie, or to charge anie author falslie: I will neuer require credite at the readers hand, nether in this vvork nor in anie other, that I shall publishe at anie time hereafter: requesting the adversarie, that shall perhaps replie vpon me, (which is but reason:) to vse like sinceritie, and to couenant in like maner with me. which if hee refuse to graunt and obserue, he shall condemne himselfe in euerie wise mans iudgement, before he beginne.
            
            
               
               
                  The second Chapter, of the Popes pardons, vvith the quantitie, qualitie, and originall thereof.
               VVOnderfully haue the popes or bishops of Rome seduced Gods people, manie and sundrie waies: but neuer more groslie infatuated or bewitched them, then by their ridiculous, mō
                  struous, and execrable pardons: as which are foolish, vncertaine, absurd, new, and the deadlie woundes of all popish doctrine. For plaine and evident demonstration of this assertion, I put downe these conclusions following.
               
                  The first Conclusion.
                  THe popes pardons are too too foolish, as which are repugnant to common sense and reason. My proofe standeth thus: all relaxations beeing larger then any man liuing or dead doth or can need, are too too foolish, but the popes pardons are such: ergo the popes pardons are to to foolish. The consequence is good, and the consequent directly and truelie inferred vpon the premisses, as which is in prima figura, and modo darij, as the Logicians terme it: the proposition is so euident, as none can or will denie the same: so the difficultie resteth onely in the assumption, vvhich I proue three seuerall waies.
                  First, by the huge and infinite numbers of pardons, hanged vp in pardoning tables at the pillars of euerie church for the most part in Rome. which not onelie my selfe haue seene and read, but manie thousand besides me.
                  Secondlie, by pardons conteining manie thousand yeares, expressely set downe in olde English primars: vvhereof the papistes seeme novv at length so ashamed, that the like is not to be found in the nevv tridentine primars.
                  Thirdly, by a litle pamphlet of the marueilous things of Rome, which is commonlie to be sold euerie where, one of vvhich I brought from thence my selfe, and haue at this houre. For in all these three, pardons are graunted prodigallie, (I would say charitably,) for manie thousands of yeares. yea, in the litle romish pamphlet to omitte other churches, are graunted euerie day to S: Iohn Euangelistes church, 6048. yeares of pardon. Novv, least any be so sottish as to imagine; that a man can neede so manie yeares of pardon: that I vvill disprooue sundrie vvaies.
                  First, because it is against the holy scripture, that any man should liue so long.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  The daies of our yeares in thē 70. and if they be of strēgth 80. yeares.

vvhich vvords saint Hierome glosseth in this maner:
                  
                     Vbi sunt mille anni? in feptuaginta annis contracti sumus, si autem multum, octoginta. Si autem plus vixerimus, i am non est vita sed mors. 
                     Hier. in psa. 99
                  
                  VVhere are the thousand yeares (that they liued of old?) vve are novv brought to seaventie yeares, and if vve endure long, to eightie. but if vve liue longer, then is it not life but death.
                  2 Secondlie, because no man can abide so long in purgatorie. And least some papist replie, and say, that one may be so long in purgatorie, I vvill prove mine assertion by the best popish doctors. Bellarminus in his defense of the pope thinketh that opinion verie probable, Bellar. lib. 3. de Rom. pont. cap. 3. vvhich holdeth, that the vvorld shall not henceforth endure aboue 400. yeares at the most. And of his opinion are great learned men, Ireneus, Iustinus, Lactantius, and others. yea Saint Augustine and S. Hierome, are not dissonant from that supposition. the Thalmudistes likevvise had a prophesy of Elias, as they say: that the world should continue 6000. yeares, to vvit, 2000. before the lavv, 2000. in the lavv, and 2000. after the lavv: that is, from Christes incarnation vntill the second aduent, or doomesday. Dominicus Soto cō
                     menting vpon the maister of sentences, holdeth as a stable and constant ground, that no soule in purgatorie abideth the paines thereof aboue ten yeares. and doubtles, if the popes pardons 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Soto in 4. lib. Petr. Lombardi. dist. 19. quaest, 3. arg. 2 vvere of force. So to his opinion could not be false. the reason therof is evident, because all that vvill may vpon small sute (if not vvithout sute,) haue not only for themselves but for their friendes also, so many thousands of pardons as they shall desire: vvhich liberalitie in pardoning, pope Gregorie bestovved on our disloyal captaine Stukeley, vvhen he imploied him to invade his naturall countrey England. but as the pardons vvere counterfaite, and Stukeleys heart disloiall: so vvas the Popes intention frustrate, and Stukeley revvarded accordingly: that is, iustly slaine for his proud attempt, vvhile my selfe vvas at Rome.
               
               
                  
                     The 2. Conclusion.
                  
                  THe vertue and efficacie of Popes pardons is so vncertaine and doubtfull, and that euen amongest the greatest popish doctors: as themselves can not tel, vvhat in the vvorld to say or thinke therof. This conclusion I proue thus: Angelus de Clauasio a famous canonist and religious Frier, reciteth 6. severall and dissonant opinions Angelus de indulgentia. concerning the vertue of pardons, and after hee hath confuted them all, he setteth dovvne the seaventh for his ovvne, and the best, vvhich as hee sayth is true, it is therefore no doubt substantiall, as shortlie shall bee seene. The first opinion (saith our holie Frier,) holdeth that the Popes pardons onely remit that punishment,

which God appointeth to be imposed in another worlde, for a supplie unto those, who have done penance onely according to the Canons, but doeth in no case remit that penance, which is imposed and taxed by the Canons. The second opinion holdeth, that the Pardons onely forgive that penance, which is taxed by the law and penitentiall Canons; but not that paine, which Gods justice appointeth to be imposed. The third opinion holdeth, that Pardons forgive paine due for sinne, aswell before God as before his Church: but this opinion addeth a clause so sharpe, as our holy Father doeth not brooke it, to wit, that the Pope is bound to do penance, for that person whome he pardoneth. The fourth opinion holdeth, that the paine of hell is partly remitted by the Popes pardons, as which becommeth thereby more tollerable. The fift opinion holdeth, that that penance onely is pardoned, which the partie omitted of negligence, not of purpose or contempt. The sixt opinion holdeth, that the Popes pardons remit not onely penance imposed by the Priest, but that also which is taxed of God: marrie this opinion hath one limitation, which forsooth is this: that the Priest must be content therewith, or else the Pope can not worke his will. The seventh opinion holdeth, that Popish pardons forgive, and are woorth so much, as the wordes of the Pardons do sound: that is to say, if the Pardons containe an hundred thousand yeeres, then the partie obteining such pardons at the Popes handes, must have remission of so many yeeres. Thus gentle Reader standeth the doctrine of Popish pardons, amongst the greatest Doctors of that faction. He that listeth to peruse the place quoted by me out of Angelus, shall finde every thing as I have set it downe. The rehearsall of the varietie and uncertaintie of these opinions, is a most sufficient confutation of the same. Sylvester Prieras a great Sylvester de indulgent. Thomist, and sometime Master of the sacred pallace, reciteth three severall opinions, and disliking them all, setteth downe the fourth for the trueth. Antoninus sometime the Arch-bishop of Florence, alledgeth three opinions, and scarce knoweth which of them he should preferre. Bellarminus in his written disputations abridged by Robert Persons his brother Iesuite, defendeth and approoveth another opinion plaine opposite to all yet rehearsed, and maketh in deede the Popes pardons not woorth a button: which is the cause (as I probably coniecture,) that the third and last part of his disputations, is not permitted as yet to come abroade: and either will never be published, or wholly omitted, or at least changed before it come abroad. The Councell of Trent speaketh very slenderly and coldly, of the Popes pardons.
               
               
                  
                  The third Conclusion.
                  TO give pardons as the Pope doeth, is a straunge and newe doctrine of a most damnable Religion, which neither Christ nor his Apostles ever taught or practised. This I will proove, as I doe other things, by the expresse testimonies of the Popes owne renowmed Doctors: that so all the worlde may perceive and beholde, Papistrie confuted and confounded, by papistrie it selfe. Sylvester reputed, and as it were surnamed absolutus Theologus, hath these verie wordes:
                  
                     Indulgentia nobis per Scripturam minimè innotuit, licet inducatur illud Apostoli, (si quid donavi vobis,) sednec per dicta antiquorum 
                     Sylvester de indulg. 
                     Doctorum, sed modernorum.
                  
                  The Popes pardons (saith the Popes owne deare Doctor,) were never knowen to us by the Scriptures, although some alleadge Saint Paul for that purpose: neither were they knowen by the auncient Fathers, but onely by late writers. Antoninus in his first part hath the verie wordes alreadie cited, and holdeth the selfe same opinion with fryer Sylvester. Petrus Lombardus, who with great diligence collected into one volume, all worthie sentences of the auncient fathers: and therefore was surnamed the Master of sentences, maketh no mention of the Popes pardons at all; as which he could not finde, notwithstanding his painefull Antoninus part. 1. rit. 10. cap. 3. Lombardus: could not find the Popes pardons in the holy fathers. industrie imployed in that kinde of exercise. For as Sylvester truly writeth, the olde writers were not acquainted with any such thing. The like may be said of S, Cyprian, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, Nazianzene, and others of antiquitie: for which cause Durand, Caietain, and sundrie other schoolemen, affirme the popes manner of pardoning, to be a newe thing in the Church of God. Neither can Dominicus Soto deny the same indeede, albeit he busieth him selfe more then a little, in the Popes defence if it would be. Yea, the originall of popish pardoning is so very young, as their famous martyr and bishop, M. Fisher in his aunswere to M. Luthers articles: was enforced to admit the newnesse and young age of the same, and to yeeld this reason in defence Soto in 4. sent. dist. 21. quaest. 1. art. 3. Roffensis contra artic. Luther. thereof: to wit, that purgatorie was not so well knowne at that time to the Church, as it is nowe. which saying I weene is true indeede, because purgatorie and pardous were not heard of in olde time, and nowe onely knowen by vaine, grosse, and sensuall imaginations. O worthie pardons? O brave purgatorie? O holy pope of Rome? what stronge reasons, what forcible arguments, what grave authorities, are alleadged in your behalfe?

Let us heare with attention the finall resolution hereof, set down by Sylvester and Antoninus for their holy father the pope.
                  
                     Quia inquiunt, Ecclesia hoc facit & servat, credendum est ita esse. 
                     Sylvester & Antoninus ubi supra.
                  
                  Because the Church this doeth, and thus observeth, we must beleeve that it is so. Loe, a short and sweete conclusion: as if they should say, though we can proove the popes pardons, neither by Scriptures, nor by fathers, nor by reasons, yet must we beleeve them, because the Church, that is, the pope saith so, who can not erre: which saying, (gentle Reader,) both hath bene, and is, the sole and onely foundation of all notorious Papistry.
               
               
                  
                     The 4. Conclusion.
                  
                  THE Popes manner of pardoning, argueth aswell inordinate affection of filthie lucre, as also want of charitie. His want of charitie is prooved, and convinced, in that he can deliver (as his religion teacheth,) all soules out of purgatorie with his word: and neverthelesse suffereth them to abide most bitter torments, so many yeeres in that affliction. For the papistes holde, that the paines of purgatorie are as great and painefull, as be the torments of hell: and that they differ accidentally in this only, because the paines of purgatorie shall once have an ende, but the paines of hell, never. Thus writeth Sylvester Prieras.
                  
                     Sicut potest (Papa) liberare à poena peccatorum debita in hoc mundo 
                     Sylvester ubi supr. Par. 7. 
                     omnes qui sunt in mundo, si faciant quod mandat, etiamsi essent millies plures quàm sunt: it a liberare potest omnes qui sunt in purgatorio, siquis pro eis faciat quod iubet.
                  
                  As the Pope can deliver al in this world, from paine due for sinne in this world, if they doe that which he appointeth, though they were thousands more then they be: even so can he deliver all that are in purgatorie, if any doe that for them which he commandeth: and lest any man should thinke that impossible, or a verie difficult matter, which the Pope requireth to be done: Sylvester in another place telleth us, that it is a thing most easie. These be his wordes:
                  
                     Indulgentiae simplicitèr tantum valent, quantum praedicantur, 
                     Sylvester ubi supr. Par. 7. 
                     modò exparte dantis sit autoritas, ex parte recipientis charitas, & ex parte causae pietas.
                  
                  Pardons are simply worth so much as they are preached, so there be autoritie in the giver, charity in the receiver, & piety in the cause or motive. But so it is, that the souls in purgatory be in charity by popish confession, for else they could not be out of hel: and that the pope hath

authoritie, as also that he graunteth his Pardons for good and godly causes, I suppose no Papist will denie: if they doe, my argument is the stronger, and my selfe shall easily agree there to. Bartholomaeus Fumus confirmeth this point, when he thus writeth. Barthol. Fumus de Papa. Par. 11.
                  
                  
                     Papa posset liberare omnes animas Purgatorij, etiamsiplures essent, si quis pro eis faceret quod iuberet, peccaret tamen indiscretè concedendo.
                  
                  The Pope could set at libertie all the soules of Purgatorie though never so many, if any would doe that for them which he appointed: marrie he should sinne by his undiscreete pardoning. And the popish schole-doctor Viguerius proceedeth further, and avowcheth it to be neither inconvenient, nor against the justice of God: these are his expresse wordes.
                  
                     Nec est inconveniens quòd Papa Purgatorium posset evacuare, non enim per hoc aliquid detraheretur Divinae iustitiae. 
                     Viguerius de Sacrament. ordinis in fine.
                  
                  Neither is it inconvenient that the Pope can harrowe hell, for that doeth nothing derogate from the iustice of God. Nowe to say that he can this doe, but yet doeth it not, to keepe him selfe from sinne: is altogether vaine and frivolous. For first, he should no more sinne in delivering all, then he doeth in setting one onely at libertie, as is alreadie prooved by Sylvester and Viguerius. Againe, plenarie Pardons are so common at the houre of death, as none that either have friendes or money, are or can be destitute thereof: which yet is a poynt more undiscreete then the other, by their owne doctrine. Thirdly, the three condicions required for the legitimation of Popish Pardoning, concurre as sweetely in delivering all together ioyntly, as in delivering one by one severallie. His inordinate affection of lucre is convinced in this, that albeit he can with one onely pardon set open the gates of Purgatorie, and so set all the prisoners at libertie: yet will he not extend that compassion to them, but taketh this course with them, that they shall appoint Pia Legata by their last willes and testaments, for Masses, Diriges, and Trentals to be said yeerely, or rather perpetually, (if their abilitie will extend so farre:) with which Masses, Diriges, and Trentals, his pardons shall concurre, and so deliver them by discretion. By reason of which ungodly pollicie, we may this day behold with our eyes, so many altars erected, so many Churches sumptuouslie decked, so many Priestes richly maintained, especially in Saint Gregories Church at Rome. For which Masses, Diriges, and Trentals, huge summes of money are given, daily, yeerely, perpetually, not for the Masses formallie concedo, but yet formally for the Priestes paines, and materially for the Masses, constanter assero.
               
               
                  
                  
                     The 5 Conclusion.
                  
                  THE foundation of the Popes pardons is wicked, blasphemous, and derogatorie to the most pretious blood of Christ, shed for mans redemption. This is the proofe of this conclusion: the Pope and many of his popish Doctors tell us, that the foundation Sylvester de indulg. Pat 4. Soto in 4. sent. dist. & art. 2. of their popish pardons is this, Thesaurus meritorum Christi, & Sanctorum eius: the treasure of the merites of Christ, and of his Saintes. For say they, not onely Christ, but many of his Saintes also, suffered much more then was due for their owne sinnes: which workes of supererogation or satisfactions, they call the treasure of the Church: and because (say they,) Gods Saintes did not applie those their superaboundant passions to this or that person, the Pope therefore must make application thereof at his pleasure, as one that hath Christes full authoritie, or plenitudinem potestatis, being his Vicar generall upon earth. And here note by the way (gentle Reader,) that for the execution of this Vicars office, there be ever in Rome two Vicars generall, and one substitute Vicar, whereof two neither preach, teach, or execute any priestly function usuallie: but the poore substitute, must doe all that is done. So in my time, Gregorie the foureteenth was Vicar generall to Christ, si dijs placet, Cardinall Sabello Vicar-generall to Gregorie, and our Goldwell, sometime Bishoppe of Saint Assaph, substitute to Sabello: which poore Bishoppe tooke all the paine, and had the least gaine. For it is not the usuall maner of Popes and Cardinals in these latter dayes, to say Masse, to preach, to teach, and so foorth, (I speake of Cardinals resiant at Rome,) but to joyne living to living, benefice to benefice, promotion Here would I learne, why the Queenes Mai estie may not employ Abbeyes to the maintenance of the whole Realm, with suppression of abuses: as well as the Pope may bestow the same, upon irreligious and idle Cardinals. to promotion, and which is more absurd in their owne religion, to be so lordly Abbots, or rather so idle Lubbards, that they will take and snatch all the commodities of the whole Abbeyes unto themselves, and neither graunt sufficient foode and rayment for the Monkes, nor competent allovvance for the necessarie maintenance of the house it selfe, for their Masse, Mattins, and service: Such is their charitie to their neighbors, zeale to their office, & reverence to their own religion. This is also true, as if any Papist wil deny the same, his owne breath will witnesse against him. For to omit others, S. Laurence and S. Pancratius their Abbeyes and Churches are so poore and beggerly (through the pilling and polling of Cardinals their Abbots,) that when priestes come thither to say Masse, (as the usuall manner there is,) they can neither finde wine nor candles without money: which default when any one obiecteth as a disgrace to their profession and Religion, the poore

Monkes answere in this manner; Alas, we can not doe withall, my L. Cardinall hath all the living, and alloweth us a small portion, not able to fill our bellyes. But to leave this digression, and to returne to the scope and matter in hand: this foundation of pardons to be the superaboundant merits and satisfactions, not onely of Christ, but of his Saintes also, holdeth Thomas Aquinas, Dominicus Soto, Sylvester Pryeras, Antoninus, and others. Sylvester hath these wordes: Sylvester de indulgent. Par. 4.
                  
                  
                     Ratio quare valere possunt indulgentiae, est unitas corporis mystici, in qua multi supererogaverunt admen suram debitooum suorum, & multas tribulationes iniustè sustinuerunt patientèr, per quas multitudo 
                     Iosephus Angles in 4. sent. quaest. de indulg. holdeth the selfe same opinion. 
                     poenarum poterat expiari, sieis deberetur: quorum meritorum tantaest copia, quòd omnem poenam debitam nunc viventibus excedunt, & praecipue propter meritum Christi.
                  
                  The cause that pardons are of force, is the unitie of the mysticall bodie, in which many have supererogated in the workes of penance, to the measure of their owne demerits, and have sustained patiently many uniust tribulations, through which the multitude of paines might be purged, if it were due unto them: of whose merites there is such plentie, that they exceede all paine due for those that nowe be living, and especially for the merite of Christ. This is the testimonie of Sylvester, and Aquinas Tho. Aquinas in supplem. quaest. 25. art. primo. their angelicall Doctor proceedeth further, and sayeth thus:
                  
                     Christus poterat relaxare, ergo & Paulus potuit, ergo & Papa potest, qui non est minoris potestatis in Ecclesia, quàm Paulus fuit.
                  
                  Christ could pardon, therefore Paul could pardon, therefore the Pope also can pardon: as who is of no meaner authoritie in the Church, then Paul him selfe was. So then à primo ad ultimum 
                     The Popes power as great as Christes. by Aquinas his doctrine, the Pope can doe as much as Christ. He can make the deafe to heare, the dumbe to speake, the lame to walke, the blinde to see, and the dead to arise to life: which I must first see, before I beleeve it, howsoever their holy Aquinas write: and yet should this follow necessarily, if Aquinas his reason were good. And doubtlesse, this which Aquinas here attributeth to the Pope, is not farre from the peculiar marke of Antichrist, but I will not nowe stande upon that point. VVe see evidently the foundation of Popish pardons, confessed by the best learned Romish doctors. which manner of establishing popish pardons, to be blasphemous and derogatorie to the blood of Christ, I proove many and sundrie wayes. First, by the testimonie of holy writte.
                  
                     
                     Advocatum habemus apud Patrem Iesum Christum iustum, & 
                     1. Iohan. 2. 2. 
                     ipse est propitiatio pro peccatis nostris.
                  
                  VVe have an Advocate with the Father Iesus Christ the iust, and he is the propitiation for our sinnes. And as it is said more significantly in the Greeke, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . He is the attonement and reconciliation for our sinnes: it is he, through whome we are accepted of God. Of him onely saide the voyce from heaven, This is my beloved Sonne, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in whome I am well pleased. Againe, Matth. 3. 17.
                  
                  
                     Si autem in luce ambulemus, sicut ipse est in luce, societatem habemus ad invicem, & sanguis Iesu Christi Filij eius emundat 
                     1. Iohan. 1. 7, 8. 
                     nos ab omni peccato.
                  
                  If we walke in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowshippe one with another, and the blood of Iesus Christ doeth clense us from all sinne. Againe,
                  
                     Vna oblatione consummavit in sempiternum sanctificatos.
                  
                  VVith one onely oblation hath he consummate for ever, those Heb. 10. 14. that are sanctified. Againe,
                  
                     Ego Dominus Deus tuus ex terra Aegypti, & Deum abs
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         me nescies, 
                     Osee. 13. 4. 
                     & salvator non est praeter me.
                  
                  I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and thou shalt knowe no God without me, and there is no Saviour but my selfe. Againe,
                  
                     Ego sum, Ego sum ipse, qui deleo iniquitates tuas propter me.
                  
                  I, even I am he, that blot out thine iniquities for mine owne Esa. 43. 25. sake. VVhich is most significantly uttered in the Hebrewe phrase.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  I, even I mine owne selfe wipe away, and utterly destroy thy rebellious transgressions, for none other cause but for mine owne sake. Againe,
                  
                     Ipse vulneratus est propter iniquitates nostras, attritus est propter 
                     Esa. 53. 5. 
                     scelera nostra.
                  
                  He was wounded for out iniquities, he was torne for our offences. By which manifold places of holy Scripture it is evident, that Christ did both merite eternall glorie for us, and also did offer to his Father eternall satisfaction for our sinnes. VVhich S. Augustine declareth finely, in briefe and pithie wordes.
                  
                     Dominus noster Iesus Christas mori venit, peccare non venit, 
                     Angser. 141. de tempor. Tom. 10. 
                     communicando nobiscum sine culpa poenam, & culpam solvit & poenam.
                  
                  
                     
Our Lord Iesus came to die, he came not to sinne, communicating paine with us without sinne, he clensed both the sinne, and the paine of sinne. I proove the same secondly by the evident testimonies of the Popes owne Doctors, because no better arguments can possibly be alledged against them, then such as them selves have made and approved. Angelus writeth thus: Angelus de indulgent. Par. 9.
                  
                  
                     Communis opinio tam Theologorum, quàm Canonistarumtenet, quòd indulgentia sunt ex abundantia meritorum, que ultra mensuram demeritorum suorum sancti sustinuerunt, & Christus: sed ego teneo cùm Francisco de Mayrone, quòd cùm merita sanctorum sint ultra condignum 
                     Mayro in 4. sent. dist. 19. 
                     remunerata à Deo, & sic exhausta, quòd solùm dantur ex merito Christi, & passionis eius.
                  
                  The common opinion aswell of Divines as of Canonistes, holdeth that pardons be graunted of the abundant merits, which Christ and his Saintes here suffered, farre above the measure of their demerits: but I (saith Angelus) hold with Frauncis Mayro, that since God hath remunerated the merits of his Saintes above their condigne deserts, and so they are exhaust, nothing remaining unrewarded, that pardons onely are given of the merite of Christ, and of his passion. Durandus also a famous popish Doctor, holdeth the selfe same opinion with Durand. in 4. sent. dist. 20. Angelus: for albeit he admitteth the treasure of Christ, yet doeth he denie the treasure and supererogations of Saintes: and that, because as Angelus and Mayro teach, Saints have received remuneration farre above their desertes: which opinion of Durandus, Angelus, and Mayro, S. Paul confirmeth in his Epistle to the Romanes, in these wordes.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Rom. Cap. 8. vers. 18. For I count, that the afflictions of this present time are not worthie of the future glorie, which shall be revealed towardes us: in which wordes, the Apostle confuteth manifestly that foolish distinction of the Papistes, unto which they flee as to an holy sanctuarie, so often as they feele them selves galled in defence of the Popes pardons. They say forsooth, that Saintes have received full remuneration as their workes be meritorious, but not as they be satisfactorie, or penall. Saint Paul (I say) reprooveth this their vaine and ungrounded distinction, by the worde (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) passions, afflictions, or penalties. for he saith, not the merits: of this time, but the passions of this time, and that those passions of ours are unworthie of the glorie Marke well the word Passions. to come: which point Durandus, Mayro, and Angelus perceived right well, and therefore would not in any wise admit the treasure of Saintes, though they were great Papistes all three. Their owne

popish glosse confesseth the same in the comment vpon the text rehearsed, to wit, that our passions or satisfactions (as papistes terme Glossa interlin. ibidem. them,) are not worthy sidistricte nobiscū ageretur, if God should deale with vs according to iustice. But as the said glosse addeth wisesely, facit spiritus quod merita non possunt, the holie ghost supplieth that which wanteth in our merits. And their clarke Nicolaus Lyranus can not denie the same, for these be his words: Lyranus in cap. 8. ad Rō.
                  
                  
                     Ratio consistit in hoc, quod praemium excedit incomparabiliter meritum nostrum in tolerantia passionum, propter quod patienter sunt meritò tolerandae.
                  
                  The reason saith Lyra, for vvhich the apostle mooueth vs to beare patientlie the afflictions of this vvorld, consisteth chieflie in this, that the reward which God vvill bestovv on vs, doth infinitely exceed the worthinesse of our aflictions, or the condignitie of our passions: and for that respect, wee ought vvorthilie to endure them with patience. Neuerthelesse, Lyra vvould gladly haue our worke to bee meritorious, and for that end he distinguisheth them as they proceed of free wil, and as the holie Ghost worketh them, these are his words:
                  
                     Sciendum tamen, quodpassiones istae dupliciter possant consider ari. vno 
                     Lyranus vbi supra. 
                     modo vt acceptantur à libero arbitrio, & sic loquitur hic apostolus. alio modo, prout spiritus sanctus mouens liberum arbitrium, est huius acceptionis principium: & sic est meritum de condigno, quia principium meriti est eiusdem dignitatis cum praemio.
                  
                  VVe must know for all this saith Lyra, that our afflictions may be considered two waies: one way, as they are accepted and receiued from our free will: and so the apostle speaketh, when he saith, they be vnworthie. Another way, as the holie ghost moouing our free will, is the beginning of this acceptation. And so there is merite of condignitie, because the beginning of merite, is of the same dignitie with the rewarde. These are the wordes of Lyra, Note well the confutatiō of Lyra his distinction. cited with all advantage for that cause, that he being once directly & fullie confuted, all other papistes may be confuted in him: as who doubtles being all ioined in one, can lay no more then he hath done, in behalfe of their merites and supererogations. I therefore say first, 1 that Saint Paul affirmeth with me, that our afflictions or passions are not worthie the glorie of heaven.
                  I say secondly, that Lyra himselfe graunteth so much, as his owne woords alreadie alleadged do witnesse. 2
                  
                  I say thirdly, that their glosse is on my side. 3
                  
                  I say fourthly, that if al were granted vvhich Lyra saith, yet would it little or nothing helpe his purpose. 4
                  
                  For first, our passions are no way ours, but as they proceede from 1
                     
our free vvils: omnis enim actio humana est voluntaria: yea so voluntarie, that as Saint Augustine truely saith: if it vvere not voluntarie, it should not be mans: and yet our afflictions or passions considered, as they proceed from our free will, are not worthie of the glorie to come by Lyraes ovvne graunt. Againe, when the holie ghost, and man worke both one and the same acte: that vvhich the holie ghost doth, can no more be reputed mans act, then that which man doth can be demed Gods acte. But so it is, that that vvhich mā doth can not be demed the holie ghosts deede: ergo neither that vvhich doth the holie ghost, can be demed mans deed. The assumption wherein consisteth the difficultie, (if there be any at all,) is proved by mans sinfull actions. For the most cruell and wicked fact that can bee imagined, is not done vvithout the concourse of the holy ghost, as all learned papistes doe and must confesse: and yet are mans sinfull actes so farre from being deemed Gods actes, as the deformities and irregularities thereof bee onely mans, and neuer Gods: and yet doth God concurre more to those vvicked actes, in that he is the principall agent of the real and positiue entities of the same, then man doth or can concurre to anie act of Gods: that is to say, to any good act that hee himselfe doth. For as S. Iames saith, euerie good thing that man doth, is of God. Iacobis. v. 17
                  
                  Thirdlie, because great absurdities do follovv vpon this opinion, to wit, that many sinnes freelie remitted and forgiuen in this life, should be punished eternallie in the vvorld to come. greater then vvhich, no absurditie can be thought vpon. the reason of the consequent is yeelded by Thomas Aquinas, Dionisius Carthusianus, Dionysius Aquinas, p. 1. q. 114. ar. 3. ad 3, Dionys. Carthus. lib. 1. orthod fid. ar. 156. Areop. dc diuin. nominib apud Carthus. Areopagita, and others. VVho all do hold, (neither is holy writ dissonant to their opinion,) that the deuils concurre if not to all, yet to the greater part of sinnes, committed in this life by sinfull mortall men. vvhereupon I inferre first, that the Deuils sinnes are mans, and mans sinnes the Deuils: if Lyraes distinction vvere of force the reason of the consequence is euident, because the deuill and man doe both one and the selfe same acte.
                  I inferre secondlie, that the sinnes forgiuen to penitent sinners in this life, are punished in the Deuils world vvithout ende.
                  For vvhat replie so euer the adversary can make, or vvhat euasion so euer he shall vse in this point: the same can I make, and the same shall I vse against himselfe, in the passions and merites of Saintes. Let vvhat papist as vvill, beginne when hee vvill, to make triall thereof: For no effectuall disparitie doubtlesse, can euer bee yeelded in that behalfe.
                  Another absurditie is, that God should hereby bee the author or partaker of sinne. The reason hereof is euident, because as mans actes be meritorious, for that God concurreth to them: in

like maner Gods actes must bee demeritorious, for that man concurreth to the same. For God and man concurre no lesse to that selfe same act, vvhich is sinne: then they doe to that acte, vvhich the papistes terme of condigne merite. that there is no comparison betvvene mans deserts and glorie eternall, Saint Bede shevveth pithilie and plainelie in these vvords:
                  
                     Ipse dicit qui patiebatur & sciebat pro quo nomine patiebatur, & quo 
                     Beda in c. 8. ad Rom. 
                     fructu patiebatur: non sunt condignae passiones huius temporis ad futuram gloriam, quae revelabitur in nobis. appendo quod patior, contra id quod spero, hoc sentio: illua credo, & tamen plus valet quod credo, quam quod sentio.
                  
                  He saith, vvho suffered, and vvho knevv for vvhose sake he suffered, & vvith vvhat fruit hee suffered: the sufferings of this life are not vvorthie of the future glorie, vvhich shall be reuealed in vs. I vveigh in the ballance that vvhich I suffer, against that vvhich I hope for: this I feele, that I beleeue, and yet that is of more force vvhich I beleeue, then that vvhich I feele. yea, as their ovvne durand telleth thē, Christ himselfe could not satisfy in rigore iustitiae as he vvas man, but only Durand. in 3. sent. dist. 20. & in 4. d. 15. in respect of hipostaticall vnion: & therfore is it impossible that satisfaction of pure man, I say of corrupt and sinful man, shall any way be equivalent or perfect: for as the popes deare monke Dominicus So to granteth:
                  
                     Perfecta satisfactio est illa, cuius valor & pretiūtotū emanat a debitore, 
                     Soto de nat. & grat. lib. 3. c. 6. 
                     nulla vel preueniente vel interveniente gratia creditor is: taliter visit redditio aequiualentis alias indebiti voluntarie.
                  
                  Perfect satisfaction is that, vvhose valoure and price vvholly. proceedeth from the debtour, vvithout either preuenting or interventing grace of the creditour: so as the reddition be of that, vvhich is equiualent and not othervvise due. This is truelie said of Soto, vvhich Aristoteles perceiued by very natural discours, teaching that vve cānot make condigne satisfaction to God and our parents. in the description Arist. lib. 8 ethic. cap 7 of our Frier Soto, vve haue to note 4. things. First, that the valour of satisfaction must proceed vvholy from the debtour. Secondly, that ther must be no preuenting or interventing grace of the creditor. Thirdlie, that there must be equiualent restitution. Fourthly, that that equivalent reddition must be a worke, othervvhise not due. which four vvhen any papist in the vvorld, can proue to be in any satisfaction made by pureman, (neither shall the popes holines be excepted,) I vvil be a papist once againe. For our satisfaction is so vnperfect indeed, as no one of the 4. condicions here required, cā be found and approoued therein. For first, vvhat act soeuer proceedeth from our selves, as of our selues, is lothsom in Gods sight, according to this say-ing of the Prophet:
                  
                     
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Esai. c. 6
                           •
                        . v. 6.
                  
                  All our righteousnesse is as a filthie cloute, nothing pure or cleane.
                  2 Secondly, what acte so euer proceedeth from vs without Gods preuenting grace, cannot possiblie be void of sinne: for as the apostle saith:
                  
                     Non sumus sufficientes cogit are aliquid a nobis, quasi ex nobis, sed sufficientia 
                     2. Cor. 3. v. 5 
                     nostra ex deo est.
                  
                  VVe are not able to thinke one good thought of our selues, as of our selues, but all and euerie parte of our sufficiencie is of God.
                  And againe hee saith:
                  
                     Nemo potest dicere dominus Iesus, nisiin spiritus sancto.
                  
                  No man can say Lord Iesu, but by the power of God.
                  VVee owe of dutie to God, more then possiblie we can euer performe, 1 Cor. 12. v. 4 and therefore can not iustlie, nay therefore can not without the note of intollerable pride, smelling of more then pelagianisme, terme anie of our best workes, a worke not due to God, or a worke of supererrogation. For Christhath taught vs another lesson:
                  
                     Cum fecerit is omnia quae precepta sunt vobis, dicite, servi invtiles sumus, quod debuimus facere fecimus. 
                     Luk. cap 7. vers. 10.
                  
                  vvhen yee haue done all thinges which are commaunded you, say, wee are vnprofitable seruants, wee haue done that which we were bound to doe.
                  4 Fourthly, concerning equivalent satisfaction, their owne angelicall D. Aquinas shall answere them, vvhose wordes are these:
                  
                     Dicendum, quo daliqua satisfactio potest dici dupliciter sufficiens: Uno modo perfectè, quia est condigna per quandam adaequationem ad recō
                        pensationem culpae commissae, & sic hominis puri satisfactio sufficiens 
                     Aquinas in 3. part. q. 1. ar. 2. 2m. 
                     esse non potuit pro peccato; alio modo potest dici satisfactio hominis esse sufficiens imperfecte, scilicet secundu acceptationem eius, qui est ea contentus, quauis non sit condigna. Et hoc modo satisfactio puri hominis est sufficiens.
                  
                  VVe must answere, that satisfaction may be called sufficient two waies: one way perfectly, because it is vvorthie by a certaine adequatio nor equalitie to the compensation of the fault committed: And so the satisfaction of pure man, can not be sufficient for sinne. Loc, here is a misterie, for not sufficient is sufficient. Another vvay vnperfectly to vvit, according to his acceptation vvho is content vvith it, although it bee not vvorthie: and this vvay the satisfaction of pure man is sufficient.
                  This is the ansvvere of Aquinas, vvhose doctrine is confirmed for

authenticall, by papall authoritie. Now marke it well, for Christes love. This great doctour was so busied to defend popish pardons, and the ground or foundation of the same, (which is the supererogation of mans deserts, as we haue heard,) that he had no other shift in the worlde, but to coine a new no distinction of dubble sufficient satisfaction. which distinction for all that, if I doe not proove it to confute and make frustrate it selfe, I will desire no credite of the reader.
                  Satisfaction (saith Aquinas) may be called sufficient, either because it is indeed sufficient, as which is an equivalent compensation: or it may be called sufficient, not because it is equivalent and sufficient indeed: but because it is accepted and admitted, albeit it be not worthy.
                  Now what I pray you, can be more foolishly spoken, or more against a mans owne assertion? hee woulde establish a sufficient satisfaction, and yet is enforced to acknowledge a satisfaction not sufficient, but accepted as if it were sufficient. which is the verie same that I would never denie, and which overthroweth all popish doctrine: For it prooveth in deed, that no workes of the regenerate are good and without sinue, though they be accepted and imputed for good and without sinne: and consequently, if the papistes would be constant in their owne doctrine, wee and they woulde soone agree. But what? doeth not our holy father the pope tell us, that though Christ pardon a penitent sinner, yet must he suffer temporall paine in purgatorie, and so to need the popes pardons? yes doubtlesse as you haue heard, and the pope and papists glory in the same. And yet this notwithstanding, if a man can get a plenarie pardon from the pope for the houre of his death, he shall come to heaven with all speed, and never once enter in at purgatorie gates. If any credit not my wordes, let him yet credit their doctout Sylvester, who writeth in this manner: Sylvest. de in-dulg. par. 33.
                  
                  
                     Qui plenariam indulgentiam ritè assecutus est, si eo instanti moreretur, evolaret statim ad coelum.
                  
                  He that hath lawfully gotten a plenary pardon, if he should die at that instant, should incontinently goe to heaven. The popes pardons then, are so farre from beeing such as they are preached to be: that they doe not onely not yeelde us any remission of paine, but greatly increase our paine when wee beleeve them: as vvhich derogate no little from Christes passion, and from the veritie of his sacred vvorde. For indeede saintes can no more satisfie for us, then Soto in 4 sent. d. 21. q. 1. ar. 2. prope finem. they can merite for us: and yet dareth not Dominicus Soto avouch their merites for us, though he be the popes doctor deare. For which cause vvisely and gravely saith Augustine:
                  
                     
                     Vaeetiam laudabili vitae hominum, siremota misericordia discutias eam. 
                     Aug. lib. 9. confess. ca. 13.
                  
                  VVoe euen to the laudable life of men: if thou discusse and examine it, thy mercie set a part. which thing their owne frier Iohn de Combis did well perceiue, when in his Theologicall abridgement he affirmeth itto be a maxime with God, euer to reward us above our well doings, and to punish us lesse our euill demerits. His wordes be these:
                  
                     Et hoc patet quia Deus semper remuner at supra meritum, sicut punit citra condignum. 
                     Io. de Combis lib. 5. theol. verit. cap. 11.
                  
                  And this is evident, because God euer rewardeth aboue our merites, and punisheth us lesse then we be worthy. so then wee see it manifest, that euen by popish doctrine, there is no place for popish pardons.
               
               
                  The sixt Conclusion.
                  POpes usually giue many pardons, affirming most impudently in the same, that whosoeuer shall pray in such maner, say masse over such reliques, visite such a Church, or contribute so much to such an end, shall deliuer a soule from purgatorie. which kinde of pardons, Pope Gregorie graunted often during my abode at Rosse: as to the bishop of Rosse, in the behalfe of the Scottish Queene: to Stukeley, for the trecherous practises he should haue contrived against England: to Alphonsus the Iesuite, for the successe of English complots, and such like. This notwithstanding, these solemne and glorious pardons be nothing els, but mere fabulous and lying graunts.
                  For first, there is no purgatorie after this life as shall be prooved hereafter, and consequently the pope can deliver no soule from thence, though he graunt never so many pardons.
                  Secondly, because to giue pardons is an act of Iurisdiction, as appeareth by the Scripture which they alledge, and consequently Mat. 16. v. 19. that act can not be exercised but upon the popes subiects, and therfore not upon the soules in purgatorie, who are exempt from his iurisdiction. All which their owne schoole doctour Richardus de Mediavilla prooveth out of their canon-law in these wordes: Richard. de Mediavilla in 4. sent. dist. 3. q. 3. dist. apud mag. 20. extra de pe. & re.
                  
                  
                     Indulgentiae non prosunt illis qui non sunt de iurisdictione illius qui eas concessit, extra de pe. & re. illi autem qui sunt in purgatorio, non sunt sub iurisdictione praelatorum Ecclesiae, quod satis datur intelligi, cum dixit dominus Petro: quodcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         solveris super terram. addendo enim super terram, videtur referre collationem huius potestatis tantum superviventes hac vita mortali.
                  
                  
                     
Pardons do not profit them, vvho are not of his iurisdictiō that granteth them: but they vvho are in purgatorie, bee not vnder the iurisdiction of our prelates of the church. vvhich is sufficiently giuen to be vnderstood, vvhen our Lord said to Peter: (vvhatsoeuer thou shalt bind vpon earth:) for adding vpon earth, he seemeth to referre and extend this povver, onlie to the liuing here on earth. Novv, if answere be made as is vsed by the vviser sort of papistes, that the pope pardoneth in purgatory onelie by vvay of suffrage, then doe I reply, that that is petitio principij, and that that kind of pardoning is vncertaine and fallible, and so still I haue my purpose. For the preachers of the pardons, and the pardons also tell vs: that vvhosoeuer visiteth such a church, saith masse at such an aultar, or contributeth to such an ende, shall deliuer a soule from purgatorie. and yet by vvay of suffrage no such thing can bee assured, no more then vvhen an other devoute papist shall offer vp his prayers for them. vvhich thing seemed so to trouble Bellarminus, that in his written dictates hee knovveth not vvell vvhat to holde or vvrite, concerning romish pardons. Thirdly, because the pope can not applie Christs satisfaction more effectuallie to them by his pardoning, then the same is applied to them by the saying of masse, as vvhich by popish religion is the selfe same sacrifice reallie, that vvas offered vpon the crosse: and yet doth no papist saye or thinke that our saying of masse, can or vvil deliuer his friends soule from purgatory. For othervvise, there vvould not be so many masses said so many times for the selfe same persons, as hath beene and is daily seen, amongst the papists. For to this end doe they celebrate and obserue yerely anniuersaries, for soules departed 10. 20. 30. 40. 60. yeares before. vvhich the pope, cardinals, and monkes had taught the people to frequent, as most necessarie for their friends soules in purgatorie. Fourthly, because it cannot be proued, that after God hath pardoned our sinnes and the eternall paine due for the same, there still remaineth some temporal paine, remissible by the popes pardons. Fiftly, because al the three thinges required of papistes in popish pardoning, are most firm, certaine, and readie, in the soules of purgatorie: to vvit, auctoritie in thhe giuer, charitie in the receiuer, and the cause of pietie. For first, the soules of purgatorie bee in charitie, as all papistes confesse: as vvho othervvise, could neuer be saued.
                  2 Secondly, it is mere crueltie not to helpe the faithful in such vvofull case. Thirdlie, if they denie the popes auctoritie, I vvill vvillinglie denie it vvith them: though he accurse me as hee hath alreadie done, for my paines. For I nothing doubt, but God of his great mercie vvill conuert his curse, to my greater ioy and blisse. And here, because the Seminaries neuer ceasse to boast in corners amongest the simple: that none in this realme dareth to dispute

with them, I offer publique dispute with what seminarie in England soeuer he be, no one or other excepted who soeuer: so it may stand vvith the honourable licence and good liking of higher povvers, whose mindes I am of dutie bound to obay in that behalfe. For I nothing doubt, if my option may bee graunted: but that it will tend to the glorie of God, the service of my soveraigne, the honour of my countrie, the edification of the auditours, and the comfort of myne owne soule. The reason is, for that I know verie sufficientlie, the foundations, groundes, auctorities, and reasons, of both sides: and vvithal behold as in a glasse of christall, the euident confutation of all whatsoeuer, can possibly bee said in defense of papistrie: which if I had not first seene, I had neuer departed from popish doctrine.
               
               
                  
                     The 7. Conclusion.
                  
                  IF the popes pardons be not of so great force, and worth so much as they are said and preached to be: then is the popes religion vaine, and of no credite at all. This proposition both is and must be graunted of all papistes, if they will defend their now professed Romish religion. Thomas Aquinas (whose doctrine and bookes divers popes haue approoved for good and godly,) writeth thus:
                  
                     Ecclesia praedicando indulgentias non mentitur, & ita tantum valent quantum praedicantur: sicut enim dicit Augustinus, si in sacra 
                     A quin. in supplement. 3. part. q. 25. art. 2. in corpore. 
                     Scriptura deprehenditur aliquid falsitatis, iam robur authoritatis sacrae Scripturae perit. Et similiter si in praedicatione ecclesiae aliqua falsitas deprehenderetur, non essent documenta Ecclesiae alicuius autboritatis adroborandam fidem.
                  
                  The Church preaching pardons doth not lie, and so they are worth no lesse then they are preached. For as Augustine saith, if in holy Scripture any falshood be found, euen then the full authoritie of holy scripture perisheth utterly. And in like manner, if in the preaching of the Church any falshood should be found, the doctrine of the Church shoulde not be of any force to establish our faith. These are the wordes of their canonized saint and renowmed doctour Aquinas, which shewe unto us so plainely, as more plainely nothing can be told: that if the Church of Rome erre in any one point, as in giving pardons or such like, then must we giue no credit to it in other pointes of religion. Neither is this the opinion of Aquinas onely, but their other great Thomist Dominicus Soto singeth the same song.
                  
                     
These be his wordes:
                  
                     Alij dixerunt indulgentias nihil prorsus valere, nisi quantum unusquisque devotione sua faciendo quodindulgentia praecipit, moeretur. 
                     Soto in 4. sent. dist. 21. q. 2. art. 1. 
                     Attamen isti seu blasphemi non sunt audiendi, sanè qui authoritatem Ecclesiae infringunt: si enim de hac re nos Ecclesia seduceret, nulla ei esset in reliquis adhibenda fides.
                  
                  Some said that pardons were no more woorth at all, then every man doeth merite by his owne devotion. But these fellowes are to be reiected as blasphemous, because they infringe the authoritie of the Church: for if the Church should in this point seduce us, then were there no credite to be given unto it in other pointes. These are the expresse wordes of the Popes owne and best Doctors, Aquinas, and Soto: whose testimonies, with that which is said in other conclusions: disable altogether the authoritie and religion of the Church of Rome. For if the Church of Rome deceive us in her pardons, (as is sufficiently prooved that she hath done:) then is she not to be credited in other things, as both Aquinas and Soto tell us: whose doctrine the pope, yea, sundry Popes of Rome have confirmed.
               
            
            
               THE COROLLARIE.
               FIRST therefore, since the Popes pardons be foolish and repugnant to common sence: Secondly, since the veritie and efficacie of pardons be so uncerten, as the best learned Papistes, can not tell what to say or write thereof: Thirdly, since to give pardons, as the Pope doeth, is a strange and new thing: as which, neither Christ, nor his Apostles ever taught or practised: Fourthly, since the Popes manner of pardoning, (ordinarie popish practise considered) is most absurd: Fiftly, since the Popes pardons in Romish doctrine, are reputed aequivalent with holy martyrdome: Sixtly, since the Popes pardons be not such, nor so forcible, as they are preached to be: Seventhly, since the foundation of Popish pardons, is blasphemous and derogatorie to Christes passion: Eightly, since the Pope taketh upon him by his pardons, to deliver soules from purgatorie, which he can not perfourme: Nynthly, since, Aquinas, Soto, and Sylvester, his owne renowmed Doctors doe affirme, that if the Pope preach falsely in his pardons, all his other doctrine is false and naught: I conclude, that it is a sufficient motive for me to renounce the Romish religion, as false, erronious, and pernicious doctrine.
               Thus much of the first Motive.
            
            
               
               THE THIRD CHAP
                  ter: Of the Popes maners, Faith, and Religion.
               
               
                  ALbeit concerning Sanctimonie of life, and honest conversation among men; the learned Papistes will not defend their Popes, whome they use to tearme by name of holinesse: yet do they all persist in this, that none of them can erre in their judiciall decrees, concerning either faith or manners: for better examination whereof, I put downe certaine conclusions.
               
                  
                     The 1 Conclusion.
                  
                  THE lives and manners of Popes have bene most wicked, most notorious, and most scandalous to the world. This conclusion I will onely proove, by the testimonies of great Romish doctors, that so my wordes may be of better credit therein. Heare therefore what Bartholomaeus Carranza writeth of them.
                  
                     Stephanus Sextus magno odio persecutus est nomen Formosi, cuius 
                     Carranza in summa Conc. fol. 354. & fol. 355. 
                     & ordinationes omnes rescidit & damnavit: iam enim tunc coeperat Pontificum & virtus & integritas desinere.
                  
                  Pope Stephanus the sixt persecuted the verie name of Formosus, all whose ordinations, or giving of orders, he disanulled and condemned: for even then beganne, the vertue and integritie of Popes to faile.
                  
                     Romanus universa acta Stephani improbat & abrogat.
                  
                  Pope Romanus doeth reproove and abrogate, the whole actes of Pope Stephanus.
                  
                     Sergius Tertius Formosi nomen prosequitur, cuius corpus humatum truncari capite iussit. Res plena horroris, at videas quantum degener abant Pontifices à maioribus suis: ne cui mirum sit, interim si qui abusus & perversae opiniones in Ecclesiam irrepserunt.
                  
                  Pope Sergius the third doeth persecute the name of Formosus, Lo, the Popes owne deare Doctor, can not denie errors to be in the Church of Rome. whose bodie after it was buryed, he commaunded to be beheaded. A thing verie dolefull, that thou mayest see howe much the Popes in these dayes did degenerate from their ancestours: least any marvell if in the meane time, abuses and perverse opinions be crept into the Church.
                  
                     Iohannes 13. venationibus, magis quàm orationibus vacabat: &
                     
                     multa alia auditu indigna de eo dicuntur.
                  
                  Pope Iohn the thirteenth was more addicted to hunting, then to prayer: and many other unworthy factes are reported of him. This is the censour of Bartholomaeus Carranza, a learned Thomiste, and Dominican Fryer: and therefore hath he not said more against the Popes of Rome, then the force of veritie induced him unto. Platina affirmeth no lesse then Carranza, of the wicked lives of Popes: but I will onely alledge one place or two, omitting all the rest for brevitie sake.
                  
                     Nihil enim aliudhi Pontifices cogitabant, quàm & nomen & dignitatem 
                     Platina in vita Rom. primi. pag. 147. 
                     maiorum suorum extinguere.
                  
                  For these Popes went about no other matter, but onely howe to extinguish the name and dignitie of their auncestours. And in another place the said Platina writeth thus:
                  
                     Vide quae so, quantùm isti degenerarunt à maioribus suis, illi enim utpote 
                     Platina in vita Sergii 3. pag. 148. 
                     viri sanctissimi, dignitatem ultrò oblatam contemnebant, orationi & doctrinae christianae vacantes: hi verò largitione & ambitione pontificatum quaerentes, & adepti, posthabito divino cultu, inimicitias non secùs ac saevissimi quidam tyranni inter sese exercebant: suas posteà voluptates securiùs expleturi, cùm nullibi extarent qui eorum vitia coercent.
                  
                  Behold, I pray thee, how much these bishops doe degenerate from their auncestours: for they, as most holy men, contemned dignitie offered them, giving them selves to prayer, and Christian doctrine: but these popes, seeking and attaining their popedomes by bribes and ambition, (Gods devine worship set aside,) did exercise enmities among them selves, as most cruell tyrants: thinking after to enioy their pleasures more securely, when there should be none to reproove their vices. Thus saith Platina a very learned Papist, who was abbreviator Apostolicus to the church of Rome.
               
               
                  The second Conclusion.
                  MANY Popes have aspired unto popedome, by most naughty and ungodly meanes. Pope Christophorus the first, shall first beginne this proofe, of whome thus writeth Platina:
                  
                     Christophorus, cuius patria & cognomentum ob ignobilitatem ignoratur, pontificatum malis artibus adeptus, malè amisit; septimo enim 
                     Platina in vita Christopheri primi. 
                     mense dignitate ac meritò eiectus, monasticam vitam unicum calamito sorum refugium obire cogitur.
                  
                  Pope Christopher, whose countrie and surname by reason of his basenesse is not knowen, came naughtilie by his Popedome, and lost it as naughtily. For before the seventh Moneth was fully expired, he was deprived of his Pontificall

dignitie, and enforced to be a Monke, the sole and onely refuge of all distressed persons. Carranza reporteth this to be true, which Carranza in summa conciliorum, fol. 354. Platina hath set downe. Pope Bonifacius the seventh, and Sylvester the second, aspired to their Popedomes by Necromancy, and Diabolicall meanes. Sylvester the third, attained his Popedome by sedition: and Damasus the second, was made Pope by violent meanes, without consent, either of the Clergie, or of the people. This to be so, witnesseth both Platina & Carranza. And Platina addeth these words
                  
                     Eò enim tum Pontificatus devenerat, ut qui plus largitione & ambitione, 
                     Platina in vita Sylvestri 3. 
                     non dico sanctitate vitae & doctrina valeret, is tantummodò dignitatis gradum bonis oppressis & reiectis obtineret, quem morem utinam aliquando non retinuissent nostra tempora.
                  
                  For to that passe was Popedome now brought, that who so coulde more in giving bribes, and in ambition, (I say not in good life and doctrine,) he onely should have the degree of honour, and good men should be reiected: which custome, would to God, it had never bene in our time kept. And the said Platina saith in another place:
                  
                     Adeò enim inoleverat hic mos, ut iam cui
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ambitioso liceret, Petri 
                     Platina in vita Damasi 2. 
                     sedem invadere.
                  
                  For this custome did so increase, that now every ambitious fellow, might invade Peters seat or chaire. Gregorie the fift, was by sedition thrust out of his throne, and Pope Iohn 18 by tyranny occupied the Popedome: so say Carranza and Platina. Yea, Platina proceedeth Carranza ubi supra fol. 355. further, and saith thus:
                  
                     Qua quidem beatitudine Ioannes caruit, fur certè in Pontificatu, & 
                     Platina in vita Ioan. 18. 
                     latro: non enim ut par fuerat, per ostium intravit.
                  
                  VVhich happie life Pope Iohn wanted, as who was a thiefe and a robber: for he entred not in by the doore, as he ought to have done. And to be briefe, Pope Bonifacius 8. shall sound the trumpet for the rest, of whom thus writeth Carranza: Intravit ut vulpes, regnavit ut lupus, 
                     Carranza ubi supra fol. 369. 
                     mortuus est ut canis. He entred as a foxe, he reigned as a wolfe, he dyed as a dogge. Thus he did, and thus he lived, after he had gotten his Popedome by deceitfull meanes, as is alreadie prooved.
               
               
                  
                     The 3. Conclusion.
                  
                  POPES may not only erre, and hold false opinions, but also become most notorious heretikes; and for their heresies, be deprived of their popedomes. This conclusion may be proved, both by the testimonies of great learned papistes, and also by the flat decrees of many Popes. Dominicus Soto hath these wordes: Quamvis Papa, ut Papa errare non possit, hoc est, statuere errorem nequeat tanquam articulum fidei, 
                     Soto in 4. sent. dist. 22. q. 2. art. 2. 
                     quia spiritus sanctus idnon permittet: tamenut singularis persona errare in fide potest, sicut aliae peccata committere.
                  
                  
                     
Albeit the Pope as Pope, can not erre: that is to say, can not set downe any errour as an article of our faith, because the holy Ghost will not that permit: neverthelesse, as he is a private person, so may he erre even in faith, as he may doe other sinnes: and for ful proofe of this point, only Sylvester Prieras is sufficient, who albeit he extol the Popes power above Kings, and Emperours, and Angels in heaven their authoritie; yet doeth he confesse, that our holy father the Sylvester in Papa. Par. 4. Pope, in casu haeresis, both may be iudged and deposed: yea, this point is very manifest in many texts of the popish Canon-law, for in one place it is thus written:
                  
                     Oves, quae suo pastori commissae sunt, eum nec reprehendere, nisi à fide exorbitaverit, 
                     2. Quaest. 7. cap. Oves. 
                     nec ullatenus accusare possunt.
                  
                  The sheepe that are committed to (the Pope) their Pastor, neither can reproove him, nor any way accuse him: unlesse he shall swarve from the faith. In another place it is said, that though the Pope be never so wicked, (though he carry thousands with himselfe headlong Dist. 40. cap. si Papa. to hell,) yet must no man iudge him, unlesse he be an heretique.
                  
                     Quia cunctos ipse iudicaturus, à nemine est judicandus, nisi deprehendatur à fide devius. Because (saith the Popes lawe) he must iudge all, and none iudge him, unlesse he be found to have forsaken the faith. Iosephus Angles, in his booke which he dedicated to the Pope himselfe, confirmeth this matter in these wordes:
                  
                     Papa haereticus ut apostata, ab universali Concilio deponi potest: & 
                     Ioseph. Angl. in 4. sent. part. 2. quaest. de excommunicat. art. 4. diffic. 1. 
                     ratio est, quia sicut nullus potest esse alicuius religionis praelatus, qui non sit in illa religione professus: it a ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         potest esse Papa, si fide ecclesiae careat.
                  
                  The Pope being an heretike, as also an apostate, may be deposed by a generall Councel: and the reason is, because as none can be a prelate of any religion, which is not professed in that religion: so neither can he be Pope, that holdeth not the faith of the Church.
               
               
                  
                     The 4. Conclusion.
                  
                  MAny Popes have de facto forsaken the Christian faith, and become flat heretikes. This proposition, though it seeme strange to many, shalbe prooved (God willing) effectually, and that by the expresse testimonies of great popish doctors. For it is so certen, that Pope Honorius was an heretike, as their eight solemne Councel holden at Constantinople, can not deny the same. Melchior Canus giveth this sentence of the said Honorius: 8. Conc. Constant. act. 7. Canus de locis Theolog. lib. 6. cap. ult.
                  
                  
                     At Honorium quomodo ab errore vindicabit? quem haereticum fuisse tradit Psellus in carmine de septem synodis, Tharasius ad summos Sacerdotes Antiochiae, Alexandriae, Sanctae urbis, ut septima Synodo act. 3. scriptum est: Theodosius cum Synodo sua Hierosolymitana, in confessione fidei quae habetur eadem actione 3. Epiphanius respondens haereticis iu conspectu Concilij eiusdem, act. 6. Tota demùm ipsa septima synodus actione ultima, & in Epistola
                     
                     ad omnes sacerdotes & clericos. But howe will (Pighius) deliver pope Honorius from errour? whome to have bene an heretike, witnesseth Psellus, in his verses of the seven synodes: Tharasius to the patriarks of Antioch, of Alexandria, & of the holy city, as it is written in the 7. Synode: Theodosius with his Synode at Hierusalem, in the confession of their faith: Epiphanius answering to the heretikes, in the sight of the said Councell: finally, the seventh Synode wholly in the last action, and in their Epistle to all priests & Clergie men. Viguerius holdeth for a constant position, that pope Anastasius erred in an article of the faith: his wordes be these:
                  
                     Si dicamus, quòd summus Pontifex errare potest, & in animo suo concipere aliquem articulum orthodoxae fidei contrarium, & etiam priuatim 
                     Viguerius de virtute fidei. cap. 10. Par. 3. vers. 13. 
                     proferre, ut legitur de Anastasio 2. dicendum quòd summus Pontifex, ut privata persona errare potest, non tamen ut est summus Pontifex.
                  
                  If we say that the pope may erre, and conceive in his minde some article contrarie to the Catholike faith, and pronounce the same also privately: answere must be made, that the pope may erre as a private person, but not as he is Pope. Nicolaus Lyranus uttereth this matter As we read of Anastasius. so plainly, as no mā can long stand in doubt therof: these be his words:
                  
                     Ex quo patet, quòd Ecclesia non consistit in hominih. ratione potestatis, vel dignitatis, ecclesiasticae, vel secularis, quia multi principes, & summi 
                     Lyranus in cap. 16. Matt. 
                     Pontifices, & alij inferiores, inventi sunt apostatasse à fide: propter quod Ecclesia consist it in illis personis, in quibus est notitia vera, & confessio fidei, & veritatis.
                  
                  VVhereby it is evident, that the Church doeth not consist in men, by reason of power or dignitie, either ecclesiasticall or secular: because many Princes, and Popes, and other of the inferiour sort, are found to have swarved from their faith: for which cause the Church consisteth in those persons, in whome there is true knowledge, and confession of the faith, and veritie. Loe, the iudgement of their owne Doctor: not they that sit in S. Peters chaire, are the true and lawfull successours of S. Peter: but they that confesse, and preach S. Peters faith and doctrine. VVe therefore impugne nothing in popish proceedings, but the selfe same, which popish Doctors reprooved before us: and that in their publique writings, published to the world.
               
               
                  
                     The 5. Conclusion.
                  
                  MANY Popes have erred, in their publique doctrine of faith and manners. Pope Iohn the 22. of that name, as witnesseth Okam, Erasmus, Alphonsus, Adrianus, & others, taught the people that the soules of the iust doe not see God, before the resurrection: yea, Gerson that great popish doctor, (who sometime was Chancellour of Paris,) affirmeth this matter in these expresse wordes:
                  
                     Hoc fecit latroni, qui verisimilitèr nondum complever at poenitentiam
                     
                     pro omnibus peccatis suis, qui fuit illa hora propria beatificatus, & vidit Deum facie ad faciem, sicut Sancti in Paradiso: propter quod insuper apparet falsitas doctrinae Papae Ioannis 22. Quae damnata fuit cum 
                     10. Gerson. in ser. de pasch. tom. 4. 
                     sono buccinarum coram Rege Philippo per Theologos Parisienses, & credidit potius theologis Parisiensibus, quàm curiae.
                  
                  This he did to the thiefe (which by likelihood had not yet accomplished Of Pope Iohn penance for all his sinnes,) who was blessed in that very houre, and sawe God face to face, as doe the Saintes in Paradise: by reason whereof, further appeareth the falshood of the doctrine of pope Iohn, which was condemned by the sound of trumpets before K. Philip by the devines of Paris, & the King beleeved rather the devines of Paris, then the court. In which words, we have to note first, that Gerson a voucheth the thiefe: crucified with Christ, to have seene 1 God face to face in that houre, & so to be blessed. Secondly, that he reproveth the false doctrin of Pope Iohn, Thirdly, that his doctrine was 2 condemned with the sound of trupets, in the presence of the king of 3 France. Fourthly, that the K. gave more credit to the devines of Paris, then to the iudgement of the court of Rome. Fiftly, that neither the 4 K. nor the learned papists, did at that time grant such authority to the 5 Pope, as now the pope chalengeth. whreupon it foloweth consequētly, that the pope taught false doctrine in a weighty matter of faith: which thing not only Gerson affirmeth, as you have heard: but Pope Adrian himselfe testifieth the same, as recordeth the zealous papist Alphonsus in these wordes:
                  
                     Sexta haeresis docet nullam animam ante diem iudciij esse beatam, quū (ut ait) nulla anima ante illum diem videt Deum. Huius haeresis auctores sunt Armeni, eandem etiam tuentur Graeci, post istos surrexit Iohannes 22. huius nominis pontifex. Sed ne verbis meis aliquis in hac parte deroget, 
                     Alphonsus de Castro. lib. 3. adversus haereses. prope finem. 
                     verba Adriani papae referam, qui in suo 4. sententiarum in calce cuiusdē questionis de Sacramento confirmationis, it a ait: Novissimè fertur de Ioanne 22. quòd publicè docuit, declaravit, & ab omnibus teneri mandavit, quod animae purgatae ante finale iudicium non habēt stolam, quae est clara & facialis visio Dei: & universitatē Parisien sem ad hoc induxisse dicitur, quod nemo in ea poter at gradū in Theolog. adipisci, nisiprimitus hunc errorē iurasset se defen surū, & perpetuòei adhae surū. haec Adrianus.
                  
                  The fixt heresie teacheth no soule to be in blisse, before the day of iudgement, because (as it saith,) no soule before that day seeth God. The Armenians are the authors of this heresie and the Greeks hold the same. After these rose up pope Iohn, the 22. of that name. But least any man distrust my wordes in this point. I will recite the words of pope Adrian, who in his 4. book of sentences in the end of a certaine question of the sacrament of confirmation, sayeth this: Last of all, it is reported of Pope Iohn the 22. that he publikely

taught, declared, and commanded all men to hold, that the soules of the lust, before the day of iudgement, have not the stole which is the cleare and facely vision of God. And he is reported, to have induced the Vniversity of Paris to this: that no man could take degree in the same, but he that first did sweare to defend this error, and to adheare unto it forever. Thus saith Adrian, who was him selfe pope of Rome: and thus reporteth Alphonsus a popish Friar. And it will not helpe to say, as Bellarminus doeth, in defence of popish faith: to wit, that pope Iohn erred as a private man, but not as pope: for that distinction doeth not only want a good foundation, whereupon it should be built, but also it flatly destroyeth the plaine text: the reason hereof, is evident to every child. First, because Adrian saith, docuit, he taught. 1 Secondly, because he saith, publicè, publikly. Thirdly, because he saith, 2 
                     mandavit, he commanded al to hold it. Fourthly, because none could 3 be made graduate, which held not this opinion. Fiftly, because every 4 graduate did sweare to defend it, and to hold it forever. So then the 5 pope may erre in publike decree of faith, aswel as an other man. And that, even by the consent of Adrian, who was pope him selfe: yea, who for learning and knowledge, was one of the rarest popes that ever was at Rome. Canus telleth us, that Gerson, Almain, & Thomas VValdensis, do all hold, that the pope may erre, as is said. Pope Celestine erred not only as a private man, (but even as pope and publike person,) in his publike decree of matrimonie. This to be so, witnesseth the said Alphonsus, in these very words: Coelestinum papam errasse 
                     Alphons. lib. 1. cap. 4. advers. haereses. 
                     circa matrimonium fidelium, quorum alter labitur in haeresim, res est omnibus manifesta. neque hic Coelestini error talis fuit, qui soli negligentiae imputari debuit, ita ut illum errasse dicamus, velut privatam personā, & non ut papam, qui in qualibet reseria definienda consulere debet viros doctos: quoniam huiusmodi Coelestini definitio habebatur in antiquis decretalibus, in cap. laudabilem, titulo de convers. infidelium: quam ego ipse vidi, & legi. That pope Celestine erred about matrimonie of the faithful, whereof th'one is 
                        
                           ••
                         Pope Celestus. fallen into heresie, is a thing so manifest, as all men know the same: neither was this error of Celestine such, as it ought to be imputed to negligence, so as we may think him to have erred as a private man, and not as pope, who ought in the decree of every serious matter, to aske counsell of learned men: for that definition of Celestine was in the old decretals, in the chap. laudabilem, and in the title de conversione infidelium, which I my selfe have seene & read. By this assertion of Alphonsus, it is cleare that pope Celestine erred in the decree of faith. For first he saith, that Celestine erred, not as a private man, but as a pope, & as a publike person. Secondly, he called it the decree 1 of a serious matter. Thirdly, he termed it a definition, enrolled in the 2 popes decretals. he therfore erred, as a publike person, in the publike 3 definition & decree of faith. Pope Nicholas their. taught baptisme

giuen onely in the name of Christ to bee of force and good, vvhich is not only an errour, but a flat heresie, neither vvil it helpe the papists, to say as Bellar minus doth, that the pope did not define any Of pope Nicolas. thing, but onely vttered his ovvne opinion as a priuate doctor. For if they vvil denie the popes publique resolutions set dovvne in their ovvne cannon law, to be decrees, and definitions: they may with as good reason call white blacke, and blacke vvhite, good euill, and euill good: and say the pope cannot erre indeed in their sense. But let vs examine the popes vvords, vvho writeth thus, as is to be seene in their ovvne lavv:
                  
                     A quodam Iudaeo nescitis vtrum christiano an pagano, multos in patria vestra baptizatos asseritis, & quid de ijs sit agendum consulitis: hi 
                     de consecrat. dist. 4. cap. a quodā Iudaeo. 
                     profecto si in nomine S. trinitatis, veltantum in Christi nomine, sicut in actibus apostolorum legimus baptizati sunt, (vnum quippe idem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         est vt sanctus exponit Ambrosius) constat eos non esse denuo baptizandos.
                  
                  You say, many in your countrey were baptized of a Ievv: but yee knovv not vvhether that Ievv bee a christian or a pagan, & yee aske counsell of me, vvhat is to be done in that case. doubtles they must not be rebaptized, if they vvere baptized either in the name of the holie trinitie, or onely in the name of Christ, as vve read in the actes of the Apostles: for it is all one, as saith S. Ambrose. Bellarminus confesseth this sentence of Nicholas to be false indeede, but he denieth it to be hereticall, because the church, that is, the pope hath not so defined it. VVhich ansvvere of Bellarminus, doth not defend that prerogatiue in decrees of faith, vvhich the pope chalengeth vnto himselfe,
                  1 For first, this vvas a publique decree, because the Bulgarians asked the popes iudgement, as appeareth by the vvord (consulitis) ye require my counsel.
                  2 Secondle, he erred herein, as Bellarminus is enforced to graunt, and consequently in his publique decree.
                  3 Thirdly, this his decree vvas contrarie to the Gospell, as pope Pelagius defineth in the said canon lavv. & therefore is Bellarminus his destinction friuolous, vvhen he graunteth the popes definition to be false, but not hereticall: as if forsooth an opinon repugaant to christs gospel can not be heretical, vnlesse the popes holines so appoint it.
                  4 Fourthle, it is enough, that the pope hath erred in his decree of faith, whether they graunt it to be hereticall or no.
                  5 Fiftly, pope Pelagius, pope Zacharie, and a provinciall counsell of England holden in time of papistrie, have decreed his sentence to be hereticall. Pope Pelagius hath these wordes: De consecr. dist. 4 cap. multi.
                  
                  
                     Multi sunt qui in nomine solummodo christiani, vna etiam mersione
                     
                     se asserūt baptizare, euangelicū vero praeceptū ipso deo et domino saluatore nostro Iesu Christo tradente, nos admonet in nomine trinitatis, trina etiam mersione, sanctum baptisma vnicui
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         tribuere.
                  
                  There be many that say, they baptise onely in the name of Christ, with one mersion also: but the commaundment of the gospel delivered by God himselfe, and our saviour Iesus Christ, doth advertise vs to baptise euety one in the name of the trinitie, vvith three mersions. Pope Zacharie hath these words:
                  
                     In synodo Anglorū decretū et iudicium firmissime praeceptū, et diligenter demōstatū esse digno scitur: vt quicunque sine invocatione trinitatis mer 
                     De consecr. dist. 4. cap. in synodo. 
                     sus fuisset, sacramentū regenerationis nō haberet. quod omnino verū est, quia silotus in fōte baptismatis quis fuerit sine inuocatione trinitatis, per fectus christianus nō est, nisi in nomine patris, et filij, et spiritus sācti fuerit baptizatus hoc quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         obseruari in praedicta synodo sacerdotes voluerūt vt qui velvnā de trinitate personā in baptismo nō nominaret, illud baptisma esse verū nō posset. quod pro certo verum est, quia qui vnāex sancta trinitate confessus non fuerit, perfectus christianus esse non potest.
                  
                  It is wel knowen that it was decreed in a councel of England, and that iudgement was giuen most constantly, and exactly proued, that who soeuer was baptized without the inuocation of the trinitie, hee could not haue the sacrament of regeneration: which is altogether true: because, if that any shalbe washed in the fountain of baptisme, without the innocation of the trinitie: he is no perfect christian, vnlesse he be baptized in the name of the father, & of the son, & of the holy ghost. This also the priestes in that synod would haue obserued, that who so should omit but one person of trinitie in baptisme, that baptism could not be true. which thing is true for certainty: because, he that shall not confesse one person of the trinitie, can not be a perfect christian. by vvhich testimonies being not onely of popes, but of english papists also assembled in councel, we haue to note 2. things: the one, that the resolutiō of pope Nicholas was a publique decree, & no priuat opiniō: the other, that his decree was false, erroneous, & cō
                     trary to the gospel of Christ Iesus. Iosephus Angles, a learned popish Frier, in a booke dedicated to the pope, sheweth this vvhole matter distinctly in these words. Si baptismus modo in nomine Christitātum, vel sanctissimae trinitatis implicite conferatur, non erit sacramentum. definita est a Gelasio 
                     Iosephus Angles de forma baptismi, ar. 4. cō
                        clus. 3. 
                     papa in canone sirevera, & in canone si multi, vbi dicuntur agere contra praeceptum evangelicū sic baptizantes, & baptismum esse reiterandum. If baptisme this day be giuē in the name of Christ only, or in the name of the holy trinitie, but not expresly, it shall not be the sacrament of baptisme. this is defined by pope Gelasius in the canō 
                     sirevera, & in the canon si multi, where they are said to doe against the precept of Christs ghospel,

that baptise in that maner, & that their baptism must be iterated and done againe. in fine, it is wonderful and almost incredible, what grosse, shamefull, & vnchristian cōstitutions many popes haue made, aswel in decrees of faith as of maners. But I surceasing from recitall of huge numbers, wil content my selfe with onely 3. to wit, Stephanus the 6. Iohn the 9. & Sergius the 3. For first, pope Stephanus made frustrate Platina in vitis pontificum. and of none effect, the orders receiued of pope Formosus his predecessor. but shortly after, pope Iohn disanulled & made frustrate the acts of pope Stephanus, & approued the acts of pope Formosus. yet after all this, pope Sergius vndid againe the acts of pope Formosus, & of pope Iohn, & approved the actes of pope Stephanus the sixt. These shamefull and erroneous constitutions & factes of these three popes are so true, as not onely Baptista Platina, a graue popish historiographer, but Carranza also, yea & Bellarminus himself do al confesse the same. wherin we haue first to consider, that amongst the papists order is an holie sacrament, & impresseth in the receiuer, an indelible character: by vertue wherof once a bishop must euer he a bishop by popish doctrine, how soeuer iurisdiction be taken away: and consequently, since For nosus was once a bishop: to wit, episcopus Portuensis, as Argumentum ad hominem. saith Platina: and by vertue thereof had their indelible character, and power to giue orders: it was a most manifest errour in faith, and most wicked fact in maners, to decree as pope Stephanus, and pope Sergius did: that orders giuen by pope Formosus were not true orders, but none at all: and thereupon to commaund with the notorious scandall of all the world: that all such as were made priestes by him where is now their character indelibilis? should take orders againe, as if they had beene of the meere laicall order.
               
               
                  
                     The 6. Conclusion.
                  
                  NOt onely the pope as pope may erre in his publique decrees, when he alone defineth matters of faith or maners: but also when hee so defineth, vvith a prouinciall romish councell. This conclusion is certaine and vndoubtedly true, euen by the testimonies of best learned papistes. And because Bellarminus dorh not denie this to be so, I will alleage his words, which be these:
                  
                     Secunda opinio est, pontificem etiam vt pontificem, posse esse hereticum, 
                     Bellarminus lib. 4. de Rom. pōtifice cap. 2. 
                     & docere haeresim, si abs
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         generali concilio definiat, & de facto aliquando accidisse. hanc opinionem sequitur & tuetur Nilus in suo libro aduer sus primatum papae. eandem sequuti sunt aliquot Parisienses, vt Gerson, & Almain in libris de potestate ecclesiae, nec non Alphonsus de Castro libro primo, capit 2. contra haereses, & Adrianus sextus papa in questione de confirmatione: qui omnes non in pontisice sed
                     
                     in ecclesia, siue in concilio generali tantum, constituunt infallibilitatem dicij de rebus fidei.
                  
                  2 The second opinion is, that the pope euen as pope, may bee an Loe the doctrine of the best learned papistes is good, and altogether against the popedom. heretique, and teach heresie: if he define without a generall councell: and that this hath in verie deede sometime chaunced so. this opinion doth Nilus follovve and defend, in his booke against the popes primacie. The same opinion haue some of the vniuersitie of Paris followed, as Gerson & Alma in in their books of the churches povver, and of their opinion are also Alphōsus, and pope Adrian: vvho all do not ascribe the infallibilitie of iudgement to the pope, but to the church or to a generall councell onely, in all matters of faith: out of vvhich vvords I note:
                  1 First, that the pope as pope may erre when he alone decreeth anie matter of faith.
                  2 I note secondlie, that the pope, as pope may erre, vvhen he defineth anie matter of faith vvithout a generall councell: and consequentlie, that he may erre vvith a prouinciall councell.
                  3 I note thirdly, that popes as popes, that is as publique persons, haue erred alreadie, and de facto: vvhen they haue decreed vvithout a generall councell.
                  4 I note fourthlie, that all this is testifyed by foure great learned papistes, vvhereof one vvas pope himselfe.
                  These testimonies are important, doubtlesse, & verie sufficient to establish my conclusion. But I vvill alleage yet another proofe, so excellent, so evident, and so irrefragable, as more cannot be vvished. The proofe standeth thus.
                  Pope Stephanus, vvith a councell of all the bishops and priestes of Italie, defined flatlie against rebaptization. vvhich decree of councell vvith the popes assent thereto: Saint Cyprian contemned, after it defending his former opinion constantlie. yea he vvas so far from acknowledging that prerogatiue in popes, vvhich they of latter daies chalenge vnto them selues, that he vvould not take pope Stephanus for his superiour, or to haue anie iurisdiction ouer him, but termed him, superbum, imperitum, & caeeae ac prauae mentis, proud, ignorant, blind, and naughtie, as is euident to such as reade his epistle to Pompeius. Out of vvhich I note:
                  1 First, that Cyprian vvas an holie martir, & novv a saint in heauen..
                  2 I note secondly, that he vvas a verie ancient father and a great learned clarke.
                  3 I note thirdly, that he knevv vvhat the pope and his councell had decreed.
                  4 I note fourthly, that he iudged a romish coūcel to be of no greater

force than a Councell African. I note fiftlie, that hee iudged the Councell of Italie to bee of no greater force for the Popes consent, then was 5 the Councell of Afrike for his owne consent. I note sixtlie, that provinciall 6 Councels are of no greater authoritie for the Popes confirmation, than for the confirmation of another bishop: all which pointes are necessarilie deduced, out of Saint Cyprians fact, and writings. And Bellarminus Bellarm. lib. 4 de Rom. Pont. cap. 7 answere hereunto is frivolous, and not worth the rehearsall. The Pope defined not the controversie as a matter of faith (saith Bellarminus) because he did not excommunicate Saint Cyprian: A sweet dish of a messe of mustarde. The Pope utterlie disliking Saint Cyprian his opinion, and deeming it repugnant to Christes Gospell, and for that ende convocating all the Clergie men of Italie, did define the controversie, but not Bellerminus is confuted. as a matter of faith, saith Bellarminus. The controversie was about rebaptization, which was either flatlie with the Gospell, or flatlie against the same. If it were flatlie with the Gospell, then erred the Pope and his Councell egregiouslie: If it were flatlie against the Gospell, and the Pope decreed it, then decreed he against it, as against a matter of faith, or els opinions against the Gospell are not against faith.
               
            
            
               The Corollarie.
               First therefore, since the Popes lives have bene most wicked, most notorious, and scandalous unto the world: secondlie, since Popes have aspired unto their Popedomes by naughtie and ungodlie meanes: thirdlie, since Popes may not onelie erre, and hold false opinions, but also become notorious heretiques, and for their heresies be deprived of their Popedoms: fourthlie, since manie Popes have de facto forsaken the Christian faith, and become flat heretiques: fiftlie, since manie Popes have erred in their publike doctrine of faith and manners: sixtlie, since not onelie the Pope, as hee is Pope, may erre in his publike decrees, when hee alone defineth matters of faith and manners, but also when hee so defineth with a provinciall Councell: I conclude, that it is a sufficient motive for me to renounce the Romish religion, as false, erronious, and pernicious doctrine.
               Thus much of the second motive.
            
            
               
               THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. Of the authoritie of generall Councelles in these our dayes.
               
               I Haue sometymes had the decrees of generall Councelles, aswellatter as former in great admiration, thinking them the determinations and resolutions of the holy Ghost: but of late yeares I have changed my opinion upon sundrie waightie motives, the chiefest whereof I will set downe by way of conclusions.
               
                  The first Conclusion.
                  THe decrees of generall Councels in these latter dayes, are nothing els but a meere mockerie and sophisticall subtiltie, to deceive Gods people withall. For although there be before everie generall Councell, solemne convocation, sumptuous preparation, and chargeable peregrenation: and before the end, long, costlie, and tedious abode, yet neither doe or can the Fathers of the councels determine anie thing there, which the Pope hath not before concluded, sitting in his chaire at home. This may seeme strange unto thee (gentle Reader,) as sometimes ir did unto my selfe: but I shall (God willing) unfold the obscuritie with such evident perspicuitie, as never man henceforth can stand in doubt thereof. This shall bee perfourmed, if I prooue 4, things: First, if I proove that the decrees of Councels be of no force with papists, unles the Popes Legates consent unto the 1 same. Secondlie, if I proove that though the Popes Legates agree unto the decrees of Councels, yet are the said decrees of no force: if the legates 2 shal consent unto anie one iot, contrarie to the Popes appointment. Thirdlie, if I proove that the pope cannot delegate his authoritie, unto the Legates 3 whome he sen deth to the Councell. Fourthlie, if I proove that he wil not come to the Councels himselfe, but determine everie thing at home 4 in his chamber. the proofe hereof shall be the flattestimonie of Melchior Canus, a most profounde Schoolman in reasoning, a most reverend Bishop

in dignitie, a most sound papist in opinion and sometime the chiefest and most excellent pofessour of Divinitie, in Salmantica. This Canus writeth in this manner:
                  
                     Si Legatus contra instructionem agit, non censetur ex potestate delegata 
                     Canus lib. 5 de auctor. Conc, cap. 5. 
                     agere, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         adeo non est, cur eo modo act a superioris auctoritate probata esse credantur. Et paulò pòst? Decreta igitur quae à Legato contra sedis Apostolicae traditionem approbentur, non habent Romanae Ecclesiae authoritatem, nec aliter se habent, quam sià Concilio sine Lega. tis prodijssent. & paulò pòst. Solidam auctoritatem, quam in confirmandis & fratribus & dogmatibus Petrus habet, in Legatos transferre non potest.
                  
                  If the Legate doe anie thing contrary to instruction given him, hee must not be deemed to proceede of power delegate, and so there is no cause why the pope shall be thought to approve the decrees: The decrees therefore, which the Legate shall approove against tradition of the Church To what ende are Councels, when everie thing must be as the Pope saith at home. of Rome, have no authoritie from the Church of Rome, neither are they of anie more force, than if they had proceeded from the Councell without consent of the Legates: The sound authoritie therefore, which Peter hath in confirming his brethren and decrees, he cannot transferre unto his Legates. These are the expresse wordes of Canus, that great piller of popish doctrine. Out of whose wordes I note first, that decrees of Councels bee of no force without consent of the Legates. I note secondlie, that the decrees of Councels, even when they have the consent of the Legates: are yet of no force when the Legates condiscend to anie thing, against the Popes minde. I note thirdlie, that the Pope cannot translate or give his authoritie unto the Legate, and consequentlie, the Pope greatlie abuseth the whole world, when he calleth together all bishops in the Christian world, and yet will allowe nothing that they doe: unles it be the same that hee decreeth, in his chaire at home. Now that hee never commeth to Councels in his owne person, Bellarminus recordeth in this maner:
                  
                     Summus Pontifex nunquam interfuit Concilijs Orient alibus per 
                     Bellarm. lib. 1 de Conciliis. cap. 19 
                     se, &c.
                  
                  The Pope was never present at the Councels in the East Church, in his owne person: and why was not the Pope present at generall Councelles in the East Church? Bellarminus giveth two reasons; the one forsooth, because it was not convenient, that the heade should follow the members. The other, because the Emperour would ever sitte in the highest Mark what the Popes vassal saith, place: which our humble Father the Pope, coulde not endure. Out of vvhose wordes I note two thinges: the one, that the highest

place in Councels, was in olde time reserved to the Emperour: the other, that the Greeke Church did never acknowledge the Popes primacie.
               
               
                  The second Conclusion.
                  IN these latter dayes since the Pope attained his usurped iurisdiction, generall Councelles are so destitute of the holie Ghostes asistance, (though the Papistes never cease to bragge thereof) that they decree altogether against the holie Ghost. This is manifest by the solemne decrees of the late Councel of Trent, as after due examination will evidentlie appeare. First therefore, the saide Councell decreed flatlie, that to be no matrimonie which was approoved Matrimonie, by the uniforme consent of the auncient Catholike Church, and which is this day perfect Matrimonie by Christes institution: These be the wordes of the Councell,
                  
                     Qui aliter quam praesente parocho vel alio Sacerdote de ipsius seu ordinarii licentia, & duobus vel tribus testibus matrimonium contrahere 
                     Conc. Triden. de reformatione. Sess. 8. p. 46. 9. 
                     attent abunt, eos sancta synodus ad sic contrahendum omnino inhabiles reddit, & huiusmodi contractus irritos & nullos esse decernit presenti decreto.
                  
                  They that shall goe about to marrie otherwise, than in the presence of the parish Priest, or of some other priest, by his licence, or graunt of the Ordinarie, and with two or three witnesses those the holie Counsell maketh utterlie uncapable of Mariage, and defineth by this present decree, such contracts to be frustrate and of no force. By which words and by which decree we see plainelie, that this day those persons are made uncapable of matrimonie, and their mariage disanulled, whom Christ Behold here the magnificēce of popish Councels. pronounceth capable, and whose marriage hee approoved. For before this decree of the late Councell of Trent, all papistes in the worlde approoved private and secrete matrimonies, for true and perfect: yea, all learned papistes doe confesse constantlie, such clandestine matrimonies to be true mariages in England, albeit that such contracts be of no force neither in Spaine nor Italie, by their religion. The reason hereof is, because promulgation of the said Tridentine Councels decree was not yet made in England, as appeareth by the first Cannon in the eight section dereformatione. This constant opinion of all Divines, the Councell it selfe acknowledged in these wordes,
                  
                     Dubitandum non est, clandestina matrimonia libero consensu facta rata & vera esse matrimonia, quandiu Ecclesia ea irrita non fecit. 
                     Conc. Triden. Sess. 8. de reformatione.
                  
                  There is no doubt, but clandestine and secrete matrimonies made with free consent, were perfect and true matrimonies, so long as the Church did not disanull the same. Yea, the Councell of Trent acknowledgeth

matrimonie, to be one of the seven Sacraments of the newe Testament instituted by Christ, and yet accurseth all such as beleeve not the Church of Rome, to have authoritie to dissolve the same. These be the wordes:
                  
                     Si quis dixerit matrimonium non esse verè & propriè, unum ex septem 
                     Conc. Triden. sess. 8. Can. 1 de matimon, 
                     legis Evangelicae sacramentis à Christo domino institutum, sed ab hominibus in Ecclesiam invectum, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         gratiam conferre, anathemasit.
                  
                  If anie shall say that matrimonie is not truelie and properlie, one of the seven Sacraments of the Evangelicall law instituted by Christ our Lord, but brought into the Church by men, neither to give grace, accursed be that man. And in another place it hath these wordes,
                  
                     Si quis dixerit Ecclesiam non potuisse constituere impedimenta matrimonium dirimentia, vel in ijs constituendis errasse, anathemasit. 
                     Sess. 8. Can. 4
                  
                  If anie shal say, that the Church could not appoint impediments which dissolve matrimonie, or that the Church erred in appointing them, accursed be that man. These bee the decrees of the holie Councell of Trent, which, as the Papists beleeue, had the assistance of the holie Ghost, and therefore could not erre. Out of which decrees we have first, that matrimonie 1 is a contract instituted by Christ himselfe: we have secondlie, 2 that it is an holie Sacrament with the Papistes: Wee have thirdlie, that it is now no Sacrament with the Papistes, which by Christs institution is a 3 Sacrament in their religion: We have fourthlie, that matrimonial contractes, made without the presence of a Priest: are true and perfect matrimonies, 4 by Christes law and institution: We have fiftlie, that such matrimonies, 5 to wit, clandestine, are disanulled and made no matrimonies, by the Pope and his Tridentine Councell. neither will it help to say, as the wiser sort of Papists doeth, that the Councell doeth not unmarie persons alreadie married, but onelie disableth unmaried persons so, as their prohibited marriages cannot be of force. For, first, the Councell pronounceth that to be no Mariage, by reason of mans prohibition, which 1 without such prohibition should bee perfect mariage by Christs institution: as is alreadie prooved out of the said Councell. Secondlie, that prohibition taketh away the libertie of the Gospell, as which implyeth a 2 negative precept not contained in the law of nature: for as their famous popish doctour Franciscus à Victoria writeth,
                  
                     Lex Evangelicalex libertatis d Christo & Apostolis vocatur, quod 
                     Victoria rele. 7. de matrim. pag. 280. 
                     solo jure naturali post Evangelium Christiani teneantur, ex omnibus quae in veteri lege erant.
                  
                  The lawe of the Gospell is tearmed the lawe of libertie, by Christ and his Apostles: because after the Gospell Christians are bound onelie to the law of nature, concerning all such things as were in the olde Law. Thirdlie,

because this to do, is to challenge greater authoritie than Christ hath, and to be aboue Christ. The reason whereof is evident, because an inferiour cannot chaunge the law of his superiour, unlesse he haue from his superiour commission so to doe: which Victoria well observed in these wordes:
                  
                     Dispensatio in lege spectat solùm ad legislatorem, vel superiorem, 
                     Victor. de potest. Papae. & Concil. relect. 4. ad, S. p. 133 
                     vel adillum cui specialiter commiserint ipsi.
                  
                  Dispensation in the Law pertaineth onelie to the lawmaker, or to his superiour, or to whome they speciallie graunt commission: If answere be made, that the Pope hath such commission: then would I know, whether he received it by word or writing: in the meane season the saide Victoria telleth the Pope, that he cannot dispence in the law divine. These be his wordes:
                  
                     Manet ergo conclusio tanquam certa & firma, quod in primo genere 
                     Victor. ubi suprà. 
                     praeceptorum Concilij, scilicet quae sunt iuris divini, Papa non potest dispensare.
                  
                  The conclusion therefore abideth firme and sure, that in the first kind of preceptes of the Councell: to wit, which are of the lawe divine, the Pope cannot dispence. And of Victoria his opinion, are Thomas Aquinus, Anthoninus, Sylvester, Soto, Covarruvias, and all learned papistes. Fourthlie, because that which is of more force, to wit, a simple vow, doth 4 not dissolve matrimonie: for if that which is of greater force cannot disanull matrimonie, much lesse can that doe it, which is of lesser force, as both the rule of logick and experience teacheth. Now, that a simple vowe is of greater force than the Popes prohibition, cannot be denied: for it is de iure divino, as all the Papistes confesse, and as the Scripture recordeth. And Psal. 75 Eccl. 5 that a simple vow doeth not dissolve matrimonie: Angelus prooveth at Angelus de mattimon. imped. 5 large, out of the popish Cannon law. Fiftlie, because the Pope or Councell cannot change the essence or essentiall partes of matrimonie, for so saith the Tridentine Councell. And if it were otherwise, the Pope might 5 make more or fewer Sacraments at his pleasure: whereuppon it followeth necessarilie, that all matrimoniall contractes bee as perfectlie matrimonies this day, as they were in Christs time: notwithstanding the prohibition of the Pope, or of his Councell. For the essence and substantiall partes abiding unaltered and perfect, the matrimonie must needes be perfect. Sixtlie, because the Priest is meere extrinsecall unto the contract, and therfore cannot necessarilie concurre to the essentiall 6 constitution thereof. The Councell then in this decree, was destitute of the holie Ghost. The saide Councell affirmeth the solemne vowe of religion, to dissolve matrimonie in these wordes:
                  
                     Si quis dixerit matrimonium ratum non consummatum, per solemnem 
                     Conc. Triden. de mat, Sess. 8. can. 6. 
                     religionis professionem alterius coniugum non dirimi, anathemasit.
                  
                  
                     
If any shall say that matrimonie firme not consummate, is not dissolved by solemne profession of religion of the one partie, accursed be that man. This decree likewise is flat against the holie Ghost: which to be so, I prove by sundrie meanes. The Councell it selfe shall first confute it selfe, when it saith thus:
                  
                     Matrimonij perpetuum indissolubilem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         nexum, primus humani generis 
                     Conc. Triden. Sess. 8. in init. 
                     parens divini spiritus instinctu pronuntiavit, cum dixit: hoc nunc os exossib. meis, & caro de carne mea: & paulò post: quod deus coniunxit, homo non separet. The first parent of mankind pronounced by the instinct of the holie Ghost, the perpetuall and indissoluble bond of matrimonie, when he said: this is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: and a litle after: what therfore God hath coupled together, let no man put asunder: These are the wordes of the Councell: by which wee see evidentlie confessed, even of the Councell: that matrimonie was indissoluble by Gods The Councel that dissolveth, which it confesseth to indissoluble. appointment, before the consummation (as they tearme it,) or before copulation carnall, which is all one. Whereuppon I inferre first, that matrimonie before consummation, or carnall copulation: is indissoluble by the holie Ghosts appointment. I inferre secondlie, that the Councel of Trent dissolveth matrimonie before consummation. I inferre thirdlie, directlie upon the first and second illation: that the decrees of the Councel, are flatlie against the holie Ghost. I inferre fourthlie, that that may trulie be verified of the Pope and his Councel of Trent: which their owne Doctour Victoria soundeth out against them, in these words:
                  
                     Officium Apostolorum Paulus semper vocat ministerium, & certè si quis mandata Christi relaxaret, non se haberet sicut Dei minister, sed sicut 
                     Victor. relect. 4. de potest. Papae. & Con. ad. 5. Arg. pag. 132 
                     aequalis, aut potius superior.
                  
                  Paule tearmeth the office of the Apostles alwaies ministerie: and doublesse, if anie should dissolve Christs commandements, he should not behave himselfe as the minister of God, but as his equall, or rather as his Supeour.
               
               
                  The third Conclusion.
                  ALthough the Popes of latter yeares take upon them to like or dislike, to proove or disproove the decrees of generall Councels at their pleasures: yet is everie generall Councell above the Pope, yet may everie generall Councell excommunicate, iudge, and depose the Pope, yet may everie generall Councell sette downe lawes and decrees concerning faith and manners: which no Pope hath authoritie, once to alter or change. All which shall be prooved, Gods holie Spirite assisting me, by the flat testimonies and opinions of the best learned

Papistes. Victoria writeth in this maner,
                  
                     Si Concilium declarat aliquid esse de fide, aut de iure divino, Papa in hoc nihil potest aliter declarare aut immutare, maximè sitale ius spectet 
                     Victor. ubi suprà. concil. 2, pag. 133. 
                     adfidem vel admores Ecclesiae universalis.
                  
                  If the Councell declare anie thing to be of faith or of the lawe divine, in this point the Pope can nothing otherwise declare or change: especiallie, if such law appertaine either to faith or maners of the universal Church. Of this opinion are manie other learned papistes, and especiallie, their Angelicall Doctor Thomas Aquinas: that everie generall Councell is above the Pope: great learned papistes affirme constantlie, to wit, Abulensis, Panormitanus, Ioannes Gerson, Almainus, Cardinalis Cameracensis, and Cardinalis Florentinus. Panormitanus argueth out of Pope Panorm. in Concil. Basil. num. 18. apud Vict. pag. 139. Gregories wordes, that as the Pope cannot chaunge anie thing in the contentes of the Gospell, so neither can he chaunge anie thing in the decrees of Councels. Yea Ioannes Gerson proceedeth further, and saith, that a generall councel cannot onlie limit the Popes power, so as he can neither Io. Gerson 1. parte tract. 3. apud Vict. pag. 138. dispense nor abrogate the decree of the Councell: but also that the Councell may upon a reasonable cause, exempt anie man from his iurisdiction. that the Councell may iudge and depose the Pope, as also compell him to appeare, and for his disobedience excommunicate his Holines: The Popes owne deare Friar Iosephus Angles Valentinus, avoucheth in these wordes,
                  
                     Concilium ecclesiae potest Papam per excommunicationem compellere, 
                     Iosephus in 4. sentent. p. 2. q. de excom. art. 4. diffic. 1. conclus. 3. 
                     nt redditurus rationem haeresis aut apostasiae criminis cuius accusatur, compareat, & in his duobus casibus illum excommunicare. patet, quia cumpossit in his duobus casibus papam deponere, erit tunc illo superior, & exconsequenti antequam deponatur, per excommunicationem illum ut in iudicio compare at, compellere: aliter enimsi non posset Concilium Papam compellere, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         posset illum iudicare.
                  
                  A generall Councell may by excommunication compell the Pope to appeare, and to give an account of that heresie or apostacie, whereof he is accused: and in these two cases excommunicate him. The thing is evident, because when it can in these two cases depose the Pope, it shall then be his superiour: and consequentlie, before he be deposed, compell him by excommunication to appeare in iudgement. For otherwise, if the Councell could not compell the Pope, neither could it iudge him. I could alleadge moe like testimonies in this behalfe, but it is needles: because manie expresse textes in the Popes owne cannon lawe, doe witnesse the same: whereof this one of Pope Zozimus may suffice for manie,
                  
                     Contra statuta sanctorum Patrum condere aliquid aut immutare, 
                     25. q 1. cap. contra.
                     
                     nec huius quidem sedis potest authoritas.
                  
                  To make any lawe, or to chaunge any thing against the decrees of the holy fathers: this our seat of Rome hath no authoritie. Vict. relict. 4. de potest. papae. concl. 20. p. 149.
                  
                  Victoria saith thus:
                  
                     Bene scio quod Pavormitanus, & Gerson, & Okam defendunt, quod licet appellare a papa ad concilium.
                  
                  I know right wel, that Pavnormitaine, Gerson, and Okam doe holde, that vvee may appeale from the pope vnto a generall councell,
                  Bellarminus graunteth, that albeit Cameracensis, Gerson, Almaine, Cusanus, Pavnormitanus, Florentinus, Abulensis, (who all are great popish doctors,) doe differ in the maner, yet doe they all acknowledge the povver of a generall councell, to be greater then the authoritie of the pope.
                  These be his verie owne words:
                  
                     Conveniunt tamen in eo omnes, vt doceant esse hanc potestatem immediatè 
                     Bellar. de con. lib. 2. 1. 14. 
                     in ecclesia, & proinde mortuo papavel deposito vel nolente adesse concilio, concilium non propterea esse corpus imperfectum, sed perfectū & habere potest atē papalē definiendi de fide, sanciendi leges, dandi indulgentias &c. exquib. deducunt concilium esse supra papam, & posse ipsum indicare, & punire: & idem esse querere, an papasit maior concilio, ac si quereretur, an pars sit maior suototo.
                  
                  But they all agree in this, that they teach this power to be immediatly in the church: and therefore when the Pope is dead, or deposed, or will not come to the councel (as he neuer doth,) that then the councell is not an vnperfect bodie, but perfect, and hath papall power to define matters of faith, to make lawes, to giue pardons, &c. VVhereupon they gather that the councell is aboue the pope, that it can iudge him and punish him, and that it is all one to demaunde if the pope be greater then the councell, as if it were asked if the part be bigger then the whole. The councell of Basill defined it for an article of our faith, to beleeue that the councell is aboue the pope.
                  These be the expresse words of the councell:
                  
                     Veritas de potestate concilij generalis vniuersalem ecclesiam repraesentantis 
                     Cont. Basilensess. 33. 
                     supropapam & quemlibet alterum, declarata per Constantiense & hoc Basileense generalia concilia, est veritas fidei catholicae.
                  
                  The veritie of the power of a generall councell representing the vniuersall church aboue the pope, and euerie other person declared by the generall councell of Constance, and this of Basil, is the verie truth of the catholike faith. And the councell addeth another clause, to wit, that whosoeuer denieth this veritie obstinately, is to be reputed 25. q. 1. cap. unt quidam. for an heretike. In fine, Pope vrbanus saith thus:
                  
                     
                     Vbi apertè Dominus veleius apostoli, & eos sequentes sancti patres sententialiter aliquid definierunt, ibi non novam legem Rom. Pontifex dare, sed potius quod praedicatum est, vsque ad animam & sanguinem confirmare debet.
                  
                  vvhere our Lord or his apostles haue spoken any thing plainlie, and the holy fathers comming after them, haue defined any thing iudicially, There the bishop of Rome must not make any new lavv, but rather confirme that vvhich is preached, vvith the best bloud in his bodie.
               
               
                  The fourth Conclusion.
                  GEnerall and popish councels in these daies, are as a nose of waxe, and the decrees therof as vncertaine as the wind.
                  This conclusion is proved to be such, by the expresse iudgement of great learned papistes.
                  Bellarminus writeth of councels, in this maner:
                  
                     Nos dicimus, concessum episcoporum in concilijs legitimis esse verum 
                     Bellar. de conlib. 1. cap. 18. 
                     iudicum concessum, & eorum decreta & leges necessario sequendas.
                  
                  vve say, that the assembly of Bishops in lavvfull councels, is the true assembly of iudges, and that their decrees and lavves must bee followed of necessitie.
                  But in another place, the same Bellarminus hath these vvords:
                  
                     Dico igitur, concilium illud non posse errare, quod absolutè est generale, 
                     Bellar. lib. 2. de concil. cap. 11. 
                     & ecclesiam vniversam perfectè representat: eiusmodi autem concilium non est, antequam adsit sententia summi pontificis.
                  
                  
                     I say therefore, that that councell cannot erre, which is absolutely generall, and vvhich representeth the vniuersall church perfectly: but such a councell is not before the pope giue his assent. And hee saith againe in the selfe same chapter:
                  
                     Idem enim est sive pontifex expresse concilium reprobet, sive conciliū agat contra pontificis sententiam.
                  
                  For it is all one, whether the pope expressely disalow the councel, or the councell doe against the popes mind. Now in the first place Bellarminus telleth vs, that bishops are true iudges in the councels, and haue definitiue voices in the same: and that their decrees must Mat contradiction in the Iesuite. needes be followed. But in the other two places he singeth another song and telleth vs, that though the Pope commeth not in person to the councels, but sendeth his legats in his place: yet are the decrees of such councels of no force, nor to any purpose, vnlesse they bee according to the popes mind. They are therefore as a nose of waze, because, when the bishops haue imploied their whole industrie, when they haue vsed long consultation, when they haue disputed the matter

                     pro & contra: when they haue inuocated the holy ghost, and haue with mature deliberation set downe cannons, accursing such as will not obay the same: the pope notvvithstanding saith, all this is not worth a stravv, as which is contrarie to his opinion, that cannot erre, and so of none effect.
                  For the vncertaintie of the decrees of councels, Bellarm. saith thus:
                  
                     Non potest fieri vt aliquando adfinem controuersiarum deveniatur, nisidetur 
                     Bellarm. de concil. l. 1. c. 21. 
                     locus maiori parti suffragiorum.
                  
                  It cannot be, that euer an end of controversies should be made, vnlesse the greater part of voices bee of force: and he saith in another place.
                  
                     Est autem verum decretum concilij quod fit a maiori parte, alioqui nullum 
                     Idem Bellar. li, 2. ca. 11. 
                     esset legitimum concilij decretum, cum semper aliqui dissentiant.
                  
                  For it is the true decree of the councell, vvhich hath the consent of the greater part: othervvise there should bee no lavvfull decree made, because euer some dissent.
                  But Melchior Canus telleth vs another tale, and saith in this maner:
                  
                     Non ita
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         quod in Romanis concessionibus fit, plurium apud nos sententia praevalet: 
                     Canus li. 5. de auct. concilii, cap. 5. p. 164 Of th
                           •
                         popes gravitie and authoritie, see at large in the 3. chapter. 
                     & paulo post, nō enim numero haec indicantur, sed pondere. Pondus autem concilijs dat summi Pontificis, & gravitas, & auctoritas: quae si adsit centum patres satis sunt, sin desit nulli sunt satis, sint quamlibet plurimi.
                  
                  Not therfore as in humaine consents the voices of moe are of force vvith vs: for these thinges are not iudged in number, but in weight: and the councels receiue their weight from the grauitie and authoritie of the pope: vvhich if it be once present an hundreth fathers are enough, but if it vvant, none are enough, be as manie as they vvill.
                  Novv sir, Bellarminus telleth vs, that moe voices in councelles must needes be of force: But Canus saith, it is not so: for bee they manie, be they few, what part the pope liketh shall be true.
                  The decrees therefore of popish councels, are as vncertaine as the vvind. For after the fathers of the councels haue fasted long, praied much, consulted gravely, deliberated maturely, decreed soberlie, commaunded strictlye, and accursed severely: neither others, nor yet themselues canne tell, what shall be of force therein: for all must be as pleaseth the popes holinesse, & perhaps their decrees will not content his mind.
               
               
                  
                  The fift Conclusion.
                  NO bishops can in these our daies haue voices in councels, but such as first sweare obedience to the pope, and promise to defend his canon law: which thing, though most absurd, is for all that so cleare, as Bellarminus cannot denie the same.
                  These be his words. Bellar. lib. 1. de concil. cap. vltimo.
                  
                  
                     Istud iur amentum non tollit epi scoporum libertatem, quae in concilijs necessaria est. iur ant enim se fore obedientes summo pontifici, quod intelligitur donec pontifex est, & dum iubet ea quae secundum deum & sacros canones iubere potest, seanon iur ant se non aicturos quod sentiunt in concilio, vel se non deposituros eum si hereticum esse convincant.
                  
                  This oth taketh not avvay the libertie of Bishops, which in councels is necessarie. For they sweare that they vvill bee obedient vnto the pope, which is to be vnderstood, so long as he is pope, and while he commaundeth those thinges, which he may commaund agreeable to God, and to the holie cannons: but they sweare not, that they will not speake vvhat they thinke in the councell, or that they will not depose him if they proove him to bee an heretique.
                  Thus saith Bellarminus, vvhose onely testimonie is most sufficient A point worthie the observation. in all popish affaires, as vvho is the popes sworne and tenderlye beloued vassall: Out of whose vvordes for more perspicuitie, I note.
                  1 First, that all Cleargie men admited to giue voices in councelles, are sworne vvholly to obey all the popes constitutions.
                  2 I note secondly, that the sayd persons are sworne to beleeue, that the pope cannot erre in his iudiciall decrees of faith or maners: that no councels are of force, vvithout the popes confirmation: thatall councels confirmed by him, are approued by the holie ghost: that he can excommunicate & deposeall Emperours, kings, queenes, and bishops in the christian vvorld, that hee can deliuer by his pardons all soules out of purgatorie, and a thousand like things. For all such matters are conteined in his canons, and consequentlie in their most lamentable oth.
                  3 I note thirdly, that they are svvorne to admit his decrees, vvho as they beleeue, may be an heretique.
                  4 I note fourthly, that they are svvorne to admit his iudgement in all matters of faith, vvhom yet they may iudge and depose for heresie.
                  
                     
5 I note fiftly, that their fundamentall article, in appointing the Pope iudge over all controversies: is quite overthrowen and turned vpside downe, in this Bellarminus his explication. For when he saith, (while he commandeth, &c.) he graunteth every Bishop freedome The inconstancie of Popish doctrine, is the cause of dissenting from them. to examine and iudge, when the Pope commaundeth things agreeable to God and the Canons. VVhich libertie, if they would constantly performe: all true Christians and perfect Catholicks, would agree with them. For none that beleeve rightly in God, will denie obedience to the Pope: when he preacheth and teacheth any thing, agreeable to God and holy Canons. But true Christians finding his canons to be disholy, and his decrees to be against God: thinke as Bellarminus here teacheth them, that they are not bound to obey him. For as an other great learned papist Franciscus à Victoria saith profoundly, the vniust laws of the Pope doe not binde in conscience. These are his very words:
                  
                     Ego pro certo habeo, quod omnes leges iniustae etiam Papae, non obligant 
                     Victor. relect. 4. de potest. Papae & Concilii propos. 17. pag. 157. 
                     in foro conscientiae.
                  
                  I holde it for a constant and vndoubted truth, (saith the Popes learned Doctour,) that all uniust lawes even of the Pope, doe not bind in the Court of conscience.
                  The Papistes then, who charge us so strictly to obey the popes lawes, and withall prohibite us to examine the same, doe deny us that libertie, which they take unto them selves: and that the Reader may fully understand the abomination of the othe, which all popish Bishops sweare unto the Pope: I will here set downe the expresse wordes thereof, as I finde them in their owne decretals:
                  
                     Ego N. Episcopus, ab hac hor a fidelis ero S. Petro, sanctae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Romanae Ecclesiae, domino
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         meo Papae N. eius
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         successoribus Canonicè intrātibus. Sequitur: Papatum Romanae Ecclesiae, & regulas sanctorum patrum, adiutor ero, ad defendendum & retinendum contra omnes homines; sic me Deus adiuvet, & haec sancta Evangelia.
                  
                  
                     I (Iohn Fisher,) Bishop, will be faithfull from hencefoorth to S. Peter, Decret. l b. 2. tit. 24. cap. 4. and to the holy Church of Rome, and to my L. (Boniface) the pope, and to his successours chosen Canonically: and I will be an helper to defend (against all the world,) the popedome, or Papall superioritie, and the rules of the holy fathers; so God me helpe, and the holy Gospell.
                  Loe 'here gentle reader, open rebellion is required and by evangelicall othe coufirmed, of suhiectes against their soveraignes: for the bishops of euery countrey, are fubiects to kings of the same countrey, and yet doe they sweare to defend the

popes tyrannie, and vsurped iurisdiction, against their naturall dread Soueraignes. For they sweare to defend the popes vsurped authoritie against all people none excepted: which his vsurped authoritie, (as you haue partlie heard, and shall heare more at large in the sixt Chapter following,) extendeth it selfe to the translation of kingdomes, empyres, and regalities.
               
            
            
               The Corollarie.
               FIrst therefore, since generall counsels in these daies, are nothing else, but a meere subtiltie to deceiue Gods people withal.
               2 Secondely, since the said councels decree all together against the holy Ghost.
               3 Thirdly, since Popes take vpon them, to approue or disproue councels at their pleasures.
               4 Fourthlie, since by popish doctrine, councels can iudge and depose popes.
               5 Fiftly, since councels bee as a nose of waxe, and as vncertaine as the vveathercocke.
               6 Sixtly, since appeales may be made vnto councels from the Pope, though the pope denie the same.
               7 Seauenthly, since the popes doctrine can not be mainteined, but by extorted othes.
               I conclude, that it is a sufficient motive for mee to renounce the mish religion, as false, erroneous and pernitious doctrine.
               Thus much of the third Motyve.
            
            
               THE FIFT CHAPTER. Of the Popes Dispensations
               
               
                  THe enormities in popish dispensations, are such, so great, and so manie: that if I should receite all, time would sooner faile mee then matter wherof to speake. I will therefore at this present content my selfe with some fevv, reseruing the residue till more conuenient time.
               
                  
                  
                     The 1. Conclusion.
                  
                  THE pope vsually dispenseth vvith professed Monkes, that they may marrie lawfullie: which dispensation is not onely against the lavve divine with them, but flatlye against the Popes owne religion.
                  In this conclusion, three thinges are to be proued.
                  
                     
                        1 First, that the pope doth dispense, as is said.
                     
                        2 Secondly, that his dispensation is against the law diuine.
                     
                        3 Thirdly, that it is against his owne religion.
                  
                  For the first part, Navarrus writeth in this maner: Navarrus de iuditiis, notab. 3. p. 275
                  
                  
                     Papa potest dispensare cum monacho iam professo, vt contrahat matrimonium: imò de facto multi papae dispensarūt. Consentit ipse Caietanus, Antoninus, & Paludanus.
                  
                  The pope may dispense vvith a Monke alreadie professed, that hee may take a wife and marrie: for many popes de facto haue dispensed so Caietanus, Antoninus, and Palludanus are of the same opinion. For the second point Victoria writeth thus: Multitenent quod 
                     victor. de potest. papae, relect 4. ad 3. argument. 
                     Papa non potest dispensare in votis, quia dispensatio proprie est relaxatio iuris. vnde cum sit de ture divino, dispensatio erit iuris divini relaxatio, quod sane ad papam non spectat. & vtinam haec opinio non sit vera.
                  
                  Many hold, that the Pope can not properlie dispense in vowes, because dispensation properly is the relaxation of the Lavv. wherevpon since a vow is of the law divine, dispensation must bee remission of the lavv divine: which thing doubtles belongeth not vnto the Pope: and would to God this opinion were not true.
                  Loe, this religious Frier is so zealouslie affected towards the popes credite, that he vvisheth the opinion which overthrovveth his practise were not true.
                  And the Popes famous Canonist Covarruvias, writeth to the same effect in these vvords: Covarruvias to. 1 c. 20. par. 11 in med. ipsius col. prima
                  
                  
                     Nec me latet D. Thomam previa maxima deliberatione asserere, Rom. Pontificem non posse propria dispensatione continentiae solemne Monachorum votum tollere. & paulo post: oportet tamen primam opinionem defendere, ne quae passim fiant evertantur omnino.
                  
                  Neither am I ignorant, that Saint Thomas affirmeth after Necessitie hath no law, the popes mind must be obered. greate deliberation; that the Bishoppe of Rome can not vvith his dispensation, take away from Monkes their solemne vowe of chastitie: This notwithstanding vvee muste defende the first opinion, lest those things vvhich are practised euery where,

be utterly overthrowne: thus saith the great Canonist and reverend The popes doings must be defended, because otherwise poperie cannot stand. popish bishop Covarruvias, out of whose wordes sundrie things may be noted worthy the observation.
                  First, that the papistes cannot agree about the Popes authority.
                  Secondly, that great learned papistes among whome Thomas Aquinas is one, (whose doctrine sundry Popes haue confirmed,) 1 doe denie the Popes authoritie in the premisses. 2
                  
                  Thirdly, that the contrary opinion must be defended, for the honestie and safegard of the popes religion. 3
                  
                  Fourthly, that most miserable is the Popes doctrine, which needeth such poore and beggerly shiftes for the maintenance thereof. 4
                  
                  Fiftly, that the papists haue no cause so to exclaime against priests mariage, since the Pope dispenseth with his monkes to marry at 5 their pleasures. For the mariage of priestes is onely prohibited by the Popes law, but the marriage of monkes by the law divine, as the Popes owne deare doctours Victoria and Aquinas tell us.
                  Sixtly, that Aquinas his doctrine, which the Pope hath approoved, 6 confuteth the Popes religion. For the third point, Thomas Aquinas giveth this testimony, out of the Popes owne law.
                  
                     Abdicatio proprietatis sicut etiam custodia castitatis, adeo annexa est regulae monachali, ut contra eānec summus Pontifex possit indulgere.
                  
                  The renouncing of propertie, as also the keeping of chastitie, is so annexed to the rule of monkes, that the Pope him selfe cannot dispence against the same: this saying of Thomas Aquinas, is found verbatim in the popes canons, Extra destatu monachorum 
                     Extra de statu monachorum cum ad mon. 
                     cum ad monasterium.
                  
               
               
                  
                     The 2. Conclusion.
                  
                  THe Pope often pronounceth matrimony dissolved by his dispensations, which is firme and stable by Christes owne institution. The first part is prooved by Martinus Navarrus, in these words.
                  
                     Dividitur (matrimonium) ante consummationem, per dispensationem Papae iusta de causa factam. 
                     Navarr. in enchir. cap. 22. par. 21.
                  
                  Matrimonie is dissolved before consummation, by the popes dispensation vpon iust cause graunted. And a litle after he hath these wordes:
                  
                     Quorum opinio adeo observatur, quodetiam ter vel quater adpetitiones consilio meo antequam in urbem venissem oblatas, Paulus 3. & Pius 4. per suas dispensationes dissolverunt quaedam matrimonia omnino clandestina nondum consummata, in remedium animarum alioquin probabiliter periturarum.
                  
                  
                     
whose opinion (he speaketh of the Canonistes who generally are of his owne opinion,) is so observed, that thrise or foure times before my comming to Rome upon petitions made by my advise, Loe, how readily the Pope displeaseth God, for the pleasure of man. Pope Paulus the third and pope Pius the fourth, with their dispensations dissolved certen secret matrimonies not yet consummate, for the safegard of soules which by likelihood woulde otherwise haue perished. And Covarruvias affirmeth Paulus the fourth and Iulius the third, to haue dispensed in like maner: these be his words. Nec me latet Paulum quartum summum ecclesiae Pontificem, Ann. 1558. hac vsum fuisse dispensatione quibusdam ex causis, quas iustissimas esse idem summus ecclesiae praesul existimavit. idem paulo ante Iulius 
                     Covarruvias, tom. 1. cap. 7. par. 4. n. 13. col. 1. 3. fecerat in eodem matrimonio, cum ecclesiae vniversali praesideret.
                  
                  Neither am I ignorant that Pope Paulus the 4. put this dispensation in practise, for certaine causes which the same Pope thought to be most iust. Iulius the third when he was Pope, graunted in like cause the same dispensation.
                  The second part is prooved, by the vniforme consent of all divines. For Bellarmine saith; Bellar. lib. i. c. 5. de matrim prope finem.
                  
                  
                     Non autem essentialia matrimonia (ecclesia) vllo modo mutat, aut mutare potest.
                  
                  But the essentiall partes of Matrimonie, the Church neither doth change, neither can change.
                  And doubtles if the Church can not doe it, á fortiori, the Pope can not doe it, which Bellarmine will not denie, and Victoria doth witnesse no lesse in these words:
                  
                     Communis schola theologorum negat maiorem, scilicet quod Papa 
                     Victor. in relect. 4. de potest. papae & conc. pag. 128. ad primum. 
                     possit dispensare, sed in contrarium sunt multi doctores Cannonistarum.
                  
                  The common schoole of Divines denieth the maior, to wit, that the Pope can dispence with matrimonie, but many Cannonists holde the contrarie.
                  Cov arru vias likewise saith thus:
                  
                     Tutior ac verior est communis theologorum opinio, quae probat matrimonium 
                     Covarruv. to. t. par. 2. cap. 7. par. 4. n. 14. in medio. 
                     ratum nondum secut â commixtione carnis & sic non consummatum, minime posse dissolvi Rom. Pontif. dispensatione.
                  
                  The common opinion of Divines is more safe and true, which prooveth that matrimonie perfected by consent, but not consummate by carnall copulation, can not be dissolved by the Popes dispensation.
                  And the said Covarruvias addeth these words:
                  
                     Ipse vero non auderem à communi theologorum sententia discedere.
                  
                  
                     
I my selfe truely durst not forsake the common opinion of devines. And no marvell: for Christ himselfe putteth the marter out of all doubt, when he saith: Mat. c. 19. v. 7.
                  
                  
                     Quod Deus coniunxit homo non separet.
                  
                  That which God hath conioined, let no man put asunder.
                  And in another place he saith thus:
                  
                     Omnis qui dimittit vxorem suam, & alteram ducit, maecatur. 
                     Luc. c. 16. v. 18.
                  
                  Everie one that putteth avvay his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adulterie.
                  And Saint Paul vpon the same argument, hath these wordes:
                  
                     His autem qui matrimonio iuncti sunt, precipio non ego sed Dominus, 
                     1. Cor. 7. v. 10. 
                     Uxorem a viro non discedere, quod sidi scesserit, manere innuptam, aut Uiro suo reconciliari, & vir vxorem non dimittat.
                  
                  Those that are married commaund not I, but the Lord, that the wife depart not from her husband: but if shee shall depart, then to abide vnmarried, or to be reconciled to her husband.
                  Thus saith Christ, thus saith saint Paul, that man and wife ioined by Christ, must abide during life together, or liue vnmarried, and nor be seuered by the popes dispensation. Neither will it helpe to say as Bellarm. doth, & others with him: that Christ onely speaketh de matrimonio consummato, and that matrimonium ratum, with which the pope dispenseth, is not de iure divino: For first, if matrimonium ratum 
                     vvhat an absurd ansvvere is this? were not de iure divino: the greatest popish deuines would not denie the popes dispensation therein: as who graunt him power over all lawes humane.
                  2 Secondly, Christ speaketh absolutely, and maketh no mention of copularion or popish consumation, vvhich is all one.
                  3 Thirdly, with papistes matrimonie is a deuine sacrament, and so is perfect vvithout carnall copulation.
                  For as their owne Canus saith:
                  
                     Sanctus spiritus & sacramenti gratia, per coitum non datur. 
                     Canus, lib. 8. de locis theol. c, 5. p. 246.
                  
                  The holie ghost and grace of sacrament, is not giuen by copulation.
                  4 Fourthly, it followeth hereupon, that matrimonie is not fullie perfect in the popish Church, because copulation followeth a good while after.
                  5 Fiftly, because it is absurd to say, that it beginneth to be a sacramēt by carnall copulation, and was not a sacramēt by the priests action.
                  6 Sixtly, it followeth hereupon, that the marriage betweene the blessed Virgin and S. Ioseph was not perfect matrimonie: For there doubtlesse wanted popish carnall copulation.
                  7 Seauenthly, it follovveth hereupon. that there was not perfect matrimonie betweene Adam and Eue: For their matrimonie was in

the state of innocencie, and before all carnall copulation.
                  8 Eightly, because if matrimonie be not de iure divine before copulation: there is no cause why both parties agreeing together, may not release the bargaine, and quite dissolue the contracte. For as the Vide Victor. de potest. papae. p. 128. & Soto, in 4. dist. 27. p. 48. law saith: Quisque potest suo iuri cedere: Euery man may yeelde vp his right: vvhich thing all, both canonistes and devines, admit for good in sponsalibus.
                  
               
               
                  
                     The 3. Conclusion.
                  
                  AS the pope pronounceth, that matrimonie dissolved by vertue of his dispensation, vvhich remaineth true and perfect matrimonie by Christes institution: So doth hee likevvise pronounce by like dispensation that to be true and perfect matrimonie, which both by the law devine, and law of nature, is no matrimonie at all. The former part of this assertiue proposition, is proued in the conclusion going next before. For probation of the second part, I make this supposall: that the pope hath dispensed vvith brothers in the marriages of their brothers vviues, as the vvorld right vvell knoweth to be true.
                  This supposall made, I proceed in this manner. The lavv of Moyses vvas partly iudiciall, partly ceremoniall, and partly morall. The iudiciall and ceremoniall partes vvere abrogate by Christes passion, as vvitnesseth Saint Paule in these vvords: Translato sacerdotio, necesse 
                     Heb. c. 7. v. 12. 
                     est vt & legts translatio fiat. Translation of priesthood being made, there must also be translation of the lavv: but the morall and part natural is stil in force, in so much as al Christians are this day bound to keepe the decalogue: notvvithstanding the translation of the law of Moises, euen as vvere the Gentiles before the said lavv vvas giuen. For the gentiles vvere as much bound before the lavv, and we novv after the law: to absteine from Idolatrie, theft, adulterie, & the rest, as were the Iews in time of the law. For as Victoria hath wel observed, the gospell is called the law of libertie, because Christians after promulgation of the gospel, are only bound to the lavv of nature: of all such thinges as are conteined in the old lavv: and all devines are of the same opinion, as vvitnesseth the said Victoria in these vvords: Receptissimum est apudomnes theologos, & necessarium est it a tenere, ex omnibus precept is veteris legis, sola moralia integra & firma restitissein nova lege. It Victor. de matrim. sect. 2. relect. 7. p. 280 is a generall opinion approved of all divines: and it is necessatie so to hold, that of all precepts in the old law onely morall abode firme & intier in the nevv lavv. Thus then is it plaine, that that part of Moises lavv vvhich is moral, or natural, abideth still in full strength and vertue. To vvhich I must ad two thinges, for the exact and perfect probation of this my third conclusion.
                  1 The one, that the lavv of nature is immutable, and indispensable by the power of man: and consequently, that the pope cannot dispense thervvith. The other, that al the lavves prohibited in the 18. of

Leviticus, especiallly that of marying the brothers wife, are morall and prohibited by the lawe of nature. For the former parte, Victoria writeth in this manner. In hoc genere decretorum aut Canonum, 
                     Victor. relect. 4 de potest. papae, prop. 1. pag. 126. 
                     papa nihil potest immutare dispensando, & multominus abrogando. Conclusio est omnium theologorum absque controversia, & potest brevitèr probari, quia ius naturale est immutabile, & ut legitur in decretis, naturale ius semper permanet.
                  
                  In this kinde of decrees or Canons, the Pope can chaunge nothing by dispensation, and much lesse by abrogation. It is the conclusion of all divines without any controversie, and it may be prooved briefely, because the lawe of nature is immutable, and as it is in the decrees, the lawe of nature abideth alwayes. Thomas Aquinas confirmeth the same in these wordes:
                  
                     Sed praecepta decalogi sunt de iure naturali, ideo nec in eis nec in alijs, 
                     Aquin. in lib. 3. sent. dist. 37. art. 4. 
                     prout vim eorum continent, licet alicui homini dispen sare.
                  
                  But the precepts of the decaloge are of the law of nature, & therefore no man can dispense either with them or with others, that conteine the force thereof. And the Popes famous archbishop Autoninus telleth his holinesse flatly, that his fullnesse of power doeth in no case extend it selfe, to the law divine or law of nature. These are his wordes:
                  
                     Quantum verò ad illa quae sunt de iure naturali vel divino, iurisdictio seu potest as papalis non se extendit: sic vero quod ista possit mutare, 
                     Antoninus de potest. papae, part 4. tit. 22. cap. 3. par. 1. 
                     vel etiam dare eis vim obligandi: & ratio est, quia inferior non potest mutare leges superioris: deus autem est superior ad papā.
                  
                  Concerning those things which are of the law of nature, or law divine, iurisdiction or papall power doth not extend it selfe: so to wit that the Pope can change these things, or giue power obligative unto them: and the reason is, because an inferiour can not change the lawes of his superiour, and God is the Popes superiour. I deeme he be in verie deed. Thus then haue I prooved evidently by the Popes owne doctours, that the Pope can not dispense with the law divine, or with the lawe of nature. It remaineth that I likewise proove, the lawes prohibited in Leviticus to be the lawes of nature: and consequently, indispensable by the power of man. First therefore, it is written in the selfe same chapter after the prohibition of the said degrees, in this maner. Nec polluamini in omnibus his, quibus contaminatae sunt universae gentes, 
                     Levit. 18. 24. 
                     quas ego eijciam ante conspectum vestrum, & quibus polluta est terra, cuius ego scelera visitabo, ut evomat habitatores suos. Be ye not polluted in al these things with which all nations are defiled, whom I will cast out before your sight, & with which the earth is polluted, whose iniquities I will visite, that it may vomit out the inhabitants thereof. By which words we see evidētly, that the breach of these lawes was wicked & unlawfull amōg the Gentiles: & cōsequently, that the Gentils

marrying vvithin degrees here prohibited, transgressed the lavve of nature. For they beeing free from all other lavves, could not bee polluted by the breach of any lavve, save onelie of the lawe of nature.
                  2 Secondly, euerie one knoweth, and can easilie discerne by naturall discourse, that a brother to marrie his owne sister, is against the la vve of nature: and yet doth Thomas Aquinas affirme, that there is like prohibition in affinitie.
                  His vvords be these.
                  Naturall propinquitie (saith he) cometh alio modo per carnalem copulam, 
                     Aquinas in 4. sent. dist. 4. ar. 2. 
                     quae est etiam actus naturae adgenerationem ordinatus, & exhac causatur affinitas, quae quidem impedit matrimonium eisdem rationibus, quibus & consanguinitas.
                  
                  Naturall propinquitie commeth another vvay by carnall copulation, vvhich is an acte of nature ordeined to generation: and of this is caused affinitie, vvhich verilie prohibiteth Matrimonie by the selfe same reasons by vvhich consanguinity doth.
                  3 Thirdlie, because manie late popish writers doe affirme the same.
                  Victoria hath these vvords:
                  
                     Aliqui, vt Archiepi scopus Florent. 3. p. tit. 1. cap. 4. & Palud. in 4. Victor. relict. 4. de potest. papae, pag. 129. ad, 2. 
                     d. 40. Videntur tenere, quodin omnibus gradibus prohibitis in Leuttico, Papa non posset dispensare. & hoc reputat Silvester probabilius.
                  
                  Some, as Archbishop of Florence, and Paludanus seeme to hold that the pope can not dispense, in any of the degrees prohibited in Leviticus: And this opinion Sylvester thinketh more probable:
                  4 Fourthly, because the common opinion of the Fathers was, that all degrees prohibited in the said Leviticus, are prohibited now by the lavv devine. VVhich Iosephus Angles constantly avoucheth to be so, in these vvords.
                  
                     Duae sunt opiniones, prima omnium fere antiquorum, qui affirmabant omnes gradus in Levit. prohibitos, esse etiam nunc iure divino prohibitos. 
                     Ioseph. Angles in 4. S. p. 1. q. 13. ar. 3. 
                     Haec fuit S. Bo. Tho. Ric. & Dur. quibus adhaesit Sylvester, affirmās Papam non posse dispensare in gradibus in Levit. prohibitis.
                  
                  There be twoo opinions:
                  1 The first was of all the olde vvriters some fevv excepted, vvho affirmed that all degrees prohibited in Leviticus, are novv also prohibited by the lavv devine. This vvas the opinion of Saint Bonaventure, of Thomas, of Richardus, and of Durand, vvith

whom Sylvester tooke part, affirming that the pope can not dispense vvith degrees prohibited in Leviticus.
                  This then is true not onely by the scriptures, but euen by the testimonie of the popes owne doctors, and by the vniforme consent of approved antiquitie.
                  Absurd therefore is Cardinall Allens opinion, and most disloyall Allens vvords disloiall. are his speeches: when he in his apologie for the seminaries, iustifieth Iames Laborne his opinion against the premisses.
               
               
                  The fourth Conclusion.
                  THE popes dispensations are as generall as vngodly: his corrupt vassals dailie gaping and expecting, vvho will aske dispensations for euery iote in the law. This conclusion though strange to many mens cogitations, shall be proved by the constant assertion of the best learned popish doctor.
                  Thus therefore writeth Victoria.
                  
                     Videmus quotidie a Romana curiatam largas, imo omnino tam dissolutas 
                     Victor. de potest. papae & conc. relect. 4 p. 139. 
                     dispēsationes profectas, vt orbis ferre non possit, non solùm in scandalum pusillorum, sedmaiorum.
                  
                  VVe see daily so large, yea altogether so dissolute dispensations come from the court of Rome, that the world cannot endure it, neither is that to the scandall onely of the weake, but euen of the perfect sor
                        ••
                     .
                  And in another place, the said Victoria saith thus:
                  
                     Sed clamat experientia in contrarium, & videmus quodnullus quaerit dispensationes, quin obtineat.
                  
                  But experience exclameth to the contrarie: and wee see that no man seeketh for dispensations, but hee atteineth the same.
                  And in another place he saith thus:
                  
                     Ego nullam dispen sationem in particulari condemno, sed video duo: primum, quod in fine anni sunt tot dispensationes factae, vt nescio an sint 
                     Vbi supra pag. 149. 
                     tot qui legem servent. Secundo, video quod omnes qui petunt afferunt dispensationes, quos mirum est habere legitimas causas, vt cum eis dispensetur in impedimētis matrimonij, & irregularitatis, & in pluralitate beneficiorum.
                  
                  I condemne no dispensation in particular, but I see two thinges: First, that in the end of the yeare there are so many dispensations gotten, as I know not if so many keepe the law. Secondly, I see all Loe, for spiritual livings & matrimonie, and such like, dispensations are never denied. that aske bring dispensations, whom I marvell if they all haue lawfull causes, that they may be dispensed withall, in the impediments of matrimonie, and of irregularitie, and for the pluralitie of spirituall livings.
                  
                     
And in another place the said Victoria hath these words.
                  
                     Et paultim adhanc intemperantiam dispensationum deventum est, & hunc talem statum, vbi necmala nostra nec remedia pati possumus, 
                     Victor. vbi supag. 151. 
                     & ideo necesse est aliam rationem excogitare adconservandas leges. Da mihi Clementes, Linos, Sylvestros, & omniapermittam arbitrio eorum. Sed vt nihil gravius dicatur in recentiores pontifices, certe multis partibus sunt priscis illis inferiores.
                  
                  By Title and litle wee are brought to these in ordinate dispensations, and to this so miserable state, where we are neitherable to endure our owne griefes, nor remedies a sligned for the same. And therefore must vve perforce inuent some other way, for conferuation of the lawes. Giue mee Clements, Lines, Silvesters: and I will commit all things vnto their charge. But to speake nothing grievously against these latter popes: they are doubtlesse inferiour to popes of old time, by many degrees. I could all eage many other testimonies: But this Victoria being of great credit among the papistes, is a most sufficient witnesse in their owne proceedinges.
               
            
            
               The Corollarie.
               First therefore, since the Pope dispenseth vsually with professed monkes, against his owne canons, and religion.
               2 Secōdly, since the pope dissolueth by his dispensations, such matrimonies as are indissoluble by Christes institution.
               3 Thirdly, since the pope pronounceth that to be true matrimonie by vertue of his dispensation: which both by the law deuine, and law of nature, is no matrimonie at all.
               4 Fourthly, since the pope doth not onely dissolve Christes law: but also turneth his owne lavv vpside downe, by his vngratious and intollerable dispensations.
               I conclude, that it is a sufficient motiue for me to renounce the Romish religion, as false, erroneous, and pernitious doctrine.
               Thus much of the fourth Motyve.
            
            
               
               THE SIXTE CHAPTER. Of the Popes authoritie, and Iurisdiction.
               
                  THe papistes boaste, that the pope is Christes vicar generall, that hee hath fulnesse of povver, that all ecclesiasticall iurisdiction is dependent vppon him: that hee canne excommunicate kings, depose kinges, and give their kingdomes vnto others: concerning vvhich pointes, I vvil proceed by way of conclusions.
               
                  The first Conclusion.
                  THe ecclesiasticall povver of all the Apostles, vvas generall ouer all the vvorld, equall with Peters, and the selfe same that Peters vvas.
                  Christ himselfe proueth this conclusion, when he saith:
                  
                     Data est mihi omnis potest as in coelo & in terra, euntes ergo docete 
                     Mat. cap. vlc. vers. 19. 
                     omnes gentes.
                  
                  All povver is giuen mee in heauen and in earth: goe therefore and teach all nations.
                  In an other place hee saith thus:
                  
                     Hoc facite in meam commemorationem.
                  
                  Doe this in the remembrance of mee. Luc. 22. v. 20. Iohn 20. v, 23
                  
                  And againe thus:
                  
                     Quorum remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis.
                  
                  VVhose sinnes yee shall forgive, are forgiuen them.
                  And in another place, thus:
                  
                     Amen dico vobis, quaecunque alligaueritis super terram, erunt ligata & in coelo, & quaecunque solueritis super terram, erunt soluta et in coelo: 
                     Mat. 28. v. 18.
                  
                  Verily I say vnto you, vvhat things soeuer ye shall bind vpon earth, shall be bound also in heaven: and vvhatsoeuer things ye shall loose vpon earth, shalbe loosed also in heauen. All vvhich sayings, Christ spoke and vttered of and to his apostles all, as vvell as to Peter: making them al apostles, as wel as Peter. And as they vvere all apostles as vvel as Peter, so had they all equall povver, not onely of order, but Mat. 10. v. 1. Mark. 3 v. 14. Luc. 6. v. 14. Victor. de potest. eccles. relect. 2. conc. 3. p. 84. of iurisdiction also: which their Victoria recordeth in these vvords:
                  
                     Adofficium Apostolatus, spectat potestas ordinis & iurisdictionis.
                  
                  To the office of Apostleship, perteineth both the power of order

and of iurisdiction. And S. Cyprian decideth this matter in most plaine and evident words, when he saith thus:
                  
                     Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum, Ego dico tibi, quiatu es Petrus, &c. & Cypr. de simppraelat. p. 113. paulo post; Hoc erant uti
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         & caeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti & honoris & potestatis, sedexordum ab vnitate profici scitur, ut Ecclesia vna monstretur.
                  
                  Our Lord speaketh vnto Peter, I say vnto thee that thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke will I build my Church. &c. and a little after: The same were the rest of the Apostles doubtles, that Peter was: endued with equall fellowship, both of honour and of power: but the beginning proceedeth from vnitre, that the Church may be shewed to be one.
                  Covarruvias their famous Canonist, albeit he would very gladly defend the Popes pretended power, and have onely Peters power ordinarie and independent: yet can he not denie our Saviour Christ to have given equall power to all the Apostles. These be his very words:
                  
                     Etenim iuxta catholicorum virorum auctoritates, & communem omnium traditionem, 
                     Covarruvias to. 1. part. 2. §. 9. pag. 242. col. 4. prope finem. 
                     apostoli parem ab ipso Domino Iesu cum Petro potestatem orainis & iurisdictionis acceperunt: it a quidem, vt quilibet apostolorum aequalem cum Petro habuerit potestatem ab ipso deo, in totum orbem, & in omnes actus quae Petrus agere poterat.
                  
                  For according to the auctorities of Catholike writers, and the common tradition of all, the Apostles received from our Lord Iesus Christ himselfe, equall power with Peter, both of power and iurisdiction: in so much doutlesse, as every Apostle had equall power with Peter from God himselfe, and that both over all the worlde, and to all actions that Peter could doe.
                  Out of which testimonies I note first, that all the Apostles had equall 1 auctoritie with Peter. I note secondly, that all the Apostles had power 2 over all the world, even as Peter had. I note thirdly, that what acte so ever 3 Peter could doe, every other Apostle could doe the same. I note fourthly, that the iurisdiction of every Apostle, did extende as farre as Peters. 4 I note fiftly, that Christs speaches to Peter in the singular number, 5 did not argue superioritie of iurisdiction: but did onely signifie the vnitie of his Church. I note sixtly, that all this is confirmed by the opinion of 6 Catholike writers, & by tradition of all generally. For all these sixe points are expressely conteined, (if they be well marked,) in the auctorities alreadie alledged. The same are confirmed by the testimonie of S. Augustine, in sundrie places of his workes.
                  
                     Claves (inquit Augustinus) non vnus homo Petrus, sed vnitas accepit 
                     Aug. in serm. Petr. & Pauli, apud Canū. 
                     Ecclesiae.
                  
                  Not one onely man Peter received the keyes, but the vnitie of the Church.
                  In an other place, the same S. Augustine writeth in this manner: Aug. in lib. de agone Christ. cap. 30. tom. 3.
                  
                  
                     Ecclesiae catholicae personam sustinet Petrus, & cum ei dicitur ad
                     
                     omnes dicitur; amas me, pasce oves meas.
                  
                  Peter representeth the person of the Catholike Church, and when it is said to him, it is said to all: Lovest thou me, feede my sheepe.
                  So then, that text of Scripture, which with the Papists is the foundation of popish primacie, to wit, Feede my sheepe: maketh no more for Peters superioritie, then it doth for the supremacie of other Apostles. For as you have heard out of S. Augustine, it was as well spoken to all, as to Peter. Yea, the grosse imagination of papists, concerning the building of the Church vpon Peter, is lively and evidently confuted of S. Augustine in an other place, where he thus writeth:
                  
                     Tu es inquit Petrus, & super hanc Petram quam confessus es, super 
                     August. de verb. dom. serm. 13. 10. 10. 
                     hanc Petram quam cognovisti, dicens, tu es Christus filius dei vivi, aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. id est, super meipsum filium dei vivi, aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. super me aedificabo te, non me super te.
                  
                  Thou art Peter saith Christ, and vpon this rocke which thou hast confessed, vpon this rocke which thou hast acknowledged, saying, Thou art Christ the Sonne of the living God, will I build my Church: that is, vpon my selfe the Sonne of the living God, will I build my Church. I will builde thee vpon my selfe, but not my selfe vpon thee.
                  Marke well these wordes, (gentle Reader,) with the other last rehearsed out of Saint Augustine: and doubtlesse, if plaine and manifest exposition of the Scripture will content thy minde, thou canst not but nowe have thy desire. The great generall Councell of Constantinople, maketh the Church of Constantinople equall in Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction, with the Church of Rome. These be the words:
                  
                     Renovantes quae à s. patribus, 150. qui in hac regia vrbe convenerunt, 
                     Concil. Const. 6. can. 36. 
                     & à 630. qui Chalcedone convenerunt, constituta sunt; decernimus, vt thronus Constantinop. aequalia privilegia cum antiquae Romae throno obtineat, & in Ecclesiasticis negotijs vt illa emine at, secundus post illam existens.
                  
                  We renewing the Canons which were set downe by the 150. holy fathers, assembled in this royal citie, & by the 630. fathers gathered together in Chalcedon: doe define, that the See of Constantinople have equall priviledges with the See of old Rome, and that it excell as Rome in Ecclesiasticall affaires, beeing the second after Rome.
                  And long before all this, that famous Councell of Nice distributing circuits, and assigning determinate iurisdictions to the Patriarchall seates, appointed to the Church of Rome prefixed limits, as to the rest. These be the wordes:
                  
                     
                     Mos antiquus perduret in Egypto, vel Lybia, & Pentapoli, vt Alexandrinus 
                     Conc. Nicen. can. 6. 
                     Episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem, quoniam quidem & Episcopo Rom. parilis mos est.
                  
                  Let the olde custome continue in Egypt, or Lybia, and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria may have power over them all, because like custome hath the Bishop of Rome.
                  Which Canon is reported in the Councell of Carthage, and there vttered in plaine tearmes.
                  
                     Antiquiores obtineant qui apud Egyptum sunt, & Lybiam, & Pentapolin, 
                     Conc. Carth. 6. can. 6. 
                     ita vt Alexandrinus Episcopus horum omnium exhibeat solicitudinem, quia & vrbis Romae Episcopo similis mos est. similiter autem est circa Antiochiā, & in caeteris provincijs privilegia propria reserventur metrapolitanis Ecclesiis.
                  
                  Let the auncient obteine which are at Egypt and Lybia, and Pentapolis, so that the Bishop of Alexandria may have the charge of them all, because also the Bishop of Rome hath the like custome. In like manner also, let the proper priviledges be reserved to metropolitain Churches, about Antioch and other Provinces.
                  By which wordes we see evidently, that this auncient and famous Councell maketh no other account of the Church of Rome, then it doeth of other Patriarchall seates. Which Ruffinus himselfe, though reputed a great Papist, hath confessed bountifully in these wordes:
                  
                     Vt apud Alexandriam vel in vrbe Roma vetusta consuetudo servetur, 
                     Ruffin. lib. 10. hist. Eccles. cap. 6. 
                     vt vel ille Aegypti, vel hic subvrbicarum Ecclesiàrum sollicitudinem gerat.
                  
                  That the old custome may continue, and that the Bishop of Alexandria may have the charge of Egypt, as the Bishop of Rome hath charge of the Churches nigh to Rome.
                  Loe, in Ruffinus his dayes, the Bishop of Rome had his iurisdiction limited, which extended onely to certaine speciall Churches of Italie. For which cause Saint Hierome, a deare friend and great favourer of the Church of Rome, confessed for all that, the Bishop of Rome to be of no greater merite, excellencie, or auctoritie, then other Bishops are: as also that the custome of Rome, could not over-rule other Churches.
                  These are S. Hieromes owne and expresse wordes:
                  
                     Si auctoritas quaeritur, orbis maior est vrbe vbicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         fuerit Episcopus, 
                     Hier. epist. ad Evagr. tom. 3. fol, 150. 
                     sive Romae, sive Eugubij, sive Constantinopoli, sive Rhegij, sive Alexandriae, sive Tanis: eiusdem meriti, eiusdem est & sacerdotij.
                     
                     potentia divitiarum & paupertatis humilitas, vel sublimiorem vel inferiorem Epi scopum facit, caeterùm omnes Apostolorum successores sunt. Sed dicis, quomodo Romae adtestimonium diaconi presbyter ordinatur? quid mihi profers vnius vrbis consuetudinem?
                  
                  If we looke for authoritie, the world is greater then one citie. Where so ever a bishop shall be, whether at Rome, or at Eugubium, or at Constantinople, or at Rhegium, or at Alexandria, or at Tanis; he is of the same merite, and of the same priesthoode. The magnificence of riches, & the basenes of povertie, doth make him higher or lower, but all are the successours of the Apostles. But thou wilt say, how is a priest made at Rome by the testimonie of a Deacon? why doest thou alleadge vnto me the custome of one onely citie?
                  Thus S. Hierome agreeth with Ruffinus, Ruffinus with the Councell of Nice, and the Councell of Nice with other Councels, fathers, & Scriptures. And all ioyntly conclude the equalitie of other Bishops and Churches, with the Bishop and Church of Rome.
               
               
                  The second Conclusion.
                  ALL the Apostles received their vniversall power immediately from Christ, and not from Peter at all; and consequently, their iurisdictions were no lesse ordinarie then Peters was. This to be so, (though this day much impugned by the Papists,) prooveth a great popish Doctour Franciscus a Victoria, in these words:
                  
                     Omnem potestatem quam Apostoli habuerunt, receperunt immediatè 
                     Victor. de potest. eccles. relect. 2 conclus. 3. pag. 84. 
                     à Christo.
                  
                  All power which the Apostles had, they received it immediately from Christ.
                  And in an other place, the said Victoria hath these words:
                  
                     Lex iniusta Episcopi non obligat, ergo nec Papae. Antecedens est notū, 
                     Victor. de potest. Papae, & concilii, relect. 4. pag. 157. 
                     & concessum ab omnibus; & consequentia videtur not a, quia nō habet maiorem auctoritatem Papa adinferendum iniuriam, quam Episcopus; circa ea enim quae sunt sui officij, & in proprios subditos, non minus potest quàm Papa.
                  
                  The vniust law of the Bishop doth not binde a man, ergo neither doth the vniust lawe of the Pope binde a man. The antecedent is knowne and graunted of all, and the consequence seemeth manifest, because the Pope hath no more auctoritie to doe an iniurie, then hath the Bishop. For in those things which perteine to his office, and to his proper subiects, he can doe as much as the Pope.
                  Loe, this great learned Papist, who for his learning is reverenced of all Papists in the world, ascribeth no lesse auctoritie to every Bishop in his diocesse,

then to the Pope himselfe. Againe, he affirmeth that no bishops authoritie is dependent vpon the Pope, but is immediately from Christ: so that papistrie is still confuted and confounded by it selfe, and that by the best doctours of greatest authoritie, even in the Church of Rome. Iosephus Angles, though otherwise he flatter the Pope and advance his auctoritie, yet hath Gods Spirit enforced him to testifie the same truth. These are his wordes:
                  
                     Si comparemus B. Petri & aliorum Apostolorum potestatem ad gubernationem 
                     Ioseph. Ang. in 4. sent. q. de clavib. diffic, 2. conclus. prima, pag. 6. 
                     omnium credentium, tantam alij Apostoli habuerunt potestatem, quantam B. Petrus habuit, it a quod poterant quemlibet Christianum totius orbis, sicut modo Rom. Pont. excommunicare, & in qualibet Ecclesia Episcopos & sacerdotes creare. ratio est, quia omnis potestas B. Petro promissa & tradita, fuit & caeteris Apostolis collata, & hoc sine personarum, loci, vel fori discrimine.
                  
                  If we compare the power of S. Peter and of the other Apostles, to the government of all the faithfull: other Apostles have even as much power as S. Peter had, so that they could then excommunicate every Christian in the whole world, as the Bishop of Rome doth now, and also make Bishops and Priests in every Church. The reason is, because all power promised and given to S. Peter, was also given to the rest of the Apostles, and that without difference of persons, place, or consistorie.
                  This is the sentence of fiyer Ioseph, who vnwittingly and vnwillingly Magna est veritas & praevalet, 3. Esdrae 4. 42. (such is the force of veritie,) doeth wonderfully advance the trueth, even while he seeketh to oppugne the same.
                  1 For first, he graunteth that every Apostle had as much auctoritie as S. Peter.
                  2 Secondly, that every Apostle had then as much auctoritie, as the Pope chalengeth now.
                  3 Thirdly, that every Apostle had auctoritie from Christ, to create Priests and Bishops every where.
                  4 Fourthly, that all this their authoritie was given them, without difference of person, place, or consistorie.
                  O mercifull God, blessed be thy holy Name for ever: such is the maiestie of thy holy Gospell, that the enemies thereof iustly infatuated for their sinnes, doe vnwares even then illustrate thy trueth, when they thinke the most to obscure the same. This I did not see, O God, when I was abandoned from thee: this I nowe behold, O God, when thou of thy mercy hast called me to thee. Graunt, O sweete Father, that all seduced Papistes may behold the same with me, to the glorie of thy holy Name, the honour of thy Church, and the eternall solace of their owne soules. For more then the Popes owne deare doctours doe teach vs, we desire not at the Popes hands. The generall Councels of Constance and Basil, decreed this matter in these manifest tearmes:
                  
                     
                     Ipsa synodus in spiritu Sancto legitimè congregata generale concilium 
                     Const. Conc. Ses. 4. & Basil. Conc. Sess. 2. & 3. 
                     faciens, & Ecclesiam militantem representans, potestatem immediatè à Christo habet.
                  
                  The Synode lawfully assembled in the holy Ghost, making a generall Councell, and representing the Church militant, hath power immediately from Christ.
                  Thus saith the Councell, and doubtlesse where power commeth immediately from Christ, it can not be derived from the Pope. Thirdly, S. Paul had speciall auctoritie over the Gentiles, and largely as much as Peter, if not more: and consequently, since all Christians now, were Gentiles then: the Pope if he will needes have superioritie over his brethren Bishops, must reduce his succession from S. Paul. For thus saith S. Paul of himselfe: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . The Gospell Gal. 2. 7. of the vncircumcision was committed to me, even as the Gospell of circumcision to Peter.
               
               
                  The third Conclusion.
                  KInges have power coactive over Popes, but Popes have no coactive power over Kings: albeit Popes of late dayes, have not onely excommunicated Princes, but deposed them also. For proofe of this conclusion, many texts of holy Scripture are consonant. King Salomon deposed Abiathar, and placed Sadock in his roome. For so the booke of Kings saith:
                  
                     Abiathar quoque sacerdoti dixit rex, vade in Anathoth ad agrum tuum, 
                     3. Reg. 2. vers. 27. & 35. 
                     & quidem vir mortis es, sed hodie te non interficiam, quia portasti arcam domini dei coram David patre meo, & sustinuisti laborem in omnibus, in quibus laboravit pater meus. eiecit ergo Salomon Abiathar, vt non esset sacerdos domini. & paulò post: & Sadoc sacerdotem posuit pro Abiathar.
                  
                  Then the King said to Abiathar the priest, goe to Anathoth vnto thine owne farme, for thou art worthie to die, but I will not this day kill thee, because thou barest the Arke of the Lord God before David my father, and because thou hast suffered in all where my father hath beene afflicted. Salomon therefore cast out Abiathar from beeing priest vnto the Lord, and set Sadock the priest in the roome of Abiathar.
                  King Iosaphat appointed both Ecclesiasticall and secular Magistrates, commanding them strictly to looke vnto their charge. These be the words of holy writ:
                  
                     In Hierusalem quoque constituit Io saphat Levitas, & sacerdotes, & principes familiarum ex Israel, vt iudicium & causam domini iudicarent 
                     2. Par. 19. 8, 9. 
                     habitatoribus eius. Praecepit
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         eis dicens: sic agetis in timore domini
                     
                     fidelitèr, & corde perfecto.
                  
                  King Iosaphat appointed in Hierusalem, Levites and Priests, and Princes of the families of Israel, that they should iudge the iudgement and cause of the Lord to the inhabitants thereof. And he commanded them, saying: Thus shall ye doe in the feare of the Lord, faithfully and with a perfect heart.
                  And it followeth in these wordes:
                  
                     Omnem cau sam quae venerit ad vos fratrum vestrorum qui habitant 
                     2. Par. 19. 10. 
                     in vrbibus suis, inter cognationem & cognationem, vbicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         quaestio est de lege, de mandato, de caeremonijs, de iustificationibus, ostendite eis vt non peccent in Dominum.
                  
                  Every cause which shall come vnto you of your brethren which dwell in their cities, betweene kindred and kindred, where soever question is of the law, of commandement, of ceremonies, of iustifications, tell them that they sinne not against the Lord. It followeth thus:
                  
                     Amarias autē sacerdos & Pontifex vester, in his quae ad deum pertinent, 
                     2. Par. 19. 11. 
                     praesidebit: porro Zabadias filius Ismaelqui est dux in domo Iuda, super ea operaerit quae adregis officium pertinent.
                  
                  Amarias the Priest and your Bishop, shall beare rule in those thinges which perteine to God: and Zabadias sonne of Ismael captaine in the house of Iuda, shall be over those workes which belong to the office of the King.
                  These are the expresse words of holy Scripture, which I have alleadged at large, because if they be once applied effectually, they can not but proove my opinion fully.
                  1 First therefore, as the Queenes most excellent Maiestie that nowe is, appointeth Bishops and Priests: so king Iosaphat appointed Priestes and Levites, so king Salomon appointed Sadock.
                  2 Secondly, as her Maiestie deposeth Priests: so king Salomon deposed Abiathar.
                  3 Thirdly, as her Maiestie commandeth her Bishops in Englande: to preach the Gospell, to administer the Sacraments, to reforme abuses, and to execute censures Ecclesiasticall according to the Scriptures: so commanded king Iosaphat his Priests in Ierusalem: to decide all controversies arising about the lawe, about commandements, about ceremonies, about iustifications, and to teach his people their duetie therein.
                  4 Fourthly, as king Iosaphat appointed Amarias ruler in spiritual causes, and Zabadias governour in secular affaires, distinguishing their offices, and limiting their iurisdictions: so doth her Maiestie referre Ecclesiasticall affayres to her cleargie men, and matters of state to her secular lords, neither confounding their functions, nor disabling their persons.
                  5 Fiftly, as King Iosaphat did neither beare the Arke, nor burne

incense, nor offer vp sacrifice, nor initiate his priests; so neither doth her Maiestie preach the Gospell, administer the Sacraments, consecrate her Bishops, or personally execute any Churchly function. And therefore are the Iesuite Bellarmine his words most absurd, when he saith:
                  
                     Et iam reipsa Calvinistis in Anglia, mulier quaedam est summus pontifex.
                  
                  And nowe in very deede, a woman is Pope of the Calvinists in Englande.
                  Hee might more probably have saide, that a woman was once Pope to Romish Iesuits his brethren. For so much he may read this day, painted vpon the Church walles in Syenna: which in the late repairing of that famous Church, the Bishop would not suffer to be defaced, albeit the Iesuits made such request vnto him. I will omit to speake of king David, king Iosias, king Ezechias, and others; who all practised like iurisdiction 1. Par. 23. 2. Par. 35. 2. Par. 31. in Ecclesiasticall affaires: one onely text of the Scripture shalbe sufficient, with popish glosses vpon the same. Thus therefore is it written by the holy Prophet, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     To thee, to thee alone haue I sinned. Where the gemination Psal. 51. of (to thee) after the Hebrew manner and custome, argueth the vehemencie of the subiection and gravitie of the trespasse: that is, David beeing king, sinned onely to the king of all kings, God him selfe. Which Euthimius in his glosse vpon the same words, confirmeth in this manner:
                  
                     Tibi soli peccavi. cum sim rex & te solum commissorum à me scelerum 
                     Euthimius, in psal. 50. 
                     iudicem habeam, tibi soli peccasse videor, hoc est, tibi soli iudici subiicior. caeterorum enim omniū ego dominus sum, & ob potentiam meam, licere mihi videntur quaecunque libuerint.
                  
                  To thee onely have I sinned: because beeing a king, and having thee onely iudge over my trespasses, I seeme to haue sinned to thee only: that is, I am onely subiect to thee, as to my iudge. For I am lord over all others, and in respect of my magnificence, whatsoever doth please me, seemeth to be lawfull for me.
                  Raynerius Snoygoudanus and divers others, have set downe the like interpretation, vpon this portion of Scripture. The popish glosse vpon the same text, hath these words:
                  
                     Tibi soli, quia rex omnibus superior, tantum à deo puniendus est. 
                     Glossa ordin. in psal. 50.
                  
                  To thee onely, because the king is above all men, and can onely be punished of God.
                  Nicolaus Lyranus a man of no small account with the papists, glosseth the said text in this manner:
                  
                     Tibi solipeccavi, scilicet tanquam iudici & punire potenti. peccaverat 
                     Lyranus in psal. 50. 
                     enim contra Vriam, & alios occasione huius interfectos. tamen quia er at rex, non habebat iudicem superiorem qui posset eum punire nisi
                     
                     Deum.
                  
                  To thee onely have I sinned: that is to say, to thee onely as to the iudge and him that can punnish. For he had no we sinned against Vrias and others, whom he caused to be murdered by that occasion: but because he was a King, he had no superiour iudge that could punnish him, save God alone.
                  What can be more plainly spoken? for if none but God be superiour to the King? if none but God can iudge the King? if none but God cā punish the King? (all which the Popes owne doctours affirme, then doubtles, can not the Pope depose the King. The King therefore by popish resolution, is greater and above the Pope. Yea, which is wonderful: Thomas Aquinas, who is as it were the platforme and patterne, or Idaea: according to which the Popes of late yeares doe fashion and frame their lawes, and whose doctrine is as the Gospell with the Papists, doth confirme Lyra his exposition in these words:
                  
                     Tibi soli peccavi: dicit glossa, quodrex non habèt hominem, qui sua fact a 
                     Aquinas, 12. quaest. 96. ar. 5. ad 3. 
                     diiudicet: sed quantum ad vim directivam legis, princeps subditur legi propria voluntate.
                  
                  To thee onely have I sinned. the glosse saith, the King hath no man, that can iudge his doings: but yet touching the directive force of the lawe, the Prince is subiect of his owne accord vnto the law.
                  Which Victoria vttereth wisely and learnedly, in these words:
                  
                     Leges latae à rep. obligant omnes, ergo etiam sifer antur à rege, obligant 
                     Victor. de potest. civili, relect, 3. pag. 120. 
                     ipsum regem; & confirmatur, quia in aristocr atico principatu senatus consulta obligant ipsos senatores auctores illorum: & in populari regimine plebiscit a obligant ipsum populum: ergo similiter, leges regiae obligant ipsum regem. & licet sit voluntarium regi condere legem, tamen non est in voluntate sua non obligari aut obligari, sicut in pactis; libere enim qui squis paciscitur, pactis tamen tenetur.
                  
                  Lawes which the common-weale maketh, binde all: therefore if the King make them, they binde him also. And it is confirmed, because in the aristocraticall government, the lawes of the senate binde the fenatours the auctors thereof: and in popular regiment, the decrees of the common people binde the people: ergo in like manner, the kings laws binde the king. And although the king make lawes voluntarie, yet is it not in his will to be bound or vnbound, as in covenants: for every one maketh covenants voluntarily, and yet is every one bound by his covenants.
                  Ambrose who freeth Kings from all lawes made by man, shall conclude this point. Thus doth he write:
                  
                     Qui tenentur legibus, audent suum neg are peccatum, de dignantur rogare 
                     Ambr. l. de Apolog. David, cap. 4. 
                     indulgentiam: quam petebat, qui nullis tenebatur legibus humanis.
                  
                  
                     
They that are bound to lawes, dare denie their sinne, and disdaine to aske forgivenesse: which he desired, that was bound to no law of man.
                  And againe, he saith:
                  
                     Rex vtique erat, nullis ipse legibus tenebatur: neque enim vllis adpoenam 
                     Ibidem, cap. 10. 
                     vocantur legibus, tuti imperij potestate. homini ergo non peccavit, cui non tenebatur obnoxius.
                  
                  He was in deede a king, he was bound to no lawes: for kings beeing free by the power of Empyre, are not punnished by any lawes. He therefore finned not to man, to whome he was not subiect.
                  Most impudent therefore and intollerable, is the Popes insolencie: when he exalteth himselfe above Kings and Emperours, threatning them that he can depose them from their scepters and regalties, and dispossesse them of their Empires and dominions. Which for all that, Cardinall Allen is not ashamed to avovch with lying lippes, in the Popes behalfe: in that his disloyall pamphlet, which he published without name in defense of the Seminaries. But such flatterie of feyned titles, a Pope of famous memorie shall confute. Gregorie surnamed the great, himselfe beeing Pope of Rome: at what time as he was appointed by Mauricius the Emperour, to publish a certaine law sent him from the Emperour: did not refuse to accomplish the said Emperours assignment, but acknowledged him by duetie bound to execute his commandement therein: albeit he thought the law in some part: disagreeable to Gods will. This to be so, the Popes owne words shall witnesse, which be these:
                  
                     Ego quidem iussioni subiectus, eandem legem per diversas terrarum 
                     Gregor. lib. 2. epist. exregist. indict. 11. epist. 62. cap. 100. 
                     partes transmitti feci: & quia lex ipsa omnipotenti Deo minime concordat, ecce: per suggestionis meae paginam, sereni ssimis dominis nunciavi: vtrobique ergo quae debui exolvi, qui & Imperatori obedientiam praebui, & pro deo quod sensiminime tacui.
                  
                  I subiect to your commandement, have caused the same law to be sent through diverse parts of the lande: and because the lawe doth not agree with Gods will: behold, I have intimated so much vnto your Maiestie by my epistle: I have therefore discharged my duetie in both respects, as who have yielded my obedience vnto the Emperour, neither concealed what I thought, in Gods behalfe.
                  These are the Popes words, besides many others in the same epistle, to the like effect. Which being vttered by the chiefest Pope, are most effectuall to proove the subiection of Popes vnto Kings.
                  1 For first, Pope Gregorie acknowledgeth the Emperour, to be his lord.
                  2 Secondly, he confesseth him selfe to be the Emperours subiect.
                  3 Thirdly, he graunteth that he oweth loyall obedience to the Emperour: for which duetie, he durst not but publish the Emperours law, though in some part, it were very rigorous: and that least he should have bin guiltie of distoyaltie towards his Prince.
                  
                     
Now that Romish pontificalitie, and pompe of Poperie, came vp first by beggerly Canonists: who to advance them selves, flattered the Pope, and gave him more then princely titles: the Popes owne deare Doctour, (who carieth therefore credite on his backe,) telleth vs, who after he hath rehearsed many lordly titles, and more then royall power, ascribed to the Pope: hath these expresse words;
                  
                     Sed glossatores iuris hoc dominium dederunt Papae, cum ipsi essent 
                     Victor. de potest. Eccl. relect. 1. sect. 6. p. 39. 
                     pauperes rebus & doctrina.
                  
                  But the glossers of the Popes law, gave this dominion (and these royall titles) vnto the Pope, when them selves were blind bayards, and beggerly fellowes.
                  Thus saith the Popes Doctour: and thus we see, that povertie and ignorance, were the beginning of Pope dome. For by reason of povertie, they flattered and sought to please: and by reason of their ignorance, they avouched many things which they did not vnderstand.
               
               
                  The fourth Conclusion.
                  
                     THE Pope had no auctoritie to give dominion of the Indians to the King of Spaine, albeit many defend the spanish invasion, by vertue of that donation. The latter part hereof, Victoria sheweth in these wordes:
                  
                     Secundus titulus qui praetenditur, & quidem vehementer asseritur ad instam possessionem illarum 
                     Victor. relect. quinta, de Indis. pag. 188 
                     provinciarum, est exparte summi Pontificis. dicunt enim quod summus Pontifex est Monarcha & etiam temporalis in toto orbe, & per consequens quod potuit constituere Hispaniarum reges principes illorum barbarorum, & it a factum est.
                  
                  The second title which is pretended, and earnestly affirmed, for the iust possession of those provinces, consisteth in the Popes graunt. For say they, the Pope is a temporall Monarch, even of the whole worlde: and consequently, that he could appoint the Kings of Spaine Princes over those Barbarians, and so it came to passe.
                  The former part of the conclusion, Aquinas prooveth in these wordes:
                  
                     Ad Ecclesiam autem non pertinet punire infidelitatem in illis, qui 
                     Aquinas 22. quaest. 12. ar. 2. in corp. 
                     nunquam fidem susceperunt, secundum illud Apostoli, 1. Cor. 5. quid mihi de his qui foris sunt iudicare?
                  
                  But it belongeth not to the Church, to punnish infidelitie in them,

who never received the saith, according to that saying of the Apostle; What have I to doe to iudge of those, that be not in the Church.
                  Dominicus Soto is of the same opinion, whose words are these: Soto in 4. dist. 5. ar. 10. in med. art.
                  
                  
                     Ad hoc autem respondetur, in primis Pontificem neque concessisse, imò vero neque (vt cum omni reverentia & obedientia de sanctissimo Christi vicario loquar,) concedere potuisse eorum suorumve honorum dominium, quasi dominium in eos ipse haberet.
                  
                  But to this I answer, (be it spoken with all reverence and obedience to the most holy Vicar of Christ) that neither the Pope did graunt, yea neither could he graunt vnto the King of Spaine, dominion over those Indians or their goods: as though himselfe had dominion over them.
                  It followeth in the same Soto:
                  
                     Lex fidei dominium rerum ab infidelibus non aufert, quod sibi natur a concessit.
                  
                  The law of faith doth not take away dominion of possessions from infidels, which nature hath graunted them.
                  Victoria accordeth to Aquinas and Soto, in these words: Victor. in relect. 5. de Indis, pag. 193.
                  
                  
                     Ex quo patet, quodnec iste titulus est idoneus contrabarbaros, vel quia Papa dederit provincias illas tanquam dominus absolute, vel quia non recognoscent dominium Papae.
                  
                  Whereby it is plaine, that neither this title is sufficient against the barbarians: either because the Pope gave those Provinces, as beeing absolute lord thereof: or for that they doe not recognize, the Popes authoritie.
                  Iosephus Angles likewise saith:
                  
                     Hinc neque poterit alicui regi Christiano potestatem dare, vt sibi Indorum 
                     Iosep. Angles, de sacram. ord. pag. 518. 
                     regna v surpet; non enim est orbis temporalis dominus.
                  
                  For this cause he can not give any Christian king auctoritie, to vsurpe the kingdomes of the Indians to himselfe: for he is not the temporall lord of the world.
                  By which testimonies it is cleare, that the Pope could not give to the Spanish King any iust title over the Indians, because he could not give that which himselfe had not. Yet 
                        •
                     hust Emperours hold his bridle, and Kings be his footestoole, if they will.
               
            
            
               The Corollarie.
               FIrst therefore, since all the Apostles were equall with Peter in power, authoritie, and iurisdiction: secondly, since all the Apostles received their power immediately from Christ: thirdly, since all the Apostles had ordinarie calling and iurisdiction, as well as Peter had: fourthly, since Kings have power coactive over Popes, and not Popes over Kings: fiftly,

since the Popes pretended power, is controlled by his owne popish doctours: I conclude, that it is a sufficient motive for me to renounce the Romish religion, as false, erroneous, and pernicious doctrine.
               Thus much of the fift Motive.
            
            
               The VII. CHAP. Of popish Purgatorie, with circumstances thereto pertaining.
               
                  THE Papistes dreaming vpon mans iustification by his owne good deedes, and consequently imagining no glorification before condigne satisfaction for evil deeds: have invented a purgation satisfactorie in the life to come, that so such as depart this life without complete satisfaction: may accomplish that which wanteth, in their purging fire. For confutation whereof, I put down conclusions.
               
                  The first Conclusion.
                  
                     EVery one in what state he dieth, remaineth in the same world without end. For probation of this conclusion, Ecclesiastes writeth in this manner:
                  
                     Siceciderit lignum ad Austrum, aut ad Aquilonem, in 
                     Eccles. 11. 3, 4. 
                     quocunque loco ceciderit, ibi erit.
                  
                  If woode shall fall to the South, or to the North; in what place soever it shall fall, there shall it be.
                  Christ himselfe confirmeth the same, in these expresse words:
                  
                     Et ibunt hi in supplicium aeternum, iusti autem in vitam aeternam. 
                     Matt. 25. 46.
                  
                  And these shall goe to eternall punishment, but the iust to life everlasting.
                  And in an other place, he hath these words:
                  
                     Beati mortui qui in domino moriuntur, amodo iam dicit spiritus vt à laboribus requie scant suis. 
                     Apoc. 14. 13.
                  
                  Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, for from henceforth saith

the spirit, They shall rest from their labours. Which saying S. Cyprian explicateth in most manifest tearmes. Qualem te invenit Deus cum vocat, talem pariter & iudicat. 
                     Cypr. in serm. de mortalit. circa medium
                  
                  As God findeth the when he calleth, so doeth he iudge thee. And in another place hee hath these most excellent and golden wordes:
                  
                     Hortamur, inquit, dum facultas adest, dum adhuc aliquid de seculo superest, deo satis facere, & ad verae religionis candidam lucem de profundo tenebrosae superstitionis emergere.
                  
                  Et paullò pòst,
                  
                     Quum istinc excessum fuerit, nullusiam locus poenitentiae est, nullus satisfactionis effectus. Hic vita aut amittitur, aut tenetur, hic saluti aeternae cultu dei & fructu fidei providetur. Nec quisquam aut peccatis retardetur aut annis, quo minus veniat ad consequendam salutem. In isto adhuc mundo manenti, poenitentia nulla sera est: patet adindulgentiam aditus, quaerentibus atque intelligentibus veritatem facilis accessus est.
                  
                  We exhort, saith he, to satisfie God while we may, while wee are in this worlde, and to come from the depth of darke superstition to the bright light of true religion. When wee shall goe hence, there is no place of repentance, no effect of satisfaction. Here life is eyther lost or wonne, here provision is made for eternall life, by the service of God and fruite of faith. No man is hindred through his sinnes or yeres, but that he may attaine salvation. VVhile one is this worlde, no repentance is to late: the gate is open to pardon, the accesse is easie to such as seeke and understand the truth.
                  Saint Ambrose writeth in this maner:
                  
                     Qui enim hic non accipit remissionem peccatorum, illic non erit. Non erit autem, quia adaeternam vitam non poterat pervenire, quid 
                     Ambr. tom, i. lib. de bono mortis, cap. 2. 
                     vita aeternaest remissio peccatorum: ideoque dicit (David) remitte mihi (peccata) vt refrigerer, priusquam abeam.
                  
                  He that receiveth not remission of sinnes here, shall not come there: and hee shall not be there, because he can not come to eternall life, for that eternall life is remission of finnes.
                  And therefore saith David, Forgiue me my sinnes, that I may be refreshed before I goe hence.
                  
                     
Saint Hierome hath these wordes:
                  
                     Dum estis in hoc seculo, hortor vos agere poenitentiam. Confitemini 
                     Hier. in Psal. 105. 
                     ergo Domino, quoniam in isto tantum seculo misericors est. Hic misereri potest poenitenti, quia ibi iudex est, non est misericors. Hic misericors est, ibi iudex est. hic porrigit manum cadenti, ibi sedet iudex.
                  
                  While you are in this worlde, I exhort you to doe penance. Confesse therefore unto the Lorde, because he is mercifull in this world onely. Here he can shew mercie to the penitent: there because he is iudge, he is not mercifull. here he is mercifull, there he is iudge: here hee reacheth his hand to him that falleth, there he sitteth iudge.
                  Againe, the said Saint Hierome writeth thus in another place:
                  
                     Obscure licet docemur, per hanc sententiolam novum dogma quod 
                     Hier. tom. 9. ad Gal. cap. 6. 
                     latitat: dum in praesenti seculo sumus, sive orationibus, sive consilijs invicem posse adiuvari. Cum autem ad tribunal Christi venerimus, non Iob, non Daniel, non Noe, rogare possepro quoquam, sedvnumquen
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         portare suum onus.
                  
                  Wee are taught here though obscurely, a newe doctrine that is hidde: that while wee are in this worlde, one may helpe an other, eyther by his prayer or counsell. But when we shall come to the tribunall seat of Christ, then neither Iob, nor Daniel, nor Noe, can make intercession for any man, but every one must beare his owne burden.
                  Augustine is of the same iudgement in many places of his workes:
                  
                     Tuus certe dies vltimus, longe abesse nonpotest. Adhunc te praepara: qualis enim exieris de hac vita, talis redderis illi vitae, 
                     Aug. in Psal. 36. conc. 1.
                  
                  The last day doubtlesse can not bee farre hence: prepare thy selfe for it. For as thou shalt depart out of this life, so shalt thou bee restored to that life.
                  Againe, in another place:
                  
                     Quod autem dicit adealoca in quibus torquentur impij, iustos etiam sivelint non posse transire: quid aliud significat, nisipost hanc vitam ita receptis in carcere, vt inde non exeant donec reddant novissimum quadrantem, 
                     Aug. in quaest. evang. q. 38. to. 4. pag. 249. 
                     per incommut abilitatem divinae sententiae, nullum auxilium misericordiae posse praeberi à iustis, etiamsi velint illud praebere.
                  
                  In that hee saieth, to those places in which the wicked are tormented, the iust can not come though they woulde, what other thing doeth hee signifie, but the immutabilitie of Gods sentence to

be such, as the iust, though most willing, can yeild no helpe of mercie after this life to those that be so in prison, as they can not get out till they pay the last farthing.
                  Againe, in an other place:
                  
                     Ille autem iudex novit quantam vnicuique sit daturus gloriam, qui in hac vita per misericordiam gratis iustificando praevenit, quos ille per iustitiam glorificare dispo suit. tempus vero acquirendi vitam aeternam 
                     Aug. de fide ad Petrum, cap. 3. circa medium. 
                     in istatantum vita deus hominibus dedit, vbi voluit etiam poenitentiam esse fructuo sam.
                  
                  That iudge knewe howe much glorie he would give to every one, who prevented by iustifying freely in this life through mercie, whome he disposed to glorifie in the other by iustice but time to attaine eternall life God graunted to men in this life onely, where he would have penance to be of force.
               
               
                  The second Conclusion.
                  
                     CHRISTES bloode is the true and onely purgatorie for mans sinnes, as well quoad poenam, as quoad culpam: that is, both concerning the sinne, and punishment due for the same. This conclusion S. Paul maketh plaine, writing thus to the Hebrewes:
                  
                     Qui cum sit splendor gloriae & figura substantiae eius, portan sque omnia verbo virtutis suae, purgationem peccatorum faciens, sedet ad dexter ammaiestatis in excelsis. 
                     Hebr. 1. 2, 3.
                  
                  Who beeing the brightnes of his glorie, and the figure of his substance, and susteining all things by the word of his power: did by him selfe purge our sinnes, and sitteth on the right hand of maiestie on high.
                  And in an other place, he saith thus:
                  
                     In quo habemus redemptionem & remissionem peccatorum. 
                     Coloss. 1. 16.
                  
                  In whome wee have redemption and remission of our sinnes.
                  Againe, in an other place:
                  
                     Hi sunt qui venerunt de tribulatione magna, & laverunt stolas suas, & dealbaverunt eas in sanguine agni. 
                     Apoc, 7. 24.
                  
                  These are they that came from great tribulation, and washed their stoles, and made them white in the bloode of the lambe.
                  Againe in an other place:
                  
                     Sanguis Iesu Christi, emundat nos ab omni peccato. 
                     1. Ioh. 1. 8.
                  
                  The blood of Iesus Christ, doth purge vs from all sinne.
                  Againe, in an other place:
                  
                     Is qui non nover at peccatum, peccatum pronobis fecit, vt nos efficeremur iustitia dei in ipso. 
                     2. Cor. 5. 21.
                  
                  
                     
He that knew not sinne, suffered paine due for sinne for vs, that we might be made the iustice of God in him.
                  Againe.
                  
                     Ego sum, ego sum ipse, qui deleo iniquitates tuas propter me. 
                     Esai. c. 43. v. 25
                  
                  I, even I am he, that blot out thine iniquities (not for thy deserts, but for mine owne sake.
                  Againe in another place:
                  
                     Ipse vulneratus est propter iniquitates nostras, attritus est propter 
                     Esai. c. 23. v. 5 
                     scelera nostra.
                  
                  He was wounded for our iniquiries, hee was torne in peeces for our offences.
                  Againe in another place:
                  
                     Christus nos redemit de maledicto legis, factus pro nobis male dictum. 
                     Gal. c. 3. v. 13.
                  
                  Christ redeemed vs from the curse of the Law, being a curse for vs.
                  Neither will it helpe the papistes to answere, that these textes of scripture are vnderstood onelie of the guilt of sinne, and not of the punishment due for the same.
                  1 For first, no scripture maketh that distinction between the guilt of sinne & punishment correspondent to the same.
                  2 Secondly, no ancient writer did ever so expound such textes of scripture.
                  3 Thirdly, because their owne doctor Aquinas avoucheth our redeemer to haue suffered not onely for the guilt of our sinnes, but also for the punishment due vnto the same.
                  These be his words:
                  
                     Christus dedit maximum exemplum poenitentibus, dum non pro peccato proprio, sed pro peccatis aliorum voluit poenam subire. 
                     Aquinas in part. 3, q. 15. ar. 1. ad. 5.
                  
                  Christ gaue an exceeding great example to penitent sinners, while his pleasure was to susteine punishment, not for his owne sin, (which was none at all,) but for the sinnes of others.
                  And Saint Augustine writing vpon the Psalmes hath these words:
                  
                     Ergo apud te est propitiatio, nam-sinon esset apuate propitiatio, siiudex solum esse velles, & misericors esse nolles, siobservares omnes iniquitates 
                     Aug. in ps. 129. to 8. pag. 1036. 
                     nostras, & quaereres eas quid sustineret? quis ante te staret & diceret innocens sum? quis staret in iudicio tuo? spes ergo vna est, quoapud te est propitiatio.
                  
                  Therefore with thee is mercie: for if there were not mercie with thee, if thou wouldest onely be our iudge, and not shew vs mercie, if thou wouldest looke into our iniquities, and seeke them, who were able to abide it? who could stand before thee, and say, I am innocent? who could stand in thy iudgement? Therefore there is one onlie hope, because with thee mercie is to be found.
                  
                     
And the same Saint Augustine in another place, hath yet more plaine words:
                  
                     Dominus noster Iesus Christus mori venit, peccare non venit, communicando nobiscum sine culpapaenam, & culpam solvit & paenam.
                  
                  Our Lord Iesus (saith saint Augustine) came to die, he came not to sinne, communicating paine with vs without sinne, he loosed both Aug. ser. 141. de tempore to. 10 the sinne and paine of sinne.
                  4 Fourthly, because it would followe thereuppon, that Christes workes were verie vnperfect: and yet doth the scripture say:
                  
                     Dei perfecta sunt opera. 
                     Deut. 32. v. 4.
                  
                  The workes of God are perfect.
                  But doubtlesse, hee wrought not mans redemption perfectlie, if mans satisfaction must concurre to the perfection thereof: and yet concurre it must perforce if another purgation be established in purgatorie fire, besides that purgation which Christes bloud hath wrought.
                  5 Fiftly, because Christes satisfaction otherwise had bene in vaine. For if we can satisfy for our selves, or by the help of our neighbors in purgatorie fire: then did Christ in vaine satisfy for vs vpon the Crosse: then did not Christ loose both the sinne & paine of sinne, as Saint Augustine avoucheth.
                  6 Sixtly, because our satisfaction speaking of the best, is not, nor can be infinite: and consequently, cannot make compensation for infinite transgression.
                  For as Aquinas saith:
                  
                     Peccatum contra Deum admissum, quandam infinit atem habet ex infinitate 
                     Aquinas 3. p. quaest. 1. ar. 2. ad 2. 
                     divinae maiestatis tanto enim offen sa est gravior, quanto maior est ille in quem delinquitur.
                  
                  Sinne committed against God is infinite, by reason of his infinite Maiestie: For so much is the offence greater, by how much he is greater against whom we sinne.
                  7 Seventhly, because it is flatly against the opinions of the holy fathers. Thus saith Saint Augustine:
                  
                     Primum locum fides cabolicorū divina auctoritate credit, regum coelerum: 
                     Aug. l. 5. hypognost, vltra med. sermo. 14. de verb. apost. l. 1. c. 28. de peccatorū merit & remis. 
                     secundum gehennam, vbi omnis apost at a vel a fide Christi alienus, aeterna supplicia experietur: tertium penitus ignoramus, imo nec in scripturis sanctis inveniemus.
                  
                  The faith of Catholikes by Gods auctoritie, beleeueth the first place to be the kingdom of heaven: the second place to be hell, wher euery apostate or infidell shall bee punished euerlastingly: the third place we are vtterly ignorant of neither shall we find it in the holy scriptures.
                  
                     
which assertion saint Augustine doth often inculcate, in sundrie of his bookes. Saint Hierome likewise teacheth vs, that after the separation of the soule from the bodie, there is no resting place, but either heaven or hell. These are his words:
                  
                     Quum anima vinculis laxata corporis, volandi quo velit, sive quo iure 
                     Hier. in c. 9. Amos prope med. capitis. 
                     compellitur, habuerit libertatem: aut adinferna ducetur, de quibus scriptum est: in inferno quis confitebitur tibi? aut certe adcoelestia sublevabitur.
                  
                  VVhen the soule shall bee leused from corporall bondes, and shall have liberte to goe whither it will, or whither it is compelled to goe: either it shall bee brought to the infernall spirites, of whom it is written, ïn hell who will confesse vnto thee? or doubtlesse it shall be exalted to heaven aboue. To conclude, their famous bishop and holy martyr Roffensis, confessing the late originall of popish pardons, among other reasons, yeldeth this for one:
                  
                     Quarum prima est, quodolim non erat vsque adeo ecclesiae notum purgatorium. Imo Graecis inquit, adhunc vsque diem non est creditum. 
                     Roffēsis apud Domin. Soto in 4. sent. dist. 21. q. 1. art. 3
                  
                  whereof the first reason is, that in old time, purgatorie was not so well knowen vnto the church. yea saith he; the Greekes do not to this day beleeue it.
                  And doubtlesse, if there were anie purgatorie besides Christs passion, the thiefe that lived wickedly to the last houre, should have had his part therein; who yet went incontinently to paradise, as saith Luc. c. 23. v. 43. the holie scripture.
               
               
                  The third Conclusion.
                  AFter this life is neither place to merit, demerit, or satisfaction. This conclusiō is proved out of Ecclesiasticus, where it is writtē. Ante obitum tuum operare iustitiam, qui a non est apud inferos invenire 
                     Eccles. c. 14. v. 17. 
                     cibum.
                  
                  Before thy death, worke iustice, because there is no reliefe to be found among the dead.
                  Correspondent hereunto, is this saying of Aquinas:
                  
                     Dicendum, quod mereri & demereri pertinent ad statum viae: vnde bona in 
                     Aquinas 22. q. 13. ar, 4. ad. 2. & 1. p. q. 62. ar. 9. corpor. 
                     viatoribus sunt meritoria, mala vero demeritoria. in beatis autem bona non sunt meritoria, sed pertinentia ad eorum beatitudinis premium, & sic mala in damnatis non sunt demeritoria, sed pertinent ad damnationis poenam.
                  
                  we must answere, that to merit & demerit, perteine to the state of the way: wherefore, good workes are meritorious to suche

as be viatores, and liue in this world: and likewise euill workes demeritorious.
                  But in the saintes of heaven good vvorkes are not meritorious, but appertaine to the reward of their beatitude.
                  And in like manner euill workes in the damned are not demeritorious, but perteine to the paine of their damnation.
                  Dominicus Soto commenting vpon the maister of sentences, holdeth the selfe same opinion. For which cause saint Paul exhorteth Dominic. Soto in 4. dist. 19 quaest. 3. ar. 1, ad arg. 1. vs to doe good, dum tempus habemus, while wee haue time.
                  This the preacher confirmeth in these words:
                  
                     Viventes sciunt quod morientur, & mortui nesciunt quicquam, & non est eis amplius merces, in oblivione enim est memoria eorum. 
                     Gal. 6. v. 10. Eccle. c. 9. v, 5,
                  
                  The living know that they must die, and the dead know nothing at all, neither haue they henceforth a rewarde, for their memorie is forgotten.
                  Vppon which wordes saint Hierome hath this glosse:
                  
                     Viventes metu mortis possunt bona operaperpetrare, mortui uero nihil 
                     Hier. in 9. cap. eclesiastes. 
                     valent adid adijcere quod semel secum tulere de vita. Sed & dilectio eorum, & odium, & aemulatio, & omne quod in seculo habere potuerunt, mortis finitur adventu: nec iuste quippe possunt agere, nec peccare, nec virtutes adijcere, nec vitia.
                  
                  The living may doe good woorkes for feare of death: but the dead can ad nothing to that, which they once tooke with them out of this life. Their loue also and their hatred, their emulation, and what soeuer they could haue in this world, all is ended with death. For they can neither doe well nor sinne, neither addevice nor vertue.
                  All which, Saint Cyprian comprised in these fewe golden words: Cypria. contr. Demetr. in fine
                  
                  
                     Quumistine excessum fuerit, nullus iam locus paenitentiae est, uullus satisfactionis effectus.
                  
                  VVhen vve shall depart out of this life, there will be no place to penance, no effect of satisfaction.
                  Saint Augustine teacheth the course of Gods iustice to be such, as wee must either attaine remission of our sinnes in this world or never to expect the same.
                  These are his wordes:
                  
                     Morum porro corrigendorum, uullus alius quam in hac vit a locus: nā post hanc quisque idhabebit, quod in hac sibimet conquisierit. 
                     Aug. epist. 54 tom. 2. in initio.
                  
                  There is no other place but this life to reforme our manners: For after this life everie one shall have that, which hee purchased for himselfe in this life.
                  
                     
many other like sayinges the said holie father hath to the like effect and purpose: which I now let passe with silence, thinking that sufficient which is alreadie said hereof.
                  Most miserable therefore are the soules in popish purgatorie, as who by popish doctrine can neither merite nor satisfie for their sinnes.
                  For if soules in purgatorie can satisfy or merit, then can they also demerite, (because the selfe same reason holdeth in both alike,) and if they can demerite, they can also sinne mortally, and so perish eternallie, contrarie to popish doctrine.
                  Again, if any mercie can be found after this life: the reason made by saint Paul to the Corinthians which was grounded vpon the chiefest misterie of our Christian faith is doubtlesse of no force at all: to wit, when hee concludeth of the faith vpon Christ his resurrection from the dead.
                  Thus standeth the Apostles discourse: they that die in the faith of Christ, are either saved or damned: who if they be saved, then is Infra cap. 9. per totum. Christ risen againe, and become a true saviour: but if they be damned: then doubtlesse is Christ not risen againe, neither become a true saviour. Now to confesse a thirde place, where soules remaine neither saved or damned, but in a perplexe manner, that indeed may stand with popish doctrine, but is flatte against Saint Paules discourse.
                  Againe, to hold a third place doth overthrovv another of Saint Paules reasons, when he affirmeth the being in this bodie, to keepe the faithfull from Christ.
                  For if popish purgatorie be admitted, the soules suffering there shall be as well absent from Christes presence, as when they were in 2. Cor. 5. v. 7. 8. Christes bodie.
                  But perhaps, saint Paul knew not how to conclude his purpose, or at least was not in love with papistrie. Yet the papistes will say, that it is verie common with the fathers to pray for the dead.
                  To this I say, that in verie deede it cannot be denied, but that sundrie of the fathers have both praied themselues for the dead, and haue also approved the praiers of others to the like end. But this will neither establish the popish purgatorie, nor their manner of praying for the dead.
                  VVhich obiection, because it seemeth to carrie a great maiestie with it, and indeede seduceth many a one, (as which is plainly set downe in verie expresse termes, in many places of the auncient writers,) I purpose a litle to stand vpon it, nothing doubting but to satisfy the indifferent reader therewith through the power of God, so he will yeeld attentiue eares vnto my words.
                  1 I therefore say first, (as is proved elswhere in this treatise,) that 1. Cor. c. 15. v. 17. 18.
                     
what writer so euer affirmeth any doctrine, contrarie to that which is taught in the holy scriptures: he who soeuer he be, must be reiected, and his doctrine in that point contemned.
                  VVhich thing I doe not barely say, but I haue prooved the same out of the doctrine of the fathers, by the flat and expresse wordes of the fathers themselues. peruse the ninth chapter, of credit to be giuen to writers.
                  2 I say secondly, that it is a seemely, good, and godly maner, to pray for the dead: so our hearts bee rightly disposed, and our praiers framed accordingly.
                  As for example: when it is said of some friend departed out of this life, God grant him a ioyfull resurrection: which is the most orderly and plainest forme, of praying for the dead.
                  3 I say thirdly, if one say God have mercie vpon the soule, being wel instructed for the true sense thereof: it is not to be reproued, though the other phrase and maner of praying, ought rather to be vsed: especially in these daies, when the latter kinde is commonly abused. for albeit the holie and ancient fathers, when they prayed for rest & mercie to the dead, vnderstoode nothing els but the resurrection of the bodie, and the complement that redoundeth to the soule by vnion of the same: yet haue the papistes taught, and this day teach the people to vnderstand therby, the mitigation of purgatorie pains: which the soules of the dead enioy (as they groslie imagine,) either by praiers of the faithfull, or by masses, trentals, and diriges, or by the popes pardons. So that the evill of this maner of praying, consisteth not in the phrase and praier it selfe: but in the erronius affection of the partie that so praieth.
                  For the better vnderstanding whereof, we must obserue:
                  1 First, that it is lawfull to pray for such things, as are verie certaine: but not yet accomplished or brought to passe.
                  And consequently, that it is lawfull to pray for the resurrection of the bodie: as also that the soules in the second advent may be vnited againe to the bodies: that so the faithfull may in complete maner, be made partakers of the vision beatificall.
                  This observation is manifest by that praier which our saviour himselfe praied: whose actions, as writeth the apostle, are our instructions.
                  For our Lord Iesus praied for the salvation of his elect, who neither 1 Pet. 2. v. 22. shall nor could perish by any possibilitie.
                  That he praied for them, is manifest in these wordes:
                  
                     Non pro mundo rogo, sedpro his quos dedisti mihi, quia tui sunt. Pater 
                     Iohn. c. 17. v. 9. 12. 
                     sancte, seruaeos in nomine tuo, quos dedisti mihi.
                  
                  
                     
I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou hast giuen me, because they are thine. holy father, keepe them in thy name, whom thou hast giuen me. Yea, the verie elect are commaunded to praye for their salvation, because that is one of the petitions in the Lords prayer, which appertaineth to all, especially to the elect.
                  And that the elect cannot perish, is euident by this testimonie of the holie gospel:
                  
                     It a vt in errorem inducantur (sifieri potest) etiam electi: 
                     Mat. c. 24. v. 24
                  
                  So that the verie elect should be seduced, if it were possible.
                  2 vvee must obserue secondly, that in thē writinges of the fathers, sinne is often taken for the corruption and mortalitie of the bodie: as the papistes themselves doe ever in their romish pardons, vnderstand by sinne the paine due for sinne.
                  which observations well remembred, all obiections out of the fathers, touching praying for the dead, may bee answered with all facilitie. For first, when the ancient churches offered vp their sacrifices of thankes giving, and prayers for the dead:
                  2 And secondly, when the fathers doe desire eternall rest vnto the dead: they desire nothing lesse, then that such souls may be delivered out of purgatorie, or haue remission of their sinnes.
                  vvhich thing I will proue, by two verie sound foundations.
                  1 The one, because such prayers or oblations were made for those, who (not only as the fathers beleeued, but euen as the papistes themselves confesse) were then in heaven, where they neither needed nor could be relieved, by such praiers or oblations.
                  2 The other, because the fathers haue ackowledged so much, by expresse wordes in their writings.
                  1 The former foundation is evident in the liturgie of S. Chrisostom, Chrysost. in liturg. prope finem. to. 5. p. 1377. who there offered his sacrifice of thankes giuing, for the prophets, apostles, martyrs,, and for our blessed ladie the holie virgin Marie. vvhom all I am well assured, the papistes will confesse to haue beene in heauen, long afore saint Chrysostome was borne.
                  2 The second foundation is plainly confessed by saint Ambrose, who in his funerall orations for the emperours Theodosius and Valentinianus with his brother Satyrus: both confesseth them to possesse eternall rest in heaven, and neverthelesse praieth for eternall rest vnto them.
                  which words, though they seeme to implie manifest contradiction: yet are they no lesse exact and sound, then godlie and easie to be vnderstood: if my rehearsed observations be well marked. For though their soules were in eternall blisse, that is, in heaven: yet neither were their bodies then, neither are they now, neither shall they be, vntill the second advent of our redeemer, in that eternal rest.
                  
                     
VVhich rest that Valentinianus, Thedosius; and Satyrus may enioy after the day of dome in complete maner: that is, in soule and bodie vnited in perpetuall vnion: Sainte Ambrose prayed so instantly.
                  Now for thy better instruction and satisfaction, (gentle Reader,) I will alleage Saint Amhrose wordes, as himselfe hath vttered them.
                  Of his brother Satirus he saith thus:
                  
                     Tibi nunc omnipotens Deus innoxiā commendo animam, tibi hostiam meam affero: cape propitius ac serenus fraternum munus, sacrificium 
                     In oratione funebri pro Satyro, to. 3. in fine. 
                     sacerdotis.
                  
                  To thee now, O almightie God, I commend his innocent soule: to thee I offer my oblation, accept favourably my brotherly present, the sacrifice of thy priest.
                  Of Theodosius he saith thus:
                  
                     Da requiem perfectam servo tuo Theodosio, requiem illam quam preparasti 
                     In oratione funeb. pro Theod. to. 3. p. 52. 
                     sāctis tuis.
                  
                  Giue perfect rest to thy seruant Theodosius, that rest which thou hast prepared for thy saintes.
                  Of Valentinianus he saith thus: Ambr. de obitu Valent. p. 12. to. 3.
                  
                  
                     Nulla dies vos silentio preteribit, nulla inhonoratos vos mea transibit oratio, nulla nox non donatos aliqua precium mearum contextione transcurret. omnibus vos oblationibus frequentabo.
                  
                  No day shall passe with silence, none of mine orations shall passe without your honour, no night shall slide away without some prayer of mine for you. I will frequent you with all oblations.
                  Thus we see plainly, that Saint Ambrose both offered sacrifice of lawde, and prayed for Valentinianus, Theodosius, and Satirus being dead.
                  Let vs now proceed a litle further.
                  Thus saith saint Ambrose of Satyrus:
                  
                     Intravit in regnum coelorum, quoniam credidit Dei verbo.
                  
                  Hee is entred into Heaven, because hee beleeved the word of Ambt. vbi supra de sing. God.
                  Thus saith he of Theodosius:
                  
                     Manet ergo in lumine Theodosius, & sanctorum caetibus gloriatur. fruitur Augustae memoriae Theodosius luce perpetua.
                  
                  Theodosius therefore abideth in light, and in the glorie and fellowship of Saints. Theodosius of famous memory, enioyeth perpetuall light.
                  Thus hee saith of Valentinianus:
                  
                     Creaimus quia ascendit a de serto, hoc est, ex hoc arido & inculto loco
                     
                     adillas florulentas delectationes, vbi cum fratre coniunctus aeternae vitae fruitur voluptate.
                  
                  Let vs beleeue, that he is ascended from the desert: that is, from this drie and vntilled place to those florishing delectations, wherin the fellowship of his brother hee enioyeth the pleasure of eternall life.
                  These wordes are plaine, and neede no glosse. Saint Ambrose then beleeved, that Valentinianus, Theodosius, and Satyrus were in heaven, and enioied eternall rest: and neverthelesse, even then prayed for their eternall rest. But doubtlesse his praiers had beene both vaine and foolish if he should haue praied for that vnto them, which they had and enioyed alreadie. Hee therefore praied, (as my observations declare,) not for the rest and blisse of the soules, which thē possessed eternall rest and blisse: but that the bodies also may bee pertakers of that place and rest, which they wanted them, and shall vntill the day of dome.
                  And for the better confirmation of this mine assertion, saint Ambrose doth in expresse words so expound himselfe:
                  For thus he writeth:
                  
                     Te quae so summe Deus, vt charissimos iuvenes matura resurrectione 
                     Ambrosius vbi sup. 
                     resuscites. & immaturum hunc vitae istius cur sum matura resurrectione compenses.
                  
                  O high and mightie God, I beseech thee to raise vp most deare yong youthes with mature resurrection, and to recompence the vnripe course of this their life, with mature and ripe resurrection.
                  Loe here in plaine and briefe tearmes, the compendious explication Let this be wel noted. of that popish obiection, and doubt, vvhich so troubleth and seduceth many a one.
                  And so Saint Ambrose his prayer for the dead, was even this and no other: God give them a ioyfull resurrection.
               
               
                  The fourth Conclusion.
                  IF popish purgatorie were admitted to be 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : yet would it follow by a necessarie consequent, that the soules tormented there should perish everlastingly.
                  This conclusion is thus proved.
                  There is no salvation to be expected out of the church, as witnesseth their great councell of Lateran, and the holie fathers accord thereunto. But soules boiling in purgatorie papisticall, bee neither in the church triumphant, because there is no neede of purgation, neither in the church militant, because there is place for merite and satisfaction: ergo they be out of the church: And consequently without

the state of salvation: and in the state of eternall damnation.
                  And that the best learned papistes stand in doubt of their salvation, it cannot with right reason be denied. For in their Masses of Requiem, the priestes are commaunded to pray in these expresse words:
                  
                     Ne absorbeat eas tartarus: 
                     In missa requiem pro defunctis.
                  
                  That hell swallow not them vp and devoure them.
                  And doubtlesse, if they bee assured of their salvation: it is a vaine and ridiculous thing to pray, that they be not swallowed vp of hell: And consequently, their holie Masse is farced with a bundell of vanities. Neither wil it helpe the adversarie to say, that though the soules in their purgatorie can not satisfy for themselves: Yet may the living satisfy for them, which is of as much force, as if they did satisfy for themselves. For as the transgression is personall, so must the satisfaction also bee.
                  The reason hereof is evident, because to accept ones satisfaction for another: may well stand with acceptation or mercie, but never with iustice.
                  For which iustice notwithstanding, popish purgatorie was invented, and this day is defended: as their reverend professor of divinity Dominicus Soto, plainly testifyeth in these words:
                  
                     Respondetur, quod licet tunc moriens satisfacere nequeat, culpa sua fuit, quod tempus adid antea non elegit: & ideo poena quae per contritionē
                      
                     Soto in 4. dist. 19. q. 2. ar. 5. in fine. 
                     nonfuerit ei dimissa, in purgatorio est luenda: vt ratio divinae iustitiae servetur. I answere,
                  That although he that dieth, can not satisfy for his sins: yet was it his owne default, because he chose not before time for it: And therfore, the punishment which was not remitted by contrition and confession, must be punished in purgatorie: that the order of Gods iustice may be observed.
               
               
                  
                     The 5. Conclusion.
                  
                  IT is euident even by the opinion of great papistes, that manie soules in purgatorie shall abide there for ever: and yet is that flat against popish religion.
                  This conclusion shall bee manifest, if I prove three pointes.
                  
                     
1 First, that everie sinne is mortall.
                  2 Secondlie, that no mortall sinne can be remitted or forgiven in popish purgatorie.
                  3 Thirdly, that many depart out of this world, not having their venial sinnes (of the papists so tearmed) before remitted, or forgiven.
                  For first, if everie sinne bee mortall: and secondly, if no mortall sinne be forgiven in purgatorie: and thirdly, if sundrie be in purgatorie, whose sinnes be not all forgiven: it must needes follow by a necessarie sequel, that such persons must continue in purgatorie eternallie, because they cannot come from thence vntill their sinnes be remitted wholy.
                  1 First therefore, that euerie sinne is mortall, is confessed by three great papistes: that is to say, Roffensis, Gersonus, and Michael Baius.
                  For these three confesse plainlie, that everie sinne is mortall of it owne nature, and onely veniall through Gods mercifull acceptation: and therefore may it be iustly punished everlastinglie.
                  Roffensis writing against Luther, hath these expresse words. Roffensis art. 32. advers. Luther. pag. 328.
                  
                  
                     Quod peccatum veniale solum ex Dei misericordia veniale sit, in hoc tecum sentio.
                  
                  That a veniall sinne is onely veniall through the mercie of God (& not of it owne nature,) therein doe I agree vnto you.
                  Loe, my Lord of Rochester confesseth plainlie, that euerie sinne is mortall of it owne nature.
                  And Ioannes Gerson sometime chanceler of Paris, that famous vniuersitie, though otherwise a great papist, can not denie this veritie: for these are his words.
                  
                     Nulla offensa Dei est venialis de se, nisitantum modo per respectum ad divinā misericordiā, qui nonvult de facto quālibet offensam imputare 
                     Ioan. Gers. de vita spirituali, lect. 1. p. 3. in 1. corollar. 
                     ad mortem, cū illud posset iustissime. Et ita concluditur, quod peccatū mortale & veniale in esse tali, non distinguuntur intrinsece & essentialiter, sed solum per respectum ad divinam gratiam, quae peccatum istud imputat ad poenam mortis, & aliud non.
                  
                  No offence of God is veniall of it owne nature, but onely in respect of Gods mercie, who will not de facto, impute euerie offence to death, although he might most iustlie doe it.
                  And so I conclude, that mortal and veniall sinnes as such, are not distinguished intrinsecallie, and essentiallie: but onelie in respect of Gods grace, which assigneth this sinne to the paine of death, and not the other.
                  Manie other sentences to the like effect the said Gerson hath, but these may suffice to content anie reasonable mind.
                  
                     
Other papistes are of the same opinion in verie deed, though they do not disclose their mindes in such manifest tearmes.
                  Thus writeth our father Iesuit Bellarminus:
                  
                     Respondeo, omne peccatum esse contra legem Dei non positivam sedaeternam, vt Aug. recte docet. omnis enim iusta lex siue a Deo, sive ab 
                     Bellar. de Rō. Pontif. cap. 21. 
                     homine detur, ab aeterna dei lege derivatur: est enim aeterna lex, vt malum sit violare regulam.
                  
                  I answere, that everie sinne is against the lawe of God, not positiue, but eternall, as Augustine rightly teacheth. For euerie iust law, whether it be made by God or by man, is derived from the law of God eternall. For the lawe eternall is, that it is sinue to transgresse the rule.
                  And this is the common opinion, as I haue proved out of Iosephus Angles.
                  Neither will it helpe the papistes to say as the Thomistes doe: that veniall sins are praeter non contra legem, besides the law, but not against Legendus est Ioseph. Ang. sup. cap. 7. ar. s the law.
                  1 First, because saint Augustine defineth sinne generallie to be a gainst the law of God, writing in this manner:
                  
                     Peccatum est dictum, vel factum, vel concupitum, contra legem aeternam 
                     Aug. l. 22. c. 27. contra faustū. 
                     dei.
                  
                  Sinne is a saying, or doing, or coveting, against Gods eternall lawe.
                  Secondly, because as Iosephus Angles their owne doctor saith: everie venial sinne is against right reason, and to doe against right reason, Ioseph. Angl. in 4. sent. part. 3. p. 215. is to doe against the law of nature, which commaundeth not to depart from the rule of right reason.
                  3 Thirdly, because we must give an accompt of euerie idle word in the general day of iudgement, as Christ himselfe telleth vs: & for noother end doubtlesse must this accompt be made, but onely because Mat. 12. v. 36. This reason convinceth doubtles. everie idle word is against the law of God.
                  This the papistes can never denie, and yet must they likewise confesse, that idle wordes bee those sinnes, which they tearme venialles: and consequently that veniall sinnes be against the lawe of God.
                  Secondly, that no mortall sinne can be forgiven in purgatorie, is confessed of all papistes without contradiction.
                  Thus writeth Bellarminus:
                  
                     Manet vltima sententia vera & catholica, purgatorium pro ijs tantum esse, qui cum venialib. culpis moriuntur. & rur sum pro illis qui 
                     Bellar. lib. 2. de purgat. c. 1. in fine. 
                     decedunt cum reatupaenae, culpis iam remissis.
                  
                  
                     
The true and catholike opinion remaineth, that purgatorie is only for those, that die with veniall sinnes: and againe, for those that die with the guilt of sinne, after their sinnes bee forgiven.
                  And with Bellarminus doe all other papistes agree, that such as die in mortall sinne, goe incontinently to hel.
                  Thirdly, that sundrie having venial sinnes abide the paines of purgatorie, appeareth by Bellarminus his wordes before alleaged, and by Dominicus So to in these wordes:
                  
                     Qui dixerit verbum contra spiritum sanctum, nō remittetur ei in hoc seculo, neque in futuro. Vbi Gregorius lib. 4. di alogorum, adnotavit aliqua 
                     Soto in 4. s. dist. 19. q. 3. 
                     leuia peccata remitti in futuro seculo, per ignem purgationis.
                  
                  He that shall blaspheme the holie Ghost, shall neither be forgiven in this vvorld, neither in the vvosld to come.
                  In vvhich place, Gregorius pope of Rome, noted certaine light sinnes to be forgiven in the world to come, by the fire of purgation. Idē habeturd. 25. can. qualis.
                  
                  And their Aquinas saith thus.
                  
                     Secundum enim quod peccata venialia sunt maioris vel minoris adhaerentiae vel gravitatis, citius vel tardius per ignem purgantur.
                  
                  For veniall sinnes are purged by fire sooner or latter, according to A quini 12. q. 89, ar, 2. ad. 4. their greater or lesser adherence or gravitie.
                  And for a full accomplishment of this conclusion, Iosephus Angles vttereth the great perplexitie of papistes, concerning this their purgative imagination.
                  These are his vvords:
                  
                     Quo igitur modo remittuntur (venialia) in purgatorio? varij sunt modi dicendi. Scotus dicit in instanti mortis, idest, in primo non esse hominis, 
                     Ioseph. Ang. in 4. senten. de sacr. poenit. pag. 219. 
                     propter merita quae homo habuit in vita: Dur andus dicit remitti quoad culpam in purgatorio, propter displicentiam quam habent illic animae venialium, cum sint in charitate. Soto asserit remitti quoad culpā in purgatorio, propter actum chariiatis & continuam patientiam, quam dum cruciantur, habent.
                  
                  Hovv then are veniall sinnes forgiven in purgatorie? diverse hold diversly. Scotus saith, they are forgiven in the instant of death: that is, vvhen man first beginneth not to be, by reason of his merits in his life time.
                  Durand saith, the fault is remitted in purgatorie, for the displicence of venials, vvhich the soules haue in that place: and that because they be in charity. Soto saith, the sinne is remitted in purgatorie, for the act of charitie and continuall patience, vvhich they have in ther torments. VVhom vvill not this discordant theologie, vtterly dissvvade from papistrie.
               
               
                  
                  The sixt Conclusion.
                  THe booke of Machabees, (which is the sole and onely foundation of popish purgatorie,) is of no force at all to establish the same. This conclusion shalbe evidently prooved, when I shall effectually disproove the authoritie of the said booke of Machabees, wherewith many have a long time beene most miserably seduced. Marke therefore my discourse herein.
                  To prove that the 2. book of Machabees, (out of which, prayer and sacrifice for the dead, and consequently purgatory is gathered,) is not Canonicall, that is, not penned by the assistance of the holy ghost, I say first, that it is not in the canon of the Hebrewes, neither 1 did the Iewes or Hebrewes at any time repute it, as a part of holy & divine scripture. This S. Hierome witnesseth in these wordes:
                  
                     Sicut ergo Iudith, & Tobiae, & Machabaeorum libros legit quidem Ecclesia, sedinter Canonicas scripturas non recipit, sic & haec duo volumina legit ad aedificationem plebis, non ad authoritatem Ecclesiasticorum 
                     Hier. in epist, ad Chromatium & Heliodorum, de lib. Solomonis. 
                     dogmatum confirmandam.
                  
                  As therefore the Church readeth the bookes of Iudith, & of Toby, and of the Machabees, but receiveth them not amongst the Canonicall scriptures, so doth it read also these 2. volumes for edification of the people, but not to confirme any Ecclesiasticall doctrine. S. Cyprian hath the very same wordes in effect, in Symb. expositione.
                  S. Augustine doth testifie the same, when he thus writeth: Cyprian. in expos. Symb. Aug. contra 2. Gaudentii epist. lib. 2. cap. 23. tom. 7.
                  
                  
                     Hanc scripturam quae appellatur Machabaeorum, non habent Iudaei sicut legem, & prophetas, & Psalmos, quibus dominus testimonium perhibet tanquam testibus suis: dicens: oportebat impleri omnia, quae scripta sunt in lege, & Prophetis, & in Psalmis de me. Sedrecepta est ab Ecclesia non inutiliter, si sobriè legatur, vel audiatur: maximè, propter illos Machabaeos, qui pro Dei lege sicut veri martyres, à per secutoribus tam indigna at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         horrenda perpessi sunt.
                  
                  This scripture which is of the Machabees, the Iewes repute not as they do the law, the Prophets, & Psalmes, to which the Lord gave testimonie as to his witnesses, saying: It behoved all things to be fulfilled, which are written in the law, in the Prophets, and Psalmes of me: but it is received of the Church not without profite, if it bee read or heard soberly: especially, for those Machabees, who for the lawe of God as true martyrs, suffred of their persecutors so unworthy & horrible torments. And their owne deare fryer Bryton telleth vs, that neither is it knowne who was the author of these bookes, neither did Bryto in Prolog. Mach. the east Church ever receive them. I say secondly, that this second booke (out of which purgatorie is collected,) was never in Hebrew: and consequently, never authenticall among the Iewes. I say thirdly, 2 that many things found & affirmed in the bookes of Machabees, 3
                     
proove the same to be of no credit at all. For first, those for whome Iudas offred sacrifice & prayer, could not be holpen therwith: because as 1 the text recordeth, they perished for their secretidolatry: & so saith the Glosse also. and consequently, Iudas erred grosly in praying and sacrificing for them, and the author of the booke likewise in commē
                     ding Iudas his fact. wherupon it followeth necessarily, that the writer was not directed by the holy ghost: because he concluded prayer for the dead, upō a notorious known fact condēned by the scriptures. Secondly, this booke saith, that the Iewes were led captives into Persia: but they were translated indeed, not into Persia but into Babylon, as their 2 owne Lyranus doth testifie. Thirdly, the second book saith, that Iudas with 2. Mac. 1. 19. others wrote their epistle to Aristobolus in the 188 yere, but the first book 3 affirmeth Iudas to be dead in the yere 152, so that he must perforce write 2. Mach. 1. his epistle 36 yeres after his death. Fourthly, the first book saith, that Antiochus 1. Mach. 9. died in Babylon in his bed for sorow: but the second book avoucheth, 4 
                     1. Mach. 6. that he was slaine in the tēple of Nannea. Fiftly, because the author of 2. Mach. 1. the books of Machabes desireth pardō, if any thing be done amisse. These 5 be his words. Si bene & ut historiae competit, hoc et ipse velim: si autem minus 
                     2. Mach. 15. 
                     dignè, concedendumest mihi. If I haue done well and as is decent for the historie, that is my desire: but if not worthily, I must craue pardon. And 2. Mach. 14. 37. doubtlesse, he that writeth by the direction of the holy ghost, needeth no pardon at all. Sixtly, the wilfull murder of Razias is there commended, which commendation can not proceed from the holy ghost. Seventhly, 6 the authour of the Macchabees doeth onely conclude praying 7 for the dead, because Iudas offered sacrifice for the dead. VVhich general illation vpon a particuler fact, is not good in popish maner of proceeding. For as their Maxime saith, which is true indeede:
                  
                     Privilegium paucorum, non facit legem communem.
                  
                  The privilege of a fewe, can not establish a generall law: neither will it helpe the papistes to say, that saint Augustine and others alleaged this booke. For so saint Paul alleaged the testimonies of Tit. cap. 1. 12. 1. Cor. 15. 33. Acts 17. 28. Ethnickes, Epimenides, Menander, and Aratus: and popish divines alleage now and then Esops Fables.
                  But in what maner & to what end S. Augustine alleaged this book, I have shewed out of Augustine alreadie. Neither yet will it helpe to say, (which some repute for a great argument) that this booke is in the corps of the Bible. For so is the fourth booke of Esdras within the corps of the bible: & yet doe the papistes themselves repute it, no better then a fable. yea, which is more to be noted: they will not haue the last end of the Lords praier, to be canonicall: albeit it be found in the greeke originall, and placed in the corpse of the bible.
                  For the great popish linguist Benedictus Arias Montanus, telleth Arias Mont. in cap. 6. Mat. vers. 13. the reader in his observation vpō that place, that it is not of the text though he can not denie it, to be in the greeke & first originall.
                  
                     
To conclude, neither did Iudas pray himselfe, neither did he will others to pray for remission of sinnes unto the dead: neither is it flatly so said in the Greeke copie, neither did hee offer sacrifice for the sinnes of the dead, but for the resurrection of the body, vnderstanding by sinne the death and corruption of the bodie, which proceedeth of sinne and followeth the same. VVhich my interpretation may be gathered out of these wordes of the text it selfe:
                  
                     Bene & religiose de resurrectione cogitans.
                  
                  Thinking well and religiously of tbe dead. 2. Mach. 12. 43.
                  
                  And therefore is the illation of the popish latine translation, so highly commended and strictly commanded by the synod of Trent, vaine, frivolous, and foolish. He that penned the storie, hath without all rime and reason infarced the same: because no such conclusion can be truly gathered, of Iudas his oblation and fact.
               
            
            
               The Corollarie.
               FIrst therefore, since there is no purgatorie but Christs blood.
               Secondly, since after this life there is no place for merite or satisfaction.
               Thirdly, since the booke of Machabees is not Canonicall: I conclude, that it is a sufficient motive for me to renounce the Romish religion, as false, erroneous, and pernicious doctrine.
               Thus much of the sixt Motive.
            
            
               The VIII. CHAP. Of dissention amongest the Papistes.
               ALthough nothing is more common with the Papistes, then to charge protestants with dissention: yet is it their owne peculiar badge, as will appeare by due examination thereof.
               
                  The first article of dissention.
                  THe first erection of the English seminarie at Rome, began with dissention, betweene the students on the one part, and Master Morice the VVelsh-man on the other part. This Morice

was appointed the rectour of the seminarie, with whome tooke part doctor Lewes an other VVelsh-man, (who was Arch-deacon to the Arch-bishop of Cambrey, and referendarie to the Pope at that time,) and also Cardinall Morone then the protectour of the English nation.
                  With the scholers tooke part, the close and politike Iesuites, who would seeme to doe nothing in the matter openly, but in deede did all in all secretly. For the space of some daies, (in which time the matter was hotely handled on both sides, daily sutes being made, and supplications exhibited unto his holinesse,) the Cardinall prevailed, and the pope discharged the schollers. But the Iesuites laboured so forcibly (& yet covertly:) that within three daies, (notwithstanding all the means that the Cardinall did and could make,) the schollers were againe restored to their places. For Toledo the Iesuite was commaunded by the generall of their societie, to fall prostrate This Toledo was pope Gregories preacher, & adviser in al important Ecclesiasticall causes. on his knees before the popes holinesse, and there to make a pitifull lamentation for the overthrowe of England. that is forsooth, that now were reiected the finest wittes, the most towarde youthes, the seed of poperie, and the onely hope of the English nation: who now exiled for zeale in religion, and come to be his popish vassals: must either be trained up in papistrie after the Iesuiticall maner, or els should England never be reclaimed world without end.
                  VVhich sweete narration, no sooner sounded in the popes eares: but he commanded the schollers, to be received into the Colledge againe. And shortly after by Iesuiticall pollicie, Master Morice was officiperda, and a Iesuite made rectour in his place.
                  This dissention still continueth in that seminarie, as in which have bene foure or five (to speake of the least,) notorious combattes or endeavours betweene the rectour and the students: who should expulse ech other. And sometime the rectour hath so prevailed by pollicie, that some fewe haue bene dismissed: and other-somtime the generall of the Iesuites hath bin glad to change the rector, so to appease the dissention.
                  The like agreement is, amongst the papistes at home here in England: for I pray you, did not their holy confessor M. Sherewood, even in the time of his bondes for poperie, murder his brother papist in the towre of London? I wote he did. Did not olde Sir Iohn in the kidcote at Yorke so agree with Comberforth the priest, that they would never keepe companie the one with the other: though living both in one little prison, and imprisoned for the selfe same cause? it was so, my selfe was testis oculatus. Did not VVright, Fletcher, and Comberforth, imprisoned all together in the blockehouses at Hull upon Kingstone, agree in deviding their contributions

which were right large ones, euen as theeves agree in deviding their spoyles and robberies? Their mutuall contumelies filled the eares of countrey-papistes, their writings were lamented of the readers.
                  Let Padley, Norlees, and Haversiege say, if it be not so.
                  VVhat holy amitie is betweene the Iesuite Mushe, and other seminarie-priestes, Brodell, Dakins, Butler, and others his brother priestes will witnesse with me.
                  And that ye may knowe in one worde the perfection of the English Romish seminarie, you must vnderstand, that by the Iesuites their advise, the students in their supplications to the pope in their great conflict with the Cardinall, promised that they woulde all be romish priests, for the conversion of England to his Romish religion.
                  VVhich offer and promise was verie plausible in the popes eares.
                  For the better confirmation of which promise, all the schollers were shortly after called to their corporall oathes.
                  All which was wrought and contrived, by the politikes the Iesuites: some fewe schollers onely acquainted with the promise and oath, vntill the verie instant in which they did sweare.
                  VVhich oth as it was ungodlily made, so is it and will be ungodlily perfourmed, so long as that colledge can stand, by all probabilitie.
                  I say by all probabilitie, because I haue great reason so to thinke: though I can not as a God, divine of future contingents.
                  That it is vngodlily perfourmed, too much experience sheweth by so many seminaries sent daily in multitudes, oddely and disloyally into this land.
                  The like experience we haue in Iohn Gower, who so long resisted the Iesuites in refusing to bee made priest, and at length was made against his will for feare: as also in Humfrey Maxfielde and Thomas Nevvell verie proper schollers for their time, who staying in the seminarie untill they were urged to be priestes, were at the last expulsed because they would not be priestes. But now to dissentions of more importance.
               
               
                  The second Article.
                  BEllarminus auoucheth, that it neither is nor ever was lawfull since Christes time, for Bishoppes, Priestes, or Deacons,

to marrie after taking of their orders: as which saieth Bellar. lib. 1. de clericis ca. 19. hee, is prohibited by the apostolique law.
                  But their Canon law telleth us another tale, for thus is it written in their owne decrees:
                  
                     Cum ergo ex sacerdotibus nati in summos pontifices supra legantur esse promoti, non sunt intelligendi de fornicatione, sed de 
                     Dist. 56. cap. cenomanēsē. 
                     legitimis coniugijs nati: quae sacerdotibus ante prohibitionem vbique licita erant, & in Orient ali Ecclesia vsque holie eis licere probantur.
                  
                  VVhen therefore, wee reade that they are promoted to the popedome, who vvere the sonnes of Priestes: wee must not understande that such were bastardes, but borne in lawfull wedlocke and legitimate: which marriages were lawful for priestes everie vvhere before the prohibition: and in the east church they are approoved to be lawfull vntill this day.
                  And in other place of the saide Canon-lavve vvee are tolde of many popes that vvere priests sonnes: to wit, Bonifacius, Agapitus, Dist. 56. cap. Osius. Theodorus, Sylverius, Foelix, Deusdedit, and others.
               
               
                  The third article.
                  
                     COncerning veniall sinnes, hovve they are remitted in purgatorie: the dissention is such and so great, as of the schoole-men eache one differeth from other.
                  Scotus saith, they are forgiven in the instant of death: that is, vvhen man beginneth first not to be, by reason of his merites Ioseph. Ang. in 4. sent. de sacrament. poenit. p. 219. in his life time.
                  Durandus sayeth, they are forgiven for the displiecence of venials, which the soules haue in that place: and that because they are in charitie.
                  So to sayeth, the sinne is remitted in purgatorie, for the acte of charitie, and continuall patience, which the soules haue in their tormentes.
                  The like dissention is about their pardons, as is said alreadie.
               
               
                  
                  The fourth article.
                  NAvarre telleth vs, that wee are onely bounde to confesse our mortall and great sinnes; and that a papist comming to their sacramentall confession, may confesse some, and conceale other Navarr. ca. 21. n. 34. in ench. some.
                  These are his wordes:
                  
                     Hoc praeceptum non includit venialia, etiam si mixta sint mortalibus. Quibus consequens est posse quem si velit, confesso uno peccato veniali alterum tacere.
                  
                  This precept doth not include veniall sinnes, albeit they be mingled with mortals. whereupon it followeth, that the penitent may if he list, confesse one veniall and conceale another. Thus Navarre. To which I adde: that by this doctrine, the penitent may dissemble egregiously in confession, and deceive his ghostly father: and yet not sinne at all.
                  But the famous popish Chancellour of Paris Iohannes Gersonus, telleth another tale. Thus he writeth:
                  
                     Omne peccatum pro quanto est offen sa Dei & contra legem eius aeternam, est de sua conditione & indignitate mortiferum, secundum rigorem 
                     Gerso. de vita spirituali, lect. 1. circa mediū part. 3. 
                     iustitiae, & à vita gloriae separativum. Ratio est, quoniam omnis offen sa in Deum, potest iustè ab ipso iudice deo puniri poena mortis t
                           •
                        n temporalis quàm aeternae, imò annihilationis poena. est igitur de se mortifera. assumptum deducitur ex hoc, quod nulla poenâ talis est ita mala, quàm mala est ip sa offen sa. Et ex alio: quia potius toleranda esset omnis mors paenalis & annihilatio, quàm committenda esset quantumlibet parva offen sa in deum, da oppositum, iam offen sa Dei licitè fieri deberet in casu.
                  
                  Every sinne in that it is an offense against God and his eternall lawe, is mortall of it owne condition and indignitie according to the rigour of ivstice, and devideth us from the life of glorie. The reason is, because God may iustly punish every offense done against him, as well with eternall as temporall death, and with the mult of annihilation. It is therefore mortall of it owne nature.
                  The assumption is gathered of this, for that no such punishment is so evill as the offense. as also because every penall death, and annihilation both: ought rather to be tolerated, then the least sinne

to be committed: Graunt the contrarie, and in some case sinne shall be done lawfully, and be no sinne at all.
                  Thus saith Gerson, and this is a true, learned, and comfortable saying. whereof more shalbe said hereafter.
               
               
                  The fift Article.
                  
                     NAvarre saith, that one may both denie in word and upon his oth, that which the iudge requireth of him: so he equivocate, and make his owne sense unto himselfe: but their lerned doctour Navar. in enchir. cap. 18. n. 61. cap. 25. n. 43. Genesius Sepulveda, telleth him it may not be so. Yet all our politikes, our Iesuites I would say, holde with Navarre. Yea, the Iesuites will now and then by equivocation, denie them selves to bee Christians: as their deare brother Iohn Mushe confesseth, in his answere to my addition. whose wordes Irehearsed at large, in my counterblast against him and his adherents.
               
               
                  The sixt Article.
                  
                     ALL the Romish Iesuites and other papistes now adaies avouch obstinately, that matrimonie is a sacrament, and conferreth grace ex opere operato: but their owne Durandus and Gaufridus, affirme boldly the contrary.
                  Durand hath these expresse wordes:
                  
                     Praeter duo praedicta, sunt alia duo circa matrimonium, 
                     Durand. in 4. sent. dist. 26. q. 3. 
                     circa quae sine periculo haeresis, licitū est contraria opinari: quorum unum est theologicum, videlicet, vtrum in matrimonio confer atur gratia ex opere operato, sicut in aliis sacramentis novaelegis. Secundum est logicum, videlicet, vtrum matrimonium habeat plenam vnivocationem cum alijs sacramentis.
                  
                  Besides these two, there bee other two things to bee considered in matrimonie, wherein we may without daunger of heresie thinke the contrary. The one is theological, to wit, if in matrimony be conferred grace ex opere operato, as in other sacraments of the new law. The other is logicall, to wit, if matrimony be a sacrament properly and univocally so called. And Durandus avoucheth Gaufridus with other Canonists, to be of his opinion. So then, matrimony neither giueth grace, nor yet is properly a sacrament.
               
               
                  
                  THE SEAVENTH ARTICLE of their Dissention.
                  
                  SYlvester Prieras hath these words:
                  
                     Papa est imperatore maior dignitate, plus quàm aurum plumho. 
                     Sylvest. de papa num. 10.
                  
                  The pope doth more excell the Emperour in dignitie then gold excelleth leade.
                  Againe he saith thus
                  
                     Donavit Constantinus papae in vener ationem & recognitionem Dominij, administrationem temporalem imperij, & eandem immediatè Papa conceait imperatori in vsum, & stipendium officij, pro gubernatione & defensione pacifica ecclesiae.
                  
                  The Emperour Constantine gave the pope temporall administration of the Empire, in token of his reverence and homage: and the pope gaue the Emperour the same againe, as the stipend of his service, for his peaceable protection of the church.
                  And a litle after he hath these wordes:
                  
                     Vnde dico, quod de plenitudine potestatis ex causa rationabili, potest omnes leges civiles evertere, & alias condere: nisi in quantum spectant ad 
                     Sylvest. de papa num. 14. 
                     ius naturale aut divinum, nec imperator cum omnibus legibus & populis Christianis possent contra eius voluntatem quicquam statuere.
                  
                  VVhere vpon I saie, that of the fulnes of power vpon reasonable cause, the pope may dissolve all the ciuill lawes, and make others: neither can the emperor with all lawes and consent of Christendom determine anie one iote against his mind.
                  Archidiaconus and Augustinus de Ancona, are of the selfe same opinion with Sylvester. But other papists are ashamed now thus to hold: and therfore write sharply against this opinion.
                  Bellarminus saith thus:
                  
                     Christus vt homo dum in terris vixit, non accepit, nec voluit vllum temporale dominium: summus autem Pontifex Christi vicarius 
                     Bellar. li. 5. de Rom. pont. c. 4. A. 
                     est, & Christum nobis represent at qualis erat dum hîc inter homines vlveret. Igitur summus Pontifex vt Christi vicarius, at que adeo vt summus Pontifex est, nullum habet temporale dominium.
                  
                  Christ as man while he lived on earth, neither had nor would haue any temporal dominion: but the pope is Christes viear, and representeth Christ to vs, in such sort as he lived here among men: therefore the pope as Christes vicar, and consequently as pope, hath no temporal dominion. Victoria hath these words:
                  
                     
                     Potest as temporalis non dependet a summo pontifice, sicut aliae potestates 
                     Victor. test. ecclesiae pag. 38. 
                     spirituales inferiores. Et paulo post: licèt assertores alterius partis communiter dicunt, quòd papa instituit omnem potestatem temporalem, tanquam delegatam & subor dinatam sibi, & quod ipse constituit Constantinum imperatorem: sedtotum hoc est fictitium & sine quacunque probabilitate, nec innititur vel ratione, vel testimonijs, vel scripturae, vel saltem alicuius expatribus, vel verè theologis, sed glossatores iuris hoc dominium de derunt papae, cum ipsiessent pauperes rebus & doctrina.
                  
                  Temporall power doth not depend vpon the pope as inferiour spiritual powers doe: although others of the other part commonly say, that the pope ordeined all temporall power, as delegate and subordinate to himselfe, and that he made Constantine emperoure. But al this is a meere fable, and voide of all probabilitie, neither hath it any ground, either of reason, or of scripture, or of ancient fathers, or good deuine. yet the glosses of the canons gaue the pope this preheminence, Loe, ignorāce and pouertie are the advā
                        cers of popedome. because themselues were beggerlie followes and vnlearned. Behold here the liuely originall of popedome, euen by the testimonie of the best learned popish doctor.
               
               
                  The eight article of Dissention.
                  THe papistes this day do constantly hold and teach, as a necessarie doctrine of faith: that there be veniall sinnes which doe not dissolve the amitie betweene God and man: because they are not (say they) contra but praeter legem dei. which distinction Thomas Aquinas vttereth verie plainly in these words:
                  
                     Peccatum veniale dicitur peccatum secundùm rationē imperfectam, & in ordine ad peccatū mortale, sicut accidens dicitur ens in ordine ad substantiam secundum 
                     Aquinas 12. q. 88. ar. 1. ad 1. 
                     imperfectam rationem entis: non enim est contra legem. quia venialiter peccans nō facit quod lex prohibet, nec praetermittit ia, ad quod lex per praeceptum obligat, sedfacit praeter legem, quia non observat modum rationis quā lex intēdit,
                  
                  A venial sin is termed sin, after an vnperfect maner, & way to a mortal sin, euen as accidens is called ens in order to substantia, after an vnperfect reason of ens. For it is not against the law: because hee that sinneth venially, doth not that which the lawe forbiddeth, neither doth omit that to which the law by precept doth oblige, but doth besides the law, because it doth not observe the maner of reasō which the law intendeth. But this opinion is sharply reproved, and flatly confuted, by many learned papistes. For Michael Baius apud Bellar. Mich. Baius apud Bellar. de purgator. l. 2. cap. 4. Ioannes Gerson de vita spirituali, lect. 1. circa med. & Roffensis artic. 32. cont. Luther, affirme, that every sin is mortall of it owne nature & therefore may iustly be punished eternally. Durandus proueth by manie reasons, that euerie sin is against the law of God. Ioannes Gerson & Almain Apud Navar. prelud. 7. nū. 16. hold the same. For thus speaketh Ioseph. Angl. of them.
                  
                     
                     Tertia opinio est Gerso. & Almaini asserentium venialia & mortalia non differre ex natura rei, sed tantum ex divina misericordia, eo 
                     Ioseph. Ang. in 2. s. d. 37. diffic. 6, 
                     quod placuit divinae maiestati imputare ad paenam aeternam mortale, veniale autem ad temporalē. vtrumque tamen ex natura sua, cum sit in Deum, esse dignum poena aeterna.
                  
                  The third opinion is Gersons and Almains, affirming that veniall and mortall sinnes do not differ in the nature of the thing, but only Gerson. part. 3. de vita spiritualilect. 1. by the mercie of God: in that it pleased the maiestie of God, to assigne eternall paine for the one, and temporall for the other. For both of them deserve eternall paine of their owne nature, because they are against God,
                  And in another place, the same Iosephus writeth in this manner.
                  
                     Durandus tamen & alij permulti hanc sententiam impugnant, affirmantes 
                     Idem Ioseph. vbi supr, diffic. 
                     peccata venialia esse contra mandata: & haec opinio, videtur modò in scholis communior.
                  
                  But Durand and many others impugne this opinion, auouching veniall sinnes to be against the commaundement: and this opinion now adaies, seemeth to be more common in the scholes. where note The popish doctrine is mutable. See the 1. c. & 4. concl. by the way out of the word (modo now adaies,) the mutabilitie of tomish religion.
               
               
                  THE NINTH ARTICLE. of Dissention.
                  
                  THe councell of Trent, Thomas Aquinas, Bellarminus, and manie other papistes, affirme matrimonie to be properlie a sacrament of the new testament, and to conferre grace.
                  But Durand denieth it, either to give grace, or to be properlie a sacrament. Durand. in 4. d. 26. quest. 3.
                  
                  So Alphonsus a Castro, and Petrus a Soto, denie it to bee properlie a sacrament of the new Iawe. Apud. Bellar. l. 1. de matr. c. 6.
                  
                  And Melchior Canus, having sundrie others of his opinion, (as he saith,) holdeth matrimonie to be a sacrament, yet not everie matrimonie to be so: but only that matrimonie, which is celebrated a ministro 
                     Canus de locis l. 8. c. 5. fol. 246. 
                     ecclesiastico sacris et solennibus verbis: by the minister of the church in sacred and solemne words.
                  The like dissention is among Papistes, about the matter and forme of the said sacrament. For Iosephus Angles reciteth fiue severall opinions, Ioseph. Ang. in 4. s. de matri. ar. 4. diffi. 1. for and concerning this one point of popish doctrine.
                  
                     
And Melchior Canus beholdeth such varietie in this matter, as he reputeth him a mad man, that wil beleeve their sayings. whose words for better credite sake, are these: Canus de locis lib. 8. cap. 5, p, 245.
                  
                  
                     Lege magistrum. D. Tho. Scotum, Bonav. Richard. Palud. Durand. caetero s
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         scholae theologos, & nisi statim eorum pendentes ac vacillantes animos deprehenderis, tum vero me aut stultum, aut temerarium iudicato. Nam & cum quaerunt an matrimonium conferat gratiam, id quod maxime eo loco finiendum erat, non definiunt tamen: sed in his referunt quae in hominum opinione sunt posita. In materia item & forma huius sacramenti statuenda, adeo sunt inconstantes & varij, adeo incerti & ambigui, vt ineptus futurus sit, qui in tanta illorum varietate & discrepantia, rem aliquam certam, constantem, exploratam conetar efficere.
                  
                  Read the master, S. Thomas Bonaventure, Richardus, Paludanus, Durandus, and other schoole divines: & if by and by thou doest not perceiue their wavering and doubtfull mindes, then iudge me either a foole or a rash fellow. For when they enquire if matrimonie confer grace, that which was especially to be defined, that define they not at all, but onely tell what others thinke therein: and in determining the matter and forme of this sacrament, they are so unconstant and various, so uncerten and ambiguous: that he may be deemed a foole, who in such their variety and dissent, will establish any constant doctrine. Here gentle reader, thou maiest behold the dissention of papistes, even in their sacraments and matters mostimportant.
               
               
                  The tenth Article of dissention.
                  PAnormitanus, Abulensis, Gerson, Almaine, Cusanus, with all the fathers of the counsell assembled at Constance, affirme every generall councell to be aboue the Pope, as I haue proved in the 4. chapter and third conclusion: But all our Dominicanes, Iesuites, and seminaries, doe with open mouthes avouch the contrarie, as their writings Let not the Papists hence forth boast of their unitie. and experience this day teacheth vs.
               
               
                  The eleventh article of dissension.
                  THe Iesuites and seminaries tell us, that the Church consisteth in those popes, who sit by materiall succession in Peters chaire at Rome: how badde soever their lives be, and how erroneous soever be their private opinions: but their owne great doctour Nich. Lyranus, doth sharpely impugne that their sottish assertion: telling them that many popes have forsaken the christian faith and become atheists, & therefore that the church doth not consist in the materiall succession of men, but in the faith of Peter and doctrine which he preached. Reade the place & mark the words, for they are most evident.
                  
                  Read his words in the third chapter, and fourth conclusion.
                  The like dissention is amongst papists, about the popes dispensation in matrimonio ratonon consummato, as is alreadie prooved in the fifth chapter: read and peruse the chapter.
               
               
                  
                  The twelfth Article of dissention.
                  MAny papists, as Aquinas, Richardus, Paludanus, Marsilius, pope Gregorie, & all his canonists do hold, that a simple priest by vertue vide Bellar. & Ios. Ang. de sacram. confir. of the popes dispensation, may lawfully and effectually minister their sacrament of confirmation.
                  VVhich opinion Covarruvias recordeth and iustifieth in these wordes:
                  
                     Tertio probatur simplicem sacer dotem posse ex Rom. pontificis dispensatione, sacramentum hoc confirmationis ministrare, auctoritate D. Gregorij 
                     Covar. tom. 2. l. 1. c. 10. pa. 24. de sacr. consir. 
                     qui permittit & vere concedit licentiam presbyteris, ubi desunt Episcopi ministrandi sacramentum confirmationis: quod si fieri iure non posset, vir doctissimus & sanctissimus minime permisisset.
                  
                  It is prooved thirdly, that a simple priest may vpon the popes grant, administer this sacrament of confirmation by S. Gregories authoritie, who permitteth and indeed giveth license unto priestes where bishops want, to doe the same.
                  But his opinion and practise is stoutly impugned by other great vide Covarr. Ios. & Bellar. de sacr. confir. papistes, to wit, Bonaventura, Alphonsus, Durandus, Scotus, Maior, and pope Hadrian, who all avouch that pope Gregorie was a man and therefore might erre, and erred indeed egregiously, what greater and more important dissention can be then this? for confirmation is a sacrament with the papistes.
               
               
                  The thirteenth article of dissention.
                  ALbertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas, Ioannes Maior, Bonaventura, Almain, Richardus, and other papistes affirme, that every vide Bellarm. & Ios. Ang. of their 7. orders is a sacrament. VVhereupon I might inferre right consequently, that the papistes have by iustnumber, 13. sacraments in all.
                  But their Durand doeth reiect this common opinion, as foolish and improbable. Yea, Victoria, Iosephus Angles, Caietanus, and Petrus Lombardus their master of sentences, are no small patrones of Durandus his opinion.
                  Iosephus Anglus writeth thus:
                  
                     Non est erroneum affirmare cum Dur ando, solam or dinationem sacerdotis 
                     Ios. Ang. de sacram. ord. ar. 2. diffic. 3. 
                     esse sacramentum ordinis, reliquas vero ordinationes sacramentalia esse, quia Ecclesia hactenus non declaravit oppositum, neque eius opinio scripturae sacrae & sanctorum auctoritatibus contradicit.
                  
                  It is not erroneous to affirme with Durande that onely priesthood is a sacrament, and that the sixe other are meere sacramentals, because the Church hitherto hath not declared the contrarie, neither is this opinion contrary to holy scripture, or to the doctrine of the fathers. Victoria hath these wordes:
                  
                     
                     Sienim aliqui ordines non sunt iuris divini ut certo constat deminoribus: non est dubitandum, quin collatio illorum committi possit non Episcopo. 
                     Victor. de potest ecclesiae, relect. 2. p. 90.
                  
                  For if some orders be not de iure divino, as it is certen of the lesser orders: there is no doubt but the collation thereof may be committed to him that is no bishop.
                  And in another place the said Victoria saith thus:
                  
                     Opinio Durandi & Caietani est probabilissima, scilicet quod solum sacerdotium est sacramentum, vel saltem quod quatuor minores non 
                     Victor. de sacramento. ord. p. 119. 
                     sunt sacramentum.
                  
                  The opinion of Durand and Caietane is most probable, to witte, that onely priesthood is a sacrament, or at the least, that the foure lesser orders are not a sacrament. And a little after he telleth us, that pope Vrbanus and Innocentius are of the same opinion.
                  These be his wordes:
                  
                     Innocentius vir doctissimus, allegans Vrbanum papam dicit: Vrbanus ait quod solum presbyteratus & diaconatus sunt sacri ordines, & 
                     Victor. ubi su-pra. 
                     quodilli solum leguntur fuisse in primitiva Ecclesia.
                  
                  Innocentius a very learned pope affirmeth with pope Vrbane, that onely priesthood and deaconship are holy orders, and that they only were in the primitiue Church.
               
               
                  The fourteenth article of dissention.
                  COvarruvias having alledged many writers touching the exemption of Clergie-men frō secular iudgements, hath these wordes: Covarr. tom. 2. cap. 3. pract. quaest.
                  
                  
                     Quorum omnium ea est concors sententia, quodhaec clericorum exemptio sit omnino iuris divini, cut per humanam legem derogari non possit.
                  
                  VVho all hold this opinion constantly, that this exemption of Clerkes is wholly of the law divine: from which, mans lawe can not derogate. Yet as saith the said Covarruvias in the same place, the contrary opinion is defended of many other papistes: to wit, of Aquinas, Medina, Alciatus, Innocentius and others: so doubtfull is their popish doctrine. The like dissention is about the conception of our Lady: for the pope and his Iesuites hold, that she was conceived without sinne, and therefore doe they celebrate the day of her conception: Aquinas in 3. part. q. 27. ar. 2. ad. 3. but Aquinas (whose docttine sundry popes have confitmed) defendeth constantly the contrary opinion. And all Thomistes take part with him, some few excepted.
               
               
                  The fifteenth article of dissention.
                  IT is a constant position with the papistes, as which is lately defined bytheir councell of Trent, that no man knoweth himselfe to be in the favour of God: & yet doth their religious bishop Amb. Catharinus, oppose him selfe with tooth & naile against the same: as appeareth evidently to such as list to read them, by the bitter invective treatises betwene Dominicus Soto & him, concerning morall good acts.

The Scotistes hold, that we can keepe all the commandements, quoad substantiam operis: the Thomistes say, wee can doe some, but not all: their great schooleman Gregorius holdes, that we can doe none at all.
               
               
                  The sixteenth Article of dissention.
                  THat the Emperour Constantine was baptised at Rome by Sylvester then bishop there, is constantly affirmed by Damasus, Nicholaus, vide Canum de locis, lib. 11. cap. 5. p. 320. Clemens, Thomas, Platina, Marianus, Sabellicus: yea, Nicephorus avoucheth it to be so certen, as every one may thinke it, and securely beleeue it. yet is this opinion sharply impugned, by many others with them deemed papistes: Hieronymus, Eusebius, Socrates, Argumentum ad hominem. Theodoritus, Zozomenus, Cassiodorus, and Pomponius.
               
               
                  The seventeenth article of dissension.
                  THe pope and his Iesuites tell vs, that in the eucharist, the substance of bread is transsubstantiated into the bodie of Christ, so as accidents remaine there without their subiects: but my L. Abbot their Rupertus saith, that Christ is personally bread in hypostaticall vnion by force of consecration, even as he is personally man Apud Bellar. lib. 3. de euch. cap. 11. by incarnation.
               
               
                  The eighteenth article of dissention.
                  THe pope and his Cardinals with the troupes of Iesuites, tell vs, that private Masse is lawfull, and that the priest may devoure De consecr. dist. secunda, cap. peracta. d. 1. c. omnes, & can. 10. apostolorum. vp all himselfe: but apostolicall canons appoint all to communicate, or els to be driven out of the congregation: and pope Calixtus affirmeth the very same.
               
               
                  The ninteenth article of dissention.
                  POpish dissention touching the production of a substance, out of the accidents which papistes imagine, to remaine without Ios. Ang. in 4 art. vlt. de accid. euchar. subiectes in the eucharist: is incredible. Innocentius holdeth one opinion: Aquinas two, the one repugnant to the other: Richardus another, Caietane another, Scotus another.
               
               
                  The twentieth article of dissention.
                  THe Church of Rome teacheth it to be a matter of faith, to beleeve Christes bodie to be in every part, when one of their consecrated hostes is broken in many peeces: but their schoole-doctour Ios. Angl. in 4. s. q. 1. de euch. 7. diffic. Iohannes Maior, saith it is a probleme.
               
               
                  
                  
                     The 21. article of Dissention.
                  
                  TOuching the quantitie of bread and wine, how much may bee Ioseph. Angl. in 4. s. de euchar. 5. diffic. q. 1. consecrated at one masse: there are three opinions amongest the papistes. Bonaventura holdeth one opinion, Caietain another, and the third is the common.
               
               
                  
                     The 22. article of dissention.
                  
                  COncerning the bread to be consecrated: Albertus magnus holdeth, that either wheat or barley bread will suffice. Caietaine Ios. Ang. in 4. de euchar. art. 3. saith, any bread what soever is vsed to be eaten in any countrie, may be the bread of consecration.
                  3 The thirde opinion holdeth, that onely bread of wheat can suffice.
               
               
                  
                     The 23. article of Dissention.
                  
                  COnfirmation with the papistes is a sacrament, and therefore can it not be omitted without sinne, as Richardus, Durandus, Adrianus q. de confir. ar. 1. and Sylvester affirme: yet doe Aquinas and pope Adrian, defend the contrarie.
               
               
                  
                     The 24. article of Dissention.
                  
                  IOannes Parisiensis affirmeth the substance of breade, to Aquinas p. 3. q. 65. ar. 4. Apud Ioseph. Ang. in 4. sent. de convers. p. 166. be vnited to the bodie of Christ hipostatically: Durande holdeth that the substance of bread is destroyed, but the matter of bread abideth stil with Christs bodie. Cardinal Caietain saith, that nothing in the Gospel enforceth vs to vnderstand these words, (this is my bodie,) so grossely & carnally as the papistes doe. The councell of Trent avoucheth, that the bread neither is annihilated, neither abideth it stil in the sacrament: quod qui potest capere, capiat: for if it neither abide in the sacrament, neither is annihilated, that is, become nothing: I would know what it is, and where it abideth.
               
               
                  
                     The 25. article of Dissention.
                  
                  AQuinas and Caietanus affirme, that the quantitie of a popish cō
                     secrate host, may be corrupted naturallie Scotus saith, that is Ioseph. Ang. in 4. sent. de accident. eucharist. p. 172. impossible, to everie naturall agent: Iosephus Angles holdeth, that a naturall agent may corrupt the whole quantitie, by division of the partes thereof: but neither by way of condensation, neither by transemutation into another forme: and that forsooth, because the quantitie of popish sacrament, is there without a subiect: which subiect is the ordinarie obiect of everie naturall agent.
               
               
                  
                  
                     The 26. article of Dissention.
                  
                  COncerning consecration of the chalice, (as the papists terme it,) Aquinas holdeth, that all the wordes set downe in the romish missall, are of the essence of the forme. Alexander Alensis, Bonaventura, and Durandus affirme, that more then the one halfe of the said words, are meere extrinsecall and not of the essence thereof. Scotus saith, that the forme is not certainlie knowen vnto the Church of Rome: and therefore none can be-secure, but hee that pronounceth all the wordes. Soto avoucheth, that if the priest have intention to consecrate by the former words, (which Bonaventure, Alensis, & Durand Ioseph. Ang. in 4. sent. de euchar. p. 104. teach to be the forme,) then the saide priest consecrateth, but committeth thereby sacriledge: because forsooth, saith Soto, peradventure the other opinion is true. And Iosephus exhorteth verie grauely, to haue intention, neither to consecrate precisely by the former wordes, nor yet by the latter, but to have the intention of the Church, (inmpe with the colier:) for in so doing saith he, the sacrificer shall be in no daunger.
                  Now I beseech thee gentle Reader, what horse would not breake his halter to heare this melodie.
               
               
                  
                     The 27. article of dissention.
                  
                  COncerning the formation of Eve, wonderfull are the exclamations of Catharinus against Caietanus, and of Antonius Fonseca against Catharinus: as also of Paulus Burgensis against Lyranus, & of Matthias Thoring against Burgensis. in many other thinges pervse their glosses vppon the old and new testament, and all this will appeare.
               
               
                  
                     The 28. article of Dissention.
                  
                  IT is a great questiō amongst the papists, what that is which a mouse eateth, when she catcheth their reserved host. Bonaventura, & their Lombard. & Bonavent. in 4. s. d. 13. maister of sentences affirme, that the mouse eateth not Christes bodie: but our popes, Cardinals, and Iesuites defend the contrarie, as a grounded article of their beleefe.
               
               
                  
                     The 29. article of Dissention.
                  
                  POpe Adrian, Richardus, and Panormitanus tell vs, that a priest beeing contrite, may say masse before he be confessed: but by Ioseph. Ang. in 4. s. p. 117. the decree of our councell of Trent, this fact is a damnable sinne.
               
               
                  
                  
                     The 30. article of Dissention,
                  
                  OVR pope, Cardinalles, and Iesuits tell vs, that infidels are not Ioseph. Angl. iu 4. s. ar. 2. de confes. bounden to their auricular confession: But Richardus, Gabriel, and Angelus, defend the contrarie.
               
               
                  
                     The 31. article of dissention.
                  
                  BEllarminus avoucheth, that moe voices in councels must needes Read their words in the 4. chap. be of force: but Canus affirmeth, that the lesser part is the best, if the pope hold with the same. And yet in this point notwithstanding their good agreement resteth the foundation of their popish religion.
               
               
                  
                     The 32. article of dissention.
                  
                  THe councell of Lateran, (where were present 284. persons, patriarkes, Concil. Later. can. 1. de fide cathol. metropolitanes, bishops, and abbots) defined absolutelie, that aungels were created at one and the selfe same time with the world: and yet Basilius, Nazianzenus, Damascenus, Hieronimus, Augustinus, and Aquinas, denie the same to be a matter of faith. Canus de Iocis lib. 5, 169.
                  
                  Manie other like dissentions I could easilie alledge, as of Cardinal Caietanes dissention about divorse and such like. But because mine intent is to bee briefe, these for this time may suffice.
                  For if I should touch all dissentions amongest the papistes, the day would sooner faile mee, then matter whereof to speake.
               
            
            
               The Corollarie.
               FIrst therefore, since the papistes are at bloudie conflict, concerning the popes civil regiment. Secondly, since they teach veniall sinnes not to dissolue amitie betweene God and man, their greatest doctors impugning the same. Thirdly, since some of them constantlie affirme matrimonie to be a sacrament: and other some deny the same with tooth and naile. Fourthly, since to hold the pope to be aboue the general councel, is with some no article of faith nor error at all, with other some an error in faith, and flat heresie. Fiftly, since some papists maintaine romish doctrine by material succession, & other some bitterlie exclaime against the same. Sixtlie, since some do affirme, that the pope may dispense for the ministrie of confirmation: and other some that it is a heinous crime. Seaventhlie, since some hold, that every of their orders is a sacramēt, & some zealouslie impugne the same. Eightly, since many papists defēd our Ladies cōceptiō without sin: & manie other avouch it to haue bin in sin. Ninthly, since it is a constant doctrine among the papistes, that Constantine was baptized at Rome, and that notwithstanding auncient fathers with vniforme consent, repute the same a fable:

a lie, since those & manie other important dissentions, bee amongst the papistes: I conclude, that it is a sufficient motive for mee to renounce the romish religion, as false, erroneous, and pernicious doctrine.
               Thus much of the seaventh motive.
            
            
               THE NINTH CHAPTER: Of credite due vnto vvriters.
               
               THe papistes exclame against protestants, because they reiect now and then the authoritie of man.
               For whose better satisfaction in that behalfe, if they will bee satisfyed with reason: these conclusions following may suffice.
               
                  The first conclusion.
                  THe protestants speaking of the wiser and discreter sort, do highlie reverence the holie fathers and ancient writers, diligentlie reade their workes, and gladly vse them as good helpes and ordinarie meanes vnder God: for & concerning the exact explication of holie writte. Of this conclusion none can bee ignorant or stande in doubt therof, that seriouslie peruse doctor Iewel, the famous and worthie bishop of Saris burie against Doctor Harding: Doctor VVhitgift, the most reverend, learned, and vertuous arch bishop of Canterburie, against M. Cartwright: Doctor Cooper the reverend bishop of winchester, against the Martinistes: Doctor Reinolds, Doctor Seravia, Doctor Sutliue, and others.
               
               
                  The second Conclusion.
                  THE Protestants, although they speake and thinke reverentlie of the ancient fathers: yet doe they neither repute their works of equal authoritie with the holie Scriptures: neither to be free from all errours and imperfections. wherein they nothing at all

swerve from the modest estimation, which the said holie fathers had euer of themselves.
                  For proofe of this conclusion. S. Augustine writeth in this maner. Ego solis eis scriptur arū libris qui iam canonici appellantur, hunc timorem & honorem didici deferre, vt nullum eorum auctorem scribendo 
                     Aug. epist. 19. ad Hero. 
                     aliquiderrasse firmissime credam. alios autem it a lego, vt quantalibet sanctitate doctrina
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         praepolleant, non ideo verum putem quia ipsi it a censuerunt, sed quia mihi velper illos auctores canonicos, vel probabili ratione quod a veritate non abhorreat, per suadere potuerunt. I haue learned to give this feare and honour to those onely books of scripture, which are called canonical, that I firmly beleeue no author thereof to have erred in anie point: but yet I read others so, that how holie or learned soever they be, I do not by & by thinke it true, because they say so: but because they perswade me by those canonicall writers, or by probable reason, that that is true they say.
                  And in another place, the same saint Augustine hath these wordes.
                  
                     Ego huius epistolae authoritate non teneor, quòd liter as Cypriani vt canonicas 
                     Aug. contra Cresconium l. 2. c. 32. 
                     non habeo, sed eas ex canonicis considero, & quod in eis divinarum scripturarum auctoritati congruit, cum laude eius accipio: quòd autem non congruit, cum pace eius respuo.
                  
                  I am not bound to the authoritie of this epistle, because I take not Ciprian his writings for canonicall, but consider them by the canonicall, and what I finde in them agreeable to holy writ, that with his praise do I receiue: but what is dissonāt, that with his favour I reiect.
                  And againe hee saith of him selfe in this maner:
                  
                     Negare non possum nec debeo, sicut in ipsis maioribus it a multa esse 
                     Habetur dist. 9. c. negare 4. 
                     in tam multis opusculis meis, quae possunt iusto iudicio et nulla temeritate culpari.
                  
                  I neither can nor dare denie, but as in our auncestors, so in my workes also are manie thinges, which may iustly, and without all temeritie be reproved. yea the same saint Augustine opposeth only saint Pauls testimonie against all the writers Saint Hierome could Aug. epist. 19. ad Hier. tom. 2. pag. 50. alledge, about the great controversie, where saint Peter was reproved of saint Paul. By which testimonie it is very plaine, that S. Augustine did reverence the old writers, but yet did think them men, and to have their errors: & therefore would be not admit for truth what soever they wrote but only that which he foūd to be consonāt to the holie scriptures. And because my L. of Roch. is so highly renowmed in the church of Rome, he shal make an end of this conclusion, where he writeth in this maner: Nec Augustini nec Hieronimi, nec alterius cuinslibet auctoris doctrinae sic ecclesia subscripsit, quin ipsi locis aliquot ab ijs lice
                     
                     at dissentire. nam in nonnullis ipsilocis se plane monstrarunt homines 
                     Roffensis art. 32. advers. Luth. p. 420. 
                     esse, atque nonnunquam aberrasse sequitur: quo fit, vt tametsi propter aliquas humanas hallucinationes, de multis (quae dicti patre, in commentarijs suis reliquerunt) dubitare liceat: sanctitatem tamen eorum haud licet in dubium revocare.
                  
                  The church (of Rome) hath not so subscribed to the doctrine, either of Augustine or of Hierome, or of anie other writer: but that we may dissent from their opinions in some places. For themselves haue in certaine places shewed plainlie that they were men, and wanted not their errours. VVherefore albeit by reason of humaine frailtie we may lawfullie doubt of manie thinges which the said fathers have left behind them in their bookes: yet may we not now call their holinesse into question. In which wordes, our great popish bishop teacheth vs three documents.
                  1 First, that their church giveth everie one libertie, to dissent from Augustine, Hierome, and other writers whosoever.
                  2 Secondlie, that the fathers have plainlie declared themselves to be men, and to haue had their imperfections accordinglie.
                  3 Thirdlie, that manie errours are to be found in the commentaries of the fathers. So then our bishop is of my opinion, and so also should the rest be: if they would be constant in their owne doctrine, which is published to the view of the world.
               
               
                  
                     The 3. Conclusion.
                  
                  NOt that which the greater part of the fathers or moe voices agree vnto, is alwaies the vndoubted truth: but often times that which the lesser part, and fewer persons doe affirme.
                  For the proofe hereof, Melchior Canus writeth thus:
                  
                     Scimus frequenter vsu venire, vt maior pars vincat meliorem scimus 
                     Canus de locis lib. 5. c. 5. pag. 164. 
                     non ea semper esse optima, quae placent pluribus: scimus in rebus quae ad doctrinam pertinent, sapientum sensum esse praeferendum: & sapientes sunt paucissimi, cum stultorum infinitus sit numerus.
                  
                  VVee know it often chaunceth so, that the greater part prevaileth against the better. vve know that those thinges are not ever the best, which please the most. we know that in matters of doctrine, the iudge ment of the wise ought to be followed: for wise men bee few, and fooles infinite. Iosephus Angles, Thomas Aquinas, and Petrus Lombardus affirme it to be the opinion of the old fathers, of Basilius, of Ioseph. Ang. de creat. rerū dist. 12. q. 1. Ambrosius, of Chrisostomus, of Hieronimus, of Eusebius, of Damascenus, of Gregorius, and of others, that the world was created in 6. naturall daies successivelie, as Moises recordeth the same: yet this notwithstanding, saint Augustine holdeth opinion against them all, Tho. Aquinas 1. p. quest. 74. ar. 2. in cor. p. Lombard. l. 2. dist. 12. and saith, that the 6. daies mentioned by Moises were metaphoricall, not natural. Moises dividing those things which were made by parts,

for the better capacitie of the rude and ignorant people to whom he spake. which opinion of one onelie Augustine, was ever preferred in the church, as testifyeth Melchior Canus in these wordes:
                  
                     At communis hic sanctorum consensus nullum argumentum certum 
                     Canus de locis. l. 7. cap. 1 p. 116. 
                     theologis subministrat, quin vnius Aug. opinio caeteris omnibus adversa, probabilis semper in ecclesia est habita.
                  
                  But this common consent of the holie fathers doth not yeeld any found argument to devines, for the opinion of one onelie Augustine repugnant to the rest was ever thought probable in the church.
                  All the old writers, Augustinus, Ambrosius, Chrisostomus, Remigius, Canus, vbi supra, p. 217. Eusebius, Maximus, Beda, Anselmus, Bernardus, Erhardus, Bernardinus, Bona ventura, Thomas, Hugo, and all the rest without exception, affirme vniformelie citing expresse textes of scripture for their opinion, that the blessed virgin Marie was conceived in originall sinne: & yet doth the late hatched nest of Iesuits, and sundrie other papistes avouche this day the contrarie for the truth. Therefore saith their owne archbishop and greate canonist Panormitanus: that we ought at all times to give more credite to one onelie prelate whosoever alledging the scriptures, then to the resolution of the Panormit. apud. Sylvest. de conc. par. 3 pope himselfe, or of his counceil, not grounded vpon the said scriptures.
               
               
                  
                     The 4. Conclusion.
                  
                  THe papistes themselues doe often reiect the generall and common opinion, and follow their owne private iudgements, never remēbring, or litle regarding, that they condemne the like in others.
                  This writeth their owne Melchior Canus.
                  
                     Vbi ego si Thomistae omnes cum Scotistis existant, sicum antiquis iuniores vellent contra me pugnare, tamen superior sim necesse est. non enim 
                     Canus de locis, l. 8. c. 5. p. 245. 
                     vt nonnulli putant, omnia sunt in Theologorum auctoritate.
                  
                  wherin, though all the Thomistes stand with the Scotistes, though the old writers with the yong fight against me, yet shall I of necessity have the vpper hand ouer thē. For al things rest not as some do think, in the authoritie of divines. Their owne Cardinal Caietain, notwithstanding his zealous affection towards poperie & his owne popish estate, did for all that freelie acknowledge the truth in this point: in so much that he preferreth a sense newly perceived, but grounded vpon the scriptures before the old received opiniō of how many fathers so ever. whose words because they are worthie the hearing and reading I wil alledge at large. Thus doth he write. Super quinque libris Mosis iuxta sesum literalem novum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         scripturae sensum quandoque illaturus sub s
                           •
                        matris 
                     Caietai, in sua prefat. in 5. libros Mosaicos 
                     ecclesiae aec apostolicae sedis censura, rogo lectores omnes ne precipites detestentur aliquid, sed librent omnia apud sacram scripturam, apudfidei christianae veritatem, apud Catholicae ecclesiae documenta ac mores.
                  
                  
                     
                     & siquando occurrerit novus sensus textui consonus, nec a sacra scriptura, nec ab ecclesiae doctrina dissomus, quamvis a torrente doctorum sacrorum alienus, aequos se prebeant censores. meminerint ius suum vni cuique tribuere, solis scripturae sacrae authoribus reservata est authoritas haec, vt ideo credamus sic esse quodipsiita scripserunt. nullus itaque detestetur novum sacrae scripturae sensum, ex hoc quod dissonat a priscis doctoribus. sed scrutetur per spicacius textum ac contextum scripturae, & si quadrare invenerit, laudet deum, qui non alligavit expositionem scripturarum sacrarum priscorum doctorum sensibus, sed scripturoe ipsi integrae sub catholicae ecclesiae censura. alioquin spes nobis ac posteris tolleretur exponendi scripturam sacram, nisitransferendo (vt aiunt) de libro in quinternum.
                  
                  Being now readie to write vpon the pentateuch of Moses according to the literall sense, and purposing to bring now and then a new sense of the scripture, vnder the censure of our holy mother the church and apostolike seate: I desire all that shal read my commentaries, to contemne nothing rashly, but to ponder every thing with the scripture and the veritie of the christian faith, and the doctrine of the catholike church. And if at any time a new sense occurre, which is consonant to the text, and not dissonant from holy writ or doctrine of the church, although it swarve from the opinion of never so manie fathers: yet let the readers iudge thereof indifferently, and according to equitie: Let them remember to give everie one his right: for this priviledge is onely graunted to the writers of the holie scriptures: that wee must therefore beleeve it to be so, because they haue written so. Let none therefore loath a newe sense of holie scripture, because it dissenteth from the old doctors: but let him exactlie consider the text and context of the scripture: and if he find it to agree, let him praise God, who hath not tied the exposition of the holy scriptures, to the opinions of the old doctors, but to the integritie of the scripture it selfe, vnder the censure of the catholike church. For otherwise neither wee nor our posteritie should have anie hope to expound the scripture, but onelie to translate out of one booke into another.
                  Thus we heare the verdict of our Caietaine, our Thomist, our frier, our Cardinall of Rome: by whose resolution it is evident, that no sense, though never so new, no exposition though never so strange, no opinion though different from never so many fathers, ought to bee reiected if it be agreeable to the scriptures. and consequently, it followeth by the said resolution, that everie truth is to be tried by the scriptures and none by the fathers.
                  
                     
For first, our Cardinall telleth us, that he purposeth now & then, to bring newe senses, new Glosses, nevv expositions of the Scriptures. 1
                  
                  Secondly, he saith, that such new senses must not rashly bee contemned, but duely examined by the scriptures: and then admitted, if 5 they be found consonant to the same.
                  Thirdly, he teacheth us this golden lesson, that God hath not tyed the exposition of the scripture, to the iudgement of any auncient 3 father or fathers whosoever.
                  Fourthly, he telleth us, that the Apostles and such as only penned the holy scriptures, had this speciall prerogative, that they coulde 4 not erre. All which important pointes, are so learnedly, so gravely, & so christianly observed by this Cardinall, as more cannot be wished: yea, in the selfe same preface hee professeth constantly, that hee will neither expound the Greeke nor the Latine text: but the fountaine Caiet. vbi supra. and the originall, to wit, the Hebrew. And his reason is, because the Hebrew onely is authenticall.
                  Where note by the way, that the Latine edition which the papists tearme vulgata, and which is so magnified by the late councell of 1 Trent, as both the Greeke and the Hebrew must give place unto the same: is of small or no authoritie in respect of the Hebrew, by Cardinall Caietanus his resolution.
                  Note secondly, that this Cardinal did dedicate these his commentaries, 2 (in which all these memorable observations are conteined,) to our holy father Pope Clement him selfe, who perused them and difallowed no part thereof: and consequently, that this doctrine of Caietane is confirmed by the pope. For so mightily hath God alwayes wrought for the truth of his Gospell, as evident testimonies are set downe euen by the adversaries, and remaine this day with them vncancelled, for confirmation of the same. Neither is this the opinion of the popes Cardinall onely, but of Aquinas also his angelicall and best approoved doctour.
                  His wordes I will likewise alledge at large, because, albeit they belong, yet can they not be thought tedious to such as loue the trueth: as which are most significant and effectuall for the controversie now in hand.
                  Thus therefore doeth he write:
                  
                     Licet locus ab auctoritate quae fundatur super oratione humana, sit infirmissimus; locus tamen ab auctoritate quae fundatur super revelatione divina: est efficacissimus. Vtitur tamen sacra doctrina etiam 
                     Aquin. p. 1, q. 1. ar. 8. ad 2. argumentum. 
                     ratione humana, non quidem ad probandum fidem, (quia per hoc tolleretur meritum fidei,) sed ad manifest andum aliqua aliaquae traduntur in hac doctrina. Cum igitur gratia non tollat naturam sed perficiat,
                     
                     oportet quod naturalis ratio sub serviat fidei, sicut & naturalis inclinatio voluntatis obsequitur charitati. vnde & apostolus dicit, 2. Cor. 10. in captivit atem redigentes omnem intellectū in obsequium Christi. Et inde est, quod & authoritatibus philosophorum sacra doctrina vtitur, vbi per rationem naturalem veritatem cogno scere potuerunt: sicut Paulus act. 17. inducit verbum Arati, dicens. sicut & quidam poetarum vestrorum dixerunt, genus Dei samus. sed tamen sacra doctrina huiusmodi auctoritatibus vtitur, quasi extraneis argumentis & probabilibus. auctoritatibus autem canonicae scripturae vtitur, propriè ex necessitate argumentando. auctorit atibus autem aliorum doctorum ecelesiae, quasi arguendo ex proprijs, sed probabiliter. innititur enim fides nostra revelationi apostolis & prophetis factae, qui canonicos libros scripserunt. non autem revelationi, si qua fuit alijs doctoribus facta.
                  
                  Although the place of authoritie, which is grounded vpon mans reason, be most weake and infirme: yet the place which is grounded vpon divine authoritie, is most sure and effectuall. neverthelesse, sacred doctrine vseth also mans reason, not indeede to establish faith, (for so faith should lose it merite,) but for the manifestation of some other thinges which are deliuered in this doctrine.
                  Since therefore grace doth not destroy nature, but doth pervert the same, it is expedient that naturall reason be servant vnto faith, even as naturall inclination of the will is servant vnto charitie. whervpon the apostle willeth vs, to bring our vnderstanding captive to the obedience of Christ. And from hence commeth it, that sacred doctrine vseth also the authorities of philosophers, when they could by naturall reason haue knowledge of the truth, as Saint Paul alledged the saying of Aratus. yet sacred doctrine vseth such authorities, as arguments which are externall, and onely probable. But vseth the authorities of canonicall scripture, as argumentes that are proper, and which conclude of necessitie. as for authorities of the doctors of the church, it vseth them as proper arguments: but which are onely probable, and do not conclude necessarilie. For our faith is grounded vpon revelation made to the apostles and prophets, who wrote the canonical scripture: but not vpon revelation of anie other writers, if anie were made vnto them. Thus saith Aquinas. Out of whose words I gather First, that the authoritie brought from man, is ever insufficient.
                  2 I gather secondly, that that ground whereupon we must build, as vpon an vndoubted truth, is onelie and solelie the authoritie of the scriptures.
                  3 I gather thirdlie, that mans reason may never be vsed, to establish any point of doctrine.
                  
                     
4 I gather fourthlie, that the fathers are to be read reverentlie, and their authorities to be vsed as probable reasons, but not as necessarie demonstrations.
                  5 I gather fiftlie, that feined romish revelations are not authentical. And consequentlie, that all revelations divulged vnder the name of Saint Bridget and others, are either meereillusions, or of small force, and which can yeeld no sound argument in matters of faith.
                  Victoria in verie briefe wordes, vttereth this point effectuallie.
                  
                     Licet in hoc omnes conveniant, non est tamen mihi certum. 
                     Victoria de sacram. p. 118.
                  
                  Although (saith he) all agree in this, yet doe not I make it certaine.
                  Navarre singeth the same song in manie places, whereof I will recite onelie one.
                  
                     Tum quod fundamentum principale ipsius est; quod communis tenet 
                     Navar. in en-chir. cap. 7. paral. 4. 
                     oppositum, quodip sum etiam ipse assero: sed non obstat, quia a communi recedendum, quum pro contraria est textus velratio, cui non potest satis bene responderi.
                  
                  Because also his principal ground is, that the common opinion is to the contrarie: which thing I my selfe also graunt. But that is not of force: for we must renounce the common opinion, when there is either text or reason, which can not be sufficientlie answered.
                  In fine, their owne glosse in their decrees reiecteth saint Augustine roundlie in these words:
                  
                     Cum enim salva sua pace, Augustinus non bene opponit istis, & it a dormit 
                     27. q. 1. c. nupr. 
                     avit hic Augustinus.
                  
                  VVhere saint Augustine by his favour doth not well obiect against this: and so Augustine here was a sleepe.
                  Loe, when the fathers speake not placentia, everie beggerlie popish glosse reiecteth them at pleasure. And yet must wee vnder paine of excommunication admit their authoritie, when they seeme to make for poperie. albeit, they speake never so flatlie against the holie concil. later. 2. sess. penult. scriptures. yea their late councell of Lateran chargeth all preachers vnder paine of excommunication, that they expound the scriptures according to the old doctors, received in the church of Rome.
               
            
            
               The Corollarie.
               1 FIrst therefore, since the ancient fathers may erre, and have also erred de facto.
               2 Secondlie, since Saint Augustine admitteth the opinion of fathers, no further then they agree with the scriptures.
               3 Thirdlie, since that which is holden of the greater part of the fathers is often false and disagreeable to the truth.
               
                  
4 Fourthly, since the papistes them-selves preferre the opinion of one before many:
               Fiftly, since Caietanus, Canus, Navarrus, and others, doe al roundly reiect the common opinion, when it disliketh them:
               6 Sixtly, since their owne glosse maketh no accompt of S. Augustine, when he speaketh not placentia: I conclude, that it is a sufficient motive for me to renounce the romish religion, as false, erroneous, and pernicious doctriue.
               Thus much of the eight Motive.
            
            
               The X. CHAP. Of Traditions vvritten and vnwritien.
               
                  THe Papistes beare the world in hand, that many things necessarie for mans salvation, are not conteined in the written worde: and consequently, that none can be saved, but such as beleeve their unwritten traditions.
               VVherein, that trueth may plainly shewe it selfe, after mine accustomed manner, I put downe conclusions.
               
                  The first conclusion.
                  THe written worde or holy scripture, conteineth in it selfe everie thing necessary for our salvation.
                  For proofe of this conclusion, S. Paul writeth unto Timothie in this manner:
                  
                     Quia ab infantia sacras literas nosti, quae te possunt instruere ad salutem per fidem in Christo Ie su. 
                     2. Tim. 3. 15.
                  
                  Because thou hast knowne the Scriptures from thy infancie, which are able to instruct thee to salvation, through faith in Christ Iesus.
                  Now, if the scriptures be able so to instruct one, as hee may thereby attaine his salvation: it can not doubtlesse be denied with reason,

that euerie thing necessarie for mans salvation is conteined therein.
                  For which cause the Apostle addeth these wordes:
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Cap. cod. vers. 16.
                  
                  The whole scripture is given by the inspiration of God: and is profitable to doctrine, to redargution, to correction, to instruction, which is in righteousnesse, that the man of God may be perfect, prepared to everie good worke.
                  In which wordes the holie vessell of God Saint Paul, confirmeth that which he said before, to wit: that the holie scripture is able of it selfe, to instruct vs fullie vnto salvation.
                  And the Apostle declareth this by an argument drawen from the sufficient enumeration of those partes, which are required vnto our salvation: and withall he commendeth the scripture, of the sufficient cause, end and vse thereof.
                  The cause is, in that he saith the scripture is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is to say The cause. given by the inspiration of God. The vse is foure fold, whereof the two former pertaine to doctrine: the two latter to life and manners. The vse.
                  
                  1 For first, it is profitable to the doctrine of faith, and holie obedience.
                  2 Secondlie, to the refutation of errors, contradictions and false opinions.
                  3 Thirdlie, for the correction of abuses as wel publique as private.
                  4 Fourthlie, for instruction vnto righteousnes, that is, to leade a godlie and holie life. The end.
                  
                  The end is, that the man of God, to wit, hee that is the true worshipper of God may be sounde, perfect, and most absolute furnished in ail kinde of goodnes. which being so, we must needes confesse, (if we will not obstinatelie denie the manifest truth,) that the scriptures containe all thinges necessarie for christian doctrine, and for the full accomplishment of eternall life. Neither will it helpe the papistes to answere, (as their wonted maner is,) that the greek vvord (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) signifieth everie, not all: so as the Apostle should say, not the whole scripture, but everie scripture. For first, everie scripture is not so copious or fruitfull, as it can afford vs all those goodlie affects, which saint Paul here rehearseth.
                  Againe, the selfe same greeke worde (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) is vsed for the whole, by saint Paules owne interpretation in another place of holie scripture, where he hath these expresse words.
                  
                     
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 1. Cor. c. 13. v. 2
                  
                  And if I have all and the whole miraculous faith, so that I can remove mountaines, but have not love, I am nothing.
                  In which place the papistes can not possiblie interprete the selfe same greeke word, though they would never so gladlie, but for all & the whole, because otherwise the sense would be most absurd. as which would prove saint Paul to speake of everie kinde of faith, and consequentlie of the iustifying faith with the rest: albeit, it is most cleare: that he speaketh of the miraculous faith onelie, which is often in the verie wicked.
                  The same greeke word in two severall places of saint Matthew, is likewise taken for the whole.
                  For in the second chapter it is thus written.
                  When king Herod heard, hee was troubled and the whole citie of Hierusalem with him. Mat. cap. 2. v. 3. 4.
                  
                  VVhere if the greeke word (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) were interpreted everie, and not the whole, the sense would be absurd: to wit, everie citie of Hierusalem, being yet but one onlie Hierusalem in all. but (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) being taken for the whole, the sense is plaine and easie: to wit, the whole citie of Hierusalem.
                  So in the sixt chapter it is thus written. Mat. c. 6. v. 29.
                  
                  Neither was Salomon in all his glorie, araied like one of these.
                  VVhere if the word (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) bee taken for everie, the sense is not currant, because Christ compareth his bountifull providence over hearbes and flowers, not with a peece of Salomons glorie, but with all and the whole. For whosoever shal otherwise interpret the greeke word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , shall no litle derogate from the magnificence of Christ his providence, as also frustrate his comparison.
                  Our holie father Abraham in matters of salvation, doth not send vs to traditions, but to the scriptures of Moses and the prophets.
                  For thus it is written:
                  
                     Habent Mosen & Prophetas, audiant illos.
                  
                  They have Moses and the prophets, let them heare them. Luc. c. 26. v. 29.
                  
                  As if he had said, now the law is not studied, now the prophets are contemned: now God is not heard speaking in his word:
                  Some would haue angels come downe from heaven: some desire miracles, other some the dead to rise againe: But to heare Moses and the prophets, that is, to read the scriptures, is the true and only

way to attaine eternal life.
                  And doubtlesse, if the scriptures be meanes to bring vs to salvation, (which the papistes dare not denie,) then must they be sufficient for that end, or else Christes workes should be vnperfect.
                  For which cause Saint Iohn writeth thus:
                  
                     Haec autem scripta sunt, vt credatis quod Iesus est Christus filius Dei, 
                     Ioā. c. 20. v. 30. 
                     & vt eredentes, vitam habeatis in nomine ipsius:
                  
                  But these things are written, that yee may beleeve Iesus to be Christ the sonne of God, and that by beliefe, yee may have life in his name▪
                  
                  Loe, Saint Iohn affirmeth so much to be written, as is sufficient for our beliefe, through which we must be saved.
                  The popish glosse vpon the same text hath these wordes:
                  
                     Haec quae fecit Iesus & ante resurrectionem et post, dicit se scripsisse 
                     Glossa ordin. super cap. 20 Ioannis. 
                     vt fidem astruat qua vita habeatur.
                  
                  The thinges that Iesus did before and after his resurrection, hee caused to be written, for the establishing of that faith which giveth life.
                  Nicolaus Lyranus their owne deare doctor, confirmeth the same in these wordes.
                  
                     In nomine eius. i. per fidem nominis Christi, quia secundum quod dicitur Act. 4. neque enim aliud nomen est sub coelo datum hominibus, in quo nos oporteat salvos fieri. 
                     Lyran. in c. 20. Ioānis.
                  
                  In his name, that is, through faith of the name of Christ, because as is said in the actes: ther is no other name vnder heaven given vnto men, in which we can be saved.
                  S. Hierome, though so much liked of the papistes, is not for all that dissonant from the rest.
                  For thus doth he write.
                  
                     Ergo nec parentum, nec maiorum error sequenáus est, sed auctoritas scripturarum, & Dei docentis imperium. 
                     Hier. in 9. cap. Ier. tom. 5.
                  
                  Therefore we must neither follow the errour of our parents, nor of our auncestours: but the auctoritie of the scriptures, and the commandemēt of God that teacheth vs. S. August. that grave father, that glistering beame that strong piller of Christs church, doth avouch the same truth in words yet more manifest, writing in this maner:
                  
                     Cūmulta fecisset Dom. Iesus, nō omnia scripta sunt: electa sunt autem quae scriberentur, quae saluti credentium sufficere videbantur. 
                     August. in Ioan. tract. 49. to. 9. in initio.
                  
                  where as our Lord Iesus did manie thinges, all were not written,

but so much was appointed to be written, as was thought sufficient for the salvation of the faithfull.
                  What more forceable wordes can be wished? what more effectuall narration can be expected? what more sensible speeches can bee vsed? yet if it be possible to say more herein, the selfe same Augustine will performe it in another place, where he hath these expresse words.
                  
                     In his enim quae aperte in scriptura posita sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem more sque vivendi, spem scilicet, atque charitatem. 
                     Aug. de doctri na Christ. li. 2. c. 
                           •
                        . tom. 3.
                  
                  For in those things which are plainely set downe in the scripture, are found all those thinges, which conteine our faith and maners, that is, hope, and charitie.
                  Loe, all things that concerne faith, hope, and charitie, are plainly found in holie scripture. where it is diligently to be observed, that Saint Augustine doth not onelie say, that all thinges conteining faith, hope, and charitie, are to bee found in the scripture: but hee doth further say, that all such thinges are plainlie set downe in the scriptures.
                  VVherevpon I inferre this notable document against popish doctrine, that albeit manie thinges in manie places of the scripture bee obscure and intricate, (which I willinglie graunt vnto the papistes,) & consequentlie, that the same surpasse the capacity and iudgement of the vulgar sort: yet are all thinges concerning our beleefe, concerning our maners, concerning our hope, concerning our charity, concerning our salvation so plaine and so manifest, as everie one even of the meanest iudgement, may easilie perceive, and vnderstande the same: and this the papistes must perforce graunt vnto mee, neither will I require more at their handes.
                  This is confirmed by my Lord of Rochester, their learned Bishoppe and reputed martire.
                  For these bee his wordes, as hee himselfe hath vttered them:
                  
                     Scriptura sacra conclave quoddam est omnium veritatum, qua 
                     Roffensis art. 37. aduers. Luth. p. 411. 
                     Christianis scitu necessariae sunt.
                  
                  The holie scripture is a cellar, parlour, or storehouse of all truthes, which are needfull to be knowen of Christians.
                  NOVV gentle reader, by this bishops confession it is evideut, that popish vnwritten traditions are not needfull or necessarie for christians: and so with no reason can they be thrust vppon vs.
                  
                     
Dionysius Areopagita, who lived in the Apostles time, is of the same mind:
                  These are his wordes:
                  
                     Omnino igitur non audendum est, quicquam de summa abstrusaque divinitate aut dicere, aut cogitare, praeter eaquae nobis divinitus scriptae 
                     Dionys. Areopag. de divinis nominib. cap. 1. in initio. 
                     divinae enuntiarunt.
                  
                  In no wise therefore may wee make bold to speake, or thinke anie thing of the most high and ineffable divinitie: but that onelie, which holie writ hath revealed vnto vs from heaven.
                  Melchior Canus, albeit he labour with tooth and naile to prove the consent of the fathers, to yeelde vs an vndoubted argument of Canus de locis l. 7. c. 3. pag. 228. the truth: yet can hee not denie that the scripture is perfect and most sufficient in everierespect:
                  These are his wordes:
                  
                     Sedquaer at hic for sit an aliquis: cumsit perfectus scriptur arum canon, sibique adomnia satis superque sufficiat: quid opus est, vt ei sanctorum & intelligentia iung atur & auctoritas.
                  
                  But some man happily here will demaund: that since the canon of the scripture is perfect, and most sufficient of it selfe to everie end, and in everie respect: what neede have wee to ioine with the same, either the exposition or the authoritie of the fathers.
                  Thus saith Canus, not denying the sufficiencie of the holie scripture: but requiring the commentaries of the fathers, for the better vnderstanding of the same. whose opinion in that respect I doe not whollie dislike, as is alreadie declared in the ninth chapter.
                  This being so, it followeth by a necessarie consequent: that neither yong nor old, rich nor pore men nor women, learned nor vnlearned, ought to be debarred from reading of the scriptures. which my doctrine was altogether practicall, in the auncient and primitive church.
                  For confirmation whereof, no greater testimonie can be had, then the old vulgar translations of the bibles.
                  In which behalfe, I savv verie latelie to my great comfort in the librarie of Emmanuell colledge in Cambridge, an English Bible of such antiquitie, as I could not vnderstand perfectlie the greater part of the wordes. vvhich is an evident demonstration, that bibles were in old time translated into the vulgar tongue, so as the common people might reade them.
                  Thomas Aquinas, (whose person the church of Rome hath canonized for a saint, and his doctrine for authenticall,) teacheth vs not to beleeue anie thing concerning God, save that onelie vvhich is conteined in the scripture expresselie, or at least significantlie.
                  
                     
These be his wordes:
                  
                     Dicendum quod de deo dicere non debemus, quod in sacrae scriptur a non 
                     Aquin. p. 1. q. 36. ar. 2. adprimum. 
                     invenitur, velperverba, velper sensum.
                  
                  vve must answere, that nothing is to bee verified of God, which is not conteined in holie writ, either expresselie, or else in sense.
                  And in another place, the same Aquinas saith thus.
                  
                     Quicquid enim ille (Christus) de suis factis & dictis nos legere voluit, 
                     Aquin. p. 3. q. 42. ar. 4. ad 1. 
                     hoc scribendum illis tanquam suis manibus imperauit.
                  
                  For vvhatsoeuer Christ vvould haue vs to reade of his doinges and sayinges, that he commaunded his Apostles to vvrite, as if hee had done it vvith his ovvne handes.
                  In vvhich vvords Aquinas avoucheth most plainlie, that al things necessarie for our salvation, are conteined in the scriptures. For in Christes deedes, are conteined his miracles, his life, his conversation: in his sayings are conteined his preaching, his teaching, hic doctrine.
                  If then this be true as it is most true, (for the papistes neither can nor will denie Aquinas,) that whatsoever Christ vvould haue vs to knovv, of his miracles, of his life, of his conversation, of his preaching, of his teaching, of his doctrine, the same is novv vvritten in the scriptures: no man doubtlesse, but he that vvill cum ratione insanire, can denie all thinges necessarie for our salvation, to be conteined in the holie scriptures.
                  vvith Aquinas agreeth their ovvne renovvmed professor and deare frier Franciscus Victoria, vvhose vvordes are these:
                  
                     Non est mihi certum licet omnes dicant, quòdin scriptur a non continetur. 
                     Vict. de sacrā. p. 120.
                  
                  I doe not thinke it certaine, albeit all vvriters say so, because I can not find it in the scripture.
                  Againe in an other place, he vvriteth in this maner.
                  
                     Propter quas (opiniones) nullo modo debemus discedere a regula & synceritate 
                     Victor. relect. 8. de augmen. charit. p. 308. 
                     scriptur arum.
                  
                  For vvhich opinions we must by no meanes depart, from the rule and sinceritie of the scriptures. I could say much more herein, but nothing can be more effectuall against the papistes, then to confute them by their ovvne approved doctors. And my desire also is to avoide all superfluous words.
               
               
                  
                  The second Conclusion.
                  ALL persons ought to read the scriptures diligentlie, because out of them even the simplest of all may gather so much, as shall bee necessarie for their salvation.
                  This I say, against that popish ridiculous, vnchristian, and pestilent abuse, in vvhich they deliver by vvay of tradition to the people, the scriptures, sacramentes, and church service, in a strange tongue to them vnknowen. vvhich their vngodlie and intollerable dealing. S. Chrisostome most sharplie reprooveth in manie places, vvherof I vvill onelie alledge some fevv.
                  In his commentarie vpon Saint Paul, he hath these vvordes:
                  
                     Et vos itaque silectioni cum animi alacritate volueritis attendere, nullo 
                     Chrysoft. in proaemio epist. ad. Rom. 
                     alio preterea opus habebitis. verus enim est sermo Christi, cum dicit, quaerite & invenietis, pulsate & aperietur. verum quia plures exijs qui huc convenere, & liberorum educationem & vxoris curam gubernandae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         domus in sesereceperunt, atque ideo non sustinent totos se labori isti addicere, saltem ad percipienda quae alij collegerunt excitamini, tantum ijs quae dicuntur audiendis impendite diligentiae quantum colligendis pecunijs. tametsi enim turpe sit non nisi tantum a vobis exigere, tamen conenti erimus, sivel tantum prestetis. nam hinc innumera mala nata sunt, quod scripturae ignorantur. hinc erupit multa illa haere seon pernicies, hinc vita dissoluta, hinc inutiles labores. quēadmodum enim qui luce ista privati sunt, recta vti
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         non pergunt: ita qui adradios divinarum scripturarum non respiciunt, multa coguntur continuo delinquere, vtpote in longe peioribus tenebris ambulantes: quod ne nobis vsuveniat, oculos ad spelndorem apostolicorum verborum aperiamus.
                  
                  If therefore you vvil read the scriptures vvith alacritie of minde, you shall neede no other helpe at all: for Christes vvord is true.
                  vvhen he saith:
                  Seeke, and yeee shall finde: knocke, and it shall bee opened vnto yov. Mat. 7.
                  
                  But for that manie of you are charged vvith vviues, children, and domestical regiment, and so cannot vvhollie addict your selves to this stndie: and yet at least be readie to heare vvhat others haue gathered, and bestovv so much diligence in heering vvhat is said, as you doe in scraping vvorldlie goods together: for although it bee a shame to aske no more of you; yet vvill I bee content, if yee doe so much.
                  
                     
For this is the cause of infinite evils, that you are ignorant in the scriptures. From hence springeth the manifold mischiefe of heresies, from hence dissolute life, from hence vaine, and vnprofitable labours.
                  For euen as they that are deprived of this light, can not goe on the right way: so they that doe not behold the beames of holie scripture, are enforced incontinentlie to offend in many things, as walking in farre greater darkenesse.
                  This is the censure of saint Chrysostome: out of which I note,
                  1 First, that whosoeuer studieth the scriptures seriouslie, and with alacritie, shall finde therein, and vnderstand so much, as is necessarie for his salvation. And consequently, that our disholie father the pope, debarreth vs of the ordinarie meanes of our salvation: when hee vppon paine of excommunication, inhibiteth vs to reade the scriptures in our vulgar tongue, vnlesse we have his licence and dispensation so to doe.
                  3 I note secondly, that if it be a shame for such as are charged with wives, children, and families, only to heare sermons, & not to studye the scriptures vvithall: much more is it a shame for others that bee more free, not to read them diligently: and greatest shame of al for a bishop to approve them that wil not so doe.
                  I note thirdlie, that heresies, dissolute life, and all other evils, proceede of ignorance, and not reading the scriptures.
                  Againe, the said Chrysostome in another place hath these vvordes.
                  
                     Propterea obsecro, vt subinde huc veniatis, & divinae scripturae lectionem diligenter auscultetis: nec solum cum huc venitis, sed & domi 
                     Chrysost. in c. 9. Gen hom. 29. tom. 1. 
                     divina biblia in manus sumite, & viilitatem in illis positam magno studio suscipite. & paulo post: tantum igitur lucrum oro, ne per negligentiam amittemus, sed & domi vacemus divinarum scripturarum lectiooni; & hic praesentes non in nugis & invtilibus colloquijs temporis decoquamus.
                  
                  I beseech you therefore, that you come hither novv & then, and attend diligently the hearing of holie scripture: neither onely when ye come hither, but at home also take the holie bibles into your hands, & with great studie receive commoditie vvhich is in them conteined.
                  I pray you therefore let vs not negligently loose so great gaine: but vvhen vve are at home, let vs then apply our selues to read the holie scriptures: and being here, let vs not spende our time idlely & vainly.
                  And in another place he speaketh in this maner:
                  
                     Hoc igitur pacto, si scripturas diligenter scrutari voluerimus, salutem assequi poterimus: sipenitus in eis ver sabimur, & doctrinam rectam & 
                     Chrisos. hom. 52. in cap. 8. Ioannis. 
                     vitam erudiemur. Et paulo posi: Non enim fieri potest, vt qui Deum &
                     
                     audiat, & alloquatur Deū assequatur vtilitatem. sequitur: vacemus ergo scripturis dilectissime, et saltē evangelijs, ea frequēter pertractemus.
                  
                  By this maner then if we will search the scriptures diligentlie, we shall attaine salvation: if we shall be wholie conversant in them, we shall be taught both right doctrine and good life. For it can not bee but he shall get profite, that both heareth and talketh with God.
                  Let vs therfore studie the scriptures, (my dearest,) and at the least let vs often read the holie gospels.
                  In and by which words (as we see most evidentlie,) SaInt Chrysostome greatlie lamenteth, that the people in his time were so negligent, in reading the holie scriptures. vvhat therefore would that holie father say, if he lived in these our daies when the pope burneth such scriptures as the people vnderstand? when the pope commaundeth all thinges to be done in strange tongues? when the pope excommunicateth all lay persons be they never so well learned, that reason in matters of their faith?
                  VVhat would he say, if he heard priestes pronounce absolution in 6. decret. l. 5. c. quicunque. their popish sacrament of penance, which neither the penitents, nor the priestes themselves doe oftentimes vnderstand.
                  Nay, what would he say, if he were this day in romish churches, where they doe not onely read their church-service in Latine, but also Latine homilies, or sermons vnto the vulgar sort, which yet they teatme, an exposition of the scripture? VVhich thing is done in everie festivall day of nine Lessons in the tyme of Mattins.
                  In fine, what would hee say, if hee knew the rude vulgar sort commaunded to heare the gospell read in Latine: and withall should see them listening with their eares, least anie word should not be heard, though impossible to bee vnderstood? vvould he not, and mighte hee not iustlie say with the holie Apostle, that they were madde?
                  Ves doubtlesse.
                  Origen, who lived above a thousand and three hundred yeares sithence, doth not onelie exhort the people seriouslie to reade the 1-Cor. 1. 14. vers. 24. Orig. hom. 4. super Levit. propesiuem. scriprures: but withall sheweth plainelie, that in his time, they were reade in the vulgar tongue.
                  These are his words:
                  
                     Certe si non omnia possumus, saltem ea quae nunc docentur in ecclesia, vel quae recitantur, memoriae commendemus.
                  
                  Doubtlesse, if we can not beare away all thinges conteined in the scriptures, at the least let vs remēber those things, which are taught, &

read in the Church.
                  In which words he speaketh not onely of sermons, but also of the gospels, epistles, praiers, lessons, and histories of the bible. For sermons are conteined in the worde (decentur) which are preached, and the rest in the word (recitantur) which are read or rehearsed.
                  And if such thinges had beene read in a strange tongue, the vulgar sort could not haue committed them to memorie.
                  Saint Augustine doth not onely exhort to reade the scriptures, but also giveth great encouragement thereto, avouching that the scriptures may be vnderstood with all facilitie.
                  
                     Magnifice igitur & salubriter spiritus sanctus ita, scriptur as sanctas modificavit, vt locis apertioribus fami occurreret, obscurioribus 
                     Aug. de doctr. Christi lib. 2. cap. 6. 
                     autem fastidia detergeret.
                  
                  The holie ghost hath so magnificallie and healthfullie measured the holie scriptures, that in the obscure places lothsomnes is taken away: and with the places that be plaine and easie, our hunger is satisfyed. And his reason hereof followeth in these next wordes.
                  
                     Nihil enim fere de illis obscuritatibus eruitur, quod non plani ssime dictum alibi reperiatur.
                  
                  For almost nothing is conteined in obscure places, which is not most plainelie vttered in some other place. so then by the testimonie of this holie father, so auncient for antiquitie, so holie for vertue, so grave for auctoritie, so profound for his iudgement, so rare for his Loe, the scriptures are plaine & easie. wit, so renowmed for his learning, that the papistes hitherto have admired his doctrine as an oracle from heaven: the holie scriptures are easie to be vnderstood: and whatsoever is obscurelie spoken in one place, the same is plainlie told in another.
                  To conclude, the practise of those godlie Christians, of whom we reade in the Actes of the Apostles, decideth this controversie sufficientlie: as who beeing meere lay-men, did notwithstanding studie the Act. 17. v. 11. scriptures most seriouslie.
               
               
                  
                     The 3. Conclusion.
                  
                  TRaditions are to be examined by the holie scriptures the true touchstone of veritie: and to be admitted, when they are found consonant to the same.
                  This conclusion is evidentlie proved, by the iudgement practicall of saint Cyprian. For he being required by Stephanus then bishop of Where was the magnificēce of popedome then? Rome to yeelde vnto traditions, did not terme the said Stephanus by the title of Pope, or holinesse, (as now the romish maner is,) but by the name of fellow or brother, and calling him blind byarde (not

Saint Peters successour, who could not erre) did contemne & vtterlie reiect that tradition, which the said Stephanus requested him to yeelde vnto.
                  His verie owne words are these:
                  
                     Nihil innovetur, inquit, nisiquod traditumest? vnde est istae traditio? 
                     Cyprian ad Pompeium, pag. 228. 
                     vtrumne de dominica & evangelica auctoritate descendens, an de Apostolorum mandat is atque epistolis veniens? ea enim facienda esse quae scriptae sunt, Deus testatur, & proponit ad Iesum Nave. dicens: non recedet liber legis huius ex ore tuo, sed meditaberis in eo die ac nocte, vt observes facere omnia quae scripta sunt. item, Dominus apostolos suos mittens, mandat baptizari gentes & doceri, vt observent omnia quae cunque ille praecepit. Si ergo aut in evangelio praecipitur, aut Apostolorum epistolis, aut actibus continetur, vt a quacunque haeresi venientes non baptizentur, sedtantum manus illis imponantur in paenitentiam, observetur etiam & haec sancta traditio.
                  
                  Let nothing be renewed, saith Pope Stephanus, but let that bee done which was received by tradition. from whence came this tradition? whether doth it descend from the auctoritie of our Lord & of his gospel, or commeth it from the epistles, or actes of the Apostles? For God testifyeth that those thinges must be done which are written, and propoundeth them vnto Nave, saying: Let not the book of this law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate in it day & night, that thou maiest observe to doe all thinges that are written. Our lord also sending forth his Apostles, chargeth them to baptize the gentiles, and to teach them to doe all thinges vvhich he commaunded them. If therfore it be commanded in the gospel, or in the epistles of the apostles, or actes, that such as came from anie herisie should not bee baptised, but onelie receive imposition of handes for penance, then let this holie tradition be observed.
                  Thus wee see, that this auncient father, canonized by the pope for an holie and blessed martir, will indeede admit traditions, (as the wiser sort of protestantes do admit with him,) but yet no other traditions, then are found constant to the scriptures:
                  By which scriptures saint Cyprian examineth the veritie of al traditions, admitting those that be consonant, and reiecting such as be dissonant from the same. At vvhat time the Arrians vvould not admit the vvord 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,) because it vvas not found in the scriptures, the fathers of the councel did not then alledge traditions for proofe thereof, neither did they say, that manie thinges must bee believed, which are not vvritten.
                  
                     
But they answered simplie, that though that word were not expteslie written: yet was it virtuallie, and effectuallie conteined in the scriptures. which thing is evident by the testimonie of Athanasius, who writeth in this manner.
                  
                     Sed tamen cogno scat qui squis est studiosior is animi, has voces tametsi in 
                     Athanasius de decret. nic. synod. to. 2. prope finē. 
                     scripturis non reperiantur, habere tamen eas eam sententiam quam scripturae volunt.
                  
                  Although the wordes bee not founde in the scripture, yet haue they that meaning and sense which the scripture approveth, and intendeth, as everie one that studieth the scripture seriouslie, may easily vnderstand.
                  Origen giveth counsel to trie all doctrines by the scriptures, even as pure gold is tried by the touchstone.
                  Thus doth hee write.
                  
                     Debemus ergo ad testimonium omnium verborum quae proferimus in 
                     Origenes in Matth. hom. 25. 
                     doctrina, proferre sensum scripturae, quasi confirmantem quem exponimus sensum. sicut enim omne aurum quodquod fuerit extra templum, non est sanctificatum, sicomnis sensus qui fuerit extra divinam scripturam (quamvis admirabilis videatur quibusdam:) non est sanctus, qui non continetur a sensu scripturae, quae solūet e sensum solū sanctificare quem habet in se, sicut templum proprium aurum, Non ergo debemus ad confirmandam doctrinam nostram nostram nostras proprios intellectus iur are, & quasi testimonia assumere, quae vnusqui sque nostrum intelligit, & secundum veritatem aestimat esse: ni ostenderit eos sanctos esse ex eo, qui in scripturis continetur divinis quasi in templis quibusdam Dei.
                  
                  
                     Stulti ergo & caeci omnes qui non cognoscunt, quin templum, idest, lectio scripturarum, magnum & venerabilem facit sensum, sicut aurum sacratum.
                  
                  VVee must therefore alledge the sense of scripture, for the testimonie of everie word vvee vtter in doctrine, as which confirmeth the sense of our exposition.
                  For as all gold which is without the temple is not sanctifyed: so euerie sense, which is vvithout the holie scripture (albeit it seeme to some wonderfull,) is vnholie, because it is not conteined in the sense of scripture: which onely sanctifyeth that sense which it hath in it selfe, as the temple sanctifyeth the gold. wee must not therefore for the confirmation of our doctrine, sweare to the sense, which everie one of vs vnderstandeth, and conceiveth to be true, vnlesse wee can shew it to be divine, because it is conteined in the divine scriptures: as in

the temple of God.
                  Foolish therefore and blind are all those, who know not that the temple, to wit, the reading of scriptures, maketh the sense great and venerable, as hallowed gold.
                  In another place, the said Origen hath these words:
                  
                     Querimus verba quae dicta sunt, iuxta personae dignitatem exponere: 
                     Origen. hom. 1. in 1. c. Iere. 
                     quapropter necesse est nobis scriptur as sanct as in testimonium vocare. Sensus quippe nostri & enarrationes, sine ijs testibus non habent fidem.
                  
                  VVee seeke to expound the wordes rehearsed, according to the dignitie of the person: wherefore wee must of necessitie, call the holie scriptures to witnes.
                  For our iudgements and expositions without those witnesses, are of no credite at all.
                  Thus wee see, Origen his iudgement, and that nothing can be of credite, which is not grounded vpon the scriptures.
                  But what? is Origen onelie of this opinion? no verilie, for all auncient, grave, and learned fathers, are of the selfe same mind.
                  Saint Augustine writing against Petilianus, hath these wordes.
                  
                     Proinde, sive de Christo, sive de eius ecclesia, sive de quacunque alia re quae pertinet ad fidem vitam
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         nostram, nos aut angelus de coelo 
                     Aug. cont. liter. Petiliā. l. 3 cap. 6. tom. 7. 
                     vobis annunciaverit preterquā, quod in scriptur is legalibus & evangelicis accepistis, anathemasit.
                  
                  VVherefore, whether wee speake of Christ, or of his church, or of what other matter soever, which apperteineth to faith or manners, whether we, or an angell from heaven shall announce otherwise thē yee have received in the scriptures of the law and the gospel, accursed be that man.
                  The same saint Augustine in another place hath these wordes:
                  
                     Nemo mihi dicat, O quid dixit Donatus, aut quid dixit Parmenianus, 
                     Aug. de vnit. ecclesiae, c. 10 nō longe abi nitio. 
                     aut Pontius, aut quilibet illorum. quia nec catholicis episcopis consentiendum est, sicubi forte falluntur, vt contra canonicas Dei scriptur as aliquid sentiant.
                  
                  Let no man say to mee, Oh what said Donatus, or what said Parmenianus, or Pontius, or anie of them: because we must not consent to catholike bishops, if they chaunce to erre in anie thing, and speake against the canonicall scriptures.
                  Sainte Chrisostome agreeth vniformelie vnto the rest, writing in

this maner:
                  
                     Cum videritis haeresim impiam quae est exercitus antichristi stantem 
                     Chrysost. in c. 24. Mat. ho. 49 
                     in locis sanctis ecclesiae, in illo tempore qui in Iudaea sunt fugiant ad montes, idest, qui sunt in Christianitate conferant se ad scripturas. & quare iubet in hoc tempore omnes christianos conferre se ad scripturas? quia in tempore hoc ex quo obtulit haeresis illas ecclesias, nulla probatio potest esse verae christianitatis, neque refugium potest esse christianorum aliud volentium cognoscere fidei veritatem, nisi scripturae divinae.
                  
                  when you shall see wicked heresie, which is Antichristes armie, standing in the holie Church: at that time they that be in Iurie must flee to the mountaines, that is, they that are Christians must flee vnto the scriptures.
                  And why commaundeth he at this time all Christians to flee to the scriptures? because at that time, when heresie hath yeelded vp the churches, no proofe can be had of true christianitie, neither anie other refuge is left to christians desyrous to know the veritie of faith, but onlie the holie scriptures.
                  Againe, the said Crisostome saith in an other place after this maner:
                  
                     Neque enim quicquam dicere oportet sine testibus sola
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         animi cogitatione nam si quid dicatur absque scriptura, auditorum cogitatio claudicat, 
                     Chrysost. in Psal. 95. prope finem. tom. 1. 
                     nunc annueus, nunc haesitans, & interdum sermonē vt frivolum aver sans, interdum vt probabilem recipiens. verum vbi è scriptura divinae vocis prodijt testimonium, & loquentis sermonem, & audientis animum confirmat.
                  
                  Neither must we say anie thing without witnesses, and vpon our own cogitation onelie. For if any thing be spoken without the scripture, the cogitation of the auditors halteth, sometime graunting, sometime doubting, sometime reiecting that which is spoken as frivolous, and sometime accepting it as probable. But when testimonie is brought out of the scripture of Gods word, then it confirmeth both the wordes of the speaker, and the mind of the hearer.
                  And yet the said Chrysostome hath an other place, well worthie to be written in golden letters.
                  Thus he saith:
                  
                     Quomodo autem non absurdum est propter pecunias alijs non credere, sedipsas numerare & supputare, pro rebus autem amplioribus aliorum 
                     Chrysost. in 2. cor. ca. 7. hom. 13. in fine. 
                     sentētiam sequi simpliciter: presertim cum habeamus omnium exactistissimam
                     
                     trutinam, & gnomonem ac regulam, divinarum inquam legum assertionem. Ideo obsecro & oro omnes vos, vt relinquatis quidnam huic vel illi videatur: deque his a scripturis haec etiam inquirite, & ueras divitias discentes eas sectemur, vt & aeterna bona assequamur.
                  
                  How is it not absurd for money not to credite others; but to tell the money our selves, and yet for more important matters, to follow simplie the iudgement and opinion of others: especiallie, vvhen we have the most exact ballance & rule, I mean the assertion of all divine lawes. I therfore pray & beseech you al, that you let passe vvhat this mā, or that man thinketh, & search al things out of the scriptures: and learning true riches let vs follovv them, that so vve may attaine eternall beatitude.
                  Behold here a most godlie exhortation, and grave advise, given vs by this holie father. As vve vvill not saith he, trust others to tell our money, but tell it our selves: much lesse should vve trust others, depending vpon them in matter of our salvation, but should our selves learne and knovv the same▪ by diligent reading of the scriptures.
                  Neither must we beleeve and doe what this or that man saith, but what wee find to be true, by painfull studie of the scriptures.
                  For which cause, vviselie and gravelie said Tertullian:
                  
                     Idesse verum quodcunque primum, id esse adulterum quodcunque posterius. 
                     Tertul. advers. praxe: in initio.
                  
                  That is: that to be true, vvatsoever vvas first, and that to be counterfait vvhatsoever came after.
                  And for the same end said the holie Prophet:
                  
                     Lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum, & lumen semitis meis.
                  
                  Thy vvord is a lanterne vnto my feet, and a light vnto my path. Psal. 1. 119. nun.
                  
                  As if he had said, of our selves vve are but darknes, and can not see, except vve be lightened with Gods vvord. And consequentlie, if vve desire to have our sight, our chiefest and principall sight, the invvard and spirituall sight of our soules: vvee must imploy our vvhole industrie in reading the holie scriptures, and vvith all humblenesse of minde studie them day and night.
               
               
                  
                  The fourth Conclusion.
                  POpish traditions are so vncertaine and doubtfull, as the best learned papistes are at great contention about them, and can not possiblie be accorded therin. For the exact proofe of this conclusion, that intollerable & endlesse strife, which was a thousand and foure hundred yeares sithence betweene Victor then bishop of Rome, and other Bishops of Asia, may suffice if nothing els were said. For on both sides tradition apostolical was alledged and stoutlie avouched, for and concerning the celebration of Easter.
                  Of this matter, thus writeth Eusebius Caesariensis.
                  
                     Episcopis autem in Asia coactis, qui morem iam olim ipsis a maioribus troditum sedulo observandum constanter asseverabant, praefuit Polycrates. 
                     Euseb. Caesariens. l. 5. c. 23. hist. eccles. 
                     qui in ea epistola quam ad Victorem & ecclesiam Romanam scripsit, traditionem ad ipsius vsque tempora deductam, his fere verbis exponit. Nos diem paschatis integre in corrupte
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         recolimus, neque addendo quicquam, neque detrahendo.
                  
                  The bishops of Asia assembled in councell, Polycrates beeing president, affirmed constantlie, that that custome ought to be observed, which they of old time had received by tradition. which tradition to have beene continued vntill his daies, the said Polycrates in his epist. to Victor and the church of Rome, sheweth plainelie in these words: VVee keepe easter entirelie, and incorruptlie: neither doe we adde or detract anie thing
                  And in the same epistle hee telleth vs, that Philip one of the seaven deacons, Saint Iohn the Evangelist, Saint Polycarpe, Saint Papirius, Saint Melito, and others, did all obserue the same tradition.
                  These bee his wordes.
                  
                     Isti omnes diem paschatis 14. die lunae ex evangelij prescripto observarunt, nihil ab eo instituto ac more plane digressi: sed secundum regulam & normam fidei eum assidue tenuerunt.
                  
                  All these have observed Easter the fourteenth day of the moone after the prescripr of the Gospell, declining nothing at all from that custome and ordinance, but dailie reteined it according to the rule and analogie of faith.
                  But Victor and other bishoppes with him, defended bitterlie

a contrarie tradition. For thus writeth the said Eusebius of him:
                  
                     Uictor qui tum Rom. ecclesiae praeerat, totius Asiae ecclesias cum alijs finitimis, tanquam alterius fidei & opinionis, simul omnes (vt complectar brevi) à 
                     Euseb. l. 5. c. 24. hist. eccles. 
                     communi vnitate ecclesiae amputare conatur, & in eos per literas graviter invehitur.
                  
                  Victor then governing the Church of Rome, indeavoureth to cut off from the common vnitie of the Church, all the Churches of Asia together with others adioyning, and very bitterly inveigheth against them by his letters.
                  Which fact of Victor, Irenaeus and other Bishops sharpely reprooved in their letters to the said Victor. Which thing Ruffinus plainely testifieth, in these words:
                  
                     Sed hoc non omnibus placebat Episcopis, quin potius & è contrario scribentes 
                     Ruffinus, in sua trans. 
                     ei iubebant, vt magis quae pacis sunt ageret, & concordiae atque vnanimitati studeret. deni
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         & extant ipsorum literae, quibus asperius obiurgant victorem, velut invtiliter ecclesiae commodis consulentem.
                  
                  Yet this his dealing pleased not all Bishops, but contrariwise they wrote vnto him, bidding him to practise rather that belonged to peace, and to studie for concord and vnitie. Finally, their letters are also extant, in the which they sharpely chide Victor, as one that respected vnprofitably the good of the Church.
                  Thus saith Ruffinus. In like manner, (though with more modestie,) dissented Anicetus an other bishop of Rome, from S. Polycarpe bishop of Smyrna. Of which variance, thus writeth Eusebius:
                  
                     Ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         tamen Anicetus Polycarpo poterat persuadere, vt suum observandi 
                     Euseb. l. 5. c. 24. hist. eccles. 
                     morem deponeret, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Polycarpus Aniceto persuasit, vt consuetudinem Asiaticam vllo modo observaret.
                  
                  Neither could Polycarpus perswade Anicetus, to keepe the custome and tradition of Asia.
                  Now, gentle Reader, what neede more to be said, for the vncertentie of traditions?
                  1 For first, these Bishops that thought thus diversly of traditions, lived within one hundred yeeres of Christ: at what time the Church was in good estate, and stained with very few or no corruptions at all.
                  2 Secondly, the one side doubtles, was seduced with false traditions.
                  3 Thirdly, S. Polycarpe and other holy bishops of that age, made no more account of the bishop of Rome his opinion, or authoritie, then of an other mans.
                  4 Fourthly, they were so farre from acknowledging him to be the supreame head of the Church, that they all reputed them selves his equals: and controlled him as sharply for his doctrine, as S. Paul reprooved S. Peter for his conversation.
                  5 Fiftly, if S. Polycarpe had cause in his time, beeing the flourishing age

of the Church, to doubt of Romish traditions; much more have we cause in these latter daies, to stand in doubt thereof. For now hath iniquitie the vpper hande, nowe are corruptions more frequent, no we doe errours in every place more abound. Let vs therefore follow S. Augustines advise, let vs admit nothing rashly, let vs examine all doubtfull traditions and doctrines, by the touchstone of veritie, the holy Scriptures. And least any man thinke S. Augustine to be of another minde, these are his owne expresse wordes:
                  
                     Non audiamus, haec dico, haec dicis: sed audiamus, haec dicit dominus: sunt certe libri dominici, quorum ant horitati vtri
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         consentimus, vtri
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         credimus, vtri
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      
                     August. de vnitate eeclesiae, cap. 3. tom. 7. 
                     servimus: ibi quaeramus ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causam nostram.
                  
                  Let vs not heare, I say this, thou saiest that: but let vs heare, this saith the Lord: for our Lord hath bookes, whose authoritie we both admit, we both beleeve, we both obey: let vs there seeke the Church, let vs there decide our cause.
                  But what neede many words? For either popish vnwritten traditions, are repugnant to the Scriptures, or consonant to the same. If they be repugnant, then is there great reason to reiect them: if they be consonant, that must be tried by comparing them to the Scriptures, which is the conclusion I defend. But the Papists, perceiving them selves to be convinced by the Scriptures: tell vs plainly, that they must have their cause tried by other meanes. For so writeth my L. of Rochester, in these expresse tearmes:
                  
                     Contendentibus ita
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         nobiscum haereiic is, nos alio subsidio nostram oportet tueri causam, 
                     Roffensis, verit. 4. advers. art. Lutheri. 
                     quam Scripturae sacrae.
                  
                  When therefore heretikes, (he meaneth all, not Papists,) dispute with vs: we must vse other helpe in defense of our cause, then the Scripture.
                  Loe, they dare not be tryed by the Scripture. Which if a papist had not spoken, who would haue beleeved it?
               
            
            
               The Corollarie.
               FIrst therefore, since the written Word conteineth in it selfe, every thing necessarie for our salvation: secondly, since no traditions are to be admitted, but such as are consonant to the holy Scripture: thirdly, since Papists load vs with huge numbers of traditions, without warrant of the written word: fourthly, since popish traditions were in old time, most doubtfull and vncerten; I conclude, that it is a sufficient motive for me to renounce the Romish religion, as false, erroneous, and pernicious doctrine.
               Thus much of the ninth Motive.
            
            
               
               CHAP. ix. Of Popish auricular confession.
               
                  ALthough popish doctours doe wonderfully magnifie their auricular confession, perswading the vulgar sort, that they can not attaine salvation without the same: yet is it in deede a meere invention of man, the bitter torment of conscience, and the readie way to desperation. For manifest probation whereof, I proceede in this manner.
               
                  The first Conclusion.
                  
                     ALL Christians must confesse their sinnes to God, with internall contrition of heart, with full purpose to amend their lives, and with stedfast hope of remission by the mercie of God, through the merites of Christ his Sonne our sweete redeemer. Of this kinde of confession, the Scripture speaketh abundantly.
                  
                     Delictum, meum cognitum tibi feci, & iniustitiam meam non abscondi. dixi 
                     Psal. 32. 5. 
                     confitebor adversum me iniustitiam meam domino, & tu remisisti impietatem peccati mei.
                  
                  I have made my sinne knowne vnto thee, and mine iniustice I have not hid. I said, I will confesse to the Lord my iniustice against my selfe, and thou hast forgiven the impietie of my sinne.
                  
                     Qui abscondit scelera sua, non dirigetur: quiautem confessus fuerit & reliquerit ea, misericordiam consequetur. 
                     Prov 28. 13.
                  
                  He that hideth his offenses, shall not be directed: but who shall confesse and forsake his sinnes, shall attaine mercie.
                  
                     Sidixerimus quoniā peccatum non habemus, ipsi nos seducimus, & veritas in nobis non est. si confiteamur peccata nostra, fidelis est & iustus vt remittat 
                     1. Ioan. 1. 8, 9. 
                     nobis peccata nostra. If we say we haue no sinne, we deceiue our selues, and the truth is not in vs: but if we confesse our sinnes, &c.
                  That this confession must be ioyned with hope of remission, S. Chrysostome teacheth in these words:
                  
                     Quid proderunt lachrymae & confessio, sinulla adsit abolitionis fiducia? 
                     Chrysost. ad Theodor. laps.
                  
                  What shal teares & confession availe, if there be no hope of forgivenes?
                  And that we must adde herevnto amendment of life, S. Hilarie teacheth vs, when he saith: Quid aliud est confessio erroris, quam confessio desinendi ab errore? 
                     Hilar. in 135. psal.
                  
                  
                     
What other thing is the confession of errour, then to confesse that we will forsake errour?
                  So then, when we be wayle our sinnes, confesse them, and purpose to amend our former lives, with stedfast hope of Gods mercie, through attonement made in Christes bloode, wee shall doubtlesse have remission of our sinnes. Then though our sinnes be as redde as scarlet, yet shall they be Esay. 1. 17. made white as snow.
               
               
                  The second Conclusion.
                  VVE must confesse our sinnes one to an other, when we offende one an other. Which fraternall reconciliation done vpon earth, God promiseth to ratifie in heaven. To this confession, holy writ doth seriously exhort vs in many places:
                  
                     Si offers munus tuum ad altare, & ibi recordatus fueris quod frater tuus habuit aliquid adversum te, relinque ibi munus tuum ante altare, & vade prius 
                     Matt. 5. 23. 
                     reconciliari fratri tuo, & tunc veniens offeres munus tuum.
                  
                  If thou offer thy gift before the altar, and shall remember that thy brother hath some matter against thee: leave there thy offering before the altar, and goe first to be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and make thy offering.
                  This offering (saith the glosse) is the sacrifice of a good worke: the altar Glossa interl. supera hunc locum. is Christ, to whome we must offer our good actions by faith. And another glosse saith:
                  
                     Vade non pedibus, sed animo humili te ei prosternas, in conspectu illius cui oblaturus es: vel petendo veniam, si praesens est. 
                     Glossa ordinar. in cod. loco.
                  
                  Goe not with thy feete, but fall prostrate with an humble heart before him, to whome thou makest thy offering: or aske forgivenesse, if the partie be present.
                  Christ saith in an otherplace:
                  
                     Si septies in die peccaverit in te, & septies in die conversus fuerit ad te dicens, poenitet me, dimitte illi. 
                     Luc. 17. 4.
                  
                  If thy brother shall offend thee seaven times a day, and shal seven times a day be converted to thee, and say, it repenteth me, for give him.
                  
                     Confitemini altervtrum peccata vestra inquit apostolus, & orate pro invicem vt salvemini. Confesse your sinnes one to another, saith the Apostle, & pray Iacobi 5. 16. one for another, that ye may be saved.
               
               
                  The third Conclusion.
                  THere is yet a third kinde of confession commended in holy writ, which is a generall confession of our sinnes: not onely internally before God, but also externally before the ministers of his worde and sacraments: but this kinde doth not include in it a total and specifical enumeration

of our sinnes. This manner of confession made king David before the Prophet Nathan, when he reprooved him for his offences.
                  
                     Peccaui domino, I have sinned vnto the Lord, saith David. And the Prophet answered: Dominus quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         transtulit peccatum tuum: the Lord hath forgiven 2. Reg. 12. 13, 14 thee thy sinne. In like manner the sinnefull woman, of whome S. Luke maketh mention, confessed her sinnes generally in teares, signes, Luk. 7. 38, 48. and gestures, and received incontinently absolution at Christs handes: for he said vnto her, Remittuntur tibi peccata, thy sinnes are forgiven thee. Which manner of confession is fitly described in the booke of Nehemias, 2. Esd. 8. & 9. in the 8. and 9. chapter. For when Esdras and the Levites did interpret the law vnto the people, then the people acknowledging their offences and the offences of their forefathers, did lament, weepe, & confesse their sinnes before the Levites and the whole congregation: and that done, the Levits repeated their confession, and desired pardon of God for the same. So this The true mā
                        ner of confessing our sinnes day in the Church of England, the people confesse their sinnes generally before the minister, and in the face of the whole congregation. Yea, in Germanie they confesse such speciall sinnes, as grieve and clogge their consciences, & for which they stand in most neede to have advise and counsell. Which libertie is graunted in England also: for such as list may confesse their sinnes to the minister privately, and have both his advise and absolution, if he finde them penitent. Which confession and absolution, would It is to be wished, that confession were more vsed thē it is nowe a dayes. God it were more in practise then it is: because instruction and consolation might redound vnto the penitent, by vertue of the same. This kinde of confession was much frequented in the primitive Church, at such time as the zeale of Gods people was great, and their devotion fervent: then did all confesse their sinnes generally: then were none commanded to confesse specifically: then did Christs ministers execute their functions duely: then did S. Iohn Baptist in zealous manner reproove vice, extoll vertue, thunder out Gods wrath and ire against wicked and impenitent sinners, & with all promise free pardon and remission of sinnes, to all such as would lament their sinnes, amend their lives; reforme their manners, and beleeve in Christ Iesus the innocent lambe, that taketh away the sinnes of the world. Then the Scribes, Pharisies, and great multitudes of people were inflamed with compunction at S. Iohns preaching, bewayled their former lives, confessed Mat. 3. 6, 7, 8. generally their sinnes, and desired baptisme for the same. Then the holy vessel of God S. Paul, wrought great miracles by the power of God; in so Act. 19. 18, 19. much that many of the faithfull came vnto him confessing their sinnes, and such as had followed magicall arts brought their bookes together, and burnt them in the presence of the people.
               
               
                  The fourth Conclusion.
                  THE Popish specificall enumeration of all our sinnes, is both impossible to man, and neither commanded by Christ, nor practised by his Apostles. That it is impossible to be performed by man, the Prophet

prooveth, when he saith:
                  
                     Delicta quis intelligit? ab occultis me is munda me. 
                     Psal. 18. 13, 14.
                  
                  Who doth vnderstand his offences? clense me from secret faults.
                  
                     Quis potest dicere, mundum est cormeum, purus sum à peccato? 
                     Prov. 20. 9.
                  
                  Who can say, my heart is cleane, I am free from my sinne?
                  Neither will it serve their turne, to say as Cardinall Caietan doth, that confession is taken two waies: to wit, absolutely; and as it is the act of man. Caietanus in summ. in vltima pagella. To confesse all sinnes absolutely, is to leave no sinne vnconfessed: but to confesse all sinnes, as confession is the act of man, is to confesse all those sinnes which are in the power of man: that is, which man doth, or may remember after diligent examination of his conscience. And therefore saith Caietan, when the Gospell requireth the confession of all sinnes in the Sacrament of penance: it is not meant of all sinnes absolutely, but of all sinnes which are in mans power to confesse. This distinction, I say, will not serve;
                  1 First, because this distinction, is not mentioned in the Gospell.
                  2 Secondly, because there is no more reason for the confession of one, then for the confession of all.
                  3 Thirdly, because this notwithstanding, a man shal alway remaine perplexe: as who can never tel, when he hath vsed sufficientinquisition in that behalfe.
                  4 Fourthly, because one mortall sinne can not be remitted without another, as all papists confesse; and consequently, either the secret not confessed mortalls, are remitted with the confessed mortalls, or none at all be remitted by the absolution: if they answer, that none are remitted, because some are not confessed: then shall the penitent never have absolution, because he can never confesse al as is prooved: if they say, the secret not confessed mortals, be remitted with the other: then is it not needefull to confesse them after, when they come to remembrance: which yet al papists require, as necessarie to salvation.
                  5 Fiftly, because it followeth herevpon, that penitents are bound to confesse their sinnes very many times, which the Popes law requireth but once in the yeere: I proove it, because if they stay any time from confession, they may forget their sinnes through their owne default, and so make frustrate their absolution.
                  6 Sixtly, because the priests are often so ignorant, that they can not distinguish mortall and veniall sinnes: which yet is necessarie in absolution.
                  7 Seaventhly, because the priest standeth often excommunicate, and often dealeth with reserved cases, and a thousand such like things chance in absolution. Yea, the archpapists this day, perceiving this matter to be so intricate and dangerous: partly by reason of the cases so reserved, partly by reason of innumerable excommunications, and partly by reason of ignorance in their priests: have invented this poore shift for an helpe, if it may be: to wit, that the Pope shall give to every seminarie priest, full authoritie to

absolve from all excommunications and reserved cases what soever: so that now we have so many virtuall Popes in England, as seminarie priests. For every one of them, hath plenitudinem potestatis: and it is a world to consider, how this power is vsed. For because neither the penitent, nor the priest can tell, howe often the partie is excommunicate; the priest for securitie, pronounceth every time over every person, these words:
                  
                     I absolve thee from every bond of excommunication, so farre foorth as I can, and thou standest neede. and this is done in latine.
                  All which frustrate the same, and open to the penitent the gate of desperation. That this manner of confession, is neither commanded by Christ, nor practised by his Apostles: may be evidently prooved by their owne canon-law, as their owne doctours testifie.
                  Thus writeth the great Thomist Sylvester Prieras:
                  
                     Quarto, vtrum ad confessionem teneamur divino iure vel humano? & dico 
                     Sylvester. de confess. secundo, par. 4. 
                     quod canonistae videntur tenere, quod sit de iurepositivo. & ad hoc est glossa de pen. dist. v. in summa, quae vult quod instituta sit à quadam vniversali traditione ecclesiae: ideo infert, quod confiterinon tenentur infideles, nec similiter graeci, ex quo non acceptaverunt huiusmodi constitutionem, sicut nec votū castitatis.
                  
                  It is demanded fourthly (saith the great papist Sylvester,) whether we be bound to popish confession, by the law of God, or by the positive law of man? and I say, the canonists holde, that we are but bound by the lawe of man. And of this opinion is the glosse, which is of this minde, that confession was institute by a certaine vniversall tradition of the Church; whereupon the said glosse inferreth, that infidels are not bound to confession, neither the Greekes in like manner: since they did never approove such constitution, no more then the vow of chastitie.
                  Yea, the Popes own decrees admit no lesse: for these are the words of his canōs; Quibus authoritatibus vel quibus rationū firmamēt is vtra
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         sentētia satisfactionis 
                     Depoenit. d. 1. cap. quamvis plenit. 
                     & confessionis nitatur, in medium breviter exposuimus. cui autem harum potius adhaerendum sit, lectoris iudicio reservatur. vtra
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         enim fautores habet sapientes & religiofos viros.
                  
                  Vpon what authorities of foundations of reasons either opinion is grounded, I have briefly shewed. Nowe to whether of them, the reader should adhere, I leave it to his owne discretion. For either opinion hath wise and religious men, for the patrons of the same.
                  Behold here, gentle reader, that not onely the Popes doctours, but his owne canon-law, and the commenters vpon the same: doe all confesse, that confession after popish manner, is onely grounded vpon mans law. Yea, the glosse addeth that both wise and religious men doe so think, though some others hold the contrarie.
                  
                     Martinus Navarrus, (though he hold a contrarie opinion to the canonists, Navar. in enchirid. cap. 2. de confess, n. 3,) confesseth plainly, that their solemne glosse commonly received and approoved of all canonists, holdeth confession to be commaunded

by the Church.
                  The famous Canonist and honourable Archbishop Panormitanus, was of the same opinion with the glosse, as confesseth Covarruvias in these words: Covar. tom. 1. par. 1. p. 155.
                  
                  
                     Quam ex nostris pleri
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         secuti sunt, maximè Panormitanus: ex ea asserentes confessionem sacramentalem quae sacerdotibus fit, iure humano institutam esse.
                  
                  Which glosse many of our canonists have followed, especially Panormitan: affirming out of that glosse, that sacramentall confession which is made to priests, was ordeined by the law of man.
                  This to be true, S. Christome confirmeth in these words:
                  
                     Non tibi dico vt te prodas in publicum, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         apudalios te accuses: sed obedire 
                     Chrysost. supra cap. 12. ad hebrae: homil. 31. post med. eiusd. tom. 4. 
                     te volo Prophetae dicenti, revela domino viā tuam, antedeū ergo tua confitere peccata: apud verum iudicem cum oratione delicta tua pronuncia, non lingua, sed conscientiae tuae memoria, & tunc demum spera te misericordiam posse consequi.
                  
                  I doe not bid thee come forth in publike, neither to accuse thy selfe before others: but I would have thee to obey the Prophet, when he saith, reveale thy way to God. Before God therefore confesse thy sinnes, before the true iudge in prayer pronounce thine offences, not with thy tongue, but with the memorie of thy conscience: and then hope to have mercie.
                  And in another place, the same S. Chrysostome hath these words:
                  
                     Peccata tua quotidie dicito, vt deleas ea. sed si confunderis alicui dicere, 
                     Chrysost. apud Lombard. in 4. s. dist. 17. 
                     dicito ea quotidie in animo tuo. non dico vt confitearis ea conservo tuo, vt tibi exprobet. dicito deo, qui curat ea.
                  
                  Confesse thy sinnes daily, that thou maist blot them out. But if thou be ashamed to confesse them to an other, confesse them daily in thine heart. I doe not bid thee confesse them to thy fellow servant, that he may vpbraide thee. Confesse them to God, who can cure the same.
                  Saint Augustine is very plaine in this point, for these are his expresse words:
                  
                     Quid mihi ergo est cum hominibus vt audiant confessiones meas, quasi ipsi sanaturi fint omnes languores meos? curiosum genus ad cogno scendam vitam alienam, 
                     Aug. lib. 10. confess. cap. 3. tom. 1. 
                     desidiosum ad corrigendam suam. quid a me quaerunt audire qui sim, qui nolunt à te audire qui sint? & vndesciunt cum à meipso de meipso audiunt, an verum dicam, quandoquidem nemo scit hominum quid agatur in homine, nisi spiritus hominis qui in ipso est.
                  
                  What have I therefore to doe with men, that they must heare my confessiōs? as though they shold heale al my diseases? a curious kinde to know an others mans life, and sluggish to correct their owne. VVhy seeke they to heare of me what I am, who will not heare of thee what them selves are? And how know they when they heare me tell of my selfe, that I say

truely? since no man knoweth what is done in man, but the spirit of man that is in him.
                  These are S Augustines owne words, so plaine and effectuall against popish, vnchristian, foolish, and execrable confession, as nothing more needeth to be said therein.
               
               
                  The fifth Conclusion.
                  ALbeit Popish auricular confession be so magnified with Papistes, that every one is commanded vnder paine of damnation to beleeve the same, as instituted by Christ himselfe: yet was it not an article of popish faith, for the space of one thousand and five hundred yeeres after Christ. This conclusion, because it is very important, I shal desire thee, gentle Reader, to ponder deepely with me my discourse.
                  Iosephus Angles Valentinus a popish fryer, and bishop of Bosana, in the second tome of that worke which he dedicated to the Pope himselfe Sixtus Quintus, hath these expresse words:
                  
                     Ante concilium Later. erat haereticum negare necessitatem confessionis, negantes tamen 
                     Ioseph. Angl. in 4. sent. q. de confess. p. 255. 
                     non erant haeretici. ratio est, quia nondum erat ab ecclesia declaratum.
                  
                  Before the councell of Lateran it was hereticall to denie the necessitie of confession, but yet they were not heretikes that denied it. The reason is, because the Church of Rome had not yet declared it to be an article of faith.
                  Loe, these words conteine effectually, the exact proofe of this conclusion, if they be well marked.
                  1 We must therefore observe first, that who soever beleeveth not stedfastly every decree of the Church of Rome in matters of faith, is holden of that Church for an heretike.
                  2 We must observe secondly, that the councell of Lateran, (whereof this fryer speaketh) was holden in time of Pope Iulius the second, and Pope Leo the tenth, that is 1500. yeeres after Christ.
                  3 VVe must observe thirdly, that vntill fifteene hundred yeeres after Christ were expyred, they that beleeved not popish auricular confession to be ordeined by Christ, were no heretikes. For so, as you see, this fryer teacheth, and the Pope him selfe graunteth.
                  4 VVe must observe fourthly, that the Church of Rome hath no authoritie, to coyne any new article of faith.
                  5 VVe must observe fiftly, that the Church of Rome hath no new revelations in matters of faith, but the very same which it had in the Apostles time: both which latter observations, their owne deare Canus telleth vs, in these words:
                  
                     Omnia siquidem fidei dogmata ab Apostolis accepit ecclesia, vel scripto, vel 
                     Canus, de loc. lib. 3. cap. 4.
                     
                     verbo. quoniam ij ministri fuere sermonis, nee vllas in fide novas revelationes ecclesia habet.
                  
                  For the Church received all doctrines of faith from the Apostles, eyther by word or writing. Because the Apostles were the ministers of the word, neither hath the Church any new revelations in faith.
                  Now out of these observations which are evident, it followeth necessarily, that confession this day ought not to be an article of faith, no not in the Church of Rome.
                  1 For first, during the time of fifteene hundred yeeres after Christ, it was no article of faith in the Church of Rome.
                  2 Secondly, the Church of Rome can not make that an article of faith now, which was no article of faith in the Apostles time.
                  3 Thirdly, the Church of Rome hath no new revelations, in matters of Christian faith. For so as you have heard, hath their owne Melchior Canus avouched.
                  Neither will it helpe to say, that auricular confession was an article of faith in the Apostles time, but not then revealed to the Church. For as Canus hath told vs plainly, the Church receiveth no newe revelations of faith.
                  This doctrine is confirmed by their famous Cardinall Caietan, who avoucheth two speciall grounds against popish auricular confession. For Caietan. super Ioan. cap. 20. first, although Christ by his opinion instituted confession, yet did he make it voluntarie, and left it in mans election, whether he would confesse, or not confesse. Againe, he telleth vs that the manner of popish confession, to wit, to confesse secretly in the priests eare, was not ordeined by our Saviour Christ. Out of which assertion, I inferre a double conclusion against the Papistes. The one, that confession is not necessarie to salvation. For that which is voluntarie, as to be a Monke, a Nunne, a Priest, a Iesuite; is not necessarie to salvation, as every papist graunteth: but is as a counsell, & worke of supererogation. The other, that popish lawe vrging men to auricular confession, is flat against Christs institution. And thus I weene, I have prooved this conclusion.
               
               
                  The sixt Conclusion.
                  IF Popish confession were ordeined by Christ, as the papists falsely and grossely imagine: yet would it followe by a necessarie consecution, that every Pope should be in daunger of his salvation. This conclusion may seeme somewhat strange: but I proove the fame. By popish doctrine every man and every woman of lawfull yeeres, are bound vnder paine of damnation, to the said confession; and consequently, the Pope beeing either man, or at least woman, (as is thought of pope Iohn,) is strictly bound vnto the same. Now syr, how our Pope his holinesse shall come to confession,

and have absolution of his sinnes, hoc opus, hic labor est. And that the reader may fully vnderstand the difficultie herein: it is to be noted, that no priest can absolve any person from his sinnes, over whome he hath not superioritie and iurisdiction but, his holines hath both the swords, his power is above Kings and Emperiours, and over him no mortall creature, no not an Angel of heaven, hath any iurisdiction at all, as holdeth popish faith. The Pope then being subiect to none, & must yet be absolved of some; which some, must haue iurisdiction over him; standeth doubtles in great perplexitie, and in no small danger of his saluation. Let us therefore find some poore shift, to helpe his holines if it may be. What if we say, that the Pope hath no mortal sinne, & so is not bound to popish absolution. But, alas, all Popes are not Saints, as is prooved, and so some must perforce have absolution. Let us say, that he may absolue himselfe, as well as he may graunt pardons to him selfe. But, alas, that implyeth contradiction: because so he remaining one and the same man, should be both superiour and inferiour to himselfe: superiour, as he did absolve: and inferiour, as absolved. Let vs say, that he voluntarily submitteth himselfe, and so receiueth absolution. But, alas, so shall his holines still be inferiour to the silly priest: because as S. Paul discourseth to the Hebrewes, he that blesseth, is greater then he that is blessed. Let us say, Hebr. 7. 
                           •
                        . that the Pope giueth to the priest power ouer him, for that time onely. But, alas, that would be a rare and strange metamorphosis, with an impossibilitie annexed therevnto. For first, by this meanes the simple priest should be Pope in time of absolution, as having then greatest power upon earth. Secondly, after absolution, he that was pope, should cease to be pope: and he Argumentum ad hominem. that was not pope, should without election or consecration, be pope again. Which is a thing impossible, euen by popish proceeding. Let vs say, that some other pope hath given this auctoritie to the priest. But, alas, that can not possibly be graunted. For this is a constant axiome with the papists: par in parem non habet potestatem. When two are of equall auctoritie, the one can not make a law for, or against the other. Well, since none of these waies can content his holines; let vs heare what his owne deare vassals can say in his defense.
                  
                     Iosephus Angles vnfoldeth this great difficultie at large, when he thus writeth:
                  
                     Canus affert tres opiniones: prima est S. Thomae, & D. Bonaventurae, quibus adhasit Turrecremata. Secunda opinio est Paludani, asserentis habere authoritatem 
                     Ioseph. Ang. in 4. s. q. de confess. p. 257. absolvendi non à Papa, sed à Christo. Tertia est Caietani, dicentis iurisdictionem quam habet sacerdos absolvendi Papam, nec esse à Christo, neque à Papa, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ab ecclesia, sed solum ex electione, per hoc scilicet quod papa se subiicit illi illum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      eligit. Est & quarta opinio, qua tenetur, quod quemadmodum in receptione ordinis datur vnicui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      simplici sacerdoti potest as iurisdictionis respectu venialis, & mortalis quae poenitens alias confessus est, & etiam respectu cuiuscū
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                     
                     peccatoris in articulo mortis: ita datur tunc iurisdictio eidem sacerdoti absolvendi papam.
                  
                  Master Canus bringeth three opinions▪ the first is, of S. Thomas and S. Bonaventure, to whome agreeth Turrecremata. The second is, the opinion of Paludanus, who avoucheth that the Priest receiveth his authoritie, not from the Pope, but from Christ him selfe. The third opinion is Caietans, who affirmeth, that the Priest hath authority to absolve the Pope, neither from Christ, nor from the Pope, nor from the Church, but onely by election: to wit, in that the Pope submitteth him selfe to the Priest, and chooseth him. And there is yet a fourth opinion, which holdeth that as in receiving of priesthoode, power of iurisdiction is given to every simple priest, in respect of veniall sinnes, and of those mortalls which the penitent nath otherwise confessed, and also in respect of every sinner in the point of death: so is iurisdiction then given to the said Priest, that he may absolve the Pope.
                  Thus saith our reverend bishop, and worthie fryer Ioseph. Out of whose words I note;
                  1 First, that since our Lord is the God of peace, and not of dissention, as recordeth his holy Apostle in many places: it must needes follow, that this popish doctrine is not of God, which is so devided against it selfe: and 1. Thess. 5. 23. 2. Thess. 3. 16. 1. Cor. 14. 33. therefore said Caietain truely, though vnwittingly, and to another ende: when he denied the priest to have his authoritie, from Christ, or from his Church.
                  2 I note secondly, that their doctrine is meere opinative, as which is onely grounded vpon mans invention.
                  3 I note thirdly, that as the priestes iurisdiction is vncerten, so is the Popes absolution also, as which is consectarie therevnto: and consequently, that the Pope standeth in daunger of his salvation. And so, if I be not deceived, the obscuritie of this conclusion is made evident.
               
            
            
               The Corollarie.
               
                  FIRST therefore, since auricular popish confession is not commaunded by Christ: secondly, since it was not practised by the Apostles: thirdly, since it was instituted onely by the positive lawe of man: fourthly, since the Greeke Church never admitted that lawe: fifthly, since it is contrarie not onely to the fathers, but to popish doctours also: sixtly, since it bringeth the Pope him selfe to the hazard of his salvation: I conclude, that it is a

sufficient motive for me to renounce the Romish religion, as false, erroneous, and pernicious doctrine.
               Thus much of the tenth and last Motive.
            
         
         
            
            Peroratio.
            
               I HAVE in this discourse (gentle Reader) briefly confuted ten special articles, of popish faith and religion.
            1 First, I haue shewed the insufficiencie, blasphemie, and absurdities of popish pardons.
            2 Secondly, that the Pope both may erre, and hath erred defacto, not only as a priuate person in priuate opinion: but euen as Pope and publike person, in iudicial definitions.
            3 Thirdly, that generall councels in these latter daies, are nothing els but a meere mockerie & sophistical subtiltie, to deceiue Gods people withal.
            4 Fourthly, that the Popes dispensations are wicked, licentious, and intollerable.
            5 Fiftly, that Kings are above Popes: that their power is independent: & that they are subiect to none, but to God alone.
            6 Sixtly, that popish dissention is of matters most important, and incredible to such, as are not wel acquainted with their bookes.
            7 Seaventhly, that the writings of the auncient fathers, are to be received with great reuerence: yet so, as we acknowledge them to be men, to haue their errours, and to binde vs to their authorities no further, then they accord with the holy Scriptures.
            8 Eightly, that all things necessarie for our salvation, are conteined in the holy Scriptures; and that popish traditions are so vncerten, as the best learned papists can not agree therein.
            9 Ninthly, that after this life, there is neither merite, nor demerite, nor satisfaction to be made: and that the booke of Machabees, can not establish popish purgatorie.
            10 Tenthly, that the specificall enumeration and confession of all our sinnes: is not onely not commaunded by the Scriptures, but repugnant to the same, and impossible to be accomplished by the power of man.
            All which points I have prooued, not onely by Scriptures, authorities, and reasons; but euen by the expresse testimonies, of best learned papists. A thing heretofore never performed by any, to my knowledge: and yet so

forceable against the papists, (if I be not deceived,) as nothing can be more. My desire was to content all, to offend none, to confirme the weake, to instruct the ignorant, to reclaime the seduced, and to confound all arrogant disloyall subiects. If 
                  •
               ffect succeede correspondent to my option, God be thanked for it, who is the chiefe worker of every good act; to whome with the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be all honour, power, glorie, and dominion, nowe and ever.
            AMEN.
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            
            
         
      
   