
      
         
            
            
            CERTAINE
Characters and Eſſayes
of Priſon and Priſoners.
COMPILED BY NOVVS
HOMO A PRISONER
in the Kings Bench.
            Experientia eſt optimus magiſter.
            LONDON
Printed by William Iones, dwelling in
Red-croſſe ſtreete. 1618.
         
         
            
            
            TO HIS MOST KIND
AND EVER RESPECTIVE
Kind Vnckle, M. Mathew Mainwaring
of Namptwitch in Chesſhire.
            
               SInce my coming into
Priſon, what with the
ſtrangnes of the place,
and ſtrictneſſe of my Liberty,
I am ſo tranſported
that I could not follow that ſtudy
wherein I tooke great delight and
cheife pleaſure, and to ſpend my time
Idly would but add more diſcontentments
to my troubled breaſt, & bring
in this chaos of diſcontentments, fantaſies
muſt ariſe, which wil bring forth
the fruites of an Idle brayne, for è


Malis minimum. It is far better to giue
ſome account of time though to little
purpoſe then none at all. To which
end I gathered a handfull of Eſſayes,
& few Characters of ſuch things as by
my owne experience, I could ſay Probatum
eſt: not that thereby I ſhould
either pleaſe the reader, or ſhew exquiſitnes
of inuētion, or curious ſtyle.
Seing what I write of, is but the child
of ſorrow, bred by diſcontentments

and nouriſht vp with misfortunes, to
whoſe help melancholly Saturne gaue
his Iudgement. The night Bird hir inuention,
and the ominous Rauen
brought a quill taken from his owne
wing, dipt in the Inke of miſery as
cheife ayders in this great Architect
of ſo row.
            This child is borne and brought to
the Font all things ready, onely there
wants a patron. Hoc difficillimum eſt.
For who will defend ſorrow, and miſery,
who wil giue him entertainment,
who will countenance this worke the
Author being miſerable, who will reſpect
the matter, the man being an abiect,
who wil cheriſh the circumſtance
when the ſubſtāce is almoſt periſhed?
Surely non in his diebus, for friendſhip
is baniſhed, loue extinguiſhed, natural
affection gone to trauel, gould is dearer
then a friend, treaſure is nearer thē
a kinſman, and mammon better beloued
then a ſonne. Yet in this famine
of true friends I will venter vpon you
(moſt louing Vnckle) as a god-father
to this my firſt borne though in miſery.
I can haue but a denyall which if
you doe it muſt dye in obliuion. But

why ſhould I feare ſince you haue alwaies
bin my anchor when I haue bin
Ship-wrackt, and many times ſaued
my poore Barque when it was ready
to ſplit. Why thē ſhold I doubt of your
friendly patronage which haue neuer
fayled me? Be bould then, and goe thy
way, thou ſhalt be entertained though
not for any worth which is in thee, yet
in reſpect thou doſt but ſhew a willing
heart, and doſt endeauour to expell
ingratitude a thing moſt odious not
onely to man but God, not to Chriſtians
but Heathens, not to Heathens
but Beaſts.
            What then ſhould I giue to you for
all your kindneſſes which you haue
continually beſtowed vpon me which
are ſo many that if I ſhould endeauour
to recite (Ante diem clauſo componet
veſper olympo) but to ſhew my willingnes
to my power though I am not able
to requite (for, vltra poſſe non eſt eſſe)
doe offer vp vnto the Oracle of your
loue the ſacrifice of a louing heart, hoping
that what is amiſſe you will impute
it to the ſlendernes of my iudgement,
and the dulnes of my brayne
which this place hath made worſe (and

not to the leſt defect of goodwill.) &
that you would let none but your ſelfe
ſee my imperfections, which are ſuficiently
divulged by my owne actions,
& would be vnwilling to haue a ſecond
edition of them by my writing this
was the chiefeſt cauſe I tooke. This in
hand; another was becauſe that happily
ſome friend of mine (poſt mea funera)
by accident may find this paper, & read
them & by my example ſay. Foelix ſum
quem pericula huius authoris faciunt
me cautum, for qui non ante cauet poſt
dolebit, & that they may be afraide to
enter into debt any further then neceſſity
vrgeth, & if they be forced to borrow
to pay as ſoone as the can (for vſury
& extortion bite deepe) and credit
once crackt is not eaſily recouered nor
all creditors of on mind, for ſome will
in pitty forbeare and others will ſhew
the greateſt ſeuerity.
            So hoping you
will accept non donum ſed animum▪
                I
reſt 
                  this 27. of Ianuary Anno 1617.
From the Kings-bench Priſon in
South-warke.
               
               Your euer-louing nephew
Yarffeg Lluhſnym.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE COVRTEous
Reader.
            
               Courteous Reader only to baniſh
melācholy and to wade through
tedious time, tedious in reſpect
of this place, I gathered a few eſſayes &
characters, with an intent not to haue thē
ſeen of any, but to him to whom they
were ſent, being on that I might trulie
ground a certainty of, who would excuſe
my imperfections, and iudge charitably of
my ſlendernes of iudgmēt, this coppy by accident
came to ſome of my friends hands,
who hauing peruſed it wiſhed mee to put
it in print, which I altogether refuſed,
becauſe I would not preſume of my owne
iudgment, or dare to venter to put my ſelfe
to the cenſure of ſo many vnderſtanding
readers into whoſe hands it is ſubiect to
fall, theſe perſwaſions preuailed not,
intreaties were laid aſide, and I muſt either
divulge them, or elſe looſe their loue
this was the firſt motiue that with an vnwilling
willingnes cauſed me to put my
booke to cenſure. Another was in reſpect
ſome obdurate creditors may reade it, &
by reading mollifie their ſtrong harts. The

laſt reaſon becauſe it may be as a caueat
to young gallants, to terrifie them how
they run in debt, wherein they may know
that impriſonment is of all miſeries moſt
lamentable.
            So hoping that the iudicious will with
laudable cenſure mittigate my many imperfections,
and the other iudge fauorably
of my intention, which if it take
well is better then I can expect,
if otherwiſe they do not iniury
mee, giuing deſert
his reward.
         
      
      
         
            
            Eſſays of a Priſon.
            
               TO what end or purpoſe
ſhould I intreat halfe of
the Muſes for the ayd of
inuention, or Cicero to
adorne my phraſe with eloquence,
or Floras deepe iudgment
to write iudicially, or implore ayde of
Martiall to ſpeake miſtically, or Virgills
heroicke ſtile to pleaſe the hearers,
ſince what I write is nothing but of
ſorrow, the ſubiect but diſcontentmēt,
and the whole matter but an Index of
many miſeryes, & therefore my phraſe
ſhalbe altogether vnpolliſhed, being
the ſeruant of my more dull apprehenſion.
            
               Vade, ſed incultus, qualem decet exulis
eſſe,
               Infoelix habitum temporis huius habe.
            
            My purpoſe is with dim water coulors
to lime me out a heart, yea ſuch a heart
ſo diſcontēted & oppreſſed, that I need
not to be curious in fitting euery coulor
to his place, or to chuſe the pleaſanteſt
chamber to draw it in, becauſe in

it I am to lay downe the bounds of
thoſe tempeſtuous ſeas in which ten
thouſands are euery day toſſed, if not
ouerwhelmed, which is ſo vſuall here
amongſt vs that euery one is arts maiſter
in this workmanſhip, & euery minute
ſome thing or other is ſtill added
to this diſtreſſed Picture, whoſe ponderous
waight is ſo great that the frame
is ſcarce able to beare the effigies.
            
            My trauells hither to this infernall
Iland was but a ſhort voyage, and my
abode here as yet but few months, but
it was longer to me then an Eaſt Indian
voyage, and I am ſure farre more
dangerous for if from the Indyes of
ſixty men twenty come home ſafe it
is well, but in this if eighty of a hundred
be not caſt-ouer board it is a wonder
            Being once arriued,Loci incommoditas. no ſtarre of comfort
heere can be ſeene to ſayle by, no
hauen of happyneſſe neere, no anchor
of hope to caſt out, Top-ſayle, Foreſayle,
Spritſayle, Mizen, Mayne, Sheate,
Bollings and Drablers are all torne by
the windes, and the Barque it ſelfe ſo
weather-beaten, that there is few can

come neere to touch at the Cap of Bona
Speranza.
            
            Being once arriued at, all are not onely
ſtayd, but the in chauntments are ſo
ſtrōg that it tranſformeth all that come
thither. Firſt the greateſt courages
are here wracked, the faireſt reuenewes
doe here cōe aground, it maketh a wiſe
mā to looſe his witts, a foole to know
himſelfe, it turnes a rich man into a
begger, and leaues a poore man deſperate,
he whom neither Snowes nor
Alpes can vanquiſh, but hath a heart
as conſtant as Haniball, him can the
miſeryes of a Priſon ouercome.
            
               The Character of a Priſon.
               A Priſon is a graue to bury men aliue,
and a place wherein a man
for halfe a yeares impriſonment may
learne more lawe, then he can at Weſtminſter
for a hundred pound.
               It is a Microcoſmos, a little world of
woe, it is a mappe of miſery, it is a place
that will learne a young man more
villany if he be apt to take it in one
halfe yeare, thē he can learne at twenty
dycing howſes, Bowling allyes,

Brothelhouſes, or Ordinaryes, and an
old man more pollicie, then if he had
bin Pupil to Machiauill.
               
               It is a place that hath more diſeaſes
perdomināt in it, then the peſt-houſe in
the plague tyme, and it ſtinckes more
then the Lord Mayors dogge-houſe
or paris-garden in Auguſt.
               
               It is a little common wealth, although
little wealth be commō there,
it is a deſart where deſert lyes hoodwinckt
it is a famous Citty wherein
are all trades, for here lyes the Alchymiſt
that can rather make ex auro non
aurum, then ex non auro aurum.
               
               It is as intricate a place as Roſamunds
Labyrinth, and is as full of
blind Meanders; and crooked turnings
that it is vnpoſſible to find the
way out except he be directed by a
ſiluer clue, and can neuer ouercome
Minotaure without a goulden ball to
worke his owne ſafety.
               It is as Innes of Court, for heerin
Lawyers inhabit, that haue crochets
to free other men yet all their quirks
& quiddities cannot infranchiſe them.
               
                  
It is the Doctors Commons where
skilfull Phyſitians frequent, who like
Aeſculapius can cure other mens diſeaſes,
yet cannot Quinteſſence out of all
their Vegetalls and Mineralls a Balſamum,
or Elixir to make a ſoueraigne
plaiſter to heale the ſurfet the mace
hath giuen them.
               It is the Chyrurgions hall where many
rare artiſts liue, that can ſearch other
mens wounds yet cannot heale the
wound the Searieant hath giuen them.
               It is your Bankrupts banqueting
houſe, where he ſits feaſting with the
ſweete meates borrowed from other
mens tables, hauing a voluntary diſpoſition
neuer to repay them againe.
               It is your Prodigalls (vltimum refugium)
wherein he may ſee himſelfe as in
a glaſſe what his exceſſe hath brought
him to, and leaſt that he ſhould ſurfet,
comes hither to Phiſicke himſelfe with
moderate dyet, and leaſt that his bed
of downe ſhould breed too many diſeaſes,
comes hither to chang his bed
where he is ſcarſe able to lye downe.
               It is a Purgatory which doth afflict
a man with more miſeries then euer

he reaped pleaſures.
               It is a pilgrimage to extenuate ſin
                     •
                  
and abſolue offences: for heere be Seminaries
and Maſſe—Prieſts which doe
take downe the pride of their fleſh
more, then a voyage to the holy Land
or a hayre ſhirt in Lent.
               It is an exile which doth baniſh a
man from all contentments, wherein
his accounts doe ſo terrify him, that it
makes a man grow deſperate.
               To conclude what is it not? in a
word it is the very Idea of all miſery
and torments, it conuerts ioy into ſorrow,
riches into pouerty, eaſe into diſcontentments,
and further,

                     Of all the ill that may be thought,
                     Imagind or be writ:
                     In priſon here a man ſhall find,
                     Which will his owne heart ſplit.
                  
               
            
            
               Of Priſoners.
               I Could wiſh that every one that
comes to priſon ſhould not be diſmayed,
but cary it out brauely & with
reſolution, & to conſider that no miſery
in this world is endleſſe. After

ſtormes calms wil ariſe, & though ſorrow
be over night yet ioy will come
in the morning, & to ſay as Caeſar did
to the Pilott that carried him when he
was afraid, (quoth he) thou carieſt Caeſar:
So every generous minde ought
to be arm'd with reſolution to meete
all ſtormes of adverſitie,Omnis homo Miſer. and to conſider
that man was borne to miſery,
and therefore naturall to him.
               But thou wilt peradventure ſay the
name of a Priſoner is loathſome to
thee, is it becauſe thou art cooped vnder
locke and key? Is it becauſe thou
feeleſt wants? Is it becauſe thou art
barred of freedome? Is it becauſe thy
freinds looke ſtrangely on thee or forſake
thee? Is it becauſe thou art diſgraced
and holden in ſcorne? Is it becauſe
thou lodgeſt hardly and peradventure
with an ill bed-fellow: Yet let
not all theſe diſmay thee, for hadſt
thou the whole Countrey to walke
in, yet thy ſoule is ſtill impriſoned in
thy corrupted body. Let not want diſcourage
thee, for thy redeemer ſuffered
hunger & cold to fulfil thy wants.
Let not want of freedome trouble

thee, thy Sauiour was fettered and manackled
to infranchiſe thee. Let not
the coy lookes of thy freinds diſmay
thee, thy Lord was ſcorned of all men
to bring thee into favour. Let not diſgraces
moleſt thee, the King of Kings
was moſt diſgraced to honour thee,
let not thy lodging or forced chamber
fellowes afflict thee, the Pilot of
thy ſafety was lodged in a manger and
made a companion for theeues. But
looke into thy owne boſome & learne
but a ſhort rule yet very difficult viz:
(Noſce te ipſum) and thou ſhalt find it
is not impriſonment that afflicts thee,noſee tuipſum.
but the evill which is in thy ſelfe,
makes thee ſo diſtaſtfull, for hadſt
thou all things at will, yet ſtill thou
wouldſt wiſh for more. The greateſt
Monarch liues not without ſome diſcontentment,Nemo vinit contentus.
and comfort thy ſelfe
that one day thou ſhalt be infranchiſed
and goe to that place and manſion
houſe which is prepared for thee,
where all ſcores ſhall be payd, all cares
baniſhed, and all teares wiped away.
               Varlets and Catch-poles arreſt
thee, fret not at it, if law haue power

to whet an axe, ſhe muſt pick out a
hang-man to ſtrike the mace, this
doeth but onely put thee in remembrance
of that arreſt which ſhal Summon
thee to appeare at the Imperiall
Court of heauen.
               Thy accounts are many and great
which are againſt thee,Redde rationem. yea ſome of
you come to a tormenting execution,
greeue not at this, it doth but teach
thee that thy accounts muſt be
brought againſt thee, to draw thee to
a reckoning to make thee to knowe
that thou oweſt a reckoning to heauen
as well as man, and Iuſtice will
execute her power not to driue thee
to deſpaire, but to a mendment.
               Further I perſwade my ſelfe their
are many priſoners whoſe reſolution
are ſo noble, and reſolute that before
they would yeeld to the threats of an
inſulting creditour, they would cherefully
thruſt their nekes into the yoake
of aduerfity, if no more veines herein
were cut but their owne, but here is
none ſo poore which dyes in priſon
but the laſt gap doth cracke the heartſtrings
of a wife,Parentes et Liberi ſunt chari. children, father, mother,
friends or allies, therefore art

thou bound to take pitty of thy ſelfe,
and to hang out the flag of truce to
thy bloudy-minded Creditor, and
ſeeke or ranſome to pay all ſo that
thou maiſt eſcape with life, though it
be vpon ſome ignoble tearmes, and
much loſſe to thee, if none of theſe reſpects,
yet for thy Countries ſake, to
whom thou art a Traytor if thou giue
thy ſelfe to thine enimies hand when
vpon parley thy peace may be made.
Come forth of Priſon, and dye not
there, that thou maieſt honour thy
King, and do ſeruice to thy countrey,
and pay thy dets ſo farre as thou art able,
decauſe the greateſt debt that euer
thou didſt owe was paid for thee.
            
            
               Priſoners of another nature.
               SOme there be which haue gotten
other mens goods and ſoe lye
here to defraud them, theſe of all men
deſerue no pitty, or compaſſion, which
tie their owne hands, and make themſelues
gally ſlaues onely to weare golden
ſetters, how canſt thou ſay thy
prayers, and expect a bleſſing ſhould
be poured on thee, that ſo willingly
erreſt from the type of a iuſt mā which

is (Suum cuique attribuere) I will not
ſpeake much of thee,Fac alijs fieri quod velis ipſe tibi. becauſe it muſt
be all gall. In a word the gallowes on
which the poore theefe hangeth
is moſt fit for thee, he robbeth one
man, thou whole families, he is a felon
to man onely, thou art a felon to God
and man, if he kill, he doth it ſodainly
and but one, when thou with a lingring

                     •
                  eath deſtroyeſt father, mother,
children, and peraduenture many Orphants
left to their charge.Diuiti
                        •…
                      faciunt homines potentiores non. meli ores. But looke
to it that although thou compound
for two ſhillings or three ſhillings in
the pound, the ouerplus which thou
ſo ill haſt got will bring thy ſoule into
ſuch debt that the remainder will not
pay the intereſt to ſaue the forfaiture
of thy ſoule to the Diuell, which will
damne thee and thy angells, with him
and his angells, and thy iſſue or allies
which ſhall inioy them ſhall neuer
proſper with them.
            
            
               The Character of a Priſoner.
               A Priſoner is an impatient patient
lingrin
                     •
                   vnder the rough hands
of a cruell phyſition,Bona male parta, male di
                        •
                     abuntur. his creditour hauing
caſt his water knowes his diſeaſe,

and hath power to cure him, but
takes more pleaſure to kill him. He is
like Tantalus, who hath freedome
running by his dore, yet cannot enioy
the leaſt benefit thereof, his greateſt
griefe is that his credit was ſo good,
and now no better his land is drawne
within the compaſſe of a ſheepes skin
and his owne hand the fortification
that bars him of entrance, he is fortunes
toſſing-ball, an obiect that would
make mirth melancholly, to his friends
an abiect, and a ſubiect of nine dayes
wonder in euery Barbers ſhoppe, and
a mouth-full of pitty (that he had no
better fortune) to Midwiues, and
talkeatiue goſſips, and all the content
that this tranſitory life can giue
him ſeemes but to flout him, in reſpect
the reſtraint of liberty barres the
true vſe. To his familiars he is like a
plague, whom they dare ſcarſe come
nigh for feare of infection, he is a monument
ruined by thoſe which raiſed
him, he ſpeads the day with a hei mihi,
vae miſerum, & the night with a Nulla
dolor eſtmedicabilis herbâ: & to conclud

                     A Priſoner is a woefull man,
                     Oppreſt with griefe of mind.
                     
                        
And tell his miſeries, no man can:
                     Which he is ſure to finde.
                  
               
            
            
               Of Creditors.
               A Creditor hath two payre of hands
on of fleſh and blood, & that nature
gaue him; another of Iron & that
the law giues him: but the one is more
predominant then the other, for mercy
guids the one, & māmon the other.
But if he once conſider what he goeth
about to doe, and that it is the image
of God whō he goeth about to deface
and oppreſſe with miſeries,Deus fecit hominem ſecundum imaginem ſuam. & calamities
then the ſoftnes of the one doth
ſo operate, that it meets with the hardnes
of the other, which neuer cōes to
paſſe but when grace & mercy kiles
Law & Iuſtice, but ſuch dayes are ſeldome
ſet downe in our Calenders, neither
will it ſerue this Iland, but perſwade
my ſelfe that for a ſtrange meridian
is that Almanack calculated in
which they are found.
               I by mine owne experience (though
little, yet too much to learne it heere)
haue knowne of my owne knowledg
a hundred creditors which haue laid
their debtors in irons as relentles as

themſelues, and of thoſe hundred, if
I ſhould add a hundred more, I thinke
I ſhould nominate but one onely, and
only on of a mercifull breaſt, who did
not onely greiue to ſee his debtor oppreſt
with miſery, but alſo layd money
out of his purſe to free him, he ſhot a
ſecond arrow to finde the firſt and ſuppoſe
he ſhot both away, doe you thinke
his quiuer was the emptier? No, he
ſcattered a handfull of corne & reaped
a buſhell, he receiued treble intereſt,
he gained by this new ſecuritie, &
ſuch as would not faile him at the day;
God became his debtor, and paid him
more then his accompt came to.
               Thou that art a Creditor wilt not
beleeue this:Ironia. doe not. But in ſtead
of this mans weeping make thy debtor
melt into teares, and in ſtead of
his lamentation reioyce hee is in thy
hands to vſe him cruelly, and flatter
thy ſelfe in ſaying thou haſt no reaſon
to looſe ſo much by him, and I will
haue his body, or in perſwading thy
ſelfe that his friends will not let him
lye for ſuch a debt, and that thou wilt
not forgiue him, but nolens volens will
be ſatiſfied, or elſe he ſhall ſtarue and

rot:Homo homini lupus. o thou wicked man, thou neuer
doſt conſider what teares thy Sauiour
ſhed to free thee, and when thou waſt
giuen vp to the priſon of hell by the
hands of thy cruell creditour the Divel
to be cruelly tormented, yet Chriſt
paid all thy ſcoares with his pretious
bloud, and how canſt thou lye downe
on thy pillow to pray to God to forgiue
thee a million of debts, nay they
run into infinitum, which will not forgiue
thy brother one debt. And when
all thy friends would not redeeme thee
thy Sauiour freed thee, how canſt thou
doe theſe things with a ſafe cōſcience?
Poſt thou not ſleepe on the pillow of
thy owne damnatiō, thy prayers turne
into curſings, and thou doſt but mock
him that thou prayeſt vnto.
               Conſider what a great ſcoare thou
art to pay, what an accompt thou art
to make, and how thou ſhalt not eſcape
if thou vſe ſuch cruelty till thou haſt
paide the vtmoſt farthing, thou that art
a cruell murtherer whom the reuenge
and wronges of a wife, children, parents,
and orphants will like the bloud
of Abell call to heauen for vengeance
on thee and thy poſterity: doe but

conſider of this, and then thou wilt be
affaid to torment thy brother. But imitate
the Romaines who builded a
temple for the reliefe of thoſe which
were fallen into decay & pouerty, then
find a priſon to ſtarue them in, and follow
Titus Veſpacian who hauing omitted
but one day to doe Iuſtice cauſed
that day to be put forth of the calender.
So that day when thou ſhalt haue
but a thought of tormēting thy poore
brother▪ doe but looke into thy owne
conſience and it will make thee repent
that euer thou haſt liued ſuch a day
wherein thou haſt plaid the tyrant in
thy heart. The rockes haue yeelded
reliefe to men oppreſt, but you more
harder then they, are the cauſe of their
miſery. Be thou as great a tyrant ouer
thy poore debtor as Nero was, as
cruell as Phalaris, as inhumane as Lycaon,
& in the end thou doeſt with thes
get a ſtaffe to breake thy owne head,
and lay a ſnare which thou thy ſelfe
ſhalt fall into, which though thy owne
perſon eſcape, yet thy poſterity ſhalbe
ſure to feele the puniſhment.
               Thou that vaunteſt, and wilt make
dice of thy debters bones, be theſe the

words of a man? no, of a monſter? no,
but a diuell, nay worſe then a diuill,
a thing not worthy name, for theſe
words thou art as infamous, as the
Iewes hatefull for caſting of dice for
the Lords garments, that garment
was but a ſenceles thing but thou
caſts dice for a peece of thy redeemers
body.
               Thou takeſt with one clap of a Varlets
hand, from the Courtier his honour,
from the Lawyer his tongue,
from the Merchant the ſeas, from the
Cittizen his credit, from the Scholler
his preferment, from the husband man
the earth it ſelfe (and from all men as
much as thou maiſt) the brightnes
and warmth of the ſunne of heauen,
in a word if nothing will make thy
ſtony heart relent, thou in being cruell
to thy debtor, art worſe then the
hang man, hee before hee ſtrikes begs
pardon, thou takeſt a pride to condemne
where thou maiſt ſaue.
               But it may bee thy eſtate is ſicke,
thy credit much ingaged, and to ſaue
thy ſelfe thou art forced to doe this.
In ſo doing thou doſt well, if another
weare thy coate and thou goeſt colde

thou maiſt pluck it from his ſhoulders.
If thou art hungry and another keepeth
thy meate, thou maiſt take it off his
table; if he be able to cure thy wound,
which for his ſake thou haſt made,
thou haſt reaſon to ſeeke thy remedy,
but if he which hath borrowed thy
coate, hath worne it out, and hath not
a ragge to couer him with, wilt thou
trample vpon his naked body? If with
the Iew of Malta in ſtead of coyne
thou requireſt a pound of fleſh next to
thy debtors heart, wilt thou cut him
in peeces? If thy debtor offer thee his
bed he lyes in, his chamber hee ſleepes
in, his diſh hee drinkes in, nay all that
he hath, ſo that he leaues himſelfe, wife
and children as naked as they came into
the world, wilt thou for all this ſuffer
him to lye in priſon? If thou be
mercifull to thy debtor that cannot
pay thee, alas what is it? No more then
if thou ſhouldſt lift vp the head of a
ſick man vpon his pillow to eaſe him,
he may recouer and doe as much for
thee; in priſon pouerty is made beggery,
and ſo thereby thou doſt not onely
vndoe thy debtor, but looſe all,
therefore bee mercifull and pittifull,

and thou ſhalt not looſe thy rewarde.
               
                  Lycurgus being askt why he made
no law for parracides,Particides. he anſwered becauſe
he thought there were none ſo
vnnaturall: ſo if I ſhould haue ſtudied
all the dayes of my life, and that
my yeares ſhould be doubled, I ſhould
neuer haue Imagined either to haue
inuented, or to haue bin an eye-witneſſe
of ſuch vnnaturallnes as is heere
exemplary, as the ſonne who being
bound for his father, to free himſelfe
hath layd his father vp in cloſe priſon,
and heere hath detayned him ſeauen
yeares neuer yeelding to any compoſition,
but his poore father liues at his
mercileſſe mercie, and againe the father
ſuffers his ſonne to be impriſoned
for his owne debt at his owne
ſuit, ſurely a thing ſo abhorde, that I
tremble to write it, and none can
reade it without bluſhing. What will
this world come to, when the Mammon
of this world ſhall ſet father againſt
ſonne, ſonne againſt father, and
make them more mercileſſe then Tygers,
and more vnnaturall then beaſts:
for a beaſt forſakes not his owne, but
man reſpecteth gold before his friend,

& the father, coyne before the ſonne
of his body, fleſh of his fleſh. And
the ſonne the God of this world before
his father, which gaue him life,
and beeing whom he ought to cheriſh,
and vndergoe all troubles to
eaſe him. But looke to it, both fathers
and children, leaſt in a moment
the iuſt iudgment of God fall vppon
you, and damne them and your gold
together, louing it better then thoſe
whom you ought to cheriſh, and the
one to be but a thing of the baſeſt
eſteeme in reſpect of the other.Ex paucis dictis plurima in
                        •
                     endere potes. I could
exemplifie it with hiſtoryes as well
forraine as domeſtique but that it is
not my purpoſe, for Ex paucis plurima
concipit ingenium.
               
            
            
               The Character of a Creditor.
               A Creditor is a man whoſe eſtate
is wrapped vp in ſheepe-skins,
his riſing growes by his debtors fall,
his credit relyes vpon his debtors performance,
and the death of a young
gallants father is more pleaſing to him
thē faſting dayes to a Vſurer, or death
to a Broker, hee growes rich onely by
putting forth commodities, which

mediately conuerts▪ to diſcommodities,
hee will not put out money for
tenne in the hundred, for vſury is hatefull
to him, but hee loues extortion
and makes that his ſummum bonum,
for he will marchandize with you,
whereby hee will gaine ſixty in a hundred,
hee is your Cities honeſt man,
which is, to ſpeake the truth, more thē
a knaue, for a knaue that is crafty needs
no broker, but hee cannot liue without
one. He is a man compoſed of
all loue, and proteſting kindneſſe to
pleaſure the occaſions of his gallant
debtor, with his much affirmation of
his reſpect, how willing he is to doe
his worſhip a pleaſure, whereby the
chiefe ayme of his pleaſure is to haue
a footing vppon ſome capitall meſſuage,
or elſe to be fingring ſome petty
Lordſhippe, or cōely mānor, who hauing
no ſooner glutted himſelfe with
the rich banquet of his debtors deere
coſt, but immediately to phyſick himſelfe
he is at the charge of a faire hackney
Coach with three moſt abſolute
lades to draw him (whither hee moſt
willingly is drawne) with his curious
wife, and two or three of his owne

conditioned neighbours,Similis ſimili gaudet. to ſee this
goodly purchaſe, who prepare themſelues
ſome fortnight before hand,
and prune themſelues vp in their Peacocks
feathers like the puppets in a
Lord Maior his pageant, and for this
his great act he is admired at amongſt
his neighbours as the Owle in the
day time amongſt other birds, and
eſteemed of with as much reſpect
as that captaine Pigmi was, which
was commander in that bloudy
warres againſt the terrible black
Crowes.
               A Creditor may further be ſaid to bee
either, homo, monſtrum, or demon.
A man when he caſts his debtor into
Priſon with a determination to ſeeke
his owne, not to ruin him, and if he bee
not able to pay all, to take what he can
ſpare, and giue him day for the reſt,
and ſo releaſe him: this man is (homo
homini Deus) that as he doth puniſh,
ſo he doth preſerue.
               A Monſter when he hath not onely
extended his ſubſtance but caſts him
in Priſon, and is as deafe as an adder to
heare of releafe till he haue paid him
the vtmoſt farthing.
               
                  
A Diuell when hee hath ruined him
doth reioyce to ſee him fall, and in
ſtead of coyne will haue his carkaſſe,
but to finde a creditor both Homo et
Angelus, that will releaſe his priſoner
when he is not able to pay him, and
that will conſider that vltra poſſe non
eſt eſſe. Such a one is Rara auis in
terris, &c.
               
               
                  Some creditors are pittifull,
                  And mercy ſtill will ſhow:
                  And ſome as flint will harder be,
                  Which many debters know.
               
            
            
               Of choyce of company in Priſon.
               VVOuldſt thou learne to diſpute
well, be an excellent Sophiſter,
wouldſt thou diſpute of forraine
affaires, and be an excellent linguiſt, I
counſell thee to trauel? Wouldſt thou
be of a pleaſing and affectionate behauiour?
Frequent the Court. Wouldſt
thou diue into the ſecret villanies of
man? Lye in priſon.Via perieu loſa.
               
               Take heed when thou entreſt into
this wilderneſſe of wilde beaſts,
what path thou takeſt, ſome guide is

neceſſary, or elſe vnawares, thou wilt
with the Roman Emperours Steward
fall into a pit, where cruell deuouring
are intrapped, which will ruine thee.
               Societie is the ſtring at which the
life of man hangeth without which
is no muſicke, two in this maske is
but a vnion, Adam had his Eue, and euery
ſonne of Adam hath his brother
whom he loues.
               No Chariot runs with one wheele,
two makes it ſteady, a third is ſuperfluous,
foure too cumberſome, thou
muſt chooſe one and but one, who
walkes alone is lame.
               Men of all conditions are forced
into priſon, as all riuers runne into
the ſea, therefore it is good to be familiar
with all, acquainted with few,
and if with any eandem cantilenam cano,
but with one, make triall what the
veſſell will hold before thou powre
thy ſelfe into him, and bee wary what
thou ſayeſt or doeſt, for thou ſhalt
haue the eies of enuy, not of reproofe
which will looke vpon thee, to malice
thee if thou doeſt well, and if thou deny
to follow them in their humors,
or to daunce after their owne pipe,

thou ſhalt be more emulated then the
boy was of the two Ladies when hee
preferred Venus before in giuing her
the golden bal, and if by accident thou
doeſt any thing amiſſe, as humanum
eſt errare thou ſhalt bee more vilified,
and with inueterate malice more proſecuted
to diſgrace thee, then the Phariſees
did the Hugonites.
               Be wary therefore of thy company,
for to be a bowle for euery alley, and
runne into euery company prooues
thy minde to haue no bias.
               Thy comming into priſon is like a
traueller comming into ſtrange countries,
and takes vp ſeuerall lodgings,
hath many welcomes, but they are not
to him, but to his money.
               If thou wilt dwell with thy ſelfe be
not giddy, but compoſed, for hee that
is euery where is no where, therefore
be wary whom thou ſelecteſt, for here
bee of all ſorts, for thou ſhalt as well
finde a flattering Gnatho, as a diſſembling
Sinon, and if thou haue ſtore of
crownes, then thou ſhalt be ſure to be
humored and bee beloued with outward
reſpects, and then they wil counſell
and aduiſe thee with proteſtations

of their loue, but looke to ſuch, whoſe
counſell to heare, and not imbrace will
do hurt but may much improue thee,
but if once taken it will operate as the
apple which Valentine dutcheſſe of
Orleans caſt to the young Princes
which once taſted, will ſo poyſon
thee with corruption that thou art
vncurable.
               Further heere be vaine glorious &
taska iue headed fooles, ſnch wil more
trouble thee, then any action of debt
which is laid one thee heere be common
drunkards, which wil lie heauier
one thee then an execution.
               But if thou ſuffer a man to ly long
in thy boſome, albeit his conditions
be full of flawes, yet labour to peece
and ſeame vp his vices, rather then
to caſt him off leaſt that it call thy
owne iudgment in queſtion.
               All men haue imperfections,humanum eum errare. and
being in priſon wee muſt not looke
to haue them ſtarres, this place is noe
Orbe for ſuch conſtellations.
               Let not thy companion be a miſerable
baſe minded fellow, for then nigardlineſſe
will hold her fingers one
thy purſe ſtringes, let him not be a Prodigall

for then he will draw thee to
riot, of adultery to luſt, of ſwearers
to damned oaths,Diuitiae faciunt homines potentiores non meliores. of pot companions
to drunkenneſſe, acquaint thy ſelfe
therefore not with the moſt, but beſt,
not the beſt in cloths or money, but
in vertue, if there be none ſuch in priſon
then keepe company with thy
ſelfe,Cum bonis bonus. and in thy chamber keepe company
with Plutarke and Seneca, or rather
Perkins and Greeneham, the one
will teach thee to liue well, the other
to dy well.
               
                  The good will teach thee good,Cum bonis bonus, cum malis malus.
                  
                  The bad will thee defame:
                  The one to vertue thee will bring
                  The other greife and ſhame.
               
            
            
               The Character of Companions in
Priſon.
               Quot homines, tot ſententiae.
               All companies are not alike, neither
is there a vnion in their diſpoſitions.
I will therefore touch but three
kinds of perſons which thou ſhalt be
ſure to find in priſon. viz.
               
               
                  1 A Paraſite.
                  2 A Iohn indifferent.
                  3 A true harted Titus.
               
               
                  
The firſt loueth thee better for thy
meanes then merit, thy ſubſtance
then thy ſelfe, who will rippe open
thy boſome to thy enemy, and when
thy money begins to ſinke, will fly
from thee, and will be the firſt that
will diſgrace thee. Hee is like a whore
who will no longer fawne, then thou
wilt feede him. Hee is a trencher raſcall,
which will more hate thee when
thou leaueſt to releeue him, then euer
hee did ſeeme to loue thee.
               The ſecond is one that will flatter
thee, and will neither abſolutely loue
thee nor hate thee, but when preſent
will be with thee, when abſent againſt
thee, hee is hic et vbique, heere and euery
where, and in very truth he is no
where.
               The laſt of theſe thou maiſt call the
maſculine ſweete heart, on which
may be reſembled to truth whoſe boſome
is allwaies bare, and hath a breaſt
of Chiſtall, that thou maiſt looke
through his body to his heart, he is
one that will loue thee in aduerſity,
hee will reſpect thee in the kitchin
as well as in the parlor, he will reuerence
thee in the hole as well as in the

maiſters ſide hee will looke on thee
in raggs as well as in robes, and will
acknowledge thee in fetters as in a
feather-bed, come ſtormes, cōe calmes,
come tempeſts, come ſun-ſhine, come
what can come, he wilbe thine and
ſtick to thee therefore.
               
                  Be carefull that thou keepe alway,Verus ami, cus optimus theſaurus.
                  
                  A freind in time of neede:
                  That will thee helpe without delay,
                  If that thou ſtand in neede.
               
            
            
               Of Viſitants in Priſon.
               Nullus ad amiſſas ibit amicus opes.
               From a ruinous houſe euery man
flies, they that are abroad ask euery
day how thou doeſt, when in priſon
they proteſt they are ſorrow for thy
misfortunes, but neuer come to thee,
ſuch are idle paſſengers preſſing about
a Barbers ſhoppe, when a man is carried
in wounded, who will peepe in
ānd climbe about the windowes, but
dare not enter into the ſhoppe, for
feare they ſhould fall into a ſwoond to
ſee him dreſt, a Priſoner is as much beholding
to ſuch leape-frogge acquaintance
as a man ſhaken with an ague
to euery goſſoping woman he meetes

who will teach him a hundered medicines
and not one worth taking.
               But if thy abiility be ſuch that thou
workeſt thy liberty then thou ſhalt
haue as many hands imbracing thee
as Centimanus had, much wine with
little loue beſtowed vpon thee, with
oaths infinite that they were comming
forty times to ſee thee, but this
or that occaſion hindred them, when
indeede they were afraide thou ſhouldeſt
haue had occaſion to vſe them, &
they had purpoſed to hath come this
day, but they are happy that thy ſo
much deſired liberty haue preuented
them, to ſuch giue no credit, onely
ſalute them with a Salue, and a
Vale.
               
               Others will come to thee with weeping
and ſighthing to cheere thee vp,
but ſuch are like Robin-redbreſts
that brings ſtrawes in their charitable
bills to couer the deade.
               Others will promiſſe to lend thee money,
but try them before thou haue
occaſion to vſe them, which if they
deny thee, when thou art at liberty be
then vnto them as a ſhaddow. But
true friends in a priſon are like ſtrawberries

in a barren countrey, that one
can hardly get a handfull in a whole
yeare, nay they are like your roſes
heere in Chriſtmas, a thouſand to one
if in an age, one bee found ſo in priſon
it is a great ods if of a thouſand
kinſmen, allies, and acquaintance I
finde but one true freind.
               
                  Donec eris foelix multos numerabis
amicos.
                  Tempora ſi fuerint nubila, ſolus eris.
               
               But if in this great dearth of freinds
wherein wee liue, vnder what fortunate
plannet may I iudge my ſelfe to
be borne, and that the conſtellations
of the ſtarres haue much fauored me,
that amongſt all my fleſh and blood
I haue found one true Damon or faithfull
Pylades, and amongſt all my acquaintance
haue found ſome faithfull,
and more conſtant in their loue and
reſpect to me in this place, then when
I was at liberty they did make ſhew
of, that I may truly ſay.
               
                  Of Viſitants ſome faithfull are,
                  When Priſoners them require:
                  And to them nothing will deny,
                  If that they them deſire.
               
            
            
               
               The Character of Viſitants.
               Viſitants for the moſt part are men
compoſed all of proteſting promiſes,
and little or no performance
they are like your Almanacks,
which when they promiſe faire weather,
it is a million to a mite if it proue
not contrary, they are like the German
clocks which ſeldome goe right,
their tongues runne faſter then the
clock one ſhroue-tueſday, the piſſing
Conduit in cheapeſide, or an Iriſh
mans paire of heeles when he runnes
one a wager, he will tyre thy eares
more in one hower with his loude
proteſtations, then a Scholler, Citizen
or Taylor will a hackney horſe in halfe
a dayes riding, but in performance
will be as ſlow as a Snayle in her pace,
and when thy meſſenger comes to
them for money, thē they will be ſure
to haue the Strongullion, or Cholick
that they cannot ſpeake, and looke as
ruſtily one thy meſſenger, as a Lawyer
wil one his clyent which ſueth vnder
forma pauperis, your letters as acceptable
as water into a ſhippe, the
Kings priuie ſeale to a vſurer, a Subpoena

to a countrey Gentleman, or a
catchpole amongſt the freindly ſociety
of Gallants.
               They are like the riches & chaynes
bought at Saint Martynes who were
faire for a little time, but ſhortly after
will proue alchamy or rather pure
copper.
               Laſtly, they are like the apples
which growe on the bankes of Gomorrah,
they haue crimſon and beautifull
rindes, but when they come to
gather them, they crumble all to duſt;
and truely can I ſay:

                     Of Viſitants ſome deſerue the name,
                     And freindly are to ſome:
                     And ſome there be that meāe no good,
                     But hurt to them they come
                  
               
            
            
               Of entertainement in Priſon.
               AS ſoone as thou commeſt before
the gate of the Priſon, doe but
thinke thou art entring into hell, and
it will extenuate ſomewhat of thy miſery,
for thou ſhalt be ſure not onely
to finde hell, but fiends & vgly monſters,
which with continuall torments
will afflict thee, for at the gate their
ſtands Cerberus a man in ſhew but a

dogge in nature, who at thy entrance
will fawne vppon thee, bidding thee
welcome in reſpect of the golden
Cruſe which he muſt haue caſt him,
then he opens the dore with all gentlenes,
ſhewing thee the way to miſery
is very facile, and being once in, he
ſhuts it with ſuch fury, that it makes
the foundation ſhake and the dore &
windowes ſo baracadoed, that a man
ſo looſeth himſelfe with admiration
that he can hardly finde the way out,
and be a ſound man. Now for the
moſt part your Porter is either ſome
brokē Cittizen, who hath plaide lack
of all trades, ſome Pander▪ Broker, or
Hangman, that hath plaide the knaue
with all men, and for the more certainty
his emblime is a red beard to which
ſack hath made his noſe couſen Ierman.
               No ſooner ſhall a man paſſe this fury,
but hee is conducted to little eaſe
his chamber, where he no ſooner hath
entred, but (hard vſage) his chamberlaine
ſalutes him, and proteſts he hath
lodged thee with as honeſt a man as
himſelfe, when in truth, as a paire of
Sheeres cannot part the knaue betwixt

them, and proteſteth thou ſhalt
haue a cleane payre of ſheetes, and of
the beſt, who hauing no ſooner fingred
thy coyne but ſends thee a payre
of ſheetes fitter for a horſe then a man
who hauing plaide the lade ſo with
thee, then leaues thee. Hee no ſooner
departs but thridbare, and monileſſe
thy chamber-fellowes, come vpon
thee for a Garniſh, which if thou
deny them or haſt no money, then
Exit cloake from thy ſhoulders, and
enters two douſen of pots, and one
douſen of pipes, this is the pillowe
which ſhall be giuen thee to ſleepe on
the firſt night: now thou muſt be ſaluted
in the morning, or elſe peraduenture
thou wilt thinke thy ſelfe
not welcome.
               In the morning at thy vpriſing,
(Pothearbe) the Gardiner appeares in
his likeneſſe, and he wil haue vnguentum
arum for the narrowe path thou
haſt to walke in.
               Then to whet on thy ſtomach to
dinner comes (Cut-throate) the Steward
for his crowne, who profeſſeth
much kindneſſe hee will ſhewe thee,
for thou haſt bound him with thy

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
courteſie, to couzen thee, not onely
in thy meate but money.
               Next after this comes (Miſtreſſe
Deceipt) the head Cooke, who proteſteth
thou ſhalt commaund her, who
hauing no ſooner greaſed her fingers
with thy ſiluer, but euer after ſhe will
haue a hand in thy diſh what thou
canſt to preuent it, ſo on all ſides the
blood of thy purſe muſt bee powred
out to maintaine ſuch merciles blood▪
hounds and continuall purſe-leaches.
               Theſe furies, as they haue diuers
ſhapes, ſo haue they ſeuerall kindes of
temptations, for after thou haſt beene
ſome fortnight in priſon, they will
come to thee, to cheere thee leaſt thou
ſhouldeſt adde melancholy to diſcontentment,
and will tell thee they wiſh
thee well, and thou ſhalt commaund
them, and in their opinion the ſight
of thee ſtreete wil much content thee,
and they will attend thee to the Tauerne
within the rule, where thou
muſt quench their thirſt with ſacke,
and what is got of thee is well got, being
obtained by rule, for he that liues
by rule cannot erre.
               Suppoſe thou either perceiueſt theſe

things by others, or by thy owne example,
and ſo refuſe this profered
courteſie of theirs purchaſed for their
pleaſures at thy owne coſt. Then if at
any time vpon iuſt occaſion thou deſireſt
it, then thou muſt giue them a
cup of aurum potabile, or elſe expect
not the leaſt fauour, or ſmalleſt courteſie
for no penny no paternoſter, no
gold no friendſhip.
               If thou continually bee offered iniuries
beare them patiently, or elſe
thou ſhalt bee laide in yrons for ſatiſfaction.
               If they perceiue thou art like to
continue, and haſt good meanes, thou
ſhalt want no content that priſon can
yeelde, but euery dram of content wil
coſt thee a pound of ſiluer.
               When they heare thou art vpon
diſcharge, then they will bee very ſorry
and make all the beſt meanes that
poſſibly they can to detaine thee, but
if there be no remedy, but thou muſt
needes depart, then what with their
three half-pence apound for Action
money, and three in the pound for
Execution, they will make ſuch a large
bill, which will bee more vnconſcionable

then a Taylors, for he will abate
of the Summa totalis, but in this, here
is nothing to bee abated, all their
ſpeech is legem pone, or elſe with their
ill cuſtome they will detaine thee, for
thy deniall is an Execution without
triall by lawe, for notwithſtanding
that amongſt iuſt men malus vſus abolendus
eſt, heere conſeruandus et preſeruandus,
and ſo thy entrance into
priſon▪ thy continuance in priſon, and
thy diſcharge out of priſon will bee
nothing but racking the heartſtrings
of poore priſoners, and exhauſting
the ſubſtance of the diſtreſſed, whatſoeuer
their wants be, holding it for a
maxime, that Summa iniuria eſt ſummum
ius.
               
            
            
               Of Keepers which goe abroad
with Priſoners.
               HAſt thou a deſire to goe abroad
thy Argos which attends thee,4 ſhillings per diem cum Cerere et Baccho.
will be more chargeable then the
Lord Maiors gally foyſt on Simon &
Iudes day, or a Cittizens wife to her
husband when ſtrawberries and cherries
are firſt cryed in the ſtreetes, and

will conſume thee if thou forbeare
not, thou maiſt better cheaperide one
thy foote-cloth, then goe adroade
with thy keeper.
               If thou walkeſt abroad with thy
keeper vſe him freindly, but reſpectiuely,
ſo manage him, that he ſhall rather
thinke himſelfe beholding to
thee then thou to him, for howſoeuer
hee fawnes vppon thee with complements
ſtanding bare with officious attendance,
yet know hee ſerues in his
place but as the dogge the Butcher he
is to thee as a curre to a droue of beaſts
if thou goeſt one quietly (be it to thy
ſlaughter amongſt griping Citzizens,
& cruell creditors to worke thy owne
freedome, he waits gently and brings
thee to the dore, but if thou once off
                     •
                  r
to ſtray he woo
                     •
                  e es thee.
               Remember his eye ſhootes at two
whites, thy perſon and thy purſe, the
one is to guard thee the other to feede
him, thou art compelled to ptotect
thy carcaſe vnder his ſhelter, as a ſheepe
in a terrible ſtorme vnder a bryar, and
be ſure thy ſtanding there is to hae
ſome of thy woo
                     •…
                   torne off.
            
            
               
               The Character of Keepers.
               YOur Keepers moſt commonly are
inſinuating knaues, and mercinary
raſcalls▪ wearing their maiſters liuery,
but their owne badge which is
ſlaue, in full proportion they looke
like the picture of enuy, with their
hands continually diuing into poore
Priſoners pockets, with their heads
vncouered, ſtill proffering courteſies
when their hearts make anſwere, what
kindeneſſe they doe is (non tibi ſed pecuniae,)
they moſt commonly feede
well, to their maiſters creddit, but the
tablers charge. Now if any take exception
of the badge knaue which I
haue giuen them, as the olde prouerbe
is, touch a gald horſe and he wil kick.
I wil maintain (I ſay) what out of their
owne authors, a bird of their owne
neſt vet not altogether ſo ill, who ſaid
to me that he was weary of his ſlauiſh
life, in reſpect he muſt be knaue in his
place, who ſaid, if he were true to his
Maiſter, he muſt be knaue to priſoners,
if true to priſoners, knaue to his maiſter.
So be he honeſt in his vocation,
or diſhoneſt, hee muſt bee ſtill knaue

for mala mens, malus animus.
               
               There are abundance of theſe
ſnakes which lie lurking in this place,
whoſe chiefeſt felicitie is to talke of ſo
many new priſoners which are committed,
and are ready to faint if they
but heare of releaſe, and all the dogges
at Paris-garden keepe not ſuch a bawling
as theſe curres euery morning in
the Tearme, to goe abroad with poore
priſoners, by rule onely to prey and
ſeiſe vpon their coyne, and they will
not abate one peny of their extortion,
though the poore priſoner faſt a week
with bread and water▪ And they reioyce
more for a Habeas Corpus in
the vacation. then the husband man
for a plentifull harueſt, or the Merchant
for the ſafe landing of his ſhip.
               For mony they will doe any thing,
be it neuer ſo ill, ſo thereby they may
purchaſe coyne, holding it a maxime,
that ſiluer is well gotten, if by any
meanes obtained, and to vſe cruelty to
priſoners, is pollicy, and wiſedome;
becauſe now is the time or neuer, for
being once infranchiſed they will
bee as wary to come in againe as the
bird which hath eſcaped the fowlers
net.
            
            
               
               Of Iaylors, or the Maiſters of
priſons.
               
                  VTrum horum mavis accipe, there
is not a haire to chooſe, the olde
prouerbe muſt bee verified, neuer a
barrell the better herring, Iacke muſt
bee equall to Gill, they are all one in
nature, in place onely they differ (nomine
tantùm: but learne them as you
pleaſe, or by what name, they are as
origine, but laylors.
               All laylors are not alike, ſome are
more worthy then other, I onely
touch the worſt ſort of them, and
that for the moſt part, for the baſenes
of the one cannot any waies impeach
the worth of the other, but doeth giue
greater ſplendor to the truly noble,
being moſt contrary, for Duo contraria
oppoſita magis eluceſcunt.
               
               For the moſt part your keepers of
priſons are very obdurate, and will
ſhewe no fauour and doe looke to bee
ſpoken to by men of worth to bee fauourable
to their priſoners, who will
promiſe faithfully, but the croſſing of
the water derounes their remēbrance,
they put much confidence in the porter,

and other officers, and will beleeue
the wordes of ſuch inſinuating
knaues, before the oathes of Gentlemen
of worth, or other conſcionable
men their priſoners, they are more
griping then an Vſurer, for he will be
content with ſecuritie, but when a
priſoner is vpon diſcharge they will
not take baile or ſecuritie, nay they
will not abate one poore twenty
ſhillings, though they haue gained
neuer ſo much by them, but will bee
King and Keyſar hauing the lawes in
their owne hands, will iuſtrfie the detaining
of trunkes or cloathes; if the
priſoner haue none, then they by violence
will take cloake, or doublet,
and turne you out naked.
               Further, they are farre more vnconſcionable
then a Broker, who takes
fortie in the hundred, but they will
thinke it charitie to take fiftie, I and
for a chamber where poore priſoners
lye like beaſts, not men.
               For cruelty they exceede Nero, for
he would kill ſuddenly, but your laylors
doe detaine men of good parts,
who haue lyen there ſeauen yeere,
not taking any commiſeration, in being

content to take what they can
ſpare, and giue day for the reſt, but
when the cruell creditor hath relented,
then the obdurateneſſe returnes,
and penetrates the breſt of his keeper
not to redeeme him till he haue paide
all demaunds. But what are they inriched
by it? It ſo conſumes them, that
they are ſo poore, ſo compaſſed about
with troubles, that they liue beggerly,
and dye poore, and that which they
inrich themſelues by exhauſting their
ſubſtance out of the very blood of
priſoners, their iſſue liues the worſe
by it; and, without godly repentance,
they may keepe hell gates to giue his
men place, which for their tallent hath
beene worſe then their maiſter.
            
            
               The Character of Iaylors.
               A Iaylor is as cruell to his priſoners,
as a dogge-killer in the plague
time to a diſeaſed curre, and ſhewes
no more pity to a young Gentleman,
then the vnconſcionable Citizen that
laide him in: when they meete you in
the ſtreetes they ſhewe themſelues
more humble to you, then a whore

when ſhe is brought before a Conſtable,
or a cheater before a Iuſtice, but
when you fall into their fingers, they
wil be as curriſh as they ſeemed kind.
               They are like Bawdes and Beadles, ,
that liue vpon the ſins of the people,
mens follies fill their purſes.
               But ſome conflict is, he hath ſome
miſery, for his pillowe is more ſtuft
with feates then feathers, and though
euery priſoner ſinkes vnder the
waight of his owne debts, yet his keeper
feeles the burthen of all, and if
ſometimes by eſcapes (though againſt
his will) hee did not pay ſome poore
mens debts, his extortion would be ſo
waightie, that the earth could ſcarce
beare him and to conclude, he deſerues
the olde prouerbe,
as cruell as a
laylor.
⸪
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   