
      
         
            
            
            METROPOLIS CORONATA, THE TRIVMPHES OF Ancient DRAPERY: OR, Rich Cloathing of England, in a ſecond Yeeres performance. In Honour of the aduancement of Sir IOHN IOLLES, Knight, to the high Office of Lord Maior of London, and taking his Oath for the ſame authoritie, on Monday, being the 30. day of October. 1615. Performed in heartie affection to him, and at the bountifull charges of his worthy Brethren the truely Honourable Society of Drapers, the firſt that receiued ſuch Dignitie in this Citie. Deuiſed, and written, by A. M. Citizen, and Draper of LONDON.
            Printed at London, by George Purſlowe. 1615.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            METROPOLIS CORONATA: OR, The olde Drapery and Cloathing of England, triumphing a ſecond Yeere.
            
            
               HAuing in our laſt yeeres diſcourſe of Himatia Poleos, ſufficiently approued the true antiquitie, and primary Honour of Englands Draperie, heere in the Citie of London, firſt granted by King RICHARD the firſt, and ſeconded by his brother King Iohn, by enſtalling that famous noble Gentleman, Sir Henry Fitz-Alwine Knight, in the firſt dignity of L. Maior of London, wherein he continued (by yeerely election) the ſpace of twenty foure yeeres and an halfe, and longer had done, if hee had longer liued: Seeing likewiſe, that Drapery triumpheth now two yeers together, by ſucceſſion of two Lord Maiors in one and the ſame Society: I held it not fit (finding my ſelfe not barren of inuention, in a Theame of ſuch ſcope and large extendure) to runne againe the ſame courſe of antique honour: but rather to iumpe with the time, which

uermore affecteth nouelty, in a new forme of this ſecond yeeres triumph, prepared for that honourable and worthy brother of Drapery, Sir Iohn Iolles, Knight and Alderman, on the day of his entrance into ſo high a dignitie.
            On Monday, being the 30. of October, 1615. according to auncient and moſt honourable cuſtome, the L. Maior being to paſſe by water to Weſtminſter, in company of his worthy Brethren, and attended by all other Companies in their ſeuerall Bardges made fit for triumph, after ſuch manner as formerly hath been obſerued: The firſt deuice that welcommeth him to the water, is an inuention proper to that nature, and thought apt to conduct him in his paſſage. He being both a Draper and Stapler, and theſe two profeſſions (in former times) appertaining to the Brethren of Londons Drapery, trading only in wools and woollen cloth, the then chiefe riches of the kingdome: both theſe myſteries meeting together ſo conueniently in one man, I did account it as a ſinne in me to ſunder them, and therefore made vſe of that Creaſt or Cognizaunce of the Golden Fliece, giuen by auncient Heraldrie to them both, and remaining ſtill in firme force with the Draper, as their Eſcutchion of Armes maketh manifeſt.
            In a goodly Argoe, ſhaped ſo neere as Art could yeeld it, to that of ſuch auncient and honourable fame, as conuaied Iaſon and his valiant Argonautes of Greece, to fetch away the Golden fleece from Cholchos; we make vſe of that memorable hiſtorie, as fit both for the time and occaſion. Therein aloft ſitteth Medea, whoſe loue to Iaſon, was his beſt meanes for obtaining

the Golden fleece: And therefore, as ſtill witneſſing the fiery zeale of her affection towards him, ſhe ſitteth playing with his loue-lockes, and wantoning with him in all pleaſing daliance, to compaſſe the more ſettled aſſurance of his conſtancy: His noble Companions, as Hercules, Telamon, Orpheus, Caſtor, Pollux, Calais and Zethes the Sonnes of Boreas, are ſeated about him in their ſeuerall degrees, attired in faire guilt Armours, bearing triumphall Launces, wreathed about with Lawrell, Shields honoured with the Impreſſe of the Golden fleece, and their heads circled with Lawrell, according to the manner of all famous Conquerors. This Argoe is rowed by diuers comely Eunuches, which continually attended on Medea, and ſhe fauouring them but to paſſe vnder the fleece of Golde, had all their garments immediatly ſprinkled ouer with golde, euen as if it had ſhowred downe in droppes vpon them, and ſo they rowe on in Iaſons triumph.
            Hauing thus borrowed the helpe of this well knowne ſtorie, to honour the day of our London Iaſon: we doe Poetically inferre, that Neptune hauing declared himſelfe kinde in their comming hither, and Thameſis ſhewen her ſelfe as gracious, in paſſing ouer her watry boſome, To make his triumph more maiecall, they lend the aſſiſtance of their Sea Chariot, wherein they vſe to ſport themſelues on their watry regiment, it being ſhaped like to a Whale, or the huge Leuiathan of the Sea. Therein is placed the ſhadow of Sir Henry Fitz-Alwine, to grace this dayes honour, both by water and land, and by him are ſeated eight royall Vertues, bearing the Enſignes of

Armes of eight honourable Drapers and Staplers, with beautiful ſhields, that declare each mans name, vz. Poultney, Cromer, Aeyre, Wotton, Sidney, Bulloin, Capell, Champion. Many more we could haue brought to accōpanie them, but neither place nor time might afford it: only theſe are remembred for their high deſeruings, as our Chronicles (at large) doe more amply declare, Fame triumphing in the top, and Time guiding the way before. No ſooner is my Lord and his Brethren ſeated in their Bardge, and ſuch ſilence obtained as the ſeaſon can beſt permit: but Fitz-Alwine ſaluteth him in this manner.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Sir Henry Fitz-Alwines Speech on the Water, at the three Cranes.
                        IT is now a compleate yeere,
                        Since in the borrowed ſhape I beare
                        Of olde Fitz-Alwine, I was rayſde from reſt.
                        On that dayes Triumph fully was expreſt
                        The honour due by graue Antiquitie,
                        Then giuen to Londons Draperie,
                        By Royall RICHARD, who in me, K. Richard the Firſt.
                        
                        Firſt ſtilde the name of Maioraltie:
                        
                        Which I held foure and twenty yeere,
                        As in good Records may appeare.
                        
                           
In all this time my labouring ſoule,
                        Not quitted from the high controule
                        Of diuine Poeſie; hath waited ſtill
                        Vpon her great commanding will;
                        By information, that another
                        Of mine owne band, a Draper Brother,
                        Was to ſucceed in dignitie;
                        Of Londons famous Maioraltie,
                        This was a motiue of ſuch might,
                        That made me houer day and night,
                        To honour this ſolemnitie,
                        With whatſoere remaines in me.
                        Two Drapers to ſucceede each other?
                        I beeing their firſt aduanced Brother▪
                        
                        To both muſt my affection prooue
                        Of cordiall and ſincereſt loue.
                        Then Sir, as I am taught to know yee,
                        So doe theſe goodly Enſignes ſhew yee
                        Draper and Stapler; ſo was I,
                        And both but one Societie
                        In thoſe graue times when woollen Cloth
                        Seru'd beſt for King and ſubiect both.
                        The Draper and the Stapler then
                        I tell yee were right worthy men,
                        And did more needy ſoules maintaine,
                        Then I feare will be ſeene againe.
                        But times muſt haue their reuolution,
                        And each their ſeuerall execution.
                        But paſſe wee them; And come to ſay
                        What Honours now doe crowne this day▪
                        
                        The Golden Fleece being the creſt
                        Of ancient Drapery; we digeſt
                        
                           
The ſtory of the Golden Fleece,
                        Fetcht by the Argonautes of Greece
                        From Cholcos in reſemblance here,
                        Where Iaſon and thoſe Greekes appeare,
                        Which in that trauaile did partake,
                        Both for his loue and honours ſake.
                        
                           Medeas powerfull charmes preuailde,
                        And all thoſe dreadfull Monſters quailde,
                        That kept the Fleece in their protection,
                        Which then was wonne by her direction.
                        By way of Morall application,
                        Your Honour may make ſome relation
                        Vnto your ſelfe out of this ſtorie,
                        You are our Iaſon, Londons glorie,
                        Now going to fetch that fleece of Fame,
                        That euer muſt renowne your name.
                        An Oath of Faith and Fealtie
                        Vnto his ſacred Maieſtie,
                        That makes you his Great Deputie
                        Or Image of Authoritie.
                        No Monſters dare confront your way.
                        Imagine then, as well you may,
                        That all this faire and goodly Fleete,
                        Do in meere loue (on purpoſe) meete,
                        Like to thoſe Argonautes of Greece,
                        
                        That then fetcht home their Golden Fleece,
                        To tend the Argoe where you ride,
                        Behind, before, on euery ſide
                        With all applauding melodie,
                        That beſt this day may dignifie.
                        
                           Neptune and gracious Thameſis,
                        
                        To honour ſuch a day as this,
                        
                           
Haue ſent out of their watry ſtore
                        Their owne Sea Chariot, which before
                        They nere would part with. But as now,
                        Their ſacred Deities allow
                        Our vſe thereof, which we employ,
                        To make more full this day of ioy.
                        Eight Royall Vertues take the paine
                        Eight honoured Enſignes to ſuſtaine
                        Of eight Lord Maiors, as you may ſee
                        Deſcribed by their Heraldrie,
                        Drapers, and Staplers Brethren kinde,
                        Leauing rare monuments behinde
                        Of their affection to this Citie,
                        For the poores good whom they did pittie.
                        
                           Poultney, Cromer, Eyre, Wotton,
                        
                        
                           Sidney, Bullen, Capell, Champion.
                        
                        Time checks me, that I may not tell
                        Their ſeuerall deedes. Nor fits it well
                        In ſerious buſineſſe to delay:
                        On then a Gods name, lets away.
                     
                  
               
            
            The Speech being ended, the Companies witneſſing their ioy for his taking water, and the ſame further confirmed by a gallant peale of Ordenance: wee waite on my Lord ſo farre as conueniently we may, euermore hauing care of our further employment in the land ſeruice, the time being ſo ſhort, and our preparation requiring ſuch decencie in order: yet much abuſed by neglect in marſhalling, and hurried away with too impudent haſtineſſe, albeit ſo aduiſedly ſet downe in proiect, that nothing but meere wilfulneſſe can miſplace them.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        The Shewes appointed for ſeruice on the LAND.
                        
                        FIrſt, a faire and beautifull Shippe, ſtiled by the Lord Maiors name, and called the Ioell, appearing to bee lately returned, from trafficking Wool and Cloth with other remote Countryes; vſhereth the way for her worthy Owners ſeruice, and is well gouerned by her Captaine, Maſter, Mate, &c. Neptune, who hath been auſpicious to all her aduentures, and Thameſis, by bringing her alwaies ſafely within her owne bounds, beeing mounted in triumphall manner, the one on a pelletted Lyon, the ſupporter to the Drapers Armes, and the other on a ſea-Horſe, belonging to the Lord Maiors Armorie, doe both (with their preſence) approue this dayes delighting. Then followeth a goodly Ramme or Golden Fleece, the honoured Creaſt (as already hath been ſayd) to Drapers and Staplers, hauing (on each ſide) a houſewifely Virgin ſitting, ſeriouſly imployed in Carding and Spinning Wooll for Cloth, the very beſt commoditie that euer this Kingdome yeelded. The Argoe ſucceedeth this Fleece or Ramme, according to our former deſcription: and then, in ſtead of Neptunes Whale on the water, commeth another Sea-deuice, tearmed The Chariot of Mans life, anſwerable in all reſpects to Times relation thereof; as alſo that other Monument of London and her twelue Daughters, at this time imploying Metropolis Coronata, the Kings chiefe Citty and Chamber, moſt deſertfully

crowned, as being the ancient Mother of the whole Land, and firſt receiuing honour, by the triple imperiall Crownes of Draperie.
                     
                  
               
            
            After all theſe ſhewes, thus ordered in their appointed places, followeth another deuice of Huntſmen, all clad in greene, with their Bowes, Arrowes and Bugles, and a new ſlaine Deere carried among them. It ſauoureth of Earle Robert de la Hude, ſometime the noble Earle of Huntington, and Sonne in Law (by Marriage) to olde Fitz-Alwine, raiſed by the Muſes all-commanding power, to honour this Triumph with his Father. During the time of his out-lawed life, in the Forreſt of merry Sh
                     ••
                  wood, and elſewhere, while the cruell oppreſſion of a moſt vnnaturall couetous Brother hung heauy vpon him, Gilbert de la Hude, Lord Abbot of Chriſtall Abbey, who had all, or moſt of his Lands in morgage: hee was commonly called Robin Hood, and had a gallant company of men (Out-lawed in the like manner) that followed his downecaſt fortunes, and honoured him as their Lord and Maſter; as little Iohn Scathlocke, Much the Millers ſonne, Right-hitting Brand, Frvar Tuck, and many more. In which condition of life we make inſtant vſe of him, and part of his braue Bowmen, fitted with Bowes and Arrowes, of the like ſtrength and length, as good Records deliuer teſtimonie, were then vſed by them in their killing of Deere.
            Now, becauſe after my Lords landing, protraction of time neceſſarily required to be anoyded, in regard of the Lords of his Maieſties moſt honourable priuie Councell, and other great perſonages, inuited

gueſts to this ſolemne Feaſt: ſuch ſpeeches as ſhould haue beene ſpoken to him by the way, were referred till his Honours returne to Saint Paules in the afternoone. And then, another man, of no meane ſufficiency, both for knowledge and exquiſite vſe of action, who had in the morning guided and directed Neptunes Whale, made in the forme of a Triumphall Chariot on the water, and held the ſame office in the other Chariot vpon the Land of Mans life: neere to the little Conduit in Cheapſide, hee deliuereth this briefe ſpeech (importing a narration of the other deuiſes) to the Lord Maior in manner following.
            
               
                  
                     
                        The Speech of Time in the afternoone, at the Lord Maiors going to PAVLES.
                        HOnourable Lord, Time hath nothing elſe to tel you, but the briefe meaning of theſe ſeuerall inuentions. The water-deuices haue already ſufficiently ſpoken themſelues. This Ship, bearing your owne name, and called the IOEL, trafficking Englands Drapery with all other Countries, as by the goodly Ramme or golden Fleece of England appeareth, where two Houſwifely Virgins ſit carding and ſpinning, is (after many happie voyages) returned to honour the day of her worthie Owner, being ſafely brought home by Neptune and Thameſis, who (mounted on a Lyon and Sea-horſe) vouchſafe their attendance on your triumph. And in ſtead of that Sea Chariot, which waited on the Argoe in

the morning, they bring another, graced with the ſame Royall Vertues, and Enſignes of Armes belonging to thoſe honourable Drapers. On the top is placed a Spheare or Globe, intimating the world, created for the vſe of man, and ſuch expence of time as is allotted him. It is ſupported by the foure Elements, Water, Earth, Ayre, and Fire, as their figures and Emblemes doe aptly declare. It runneth on ſeuen wheeles, deſcribing the ſeuen ages of man; his Infancie, Child-hood, Adoleſcency, or Stripling eſtate, Youth-hood, Man-hood, Age, and Ages extremity, or decrepit condition: all of them ſubiected to the power of the ſeuen Planets, as on each wheele they beare their Characters. It is drawne by two Lyons and two Horſes of the Sea, figuring what ſwift motion haſtneth on the minutes, houres, months and yeeres of our frailtie: and the whole frame or body guided by Time, as Coach-man to the life of man. That other goodly Monument or Pageant, with the glorious Sunne in continuall motion ouer it, appertaining to the Drapers Armory; preſents yee London in the ſupreme place of eminence, and the twelue Companies (her twelue Daughters) all ſeated about her in their due degrees, onely Drapery is neereſt to her, as being the firſt and chiefeſt honoured Society before all other. As ſupports to Londons flouriſhing happineſſe, and continuance of the ſame in true tranquilitie: foure goodly Mounts (as ſtrong and defenſiue bulwarkes) are rayſed about her, bearing Emblemes of thoſe foure eſpeciall qualities, which make any Common-wealth truly happy. Learned Religion,

Militarie Diſcipline, Nauigation, and Homebred Husbandrie.
                        
                           For thus, my Lord, I truely vnderſtand,
                           No greater Croſſe can hap to any Land,
                           Then lacke of Schollars, Souldiers, Saylers, Husband-men,
                           Long may we haue them all, Time ſayes Amen.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            Euening haſtening on ſpeedily, and thoſe vſuall Ceremonies at Paules being accompliſhed: darkeneſſe becommeth like bright day, by bountifull allowance of lighted Torches, for guyding all the ſeuerall ſhewes, and my Lord homeward. The way being ſomewhat long, the order of march appeared the more excellent and commendable, euen as if it had been a Royall Maske, prepared for the marriage of an immortall Deitie, as in the like nature we hold the Lord Maior, to be this day ſolemnely married to Londons ſupreame Dignitie, by repreſenting the awefull authority of ſoueraigne Maieſtie. No ſooner commeth he to his owne Gate, but there our ſuppoſed Sir Henry Fitz-Alwine, on behalfe of the honourable company of Drapers, who made no ſpare of their bounty, for full performance of this dayes ſolemne Honor; ſpeaketh this enſuing ſpeech.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                        Fitz-Alwines Speech to the Lord Maior at Night.
                        
                        
                           NOw honour'd Lord, ſince day is done,
                           And you to your owne houſe are come,
                           With all delight that we can make yee:
                           Me thinks we ſhould not yet forſake yee,
                           But that ſtrict Time will haue it ſo,
                           And parts vs, whether we will or no,
                           All then my Lord that I ſhall ſay,
                           Is, that your Honour would well weigh
                           Your worthie-minded Brethrens loue,
                           Who haue in firme affection ſtroue;
                           How beſt they might renowne this day:
                           In honouring you. And I dare ſay,
                           That neuer men did more deſire
                           To ſtretch their loue and bounty higher
                           Then they haue done, and could afford
                           For ſuch a worthy minded Lord,
                           Which they by me humbly commend
                           Still at your ſeruice: So I end.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            Afterward, as occaſion beſt preſenteth it ſelfe, when the heate of all other employments are calmly ouerpaſt: Earle Robin Hood, with Fryer Tuck, and his other braue Hunteſ-men, attending (now at laſt) to diſcharge their duty to my Lord, which the buſie turmoile of the whole day could not before affoord: they ſhewe themſelues to him in this order, and Earle Robin himſelfe thus ſpeaketh:
            
               
               The Speech ſpoken by Earle Robert de la Hude, commonly called Robin Hood.
               
               
                  SInce Graues may not their Dead containe,
                  Nor in their peacefull ſleepes remaine,
                  But Triumphes and great Showes muſt vſe them,
                  And we vnable to refuſe them:
                  It ioyes me that Earle Robert Hood,
                  
                  Fetcht from the Forreſt of merrie Shirwood,
                  
                  With theſe my Yeomen tight and tall,
                  Braue Huntſmen and good Archers all:
                  Muſt in this Iouiall day partake,
                  Prepared for your Honours ſake.
                  No ſooner was I rayſde from reſt,
                  And of my former ſtate poſſeſt
                  As while I liu'd: But being alone,
                  And of my Yeomen ſeeing not one:
                  I with my Bugle gaue a call,
                  Made all the Woods to ring withall.
                  Immediatly came little Iohn,
                  
                  And Scathlock followed him anon,
                  With Much the honeſt Millars Sonne.
                  And ere ought elſe could be done,
                  The frollicke Frier came tripping in,
                  His heart vpon a merrie pinne.
                  
                     
Maſter (quoth he) in yonder brake,
                  A Deere is hid for Marians ſake,
                  Bid Scathlock, Iohn, or honeſt Brand,
                  
                  That hath the happy hitting hand,
                  Shoote right and haue him. And ſee my Lord
                  The deed performed with the word.
                  For Robin and his Bow-men bolde,
                  Religiouſly did euer holde,
                  Not emptie-handed to be ſeene,
                  Were't but at feaſting on a Greene.
                  Much more then, when ſo high a day
                  Calls our attendance: All we may,
                  Is all too little, tis your grace,
                  To winke at weakeneſſe in this caſe.
                  So fearing to be ouer-long,
                  End all with our olde hunting Song.
               
               
                  Fryer.
                  But good Maſter ere they ſing,
                  Fauour me to moue one thing.
                  A boone, a boone, for Fryer Tuck,
                  
                  Who begges it with a lowly ducke.
               
               
                  Rob.
                  What is it Fryer?
               
               
                  Fryer.
                  Since we are thus rayſde from our reſt,
                  In honour of this famous feaſt,
                  And for his ſake that may commaund,
                  (Next to my Maſter) heart and hand,
                  Of mee and all theſe good Yeomen:
                  Ere we returne to ground agen,
                  Seeing iolly Chriſtmas drawes ſo neere,
                  When as our ſeruice may appeare,
                  Of much more merit then as now,
                  Which doth no larger ſcope allow,
                  
                     
Then that which is already done;
                  Your loue, my Lord, ſo much hath won
                  Vpon the Fryer and his Compeeres,
                  As we could wiſh to liue whole yeeres,
                  To yeeld you pleaſure and delight,
                  Be it by day, or be it by night.
                  For we haue choiſe delights in ſtore,
                  Command them, and I craue no more.
               
               
                  Rob.
                  You heare (my Lord) the Fryers motion,
                  Out of meere loue, and pure deuotion.
                  You ſee beſide that all my men,
                  (For any ſeaſon, where or when,)
                  Second his ſute. May it pleaſe you then,
                  Not to diſlike his kinde requeſt,
                  Earle Robin frankly doth proteſt,
                  We will all ſtriue to do our beſt,
                  When any occaſion ſhall require,
                  The offer of our merry Fryer,
                  For ſuch a worthy minded Lord,
                  
                     Robin Hood ſeales it with his word.
               
               
                  Fryer.
                  Thankes my deare Domine,
                  And to you noble Homine,
                  For to this Indenter,
                  Frier Tuck ſubſcribes Libenter.
                  Now leſt we offer wrong,
                  Fall to your Sing Song.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Song of Robin Hood and his Hunteſ-men.
                  
                     NOw wend we together, my merry men all,
                     Vnto the Forreſt ſide-a:
                     And there to ſtrike a Buck or a Doae,
                     Let our cunning all be tride-a.
                  
                  
                     Then goe we merrily, merrily on,
                     To the Green-wood to take vp our ſtand,
                     Where we will lye in waite for our Game,
                     With our bent Bowes all in our hand.
                  
                  
                     What life is there like to Robin Hood?
                     
                     It is ſo pleaſant a thing a:
                     In merry Shirwood he ſpends his dayes,
                     As pleaſantly as a King a.
                  
                  
                     No man may compare with Robin Hood,
                     
                     With Robin Hood, Scathlocke and Iohn:
                     
                     Their like was neuer, nor neuer will be,
                     If in caſe that they were gone.
                  
                  
                     
                     They will not away from merry Shirwood,
                     
                     In any place elſe to dwell:
                     For there is neither City nor Towne,
                     That likes them halfe ſo well.
                  
                  
                     Our liues are wholly giuen to hunt,
                     And haunt the merrie Greene-wood:
                     Where our beſt ſeruice is daily ſpent,
                     For our Maſter Robin Hood.
                     
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   