
      
         
            
            
            The great wonders that are chaunced in the Realme of Naples, with a great misfortune happened at Rome and in other places, by an earth quake in the moneth of December last past.
            
            
               Translated out of Frenche into Englishe, by I. A. 1566.
            Ierem. 18.
            When I take in h
                  〈…〉
                to roote out, to destroy, or to wast any people or kingdome, if that people against whom I haue thus deuised, conuerte from their wickednesse, I repente of the plague that I deuised to bring vpon them.
         
         
            
            
               GEntle Reader by this little discourse,
               Which doth containe thinges wonderful & high
               And that one God doth number dayes & houres
               Thy houre to be vncertayne thou mayst see.
               In reading it thou mayst likewise remember,
               That great Cyty called Sodom and Gommor:
               
               To be in great perill to sinke without succour,
               Which wil not God alone in fear & faith honor.
            
         
         
            Psal. 107. vers. 33.
            
               For running floudes to dry deserts,
               He doth oft chaunge and turne:
               And dryeth vp as it were dust,
               The springing well and burne.
               A fruitfull lande with pleasures deckt,
               Full barren doth he make:
               When on their sinnes that dwell therein,
               He doth iust vengeance take.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader health.
            
               FOrasmuch (gentle reader) as the Lord god the louer & preseruer of thinges which he hath created, giueth vs oftentymes warninges and foreshewynges, & doth declare his diuine power by shewing of sygnes and tokens, and things more than naturall, as the exāples therof are verye familiar and playne in holy scriptures, as wel in the olde as in the newe Testament, making sometyme the thunders, tempestes, & earthquakes,

ministers and executers of of his vengeaunce and iustyce. Those his ministers or scourges, are to admonishe vs, and to call vs to repentance, shewing therby vnto vs his greate clemencye and goodnesse, for so muche as his heauy displeasure is kindled towardes vs, and his wrath neerer than we be aware of, whē that we knowleging our selues to be grieuous sinners, will not repente & amende our euill and peruers life. I thought it ther fore good, to put into our vulgar tongue these wonderfull

chaunces that are happened of late dayes, as well in the borders of Naples, as also within the Citye of Rome, the. xvj. xvii. and xviij. days of December last past 
                  Anno. 1565. by the which thou mayest in my iudgemente gather some fruite, whereby thou mayst remember the great and vnspeakeable power of our good God, and hys secret iudgement. Wherefore I praye thee to take this my litle work in good part. God of his goodnesse defende & kepe you.
            
               From Auignon the. xxvij. of Ianuary.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The great wonders that are chaunced in the Realme of Naples, with the great misfortune happened at Rome by an earthquake in the moneth of December last past.
            
               ¶ The Copy of certayne letters sent from Naples, to Cardinall Alexandrian, of that which hath happened in the sayd countrey, the. 16. 17. and 18. dayes of December last.
            
            FIrst there is ouerthrowen a Pallace by the force and violence of the winde and earthquake: in the fal wherof was slaine vnder the sayd Pallace xxv. persons, standing in a towne called Reyne, within. xxx. myles of Naples.
            
            Moreouer ther are ouerthrowen by the like tirrible winde and earthquake, fyue Castelles belonging to the Lorde Carigoll,
               
that is to witte, the Castell Casignam, Valerin, Sainct George, Sainct Iulian, and Sainct Angell, the which at the very season did sinke, & were swallowed vp. The sayde Castelles were standing towardes Sallerne.
            
            More the Pallace or Castle of Poliquam is opened by the Earthquake, the bredth and measure of fifty spaces.
            More there is a Laake nere to the sayd Castell by Angully, that is dryed vp, and no man can iudge whiche way the water is gone out, nor what way it hath taken.
            More a great floud or Ryuer, that none could passe without Baarges or Boates, is likewyse dryed vp, and the water consumed and gone.
            Likewyse in the towne of Basillicat, the Byshoppes Pallace, and the greate walles compassing the sayde Pallace, is also throwen downe.
            The Floude and water of Neuo that was verye great, is also loste and cleane cōsumed, as the others aforenamed, eight dayes before the Earthquake.
            The Castle of Vicelle, fell downe by

nighte, and a little towne nere vnto it, with a great number of houses and Uillages, and there is made count of twelue thousande people that are slayne.
            The Castle of Cappello is almoste all shaken down, with the death of seuen hundreth persons.
            There hath bene such a wind at Rome that it hath blowen downe a great many houses, and throwen downe a great number of trées, since the. 17. and 18. of December last past.
            The Ryuer of Tiber was séene couered with suche a quantity of dead fyshes, that they thinke not so many to be left lyuing in the sayd Riuer, as there was sene deade.
            The pestilence or plague is grieuouser in Turkey than euer it was, and the Turk is so combred with warre, that he requyreth helpe of the Christians.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautu.
            
            ¶ An admonition or Warning to England.
            
               LO here O Englande thou, thy fatall ende mayst sée:
               A warning great if thou be wise, this same may be to thée.
               Beholde what noble things are come to ruine great:
               When fruites are rype, thou well doest know, then are they pluct to eate:
               The sinne is very rype, the bankes doe ouer flowe:
               The tyme wyll come when thou shalt be, like these be brought as lowe.
               If thou doe not repent, when mercy standes in gate:
               I feare me when thou wouldest fayne, that it will be to late.
               Take tyme while tyme doth giue, a laysure for the same:
               Remember well that tyme hath féete, and she is nothing lame.
               
                  Before long haire she hath, behinde she quite is polde:
               Put to thy hande, and of her lockes, sée that thou take good holde.
               Fall nowe for to repent, for lo, she still doth stande:
               And eke beholde howe for to cutte, her Sythe is in her hande.
               Not foure Monthes fully past, since these were lyke to thée:
               And now thearth hath gaped so wyde▪ that swallowed vp they be.
               What was the cause right well, the scripture vs doth showe:
               It was the very sinnes of them, that brought those townes so lowe.
               Thy sinnes do more abounde, what filth is not in thée:
               Why shouldst not thou be swallowed like as all these Castelles be?
               But that the mighty God of his abundaunt grace:
               Doth yet in mercy graunt to thée, somewhat of longer space.
               Consider howe he fierce, of late hath delt with thée:
               
                  Bicause these Castelles and thy selfe, after might warned be.
               And now bycause nothing, could make them to repent:
               From thée he did transport to them, his grieuous punishment.
               Thy warning could not serue, ne yet theirs could serue thée:
               Well now for their refusall great, swallowed vp they bée.
               Amend my country still, I thée desire and pray:
               For I a member of thy state, were loth thou shouldst decay.
               Beholde thy louing Lorde, his sworde is in his hande:
               Thée to the earth to fling in yre what can his force withstande:
               Can mighty gates of brasse, can Castels strongly builte:
               His force withstande? his very breath, these Castels quite hath spilte.
               No meane there is in déede, that can his plagues withstande:
               But onely this repentance may, by mercy stay his hande.
               
                  Repent in tyme therfore, to God for mercy cry:
               Which when thou doest his mighty hand he stayeth by and by.
               For thus he playne doth say, when sinners shall relente:
               And turne from sinne, I euen then lykewise my selfe repente.
               Of all the plagues which I vpon them thought to bring:
               Lo here the mercy great I say, of our most heauenly king:
               Their sinnes Ill quite forgette, if they will turne to me:
               I will remember them no more, though thousandes that there be.
               Remember Niniuie, how that when god had sente:
               
                  Ionas the Prophet vnto them, they straight wayes did repent.
               Whereof did come that God, his wrath did still restrayne:
               Repent therefore in tyme I say, so mayst thou styll remayne.
            
            FINIS.
            
               ꝙ Iohn Partridge.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Imprinted at London by Henry Denham for Tho
                  mas Hacket, and are to be solde at his shoppe in Lumbart streate.
            
         
      
   