
      
         
            
            
            THE ENGLISH Romayne Lyfe. Discouering: The liues of the Englishmen at Roome: the orders of the English Semiminarie: the dissention betweene the Englishmen and the VVelshmen: the banishing of the Englishmen out of Roome: the Popes sending for them againe: a reporte of many of the paltrie Reliques in Roome: their Vautes vnder the grounde: their holy Pilgrimages: and a number other matters, worthy to be read and regarded of euery one. There vnto is added, the cruell tiranny, vsed on an English man at Roome, his Christian suffering, and notable Martirdome, for the Gospell of Iesus Christe, in Anno. 1581. VVritten by A.M. sometime the Popes Scholler in the Seminarie among them.
            Honos alit Artes.
            Seene and allovved.
            Imprinted at London, by Iohn Charlewoode, for Nicholas Ling: dwelling in Paules Churchyarde, at the signe of the Maremaide. Anno. 1582.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Bromley, Knight, Lord Chaunceller of Englande: William, Lorde Burleigh and Lord Treasorer: Robert, Earle of Leicester, with all the rest of her Maiesties most Honourable priuie Councell. A. M. wisheth a happy race in continuall honour, and the fulnesse of Gods blessing in the day of ioy.
            
               
                  THis Booke (right Honorable) as I haue beene care full to note downe nothing in it, that myghte impeach mee, either with error or vntrueth, mallice or affection to any, but euen haue ordered the same, according to certeintie and knowledge: so when I had fully finished it, and doone the vttermost of my endeuoure therin, I considered with my selfe, I was to present

the same, to such personages of Honor, wisedome, and grauitie, as, did mallice rule me, they coulde quickly espie it, or affecting my selfe to any, they woulde soone discerne it: then would Honour reprooue me for the one, & their noble nature reprehende me in the other.
            To discharge my selfe of bothe these, and purchase the fauoure wherewith your Honors are continually adorned: I directed my compasse by trueth, perswading my selfe, that albeit in some, Veritas odium parit: yet in your Honours, Magna est veritas et praeualet.
            
            Fewe woordes suffiseth your wisedomes, and circumstaūce without substaunce, may incurre disliking: accordinge as when I presented your Honours with my booke, called the Discouerie

of Campion, I promised, so now in my English Romaine life, I haue performed: thinking my selfe in as safe securitie, vnder your Honourable fauor, as Vlisses supposed himselfe vnder the buckler of Aiax.
            
            
               
                  Your Honors euer in dutie, Anthonie Munday.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the courteous and freendlie Reader.
            
            
               THe thing long promised (gentle Reader) is now perfourmed at last, and that which my aduersaries thought I would neuer set forth, to their disproofe and thy profit, I haue now published. Thou shalt find a number of matters comprehended within this small volume: some, that will irritate the minde of anie good subiect, and therefore to be read with regard: others, importing the whole course of our Englishmens liues in Roome, with the od conceits, and craftie iuglings of the Pope, (whereto our Englishmen are likewise conformable) they are in such true & certaine order set downe, as if thou were there thy selfe to behold them. I will not vse manie words, now thou hast it, read aduisedlie, condemne not rashlie, and if thou thinkest mee woorthie anie thanks for my paines, then freendlie bestowe it on me.
            
               
                  Thine in courtesie, Anthonie Munday.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶The English Romaine lyfe, Discoursing the liues of such Englishe men, as by secret escape, leaue their owne Countrey, to liue in Roome, vnder the seruile yoke of the Popes gouernment. Also after what manner they spend their time there, practising, and daylie looking for the ouerthrowe and ruine of their Princesse and Countrey.
         
            First, howe the Authour left his natiue Countrey of England, betaking himselfe to trauell, and what happened in his iourney toward Roome. 
            
               Chap. 1.
            
               
                  BEcause a number haue been desirous, to vnderstand the successe of my iourney to Roome, and a nūber beside are doubtfull, whether I haue béene there or no, albeit the proofes thereof, sufficiently are extant to be séene: as well to content the one, as remoue the doubte of the other, I will (God ayding mée) héere set downe such a certaintie thereof, that if it happen not to please bothe, yet, if they will, it may profite bothe.
            When as desire to sée straunge Countreies, as also affection to learne the languages, had perswaded me to leaue my natiue Countrey, and not any other intent or cause, God is my record: I committed the small wealth I had, into my purse, a Trauelers wéede on my backe,

the whole state and condition of my iourney to Gods appointment, and beeing accompanied with one Thomas Nowell, crossed the Seas from England to Bulloine in Fraunce. From thence we trauelled to Amiens, in no small daunger,The Camp broken vp, the soldiers met with vs, & robbed vs, & hardly did we escape with our liues. standing to the mercie of dispoyling Soldiers, who went robbing and killing thorowe the Countrey, the Campe beeing by occasion broken vp at that tyme. Little they left vs, and lesse would haue done, by the value of our liues, had not a better bootie come then we were at that time: the Soldiers preparing towards them, whome they sawe better prouided for their necessitie: offered vs the l
                  •
               ysure too escape which we refused not, béeing left bare enough bothe of coyne and cloathes. But as then we stoode not to accoumpt on our losse, it suffised vs that we had our liues: whereof béeing not a little glad, we set the better legge before, least they should come backe againe; and robbe vs of them too. This our misfortune vrged vs to remembraunce, of our former quiet béeing in England, carefullie tendered by our Parents, and loouingly esteemed among our 
                  ••
               éends, all which we vndutifullie regarding, rewarded vs with the rod of our owne negligence: béeing as then fearefull of all company on the way,Many men robbed and slaine by the Soldiers, which made vs trauell in no small feare. such cruell and heauy spectacles was still before our eyes, but yet this did somewhat comfort vs, we had nothing woorth the taking from vs, but our liues, which we had good hope to saue, either by their pittie, or our owne humble perswasion.
            When we were come to Amiens, we were giuen to vnderstande, that there was an olde Englishe Préest in the Towne, whose name was Maister Woodward: of whome we perswaded our selues for Countrey sake, to finde some courtesie, in hope whereof, we enquired for his lodging, and at last found him. After such salutations as passe betwéene Countreymen at their méeting, I began to tell him, howe we had left our Countrey, for the

earnest desire we had to sée forraine Dominions,The Preest of whome I haue made mention in my Discouerie of Campion.
                howe we had béene spoyled by the way, of all that we had, and that we hoped for some fréendship at his handes, which if God vouchsafed vs safe returne, should not be cast out of remembraunce.
            Alas my freendes (quoth he) I am your Countreyman I will not denie, but not such a one as you take me for. I am a poore Préest, and héere I liue for my conscience sake, whereas, were thinges according as they should be, it were better for me to be at home in mine owne Countrey. And yet trust me, I pittie to sée any of my Countreymen lacke, though I am not able any way to reléeue them: there be daylie that commeth this way, to whome, according to my hability, I am liberall, but they be such, as you are not, they come not for pleasure but for profite, they come not to sée euerie idle toye, and to learne a little language, but to learne how to saue bothe their owne and their fréendes soules, and such I would you were, then I could say that to you, which (as you be) I may not.
            Trust me Sir (quoth I) I hope we haue learned to saue our soules already, or else you might estéeme vs in a verie bad case. If you haue (quoth he) it is the better for▪ you, but I feare me one day, they that teach you to saue your soules after that manner, will pay for it déerelie, and you with them for company.
            With these wordes, he began to wexe somewhat melancholie; which I perceiuing, and remembring that our necessitie, stoode not in case to pleade pointes of controuersie▪ rather sought to please him in hope of some lyberalitie, then to contend with him (we béeing vnable) and so fall into farder daunger. Whervpon I desired him, not to be offended at any thing we had sayde, for we would gladlie learne any thing that might benefite vs, and beside, would follow his counsaile in any reasonable cause.

Then he began to be somewhat more gentlie disposed, saying, he could not greatlie blame vs, if we were obstinate in our opinion, comming from such a young Hell as we dyd, but he had good hope, that ere long it would be harrowed.
            
               The Préeste vsed many circumstaunces, of the Popes lyberality to our Countreymen: as also what Treasons was toward her Maiestie and the Realme.Then he willed vs to walke with him, and he would bring vs where we should lodge that night, at his charges: all the way rehearsing vnto vs, how beneficiall the Pope was to our Countreymen, and howe highlie we might pleasure our selues, our fréendes and Countrey, if we would followe his councell. Beside, such horrible and vnnaturall spéeches, he vsed against her Maiestie, her honourable Councell, and other persons that he named: as the verie remembraunce maketh me blushe, and my heart to bléede. To all which we gaue him the hearing, but God knowes, on my parte, with what anguishe of minde: for I would haue perswaded my selfe, that duety should haue with-helde the Subiect from reuiling his Princesse, and nature from slaundering his owne Countrey: but it suffiseth, where grace is absent, good qualities can neuer be present. When wée were come to our Lodging, he talked with our Hostesse, what she should prouide for vs, and afterward taking his leaue, tolde vs he woulde haue more talke with vs in the morning: in the meane time, we should thinke on that, which he had opened to vs, and resolue our selues on a certayne determination, for he meant vs more good then we were beware off.A little suffiseth hunger, where necessitie is mistresse of the feast. He béeing departed, we fell to such simple chéere as was prepared for vs, which was simple in déed, scant sufficient to the good stomackes we had to our victualles: but because we had soone done, we went the sooner to bed, sparing as much time as we could, in remembraunce of the Préestes woordes, tyll the wearinesse of our iourney, compelled vs to take our rest.
            In the morning, the Préest sent a poore fellow, whom

he kept to make his bed, and r
                  •
               n about on his errandes, to our lodging, that we should come vnto his Maister presently, because he had occasion to goe into the Town, and his returne was vncertaine, therefore he would speake with vs before he went. Upon these so hasty summons, we addressed our selues towards him, finding him in his Chamber, reading vpon his Poetesse, to him we gaue thankes for his courtesie, promising to requite it if he came where we might doo it. In bréefe, among great circumstaunce of talke, wherein he manifested the treason toward England: he behaued him selfe in spéeches to vs, according as I haue already declared in my Discouerie of Campion,
               There you maye reade his woords, at large set downe. where you may perceyue the Popes determination, & our Englishmēs vnnatural consent, to be Traitors to their own Princesse, to shorten her life, & ouerthrow their natiue Coūtrey, where they were borne.
            When he had mightily besieged vs with a multitude, as well threatninges as perswasions, to conforme our selues vnder that obedience: as well to auoide perill that might otherwise happen, as also to gayne somewhat towarde our reléefe, we promised him to doo as he would haue vs, & to goe whether he would appoint vs. Whervpon he presentlie wrote two Letters to Doctor Allen at Rheimes, one of them cōcerned our preferment there, howe we should be entertayned into the Englishe Seminarie, and take the orders of Préesthood, because we might doo good in our Countrey an other day. The other Letter was of such newes, as he heard out of England, howe matters went forewarde to their purpose, and beside, other thinges which I am not to speake of héere, because they are not to be read of euerie one.
            These Letters finished▪ and sealed vp with singing Cake, he delyuered vnto vs, saying: I thanke God that I am ordayned the man, bothe to saue your Soules, and a number of your fréendes héere in England, whome

I could wishe: héere present with you, for that I pittie their estate, as well that they are in, as that which is wurse, and I feare mée will fall on them shortlie.
            I put vp the Letters, and gaue him to vnderstande, that we could hardlie trauell from thence to Rheimes, hauing nothing wherwithall we might beare our charges. Trust me (quoth he) & I haue done as much for you as I am able, for I haue nothing héere but to serue mine owne necessitie.When we offered to sel our Clokes: he could find money to buie them. Then we offered to sell our Cloakes, which the Soldiers against their willes had left vs. In déede (quoth he) to trauell in your Cloakes will doo nothing but hinder you; I will send my man to a fréend of mine (as much to saye, as his Chest) to sée what money he can gette for them.
            The fellowe tooke our Cloakes, after his Maister had whispered him in the ear
                  •
               , and went downe the staires, returning quicklie with two French Crownes, which the Préest deliuered to vs, with fow
                  •
               e or fiue French Soules out of his owne Purse,Great lyberalitie. so, willing vs to do
                  •
                his commendations to Doctor Allen, and to labour earnestlie in that we went about & Maister 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                we parted, he into the Towne, and we in our iourney.
            When we were about thrée or fowre myles from Amiens, we sate downe on the side of a hyll, recounting what the Préest had sayde to vs, as also the cause why he sen
                  •
                vs to Rheimes: the remembraunce of the true and vndoubted Religion, vsed in our owne Countrey, and wherein we were trayned vp, was of force sufficient to perswade vs from yéelding to that, which we iudged rather to be a mummerie, and derision of the true. Doctrine, then otherwise: So that (notwithstanding many matters my companion alleadged vnto me, what daunger we might come vnto, if we went not to deliuer the Letters, as also the harde penurie we should 
                  〈◊〉
                in trauell, béeing destitute of money, apparell, an
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
               
other néedefull thinges) by the onelie appointment of God wha no doubt put it in my minde at that tyme,This to be true, albeit he nowe be my vtter enimie, I am sure he will not denie. I willed him to followe the, and come woe, want, miserio, or any other calamitie, I would n
                  ••
               er leaue him to the death. But if any exercise might get it, any paines compasse it, or the extreme shifte of begging attayne it: I would doo all my selfe, whereby to maintaine vs, onelie that he would but beare me company, for I would trie all meanes that might be, ere I woulde forsake my Faith.
            This to be true, I am sure and certayne himselfe will not denie, who séeing my earnest in treatie, and the promises I made to the vttermost of my 
                  〈…〉
                to goe with me, and so we left the way to Rheimes, and went on strayte to Paris.
            
            In Paris we mette with a French man, who coulde speake a little broken Englishe, and he conducted vs where my Lord the English Ambassador laie: to whome I gaue the Letters and after certaine talke he vsed with vs, he bestowed his Honourable lyberalitie vppon vs, wishing vs to returne backe againe into England.
            
            Leauing my Lord,It is a good help, to meet a freend in a straunge Countrey, when a mā is in some neede. and walking into the Cittie, we met too certayne English Gentlemen, some of them for the knowledge they had of me in England, shewed them selues verie courteous to me, bothe in money, lodging, and other necessaries. And through them we became acquainted with a number of Englishe men more, who lay in the Cittie, some in Colledges, and some at their owne houses: where vsing dailie company among them, sometime at dinner, and sometime at supper, we heard many girdes and nippes against our Countrey of England, her Maiesty very vnreuerently handled in woords, and certayne of her honourable Counsell, vnduetifullie tearmed.
            Great talke they had, about Doctor Saunders, who

they sayde, eyther as then was, or shortlie would be, arriued in Ireland, howe he had an Armie of Spaniardes with him, and howe him selfe vnder the Popes Standarde, would giue such an attempt there, as soone after should make all England to quake, beside, there were certaine Englishe men gone to the Pope, for more ayde, if néede should be, at whose returne, certaine Noble men English men, then béeing in those partes, whose names I omitte for diuers causes, would prosecute the matter, with as much spéede as might be.
            
               
                  Any subiect, that hath either feare of God, or loue to his prince would quake to heare their Trayterous deuises.
                  The Deuil wanteth no instruments to helpe his cause.
               The very same did the Préest at Amiens giue vs to vnderstand of, almost in euerie point agréeing with this: which made vs to doubt▪ because in euerie mans mouth; her Maiesty styl was aimed at, in such māner as I trēble and shake to thinke on their woordes. All this tyme that we remained amongst them, diuerse of the Gentlemen and others (who were lyke factors for the Pope, as Maister Woodward at Amiens, Doctor Bristowe at Doway, and Doctor Allen at Rheimes were, to encrease his Seminaries with as many Englishe men as they might,) verie earnestlie perswaded vs to trauell to Roome, assuring vs, that we should be there entertained to our high contentment, beside, they would giue vs Letters for our better welcome thether.
            We were soone entreated to take the iourney on vs, because we thought, if we could goe to Roome, and returne safelie againe into England, we should accomplish a great matter, the place béeing so farre of, and the voyage so daungerous. Uppon our agréement to vndertake the trauell, we receyued of euerie one lyberallie toward the bearing of our charges,By their perswasions and liberalitie, they win a number daylie to them. and Letters we had to Maister Doctor Lewes in Roome, the Archdeacō of Cambra, and to Doctor Morris, then the Rector of the English Hospital or Colledge in Roome, that we might there be preferred among the English Students.

Taking our leaue of them, and yeelding them thankes for their greate courtesy, we iournied to Lyons, where in the house of one Maister Deacon, the wordes were spoken by Henry Orton, one of them condemned, and yet liuing in the Tower, which in my other booke I haue auouched. From thence wee went to Millaine, where in the Cardinall Boromehos Pallace, we found the lodging of a Welshman, named Doctor Robert Griffin, a man there had in a good accoūt, and Cō
               fessor to the aforesaid Cardinal. By him we were very courteouslye entertained,There are Englishmen almoste in euery 
                     •
                  ittie by the waye. and sent to the house of an Englishe Prieste in the Cittie, named Maister Harries, who likewise bestowed on vs very gentle acceptaunce, as also three English Gentlemē, who lay in his house, being very lately retourned frō 
               Roome: they likewise both in cost and courtesie, behaued them selues like Gentlemen vnto vs, during the time that we made our abode in Millaine.
            
            Our comming to Millayne was on Christmas euen, and hauing lyen that night at an Osteria where Maister Harryes appoynted vs, on Christmas day we dyned with Doctor Griffin, where we had great cheere, and lyke welcome.The talke that Doctor Griffen had with vs, being at dinner with him. In the dinner time, he moued many questions vnto vs, as concerning the estate of England, if we heard of any warres towardes and howe the Catholiques thriued in Englande: and at the laste (quoth he) haue you not séene three Gentlemen that lye at Maister Harryes his house? Yes that we haue (quoth I) to vs they séeme meruailous curteous, and offer vs such freendshippe as we haue neuer deserued. Oh (quoth he) if all things had fallen right to their expectation, they would haue béene iolly fellowes. I am sure you haue heard what credite Captaine Sukelye was in with the Pope, and howe he was appointed wt his Armie, to inuade England: he being slayne in the battaile of the King of Portugall, thinges went not

forwarde according as they should haue done. These three Gentlemen came foorth of the North partes of England,
               An vnnaturall desire of men to seeke the ruine of theyr owne Country. taking vpon them to goe forward with that, which Stukely had enterprised, which was, to haue the Popes Armie committed to theyr conduction, and so they would ouerrun England at their pleasure, then they would make Kings and Dukes and Earles, euery one that they thought well off. To helpe them forwarde in this matter, they purchased the Letters of Doctor Saunders, Doctor Allen, Doctor Bristow, and others, who thought very well of their intent, & therfore furthered thē in their Letters so much as they might, to Doctor Lewes,
               The secret seducing Preestes, win a number to ioyne in theyr trayterous intent, Doctor Morris, Doctor Moorton, and diuers other Doctors and Gentlemen at Roome, all of thē verye earnestly following ye sute hereof to ye Popes holines, informing him, how they had already wun such a nūber in England, to ioin with thē when ye matter came to passe, ye graunting thē his holines Army, they would presently ouerrun all England, and yeelde it wholly into his hand. But when the Pope had scanned on this hasty busines, well noting the simple and arrogant behauiour of the men, and their vnlikelihoode, of performing these thinges: euen accordinge as they deserued, they were denyed theyr request, & sent away without any recompence.The Pope seeketh to accomplish his desire, by the Subject that must betray his owne Country. The Pope was not to truste to any such as they, he well knowes England is too strong yet, & till the people be secretely perswaded, as I doubt not but there is a good number, and more & more still shalbe, by ye Préests are sent ouer dayly, and they must war within, while other holds thē play with out: till then England will not be conquered any way.
            Other talke we had, not heere to be rehearsed, but truly it would astonishe a heart of Adamant, to heare the horrible Treasons inuented againste her Maiestie and this Realme, and so greedily followed by our owne Countrye men. But some perhaps will demaunde

howe wee behaued our selues to come to the knowledge of such trayterous intentions, iudging yt they would rather kéepe thē secret, then reueale them to any: to aunswer such as so doo question, thus it was.
            When I was at Paris,
               The meane, wherby they made me acquainted with al their deuises. the Gentlemen tooke me to be a Gentlemans Sonne héere in England, whom I refuse héere to name, but as it séemed, they were some▪ what perswaded of him: I perceiuing they tooke mee for his Sonne, called my selfe by his name, where through I was the better estéemed, and beside, loued as I had béene he in deede. When they vnderstoode my fellowes name to be Thomas Nowell, they whispered among themselues, and sayd vndoubtedly, he was kin to Maister Nowell the Deane of Paules: and if they wist certainly that he were so, they woulde vse him in such gentle order, as they woulde keepe hym there, so that one day he shoulde stande and preache against his Kinseman. This suppose, seruing so wel our necessitye, we were glad to vse: which made vs well thought on of all, and kéeping company so familiarlye with them, we were made acquainted with a number more matters then may heere be expressed.
            While we were in Millaine,
               The treason against England, was cōmon in euery Englishmās mouth. wee visited Maister Doctor Parker, who likewise told vs the same tale that Doctor Griffin had before rehearsed, beside, he tolde vs that Préestes were appointed from Roome & Rheimes for Englande, and that ore long they should be sent. Soone after we departed thence, to Bologna, Florence, Scienna, and so to Roome, wher how we were receiued the Chapter following shall amply vnfolde. Thus, as well to certifie the incredulous, as also to content those desirous howe I attained to Roome: I haue breeflye doone my good wyll to please bothe.
            You haue hearde heerein, howe at sundrye places, and by seuerall spéeches, there was a generall agreement of Treason, expected and daylye looked for,

to the harme of our gracious Soueraigne, and hurte of her whole Realme. All these matters wee heard before we came to Roome, from whence the treason shoulde cheefely procéede: we séeing such deuillish deuises to be talked on by the way, we might well iudge Roome to be Hell it selfe, in that all thinges should goe forwarde, as it was there determined. You are not altogether ignoraunt of their intentes at Roome, for that my other booke hath truely reueled some of their traiterous and disloyall practises: and such as modestie will suffer me to vtter, and you to reade, you shall here finde faithfullye discoursed.
         
         
            ¶ The Author beeing come to Rome, after what manner he was receiued into the Englishe Seminarie. The emulation & dissension, between the VVelshmen and the English men in the Colledge, their banishment out of Roome, & the Popes sending for thē againe, as you shall reade heareafter. Chap. 2.
            
               OUr entraunce into Roome, was vppon Candlemas euen, when as it drew somewhat towardes nighte: for which cause, we refused as then to goe to the English Colledge, taking vp our Lodging in an Osteria somewhat within the Cittie, and determining to visite the Englishe house on the next morning. On the morrowe by enquiring, we founde the Englishe Colledge, where after we were once entered, wee had a number about vs quicklye▪ to knowe what newes in

England, and how all matters went there. Not long had we stoode talking with them, but one entred the Colledge,A present of holy Candls brought from the Pope to the English Students. with a great many of war Candles in hys hande: who gaue them to vnderstande, that the Pope had sent to euery Scholler in the Colledge a Candle, which that day at high Masse he had hallowed, for it was Candlemas day. They receiuing thē with great account, both of the Popes fauoure, as also the holines they credited to consist in the Candles, went euery one to lay them vp in their Chambers: in the meane time Maister Doctor Morris the Rector of the house came to vs, to whom we deliuered the Letter sent to him on our behalfe from Paris, which when he had read, he said we were welcōe, allowing vs ye eight dayes entertainment in the Hospitall, which by the Pope was graunted to such Englishmen as came thether. Then hee brought vs to Doctor Lewes, the Archdeacon of Cambra, to whom we deliuered his letter likewise, and with him we stayed dinner, ignorant whither he were an Englishman or no, for that he gaue vs our entertainment in Latine, demaunded a number of questions of vs in Latine, and beside, dined with vs in Latine: whereat we meruailed, till after dinner, he bad vs walke to the Colledge againe with Doctor Morris, in English. We were no sooner come to the Colledge, but the Schollers, who had already dined, and were walking together in the Court, came about vs, euerye one demaunding so many questions, that we knewe not which to aunswer first: at last, one of them tooke my fellow aside, and one of the Priestes lykewise desired to talke with me, because he sayd he knew my Father well enough,The talke one of the Priests had with me in the Garden. vsing the name that I did, so, he and I sitting together in the Garden, among other talke he asked of me, wherefore I came to Rome? Truste me Sir (quoth I) onely for the desire I had to see it, that when I came home againe, I might say, once in my life

I haue béene at Roome. Then I perceiue (quoth he) you come more vpon pleasure then any deuotion, more desirous to see the Cittie, then to learne the vertues conteined in it: in sooth I see, you remaine in the same wildnes you did, when I lay at your Fathers house, but I doo not doubt now we haue you heere, to make you a stayed man ere you departe, that your Father may haue ioy of you, and all your freends receiue comfort by you. In deede Sir (quoth I) I haue alwayes addicted my mind to so many youthfull deuises,Mine owne tale, which so well as I could, I made to agree with the Preests discourse. that I little regarded any religion, which my Parents séeing, and fearing I would neuer be bridled: sent me ouer to Paris, where I should remaine at my booke. But there I found Gentlemen of mine acquaintaunce, who wished me to trauell hither, whereto I quickly gaue my consent, béeing (as I haue told you) desirous to see a thing so famous. I thinke very well (quoth he) of your woordes, aswell for your Parents sake as also your owne. But this I will say vnto you, there ought none to come hither, the place being so holy, auncient, and famous, but onely such as with earnest endeuour, séeke and thirst after the Catholique faith: beeing heere taught and mainteined, according as Christ ordeyned it, the Apostles deliuered it, Peter himselfe planted it, and all the Fathers of the Church since, haue followed it.Heere may you beholde, what vnreuerent speeches they can affoorde her Maiestie. They must denounce that damnable heresie, crept in to the Church of England, that proude vsurping Iezabell, (meaning our bread & gracious Princesse) whom (quoth he) God reserueth to make her a notable spectacle to the whole world, for keeping ye good Queene of Scots frō her lawfull rule: but I hope ere long, ye Dogs shall teare her flesh, & those yt be her props & vpholders.
            
               A paper of the names of such noble men of her MaiestiesThen drawing a paper out of his pocket, he sayd, I haue a Bead role of them heere, who little knowes what is prouiding for them, & I hope shall not know, till it fall vpon them. Then he read their names vnto

me,Counsell▪ whom they meant to persecute, when their intent came to passe in England. which, that all may perceiue the villainous & trayterous mindes of our owne Countriemen: so many of them as I can call to memory, I will set down, euen in the same manner as he read thē. But first I must craue pardon of those honourable personages, to whome the words doo offer great abuse, and whom I vnfeynedlye reuerence and honour: that they would not admit any euill conceite against mee, but in the noble nature wherewith they are dayly adorned, I, béeing but the reporter,I desire thee gentle Reader, to vse some reuerence in reading these vndecent woords, because they are truly set downe, after the order as they were there spoken may be pardoned and not reprooued. First, (quoth he) héere is my Lord Keeper, the Bacon hogge, the Butchers sonne, the great guts, oh he woulde fry well with a Faggot, or his head would make a fayre showe vpon London bridge, where I hope shortly it shall stand. Next is eloquent Maister Cecill, Lorde Treasorer, you shall shortly see if he can saue his owne life with all ye wit he hath: had it not béen for these two before named, England had gon to wracke long since. Then heere is the Earle of Leicester, the Queenes Ostler, & his brother Ambrose Dudly, a good fat whorson, to make Bacon of: with other words of my Lorde of Leicester, not here to be rehearsed. My Lord of Bedforde, he forsooth is ye Queenes Coozin, we will sée how finely his Coozin & he can hang together. Sir Fraunces Walsinghā, & Doctor Wilson, they be her Secretaries: for euery warrāt they haue suffered, to apprehend any of our Priestes, our fréends or other, by that time they haue coūted their reckoning, they shall find they haue a deere payment. Sir Christopher Hatton, he pleased ye Queene so wel, dauncing before her in a Maske, yt since yt time he hath risen to be one of ye Counsell: with other words, which I referre for modestie. Sir Fraunces Knowles, and other of the Counsell whose names I well remember not: he gaue them many a heauy threatning. Then opening the paper farder, at the end therof was a great many of names, of Magistrates & other belonging

to this Cittie,Euery one that was named in the paper, the manner and order of of their death was appoynted. among whome was Maister Recorder, Maister Nowell Deane of Paules, Maister Foxe, Maister Crowlye, & sundry other, whose names I cannot very well remember, and therefore am loth to set downe any thing, but that whereof I am certainly assured: but verye well I remember, there was no one named, but he had the order of his death appoynted, eyther by burning, hanging, or quartering, and such like.
            It is not vnlike, but that this vnreuerent matter will offende some in the reading, that men of honour, and worshippe, and those of credite and countenaunce, shoulde haue their names published in print in suche sorte: I haue had the iudgement of those, of worshippe and learning, on this behalfe, and they haue sayde, how it is necessary, that theyr owne wicked spéeches should be set downe, for an example to all men, howe they abuse her Maiestie, her honourable Councell, and learned and discréete Maiestrates, whereby their trayterous dealings may be the better discouered. And to them thus vndutifully regarded, it can not séeme an offence, considering, that Christe vnto his chosen vessels hath sayd.Math. 5.11. 
               You shall be mocked, scorned, and reuiled for my sake: but doo you reioyce and be glad, for your rewarde is the greater in the kingdome of Heauen, and you remaine blessed.
            
            
               There are other heere, to whom the like charge hath beene, giuen to iustifie that I doo not report any vntrueth.Then putting vp his Paper agayne, he began after this manner. As I haue sayd before, so now I saye the same, such as come to this holy place, must faithfully bende his life and conuersasion, to honour and reuerence our prouident and holy Father the Pope, in all thinges, that shall like him to commaund, to holde and confesse him the vniuersall supreme heade of Christes church, & embrace his decrees, as the onely ordenance & will of God. For he is the person of God on earth, and he can not sinne, because the spirite of diuine grace

guideth him continuallie: he hath aucthoritie ouer all Kinges and Princes, to erect and suppresse whome he pleaseth, and that shall England well knowe ere long, that he hath such power and aucthoritie. To honour and obey him, to be a true and faithfull member of his Church, and to liue and die in his cause, this ought to be the intent of all that commeth héere.
            This long Tale, contayning a number of more circumstaunces than I can vnfolde: made me studie what aunswer I should make him, which after some pause, came foorth as thus. Credite me Sir, I am but a Nouesse in these matters, and therefore you might as well haue disputed with me, in the déepest Schoole points that is, and I should haue censured bothe alike. Nay (quoth he) I thinke not your ignoraunce so great, albeit it séemeth great enough, though you haue béene looselie brought vp, yet you haue béene with me, bothe at Masse, and at Confession diuers times, at such time as I serued my Lady B.
            
            Beside,A number of places he tolde me heere in Englande, where preestes haue entertainement. there are a great many of Priestes in England, as in Warwickshire, at Maister I. T. in Staffordshire, at Maister G. of C. and at S. T. F. in the same shyre: all these be neere your Fathers, and not one of them but visiteth your Fathers house, three or fowre times euerie yéere, as they dyd when I was there (for there is no long tariaunce in one place for a Priest, but he must shifte styll, least he be taken,) and I am sure your Father would sée you duelie confessed.
            Nowe I was put to so harde a shifte, that I knewe not well what to say, I knewe none of these men he named, but one, and he in deede had a Priest, who after his long raunging about his Maister the Popes businesse heere in England, I thanke God, I haue caused to be stayed. Likewise, I knewe not the Gentleman, whome▪ bothe they at Paris, and he sayde, to be my Father,

neither where he dwelt,It was only God, that framed my aunswers to agree with the Preests demaunds. nor what he was: which made me stand in feare to be disprooued, hauing auouched my selfe before to be his Sonne. Wherfore, referring my case to God, who had so prouided for me tyll that time, in his name I resolued my selfe on this aunswer, not knowing howe it might happen to spéede.
            In déede Sir, I can not denie, but that I haue oftentimes heard Masse, as also béene at Confession, but my deuotion thereto hath béene 
                  •
               ender,An excuse seruing very fit for my purpose, and lyked the Preest well enough. as you your selfe haue séene, knowing me to be so wilde, and, as it were, without gouernment: but when you departed from my Fathers, I taried there but a small time after you, for I obtayned leaue of my Father, to goe lye at London, at a Kinsemans house of his, because I would studie the French tongue, to haue some knowledge therein against I went ouer, for my Father tolde me long before, that I should goe to Paris, and studie there. When I was at London, I grewe in acquaintaunce with diuers Gentlemen, in whose company I frequented many delightfull pastimes: so that I could hardlie refraine them, when my Father sent for me, to the intent I should trauell to Paris.
            
            Well (quoth he) and though you did goe to London so soone after I was gone, any of the Préestes that reforted to your Fathers, or he him selfe could haue certified you, of such places in London, where you might haue heard Masse, and béene Confest too, without suspect at all.A matter woorthy to be regarded. For at Maister S. his house on the backside of P. you might diuers times haue heard Masse, and béene Cōfest there likewise: I lay there an indifferent while, and sayd Masse there, wherat diuers were present, also in the after noone, when they haue béene at the Play, in all that time I haue Confessed many.
            Likewise, you might haue gone to the Marshalse a, and enquired for Maister Fownd, & you should sildom

haue missed,
                  Euerarde Ducket, was taken, going into the Marshalsea, to speake with the Papists he beeing a Preest: and beeing there taken, behaued him selfe in such trayterous manner, that he was executed at Tiborne, 1581. but haue found a Préest there with him: for sometime vnder ye habites of Gentlemen, Seruingmen, or what apparell they imagine most conuenient for them, Préestes doo daylie resorte vnto him, where they confesse him, and giue him such halowed things as are sent him from Roome, as Agnus Deis, Grana benedicta, and other things: there, if you had made him priuie to your intent, he would haue appointed one that should haue done it for you. He likewise would haue bestowed on you some of those holie thinges, for he findeth such meanes, what with the Préests that come to him, and other, whome he hyreth or infreateth to cary a Letter abroade now and then for him: that those holie thinges are deliuered to their handes, who doo not a little reioyce in them. My selfe once, made Norris the Pursuiuant carie a Letter for me, to one of my Lady B. her Gentlewomen: and therin was two Agnus Deis, a hallowed Girdle, and aboue fortie or fiftie Grana benedicta, which maketh me to smile euerie time I thinke on it, that I could make him my man, when I durst not deliuer it my selfe.
            Maister Norris béeing told this: offereth his life, if any such thing can be prooued, for he sayth, he neuer deliuered any thing to any of my Lady B. Gentlewomen. And for his faithfull seruice to her Maiestie, I haue to shewe vnder his owne hande, the penaltie he putteth him selfe too, if any vniust seruice can be layde to his charge.
            By this time, the Bell rung for all the Studentes to come to Supper, which made the Préest to staye at this Periadus, else he would haue continued in discourse, I know not how long: for what with the seueral charges wherwith he sounded me, my care styl how to shape a sufficient aunswer, and the tediousnesse of his tale, mixed with so many woordes, farre distaunt

from ciuill and duetifull regarde, he was not so readie to goe to his Supper, as I was glad for that tyme to breake off company.
            So after certaine familiar behauiour, vsed betweene him and I, he glad to see me at Rome, and well hoping in shorte time to make me a newe man, I appliable with thankes, for euerie thing; for that it stoode with wisedome to accept all thing: he went into the Refectorium, which is the name of their dining Hall, & I to the Chamber appointed for me and my fellow, whome I found there sitting with Doctor Morris, 
               
                  ••
               aying my comming, that we might sup togeather, which in deede we did, Maister Morris vsing vs verie courteouslie, passing away the supper time with much variety of talke, among which, Maister Doctor sayde his pleasure of diuers persons in England: which, for that it would rather checke modestie, then challenge any respect of honestie, I admit it to silence, the talke béeing so broade, that it would stand as a blemish to my Booke.
         
         
            In what manner our English men passe away their time in the Colledge, the orders of the house and other thinges to be regarded. Chap. 3.
            
               IT is vnpossible for me, to note down halfe the spéeches, that passed betwéen ye Schollers and me, as also my fellowe: but as for that was vsed to him, I could seldome come acquainted with all, except I had stoode by & heard it▪ for either they had fullie perswaded him, or he ioyned

into consent with them▪ so that he would neuer report any thing that had passed betwéene them, he lyked so well of euerie thing. But letting these matters passe a while, I thinke it expedient héere so set downe, before I goe any farder, the orders vsed in the Englishe Colledge, how the English men spende the time there, and within what compasse they limitte them selues, which so bréeflie as I can, I will passe ouer.
            The Englishe Colledge,The place where the Englishe Colledge standeth in Roome.
                is a house bothe large and fayre, standing in the way to the Popes Pallace, not farre from the Castle Sante Angello: in the Colledge, the Schollers are deuided, by certaine nūber into euery Chāber, as in some foure, in some fix, or so many as the Rector thinketh cōuenient, as well for the health of the Schollers,The order for the English mennes lodging. as the troubling not much roome. Euerie man hath his Bed proper to him selfe, which is, two little Trestles, with sowre or flue boordes layde along ouer them, and thereon a quilted Mattresse, as we call it in England, which euerie morning after they are rysen, they solde vp their shéetes hansomelie, laying them in the middest of the Bed, & so rowle it vp to one ende, couering it with the Quilt, that is their Couerlet all the night time.
            First in the morning,The orders obserued by the Schollers, euerie morning. he that is the Porter of the Colledge, ringeth a Bell, at the sound whereof euerie Student ariseth, and turneth vp his Bed, as I have sayde before. Not long after, the Bell ringeth againe, when as euerie one presentlie kneeling on his knées, prayeth for the spare of halfe an howre: at which time, the Bell béeing souled againe, they arise and bestowe a certaine time in Studie, euerie one hauing his Deske, Table, & Chayre to him selfe verie orderlie, and all the time of Studie, silence is vsed of euerie one in the Chā
               ber, not one offering molestation in speeche to an other.
            The time of Studie expired, the Bell calleth them

from their Chambers, downe into the Refectorium: where euerie one taketh a glasse of Wine, and a quarter of a Manchet, & so he maketh his Collatione. Soone after, the Bel is knouled againe, when as the Studēts two & two togeather, walke to the Romaine Colledge, which is the place of Schoole or instruction: where euerie one goeth to his ordinarie Lecture, some to Diuinitie, some to Phisique, some to Logique, & some to Rhetorique. There they remaine the Lecture time, which béeing done, they returne home to the Colledge againe: where they spend the time tyll dinner, in walking and talking vp and downe the Gardens.
            And an order there is appointed by the Rector and the Iesuites,
               The diuersitie of penaunce adioyned the Englishe Studentes: which they must doo openlie in the Hall, at dinner tyme. and obeyed by all the Studentes, that who soeuer dooth not in the morning turne vp his Bed hansomlie, or is not on his knées at prayer time, or heareth not Masse before he goe to Schoole, or after he comes home, but forgetteth it: or else if he goe foorth, and put not the Peg at his name in the Table. For there is a Table hangeth by the doore, which hath a long Box adioyned to it, wherein lyeth a great company of wooden Pegges, and against the name of euerie Scholler written in the Table (which is obserued by order of the Alphabet) there is a hole made: wherein, such as haue occasion to goe abroade, must duelie put a Peg, to giue knowledge who is abroade, and who remaineth within.
            Beside, diuers other orders they haue for slight matters, the neglecting whereof, is publique penaunce at dinner time: when as all the Studentes are placed at the Tables, such as haue so transgressed, goeth vp into the Pulpit I which standeth there, because one readeth all the dinner tyme▪) and there he sayeth: Because I haue not fulfilled this or that, whatsoeuer order it be that he hath broken, I am adioyned such a penaunce.

Eyther to knéele in the middest of the Hall on his bare knées,All these I haue beene forced to do, albeit it were with an yll will. and there to say his Beades ouer: Or to say certaine Pater nosters, and Aue Marias: Or to stand vpright and haue a dishe of potage before him on the grounde, and so to bring vp euerie spoonfull to his mouth: Or to loose, either one or two or thrée of his dishes appointed for his dinner: Or to stand there all dinner time, & eate no meate: and diuers other, which according as it is, either afterwarde he hath his dinner or supper, or else goes without it: And all these penaunces I haue béene forced to do, for that I was alway apt to breake one order or other. As for the priuate penaunces, it shall not be greatly amisse to rehearse them héere too: so long I shall desire you to stay, from hearing the manner of the Students dinner.The priuate penaunces, which are appointed by the ghostly Father. The priuate Penaunces, are appointed by the ghostly Father at Confession: which are fulfilled without publique knowledge of the cause, and likewise of the person. If his penaunce be, to whip him selfe openlie in the Hall at dinner time: then the Rector ordereth it after this manner, that he shall not be knowen, to be reproched by any of his felowes, or that they shall certainlie saye, it is such a one. At the dinner or supper, that this penaunce is to be accomplished, the Rector causeth seuen or eight to kéepe their Chambers, and commonly but one that time in a Chamber: their doores must be made fast to them, & they, not so much as looke out at their windowe, to sée from which Chamber he comes that dooth the penaunce.The whipping them selues, publiquelie at dinner. When they are all set at the Tables, he commeth in, cloathed in a Canuas vesture downe to the grounde, a hood of the same on his head, with two holes where through he hath sight, and a good bigge round place bare, against the middest of his backe: in this order he goeth vp and downe the Hall, whipping him selfe at that bare place, in somuch, that the blood dooth trickle on the ground after him.

The whip hath a verie short handle, not much aboue a handfull long, and fortie or fiftie Cordes at it, about the length of halfe a yarde: with a great many hard knots on euerie Corde, and some of the whippes hath through euerie knot at the ende crooked wiers, which will teare the fleshe vnmercifullie.
            
               The māner of the Iesuits whips wherewith they whip themselues.The Iesuites haue, some of them, to whip them selues, whips with Cordes of wier, wherewith they will beate them selues, tyl with too much effuse of blood, they be readie to giue vp the ghost. And this they will doo in their Chambers, either before a Crucifix, or the image of our Ladie, turning their backes when they bléede towarde the Image, that it may sée them. One of the Iesuites, because they could neuer gette me to whip my selfe, (for that I well knewe God sayde: Rent your hearts,
               Ioel. 2.13. Psal. 51.17 
               and not your skin: And that, A contrite and sobbing heart, is more acceptable to God, then a bleeding body,) tooke me once with him into his Chamber, saying: I should sée (because I was so fearefull) what he would inflict vpon his owne body.The exāple one of the Iesuites gaue me, to whip my selfe. So when he was vnapparelled, he tooke a whip, the Cords whereof was wier, & before the Picture of our Lady, he whipped him selfe verie gréeuouslie, saying: Sancta Maria mater Dei, suscipe dolorem meum: Sancta Maria mater Dei, accipe Flagitium meum: Et ora prome, nunc et in hira mortis: Which is as much to say, Saint Marie mother of God, receiue my dolor:
               O monstrous ignoraunce. 
               Saint Marie mother of God, accept my whipping, and pray for me, now and in the howre of death. These, with other like woordes, he vsed to the Picture a great many times: and then he went to the Crucifix, which stoode vpon his Deske, and whipping him selfe styll, he sayde these, or the verie lyke woordes. O Iesu obtestetur te virgo gloriosa Maria mater, quae (quod pro certo noui) pro me nunc tecum agit. Flagitistu
                     •
                  , sanguinolenti tui sudoris, Cruci
                     •
                   tuae, mortis ac passionis tuae, pro

me passae memoriae, ad hoc me faciendum impulit: eo quod perpessus sis, his decies pro me grauiora: In English thus. O Iesus,
               Egregious impudency 
               be thou intreated by that glorious virgin thy mother, who I am sure at this time maketh intercession to thee for me. The remembraunce of thy whipping, bloody sweat, Crosse, death and passion, maketh me do this, in somuch as thou hast suffered ten times more for me.
            
            In these and such like acclamations, be continued whipping him selfe, almost the space of halfe an howre, bléeding so sore, as it gréeued me verie much to sée him. Afterward, he willed me to trie it once, and I shoulde not finde any paine in it, but rather a pleasure. For (quoth he) if Christe had his fleshe rent and torne with whips, his handes and féete nayled to the Crosse, his precious side gored with a Launce, his head so pricked with a Crowne of thorne, that his déere blood ran trilling downe his face, and all this for you: why should you feare to put your body to any torment, to recompence him that hath done so much for you? I desired him to beare with me a while, for I was not indued with that strength and fortitude, as to abide and suffer the paines he did: but yet in time I doubted not, to fulfill any thing on my body, he would commaund me. My aunswer pleased him indifferentlie, so I left him in his Chamber, and went downe, lamenting to sée a spectacle of so great follie.
            Now as for the other penaunces,Diuersity of penaunces, giuen them, all by their ghostly Cō
                  fessor. as they be diuers, so be they diuers wayes fulfilled, eyther by Fasting, wearing a shyrt of heaire, trudging to the seuen Churches, lying vpon the bare boardes, going into the darke vautes vnder the ground, or traueling on Pilgrimage, and a number more, which excéedeth my memorie to vnfolde, they haue amongst them, as there be diuers can beare me witnesse, and some of them my Confessor

hath constrayned me to doo.
            Returne we now to the Students, who béeing come from the schooles, and haue recreated them selues some what, either in the house or in the Gardens: are now at the sound of the Bel come into the Refectorium to dinner.The maner of the English mens dinner. The custome is, that dayly two of the Studentes take it by turnes, to serue all the other at ye Table, who to helpe them, haue the Butler, the Porter, and a poore Iesuite, that looketh to all the Schollers necessaries, to bring them their cleane shirtes, and foreséeeth, that neither their Gownes, Cassocks, Dublets, Bréeches, Hose nor shooes want mending. These bring in their hands, eche of them a round boorde, which hath a staffe about halfe a yarde long, made fast through the middle of it: and round about that boord is set little Saucers, wherin the Cooke shareth euery man a little quantity, which they bring, and holde ouer the Table, when as euerie man taketh his owne messe.
            As for their fare, trust me it is very fine and delicate, for euery man hath his owne Trentcher,The variety of dishes, and daintinesse of the Englishe mens fare▪
                his Manchet, knife, spoone, and forke layde by it, & then a fayre white napkin couering it, with his glasse and pot of wine set by him. And the first messe, or Antepast (as they call it) that is brought to the Table, is some fine meat to vrge them haue an appetite: as sometime the Spanish Anchouies, and sometime stued Prunes and Raysons of the Sun togeather, hauing such fine tarte sirope made to them, as I promise you a weake stomacke would very wel digest them. The second, is a certaine messe of potage of that Countrey manner, no meat sod in them, but are made of diuers thinges, whose proper names I doo not remember: but me thought they were bothe good and wholsome. The thirde, is hoylde meate, as Kid, Mutton, Chickin, and such like: euerie man a pretie modicum of eche thing. The fourth, is rosted meat,

of the daintiest prouision that they can get, and sometime stewde and bakte meate, according as pleaseth Maister Cooke to order it. The fift and last, is some time Chéese, some time preserued conceytes, some tyme Figges, Almonds and Raysons, a Limon and Sugar, a Pomegranate, or some such swéete géere: for they knowe that Englishmen looueth swéete meates.
            And all the dinner whyle,The order that one of the Schollers obserueth, reading all the dinner tyme. one of the Schollers, according as they take it by wéeklie turne, readeth: first a Chapter of their Bible, and then in their Martirilogium, he readeth the Martirdome of some of the Saintes, as Saint Fraunces, Saint Martin, Saint Longinus, that thrust the Speare into Christes side, Saint Agatha, Saint Barbara, Saint Cecilia, and diuers other: among whome they haue imprinted the Martirdome of Doctor Storie, the two Nortons, Iohn Felton and others, calling them by the name of Saintes, who were héere executed at Tiborne for high treason.
            The dinner done, they recreate them selues for ye space of an howre, & then the Bell calleth them to theyr Chā
               bers, where they staye a while, studying on their Lectures giuen them in the forenoone: anon the Bel sūmoneth them to Schoole again, where they stay not past an howre,They haue feeding enough, foure meales a day. but they returne home againe, and so soone as they be come in, they goe into the Refectorium, and there euerie one hath his glasse of wine, and a quarter of a Manchet againe, according as they had in the morning.
            Then they depart to their Chambers, from whence at conuenient time they are called to exercise of disputation: the Diuines to a Iesuite appointed for them, and euerie Studie to a seuerall Iesuite, where they continue the space of an howre, and afterwarde tyll supper tyme, they are at theyr recreation.
            
               
               Their exercise after Supper.After Supper, if it be in winter time, they goe with the Iesuites, and sit about a great fire talking, and in all their talke, they striue who shall speake wurst of her Maiesty, of some of her Councell, of some Bishop héere, or such lyke: so that the Iesuites them selues, will often take vp their hands and blesse them selues, to beare what abhominable tales they will tell them. After they haue talked a good while, the Bell calleth them to their Chambers, the Porter going from Chamber to Chāber, & lighteth a Lampe in euerie one: so when the Schollers come, they alight their Lampes, lay downe their Beddes, and goe sit at their Deskes and studie a little, tyll the Bell ringes, when euerie one falles on his knées to Prayers. Then one of the Préestes in the Chamber, as in euerie Chamber there is some, beginneth the Latin Letany, all the Schollers in the Chamber aunswering him: and so they spend the time tyll the Bell ringes againe, which is for euerie one to goe to bed.
         
         
            ¶ Other matters of our Englishe Studentes in the Colledge, their dayes of recreation at their vineyarde, their walke to the seuen Churches, a report of some of the Romish Reliques, and other thinges concerning their behauiour. Chap. 4.
            
               
               THe English Studentes euerie thirde or fowrth day, goe not to the Schooles, but haue accesse abroade; to sport and delight them selues: sometime they walks to theyr Uineyarde, and the Iesuites with them, where they passe away the day in diuers disportes, what game, what toy any one can deuise, they altogeather in pastime ioyne to performe it.
            An other day they goe to the seuen Churches, which according as I remember their names, I will héere set them downe.The seuen Churches in Roome, wherto they goe on pylgrimage. S. Peters, S. Paules, S. Iohn Lateranes, S. Maria maiore, S. Croce, S. Laurences, S. Sebastianes. In all these Churches, there be diuers Reliques, which make them haunted of a meruailous multitude of people: whereby the lazie lurden Friers that kéepe the Churches, gettes more ritches, then so many honest men should doo. For eyther at the comming into the Church, or else at the Aultar where the Reliques be, there standeth a Basen, and the people cast money therein, with very great liberality. And there standeth a Frier,A craftie kinde of coosonage, wherby the ignorant people are beguiled. with a forked sticke in his hand, and thervpon he taketh euerie bodies Beades, that layes them on the Aultar, and then he wipes them along a great proportioned thing of Christall and Golde, wherein are a number of rotten bones, which they make the people credite to be the bones of Saintes: so wiping them along the outside of this Tabernacle, the Beades steale a terrible deale of holynesse out of those bones, and God knowes, the people thinke they doo God good seruice in it: Oh monstrous blindnesse.
            But because euery good Subiect may sée into the Romishe

iuglinges, and perceyue the subtiltie of Antichriste the eldest childe of hell: I will rehearse some of these Reliques, as many of them as I can possiblie call to my remembraunce.
            
               A breefe rehearsall of some of the Romishe Reliques, whereby the Pope deceiueth a number, and hath good gaines, to the maintenaunce of his pompe.
               
                  In Saint Peters Church.
                  
                     The Popes brasē Rock, taken for the Rock Christ spake off.AS we enter into the Court before Saint Peters Church, there standeth the forme of a Rock made of brasse, an old & auncient thing: the which is kept there, that the ignoraunt people should beléeue that to be the Rock, which our Sauiour spake off to Peter, when as vpon Peters confessing him to be, Christe the sonne of the liuing God:Math. 16.16.18. he aunswered. Vpon this Rock will I builde my Church, which Rock he meant by him selfe, and not by Peter. This péece of brasse they make the ignorant to beléeue to be that Rock, and therfore a nūber as they goe into the Church, fall downe on their knées, and worship this brasen Rock with their prayers.
                  
                     The halfe bodies of S. Peter and Paule.
                     Going thorowe the Church, we come to a Chappell, wherin is an high Altar, wheron standeth a Picture of S. Peter and S. Paul: within that Altar, they say, lyeth halfe the bodyes of these two Apostles and Saints, and therfore that Aultar is daylie worshipped.
                  Comming back againe into the Church, we come to a square Aultar,The speare that was thrust into Christes side, and the handkercher wherewith he wiped his face, when he carried his Crosse. wherin (say they) is the head of ye Speare that was thrust into our Sauiours side: but the point therof, is broken off, and is in an other place. And in the

same Aultar, is ye Hādkercher which Christe wiped his face with all, when he caried his Crosse sweating, & left the perfect print therof on ye cloath: this is called Vultus sanctus. How this aultar is honored, you shal read more in the Chapter, which talketh of the Flagellante night.
                  What other Reliques be in this Church, I certainlie knowe not, but they say there is the bodies of diuers Saintes: whose names because I can not remember, I will let passe, because I will not be founde in an vntrueth.
               
               
                  In Saint Paules Church.
                  IN this Church,The other halfe of S. Peter and Paule.
                      vnder the high Aultar, is sayde to be the other halfe of the bodies of S. Peter and Paule: this Aultar is likewise adored with meruailous reuerence.
                  Not farre from this Church, there is a place called Tre Fontana,
                     Three leapes of S. Paules head made three Fountains. at this place they say Saint Paule was beheaded: and when his head was cutte off, it leaped thrée times, and in those places where it leapt, there sprung vp presentlie thrée Fountaines, there is great deuotion likewise vsed at this place.
               
               
                  In Saint Iohn Lateranes Church.
                  AS we come first to the little Chappelles before the Church (wherein,The stone whereon the Cock crewe, when Peter denyed Christe. they say, our Lady hath béene diuers times séene and therefore hath left such holinesse there, as they pray there a good while) there standeth a round pyller of Stone, séeming to be but latelie made, & on this Stone, say they, the Cock stoode and crowed, at what time Peter denied Christe: & therfore they doo vse to kisse it, make courtesie to it, & rub their Beads on it.
                  
                     
                     The rings wherin the Iewes set their Banners, when Christ was crucified.Néere to this Stone, is a broade gate, béeing the entraunce into the aforesayde Chappelles, and on the one side of this gate, there is two round Ringes of Iron, whereon sometime a gate hath béene hanged, to open and shut: in these Ringes, say they, the Iewes did stick Banners, all the while that Christe was crucified, and therfore for the holinesse of them, they will drawe their Beades thorowe the sayd Kings, and kisse them when they haue so done.
                  
                     The Font wherein Constantinus Magnus was Christened.From thence we goe to a fayre large place, in the middest whereof standeth a Font, wherein, they saye, Constantinus Magnus was christened: in this Font euerie yéere on Easter euen, they doo christen Iewes, such as doo chaunge to their Religion. For there is a certaine place appointed for Sermons, whereat ye Iewes whether they will or no, must be present, because one of their own Rabines preacheth to them, to conuert them, as him selfe hath béene a great while.
                  In Roome, the Iewes haue a dwelling place within them selues, béeing locked in their stréetes by gates on either side, and the Romaines euerie night kéepeth the keyes: all the day time they goe abroade in the Cittie, and will buie the oldest apparell that is, an olde Cloke Dublet, or Hose, that a man would thinke not woorth a penny, of the Iewes you may haue ye quantity of fowre or fiue shillings for them. Now, that the Iewes may be knowne from any other people, euerie one weareth a yellow Cap or Hat, and if he goe abroade without it, they will vse him verie yll fauouredlie.
                  In this order they come to the Sermon, and when any of them dooth chaunge his Faith: he taketh his yellowe Cap or Hat off from his head, and throwes it away with great violence, then will a hundred offer him a blacke Cap or a Hat, and greatlie reioyce that

they haue so wun him. All his riches he then must forsake, yt goes to the Popes vse, béeing one of his shiftes: and to this aforesayd Font he is brought, clothed all in white, a white Cap, a white Cloke, & euery thinge white about him, with a holy Candle burning, that he beareth in his hand.Bishoppe Goldwell. baptizeth the Iewes in Roome. Then is he there baptized by an English man, who is named Bishop Goldwell, sometime the Bishop of S. Asaph in Wales: he hath thys office, maketh all the English Priests in the Colledge, and liueth there among the Theatines verye pontificallye. After ye Iewes be thus baptized, they be brought into the Church, and there they sée the hallowing of the Paschall,
                     Hallowing of the Paschall Candle. which is a mighty great wax Taper: and then a deuise (wherin is inclosed a number of Squibs) is shot off, when thorow all the Church they then cry. Sic transit gloria Mundi. From thence they goe to a Colledge, which the Pope hath erected for such Iewes, as in this manner turn to his religion: there they stay a certain time, and afterward they be turned out, to get their liuing as they can, none of their former riches they must haue again, for that goes to the maintenance of the Popes pontificallitie. This aforesaide Font is a holy thing, and there must prayers be likewise saide.
                  From this Font we goe vp into a fayre Chappell,Our Ladies holy Chappell. wherein is an Aultar dedicated to our Lady, in golde and sumptuous showes surpassing, and all about the Chappel are hanged little woodden Pictures, Tapers, and wax Candles, which are the Pilgrimes vowes to our Lady, and there they leaue them to honour her. Héere must be vsed great deuotion.
                  From thence we goe into an old roome,The three holy doores. wherein is an old Wall standing along in the midst of this roome, and in this Wall is three old doores, hauing paynting on them that is not verye olde: thorowe one of these

doores, they say, Christ went in to iudgement, when he came backe from iudgement, he went thorow the second, and thorow the third to be whipped: these doores are worshipped euery day.
                  
                     The holy stayres that Christ went vp to iudgement on.From thence we goe a long thorow an old Gallerye, and there is a fayre payre of stayres of stone, that commeth vp into this Gallerie, béeing in number of steps, about foure or fiue & twenty: vp these stayres they saye Christ went to iudgement, & as he came back again, he let fall a drop of blood on one of the steps, ouer ye which place (because the people with kissing it and rubbing it with their Beades, haue fretted a déepe hole in ye stone) is made a little Iron grate. The people must neither goe vp nor down these stayres, on their féete, but créepe them vpon their knees, and on euery step say a Pater noster & an Aue Maria: so yt with the number that créepe vp & down these stayres dayly, they are kept as cleane, as ye fine houses in London, wher you may sée your face in the boordes. These stayres haue no small reuerence.
                  
                     The vaile of the Temple, that rent in the middest.Néere to the head of these stayres, on eyther side of the Gallery, there is in the Walles two halfe pillers of stone, much like to Alablaster: which they say, to be the vayle of the Temple that rent in the middest, when Christ yeelded vp the Ghost, vpon these two halfe pillers, they rub their Beads, in signe of great deuotiō.
                  
                     The Piller that Christe was whipped at.Somewhat néere to these halfe pillers, there is a long Marble piller, at which piller, they saye, Christ was fast bound, when he was whipped in Pilates hall. This piller is much adored.
                  
                     Some of the Milke of our Ladies brests.Hard by, we goe, into a little Chapell, which hath a very rich & costly Aultar, wherin they say to be, some of the Milke that came out of our Ladyes brests, and as yet remaineth pure and swéete. To this Relique is

vsed meruailous worship.
                  And in the same Chappell, hard by the doore as wee come in,A peece of the Crosse, whereon the good Theefe was hanged there hangeth tyed with an Yron chaine a péece of wood, which is crossed euery way with diuers plates of Yron: this péece of wood, they name to bee a péece of the crosse, whereon the théefe was hanged, to whom our Sauiour sayde. This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. To this is giuen much deuotion.
               
               
                  Beneath in the Church.
                  IN the Church at the high Aultar,The first Shirt that was made for Christe there is as they say, the first Shirt, that our Lady made for Christe, when he was young.
                  In the same Aultar,The heads of Saint Peter and S. Paule.
                      are the two sculs or scalps, of the heads of S. Peter, and S. Paule, with the heire as yet on them: which are set in Golde and Siluer very costlye.
                  There is also a glasse viall,A glasse, viall, full of the blood of Christ. which is full as they say, of the blood of our Sauiour, that ran out of his precious side hanging on ye Crosse: the people whē this is showē, will take their hands, & hold the palmes of thē toward the glasse, and then rub all their face with their hands, with the great holines they receiue from the Glasse.
                  Then ther is a péece of Christes Cote without seame,A peece of Christes Cote, with his bloode yet fresh on it. and it is the part of the Cote, which when it was turned downe ouer his body, that he should be whipped, yt blood did trickle downe vpon: and vpon this péece of his Cote, say they, ye blood yet remaineth as fresh, as it was ye first day when it fell on it. This is a meruailous precious Relique too.
                  Likewise there is ye whole chaine of Iron,The chaine wherewith S. Iohn was led to Ephesus.
                      wherwith S. Iohn the Euangelist, was led bound to Ephesus: thys Chaine is a little olde one, I am sure little aboue halfe a yarde long.
                  
                     
                     One of the Nailes that nailed Christ on the Crosse.There is also one of the Nayles, wherewith our Sauiour Christ was nayled on the Crosse: and it hath the blood yet fresh vpon it.
                  And among all the rest, there is a great portion or quantitie of the Crowne of Thorne,A parte of the Crowne of Thorne. wherewith they say our Sauiour was crowned.
                  DIuers other Reliques there bee in that Church, which I cannot now very perfectly remember: but these I am certaine they make the people beleeue to be there, for I haue stoode by amonge a multitude of people, that come thither to sée them on the day they are showen, and there haue I heard all these named: almost all the English Students can beare me witnesse, for I haue gon in their company, as it is a custome and an order among them, to goe from Church to Church all the Lent time, to the Stations as they call them, and then each day in Lent, one Church or other hath their Reliques abroade to be séene. And thē they tell the people, this is the Reliques of such a Saint, and this is such a holy and blessed thing: but they be either couered with Gold, Siluer, or Christall, so that we can not tell whether there be any thing within or no, except it bee sometime in a broade Christall Tabernacle, and there you shall sée a company of rotten bones, God knowes of what they be.
               
               
                  In Saint Maria Maiore.
                  
                     The Manger wherin Christ was layde.THere is an olde rotten Crib or Manger, wherin say they, our Sauiour lay, betweene the Oxe, and the Asse, when the Shéepheards came to honour & reuerence him. This is a thing highly honored.
                  
                     
                        Arons rod.There is likewise Arons rod, as they call it, which

is in the forme of a Bishops staffe: a holy Relique.
                  There is also of the heire,Heire of our Ladies head. that grew on our Ladies head: this is there reserued richly, and worshipped for a singuler Relique.
                  There is the forme of a finger in Siluer,
                        S. Thomas his finger wherein▪ say they, is the finger of S. Thomas, which he thrust into the side of Christ: this is no simple Relique.
                  There is the point of the head of a Speare,The poynte of the speare that was thrust into Christes side. which they say, to be broken off from the Speare, that was thrust into our Sauiours side on the Crosse: a Relique of no small worshipp.
                  There is also certaine péeces of Mony,Some of the thirtye pence, for which Iudas betrayed Christe. which they name to be of those thirty pence, which Iudas receiued when he betrayed his Maister, wherwith (after he had hanged him selfe) they bought a feeld, called: The feeld of bloode. These are Reliques of great estemation.
                  There is likewise an old rotten péece of wood, which they make the people to thinke,A peece of Christes Crosse. to be a péece of ye Crosse whereon Christ was crucified: to sée this Relique, the people will come créeping on their knées, and behaue them selues with meruailous deuoutnes.
                  There is also certaine of the Thornes,Thornes of the crowne of Thornes which sometime, as they say, were on the Crowne of Thorne, wherewith our Sauiour Christ was crowned: Reliques of great authoritye among them.
               
               
                  In Sancta Croce.
                  THere is an other of the Nayles,In other of the nayles where with Christ was nayled. wherewith Christ was nayled on the Crosse: and as they say, ye blood

still fresh vpon it.
                  
                     More of Iudas penceThere is also thrée or foure of the pence, which Iudas receiued for the betraying of his Maister Christ.
                  
                     More of the Crosse.There is a good big péece of wood, which they likewise say to be a peece of the Crosse, whereon Christ was crucified.
                  
                     One of the whyppes wherewith Christ was whipped.There is a Whippe, which they report to be one of those whips, wherwith Christ was whipped in Pilates Hall. This is a holy and very precious Relique.
                  There is a Tabernacle of Christall, the Pillers therof are of siluer,Reliques of Saintes. wherin is diuers old rotten bones, which they say to be the bones of Saintes, and holye Martires.
               
               
                  In Saint Lauraunces.
                  
                  THere is made faste in a Wall, a great Marble stone,The stone whereon S. Laraunce was broiled about two yardes in length, and a yarde in bredth, which is closed in with a grate of Iron: vppon this stone they say, S. Lauraunce was broyled. This is a Relique much set by.
                  
                     The Grediron wheron S. Laraunce was broiledThere also they say to be the Grediron whereon S. Lauraunce was broyled: but that I neuer sawe, therefore I will not make any certaine report thereof.
                  
                     The head of Saint Lauraunce
                     There at the high Aultar, they say the heade of S. Lauraunce is, which they haue set in Siluer meruailous costly.
               
               
                  
                  In Saint Sebastians.
                  
                  THere vnder the High Aulter,The body of Saint Sebastian.
                      they say lyeth the body of S. Sebastian, to whose shrine they offer very much worshippe.
                  At all these seuen Churches, there are a number more Reliques then I can well remember, which maketh the people to resort to them almost daylye: and our Englishmen, they are as zealous in these matters as the best, and beléeue that those Reliques are the very certaine thinges whereof they beare the name, so great is their blindnes and want of fayth.
                  To these places they frudge commonly once euery wéeke, sometime twise, or as the Iesuites thinke it conuenient: but when they haue béene at these seuen Churches, and honoured al these paltry Reliques, they thinke they haue doone a moste blessed and acceptable seruice to God.
                  There are Reliques beside these, at most of the other Churches and Chappelles, but what they be, I doo not as nowe remember: yet thus much I can say, that when the Station hath béene at Saint Appolonias, all the way as we goe,Prayer to S. Appolonia. for the tooth-ache. the stréetes are full almoste of lame and diseased people, who, when they desire an almes of the passers by, say, they will pray to S. Appolonia for their teeth, that shee will kéepe them from ye tooth-ache, or any other paine that may happen to their téeth. This they doo, because they report, that S. Appolonia being Martired, had all her teeth by violence plucked out of her head: and therfore they imagin, that she can defend any body from hauing any payne in their téeth.
                  Likewise S. Agatha, whose brestes they say, were clipped off with a payre of tonges, made red hot in the fire:Prayer to S. Agatha for womens brestes. to her they will pray (if ye people will giue thē any money) yt any Woman passing by them, this Saint will not suffer her to haue any payne in her brestes.
                  
                     
                     A cunning shift of Beggers.Other of their Saintes, who had any thing ministred by way of torment, eyther on their heade, armes, body, legs, or féete: because the people shall giue them somewhat, these Beggers wil pray to anye of those Saints, to defende thē from payne in any such place of theyr bodye.
                  Now some lazie Fryer, or some other craftye companion, who will not take so much paynes as to begge,A commaunding Begger. but that he will compell the people to giue him somewhat: he getteth a Pax, and euery one that commeth by him, must make homage to it, come and kisse it, and giue him some Mony, ere he goe any further. This fellow standeth as Maister of the Beggers, and all these knaueries, and an infinite number more, are our Englishmen so insolent, both to like and allow off.
                  And now séeing I am among the Popes Pageants, I will blaze a little more of his holy Hell: that those (to whose handes this my Booke shall happen to come, and are by some of our secrete seducing Priestes anye thing mooued that way) may beholde the egregious follies and deuillish drifts, whereby God is dispised, and mē too much wilfully blinded. So that, turning to the bare and naked trueth, which craueth neither shadowe nor any coullored deuise: they may vomit vppe that Antechrist and his abhominable inuentions, and cleaue onely to that which God him selfe hath commaunded.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ A breefe discourse of their darke Vautes vnderneath the ground, and how they beguile a number by them. Of the Pilgrimage to S. Iames in Gallitia, to S. Maria di Loreto, to Saint Clare at Mount Faulcon, & other places of like holines. Chap. 5.
            
               AMong a nūber of their inuentions, to vpholde and maintaine their wicked dealings: they haue certaine Uautes vnderneath the groūd, wherin they say, how in the tyme that the persecuting Emperours lyued in Roome,
               Marke this good Reader, & thinke well theron. the Christians were glad to hide them selues: and there they liued many yéeres, hauing no foode or nourishment to maintaine them, but onelie that they were fed by Angelles. Some time Christe him selfe came amongst them, and he fed them by his heauenlie Deitie, When as he could not come, but was busied about other affaires: he sent his Mother the Uirgin Marie to them. At other times, the Archangell Michaell, the Angell Gabriell, or one Angell or other, was still sent vnto them: and Saintes that were liuing on earth, came daylie and preached to them. This our English men hath tolde to me & other, at diuers times: yea, and when they haue séene me to offer doubt of those matters, they haue béene ready to sweare it to be certaine and true.
            At a Church there called Saint Pancratia,
               The Uau
                     •
                   at Saint Pancratias Church. there is a Uaute, whereinto I haue gone with the Iesuites of the

Englishe Colledge and the Studentes: and there they haue shewed me in diuers places made on eyther side in the Uaut as we goe, that there lay such a Saint, and there lay such an other, there they were buried, & none was there, but they were all Saintes. Then (hauing euerie one of vs a wax light in our hands, because it is vnpossible to sée any light in the Uaute, and for those lights, the Friers that kéepe the Church must haue money, which we put into a Basen, that standeth at the going downe into the Uaute) they looke on the ground vnder their féete as they goe: and if they chaunce to finde a bone (as some sure are throwen in of purpose, to deceyue the people) whether it be of a Dog, a Hog, a Shéepe, or any Beast, they can tell presentlie what Saints bone it was, either Saint Fraunces, Saint Anthonie, Saint Blase, or some other Saint that pleaseth them to name. Then must no body touch it, without he be a Préest, and it must be brought home for an especiall Relique: and thus (sauing your reuerence) encreaseth the genealogie of the holy Reliques in Roome.
            
            
               A meruailous history and one of the Romish miracles.In this aforesayde Uaute of Saint Pancratia, as one of the English Préestes in the Colledge gaue me to vnderstand, there was some time a Franciscan Frier, who hauing long time liued among his brethren in the Monasterie, in chastitie of life, and deuoutnes in Religion: walking one day without Roome, Saint Fraunces appeared to him in his Friers Cowle, and calling him by his name, sayd vnto him. I knowe my good Brother, thou hast long thus liued in my holy order, and hast obeyed me in euerie thing: therfore I will, that thou be no longer a mortall man, but a Saint. And from this time foreward, thou shalt leaue thy Cloister, & go to the Uaute vnder the Church of Saint Pancratia: where thou shalt be woorshipped of euerie one that commeth into the sayde Uaute, and to them thou shalt giue the

bones and Reliques of holie and blessed Saintes, which they in their Churches shal adore with great reuerēce: what thou wilt haue, shall be done, and what thou wilt not, shall not be done.
            After these woordes, Saint Fraunces vanished from him, & he went home to the Monastery, to tell his Brethren what had happened: soone after, with burning Tapers, and great showes of holines they brought him to the Uaute of Saint Pancratia,
               Marke this. wherin béeing entred, they found a seate ready prepared for him, which shined as bright as the Sun, so that it dimmed the light of all their Tapers: it was like vnto the Clowdes, verie thick beset with twinkling Starres, and ouer the head of it, it was couered with a goodly Rainbowe. Nothing could be séen wheron this seate depended, it neither touched the groūd, the top of the Uaute ouer head, nor any part of the wall on eyther side, therefore it was supported by Angels, whome though they could not discerne, yet they heard them make verie mellodious hermony, to welcom this Saint to his new seat. Then the Frier béeing bashfull, to sée such a glorious seate prouided for him,O horrible and abhominable blasphemie. withdrew him selfe, as though he were vnwoorthy to sit therein: but then out of one of the Clowds stretched a hand (which they sayde to be Christes) wherein they sawe the fresh bléeding wound, béeing pierced thorow with the nayle on the Crosse, and this hand pulled the Frier to the Seat, & placed him very roially therin. At ye sight héerof, all his brethren fell downe & worshipped him, whervpō, he deliuered vnto euery one of them diuers holy Reliques: as the head of such a Saint, and bones of diuers other Saints, which was put in to his hand to giue them. Some of them for pure zeale, would not depart frō him, but staied there many yéeres, béeing fed & nourished by Angels: the other, to looke to the good ordering of their Monastery, were forced to depart.
            
               A long time this Saint remained in that Uaute, and many other that came to him, whome he daylie made Saintes: so that, as well on the behalfe of this Saint, as diuers other as good as he, this Uaute is worshipped as though it were a second heauen.
            When he had ended this braue notorious Fable, deliuered foorth with farre more reuerend iesture, then I can set downe, or you imagine: he sayde. If a man should tell this to the Heretiques of our Coūtrey, they would strayte way condemne it as a lye & vntrueth: so mightilie dooth the deuill preuayle with them, to deface the daylie miracles showne in the Catholique Church. Trust me (thought I) I know not whether they would estéeme it for a lye or no: but I doo allowe it for one of the notablest lyes that euer I heard in all my life.
            O my déere Countreimen, thinke how God hath giuen ouer these men, that repose credite in such abhominable vntruethes: whereby he is robbed of his glory, & the worship which we ought of duetie to giue to him, is bestowed on a rable of rascall Reliques, a dunghil of most irksom & noysom smell, & they themselues become spectacles to the world, following the whore of Roome, as her puddle of accursed filthinesse. Their impietie hath pierced the heauens, and offended the Almightie, to sée that his Creatures shall thus disdaine their Maker: and therefore, while they are glorying and triumphing in the middest of their wickednesse, he hath throwen them downe, accoumpted them as bastards, & not chyldren, that they might be an example to vs, howe to liue in his feare, and howe to behaue our selues lyke Christians, not to giue his honour to stockes & stones, not to lust after dreames and fantasies of the deuilles inuencion: but whyle we haue the light, to walke as becōmeth the chyldren of light, to kéepe our selues true and faithfull Subiectes, to her, by whome we enioy the

light, and to pray to God, to blesse her and vs all, to continue in the light. Amen.
            
            I will set downe one discourse more, of an other lyke myracle, done in an other of their Uautes: and then I will trouble you no longer with such friuelous & foolish stuffe, which I will declare euen in the same manner, as a Préest of theirs, as yet not taken, yet he is héere in England, tolde me, when he, I, and two of the Schollers more,An other straunge historie, of a Romishe miracle, doon in the Uaut of Saint Priscilla, without Roome.
                went into the sayde Uaute.
            Without Roome, about the distaunce of halfe a myle from ye Cittie, there is a huge great Uaute, which they call S. Priscillaes Grote: and within this Uaute, there is a great many of seuerall places, turning one this way, an other that way, as in one stréete, there may be diuers stréetes and lanes, turning euerie way. So that when they goe into this Uaute, they tye the ende of a lyne at the going in, and so goe on by the lyne, else they might chaūce to loose them selues, and so misse of their euer comming out againe: or else if they haue not a lyne, they take Chalke with them, and make figures at euerie turning, that at their comming againe, (béeing guided by Torch lyght, for Candles will goe out with the dampe in the Uaute) they may make accoumpt tyll they get foorth, but this is not so ready a way as by the lyne.
            One day I was desirous to sée this Uaute, for my fellowe Thomas Nowell, in the company of the Iesuites and the Schollers, had béene therein, and I lying sicke in my Bed, bothe he and they made such a glorious report thereof to me, what a Heauenlie place it was, what a number of Saintes and Martirs had béene buried there, and what precious Reliques was daylie found there: that I verie much desired to sée the thing, whereto they gaue such an admirable prayse. For in soothe, my fellow was euen all one with them, his company

was required of euerie one, & he as lewde in spéeches against his Countrey as the best: so that I was estéemed I can not tell howe, they would not misdoubt me for my Parents sake, & yet they would giue me many shrewd nips. As when they demaunded any thing of me, as concerning our gratious Princesse, or any of her honourable Councell, I should aunswer: Her Maiestie, God blesse her, or, the right Honourable, such a Noble man, of whom they asked me: wherat they would check me verie much, for vsing any reuerence in naming her Maiesty, or any of the Lords of her honorable Coūcell.
            And this I may say boldlie, for that it is true, as God is my witnes,I speake not this good Reader, eyther in pride or brauerie. that in all the time I was amōgst them: I neither offered moitie of misordred or vndecēt spéech, either of her Maiestie, or any Noble man in the Court, no, nor so much as thought yll of any of them, notwithstanding the woordes they vsed, sufficient (had not God ordred all my dooinges) to haue mooued a more stayed man then my selfe to an error. I appeale to God, who knoweth I set downe nothing but trueth, & to him that is my chéefest enimie, if he can iustlie report otherwise by me: for I thanke God, albeit I were so far from my Countrey, he gaue me the grace to consider, I was a Subiect, & I was bound by duety to regard and honour my Prince so long as I liued. And because my aduersaries obiect against me, that I went to Masse, & helped the Préest my selfe to say Masse: so that (say they) who is wurst, I am as euill as he. I aunswer, I did so in déed, for he that is in Roome, especially in ye Colledge amōg the Schollers: must liue as he may, not as he will, fauour comes by conformitie, and death by obstinacie. These rash heads béeing in England, would doo many goodlie matters at Roome, they would tell the Pope of his lasciuious & vnchristian life, the Cardinals of their Sodomiticall sinnes, the Friers of their secret iugling

with the Nunnes, & the Préestes of their painted Purgatorie, their wafer God, and their counterfeit blood in the Challice: all this they would doo, nowe they are in England, But I doubt if they were at Roome and behelde the mercilesse tiranny executed on the members of Christe. God hauing not endued them with the spirit of perseuerannce,The will of God must be done in all thinges. to suffer and abide the like (for what can this frayle carkase endure, if God doo not say: I will that thou shalt suffer this?) I feare me, they would be as ready to doo any thing for the safegard of their liues, as I was. You maye note a speciall example, in these our Countreymen lately executed, that neither their cause was estéemed of God, nor perfectlie perswaded in them selues: yet they would die in a brauerie, to be accoumpted Martyres at Roome, and in the middest of their brauerie, all the world might note their false and faynt hearts.
            
               Sherwood,
               
                  Sherwood, executed in Southwark. he ranne downe the Ladder, when death should arest him, hauing killed one of his fellowe Papistes. Campion, their glorious Captaine, he looked dead in the face, so soone as he sawe the place of Execution, and remained quaking & trembling vnto the death. Shert, would haue the people thinke, hée feared not death, and yet he catched holde on the halter, when the Cart was drawne away. Kirbie quaking when he felt the Cart goe away, looked styll how néere the ende of it was, tyl he was quite beside. And Cottom dismaying, died trembling & in great feare. These are the Martirs of ye Romish Church, not one of them patient, penitent▪ nor endued with courage to the extremitie of death: but dismaying, trembling & fearfull, as ye eye witnesses can beare me record. We may therfore-wel knowe, y• a good cause dooth animate ye Martir, which belonging to God: let Roome, Hell, & all the deuils set them selues against vs, they cā touch vs no farder, thē God wil suffer them.

As Saint Lauraunce béeing broiles on the Gridiren,
                  S. Lauraūce
                to witnesse the inuincible courage wherewith God indued him, he sayde: Thou Tiraunt, this side is now roasted enough,
               
                  S. Isidore.
                
               turne the other. And Saint Isidore likewise sayde to the Tiraunt: I knowe thou hast no further power ouer me, then my God will suffer thee from abooue. But now to our matter.
            As I haue sayde, through the great report they made of this Uaute, one of the Préests, two of the Schollers and I, tooke with vs a line, & two or three great lights, and so we went to this aforesayde Uaute: we going a long in farder and farder, there we sawe certaine places one aboue an other, thrée and thrée on either side, during a great way in length: and these places they sayde, to be some of them the graues of persecuted Saintes and Martires, where they hid them selues in the time of the cruell Emperours of Roome, and there they died.
            Procéeding on forwarde, we came to an olde thing like an Aultar, wheron, in olde and auncient painting, (which was then almost cleane worne out) was Christ vpon the Crosse, and our Lady and Saint Iohn by him: there the Préest sayde, Saint Peter, Saint Paule, and many other Saintes, had sayde Masse to the Christians that hid them selues there. And besides this (quoth he) there chaunced not many yéeres since, a poore man of the Cittie to come into this Uaufe, and when he was come so farre as this Aultar, the light he caried in his hand, suddenlie went out, so that he was forced to syt downe, and stay héere.
            
               A straunge and rare miracle, too straunge to be true.He béeing thus without any light, and ignoraunt of the way to get out againe: fell in prayer to our Lady, who presentlie appeared to him, hauing about her little Angelles, holding burning Lampes in their handes, where through, ye place was illumined verie gloriously.

And there she questioned with him, & he with her, about many holy and Religious matters: then she departing, lefte him there accompanied with Angelles, so that he remained there ten dayes, at the ende whereof, he came foorth, and went and tolde the Pope what he had séene, for which, when he died, he was canonized a Saint, and in this order arise many of our Romish Saints.
            As for the Pilgrimage to Saint Iames in Gallitia,
               The Pilgrimage to S. Iames in Gallitia.
                it is a thing that is vsuallie frequented all the yéere, by such a number of people, as you would scantlie iudge: among whome, diuers of our Englishmen be so holie, that they will not stick to beare them company. There they saye, lyeth the bode of Saint Iames the Apostle:Reliques at S. Iames in Gallitia.
                and there is the Cocke that crowed, when Peter denied Christe: some of the heaire of our Ladies head: certaine of the Thornes of the Crowne of Thorne: the Napkin that was about Christes head in ye graue: certayne droppes of his blood: a péece of the Crosse wheron he was crucified, and a number such lyke Reliques, which are honoured and worshipped, as if they were God him selfe.
            Then one of the chéefe Pilgrimages, is to a place called Santa Maria di Loreto,
               Pilgrimage to Saint Maria di Loreto.
                where, within is an olde little bricke roome, which they name to be the house our Lady dwelt in: there is the Image of our Lady all in Golde and Siluer, the house round about her, beset with Challices of Golde and Siluer, which are oblations and offeringes of diuers Pilgrimes, that come in whole companies thither.All this helpes to maintaine the Pope. And before her is a great barred Chest of iron, wherein they throwe money to our Lady, by whole goblets full at once: Within this little house, there is an Aultar made right before our Lady, & there is sayd euerie day, fortie or fiftie Masses, whereat the people will throng in great heapes, to get into the house, for they thinke them selues happie, if our

Lady haue once séene them. And all the Church is likewise hung with pictures, Tapers, and waxe Candles, which are the vowes of the Pilgrimes to our Lady. I haue heard of some, who by the counsaile of their ghostlie Father, haue made money of all their householde stuffe, and haue come fiue or six hundred mile bare foote and bare legged, to giue it all to our Lady there: meane while, the holy Father hath had libertie, to play with ye mans wife, at &c. In all my life I neuer sawe a place more frequented with people, then this is dayly, onelie for the admirable Miracles yt be done there. Some haue come thither for theyr eye sight: and when they were there,The myracles at our Lady of Loreto.
                they could sée a little (as they say) but they haue come away stark blind as they were before. A mā came thither, béeing gréeuouslie wounded on the Sea, by his enimies: and after he had séene our Lady, he went to the Hospitall, and within a quarter of a yéere after, at the furthest, the Chirurgions had healed him. When he was well againe, he went and hung vp his picture in the Church, that he was healed of his hurt, so soone as he looked vpon our Lady. Diuers haue béen brought thither in their Beds, some béeing sick, some wounded, or otherwise diseased and there they were set before our Lady, looking when she should say: Take vp thy bed and walke. And because she could not intend to speake to them, béeing troubled with so many other suters: they haue béen caried to the Hospitall, & there they haue béen either buried or cured, then such as recouer their health must goe set vp their picture in the Church, howe that the very looking on our Lady hath holpen them. Sūdry other holy Miracles, done by our Lady of Loreto, I could rehearse, but they be so straūge, that no wise body will care for the hearing them: neuerthelesse, the Pope finds her a good swéet Lady of Loreto, for ye pilgrimage to her, encreaseth his treasure, many thousāds in a yere.
            
               To Mount Faulcon,
               The Pylgrimage to Mount Faulcon, to see Saint Clare.
                there is an other Pilgrimage, to sée the body of S. Clare, which was buried I knowe not howe many hundred yéeres agoe, and yet the body remaineth whole and sound, without any perishing of bone or skin. I haue béene at this place, and there in a long ritch Tabernacle of glasse, lyeth, as they say, the same body of Saint Clare: the handes and féete are to be séene, which I can aptlie compare to the manner of the Anotomie, whereon the Chirurgions shewe euerie yéere their cunning, as for any flesh, there is none to be séene: but the bare bones, and the withered sinewes, which béeing kept so brauelie as that is, standing styll in one place and neuer mooned, I iudge will continue a great while, & truelie I take it to be some Anotomie, as diuers other haue done, that haue séene it as well as I. The whole body (if there be any) is couered with a gowne of blacke Ueluet, and the head couered, so that none can sée it.The Reliques of S. Clare.
                There lyeth by her, a thing which they say, was her heart, which béeing cleft a sunder in the middest: the whole torment and passion of Christe, was there in liuelie forme to be séene. Then there is likewise by her, a glasse of her teares, that she shed daylie, in remembrance of the bitter passion of our Sauiour: which teares, they say, are as fresh and swéet, as they were on the first day.
            There are a number other Pilgrimages,Other Pilgrimages to diuers places. as to Thurine, to sée the winding shéete wherin Christ was layd: wherein, as they say, he hath left the perfect Image of his body. This meruailous Relique, is neuer showen, but once in fouretéen yéere, & then to deceiue the people with the greater aucthority, there must six Cardinalles come thither, and they must holde it abroade for euerie one to sée it, no other but they may presume to touch it. To Paris, to Saint Dennis in Fraunce, to Poiters, and a nūber other places there be daylie Pilgrimages, to sée

a number like Reliques, as I haue declared before: all these helpe to vpholde the Pope, least his kingdome should decay, and so his vsurping title be cleane worne out of memorie.
            
               A newe Pilgrimage risen vp in Roome, called Madonna di Mōte.
               But now you shall heare of a newe prop and piller, wherewith the Pope is & will be meruailously strengthened, that is risen vp little more then two yéere since: and at this newe holie place▪ is wrought miracles of great accoumpt. In the yéere of our Lord .1580. about the time of Easter, a certayne poore man, one that sawe the simplicitie of the people, howe apt they were to beléeue euerie fayned inuention: he béeing a subtile and craftie fellowe, thought he would come in with some deuise of his owne, whereby he might yet a great deale of money, & beside, be canonized for a Saint when he dyed.
            He hauing concluded his practise, with diuers other craftie companions, as subtile as him selfe, who should maintaine all that he did deuise: fayned him selfe to dreame in his Bed, that a vision appeared to him, wylling him to make cleane his house, and to fall downe and reuerence an olde picture of our Lady, which stoode in his house, when presentlie there should be meruailous miracles accomplished there. His companions noised this abroade, adding thereto such admirable protestation of spéeche, as euerie one that heard thereof, conceiued no small cause of wundering. This aforesayd vision appeared to this man twise, all in one manner, by which time it was spread abroade sufficientlie: so that when it came the thirde time, he did according as the voice bade him, he arose, made cleane his house, and fell downe and worshipped the Picture of our Lady.
            His companions had some of them, bound vp their legs, & went on Croutches, some of them fayned them

selues to be blinde:Miracles very strāgely wrought. so that they came no sooner before our Lady, but the lame recouered his legges, and the blinde his sight. Then those fewe Croutches, that these counterfeit fellowes came withall, where hung vp by the Picture, and a number more, to make the people beléeue so many lame folkes were healed, and likewise the reporte of the blinde that receiued theyr sight, so that it was thought a meruailous number were healed, at this new found holie place.
            Upon this, the resort of people thither,Note the meruailous ignoraunce of these people. was truelie incredible: Gentlemen would come thither, and there hang vp their veluet Cloakes, as an offering to our Lady: Gentlewomen, would come thither bare foote and bare legged, & there hang vp their veluet Gownes, their silke Gownes, with other costlie apparell, and goe home againe in their Peticoates. As for the money, Iuelles, and other treasure daylie offered there, it was most meruailous to sée: for therewith they haue builded a verie fayre Church where this house stoode. When they sawe they were growen so ritch, they made no accoumpt of the olde Picture, wherwith all the aforesayd miracles were done: but they erected a costly Aultar, and theron made a sumptuous new Picture of our Lady, which the people doo daylie honour with meruailous resort. This is faithfully affirmed by one Iohn Young an Englishe man, who not long since came home from Roome, & while he was there, he well noted the impudencie of our English men, in landing & extolling this place, and the miracles there wrought: so that they as certainlie beléeue in those miracles, as any Christian dooth in God.
            This Iohn Young, once questioned with one of the English Préestes, why God dyd not as well suffer such miracles to be done by his Son Iesus Christ, as altogether by our Lady: wherto ye Préest aunswered. Because

among the Heretiques,A wise aunswer of an Englishe man. they vse little or no reuerende regard to our Lady, but rather despise & contempne her: therefore it is the will of God, to witnesse the power & heauenlie aucthoritie she hath, by these and many such miracles, bothe héere and in diuers other places, rather then by his sonne Christe. Héere may euerie good Christian, beholde the horrible abuses, vsed among this Sathanicall crew: their Pilgrimages, their Reliques, and all their craftie inuentions, is to be meruailed, that people will be so fonde as to beléeue.
            As for the Nayles wherwith our Sauiour was nailed on the Crosse, it is euidentlie registred by learned writers, that they were no more in number then thrée: yet I am sure in Roome, there is aboue a dozen nayles, dispearsed there through diuers Churches, and they are not ashamed to say, that with euery one of those nailes, Christe was nayled vpon the Crosse.
            
               
                  Helena, the mother of Constātine, the Emperour, found the Crosse of Christe, and gaue the nailes to her sonne.And for those thrée Nayles, wherwith Christe was nayled on the Crosse, Platina recordeth, that Quéene Helena the mother of Constantine the Emperour, searching in the ground, by chaunce found the Crosse wheron Christ was crucified, & wherin the Nayles were stil sticking, for which cause she builded there a Temple in the same place, where she found the Crosse. All these Nayles she gaue to her sonne Constantine, which he bestowed in this order. One of them he caused to be fastened in the bridle of his Horse, whereon he rode to the warres: an other he made to be wrought into his Helmet, in the place where he set his Plume of Feathers: and the third he vsed to carie about with him, tyll on a tyme he sayling on the Hardriaticum Sea, a tempest arose, so that the Sea wexed verie rough, wherevpon he cast the Nayle therein, to asswage the rage thereof. Thus haue you heard what became of the thrée nailes, wherwith our Sauiour was nayled on the Crosse: and

yet it may be, that the Nayle which Constantine threw into the Sea (according as Ambrose dooth likewise affirme it was) tooke vpon it the nature of a Fishe, and spawned a great many of other Nayles, whereof those may be some, that are helde for such holy Reliques. And because you shall not doubt whether this be the opiniō of Platina or no: I will héere set downe the woords according as they be in his workes. Platina in vitis Pontificum, et in vita Siluestri primi. Anno. 339. ab vrbe condita. 1191. Helena vero aedificato, eo in loco Templo vbi Crucem repererat, abiens, clauos quibus Christi corpus Cruci affixum fuerat, secum ad filium portat. Horum ille vnum in froenos Equi transtulit, quibus in praelio vteretur: alio pro cono galia vicbatur: tertium in mare Hadriaticum (vt ait Ambrosius) ad compescendas saeuiētis maris procellas deiecit.
            
            Bishoppe Iuell, Bishoppe of Salisburie, preaching at Paules Crosse,A Sermon of Bishop Iuell, at Pauls crosse. in the beginning of her Maiesties reigne, tooke occasion by his Text, to entreate of a company of the Popishe Reliques, where among he named the Nayles, that nailed Christe on the Crosse, what a company the Papistes had of them: two in one place, two in an other, and héere one, and there an other, so that he could reckon to the number of seuentéen, that they had. And then he tolde, how at a Uisitation in his Diocesse, he found a Nayle at a Gentlemans house, which the Gentleman and diuers of his fréendes, did worship and reuerence, for one of ye Nayles wherwith Christe was nayled on the Crosse: from him he tooke it, and sayd, I haue already reckoned seuentéene in diuers places, and this is the eightéene, which he pulled foorth, and shewed it to all the people. This is the marchandize of Roome: from reposing any credite in them, or him that is the Capitoll maister of them, Good Lord deliuer vs.
         
         
            
            ¶ The manner of the dissention in the Englishe Colledge, betweene the Englishe men and the VVelsh men: the banishment of the English men out of Roome, and the Popes sending for them againe, with other matters woorthy the reading. Chap. 6.
            
               HAuing promised before in my Booke, to rehearse after what māner the English men and Welshe men fell at variance in the Colledge: I thought good to driue off the time no further, but euen héere to set downe how and in what sort it was. The Pope when he erected the Colledge, gaue it the name of the Englishe Colledge, so that he supposed the Welshe and Englishe, to be all as one, in that they came all out of one Countrey, allowing them his liberalitie ioyntlie togeather. Now, in déede there are sundrie Welsh Doctors in Roome, who haue béen longest, & of greatest familiaritie with the Cardinall Morone, who was the Protector of the English Colledge, to whome likewise he allowed greatest fauour, so that imboldening them selues vppon him, the Welsh men would be Lordes ouer the English men, and vse them according as they thought good.
            
               Doctour Morris, fauoured more his own Countreymen then Englishmen.Doctor Morris, béeing a Welsh man, and Custos of the Hospitall or Colledge, would allowe his owne Coūtreimen greater preheminence then English men:

which indéede they began to stomack, and would not esteme him for their gouernour, but rather sought to haue the Iesuites to rule them, by whom they applied their studies, and beside, they woulde bee indifferent men on eyther parte.
            When I had béene there a pretty while, I know not how Doctor Morris conceiued anger against me, but he would not suffer me to tarry any longer in ye Colledge. As for my fellow, his sinceritye in their religion was such, his naturall disposition so agréeable with theirs, and euery thing hee did esteemed so well: that Doctor Morris would suffer him willingly to remain there, but he could not abide me in any case. The Schollers vnderstanding this, as well they that bare me affection, as they that made least account of me, agréed to take my parte, saying. That if Doctor Morris would put euery Englishman, he thought good on, out, in short time the Colledge would be all Welshmen: so they bad me stick to them and if I went away, they would goe away too.
            Beside, they mooued a certaine spéech amongst themselues, that if I were not receiued into the Colledge amongst them,The English mens policce to keepe me there still. and vsed in euery respect according as they were▪ when I returned into Englande, being knowen to come from Roome, I might be compelled to tell the names of them that were there, and what confe
                  •
               ence I had among them, so that their parentes and fréendes shoulde be discouered, and them selues be knowen against their comming into England. To auoyde therefore any such doubt, vntill they had mee sworne to Preesthood: they would kéepe me there, and th
                  ••
                I should be as déepe in any matter as they.
            When I perceiued ye scope of their deuise, I behaued my selfe more frowardly to Doctor Morris, thē euer I did before: euery thing yt I hearde of him, I tolde vnto ye Schollers, and taried there dinner & supper in spight of his no
                  •
               e. Where vpon he went and complayned to

the Cardinall Morone, howe the Schollers vsed no regarde to him, being their Rector, but maintained one lately come foorth of England, both to scorn at him, and to offer him too much abuse.
            This béeing come to the Schollers eare, and howe on the nexte daye they muste appeare before the Cardinall: they determined with themselues all one resolute opinion, which was, that Doctor Morris shoulde bee Rector ouer them▪ no longer, but the Iesuites that were kept in the house for the profite of theyre studies, and vppon this they woulde all stande, denyinge anye Rectorshippe to Doctor Morris,
            
            
               The Schollers were sent for before the Cardinal, vpon the complaint of Doctor Morris.
               On the morrowe they were sent for before the Cardinall Morone, where they founde Doctor Morris, and Doctor Lewes, they hauing made sounde theyre tale before they came. When they were come into the presence of the Cardinall and my selfe with them, these, or the verye like spéeches hee vsed vnto vs in Latine.
            You Englishmen, what meaneth this great disobedience, and vnciuil behauioure you vse in your Colledge? Maister Doctor Morris, a man of auncient time, and well estemed heere in the Cittie, being appoynted to bee your Rector, and to gouerne you in a good order, as a greate while hee hath done: you contrarye to looue and duetye, behaue your selues ridiculouslye againste him, and neyther respecting his credite and countenaunce, nor your owne honestye, determine a mutenie or tumulte amonge your selues. What is the cause of this? you are sent for to manifeste it, wherefore lette mee heare howe you can excuse thys blame layde agaynste you.
            Maister Sherwin
               ▪ who was executed with Campion, béeing there estéemed a singular Scholler, bothe for

his eloquence, as also his learning: made aunswer for them all after this manner.
            I truste my gratious Lorde, by that time you haue hearde,Mayster Sherwins aunswer to the Cardinal, on the behalfe of them all. the good cause we haue to stirre in this matter: you will neyther bee offended at our procéeding, nor displeased with vs, the cause tending to your owne honoure. It is not vnknowen to you, that the Colledge or Hospitall, which by the gratious prouidence of our deere Father the Popes holinesse, wee enioye our abydinge in at thys presente: hath béene alwayes allowed suche a sufficient stipende, that one shoulde not bee better then an other, or excell his fellowe in common behauiour.
            This moste godlye and holye appointed estate: we both haue béene, and at this present are, content to obeye: but when hee that is the heade shall fayle in hys dutye, and vrge an inconuenience among a quiet assemblie: no meruayle if the Woorme turne, béeing troden vppon, and wee speake, béeing vsed with too much spyght.
            Maister Doctor Morris, whose age wee reuerence, and obeye the title of hys authoritye: dealing with vs so vnfréendlye as hee dooth, we can hardlye beare it, muche lesse abyde it. For where his office dooth commaunde him to deale bothe iuste and vprightlye, and to vse no partialitye to eyther, for fauoure or alliaunce: he dooth not onelye abuse the credite of hys authorytye, but also maliciouslye deale with vs, who haue not so much as vsed an euil thought against him.
            When any Englishman commeth to the Hospitall, if hys learning bee neuer so good, or hys behauioure neuer so decent: excepte hee bee pleased, hee shall not be enterteyned. But if a Welshman come, yf hee bée neuer so vylde a Runnagate, neuer so

lewde a person, be can not come so soone as he shall be
                  •
                welcome to him, whither he haue any learning or no, it maketh no matter,Doctor Morris, kinde to his owne Coū
                  teromen. he is a Welshman, and hee must be permitted. Then which of vs hath the beste gowne, he must receiue one that is all ragged and torne, and the newcome Welshman must haue the best, because he is the Custos Countreiman: and many nightes hee must haue the Welshmen in his chamber, where they must be merry at theyr good chéere, we glad to sitte in our studies, and haue an ill supper, because M. Doctor wasteth our Commons vpon his owne Countrymen, so that we must be content with a snatch and away.
            If there be one bed better then an other, the Welshman must haue it, if there be any Chamber more hansome then an other, the Welshman must lodge there: in breefe, the thinges of moste account are the Welshmens at commaund.
            This maketh many of vs to wish our selues Welshmen, because we woulde gladly haue so good prouision as they, & being Countrymen to our Custos, we should be all vsed a like: excepting Maister Doctors Nephew Morganus Clenokus, he must be in his silke, though all the rest goe in a sacke.
            To mittigate therefore all inconueniences, that neither the Englishmen shall be despised▪
               They desire the Iesuits for their gouernours. nor the Welshmen contemned: we desire that the Iesuites in our Colledge, may receiue the Rectorship, they labour for the profit of our studies, and they being none of our nation or country, will sée equity vsed to eyther side: so, our discorde shall be quietly reformed, our Colledge a great deale better gouerned, our selues be encouraged to imploye vs more willingly to our studies, and wee shall ioyntly liue together in quietnes. Where other wife, our emulation shall be knowen at home in our Country, how we fall at variaunce héere, and can not agrée: and then shall our names bee knowen, our parentes

and fréendes openly discouered, then what the end will be, I leaue to your honorable iudgement.
            When the Cardinall had heard this discourse, (béeing greatly affected to Doctor Morris,
               The Cardinall so affected Doctor Morris, that he shoulde not leaue his Rectorshippe. thorow his long abiding in Roome) he would not graunt that he should be put from his office, but bad thē depart home again; and shew themselues obedient to the Rector, that both the Pope and him selfe had appointed, promising if hee heard any more disturbaunce, hee would informe the Pope of it, which should bee but small to their profite.
            So the Cardinall not minded to heare them any longer at that time, they departed home to the Colledge, greatly offended with them selues that they had spedde no better. And now, I must out of the Colledge, there was no other remedy: but yet thorowe entreaty of the Iesuites, I had leaue for a fortnight to lye in a verye swéete Chamber, filled with old rusty Iron, and all the trash of the house was put into that Chamber, béeing a vacāt place, & seruing for no other purpose, because it was next to the cōmon house of office, which ayred the Chamber with so swéete a perfume: that but for names sake of a Chamber, and feare of catching some disease, I had rather haue lyen in the stréete amongst the Beggers. Well, froward as I was, so was I frowardlye serued, which I thinke Doctor Morris did, onely to tame my youthfulnesse: for in this place, not long before my comming to Roome, there lay one tormented with a Deuill, and so distraught of hys wits, that they were fayne to binde him there in his bed.
            So Doctor Morris, séeing I vsed my selfe, both carelesse of him,Doctor Morris his prouision for my lodging. and with little regarde to theyr Religion▪ yet in such an order as they coulde haue small aduauntage of me: chambred me there, where I thinke the Deuill was still left▪ for euery night there was such a coyle among the old Iron, such ratling and throwing downe the Boordes, that with the swéete smell came

out of the counting house to my Beddes heade: I lay almost feared out of my wits, and almost choked with that pleasaunt perfume, so that when I was layd in my Bed, I durst not stirre till it was fayre broad day, that I might perceiue euerye corner of my Chamber, whither the Deuill were there or no.
            Euery morning the Priests & the Schollers woulde come to visite me, giuing me money to send for my dinner and supper into the Towne: because Doctor Morris myne olde fréende, watched them so néere, that I could not haue so muche as a draughte of Wine in the house. Then I tolde them of the noyse that was euery night in my Chamber, when they verily beléeued, that the Deuill, hauing possessed a Woman on the furder side of the Garden: dyd euery night take vp his lodgeing in my Chamber among the olde Iron.
            Wherefore one night, two of the Priestes came to hallow my Chamber,The preests come with holy water to hallowe my Chamber. and broughte their holy water, and their holy Candles, and sprinckled about in euery corner: giuing me also a pot of holy water, to hang by my Beds side, that when I heard the sturre agayne, I should with the sprinckling Brush, throw it about the Chamber. And they gaue me a payre of Beads, wheron I should say sixe Pater nosters, and sixe Aue Mariaes, then they would warraunt me, the noyse would be gon strayght way.
            Night came, and supping so well as I coulde, with two Quatrines woorth of Léekes, one Quatrine bestowed in Ricoct,
               The manner of my supper at night. which is harde Cruds to make Chéese, a Bayock in bread, and a demie Boccale, of the Vine Romanesco, wherewith I supped so wel as I might, albeit not so well as I would, yet a little thing serues to quench hunger. I had not béene in my Bedde full an hower and an halfe, not daring to sléepe for feare, nor kéepe my head out of the Bed, because of myne accustomed ayre: but then began the noyse againe, more vehement

then the night before, the olde Iron was flung about the Chamber, the Boordes that leaned against the Wall fell downe, and such a terrible coyle there was, that I thoughte the house woulde haue fallen on my head.
            Then I put foorth my hand to throw the holy water about, which did as much good, as the thing is good of it selfe: which set me in such a chase, that to make vp the Musique among the olde Iron. I sent the potte and the holy water, with as much force as I could. As for my Beades, I was so impatient with my selfe, that I gaue them the place which they best deserued: and then I called to old Sir Robert a Welsh Priest,S. Robert a Welsh Prieste, comming to see what was the cause of the noyse, fell ouer a thresholde and b
                     •
                  ra
                     •
                   hys knee. who lay in a prety Chamber hard by, but before he woulde come▪ the noyse was indifferently pacified. For hee comming with a Candle in his hād, which he vsed to kéepe a light in his Chamber, and béeing in haste, fell ouer a stone thresholde that laye in hys way: so that he burste hys knée verye sore, and coulde not lighte his Candle againe in the spate of an hower, by whych time all was quiet.
            The feare I tooke at thys noyse, brought me to bee very weake and sickly, so that I was very vnwillinge to lye there any longer. But Doctor Morris I thanke him was so gentle to me, that he sayde, and if I lyked not my lodgding goe hardly (quoth hee) and lye in the streete, for that place is more méete for thée then any roome in the house.
            Howe I receyued these churlishe woordes, I leaue to your iudgementes, but it suffyseth▪ I gaue hym my blessynge, and yf I coulde haue gotten hym foorth of Roome, I woulde haue bumd hym too.
            On the nexte daye, vppon an other complaynte of Doctor Morris the Students were all sent for again before the Cardinall▪ who playnly sayd vnto them, that

except they would liue in quietnes one with an other, (because there was one Hugh Griffin, a Welshman of a hote nature, and he would many times fall together by the eares with some of the Schollers, that somtime the blood ran about theyr eares) likewise, yt they should confesse Doctor Morris for theyr rightfull Rector, and be obedient to what he appoynted: or els to get them away out of Roome.
            
            Well home they came againe, incensed with such anger and choller, that they were nowe more disobedient then before: saying to Doctor Morris, that they would neuer consent vnto him, and therefore prouided them selues to be packing out of Roome
               ▪ Doctor Morris thinking to bring them violently to his bowe, informed the Cardinall so seuerely against them: that they were sent for the third time, when he commaunded thē to prouide themselues, for they should stay no longer in the English Hospitall, but banished them all from the Cittie.
            
               Doctor Morris beginneth to offer me gentlenes.When they were come to the Colledge, eueryman trussed vp his néedefull thinges, determining on the next morning to departs: then came Doctor Morris to me and my fellow, willing vs to stay, because the other would be gon, and he would stand our fréend meruailously Trust me no Sir (quoth I) since you would not stand my fréende when I was in great neede, now I meane not to receiue your courtesie when I care not for it: for since the Students haue stoode my fréendes so much, and you mine enemy so greatly. I will beare a share in their trauaile how euer I spéede. As for my fellow, since you haue looued him all this while, looue him now soo if you please: and let him stay & doo what you thinke best, for I haue tolde you my minde.
            
               The Englishmen auoide the Colledge.Well, on the morrow morning wee went our way, with bag and baggage, to an Englishmans house in the Cittie, and as I remember, his name was M. Creede,
               
               Creed, where to make ready our dinner▪ euerie one tooke an office vpon him, one to fetch milke, an other to make ready Rice for the pottage, some to make the fire: so that euerie one was imployed till our dinner was dispatched. Then they concluded to buie euerie man an Asse, to carrie his Bookes and his cloathes vpon, as for money, there were Gentlemens sonnes of such credite amongst them, that Doctor Moorton, and the Gentlemen in the Cittie, would prouide them with as good as fiue hundred Crownes quicklie. Within one hower and a halfe after dinner,The Schollers sent for before the Pope. came Father Alfonso the Iesuit of the English Colledge, whome the Students had chosen, and made sute to be their Rector: he, I say, came running in such haste, that he could hardly tell his tale, because he was almost out of breath. But this was the summe of his newes, that the Popes holinesse had sent for them in all the haste, and they must delay no time, but come to him with all spéede possible.
            Then we went with him to the Popes Pallace, where comming into the Popes Chamber, and hauing euerie one kissed his foote: we stayde to attende what was his pleasure. But before he spake any woorde, with a dissembling and hippocriticall countenaunce, he fell into teares, which trickled downe his white beard: and began in Latin with these, or the very like woords. O you English men, to whome my looue is such, as I can no way vtter, considering that for me you haue left your Prince, which was your duetie, and come so farre to me, which is more then I can deserue: yet as I am your refuge, when persecution dealeth straightly with you in your Countrey, by reason of the hereticall Religion there vsed, so will I be your Bulwarke to defend you, your guide to protect you, your Father to nourish you, and your fréend with my hart blood to doo you any profite.
            
               Beholde, what deceites the deuill hath to accomplish his desire? teares, smoothe spéeches, liberallitie, and a thousand meanes: to make a man carelesse of God, disobedient to his Prince, and more, to violate vtterlie the faith of a Subiect. These teares that he shed, these woordes that he spake, made diuers of them say within them selues, as one of them for example, presentlie to me sayde.
            
               The words of one of the Schollers.Oh singuler Saint, whose life, looue, and liberalitie, may be a spectacle to the whole world. Who would liue in England, vnder the gouernment of so vile a Iezabell: and may rest in safetie▪ vnder the perfect Image of Iesus? who would not forsake Father, Mother, fréends, goods, yea, and the life it selfe: to haue the bountifull blessing of such a prouident Father? The Pope recouering his health againe from his wéeping: caused this deuout fellowe to stay his talke, because he began againe as thus.
            What is the cause that you will depart from me, that haue so well prouided for you: to thrust your selues on the rocke of your owne destruction? Then Maister Sherwin began, and tolde him all the dealinges of Doctor Morris towarde them, according as he had done before to the Cardinall, and how they would haue the Iesuites for their Gouerneurs, for the causes before mentioned. Upon these woordes the Pope started out of his Chayre.The Pope supposed Englishmē and Welshemen, all as one. Why (quoth he) I made the Hospitall for Englishe men, and for their sake I haue giuen so large exhibition: and not for the Welsh men. Returne to your Colledge againe, you shall haue what you will desire, and any thing I haue in the worlde to doo you good.
            Then he commaunded one of the chéefe Gentlemen of his Chamber, to goe with vs, and to certifie the Popes minde to Doctor Morris, and so giuing vs his

benedicton, we all went merilie againe to the Colledge.
            The Gentleman gaue Doctour Morris to vnderstande, he must be Rector no longer, the Iesuite named Father Alfonso, whom the Schollers had chosen, must haue his office, then were the Schollers glad, that they had gotten the victorie of the Welshmen.
            On the morrowe,The Popes lyberallite. the Pope sent fowre hundred Crownes, to newe reparation the house, to buie the Students all néedefull thinges that they wanted, and the house must no longer be called a Colledge, but a Seminarie.
            Then Cardinall Morone, because Doctor Morris should not loose all his dignitie, caused the house to be parted, and so made bothe a Seminarie for the Studientes, and an Hospitall for the entertainement of Englishe Pilgrimes when they came, whereof Doctor Morris continued Custos, by the Popes appointment.
            Thus was the strife ended, and my selfe and my fellowe, admitted by the Popes owne consent, to be Schollers there: but yet the sicknesse I gotte, with lying in my former Chamber, hung styll vppon mée, so that I was then remooued to a verie fayre Chamber, where the Schollers euery daye would come and visite me, vntyll such tyme as I recouered my health againe.
         
         
            
            ¶Of the Carne vale in Roome: the Popes generall curssing on Maunde Thursdaie: and the manner of the Flagellante that night. Chap. 7.
            
               DUring the time of Shrouetide, there is in Roome kept a verie great coyle, which they vse to call the Carne vale, which endureth the space of thrée or fowre dayes, all which time, the Pope kéepeth him selfe out of Roome, so great is the noyse and hurlie burlie. The Gentlemen: will attire them selues in diuers formes of apparell, some lyke Women, other lyke Turkes, and euerie one almost in a contrarie order of disguising: and eyther they be on Horsebacke, or in Coatches▪ none of them on foote, for the people that stand on the grounde to sée this pastime, are in verie great daunger of their liues, by reason of the running of Coatches and great Horses, as neuer in all my life did I sée the lyke sturre. And all this is done where the Courtezanes be, to shew them delight and pastime,The Burdella, helpes to maintaine the Pope. for they haue Couerlettes layde out at their windowes, whereon they stand leaning foorth, to receiue diuers deuises of Rosewater, and swéete odours in their faces, which the Gentlemen will throwe vp to their windowes.
            During this time, euery one weareth a disguised visor on his face, so that no one knowes what or whēce they

be: and if any one beare a secrete mallice to an other, he may then kill him, & no body will lay hands on him, for all this time they will obey no lawe. I sawe a braue Romaine, who rode there verie pleasant in his Coatch, and suddenlie came one, who discharged a Pistoll vpon him, yet no body made any accoumpt, eyther of the murderer, or the slaine Gentleman: beside, there were diuers slaine, bothe by villanie, and the Horsses or the Coatches, yet they continued on their pastime, not making any regard of them.
            The first daye of their Carne vale, the Iewes in Roome cause an Ensigne to be placed at the Capitoll,The Iewes haue small pastime in this. But it is an order that they must doo, whether they wyll or no. where likewise they appoint certaine wagers at their owne coastes: and then they runne starke naked from Porta populo vnto the Capitoll for them, the which I iudge aboue a myle in length. And all the way, they gallop their great Horsses after them, and carie goades with sharpe pointes of stéele in them: wherewith they will pricke the Iewes on the naked skin, if so be they doo not runne faster then their Horsses gallop, so that you shall sée some of their backs all on gore blood. Then he that is foremost, and soonest commeth to the Capitoll, he is set on a Horse backe without any saddle, one going before him carying the Ensigne: but then you shall sée a hundred boyes, who haue prouided a number of Orrenges, they will so pelt the poore Iewe, that before he can got vp to the Capitoll, he will be beaten beside his Horse fowre or fiue times.
            The next day, there are certaine of the Christians that runne naked likewise, but no body pursueth them, either with Horse or Coatch: and the wager they run for▪ the Iewes must pay likewise▪ Then the Buffell and the Asse runneth, but it is vnpossible for me to tell all the knauerie vsed about this: and therefore thus much shall suffise of the Carne vale, letting you vnderstand,

that they who were most knauishlie disposed in this sporte, on Ash wednesday came to take Ashes in such méeke order, as though it had neuer béene they.
            ON Maunde Thursday, the Pope commeth into his Gallerie ouer Saint Peters, sitting in the Chayre wherwith he is caried on mennes shoulders: and there he hath a great painted holie Candle in his hande burning, when as a Cardinall on eche side of him, the one in Latin, the other in Italian, sigeth the Popes generall malediction.
            There he cursseth the Turke, and her Maiestie, our most gratious Princesse and Gouernesse,The Popes cursses will returne to him selfe. affirming her to be farre wurse then the Turke, or the cruellest Tiraunt that is. He cursseth likewise all Caluinians, Lutherans, Zwinglians, and all that are not according to his disposition. When he hath curssed all that he can, saying, Amen, he letteth the Candle fall: when as the people will skamble for it, and euerie one catch a lyttle péece if they can, yea, our English men will be as busie as the best, and one of them chaunced to gette a péece of the waxe of the Candle, whereof he made such a bragging when he came to the Colledge,UUas this the part of a Subiect? as you will not thinke, that he had got a péece of the Candle, wherwith the Quéene of England was curssed, and that he would kéepe it so long as he liued.
            
               The manner of the Flagellāte.
               The same night a number of the basest people, and most wicked liuers that be amongst the people, gather them selues togeather in companies: as the company of the Holie Ghost, the companie of Charitie, the cōpany of Death, and such like, euerie company their Crucifix before them, their singers following them, on eyther side a number of burning Torches, and thus they goe all whipping them selues.
            First they go vp into the Popes Pallace, & then down

into Saint Peters Church, which is all adorned with a number of waxe lyghtes: and there on the toppe of an Aultar standeth a couple of Cardinalles, who sheweth them the holie Handkercher,A fine peece of knauerie, to deceyue the people. or Vultus sanctus, (which in déede is nothing but a liuelie painted Picture, ouershaddowed with a couple of fine Lawnes, and no body must desire to sée it vncouered, because they say no body is able to endure the brightnesse of the fare, a number haue séene it, and haue béene the wurse a great whyle after) and all the while that bothe this, and the Speare head is showne, they will whippe them selues before them verie gréeuouslie, and giue a generall clamor thorowe the Church: Misericordia, Misericordia, Tu autem Domine miserere nobis: and in this order they continue almoste the whole night. This is the glorie of the Pope, the blindnesse of the people, and the great follie of our English men, to bring them selues within the compasse of such wicked order of lyfe.
            God continue his loouing and fatherlie countenaunce ouer Englande: blesse and preserue her Maiestie, and her Honourable Councell: and exercise vs all in feare to him, obedience to her, and faithfull and continuall looue to our neighbours, Amen.
            
         
         
            
            A true Report, of the Christian suffering, and mercilesse martirdome, of one Richard Atkins, English man, at Roome: who for the trueth of the Gospel, to the great terrour of all the beholders, endured the extremitie of the torment, and cruell agonie of death, in the yeere of our Lord. 1581. Chap. 8.
            
               ABout the time of Midsommer, in the yéere. 1581. one Richard Atkins, a Hartfoord shyre man, came to Roome, and hauing found the Englishe Colledge, he knocked at the doore, when as diuers of the Studentes came to welcome him, knowing that he was an Englishe man. Among other talke, they willed him to goe to ye Hospital, and there to receiue his meate and lodging, according as the order was appointed, whereto he aunswered. I come not (my Countreymen) to any such intent as you iudge,His councell to his Countreymen. but I come loouinglie, to rebuke the great misorder of your liues, which I gréeue to heare, and pittie to beholde. I come likewise to let your prowde Antechrist vnderstand, that he dooth offende the heauenlie Maiestie, rob God of his honour, and poysoneth the whole world with his abhominable blasphemies: making them homage Stocks and Stones, and that filthy Sacrament, which is nothing else but a foolish Idoll.
            When they heard these woordes, one Hugh Griffin, a

Welshe man, and a Student in the Colledge, caused him to be put in the Inquisition: where, howe they examined him, and how he aunswered them, I know not, but after certayne dayes he was set at lybertie againe.
            And one day going in the stréete, he met a Préest carying the Sacrament, which offending his cōscience, to  sée the people so croutch and knéele to it:His attempt, to smite downe the Sacrament. he caught at it to haue throwne it downe, that all the people might sée what they worshipped. But missing his purpose, and béeing iudged by the people, that he did catch at the holinesse, that (they say) commeth from the Sacrament, vppon méere deuotion: he was let passe, and nothing sayde to him.
            Fewe dayes after, he came to Saint Peters Church, where diuers Gentlemen & other, were hearing Masse, and the Préest béeing at the eleuation:His attempte in S. Peters Church. he vsing no reuerence, stepped amongst the people to the Aultar, and threwe downe the Challice with the Wine, striuing likewise to haue pulled the Cake out of the Préestes handes. For which, diuers rose vp, and beate him with their fystes, and one drew his Rapier, and would haue slaine him: so that in bréefe, he was caried to prison, where he was examined, wherefore he committed such an hainous offence: whereto he aunswered, that he came purposelie for that intent, to rebuke the Popes wickednesse, and their Idolatrie. Upon this, he was condempned to be burned: which sentence he sayde, he was right willing to suffer, and the rather, because the summe of his offence, pertayned to the glorie of God.
            During the time he remained in prison, sundry English men came vnto him,Our English mennes labouring to him, and his perswading them. willing him to be sory for that he had done, and to recant from his dampnable opiniō: but all the meanes they vsed were in vaine, he confuted their dealinges by diuers places of Scripture, & willed them to be sorie for their wickednesse, whyle God dyd

permit them time, else they were in daunger of euerlasting dampnation: these woordes made the Englishe men depart, for they could not abide to heare them.
            
                Within a while after, he was set vpon an Asse, without any saddle,His going to execution. he béeing from ye middle vpward naked, hauing some English Préests with him, who talked to him, but he regarded them not, but spake to ye people in so good language as he could, and tolde them they were in a wrong way, and therfore willed them for Christes cause, to haue regard to the sauing of their soules.
            All the way as he went, there were fowre did nothing else, but thrust at his naked body with burning Torches: whereat he neither mooued nor shrunke one iote, but with a chéerefull countenaunce, laboured styll to perswade the people,Oh meruailous patience, and Christian boldnesse. often bending his body to méete the Torches as they were thrust at him, & would take them in his owne hand, and holde them burning styll vppon his body, whereat the people not a little wundered. Thus he continued almost the space of halfe a mile, tyl he came before Saint Peters, where the place  of Execution was. When he was come to the place of Execution, there they had made a deuise, not to make the fire about him, but to burne his legges first, which they did, he not dismaying any whit, but suffered all meruailous chéerefully, which mooued the people to such a quandarie, as was not in Roome many a day. Then they offered him a Crosse,They offerd him a Cros to imbrace. and willed him to imbrace it, in token that he dyed a Christian: but he put it away with his hand, telling them, that they were euill men to trouble him with such paltrie, when he was preparing him selfe to God, whome he behelde in Maiestie and Mercie, ready to receaue him into the eternal rest. They séeing him styll in that minde, departed, saying: Let vs goe, and leaue him to the deuill, whome he serues. Thus ended this faithfull Soldier and Martir

of Christe: who is no doubt in glorie with his Maister, whereto God graunt vs all to come. Amen.
            
            THis is faithfullie auouched by the aforesayde Iohn Young, who was at that time, and a good while after in Roome, in seruice with Maister Doctor Moorton: who séeing the Martirdome of this man, when he came home to his house, in the presence of Maister Smithson, Maister Creed, and the sayd Iohn Young his seruaunt, spake as followeth. Surely, this fellow was meruailous obstinate, he nothing regarded the good councell was vsed to him, nor neuer shrunke all the way, when the Torches were thrust at his naked body. Beside, at the place of Execution, he did not faint or crie one iote in the fire, albeit they tormented him verie cruelly, and burned him by degrées, as his legges first, to put him to the greater pain, yet all this he did but smile at. Doubtlesse, but that the woord of God can be but true, else we might iudge this fellowe to be of God: for who could haue suffered so much paine as he did? but truely I beléeue the deuill was in him.
            Beholde (good Reader) how they doubt among them selues, and because they will not speake against their Maister the Pope, they inferre ye mighty power of God, vpon the deuill: but he no doubt one day will scatter the chaffe, & gather his chosen Corne into his Garner. That we may be of this good Corne, let vs defie the Pope, his hellish abhominations, continue in our duetie to God, faithfull obedience to her Maiestie, and vnity among vs all as Brethren: and then no doubt but we shall enter the land of the liuing, to our eternall comfort and consolation.
            FINIS.
            
               Anthonie Munday.
            
            
               The Picture heerin adioyned, dooth liuely decipher the order of the Martirdom, of the aforesaid Richard Atkins, at Roome.
               
            
         
      
   