
      
         
            
            
            NEWES FROM
THE LOW-COVNTREYES.
            OR THE
Anatomy of Caluiniſticall Calumnyes,
manifeſted
In a Dialogue betweene a Brabander,
and a Hollander.
            
            Vpon occaſion of a Placcart, lately publiſhed
in Hollād, againſt the Ieſuites, Prieſts,
Friars &c. by thoſe that there aſſume
vnto themſelues, the Tytle of The High-Mighty-Lords,
the States &c.
            
            
               Tranſlated out of the Netherland Language,
into English. By D. N.
            M.DC.XXII.
         
         
            
            
            THE
TRANSLATOVR
TO HIS FRIEND.
            SYR, you ſhall pleaſe to vnderstand, that
this preſent yeare of our Lord 1622.
came forth a Placcart in Holland
               ▪ there publiſhed
by the authority of the States▪ wherin
the Ieſuytes are accuſed of no leſſe cryme
thē to be the murtherers of Princes. Againſt
which placart came foorth ſoone after an
anſwere made dialogue-wiſe, vnder the title
of The Anatomy of Caluiniſticall Calumnies.
And ſeeing this accuſation of the
Ieſuytes to be the murtherers of Princes, is

made by ſuch as are knowne to be no friendes
to Princes, I was deſyrous to ſee what could
be ſayd agaynst it. And finding this anſwere
to conteyne very ſerious matter, and ſo many
proofes for the manifeſting of this accuſation
to be but a meere Calumny, I conſidered
with myſelfe that euery man, in reaſon
and charity, is obliged to preferre truth, &
to excuſe the falſly-accuſed. Heerupon I reſolued
to enforce ſo much tyme out of my other
affaires, as to tranſlate it into Engliſh,
and chiefly for your ſake▪ becauſe I know you
to be a man curious, and deſirous to penetrate
into the truth of thinges, and not cō
               tented
to be carryed away with vulgar
noyſes wherwith Idiots are ſoone ſatisfyed.
This when you ſhal h
                  •
               ue read it, I leaue vnto
your owne iudgement to cenſure, & my
ſelfe still to remayne at your comaund.
            
               From the Low-Countreyes, the laſt of
Iuly 1622.
               
               
                  Your euer louing friend
D. N.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
WRYTER OF THIS
DIALOGVE IN THE
NETHERLAND
LANGVAGE, VNTO
his friend.
            
               MY Very eſpeciall friend. I
could not leaue to let you
vnderſtand, that being aryued
heere in Cullen, this
preſent moneth of Aprill, about my
affayres, certayne merchants came to
lodge in the ſame Inne where I am loged,
that alſo intend to take their iourney

to Franckford Mart, among theſe a
Merchant of Brabant, and a Merchant
of Holland, hauing one night ſupped
togeather at the table wherat myſelfe among
others was preſent, they chanced
after ſupper to fall into diſcourſe:
which ſeeming vnto me to be worth the
wryting I haue taken paynes to pen it,
and heere I now ſend it you, ſuppoſing
you may be aſmuch pleaſed with reading
it, as my ſelfe & others were with
hearing it, when we willingly ſate vp
late in the night to that end.
            It was then occaſioned by this meanes.
Whē (according as the cuſtome is,
when men from different places happen
to meete togeather) we began
to aske one another what newes there
was ſtirring abroad. The Brabander demaunded
of the Hollander what newes
there was in Holland? The Hollander as
ſom-what diſſembling, ſayd he knew of
no newes there.
            
               Heerupon ſayd the Brabander.
               
                  
When a reformed Brother comming
out of Holland, knowes no newes, it is
a ſigne that the brethren there haue no
newes to their liking.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               It is your pleaſure ſo to ſay: but
when there is no newes, then can none
be told.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Then muſt I tell you what newes I
heare out of Holland. It is told me that
your Holland-States, of what trades
ſoeuer they haue byn heertofore, they
doe now all of them practiſe Preſſing-worke.
               
            
            
               The Hollander.
               What meane you by that? I vnderſtand
not what you ſay.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Then are you more fortunate then
many thouſandes, that both know it
well, and feele it well, by reaſon that
their very harts are in effect preſſed out
of their bodies, through the intollerable

and vnſupportable taxations which are
layd vpon them, in ſo much that many
do now begin to ſay, God be with the
good Duke of Alua, that demaunded no
more but the tenth penny of our goods.
               
               And that which is yet more grieuous
is, that of theſe moſt grieuous exactions
no end appeareth, but to the cō
                  trary
they do dayly increaſe more, as
though they were but in their beginnings,
which falleth out in a fit tyme
for the comon people, when things are
ſo good cheap, eſpecially food & fuell,
that the price is double as much as
but a whyle ſince it was, and where
traficke ſo flouriſheth, that merchants,
marryners, and artifices, are forced to
keep more holy-dayes, (or rather play-dayes)
then are ſet downe in the Almanacke.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               Concerning Trade, it may be compared
vnto the tyde, which ebbes and
flowes. If it be not ſo good now as it

hath byn, we muſt haue patience vntill
it mend. And as for the exactions, they
are not ordayned without reaſon by
our High-mighty Lords the States,
who well know what they haue to doe.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               They know it well, and the poore
comons feele it well: you comfort your
ſelues with patience vpon hope of amendment
of traficke, but the patience
is much more certayne, then the amendment.
               I agree with you in opinion that the
exactions are not ordayned without
reaſon, for lawleſſe neceſſity is the reaſon,
and need it is that enforceth them.
And therfore your high-minded Lords
the States, that well know their heauy
charge, their great debts, and their ſmall
in-comings, muſt conſequently well
know what they doe, & happy it were
that they alſo well know, wherin they
do not well.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               
                  
I note your words very well, you
call our High-mighty Lords the States,
The High-mynded Lords the States:
you ought not ſo to abuſe, & miſ-name
our Lords, and Land-rulers.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               I ſee not wherein I abuſe or miſname
them, becauſe in very right and
reaſon the tytle of High-mynded, farre
better befitteth them, then High-mighty,
for Lowneſſe they haue inough, but
Highneſſe none at all, except in their
myndes, which agrees but ill with ſuch
as liue ſo low that they ſhould ſit vnder
water, if they did not hemme thēſelues
from it with walles of earth. Being then
ſuch as they are, and dwelling ſo low
as they doe, the High-neſſe of their
minds appeareth the more in that they
will needes aſſume vnto themſelues the
tytle of High-mighty, or High-powerfull
Lords and States.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               They aſſume vnto themſelues this

tytle, in regard of their authority.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Whence haue they authority?
            
            
               The Hollander.
               From God.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Haue they heeretofore byn Princes,
or ſubiects?
            
            
               The Hollander.
               Our Countrey was ſometime belonging
vnto the King of Spayne, but ſo is
not now.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               God hath comaunded that ſubiects
muſt be obedient vnto their Kings and
Princes. Shew me where God hath
graunted a priuilege vnto the States of
Holland, to relinquiſh and reiect all obedience
vnto their lawfull and ſoueraigne
Lord the King of Spayne; and
to band agaynſt him in publike rebellion,
and to aſſume vnto themſelues the
Princely authority belōging vnto him.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               
               We haue obtained our freedome by
the ſword.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Put the caſe that now in our intēded
iorney to Frankford (where by the leaue
of God we meane to go) we ſhould happen
to be ſet vpon by theeues, who with
their ſwords ſhould hurt & wound vs,
and take our money & goods from vs; I
demaund of you whether they ought
lawfully to poſſeſſe it as their owne,
becauſe they got it by their ſwords.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               I am not obliged to ſhape you an anſwere
to euery tryfling queſtion you
may aske me.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               And I am of opinion that no man
is obliged to anſwere vnto any queſtiō,
whereunto he is not able to anſwere.
But yet I know that if ſuch robbers
by the high-way-ſide ſhould fall into
the handes of Iuſtice, they ſhould not
be freed frō the hands of the hangman

by excuſing thēſelues, that our money
& goods belonged vnto them, becauſe
they had gotten it from vs with their
ſwordes.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               Let it be, as be it may. Our high &
mightfull Lords and States Generall of
the Vnited Netherlands, haue power
and authority: and becauſe at the beginning
of our diſcourſe you asked me
for Newes, know now that theſe our
Lords and States, haue lately publiſhed
a Placcart, wherein, in ſpite of all that
are agaynſt it, they haue ſhewed that
they haue authority.
               This Placcart conteyneth a prohibition,
that no Ieſuytes, Prieſts, Friars,
or other ordayned perſons of Romiſh
profeſſion, ſhall come into theſe
vnited Prouinces, or being there, may
ſtill remayne and continue.
               Moreouer that no man ſhall ſend any
children to ſchoole, or to remayne in
any Cittyes, Places, Vniuerſityes, or

Schooles vnder the commaund of the
King of Spayne, in the enemies Countreys
or in other Colledges of Ieſuites.
And that no gatherings or collectiōs of
money, gold, ſiluer, coyned or vncoyned,
or of other goods, or wares ſhal be
made, to, or for the benefit or behoofe
of any Churches, Hoſpitalls, Spirituall,
or other Colledges, or Conuenticles.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               In this tytle of a Placcart, publiſhed
by authority of ſuch as haue not any authority
all, I note three points.
               1. The firſt is, the prohibition or
forbidding of Prieſtes and Ieſuytes the
Countrey.
               2. The ſecond is, that no children
may goe to Schoole in any place
vnder the commaund of the King
of Spayne, or in Colledges of Ieſuytes.
               3. The third is, that no money may
be giuen to the vſe or benefit of any

Churches, Hoſpitals, Spiritual, or other
Colledges.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               So it is, and ſo enacted and eſtabliſhed
in the aſſembly of the aforenamed
High-mighty Lords the States generall, in
the Earles-Hage the ſix and twentith
day of February, in the yeare of ſixteen
hundreth & two and twenty, and there
printed by Hillebrand Iabobſon, ſworne
printer vnto the High-mighty Lords
the States generall.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Heerby I am brought to vnderſtand
that this Placcart of the High-minded
Lords the States is printed in the Earles-Hage,
Ergo, There is an Earle to
whome this Hage appertayneth, & this
Earle notwithſtanding that he is lawfully
iſſued and deſcended, and conſequently
the true heyre vnto thoſe ancient
Earles, that haue gouerned there;
yet is he of new States which are no
Earles, wholy thurſt out, who haue

now made thereof a States-Hage, but
muſt neuertheleſſe ſuffer it to continue
the name of an Earles-Hage in memory
of the true claime, which the Earle &
owner thereof hath vnto it.
               Heere then is this Placcart printed
by Hillebrand Iacobſon, ſworne Printer
vnto the High-minded Lords the states:
wherby may be noted, that this ſworne
Printer vnto thoſe States, is not to leaue
out any lye that they ſhall pleaſe to giue
him in any Placcart of theirs to print,
for feare of being found periured.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               The Lords the States do giue him no
lyes to print.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Doe they puniſh him when lyes are
found printed in their Placcarts?
            
            
               The Hollander.
               He is not puniſhed, becauſe no ſuch
lyes are found.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               They that know not a lye from a

truth or will not know it, fynd it not;
but they that can diſcerne vntruthes
from truthes, can find them out, albeit
they ſtand in eſtabliſhed Proclamatiōs
of highly named Netherland States.
And ſurely, this muſt needes proue a
more lucky Placcart then many forgoing
haue proued, if no lyes were to be
found in it, and eſpecially where there
is mention made of Ieſuytes, and Eccleſiaſticall
perſons.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               Indeed the Ieſuytes in this Placcart
are called a pernicious & murtherous
ſect▪ & that they of this ſect & other priests,
Friars, and ſpiritual, or religious named perſons,
of the Romiſh Religion doe endeauour
to bring the good inhabitants of theſe vnited
Netherland Prouinces, by meanes of
their fals doctrine & Idolatry, to an auerſion
from their lawfull Superiours, to the
murthering of Princes and Potentates, &
to instruct them in all kyndes of treaſon agaynſt
them, thereby to preferre the Tyranny
                  
                  and abſolute Domination of the King of
Spayne, and his adherents in worldly, and
of the Pope of Rome and his dependants, in
ſpirituall cauſes.
               
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Haue I not gheſſed right? I ſee now
that this Placcart will not for lacke of
lyes make any fore-going Placcart aſhamed:
for heere they fall ſo faſt one
vpon another, that I had need of ſome
breathing tyme to note them.
               The Ieſuytes are heere named a pernicious
and murtherous ſect, which
is a ſhamefull lye.
               That the Ieſuytes & other Prieſts,
and ſpirituall named Perſons, of the
Romiſh religion, doe ſeeke to bring
the inhabitants through their falſe doctrine
to Idolatry, is a blaſphemous
lye.
               That they ſeeke to bring theſe inhabitātes
to an auerſion from their lawfull
ſuperiours, is a needleſſe lye, for the
Caluinian Preachers, and the States

themſelues, haue already done the ſame.
               That they ſeeke to bring them to the
murthering of Princes and Potentates,
is a Diueliſh lye.
               That they inſtruct them to all kind
of treaſon agaynſt Princes and Potentates,
is a horrible lye.
               That they ſeeke, in theſe Countreys
to preferre the Tyranny of Spayn,
is a villanous lye.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               It is not inough to ſay that theſe
are all lyes, but they muſt be prooued
ſo to be.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               How els? Haue you but the patience
that I may haue tyme to doe it.
               Seeing then, that the Ieſuytes are
heere put in the firſt place, and called
by the Epithere of a pernicious & murtherous
ſect, and that they, and other
ſpirituall perſons, do ſeeke to procure
the murthering of Princes and Potentates:
this alſo being a common ſlaunder

and Calumny which dayly rydeth
on the ſerpētine tonges of your Holland
Caluinian Miniſters. It is then needfull
to examine and call into conſideration
what murthers of Princes and Potentates,
haue hapned in Chriſtendome
in this age of ours, and ſince the tyme
that the order of the Ieſuits by Saint Ignatius
de Loyola was founded.
               The number of Princes and Potentates,
that haue come to ſuch violent
and vnfortunate endes, I fynd to haue
byn eight.
               The firſt of theſe was the moſt Reuerend
and Illuſtrious Lord, Melchior
Zobel Biſhop of Herbipolis, and Duke of
Franconia in Germany. This Prince was
cruelly murthered, as he was going
frō the bridge, ouer the riuer of Mayne,
from the Citty of Herbipolis or Wirtzburge,
to the Caſtle where he held his
Court or Reſidence, which Caſtle is
neere vnto the ſayd Citty. His murther
was cauſed by a Gentleman of the ſame

Countrey of Franconia, called Grumbagh.
What kynd of Ieſuit this Gentleman
was, reſteth in conſideration, for
Catholike he was not, but a profeſſor
of the new pretended reformation, and
ſo were alſo the actours which he imployed
in committing of the murther.
               The ſecond in this vnfortunate
nūber was Henry, King of Scotland by
his mariage with Mary Queen of Scotland,
Father to his Maieſty King Iames,
now King of England & Scotlād &c.
This Prince was a Catholike, and was
murthered by a conſpiracy of Caluiniſts,
and by Caluiniſts which thereunto
were imployed he is thought to
haue byn ſtrangled. Theſe then muſt
needes haue bin Caluiniſticall Ieſuites,
aſwell thoſe I meane that were of the
conſpiracy, as the executors of the fact,
for there was not one Catholike among
them.
               The third was Iames Earle of Murray
                  
in Scotland, baſtard Brother vnto
Mary Queene of Scotland before named.
He was a rebell and a perſecutour
of the Queene his Soueraygne, and Siſter
by the Fathers ſide: He forced her
to fly into England, and Tyrannically
vſurped the Gouernment of her Kingdome,
vntill the time that a Gentleman
named Hamilton ſlew him with a gun,
in the towne of Lithquo, when being
on horsbacke he was accōpanyed with
many Gentleman that came with him
to make his entry into that towne.
Hamilton notwithſtanding eſcaped and
fled into France. The Earle was in religion
Caluiniſt, and ſo was Hamilton
alſo that ſlew him. It may be that he afterward
in France became a Catholike.
If the Holland Caluiniſts wil make a Ieſuyte
of him, then muſt he haue byn a
Caluiniſticall Ieſuite when he committed
the fact; for Catholike-Ieſuite he
neuer was.
               The fourth in this number was

                  Francis Duke of Guyſe. This valiant
Prince ſeruing the King of France agaynſt
his rebells, was by one Iohn Poltrot,
who came behind him, ſhot throgh
the body with a piſtoll, as he was on
horſebacke in his iourney: & it is worthy
the noting that this Poltrot being
well horſt, and hauing diſcharged his
piſtoll vpon the Duke, put ſpurres to
his horſe and made a way with all ſpeed
poſſible; and hauing ridden the whole
night, and not otherwiſe weening but
that he was many myles from the place
where he committed the murther, was
in the morning apprehended neere vnto
the place where the deed was done.
If this Poltrot muſt now be made a Ieſuyte,
he muſt then be a Geneuian Ieſuyte:
for Geneua was his ſchoole, and
Beza the Caluinian Rabbin, his ſchoolmayſter
that inſtructed him, to murther
this Prince.
               The fifth in this nūber was William
of Naſſaw Prince of Orange, who being

in open rebellion agaynſt his lawfull
Soueraygne Lord, King Philip
ſecond of Spayne, the which by all
the lawes of the world is Crimen laeſae
maiestatis, was at Delfe in Holland ſlayne
with a piſtoll by one Baltazar Gerard, alias
Seragh a Burgundian. Of what religion
this Prince was, there is no certainty,
but Baltazar, that ſlew him was
a Catholike: that he was a Ieſuyte was
neuer knowne, but if Caluiniſtes haue
gotten the skill to make him a Ieſuyte
eight and thirty yeares after his death,
who in his life was neuer any, it may be
regiſtred for a Caluiniſticall miracle.
               The ſixt in nūber was Mary Queene
of Scotland, Mother vnto his Maieſty
that now is King of Scotland and Englād
&c. This Princeſſe being an abſolute
and ſoueraygne Queene, & being
enforced by her rebellious ſubiects, fled
into England, vpon hope and promiſe
to be by Queene Elizabeth ſuccoured.
She was with the Queene of England

in good peace and amity, and was by
her through her letters inuyted for her
more defence and ſafety to come into
England; but ſo ſoone as ſhe was there
arriued, ſhe was layed handes on, and
detayned as a priſoner, directly againſt
all right and reaſon, and ſo detayned about
the ſpace of twenty yeares. In all
which tyme, Queene Elizabeth did neuer
ſo much as once vouchſafe to ſee
her, or heare her ſpeake. In the end
when ſhe accepted of the meanes that
was offered her for the eſcaping out of
her vniuſt impriſonment, ſhe was murthered
with an axe, by the hands of the
comon Hang-man; which moſt foule
and great murther was cōmitted to the
euerlaſting diſhonour & ſhame of falſe
Iuſtice, becauſe it was done vnder the
cloke and colour of true Iuſtice: for ſhe
being an abſolute & Soueraigne Princes
of herſelfe, was no ſubiect vnto Queene
Elizabeth, or vnto her lawes, and yet
notwithſtanding ſhe was condemned

as a criminall ſubiect. A moſt Tyrannous
example, of very murther, and
iniuſtice, vnto all enſuyng poſterity.
And moſt contrary to the doctrine of
Caluiniſts that will haue Princes ſubiect
to no authority or power vpon
earth, but only vnto God, vnleſſe they
can heere make a God of Bul the Hangman.
               This act doth the more remain to the
greater ſhame of the actors, becauſe vpon
the committing therof, great bonfyers
were made in the ſtreets, and the
belles rung, in manner of a triumph,
for ioy of obtaining ſome great victory.
               This Queene was a Catholike. The
Hangman that murthered her was a
Caluinian Proteſtant, whoſe handes
had byn imbrued in the bloud of diuers
Ieſuytes & Prieſtes, in the raigne of the
forſayd Queene Elizabeth. If Holland
Caluiniſtes will now make a Ieſuyte of
of him, he muſt then be a Gewſe-reformed

Ieſuite, & that can be no great diſreputation
vnto them, ſeeing that Mayſter
Paul Bafous a hangman in Liuonia
or Liftland, left his office of hangmanſhip,
and turned preacher of the Word,
according to the Holland reformation.
               Vpō the death of this holy Queen, the
Calumnies of Caluiniſts raiſed againſt
Ieſuytes, are contradicted in the enſuing
Epigramme.
               
                  OVR Caluinists of Ieſuites complayne,
                  That they of Kings and Princes killers be,
                  But if heerin they did not falſely fayne,
                  They muſt ſome ſuch, the world let know and ſee:
                  But ſince ſo much as one they do not show,
                  To what end then ſerues this Calumniation?
                  To ſeeme to hate for ſooth Prince-killing ſo,
                  As hauing thereof no imagination.
                  And that meane whyle they heerof others taxe,
                  They as vnſeene, may bring them to the axe.
               
               The ſeauenth in this number is Henry
the third King of France, who after
he had cauſed Henry Duke of Guyſe &
his brother the Cardinall to be muthered,
was murthered himſelfe by one

                  Iacques Clement a lacobin or Dominican
Friar. This King was a Catholyke
& ſo was alſo the Fryar that killed him.
If our Holland-Gewſes wil now make
a Ieſuyte of him that dyed in the habite
of a Dominican Fryar (for he was preſently
killed by thoſe that then were about
the King) they can do more then
the French Hugenots, who would as
fayne haue had him a Ieſuite as the
Holland-Gewſes would, but they muſt
notwithſtanding be contented to let
him be a Dominican Fryar, as he liued
and dyed.
               Heere can I not omit alſo to note,
that if ſo be, that for this fact of Iaques
Clement, the Caluiniſts ſhould giue vnto
the Fryars of S. Dominikes order the
name of a Pernicious and Murtherous
Sect, or that they ſought to bring ſubiects
to the murthering of Princes, and
Potentates, they had in all truth done
the Religious men of this Order much
wrong: for there can be no reaſon that

a whole order ſhould beare the blame, &
reproach of the fault, that one of the
ſame order hath committed, and wherin
the others were innocent. How
much leſſe reaſon can then be found,
that the Ieſuites (of whoſe order no one
was euer knowne that euer killed
Prince or other perſon) ſhould of ſlaunderous
Gewſes be calumniated with
the name of a murtherous ſect, and to
be ſtirrers vp of the inhabitants of Holland
to the murthering of Princes and
Potentates: which were a greater pitty,
for the inhabitants of Holland to doe,
conſidering that Princes & Potentates
are not among them in ſo great aboundance,
vnleſſe the meaning of the Placcart
ſhould be, that the Ieſuites and
Prieſtes, did intend to imploy the inhabitants
of Holland to goe & murther
Princes and Potentates in other Countreys
               The eight and laſt of this vnfortunate
number and ranke, was Henry the

fourth King of France, who was murthered
by one Francis Rauaillac: and if ſo
be the Holland Gewſes will make of
him a Ieſuite alſo, yet the adminiſters
of Iuſtice in France, which are as farſeeing
as thoſe of Holland, and haue
throughly enformed themſelues of this
mans condition and ſtate of life, and
done their vttermoſt endeauours to
come to the full knowledge of all that
might concerne the matter of the Kings
death, could neuer find that he ſo was.
And yet the ſharp-ſighted ſtates of Holland,
that can looke further into milſtones
then other men▪ can better diſcerne
who are the murtherers of Princes
and Potentates, in other Countreyes,
then the officers of Iuſtice themſelues,
in whoſe handes they happen to fall,
that commit ſuch criminall facts.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               But can there no Princes els be found
that haue byn killed or murthered ſince
the Ieſuites haue had ther beginning,

then only theſe you haue named?
            
            
               The Brabander.
               I know not of any more, but of this
number of eight. Marry heere by the
way is to be noted, that fiue of this number
haue byn murthered by Caluiniſts,
and three by Catholikes: King Henry
3. King Henry 4. both Kings of France,
& William of Naſſaw Prince of Orange,
by Catholikes: Melchior Zobell Biſhop
of Wirtzburge and Duke of Franconia,
Henry King of Scotland, Iames Earle of
Murray, Francis Duke of Guyſe, and
Mary Queene of Scotland by Caluiniſts.
And if thinges had ſucceeded according
to intentions, Caluiniſts had,
had the honour to haue had ſix of theſe
eight to haue byn murthered by them:
for William Prince of Orange, before
named, was in very great poſſibility to
haue byn murthered by a Proteſtant alſo,
and I wot not how many Zeland
States with him, to haue borne him cō
                  pany
in the ayre, when he and they

ſhould haue byn blowne vp togeather
with gunpowder, wherof I may take
occaſion to ſpeake more anone. In the
meane time behold whether in this odious
buſyneſſe of Prince killing, Caluiniſts
haue not the precedence by oddes,
Notwithſtanding they cry out ſo lowd,
and ſo falſely vpon Ieſuites, giuing thē
the name of a pernicious and murtherous
ſect, when themſelues in this foule
fact, fall fouleſt of all that therein are
to be touched, & the Ieſuites not found
to be touched at all.
               Let all the world now iudge, to
whome it is, that the odious Epithete of
Prince-killing is beſt befitting, either
to Ieſuites or Calumiſts. Who might
not laugh at this mad accuſation, and
thinke that reformed Holland-Gewſes
are turned fooles, not knowing what
they ſay? They ſeeme through the vehemency
of their malice to be become
blind, and giue occaſion themſelues of
the manifeſtation of their owne ſhame

which before lay vndiſcouered. What
ſtrange kindes of Ieſuites haue heere
byn found, among the murtherers of
Princes and Potentates? The Holland
Gewſe-reformed brethrē may heere ſee
what comes of lying. That their preachers
continew their lying in their pulpits
I can in ſome ſort tollerate; the
poore fellowes haue charge of wife &
children, their preaching is their trade
to liue by, and to mayntaine their families.
But the worſhipfull Lordes the
States to lye, and to publiſh lyes in Printed
Placcarts, that indeed is ſomwhat
to groſſe: you may pleaſe to excuſe me
for beeing ſo free with your Lords and
States, Becauſe

                     He that ſpeaketh what he ſhould not,
                     Muſt heare for his anſwer what he wold not.
                  
               
               Me thinkes they that practiſe lying,
ſhould in reaſon become more cūning,
then to make lyes that are ſo groſſe and
palpable, and doe indeed bring credit
and reputation to Ieſuites, and ſhame

vnto themſelues that ſpred them: for alwayes
it is found that when any one
is accuſed and afterward found innocent,
the accuſer is curſed and hated, &
the falſe accuſed pittyed, beloued, and
belieued.
               Theſe Caluinian Calumniatours
will ſeeme by calling Ieſuites & Prieſts
the murtherers of Princes and Potentates,
as if they (poore innocent ſoules)
were becom great Care-takers for Princes
& Potentates ſafeties. This ſurely is
a very ſuddainly-growne-vp affection:
they were not wont to be ſo, for me
thinks it is not ſo long ago that Princes
can haue forgotten, that at ſuch tyme
as their ſubiects rebelled againſt them,
the good Hollād-Gewſes were alwayes
readier to aſſiſt their rebelles agaynſt
them, then them againſt their rebelles. I
muſt needes acknowledge ſome reaſon
why it ſo ſhould be, & that is, that ſimile
gaudet ſimili, & if at this day any Princes
find this to be true, themſelues know

it beſt: But further to manifeſt their
good affection to Princes, we are to
note that it hath not only byn ſhewed
in the fiue aforenamed, who they murtherouſly
haue bereft of their liues, but
alſo in ſome vnto whome euen after
their deathes they haue ſhewed indignity
and villany, as vnto William the
Conqueror King of England who was
buryed at Cane in Normandie▪
                   where the
French-Hugenotes in their Rebellion
in the yeare 1562. vnder conduct of
Chaſtilian, when they tooke this towne,
and ſpoyled the Churches, they brake
open the tombe of this great Cōquerer,
and threw his bones about the ſtreets.
               At Orleans, where they alſo committed
their Church-robbery and Sacrilege,
they brake open the tombe of
King Lewys the eleuenth, and burnt
his bones.
               The bones of Iohn Earle of Angoleſme
Father to King Francis the firſt of
France, who for his vertue & deuotion

deuotion was reputed as a Saint, they
ſuffered not to reſt in his ſepulcher, but
threw them out. This hate may haue
proceeded of two cauſes, the one becauſe
he was a Prince, the other (& poſible
the greateſt) becauſe of his Sanctity,
for to the bones of Saints or holy mē
haue Caluiniſts ſhewed ſo great hatred,
that at Towres they tooke the bones of
the holy Biſhop Saint Martin, and the
bones of the holy Saint Francis of Paula,
and ioyning vnto theſe bones the body
of a dead Aſſe, they burnt all three
togeather, to the end Catholiks ſhould
not ſaue any part of the bones or aſhes
for reliques, and yet to make more ſure
worke, they did caſt all the aſhes into
the riuer of Loire.
               
               They would alſo haue broken down
& wholy deſtroyed the Abbey of S Denis
in France, withall the tombes of the
Kings of France that there are buried,
but that the Prince of Condy who then
was their chiefe, was faine to preuent

it, by appointing a Guard about the
Abbey, which he did in regard that he
was deſcended from ſome of the Kings
that there lye buryed.
               The Caluiniſts of Scotland haue
deſtroyed the Tombes of the Kings of
that Countrey, aſwell in the Abbey of
Dunfermeling, as in the Abbey of the
Holy Croſſe.
               
               In Bruxelles, when the Caluinian
Gewſes had their domination there,
they opened the vault in the Church
of S. Godula, where ſome of the Dukes
of Brabant were buryed; and brake
open the leaden cheſts, and threw out
their bones.
               Theſe are acts of Caluinian reformed
louers of Princes, that not only rebell
againſt them, and murther them,
but when they are dead endure not that
their bodyes may quietly remaine in
their ſepulchers. Are not theſe good teſtimonies
of the great affection, that
theſe reformed brethren beare vnto

Princes and Potentates? Surely Kings,
Princes, and Potentates, may take notice,
of the great change in theſe fellowes,
who ſo ſuddainly are become ſo
great Care-takers for their ſafties. But
becauſe there is no appearance that
Princes and Potentates will ſend their
Ambaſſadors into Holland, to thanke
them for their care; it ſeemes they can
ſmell, it is but a diſſembled care, and
that they doe not heerin giue credit,
vnto thoſe reformed, or deformed Brethren.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               I ſee not for all this, that Ieſuytes
are welcome to all Princes and Potentates.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               They are welcome to all thoſe that
beſt know them, but it is no wonder
that ſuch as are miſinformed by lying-teachers,
and haue no good affection
to Catholike religion, haue an auerſion
from Ieſuites, for they neither know

them, nor yet come to heare any right
report of them, from the mouthes of
thoſe that truly know their piety, and
vertuous conuerſation. But to the end
you may know whether the greateſt
Princes of Chriſtendome do know and
reſpect them or no, I will heere for the
better knowledge of the ignorant, and
in oppoſition to thoſe that out of a reſolued
malice doe calumniate them,
make it briefly to appeare, in what accompt
and reputation they ſtand with
thoſe aforeſaid Princes: that thereby
their Caluinian Maligners, and all others,
may ſee what they haue profitted
by their ſo loud barking againſt them,
in Placcarts, in pulpits, in pamphlets, &
all kind of detraction.
               Yet with proteſtation before God,
that I do this, and haue reſolued to doe
it, wholy of my ſelfe, without being
thereunto deſyred, moued, or counſelled
by any Ieſuite in the world, or being
a Ieſuite my ſelfe.
               
                  
Let vs then begin with his Holines,
Gregory the Fifteenth, now Pope, at this
preſent, who choſe for his Confeſſor
Cardinall Bellarmyne of the Society of
IESVS.
               The Emperour Ferdinand now raigning,
hath to his Confeſſor a Ieſuite.
               The moſt Chriſtian King of France
hath to his Confeſſour a Ieſuyte.
               The victorious King of Polonia, hath
to his Confeſſor a Ieſuite.
               The Eccleſiaſtical Princes Electors,
with the Duke of Bauaria, and almoſt
all the Catholike Princes and Prelates
of Germany, haue to their confeſſours
Ieſuites. And ſo haue in like manner
the greateſt Prelates and Princes of Italy.
               And albeit his Catholike Maieſty
of Spayne hath no Ieſuite to his confeſſour,
but a Friar of the Dominicans according
to an ancient cuſtome, of ſome
former Kings of Spayne; yet is he very
much affected to the Ieſuites, of the

which one was confeſſor to his mother;
and his Brother and Siſter haue vnto
their Confeſſour a Ieſuite called Father
Ieronimo de Florentia, whome King
Philip the third, of glorious memory,
Father vnto the preſent King Philip the
fourth, cauſed to come vnto him for his
conſolation in his greateſt ſicknes, and
to remaine with him till he gaue vp the
Ghoſt.
               So haue alſo many of the greateſt
Prelates and Princes of his Court, Ieſuites
to their Confeſſours. In like ſort
haue the principalleſt Prelates & Princes
in the Court of the Emperour, in the
Court of the King of France, and in the
court of the King of Polonia &c.
               Are the Ieſuites murtherers of
Princes and Potentates, and haue the
greateſt Princes and Potentates of all
Chriſtendome, no more feare of them,
then to admit them daily in their preſence?
To make choice of them as of
thoſe eſpeciall perſons vnto whom they

reueale the ſecrets of their ſoules & cō
                  ſciences?
This is no ſigne that they beliue
Caluiniſts, & hold Ieſuites for Prince-killers,
but a manifeſt token, that they
hold Caluiniſts for falſe accuſers, and
Ieſuites for true ſeruantes of Chriſt,
whoſe great learning & vnderſtanding,
accompanyed with true religious deuotion,
with a well tempered diſcretion,
and all kinde of vertue, theſe
Princes owne experience hath ſufficiently
taught them to diſcerne. I will neuer
deſire Caluiniſts to ceaſe from calumniating
Ieſuites: they doe heereby
make themſelues the more knowne vnto
Catholike Princes & Potentates for
malicious Calumniatours. Caluiniſts
cannot teach Catholike Princes to
know Ieſuites, becauſe they are ſure
they know them better then Caluiniſts
can know them, and Caluiniſts better
then otherwiſe they ſhould, by their
calumniating them.
               Heere ſtandeth it alſo to be noted,

that ſome Princes who haue diſpoſed
themſelues to abandon the world, and
to ſerue God in religious ſtate of life,
haue become Ieſuites. As the Duke of
Gandia in Spayne, Aloiſius Gonzaga,
ſonne & heyre vnto Ferdinand Marquis
of Castillion, the Duke of Bouino in Italy.
And now of late Charles of Lonayne
Prince, and Biſhop of Verdune,
Prince of the Empire, and Coſin
to his Maieſty of England, with ſundry
other great and noble perſons. Now is
it in all reaſon to be conſidered that if
ſuch noble Men and Princes, who for
no other reſpect then the meere loue &
ſeruice of God, entred into this Society,
ſhould not therin haue foūd the deuout
& godly life of theſe Fathers, with ſuch
exerciſe of learning & vertue, not to be
in all reſpects conforme to the good opinion,
which they had conceaued therof,
before they came among thē, there can
be no doubt, but they wold haue departed
frō thē, albeit they had made proofe

of their conuerſation for ſome yeares
togeather, for that this Order doth not
oblige profeſſion to be made at the end
of one yeares probation, but alloweth
an vnlimited tyme of more yeares.
               Conſidering with my ſelfe what
great perſons in this our age (notwithſtanding
all ſlaunders that calumniating
aduerſaries haue rayſed againſt Ieſuites,
Prieſts, & Friars &c.) haue abandoned
the world, religiouſly to ſerue
God in pouerty, chaſtity, & obedience,
in ſundry Orders, and that a Duke hath
byn ſeene to become a Capuchin in Paris,
and the Brother of a Duke to become
of the ſame auſtere order in Bruxelles,
I was mooued to thinke that it
may belōg before we may ſee a Gewſe
or Caluinian Duke, or Prince become a
Miniſter, albeit that condition of life
obligeth not to the making and performing
of any ſuch vowes, or to any auſterity
at all, but to liue with eaſe, in
the Ghoſpell of free liberty. There is a

prouerbe in the Netherland language,
that Herman did in tyme get on his dublet,
after he had byn ſeauen yeares
drawing on of one ſleeue; but I ſuppoſe
Hermans dublet might wholy be gotten
on, and quite worne out, before a man
might ſee, ſuch perſons moued by the
great piety they might obſerue in Miniſters,
to enter with them into the ſeruice
of the Word.
               But to returne vnto my precedent
purpoſe, me thinkes it were not heere
impertinent to ſee, and conſider what
cauſe there may be found of the great
hatred which Caluiniſts beare vnto Ieſuytes
(and not Caluiniſts alone but all
other Sectaryes,) for albeit they beare il
will and hatred vnto all Catholikes, &
eſpecially vnto all Eccleſiaſticall perſons;
yet is it manifeſt vnto al the world
that the Ieſuites of all others haue the
precedence in the malice of Caluiniſts.
And ſeeing ſomething there may ſeeme
to be, that is ſingular in theſe religious

men, more then in others I haue the
more endeauored to diſcerne what this
may be, and three thinges I haue obſerued.
               1. This firſt is, that there was neuer
any Order in the Catholik Church,
that in ſo ſhort a ſpace hath diſperſed it
ſelfe ſo farre ouer the world, to make
the name of Ieſus Chriſt knowne vnto
heathen and Pagan people.
               2. The ſecond is, that there was neuer
any Order that in ſo ſhort a tyme,
hath written ſo many learned bookes,
aſwel in diuinity, as in al other laudable
ſciences.
               3. The third is that there was neuer
any Order, that in ſo ſhort a tyme
hath had ſo great a number of Martyrs,
aſ well by the perſecution of Pagans, as
Apoſtata Chriſtians.
               As for their exerciſes of deuotion,
labour in preaching, hearing of confeſſions,
inſtructing and bringing vp
of youth in learning, without any recompence

of their parents, making of
attonements where there is diſſention
and diſcord, readines at all houres of the
day and night, to viſit the ſicke, and
to conſolate their ſoules, is not now
needfull heere to be ſpoken at large: but
when I well conſider their manifold
deedes of Deuotion and Charity, I remember
the wordes of Chriſt vnto the
Iewes, when for his good deedes they
would haue ſtoned him to death, I haue
wrought many good workes among you: for
which of thoſe will you stone me?
               
               Enuy is the deadly enemy of vertue
and of wel-proſpering. The Ieſuites
thankes be to God, do go well forward
in al their works of piety; and for theſe,
Sectaryes will ſtone them: and beeing
themſelues the actual murtherers of Ieſuytes,
it is no maruell that they ſeeke
to robbe & tak away the good name &
fame of thoſe, whoſe lyues they let not
to take away: nor is it any wonder, that
they to coulour their owne tyrannous

murthering of Ieſuites, giue out that Ieſuytes
are murtherers of Princes & Potentates:
As if themſelues did put Ieſuites
to death, therby to ſaue the lyues
of Princes & potentates which Ieſuites
would els bereaue them off. But what
loue Caluiniſts, and principally Holland-Gewſe-Caluiniſtes
do beare vnto
Princes, themſelues doe now adayes,
the lōger the more, make better known
vnto the greateſt Princes of Chriſtendome,
then they can make knowne vnto
them, that Ieſuites are murtherers of
them, and of Potentates.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               I muſt confeſſe, that you haue heere
manifeſted vnto me much more then
before I euer knew, or heard of. But
yet, notwithſtanding that it cannot be
perceaued, that the Ieſuites haue had any
hād in the deaths of any of the eight
Princes heere by you mentioned, it
ſhould ſeeme they haue had knowledge
of intentions of murthering Princes, as

of Queene Elizabeth of England, King
Henry the fourth of France, before he
was murthered by Rauaillac, his Maieſty
that is now King of Great Britayne,
by the gunpowder Treaſon, & his Excellency
Prince Maurice in Holland.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               For the firſt, concerning Queene
Elizabeth of England, if we well conſider
her abandoning of the Catholike
Religion, which at her coronation
ſhe ſwore to mayntayne, and that
beeing a woman, ſhe tooke vpon her
ſupreame authority in Eccleſiaſticall
cauſes (which your Caluinian deuines
in Holland do affirme to be Idolatry either
in man or woman) ordayning alſo
by her Statutes, that thoſe who ſhould
deny to confeſſe her Eccleſiaſticall authority
vpon their oathes, ſhould ſuffer
death as traytors: That ſhe depoſed and
put from their places, the Catholike Biſhops
and Prelates, caſting ſome in priſon
& forcing others to fly the realme.
               
                  
That ſhe ordayned a forfayture of
twenty poundes a moneth, for not
comming to her Caluinian-proteſtant
Church-ſeruice, with other leſſer forfaytures
for Catholikes of leſſe meanes,
who in regard of their conſciences abſented
themſelues from the ſayd ſeruice;
by meanes whereof the priſons euery
where became ſo repleniſhed with
Catholikes, that new priſons muſt be
made for thē, becauſe the old could not
conteyne the number.
               Moreouer the putting to death of
ſo many Catholike Prieſtes, as alſo the
putting to death, and ruyning of ſome
Gentlemen, and others that had harbored
them.
               The queſtion now is whether
Gewſes or Caluiniſts being to the contrary
ſo treated by any Prince that had
ſworne to maintayne their Caluinian
religion, they would with patience endure
it? Who can belieue this? Seeing
they haue not letted to rebell agaynſt

their Princes and Soueraignes that haue
intruded no innouation, or change in
religion vpon them, as agaynſt the
Kings of Spaine, & France, and againſt
Mary Queene of Scotland: who I ſay
can belieue this, when it is apparent
that the very ground-worke and foundation
of Caluinian religion is layed &
ſetled vpon rebellion, as to all the world
it is manifeſt.
               This Queene Elizabeth was ſo
ſeuere and cruell, that ſhe letted not to
burne alyue ſome of our countrey-men,
beeing Netherlanders, & not her borne
Subiects, for their Anabaptiſme; and
cauſed ſome Puritans which are directly
concurring in religion with the Caluiniſts
of Holland, to be hanged, and others
to fly the realme, and lyue in exile,
becauſe they had ſought both by wryting
and preaching, to bring the religion
of England to the iuſt forme and faſhion
of that of Geneua, & Holland.
Puniſhing then, the Anabaptiſtes as heretikes,

and the Puritans as ſeditious,
ſhe hath not letted to vſe a greater cloke
and colour for her perſecuting of Catholikes,
and this was, to cauſe to be
giuen out at diuers times, that they meant
to kill her.
               She imployed among other for one
of her ſpyes, ſometyme in France, ſomtyme
in Italy one William Parry, This
Parry coming vpon a tyme out of Italy,
ſuppoſing to get more credit and fauour,
came vnto her and told her,
that at his being in Italy where he bare
himſelfe as a Catholike (hauing leaue
ſo to do) he there demaunded of a Ieſuyte,
if it ſhould be a deed well done to
kill the Queene, and that the Ieſuyte
anſwered yea, & that thereupon he had
promiſed the Ieſuyte to do it. Parry being
then demaunded, if he had not in
his trauayles abroad, byn acquaynted
with one Father William Criton a Scotiſh
Ieſuyte (who at that tyme was priſoner
in the Tower of London) he anſwered

yea. Being then demaunded if
he had asked the ſame queſtion of the
ſayd Father Criton, he anſwered he had,
but that Father Criton had diſſwaded
him from it: he thought belike that if he
had anſwered yea, he ſhould haue byn
brought face to face with Father Criton,
who might haue conuinced & ſhamed
him, and therefore he thought it eaſier
for him to bely a Ieſuyte that was abſent,
then one that was preſent. Father
Criton within a whyle after was deliueret
out of the Tower, and the rather for
that he was a Scotſman & no borne ſubiect,
howbeit he was banniſhed out of
the Countrey. Parry, becauſe of his ſeruices
in matter of ſpiery, ſolicited to
haue a place and office that now was
fallen vacāt: the place was giuen to another,
Parry grew malecontent, and
caſt out wordes of murmuration. The
Earle of Leyceſter loued him not, he was
known and diſcouered among the Catholikes
for a ſpy, & that he had broght

diuers principall Catholikes in trouble:
& being thus diſcouered he was grown
out of date, and vnable to do ſeruices of
the ſame kind, as he had formerly done;
Parry was apprehended, and charged
he had an intention to kill the Queene:
in fine he was hanged, and this was at
laſt the reward he got for the good offices
he had done. The reaſon why he
was hanged, ſeemeth to haue byn, that
if they had let him liue, & not giuen
him liuing according to his deſyre, he
might haue diſcouered many ſecrets: he
wrote a letter vnto the Queene out of
the Tower, wherin among other things
he ſayd vnto her: Pitty poore Parry, and
relieue him, for life without liuing is not fit
for him.
               
               It is no cuſtome that a criminall
offender, and in ſo haynous a matter as
the murthering of a Prince, ſhall not only
wryte to be ſet at liberty, but to be
prouided of meanes to liue by. He knew
well that they knew, that the counſell

which he ſaid was giuen him by a Ieſuite
in Italy, was but an inuention
of his owne head for the more conuenient
perſecuting of ſuch, as might be
found to haue receaued Ieſuytes into
their howſes (of the confiſcation of
whoſe goods Parry might haue had his
ſhare) but it ſo fell out, that Parry played
wily-beguyle himſelfe. For when
he came to the gallovves, and ſavv
how the matter went, he grew ſo
ill contented, that he plainly ſayd, that
the Queene after his death would ſay,
that ſhe had loſt the beſt keeper of her
parke.
               Some yeares after the death of Parry,
one Edward Squyre was alſo hanged,
who as it was giuen out, did meane
to poyſon the Queene & Earle of Eſſex,
(who afterward by the ſayd Queene
was put to death.) This Equire came out
of Spayne, and ſayd that a Ieſuyte there
had coūſelled him to poiſon the Queen,
and the Earle. The poyſon he ſayd was

deliuered him in a bladder in Spayne, &
there with he ſhould annoint the ſaddle
wheron the Earle ſhould ryde, and the
chayre wherin the Queene ſhould ſit.
This muſt haue byn a very wonderfull
poyſon, that a chayre & a ſaddle being
but annoynted therewith, it would kill
thoſe who ſhould ſit in the one, & ride
on the other.
               Who cānot thinke this to be a moſt
palpable lye? how muſt he then ſpeed
that muſt bring this forcefull poyſon in
a bladder (if any bladder could contein
it) and anoynt it on the chayre and on
the ſaddle? But the lying fooliſh knaue
that came with this tale in his mouth,
vpon hope of reward, becauſe he would
not performe the buſines, but diſcouered
it, was notwithſtanding rewarded
at Tiburne with a halter, which was
held neceſſary, becauſe it might be
thought the Queene had much reaſō to
ſuſtaine the quarrell of the Hollanders;
ſeeing Spayne ſo much hated her, that

murtherers were ſent from thence for
her deſtruction: for Squyre was ouerborne
by the force and torment of the
racke, to intend & meane the thing indeed
that himſelfe came to reueale, and
ſo was hanged, notwithſtanding he
was a good Proteſtant.
               As concerning the conſtant and
glorious Martyr Father Edmund Campian,
who with others (to wit thirteene
in number) was condemned for hauing
in Rome, and Rhemes conſpired the
Queens death, as a couple of moſt falſe
witneſſes affirmed, is as ſhamefull and
vniuſt a matter, as euer any did paſſe
by way and courſe of Iuſtice: for after
theſe falſe witneſſes, had taken their
oathes, that theſe thirteene perſons had
at Rome, and Rhemes on ſuch and ſuch
days, of ſuch & ſuch moneths, of ſuch a
yeare, conſpired the Queens death, one
Mayſter Thomas Lancaſter a Gentleman,
and one Mayſter William Nicolſon,
being there preſent, and both credit-worthy

perſons, did offer to proue
by diuers witneſſes, that ſome of
theſe thirteen perſons had not byn out
of England that yeare, wherin the falſe
witneſſes had ſworne they conſpired
the Queens death in Rome, & Rhemes:
& that they had not bin out of England
in ſome yeares, both before that yeare
and after it: and the priſoners themſelues
proteſted at the Barre, on their
ſoules, that in all the dayes of their lyues
they had neuer byn all togeather at one
tyme in one place, but only there that
very day. And albeit the proteſtation
and offer of proofe made by the two
perſons before named, had byn ſufficient
in all law and iuſtice throughout
the world to haue diſcouered theſe falſe
witneſſes, and to haue cauſed them to
haue had their deſerued puniſhment, yet
proceeded the Iudges forward in iniuſtice,
and condemned Father Edmund
Campian, & almoſt all the reſt to death,
as being culpable of that conſpiration,

whereof by theſe falſe witneſſes they
were accuſed. But at this we need not
wonder if we conſider what the Iuſtice
was of this Queene, who letted not to
make a law, directly contrary to the law
of God and all the world, that one witneſſe
only ſhould be ſufficient, for the
condemnation of a man to the loſſe of
life and goods, if it were in a caſe concerning
herſelfe: which without all
doubt may cauſe wonderful iniuſtice in
a coūtrey where ſuch perſidious people
are inough to be found, as for reward
will not make ſcruple to take any oath,
agaynſt whoſoeuer it be, let the cauſe be
what it will: and the more in the cauſe
of the Prince, whereby hope of fauour
and greater reward, is giuen. But becauſe
the hiſtory of this glorious martyr,
and of thoſe others alſo that were
with him condemned, is publiſhed to
the world in Print in the Latin tongue,
I ſhall not need in this matter further
to enlarge my ſelfe.
               
                  
That King Henry the fourth of Frāce
was hurt by one Iohn Chaſtell at Paris
who meant to haue killed him ſome
years before he was killed by Rauaillac,
is knowne to all the world. This Chastell,
had ſomtyme byn a ſcholler in the
ſchooles of the Ieſuytes, Ergo ſay the
Hugenotes, the Ieſuytes inſtructed
him to murther the King. Surely a
very fayre concluſion: Many youthes
go to other ſchooles, wherof ſome come
afterward to comit criminall offences,
as treaſons, murthers, thefts, and the
like; is it not a good argument & great
reaſon, that for this their School-maiſters
muſt be puniſhed or defamed?
               The fact of Chaſtell came to be
iudged & looked into by certayne Politykes,
and great enemyes of Ieſuites,
and in a fury the Ieſuytes were commaunded
out of Paris, a Piramide was
erected in memory of this fact, and in
accuſation of the Ieſuites, the Ieſuites
patiented this Calumny, vntill tymes

daughter might be admitted to haue audience:
which in the end ſo came to
paſſe, that this King (thankes be vnto
God) vnto whoſe view the Ieſuites had
byn by their Hugenotes and Politike
backe-friends ſo vgly painted out, and
deſcribed, receaued at their handes ſo
great ſatisfaction of their innocency,
that he not only cauſed the Fathers of
this Society to be receaued agayne into
Paris, and cauſed the ſcandalous Piramide
to be raced downe to the ground;
but by many benefits done by him vnto
theſe Fathers, beſides the erecting for
them the fayreſt Church and Colledge
they haue in all France, he ſhewed himſelfe
their very great affectioned & true
Friend: yea he made choyſe of thē, to be
the preceptors and ſcoole-maiſters vnto
his owne Children, to declare vnto
the world that he held them not for euil
inſtructors of youth, as they had byn
vniuſtly reported to be. Who can deſire
greater teſtimony of theſe Fathers acquyting,

from this great calumny?
               Let vs now come vnto his Maieſty
the preſent King of great Britaine, concerning
the acculation of Father Henry
Garnet in the matter of the gun-powder
treaſon. This treaſon was without all
doubt, a moſt wicked intention of ſome
Catholikes, that with patience would
not endure the perſecution which ſo
many of their Catholike-brethren had
ſo long, & ſo patiently endured, and as
the good Chriſtians in the perſecutions
of the Roman Emperous alſo did. But
who wotteth, whether this might not
be a deuice, firſt practiſed in the ſubtill
brayne of the Secretary, Sir Robert Cecil,
who by ſome ſubtill deuice might
get it put into the heades of ſome Catholikes,
aſwell as the Secretary Sir
Francis Walſingam had before, that imployed
one Polie a favgned Catholik, to
draw thoſe Gentlemen into the conſpiracy
of deliuering out of durance Mary
Queene of Scotland his maieſties mother

that now raygneth: by which
meanes of thoſe Gentleman came all to
loſe their hues, and that good Queene
alſo. But let that be, as be it might. One
of thoſe Catholikes that was priuy to
the ſayd powder treaſon, confeſſed on
the torture, that he had in confeſſion
giuen Father Garnet knowledge of the
matter. He ſayd not that Father Garnet
was one of the conſpirators, or that he
animated him, or any of them vnto it,
but to the contrary, that he had earneſtly
diſwaded him from it. They were put
to death: Father Garnet was apprehended;
he was accuſed to haue byn priuy
to the treaſon▪ and that he had not diſcouered
it. Father Garnet anſwered that
he might not in any ſort vtter ought
that was reuealed vnto him in cōfeſſiō,
for ſecrecy of all that which is vttered
in cōfeſſion muſt euer be an inuiolable
precept in the Catholike Church: for
the prieſt that ſhould do the contrary is
to be degraded, and to be ſhut vp,

and put to pennance all the dayes of
his life.
               But Father Garnet declared that he
was ſo earneſt in forbidding him to comit
this foule fact, that he denyed to
giue him abſolution, vnleſſe he would
deſiſt from this intention: what could
the Father haue done more, if the conſpiracy
had byn againſt the Pope himſelfe?
               Thus then was this innocent Father
put to death, not for that he was
a conſpiratour or actour in this treaſon,
but becauſe he would not violate
the ſtrong ſeale and obligation of
the holy Sacramēt of Cōfeſſion, which
no Prieſt vpon earth can be licenſed
to doe.
               It hapned at ſuch tyme as the Caluinian-Gewſes
had vſurped through
their rebellion, the gouernement of the
Citty of Antwerp, that a Spaniſh merchant
there dwelling named Iaſpar de
Enastro, hauing vnderſtood that King

                  Philip the ſecond of Spayne, had declared
by ſentence, that William of Naſſaw
Prince of Orange, of whome he was
the Lawfull ſoueraigne Lord, was fallē
                  in crimen laeſae maiestatis
                  ▪ for his publike
rebellion agaynſt his beforenamed Soueraygne,
and did thereby deſerue to
ſuffer death, & that he had put the execution
of the ſaid ſentence in the hands
of any ſuch perſon or perſons as would
vndertake it: He thereupon counſelled
and perſwaded a young fellow that was
his ſeruant, called Iohn de Iauregny borne
in Biſcay, to performe this act. But
when this Iauregny was ready to goe about
it, the aforeſayd Enastro his mayſter,
got himſelfe out of the way. Iauregny
with a piſtoll ſhot the Prince of
Orange through the checkes, whereof
he dyed not, but Iauregny was preſently
killed by ſome of the Prince his ſeruants:
heerupon enquiry being made,
it was vnderſtood that Iauregny did vſe
to go to confeſſion to one Father Antonius

Timmerman, a religious man of the
order of S. Dominicke. This Religious
man was apprehended and asked what
Iohn de Iauregny had vttered vnto him
in Confeſſion. The Religious Father
well knowing the ſtrict commaundement
of the Catholike Church, that
nothing that is vttered in confeſſion
muſt be reuealed, made anſwere that
he knew not; becauſe that he indeed
did know nothing, concerning this
mans confeſſion that he might vtter.
His examiners then cauſed him to be
hanged by his thumbes, with weightes
faſtned to his toes, to force him by this
torture to reueale vnto them what had
by Iauregny byn reuealed vnto him in
confeſſion; but the Reuerend and reſolute
Father, would in no ſort violate
therein the law and commaundment of
the vniuerſall Church of God, but alwayes
whyle he hung in this great torment,
he called vpon God, ſaying out
of the 140. Pſalme, Keep o Lord my mouth

and my lipps, that I ſinne not with my
tongue. Heerupon they ſentenced him
to death, and to the deuiding of his body
into foure quarters: which death &
martyrdome he conſtantly endured.
               Of the before-mentioned Powder-treaſon,
was alſo accuſed Father
William Baldwine, of the SOCIETY
of IESVS. This Father as he trauailed
in Germany was by Frederike the
fourth, then Palſgraue of the Rhene, apprehended
neere vnto Franckendale, &
by him ſent priſoner vnto the Ambaſſador
of his Maieſty of England, then
reſident at Duyſeldorp in the Countrey
of Cleue. And worthy it is to be noted,
that on the very ſame day that this Father
was deliuered into the handes of
the Engliſh Ambaſſadour at Duyſeldorp,
the ſayd Palſgraue dyed at Heydelberge,
& ſo came to taſt of death himſelfe,
ſooner then the Father, which he
intended to ſend to the ſlaughter.
               The Father was carryed into England,

where after he had remayned
priſoner many yeares in the Tower of
London, and not the leaſt point in the
world could be proued againſt him cō
                  cerning
the aforeſayd Treaſon, (notwithſtanding
that in ſome printed
bookes it was publiſhed that he was
culpable) he was at laſt deliuered out of
priſon, and diſmiſſed the Realme.
               Concerning one Peter Pan, ſayd
to be ſent by the Ieſuytes of Ipres in
Flanders to kill Prince Maurice in Holland,
the matter hath byn throughly
examined, and the Calumny rayſed agaynſt
thoſe Fathers ſufficiently refuted
in a Printed booke, wherein is alſo
ſet downe an atteſtation of the Magiſtrates
of Ipres (of whence this Peter
Pan was) wherin this accuſatiō is ſhewed
to be falſe. Peter Pan was knowne to
be a fellow that was frantike, but the
madnes of his braynes could not free
him out of the handes of the Holland-hangman:
for the Iuſtice of Holland

found it wiſdome, to put this poore
foole to death.
               I truſt I haue heere cleerly declared,
how the Ieſuites haue by their
Caluinian enemyes byn moſt falſly
calumniated: and albeit that themſelues
do in ſuch caſes recomend their
cauſe to God, diſpoſing themſelues to
beare with patience all iniuryes, for the
loue of CHRIST IESVS, notwithſtanding
they well know how falſe they
are: yet my ſelfe euen of zeale vnto
truth and equity, could not omit to vtter
thus much, vpon the occaſion now
giuen.
               The cuſtome of giuing out, that Ieſuites
and Prieſts do intend to murther
Princes, was firſt takē vp in England &
put in practiſe by ſome of Queene Elizabeths
Caluinian Counſellers, who to
haue the better colour to perſecute Catholikes,
whome they feared might encreaſe
to faſt, as alſo to make them the
leſſe compaſſionate of the people, did

ſeeke to make them odious by ordinarily
giuing out that they went about to
kill the Queen. But that the ſayd Queen
and her Counſellers themſelues did not
belieue this, reaſon maketh manifeſt:
for whē is it found that a Prince or Ruler
fearing that for ſome certaine notorious
cauſe he is in dāger to be killed by
any of his ſubiects, will notwithſtāding
continue the ſame cauſe, yea and daily
more & more increaſe it, as this Queen
did her perſecution▪ how can this agree
with reaſon of State? for through continuance
and increaſe of perſecution,
thoſe that are perſecuted doe comonly
alſo increaſe: and it might fall out that
among the number of the perſecuted,
for all do not alwayes endure with like
patience, ſome might be found, that being
driuen to deſperate termes might
attempt ſome ſuch thing (for as the Philoſopher
ſayth, the fly hath her ſplene)
but the patient ſuffering for religion is
eſpecially taught, and recomended by

Catholike teachers, and the contrary
by others of contrary Religions, and eſpecially
Caluiniſts, of whoſe hoat and
reuengefull ſpirits the world hath already
had teſtimony inough.
               Father William Criton the Scottiſh
Ieſuyte before named, being before
ſome of Queene Elizabeths Counſell, a
little before his departure out of the
Countrey, ſayd vpon occaſion concerning
this matter: My Lords, you vſe
heere a manner of giuing out among
your ſubiects, that Ieſuites and Prieſtes
do go about to kill your Queene; but in
very truth, if we intended any ſuch
thing, ſhe could not liue: for you muſt
vnderſtand, that there are a multitude
of people of the Catholike religion, that
haue wholy abandoned the world, and
haue choſen to liue in all ſtrictnes and
auſterity, ſequeſtring themſelues from
all worldly pleaſures, deſiring and indeauouring
nothing more then to leaue
this world, and to liue with God in his

Kingdome of heauen. Among theſe
men that ſo little reſpect the world diuers
may be found, who beeing perſwaded
that it were ſo meritorious a deed
before God, that he who ſhould deliuer
the world from an enemy and perſecutor
of the Catholike religion, and therfore
looſe his life, ſhould ſtraightwayes
enter into the eternall ioyes of heauen;
without all doubt this matter would
not be left vnattempted. The counſellers
hearing this had little to ſay to the
contrary.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               To ſay the truth, I muſt needs confeſſe
I haue heere heard much more thē
I ſuppoſed could be ſayd. I do now well
perceaue a man can neuer come to the
true vnderſtanding of what ſtandeth
in controuerſy, before he haue heard
both partyes.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               I haue firſt recounted, what Princes
and Potentates haue byn murthered, or

made away in our dayes; and after that,
I haue ſpoken of intentions or meanings
to make away Princes: It reſteth
that I now ſpeake of the intentions of
Gewſes, or Caluinian reformed Brethren,
about the murthering or making
away of Princes; thoſe innocēt wolues
I meane, that haue had their handes
in the bloud of fiue of the eight
Princes before named, to the end we
may alſo ſee how pure and vnſpotted
they are in their good meanings & intentiōs,
to haue put that buſines in further
practiſe.
               Firſt then it is a thing cleere & notorious
that the Hugnenots of France
had a reſolued purpoſe to haue murthered
the moſt Chriſtian King Francis the
ſecond, with his mother, and ſundry of
the nobility, in the Citty of Amboiſe.
               
               It is alſo moſt certayne that a Zeland
Gewſe or Caluiniſt, meant to haue
blown vp William of Naſſaw Prince of
Orange, with ſome of the Holland and

Zeland States, with gun-powder, in
the Towne-houſe of Fluſhing, if it had
not byn diſcouered by him that aſſiſted
him to conuey the powder into the ſeller
or vault of the ſayd Towne-houſe.
And had this ſucceeded according to
the purpoſe of the authour thereof, Baltazar
Gerard, that afterward killed the
ſayd Prince of Orange, had ſaued his
life, and his labour, and the Gewſes reformed
Brethren had, had the honour
of murthering ſix of the eight Princes
before named.
               When I conſider this Prince, and
theſe intentions of his death, me thinkes
it muſt needes be a great ſigne, that he
was not in the fauour of God, ſince as
well Caluiniſts, as Catholikes, went about
to kill him.
               Heerto may alſo be added the Earle
of Gowry in Scotland, a Caluiniſt alſo.
The hiſtory is publike in print, how he
meant to haue killed the King, wherof
yearly memory both in Scotland & England

is continued, on the fifth day of
Auguſt, for his Maieſties deliuery.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               You make me almoſt aſhamed of
my ſelfe, to conſider that our people in
Holland do make ſuch exclamations agaynſt
Ieſuytes and Prieſtes, and are
ſhewed to be in thoſe foule facts faulty
themſelues, and the Ieſuyts and Prieſts
whome they accuſe, not faulty at all.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               I am well content, & thinke my
labour well beſtowed, when I fynd my
ſelfe to haue to doe with ſuch as wil affoard
place vnto truth and reaſon, before
paſſion and partiality.
               But heere are you alſo to vnderſtand
that, that which I haue ſayd, concerning
the cleering of the Ieſuites of this
Calumny, doth alſo ſerue for the cleering
of other Catholike Prieſts, and ſpirituall
perſons, that ſecretly remayne
in Holland, & in the adioyned Prouinces,
or in any place els, where they are

fayne to remayne in like manner, who
haue not any charge, nor can haue any
charge to commit, or endure others to
comit ſuch foule and euill facts, but are
to meddle in matters concerning their
Prieſtly function, as in adminiſtration
of Sacraments, and inſtruction of Catholikes
in all piety & vertue.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               The Placcart ſaith notwithſtanding,
that the Ieſuytes and Prieſts do ſeeke to
bring the good Inhabitants of theſe
Prouinces with their falſe doctrine, to
Idolatry, to an auerſiō from their Lawfull
Superiours, and to the murthering
of Princes and Potentates, to preferre
therby, in theſe Countreys the Tiranny
and abſolute domination of the King of
Spayne &c.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Heere haue we agayne a whole
heape of Calumnyes togeather: Ieſuites
and Prieſts are heere accuſed for falfe
doctrine & Idolatry.
               
                  
Of intending to bring the good Inhabitants
of theſe Countreys to an auerſion
from their lawfull Superiors.
               To the murthering of Princes and
Potentates, and to the furthering of the
tyranny & domination of the King of
Spayne.
               Let vs now vpon examining of
theſe points, ſee what may be ſayd, with
truth and reaſon.
               Concerning the falſe doctrine wherwith
Caluiniſts do accuſe Ieſuites and
other Catholike Prieſtes: That is, that
among other points, which they hold
contrary to their hereſyes, that God is
not ſo vniuſt and tyrannicall, that he
doth (as Caluiniſts affirme) take yoūg
infants euen frō the breſts of their mothers,
and vndeſeruedly caſt them into
the euerlaſting fire of hell.
               The true doctrine then according
as Caluiniſts do teach▪ is, that God ſo
doth; and the doctrine of Ieſuites and
Prieſts which Caluiniſtscal falſe, is that

God is ſo good, ſo iuſt, and ſo mercifull
that he doth not ſo.
               Concerning their Idolatry, this eſpecially
is, as Caluiniſts affirme, that
they belieue and teach▪ that the body of
Chriſt is really preſent in the Sacramēt
of the Altar, that they adore it, and pray
vnto it, and that in their Churches they
haue Images. Now muſt I demaund of
you, from whence it proceedeth that
Catholiks belieue the reall Preſence of
Chriſt in this Sacrament?
            
            
               The Hollander.
               I know it is true that Chriſt at his
laſt ſupper taking bread, and bleſſing
it, ſayd vnto his Apoſtles, take and eate:
This is body: but for all that, he did not
ſo meane it.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               But withal you cōfeſſe that the cauſe
of this beliefe commeth from the very
mouth of Chriſt himſelfe: if it come
from the mouth of Chriſt, then taketh
it not originall from the mouth of any

Pope. Chriſt muſt haue lyed when he
ſayd it was his body, if it were not his
body; or Caluiniſtes muſt now lye, in
ſaying it is not his body, notwithſtanding
Chriſt ſayd it is.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               Neither of both do lye, Chriſt meant
that it was the figure, or ſigne of his body.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Where is it written, that Chriſt
meant it ſo?
            
            
               The Hollander.
               Our Preachers doe ſo interprete it.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               I perceaue your Preachers will not
only take vpō them to reforme the Catholike
Church, but they will alſo reforme
Gods word it ſelfe, and make it
vtter that which therein is not to be
found.
               But ſhew me where it is written that
aboue 1500▪ yeares after Chriſt had ſaid
it was his body, and that all Chriſtians

throughout the world did thereupon ſo
beliue it to be; he would then ſend new
teachers into the world, to reforme this
ancient Fayth, with teaching Chriſtians
to belieue, that it was not his body,
and that he did not ſo meane as he ſpak,
when he inſtituted this Sacrament.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               The oldeſt Chriſtian fayth was, that
it was not the body of Chriſt, and therfore
our teachers do call themſelues the
reformers of religion, becauſe they reforme
and bring religion to the firſt &
moſt ancient manner: for if this were
not ſo, they could not appropriate vnto
themſelues the name of reformers of
religion.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               They giue themſelues the name of
Reformers, but with their appropriating
this name vnto themſelues, they oblige
themſelues in the ſight and iudgement
of all men, of vnderſtanding, of the
whole world, & in al honour & reaſon,

if they wilbe accompted worthy to be
belieued, cleerly to demonſtrate two
thinges.
               The firſt is, that they are expreſly
ſent from God to reforme religion: for
if ſo be that a reformation was needful,
thē was it alſo needfull that God ſhould
thereunto ſend and imploy fit perſons,
that muſt be men of great holynes, and
haue power from himſelfe, to make it
appeare to the world, that they were ſēt
from him.
               The ſecond is, that they muſt be
able to ſtop the mouthes of all others,
that at the ſame tyme ſhould alſo appeare
in the world, pretending reformation
of religion as well as they, albeit
in diuers different manners, ſetting thē
at defiance, and chalenging to combat
with them, with the weapon of the
Word, as long as they dare.
               If men of vnderſtanding ſeeme to
imbrace your Caluinian reformation
without ſeeking ſuch requiſite ſatisfaction

therein as heere is noted, they can
be no other then Politikes, whoſe motiue
is their owne particuler temporall
end, or matter of ſtate, and not matter
of religion.
               But whereas you ſay that the moſt
ancient Chriſtian beliefe was, that the
reall preſence of Chriſt was not in the
Sacrament; whereas the wordes which
Chriſt ſpake and wherhence this Faith
is deriued, is the moſt ancient cauſe of
this beliefe:
               There is then to be conſidered, if
the Apoſtles themſelues when Chriſt
ſayd, Take and eate this is my Body, did
ſo belieue it to be or not: but certayne
it is that they all belieued it, vnleſſe it
were the falſe traytor iudas: for if they
had doubted thereof, the had without
all doubt demaunded or proponed ſome
queſtion vnto him about it, aſwell as
when he ſayd, that it was as eaſy for a
camell to paſſe through the eye of a
needle, as it was for a rich man to enter

into the Kingdome of heauen for them,
they ſtraight wayes demaunded of him,
who could then be ſaued? Whereupon
he anſwered them, that with God all
thinges are poſſible. Is it poſſible with
God that a camel, or the cable of a ſhip,
can go through the eye of a needle?
Then can the body of Chriſt be in the
Sacrament. But the Apoſtles among
ſundry other great miracles which they
had ſeene our Sauiour doe, whereof we
fynd ſome written (though many of
them were left vn written) did alſo ſee
him worke ſome great miracles in his
owne body, when he ſo altered the naturall
courſe therof, that he did ſundry
thinges therewith aboue the courſe and
poſſibility of nature: and therefore it is
no wonder that the Apoſtles, were all
ſilent, and without reply belieued the
wordes of Chriſt, which they knew
to meaſure by his power.
               There is alſo to be conſidered, that if
ſo be the firſt Chriſtians, to wit thoſe

of the primitiue Church, haue belieued
as Caluiniſts now do, that the body of
Chriſt is not really in this Sacramēt, or
that this Sacramēt is but a figure, ſigne,
or token of the body of Chriſt, how &
when began the beliefe in the world,
that the body of Chriſt was really
there? Through whoſe ordayning was
it ſo to be taken & belieued? By whome
was it taught? By whom was it writtē?
At what time was it that Communion-tables
were taken out of Churches, and
Altars erected there in their places?
            
            
               The Hollander.
               That know I not.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Nor no man els. But all Chriſtendome
knowes where, when, and by
whome, Altars in Churches haue byn
broken downe, & Communion-tables
there brought in: No leſſe to be ſeene
and noted to all the Chriſtians of the
world, muſt it needs haue byn, if in any
foregoing age ſince the time of Chriſt,

Communion Tables (if they had byn in
Churches) had byn caryed out, and in
place thereof, Altars had byn builded,
and Maſſe then begun to haue byn ſaid
at them, & Chriſtians then firſt taught
that the reall Preſence of Chriſt was to
be belieued to be there.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               Verily you do now tell me much.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               I will yet tell you more, howbeit
but in briefe: for I will leaue theſe matters
that Concerne controuerſies in religion
to be debated more largely & learnedly
by Catholike Deuines, but that
which I haue to tell you is this: That beſydes
the Catholike Chriſtians of the
Roman Church, there are great numbers
of Chriſtiās of the Greeke Church:
There are many Chriſtians of the Abiſſine
or Ethiopian Church: There are
Chriſtians of Malabar in the eaſt Indies
which were at firſt conuerted by Saint
Thomas the Apoſtle, with ſundry other

ſorts of ancient Chriſtians aſwell in Aſia
as in Africa: for the Apoſtles themſelues
haue byn in thoſe Countreys, &
firſt preached among their anceſtors,
and brought them to the fayth. Theſe
do differ in ſome points and ceremonies
one from another, & alſo from the
Church of Rome, but all theſe Chriſtians
can ſhew out of their Eccleſiaſticall
Annales and Church hiſtories,
that they haue had Maſſe euen from the
very tyme of the Apoſtles, and haue alwayes
belieued that the body of Chriſt
was really in the Sacrament of the Altar:
and albeit that theſe are ſequeſtred
from the Church of Rome, and all of
them who vnto that Church haue not
reconciled themſelues, are by the ſame
holden for Schiſmatikes; yet will they
all beare witneſſe for the Church of
Rome againſt all our European new &
different ſectaries, that they doe all of
them falſely bely the ſaid Church, in affirming
thoſe things to be corruptions,

which they take vpon them to reforme.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               Doe they affirme that the Apoſtles
themſelues haue firſt planted the Maſſe
in their Countreyes?
            
            
               The Brabander▪
               
               All of them with one conſent doe
reſolutly affirme it, aſſuredly knowing
that the Maſſe hath not had among thē
any other originall.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               I haue in Holland both read & heard
ſomthing, but this that you now tel me
did I neuer read, nor heare before: but
how is it then, that the Apoſtles haue
not mentioned this in their writings?
            
            
               The Brabander.
               The Apoſtles well knew that they
had no need to write that, which they
inſtituted and taught to be daily in vſe
among Chriſtians, ſeeing it could not
then be forgotten, and therefore needed
not for the preuenting of obliuion, to
be putit dovvne in vvryting.
               
                  
Of the greateſt number of the Apoſtles
we haue no wrytings at all, and
thoſe that wrote, haue left many things
vnwritten, aſwell concerning Chriſt
himſelfe, as concerning their owne
ſelues, not hauing written, when or by
whome themſelues were baptized, nor
whether they were baptized or no, and
yet were they without all doubt baptized.
They knew that Chriſt had promiſed
to ſend the Holy Ghoſt vnto his
holy Catholike Church, to teach the
ſayd church all truth, and to remayne
therewith to the end of the world, what
neceſſity was there then for them to put
downe all thinges in wryting, whereas
their expreſſe charge was to go ouer all
the world, and preach, and baptize, and
this may well be the cauſe that but fiue
of the twelue Apoſtles of chriſt haue
written, and thoſe but briefly neyther;
and the other ſeauen not at all, or not
whereof we haue any notice. But neuer
will I belieue, that any of the Apoſtles

that haue written, haue euer intended,
that their wrytings aboue fifteene
hundreth years after their deaths,
ſhould then firſt come to be truly interpreted
by a Iohn Caluin, or ſuch like,
who in our miſerable dayes haue afflicted
the whole Chriſtian world.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               You haue heere told me ſo much,
and with ſo cleere apparence of truth
that I ſtand wondering thereat, and by
Gods grace I will not leaue, to reflect
well vpon it.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Your Gewſes-reformed, will alſo
make Catholikes Idolaters, for hauing
of Images in their Churches. They
may make Moyſes an Idolater alſo,
who notwithſtanding he forbad the
making of Idols, erected Images in his
temple, for he well knew the difference
betweene the one and the other.
               The Heatheniſh Idolls, agaynſt
which the ſacred Scripture inueygheth,

ſo much, the Heathen did offer ſacrifice
vnto, which is the higheſt and greateſt
honour that is done vnto God himſelfe.
The belyers of Catholikes may put on
their ſpectacles to ſee what ſacrifice, or
Godly honour is done by them vnto Images,
albeit they be Images of Chriſt,
of his bleſſed Mother, and of his Saints,
not of the Gods of the Heathen, which
were all Diuells.
               No Catholikes offer ſacrifice to any
Images: no Catholikes pray to any Images,
for ſo to doe were not only a
moſt grieuous offence vnto God, but a
great folly & madnes in humayne creatures.
A dog will neuer run at a carued
or painted hare. Doe Sectaries weene
that Catholikes haue leſſe ſenſe then
brute beaſts? can they not vnderſtand
as well as vnreaſonable beaſts that they
are things without life? Catholike Chriſtians
haue them in vſe, for memory of
God and of his Saints, and in reuerencing
them, the reuerence is meant and

referred vnto thoſe they repreſent: as
when at hearing the name of IESVS,
we doe not reuerence the ſound, but
our thoughts are ſtraightwayes by that
ſound tranſported to Chriſt himſelfe, as
by the ſight of his Image they alſo are.
But your Caluinian pulpit-fellowes, to
ſeduce & bring the people in falſe conceyts
of Catholikes▪ will perforce make
them Idolaters, and belye them, in deſpyte
of truth. But let vs now proceed to
to the reſt.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               So I pray you do, for I haue heard inough
of this wrong-named Idolatry.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Concerning the point that Ieſuites
and Prieſtes, do go about to bring the
good inhabitants of theſe vnited Prouinces
to an auerſion from their lawfull
ſuperiours, is in troth, as good a ieſt to
be laught at, as it were, that a thiefe
hauing cut a purſe, ſhould cry out among
the people to looke well vnto

their purles, for being cut by the Cutpurſes.
The Gewſes themſelues of Holland
haue long ſince brought the inhabitants
of thoſe partes to haue an auerſion
from their lawfull Superiours; and
now they ſay, that Ieſuytes and Prieſts
do go about to do it, as though it were
not by themſelues done already, and as
though the preſent rebellious Vſurpers
of ſuperiority there, were true and lawfull
Superiours. But what goodly fellowes
will heere be lawfull ſuperiours?
Doth this lawfull Superiority belong
vnto them, becauſe they haue by fraud
and violence made themſelues the mayſters
of Cittyes and Prouinces, & chaſed
the lawfull ſuperiours away? Why
was not then Iohn Buckleſon, the Tayler
of Leydon, a lawfull King of Munſter
in Weſtphalia, when in like ſort he had
chaſed the lawfull Superiours thence?
And why haue your Holland-States by
ſtrong and forcible oppoſition hindred
the Arminians from making thēſelues

mayſters of ſome Cittyes, that ſo they
might become the lawful Superiours in
them, as well as they in others?
               But how greatly are the poore Hollanders
all the world ouer pittyed, becauſe
the King of Spayne doth ſo much
trouble them, to put them out of their
lawfull ſuperiority? They haue vnderſtood
that Catholike religion obligeth
to the reſtitution of ill gotten & detayned
goods, and therefore they are in
feare, as if they alſo knew that they are
the vniuſt detayners of that which belongeth
vnto another. But conſidering
that Caluiniſts or Gewſes, that haue
the power and authority in their hands
to make reſtitution, are not ſuch as goe
to Cōfeſſion to Ieſuites or Prieſtes, they
may therefore haue the leſſe feare.
               As touching the murthering of
Princes and Potentates, there hath already
ſufficiently byn ſpoken: but it ſeemeth
by the wordes of the placcart that
the Ieſuytes and Prieſtes doe ſeeke to

bring the good inhabitants of Holland
to become the murtherers of Princes &
Potentates; as if Ieſuytes and Prieſtes
went into Holland, to ſeeke to make
prouiſion of murtherers among the
good inhabitants there, to the end they
might employ them where need ſhould
be, in the murthering of Princes and
Potentates, in other Countreyes; as
though none els for ſuch purpoſe could
be found more fitting, then among the
good inhabitants of Holland.
               That they there ſhould alſo further
the Tyranny & domination of Spayne,
are two lyes. No ſubiects of the King of
Spayne are by him tyrannized, neyther
haue the Ieſuites or Prieſts in Holland
medled, or haue had charge to meddle
in matters of State or Gouernment, as
thinges beeing out of their profeſſion.
               The Hollanders cry out, and take
on very much about the Tyranny of
Spayne: but if it were ſo, that the
King of Spayne had no ſubiects out of

Spayne but only Hollanders, the Hollanders
might perhaps be better belieued:
but he hath other ſubiects alſo in
Europe, and out of Spayne, and of ſeuerall
nations.
               He hath Portugeſes, Neapolitans,
Sicilians, Milaneſes, Burgundians,
Germans, Walons, and Netherlanders,
that are not vnder Holland gouernement.
And which of all theſe Nations
is it, that liueth not now in a more free
and better ſtate, then in former tymes
vnder the comaund of their particuler
Kings, Princes and Lordes? And where
among all theſe differēt nations is there
any one found, that is ſo Tyrannized
ouer at this day, as are the ſubiects of
Holland, with ſo great and ſo intollerable
exactions and taxations.
               And whereas they haue alwayes
made profeſſion, to leaue people to the
liberty & freedom of their conſciences,
they do notwithſtanding forbid ſome
of their good inhabitants vpon great

paynes, the exerciſe of their religion according
as their conſciences do require,
which they deny not vnto Anabaptiſts,
nor Iewes.
               They cry out, and take on about
the Tiranny of Spayne, to make the inhabitants
afrayd of a faygned Tiranny,
that in the meane tyme they may the
better goe forward, as vnſeene, with
their owne true and great Tiranny indeed.
               No children may be ſent to ſchoole
in any places vnder the comaund of the
King of Spayne, or in Colledges of
Ieſuytes &c. Belike there is no good
Gewſes-Latin, or caluinian-reformed
ſciences there taught.
               Neyther may any children of Holland
be ſent to ſchoole in any enemyes
Countrey: but this being obſerued I do
ſcarſly ſee where any youth of Holland
may out of Holland be ſent to ſchoole;
ſeeing the Hollanders haue behaued
themſelues ſo well, and do ſo continew

to behaue themſelues, that they make
all the world their enemyes.
               All collections of money, gold, ſiluer,
goods &c. for, or to the vſe of any
Churches, Hoſpitailes, Spirituall or o
                  
                     ••
                  er
Colleges or Conuenticles, are pro
                  
                     ••
                  bited.
               Heerby may be perceaued that they

                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  etayne memory of their Churchrobbing.
They know Catholike religion
teacheth to make reſtitution of ill
gotten or wrongfully detayned goods,
and now they feare that ſome of their
good Inhabitantes Ieſuyts or Prieſts to haue
ſome ſcruple in conſcience about the
reſtoring agayne of ſome ſuch goods, &
therefore they haue held it neceſſary to
ſettle their conſciences in quiet, by prohibiting
them to come among them; &
ſo not to come to know that for any
Church-robbing they ought to make
ſatisfaction, nor yet to extend any charity
inſteed thereof to any Hoſpitalls,

ſpirituall or other Colledges &c. for the
worth-full Superiors of Holland, haue
occaſion inogh to vſe money, gold, ſiluer,
and other goods themſelues, or can
fynd occaſion to make vſe thereof, rather
then it ſhould, by collections, be
tranſported out of thoſe prouinces to other
places.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               When I well conſider of all that
you haue heere recounted, I am not
farre from belieuing, that it may all be
true, but in Holland we may not ſpeake
ſo.
               The Comons in Holland are made
belieue that all thinges are there as they
ought to be, that they do well, and alſo
proſper well.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Thoſe neuertheleſſe in Holland that
beare the heauy burthen of thoſe great
taxations, muſt needes feele the contrary.
And they that do not y
                     ••
                   feele it
though, do ſtand in good po
                     •••••
                  lity to

feele it better: for the States without all
doubt, will from hence-forward be
more and more carefull to employ all
their vnderſtandings, ſo to inure their
ſubiects to the burthen of preſſures and
taxations, that they ſhall not eaſily by
any Apoplexies looſe their ſenſe of feeling.
               Heere will I make an end, for it is
now late inough to go to bed.
            
            
               The Hollander.
               I thanke you much for your diſcourſe,
I will not forget to thinke vpon
it. And therfore thinke not I pray you,
that your wordes haue byn vttered to
deafe eares.
            
            
               The Brabander.
               Then I hope I haue not ſtrawed
Roſes before ſwyne, but haue ſhewed
reaſon to reaſonable creaturess.
            
            ¶The reſt of the company who
with ſilence had liſtned to that which
was ſpoken, did giue thankes to the
Brabander for his diſcourſe; & ſo euery

man went to his reſt. And heerewith
wil I alſo reſt from writing for the preſent:
and recomending my ſelfe vnto
the continuance of yours good fauour▪
leaue you to God.
            
               From Cullen the eight of Aprill
1622.
               
               Yours, vnto whom my handwryting
is ſufficient to let
you know my Name.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   