
      
         
            
            
            Haue vvith you to Saffron-vvalden.
OR,
Gabriell Harueys Hunt is vp. Containing a full Answere to the eldest sonne
of the Halter-maker. OR,
Nashe his Confutation of the sinfull
Doctor.
            
            The Mott or Posie, in stead of Omne tulit punctum:
Pacis fiducia nunquam.
            
            
               As much to say, as I sayd I would speake with
him.
            Printed at London by Iohn Danter
1596.
         
         
            
            
            To the most Orthodoxall and reuerent Corrector of staring haires, the sincere &
finigraphicall rarifier of prolixious rough barbarisme,
the thrice egregious and censoriall animaduertiser
of vagrant moustachios, chiefe scauinger of
chins, and principallquasi conuersant about heads. Head-man of the parish wherein
he dwells, speciall superuisor of all excrementall superfluities
for Trinitie Colledge in Cambridge, and
(to conclude) a not able and singular benefactor to all
beards in generall, Don Richardo Barbarossa de Caesario;
Tho: Nashe wisheth the highest Toppe of his
contentment and felicitie, and the Shortning of all his
enemies.
            
               ACute & amiable Dick,
not Dic mihi Musa
virum, Musing Dick,
that studied a whole
yeare to know which
was the male and female
of red herrings:
nor Dic obsecro,
Dick of all Dickes,
that in a Church where the Organs were defac'd,
came and offred himselfe with his pipe and taber:
nor old Dick of the Castle, that vpon the newes

of the losse of Calis, went and put a whole
bird-spit in the pike of his buckler: nor Dick
Swash or Desperate Dick, that's such a terrible
Cutter at a chyne of beefe, and deuoures
more meate at Ordinaries in discoursing of his
fraies and deep acting of his sl
                  •
               shing and hewing,
than would serue halfe a dozen Brewers
Dray-men: nor Dick of the Cow, that mad
Demilance Northren Borderer, who plaid his
prizes with the Lord Iockey so brauely: but
paraphrasticall gallant Patron Dick, as good a
fellow as euer was Heigh fill the pot hostesse:
curteous Dicke, comicall Dicke, liuely Dicke,
louely Dicke, learned Dicke, olde Dicke of
Lic
                     •
                  field, Iubeo te plurimum saluere, which is
by interpretation, I ioy to heare thou hast so
profited in gibridge.
            I am sure thou wondrest not a little, what
I meane to come vppon thee so straungelye,
with such a huge dicker of Dickes in a heape
altogether: but that's but to shew the redundance
of thy honorable Familie, and how affluent
and copious thy name is in all places,
though Erasmus in his Copia verborum neuer
mentions it.
            Without further circumstance to make short,
(which to speake troth is onely proper to thy Trade)

the short and long of it is this, There is
a certaine kinde of Doctor of late very pittifully
growen bald, and thereupon is to be shauen immediately,
to trie if that will helpe him: now
I know no such nimble fellow at his weapon in
all England as thy selfe, who (as I heare) standst
in election at this instant to bee chiefe Crowner
or clipper of crownes in Cambridge, and yet no
defacer of the Queenes coyne neither: and it is
pittie but thou shouldst haue it, for thou hast
long seru'd as a Clarke in the crowne office, and
concluded syllogismes in Barbara anie time this
sixteene yeare, and yet neuer metst with anie requitall,
except it were some few french crownes,
pild Friers crownes, drye shauen, not so much
worth as one of these Scottish horne crownes:
which (thy verie enemies must needes confesse)
were but bare wages, (yea as bare as my nayle I
faith) for thy braue desert and dexteritie: &
some such Thinne gratuitie or Haire-loome
it may be the Doctor may present thee with,
but how euer it falls, hath his head or his
hayre the falling sicknesse neuer so, without anie
more delay, Of or on, trimm'd hee must
bee with a trice, and there is no remedie but
thou must needes come and ioyne with me to
giue him the terrible cut.
            
               Wherefore (good Dick) on with thy apron, &
arme thy selfe to set him downe at the first word:
Stand to him I say, and take him a button lower,
feare not to shew him aBarbers knacking their fingers. 
               
                  
                     •
                  nacke of thy occupation,
and once in thy life let it be said, that a Doctor
weares thyTheyr lousy naprie they put about mēs neckes, whiles they are trīming. 
               cloth, or that thou hast cau
                  •
               d
him to doo pennance, and weare Haire-cloth for
his sinnes. Were he as he hath been (I can assure
thee) he would clothe and adorne thee with manie
gracious gallant complements, and not a rotten
tooth that hangs out at thy shop window,
but should cost him an indefinite Turkish armie
of English Hexameters. O, he hath been olde
dogge at that drunk
                  •
               n staggering kinde of verse,
which is all vp hill and downe hill, like the way
betwixt Stamford and Beec
                     •
                  feeld, and goes like
a horse plunging through the myre in the deep of
winter, now soust vp to the saddle, and straight
aloft on his tiptoes. Indeed, in old King Harrie
sinceritie, a kinde of verse it is, hee hath been 
                  •
               nf
                  •
               oft
in from his minoritie, for as I haue bin faithfully
informed hee first cryde in that verse in the
verie moment of his birth, and when he was but
yet a fresh-man in Cambridge, he set vp
                  Siquis a bill for any thīg l
                     •
                  st. 
               Siquisses,
& sent his accounts to his father in those i
                  •
               ulting
Heroicks. Come, come, account of him as
you list, by Poll and A
                     •
                  dipoll I protest, your

noble Science ofFor diuisiō & contraction. decision and contraction is immortally
beholding to him, for twice double his
Patrimonie hath he spent in carefull cherishing &
preseruing his pickerdeuant: and besides a deuine

                  •
               icarly brother of his, called Astrologicall Richard,
some few yeares since (for the benefit of his
countrey) most studiously compyled a profound
Abridgement vpon b
                     •
                  ards, & therein copiously
dilated of the true discipline of peakes, & no lesse
frutelessely determined, betwixt the Swallowes
taile cut, & the round beard like a rubbing brush.
It was my chaunce (O thrice blessed chaunce) to
the great comfort of my Muse to peruse it, although
it came but priuately in Print: and for a
more ratefied pasport (in thy opinion) that I haue
read it and digested it, this title it beareth, a
               Therfore belike hee gaue it that title, because it was most of it short 
                     •
                  aire his father made ropes of. 
               Defence
of short haire against Synesius and Pierius:
or rather in more familiar English to expresse

                  •
               t, a Dash ouer the head against baldnes, verie necessary
to be obserued of al the looser sort, or loose
haird sort of yong Gentlemen & Courtiers, and
no lesse pleasant and profitable to be remembred
of the whole Common-wealth of the Barbars.
The Pos
                  •
               e theretoo annexed, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   est breuitate
sua, as much to say, as Burne Bees and haue
Bees, & hair the more it is cut the more it comes:
lately deuised and set forth by Richard Haruey,
               
the vnluckie Prophet of prodigies. If this may
not settle thy beleefe, but yet thou requirest a further
token to make vp euen money, in the Epistle
Dedicatorie thereof to a great Man of this
Land, whom he calls his verie right honourable
good Lord, he recounteth his large bounties bestowed
vppon him, `and talkes of the secret fauours
which hee did him in his Studie or Closet
at Court.
            Heare you Dick, marke you here what a iewell
this learning is: how long wil it be, ere thou studie
thy selfe to the like preserment. No reason I
see, why thou being a Barber shouldst not bee as
hair-braind as he. Onely for writing a booke of
beards, in which he had no further experience, but
by looking on his father when he made hairs, hair
lines I meane, and yet not such lines of life as a
hangman hath in his hand, but haire lines to hang
linnen on: for that smal demerit (I say) is he thus
aduanced and courted, & from Astrological Dick
raised to bee fauorite Dick. And verie meete it is
he should be so fauored and raisd by high Personages,
for before he was as low a Parson or Vicar, as
a man could lightly set ey on.
            With teares be it spoken, too few such lowly
Parsons & Preachers we haue, who laying aside all
worldly encumbrances, & plesant cōuersing with

Saint Austen, Ierome, Chrisostome, wilbe cont
                  •
               nt
to read a Lecture as he 
                  •
               ath done de lana caprina,
(almost as slender a cast subiect as a Catts
smelling haires,) or trauerse the subtile distinctions
twixt short cut and l
                     •
                  ng taile.
            
            Fie, this is not the 
                  •
               ortieth dandiprat part of
the affectionate Items, 
               
                  •
               ee hath bequeathed on
your mysterie, with fiue 
                  •
               housand other doctrinal
deuotions, hath he adopted himselfe more than a
by founder of your trade, conioyning with his aforesaid
Doctor Brother in eightie eight browne
Bakers dozen of Alman
                  •
               ck
                  •
               s.
            In euerie of which fa
                  ••
               ous Annals of the 
                  •
               oure
windes, vnfallible rules are prescribd for men to
obserue the best time to breed loue-lockes in, and
so toSo
                     •
                  e holde, that any place of a mans chin, 
                     •
                  eeing rubd with a gold rīg beeing heated, will so harden the skin, that t
                     •
                  ere shall neuer anie haire grow there more. ringle a thorugh hayre for rooting, that
it shall neuer put foorth his sn
                  •
               yles hornes again:
as also vnder what Planet a man ma
                  •
               e with least
danger picke his tee
                  •
               h, and 
                  〈◊〉
                to catch the Sun
in such a phisicall Signe, that one may sweat
                  •
                and
be not a haire the worse.
            But these am
                  •
               lifications adiourned to another
Returne, all the deuoyre Diamond Dick,
which I am in this Epistle of thy daintie composition
to expostulate, is no more but this,
that since vnder t
                  •
               y-redoubted patronage and

protection my workes are to haue their royall

                  Bestellein, the royallest Passe in Germanie that may bee, onely for Dukes & great princes. 
               Bestellein and more than common safe conduct
into the world, and that for the Meridian of thy
honour and magnificence they are chiefely eleuated
& erected, tho
                  •
                wouldst brauely mount thee
on thy barbed steed, alias thy triumphant barbers
Chaire, and girding thy keene Pa
                     •
                  ermo rasour 
                  •
               o
thy side, in stead of a tre
                  •
               chant Turkish semitorie,
and setting thy sharpe pointedA lāce an instrumēt to let bloud with. launce in his
rest, be with them at a haires bredth that backbite
and detract me.
            Phlebothomize them, sting them, tutch them
Dick, tutch them, play the valiant man at Armes
and let them bloud and spare not; the Lawe allowes
thee to do
                  •
                it, it will beare no action: and
thou beeing a Barber Surgeon, art priuiledgd to
dresse flesh in Lent, or anie 
                  •
               hing.
            Ad
                  •
               it this be not suff
                  •
               cient to coole the hea
                  •
                of
their courage, serch them in a
                  •
               other vaine, by discharging
thy pocket dag
                  •
                against them, and let
them smart for it to the proofe.
            Ste
                  •
               le thy painted May
                  •
                po
                  ••
               
               ▪ or more properly
to tearme it, thy redoubted rigorous horsmans
staffe (which at thy dore as a manifest signe thou
hangst forth of thy martiall p
                  •
               owesse and hardiment)
on their insolent creasts, that maligne and
despise me, and forbeare not to bring forth all thy

brasse p
                  •
               eces against them. It is well kno
                  ••
               n
thou hast been a Commaunder and a 
                  〈…〉
               
               walkt the round, a
                  •
               d dealt verie short and round
with all those tha
                  •
                c
                  •
               me vnder thy f
                  •
               ngers: 
                  ••
               rugled
through the 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                deepe, and skirmisht on
the downes: wherefore if thou ta
                  •
               'st them not
downe soundlie, with a hey downe and a d
                  •
               rry,
and doost not s
                  •
               uffle and cut with them 
                  •
               ustilie,
actum est de pudicitia, I aske of God thou
maist light vpon none but bald-pates till thou diest.
But I trow thou wilt carry a better pate with
thee, and not suffer any of these indigent old fashiond
iudgements to carry it away: whose wits
were right stuffe when those loue-letters in rime
were in request & whose capacities n
                  •
               u
                  •
               r mended
their pace, since Pace the Duke of Norfolkes
foole died. As for the decaied Proctor of Saffronwalden
himself, if he wander within the 
                  〈◊〉
               
of thy indignation, I make no question but of thy
owne accord without any motion of mine, thou
wilt be as ready as any catchpoule, out of all scotch
& notch to torment him, & deal as snip snap snappishly
with him, as euer he was delt withall since
he first dated letters from his gallerie in Trinitie
Hall, not suffring a lowse that belongs to him to
passe thy hands without a powling penny, and yet

as I shrewdly presage, thou shalt not finde many
powling pence about him neither, except he rob
Peter to pay Po
                     •
                  le, empouerish 
                  •
               is spiritual Vicar
brother to helpe to pay for his powling, and
he alas, (dolefull foure nobles Curate, nothing so
good as the Confeslo
                  •
               r of Tyburne, or Superintendent
of Pancredge) hath nitti
                  •
               ide himselfe
with a dish rotundè profundè 
               
                  •
               ny time this fourteene
yeare, to saue charges of s
                  •
               eep-shearing: &
not to make of a thing more than it is, hath scarce
so much Ecclesiasticall liuing in all, as will serue to
buy him cruell strings to his booke
                  •
               
               ▪ and haire
buttons.
            Wherefore I passe not if in tender cha
                  •
               itie and
commiseration of his estate, I adde ten pound &
a purse to his wages and stipend, canuaze hi
                  •
                and
his Angell brother Gabriell in ten sheetes of paper,
and so leaue them to goe hang themselue
                  •
               
               ▪ or
outright to hang draw and quarter them al vnder
one, I care not if I make it eighteen: on that condition
in their last wil & restament they bequeath
me eighteene wise words in the way of answere
betwixt them.
            I dare gine my word for them, they will neuer
doe it, no not although it were inioynd to them
in stead of their neck-verse: their whole stock of
wit when it was at the best, beeing but ten English

Hexameter 
                  
                     •
                  
                and a Lenuoy: where
                  •
               o
                  •
               e g
                     •
                  
                  nerous
Dick (without hum drum be it spoken) I
vtterly despai
                  •
               e of them, or not so much despaire
of them, as count them a paire of poore ideots,
b
                  •
               ing not only but also two brothers, two blockheads,
two blunderkins, hauing their braines stu
                  •
               t
with 
                  •
               ought but balder-dash, but that they are
the verie botts & the glanders to the gentle Readers,
the dead Palsie and Apoplexie of the Presse,

                  
                     •
                  he Sarpego and the Sciatica of the 7. Liberall
Sciences, the surfetting vomit of Ladie Vanitie,
the sworne bauds to one anothers vain-glorie: &
to conclude, the most contemptible Mounsier
Aiaxes of excrementall conceipts, and stinking
ke
                  •
               nel-rakt vp inuention, that this or anie Age
euer afforded.
            I pry thee surmounting Don
                     •
                  el Dick, whiles
I am in this heate of Inuectiue, let me remember
thee to do this one kindnes more for me, videlicet,
when thou hast frizled and scrubd and tickled
the haires sweetly, and that thou hast filcht thy
selfe into an excellent honourable assembly of
sharpe iudiciall fierie wits and fine spirites, bee it
this winter at an Euening tearme, or where-euer,
with all the thundring grace and magnanimous
eloquence that thou hast, put vp this heroycall
Grace in their behalfe, if thou bee not past grace.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                        A Grace put vp in behalfe of the Harueys.
                        SVpplicat reuerentiis vestris, per Apostrophen, &c.
In English thus.
                        MOst humblie sueth to your Reuerences, the reprobate
brace of Brothers of the Harueys: 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            wit, witlesse
Gabriell and ruffling Richard; That whereas for anie
time this foure and twentie yeare they haue plaid the
fantasticall gub-shites and goose-giblets in Print, and
kept a hatefull scribling and a pamphleting about earthquakes,
coniun
                              •
                           ctions, inundations, the fearfull blazing
Starre, and the fors
                              •
                           orne Flaxe-wife: and tooke vpon
them to be false Prophets, VVeather-wizards, Fortunetellers,
Poets, Philosophers, Orators, Historiographers,
Mountebankes, Ballet makers, and left no Arte vndefamed
with their filthie dull-headed practise: it may please
your VVorships and Masterships, these infidell premisses
considered, & that they haue so fully performed all their
acts in absurditie, impudence, & foolerie, to grant them
their absolute Graces, to commence at Dawes crosse, and
with your general subscriptions confirm them for the profoundest
Arcandums, Acarnanians, and Dizards, that
haue been discouered since the Deluge: & so let them passe
throughout the Queenes Dominions.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Purposely that space I left, that as manie as I
shall perswade they are Pache
                     ••
                  es, Poldauisses,
and Dringles, may set their hands to their definitiue
sentence, and with the Clearke helpe
to crye Amen, to their 
                  •
               ternall vn
                  ••
               andsomming.
            Plie them, plie them vncessantly v
                     •
                  ico Dick,
euen as a Water-man plies for his Fares, and insinuate
and goe about the bush with them, like as
thou art wont to insinuate and go about the grizlie
bushie beard of some sauage Saracen Butcher,
and neuer surcea
                  •
               e flaunting and sirking it in fustian,
till vnder the Vniuersities vnited hand & seale
they bee enacted as Obsolaete a case of Cockescombes,
as euer he was in Trinitie Colledge, that
would not carrie his Tutors bow into the field,
because it would not edifie: or his fellow qui quae
codshead, that in the Latin
                  •
                Tragedie of K. Richard,
cride Ad 
                     •
                  rbs, ad vrbs, ad vrbs, when
his whole Part was no more, but Vrbs, vrbs, ad
arma, ad arma.
            
            Shall I make a motion, which I would not
haue thee thinke I induce to flatter thee neyther,
thou being not in my walke, whereby I
might come to wash my handes with thee a
mornings, or get a sprinkling or a brushing
for a brybe: wilt thou commence, and make

no more ado, since▪ thou hast almost as much learning
and farre more wit, than the two Brothers,
or eyther of those profound qui mihi Discipulasses
aboue mentioned.
            Now merely (I perswade mee) if thou wouldst
attempt it, not all the Gabriels betwixt this and
Godmanchester put together, wold make a more
perpolite cathedral Doctor than thy selfe: for all
languages at thy fingers ende thou hast as perfect
as Spruce, and nere a Dicke Haruey or cathedrall
Doctor of them all, can read a more smooth
succinct Lipsian Lecture of short haire, than
thou ouer thy Barbars Chaire, if thou bee so disposed,
nor stand and encounter all commers so
constantly.
            Dick, I exhort thee as a brother, be not a horse
to forget thy own worth, thou art in place where
thou maist promote thy selfe, do not close-prison
and eclipse thy vertues in the narrow glasse lanthorne
of thy Barbers shop, but reflect them vp
and downe the Realme, like to those prospectiue
glasses which expresse not the similitudes they receiue
neere hand, but cast them in the ayre a farre
off, where they are more clerely represented.
            Commence, commence I admonish thee, thy
merits are ripe for it, & there haue been Doctors
of thy Facultie, as Doctor Dodipowle for example:

and here in London yet extant viu
                     •
                   voc
                     •
                  
                to
testifi
                  •
                
               Doctor Nott and Doctor Powle, none
of which in notting and powling go beyond thee▪
To vtter vnto thee my fancie as touching those
Neoterick tongues thou professest, in whose pronunciation
old Tooly and thou varie as much, as
Stephen Gardineer and Sir Iohn Cheek
                     •
                  
                about
the pronunciation of the Greeke tongue: loe,
for a testifying incouragement how much 
                  •
                wish
thy 
                  •
               ncrease in those languages, I haue h
                  •
               r
                  •
                took
                  •
               
th
                  •
                paines to nit and louze ouer the Doctours
Booke, and though m
                  •
               ni
                  •
                chol
                  •
               ricke Cookes about
London in a mad rage haue dismembred it,
and thrust it piping hot into the ou
                  •
               n vnder the
bottomes of do
                  •
               s
                  •
               ts, and impiously prickt the
torne sheetes of it for basting paper, on the outsides
of Geese and ro
                  •
               sting Beefe, to keepe them
from burning▪ yet haue I naturally cherisht it
and hugd it in my bo
                  •
               ome, euen as a Carri
                  •
               r
of Bosomes Inne dooth a Cheese vnder his
arme, and the purest Parm
                     •
                  s
                     •
                  n magget Phrases
therein, 
                  ••
               ll'd and pickt out to pre
                  •
               ent
thee with.
            Read and p
                  •
               ruse them ouer as di
                  •
               ig
                  •
               ntly 
                  •
               s
thou wouldst doo a char
                  •
               e against the toothache:
for this I can gospelly 
                  •
               uouch, 
                  •
               o sleight
paynes hath the Doctour tooke in coll
                  •
               ct
                  ••
               g

them, consulting a whole quarter of a yeare with
Textors Epithites (which he borrowd of a frend
of mine in Poules Churchyard) onely to pounse
them out more poetically.
            Be not self-wild, but insist in my precepts, and
I will tutour thee so Pythagoreanly how to husband
them in al companies, that euen VVillington
himselfe thy fellow Barber in Cambridge,
(who hath long borne the bell for finicall descanting
on the Crates) shalbe constrained to worship
and offer to thee.
            Abruptly to breake into the bowels of this Index
of bald inkhornisme, what saist thou for all
thou art reputed such anA rag borrowd from his 
                     •
                  wne 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               aenigmaticall linguist,
(vnder the Doctors terme probatorie license bee
it spoken, being a terme with him as frequent as
standing vpon termes among lawiers) canst thou
enter into the true nature of villanie by conni
                  
                     •
                  ence?
I hold a groate thou canst not conster it.
A word it is, that the Doctor lay a whole weeke

                  •
               nd a day & a night entra
                  ••
               ed on his bed to bring
forth, and on the Munday euening late, causd all
the bels in the Parish where he then soiournd, to
be rong forth, for ioy that he was deliuerd of it.
            Repent, and be ashamed of thy rudenesse: O
thou that hast made so manie men winke whyles
thou cast suds in their eyes, and yet knowest not

what Conniuence meanes. Plodding and dunstically
like a clowne of Cherry-hinton basely thou
beseechest them to winke, whiles thou mak'st a
Tennis-court of their faces, by brick-walling thy
clay-balls crosse vp and downe their cheekes:
whereas if thou wert right orthographizd in the
Doctors elocution, thou wouldst say in stead of
I pray Sir winke I must wash you, Sir, by your fauour
I must require your conniuence.
            
            Againe, it is thy custome being sent for to some
tall old sinckanter, or stigmaticall bearded Master
of Arte, that hath been chin-bound euer since
Charles the ninths massacre in France, to rush in
bluntly with thy washing bowle and thy nursecloutes
vnder thy cloake, and after a few scraping
ceremonies, to aske if his Worship bee at leasure
to be recreated.
            
               A malo in peius, that is the meanest salutation
that ere I heard: vtterly thou bewrayest thy
non-proficiencie in the Doctors Paracelsian rop
                  •
               
               rethorique.
What a pestilence, a yong braine and
so poore and penurious in Conges? Rayse thy
conceipt on the trees, or rather than faile new
corke it at the heeles, before it should thus walke
bare-foote vp and downe the streetes.
            Hence take thy Harueticall exord
                     •
                  um, if thou
wouldst haue thy conceit the worlds fauourite at

first dash Omniscious and omnisufficient Master
Doctor, (for so hee calls Cornelius Agrippa)
will it please you to bee cosmologizd and smirkt.
            
            Suppose a Bishop come to the Vniuersitie, as
the Bishop of Lincolne somtimes to visit Kings
Colledge, and the Bishop of Ely Saint Iohns,
(whiles there was euer a Bishop there) a playne
Bishop (like Marti
                     •
                  
               ) at euerie word thou wilt
terme him, whereas if thou wert but one hower
entred commons in Haruey de 
                     •
                  ratore, A
great, Po
                     •
                  tife or Demy-god in omnisufficiencie
thou wouldst enstall him.
            But to appose thee more dallyingly and familiarly.
It is giuen out amongst Schollers, that thou
hast a passing singular good wit, now so trie whither
thou hast so or no, let me heare what change
of phra
                  •
               es thou hast to describe a good wit in, or
how in P
                  •
               dagogue Tragotanto Doctors english
thou canst florish vpon it.
            I feele thy pusses beat slowly alreadie, although
thou beest fortie mile off from mee, and this impotent
answere (with much adoo) droppes from
thee, euen as sweate from a leane man that drinks
lacke; namely, that thou thinkest there cannot
much extraordinarie descant be made of it, except
it be to say, such a one hath an admirable capacitie,
an incomparable quick inneution, and a surmounting

rich spirit aboue all men. Hah, ha, a destitute
poore fellow art thou, and hast mist mee
nine score: goe, goe, get thee a caudle and keepe
thy selfe warme in thy bed, for out of question thy
spirit is in a consumption.
            A rich spirit quoth a? nay then a spirit in the
way of honestie too: loe this it is, to bee read in
nothing but in Barnabe Riches workes. Spend
but a quarter so much time in mumping vppon
Gabrtelisme, and Ile be bound bodie and goods,
thou wilt not anie longer sneakingly come forth
with a rich spirit and an admirable capacitie, but
an entbusiasticall spirit, & a nimble entelechy. In
the course of my Booke a whole catalogue thou
shalt finde of all these Guiny phrases, to which in
zealous care of thy reformation, I referre thee.
            
               Dii boni boni, quid porto? What a large Diocesse
of Epistling haue I here progrest through?
The Summons to a generall Councell with all
the reasons moouing thereunto, or Tindalls Prologue
before the New Testament, are but short
Graces before meate, in comparison of this my
immoderate Dedication. But the best is, if it be
too long, thou hast a combe and a paire of scissers
to curtall it; or if thou list not stand so long about
it, with a Trinitie Colledge rubb
                  •
               r thou
maist epitomize it extempore.
            
               Marrie if thou long to heare the reason why I
haue so stretcht it on the tenter-hookes, forsooth
it is a garment for the woodcocke Gabriel Harucy,
and fooles ye know alwaies for the most part
(especiallie if they bee naturall fooles) are suted in
long coates, whereupon I set vp my rest to shape
his garments of the same size, that I might be sure
to sit on his skirts.
            Dick, no more at this time, but Nos-da diu catawhy,
and all the recompence I can make thee for
being like a Chancery Declaration so tiring troublesome
vnto thee, is this, if thou wilt haue the
Doctour for an Anatomie, thou shalt; doo but
speake the word, and I am the man will deliuer
him to thee to be scotcht and carbonado
                  •
               d: but
in anie case speake quickly, for heere he lies at the
last gaspe of surrendring all his credit and reputation.
            
               Thy Frend Tho: Nashe,
if thou beest fo
                     •
                   
                  Dick to
all the generation of
the Harueys.
               
            
         
         
            
            To all Christian Readers, to whom
these Presents shall come.
            
               WEll said my Maisters, I
perceyue there cannot a
new Booke come forth but
you will haue a fling at it.
Say, what are you reading?
Nashe against Haruey.
Fo, thats a stale ieast,
hee hath been this two or
three yeare about it. O
good Brother Timothie
rule your reason, the Miller
gryndes more mens corne than one: and those that resolutely
goe through with anie quarrell, must set all their
wordly busines at a stay, before they draw it to the poynt.
I will not gainsay, but I haue cherisht a purpose of persecuting
this Liff-lander Bogarian so long time as ye speak
of, and that like the long snouted Beast (whose backe is
Castle proofe) carrying her yong in her wombe three yere
ere she be deliuered, I haue been big with childe of a common
place of reuenge, euer since the hanging of Lopus:
but to say I plodded vpon it continually, and vsed in all
this space nothing but gall to make inke with, is a lye befitting
a base swabberly lowsie sailer, who hauing been neuer
but a month at sea in his life, and duckt at the maine
yards arme twice or thrice for pilferie, when hee comes

home sweares hee hath been seuenteene yeares in the
Turkes Gallies.
            
               Patientia vestra, there is not one pint of wine more
than the iust Bill of costs and charges in setting forth, to
be got by ame of these bitter-sanced Inuectines. Some
fool
                  •
               h praise perhaps we may mecte with, such as is affoorded
to ordinarie I esters that make sport: but otherwise
we are like those fugitiue Priests in Spaine and Portugall,
whom the Pope (veric liberally) prefers to Irish
Bishoprickes, but allowes them not a pennie of any liuing
to maintaine them with, saue onely certaine Friers to begfor
them.
            High titles (as they of Bishops and Prelates) so of
Poets and VVriters we haue in the world, when in stead
of their begging Friers, the fire of our wit is left, as our
onely last refuge to warme vs.
            
               Haruey and I (a couple of beggers) take vpon vs to
bandie factions, and contend like the Vrsini and Coloni
in Roome: or as the Turkes and Persians about
Mahomet and Mortus Alli, which should bee the greatest:
and (with the Indians) head our inuentions arrowes
with Vipers teeth, and sleep them in the bloud
of Adders and Serpents, and spend as much time in
arguing Pro & contra, as a man might haue found
out the quadrature of the Circle in: when all the contr
                  •
               
               uersie
is no more but this, he began with mee, and cannot
tell how to make an end; and I would fain
                  •
                end or rid
my hands of him, if he had not first begun.
            I protest I doo not write against him because I hate
him, but that I would confirme and plainly shew to a
number of weake beleeuers in my sufficiencie, that I am
able to answere him: and his frends and not his enemies

let him thanke for this heauie load of disgrace I lay vpon
him, since theyr extreame disabling of mee in this kinde,
& vrging what a triumph he had ouer me, hath made me
to ransacke my standish more than I would.
            This I will boldly say, looke how long it is since he writ
against me, so long haue I giuen him a lease of his life, &
he hath onely held it by my mercie.
            His Booke or Magna Charta which against M. Lilly &
me he addrest, I hauing kept idle by me in a by settle out of
sight amongst old shooes and bootes almost this two yere,
and in meere pitie of him would neuer looke vpon it but
in some calme pleasing humor, for feare least in my melancholy
too cruelly I should haue martyrd him.
            And yet though vengeance comes not Zephiris & hirundine
prima, in the first springing prime of his schisme
and heresie, let him not looke for one of Frier Tecelius
Pardons, he that (as Sleidane reports) first stird vp Luther,
pronouncing from the Pope free salarie indulgence
to anie man, though he had deflowred the Virgine Mary,
and absolution as well for sinnes past as sinnes to come:
for I meane to come vpon him with a tempest of thunder
and lightning, worse than the stormes in the VVest Indies
cald the Furicanoes, and compleate arme more words for
his confusion, than Wezell in Germanie is able to arme
men, that hath absolute furniture for three hundred
thousand at all times.
            Gentlemen, what think ye of this sober mortified stile?
I dare say a number of ye haue drawn it to a verdit alredie:
and as an Elephants fore-legs are longer than his
hinder, so you imagine my former confutation wilbe better
than my latter. Nay then, Aesopum non attriuistis,
you are as ignorant in the true mounings of my Muse, as

the Astronomers are in the true mouings of Mars, which
to this day they could neuer attaine too. For how euer in
the first setting foorth I martch faire and softly like a
man that rides vpon his owne horse, and like the Caspian
sea seeme neither to ebbe nor flow, but keep a smooth plain
for me in my el
                  •
               quence, as one of the Lacedemonian Ephori,
or Baldwin in his morrall sentences (which now
are all snatcht vp for Painters posies): yet you shall see
me in two or three leaues hence, crie Heigh for our towne
greene, and powre hot boyling inke on this contemptible
Heggledepegs barrain scalp, as men condemned for stealing
by Richard de corde Lions law, had hot boyling
pitch powrd on their heads, and feathers strewd vppor,
that wheresoeuer they came they might be knowne.
            I know I am too long in preparing an entrance into my
Text, sed tandem denique to the matter and the purpose.
            The method I meane to vse in persecuting this Peter
Maluenda and Sinibaldo Crasko is no more but this.
            
               Memorandum, I frame my whole Booke in the nature
of a Dialogue, much like Bullen and his Doctor Tocrub,
whereof the Interlocuters are these.
            Inprimis, Senior Importunio, the Opponent.
            
            The second Grand Consiliadore, chiefe Censor or
Moderat
                  •
               r.
            The third Domino Bentiuole, one that stands as
it were at the line in a Tennis-court, and takes euerie ball
at the volly.
            The fourth Don Carneades de boone Compagniola,
who like a busie Countrey Iustice sits on the Bench, and
preacheth to the eues out of their own confessions: or rather
like a Quarter-master or Treasurer of Bride-well, whose

office is to giue so manie strokes with the hammer, as the
publican vnchast offender is to haue stripes, and by the
same Tuballs musique to warne the blue-coate Corrector
when he should patience and surcease: so continually,
when by Senior Importunio the Doctor is brought to the
Crosse, Don Carneades sets downe what proportion of instice
is to be executed vpon him, and when 
                  •
               is backe hath
bled sufficient, giues a signall of retrayt.
            Neither would I haue you imagine that all these personages
are fained, like Americke Vesputius, & the rest
of the Antwerpe Speakers in Sir Thomas Moores Vtopia:
for as true as Bankes his Horse knowes a Spaniard
from an English-man, or there went vp one and twentie
Maides to the top of Boston Steeple, and there came but
one downe againe, so true it is that there are men which
haue dealt with me in the same humour that heere I shaddow.
In some nooke or blind angle of the Black-Friers, you
may suppose (if you will) this honest conference to bee
held, after the same manner that one of these Italionate
conferences about a Duell is wont solemnly to be handled,
which is, when a man being specially toucht in reputation,
or challenged to the field vpon equall tearmes, calls all
his frends together, and askes their aduice how he should
carrie himselfe in the action.
            Him that I tearme Senior Importuno, is a Gentleman
of good qualitie, to whom I rest manie waies beholding,
and one (as the Philosophers say of winde, that it
is nothing but aire vehemently moou'd) so hath hee neuer
ceast with all the vehemence of winde or breath that
he hath, to incite and mooue me to win my spurres in this
iourney.
            Vnder Grand Consiliadore, I allude to a graue reuerend

Gimnosophist, (Amicorum amicissimus, of all my
Frends the most zealous) that as Aesculapius built an Oracle
of the Sunne at Athens, so is his Chamber an Oracle
or Conuocation Chappell of sound counsaile, for all
the better sort of the sonnes of understanding about London,
and (as it were) an usuall market of good fellowship
and conference.
            Hee also (as well as Senior Impor
                     •
                  uno) hath dealt
with me verie importunately, to employ all my Forces in
this Expedition, and as Hippocrates preserued the Citie
of Coos from a great plague or mortalitie (generally
dispersed throughout Greece) by perswading 
                  〈◊〉
                to kindle
fires in publique places, whereby the aire might be purisied:
so hath hee (in most feruent deuotion to my well
dooing) un
                  •
               essantly perswaded me to preserue my credit
from iadish dying of the scratches, by powerfull through
enkindling this Pinego Riminos euerlasting fire of
damnation.
            For Domino Bentiuole and Don Carneades de
boune compagniola, they be men that haue as full shares
in my lous and affection as the former.
            The antecedent of the two, besides true resolution and
valure, (where with he hath ennobled his name extraordinarie)
and a ripe pleasant wit in conuersing, hath in
him a perfect unchangeable true habit of honestie, imitating
the Arte of Musique, which the Professours thereof
affirme to be infinite and without end.
            And for the subsequent or hindermost of the paire,
who likewise is none of the unworthiest retainers to Madame
Bessona, hee is another Florentine Poggius, for
mirthfull sportiue conceit & quick innention, ignem fac
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  ns
exlaplde nigro, (which Munster in his Cosmography

alledgeth for the greatest wonder of England) that is,
wresting delight out of aniething. And this ouer and aboue
I will giue in eu
                  •
               dence for his praise, that though all
the ancient Records and Presidents of ingenuous Apothegs
and Emblemes were burnt, (as Polidore Virgill
in King Harry the eights time burnt all the ancient Records
of the true beginning of this our I le, after hee had
finished his Chronicle) yet out of his affluent capacitie
they were to be renewed and reedified farre better.
            These foure with my 
                  •
               elfe, whom I personate as the
Respondent in the last place, shall (according as God wil
giue them grace) clap up a Colloquium amongst them,
and so schoole my gentle Comrade or neighbor Quiquiffe
in some few short principles of my learning and industrie,
that (I doubt not) by that time they haue concluded
and dispatcht with him, my Gorboduck Huddleduddle
will gladly (on his knees) resigne to mee his Doctoursh
                  ••
               ,
and as Antisthenes could not beate Diogenes away from
him, but he would needes be his scholler whether he would
or no: so shall I haue him haunt me up and downe to be
my prentise to learne to endite, and doo what I can I shall
not be shut of him.
            This is once, I both can and wilbe shut presently of
this tedious Chapter of contents, least where as I prepared
it as an antipast to whet your stomacks, it cleane take
away your stomackes, and you surfet of it before meate
come: wherefore onely giuing you this one caueat to obserue
in reading my Booke, which Aristotle prescribes to
them that read Histories, namely, that they bee not nimis
credulos aut incredulos, too rash or too slow of beleefe,
and earnestly commending me to Qui cytharam neruis,
& neruis temperat arcum, the melodious God of Gam

vt are, that is life and sinnewes in euerie thing; as also to
Ioues ancient trustie Roger, frisking come aloft sprightly
Mercury, that hath wings for his moustachies, wings
for his ey-browes, wings growing out of his chinne like a
thorough haire, wings at his armes like a fooles coat with
foure elbowes, wings for his riding bases, wings at his
heeles in stead of spurres, and is true Prince of VVingandecoy
in euerie thing, and desiring him to inspire my pen
with some of his nimblest Pomados and Sommersets, &
be still close at my elbow, since now I haue more use of
him than Alchumists, in loue and charitie I take my
leaue of you all, at least of all such as heere meane to leaue
and read no further, and hast to the launching forth of
my Dialogue.
         
      
      
         
            
            Haue with you to Saffron-walden. Dialogus.
            Interlocutores, Senior Importuno, Grand Consiliadore,
Domino Bentiuole, Don Carneades
de boune compagniola, Piers Pennilesse
Respondent.
            
               Importun
                     •
                  .
               
                  WHat Tom, thou art very
welcome. VVhere hast
thou bin this long time;
walking in Saint Faiths
Church vnder ground,
that wee neuer could
see thee? Or hast thou
tooke thee a Chamber
in Cole-harbour, where
they liue in a continuall
myst, betwixt two Brew-houses.
            
            
               Cons
                     •
                  li:
               Indeed we haue mist you a great while, as
well spiritually as corporally; that is, no lesse in the absence
of your workes, than the want of your companie:
but now I hope by your presence you will fully.
satisfie vs in either.
            
            
               Benti
                     •
                  ole:
               Nay, I would he would but 
                     •
                  ully satisfie

and pay one, which is the Doctor: for this I can assure
him, he is run farre in arrearages with expectation, &
to recouer himselfe it wilbe verie hard, except hee put
twice dubble as much aqua fortis in his inke as he did
before.
            
            
               Carnead:
               No aqua fortis if you loue me, for it almost
poysoned and spoyled the fashion of Stones the
sooles nose; and would you haue it be the destruction
and desolation of a Doctor Foole now? What, content
your selfe, a messe of Tewksbury mustard, or a
dramme and a halfe of Tower-hill vineger, will seeme a
high festiuall banquet, and make a famous coronation
shew on this forlorne Ciuilians hungry table.
            
            
               Impor:
               Tush, tush, you are all for iest, & make him
be more careles of his credit than he wold be, by thus
contemning and debasing his Aduersarie. Will you
heare what is the vnited voyce and opinion abroad?
Confidently they say, he is not able to answere him he
hath deferd it so long; & if he doo answere him howsoeuer
it be, it is nothing, since hee hath been a whole
Age about it, though I for mine owne part know the
contrarie, & will engage my oath for him (if need be)
that the most of this time they thinke him houering ouer
the neast, he hath sat hatching of nothing but toies
for priuate Gentlemen, & neglected the peculiar busines
of his reputation, that so deeply concerne him,
to follow vaine hopes and had I wist humours about
Court, that make him goe in a thred-bare cloake, and
scarce pay for boate hire. Often enough I told him of
this, if he would haue belee'ud me, but at length I am
sure he findes it, and repents it all too late. In no companie
I can come, but euerie minute of an howre (bebecause

they haue taken speciall notice of my loue towards
him, they still will be tormenting me with one
question or another, of what he is about, what means
he to 
                     •
                  e thus retchles of his fame, or whither I am sure
those things which are past vnder his name heretofore
were of his owne dooing, or to get an opinion of
wit hee vsed some other mans helpe vnder hande▪ that
nowe hath vtterly giuen him ouer and forsaken him,
whether he be dead or no, or forbidden to writ
                     •
                  , or
in regard he hath publisht a treatise in Diuinitie makes
a conscience to meddle any more in these controuersies?
with a thousand other like idle interrogatories▪
whereto I answere nothing else, but that he is idle and
new fangled, beginning many things, but soone wearie
of them ere hee be halfe entred, and that hee hath
too much acquaintance in London euer to doo any
good, being like a Curtezan that can deny no man, or
a graue common-wealths Senatour that thinkes he is
not borne for himselfe alone, but as old Laertes in Homers
odissaea, Dum reliqua omnia curabat, s
                        •
                     ipsum negl
                        •
                     
                     g
                        •
                     bat▪
                  
caring for all other things else, sets his owne estate
at sixe and seauen. Iudge you, whom he takes for
his best friends, what the end of this will be. A disgraced
and condemned man he liues whiles Haruey thus
liues vnanswered, worse than he that hath peaceably
and quietly put vp an hundred bas
                     •
                  inadoes, or suf
                     •
                  red
his face to be made a continual common wall for men
to spit on: Spittle may be wip't off, and the print of a
broken pate, or bruse with a cudgell quickly made
whole and worne out of mens memories, but to be a
villaine in print, or to be imprinted at London the reprobatest
villaine that euer went on two legs, for such

is G
                        •
                     briell Scur
                        ••
                     ies (as in thy other booke thou termst
him) his wi
                     •
                  les malicious testimony of thee▪ with other
more rascally h
                     •
                  dg
                     •
                   rak't vp t
                     •
                  rmes, familiar to none
but roguish morts and doxes, is an attainder t
                     ••
                  t will

                     ••
                  icke by thee for euer. A blot of ignominie it is which
though this age or at the vtmost, such in this age as
h
                     •
                  ue conuer
                     ••
                   or are acquainted with thee, hold light
and ridiculous, and no more but as a Bulls roaring and
bellowing, and running horne mad at euery one in his
way, when he is wounded by the Dogges, and almost
bayted to death: yet there is an age to come, which
knowing neither thee nor him, but by your 
                     •
                  euerall
workes iudging of either, will authorise all hee hath
belched forth in thy reproach for sound Gospell, since
as the prouerbe is, qui tacet consentire videtur, thou
holding thy peace, and not confuting him, seemes to
confess
                     •
                   and confirme all whereof hee hath accused
thee, and the innocent vnheard doo perish as guilty.
Deceiue not thy selfe with the bad sale of his booke
                     •
                  ,
for though in no othe
                     •
                   mans handes, yet in his owne
Deske they may bee founde after his death, wh
                     •
                  reb
                     •
                  
whil
                     •
                   Printing lasts, thy disgrace may last, & the Printer
(whose Copie it is) may leaue thy infamie in Legacie
to his heyres, and his heyres to their next heyres
successiuely to the thirteenth and fourteenth generation,
Cum Priuilegio, forbidding all other to Print those
lewd lying Recordes of thy scandall and contumely▪
but the lineall offspring of their race in sempiternum.
Hast thou not heard howe Orpheus wrote in the 2700.
age of the world, whereas it is now 5596. and yet his
memorie is fresh, his verses are extant, whereas all the
Kings that raignd and suruiude at that time, haue not

so much as the first letter of th
                     •
                  ir names to posterity
commended: the very same is thy case with those in
Germanie, which beeing executed are neuer buried.
Consider and deliberate well of it, and if it worke not
effectually with thee I know not what will. Neither
if thou beest so sencelesse that thou wilt not let it sinke
into thee, doo I hold thee worthy to be any thing but
the sinke of contempt, to be excluded out of all men
of worths companies, & counted the abiect scumme
of all Poets and ballet-makers.
            
            
               Respond:
               So you haue said sir▪ Now let mee haue
my turne another-while, to counterbuffe and beate
backe all those ouerthwart blowes wherewith you
haue charged me.
            
            
               Benti:
               No reason to the contrarie, but in any case
be not chollerick, since the most of those speeches he
hath vttred my owne eares can witnesse to bee true,
when as at diuers great meetings, and chiefe Ordinaries,
I haue Champion-like tooke thy part, and euery
one obiected and articled against thee, much after the
same forme he hath expressed.
            
            
               Respond:
               Will you haue patience and you shall
heare me expressely and roundly giue him his quietus
est. To the first, wherein he concludes I am not able
to answere him, because I haue deferd it so long; I answere
that it followes not, in so much as many men
that are able to pay their debts, doo not alwaies discharge
and pay them presently at one push; and secondly,
or to the second lye, where he sayth and I doo
answere him it is nothing since I haue beene a whole
age about it, If I list I could proue his assertion to bee
vnder age: but thats all one, I am content my witte

should take vppon it antiquitie this once, and nothing
else in my defence I will alledge, but Verit as Tempor is
silia, it is onely time that reuealeth all things: wherefore
though in as short time as a man may learne to
run at Tilt, I could haue gone thorough with innention
inough to haue run him thorough & confounded
him, yet I must haue some further time to get perfect
intelligence of his life and conuersation, one true point
whereof well set downe, wil more excruciate & commacerate
him, than knocking him about the cares with
his owne stile in a hundred sheetes of paper. And this
let me informe the lury ouer and aboue, that age is no
argument to make anie thing 
                     〈◊〉
                   & though gray beard
drumbling ouer a Discourse, be no crime I am subject
too, yet in the behalfe of the crazed wits of that stamp,
I will vphold, that it is no vpright conclusion to say
whatsoeuer is long laboured; is lows
                     •
                  e and not worth
a straw; since by that reason you might conclude Dianas
Temple at Ephesus to haue been a stinking Doue
                  
                     •
                  ote
or a Hog-sty, because it was 220. yere in building
by the Am
                        •
                     zons. Anie time this 17. yere my aduersary
Frigius Pedagogus hath laid waste paper in pickle, and
publisht some rags of treatises against Master Lilly and
mee, which I will iustifie haue lyne by him euer since
the great matches of bowling and shooting on the
Thames vpon the yee. But for my part, trie mee who
will, and let anie man but finde mee meate and drinke
with the appurtenances, while I am playing the paper
stainer, and fishing for pearle in the bottome of my
tar-boxe, and but free me from those outward encumbrances
of cares that ouer-whelme mee, and let this
Paraliticke Quacksaluer fill ten thousand tunnes with

                  Scelerata sinapis, 
                  
                     ••
                  rewish snappish mustard, as Plautus
calls it, or botch and cobble vp as manie volumes as he
can betwixt this and doomesday, and he shall see I will
haue euerie one of them in the nose straight, and giue
as suddaine extemporall answeres, as Pope Siluesters
or Frier Bacons brazen head, which he would haue set
vp on the Plain of Salsbury. As touching the vain hopes
and had I wist Court humors which you say I follow,
there is no Husbandman but tills and sowes in hope of
a good crop, though manie times hee is deluded with
a bad Haruest. Court humours like cutting of haire
must either bee obserued when the Moone is new or
in the full, or else no man will haue his hands full that
gleanes after them. Not vnlikely it is they so question
you about the cause of my long stay, and their wits being
dull frozen and halse dead for want of matter of
delight, (wher of Poules Church-yard was neuer worse
fuelled) like those in Florida or diuers Countreyes of
the Negroes, that kindle fire by rubbing two sticks one
against another: so to recreate and enkindle their decayed
spirites, they care not how they set Haruey and
mee on fire one against another, or wher vs on to
consume our selues. But this Cock fight once past, I
vow to turne a new lease, and take another order with
them, resoluing to take vp for the Word or Motto of
my patience, Perdere posse s
                        •
                     t est, it is enough that it is
in my power to call a Sessions and trusse him vp when
I list, conc
                     ••
                  ding with the Poet, Dum desint hesles, desit
quoque causa triumphi, as long as we haue no enemies
to trouble vs, it is no matter for anie Triumphs or
bonfires: and as it was said of the blacke Princes souldiers,
that they car'd for no spoyle but gold and siluer,

or feathers, so euer after I will care for no conquest or
victorie, which carries not with it a present rich possibilitie
of raysing my decayed fortunes, and Caualier

                     •
                  lourishing with a seather in my cappe (hey gallanta)
in the face of enuie, and generall Worlds opinion.
As new fangled and idle, and prostituting my pen like a
Curtizan is the next Item that you taxe me with; well
it may and it may not bee so, for neither will I deny it
nor will I grant it; onely thus farre Ile goe with you,
that twise or thrise in a month when res est angusta domi,
the bottome of my purse is turnd downeward, &
my conduit of incke will no longer flowe for want of
reparations, I am faine to let my Plow stand still in the
midst of a furrow, and follow some of these new fangled
Galiardos, and Senior Fantasticos, to whose amorous
Villanellas and Quipassas, I prostitute my pen in
hope of gaine, but otherwise there is no new fanglenes
in mee but pouertie, which alone maketh mee so
vnconstant to my determined studies; not idlenesse,
more then discontented idle trudging from place to
place, too and fro, and prosecuting the meanes to keep
mee from idlenesse. My Doctour Vanderhulk peraduenture
out of this my indigent confession may take
occasion to work piteously: It is no matter I care not,
for many a faire day agoe, haue I proclaimed my selfe
to the worlde Piers Pennilesse, and sufficient petigrees
can I shewe to prooue him my elder brother. What
more remaineth behinde of the condemned estate
I stand in, till this Domine Dewse-ace be conswapped, &
sent with a paire of newe shooes on his feete, and a
scrowle in his hand to saint Peter, like a Russian when
he is buried, as also of the immortality of the Print, &

how though not this age, yet another age three yeares
after the building vp the top of Powles sleeple, may
baffull and infamize my name when I am in heauen, &
shall neuer feele it, in foure words I will deseate, and
lay desolate. Forsooth (bee it knowne vnto you) I
haue prouided harping yrons to catch this great
Whale: and this Gobin a grace ap Hannikin by Gods
grace shall be met and combatted. Yet this I must tell
you sir in the way of friend ship twixt you & mee, your
graue fatherly forecasting Forasmuches, and vrging of
posteritie and after ages whose cradle makers are
not yet begot; that they may doo this, and they may
doo that, is a stale imitation of this heathen Gregorie
Huldricke my Antigonist. And thus I trust all reckonings
are euen twixt you and mee.
            
            
               Impor:
               Nay I promise thee thou hast giuen me my
Pasport, and I know not what to say, now thou sayst he
shall be answerd.
            
            
               Benti:
               I am very glad for thy credits sake, that thou
perseuerst in that purpose, but more glad would I bee
to see it abroad and publisht.
            
            
               Resp:
               Content your selfe, so you shall; although it
hath gone abroad with his Keeper any time this quarter
of this yeare, but as pro
                     •
                  ounde a reason as any I
haue alleag'd yet of the long stay and keeping it backe,
was, that I might fulfill that olde verse in Ouid 
                        〈◊〉
                      metam
properate simul cun
                        •
                      plen
                        ••
                      vo
                        •
                     uptits, as much to say
as march together merrily, and then there will be iusty
dooings and sound sport, so did I stay for some company
to march with mee, that wee might haue made
round worke, and gone thorough stitch, but since all
this while they come not sorwarde according to promise

but breake their daye, as the King of Sp
                        ••
                     ne did
with Sebastian King of Partugall, about his meeting
him at Guandulopeia, when they should haue gone together
to the Battaile of Alcazar; veiab diabolo, Saint
George and a 
                     •
                  ickling pipe of Tobacco, and then pell
mell, all alone haue amongst them, if there were ten
thousand of them.
            
            
               Carn:
               Faith well-said, I perceiue thou searst no colours.
            
            
               Resp:
               Whatsoeuer I feare, Ile force I enkin Heyderry
derry both to feare and beare my colours, and suite
his cheekes (if there be one pimple of shame in them)
in a perfecter red, than anie Venice dye.
            
            
               Consil:
               Vengeance on that vnluckie dye may hee
crie, like a swearing shredded gamester, that looseth at
one set all that euer he is worth: but I pry thee (in honestie)
if thou hast anie of the papers of thy 
                     •
                  ooke about
thee, shew vs some of them, that like a great Inquest
we may deliuer our verdit, before it come to the
Omnigatherum of Towne and Countrey.
            
            
               Respon:
               Then gather your selues together in a ring,
and Grand Consiliadore be you the grand commander
of silence (which is a chiese Office in the Emperour of
Russi
                        •
                     es Court), for here it is in my sleeue that will besliue
him: yet if I be not deceiued, some part of the Epistle
I haue read to you heretofore.
            
            
               Import:
               I to the Barber such a thing I well remember,
but what Barber it was, or where he dwelt, directly
thou neuer toldst vs.
            
            
               Respon:
               Yes, that I haue both towld and bookt him
too; neuertheles (for your better vnder standing) know
it is one Dick Litchfield the Barber of Trinity Colledge,
                  
a rare ingenuous odde merry Greeke, who (as I haue
heard) hath translated my Piers Pennilesse into the Macaronicall
tongue, wherein I wish hee had been more
tongue-tide, since in some mens incensed judgements
it hath too much tongue alreadie; being aboue 2. yeres
since maimedly translated into the French tongue, and
in the English tongue so rascally printed and ill interpreted,
as heart can thinke, or tongue can tell. But I
cannot tell how it is growen to a common fashion amongst
a number of our common ill liuers, that whatsoeuer
tongue (like a spaniels tongue) doth not licke
their aged soares and fawne on them, they conclude it
to be an adders tongue to sting them: and wheras wittie
Aesope did buy vp all the tongues in the market hee
could spie, as the best meate hee esteemed of, they (by
all meanes possible) euen out of the buckles of theyr
girdles labor to plucke forth the tongs, for feare they
should plucke in, their vnsatiate greedie paunches too
straight.
            
            
               Carn:
               O peace, peace, exercise thy writing tongue,
and let vs haue no more of this plaine English.
            
            
               Resp:
               With a good will, agreed: & like Mahomets
angels in the Alcheron, that are said to haue eares stretching
from one end of heauen to the other, let your attention
be indefinite & without end, for thus I begin.
            
            
               MAscula virorum, Saint Mildred and Saint Agapite!
more Letters yet from the Doctor? nay
then we shall be sure to haue a whole Grauesend
Barge full of Newes, and heare soundly of all
matters on both eares. Out vppon it, heere's a
packet of Epistling, as bigge as a Packe of Woollen

cloth, or a stack of salt-
                  •
               ish. Carrier, did
                  ••
                thou bring it
by wayne, or on horse-backe? By wayne sir, & it hath
crackt me three axeltrees, wherefore I hope you will
consider me the more. Heauie newes, hea
                     •
                  ie newes,
take them againe, I will neuer open them. Ah quoth
he (deepe sighing) to mee I wot they are the heauiest,
whose Cart hath cryde creake vnder them fortie times
euerie furlong: wherefore if you bee a good man, tather
make mud walls with them, mend high wayes, or
damme vp quagmires with them, than thus they shuld
endammage mee to my eternall vndooing. I hearing
the fellow so forlorne and out of comfort with his luggage,
gaue him his Char
                     •
                  ns Naulu
                     ••
                  
                or 
                  •
               erry three half
pence, & so dismist him to go to the place from whence
he came, and play at Lodum. But when I came to vnrip
and vnbumbast this Gargantuan bag-pudding, and
found nothing in it, but dogs-tripes, swines liuers, oxe
galls, and sheepes gutts, I was in a bitterer chafe than
anie Cooke at a long Sermon when his meate burnes.
Doo the Philosophers (said I to my selfe) hold that letters
are no burden, & the lightest and easiest houshold
stuffe a man can remooue? Ile be sworne vpon Anthenie
Gueuar as golden Epistles if they will, there's not so
much toyle in remoouing the siedge from a Towne,
as in taking an inuentorie suruay of anie one of them.
Letters doo you terme them? they may be Letters patents
well enough for their tediousnes: for no lecture
at Surgeons Hall vppon an Anatomie, may compare
with them in longitude. Why they are longer than the
Statutes of clothing, or the Charter of London. Will
ye haue the simple truth, without anie deuices or playing
vpon it. Gabriell Harney, may stale Gull, & the onely

pure Orator in senseles riddles or Packst onis
                     ••
                  e, that
euer this our litle shred or seperate angle of the world
suckled vp, not content to haue the naked scalp of his
credit new couered with a false periwig of commendations,
and so returne to his fathers house in peace,
and there sustaine his hungry bodie with wythred sca
                  •
               
               lions
and greene cheese, hath since that time deepely
forsworne himself in an arbitrement of peace, & after
the ancient custome of Scottish amitie, vnawares proclaimed
open warres a fresh in a whole Alexandrian
Librarie of waste paper. Piers his Supererogation, or
Najhes Saint Fame, pretely & quirkingly he christens
it; and yet not so much to quirke or crosse me thereby,
as to blesse himselfe and make his booke fell, did hee
giue it that title: for hauing found by much shipwrackt
experience, that no worke of his absolute vnder hys
owne name would passe, he vsed heretofore to drawe
Sir Philip Sydney, Master Spencer, and other men of
highest credit into euerie pild pamphlet he set foorth;
and now that he can no longer march vnder their Ensignes,
(from which I haue vtterly chac'd him in my
Fo
                     •
                  re Letters intercepted) he takes a new lesson out of
Plutarch, in making benefit of his enemie, & borrows
my name, and the name of Piers Pennilesse (one of my
Bookes) which he knew to be most saleable, (passing
at the least through the pikes of sixe Impressions) to
helpe his bedred stuffe to limpe out of Powles Churchyard,
that else would haue laine vnrepriuably spittled
at the Chandlers. Such a huge drifat of duncerie it is
he hath dungd vp against me, as was neuer seene since
the raigne of A
                     ••
                  rrois. O tis an vnconscionable vast
gorbellied Volume, bigger bulkt than a Dutch Hoy, &

farre more boystrous and cumbersome, than a payre
of Swissers omnipotent galeaze breeches. But it shuld
seeme he is asham'd of the incomprehensible corpulencie
thereof himselfe, for at the ende of the
                  •
                
               
                  •
               99.
Page, hee beginnes with one 100. againe to make it
seeme little, (if I lye you may look and conuince mee);
& in halfe a quire of paper besides, hath left the Pages
vnfigured. I haue read that the Giant Antaus Shield
askt a whole Elephants hyde to couer it, bona fide I
v
                  •
               ter it, scarce a whole Elephants hyde & a half would
serue for a couer to this G
                     •
                  gma
                     •
                  og Iewish Thalmud of
absurdities. Nay, giue the diuell his due, and there an
ende, the Giant that Magellan found at Caput sanct 
                     •
                  
crucit, or Saint Christophers picture at Antwerpe, or the
monstrous images of Seso
                     ••
                  res, or the Aegiptian Rapsinates, are but dwar
                  •
               fes in comparison of it. But one Epistle
thereof to Iohn VVolfe the Printer, I tooke and
weighed in an Ironmongers scales, and it counterpoys
                  •
               ch
a Cade of Herring, and three Holland Cheeses.
You may beleeue me if you will, I was saine to lift my
chamber doore off the hindges, onely to let it in, it
was so fulsome a fat Bonarobe and terrible Rounceuall.
Once I thought to haue cald in a Cooper that went
by and cald for worke, and bid him hoope it about like
the tree at Grays-Inne gate, for feare it should burst it
was so beastly; but then I remembred mee the boyes
had whoopt it sufficiently about the streetes, and so I
let it alone for that instant. Credibly it was once rumord
about the Court, that the Guard meant to triema
                  •
               teries
with it before the Queene, and in stead of
throwing the sledge or the hammer, to hurle it foorth
at the armes ende for a wager. I, I, 
                  •
               u
                  •
               rie one maye

hammer vpon it as they please, but if they will hit the

                  •
               ayle on the head pat as they should, to nothing so aptly
can they compare it as Africke, which being an vnbounded
stretcht out Conti
                  •
               ent, equiualent in greatnes
with most Quarters of the Earth, yet neuertheles
is (for the most part) 
                  •
               uer-spred with barraine sands:
so this his Babil
                  •
               nian towre or tome of confutation,
swelling in dimension & magnitude aboue all the prodigious
commentaries and familiar Epistles that euer
he wrote, is notwithstanding more drie, barraine, and
sandie in substance, than them all. Peruse but the Ballet
In Sandon soyle as late befell, and you will be more
soundly edified by fixe parts. Sixe and thirtie sheetes it
comprehendeth, which with him is but sixe and thirtie
full points; for he makes no more difference twixt
a sheete of paper and a full point, than there is twixt
two blacke puddings for a pennie, and a pennie for a
paire of blacke puddings. Foule euill goe with it, I
wonder you will prate and tattle of sixe and thirtie
full points so compendiously trust vp (as may bee) in
sixe and thirtie sheetes of paper, when as those are
but the shortest prouerbs of his wit; for he neuer bids
a man good morrow, but he makes a speach as long as
a proclamation; nor drinkes to anie, but he reads
a Lecture of three howers long, De Arte bibe
                     •
                  
                  di.
O tis a precious apothegmaticall Pedant, who
will finde matter inough to dilate a whole daye of
the first inuention of Fy, fa, fum, I smell the bloud
of an English-man: and if hee had a thousand
pound, hee hath vowd to consume it euerie doyt,
to discouer and search foorth certaine rare Mathematicall
Experimentes; as for example, that of

tying a flea in a chaine, (put in the last edition of the
great Chronicle) which if by anie industrie hee ceuld
atchieue, his owne name beeing so generally odious
throughout Kent and Christendome, hee would presently
transforme & metamorphize it from Doctour
Haruey to Doctour Ty, (of which stile there was a famous
Musition some few yeres since) resoluing as the
last cast of his maintenaunce, altogether to liue by carrying
that Flea like a monster vp and downe the countrey;
teaching it to doo trickes, hey come aloft 
                  •
               ack,
like an ape ouer the chaine. If you would haue a flea
for the nonce that you might keepe for a breeder, why
this were a stately flea indeede to get a braue race of
fleas on, your fly in a boxe is but a drumble-bee in cō
               parison
of it; with no expence at all (on your chin like
a witches familiar) you might feed it, and let the chaine
hang downe on your breast, like a stale greasie Courtiers
chaine, with one strop. Alacke and weladay, too
too inconsiderately aduised was this our Poeticall Ga
                  
                     •
                  riell,
when hexameterly entranced, he cride out

                  O blessed health, blessed wealth, and blessed abundance,
                  O that I had these three for the losse of 
                        •
                     o. Commensments.
               
when he should haue exclaimd,
O that I had this flea for the losse of 30. Co
                     ••
                  ensments.
            
            Peraduenture he thinkes thus slightly to steale away
with a Flea in his eare, but I must flea his asses skin
ouer his eares a little handsomer ere wee part. Those
that bee so disposed to take a view of him, ere hee bee
come to the full Midsommer Moone, and raging Calent
                     •
                  ra
of his wretchednes, here let them behold his
liuely counterfet and portraiture, not in the pantofles
of his prosperitie, 
                  •
               she was when he libeld against my

Lord of Oxford, but in the single-soald pumpes of his
aduersitie, with his gowne cast off, vntrussing, and readie
to beray himselfe, vpon the newes of the going in
hand of my booke.
            
               
                  The picture of Gabriell Haruey, as hee is readie to let fly vpon Aiax.
                If you aske why I haue
put him in round hose, that
vsually weares Venetians?
It is because I would make
him looke more dapper &
plump and round vpon it,
wheras otherwise he looks
like a case of tooth-pikes, or
a Lute pin put in a sute of
apparell. Gaze vppon him
who list, for I tell you I am
not a little proud of my
workmanship, and though
I say it, I haue handled it so
neatly and so sprightly and
withall ouzled, gidumbled,
muddled, and drizled it so
finely, that I forbid euer a
Hauns Boll, Hauns Holbine,
or Hauns Mullier of them
all (let them but play true
with the face) to amend it or come within fortie foote
of it. Away away, Blockland, Trusser, Francis de Murre
and the whole generation of them will sooner catch
the murre and the pose tenscore times ere they doo a
thing one quarter so masterly. Yea (without Kerry
merry buffe be it spoken) put a whole million of I ohannes
Mab
                     •
                  siusses of them together, and they shall not

handle their matters atPainters sharp handling. sharpe so handsomly as I.
            
               Benti:
               From sharpe to come to the poynt, as farre
as I can learne, thou hast all the aduantage of the quarell,
since both the first and last fire-brand of dissention
betwixt you, was tost by the Doctour.
            
            
               Respond:
               Tossing (by your fauour) is proper to the
sea; and so (like the sea) doth hee tosse water, and not
fire.
            
            
               Benti:
               That is tost or cast water on fire: if hee did
so, he is the wiser.
            
            
               Respon:
               On a fire of sea-cole you meane, to make it
burne brighter.
            
            
               Benti:
               A fire that the sea will coole, or Haruey find
water inough to quench, if you looke not too it the
better.
            
            
               Respon:
               I warrant, take you no care, Ile looke to
his water well inough.
            
            
               Imp:
               But me thought euen now thou contemndst
him, because hee tost water and not fire; whereas in
my indgement, there is not a hairs difference betwixt
being burnd and being drownd, since death is the best
of either, and the paine of dying is not more tedious
of the one, than of the other.
            
            
               Respon:
               O, you must not conclude so desperate, for
euerie tossing billow brings not death in the mouth of
it: besides, if the worst come to the worst, a good swimmer
may doo much, whereas fire rapit omnia secum,
sweepeth cleane where it seazeth.
            
            
               Importun:
               I, but haue you not heard that broken
peece of a vearse, Currenticede furori, giue place to
fire or furie, and you shall quickly see it consume
it selfe.
            
            
               
               Respon:
               A stale puddings end, by that reason you
may as well come vpon mee with Tempus edax rerum,
quid non consumit is anni? As though there is anie thing
so eternall and permanent, that consumes and dies not
after all his fire of life is spent. For mee, I know I shall
liue and not die, till I haue digd the graues of all my enemies;
and that the fire of my wit will not bee spent,
till (as amongst the Samogetes and Chaldaeans) I get it to
be worshipt as god of those whom it most cōfounds:
and as diuers of the Aethiopians curse the sunne when
it riseth, and worship it when it setteth; so how-euer
they curse and rai
                     •
                  e vpon mee in the beginning, I will
compell them to fall downe and worship mee ere I
cease or make an end, crying vpon their knees Ponuloi
nashe, which is in the Russian tongue, Haue mercie
vpon vs: but I will not haue mercie or be pacifide, till I
haue left them so miserable, that very horses shal hardly
abstaine from weeping for them, as they did for the
death of Caesar; and if they haue but euer a dog that
lou'd them, he shall die for griefe, to view his masters
in that plight.
            
            
               Consil:
               In anie case leaue this big thunder of words,
wherein thou vainly spendst thy spir
                     •
                  ts before the push
of the battaile; and if thou hast anie such exhaled heat
of reuenge in the vpper region of thy braine, let it
ligh
                     •
                  en and flash presently in thy aduersaries face, and
not a farre off threaten thus idely.
            
            
               Respon:
               Threaten idely said you? Nay sure, Ile performe
as much as hee that went about to make the dyuing
boate twixt Douer and Callis, and as lightning and
thunder neuer lightly goe asunder, so in my stile will I
temper them both togither, mixing thunder with lightning,

and lightning with thunder, that is, in dreadfull
terror with stripes, & sound thrusts with lowd threats.
Tell mee, haue you a minde to anie thing in the Doctors
Booke? speake the word, and I will helpe you to
it vpon the naile; whether it bee his words, his me
                     •
                  aphors,
his methode, his matter, his metters. Make
your choyce, for I meane to vse you most stately.
            
            
               Garn:
               Then good gentle Frend (if you will) let's
haue halfe a dozen spare ribs of his retho
                     •
                  ique, with
tart sauce of taunts correspondent, a mightie chyne of
his magnificentest elocution, and a whole surloyne of
his substantiallest sentences and similes.
            
            
               Resp:
               And shall, I am for you; Ile serue you of the
best you may assure your selfe: with a continuat Tr
                        •
                     
                     polo
                        •
                     gicall
speach I will astonish you, all to bee-spi
                     •
                  ed &
dredged with sentences and allegories, not hauing a
erum of any cost bestowed vpon it more, than the Doctors
owne cooquerie.
            
            
               Import:
               
                  Tropologicall! O embotched and tru
                     •
                  ulent.
No French gowtie leg with a gamash vpon it, is
so gotchie and boystrous.
            
            
               Consi:
               It founds like the ten-fold 
                     ••
                  choing rebound
of a dubble Cannon in the aire; and is able to spoyle
                     •
                  
                  nie
little mouth, that offers to pronounce it.
            
            
               Resp:
               Gentlemen, take God in your minde, & nere
feare you this word Tropologicall, for it is one of Dick
Harueys sheepes trattest in his 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      of God.
               
            
            
               Imp:
               I, Dick H
                        •
                     rueys, that may wel be; for I neuer
heard there was more in him, than would hard and
scant serue him to make a Collation: but for the Doctor,
trie it who will, his stile is not easie to be match
                     •
                  ,
beeing commended by diners (of good i
                     •
                  dgement)

for the best that ere they read.
            
            
               Respond:
               Amongst the which number, is a red bearded
thrid-bare Caualier; who (in my hearing) at an ordinarie,
as he sat fumbling the dice after supper, fell into
these tearmes, (no talke before leading him to it)
There is such a Booke of Harneys (meaning this his last
Booke against mee) as I am a Souldiour and a Gentleman
I protest, I neuer met with the like contriued pile
of pure English. O it is deuine and most admirable, &
so farre beyond all that euer he published heretofore,
as day-light beyond candle-light, or tinsell or lease-gold
aboue arsedine; with a great many more excessiue praises
he bestowed vpon it: which authentically I should
haue beleeued, if immediately vpon the nicke of it, I
had not seene him shrug his shoulders, and talk of going
to the Bathe, and after like a true Pandar (so much
the fitter to be one of Gabriels Patrons) grew in commending
to yong gentlemen, two or three of the most
detested loathsom whores about London, for peereles
beauteous Paragons, & the pleasingest wenches in the
world; wherby I guest, his iudgment might be infected
as wel as his body: & he that wold not stick so to extoll
stale rotten lac'd mutton, will like a true Millanoys
sucke figges out of an asses fundament, or doo anie
thing. I more than halfe suspect those whom you preferre
for the best iudgements, are of the same stampe;
or if they be not, I wil set a new stampe on thier iudgments:
hauing (to let them see their dotage and error,
and what his stile is they make such a miracle of) musterd
together in one galimafrie or short Oration, most
of the ridiculous senseles sentences, sinicall 
                     •
                  launting
phrases, and termagant inkhorne tearmes throughout

his Booke, and fram'd it in his owne praise and apologie,
because I would cut his cloake with the Wooll,
though Lilly and Najhe neuer so, cry N
                        •
                     n placet therear.
Auditors, awake your attention, and here expect
the cleare repurisied soule of truth, without the least
shadow of fiction; the vnflattered picture of Pedantisme,
that hath no one smile or crinkle more than it
should: for I deeply auow on my faith and saluation,
if he were a Doctor of gold, here in his owne clothes
he shal appeare to you, & not so much as a knot to his
winding sheete, orcorner tip to the smallest seluage of
his garments I will insert; only a needle and thred to
trusse vp his trinkets more roundly (vppon better aduice)
I am determined to lend him, in hope it may be
his thred of life, and euen by that single bountie dubble
stitch him vnto me to be my denoted beadsman till
death, but not a pinnes head or a moaths pallet roome
gets he of anie farther contribution. Hem, cleare your
throates, and spit soundly; for now the pageant begins,
and the stuffe by whole Cart-loads comes in.
            
            
               An Oration, including most of the miscreated
words and sentences in the Doctors
Booke.
               REnowmed and amicable Readers, from whom it is
not concealed, that Silence is a flaue in a chaine, and
the Pen the hot shot of the musket:
               
                  Benti:
                  
                     Marke, marke, a sentence, a sentence.
                  
               
               
                  Orati:
                  
that when the caitife Planet raigneth, of Punical war ther
is no end, & of the coūter-tenor of an offended Sirē, no ela.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Carne:
                  
                     Theres two, keepe tally.
                  
               
               
                  Orati:
                  Tell mee (I pray you) was 
                        •
                     uer Pegasus a cow in a cage,
Mercury a mouse in a cheese, Dexteritie a dog in a dublet,
Ledgerdemaine a slow-worme, Vi
                        •
                     acitie a lazy bones,
Entelechie a slug-plum, Humanitie a spittle-man, Rhetorique
a dummerell, Poetrie a tumbler, Historie a banqrout,
Philosophie a broker?
               
               
                  Consili:
                  I marry, now it workes.
               
               
                  Respon:
                  I bely him not a word; iust as it is there, in
his owne text it comes together.
               
               
                  Orati:
                  
                     VVhy should I then, that haue been an incorruptible Areopage,
               
               
                  Benti:
                  Stay that same Areopage, hee is a forreyner
newe come ouer, set vs examine him if hee bee the
Queenes friend or no, ere he passe.
               
               
                  Orati:
                  
                     without anie pregnant cause be thus pres
                           •
                        igiously besiedged
and marked with an Afteriske by them that are superficiall
in Theory?
                  
               
               
                  Carne:
                  
                     On my vertuous chastitie & in veritie, pregnant,
prestigious, superficiall and pretie.
                  
               
               
                  Orati:
                  In manie extraordinarie remarkeable energeticall lines,
and perfuncto
                        •
                     ie pamphlets both in ambiaexteritie and
omnidexte
                        •
                     itie, together with matters adiop
                        •
                     or all haue
I disbalased my minde, & not let slip the least occasionet
of aduantage, to acq
                        •
                     aint the world with my pregnant
propositions and resolute Aphorismes.
               
               
                  Consili:
                  That word Aphorismes, Greenes Exequutors
may claime from him; for while hee liu'd, he had

no goods nor chattles in commoner vse than it.
               
               
                  Import:
                  Away, away, I cannot be perswaded hee
wold euer come forth with anie one of these balductum
bastardly termes.
               
               
                  Respon:
                  You cannot: then cannot I be perswaded
that you cannot bee perswaded; since I haue as much
reason not to credit your bare assertion, where you say
you are perswaded it is not so, as you to distrust my
deep vehement protestatiōs, wherin I wold perswade
you it is so: but if none of these perswasions or protestations
may preuaile with your incredulitie, bring
me to the booke if you please (the Doctours Booke
s
                           •
                        bintelligitur) and that will soone resolue you.
               
               
                  Import:
                  It shall not need, I beleeue thee, since thou
standst in it so seriously: yet I wonder thou 
                        •
                     etst not
downe in figures in the margent in what line, page &
folio, a man might find euerie one of these fragments
which would haue much satisfied thy Readers.
               
               
                  Respon:
                  What, make an Errata in the midst of my
Booke, and haue my margent bes
                        •
                     ratcht (like a Merchants
booke) with these roguish Arsemetrique gibbets
or flesh-hookes, and cyphers or round oos, lyke
pismeeres egges? Content your selfe, I will neuer do
it: or if I were euer minded to doo it, I could not,
since (as I told you some few leaues before) in more
than a quarter of that his tumbrell of Confutation he
hath left the Pages vnfigured; foreseeing by deuination
(belike) that I should come to dis
                        •
                     igure them.
               
               
                  Consil:
                  I warrant thee I, thou hast figu'd him well
enough as it is; and if thou hadst tooken the paynes of
quotations or figures as he would haue thee, I doubt
whether there be anie would euer haue bestowed so

much paines to conferre or examine them.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  On forward good Piers Respo
                           •
                        dent with
your Oration, for I am hungrie vpon it; and with this
I haue heard alreadie, my appetite is nothing stancht,
but rather whetted.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  
                     Beare wit
                           •
                        es my masters, if hee dye of a
surset, I cannot doo withall, it is his owne seeking, not
mine 
                           •
                        as long as I haue it, I am no niggard of i
                           •
                        , at all
aduentures I will set it before him.
                  
               
               
                  Oration.
                  Omitting (sicco pede) my encomiasticall Orations, and
mercuriall and martiall discourses of the terr
                        •
                     bilitie of
war, in the active & cheuatrous vaine, every way cōparable
with the Caualcads of Bellerophon, or Don Alphō
                        
                           •
                        sod'
Aualos, my Seraphicall visions in Queene P
                        •
                     etrie,
queint theorickes, melancholy proiects, and pragmaticall
discourses; whose beau-desert and rich 
                        ••
                     onomie, the inspiredest Heliconists & Arch-patrons of our new Omniscians,
haue not stickt to equipage with the ancient Quinquagenarians,
Centurions, and Chiliarkes: not withstanding
all which Idees of monstrous excellencie, some
smirking Singutarists, brag Reformists, and glicking Remembrancers,

                        •
                     not with the multiplying spirite of the Alchumist,) but the villanist) seeke to bee masons of infinite
contradiction; they (I say) with their frumping Contras,
tickling interiections, together with their vehement
incensiues and allectiues, as if they would be the onely A
per se a's, or great A's of puissance, like Alexander,
(whom yet some of our moderne VVorthies disdaine to
haue sceptred the est Amen of val
                        •
                     re) commensere doubtable
Monomachies against mee, and the dead honn
                        •
                     ebee
my brother.
               
               
                  
                  Bentiu:
                  A per se, con per se, tittle, est, Amen! Dost
thou not feele thy selfe spoyld? why he comes vppon
thee (man) with a whole Horn-booke.
               
               
                  Import:
                  what a supernaturall Hibble de beane it is, to
call his brother a dead honnie-bee?
               
               
                  Consil:
                  I laughd at nothing so much, as that word
Arch-patrons. Goe thy wayes thought I: thou art a
Ciuilian, and maist well fetch metaphors from the Arches,
but thou shalt neuer fish anie monie from thence
whilest thou liu'st.
               
               
                  Carn:
                  Troth I would hee might for mee (that's all
the harme I wish him) for then we neede neuer wish
the Playes at Powles vp againe, but if we were wearie
with walking, and loth to goe too farre to seeke sport,
into the Arches we might step, and heare him plead;
which would bee a merrier Comedie, than euer was
old Mother Bomby. As for an instance: suppose hee
were to sollicite some cause against Martinists, were it
not a iest as right sterling as might be, to see him stroke
his beard thrice, & begin thus. Graue Heliconists, seraphicall
Omniscians, & the only Centurions, Quinquagenarians
and chiliarks of our time; may it please you to
be aduertised, how that certaine sm
                           •
                        rking singularists,
brag Reformists, and glicking Remembrancers, not with
the 
                           •••
                        ltiplying spirit of the Alchumist but the villanist,
have sought to be Masons of infinite contradiction, and
with their melancholy pro
                           •
                        ects, frumping contras, tickling
interiections, and vehement incensi
                           •
                        es & allectiues
in all pragmaticall terribilitie, commense redoubtable
Monomachies against you, & the beau-desert &: 
                           •
                        dees of
of your encomiasticall Church go
                           •
                        ernment, and partic
                           •
                        
                        lar
& peculiar 
                           ••
                        onomi
                           •
                        s. O we should haue the Proctors

and Registers as busie with their Table-books as
might bee to gather phrases, and all the boyes in the
Towne would be his clients to follow him. Marry it
were necessarie the Queenes Decypherer should bee
one of the high Commissioners; for else other-while
he would blurt out such Brachmannicall fuldde-fubs, as
no bodie should be able to vnderstand him.
               
               
                  Respon:
                  You make too long gloses on the text, attend
how it followes.
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
                     But Mercury sublimed is some-way a coy & stout fellow.
                  
               
               
                  Ben:
                  Verie true, for it is a good medicine for the itch.
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
                     and spite as close a se
                           •
                        retarie as a scummer,
                  
               
               
                  Canead:
                  Secretarie Spite and Secretarie Scummer,
giue me your hands: I beseech you, what Noble-men
about Court doo you belong too?
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
                     Resolution a forward mate, and Valour a braue man;
                  
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  O braue man, will you buy a braue dog?
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
                     Impudencie and Slaunder, two arrant vagabonds.
                  
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  I crie you mercie, I alwaies tooke them
for the two Brothers.
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
                     The world neuer such a Scogin as now, and the diuell neuer
such a knaue as now.
                  
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  What a diuell ayles he to rayle so vppon a
poore painfull diuell, that dooes for him all he can?
               
               
                  Respond:
                  Whist, silence on euerie hand, for here is
the very S. Georges robes of rhetorique, a speach that I
haue tooke vp by the lumpe, as it lies in his Booke.
               
               
                  
                     Oration.
                  
                     VVhat's the saluation of Dauid Gorge? A Nullitie.
VVhat the deification of H. N? A Nullitie. VVhat the
glorification of Ket? A Nullitie. VVhat the sanctification
of Browne? A Nullitie. VVhat the communitie
of Barrow? A Nullitie. VVhat the plausibilitie of
Martin? A Nullitie; yea and a wofull Nullitie, and a piteous
Nullitie.
                  
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  What a piteous noyse like a spirit in a wal
doth he here make with his Nullities? I should sure
run out of my wits, if one should come to my chamber
doore at midnight, with nothing but such a dismall
note of A Nullitie, a Nullitie.
               
               
                  Oration
                  
                     Nay, be you Load-stones to exhale what I say. Martin
is a Guerra, Browne a browne-bill, & Barrow a wheelbarrow;
Ket a kight, H. N. an o. k. and to conclude, as
the VVheele was an ancient Hierogliphicke amongst the
Aegyptians, so some tooles are false Prophets.
                  
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  That's the cause wee haue so manie bad
work-men now a daies: put vp a Bill against them next
Parliament.
               
               
                  Import:
                  But if he had said, manie men have some
tooles that are litle for their profit, he had hit the mark
somewhat nearer.
               
               
                  Oration.
                  Iudas the Gaulonite in the raigne of Herod was a hot
toast,
               
               
                  Carn:
                  
                     It cannot choose but the lou'd ale well then.
                  
               
               
                  Oration.
                  and present examples we haue as hot as fresh, that he that
hath time hath life.
               
               
                  
                  Consil:
                  In good time be it spoken.
               
               
                  Import:
                  A good admonition to Musitions to keepe
time with their instruments, if they be desirous to liue
long.
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
                     Duke Allocer on his lustie cock-horse is a hot familiar,
                  
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  Let him but liue in London halfe a yeare,
and there be them that wil take him downe and coole
him, were he twice as hot.
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
                     and no such Arte memoratiue as the crab-tree deske:
                  
               
               
                  Consil:
                  No; what say you to a crab-tree cudgell? if
it were well husbanded about his shoulders, I thinke
it would make him remember it time enough.
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
                     for vnder correction of the arte notorie be it spoken, enuic
is a soaking register, and mortall fewde the claw of
an adamant.
                  
               
               
                  Import:
                  Hath adamant such sharpe clawes? that
makes it hold yron so fast when it hath it.
               
               
                  Respon:
                  Harke, harke, how hee praiseth Sir Philip
Sidney.
                  
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
                     Sweete Sir Philip Sidney, he was the Gentleman of curtesie,
and the verie Esqu
                           •
                        re of industrie?
                  
               
               
                  Carnea:
                  The Esquire of industrie? O scabbed scald
squire (Scythian Gabriell) as thou art, so vnder-foot to
commend the cleerest myrrour of true Nobilitie.
               
               
                  Consil:
                  What a mischiefe does he taking anie mans
name in his vlcerous mouth? that being so festred and
ranckled with barbarisme, is able to rust and canker it,
were it neuer so resplendent.
               
               
                  
                  Respon:
                  In all his praises he is the most fore-spoken
and vnfortunate vnder heauen, & those whom he seruentest
striues to grace and honour, he most dishonors
and disgraceth by some vncircumcised fluttish epithi
                        •
                     e
or other: and euen to talke treason he may be drawn
vnwares, and neuer haue anie such intent, for want of
discretion how to manage his words.
               
               
                  Bent:
                  It is a common scoffe amongst vs, to call anie
foolish prodigall yong gallant, the gentleman or floure
of curtesie▪ & (if it were wel scand) I am of the opinion,
with the same purpose hee did it to scoffe and deride
Sir Philip Sidney, in calling him the Gentleman of curtesie,
and the verie Esquire of industrie.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  Poore tame-witted silly Qu
                           •
                        rko, on my
conscience I dare excuse him hee had neuer anie such
thought, but did it in as meere earnest, as euer in commendation
of himselfe and his brothers hee writ these
two verses,
Singular are these three, Iohn, Richard Gabriel Haruy,
                  
                     For Logique, Philosophie, Rhetorique, Astronomie.
as also in like innocent wel meaning added he this that
ensues.
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
                     His Entelechy was sine Greece, and the finest Tuscanisme
in graine. Although I could tickle him with a contrarie
president, where he casts Tuscanisme, as a horrible
crime in a Noble-mans teeth.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  Bodie of mee, this is worse than all the
rest, he sets foorth Sir Philip Sidney in the verie style
of a Diers Signe. As if hee should haue said:
                  
                     HEERE WITHIN THIS
PLACE IS ONE THAT DIETH
ALL KINDE OF ENTELECHY
IN FINE GREECE,
AND THE FINEST TVSCANISMEIN
GRAINE THAT
MAY BEE, OR ANY COLOVR
ELSE YE WOLD DESIRE. AND
SO GOD SAVE THE QVEENE.
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  More Copie, more Copie; we leese a great
deale of time for want of Text.
               
               
                  Imp:
                  Apace, out with it; and let vs nere stand pausing
or looking about, since we are thus far onward.
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
                     But some had rather be a pol-cat with a stinking stirre,
than a Muske-cat with gracious fauour.
                  
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  I smell him, I smell him: the wrongs that
thou hast offred him are so intollerable, as they would
make a Cat speake; therefore looke to it Nashe, for
with one Pol-cat perfume or another hee will poyson
thee, if he be not able to answere thee.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  Pol-cat and Muske cat? there wants but
a Cat a mountaine, and then there would be old scratching.
               
               
                  Be
                        •
                     tiu:
                  I but not onely no ordinarie Cat, but a
Muske-cat; and not onely a Muske cat, but a Muskecat
with gracious fauour (which sounds like a Princes
stile Dei gratia): not Tibeult or Isegrim Prince
of Cattes, were euer endowed with the like
Title.
               
               
                  
                  Respon:
                  
                     Since you can make so much of a little, you
shall haue more of it.
                  
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
To vtter the entrayles of a spheri
                        •
                     all heart in few sillables,
Muske is a sweete curtezan, and sugar and h
                        •
                     ncy
daintie hipocrytes.
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  O sweeter and sweeter, some bodie lend
me a hand kercher, that I may carrie some home in my
pocket for my little God-sonne.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  Madame Muske, if you be a curtezan (as
the Doctour informes vs), sure you haue drest a number
of my friends sweetly, haue you not? But you
were neuer otherwise like, for mans apparaile & womans
apparaile, all was one to you; and some mysterie
there was in it, that they alwayes cride, Foh, what a
stinke is heere? and stopt their noses when you came
neere them. For your worships, Master Sugar & Master
Honie, (be you likewise such daintie hipocr
                        •
                     tes as
he giues testimonie) I doubt not but at one time or other
we shall taste you.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  Stay, let me looke vpon it: I it is the same,
right Isenborough good, or neuer trust mee. A speach
or sudden exclamation, which after hee had been in a
deadly sound for sixe or seauen houres (vppon what
fear-procured sicknes I leaue you to imagine) was the
first words vpon his reuiuing he vttered.
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
                     O Humanitie my Lullius, and Diuinitie my Paracelsus.
               
               
                  Consil:
                  As much to say, as all the humanitie he hath,
is gathered out of Lullius, and all his diuinitie or religion
out of Paracelsus.
                  
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  Let him call vppon Kelly, who is better

than them both; and for the spirites and soules of the
ancient Alchumists, he hath them so close emprisoned
in the firie purgatorie of his fornace, that for the welth
of the King of Spaines Indies, it is not possible to release
or get the third part of a nit of anie one of them,
to helpe anie but himselfe.
               
               
                  Import:
                  Whether you call his fire Purgatorie or
no, the fire of Alchumie hath wrought such a purgation
or purgatory in a great number of mens purses in
England, that it hath clean fir'd thē out of al they haue.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  
                     Therefore our Doctor (verie well heere
towards the latter end of his Oration) comes in with
a cooling card.
                  
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
Cordially I could wish, that the pelting horne of these
sturres (according to the foeciall law) were rebated, wherby
our populars might taste of some more plausible Panegericall
Orations, fine Theurgie, and profound essentiall
God-full arguments.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  Soft, ere I goe anie further, I care not if I
draw out my purse, and change some odde peeces of
olde English for new coyne; but it is no matter, vpon
the Retourne from Guiana, the valuation of them
may alter, and that which is currant now be then copper.
Onely this word God-full goes with mee, if it be
but to court a widdow in Christ, or holy sister of ours
with, that weares Thy spirit be with vs, for the posie of
her ring.
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
                     But the arte of figges had euer a dappert wit, and a deft
conceit, Saint Fame give him ioy of his blacke cole & his
white chalke.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Consil:
                  
                     Saint Fame is one of the notorious nickenames
he giues thee, as also vnder the arte of figges (to
cleaue him from the crowne to the waste with a quip)
he shadowes Master Lilly: but if betweene you you
doo not so chalke him vp for a Crimme & Maniquenbecke,
and draw him in cole more artificially than the
face in cole that Michaell Angelo and Raphaell Vrbin
went to buffets about, I would you might be cole carriers
or pioners in a cole-pit, whiles colliers ride vpon
collimol cuts, or there be any reprisalls of purses twixt
this and Cole-brooke.
                  
               
               
                  Respond:
                  Pacifie your conscience, and leaue your
imprecations, wee will beare no coales, neuer feare
you. As for him (whom so artlesse and against the haire
of anie similitude or coherence) hee calls the arte of
figges, he shall not need long to call for his figs, for hee
will be choakt soone inough with them; they hauing
lyne ripe by him readie gathered (wanting nothing but
pressing) anie time this twelue month. For my owne
proper person, if I doo not (in requitall of S. Fame)
ensaint and canonize him for the famousest Paliard and
Senior Penaquila, that hath breathed since the raigne
of S. Tor, let all the droppings of my pen bee seazed
vpon by the Queenes Takers for Tarre to dresse
ships with. I tarry too tristing superfluously in the
twittle cum-twattles of his Text: take it with a wennion
altogether, if you will haue it.
               
               
                  Oration.
                  
                     Embellishtly I can resolue them, here they shall not meete
with chalke for cheese; and though some drinke oyle of
prickes for a restorati
                           •
                        e, they shall have much adoo to void
sirrupe of Roses: for it is not euerie mans blab that casts

a sheepes eye out of a calues head, and for ought I know, I
see no reason why the VVheel wright may not be as honest
a man and pregnant m
                           •
                        echanic
                           •
                         an as the Cutler, the Cutler
as the Drawer, the Drawer as the Cutter, and the
VVriter as the Printer. And so I recommend euery one
and them all to your curtesies. Your mindfull debter,
Gabriell Haruey.
                  
               
               
                  Thou hast opprest vs with an Inundation of
Biscanisme;
                     Biscanism the most ba
                           •
                        barous Spanish, cue as the Northren tung of the English. and though we would saine haue made
him stand in a white sheet for his baudie oyle of pricks,
(a common receipt for the greene sicknes); as also examind
his sirrupe of roses, wherein Rose Flowers is best
experimented, yet time & tide (that staies for no man)
forbids vs to tire any more on this carrion, being more
than glutted with it alreadie.
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  But yet to giu
                        •
                      him this one comfort at the
parting, it had not been amisse, that whereas he stands
in such feare of ca
                        ••
                     ing his sheeps eye out of his calues
head, thou neuer meantst it, but if it were an oxes hee
should still keepe it, and rather thou wouldst enlarge
it than empayre it.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  I, make it vp a paire (I sweare) rather than
he should bee vnprouided. Responde breuiter Senior
Importune, haue not I comprehended all the Doctors
workes brauely, like Homers I liads in the compasse of
a nut-shell? Now where be our honorable Caualiers,
that keepe such a prating and a gabrill about our Gabriell
and his admirable stile, (nothing so good as Littletons
with his Iohn a Nokes and Iohn a Stiles) let them
look to it I wold aduise them, for the course they take

in commending this course Himpenhempen Slampamp,
this stale Apple-squire Cockledemoy; who some 18,
yeares since, when these Italionate carnation painted
horse tayles were in fashion, in selfe same sort was a
bout (if his chamber fellow had not ouer-rulde him)
to haue seutchaneled and painted his pickerdeuant, to
make it trauer like antick: 
                        •
                     this iadish course, this iauel
                        •
                     
course, this drumbling course, this dry braind course,
if you perseuer and insist in, and on the toppe of asses
buskind eares, thus labour to build trophees of theyr
praise, canonizing euerie Bel-shangles the water-bearer
for a Saint, and the contemptiblest worlds dish-cloute
for a Relique; inspiredly I prophecie, your endes will
be Ale and Shorditch, that all preferment and good spirits
will abandon you: and more, (to plague you for
your apostata conceipts) ballets shall be made of your
base deaths, euen as there was of Cutting Ball.
                  
               
               
                  Consil:
                  Ho Ball, ho; in the name of God, whether
wilt thou?
               
               
                  Respond:
                  To Saffron-walden as fast as I can, though
I goe a little way about.
               
               
                  Import:
                  Vnfortunate Gabriell, I am sorry for him,
for he hath been a man of good parts.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  Good parts? Ile name you one of seauen
times better parts than he, whom you and I and euery
one heere, haue knowen from our childhood.
               
               
                  Import:
                  Who is that?
               
               
                  Respond:
                  
                     In Speach with his eight Parts. But without
further speach, that you may throghly be resolu'd
what those good parts are you enable the Doctor for,
here haue I set downe his whole life from his infancie
to this present 96, euē as they vse in the beginning of a

Book to set down the life of anie memorable ancient
Author. Dispense with it though it drink some inck, or
prodigally dispend manie Pages, that might haue been
better employd; for if it yeeld you not sport for your
money, at the same price shall you buye mee for your
bond-slaue, that my Booke costs you.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  On that condition, wee will make thee a
lease of our attention for three liues and a halfe, or a
hundred lacking one.
               
            
            
               The life and godly education from his childhood of that
thrice famous clarke, and morthie Orator and Poet
Gabriell Haruey.
               
                  GAbriell Haruey, of the age of fortie eight or vpwards,
(Turpe senex miles, tis time for such an
olde foole to leaue playing the swash-buckler)
was borne at Saffron walden, none of the obscurest
Townes in Essex. For his parentage, I will say as P
                        •
                     
                     lidore
Virgill saith of Cardinall VVolsey, Parentem habuit
v
                        •
                     rum probum, at lanium, he had a reasonable honest
man to his father, but he was a butcher; so Gabriell
Haruey had one Good-man Haruey to his 
                     •
                  ather, a
true subiect, that paid scot and lot in the Parish where
he dwelt, with the best of them, but yet he was a Ropemaker:
Id quod reminisci nolebat (as Polidore goes forward)
vt rem utique persona illius indignam, that which
is death to Gabriell to remember, as a matter euerie
way derogatorie to his person, quare secum totos dies
cogit abat, qualis esset, non vnde esset; wherefore, from
time to time he doth nothing but turmoile his thoghts
how to raise his estate, and inuent new petegrees, and

what great Noble-mans bastard hee was likely to bee,
not whose sonne he is reputed to bee.
               
                  Consil:
                  
                     Giue me leaue before thou readst any further.
I would not wish thee so to vpbraid him with his birth,
which if he could remedie it were another matter: but it
is his Fortune and Natures, & neither his fathers fault
nor his.
                  
               
               
                  Resp
                        ••
                     d:
                  Neither as his fathers nor his fault doo I
vrge 
                        〈◊〉
                     , otherwise than it is his fault to beare himselfe
too arrogantly aboue his birth, and to contemne and
forget the house from whence he came; which is the
reason that hath induced mee (as well in this Treat
                        •
                     se
as my former Writings) to remember him of it, not as
anie such hainous discredit simply of it selse, if his 
                        〈…〉
                     
pride were not;

                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Namo genus & pronaues, & quae non secim
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
It is no true glorie of ours what our fore-fathers did,
no
                        •
                      are we to answere for anie sinnes of theirs. Demosthenes
was the sonne of a Cutler, Socrates of a Midwife;
which detracted neyther from the ones eloquence,
nor the others wisedome: (farre be it that eyther
in eloquence or wisedome I should compare G
                           •
                        
                        briell
to either of them) Marry for 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      or
Socrates to be ashamed or take it in high d
                        •
                     ri
                        ••
                      (which
they neuer did) the one to be said to haue a Cutler to
his father; or the other that hee had a Midwife to his
mother (as H
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        ey doth to haue himselfe or anie of his
brothers called the sonnes of a Rope maker, which by
his own priuate confession to some of my friends, was
the onely thing that most set him a fire against me): I wil
                        •
                     
                     
                        ••
                     stify it, might argue thē or him more inferio
                        •
                      & despicable,

than anye Cutler, Mid-wife, or Rope maker.
Turne ouer his two bookes he hath published against
me, (where on he hath clapt paper Gods p
                        •
                     entie, if that
would presse a man to death) and see if in the waye of
answer or otherwise he once mention the word ropemaker,
or come within fortie foot of it: except in one
place of his first booke where hee nameth it not neither,
but goes thus cleanly to worke, (as her
                        •
                     tofore I
haue set downe) though hee 
                        〈…〉
                      no roome in
the expence of 36. Sheetes of 
                        〈◊〉
                      to resute it. And
may 
                           〈…〉
                         his father? (a
Periphrasis of a Rope maker, which (if should shryue
my selfe) 
                        •
                      neuer heard before). This is once, I haue
given him cause enough I wot 
                        〈◊〉
                      haue stumbled 
                        〈…〉
                     ,
and take 
                        〈◊〉
                      of it; for where in his first bo
                        •••
                      hee
                        •
                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      begger in my dish 
                        〈◊〉
                      third sillable, and
so like an Emperour triump
                        •
                     s ouer mee, as though he
had the Philosophers Stone to play at foot bal with, &
I were a poore Alchumist new
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , that had s
                        •
                     arce
money to buy 
                        〈◊〉
                      for my fornace. In kind
g
                        •
                     er don and requitall, h
                        •
                     olde him in Piers 
                           〈◊〉
                        
That be 
                           〈…〉
                         (like the

                           〈…〉
                         for he was but the sonne of a Rope-maker; 
                           〈…〉
                         would
not 
                           •
                        ave a shoo to put on his feete if his father' had 
                           〈…〉
                        .
And in an
                        •
                     ther place,
where he brought the Towne Seale or next Iustices
where he brought the Towne Seale or next I 
                        〈◊〉
                     
hands (as it were) to witnes▪ that his father was an honest
man; which no man denide or impaired anie surther,
than saying, 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
                     which is more, three proud sonnes, that when they met
the hang man (their fathers best 
                           〈◊〉
                         stomer) would not put
off their hatts to him; with other by glances, to the like
effect: which he silently ouer-skippeth, to withdraw
men (lapwing like) from his neast, as much as might
bee. Onely hee tells a foolish twittle twattle boasting
tale, (amidst his impudent brazen-fac'd defamation of
Doctor 
                        〈◊〉
                     ) of the Funerall of his kinsman Sir Tho
                        
                           •••
                        
Smith, (which word kinsman, I wonderd he causd
not to be set in great capitall letters), and how in those
Obsequies he was a chiefe Mourner. I wis his father
was of a more humble spirit; who in gratefull lieu and
remembrance of the hempen mysterie that hee was
beholding too, and the patrons and places that were
his trades chiefe maintainers and supporters, proui
                        •
                     ded
that the first letter each of his sonnes names began
with, should allude and correspond with the chrese
marts of his traffick, & of his profession & occupation▪
as Gabriell his eldest sonnes name, beginning with
a G. for Gallowes, Iohn with an I. for Iayle, Richard
with an R. for Rope-maker; as much to say, as all his
whole liuing depended on the Iayle, the Gallowes, &
making of Ropes. Another brother there is, whose
name I haue forgot, though I am sure it iumpes with
this Alphabet. Iumpe or iarre they with me as they
see cause, this counsaile (if the ease were mine) I
would giue them, not to bee daunted or blancket anie
whit, had they ten hundred thousand legions of hang
                     
                        •••
                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      or per collum pe
                           •
                        dere debes to their fathers,
and any should twit them or gaule them with it neuer
so: but as Agathocles comming from a durt
                        •
                     kneading
Potter to be a King, would (in memorie of that his first

vocation) be serued euer after, as well in earthen dishes,
as sumptuous royal plate; so, had they but one royall
of plate or sixe pennie peece amongst them, they
shuld plat (what euer their other cheere were) to haue
a salt eele in resemblance of a ropes end, continuallye
seru'd in to their tables; or if they were not able to be
at such charges, let them cast but for a two-penny rope
of onions euerie day to be brought in, in stead of frute
for a closing vp of their stomackes. It cannot doo amisse,
it will remēber them they are mortal, & whence
they came, & whether they are to goe. Were I a Lord
(I make the Lord God a vow) and were but the least a
kin to this breath strangling linage, I would weare a
chain of pearle brayded with a halter, to let the world
see I held it in no disgrace, but high glorie to bee discended
howsoeuer: and as amongst the ancient Aegipt
                           •
                        ans (as Massarisus de ponderibus writes) there was
an Instrument called Funiculus, conteining 60. surlongs,
wherewith they measured their fields and their
vine yards; so from the plough harnesse to the slender
hempen twist that they bind vp their vines with, wold
I branch my al
                        •
                     iance, and omit nothing in the praise of
it, except those two notable blemishes of the trade of
rope-makers, Achitophel and I
                           •
                        das, that were the first
that euer hangd themselues.
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  Thereto the Rope-makers were but accidentally
accessarie, as any honest man may be, that lends a halter
to a thiefe, wherewith (unwitting to him) he goes &
steales a horse: wherefore, how euer (after a sort) they
may be said to haue their hands in the effect, yet they are
free and innocent from the cause.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  As though the cause and the effect (more

than the superficies and the substance) can bee seperated,
when in manie things, causa sine qua non is both
the cause and the effect, the common distinction of potentia
non actu approuing it selfe verie crazed and impotent
herein, since the premisses necessarily beget the
conclusion, and so contradictorily the conclusion the
premisses; a ha
                        •
                     ter including desperation, 
                        •
                     nd so desperation
concluding in a halter; without which fatall
conclusion and priuation, it cannot truly bee termed
desperation, since nothing is said to bee, till it is borne▪
and despaire is neuer fully borne, till it ceaseth to bee,
and hath depriu'd him of beeing, that first bare it and
brought it forth. So that herein it is hard to distinguish
which is most to be blamed of the cause or the effect;
the Cause without the effect beeing of no effect,
and the effect without the cause neuer able to haue
been. Such another paire of vndiscernable twins and
mutuall married correllatiues are Nature & Fortune.
As for example; If it be any mans fortune to hang himselfe
and abridg his naturall life, it is likewise natural to
him (or allotted him by Nature) to haue no better fortune.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  
                     Better or worse fortune, I pry thee let vs
heare kow thou goest forward with describing the Doctor
and his life and fortunes: and you my fellow Auditors,
I beseech you trouble him not (anie more) with these
impertinent Parentheses.
                  
               
               
                  Respond:
                  His education I will handle next, wherein
he ran through Didimus or Diomedes 6000. books of
the Arte of Grammer, besides learnd to write a faire
capitall Romane hand, that might well serue for a
boone-grace, to such men as ride with their face towards

the horse taile, or set on the pillory for cousnage
or periurie. Many a copy-holder or magistrall scribe,
that holds all his liuing by setting school-boies copies,
comes short of the like gift. An old Doctor of Oxford
snewd me Latine verses of his, in that flourishing flantitanting
goutie Omega fi
                        •
                     t, which hee presented vnto
him (as a bribe) to get leaue to playe, when hee was in
the heigth or prime of his Puer es cupis at que doceri. A
good qualitie or qualification I promise you truely, to
keepe him out of the danger of the Statute gainst wilfull
vagabonds, rogues and beggers. But in his Grammer
yeares, (take me thus farre with you) he was a verie
graceless litigious youth, and one that would pick
quarrels with old Gulielmus Lillies Sintaxis and Pr
                           •
                        
                        sodia,
                     
                        •
                     ucrie howre of the daye. A desperate stabber
with pen-kniues, and whom he could not ouer-come
in disputation, he would be sure to break his head with
his pen and ink-horne. His father prophecyde by that
his ventrus manhood and valure, he would proue an
other S. Thomas a Becket for the Church. But his mother
doubted him much, by reason of certaine strange
dreames she had when she was first quicke with childe
of him; which wel she hoped were but idle swimming
fancies of no consequence: till being aduisde by a cunning
man (her frend, that was verie farre in her books)
one time shee slept in a sheepes skinne all night, to the
intent to dreame true, another time vnder a lawrell
tree, a third time on the bare ground starke naked, and
last on a dead mans tomb or graue stone in the church
in a hot Summers after-noone: when no barrel better
herring, she sped euen as she did before. For first shee
dreamed her wombe was turned to such another hollow

vessell full of disquiet fiends, as Salomons brazen
Bowle, wherein were shut so manie thousands of diuels;
which (deepe hidden vnder ground) long after
the Babilonians (digging for mettals) chaunced to light
vpon, and mistaking it for treasure, brake it ope verie
greedily, when as out of Pandor as Boxe of maladyes
which Ep
                           •
                        metheus opened, all manner of euills flewe
into the world; so all manner of deuills then broke
loose amongst humane kinde. Therein her drowsie
diuination not much dece
                        •
                     i'd her: for neuer wer Empedocles
deuils so tost from the aire into the sea, & from
the sea to the earth, and from the earth to the aire againe
exhaled by the Sunne, or driu'n vp by windes &
tempests, as his discontented pouertie (more disquiet
than the Irish seas) hath driu'n him from one profession
to another. Deuinitie (the Heauen of all Artes) for
a while drew his thoughts vnto it, but shortly after the
                        •
                     
world the flesh and the diuell with-drewe him from
that, and needes he would be of a more Gentleman-like
lustie cut; whereupon hee fell to morrall Epistling
and Poetrie. He sell I may well say, & made the price
of wit and Poetrie fall with him, when hee first began
to be a sripler or broker in that trade. Yea, from the
aire he fell to the sea, (that my comparison may hold in
euerie point) which is▪ he would needs crosse the seas
to fetch home two penniworth of Tuscanisme: from
the sea to the earth againe he was toft, videlicet shortly
after hee became a roguish Commenter vppon earth
quakes, as by the 
                        •
                     amous Epistles (by his owne mouth
onely made famous) may more largely appeare. Vltimalinea
rerum, his finall entrancing from the earth to
the skies, was his key colde desence of the Cleargie in

the Tractate of Pa
                           •
                        -hatchet, intermingled like a small
Fleete of Gallies, in the huge Armada against me. The
second dreame his mother had, was that shee was deliued
of a caliuer or hand-gun, which in the discharging
burst. I pray God (with all my heart) that this caliuer
or caualier of Poetrie, this hand gun or elder-gun
that shoots nothing but pellets of chewd paper, in the
discharging burst not. A third time in her sleep she apprehended
and imagined, that out of her belly there
grew a rare garden bed, ouer-run with garish weedes
inn
                        •
                     merable, which had onely one slip in it of herb of
grace, not budding at the toppe neither, but like the
floure Narcissus, hauing flowres onely at the roote;
whereby she augur'd and coniectur'd, how euer hee
made some shew of grace in his youth, when he came
to the top or heighth of his best proofe, he would bee
found a barrain stalk without frute. At the same time
(ouer and aboue) shee thought that in stead of a boye,
(which she desired) she was deliuerd and brought to
bed of one of these kistrell birds, called a wind-fucker.
Whether it be verisiable or onely probably surmised, I
am vncertaine, but constantly vp and downe it is bruted,
how he pist incke as soone as euer hee was borne,
and that the first cloute he fowld, was a sheete of paper;
whence some mad wits giu'n to descant, euen as
Herodotus held, that the A
                           •
                        thiopians seed of generation
was as blacke as inke, so haply they vnhappely wold
conclude, an Incubus in the likenes of an inke-bottle,
had carnall copulation with his mother when hee was
begotten. Should I reckon vp but one halfe of the miracles
of his conception, that verie substantially haue
been affirmed vnto me; one or other like Bodine wold

start vp and taxe mee for a miracle-monger, as hee taxt
Li
                           •
                        y, saying that he talkt of nothing else, saue how oxen
spake, of the flames of fire that issued out of the
Scipioes heads, of the Statues of the Gods that swet,
how I upiter in the likenes of a childe or yong-man appeared
to Hanniball, and that an Infant of six months
olde proclaymed triumph vp and downe the streetes.
But let him that hath the poyson of a thousand Gorgons
or stinging Basi
                        •
                     iskes full crammed in his inke-horne,
tamper with mee, or taxe mee in the way of contradiction
neuer so little, and he shall finde (if I finde him
not a toad, worthie for nought but to be stampt vnder
foote) that I will spit fire for fire, fight diuell fight dragon,
as long as he will. No vulgar respects haue I,
what Hoppenny Hoe & his fellow Hankin Booby thinke
of mee, so those whom Arte hath adopted for the peculiar
Plants of her Academie, and refined from the
dull Northernly drosse of our Clyme, hold mee in anie
tollerable account.
               
               The wonders of my great Grand father Har
                        •
                     eys
Progeniture, were these.
               In the verie moment of his birth, there was a calse
borne in the 
                     ••
                  me Towne with a dubble tongue, and
hauing 
                     •
                  ares farre longer than anie asse, and his seete

                     •
                  urned backward like certaine people of the Tartars,
that neuertheles are reasonable swift.
               In the houre of his birth there was a most darksome
Eclipse, as though hel and heauen about a consultation
of an eternall league had met together.
               Those that calculated his nati
                     •
                  itie said, that Saturne
and the Moone (either of which is the causer of madnesse)
were melancholy conioynd together (contrarie

to all course of Astronomie) when into the world hee
was produced. About his lips, euen as about Dions
ship, there flocked a swarme of waspes, as soone as euer
he was laid in his cradles. Scarce nine yeres of age
he attaind too, when by engrossing al ballets that came
to anie Market or Faire there-abouts, he aspired to bee
as desperate a ballet maker as the best of them. The
first frutes of his Poetrie, beeing a pittifull Dittie in lamentation
of the death of a Fellow, that at Queene
Maries coronation, came downward with his head on
a rope from the Spyre of Powles steeple, and brake his
necke. Afterward he exercised to write certaine graces
in ryme dogrell, and verses vppon euerie Month,
manie of which are yet extant in Primers and Almanackes.
His father with the extreame ioy of his towardnesse
wept infinitely, and prophecide he was too
forward witted to liue long. His Schoole-master neuer
heard him peirse or conster, but he cryde out, O acumen
Carneadum! O decus addite diuis! and swore
by Susenbrotus and Taleus, that he would prooue another
Philo Iudeus for knowledge and deep iudgment,
who in Philosophie was preferd aboue Plato; and bee
a more rare Exchequer of the Muses, than rich Gaza
was for wealth; which tooke his name of Cambyses
laying all his Treasure there, when hee went to make
warre against Aegipt.
               
               By this time imagin him rotten ripe for the Vniuersitie,
and that hee carries the poake for a messe of porredge
in Christs Colledge: which I doo not vpbraid him
with, as anie disparagement at a
                     •
                  l, since it is a thing euetie
one that is Scholler of the House, is ordinarily subiect
vnto by turnes, but onely. I thrust it in for a Periphrasis

of his admission or ma
                     •
                  riculation. I am sure
you will bee glad to heare well of him, since hee
is a youth of some hope, and you haue been partly
acquainted with his bringing vp.
               In sadnes I would be loath to discourage ye, but yet
in truth (as truth is truth, and will out at one time or
other, and shame the diuell) the coppie of his Tutors
Letter to his father I will shew you, about his carriage
and demeanour; and yet I will not positiuely affirme
it his Tutors Letter neither, and yet you maye gather
more than I am willing to vtter, and what you list not
beleeue, referre to after Ages, euen as Paul
                        ••
                      Iouius
did in his lying praises of the House of Medices, or the
importunate Dialogue twixt Charles the fifth and him,
of Expedire te op
                        •
                     rtet, & parare calames: or his tempestuous
thunder-bolt Inuectiue against Seli
                        •
                     us.
               
            
            
               The Letter of Harueys Tutor to his Father,
as touching his manners and behauior.
               
                  Emanuell.
                  SIr, Grace and peace vnto you premised. So it is, that
your sonne you have committed to my charge, is of a
passing forward carriage & profiteth very soundly.
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     :
                  That is, beares himselfe very forward on
his tip-toes, (as he did euer) & profits or battles soundly,
and is a youth of a good size.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Letter.
                     Great expectation we haue of him, that bee will proue a
                           •
                        
other Co
                              •
                           ax or Lacedemonian Cres
                              •
                           phon for Rheth
                           •
                        
                        riq
                           •
                        e,

                           〈◊〉
                         was 
                           〈◊〉
                         because he vaunted he could talke

                           〈…〉
                         day of a
                           •
                        ie thing.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Benti:
                  I would our Gurm
                           •
                         Hidruntum, were like
wise banisht with him, for he can hotch-potch whole
Decades vp of nothing, and talks idlely all his life time.
               
               
                  
                     Letter.
                     and not much infer
                           •
                        our to Demo
                              •
                           henes, Aeschines,
Demades, or the mel
                           •
                        dious recording Muse of Italy,
Cornelius Musa, Bishop of Bitonto, or the yet liuing
mellisluous Pancarola, who is said to cast out spirites by
his powerfull diuine eloquence.
                  
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  The spirit of foolery out of this Archibald
Rupenrope he shall neuer be able to cast, were the Ne
                        
                           •
                        tar
of his eloquence a thousand times more superabundant
incessant sourding.
               
               
                  
                     Letter.
                     VVhen I record (as I doo often) the strange vntraffiqu't
phrases, by him new vented and vnpackt, as if incendatie
for fire, an illuminarie for a candle and lant-horne,
an indument for a cloake, an vnder foote abiect for a
shooe or a bo
                           •
                        te; then I am readie (with Erasmus) to cry,
Sancte Socrates; or (with Ari
                              •
                           totle) Ens entium miserere
mei! what an ingeny is heere? O his conce
                           •
                        pt is most
delicate, and that right well he apprehendeth, hauing atreadie
proposed high matters for it to worke on. For stealing
into his Study by chance the other day, there I found
diuers E
                           •
                        istles and Orations, purposely directed and prepared,
as if he had been Secretarie to her Maiestie for
the Latine tongue; or against such a place should fall, he
would be sure not to be vnprouided: as also hee had furnisht
himselfe (as if he made no question to be the Vntuersitie
Orator) for all Congratulations, Funerall Elegiacall
condolments of the death of such and such a Doct
                           •
                        r
in Cambridge; and which is more, of euerie P
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        y Counsailour

in England. T
                           ••
                         are no Scholler, & therefore little
know what belongs to it, but if you heard him how sacredly
hee ends enerie sentence with esse posse videatur,
you would (like those that arriue in the Phillipinas, opprest
with sweete odors) forget you are mo
                           •
                        t all, and imagine
your self no where but in Paradice. Some there be (I am
not ignorant) that upon his often bringing it in at the end
of euerie period, call him by no other name, but esse posse
videatur: but they are such, as were neuer endenizond
in so much arte, as Similiter Desinens; and know not the
true vse of Numerus Rhetoricus. So vpon his first manumission
in the mysterie of Logique, because he obseru'd
Ergo was the deadly clap of the p
                           •
                        ece, or driu'n home stab
of the Syll
                           •
                        gisme, hee accustomed to make it the Faburden
to anie thing hee spake; As if anie of his companions
complained hee was hungrie, hee would straight conclude
Ergo you must goe to dinner; or if the clocke had stroke
or bell towld, Ergo you must goe to such a Lecture; or if
anie stranger said he came to seeke such a one, and desir'd
him he would shew him which was his chamber, he would
foorthwith come vpon him with Ergo he must go vp such
a paire of staires: whereupon (for a great while) he was
cald nothing but Gabriell Ergo vp and downe the Colledge.
But a scoffe which longer dwelt with him than the
rest, though it argued his extreame pregnancie of capa
                        
                           ••
                        tie,
and argute transper sing dexteritie of Paradoxisme;
was that once he would needs defend a Rat to be Animal
rationale, that is, to haue as reasonable a soule as a
                           •
                        ie Aca
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        ick,
because she eate and gnawd his bookes, and except
she carried a brai
                           •
                        e with her, she could ne
                           •
                        er digest
or be so capable of learning. And the more to co
                           •
                        firme it,

                           〈◊〉
                         e
                           •
                        erie 
                           〈◊〉
                         laught at him for a c
                           •
                        mmon Mountebanke

banke Rat-ca
                           •
                        cher about it; the next rat he seazd on he
                           •
                        
made an Anatomie of, and read a lect
                           •
                        re of 
                           •
                        . dayes long
upon e
                           •
                        erie artire or musckle in her, and after hangd her
oner his head in his studie, in stead of an Apothecaries
Crocodile, or dride Alligatur. I have not yet mentiond
his Poetrie, wherein hee furmounteth and dismounteth
the most her 
                           •
                        ycallest Countes Mountes of that Craft;

                           •
                        auing writ verses in all kindes, as in forme of a paire of
gloues, a dozen of points, a paire of spectacles, a two hand
sword, a poy
                           •
                        ado, a Colossus, a Pyramide, a Painters eazill,
a market-crosse, a trumpet, an anchor, a paire of potbookes;
yet I can see 
                           •
                        o Authors he hath, more than his
owne natur all Genius or Minerua, except it bee Haue
with ye to Florida, The storie of Axeres and the worthie
Iphijs, As I went to Walsingham, and In Creete
when Dedalus, a song that is to him food from heauen,
and more transporting and raushing, than Platoes Discourse
of the immortalit
                           •
                        e of the soule was to Cato, who
with the verie ioy he conceiud from rreading thereof, wold
needs let out his soule, and so stabd himselfe. Abou Homers
or all mens workes who soeuer he doth prize it, laying
it vnder his pillow (like Homers works) euery night
and carrying it in his bosome (next his heart) euer
                           •
                        e day.
From the generall Discourse of his vertues, let mee digresse,
and informe you of some few fragments of his vices;
as like a Church and an ale-house, God and the d
                           ••
                        
well they manie times dwell neere together. Memorandum,
his laundresse complaines of him that hee is mi
                           •
                        htie
fleshly giue
                           •
                        , and that there had lewd
                           •
                        es past betwixt
her daughter and him, if she had not lu
                           •
                        kely preuented it
by searching her daughters pocket, wherein she found a

                           〈…〉
                         
                        Bradfords Meditations no bro
                           •
                        der volu
                           •
                        'd

than a Scale at Armes, or a blacke melancholy veluet
patch, and a three-pennie pamphlet of The Fall of
man he had bestowed on her, that he might 
                           ••
                        ow her vnder
hatches in his study, & do what be w
                           •
                        ld with her. In
awast white l
                           •
                        afe of one of which bookes, he had writ for
his sentence or posie, Nox & amor, as much to say, as O
for a pretie wench in the darke; and vnderneath, Non
sunt sine viribus artus, If thou comst old l
                           •
                        sse, I will 
                           〈◊〉
                        
thee: and in the other, Leue fit qu
                              •
                           d bene f
                              •
                           rtur onus,
that is, we must beare with one another, and Foelices
quibus vsus adest, vse in all things makes perfect. Secondly
he is beyond all reason or Gods forbod distractedly
enamourd of his own beautie, spending a whole forenoone▪
                        
                           •
                        uerie day in spunging and licking himselfe by the glasse;
and vseth cuerse night after supper to walke on the market
hill to shew himselfe, holding his gown vp to his middle,
that the wenches may see what a fine leg and a dainty
foote he hath in pumpes and pantoffles, and if they giue
him neuer so little an amorous regard, he presently boords
them with a set speach of the first gathering together of
societies, and the distinction of amor and amicitia out of
Tullies Offices; which if it work no effect, & they laugh
at, he will rather take a raifon of the sunne, and weare it
at his eare for a fauor, than it should bee said hee would
goe away emptie. Thirdly, he is verie seditious and 
                           〈◊〉
                        
in conuersation, picking quarrells with euerie man
that will not magnifie and applaud him; libelling most execrably
and inhumanely on Iacke of the Falcon, for that
he would not lend him a messe of mustard to his red herrings;
yen for a lesser matter than that on the Colledge dog

                           〈…〉
                        , onely because he proudly bare vp his taile as hee
past by him. And fourthly and lastly he vseth often to be

drunk with the firrupe or br
                           •
                        th of 
                           ••
                        ewd prunes, and e
                           •
                        
                        teth
more bread vnder pretence of swearing by it, than
would serue a whole Band in the Low Countries. These
are the least part of his veniall sinnes, but I forbear him,
& proceed no further, because I loue him: only I wold
wish you (being his father) at anie hand to warne him of
these matters priuately betwixt him and you, and againe
and againe cry out vpon him to beware of pride; which I
more than fatally prophecie will be his vtter ouer-throw.
                     
                        
                           Yours assuredly, and so foorth,
Iohannes fine nomine, Anno
Domini, what ye will.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  VVhat is your censure, you that bee of the
common counsaile, may this Epistle passe or no without a
demurre or prouiso?
               
               
                  Consil:
                  Passe in the way of pastime, and so foorth; it
being no indecorum at all to the Comedie we haue in hand
to admit Piers himselfe for his Tutor, for if he proceed
in the seuere discipline he hath begun, he is like to humble
him, and bring him to more goodnes, than anie Tutor or
Master he euer had since he was borne
               
               
                  Life.
                  Leauing his childhood, which hath leaue or a lawe
of priuiledge to be fond; & to come to the first prime
of his pamphleting, which was much about the setting
vp of the Bull by Felton on the Bishop of Londons gate
or rather some prettie while before; when for an aslay
or nice tasting of his pen, he capitulated on the births
of monsters, horrible murders, and great burnings:
and afterward in the yeare when the earth-quake was
he fell to be a familiar Epistler, & made Powles Churchyard
                     
resound or crie twang againe with foure notable
famous Letters: in one of which hee enterlaced his
short but yet sharpe iudiciall of Earth-quakes, & came
verie short and sharpe vppon my Lord of Oxford, in a
r
                        •
                     tling bund
                        •
                     e of Eng
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     h Hexameters. How that
thriu'd with him, some honest Chronicler helpe me to
remember, for it is not comprehended in my braines
Diarie or Ephemerides: but this I can iustifie, that immediately
vpon it, he became a common writer of Almanackes.
Tis meruaile if some of you amongst your
vnsatiable ouerturning of Libraries, haue not stumbled
on such an approued architect of Calenders, as Gabriel
Frend the Progno
                        •
                     ticator. That Frend I not a little suspect
(if a man should take occasion to trye his Frend)
would be found to bee no Frend, but my constant approued
mortall enemie Gabriell Haruey Well, I may
say to you, it is a difficult rare thing in these dayes to
finde a true Frend. But the probable reasons which
driue me to cōiecture that it is a false Frend which deludes
vs with these durtie astronomicall predictions, &
that Gabriell Ha
                           •
                        uey is this Frend in a corner, which
no man knowes of, be these that follow. First, he hath
been noted in manie companies where hee hath been,
very suspitiously to vndermine, whither any man knew
such a fellow as Gabriell Frend the Progno
                        •
                     ticator or
no? or whether they euer heard of anie that euer saw
him or knew him? Wheretoo, when they all aunswered
with one voyce, not guiltie to the seeing, hearing
or vnderstanding of anie such Starry Noune Substantiue;
vp starts me he (like a proud school-master, when
one of his Boyes hath made an Oration before a
countrey Maior that hath pleasd) and bites the lip, and

winkes and smiles priuily, and lookes pertly vpon it, 
                        •
                     
who s
                        •
                     ould say, 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         quem querit is a
                           •
                        s
                           •
                        m: and after
some little coy bridling of the chi
                        •
                     , and nice simpr
                        •
                     ng
and wrything his face; o waies, tels them flatly that vppon
his credit and knowledge (both which are hardly
worth a candles end to helpe him to bed with) there is
no such Quarter-master, 
                     
                        •
                     r master of the 4. Quarters,
or Writer in redde letters, as that supposed flower of
Frend-ly curtesie, Gabriell Frend the Prognosticator;
but to vse plaine dealing amongst frends, a frend of his
it is he must cōceale, who thoght good to shroud himselfe
vnder that title. Now if ye will allow of my verdit
in this behalfe, I hold vnusquisque proximus ipse sibi, euery
man is the best Frend to himself, & that he himself
& no other, is that Frend of his he must conceale. The
2. argument that confirmes me in this strong article of
my creede, is, for none is priuy to a blank maintenance
he hath, & some maintenāce of necessity he must haue,
or else how can he maintaine his peak in true christendome
of rose-water euerie morning? By the ciuil law
peraduenture you wil alleage he 
                        •
                     etches it in: nay therin
ye are deceiud, for he hath no law for that. I will not
deny but his mother may haue su'd in forma pauperis, but he neuer sollicited in form of papers in the Arches
in his li
                        •
                     e. How then, doth he fetch it aloft with his poetrie?
Dii faciant laudis summa fit ista suae. I pray God
he neuer haue better lands or liuing till he die. Shall I
discharge my conscience, being no more than (on my
soule) is most true, the Printers and Stationers vse him
as he wer the Homer of this age, for they say vnto him,
Si nihil attuleris, ibis Homere foras, Haruey if ye bring
no mony in your purse ye get no books printed here.

Euen for the printing of this logger-head Legend of
lyes, which now I am wrapping vp hot spices in, hee
ran in debt with VVolfe the Printer 36. pound & a blue
coate which he borrowed for his man, and yet VVolfe
did not so much as brush it when hee lent it him, or
presse out the print where the badge had been. The
Storie at large a leafe or two hence you shall heare.
The last refuge and sanctuarie for his exhibition (after
his lands, law & poetrie are confiscated) is to presume
he hath some priuy benefactors or patrons that holde
him vp by the chin. What hee hath had of late, my intelligence
failes me, but for a number of yeares past, I
dare confidently depose, not a bit nor cue of anie benefactor
or patron he had, except the Butler or Manciple
of Trinitie Hall (which are both one) that trusted
him for his commons & sizing; so that when I haue
toyled the vtmost that I can to saue his credite and honestie,
the best wit craft I can turn him too to get three
pence a weeke, and keepe the paper soales and vpper
leather of his pantoffles together, is to write Prognostications
and Almanackes; and that alone hath beene
and must bee his best Philosophers Stone till hys last
destiny.
                  I was sure, I was sure at one time or other I should
take him napping. O eternall ieft (for Gods sake helpe
me to laugh): What, a graue Doctor, a base Iohn Doleta
the Almanack-maker, Doctor Deuse-ace and Doctor
Mery-man? Why from this day to proceed, Ile neuer
goe into Powles Church-yard to enquire for anie of
his workes, but (where euer I come) looke for them
behinde the doore, or on the backe-side of a screene,
(where Almanackes are set vsually) or at Barbers or

Chandlers shop 
                        •
                     euer to misse of them. A maker of
Almanackes quoth a, God forgiue me, they are readier
money than Ale and cakes, and are m
                        •
                     re familiar
read than Tullies 
                     
                        •
                     amiliar Epistles, or the Discourse of
Debitor & Creditor, especially of those that ordinary
write Letters, or haue often occasion to paye money.
They are the verie Di
                        •
                     lls of dayes, the Sunnes ghesses;
and the Moones months-mind. Here in London streets
if a man haue busines to enquire for anie bodie, and he
is not well acquainted with the place, he goes filthely
halpering, and asking cap in hand from one shop to another,
where's such a house and such a signe? But if
we haue busines to speak with anie in the skie, buy but
one of Gabriell Frend or Gabriell Harueys Almanacks,
and you shall carry the signe & house in your pockets,
whether Iupiters house, Saturnes house, Mars hys
house Venus house, or anie hot-house or baudy house
of them all. To conclude, not the poorest walking-mate,
or thred-bare cut purse in a countrey, that can
well be without them, be it but to know the Faires &
Markets when they fall: & against who dare I will vphold
it, that theres no such necessarie Book of common
places in the earth as it; as for example, From London
to Yorke, from Yorke to Barwicke, and so backwardes.
It is a strange thing I should be so skilfull in Phisiognomie,
and neuer studied it. I alwaies saw in the Doctors
countenaunce, he greedily hunted after the high way
to honour, and was a busie Chronicler o
                        •
                      high wayes,
he had such a number of vgly wrinckled high wayes in
his visage. But the time was when he would not haue
giuen his head for the washing, and would haue tooke
foule scorne that the best of them all should haue outfac'd

him. I haue a tale at my tungs end if I can happen
vpō it, of his hobby-horse reuelling & dominering at
A
                           •
                        dley-end, when the Queene was there: to which
place, Gabriell (to doo his countrey more worship &
glory) came ruffling it out huffty tuffty in his suite of
veluet. There be thē in Cambridge that had occasion
to take note of it, for he stood noted or scoard for it in
their bookes manie a faire day after: and if I take not
my markes amisse, Rauen the botcher by Pembrook-hal
(whether he be aliue or dead I know not) was as priuie
to it euerie patch of it from top to toe, as hee that
made it; and if euerie one would but mend one as often
as hee hath mended that, the world would bee by
200. parts honester than it is: yet be he of the mending
hand neuer so, and Gabriell neuer able to make him amends,
he may blesse the memorie of that wardrope,
for it will be a good while ere hee meete with the like
customer as it was to him at least 14. yere together, falling
into his hands twice a yeare as sure as a club, before
euery Batchelors and Masters Commensment, or
if it were aboue, it was a generall Item to all the Vniuersitie,
that the Doctor had some ierking Hexameters
or other shortly after to passe the stampe, hee neuer in
all his life (till lately he fel a wrangling with his sister in
law) hauing anie other busines at London. The rotten
mould of that worme eaten relique (if hee were well
searcht) he weares yet, meaning when he dies to hang
it ouer his tombe for a monument: and in the meane
time, though it is not his lucke to meete with euer a
substantiall baudie case (or booke case) that carries rem
in re, meate in the mouth in it (A miserable intollerable
case, when a yong fellow & a yong wench cannot

put the case together, and doo with their owne what
they lift, but they shalbe put to their booke to confesse,
and be hideously perplext) yet I say daily and hourely
doth he deale vpon the case notwithstanding. You wil
imagine it a fable percase which I shall tell you, but it is
x. times more vnsallible, thā the newes of the Iewes rising
vp in armes to take in the Land of promise, or the
raining of corne this Summer at VVake
                           •
                        ield. A Gentleman
(long agoe) lent him an old veluet saddle, which
when he had no vse for, since no man else would trust
him for a bridle, and that he was more accustomed to
be ridden than to to ride, what does me he, but deeming
it a verie base thing for one of his standing in the Vniuersity
to be said to be yet d
                        •
                     nsing in Sadolet, & with
all scorning his chamber shuld be employd as an oftry
presse to lay vp iades riding iackets and trusses in, presently
vntrusseth & pelts the out-side from the lining,
and vnder benedicite here in priuate be it spoken, dealt
verie cunningly and couertly in the case, for with it he
made him a case or couer for a dublet, which hath cased
and couerd his nakednes euer since, and to tell yee
no lye, about two yeare and a halfe past, hee creditted
Newgate with the same metamorphized costly vestiment.
As good cheape as it was deliuerd to mee (at
the second hand) you haue it. Nil habeo praeter auditum,
I was not at the cutting it out, nor will I binde
your consciences too strictly to embrace it for a truth,
but if my iudgement might stand for vp, it is rather likely
to be true than false, since it vanisht inuisible and was
neuer heard of: and besides, I cannot deuise how he
should behaue him to consume such an implement, if
he cōfiscated it not to that vse, neither lending it away,

nor selling it; nor how hee should otherwise thrust
himselfe into such a moth-eaten weed, hauing neyther
money nor frends to procure it. Away, away, neuer
hauke nor pause vpon it, for without all par-anters it is
so; and let them tattle and prate till their tongues ake,
were there a thousand more of them, and they should
set their wit to his, he would make them set besides the
saddle, euen as he did the Gentleman. A man in hys
case hath no other shift, or apparaile which you will,
but he must thus shift other-while for his liuing, especially
liuing quiet as he dooth without anie Crosses (in
his purse subaudi) and being free from all couetous incumbraunces:
yet in my shallow foolish conceipt, it
were a great dea
                        •
                     e better for him if he were not free,
but crost soundly, & cōmitted prisoner to the Tower,
where perhaps once in his life he might be brought to
look vpon the Queenes coine in the Mynt, & not thus
be alwaies abroad and neuer within, like a begger. I
must beg patience of you, thogh I haue been somwhat
too tedious in brushing his veluet, but the Court is not
yet remou'd from Audley end, and we shall come time
enough thether to learne what rule he keepes.
                  There did this our Talatamtana or Doctour Hum,
thrust himselfe into the thickest rankes of the Noblemen
and Gallants, and whatsoeuer they were arguing
of, he would not misse to catch hold of, or strike in at
the one end, and take the theame out of their mouths,
or it should goe hard. In selfe same order was hee at
his pretie toyes and amorous glaunces and purposes
with the Damsells, & putting baudy riddles vnto them.
In fine, some Disputations there were, and he made an
Oration before the Maids of Honour, and not before

her Maiestie, as heretofore I misinformedly set down,
beginning thus;

                        Nux mulier asinus simili sunt lege ligata,
                        Haectria nill recte faciunt si verbera desunt.
                        A nut a woman and an asse are like,
                        These three doo nothing right, except you strike.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  He would haue had the Maids of Honor
thriftely cudgeld belike, and lambeakt one after another.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  They vnderstood it not so.
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  No, I thinke so, for they vnderstood it not
at all.
               
               
                  Consil:
                  Or if they had, they would haue driu'n him 
                        •
                     o
his guard.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  Or had the Guard driu'n him downe the

                        •
                     taires, with Deiu vous garde Monsieur, goe and prate
in the yard Don Pedant, there is no place for you here.
               
               
                  Life.
                  The proces of that Oration, was of the same woofe
and thrid with the beginning: demurely and maidenly
scoffing, and blushingly wantoning & making loue to
those soft skind soules & sweete Nymphes of Helicon;
betwixt a kinde of carelesse rude ruffianisme, and curious
finicall complement: both which hee more exprest
by his countenance, than anie good iests that hee
vttered. This finished (though not for the finishing or
pronouncing of this) by some better frends than hee
was worthie of, and that afterward found him vnworthie
of the graces they had bestowed vpon him, he was
brought to kisse the Queenes hand, and it pleased her
Highnes to say (as in my former Booke I have cyted)
that he lookt something like an Italian. No other incitement
he needed to rouze his plumes, pricke vp his

                     
                        •
                     ares, and run away with the bridle betwixt his teeth,
and take it vpon him; (of his owne originall ingrafted
disposition theretoo he wanting 
                        〈◊〉
                     ) but now
he was an insulting Monarch aboue Monarcha the Italian,
that ware crownes on his shooes; and quite renounst
his naturall English accents & gestures, & wrested
himselfe wholy to the Italian puntilios, speaking
our homely Iland tongue strangely, as if he were but
a raw practitioner in it, & but ten daies before had entertained
a schoole master to teach him to pronounce
it. Ceremonies of reuerence to the greatest States (as
it were not the fashion of his cu
                        •
                     tray) he was very parsimonious
and niggardly of, & would make no bones
to take the wall of Sir Philip Sidney and another honourable
Knight (his companion) about Court yet attending;
to whom I wish no better fortune, than the
fore lockes of Fortune he had hold of in his youth, &
no higher fame than hee hath purchast himselfe by his
pen: being the first (in our language) I haue encountred,
that repurified Poetrie from Arts pedantisme, &
that instructed it to speake courtly. Our Patron, our
Phabus, our first Orpheus or quintessence of inuention
he is: whersore, either let vs iointly inuent some worthy
subiect to eternize him; or let Warre call back Barbarisme
from the Danes, Pictes and Saxons to suppres
our frolicke spirits, and the least sparke of more eleuated
sence amongst vs finally be quenched and die, ere
we can set vp brazen Pillers for our Names and Sciences,
to preserue them from the Deluge of Ignorance.
But to returne from whence I haue strayd, Dagober
                           •
                        
Coppenhagen in his iollitie persisteth; is Haile fellowe
well met with those that looke highest: and to cut it off

in three syllables, follows the traine of the delicatest fauorites
and minions, which by chaunce being withdrawne
a mile or two off, to one Master Bradburies,
where the late deceased Countesse of Darbie was then
harbinged, after supper they fell to dansing, euery one
choosing his mate as the custome is; in a trice so they
shuffled the cards of purpose (as it wer to plague him
for his presumption) that will he nill he must tread the
measures about with the fouleft foulest vgly gentlewoman
or fury that might be, (then wayting on the foresaid
Countesse) thrice more deformed than the woman
with the horne in her head. A turne or two hee
mincingly pac't with her about the roome & solemnly
kist her at the parting: Since which kisse of that
squinteyd Lamia or Gorgon, as if she had been another
Circe to transforme him, he hath not one houre beene
his owne man. For whilst yet his lips smoakt with the
steame of her scortching breath, that partcht his beard
like sun-burnt graffe in the Dog-dayes, he ran headlong
violently to his study as if he had bin born with a whirlwinde, and strait knockt me vp together a Poem calde
his Aedes Valdinenses, in prayse of my L. of Leycester,
of his kissing the Queenes hand, and of her speech &
comparison of him, how he lookt like an Italian, what
vide sayth he in one place; Did I see her Maiesty quoth
a? I mo, vide ipse loquentem cum Snaggo, I saw her conferring
with no worseman then Master Snagge. The
bu
                        •
                     gerliest ve
                        •
                     rses they were that euer were scande,
beeing most of them hought and cut off by the knees
out of Virgill, and other Authors. This is a patterne
of one of them, VVodde meusque tuusque suusque Britannorumque
suorumque, running through all the Pronounes

in it, and iumpe imitating a verse in As in presenti,
or in the demeanes or adiacents I am certaine. I
had forgot to obserue vnto you out of his first foure familiar
Epistles, his ambicious stratagem to aspire; that
whereas two great Pieres beeing at iarre, and their
quarrell continued to bloudshed, he would needs vncald
and when it lay not in his way steppe in on the one
side which indeede was the safer side (as the foole is
cra
                        •
                     ty inough to sleepe in a whole skin) and hewe and
slash with his Hexameters, but hewd and slasht he had
beene as small as chippings, if he had not playd ducke
Fryer and hid himselfe eight weeks in that Noblemans
house, for whome with his pen hee thus bladed. Yet
neuerthelesse Syr Iames a Croft the olde Controwler
ferrited him out, and had him vnder hold in the Fleete
a great while, taking that to be aimde & leueld against
him, because he cald him his olde Controwler, which
he had most venomously belched against Doctour
Per
                           •
                        e. Vppon his humble submission, and ample exposition
of the ambiguous Text, and that his forementioned
Mecenas mediation, matters were dispenst with
and quallified, & some light countenance like sunshine
after a storme, it pleased him after this to let fall vppon
him, and so dispatcht him to spurre Cut backe againe
to Cambridge. Whereafter his arriuall, to his associates
and companions he priuatly vaunted what redoubled
rich brightnes to his name, this short eclipse had
brought, and that it had more dignified and raisd him,
than all his endeuours from h
                        •
                     s childhood. With
such incredible applause and amazement of his Iudges
hee bragd hee had cleard himselfe, that euery one that
was there ran to him and embrast him, and shortly hee

was promist to be cald to high prefermēt in court, not
an ace lower than a Secretariship, or one of the Clarks
of the Councell. Should I explaine to you howe this
wrought with him, and howe in the itching heate of
this hopefull golden worlde and hony moone, the
ground would no longer b
                        •
                     are him, but to Sturbridge
Fayre, and vp and downe Cambridge on his foot-cloth
maie
                        •
                     ftically he would pace it, with manie moe madde
trickes of youth nere plaid before; in stead of making
his heart ake with vexing, I should make yours bur
                        •
                     t
with laughing. Doctor Perne in this plight nor at anie
other time euer met him, but he would shake his hand
and crie Vanitas vanitatum, omnia vanitas, Vanitie of
vanities, and all things is vanitie.
                  His father he vndid to furnish him to the Court once
more, where presenting himselfe in all the coulours of
the raine-bow, and a paire of moustachies like a black
horse tayle tyde vp in a knot, with two tuffts sticking
out on each side, he was askt by no meane personage
Vnde hac insania? whence proceedeth this folly or
madnes? & he replied with that wether-beaten peice
of a verse out of the Grammer, Semel insaniuimus omnes,
once in our dayes there is none of vs but haue
plaid the ideots; and so was he counted and bad stand
by for a N
                           •
                        dgscombe. He that most patronizd him, prying
more searchingly into him▪ d finding that he was
more meete to make sport with, than anie way deeply
to be employd, with faire words shooke him of, & told
him he was fitter for the Vniuersitie, thā for the Court
or his turne, and so bad God prosper his studies & sent
for another Secretarie to Oxford.
                  
                  Readers, be merry; for in me there shall want nothing

I can doo to make you merry. You see I hau
                        •
                     
brought the Doctor out of request at Court, & it shall
cost me a fall, but I will get him howted out of the Vniuersitie
too, ere I giue him ouer. What will you giue
mee when I bring him vppon the Stage in one of the
principallest Colledges in Cambridge? Lay anie wager
with me, and I will; or if you laye no wager at all, Ile
fetch him aloft in Pedantius, that exquisite Comedie in
Trinitie Colledge; where, vnder the cheife part, from
which it tooke his name, as namely the concise and firking
finicaldo fine School-master, hee was full drawen
& delineated from the soale of the foote to the crowne
of his head. The iust manner of his phrase in his Orations
and Disputations they stufft his mouth with, & no
Buffianisme throughout his whole bookes, but they
bolsterd out his part with; as those ragged remnaunts
in his foure familiar Epistles twixt him and Senior Immerito,
Raptim scripta, Nosti manum & stylum, with
innumerable other of his rabble routs: and scoffing his
Musarum Lachrymae, with Flebo amo
                           •
                        em meum, etiam
Musarum lachrymis; which to giue it his due, was a
more collachrymate wretched Treatise, than my
Piers Pennil
                           •
                        sse, being the pittifullest pangs that euer anie mans
Muse breathd foorth. I leaue out halfe; no
                        •
                     
the carrying vp of his gowne, his nice gate on his pantoffles,
or the affecte, 
                        •
                     ccent of his speach, but they
personated. And if I should reueale all, I thinke they
borrowd his gowne to playe the Part in, the more to
flout him. Let him denie this (and not damne himselfe)
for his life if hee can. Let him denie that there was a
Shewe made at Clare-hall of him and his two Brothers,
called;

                        Tarra
                           •
                        antantara turba tumultuosa. Trigonum,
Tri-Harueyorum, Tri-harmonia.
Let him denie that there was another Shewe made of
the little Minnow his Brother Dodrans Dicke at Peterhouse,
called;

                        Duns furens. Dick Haruey in a frensie.
Whereupon Dick came and broke the Colledge glasse
windowes; and Doctor Perne (being then either for
himsel
                        •
                     e or Deputie Vice-chancellour), caused him to
be fetcht in, and set in the Stockes till the Shew was ended,
and a great part of the night after.
                  The first motiue or caller foorth of Gabriels English
Hexameters, was his falling in loue with Kate Cotton,
and VViddowes his wife the Butler of Saint Iohns.
And this was a rule inuiolate amongst the fraternitie of
them, Gabriell was alwayes in loue, Dick still in hate,
either with Aristotle, or with the great Beare in the firmament,
which he continually bayted; or with Relig
                        •
                     on,
against which in the p
                        •
                     blique Schooles he set vp
Atheistical Questions, and besides compared his beard
so Perphirian blasphemously, as I am afraid the Earth
would swallow me, if I should but rehearse, It fell to
my lot to haue the perusing of a letter of his to Doctor
Fulke, then lying at a Preachers house neere Criplega
                        •
                     e
in London, as touching his whole persecution
by the 
                        •
                     ellowes of the House about it, & how except
he had mer
                        •
                     ie on him, he were expulst and cast awaye
without redemption.
                  The third Brother (Iohn) had almost as iil a name
as the Spittle in Shorditch, for the olde r
                        •
                     akes hee kept

with the wenches in Queenes Colledge Lane; and if M.
VVathe his ancient ouer wharter, (betwixt whom &
him there was such de
                        •
                     dly emulation) had bin furnisht
with those instructions therof which I could haue lent
him, he had put him downe more handsmoothe than
he did, though at a Commensment dinner in Queenes
Colledge, (as apparantly as might be) he graueld and set
a ground both him and his brother Gabienus. This
Iohn was hee, that beeing entertaind in Iustice Meades
House (as a Schoole-master) stole away his daughter,
and to pracifie him, dedicated to him an Almanacke;
which daughter (or Iohns wife) since his death, Gabriel
(vnder pretence of taking out an Administration, according
as she in euery Court exclaimes) hath gone about
to circumuent of al she hath: to the which effect,
(about 3. yere agoe) there were three Declarations put
vp against him, & a little while after I heard there were
Attachments out for him; whether he hath compounded
since or no, I leaue to the Iurie to enquire.
                  
                     Pigmey Dicke aforesaid, that lookes like a pound of
Gold-smiths candles, is such another Venerian steale
Placard as Iohn was, being like to commit folly the last
yeare in the House where he kept (as a frend of his verie
soberly informd me) with a Milke-maid; & if there
had not bin more gouernmēt in her than in him (for all
his diuinitiship) the thing you wote of, the blowe that
neuer smarteth had been strooke, and she carried away
to Saffron-walden, he sending for her to to one Philips
his house at the signe of the Bel in Bromley, & there seafting
her to that end. Fast and pray luxurious Vicar, to
keepe vnder thy vnruly members, and wrap thee in a
Monkes Cowle, which (they say) is good to mortifie;

or drinke of the water of Saint Iues by Iohn Bale (out
of Romish Authors) produced to be good against the
temptations of the petticoate; or (which exceedeth
them both) trie Master Candishes Roote hee brought
out of the Indies, giu'n him by a venerable Hermit,
with this pr
                           •
                        batum est or vertue, that he which tasted
it should neuer lust after; by that token he could meet
with none about Court or in London, that was content
to be an Eunuch for the Kingdome of Heauen, or
lou'd his pleasure so little, as to venture vpon it. I haue
not yet seald and shakt hands with him for making two
such false Prophets of Saturne & Iupiter, out of whose
iumbling in the darke and coniunction copulatiue, he
denounced such Oracles and alterations to ensue, as if
(like another Thebit Bencorat) he had liu'd 40. yere in
a mountain, to discerne the motion of the eighth Orbe:
but as he (for all his labour) could not attaine to it, no
more could Dick (with his predictions) compasse anie
thing but derision, being publiquely preacht against for
it at Powles Crosse by the Bishop of London that then
was, who (according to Arte, if such a Coniunction
had chanc'd) disproou'd the reuolutions to bee cleane
contrarie; and besides a singular Scholler one Master
Heath, (a Follower of the right Honrable and worthie
Lord of Hu
                           •
                        sdon that now is) set vpon it and answered
it in Print pell mell cape a pee, by probable reason, and
out of all Authors perspicuously demonstrating what
a lying Ribaden, and Chincklen Kraga it was, to constellate
and plannet it so portentously. I am none of the
Cashiers or Prouiditores for lame Souldiours, or men
of desert, but were I one; as the Athe
                           •
                        ians (in the noblest
Schoole of their Academy) erected to Berosus the

Astrologer a Statue with a golden tongue, for his predictions
were true; so wold I largely disburse toward
the building him a Statue on Sophisters Hills by Cambridge,
with a tongue of copper or ockamie (neerely
counterfetting siluer) such as organe pipes & serieants
maces are made of, because his predictions are false &
erronious. And so lightly are all the trade of them, neuer
foretokening or fore-telling anie thing, till after it
be come to passe: and then if it bee a Warrior or Conqueror
they would flatter, who is luckie and succesfull
in his enterprises, they say he is borne vnder the auspicious
Signe of Capricorne, as Cardan saith Cosmo de Medices,
Selimus, Charles the fifth, and Charles Duke of
Burbon were; albeit I dare be sworne, no wizardly Astronomer
of them all euer dreamd of anie such Calculations,
till they had shewd themselues so victorious,
and their prosperous raignes were quite expired. On
the other side, if he be disastrous or retrograde in hys
courses, the maleuolent Starres of Medusa and Andromeda,
inferring suddaine death or banishment, predominated
his nati
                        •
                     itie. But (I thank heauen) I am none
of their credulous disciples, nor can they they cousen
or seduce me with anie of their iugling coniecturalls,
or winking or tooting throgh a six penny Iacobs Staffe;
their spels, their characters, their anagrams, I haue no
more perswasion of, than I am perswaded, that vnder
the inuersed denomination or anagram of this Word
September, (as some of our late Deuines and auncient
Hebrue Rabbines would enforce vpon vs) is included
the certaine time of the Worlds first Creation; or that
he which is born vnder Aries, shall neuer goe in a third
bare cloake, or be troubled with the rheume, because

the Sunne arriuing in that Poynt, cloatheth the Earth
with a new fleece, and sucks vp all the Winters superfluous
moysture; or that he which is borne vnder Libra
shall bee a Iudge or Iustice of Peace, because the
Sunne in that Signe equally poyzeth the daies & nights
alike. Heilding Dicke (this our Ages Alb
                           •
                        mazar) is a
temporist that hath faith inough for all Religions, euen
as Thomas Deloney the Balletting Silke-w
                        •
                     auer hath
rime inough for all my racles, & wit to make a Garland
of good will more than the premisses, with an Epistle
of Momus and Zoylus; whereas his Muse from the first
peeping foorth, hath flood at liuery at an Ale-house
wifpe, neuer exceeding a penny a quart day nor night;
and this deare yeare, together with the siiencing of his
looms, scarce that; he being constrained to betake him
to carded Ale: whence it proceedeth, that since Candlemas
or his Iigge of Iohn for the King, not one merrie
Dittie will come from him, but The Thunder-bolt against
Swearers, Repent England repent, & The strange
iudgements of God. No more will there from Dick quibus
in terris, Dick Pa
                        •
                     tor of Cheselhurst, that was wont
to pen Gods iudgements vpon such and such and one,
as thicke as Water-men at VVestminster-bridge. The
miracles of the burning of Brustur with his Wench in
adulterie he writ for Binneman; which a villaine (Brusturs
owne kinsman) long afterward at the Gallowes
tooke vppon him, and shewed what Ninnies a vayne
Pamphleter (one Richard Haruey) had made of the
world, imputing it to such a wonderfull vengeance of
adulterie, when it was nought but his murdrous knauerie.
Dead sure they are in writing against the dead;
dauncing Moriscoes & Laualtoes on the silent Graues

of Plata, Buchanan, Sinesius, Pierius, Aristotle, & the
whole Petigree of the Peripat
                           ••
                        ians, Sophisters, & Sorbonists;
the most of whole mouthes, clods had bungd
vp manie Olimpiades since, 
                        〈…〉
                      they to s
                        •
                     ifle and
choak them again with waste paper: when (in thys innouating
selfe-loue Age) it is disputable, whether they
haue anie frend
                        •
                      or no left to defend them. This is
that Dick, that set Aristotle with his heeles vpward on
the Schoole gates at Cambridge, and asses eares on hys
head: a thing, that in perp
                           •
                        tuam rei memoriam, I will
record and neuer haue done with. This is that Dick,
that comming to take one Smiths (a yong Batchelour
of Trinitie Colledge) Questions, and they being such as
he durst not venture on, cride Aquila non capit muscas,
an Eagle catcheth no flies; and so gaue them him againe:
wheretoo, the other (beeing a lustie big boand
fellow, & a Golias or Behemoth in comparison of him)
strait retorted it vpon him, Nec elephas mures, no more
doth an elephant stoope to myce; and so they parted.
This is that Dick, of whom Kit Marloe was wont to
say, that he was an asse, good for nothing but to preach
of the Iron Age: Dialoguizing Dicke, Io Paean Dicke,
Synesian and Pierian Dick, Dick the true Brute or noble
Troian, or Dick that hath vowd to liue and die in defence
of Brute, and this our iles first offspring from the
Troian, Dick against baldnes, Dick, against Buchanan,
little and little witted Dicke, Aquinas Dicke,
                     Therefore Lipsian Dicke, because lamely & lubb
                           •
                        rly hee striues to imitate and bee another English Lipsius: when his lippes hang so in his light, as hee can neuer come neere him. 
                     Lipsian
Dick, heigh light a loue a Dick, that lost his Benefice &
his Wench both at once; his benfice for want of sufficiencie,
and his wench for want of a Benefice or sufficient

liuing to maintaine her, Dilemma Dick, dissentious
Dick; with ab
                           •
                         in malam crucem, that is, get all thy
frends in their prayers to commend thee, I shut vp the
congested Index of thy redundant opproby, and hast
backe to the right worshipfull of the Lawes Master D.
Garropius thy brother, (as in euerie Letter that thou
writ'st to him thou tearmst him): who for all he is a ciuill
Lawier, will neuer be Lex loquens, a Lawier that
shall lowd throate it, with Good my Lord consider
this poore mans case. But thogh he be in none of your
Courts Licentiate, and a Courtier otherwise hee is neuer
like to be; one of the Emperour Iustinians Courtiers
(the Ciuill Lawes chiefe Founder) malgre he will
name himselfe: and a quarter of a yeare since, I was
aduertised, that aswell his workes, as the whole body
of that Law compleat, (hauing no other employment
in his Facultie) hee was in hand to tourne into English
Hexameters; and if he might haue had his will, whiles
he was yet resident in Cambridge, it should haue been
seuerely enacted throghout the Vniuersitie, that none
should speake or ordinarily conuerse, but in that cue.
For himselfe, hee verie religiously obseru'd it, neuer
meeting anie Doctor or 
                        •
                     rend of his, but he would salute
him or giue him the time of the day in it most heroically,
euen as hee saluted a Phisition of speciall account
in these tearmes,
Nere can I meet you sir, but needs must I veile my bonetto.
                  
                  Which he, (loth to be behinde with him in curtesie)
thus turnd vpon him againe,
Nere can I meet you sir, but needs must I call ye knauetto.
                  
                  Once hee had made an Hexameter verse of seauen
feete, whereas it would lawfully beare but sixe; which

fault a pleasant Gentleman hauing found him with,
wrapt the said verse in a peece of paper, & sent a lowse
with it, inserting vnderneath This verse hath more feet
than a lowse. But to so Dictionarie a custome it was
grown with him, that after supper if he chaunst to play
at Cards, and had but one Queen of Harts light in his
hand, he would extempore in that kinde of verse runne
vppon mens hearts and womens hearts all the night
long, as
Stout hart & sweet hart, yet stoutest hart to be stooped.
No may-pole in the streete, no wether cocke on anie
Church steeple, no garden, no arbour, no lawrell, no
ewe tree, that he would ouerslip without haylsing after
the same methode. His braynes, his time, all hys
maintenance & exhibition vpon it he hath consumed,
and neuer intermitted, till such time as he beganne to
Epistle it against mee, since which, I haue kept him a
work indifferently: and that in the deadest season that
might bee; hee lying in the ragingest furie of the last
Plague, when there dyde aboue 
                        •
                     600. a week in London,
inck-
                        •
                     quittring and printing against me at VValfes
in Powles Church-yard. Three quarters of a yere thus
cloystred and immured hee remained, not beeing able
almost to step out of dores, he was so barricadoed vp
with graues, which besiedged and vndermined his verie
threshold; nor to open his window euening or
morning, but a dampe (like the smoake of a Cannon)
from the fat manured earth with contagion (being the
buriall place of 
                        •
                     iue parishes), in thick rouling clowds
would strugglingly funnell vp, & with a full blast puffe
in at his casements. Supply mee with a margent note
some bodie that hath more idle leasure than I haue at

the post hast hudling vp of these presents, as touching
his spirites yearning empassionment, and agonizd fiery
thirst of reuenge, that neglected soule & bodies helth;
to compasse it, the helth of his bodie, in lying in the hell
mouth of infection, & his foules health, in minding
any other ma
                        •
                     ters than his soul; nay, matters that were
vtter enemies to his soul (as his first offring of wrong, &
then prosecuting of it) when his soule and bodie both,
euerie hower wer at the hazard poynt to be seperated.
The argument (to my great reioycing & solace) frō
hence I haue gathered, was, that my lines were of more
smarting efficacie than I thought, & had that steele and
mettall in them, which pierst & stung him to the quick,
and droue him vpon the first searching of the wounds
I had giu'n him, to such rauing impatience, as he could
rest no where, but through the poysonf
                        •
                     llest iawes of
death, and fire and water he would burst, to take vengeance,
and not onely on the liuing, but the dead also,
(as what will not a dogge doo that is angerd, bite and
gnarle at anie bone or stone that is neere him): but rather
I deeme that from the harsh grating in his eares &
continuall crashing of sextens spades against dead mens
bones, (more dismall musique to him, than the Voyce
or Ghosts Hearse) he came so to be incenst & to inueigh
against the dead, therewith they exasperating and setting
his teeth on edge, more than hee would. But let
that rest, which would not let him rest, at VVolfes he is
billetted, sweating and dealing vpon it most intentiuely;
and for he would (as nere as was possible) remoue all
whatsoeuer encumbrāces, that might alienate or withdraw
him from his studie, hee hath vowd (during his abode
there) not to haue a denier in his purse, or see money,

but let it run on the score and goe to the diuell if it
will, he is resolute, and means to trouble himselfe with
none of this trash: and yet it is a world to heare how
malicious tongues will slaunder a man with truth, and
giue out, how of one Mighell (somtimes Dexters man
in Powles Church-yard, though now he dwells at Exceter)
he should borrow ten shillings to buy him shooes
and stockings, and when it came to repayment, or that
he was faine to borrow of another to satisfie and paye
him, (as he will borrow so much fauor of him he nere
saw before) no lesse than halfe a crowne out of that ten
shillings he forswore, & rebated him for vsurie. Contēt
your self, it was a hard time with him, let not Mighel
and Gabriell (two Angels) fal out for a trifle: those that
be his frends will consider of it & beare with him, euen
as Beniamin the Founders father who dwels by Fleete-bridge,
hath borne with him this foure yere for a groat
which he owes him for plaisters; and so Trinitie Hall
hath borne with him more than that, he being (as one
that was Fellow of the same House of his standing informed
mee) neuer able to pay his Commons, but from
time to time borne out in almes amongst the rest of the
Fellowes; how euer he tells some of his frends he hath
an out-brothership or beads
                        •
                     mans stipend of ten shillings
a yeare there still comming to him, and a Library
worth 200. pound. Iohn VVolfe sayes nothing, and yet
hee beares with him asmuch as the best, and if hee had
borne a little longer, he would haue borne till his back
broke, though Gabriell lookes big vpon it, and protests
by no bugges, he owes him not a dandiprat, but that
VVolfe is rather in his debt than hee in his, all reckonings
iustly cast. In plaine truth and in verily, some

pleasurs he did VVolfe in my knowledge. For first and
formost he did for him that eloquent post-script for the
Plague Bills, where he talkes of the series the classes &
the premisses, & presenting them with an exacter methode
hereafter, if it please God the Plague continue.
By the style I tooke it napping, and smelt it to be a pig
of his Sus Mineruam the Sow his Muse as soone as euer
I read it, and since the Printer hath confest it to mee.
The vermilion VVrinckle de crinkledum hop'd (belike)
that the Plague would proceed, that he might haue an
occupation of it. The second thing wherein he made
VVolfe so much beholding to him, was, that if there
were euer a paltrie Scriuano, betwixt a Lawiers Clark
& a Poet, or smattring pert Boy, whose buttocks were
not yet coole since he came from the grammer, or one
that houers betwixt two crutches of a Scholler and a
Traueller, when neither will helpe him to goe vpright
in the worlds opinion, & shuld stumble in there with a
Pamphlet to sell, let him or anie of them but haue conioynd
with him in rayling against mee, and feed his humor
of vaine-glorie, were their stuffe by ten millions
more Tramontani or Transalpine barbarous than balletry,
he would haue prest it vpon VVolfe whether he
would or no, and giu'n it immortall allowance aboue
Spencer. So did he by that Philistine Poem of Parthenophill
and Parthenope, which to compare worse than
it selfe, it would plague all the wits of France Spaine or
Italy. And when hee saw it would not sell, hee cald all
the World asses a hundred times ouer, with the stampingest
cursing and tearing he could vtter it, for that he
hauing giu'n it his passe or good word, they obstinately
contemnd and mislik'd it. So did he by Chutes Shores

VVife, and his P
                           •
                        ocris and Cephalus, and a number of
Pamphlagonian things more, that it would rust & yron
spot paper, to haue but one sillable of their names breathed
ouer it. By these complots and carefull purueyance
for him, VVolfe could not choose but bee a huge
gainer, a hundred marke at least ouer the shoulder: &
which was a third aduantage to hoyst or raise him, besides
the Doctors meate and drinke, which God payd
for, and it is not to be spoken of, he set him on the score
for sack centum pro cento, a hundredYou must consider it was the dog daies, and he did it to
                           •
                         coole him. quarts in a seuennight,
whiles he was thus saracenly sentencing it against
mee. Towards the latter end, he grew weary of keeping
him and so manie asses (of his procuring) at liuery,
and would grumble and mutiny in his hearing of want
of money. Tut man, mony would he say, is that your
discontent? plucke vp your spirites and bee merry, I
cannot abide to heare anie man complaine for want of
money. Twice or thrice hee had set this magnificent
face vpon it, and euer VVolfe lookd when hee would
haue terrifide the table with a sound knock of a pursse
of angels, and sayd, There's for thee, paye mee when
thou art able: but with him there was no such matter,
for he put his hand in his pocket but to scrub his arme
a little that itcht, and not to pluck out anie cash, which
with him is a stranger shape than euer Cacus shrowded
in his den, and would make him if he should chop on
anie such churlish lumpe vnawares, to admire & blesse
himselfe, with
Quis nonus hic nostris successit sedibus hospes.
Iesu, how comes this to passe? here is such geere as I
neuer saw. So bles
                        •
                     e himselfe he could not, but beeing
a little more roundly put to it, he was faine to confesse,

that he was a poore impecunious creature, & had not
trasfiqut a great while for anie of these commodities of
Santa Cruz, but as soone as euer his rents came vp,
which he expected euerie howre, (though I could neuer
heare of anie he had, more than his ten shillings a
yeare at Trinitie Hall, if he haue that) he would most
munificently congratulate correspond and simpathize
with him in al interchangable vicissitude of kindnes; &
let not the current of time seeme too protractiue exten
                        •
                     led,
or breed anie disvnion betwixt them, for
he would accelerate & festinate his procras
                        •
                     inating ministers
and commissaries in the countrey, by Letters as
expedite as could bee. I giue him his true dialect and
right varnish of elocution, not varying one I tittle from
the high straine of his harmonious phrase, wherein he
puts downe Hermogenes with his Art of Rhetorique,
and so farre out-strips ouer-tunged Beldam Roome, or
her super-delicate bastard daughter ceremonious dissembling
Italy, as Europe puts down all the other parts
of the World in populous societies and fertilenes. A
Gentleman, a frend of mine, that was no straunger to
such bandyings as had past betwixt vs, was desirous to
see how he lookt since my strappadoing and torturing
him; in which spleene he went and enquird for him:
answere was made he was but new risen, and if it wold
please him to stay, he would come down to him anon.
Two howres good by the clocke he attended his pleasure,
whiles he (as some of his fellow In-mates haue
since related vnto mee) stood acting by the glasse, all his
gestures he was to vse all the day after, and currying &
smudging and pranking himsel
                        •
                     e vnmeasurably. Post

                           〈◊〉
                         casus, his case of tooth-pikes, his combe case, his

case of head-brushes and beard-brushes run ouer, &


tot discrimina rerum, rubbing cloathes of all kindes,
downe he came, and after the bazelos manus, with amplifications
and complements hee belaboured him till
his eares tingled, and his feet ak'd againe. Neuer was
man so surfetted and ouer-gorged with English, as hee
cloyd him with his generous spirites, renumeration of
gratuities, stopping the posternes of ingratitude, bearing
the launcier too seuere into his imperfections, and
trauersing the ample forrest of interlocutions. The
Gentleman swore to mee, that vpon his first apparition
(till he disclosed himselfe) he tooke him for an Vsher of
a dancing Schoole, neither doth he greatly differ from
it, for no Vsher of a dauncing Schoole was euer such
a Bassia Dona or Bassia de vmbra de vmbra des los pedes,
a kisser of the shadow of your feetes shadow, as he is.
I haue perused vearses of his written vnder his owne
hand to Sir Philip Sidney, wherein he courted him as
he were another Cyparissus or Ganimede; the last Gordian
true loues knot or knitting vp of them is this;

                        Sum iecur ex quo te primùm Sydnee vidi,
                        Os oculósque regit, cogit amare iecur.
                        All liuer am I Sidney, since I saw thee;
                        My mouth eyes rules it, and to loue doth draw mee.
                     
Not halfe a yeare since comming out of Lincolnshyre,
it was my hap to take Cambridge in my waye, where I
had not been in sixe yeare before, when by wonderful
destenie, who (in the same Inne and very next chamber
to mee, parted but by a wainscot doore that was naild
vp, either vnwitting of other) should be lodgd but his
Gabrielship, that in a manner had liu'd as long a Pilgrim
from thence as I. Euerie circumstance I cannot stand

to reckon vp, as how wee came to take knowledge of
one anothers being there, or what a stomacke I had to
haue scratcht with him, but that the nature of the place
hindred mee, where it is as ill as pettie treason, to look
but awry on the sacred person of a Doctour, and I had
plotted my reuenge otherwise; as also of a meeting or
conference on his part desired, wherein all quarrells
might be discust and drawne to an attonement, but non
vult fac, I had no fancie to it, for once before I had bin
so cousend by his colloging, though personally we neuer
met face to face, yet by trouch-men and vant-curriers
betwixt vs: nor could it settle in my conscience,
to loose so much paines I had tooke in new arraying &
furbushing him, or that a publique wrong in Print, was
to be so sleightly slubberd ouer in priuate, with Come
come, giue me your hand, let vs bee frends, and therevpon
I drinke to you. And a further doubt there was
if I had tasted of his beife and porredge at Trinity Hal
as he desired, (not andum est, for the whole fortnight
together that he was in Cambridge, his commons ran
in the Colledge detriments, as the greatest curtesie hee
could doo the House whereof he was, to eate vp their
meate and neuer pay anie thing); If I had (I say) rusht
in my selfe, and two or three hungrie Fellowes more,
and cryde Doo you want anie guestes? what, nothing
but bare Commons? it had beene a question (considering
the good-will that is betwixt vs) whether he wold
haue lent me a precious dram more than ordinarie, to
helpe disgestion: he may be such another craftie mortring
Drugg
                        •
                     ir, or Italian porredge seasoner, for anie
thing I euer saw in his complexion. That word complexion
is dropt 
                        •
                     oorth in good time, for to describe to

you his complexion & composition, entred I into this
tale by the way, or tale I found in my way riding vp to
London. It is of an adust swarth choll
                        •
                     rieke dye, like
restie bacon, or a dride scate-fish; so leane and so meagre,
that you wold thinke (like the Turks) be obseru'd
4. Lents in a yere, or take him for the Gentlemans man
in the Courtier, who was so thin cheekd and gaunt and
staru'd, that as he was blowing the fire with his mouth
the smoke tooke him vp like a light strawe, and carried
him to the top or funnell of the chimney, wher he had
flowne out God knowes whether if there had not bin
crosse barres ouer-whart that stayde him; his skin riddled
and crumpled like a peice of burnt parchment; &
more channels & creases he hath in his face, than there
be Fairie circles on Salsburie Plaine, and wrinckles &
stets of old age, than characters on Christs Sepulcher in
Mount Caluarie, on which, euerie one that comes,
scrapes his name, and sets his marke, to shewe that hee
hath been there: so that whosoeuer shall he hold him,
Esse putet Boreae triste furentis opus,
will sweare, on a booke I haue brought him lowe, and
shrowdly broken him: which more to confirme, look
on his head, and you shall finde a gray haire for euerie
line I haue writ against him; and you shall haue all his
beard white too, by that time hee hath read ouer this
booke. For his stature, he is such another pretie Iacke
a Lent as boyes throw at in the streete, and lookes in his
blacke sute of veluet, like one of these ieatdroppes
which diuers weare at their eares in stead of a iewell.
A smudge peice of a handsome fellow it hath beene in
his dayes, but now he is olde and past his best, and fit
for nothing but to be a Noble mans porter, or a Knight

of VVindsor; cares haue so cra
                        •
                     ed him, and disgraces
to the verie bones consumed him, amongst which hy
                        •
                     
missing of the Vniuersitie Oratorship, wherin Doctor
Perne besteaded him, wrought not the lightliest with
him; and if none of them were, his course of life is
such, as would make ani
                        •
                      man looke ill on it, for 
                        •
                     e wil
endure more hardnes than a Camell, who in the burning
sands will liue foure dayes without water, & feeds
on nothing but thi
                        •
                     tles and wormewood, & such lyke,
no more doth he feed on anie thing when he is at Saffro
                           •
                        -walden,
but trotters, sheepes porknells, and butterd
rootes; and other whi
                        •
                     e in an Hexame
                        •
                     er meditation,
or when hee is inuenting a new part of Tully, or
hatching such another Paradoxe, as that of Nicholaus
Copernieus was, who held, that the Sun remains immoueable
in the center of the World, & that the Earth
is moou'd about the Sunne, he would be so rapt, that
hee would remaine three dayes and neither eate nor
drinke, and within doores he will keepe seauen yeare
together, and come not abroad so much as to Church.
The like for seauen and thirtie weekes space together
he did, while he lay at VVolfes coppying against mee,
neuer stirring out of dores or being churched all that
while, but like those in the West country, that after the
Paulin hath cald them or they haue seene a spirit, keep
themselues darke 24. howres; so after I had plaid the
spirit in hanting him in my 4. Letters cōfsuted, he could
by no means endure the light, nor durst venter himself
abroad in the open aire for many mōths after, for 
                        •
                     eare
he should be fresh blasted by all mens scorne and derision.
My instructions of him are so ouer-flowing and
numberlesse; that except I abridge them, my Book will

grow such a bouncer, that those which buy it must bee
saine to hire a porter to carry it after them in a basket.
For breuitie sake, I omit twentie things, as the conflict
betwixt my Hostesse of the Dolphin in Cambridge and
him at my beeing there, about his lying in her house a
fortnight, and keeping one of the best Chambers, yes
neuer offring to spend a penie; the Hackney-mens of
Saffron-waldens pursuing him for their horses, he hiring
them but for three dayes and keeping them fifteene, &
telling him very flatly when he went about to excuse it,
that they could not spare them from their Cart so long,
they being Cart horses which they set him on. The description
of that poore Iohn a Droynes his man, whom
he had hyred for that iourney, a great big-boand thresher,
put in a blue coate too short wasted for him, & a
sute made of the inner linings of a sute turnd outward,
being white canuas pinkt vpon cotton; his intollerable
boasting at VVolfes to such as wold hold him chat,
& he could draw to talk with him, that he thought no
man in England had more learning than himselfe, hys
threatning anie Noble-man whatsoeuer, that dur
                        ••
                      take
my part, and vowing he would do this and that to him
if he should; his incensing my L. Mayor against me that
thē was, by directing vnto him a perswasiue pamphlet
to persecute mee, and not to let ship the aduantage hee
had against mee, and reporting certaine words I shuld
speake against him that Christmas at a Tauerne in London,
when I was in the 
                        
                           •
                        le. of VVight then and a great
while after. His inciting the Preacher at Poules Crosse,
that lay at the same house in VVood-streete which hee
did, to preach manifestly against Master Lilly and mee,
with VVoe to the Printer, woe to the Seller, woe to the

Buyer, woe to the Author. But in none of these will I insist,
which are remnants in comparison of the whole
peice I haue to shew; only I will haue a short much at
VVolfes and his parting, and so make an end o
                        •
                      an old
song, and bid God night to this Historie.
                  
                     Pierses Supererogation printed, the charge whereof
the Doctor had promist to desray and be countable to
VVolfe for, amounting (with his diet) to 36. pounds,
from Saffron-walden no argent would bee heard of,
wheresore downe he must go amongst his tenaunts as
he pretended, (which are no other than a company of
beggers, that lye in an out barne of his mothers sometimes)
and fetch vp the grand summes, or legem pone.
To accomplish this, VVolfe procur'd him horses and
money for his expences, lent him one of his Prentises
(for a seruing creature) to grace him, clapping an olde
blue coate on his backe, which was one of my Lord of
Harfords liueries, (he pulling the badge off) & so away
they we
                        •
                     t. Saint Christopher be their speed, and send
them well backe againe; but so prayes not our Dominico
Ciuilian, for he had no such determination: but as
soone as euer he had left London behinde him, he insinuated
with this Iuuentus, to run away frō his Master,
and take him for his good Lord and supporter. The
Page was easily mellowd with his attractiue eloquēce,
as what heart of adamant or enclosed in a Crocodyles
skin (which no yron will pierce) that hath the power
to withstand the Mercurian heauenly charme of hys
Rhetorique? With him he stayes halfe a yere, rubbing
his toes, and following him with his sprinkling glasse &
his boxe of kissing comfets from place to place; whiles
his Master fretting & chafing to be thus colted of both

of them, is readie to send out Processe for the Doctor,
and get his Nouice cride in euerie market Towne in
Essex: but they preuented him, for the impe or stripling
being almost staru'd in this time of his beeing with
him, gaue him warning he would no longer serue him
but wold home to his master what euer shift he made.
Gabriell thought it not amisse to take him at his word,
because his clothes were all greasie and worne out, &
hee is neuer wont to keepe anie man longer than the
sute lasteth he brings with him, and then turne him to
grasse and get one in newe trappings; and euer picke
quarrells with him before the yeares end, because hee
would be sure to pay him no wages: yet in his prouident
forecast, he concluded it better policie for him to
send him backe to his Master, than he should goe of his
owne accord, and whereas he was to make a iourney
to London within a weeke or such a matter, to haue his
blue coate (being destitute of euer another trencher-carrier)
credit him vp, though it were thrid bare. So
considered, and so done, at an Inne at Islington hee
alights, and there keepes him aloose, London being too
hot for him. His retinue (or attendaunt) with a whole
cloke-bag full of commendations to his master he dismisseth,
and in stead of the 
                        •
                     6. pounds hee ought him,
wild him to certefie him, that verie shortly hee would
send him a couple of Hennes to Shroue with. VVolfe
receiuing this message, and holding himselfe palpablye
slouted therein, went and feed Baylies, and getts one
Scarlet (a frend of his) to goe and draw him foorth, &
hold him with a tale whiles they might steale on him &
arrest him. The watch-word giu'n them when they
should seaze vpon him, was VVolfe (I must needes say)

hath vsde you verie grosely: and to the intent he might
suspect nothing by Scarlets comming, there was a kind
letter 
                        •
                     ram'd in VVolfes name, with To the right worshipfull
of the Lawes in a great Text hand for a superscription
on the out side; and vnderneath at the bottome,
Your worships euer to commaund, and prest to do
                           •
                        
you seruice, Iohn Wolfe. The contents of it, were
about the talking with his Lawier, and the eager proceeding
of his Sister in law against him. This letter deliuerd
and read, and Scarlet and he (after the ta
                        ••
                     ing of
a cup of dead beere, that had stood pawling by him in a
pot three dayes) descending into some conference, he
began to finde himselfe ill apaid with VVolfes encroaching
vpon him, and asking him money for the Printing
of his Booke, and his diet whiles he was close prisoner,
attending and toyling about it, & obiecting how
other men of lesse desert wer liberally recompenst for
their paines, whereas he (whose worth ouer balaunst
the proudest) must be constrained to hire men to make
themselues rich. I appeale to you (quoth hee) whether
euer anie mans workes sold like mine. I, euen from
a childe good master Doctor replide Scarlet, and made
a mouth at him ouer his shoulder, so soothing him on
forward till the Baylies Cue came of VVolfes abusing
him verie grosely, which they not failing to take at the
first rebound, stept into the roome boldly (as they were
two well bumbasted swaggering fat bellies, hauing faces
as broad as the backe of a chimney, and as big as a
towne bag-pudding) and clapping the Doctor with a
lusty blow on the shoulder, that made his legs bow vnd
                        •
                     r
him, & his guts cry quag againe, by your leaue they
said vnto him (in a thundring yeoman vshers diapason)

in Gods name and the Queenes wee doo arrest you.
Without more pause away they hurried him, & made
him beleeue they wold carry him into the Citie where
his Creditor was, whē comming vnder Newgate they
told him they had occasion to goe speake with one
there, and so thrust him in before them for good manners
sake, because he was a Doctour, and their better,
bidding the Keeper as soone as euer he was in to take
charge of him. Some lofty tragicall Poet helpe mee,
that is dayly conuersant in the fierce encounters of
Raw-head and bloody bones, and whose pen like the
Plowes in Spayne that often stumble on golde vaines,
still splits and stumpes it selfe against olde yron and raking
ore battred Armour and broken Truncheons, to
recount and expresse the more than Herculean fury he
was in, when hee sawe hee was so notably betrayd and
bought and solde: Hee fumde, he stampt, he buffeted
himselfe about the face, beat his head against the walls,
and was ready to byte the flesh off his armes if they
had not hindred him, out of doores hee would haue
gone (as I cannot blame him) or hee swore hee would
teare downe the walls and set the 
                        •
                     ouse on fire if they
re
                        •
                     isted him; whither quoth he you villaines haue you
brought mee? To Newgate good Master Doctour
with a lowe legge they made answer: I knowe not
where I am. In Newgate agayne replyed they good
Master Doctour: into some blinde corner you haue
drawne me to be murdred; to no place (replyed they
the third time) but to Newgate good Master Doctour.
Murder, murder (he cryed out) some body breake in
or they will murder mee. No murder but an action
of debt sayd they good Master Doctour. O you prophane

                     Plebeyans exclaymed hee, I will massacre, I will
crucifie you for presuming to lay hands thus on my reuerent
person. All this would not serue him no more
than Hackets counterset madnesse woulde keepe him
from the Gallowes, but vp he was had and shewed his
lodging where hee should lye by it, and willed to deliuer
vp his weapon. That wrung him on the withers
worse than all the rest, what my armes, my defence,
my weapon, my dagger quoth hee, my life then I see is
conspired against, when you seek to bereaue me of the
instruments that should secure it. They ratled him vp,
soundly, and told him if he would be conformable to
the order of the prison so it was, otherwise hee should
bee forc't: Force him no forces, no such mechanicall
drudges should haue the honor of his artillery, marry
if some worthy Maiestrate came, as their Master or Mistresse,
it might be vppon good conditions for his lifes
safetie and preseruation hee woulde surrender. The
Mistresse of the house (her husband beeing absent) vnderstanding
of his folly came vp to him, and went about
to perswade him. At her sight somewhat calm'd
hee was, as it is a true amorous Knight, and hath no
power to deny any thing to ladies & gentlewomen, &
he told her if she would command her seruants forth,
(whom hee scornd should haue theyr eyes so much illuminated
as to beholde any martiall engin of his) hee
would in all humillity dispoyle himselfe of it. Shee so
farre yeelded to him, when as soone as they were out
he runs and swaps the doore too, & drawes his dagger
vpon her with O I will kill thee, what could I doo to
thee nowe? and so extreamely terrified her, that shee
scritcht out to her seruants, who bur
                        ••
                      in in heapes, as

thinking he would haue rauisht ther. Neuer was our
Tapthartharath (though hee hath run through manie
briers) in the like ruthfull pickle hee was then, for to
the bolts he must amongst theeues and rogues, and tast
of the Widdowes Almes, for drawing his dagger in a
Prison: frō which there was no deliuerance, if basely
hee had not falne vppon his knees, and askt hir forgiuenes.
Dinner being readie, he was cald downe, &
there beeing a better man than hee present, who was
plac'd at the vpper end of the boord, for very spite that
hee might not fit highest, he straight flung to his chamber
againe, and vowd by heauen and earth and all the
flesh on his backe, he would famish himselfe, before he
would eate a bit of meate as long as hee was in Newgate.
How inuiolably hee kept it, I will not conceale
from you. About a two howres after, when he felt his
craw emptie, and his stomacke began to wamble, hee
writ a Supplication to his Hostesse, that he might speak
with her; to whome (at her approaching) hee recited
what a rash vow he had made, and what a commotion
there was in his entrayles or pudding
                        •
                     house for want
of food; wherefore, if she would steale to him a byt
secretly and let there be no words of it, hee would, I
marry would hee (when hee was releast) perfourme
mountaines. She (in pittie of him) seeing him a brainsicke
bedlam and an innocent, that had no sense to gouerne
himselfe, being loth he should be damnd and go
to hell for a meales meate, hauing vowd, and through
famine readie to breake it, got her husband to go forth
with him out of dores, to some Cockes shop at Pyecorner
there-abouts, or (as others will haue it) to the
Tap-house vnder the Prison; where hauing eaten sufficient

his hungrie bodie to sustaine, the diuell a scute
had he to pay the reckoning, but the Keepers credite
must goe for it. How he got out of this Castle dolorus,
if anie be with childe to know, let them enquire of the
Minister then seruing at Saint Albanes in VVood-street,
who in Christian charitie onely for the names sake (not
being acquainted with him before) enterd bōd for him
to answere it at law, & satisfied the House for his lodging
and Mangerie. But being restored to the open aire,
the case with him was little altred, for no roose had he
to hide his noddle in, or whither he might go to set vp
his rest, but in the streets vnder a bulk he should haue
been constraind to haue kenneld, & chalkt out his cabbin,
if the said Minister had not the second time stood
his friend, and preferd him to a chamber at one Rolfes
a Serieants in VVood-streete; whom (as I take it) he also
procured to be equally bound with him for his new
cousens apparance to the law, which he neuer did, but
left both of them in the lurtch for him; and running in
debt with Rolfe beside for house-roome and diet, one
day when he was from home, he closely conuaid away
his truncke foorth of doores, and shewde him a fayre
paire of heeles. At Saffron-walden (for the most part)
from that his flight to this present hath hee mewd and
coopt vp himselfe inuisible, being counted for dead &
no tidings of him, till I came in the winde of him at
Cambridge. And so I winde vp his thrid of life, which
I feare I haue drawne out too large, although in three
quarters of it (of purpose to curtall it) I haue le
                        •
                     t descant,
and taskt me to plaine song: whereof, that it is anie
other than plaine truth let no man distrust, it being
by good men and true (word for word as I let it fly amongst

you) to mee in the feare of God vttred, all yet
aliue to confirme it: wherefore settle your faith immoueably,
and now you haue heard his life, iudge of
his doctrine accordingly.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  His life and doctrine may both be to us an

                        •
                     ns
                        •
                     mple, for since the raigne of Queen Gueniuer was
there neuer seene worse.
               
               
                  Iimport:
                  Yet for all he is such a vaine Basilisco and
Captaine Crack-stone in all his actions & conuersation,
& swarmeth in vile-Canniball words, there is some good
matter in his booke against thee.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  We will trie tha
                        •
                      matter immediately, for
my minde euer giuing 
                        •
                     ee, that wee should haue you
and such like Humorists of your Faction, runne from
one matter to another, & from the matter to the manner,
and from the manner to the forme, and from the
forme to the cause, and from the cause to the effect, I
prouided to match you at all weapons And here next
his life, I haue draw
                        •
                     n an Abridgement or Inuentorie
of all the materiall Tractates and Contents of hys
Booke.
               
               
                  Import:
                  Then thou hast done well, for it is it that I
all this while lookt for. I pray thee let me read it my
selfe.
               
            
            
               A Summarie or breife Analysis of such matters as
are handled in the Doctors Booke.
               
                  INprimis, one Epistle of a sheete and more of paper,
to his gentle & liberall frends Master Barnabe Barnes
Master Iohn Thorius: Master Anthonie Chuse, and 
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  erie
fauourable Reader.
               
                  
                  Carnead:
                  O ho, those whom hee calls the three orient
wits. Mine eyes are partly accessarie vnto it. It is to
thanke them for their curteous Letters and commendaterie
Sonnets, writ to him from a farre, as namely out of
the hall into the kitchin at Wolses, where altogether at
one time they lodged and boorded. VVith a great manie
maidenly excuses, of tis more of your gentlenes than my
deseruing, and I cannot without blushing repeate, and
without shame remember. Then he comes vpon thee with
I'le, I'le, I'le.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  What should I say, I will and commaund
like a Prince? hee might as well write against Poules for
hauing three IIes in it.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  Hee calls thee the greene Popiniay, & saies
thou art thine owne idoll.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  Let him either shew how or wherein, or
I will not beleeue him, & my negatiue (in any ground
in England) is as good as his affirmatiue.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  And so proceeds with complement and a
little more complement, and a crust of quippes and a little
more complement after that; then he falls in exhorting
those his three Patrons to goe forward in maturitie, as
they haue begun in pregnancie; whose Parthenophils and
Parthenopes embellished, and Shores Wife eternized,
shall euer lastingly testifie what they are.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  And so haue I testifide for them what they
are, which will last time enough.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  Hee bids Barnabe of the Barnes, bee the
gallant Poet like Spencer, or the valiant Souldiour like
Baskeruile; and euer remember his French Seruice vnder
such a Generall.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  What his Soldiourship is I cannot iudge,

but if you haue euer a chaine for him to runne awaye
with, as hee did with a Noble-mans Stewards chayne
at his Lords enstalling at VVindsore; or if you would
haue anie rymes to the tune of 
                        
                           •
                        link-a-pisse, hee is for
you. In one place of his Parthenophill and Parthenope,
wishing no other thing of Heauen, but that hee
might bee transformed to the Wine his Mistres drinks,
and so passe thorough her.
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  Therein hee was verie ill aduisde, for so the
next time his Mistres made water, he was in danger to be

                        •
                     ast out of her fauour.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  Of late he hath set soorth another Booke
which hee entitles no lesse than A deuine Centurie of
Sonets, and prefixeth for his Posie,
Altera Musavenit, quid ni sit & alter Appollo?
As much to say, as why may not my Muse bee as great
an Appollo or God of Poetrie, as the proudest of them?
but it comes as farre short, as Paris Garden Cut of the
heigth of a Cammell, or a Cocke-boate of a Carricke:
such another deuice it is, as the godly Ballet of Iohn
Carelesse, or the Song of Greene sleeues moralized.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  For his Caualiership since thou art not instructed
in it, let mee tell thee, it is lewder by nine score
times than his Poetry; since his doughtie seruice in France
fiue yeares agoe, I not forgetting him: where hauing followd
the Campe for a weeke or two, and seeing there was
no care had of keeping the Queenes Peace, but a man
might haue his braines knockt out, and no Iustice or Cunstable
neere hand to send foorth precepts, and make hue
and crie after the murdrers; without farther tarrying or
consultation, to the Generall he went, and told him he did
not like of this quarrelling kinde of life; and common occupation

of murdring, wherein (without anie Iurie or
triall, or giuing them so much leaue, as to saye their
praiers) men were run thorough and had their throats cut,
both against Gods lawes, her Maiesties lawes, & the lawes
of all Nations: wherefore hee desir'd license to depart,
for hee stood euerie howre in 
                        •
                     eare and dread of his person,
and it was alwaies his praier, From suddain death
good Lord deliuer vs. Vpon this motion, there were diuers
warlike Knights and principall Captaines, who rather
than they would bee bereau'd of his pleasant companie,
offred to picke out a strong guard amongst them for
the safe engarisoning and better shielding him from perrill.
Two stept foorth and presented themselues as muskettiers
before him, a third and fourth as targatiers behinde
him, a fifth and sixt vowd to trie it out at the push
of the pike, before the malicious foe should inuade him.
But home hee would, nothing could stay him, to finish Parthenophil
and Parthenope, and write in praise of Gab
                           •
                        iell
Haruey.
                  
               
               
                  Consil:
                  Hee was wise, hee lou'd no blowes: but what
said the Doctor to his other two copesmates?
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  VVhy thaus; Be thou Iohn the many tungd
linguist like Androwes, or the curious Intelligencer like
Bodley; & neuer forget thy Nether landish Traine vnder
him, that taught the Prince of Nauarre, now the valorous
King of France.
                  
               
               
                  Respond:
                  Of this Iohn Thorius more sparingly I wil
speake, because hee hath made his peace with mee, &
there bee in him sundrie good parts of the Tungs and
otherwise; though thirtie parts comming, behinde &
limping after Doctor Androwes: who (if it bee no offence
so to compare him) is tanquam Paulus in Cathedr
                           •
                        ,
                     
powerfull preaching like Paul out of his chaire;
and his Church another Pantheon, or Templum 
                           〈◊〉
                        
deorum; the absolutest Oracle of all sound Deuinitie
heere amongst vs; hee mixing the two seuerall properties
of an Orator and a Poet both in one, which is
not onely to perswade, but to win admiration. Thorius
being of that modestie and honestie I ascribe to him,
cannot but bee irksomly ashamed, to bee resembled so
hyperborically, and no lesse agreeu'd than Master Bodley
(a Gentleman in our Common-wealth of singular
desertiue reckoning & industrie, beeing at this present
her Maiesties Agent in the Low countries) ought he to
bee at the hellish detested Iudas name of an Intelligencer,
which the Doctor in the waye of friendship hath
throwne vpon him. Master Bodley calls him rascall &
villaine for his labour, and before his going ouer was
mad to know where he might hunt him out to bee reuengd:
which both hee and Thorius haue reason for,
since but to be couertly suspected for an Intelligencer,
(much more to be publikely registred in Print for such
a flearing false brother or Ambodexter) is to make eyther
of them worse pointed and wondered at than a

                        •
                     uckold or wittall, and set them vp as common marks
for euerie iackanapes Prentise to kicke, spit, or throw
durt at. To bee an Intelligencer, is to haue oathes at
will, and thinke God nere regards them; to frame his
religion and alleageance to his Prince according to euerie
companie he comes in. A lew he is, that but for
the spoile loues no man; a curre, that flatters & fawns
vpon euerie one, low crowching by the ground like a
tumbler, till hee may spie an aduantage and pluck out
his throate. An ingratefull slaue, that there spendeth

the bitterest of his venome, where hee hath receiued
most benefites; a hang-man, that dispatcheth all that
come vnder his hands; a drunken serieant or sumner,
that could not liue, it (like the diuell) hee did not from
time to time e
                        •
                     quire after the sinnes of the people; a
necessarie member in a State to bee vsde, to cut off vnnecessarie
members. Such same hath he preferd Master
Bodley too, and wisheth Thorius to emulate. By
his Netherlandish trayne vnder him that taught the
Prince of Nauarre, now the valorous King of France,
is not to bee gathered that hee was schoole-fellow to
the King of France, as he would saine put the world in
a fooles Paradice, because hee hath sonnetted it in hys
praise, but that hee was Doctor Coranus sonne of Oxford,
who was Tutor to the said King, as well he might
bee, and that no argument his sonne should be so well
improou'd as he is.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  
                     The last of them is Chute, to whome hee
thus dilateth. Be thou Anthonie the flowing Oratour
like Doue, and the skilfull Herald, like Clarencius; and
euer remember thy Portugall Voyage vnder Don Anthonio.
                  
               
               
                  Respond:
                  
                     Chute, is hee such a high Clearke in hys
Bookes? I knew when hee was but a low Clarke, and
carried an Atturnies bookes after him. But this I will
say for him though hee bee dead and rotten, and by his
obsequies hath preue
                        •
                     ted the vengeaurce I meant to
haue executed vpon him; of a youth that could not
vnderstand a word 
                        •
                     f Latine, hee lou'd lycoras and
drunke posset 
                        〈◊〉
                     , the best that euer put cuppe to
mouth, and for his Orators
                        •
                     ip, it was s
                        •
                     ch, that I haue
seene him non plus in giuing the charge, at the creating

of a new Knight of Tobacco; though to make amends
since, he hath kneaded and daub'd vp a Commedie,
called The transformation of the King of Trinidadoes
two Daughters, Madame Panachaea and the Nymphe
Tobacco: and to approue his Heraldrie, scutchend out
the honorable Armes of the smoakie Societie. His voiage
vnder Don Anthonio was nothing so great credit to
him, as a French Var
                        •
                     et of the chamber is; nor did he
follow Anthonio neither, but was a Captaines Boye
that scornd writing and reading, and helpt him to set
downe his accounts, and score vp dead payes. But
this was our Graphiel Hagiels tricke of VVily Beguily
herein, that whereas he could get no man of worth to
crie Placet to his workes, or meeter it in his commendation,
those worthlesse Whippets and Iack Strawes
hee could get, hee would seeme to enable and compare
with the highest. Hereby hee thought to connycatch
the simple world, and make them beleeue, that
these and these great men, euerie waye sutable to Sy
                        •
                     
                     Thomas Baskeruile, Master Bodley, Doctor Androwes,
Doctor Doue, Clarencius and Master Spencer, had seperately
contended to outstrip Pindarus in his Olympicis,
and sty alost to the highest pitch, to stellifie him aboue
the cloudes, and make him shine next to Mercury.
Here some little digression I must borrow, to reuenge
his base allusion of Sir Thomas Baskeruile, euen as I
haue done of Doctor Androwes; neither of them being
men that euer saluted mee, or I rest bound vnto in
anie thing: otherwise than by Doctor Androwes own
desert, and Master Lillies immoderate commending
him, by little and little I was drawne on to bee an Auditor
of his: since when, whensoeuer I heard him, I

thought it was but hard and scant allowance that was
giu'n him, in comparison of the incomp
                        •
                     rable gifts 
                        •
                     hat
were in him. For Sir Thomas Baskeruile, France, England,
the Low Countries & India acknowledgeth him,
and though it was neuer my hap, but once in a young
Knights Chamber in the Strand (none of my coldest
well-wishers) to light in his comparie, yet for Syr Reger
VVilliams testimonie of him, (a noble Gentleman
that a yeare and a halse before his death, I was excessiuely
beholding too, & on whom I haue vowd when
my business are a little ouercome, to bestow a memoriall
Epitaph, such as Plato would in no more but soure
verses to bee set vpon the graues of the dead) downe
his throate I will thrust this turn br
                        •
                     ach comparison of
a chicken and a chrisome, with one of the most tryed
Souldiours of Christendome. Doctor Doue and Clarencius,
I turne loos
                        •
                      to bee their owne Arbitratours
and Adu
                        •
                     cates; the one being eloquent inough to desend
himselfe, and the other a Vice roy & next Heyre
apparant to the King of Heralds, able to emblazon him
in his right colours, if hee finde hee hath sustained any
losse by him: as also in like sort Master Spencer, whom
I do not thrust in the lowest place, because I make the
lowest valuation of, but as wee vse to set the Summ' tot'
alway vnderneath or at the bottome, he being the
Sum tot' of whatsoeuer can be said of sharpe inuention
and schollership.
               
               
                  Consil:
                  Of the Doctor it may be said, as Ouid sayth
of the Scritch owle,
Alijsque (dolens) fit causa dolendi.
Hee cannot bee content to bee miserable himselfe, but hee
must draw others to miscarrie with him. And as Plato
                     
had his best beloued Boy Agatho, Socrates his Alcibiades,
Virgill his Alexis; so hath hee his Barnabe and Anthony
for his minions and sweet-harts▪ though therein I
must needes tell him (as Fabritius the Romanc Consull
writ to Pirrhus when hee sent him back his Phisition that
offred to poyson him) hee hath made as ill choyce of frends
as of enemies; seeking like the Panther to cure himselfe
with mans dung, and with the verie excrements of the
rubbishest wits that are, to reslore himselfe to his bloud,
and repaire his credit and estimation.
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  If his Patrons bee such Peter Pingles and
Moundragons, hee cannot chuse but bee sixtie times a
more poore Slauontan arse-worme.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  Tender itchie brainde infants, they car'd
not what they did so they might come in print: and of
that straine are a number of mushrumpes more, who
pester the World with Pamphle
                        ••
                     , before they haue
heard of Terence Pamphilus, & can construe & pearse
Proh Du immortales; being like those barbarous People
in the hot Countries, who when they haue bread
to make, doo no more but clap the dowe vpon a poast
on the out-side of their houses, and there leaue it to the
Sunne to bake; so their indigested conceipts (farre rawer
than anie dowe) at all aduentures vpon the poastes
they clap, pluck them off who's will: and if (like the
Sunne) anie man of iudgement (though in scorne) do
but looke vpon them, they thinke they haue strooke it
dead, and made as good a batch of Poetrie as may be.
Neither of these princockesses (Barnes or Chute) once
cast vp their noses towards Powles Church-yard, or so
much as knew how to knock at a Printing-house dore,
till they consorted themselues with Haruey, who infected

them within one fortnight with his owne spirit of
Bragganisme; which after so increased and multiplied
in them, as no man was able to endure them. The first
of them (which is Barnes) presently vppon it, because
hee would bee noted, getting him a strange payre of
Babilonian britches, with a codpisse as big as a Bolognian
sawcedge, and so went vp and downe Towne, and
shewd himself in the Presence at Court, where he was
generally laught out by the Noble-men and Ladies:
and the other (which is Chute) because Haruey had
praised him for his Oratorship & Heraldry, to approue
himselfe no lesse than hee had giu'n his word for him,
sets his mouth of a new key, and would come foorth
with such Kenimnawo compt metaphors and phrases,
that Edge was but a botcher to him; and to emblazon
his Heraldrie, he painted himself like a Curtizan, which
no Stationers boy in Poules Church-yard, but discouerd
and pointed at. One of the best Articles against Barnes
I haue ouer-slipt, which is, that he is in Print for a Braggart,
in that vniuersall applauded Latine Poem of Master
Campions; wherein an Epigram entituled In Barnum,
beginning thus
Mortales decemtela inter Gallica caesos.
he shewes, how hee bragd when he was in France he
slue ten men, when (fearfull cowbaby) he neuer heard
peice shot off, but hee fell flat on his face. To this effect
it is, though the words somwhat varie.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  
                     Alloune, alloune, let vs march, and from
armes and skirmishing, cast thy selfe in the armes of a
sweete Gentlewoman, that here at the end of the Epistle
stands readie to embrace thee. Gabriell calls her the excellent
Gentlewoman, his patronesse or rather championesse

in this quarrell, meeter by nature, and fitter by
nurture, to bee an inchaunting Angell with a white
quill, than a tormenting furie with her blacke incke.
                  
               
               
                  Respond:
                  What, is he like a Tinker, that neuer trauailes
without his wench and his dogge? or like a Germane,
that neuer goes to the warres, without his Tannakin
and her Cocke on her shoulder. That Gentlewoman
(if she come vnder my fists) I will make a gentle-woman,
as Doctor Perne said of his mans wise.

                        Tun
                              •
                            plena voluptas,
                        Cum pariter victi famina vir
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            iacent.
                     
Then it is sport worth the seeing when he and his woman
lye crouching for mercie vnder my feete. I will
bestow more cost in belabouring her, because throughout
the whole pawnch of his booke, hee is as infinite
in commending her, as Saint Iereme in praise of Virginitie;
and oftener mentions her, than Virgill & Theocritus
Amarillis. In one place he calls her the one shee,
in another the credible Gentlewomen, in a third the heauenly
plant, and the fourth a new starre in Cassiopeia,
in the fifth the heauenly creature, in the sixth a Lion in the
field of Minerua, in the seuenth a right Bird of Mercuries
winged chariot, with a hundred such like: he saith,
shee hath read Homer, Virgill, the diuine Architipes of
Hebrue, Greeke and Romane valour, Plutarch, Polien,
Agtippa, Tyraquell.
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  I haue found him, I haue the tract of him:
hee thinkes in his owne person if hee should raile grosely
it will bee a discredit to him, and therefore hereafter hee
would thrust foorth all his writings vnder the name of a
Gentlewoman; who howsoeuer shee scolds and playes the
vixen neuer so, wilbe borne with: and to preuent that he

be not descride by his alleadging of Authors (which it will
hardly bee thought can proceed from a woman) hee casts
forth this Item, that she hath read these and these books,
and is well seene in all languages.
               
               
                  Consil:
                  Shall wee haue a Hare of him then? a male
one yeare, and a female another: or as Pliny holds there
is male and female of all things vnder heauen, and not
so much but as of trees and precious stoanes; so cannot
there be a male Con
                        •
                     uter, but there must be a female confuter
too; a Simon Magus, but hee must haue his whoore
Silenes; an Aristotle that sacrificed to his harlot Hermia,
but euerie Silius Poeta must insitate him? Doth he
when his omne wits faile, crie Da Venus consilium? Holy
Saint Venus inspire mee? But as Bentiuole hath wel
put its, Pars minima est ipsa puella sui. I beleeue it is
but a meere coppy of his countenaunce, and onely hee does
it to breed an opinion in the world, that he is such a great
man in Ladies and Gentlewomens bookes, that they are
readie to run out of their wits for him, as in the Turkes
Alchoron it is written, that 250. Ladies hanged themselues
for t
                        •
                     e loue of Mahomer, and that like another
Numa Pompilius he doth nothing without his Nymph
Egeria.
                  
               
               
                  Imp:
                  Nay, if Iupiter ioynd with the Moone (Haruey
and his Gentlewoman) conspire against thee, & that
like another Messier Gallan the Hang-man of Antwerp
he hath a whole Burdel vnder his gouernement, it cannot
chuse but goe hard with thee. She will say as the Itali
                        •
                     n
Lady did, Kill my children as long as thou wilt, here
is the mould to make more.
               
               
                  Consil:
                  VVe read that Semiramis was in loue with
a Ho
                        •
                     se, but for a Gentlewoman to bee in loue with an

Asse, is such a tricke as neuer was.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  It would doo you good to heare how he
gallops on in commending her, hee sayes shee enuies
none but art in person and vertue incorporate, and
that she is a Sappho, a Penelope, a Minerua, an Arachne,
a Iuno, yeelding to all that vse her and hers well, that
she stands vpon masculine and not feminine termes, &
her hoatest 
                        •
                     ury may bee resembled to the passing of a
braue Careere by a Pegasus, and wisheth haruly that
he could dispose of her recreations.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  Call for a Bendle and haue him away to
Bridewell, for in euery sillable be commits letchery
               
               
                  Resp:
                  He threats shee will strip m
                        •
                      wit into his shirt
were that fayre body of the sweetest Venus in pri
                        •
                     t, &
that it will then appeare as in a cleare Vrinall whose
wit hath the greene sicknes.
               
               
                  Bent:
                  If she strip thee to thy shirt, if I were as thee,
I wold strip her to her smocke.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  That were to put that fayrest body of Venus
in Print indeede with a witness, and then shee neuer
need to haue her water cast in an vrinall for the greene
sicknes.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  She may be Queene Didoes peere for honestie
for anie dealings I euer yet had with her; but anie
Gentlewomans name put in his mouth, it is of
more force to discredite it, than Licophrons penne was
to discredite Penelope, who notwithstanding Homers
Praises of her, saith shee lay with all her wooers.
               
               
                  Consil:
                  VVhether shee bee honest or no, he hath done
enough to make her di
                        •
                     honest, since as Ouid writes to a
Leno, Vendibilis culpa facta puella sua est. he hath
set her commonly to sale in Poules Church-yard.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Import:
                  Let vs on with our Index or Catalogue, and
descant no more of her, since I am of the minde that for
all the stormes & tempests Haruey from her denounceth,
there is no such woman, but tis onely a Fiction of his, like
Menanders Fable or Comedie cald Thessala, of women

                        ••
                     at could pluck back the Mcone when they listed; or Ennius
inuention of Dido, who writing of the deedes of
Scipio, first gaue life to that Legend. The Epistle Dedicatorie
past, the Gentlewomans demurre or Prologue
staggers next after, the first line whereof is stolne out of
the Ballet of Anne Askew; for as that begins

                        I am a woman poore and blinde,
so begins this
O Muses, may a woman poore and blinde,
and goes on,
Ist possible for puling wench to tame
                        The furibundall champion of fame?
                     
Bids thee hazard not panting quill thy aspen selse, calls
thee bombard-goblin, and most railipotent for euerie
raine; then followeth shee with a counter Sonnet or correction
of her owne preamble, where there is nothing but
braggardous affronts, white liuerd tronts, where doth
the vra
                           •
                        ie or surie ring, pulcrow implements, Danters
scar-crow Presse; and endes; with Vltrixaccincta flagello.
                  
               
               
                  Respond:
                  Yea Madam Gabricla, are you such an old
ierker, then Hey ding a ding, vp with your petticoate,
haue at your plum-tree: but the style bewraies it, that
no other is this goodwife Megara, but Gabriel himself;
so doth the counter-sonnet and the correction of preambles,
which is his methode as right as a fiddle. I will
neuer open my lips to consute anye rag of it, it consuting

it self
                        •
                     e suficiently in the verie rehearsall. And so
doth that which is annexed to it, of her olde Comedie
new intituled, where she saith her prose is as resolute as
Beuis sword, calls mee rampant beast informidable-hide,
with I wot not what other Getulian slabberies; scarrebugges
thee with a Comedie, which shee hath scrawld
and scribeld vp against mee. But wee shall lenuoy him,
and trumpe and poope him well enough if the winde
come in that doore, and he will needes fall a Comedizing
it. Comedie vpon Comedie he shall haue, a Morall,
a Historse, a Tragedie, or what hee will. One shal
bee called The Doctors dumpe, another Haru
                           •
                        y and his
excellent Gentlewoman Madame VVhipsidoxy, a third
The triumphes of Saffron-walden, with the merrie conceipts
of VVee three; or The three Brothers; a fourth,
Stoope Gallant, or The Fall of pride; the fifth and last,
A pleasant Enterlude of No foole to the old Foole, with
a 
                        •
                     igge at the latter ende in English Hexameters of
Oneighbour Gabrie
                           •
                        l, and his wooing of Kate Cotton.
More than half of one of these I haue done alreadie,
and in Candlemas Tearme you shal see it acted, though
better acted than hee hath been at Cambridge, hee can
neuer bee; where, vpon euerie Stage hee hath beene
brought for a Sicophant and a Sow-gelder.
               
               
                  Bent:
                  VVilt thou haue nere a plucke at him for Danters
scar-crow Presse, and so abusing thy Printer?
               
               
                  Resp:
                  In pudding time you haue spoken, my Printer
who euer, shall sustain no damage by me: & where
hee tearmeth his Presse a Scar-crow Presse, he shall find
it will scare & crow ouer the best Presse in London, that
shall Print a Reply to This. Hee that dares most, let
him trie it, (as none will trie it, that hath a care to 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
by his trade, not a hundred of anie Impresion of the
Doctors bookes euer selling). My Printers Wife too
hee hath had a twitch at in two or three places about
the midst of his booke, and makes a maulkin & a shooclout
of her, talkes of her moody tung, and that she wil
teach the florme winde to scolde English; but let him
looke to himselfe, for though in all the time I haue lyne
in her House, and as long as I haue knowen her, I neuer
saw anie such thing by her; yet since hee hath giu'n
her so good a cause to finde her tung, and so vniustly &
despitefully prouokt her, shee will tell him such a tale
in his eare the next time shee meetes him, as shall bee
worse than a Northern blast to him, and haue a handfull
of his beard (if hee defend not himselfe the better)
for a maulkin or wispe to wype her shooes with.
               
               
                  Import:
                  
                     The Gentlewoman hauing taken her Lenuoy
or Farewell, Barnabe Barnes steps in with An Epistle to
the right Worshipfull his especiall deare Frend M. Gabriell
Haruey, Doctor of the Law.
               
               
                  Respo:
                  It were no booke else, if one or other were
not drawne in to call him Right VVorshipfull: & when
hee hath no bodie to help him, he gets one of his Brothers
to Epistle it to him, or in their absence 
                        •
                     aines an Epistle
in their names, where his stile to the ful shalbe set
in great letters, like a Bill for a House to be let: and vppon
paine of excommunication with bell book & candle,
none of his Brothers must publish anie thing, but
to his Dottel ship they must frame the like dedication.
               
               
                  Import:
                  The tenure of that scrimpum scrampum of
Barneses, is no more but this, to exhort the sweet Doctor
(as hee names him) to confound those viperous critical
                        •
                     
monsters, wheretoo hee is manifestly vrged; tho
                        •
                     gh he be
                        •
                     
                     
fitter to encounter some more delicate Paranymphes, and
honour the Vrany of Du Bartas. Hee hath a Sonet with
it, wherein hee muokes and contures vp all Romes learned
Orators, sweete Grecian Prophets, Philosophers, wisest
States-men, reuerend general Councells, all in one to
behold, the Doctors ennobled Arts, as precious stones
in gold. At the foote of that (like a right Pupill of the
Doctors bringing vp) hee inserteth his post-scrist or correction
of his Preamble, with a Counter-sonnet, superscribed
Nash, or the confuting Gentleman. In which hee
besmeares & 
                        ••
                     uiles thee with all the cutpurse names that
is possible, and sayes hee cannot bethinke him of names ill
enough, since thou raylst at one, whom Bodine & Sidney
did not flatter.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  No more will I flatter him, hee may build
vpon it. Thus it is, there was sometimes some prety
expectation of this Patter-wallet & Megiddo, that now
I am a salting and poudring of, and then Sir Philip Sid
                        
                           •
                        ey
(as he was a naturall cherisher of men of the least
towardnes in anie Arte whatsoeuer) held him in some
good regard, and so did most men; & (it may be) some
kinde Letters hee writ to him, to encourage and animate
him in those his hopefull courses he was entred
into: but afterward, when his ambitious pride and vanitie
vnmaskt it selfe so egregiously, both in his lookes,
his gate, his gestures, and speaches; and hee would do
nothing but crake and parret it in Print, in how manie
Noble-mens fauours hee was, and blab euerie light
speach they vttred to him in priuate, cockering & coying
himselfe beyond imagination; then Sir Philip Sidney
(by little and little) began to looke askance on him,
and not to care for him, though vtterly shake him off

hee could not, hee would so sawne & hang vpon him.
For M. Bodines commendation of him, it is no more
but this, one cōplementarie Letter asketh another; &
Gabriell first writing to him, and seeming to admire him
and his workes, hee could doo no lesse in humanitie
(beeing a Scholler) but returne him an answere in the
like nature. But my yong Master Barnabe the bright,
and his kindnes (before anie desert at all of mine towards
him, might plucke it on or prouoke it) I neither
haue nor will bee vnmindfull of.
               
               
                  Import:
                  
                     Here is another Sonet of his, which hee cals
Haruey, or The sweete Doctour, consisting of Sidney,
Bodine, Hatcher, Lewen, Wilson, Spencer; that all
their life time haue done nothing but conspire to lawd and
honour Poet Gabriell.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  
                     Miserum est fuisse foelicem. It is a miserable
thing for a man to be said to haue had frends, and
now to haue nere a one lest.
               
               
                  Import:
                  VVhat saist thou to the Printers Aduertisement to the Gentleman Reader?
               
               
                  Respond:
                  I say, ware you breake not your shins in the third line on preambles and postambles; and that it
is not the Printers, but Harueys.
                  
               
               
                  Imp:
                  In it he makes mention of Thorius & Chutes
sonets to bee added, pre
                        •
                     ixed, inserted or annexed at the
latter ende.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  The latter end? but the beginning of the tyde it may bee for the flowing.
               
               
                  Import:
                  As also a third learned French Gentlemans
verses Monsieur Fregeuile Gautius, who both in French
and Latine hath publisht some weightie Treatises.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  Were they weightie Treatises? the Printers

purse neuer so; but in this respect they might bee
tearmd to be weightie, that they were so heauie, they
would 
                        •
                     ere come out of Poules Church-yard. I will
haue a sound list at him anone, for all his Mathematical
deuices of his owne inuention, wherewith hee hath
acquainted Ma. Doctour Haruey, nothing so good as a
knife with prickles in the hast, or these Boyes paperdragons
that they let fly with a pack-thrid in the fields.
               
               
                  Import:
                  His booke.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  Hand off, there is none but I will haue the
vnclasping of that, because I can doo it nimblest. It is
deuided into foure parts; one against mee, the second
against M. Lilly, the third against Mart
                           •
                        nists, the fourth
against D. Perne. Neither are these parts seuerally distinguished
in his order of handling, but like a Dutch
stewd-pot iumbled altogether, and linsey-wolsey wo
                     
                        •
                     en
one within another. But one of these parts falleth
to my share, I being bound to answer for none but my
selfe; yet if I speake a good word now & then for my
frends by the way, they haue the more to thanke mee
for.

                        Incipit Caput primum.
                        I was euer vnwilling to vndertake a
                              •
                           ie thing, &c.
                     
You ly, you ly Gabriell, I know what you are about to
saye, but Ile shred you off three leaues at one blowe.
You were most willing to vndertake this controuersy,
for els you would neuer haue first begun it; you wold
neuer haue lyne writing against mee here in London in
the verie hart of the Plague a whole Summer; or after
(through your Frends intreatie) wee were reconcide,
popt out your Booke against me. Now say what you
will of being vrgd, loofing of time, impudencie and slander,
                     
& another Table Philosophie that ye fancy; for there
is not a dog vnder the table that will beleeue you.
               
               
                  Sa ho:
                  hath Apuleius euer an Atturney here? One
Apuleius (by the name of Apule
                           •
                        us) he endites to be an
engrosser of arts and inuentions, putting downe Plato,
Hippocrates, Aristtle, and the Paragraphs of Iustinian.
Non est i
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         ent us: there's no such man to be found; let
them that haue the Commission for the Cōcealments
looke a
                        •
                     ter it, or the Man in the Moone put for it. Gabriell
casts a vile learing eye at me, as who should saye,
he quipt me secretly vnder it, if he durst vtter so much,
Also in that which succeedeth, of One that is a common
contemner of God and man, stampes and treades vnder
his foote the reuerentest old and new VVriters, 
                           •
                        pposeth
himselfe against Vniuersities, Parliaments and generall
Councells, encloseth all within his owne braine, and is a
changer, an innouater, a cony-catcher, a rimer, a rayler,
that out-faceth heauen and earth. But sost you now,
how is all this or anie part of this to bee prou'd? make
account he will (vpon his oath) denie it. Hath he spoken,
printed, written, contriued or imagined, or caused
to bee spoken, written, printed, contriued or imagined
anie thing against these? or exprest in his countenaunce,
the least wincke of dishke of them? Let some
instance of that be produced, and he be not able to resute
it; Ile vndertake for him (which is the most ignominious
imposition he can tie himselfe to) her shall giue
thee his tung for a rag to wype thy taile with, and haue
his right hand cut off, for thy Mother to hang out for
an ale house signe. Cannot a man declaime against a
Catalonian and a Hethite, a Moabite Gabriell and an Amorite
Dicke, but all the ancient Fathers, all the renoumed

Philosophers, Orators, Poets, Historiographers,
and old & new excellent Writers must bee disparaged
and trode vnder foote, God and man contemned and
set at nought? Vniuersities, Parliaments, general Councells
oppugned? and he must be another Romane Palemon,
who vaunted all Science began and ended with
him? a changer, an innouater, a cony-catcher, a railer,
and out-facer of heauen and earth.
                  Is there such high treason comprehended vnder calling
a soppe a 
                        •
                     oppe, & cudgelling a curre for his snarling?
Or it is thus, our iracundious Stramutzen Gabriell
standing much vpon his reading, and that all the Libraries
of the auncient Fathers, renowmed Philosophers,
Poets, Orators, Historiographers, and olde and
new excellent Writers, are hoorded vp in the Amalthaeas
Horne of his braine, with whatsoeuer Constitutions
and Decretalls of generall Councells and Parliaments,
and for he hath commenst in both Vniuersities;
therefore he concludes, He which writes against him
must write against them all, & so) per consequens) vaunt
him aboue all; and if he vaunts him aboue them all, he
is a changer, an innouater, an impostor, a railer at all, &
consounds heauen and earth. This is the tydiest Argument
he can frame to make his matter good, though it
followes no more, than that a man should bee helde a
traitor and accused to haue abusde the Queene and
Counsaile, and the whole State, for calling a fellowe
knaue that hath read the Booke of Statutes, since by
them all in generall they were made.
               
               
                  Carn:
                  Thou art unwise to canuaze it so much, for hee
thrust it in but for a Rhetoricall figure of amplification.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  Rhetoricall figure? and if I had a hundred

sonnes, I had rather haue them disfigur'd & keep them
at home as cyphers, than send them to schoole to learn
to figure it after that order.
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  You may haue them worse brought vp, for
so you should be sure neuer to haue them counted lyers,
since Rhetoricians though they lye neuer so groscly, are
but said to haue a luxurious phrase, to bee eloquent anpli
                        •
                     iers,
to bee full of their pleasant Hyperboles, or speake
by Ironies; and if they raise a slaunder vpon a man of a
thing done at home, when hee is a 1000. mile off, it is but
Prosopopeya, personae fictio, the supposing or faining
of a person: and they will alledge Tully, Demosthenes,
Demades, Aeschines, and shew you a whole Talaeus &
Ad Herennium of figures for it, foure and fiftie times
more licentious. These Arithmetique figurers are such
like iugling transformers, lying by Addition and Numeration,
making frayes and quarrelling, by Diuision, getting
wenches with childe by Multiplication, stealing by
Substraction; and if in these humors they haue consumd
all and are faine to bre
                        •
                     ke, they doo it by Fraction.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  That last part of Arithmetique (which is Fraction or breaking) I intend to teach Gabriel; thogh
to all the other, as Addition, Deuision, Rebating or
Substraction, of his owne ingrafted disposition hee is
aptinough, and so hee is to Multiplication too, hee hauing
since I parted with him last got him a Gentlewoman.
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  Both the
                        •
                      and hee talke much of that Gentlewoman,
but I would we might know her, and see her vnhukt
and naked once, as Paris in Lucians Dialogues, desires
Mercury hee might see the three Goddesses naked,
that stroue for the golden Ball.
               
               
                  
                  Carnead:
                  The Venus shee is that would win it from
them all, if the controuer sie were now a
                        •
                     toate againe: and
which thou pretermitted
                        ••
                      before, hee puts her in print
for a Venus, yet desires to see her a Venus in print; publisheth
her for a strumpet (for no better was Venus) and
yet he would haue her a strumpet more publique.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  By that name had hee not so publisht her,
yet his peacocke pluming her like another Pandora,
(from Poets too parasiticall commending of whome
first grew the name of Pandare, though Sir Philip Sidney
fetcheth it out of Plautus) through his incredible
praising of her I say (wherein one quarter of his Book
is spent) he hath brought all the world into a perswasion,
that shee is as common as Rubarbe among Phisitions;
since (as Thucidides pronouhceth) shee is the honestest
woman, of whose praise or dispraise is least spoken.
My pen he prodigally insulteth shee shall pumpe
to as drie a spunge as anie is in Hosier Lane, and wring
our braines like emptie purses. I dem per idem in sense
he speakes, though it be not his comparison, and Tamburlain-
like hee braues it indesinently in her behal
                        •
                     e,
setting vp bills like a Bear-ward or Fencer, what fights
we shall haue and what weapons she will meete me a
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  Con:
                  
                     Fasilia the daughter of Pelagius King of Spain,
was torne in pe
                        •
                     ces by a Beare; & so I hope thou wilt tear
her and tug with her, if she begin once to playe the Deuill
of Dowgate: but as there was a woman in Roome, that
had her childe slaine with thunder and lightning in her
wombe ere she was deliuerd; so it is like inough hers will
bee, and proue an Embrion, and we shall neuer see it: or
if wee doe, looke for another armed Pallas issuing out of
Ioues braine, or an Amazonian Hippolite, that will bee

good inough for Theseus; or the female of the Aspis,
who (if her mate be kild by any passenger in the way), thorough
fire, thorough the thickest assembly she will pursue
him, or anie thing but water.
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  In some Countreys no woman is so honor able
as she that hath had to doo with most men, and can giue
the lusteest striker oddes by 25. times in one night as Messalina
did; and so it is with this his braiche or bitch-foxe.
               
               
                  Consil:
                  
                     Agelastus Grand-father to Crassus, neuer
laught but once in his life, and that was to see a mare eate
thistles; so this will be a iest to make one laugh that lyes a
dying, to see a Gillian draggell taile r
                        •
                     n her taile into a
bushe of thornes, because her nailes are not long inough
to soratch it, & play at wasters with a qu
                        •
                     l for the britches.
               
               
                  Carn:
                  Multi illum iuuenes, multae petiere puellae,
Boyes, wenches, and euerie one pursue him for his beauty.
                     Non caret effectu, quod voluere duo,
                     Thou canst neuer hold out, if thou wert Hercules, if two
to one encounter thee.
                  
               
               
                  Respo:
                  
                     Quis nisiment is inops tenerae declamat amic
                           •
                        .
Who but an ingram cosset would keepe such a courting
of a Curtezan to haue her combat for him; or doo
as Dick Haruey did, (which information piping hot in
the midst of this line was but brought to mee) that hauing
preacht and beat downe three pulpits in inueighing
against dauncing; one Sunday euening, when hys
Wench or Friskin was footing it alo
                        •
                     t on the Greene,
with foote out and foote in, and as bufie as might be at
Rogero, Basilino, Turkelony, All the flowers of the broom,
Pepper is black, Greene sleeues, Peggie Ramsey, he came
sneaking behinde a tree and lookt on, and though hee
was loth to be seene to countenance the sport, hauing

laid Gods word against it so dreadfully, yet to shew his
good-will to it in hart, hee sent her 18. pence in hugger
mugger to pay the fidlers: let it sink into ye, for it is true
& will be verefide. Let Gabrtel verefie anie one thing so
against mee, and not thinke to carrie it away with hys
generall extenuatings, ironicall amplifications, and declamatorie
exclamations. Nor let him muck ehill vp so
manie pages in saying he lookt for termes of aqua fortis
and gumpowder, and that I haue thundred and giu'n 
                           •
                        ut
tragically, when nought appeares but the sword of cats-meat
                           •
                        ,
and the fire-brand of dogs-meate, and Aut nunc
aut nunquam, and two staues and a pike: but let him
shew what part of that his first Booke I haue not from
the crowne to the little toe consuted, and laid as open
as a custard or a cowsheard; and if my Booke bee cats-meate
and dogs-meate, his is much worse, since on hys
mine hath his whole foundation and dependance, and
I doo but paraphrase vpon his text. Something that he
grounds this cats-meate and dogs-meate on, I will not
with stand but I haue lent him; as in my Epis
                        •
                     le to Apis
lapis, where I wish him to let Chaucer be new scowrd against
the day of battaile, and Terence but come in now
and then with the snus
                           •
                        e of a sentence and Dictum puta,
wee'l strike it as dead as a doore-naile, Haud terun
                        •
                     ij estimo,
we haue cats-meate & dogs-meate inough for these
mungrels. Hence, as if I had continually harpt vppon
it, in euerie tenth line of my Book he faith I do nothing
but assaile him with cat-meat & dogs-meat; when
there is not anie more spoken of it, than I haue shewd
you. So Aut nunc aut nunquam he brings in for a murdring
shot, beeing neuer my Posie, but Aut nunquam
tentes, aut perfice at the latter end of my Foute Letters;
                     
speaking to him, that he shuld not go about to answere
me, except he set it soundly on; for otherwise, with a
sound counterbuffe I would make his eares ring againe,
and haue at him with two staues & a pike, which
was a kinde of old verse in request, before he fell a rayling
at Turberuile or Elderton. Some Licos
                           •
                        henes reading
(which showes plodding & no wit) he hath giu'n a
twinckling glimps of, & like a school-boy said ouer his
gear to his vnckles & kinsfolk, and tels what Authours
he hath read, when he floted in the sea of encounters;
which for ought he hath alleadgd out of them, he may
haue stolne by the whole sale out of Ascanius or Andrew
Maunsells English Catalogue. No villaine, no Atheist,
no murdrer, no traitor, no Sodomite, hee euer
read of but he hath likend mee too, or in a superlatiue
degree made me a monster beyond him, for no other
reason in the earth, but because I would not let him go
beyond me, or be won to put my finger in my mouth,
& crie mumbudget, when be had baffuld mee in print
throughout England. The victorioust Captaines and
Warriours, the inuinciblest Caesars and Conquerours,
the satyricallest confuters, and Luthers (like whom the
Germanes affirme neuer anie in their tung writ so forcible)
in an Alphabet he trowles vp, and sayes I out-strip
them all, I set them all too schoole. The quorsum or
quare if you demaund, is this, I haue out stript and set
him to schoole, and he is sure he is a better man than anie
of them. The verie guts and garbage of his Notebook,
he hath put into this tallow loa
                        •
                     e, & not lest anie
Frezeland, Dutch or Almain scribe (where they Commence
and and doo their Actes with writig Bookes)
that hath but squibd foorth a Latin Puerilis in Print, or

set his name to a Catechisme, vncōpared or vnscoard.
Atrue Pellican he is, that peirceth his breast & lets out
all his bowels to giue li
                        •
                     e to his yong. No Author but
himselfe and Nashe heereafter he can cyte, which hee
hath not s
                        •
                     ellified worse than Sapiēs dominabiturastris,
the ordinarie Posie for all Almanackes, or the presenting
of Artaxerxes with a cup of water, vsde in euerie
Epistle Dedicatorie; and those two hee hath wrought
reasonably vpon, hauing worne the first (which is himselfe)
naplesse, & the other owes him nothing. Against
blasphemous Seruetus or Muretus or Sunius, that haue
been so bold with her Maiestie and this State, was thys
Inuectiue of his first armd and aduanced; which (vppon
the missing his preserment or aduauncement in
Court) he supprest, and in the bottom of a rustie hamper
let it lye asleepe by him, (euen as he did the Aduerrisement
against Pap-hatchet & Martin, which he hath
yoakt with it, by his own date euer since 
                        •
                     9.) and now
with putting in new names here and there of Nashe &
Piers Pennilesse, he hath so pannyerd and drest it that it
seemes a new thing, though there be no new thing in it
that claimes anie kindred of mee, more than a dozen
of fami
                        •
                     ht quips, but like a lose French cassock or gabberdine
would fit any man. Those more appropriate
blowes ouer the thumbe, are these. My praising of Aretine;
so did he before me, the verie words whereof
I haue set downe in my other Booke: my excepting against
his Doctorship; better Doctors than euer he wil
be put it in my head, and if therein I misrepor, I erre
by authoritie. My calling him a fawn
                           •
                        -guest messenger
betwixt M. Bird and M. Demetrius, in the companie of
one of which, he neuer din'd nor supt this 
                           •
                         yeres; & forth
                           •
                        
                        
other, he neuer drunke with to this day: he may be a

                        •
                     awn-guest in his intent neuertheles, and if he neither
eate nor drunck at M. Demetrius, why did he so familiarly
write to him, M. Demetrius, in your absence I found
your wife verie curteous? For a great irespasse he layes
it to me, in that I haue praised her Maiesties affabilitie
towards Shollers, and attributed to Noble-men so much
pollicy & wisdome, as to haue a priuy watch word in their
praises, and crossing his sleight opinion of Inuectiues &
Satyres. Like Sophisticall Disputers that only rehearse
not answere, he runs on telling, how I haue fatherd on
him a new Part of Tully, which he fetcht out of a wall at
Barnwell, euen as Poggius in an old Monasterie found
out a new Part of Quintillian, after it had bin manie hundred
yeres lost; my taking vpon me to be Greenes aduocate,
my threatning so incessantly to haunt the Ciuilian &
the Deuine, that to auoid the hot chase of my fierie quill,
they shall be constrained to enskonse themselues in one of
their Phisition Brothers old vrinall cases; my calling him
butter-whore, & bidding him Rip, rip, you kitchin-stufle
wrangler; my accusing him of carterlyderisions and milkmaids
girds, as Good beare bite not, A man's a man thogh
he hath but a hose on his head. Pulchre mehercule dictum,
sapienter, lautè, lepide, nil suprà, nothing so good as the
iests of the Councell Table asse, Richard Clarke.
                  
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  
                     Yes that he doth more than rehearse, for he
maintains them to be the Ironies of Socrates, Aristophanes,
Epicharmus, Lucian, Tully, Quintillian, Sanazarius,
K. Alphonsus, Cardan, Sir Th. Moore, Isocrates;
looke the first 156. Page of his Booke, & ye shal 
                           •
                        inde it so.
                  
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  
                     VVhat, had they no better iests, than Good
beare bite not, or A man is a man though he hath but a

hose on his head, Pulchre mehercule dictum? O dishonor
to the house from whence they come.
                  
               
               
                  Resp:
                  He chargeth mee, to haue derided and abused
the most valorous Mathematicall Arts; let him shewe
me wherein, and I will answere: of palbable Atheisme
he condemnes me, for drinking a cup of lambswooll to the
health of his Brothers Booke, cald The Lamb of God &
his Enemies; then what Atheists are they that turne it
to wast paper and goe to the priuy with it? as to no other
vses it is conuerted, it lying dead & neuer selling:
and againe with the Atheist he spur-gals mee, in that I
iested at heauen, calling it the hauen where his deceased
Brother is arriued.
                  
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  Is it a iest that his brother is arriu'd in heauen?
he is in hell then belike.
               
               
                  Consil:
                  A more likelier peice of Atheisme thou maist
vrge against him, where he saith in one leafe, that one acre
of performance, is worth twentie of the Land of
Promise: as though God had not performd to the Children
of Israel, the Land of Promise he vowd to them.
               
               
                  Resp:
                  The deepe cut out of my grammer Rules Astra pet it disert
                           •
                        s he hits me with. I am sorry for it I
slanderd him so, for he was neuer eloquent; if he bee
not aboue the starres, I would hee were. Hee complaines
I doo not regard M. Bird, M. Spencer Mounsieur
Bodin. In any thing but in praising him, and
therin as Aristotle non vidit verum in spiritualibus, nor
Barnard all things; so they may haue theyr eyes dazeled.
To a bead-roll of learned men and Lords hee
appeales, whether he be an Asse or no, in the forefront
of whom, he puts M. Thomas VVatson, the Poet: A
man he was that I dearely lou'd and honor'd, and for

all things hath le
                        •
                     t few his equalls in England, he it was
that in the company of diuers Gentlemen one night
at supper at the Nags head in Cheape; first told me of
his vanitie, and those Hexameters made of him,

                        But o what newes of that good Gabriell Haruey,
                        
                        Knowne to the world for a foole and clapt in the Fleet for a Rimer.
                     
For the other graue men, they all speak as their foreman.
His imprisonment in the Fleete he affirmes is a
lewd supposall (the Hexameter vearse before prooues
it) as also his writing the welwillers Epistle in praise of
himselfe, before his first foure Letters a yeare ago.
The Compositor that set it, swore to mee it came vnder
his owne hand to bee printed. Hee bids the world
examine the Preamble before the Supplication to the diuell,
and see if I doo not praise my selfe, and that the teno
                           •
                        r
of the stile, & identity of the phrase proues it to be
mine. He needed not go so far about to sent me out by
my stile and my phrase, for if he had euer ouerlookt it
he would haue seene my name to it, and besides another
argument that he neuer read it is, which (whosoeuer
shal peruse it wil finde) it is altogether in my owne
dispraise and disabling, and grieuing at the imperfect
printing and misinterpreting of it, let him shewe mee
but one tittle or letter in it tending to any other drist
He vpbraides me by the poore fellow my Fathers putting
me to my scribling shifts, and how I am beholding to the
Printing-house for my poore shifts of apparai
                           •
                        e: My Father
put more good meate in poore mens mouthes,
than all the ropes & liuing is worth his Father left him,
together with his mother and two brothers; and (as
another Scholler) he brought me vp at S. Iohns, where

(it is well knowen) I might haue been Fellow if I had
would: and for deriuing my maintenaunce from the
Printing-house, so doo both Vniuersities, and whosoeuer
they be that come vp by Learning, out of Printed
Boookes gathering all they haue; and would not
haue furre to put in their gownes, if it, or writing were
not. But if hee meane that from writing to the Presse,
I scrape vp my exhibition, let him s
                        •
                     rape it out for a lye;
till the Impression of this Book, I hauing got nothing
by Printing these three yeres. But when I doo play my
Prizes in Print, Ile be paid for my paines that's once, &
not make my selfe a gazing stocke and a publique spectacle
to all the world for nothing as he does, that giues
money to be seene and haue his wit lookt vpon, neuer
Printing booke yet, for whose Impression he hath not
either paid or run in debt. Printers (aboue all the rest)
haue nothing to thanke him for, in his Praise of the asse,
he putting in the Presse for the arrantest Asse of all, because
it is such a meanes to presse him to death, and
confound him. Danters Presse sweares after three
Forme a day, since he hath giuen it the Presse and disgrac't
them it will (how euer others neglect it) neuer
haue donePrinters beating with inke balles. beating vppon him, nor hath it acquited
him for calling me Danters gentleman, who is as good
at all times as VVolfes right worshipfull Gabriell, or the
gentleman he brings in reading a Chapter (Colledge
fashion at dinner time) against Piers & his proceedings,
and the approbation of his Docterly reincounter. Applaud
and partake with him who list, this is my definitiue
position, which Anaxandrides a Comick Poet said
of the Aegyptian superstition, Maximam Anguillam
quam Deum putant, comedo; canem quem colunt, verbero.
                     
They worship the great Eeele for a God, which
I eate or disgest; and the Dog they adore, I spurne or
driue out of dores. Hidr as heads I should go about
to cut off, (as Tacitus saies of them that thinke to cut
off all discommodities or inconueniences from the
Lawes) if I should vndertake to run throghout all the
foolish friuolous reprehensions & cauils he hath in his
Booke. I will take no knowledge of his late of ten egs
for a penny, and nine of them rotten, a gormandizing
breakfast he saies I was at of egs and butter; which if he
can name where when or with whom, I will giue him
an annuitie of eg-pyes. No more will I of his calling
me Captaine of the boyes, and Sir Kil-prick; which is a
name fitter for his Piggen de wiggen or gentlewoman:
or els because she is such a hony sweetikin, let her bee
Prick-madam, of which name there is a flower, & let
him take it to himselfe, and raigne intire Cod-pisse Kinko,
and Sir Murdred of placards durante bene placito,
as long as he is able to please or giue them geare. Likewise
the Captainship of the boyes I tosse backe to him,
he hauing a whole Band of them to write in his praise:
but if so he terme me in respect of the minoritie of my
beard, he hath a beard like a Crow with two or three
durtie strawes in her mouth, going to build her neast.
See him & see him not I will, about that his meaziid inuention
of the Good-wife my mothers finding her daughter
in the ouen, where she would neuer haue sought her, if
she had not been there first her selfe: (a hackny prouerb
in mens mouths euer since K. Lud was a little boy, or
Belinus Brennus brother, for the loue hee bare to oysters
built Billinsgate;) therfore there is no more to be
said to it, but if he could haue told how to haue made

a better lye he would. I will not present into the Arches
or Commissaries Court, what prinkum prankums
Gentlemen (his nere neighbors) haue whispred to me
of his Sister, and how shee is as good a fellow as euer
turnd belly to belly, for which she is not to be blam'd,
but I rather pitie her and thinke she cannot doo withall,
hauing no other dowrie to marie her. Good Lord,
how one thing brings on another; had it not bin for his
baudy sister, I should haue forgot to haue answerd for
the bau
                           •
                        ie rymes he threapes vpon me. Are they rimes?
and are they ba
                           •
                        die? and are they mine? Well, it may
be so that it is not so; or if it be, men in their youth (as
in their sleep) manie times doo something that might
haue been better done, & they do not wel remember.
                  O Yes. Be it knowen vnto all men by these presents,
that what soeuer names of Duns, asse, or
Dorbell I haue giu'n Gabriel Haruey, or of a kitchin
stuffe wrangler, and reading the Lecture of Ram alley,
I will still perseuer and insist in; as also, that I wilbe
as good as my word in desending any (but abhominable
Atheists) that shall write against him, that I will still
maintaine there is in court but one true Diana, & so wil
all that are true subiects to her Maiestie; that I think as
reuerently of London as of any Citie in Europe, though
I doo not cal it theHe might as vvell haue cald it the Countesle, or Duches Tovvue, 
                     Madam Towne of the Realme, as he
hath done, and that I hold no place better gouerned,
how euer in so great a sea of all waters, there cannot
chuse but be some quick-sands and rockes & shelues,
that I neuer so much as in thought detracted from Du
Bartas, Buchanan, or anie generall allowed moderne
Writer, howere Gnimelse Hengist here giues out, with

out naming time place or to whome I did how I
vowd to confute them all; that Mast. Lilly neuer procur'd
Greene or mee to write against him, but it was his own
first seeking and beginning in The Lamb of God, where
he and his Brother (that loues dauncing so wel) scummerd
out betwixt thē an Epistle to the Readers against
all Poets and Writers, & M. Lilly & me by name he berusfianizd & berascald, cōpar'd to Martin, & termd vs
piperly make-plaies and make-bates, yet bad vs holde our
peace & not be so hardie as to answere him, for if we did,
he would make a bloodie day in Poules Church-yard, &


splinter our pens til they stradled again, as wide as a paire
of Compasses. Further be it knowen vnto you, that before
this I praisde him (after a sort) in an Epistle in
Greenes Menaphon.
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  But 
                        〈◊〉
                      thou so?
               
               
                  Respon:
                  O what do you meane to hinder my Proclamation?
I did, I did, as vnfainedly and sincerely as
in his first butter-fly Pamphlet against Greene he praisd
me for that proper yong man, Greenes fellow VVriter,
whom (in some respects) he wisht well too; as also in hys
Booke he writ against Greene and mee, he raild vppon
me vnder the name of Piers Pennilesse, and for a bribe
that I should not reply on him praisd me, and reckond
me (at the latter end) amongst the famous Schollers of
our time, as S. Philip Sidney, M. VVatson, M. Spencer,
M. Daniell, whom he hartily thankt, & promised to endow
with manie complements for so enriching our English
Tongue.
                  
               
               
                  Consil:
                  Then what an Asse is hee to call thee an Asse
for praising him, & after thou hadst praisd him (though
it was but pretie and so, for a Latine Poet after others)

vpon a good turn done him (& no iniurie fore-running)
to build the foundation of a quarrell.
               
               
                  Resp:
                  Further than further bee it knowne (since I
had one further before) I neuer abusd Marloe, Greene,
Chettle in my life, nor ani
                        •
                      of my frends that vsde me
like a frend: which both Marloe and Greene (if they
were aliue) vnder their h
                        •
                     nds would testi
                        •
                     ie, euen as
Harry Chettle hath in a sh
                        •
                     rt note here.
               
               
                  
                     
                        I Hold it no good manners (M. Nashe) being but an Artificer
to giue D. Harue
                              •
                           
                         the ly though he haue deseru'd
it, 
                           •
                        y publishing in Print you haue done mee wrong,
which priuately I neuer found: yet to confirme by my Art
in deed, what his calling forbids mee to affirme in word,
your booke being readie for the Presse, Ile square & set it
out in Pages; that shall page and lackey his infamie after
him (at least) while he liues, if no longer.
                     
                        Your old Compositer,
Henry Chettle.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Impo:
                  
                     Yes Greene he conuinces thee to haue abused,
in that thy defence of him is a more biting commendation
than his reproose.
               
               
                  Respond:
                  It is so hereticall a falsifier, a man had not
need talke with him without a Bible in the roome; for
it may be he hath some care of his oath, if it be not in a
matter of reconciliation, or repaying of money, as to
Dexters man: but his ipse dixit, his report otherwise is
nothing so currant as beggers about the Courts remoue.
Nere tell me of this or that he sayes I spake or
did, except he particularize and stake downe the verie
words, and catching them by the throate like a thee
                        •
                     e

say, these are they that did the deed, I arrest you, and I
charge you all gentle Readers to aid me. What truly
might be spoken of Greene, I publisht, neither discommending
him, nor too much flattering him (for I was
nothing bound to him); whereas it maye be alleadgd
against Gabriel, as it was against Paulus Iouius, Quae verissime
s
                           •
                        ribere potuit noluit, & quae voluit non potuit:
Those things which hee might haue related truely hee
would not, and those which he would hee could not,
for want of good intelligence. How he hath handled
Greene and Marloe since their deaths, those that read
his Bookes may iudge: and where like a iakes barreller
and a Gorbolone he girds me with imitating of Greene,
let him vnderstand, I more scorne it, than to haue so
foule a iakes for my groaning stoole as hys mouth; &
none that euer had but one eye with a pearle in it, but
could discern the difference twixt him & me; while he
liu'd (as some Stationers can witnes with me) hee subscribing
to me in any thing but plotting Plaies, wherein
he was his cra
                        •
                     ts master. Did I euer write of Conycatching?
stufft my stile with hearbs & stones? or apprentisd
my selfe to running of the letter? If not, how then
doo I 
                        〈◊〉
                      him? A hang-by of his (one Valentine
Bird, that writ against Greene) imitated me, & would
embezill out of my Piers Pennilesse sixe lines at a clap,
and vse them for his owne. Nay he himselfe hath purloyned
something from mee, and mended his hand in
confuting by fifteen parts, by following my presidents.
There is two or three mouth fulls of my Oo yes yet
behinde, which after I haue drawne out at length, you
shall see me (like a Crier, that when he hath done kireelosoning
it, puts of his cap, and cries God saue the

Queene, & so steps into the next ale-house) steale out
of your companie before you bee aware, and hide my
selfe in a Closet no bigger than would holde a Church
Bible, till the beginning of Candlemas Terme, and then
if you come into Poules Church-yard, you shall meete
mee.
                  Oo yes, be it knowne, I can ryme as wel as the Doctor,
for a sample whereof, in stead of his
Noddy Nash, whom euerie swash, and
his occasionall admonitionatiue Sonnet, his Apostrophe
Sonnet, and tynie titmouse Lenuoy, like a welt at the
edge of a garme
                        •
                     t, his goggle-eyde Sonnet of Gorgon,
and the wonderfull yeare, and another Lenuoy for the
chape of it, his Stanza declaratiue, VVriters post-script
in meeter, his knitting vp Cloase, and a third Lenuoy,
like a fart after a good stoole; In stead of all these (I say)
here is the tufft or labell of a rime or two▪ the trick or
habit of which I got by looking on a red nose Balletmaker
that resorted to our Printing-house. They are
to the tune of Labore Dolore, or the Parlament tune of
a pot of ale and nutmegs and ginger, or Eldertons ancient
note of meeting the diuell in conture house lane. If
you hit it right, it will go maruellous sweetly.

                        Gabriel Haruey fames duckling,
                        hey noddie, noddie, noddie:
                        Is made a gosling and a suckling,
                        hey noddie, noddie, noddie.
                     
Or that's not it, I haue a better.

                        Dilla my Doctor deare,
                        sing dilla, dilla, dilla:
                        
                           Nashe hath spoyled thee cleare
                        with his quilla, quilla, quilla.
                     
                     
What more haue I in my Proclamation to yalp out?
No more but this, that in both my bookes I haue obiected
some perticular vice more against him than
pumps and panto
                           •
                        les, which those that haue not faith inough
to beleeue, may toote & superuize when they
haue any literall idle leysure. The Tragedie of wrath,
or Priscianus vapulans, promised in the epilogue Sonne
                        •
                     
of my Foure Letters, (three or foure words wherof
as Awayte, and paint, and tread no common path, he
mumbles and chewes in his mouth like a peece of Allom,
or the stone of a horse-plum to sucke off all the
meate of it,) let him take this for it, whereby I am out
of his debt, if not ouer plus. And where he terrefies
mee with insulting hee was Tom Burwels the Fencers
Scholler, and that he will squeaze and mazer me whensoeuer
he met me, why did hee it not when hee met me at
Cambridge, we lying backe to backe in the same Inne,
and but two or three square trenchours of a wainscot
dore betwixt vs? By our reconciliation he cannot excuse
it, since the law-day was out, and the feude open
againe by his breach of truce, and my defiance to him
in an Epistle to the Reader in Christs tears. But let him
hence forth prouide him of two or three sturdie Plow
men (such as his swines fac't blue-coate was) when I
legerd by him in the Dolphin, for otherwise not all the

                        •
                     ence he learnd of Tom Burwell shall keepe mee from
cramming a turd in his iawes (and no other bloud will
I draw of him.) I haue bespoken a boy and a nap
                        •
                     in
already to carry it in. Last of all there is nothing I haue
bragd of my writing in all humors, no not so much as of
his fleshly humours, but shall be anuilde for true steele
on his standish, I making an indenture twixt God and

my soule, to consume my bodie as slender as a stilt or a
broome-staffe, and my braine as poore and compendius,
as the pummell of a scotch saddle, or pan of a
Tobacco pipe, but as the Elephant and the Rinoceros
neuer fight but about the best pastures, so will I winne
from him his best Patrons, and driue him to confesse
himselfe a Conundrum, who now thinks he hath learning
inough to proue the saluation of Lucifer; Apologize
it for him as many Chutes, Barnesses, or vile 
                        •
                     riggers,
or Fregeuiles as there will.
               
               
                  Bentiu:
                  
                     Thou promisedst to haue a dead lift at that
Fregeuile.
               
               
                  Resp:
                  I, here I am come to his verses, but let mee
take them in order as they lie; Thorius is first, with a
Letter, and Sonnet, and Post-script of Chutes
                  
               
               
                  Carnead:
                  More Post-scripts and preambles, hath he
(as with his Thrasonisme) infectea them all with his methode
of Lenuoyes, Post-scripts and Preambles.
                  
               
               
                  Respond:
                  From Master Thorius I haue a Letter vnder
his owne hand which hee sent mee to be printed,
vtterly disclaiming the wrong which the Doctour (vnder
his name) hath thrust out against mee. This is the
conuterpaine of it.
               
               
                  
                     To my very good friend M. Nashe.
                     
                        MAster Nashe, I pray you to let my carriage
towardes you alwaies, beget but thus
much in your opinion, that I would neuer
haue beene led with so much indiscretion as to
raile against any man vnprouoked, or to offer

him wrong that neuer offended mee. Trucly vpon
the sight of fiue or six sheets of Doctor Harueyes
Booke, I wrote certaine verses in his commendation,
but that Sonnet which in his booke is.
subscribed with my name is not mine, and I gesse
at the mistaking of it. Indeed the Stanzaes are,
though altred to your disgrace in some places.
To vse many words were vaine, and to ende writing
and leaue you vnsatisfied, were to write to no
end, and to leaue my selfe discontented. But if
you consider how I was as much offended with
the vniust vaineglorious Print as your s
                           •
                        lfe, wee
shall both rest contented. Little did I think the
booke should haue had so famous a Title, or so
many Prefaces, or so many Letters and Pream
                        
                           •
                        les,
amongst which, some of mine blushing to
looke vppon so contēptible a person they were directed

                           〈◊〉
                        , could not but be exceedingly ashamed
to bee presented to the eyes of a whole world. I
could mislike other things, but I will leaue them
as trifles, Farewell.
                     
                     
                        Yours to vse
I. Thorius.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chute that was the bawlingest of them all, & that bobd
me with nothing but Rhenish furie, Stilliard clyme, oyster
whore phrase, claret spirit, and ale-house passions, with
talking so much of drinke, within a yere and a halfe after
died of the dropsie, as diuers Printers that were
at his buriall certefide mee. Beeing dead, I would not
haue reuiu'd him, but that the Doctor (whose Patron
he was) is ali
                     •
                  e to answere for him. Mounsieur Fregus
                        •
                     us
or Mounsieur Fregeuile Gautiu
                        •
                     , that prating weazell
fac'd vermin, is one of the Pipers in this consort,
and he is at it with his Apologie of the thrice learned and
thrice eloquent Doctour Haruey, befooles and besots mee
in euerie line, pleads the Doctors innocence, and the lawfulnes
of his proceedings; praiseth his moderate stile, saies
he is sorie he is so vniustly pusht at' and being pusht at glad
he hath so acquited him, and that his Answere 
                        〈◊〉
                      reasonable
and eloquent.
               
               I am sorie I haue no more roome to reason the
ma
                     •
                  ter with him; for if I had, I did not doubt but to
make him a fugitiue ou
                     •
                   of England as well as he is ou
                     •
                  
of his owne Countrey: & in this great dearth in England,
we haue no reason but to make him a Fugitiue or
banish him, since he is the rauenousest 
                     ••
                  ouen that euer
lapt porredge, and out of two Noblemens houses he
had his Mittimus of ye may be gone, for he was such
a peruerse Ramisticall heretike, a busie reprouer of the
principles of all Arts, and 
                     •
                  ower of seditious Paradoxes
amongst kitchin boyes.
               My clue is spun, the Tear me is at an end, wherefore
here I wil end and make Vacation: but if you wil haue
a word or two of Doctour Perne and Master Lilly, in

                     〈◊〉
                   of one of Gabriels Apostrophe Sonnets or Lenuoyes,

by Struthio Belliue
                        •
                     ento de Compasso Callpero
and the Contents of it I protest and adiure, you
shall. 
                     •
                  
               
               Against Doctor Perne our Poditheck or Tolmach
hath in his booke twilted and stitcht in a whole pennyworth
of paper, which his Gossipship that had the naming
of the child, dubs the Encomium of the Foxe. In
it he endorseth him the puling Preacher of Pax vobis &


humilitie, (to both of which Gabriell alwaies was an enemie,
euen as Doctor Perne was to his loue-lockes &
his great ruffes and pantostes;) the triangle turne-coate,
(I wold he had anie coat to turne but that he weares:)
and for triangles, one angle or corner he wilbe glad of
to hide him i
                     •
                   after this Booke is out, & brickil & ouen
vp his stinking breath, (which smells like the greasie
snase of a candle) that I maye not come within aleuenteene
score nose length of it. He brings in his coffin to
speake, what a wodden iest is that? An ap
                        •
                     stata, an hipocryte,
a Machauill, a co
                        •
                     sner, a iugler, a letcher hee
makes him, and saies he kept a Cubbe at Peter-house; that
his hospitalitie was like Ember weeke or good Friday: &
if a man should haue writ against Sergius that was the
first setter vp of Mahomet, he could not haue parbraked
more vilenes, than he hath done against him. Vincit
qui patitur he saith (or a great Counseller that giues
that Posie) can vnrip the whole packet of his knauerie,
making him a broker to his se
                     •
                  tcherie. The whole
Quire thankes you hartily. Doctor Perne is caskt vp
in lead, and cannot arise to plead for himselfe: wherefore
this (as dutie to those some way bindes mee that
were somwhat bound to him) I wil commit to inke &
paper in his behalfe. Few men liu'd better, though like

                  
                     〈…〉
                  
but that a chie
                     •
                  e Father of our Common
                     •
                  wealth
lou'd him▪ (in whose house he died) hee

                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
                     •
                  pon the place he had, and for his 
                     〈◊〉
                   &
learning, they that mislike, want the like 
                     〈◊〉
                   a
                     •
                  d 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
or else they would haue more indgement to disc
                     •
                  rne
of it. For Master Li
                        ••
                     te (who is halues with me in
this indignitie that is offred) I will not take the take 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ou
                     •
                   o
                     •
                   his mo
                     •
                  th, for he is better 
                     〈…〉
                  
I am able to say he is able to 
                     〈◊〉
                   himsel
                     •
                  e, a
                     •
                  d
in as much time as hee spendes 
                     •••
                  taking Tobacco 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
w
                     •
                  eke, he can compile that, which would make 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
repent himselfe all his li
                     •
                  e after. With a 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                     ••
                  nt he meanes shortly to bee at his chamber window
for calling him the Fiddlesticke of Oxford. In that
he 
                     •
                  wa
                     •
                  leth, it had bin better to haue confuted Mar
                     •
                  in by

                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   Cooper, than such 
                     〈◊〉
                  ; tell mee why
was hee not then con
                     •
                  uted by Reuerend Cooper, or
made to hold his peace, till Master Li
                        ••
                     te and some 
                     〈◊〉
                  
with their pens drew vpon him? A day after the

                     〈◊〉
                   when he is hangd Haruey takes him i
                     •
                   hand, but

                     〈…〉
                   had beene aliue now, euen as he writ 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
the Cooper, so would hee haue writ
                     ••
                   
                  Harueys
whoope diddle▪
                   or the non-
                        •
                     uting 
                        〈…〉
                     .
I haue a laughing 
                     〈…〉
                  
him saye, hee was once
                        •
                     suspected for Martin
                     •
                  
                  ▪ whe
                     •
                  
there is nere a Pursiuant in England▪ in the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
on his boots, euer thought of him or imputed to him
so much wit. The bangingest thinges which I can

picke out, wherein he hath 
                     •
                  e
                     ••
                  ered Martin or de
                     •
                  ended
Bishops are 
                     •
                  hese: For a pol
                        •
                     shed stil
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     ew goe beyond
Car
                        ••••
                     right; his ray
                        •
                     ing at mee, for speaking against
Beza, the grand Champion against Bishops; his ma
                     ••
                  cious
de
                     •
                  amation of Doctour Perne; where af
                     •
                  er hee
hath polluted him with all the scandale hee could, hee

                     •
                  aies The Clergie neuer wāted excellent fortune-wrights.

                        〈◊〉
                      he was one of the chee
                        •
                     est: as though the Church
of England were vpheld and A
                     •
                  lassed by corruption,
M
                     •
                  chauelisme, apos
                     •
                  atisme, hipocrysie and 
                     •
                  reacherie;
in all these hee making him notorious in the highest

                     〈◊〉
                  , dooth giue out, that he was one of the Churches

                        •
                     heife fortune-wrights: and besides, (to mend the mat
                  
                     ••
                  r)
he asks, VVhat Bishap or Politician in England was
so great a Temporiser as hee? I hope there be some Bis
                     •
                  ops
within the compasse of the two Metrapolitane
Seas, that can fish 
                     〈◊〉
                   a 
                     〈◊〉
                   meaning out of
this word Temporiser, and doo disdaine their high Calling
should be so G
                     •
                  atho
                     •
                  ically compar'd, for such is a
Tem
                        •
                     oriser; and with their profession it stands to bee
no state Po
                     ••
                  ticians, but onely to meddle with the state
of heau'n. Then he hath a tale out of Pontane against
Bishops, for their riding vpon horses, & not asses as Christ
did: aswe
                     •
                   he might restrain them to ride vpon mares,
as Iohn Bale saith our English Bi
                     ••
                  ops wer limitted too
heretofore. Such another tale of a Horse hee hath of
Gelo a Tyrant of 
                     
                        ••
                     cily, whom he 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  the politique
Tyrant, for bringing in his great 
                        〈◊〉
                      instead of a harper,
into his Banquetting
                        •
                     ho
                        •
                     se; to d
                     ••
                  g and stale amongst
his guests. It is a 
                     ••
                  ale 
                     ••
                  inking Apotheg; but Benè
                        •••••
                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      interfectus; (as Vi
                        •
                     ellius said) the sweete sauer of
an enemie slaine takes away the▪ he smell of it.
               
                  More battring engi
                     •
                  s I had in a readines prepared to
shake his walles, which I keepe backe till the next
Tearme, meaning to insert them in my Foure Letters
Con
                        •
                     uted, which then is to be renewed and reprinted againe.
               So be your leaue God be with you I was bold to call in.
Spectatores, the faults escaped in the Printing I wish
may likewise escape you in reading. In the Epistle Dedicatorie
correct Willington and put in Williamson: in
the midst of the Booke vide make vidi: about the latter
end stellified stalified, and Sunius Surius: with as many
other words or letters, too much or too-wanting as ye will.
               The Paradoxe of the Asse, M. Lilly hath wrought vppon,
as also to him I turne ouer the Doctors Apothecarie
tearmes he hath vsed throughout, & more especially in his
last Epistle of notable Contents.
               
               Herewith the Court breakes vp and goes to dinner, all
generally concluding with Traian; The Gods neuer suffer
anie to be ouer-come in battail, but those that are enemies
to peace.
               
                  Tu mihi criminis Author.
               
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   