
      
         
            
            
               
                  
                     ❧A proper newe Ballad, declaring the ſubſtaunce of
all the late pretended Treaſons againſt the Queenes Maieſtie, and Eſtates of this Realme, by
ſundry Traytors: who were executed in Lincolnes-Inne fielde on the 20. and 21. daies of September. 1586.
               
            
            To Wilſons new tune.
            
               
                  WHen firſt the gracious God of heauen, by meanes did bring to light:
               the Treaſons lately practiſed, by many a wicked wight.
               Againſt their Prince whoſe life they ſought, & many a noble Peere:
               the ſubſtance of whoſe treaſons ſtrange, you ſhal moſt truly heare.
            
            
               
                  O Lord preſerue our noble Queene, her Counſaile long maintaine:
               
               
                  Confound her foes and graunt her grace in health to rule and raigne.
               
            
            
               Their Treaſons once diſcouered, then were the Traytors ſought:
               ſome of them fled into a Wood, where after they were caught.
               And being broughte vnto the Tower, for ioye the Belles did ring:
               and throughout London Bonefiers made, where people Pſalmes did ſing
            
            
               
                  O Lord preſerue our noble Queene, &c.
               
            
            
               And ſet their Tables in the ſtreetes, with meates of euery kinde:
               where was preparde all ſignes of ioye, that could be had in minde.
               And prayſde the Lord moſt hartely, that with his mightie hand:
               he had preſerued our gracious Queene, and people of this Land.
            
            
               
                  O Lord preſerue our noble Queene, &c.
               
            
            
               Which thing was taken in good parte, by our renowned Queene:
               who by her Letters gaue them thankes, as playnly may be ſeene.
               Aſſuring them that all her care, was for their ſafetie ſtill:
               and that thereby ſhe would deſerue, their loue and great good will.
            
            
               
                  O Lord preſerue our noble Queene, &c.
               
            
            
               The Traytors well examined, (whom God himſelfe bewrayed:)
               their Treaſons knowne, then were they ſtraight to Weſtminſter conuaied.
               Whereas they all indited were, of many a vile pretence:
               ſeauen pleaded guiltie at the Barre, before they went from thence.
            
            
               The maner how they did begin, herein will playne appeare:
               their purpoſes in each reſpect, you ſhall moſt truely heare.
               Herein vnto you will be ſeene, if they had not bene foylde:
               our Queene, our Realme, yea rich and, poore together had bene ſpoilde.
            
            
               One Sauidge lurking long in Fraunce, at Rheames did there remaine:
               whom Doctor Gifford did perſwade, great honor hee ſhould gaine.
               If that he would goe take in hand, (theſe matters very ſtraunge:)
               firſt to depriue our gracious Queene, Religion for to chaunge.
            
            
               And then for to inuade the Realme, by troupes of foraine power:
               to ouerthrowe the gouernment, and kill her in her Bower.
               Or forceably to diſpoſſeſſe, the Queene of Englands Grace:
               and to proclaime the Scottiſh Queene, and ſet her in her place.
            
            
               Which matter Sauidge promiſed, his full performance too:
               ſo that he might ſee warrant with, ſafe Conſcience ſo to doo.
               The Doctor vowed by his Soule, and bad him vnderſtand:
               it was an honourable thing, to take the ſame in hand.
            
            
               When Sauidge heard that merites were, to him therby ſo rife:
               he vowed for to doe the ſame, or elſe to loſe his life.
               And ſhortly into England hyed, and did imparte the ſame:
               to Babington of Darby ſhire, a man ſure voyd of ſhame.
            
            
               And tolde him how that he had vowed, to doe it or to dye:
               deſiring him of helpe and ayde, and that immeadiatly.
               A Ieſuit Prieſt whom Ballard hight, came ouer to that end:
               he came alſo to Babington, and dayly did attend.
            
            
               Still to perſwade him that he would, attempt and take in hand:
               this vilde and wicked enterpriſe, and ſtoutly to it ſtand.
               And tolde him that he ſhould haue ayde, of ſixtie thouſand men:
               that ſecretly ſhould landed be, and tolde him how and when.
            
            
               And in reſpect of all his paines, he truely might depende:
               that it was lawefull ſo to doe, Renowne ſhould be the end.
               But let all Traytors nowe perceiue, what honor he hath wonne:
               whoſe trayterous head and wicked heart, hath many a one vndone.
            
            
               This proude and hautie Babington, in hope to gaine renowne:
               did ſtirre vp many wilfull men, in many a Shire and Towne.
               To ayde him in this deuiliſh act, and for to take in hand:
               the ſpoyle of our renowned Prince, and people of this Land.
            
            
               Who did conclude with bloodie blade, a ſlaughter to commit:
               vpon her Counſell as they ſhould, within Star Chamber ſit.
               Which is a place wheras the Lordes, and thoſe of that degree:
               yeeldes Iuſtice vnto euery man, that craues it on their knee.
            
            
               Yea famous London they did meane, for to haue ſackt beſide:
               both Maior and Magiſtrates therin, haue murdered at that tide.
               Eache riche mans goodes had beene their owne, no fauour then had ſerued:
               nought but our wealth was their deſire, though wee and ours had ſtarued.
            
            
               Beſides theſe wicked practiſes, they had concluded more:
               the burning of the Nauie and, the cheefeſt Shippes in ſtore:
               With fire and ſworde they vowed, to kill and to diſplace:
               eache Lord Knight and Magiſtrate, true ſubiects to her Grace.
            
            
               They had determinde to haue cloyde, and poyſoned out of hand:
               the cheefe and greateſt Ordinaunce, that is within this Land.
               And did entend by violence, on rich men for to fall:
               to haue their money and their Place, and to haue ſpoild them al.
            
            
               The Common wealth of England ſoone, ſhould therby haue bene ſpoylde:
               our goodes for which our Parents and, our ſelues long time haue toylde.
               Had all bene taken from vs, beſides what had enſued:
               the ſubſtaunce proueth playnely, to ſoone wee all had rewed.
            
            
               Thoſe were the Treaſons they conſpyrde, our good Queene to diſplace:
               to ſpoyle the ſtates of all this Land, ſuch was their want of grace:
               But God that doth protect her ſtill, offended at the ſame:
               Euen in their young and tender yeares, did cut them of with ſhame.
            
            
               Theſe Traytors executed were, on Stage full ſtrongly wrought:
               euen in the place where wickedly, they had their Treaſons ſought.
               There were they hangde and quattred, there they acknowledged why:
               who like as Traytors they had liued, euen ſo they ſeemde to dye.
            
            
               O wicked Impes, O Traytors vilde, that could theſe deedes deuiſe:
               why did the feare of God and Prince, departe ſo from your eyes.
               No Rebelles power can her diſplace, God will defend her ſtill:
               true ſubectes all will loſe their liues, ere Traytors haue their will.
            
            
               How many miſchiefes are deuiſde? how many wayes are wrought:
               how many vilde Conſpyracies againſt her Grace is ſought.
               Yet God that doth protect her ſtill, her Grace doth well preſerue:
               and workes a ſhame vnto her foes, as they doe beſt deſerue.
            
            
               O heauenly God preſerue our Queene, in plentie health and peace:
               confounde her foes, maintaine her right, her ioyes O Lord increaſe.
               Lord bleſſe her Counſaile euermore, and Nobles of this Land:
               preſerue her Subiects, and this Realme, with thy moſt mightie hand.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            The names of thoſe Traitors that were executed on the 20. & 21. daies of September.
            
               Ihon Ballard, a Prieſt.
               Anthonie Babington, Eſquier.
               Ihon Sauidge, Gentleman.
               Robert Barnwell, Gentleman.
               Chidiacke Tichborne, Eſquier.
               Charles Tylney Eſquier & a Pentioner.
               Edward Abington, Eſquier.
            
            
               Thomas Saliſburie, Eſquier.
               Henry Dunn, Gentleman.
               Edward Ihones, Eſquier.
               Ihon Trauers, Gentleman.
               Ihon Charnocke, Gentleman.
               Robert Gage, Gentleman.
               Ierome Bellamie, Gentleman.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, for Edward White.
         
      
   