
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧A memorable Epitaph, made vpon the lamentable complaint of the people of England,
for the death of the right honorable Sir Frauncis Walſingham Knight: principall Secretarie of Eſtate, Chauncellor
of her Maieſties Court for the Dutchy of Lankaſter, and one of her highneſſe moſt honorable priuie Councell.
Who deceaſſed at his houſe in London on the 7. day of Aprill laſt paſt. Anno. Dom. 1590.
            
            
               WHo mournes not for the preſent loſſe that England dooth ſuſtaine?
            Who hath not cauſe this dolefull day, with teares for to complaine?
            And waile the gréeuous want of him, who was a ſpeciall ſtay,
            And perfect piller to the ſtate of England euery way.
            I meane Sir Frauncis Walſingham, a Knight of great account,
            Whoſe wiſedome in a Common wealth, moſt men did ſure ſurmount.
            Of honorable place he was, beloued of Prince and Péeres,
            And founde moſt truſtie to the ſtate of England many yeeres.
            His life too great a loſſe, if Prince with gold might it redreſſe,
            His life ſo déere as none but may with blubbring teares confeſſe,
            That England by his death hath loſt a iewell of ſuch ſtore,
            As in the ſeruice of his place, the like God ſende vs more.
            His want is great and gréeuous too, this no man can denie,
            When Prince and people waile his loſſe with many a wéeping eye.
            The noble Lords of Engliſh ſoyle: and cheefe of Englands Peeres,
            Lament the death of this good Knight, and ſhedde forth trickling teares.
            The ſtates of Scotland and of Fraunce, of Holland and the reſt
            Of the vnited Prouinces, with ſorrow haue expreſt:
            Gone is the cheefe of worthie Knights in whom did wiſedome flowe,
            Gone is Sir Frauncis Walſingham the ſcourge of Englands foe.
            Gone is the man that doubtleſſe was a proppe to Englands ſtate.
            Who pittied euery ſtrangers ſute that came vnto his gate.
            Gone is the Knight that carefull was, all ſutes to ende with ſpeede,
            As did pertaine to the releefe of thoſe that ſtoode in neede.
            Gone is the man that watchfull was for ſafetie of this lande,
            To keepe the Queene and Realme in peace, and treaſon to withſtande,
            Gone is the Knight that did rewarde all men of each degrée,
            That trauel'd ought for Englands good, ſo good a Knight was hee.
            Gone is the man that carefull was our quiet to procure,
            For graue aduiſe and counſell good, we found him firme and ſure,
            The people to of Engliſh ſoyle lament with inward greefe,
            And ſay he was the cheefeſt ſtay and ſtaffe of their releefe.
            They bid farewell vnto this Knight who tendred each mans caſe,
            Founde frée from briberie to his ende: fewe ſuch will come in place.
            
            A perfect zeale to honour good in him did alwaie reſt,
            And true Religion to aduaunce his loue hée ſtill expreſt.
            He hated all Idolatours and popiſh Traytors too,
            He rooted out ſuch wicked weedes as much as he might doo.
            To ſincere Preachers of Gods word, he was a ſpeciall ſtay,
            And in his houſe he maintainde ſuch, to preach Gods word each day.
            Deceite he baniſht from his houſe, fraude lodg'de not in his minde,
            The marks of true and Chriſtian life, in him each one did finde.
            His iudgment floode with iuſtice ſtill, where as his doome was ſette,
            His will was ſtill, each man he had, ſhould pay his vtmoſt debt.
            To priſon he would none commit, but iuſt cauſe he would ſée,
            And what he did was alwaies doone in perfect charitie.
            Which makes each man to wring his hands, & ſighe with inward mone,
            And ſaith in anguiſh of theyr minde, Our cheefeſt ſtay is gone.
            
            Farewell Sir Frauncis Walſingham, that vſurie ſore didſt hate,
            That ſtill didſt good to rich and poore that came vnto thy gate.
            Farewell the comfort of the poore, that to them almes did giue,
            Farewell the ſtay to Souldiers good, while he on earth did liue.
            Farewell the comfort of the Court, and Londons dailie frend,
            Farewell to thee that for the poore thy Letters farre would'ſt ſend.
            Farewell the ſutor for the poore, that ſeldome let thee reſt,
            Farewell the fréend to fatherleſſe and widdowes ſore oppreſt.
            Farewell the care for Countries good, when Corne was priſde ſo hie,
            Farewell the Knight that ſuccourd'ſt thoſe that then were like to die.
            Farewell and thouſand times farewell thou good and worthy Knight,
            That in the cauſe of poore and rich, full many a wrong didſt right.
            Farewell thou good and freendly Kinght to Schollers poore and bare,
            Of Cambridge and of Oxford to, of whom thou hadſt great care,
            Farewell all ſutors ſay, he ſhewed himſelfe moſt kinde,
            He courteouſly would take their plaints and tell them ſoone his mind.
            His Lady wailes, his Daughter weepes, his kinſ-folke ſighing ſits,
            His Seruants waile and wring their hands as folke beſides their wits.
            The rich doo miſſe him euery day, the poore ſhall want him ſtill,
            And many wiſh him now aliue if that it were Gods will.
            But teares ſuffiſeth not at all, let vs aſſured ſtande,
            His ſoule is plaſte in heauen with Chriſt, which ſits on Gods right hand,
            He liued well, and well he died, he made a godly end,
            For to Almightie God his ſoule with zeale he did commend.
            God grant her highneſſe ſtill may haue ſuch carefull members ſtore,
            That ſhée may liue and raigne in peace, in England euermore.
            And graunt that his well gouernd life, a Loadſtone ſtill may be,
            To ſuch as ſhall from time to time ſerue in ſuch high degrée.
            Graunt Lord that they may zealous be the Goſpell to defend,
            And ſhunne for to be couetous, euen till their liues doo end.
            Then ſhall her highnes liue in ioy, and England ſhall be frée,
            From Turke, from Pope, from ſword, from fire, and force of enemie.
            FINIS.
            
               Tho. Nelſon.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Printed for William Wright.
         
      
   