
      
         
            
            
               
                  SPERO
                  CEO. CHALMERS ESQ. F. R. S. S. A.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               A tropoïon Delion, OR, The death of Delia: With the Teares of her Funerall.
            A Poeticall Excuſiue Diſcourſe of our late Eliza.
            
            
               T. N. G.
            
            
               Quis eius oblitus.
            
            
               HONI · SOIT ·:QVI:·:MAL · Y · PENSE:·
               royal blazon or coat of arms
            
            Imprinted at London for W. Iohnes at the ſigne of the Gunne, neare Holborne Conduit, 1603.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Honorable my Lady Anne, Counteſſe of Darbie, now wife to the right Honorable Sir Thomas Fgerton Knight, Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England, and one of his Maieſties moſt honorable priuie Counſell.
            
               RIght Honorable, hauing no meanes at all to make knowne the humble affection I beare vnto your good Ladyſhip, but in putting the patronizing of this my poore paines vpon your Honour: hoping firſt, for the tender loue you boare to the Delia of my ſorrowing, you will deigne both to looke ouer it, & fauour it: next, for the hartie loue (in no little hono. kindneſſe) your La. boare to your humble Seruant my late Vncle Marm. Newton; who in the bitter paines of his death, diſcours'd the bountifull affection your La. boare vnto him, and what loſſe he had ſustaind in looſing ſo good a La. and Miſtris: which corſite inwardly ſo greeued him, that he grew weerie of the World, lamenting to his laſt gaſpe, that he had not time to preferre me to your Ladiſhips fauour, that his former loue towards you, and your three honourable Daughters, dying in him, might liue in mee. And thus hoping that with the remembrance of both, your Ladiſhip will deigne to accept my paines to your fauour, in the ampleſt hope of my deſire.
            
               Your Ladiſhips deuoted in all humilitie,
Tho. Newton.
            
         
         
            
            To the right Honerable my Lady Anne Stanley, Lady St
                     〈…〉
                  g
                     •
                  .
            
            
               
                  A. Siluer flower from your rich orient eyes,
               
                  N. A
                     〈…〉
                  e tricking downe tho
                     •
                  e Alpe
                     •
                   where Beautie keepeth,
               Would more adorne the Tombe where Delia lies;
               Since that a Virgin for a Virg
                     •
                  n weepeth.
               Good Lady from your Heart one thought I craue,
               To th
                     ••
                  ke how poore your Delia lyes in Graue:
               And to weepe a teare, that will not mooue ye
               Infortunate was ſhe, so deare to loue ye:
               But I dare ſweare your eyes haue wept 
                     •
                  ö many,
               That you are not a teare behande with any.
               
                  T. N.
               
            
         
         
            To the right Honorable my Lady Francis.
            
            
               
                  F. Ainting with ſorrow this my youngling Muſe,
               
                  R. Equires as much of you for Delias death:
               
                  A. Teare 
                     〈◊〉
                  : eyes, that are ſorrowes 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               
                  N. Euer drops one, for one ſo deare on earth,
               
                  C. Ould all your teares at once be dry diſtill'd,
               
                  I. Know you would not leaue one drop vnſhead,
               
                  S. O deare you lou'd your Delia, wrapt in lead.
               
                  T. N.
               
            
         
         
            To the right Honorable, my Lady Elizabeth.
            
            
               
                  E. Yes that before her death, did then behold her,
               
                  L. Amentes in flood of teares to looſe their ſeeing,
               
                  I. N yours no leſſe I know, your teares infoldes her:
               
                  S. O heauie beares your heart, her loſſe of beeing.
               
                  A. Dde one (good Lady) more, at my deſire,
               
                  B. Vt for to giue my teares a worthier ſhade:
               
                  E. Lſe ſhall my hopes and paynes with griefe retire,
               
                  T. Hat for your Siſters ſake and yours, were made
               
                  H. Eere with my paynes, my bounden heart I giue,
               
                  E. 
                  
                     •••
                   
                  
                     •
                  o loue a S
                        〈…〉
                     y, whiles I liue.
               
                  T. N.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A POETICALL EXcuſiue Diſcourſe of our late ELIZA.
            
            
               CASTITAS.
               LAte I ſad Angell in an Angels breſt
               Inthroned late in glory, ſtate, and bliſſe,
               But now diſplac't to mourne my throne at reſt,
               I ſee how hrittle ſtate, and glory is:
               My vertuous pride, ſo proude, was neuer ſeene,
               Not ſo preſeru'd from blot, from breath, or ſtaines
               Or euer was ſo rich in any Queene,
               As in this Delia whom I thus complaine:
               No ſtrangers eye but weepes that neuer knew her,
               What then can mine, that neuer lod'ge without her?
               Or what can D
                        ••••
                     
                   ſoules that ſtill did view her?
               Or her chaſt beautious traine that kept about her?
               Ye Nimphs to her link't all like burniſh't amber
               Why let ye death approch her priuy chamber?
            
            
               NYMPHAE.
               MAd in diſpaise (poore ſoules) we ſainting ſtood,
               Arm'd all with blades of hope & ſpeares of praiers,
               Pik't hanging down our haire to ſhed deaths blood
               And drench his forces in a ſea of teares.
               With ſtormes of ſighs we ſtriu'd to weake his ſtrength,
               And fought with earneſt courage on our Knee:
               Yet pale-fac't Hag with creeping dart at length
               Depriu'd v
                     •
                   (wretches) of our Deitie:
               When we awak't, and w
                     •
                  tcht all ſleepie houres,
               That mid-night death eche heauie braine doth couer,
               That end of all vſurping ending powers,
               Rob'd her of life, and vs, who deare did loue her.
               O Lord! why let yee ſuch a one bereaue her,
               That makes vs al diſperſt mourn, weep, & leaue her.
            
            
               
               HEROES.
               Our Wits that euer were imploy'd to keepe,
               Her ſacred perſon ſafe and ſtill ſecure:
               Our Eyes, that now vpon her Hearce do weepe,
               Scarce wink't at all, ſince firſt ſhee ſeem'd vnſure.
               But wandered in our wiſedomes arts, and ſkill,
               To finde a meane, by all the meanes we could,
               Which meane we found, but being mortall ſtill,
               No meane immortall could we finde for gold.
               Wits witleſſe thus, ceaſ'd to proceed in paine: Medium fuit Phiſica.
               
               Eyes, eyeleſſe thus, ceaſ'd to be blinde in ſeeing:
               Heart, heartleſſe thus, ceaſ'd longer to maintaine
               That wrong, which had no helpe on earth a beeing.
               O World! why didſt thou foſter ſuch a foe,
               To be chaſt Delias traytour, Cynthias woe.
            
            
               MVNDVS.
               I Mourne for Delia, for I partly knew her, Regna propria, & Regna aliena.
               
               And partly knew her not; yet wholly mourne,
               The part that knew her well, makes tother rew her,
               And both together, waile to be forlorne.
               For in the ſpacious multitude of me,
               I finde a great defect, though one be ſmall,
               The loſſe of Delias crown'd Virginitie:
               But Delias grace and perſon moſt of all: Terra mortaliti ſubiecta num erum dim inuit c
                        ••
                     lum. 
                        〈◊〉
                      contra.
               
               In this (poore world) I differ from the Skies,
               For they inlarge and neuer breake their number,
               And theſe they w
                     〈…〉
                  , to thrones eternall riſe:
               And th
                     •
                  ſ
                     •
                   I looſe, 
                     〈…〉
                  'd in claye lye vnder:
               O Earth, why did thy wombe beare ſuch a brood
               That thus (remorcelesse) 
                     〈◊〉
                   my Delias blood.
            
            
               TERRA.
               
                  DELIA, ſubiect of the worlde lamenting,
               Was ſuch a glorious iſſue of my wombe,
               In her aboue the reſt, grew my c
                     〈…〉
                  ing,
               
                  
But now the mother and her iſſues tombe: Ad 
                        〈◊〉
                      terra. Humus hum
                        〈…〉
                     .  Ci
                     
                        〈…〉
                     .
               
               Alas too timeleſſe did I bring her foorth,
               Since ſhee too timeleſſe is returnde againe:
               More ioy I tooke to ſee her liuing worth
               Then thus in warpping of my Delia ſlaine:
               Her life, how rich a life was it to many.
               The ſight of her, how rich a comfort bliſtit:
               How then her death, is it not griefe to any?
               Yes, griefe; with croſſe of hopes to them that wiſht it.
               
                  Delos I wayle, and with mine eyes beweepe her,
               That neither thou nor I hadſt tower to keepe her.
            
            
               DELOS.
               IF any place of pleaſure or delight,
               As Garden, Mount, or Vale, by Riuers ſide,
               Had fed her vitall ſpirits, with their ſight:
               Then would not I haue moorn'd, not Delia di'de.
               The whiteſt ſeat Whitehal. I had, my Delia had it,
               The greeneſt Greenwich.Palace of my breſts ſupport,
               The richeſt Mount Richmond.(the richeſt hands had made it)
               Washers, where ſhe did laſtly keepe her Court:
               That time of laſt, would it had neuer beene:
               Then had my late-dead Delia laſted euer.
               For one poore period of Time, my Queene
               And me, doth both in corporate and ſeuer. In corporata mortte. Separata vita
               
               Then woe to thee, O Time for thou doſt wrong vs,
               That wouldſt not lend vs time for her among vs,
            
            
               TEMPVS.
               I Was the Aſ
                     ••
                  liſt that did attend her,
               Weſt to her vitall web, her breathing ſcope:
               I was that Time, againſt my will, did ende her,
               And he that ſet the paſſeleſſe point of hope,
               Along my Snayliſh-iourney as I went.
               I led my Delia in a dextrous hand,
               And hauing traueld farre (
                     〈◊〉
                   laſt a Saint)
               My chaſt companion, wiſh, me take a ſtand,
               
                  
Till ſhe afreſh had gotten breath and winde:
               Now I that had no ioynts to reſt nor bend, Tempus tibiatum ferro in
                        •
                     umile. 
                        〈…〉
                     pedatum Elephantis pedibus.
               
               Conſtraind to trauell, left my Saint behind,
               Els had we trauel'd to our iourneys end.
               Thou fatall Clotho, to my Sacred ſweet,
               Wouldſt not afford her Time, heart, breath, nor feet:
            
            
               CLOTHO.
               I Smoke the Diſtaffe in my boſome faſt
               Whereon my Delias life was wrapt in Flaxe,
               And duely ſate, till many yeeres were paſt
               My Diſtaffe bare and threed ful length was waxt:
               Which threed when firſt my Siſters gan to ſpin it
               How faſt they drew, ſo faſt it rol'd and knotted, Nodi repreſentant miſe
                        •
                     tas tempora ſo
                        •
                     oris. Illum aureum, auream gubernationem. Nodus accumilatus. Vita sincin.
               
               That more their care and paine was to begin it,
               Doubting too timeleſſe breach to it allotted.
               But hauing ſpun a full third part and more,
               The other two it turned all to gold,
               And ſpun not halfe ſo harſh as't did before,
               Till all at laſt vpon a knot it rold.
               So Lacheſis, thy ſpinning and my paine,
               Was but to put on Time, and done in vaine.
            
            
               LACHESIS.
               ALas, had I had ſubſtance whereupon to pull,
               Or where withall to adde vnto her threed,
               My fingers ſhould not wearie, nor mine eies be dull,
               Nor night, nor day from worke lay downe my head:
               For rich was he that might but kiſſe her hand,
               And much eſteem'd, that had her word of praiſe:
               How proud was he, might at her doore but ſtand
               And hold a Polax in her princely dayes?
               Amongſt theſe riches then, how rich was I?
               That had both twiſting, twining of the Clew,
               No greater riches with my Delia die,
               Then whom ſhe lou'd, muſt ſeeke their loue anew.
               Oh had I (Atropos) Flax for her life, Morte moritur amor.
               
               Thou ſhouldſt not only ſpin, but breake thy knife.
            
            
               
               ATROPOS.
               SO Angel-like, immortall-ſeeming Saint,
               The tract of her moſt chaſt and proſperous life,
               Did make the worldings thinke that ſcarce conſtraint
               Could bring her Threed once vnder yoake of knife.
               I cannot chuſe but mourne, her death, their griefe,
               Shee did ſo loue them: they no leſſe deſeru'd it.
               And held her next to Joue; on Earth for chiefe:
               Her as her loue, and loue as her preſeru'd it.
               If Clotho's Diſtaffe had been ſtill ſupplide,
               And Lachesis ſmall Fingers ſpinning longer:
               My Knife ſhould ſtill haue hung cloſe by my ſide,
               And neither edge nor poynt toucht threed, nor wrongd her,
               But Nature, thou art ſhe that would't not giue
               Subſtaunce of life, to make my Delia liue.
            
            
               NATVRA.
               WHen firſt my curious Penſill did purtraie
               The pure compoſed limbes of Delia's forme;
               Mee thought my fingers ſtriued to aſſaie
               A worke immortall, not terreſtriall borne,
               And hauing brought it to a full perfection,
               The very Gods deſcended downe to see,
               Their next celeſtiall ſhape, with ſuch affection:
               It pleaſ'd them ſo, they would haue robbed mee.
               But I more glorying in my labour taken,
               Grew iealous of the ſame, the whiles 'twas mine:
               Since when, my worke it ſelfe had me forſaken, Aditus eius in mundum
               
               The Gods haue ſeeted her in heauen to ſhine:
               
                  Death was the fatall meſſenger that croſt her,
               Shee hauing ſpent my ſtrength, I hauing loſt her.
            
            
               MORS.
               I Was that fatall executioner
               That gaue that fatall ſtroke of Delia's death:
               I alſo was that fatall Meſſenger
               That brought this fatall newes into the Earth.
               
                  
I was that theefe which ſtole into her chamber; Mors eſt vltimus morſus.
               
               And first that made her ſaint, the Nymphes to wonder:
               I was that traytour which did feare no danger
               For acting treaſon to be rent aſunder:
               Yet what I did, was by the Gods agreed,
               And not by me, but by the Powers aboue her; Mors non habet eſſentiam & nihil aliud eſt nisi actio deo
                        •
                     um
               
               They, not my dart, had made your Delia bleed;
               But for to make her know how they did loue her:
               A Quier of Angels did diſcend beneathe,
               To take her vp to heauen, too good for earthe,
            
            
               ANGELI.
               CEaſe Nymphes with teares to ouercharge your eies,
               For Delia, weepes not now, that ſhe hath left ye,
               Comfort your ſelues in earth for ſhe in skies,
               Comforted by them, which late bereft ye,
               So many yeeres the Gods did let ye keepe her,
               In tender loue for to ſupport your peace,
               But being gone, it naught auailes to weepe her.
               Shee now enioyes a crowne of longer leaſe:
               Let this ſuffice how looth ſhe was to part,
               So long as ſhe had tongue, hand, eye or breath,
               Till when our Quire of Angels tooke her heart,
               Shee then bid welcome ioyes, and farwell earth.
               Where once ech ſoule his Delias ſoule ſhall ſee,
               Crow'd in another kinde of Maieſtie.
            
            
               FAMA.
               BRight heauens, you that enioy our Delias ſoule,
               And death with Death that cauſd our Ladies moorne 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      eſt 
                        〈◊◊◊◊◊◊〉
                     .
               
               That did the wiſedome of our lords controule,
               And ſtriu'd againſt all Synthus power in ſcorne,
               Know this that Fame immortall is on earth,
               As you in heauen, and will not looſe her ſo:
               You haue her ſubſtance: I a God beneath,
               Will keepe the ſubſtance of her life to ſhew,
               
                  
I haue her ſhape drawne in as liuely die,
               As if my Delia were her ſelfe in being:
               And that's her Delias ſelfe vnto my eye,
               I need no other Delia for my ſeeing:
               And yet me thinkes ſhee not in heauen eſsign'de,
               So plaine I keepe her Trophey in my minde.
            
            
               I Haue in writing Golden Pens to prayſe her,
               In dateleſſe Volumes of the ſiluer ayre,
               The very ſtile ſo loftie high ſhall raiſe her,
               That Time ſhall be too ſhort to teare her haire:
               Wherein ſhall firſt her Chaſtitie be writ
               As pure in Picture as it ſelfe was pure:
               Next her Religion, Loue, her Arte and Wit Fuit caſta. Religioſa vera. Sit viuens Fama mortua corpore viuans anima.
               
               So faire, that Delias life may ſtill endure,
               Then Synthus thinke thou haſt thy Delia euer:
               The Heauens do keep her ſoule, thou keep'ſt her life,
               Which life (I vow) from thee ſhall neuer ſeuer,
               Nor ſubiect bee to Fates Atropian knife
               Take this to wipe thy bleared eyes againe,
               Her life is thine, though Heauen her ſoule containe.
            
            
               CASTIT AS.
               AT length to Church I brought my Delia's Hearſe,
               Blindfolded (for my eyes were blinde with crying)
               And all a long the way in howling verſe,
               I ſung a Dirge vnto her vtmoſt dying:
               The Birdes aboue, while I did ſing beneath,
               With heartleſſe yeelping fil'd the ſiluer ayre,
               Ne with a ſhriller Quier then Ion earth,
               For all I ſob'd, I howl'd, and rent my haire:
               But then to helpe my Song my Delias Singers,
               (I meane her boyes new turn'd to Blacke from Red,
               Like Lambs by Uthers nurſ'd, with Orpheus fingers)
               Mixt teares with Notes to ſee her buried:
               
                  
And to be chang'd to clay, her Robes from gould,
               Her princely Guard to Woormes, her bed to mould.
            
            
               NYMPHAE.
               NOw hath Attendance done the laſt commande,
               That loue or duetie to our Delia ought:
               It need not watch her call, or ſlender hand:
               The one is mute, the other waſtes to nought.
               Now are our Reuels and our dauncing ſport,
               Turnde all to ſighes, each one to priuate plaine:
               Now Delia can no more remooue her Court,
               The Graue's her Pallace, and the woormes her traine
               Shee is arrayde in Robes, in Pearle, in Stone:
               But not ſo rich as ſhe was wont to bee:
               For why; ſhee lackes vs Ladyes euery one,
               The worſt her ſelfe, ſhee lackes as well as wee:
               Her Robes are ſullen, ſuch as Earth containe:
               Her Stones vnpolliſh't, Pearle, Earthes ſinking raine.
            
            
               HEROES.
               OVr eyes did now behold their laſt beholding
               Of Delias ſhape, wrapt in obſcuritie:
               Till that the crummie Earth her corpes infoulding,
               Had blinded vs with his condenſitie:
               Returning then our thoughtes, began to paint
               Her lyuelie ſhape with new rememberaunce:
               And comming to her face, a new Complaint
               Grew, thinking on ſo ſweete a countenaunce,
               That then we thought we had a new to make
               Both mourning veſtmentes, teares, graue, hearſe and all:
               For Delia ſeem'd a new in life to wake,
               When was but done a new her Funerall.
               A griefe vnto vs all, to them moſt wretched,
               To whom our Deliaes loue and bountie ſtretched.
            
            
               PHISICI.
               With Chaſtitie the Nimphes and noble Peeres,
               Out ouer-weeried Wittes and drowſie Eyes,
               
                  
Reſtles retires with droughtleſſe ſpring of teares,
               To thinke how Delia in a colde bed lyes:
               We thought our Arte would haue preſeru'd her euer,
               But now we ſee his pureſt power and ſtrength
               Was but for to prolong, (and not deliuer)
               Her life, which death did ouercome at length:
               No truſt we put in Phiſicks Arte at all
               But this; when alwayes we began to make it,
               For life no more to be effectuall,
               Till when her ſtomacks ſtrength did faile to take it:
               Which weekeneſſe finding in her vitall vaines,
               Then ended ſhe her life, and we our paines.
            
            
               Sepulchrum CASTITATI Loquens.
               HEnce from my mouth, and waſt no more thy teares:
               No teares preuaile to take my Delia from me:
               No ſighs can make my breaſt that thee vp-reares
               Diſſolue in two; with kneeling thus vpon me:
               But to the greene-graſſe ſprouted hilles be winging,
               Where pleaſure doth releaſe the time of ſorrow,
               And where in pleaſure ſorrow ſits a ſinging,
               When one ſad ſoule anothers breſt doth borrow:
               There make a Chaplet of the ſweeteſt flowers,
               That prettie pinked Groue or Dale doth yeeld:
               There ſhade thy temples in thoſe templed bower:
               That canopize the haunters of the field:
               And round about thee in the Springing Meedes,
               The Swaynes will finger Ditties to their reedes.
            
            
               OR els, gird Bow and Quiuer to thy ſide,
               And run with Cynthia in the Pheboone-parke,
               To ſeeke the Hart where he his head doth hide,
               With bended Bow whiles chopping Talbots barke
               That after Midday-heat ſome Willow vnder
               You may betake your ſelfe to bathe and waſh
               In ſome cleare ſpring kept coole with ſuch an number
               
                  
That none may ſee you nak'd to ſport and daſh,
               Thou may'ſt be happie, that in Bruiuses ſnow,
               Thy ſlight was not decree'd nor Delias death,
               On euery twigge a thouſand pleaſures graue,
               That now a Heauen doth ſcarce reſemble Earth:
               Leaue kneeling teares, bid farewell Court & trayne,
               For them thou knowſt not when to ſee againe.
            
            
               Sepulchrum NYMPHIS, Loquens.
               AS her I haue diſmi'ſt, ſo muſt I you:
               Nought can releaſe your Queene my armes muſt keepe her,
               No ſad ſubmiſsion though you bend and bow,
               Are ought of force to make ye more be-weepe her:
               Binde vp your haire,, wipe both your cheekes and eyes,
               Leaue wringing, kneeling, thumping of my breſt,
               Enuie not me, though in me, Delia lyes.
               For ſhee contented, giues her ſelfe to reſt,
               For I am night, and bed, her life was day,
               Wherein courſ'd and recourſ'd her cares of minde,
               Which wearied her at laſt: but I for aye
               Am that ſweete reſt, wherein ſhee reſt doth finde:
               O Nymphs! for Delia, why ſo much complaine yee?
               Doubtleſſe as good a Queene will entertaine yee.
            
            
               Sepulchrum HEROIBVS Loquens.
               ASſemble now no more for Conſultation:
               (I meane, for Delias ſafetie, life, and ſtate)
               I take vpon me now her preſeruation,
               All wits extending duetie comes too late:
               You haue committed her vnto my keeping,
               Shee is my priſoner, I am her Gaole,
               The debt's ſo great, that neither gold nor weeping,
               Nor all the world beſide, can be her baile,
               Bondage is iudg'd to be her puniſhment,
               Death officer to execute her woe:
               For Time perpertuall impriſonment,
               Perpetuall to earth, to Heauen not ſoe,
               
                  
For Ioues ſweete Mercurie, will from her tombe,
               Releaſe your Delia at the day of Doome.
            
            
               Vermes MEDICIS Loquens.
               YOu that by Art procure the eaſe of man
               With ſhort abridgement of continuance,
               T'is ſhort you ſee for not beyond a ſpanne,
               The greateſt Prince of all you can aduance:
               Your eaſe is waſting eaſe, and Nature ſpendeth,
               Perchance you'le ſay it addes vnto the breath;
               Not ſo in age, for then it but beſriendeth
               The heart, to bring it to a pleaſant death:
               For now your labours vaine, you ſee at laſt,
               The leafes and Rules of Gallen lies at reſt,
               And now when all your hope is dead and paſt,
               No more you ſearch to finde Probatum eſt.
               
               Now what's your art in power, ne all you haue,
               Cannot preſerue her bodie in the Graue.
            
            
               FOr whats her body now, whereon ſuch care
               Was ſtill beſtow'd in all humilitie?
               Where are her robes? is not her body bare,
               Reſpectles in the earths obſcuritie?
               Now where's her glory and her Maieſtie?
               Her triple crowne, her honour, ſtate, and traine?
               Are not her riches all in pouertie,
               And all her earthly Gloryes paſt and vaine, Aequalitas morta
                        •
                     itatis inter Reges & pauperes eſt in morte & poſt mortem.
               
               Now where are all her cates, her glorious diſhes,
               That were by death of ſundry creatures ſpread,
               Her Fowles, her fat Quadrupidiſts and Fiſhes,
               Are they not liuing, now your Delias dead?
               And we in life too filthy for her tooth,
               Are now in death the next vnto her mouth.
            
            
               
               With that the greedy wormes their heads ſhrunk down
               The graue ſhut cloſe her heauie brooken ground,
               And crawling crept vnto hee liueleſſe crowne
               Much like to Flyes about a bleeding wound,
               Then all her Mourners eyes were vailde and blinde,
               They weepe not now with paſsion of the ſight,
               But with a true remembrance of the minde
               They meane to mourne their Delia day and night:
               Thence they returne, where Delis helpleſſe lyes,
               Each one betakes him to a priuate place
               To wipe the teares of ouer delug'd eyes,
               Inſtead of her to welcome ſuch a Grace;
               As all the Boundes of Europe, ne the Earth,
               Affords a wiſer Prince of greater Birth,
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            In laude Authoris.
            
               PASSE foorth, pure 
                     •
                  em, to Subiects cenſuring,
               And what thy vertue yeelds, let Subiects read,
               Free is thy heart from falſe diſſembling,
               For which; thrice happie, in ſo bleſt a deed:
               Small is thy port, yet with rich Trueth art grac't,
               And zealous Trueth in higheſt Heauens is plac't:
               VVhere ſhe (great Empreſſe) euer ſinging liueth,
               (Before his chriſtal Thron, which al good giueth)
               More white than Snow, free'd from infirmitie,
               Crown'd with pure Lawrell of Eternitie;
               Many haue writ ſad Elegies of woe:
               But theſe true Mourners with her Funerall goe.
               
                  I: O: St. G.
               
            
            
            
            
         
      
   