
      
         
            
            A TRVE AND FAITHFVLL RELATION, PRESENTED TO HIS MAIESTIE AND THE PRINCE, of what hath lately happened in Constantinople, concerning the death of Sultan Osman, and the setting vp of Mustafa his Vncle.
            
            
               Together with other memorable occurrents worthy of obseruation.
            
            Imprinted at London for Bartholomew Downes, and are to be sold at his house neere Fleet-bridge, and in Popes head Alley, by William Sheffard. 1622.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE DEATH OF SVLTAN OSMAN, AND THE SETTING VP of Mustafa his Vncle.
            
               THe Grand Signior Sultan Osman discontented since his disgrace in Poland, as soone as he came to Constantinople, pretended a iourney vpon the Emir de Saida, who was reported to bee in Rebellion, hauing taken Armes to other ends. But being diuerted from this purpose by the great instance of the Viziers, and that it would not so well serue his secret designes, because he must then keepe an Army on foote; he gaue out that he would visit Mecha, the tombe of his false Prophet.
            To make this voyage the more secure, in apparance, he seemed content to accept of any Treatie with the Polacks, euen to conditions

               
both of disaduantage and dishonour; for his estates in Hungary, he reenforced the frontiers with diuers troopes, and though hee were much troubled at the league betweene the Emperor of Germany and Bethlem Gaber, yet hee dissembled it so, as that he would not displease the Transiluantan, but rather offered new succors, and forbearance of his Tribute. From the incursions of the Cossacks, he hoped to assure himselfe, by the treatie of the Poles, and in occasion of breach, he had the Tartars ready to requite them (it being both their trades to liue vpon spoyle and robbery) and for more security he appoynted twenty Gallies to keepe the blacke Sea. The common people and Uiziers that loued rest, and knew not the designe, were much troubled and discontent at this iourney, who made many Remonstrances to him of the inconuenience and danger to leaue the seate of his Empire to the trust of a Deputy, in a time when Bethlem Gaber was newly reconciled to the Germane Emperour, and therefore not to be trusted, and the Polacks newly reconciled to him, and therefore to bee mistrusted. Diuers other reasons were made to him, many Petitions deliuered from the Church-men,

Lawyers, and from all estates. But Melancholike reuenge had wholy possessed him, so that by no meanes he could be perswaded to desist. The Soldioury pasted so farre, as to threaten publikely, and to protest, they would not follow, but rather set vp another King in his absence that should stay among them. In conclusion, carried by his owne fate to destruction, the seuenth of May hauing first commanded away all his Gallies to the Leuant, and thereby disposed away many of his Souldiers, he began to passe ouer his Tents and Pauilions to Asia side, with great quantities of Treasure: The Ianizaries and Spahees, who had also secret intelligence vpon the King, his owne words and actions betraying some further designe then a Pilgrimage (for he made preparations to carry away all his Iewels and Treasure, euen defacing his Palace, and taking from Churches, and his Wardrobes, whatsoeuer could bee conuerted to Bullion) suddainely met at the Hippodrome in the Citty vpon a word giuen; and from thence ranne to the Seraglio in tumult, but without Armes, and there according to their barbarous mutinies cried out for the King (hauing first taken order to stop the

passage of anything vpon the water) who appearing to them, asked what this insolency meant, and what they pretended. They then by the mouth of a multitude (for they had no head but that of the monster) demanded first that he should not proceed in his purpose to goe to Mecha nor into Asia, but that he must abide in the Cittie; Secondly, they would haue deliuered to their fury the great Uizier de-lauir Bassa, the Hoia or Confessor of the King, the Cashariaga gouernour of the women, the Tefterdar or Treasorer, the Caddee Leskar, or Chiefe Iustice, and some others, as enemies to the State, and consenting to this Voyage, which they pretended would be the ruine of the Empire. The first, after a little dispute, the King granted vnto them; promising to giue ouer his iourney, but they not content, exacted it in writing. To the second he replied that it was dishonour to him to haue his Seruants so vsed without order of Iustice: but perswaded them to haue patience to stay vntill Saterday, the next Diuan or publike Councell, where they should all appeare, and if they were found culpable, they should receiue punishment; not meaning to performe any of this, but to get

time and allay their present fury. These fellowes not content with this moderate answer, vndertooke to know that they were guilty, and therefore that they needed no other witnesse, trials, nor Iudge, but themselues, and with extreme clamour called to haue them deliuered. But the King refusing to giue them any other satisfaction, and they vnprepared for force, returned into the Cittie, which now was all in feare, euery house and shop shut vp, expecting a generall sacke. But they followed the way of their owne hatred, and first went vnto the house of the Hoia, which they brake and pillaged: but not finding him, they proceeded to the great Uiziers, who made some defence, and (they being vnarmed) beat them off; and so they separated being now euening, but yet kept a Guard in some parts of the Towne.
            This night the King made an attempt to send ouer to Asia side, but was preuented; and to fortifie and defend his Seraglio, which is walled strongly about, and hath alway in it of household Seruants about three thousand, but it seemes no man would Arme in his cause: For the next morning the Mutiners assembled

againe, and taking their Armes, went first to the Mofti, or Arch-priest among them, and forced him and diuers others to accompany them to the Court, where they anew demaunded these men, but with more instance and fury. In the meane time the Hoia, Caddee Leskar, and Tefterdar fled, and were yet neuer heard of. The Uizier retired to the King, and perswaded him earnestly to goe ouer in person in his owne boates (which from his Garden hee might easily doe) to Asia, and there to take Horse, and he would secure him from all perill; but the King would not mooue, bidding him stay confident and assured that he would punish these Rebels.
            The wise old man seeing this constancy or obstinacy, desired leaue to shift for himselfe, which he either tooke or obtained, and so got away to the Hermitage of a Saint renowned amongst them, who (like himselfe) betrayed him to a Captaine of the Ianizaries; yet did him the fauour as not to deliuer him to the multitude, but carried him backe to the Kings house. At this time it was disputed in the Seraglio about the deliuerie of these Officers, the Emperour refusing, the Rebels clamouring

and threatning, in somuch as he began to feare they would breake in, and in their rage doe worse then was yet pretended. Whereupon, whether by the Kings order, or by his owne consent (willing to be the peace-offering) the Uizier went out to them, and with a good assurednesse demaunded what they sought of him, and wherein he had offended: But they answered him with their swords, and suddainely cut him in pieces.
            The Emperour seeing their fury so outragious, had now more cause to doubt, and retired himselfe then too late, when hee had lost his braue Counsellor, would haue fled into Asia, and could not, but conueyed himselfe into a priuate place prepared by his Bustengi Bassa, or chiefe Gardiner. The Rebels continue without in their madnesse, asking for the King, and for more sacrifices. But the Seruants protesting they knew not where he was, they said they must haue a King, and if hee would not appeare, they would make another; and hauing a while attended, they resolued to enter the Palace (but first tooke a generall oath not to sacke the Imperiall Throne, which they called their house and their honour) and there

seeking for the King, not able to finde him, they extorted by confession the Caslariaga, and slew him, and then they demanded for Mustafa, Vncle to Osman, by him formerly deposed, a man esteemed rather holy (that is franticke) then wise, and indeed fitter for a Cell, then a Scepter. The King the first day of this tumult had put Mustafa into a vault with two Negro women, without bread or drinke, in which estate these new Electors found him almost naked, & halfe pined. At first sight, he thought they had bin the messengers of death: but that feare passed ouer, he begged of them a cup of water. Whom they tooke, and instantly proclaimed their Emperour, which he was loth to accept, vti pudebat aucti nominis; How vnstable are the estates of the greatest Princes. Quem dies videt veniens iacentem, hunc vidit dies fugiens regnantem; He that was now in the Iawes of death, naked, starued, and dying for thirst, is become the Emperour, and may drinke gold, or the blood of men.
            They as yet not knowing what was become of Osman, and loth to trust Mustapha in the Palace, carried him in triumph to the old Seraglio, and there left him, departing to the

sacke of the Viziers house, and so in the euening to their Rendeuous, where they kept both good guard, and good order in the Cittie from fires and other Insolencies. Sultan Osman amazed with these newes, so soone as they had left the Court, came out, and called to Councell in the night, Huzein Bassa, late Uizier in the Polish warre, and the Aga of the Ianizaries, both faithfull to him, and demanded their aduice, first, hauing sent to the old Seraglio, to practise the women there, to strangle Mustafa; but some taking his part, a new vprore began in the house betweene that sexe: and the Souldiers that kept watch, taking the Alarum, entred in, and rescued him, and from thence remoued him to the Chambers of the Ianizaries, where they garded him for that night, in an ill lodging. All this while Osman consults what course to take. These two his friends, and some others, tell him that the case was desperate, and could not be cured but by a desperate remedy. And therefore they agreed that the Aga should goe and perswade with the Mofti, and that the King in the morning should suddainely present himselfe to the Souldiers at their owne dore, and make experience,

what his Presence, his submission, and his beneuolence promised could worke, to moue them to Loyalty, or compassion; which counsell early in the morning they put in practice. The King accompanied with the Mofti (who neuer consented to his deposing, though he fauoured the Souldiers against the Vizier) with Huzein Bassa, and about twelue Horse-men, went directly to the Ianizaries Colledge where Mustafa was kept, and there in teares made them an Oration, offring great recompence, repenting of his errour, and finally inuoked them by the merits of his father and all his Ancestors to haue some pittie vpon their true Master. The multitude (tam prona in misericordiam, quam immodica saeuitiâ fuerat) now knew not what to do; a silent murmure ran among them, and they were halfe conuerted: But the Aga of the Ianizaries, thinking to merit of the King, and beginning to plead vnseasonably for him, with some harsh words of vpbraidure, vt natura Maris omni flatu ventiturbida, anew moued their furie, so that they creid out Treason, and fell vpon him and Huzein Bassa, and cut them into pieces, euery man taking a part of their flesh to satiate their reuenge.

The Mofti would speake, but is withdrawne by some, for respect to his place, and with difficulty is conueyed away. Now the poore Osman sees his friends slaine, and knowes not which way to conuert himself, but binding vp his eyes with a napkin, expects death as the last of their furie; But they carrie him first before Mustafa, and accuse him as the disturber of the Peace of the Empire, and demand sentence against him, more vulgi suum quisque flagitium alits obiectantes. The forsaken Prince pleads for life, and the new King knowes not how to condemne, but nods and agrees to all that is propounded. At last they consult with themselues, and put him vpon an horse (an insolent Spahee changing Turbants with him) and sent him away prisoner to the seuen towers vnder good guard, and then returned to their new Master, and placed him in the Seraglio and Imperiall Throne, where hee hath neede to haue good broths and nourishment to restore his decayed body.
            The Souldiers thinke all is done, and (onely sacking the houses of Huzein Bassa and some others their conceiued enemies) returne in quiet to their seuerall lodgings, and haue no

further malice. But the new Uizier Daout Bassa, made by Mustafa, knew well, if Osman liued, that this storme might passe ouer, and hee would as easily and by the same meanes returne to his estate, as he fell from it, Uulgus vt mos est, cuiusque noui motus cupidum. Therefore he consulted with some few interessed in Mustafaes preferment, and thereby obnoxious to Osman, to search how many of the Royall blood were left aliue, and resolued if there remained two, to make an end of Osman. Two of his brothers were found, the one about twelue, the other about seuen yeeres of age: and thereupon the Uizier went himselfe to the prison with a packe of hangmen, and gaue order to strangle the vnfortunate Prince: who now hauing had no rest in two nights, and thinking himselfe secure for a season, was newly falne asleepe: but awaked by the comming of these Messengers, asked what newes, saying he did not like their suddaine intrusion. They at first stood amazed, and the King made shew to defend himselfe; but a strong knaue strooke him on the head with a Battle-axe, and the rest leaping vpon him, strangled him with much adoe. Thus one of the greatest Monarkes in

the world, is first affronted by mutined troops, his owne slaues, almost vnarmed, and few in number, no man taking vp a sword to defend him: and they who began this madnesse, not meaning to hurt him, by the increase of their owne furie, which hath no bounds, depose him against their owne purpose, and at last expose his life against their will, to the counsels of other men, whom they equally hate. And now they mourne for their dead King, as freshly as they raged vnreasonably, knowing they haue stayned their honour, being the first of their Emperours they euer betrayed, and that they haue set vp another that in all likelyhood they must change for disability: Nonunquam tulit documenta sors maiora, quam fragile loco starent superbi.
            
            This is the last act of the life of Sultan Osman: but his intents and great designes, which drew vpon him this fatall blow, I suppose will not bee vnworthy the communication, the practices, reasons, secrets and counsels of all actions being the soule of history, and res gestae but the bare carcasse: and I am perswaded, as many ages haue not produced so strange an example of the incertainty of humane greatnesse;

so in the disposition thereof, and in the waies leading thereunto, there is seene euidently the wonderfull prouidence of God, in confounding of the counsels of the worldly wise, who had laid a foundation of new greatnesse, whereby he aspired the vniuersall Monarchy, ambitious of the honour of Traian, in whose time the decayed Empire was said primum mouere lacertos & senectutem Imperit, quasi reddita iuuentute reuiuiscere. And lastly, the world may see vpon how weake foundations this Monarchy was at first builded, but it is now shaken and corrupted; how their Kings are subiect to the rage of a few Slaues, how Anarchy hath prepared it an easie prey to any able hand, that would attempt it. From the Inuasion of Poland all these changes tooke their beginning. Sultan Osman aduanced to the Throne in his youth, full of heate and blood, being of a great and haughty spirit, very couragious, strong of body, and a mortall hater of Christians, enuious of the glory of his Ancestors, and ambitious to raise his name aboue any of theirs, had proiected in himselfe the Conquest of the remaines of the bordering Europe. But to so great designes he had one vice that resisted

all hope of prosperity, which was extreme auarice, and he fell into the latter times and decrepit age, vbi vires luxu corrumpebantur, contra veterem disciplinam & instituta maiorum, apud quos virtute quam pecunia res militaris melius stetit. His first enterprize was that of Poland, mooued by the incursions of the Cossacks, which yet hee vndertooke of his owne head, without the counsell of any his Uiziers (who in a Monarchy growne to the height by ease and wealth, & perhaps longa dominatione inertes, are euer corrupt and lazie) and against the liking of all the Souldiers, who now contrary to their institution being married, and fathers of a family, entred into trades, receiuing nothing in warre more then in peace, praeter periculaet labores, are not easily drawne from their owne chimneies. This action he thought so easie, as he had disposed of his conquest, and deuided the liue Lyons skinne. But being met vpon the borders with a poore Army in comparison, he was first arrested at Chotyn a little fortresse, which he was faine to leaue behind him vntaken; And then seeking to aduance into the plaine countrey, by forcing the trenches of the Chancellor of Poland opposed against him,

he could neuer procure his Ianizaries to fight, though engaging his person once or twice beyond the regard of his quality, and his own Troopes ready to mutine against him, or to forsake him, he was at last enforced to raise shamefully his Campe, and to accept of any treatie to saue his outward honour. In this attempt he lost aboue 100000. horses for want of fodder, and 80000. men for want of fighting: for they would rather die, running, or pillaging, or eating, then in the face of the enemie. For this disgrace he cōceiued so inward and rooted an indignation against the Ianizaries, and so iustly, that he often lamented himselfe, and complained hee was no King, that was subiect to his owne slaues, vpon whom he spent great treasures, and yet they would neither fight in warre, nor obey in peace, without exacting new bounties and priuiledges. Delauir Bassa a man of great wit and courage, lately called from the Easterne parts, where he had long gouerned with honour, who came in, though late, yet in a very braue and warlike equipage, aboue all other his Captaines, was suddainely made great Uizier, the former Huzein Bassa being in the same disgrace,

common with the souldier, though not in the same fault. This man was neuer bred at Court, but had liued many yeeres in Action, and so had neither faction nor dependance here, but stood vpon himselfe and his owne merit: And being now vnlooked for, and aduanced to this high dignitie, he wrought vpon the Kings discontent, and nourished it: and in conclusion, brake with him, that it was true, he was no Emperour, nor could be safely aliue, while the Ianizaries had the power which they lately vsurped: Informing him, that they were corrupted from their ancient Institution, & were lazie Cowards, giuen ouer to ease and lust, et animo per libidines corrupto, nihil honestum inerat. But if this Maiestie would pull vp his spirits, and follow his aduice, he would prouide him a new Souldioury about Damascus, and from the Coords, of men euer bred in the frōtier, hardnes, and warre, of great courage and experience, and that of them he should erect a new Militia, that should wholy depend of him, entertaining onely 40000. in pay, which should alway be his Guard, and that in the distribution of euery Prouince, he should constitute that the Beghler begh in his Gouernement should

traine some of the Inhabitants, who in all occasions of making a great Army, should bee in readinesse, and hereby he should spare infinite treasures spent vpon these Drones that eate vp his estate; And with men of new spirits and hopes, he should bee enabled to doe greater matters, then any of his Ancestors: but withall he desired the King to communicate this counsell to no man, nor to trust his life vpon anothers secrecy. Delauir Bassa neuer reueling himselfe to any but the King, who extremely pleased with this aduice, that flattered his owne humour, consented, and remitted all to the Uiziers direction, who was a true souldier, and a very wise man, able by his credit in Asia, to performe all hee had vndertaken: for hee was exceedingly beloued in those parts, very rich, and had kept Damascus, whereof he was Gouernour, for himselfe in the last rebellion. Vpon this conclusion betweene them, it was first agreed, that the king should pretend to goe in person against the Emir de Zaida, who was moued to take Armes really to assist in the designe: but they vsed it, to colour the departure of the Emperour; which when it was welwaighed, itwas found, that then

the Armie of the Ianizaries must be kept together, which could not agree with their ends. Hereupon the iourney of Mecha was divulged, that the King might, vnder the shadow of an holy pilgrimage, goe out with a small trayne, and disperse those who were suspected to him. And for this, preparation was made, but somewhat to grosely, by melting of all the Plate, Saddles, Furniture of house, Lamps of Churches, and whatsoeuer could more easily bee conueyed away in metall, with all the Iewels and Treasurie. This gaue the first suspicion, which was confirmed by diuers vnaduised words let fall from the King, of disdaine against the cowardize of the Ianizaries, and that hee would shortly finde himselfe souldiers that should whippe them; and lastly, dismissing all his houshold, except some few elect, the discontented obserued and betraied him. Delauir Bassa kept his owne secret, and in the meane time prepared by his friends in Asia 10000. about Damascus, 10000. from the Coords, besides those in readinesse of the Emir de Zaida, and all vpon pretence of defending the borders of Persia, who hauing Intelligence of some change in those parts; And

gaue order that all these should meete the King at Damascus, where he would presently cut off his Guard and stay there, vntill he had regulated his new Army, and Discipline, and then to returne triumphant to Constantinople, and vtterly roote out the order of Ianizaries, Spahees and Timariots, and to exauctorate all their Captaines and officers to settle a new gouernement, and to change the name of the Citty. And these things succeeding, hee then resolued vvith his new Souldiers to attempt the recouery of his honour in Christendome: in the meane time to hold a dissembled friendship there in all parts. Certainely this was a braue and well-grounded designe, and of great consequence for renewing of this decayed Empire, languishing vnder the insolencies of lazie slaues, if God had not destroyed it: It being very true, that the Turkish Emperour stands at the deuotion of his owne troopes for peace or warre, life or death, and is in effect nothing but the Steward or Treasurer of his Ianizaries. If this proiect had taken effect, what euents it might haue produced by a Ciuill Warre, is not easie to iudge. For doubtlesse, the Souldioury here would

haue set vp another King, and maintayned him as well as they could, and this European part had beene in danger to haue beene torne away by the diuision. Besides, Delauir Bassa hauing the King and the Treasurie in his possession, and his owne credit so great, and his inclination velle imperare once discouered, it may well bee thought that hee had some ends of his owne to share a part of this mighty estate: If on the other side the Uizier had prooued true and faithfull, the reformation and new erection of the Discipline of Warre, and the increase of Treasure consequent to the dismission of the old Militia, would haue beene fearefull to all Christendome: But, Ubiest sapiens? Ubi disquisitor saeculi haius? Nonne infatuauit Deus sapientiam mundi huius? Perdam sapientiam sapientum, & vanam reddam intelligentiam intelligentium. It is a great question whether is the wiser wish, that these Counsels had succeeded or not: for either diuision and subuersion, or a new prosperity and enlargement of their Dominion had necessarily followed.
            Some obseruations vpon this occasion, will not be very impertinent to those that desire

to know as well the disposition and vse, as the things themselues. First, in the purpose of the Souldier, not at all to violate or hurt the King, much lesse to depose and murther him; but only to take away those about him, whom they thought assistants in this proiect: yet the furie once on foot, they proceeded by missensible steppes, to the vttermost of outrage, against many innocents in that businesse, though otherwise obnoxious, and against the Throne and life of their own Emperour, vbi furor ingruat innocentes ac noxios iuxta cadere. Secondly, in the degrees, that yet the King had not falne thus low, if first he had not lost that awe & reuerence which alway attendeth vpon Maiesty, by vnseemely offices, done by him in the streetes and Tauernes, apprehending many souldiers for pettie faults, like a Constable, making his person common, cheape, and despised among them which were wont onely to be seene and feared, as somewhat supra humanitatem. And this he did also in hatred and disdaine of those that had in the war forsaken him. And now in this last act, if his own obstinacy had not plunged him into destruction, but that he had softned

them by a seasonable yeelding to time, he had preuailed onely by time. Thirdly, in the order, That these Mutiners hauing no head, or direction, kept that Reglement, that they tooke oath in their fury, in hot blood, in the Kings yard, not to dishonour, spoile nor sacke the Imperiall Throne, neither committed nor suffered any insolence nor violence in the Citie to the Neutrals, but rather proclaimed peace and Iustice. Fourthly, in the consequents, that at the third daies end, all was at quiet, and all men in their trade, as if no such thing had happened; Onely the Ianizaries suffered no Diuan nor Councell, vntill they had receiued a Donatiue, as Guerdon of their Iniquity; In which also the infinite waste of Treasure is worthy of consideration, which must of necessity be exceedingly exhausted by three changes in foure yeeres, and by the late warres in Persia and Poland: For euery Ianizarie in the Citie, absent or present, whose roll is about 40000. receiue 25. Chequins gold, besides Spahees, Iamoglans, and other orders at euery Alteration, which amounts in all neere to two Millions. And now these fellowes all liuing, that haue tasted the

sweete of prosperous mutinies, haud ignari summa scelera incipi cum periculo, peragi cum praemio, they haue taken such a head as cannot safely be suffered on, nor securely be taken off. Fifthly, of certaine presages that fore-ranne, it being related to mee from the mouth of a Cadee, inward with the King a moneth before the tumult: That Osman dreamed in the night, that he thought to ride a Cammell, and being mounted, he could not force him to goe by faire meanes nor stripes, and that then he descending in a rage, the body of the beast vanished, and left the head in the Kings hand. Who next day troubled at this fancy, sent to a Learned man, familiar with him, for the interpretation. He excused himselfe as vnfit to giue opinion in a matter of that Consequence, but perswaded Osman to send to the Mofti. Hee also craued pardon, but withall said, there was none so fit to interpret it, as Mustafa the Kings vncle, and now Emperour, who is esteemed a holy man, that hath visions, and Angel-like speculations, in plaine tearmes, betweene a mad man and a foole. The King repaires to Mustafa, who briefely tells him, The Cammell signifies his Empire: his riding, abuse

in gouernment: his descention, his disposition: the vanishing of the body, the reuolt of his Subiects: the head remaining in his hand, onely a bare title; and that he should shortly dye within few Moneths, and lose his Kingdome, but the empty name of Emperour should accompany him to his graue.
            A second of lesse consequence in the Uizier Delauir Bassa, from whom the Lord Ambassadour hauing receiued particular friendship about sixe dayes before this vprore, hee went to visit, and hauing no other businesse but to perswade him to stay the King from this intended Pilgrimage, the Ambassadour gaue him many reasons in the present estate of their owne affayres, especially the Treaty of Poland yet depending. To which the Bassa replyed very grauely. Then the Ambassadour vrging the feare of some tumult, collected from the licentious speeches rumored in the Towne, and hee was bold to deale plainely, sincerely and friendly, That if any such thing should happen, the fault would be imputed to the Bassa, as being of authoritie to perswade the King, whom his qualitie and youth would excuse, but all the fury would be discharged

vpon the greatest Minister; desiring him to consider the euent, at least, to take his affection in the best part.
            The old Renard stayed a while from reply: at last, smiling to himselfe at the Ambassadour, who perswaded him against that which was his owne counsaile, hee gaue him a finall answere, that there was no remedy, hee durst not hazard himselfe to oppose the Kings resolution: but assured him, he would so order the matter, as this iourney should not proceede so farre, as was expected. The Ambassadour concluded for himselfe, desiring then that he would leaue him a particular recommendation to the Chimacham or Deputie as his friend. To which he suddainely replied, Trouble not your selfe, nor feare; I will neuer remoue so farre, but that I will leaue one of my legges in this City to serue you: which the poore man fulfilled; for being murthered in few daies after, one of his legs whole and entire, was hanged in the Hippodrome, the most publike place of the City. Lastly, in things yet to come, and probably to be suspected, That the Souldiours in Asia, who haue now lost their hopes, will not sit downe by this affront,

but rather will attempt some Reuenge, for the death of that king who was their Martyr; Or that some great Bassaes farre remoued from Court, will apprehend this occasion, not to obey an Vsurper, set vp by treason; And vpon this colour ground their owne Ambitions, or that all euery where will fall into Combustion and Intestine warre; For I dare not hope, that God will open the eyes of Christian Princes to see the littlenesse of their owne vnciuill quarels, while this mighty Monarchy inuiteth them to Concord, and to diuide it as a prostituted spoile.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            THE CONTINVATION OF THE STORY, PRESENTED TO THE KINGS MAIESTY from the same Person.
            
               ON Saturday euening, the first of Iune following, the Capiaga or Maior Domo of the Seraglio, hauing receiued a secret order to remoue the brethren of osman from their lodgings, and in the night to strangle them: as hee was performing his command, aided with a few of his Carnifices to carry away the Princes, they cried out: the Pages running to the noise, and incouraged by the Casliaraga, who had some suspition, without further examination kill the Capiaga, now almost euery order hauing risen against their owne head. That night they sent secretly to the Ianizaries and Spahees, to informe them what they had done, and in the morning early hanged his body in the Hippodrome for a publike spectacle. The soldiers returned in fury to Court, in fauour of the Pages, and demanded iustice against those that had consented to this wicked order; which

had made an end of all the Ottoman race, only this Mustafa being left aliue, who is so holy a Saint, that he will not people the world with sinners, nor indure any women about him. The innocent King protests hee knowes nothing of this purpose: and if his command were procured, it was gotten by subreption, and he is easily beleeued. But his mother another Liuia, and the new Uizier, Daout Bassa, who had her daughter to wife, were vehemētly suspected. It was a day of Diuan or Councell; But these Souldiours would suffer none, vntill they had an account of this treason. The Vizier denies all; the mother is a woman, & hidden in the house: yet it is very likely, they both were guilty to vphold and secure their owne authority: It being rumoured, that the Uizier determined to place Subdititiously, in the roome of the elder Prince, his own Son, and very like him, and so to gouerne Mustafa for a time, and by his remoue to establish himselfe and his Race for euer. But now somewhat must bee done to appease the people; Therefore Daout Bassa is degraded from his office, and one Huzein Bassa newly arriued from the gouernment of Cairo, aduanced to his place, with

promise of further examination. Since, the fury once ouer, there hath beene no great search nor discouery made. I thinke the Sultanes Chequines haue quieted the matter. This new Uizier, a man here without friends, yet very rich, of a stubborne and obstinate nature, reported iust in his wayes, but peremptory and inflexible; audax, ferox, & prout animum intendit prauus aut industrius eadem vis one from whom almen may expect much good or much ill; Begins his gouernement roughly, vndertakes to punish Insolencies early, and professeth a reformation, or to be a Sacrifice. A man fit for these times that are desperate: For the worst will be, that he must at last endure their furie: In the meane time he procures a little awe, & hath restored the face of Iustice: yet I am perswaded it cannot last long, the Ghost of Osman will not be at rest, vntill there are some parentalia made vnto him; The nature of this Vizier is vnsupportable; But if he preuaile, and once settle, he will a new change the King, and lay an obligation vpon the Brethren of Osman; For he will neuer thinke himselfe secure vnder a man gouerned by an insolent woman, Dominandi auida: And what assurance

can he haue in that Prince, cui non iudicium, non odium est nisi indita & iussa? And though I cannot foresee the particulars, and where the Sore will breake out, yet I am sure the whole body is sicke; And Princes of Christendome shall haue breath three yeeres, before they shall haue cause to feare this state, whose present King is mentis inops, and the next in expectation, a Child, vnfit for action, and all the great men and Souldiers decayed, mutined and corrupted.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   