
      
         
            
            
            The epiſtle of one frend to another, of a ſtrange fyre that was ſene in the aire both longe and brode almoſt through al Germany, and what as well the godly as the vngodly maye or ought therof to loke for or feare.
            
               MY due ſalutations remembred right worſhipfull brother, thys ſhalbe to let you vnder ſtande that in the beginning of the yere of our lord. M. D. LXI. wherein we are nowe, the thirde after the feaſt of the birth of Chriſt, that is on childermas day: there appeared ouer our citie and all the borders of Swicerlande, two houres afore day the aire beyng clear a very red fyre, in maner whole together, but that white furrowes or ſtrakes came betwene, and it ſtretched out longe and brode almoſt a furlong brode, although in another place it ſe med narower, but in lengthe three or foure times ſo muche. So that vnto

all the beholders in maner a whole mile long towardes ye North it ſemed that ſome village or many, or els ſom towne had bene on a great fyre. And in many places the neighbours ran together as it were to quench the fire of ſome of their neighbours: and ther wer which thought that thei ſaw in this fyre of bloudy colour mani white forowes or ſtrakes, very like vnto bundels of ſpeares. But it continued not longe in one place, but remoued many furlonges further, and when it was day or rather towardes 
                  ••
               ye, by litle and litle it vaniſhed out of ſight being firſt gathered together at San gallie in maner of a great tower. By this ye may eaſly coniecture that this fyre was on the higher parte of the aire, becauſe it was ſene ſo far of, and almoſt folowed the mouinge of the aire, & yet not on ye higheſt aire yt there like vnto the comets or blaſing ſtarres might be kindeled by the element of fire. And this was alſo faithfully ſhewed vs, that it was ſo ſeen at Zurich, Glaroua, Sāgale, Conſtāce and euery where round about ye lake

of Aezon, and Venice, and ſo likewiſe at Baſill, and in the moſt part of the places of Swicerland, and the Recians or Griſons. But whether it were ſene any further we ſhall know ſhortly. And in certain places betwene Suricke and the litle towne Elgia thei ſay that flames of fire fel down to the grounde and amaſed therewith a certaine man that traueiled by the way.
            And a certaine credible man of the teritorie of Surike tolde me all the matter, which he did diligently mark.
            Fyrſt, when the night was cleare, and yet ear it was day it became darker, euen in the ſetting of the moone it ſemed vnto him as it wer a certain light to riſe from the earth as if diuers beames and of ſundrie colours (as when the Sunne by the droppes of raine maketh diuers colours) ſhuld ſo by and by ariſe from the ground as it werdrawen vp toward heauen, and there gathered a rednes as though a certaine cloude had wared red, & ſtode ſo a lytle while, and anone after a certaine cloud went through the middeſt thereof, and then was ſeene a ſhuting

out of fyre as it had bene ſtarres oute of a burning cloude.
            The ſignification of thys wonderfull matter, righte learned ſyr, which I haue ſtudied vpō to exerciſe my ſelf withall, & to ſtyre vp my minde to ye author of it, I write vnto you therefore that I may hear your iudgement vpon the ſame which I much eſteme.
            
               The ſignification of the vvonder.
               
                  1 For as much as ſuch prodigious wonders chaunce ſeldom in thys our time, and olde men far ſtryken in age can not remembre to haue ſene anye ſuch, therfore it is to be feared & loked for ſome vnacuſtomed hap to folowe.
                  2 The bredeth and bignes of it was notable, through which it was ſene euery where long and brode, and as it were euery where nere hand, wher of we diuine and pronunce a greate euyll to folowe, and that not to one region alone, and therin al men to be perplered and doutfull, to what place they maye chiefely goe, and where they may reſiſt the ragyng fyre.
                  
                     3 The colour of the fyre it ſelfe like to bloode what betokeneth it but warre: In whiche the lande ſhall abounde in the blood of the ſlaine and all thinges waſted with fyre?
                  4 And thys calamitie is thiefelye threatened to thoſe people to whome ſo euer thys wonder was ſeane neareſt.
                  5 And becauſe it apeared before day lyght and of a ſodeyne & vnloked for and in maner to al perſons as yet ſlepyng, therfore it betokeneth the calamities approchynge to be looked for to come vpon manye not thynkynge nor preparyng them ſelues, or repenting, and ouer careleſſe in themſelues and not only ſuch particular calamities to come, but ſhortly an vphoped iudgement of the whole worlde.
                  6 And that within a ſhorte time after this: becauſe this burning of the aire was ſeane euery where as it had bene preſent & nere as I haue ſayde.
                  7 And becauſe it endured but a ſhorte tyme, therefore it maketh vs hope that the perſecution ſhall not continue longe.
                  
                     8 And becauſe by and by after it being vaniſhed away the Sunne aroſe, we hope the cleare light of the wurde of god to be the end of all perſecution.
                  9 And that rednes was not al whole together, but deuided as it were with certaine cleare and bright ſpaces or furrowes by the which alſo ſtarres appeared, that ſignifieth, that in the middeſt of thoſe calamities and perſecutions God wil comfort his elect, and in that fire ſhall iſſue out the heauenlye brightnes of the goſpell.
                  10 And now ſeing this wonder was ſene in the beginning of the yere, ther fore ſhal we doute whether this calamitie ſhall indure a whole yere? For nowe alſo great mocions do begin to come furth, and thei wil come further except god turne awaye great euils, or rather dare we hope becauſe it appeared by & by after the birth of chriſt that is the thirde day after, within ſo many yeres hence, that our lorde Ieſus Chriſtes doctrine wilbe ſetfurth farre and brod and as it were reſtored againe all falſhold being expulſed and ſo the godly to loke for to beginne

a newe yere and a new kynde of lyuynge.
                  11. And becauſe that bloudy fyre appeared on childermas daye we do not deut but that he which was ſomtime a reuenger of the bloode of the innocent children will now alſo become a reuenger and puniſher for thoſe godly and faithful men, which haue ſuffered perſecutiō and death for his name ſake. And for them whiche as yet remain he wyl be a defender and maintener, ſo that finallye they wyll acknowledge him to be a father of their cauſe, and by amendment of life anſwere therunto and prepare them ſelues with praier and ſobrietie for the grace that is to come.
                  12. The ſhuting of ſtarres as it were the falling of them do doutles ſignifie vnto vs, that the day of the great iudgement is at hande. A litle before the which day that ſuch fore warning ſignes ſhoulde be ſeene our Lord Chriſt hath warned vs afore hande longe a goe.
               
               But in no age at anye time hath ther be ſene ſo many and ſo great and

ſtraunge wonderous ſygnes euerye wher abroad as within theſe few yeres: that we oght altogether already to conſider that it is by tokens ſignified vnto vs that the latter day is not farre of, and both by other wonders & chiefly by this which is not perticuler nor terreſtriall but almoſt vniuerſall and celiſtiall excepte we vtterly ſlepe with ouermuch careleſnes and ſecuritie. But firſt muſt that Babilonicall beaſt beyng ſtuffed with the bloode of ſainctes and yet not filled nor ſatiſfied be caſt downe, and the ſincere goſpell preached agayne through the whole worlde. The which that it maye very ſhortly come to paſſe we ſhal pray vnto the almightye gracious and great God by our lorde Ieſus Chriſte in the holy Goſt.
               And yet therfore we oght not to promiſe a careleſſe ſecuritie to our ſelues that the kingdō of the prince of Chriſtes enemies ſhall decaye and fal: but except we doe throughly take hede to oure ſelues by and by wyth amendement of lyfe, and ceaſſe to bragge of a vaine faith, beyng our ſelues inſtruted

and furniſhed with no good workes, we ſhall firſte be puniſhed by the ſame. For ſeynge oure lyfe of all in maner for the moſte parte anſwereth not to oure profeſſion we haue manye wayes deſerued moſte greuous puniſhmentes: and more truly then our aduerſaries, for this cauſe that in ſo great lyghte of the knowen truth, we be kyndled or moued wyth no feruencye of ſyncere religion but wallowe and are wrapped in all kind of vices and wyll almoſte ſuffer no diſciplyne eyther priuate or publyke: And for the moſte parte all Magiſtrates wyll not onelye haue Dominion in the commune wealthe and in Cityes, but they alſo wyll haue rule in the church, but they will not commyt them ſelues to the common diſcipline of the ſame.
               Finally, the paſtors and miniſters of the churches for the moſt parte be full of ambition, conetonſnes, wantonnes, and other vices, & be no better than thoſe whome they ought to teache and feede wyth the worde of GOD, but rather much worſe.
               
                  Wherfore it is greatly to be feared yt nere the day of the lord draweth vpon vs, and that to vs that waxe ſo colde ſhalbe moued and not to a fewe of vs and priuatly as hath bene hertofore, but a common publike and vniuerſal ſore of perſecution wherwith we ſhal be warned more then inough: for frō the aduerſaries of Chriſts church and his membres (except God tourne it away) ſhal go out the fyre which hath bene of longe time prepared for vs, & from Italie vnto vs and towarde the North (ye which way ye wonder & prodegious for warning did incline) ſhall it come furiouſly vpon the chriſtians. Not withſtanding we hope and humbly praye vnto the moſt gracious and mighty god the father of our lord Ieſus Chriſt with lowly and deuot hartes, that this euell may ſone after be turned from vs: not for vs but for his name ſake, and the holy worſhippers of his annoynted. For the bloode of thoſe which longe ago alreadye hathe bene moſte abundantly ſpylled & ſhed or conſumed with fyre throughout al Germany, Fraunce, Italy, Spaine,

and other regions (by that ſeuen headed and horned and bloudy Babilonical beaſt with whome the kinges and princes of the earth haue committed and do commit fornication) may now ſeme altogether to haue burſte out of the bowels of the earth wyth a flamynge brightnes, and that the ſame burnyng in the ayre betokening a reuenging from the Lord (which is the defender and reuenger of hys) hathe mingled together: That al men may ſee and vnderſtande the euident cauſe of this wonderful for warning. Therfore god wil puniſh together his whō he loueth that they may be amended, and wyth them or at the leaſt by and by after the enemies of his name which go forward obſtinatly in their malice, and in the perſecution of the ſainctes. It becometh vs to acknowledge our fauts and to aſke forgiuenes and not to deſpaire by and by at the firſte cruell aſſaute of Antichriſt whatſoeuer they be. For he ſayth that he is in danger and aſſauted himſelf and that on euery ſide is great fallyng aways frō him, & leſt he ſhulde vtterly be forſaken

he proueth al thinges to the extremitie. We yf we wyll continue in the ſincere calling vpon the Lord and remēbre to kepe our ſelfes in proſperitie, ſo many as god wil haue kept ſafe from theſe calamities ſhall proue and ſee a happy ſucceſſe and ſpreadyng abrode of the goſpell, through out the whole worlde: and the ruine and decaye of that prince or ruler which vnder the tytle of the name of Chriſte is againſt him being now of late begon wholy to be performed. For this enterpriſe of his as it is to be thought to be the greateſt ſo is it to be ſuppoſed that it ſhalbe the laſte: and as he did ſeuer this wonder from the daye that was commyng, euen ſo it is to be hoped that at the cleare preaching of the Goſpel and the laſt iudgement ſhortly comming vpon it, al euil ſhal haue an ende. So we for our ſelues oght for to geſſe well with good and valiant mindes. For the almyghtye can if he wil deliuer vs from all calamities, at the leaſt if he do not thoſe are happy ones which die ſtrongly in the confeſſion of his name for Chriſt

and the truth. But vnhappy are they whoſoeuer thynke them ſelues conquerours agaynſt Chriſt.
            
            
               That prodigies or wonders be done or ſtyrred vp by god▪ contrary to the ſayings of the Epicures.
               ARiſtotle in his fyrſt boke of celeſtiall ſpeculation and. v. chapter, in mencionyng of other thynges which he calleth fyrye ſpeculations, writeth thus. There be ſene ſometimes in the night the aire being clear many appearinges (he calleth them horrible ſightes) to mete in the ayre. As be gapyngs pittes bloody colours the cauſe whereof is euen the ſame, which is of the other aforeſaide. But next before he had ſayd that of a certaine vapour or exaltation that is whot & drie kindled in the hygh aire be made both certaine other ſpeculations, as beames, Goates, blaſyng ſtarres, and alſo that which is called Thlora, that is a flame or burning: and he ſayeth yf that vapour be kindled & ſhut forth it ſelf wide and brode, it ſemeth

oftētimes to burne like a flame as ſtrawe when it is kyndled in the felde. &c. Of vapours truly (by the opinion of the ſayde Philopher) which be ſene in ye high aire in the cleare nightes, ſome in dede burne and that longe time, as blaſyng ſtarres: ſome a ſhort time, as flames torches, goates, ſhutyng ſtarres. Some other appeare to be ſomwhat that thei be not and they may properly be called horrible ſyghtes: as cloudes ſomewh
                     ••
                   cleare of colour, but chiefelye red of colour and purple or bloudy: for other colours can ſcantly appeare, namely ſuch as ariſe by ye reflection of beames or ſuch as by cōmixion be white & firy. Likwiſe ſuch as be called gapings or pi
                     •
                  res. &c. And there be alſo which thinke that there be ſuche colours in dede. And it mai be thought that ſomtyme bloodye cloudes be in dede and ſometyme do apeare ſo. For we haue red often that ther hath rained blood and ſometime that it only appeareth ſo, by the reflexion of the light. Truly it is not to be douted but that both ther be and alſo appeareth or ſemeth

a bloody colour of burnyng in ye night and of flames, chiefely ſeyng the flame or the inflamed matter and ſubſtaunce ſo thicke. And perchaunce more in the winter when vapours to be inflamed or in dede in flames breake out of the earth go vp, by an ayre that is colde and moyſte and groſſe, euen as of a grene peace of woode the flames appeare to be more red. Per
                  
                     •
                  duenture ſome beyng perſuaded by theſe philoſophicall reaſons, wyll thynk this our wondrous or ſtrange token (or bloodye colour or fyre they wyll name it rather a flame or celeſti all burnyng) vttterly to be a naturall thyng, and ſuch as the cauſes thereof maye be ſufficientlye gathered out of the very boſome of nature: and to betoken nothyng els but peraduenture ſome naturall effect: as ſome mutation of the ayre and of the conſtitution and courſe of the yere: or ſome peſtilence at hand or immediatlye folowing: amonge the ſignes of the whych nature thei learned are wonte to put fyry ſpeculations, as gapynges, burnynges, comets, ſhuttyng ſtarres, &

other thynges that by nyght maye be perceyned in the ayre. For although in this tyme of the wynter vapours hoate and drie, and to be inflamed, ar not wont to breake out of the earth: notwithſtanding (he ſayth) it is to be thought that they beyng the longer ſhut in the earth with great froſt, being the more abundantly gathered together, breake out at the length with more violence when the wayes be opened, and being raiſed vpon high in the hygheſt ayre the heate beyng reſtrained by a repulſion and let, or els that that colour was made by the beames of the ſonne then beyng neare to the riſyng being either kindled or els only appearyng by reflixion and turning backe againe: and thoſe whyte furrowes were beames of the Sunne brought in that part onely whereon the ſubſtance of the vapours being gathered together was thinne. For the beames of the Sunne appeare muche more in the high mountaines then in the lower places. Alſo as it is written in hiſtories, thys hathe alſo happened in other places. And greate

burnings haue appeared for many vapours were gathered being long ſhut within the earth by the ſtrength of colde, and chiefely in places of mountains whoſe bellies and waies be for the moſt part full of ſuch vapours. Theſe and ſuche lyke thinges perchaunce mē that are curious in philoſophie, or alſo vtterly godleſſe, as Epicure and ſuche other couetous perſons will put furth, and ſo perſuade vs by this meane to feare nothynge. The authour Cicero of diuination (ſayeth) this only reaſon, by the opinion and teſtimonie of the expoſitors of monſtruous thynges auaileth againſt all ſhewes monſters and wonders. If that whiche coulde neuer be done, be done, if it maye not be to be meruailed at. And ſo it to be no monſtrous thing or wonder that may be done. But it was ſom great ſtrēgth whych opened the ſhuttynge of the earth, by it it may appeare. Becauſe that in ſome places about midnight an earthquake went before: as certain watchmen did obſerue it at Surick, and certain other hard the ſhakyng

of yron inſtruments and plats of glaſſe, other ſaw gapyng in maner of pittes, and the dai before the earth opened neare vnto Tubinga. So thei do iudge that are indued with mans wiſdome. But we out of the holye ſcriptures, and out of the treaſure of the eternall and diuine wiſdom, and out of the trew mouth of our lord, ſay that ſuch wonders be ſent from god, god doyng it other aboue nature, or contrary to nature, or els vſyng naturall thynges to the ſignifiyng of hys wyl, we ſaye and do beleue it, alſo hiſtories do witnes, that alwayes great calamities haue folowed after ſuche wonders.
            
            
               Out of the booke of Iulius, of prodegies or wonders: made. 505. yere after the makyng of the cytye.
               T. Gracco M. Inuentio Coſſ. amōg other wonders that he rehearſeth, ſayth: that the forme of two Sunnes were ſene in the day, the ayre burned there was often lightnynge, ſtorme and tempeſt.
               P. Scipio Naſica Cn. Martio Coſſ. it is red, that the ayre in the nyght

burned, and much lightning fell.
               P. Affrican and Lelio Coſſ. ryuers of blood flowed out of the earth, and in the night ye aire was ſene to burne A ſtar dyd burne by the ſpace of two and thyrtye dayes.
               C. Cecilio Cn. Papyrio Coſſ. in the night the mount of Albane was ſene to burne, houſes burnte with lightning and tokens out of heauen. The lande of Lucenſis gaped abroade. In Fraunce the aire was ſene to burne. The Danes and the Dutchmen paſſed the Alpes, brake the league and made murder of the romaynes and theyr felowes.
               C. Lelio. L. Domitius Coſſ. among otherr prodigies or wonders whiche he rehearſeth ſaieth: In Italy a burnyng torch appeared in the ayre, and all the aire was ſene to burne.
               L. Martio, S. Iulio Coſſ. in ye lande of Anaria the earth opened & a flame aroſe vp, & dyd ſhene in the element. About the land of Rhegium, parte of the Citie that is towardes the Sea was ouerthrowne wyth an yearthquake.
            
            
               
               Seneca in hys fyrſt booke of naturall queſtions and. xv. chapter deſcribeth a wonder or ſtrange thyng like vnto ours.
               AMonge the lightnings (ſayeth he) whiche the Grekes call Sela, maye put that fyre that was in the ayre, & we haue red it often times in hiſtories, the which burnyng was ſo high that ſometimes it was ſene amonge the ſtarres, and ſometymes ſo lowe, that it ſemed ſome fire a far of. A company of men of war vnder Tiberius the emperour (beyng amaſed when the aire for the moſt part of the night did burne) ranne to Colone for ſuccour, the fyre not beynge cleare but groſſe and ſmokye. Of theſe lightenyngs no man douteth but they haue a flame which they ſhewe, it is a certaine ſubſtaunce of them. But in the former lightnings was a bow and a crowne of ſome certaine ſubſtaunce, but it pleaſed vs not. &c.
            
            
               Out of the booke of Polidor Virgill of wonders and ſtrange thynges.
               
                  IN the yere of our ſaluacion. C. xii. a burnyng lyght in maner of a towre wyth great bryghtnes was ſene to fall out of the ayre: when Ieruſalem was taken of the Turkes.
            
            
               Wonders or ſtrange thynges taken out of the reherſal of M. Frytſchy of Laubany.
               IN the yere of oure Lorde. M. C. xl. the aire was ſene to bourne oftentymes, and many ſtarres were ſene to fall from out of the ſkye into the earht. Burning lightes, fyry dartes, and flyinge fires, were often tymes ſene in the aire. Newe ſtarres were ſene. Celeſtial fires aroſe mani wais. There was ſene in the ayre a brighte fyre, a company of horſemen and fote men to fight together, and cities, and ſwordes, and bloody wapours, were alſo ſene. &c.
               In the yere. M. C. and. xx. There was ſene in the aire bloody cloudes, a croſſe, and a whyte man. Euen at yt time men thought a deſtruction ſhuld come vpon ye whole world. It is written in Chronicles, that ſuche ſtrange things doe ſignifie ciuill warres.
               
                  Of thoſe thynges whych folowed, you may reade at length in ye Chronicles of Boem, ſet furth by Auentyne in the leafe. D. C. xv.
               In the yere. M. CCC. lxxv. the aire was ſene to burne all night.
               In the. M. D. L. three fyrye globes wer ſene in the aire in ye night in Miſnia Lipſia, which certaine ſtudents & famous men did beholde.
               The yere M. D. L. I. the xxviii. day of Ianuary at Vliſbon in Portingal were ſene in the aire bloody roddes, and horrible fyres, & it rayned bloode alſo. Furthermore there was ſuch an earthquake that two hundred houſes were terriblie ſhaken and throwen downe in ye which ſhaking more then a thouſand men periſhed.
               The yere. M. D. L. IIII. the firſt day of February at Cathalane a citie of Fraunce, after the muſteringe of the hoſte whiche the kyng of France had commaunded to be done in that place, a wonderful ſtrange ſight was ſene about the Moone. For a greate fire aroſe from the Eaſt part, & went to the weſt. And the Moone ſemed in

maner of a mighty great fire brande. The flame of thys fyre raged wyth great noyſe, often caſtyng oute blaſyng ſparkes in the ayre, none otherwyſe then when a ſmith beateth vpō hoat iron: thus ſaith Fritſchius. Ariſtotle nameth ſuch fyre a goat.
            
            
               The anſwere of a godly learned frende vnto the aforeſayde lettter or Epiſtle.
               THy letters. V. C. were giuen vnto me with the boke of wonders. For the which your gentlenes I geue you moſte heartye thankes. At your departure you dyd declare all thinges abundantly and very plainly. In the meane tyme I praye God that for his mercy ſake he wyll turne al things to ye beſt. For to ſtyrre you vp, I haue added many things which you ſhall here reade.
            
            
               The ſignification of the ſtraunge wonder.
               AS all men doe confeſſe wyth one mouth, this vnaccuſtomed ſtrāge wonder to ſignifie ſom great euil to theſe countreys: ſo I thinke ye cauſes of the ſayde euyll, to be ſo neare

vnto vs, that it ſhall perſe ye eies and mindes of all men. And ſeyng for the moſt part the calamities of mankind be ſermons of repentance, although the common people through erroure do alledge mani other cauſes of euils notwtandyng this fire of ye ayre is an euidēt argumēt & token of ye wrath of god, that without it be a few I think there is none ſo foolyſhe or ſo mad, which vnderſtandeth not that it is to come. We beleue verely that we ſhal not be caſt out of bliſſe, becauſe it ſemeth that we ſhalbe ſo punyſhed for oure ſinnes: becauſe that the croſſe & aduerſitie doth bryng alwayes more profit vnto the churche, then reſt and ſlouthfulneſſe. Of this commeth the common Prouerbe.
               The bloode of the Martyrs watereth the Garden of the Lorde.
               But although our enemies farre excede vs in all kynd of euyl, yet notwt
                  ſtanding we be not much inferior vn to them. Superfluitie is a profitable inſtrument & occaſion, you wyll ſaye the moſte parte of vs do want it, not ſuperfluitie. Religion alſo on oure

parte is a lytle neglected & beginneth to be gainfull, no leſſe truly then the Romains in time paſſed. For we ſhal finde but a few diuines whiche wyll vouchſafe to ſeke poore Chriſt in the cotage and ſtable. Manye of them couet fat benefices, for the whiche they ſerue none otherwyſe then thei wold ſerue for ye ſacrifice of the aultar. For that cauſe is there ſo much hatred, ſo much priuy backbiting which encreaſeth dayly and hourly more & more, yt ther is none more deuided thē thei, in whō ought to be moſt loue & concord. Theſe be the times which Euſebius ſetteth furth in the beginning of hys his eyghte booke vpon eccleſiaſticall hiſtories: who deſireth any Diocleſian whych may reſtore the weake mē
                  bres vnto their health agayne.
               God truely gouerneth hys church by fyre, the whiche name is called in ſcripture croſſe and perſecution, which notwithſtandyng as I hope ſhall not be longe, no more then this monſterous fire was longe, whyche laſted with vs no more then an houre, and that before day lyght. For the Pſalmograffe

compareth the furye of the vngodly lyke vnto fyre amongeſt the thornes, which maketh a feruent fire and when it appeareth to be moſt vehement, then ſoddenly it falleth and is tourned into aſhes.
               But although thys fyre wyth hys heate dyd in wrap the hygheſt mountaines, therefore not onely the baſe ſtates but alſo the highe monarches ſhall come to ruine: notwithſtanding the ſtars whiche ſhone betwene, that is, the miniſters of the churche ſhall not be put oute of their ſeate: which ſetting the worde of god before theyr face, ſhal ſhyne in darke night of perſecution by the cleare light of the goſpell vntyll the daye wiſhed for ware bright, and the Sun of righteouſnes ſhyne vpō mē. But one ſtar was ſene to fall from heauen, which being drawen by ye fyre dyd furrow in the middeſt. It is to be thought, that one doctour or other, either for feare of the greate threatnyng, or els being drawen by hope of ſome promoſion, ſhall be caſt out of his degre. Therfore the Lord is to be praied vnto, that he wil

defende vs ſtanding in the confeſſion of a ſincere faith. For this cauſe it is good for all godly men to thinke that the ſcourge of the lorde is afore their dores: whome notwithſtanding they by the mouyng of chaunces ſhall get, god onely knoweth which ruleth the cauſes of all thinges. We wyll onely bryng thoſe thyngs which be like the truth, and ſeme not diſſagreble from the worde of God. For the worde of the lord ought to be a lantarne to our feete, and a light to oure ſteppes. By it we may learn better ye cauſe of our aduerſities, then may be perceiued by any ſuch wonders, which god ſendeth commonly for the reprobate and ſtiffe necked men, amongeſt whome the worde of God taketh no place, that all their exſcuſes may be cut awaye. Notwithſtanding I do not deny that there be Sermons of repentaunce, whych not wythſtandynge they that are deſtitut of the gouernment of the word of god do take neuer the latter. For we ſee vngodly and wycked men whych beyng aſſociat with ye vnbeleuynge Iewes, require a ſygne from

heauen, which if it apeare, then with full voyce they crye out, oure ſynnes require ſuch wonders: but they of the part of the euangelicall doctrine, doe beare theſe thinges paciently and deriue part from them ſelues to other, and euery one that ſpeaketh of repentance with the mouth, ſeldom doth it in dede. The only Chriſtians in whō the light of the worde of god ſhyneth knowledge their ſynnes, and by the helpe of god ſtudieth to reforme their lyfe to a better ſtate, whome in theſe preſent calamities this one thing can comfort them, that they vnderſtande god by his ſyngular grace to tourne theyr deſerued paynes into martyrdome: through whiche is cauſed that they alſo comfort themſelues, in whō is this gyfte of God, that not onelye they beleue in Chriſt, but alſo ſuffer for hys name ſake. For although our ſynnes be greate, yet nothwythſtandyng we ſhall not feele the furye of the chiefe enemyes of Chriſt, but for the ſincere confeſſion of the faythe, whych we maye declyne from yf we wyll go from the doctrine of the goſpell.

The almightye and greate God for his diuine grace, and ſinguler aids of the holy goſt, vouchſafe to kepe vs Amen.
               The authour anſwereth againe to thys fyrſte epiſtle: and approueth it, notwythſtandyng (ſayth he) the ſtars whiche fell out of that fyrye wonder, I had rather interpretate to ſignifie the aduerſarye of Chriſte with hys, which as hitherto haue bene counted as ſtarres, and ſhal fall headlong out of heauen as Lucifer dyd. &c. That is they ſhall fall from that vſurped authoritie which they now haue, which the authour of all wonders and effectes grant. So be it.
            
            
               Certayn Eglogs taken out of diuers epiſtles of credible men, and certayne prynted bookes, prynted at Norynberghe and Vinaria, briefly ſet furth vpon the ſame wonder: ſo that it doth agre wyth thoſe epiſtles or letters ſet oute afore, whych were almoſt omitted.
               THat mōſterous fyre was not ſene at Auguſt, Vindelictorū, nor near about it, but it was ſene not far from Auguſt: as about Neurzā, Landſpergen,

Norinberg, and in the dukedom of Wirtenberge, in Belgicke, and alſo towarde Hungarye, within three dayes after Chriſtenmas, but not in all theſe places on one daye: So that many of the neyghbors thought that it dyd burne, and ranne to quench it: and the fyre fallynge from heauen in another place made them ſore afraid: This did a certayne noble man write in his epiſtle or letter. We read in a printed leafe that this fyre was ſene towarde Eccelſhemy, Frochhemy, & Bamberge: likewyſe at Campodune and in many other places. And a credeble man wrote vnto vs that it was ſene in the region of Vlme and in Atheſina: Lykewyſe at Lindauia, and in the monarchie of Bauaria, neare vnto Auguſt (notwtſtandynge it was not ſene in the citie of Auguſt) alſo towarde Vienna, and about Anwarpe. In the booke printed at Vinaria, we read that thys ſtrange wonder was ſene, the ayre beyng cleare & no cloudes at all, ſo that it occupied ye fourth parte of the heauen wyth ſuch brightnes that one might eaſely ſee and perceyue

anye thynge. For the fire was great brode and longe (in maner as if ſome great citie had ben wholly al of fyre) diſſeuered wt thre white ſtrakes or furrowes of the which the one part appeared of the colour of bloode tempered with ſome other thing, and the other part was ſomewhat thicker, & the laſt part at the goyng away of it, it was compaſſed about with a darke and thicke cloude. Other ſayde that the white ſtrakes were ſene at the beginninge wyth the fire, not beyng verye red aboute the middeſt, but a certaine clearnes mixte with redneſſe, through which alſo the ſtarres appeared. In ſome places warning was geuen by ringyng of ye belles to quench the fire. The foreſayde fyre, as farre as men coulde iudge, remoued from the Eaſt vnto the Weſt: other write that it began from the North in 
                     ••
                  aner of a cloud: and it ſemed as it wer caſtyng flames of fyre from it like vnto ſtarres. At the firſt it was ſene thre dayes and a halfe, at the leſt an houre and a halfe afore daye, it laſted about an houre and an halfe, and vaniſhed

away almoſt an houre afore dai. Out of letters written from Conſtance to vs. The nexte day after Childermas day in the ayre were ſene certaine great and longe ſpeares: two croſſes the one of them was whyte, what the other was it is not ſhewed, and a rodde was ſene in the ayre in maner of red bloode, ſo that ſome were readye to crie fyre. Certaine fiſhermen that were on the riuer aboute two of the clocke after midnight dyd ſee this great and bryght monſtrous thynge whiche continued vntil ſyxe a clocke, but towarde Turgauia and Heluitia was ſene a ſtarre wyth fyue ſeuerall beames whiche were about three yards longe, & in other places it ſemed in maner of a Hunters ſtaffe.
               The report goeth, that aboute Roteuilla a certayne heate was hearde in the ayre, euen as it had bene liquor boylynge in a potte, the which by and by wente downe into the nexte hyll, and there wythin a whyle after it made the ſame noyſe in the earth that it dyd before in the ayre. And as the letters doe teſtifie, whiche were

ſent from Memminga.
               On Childermas daye betwene fiue and ſyxe of the clocke in the mornynge, moore then the ſpace of an whole houre, was ſene in the ayre a great and an vnaccuſtomed rednes, towarde the north: in maner lyke vn to the faſhion of an hemicycle and then it remoued ſomewhat towarde the Southe, and bare before it the lykenes of burnyng fyre, by reaſon whereof in certayn villages the bels were ronge to gyue warning, to help to quenche it.
               In another part of this rednes appeared whyte forrowes: the whyche by and by went out of ſyght lyke vnto red firye flames, ſo that they were ſene ſhynyng by reaſon of the brightnes of the flame.
               Another parte of it was diſcolored and al red in maner of bloode, and terrible of ſyght. The aire at firſt was not perceyued, and through this rednes the ſtarres were ſene to caſt out their beames. A mā that watched in a towre at Suricke, ſaide that about midnight he felt an earthquake.
               
                  And a certain crafts man which was a glaſier marueyled at the ſodden ſha kings of the glaſſe in ye night, where of I maruaile that it was noted of none other, nor ſene any where elles that we can heare. Oute of another epiſtle written by a certaine learned man. This wonder of the fyre in the ayre was not ſene at Berne, but in ye fielde there were many that ſawe it. I heare of nothynge that was ſene beyonde Berne towarde Fraunce, nor at Friburge, nor at Lauſanne. They do ſhewe of a certaine monſterous thing ſene in the fielde of Berne there appeared a fyry globe in the whiche a beare and a lyon ſemed to fighte together. In the dominion of Gruenenſis they write that a globe of fire did flye ſo nere a vyllage, that a huſbande man was a frayed of the burnyng of his houſe, becauſe the fire was ſene ſo neare vnto the top of the houſe. Theſe thynges I wryte by report to ſatiſfie your requeſt vntyll I knowe them more certainely. Thus ſayde he.
               Another writeth that in the fielde

of Berne was ſene another wonder of an hoſte of men fyghtyng together but the authour I know not.
               Alſo after thys foreſayde wonder of fyre that was ſene in the aire, that is the thyrty day of December, which was the laſt yere. M. D. LX. at eyght a clocke before none, there was ſene a fyre to aryſe about Bade of Heluetia with a great thicke cloude. And when the huſbande men of Regenſpurge (which▪ towne is in ye field of Surick) ſaw it thei ran together being ready to quench it: by and by it vaniſhed away, ſo that it was not perceyued whether any fyre had ben in that place or no. Not withſtandyng, this alſo may be thought to be a certaine wonder.
            
            
               
                  ❧ The interpretation of the ſtrang wonder, ſet furth by the authour, written vn to a frende of his dvvellvng in Vindelick a countrey of Germany.
               I Geue you moſte hearty thankes, that you do part amongeſt vs your interpretation vpon that fearefull and monſterous ſyghte, whyche you

did not onely ſe in the aire at Heluetia and Ranie, but at Algea and thorough out all Sueuia, excepte at Auſpurge, in which no man, no not the watche men, did ſee any thing that daye, when not withſtandyng it was ſene two or thre mile of, and the good neyghbours there thought Auſpurge dyd burne, and they did lamentablye beholde the dukedom of Wirtenberg Franconia & Thuringa, at the ſame houre and moment when ye did ſe it. I haue no naturall philoſphie that thereby I might coniecture it to com, for in ſuch a dead and cold tyme there coulde not happen ſuch vapours nor ſuch exhalations, that mighte cauſe ſuch fyre to appear euery where: nor yet was the cauſe of the earthquake knowen amonge you, ſeing it was heard to be no where els. Therefore I come to your interpretacion: and I hope that Chriſt wyll come ſhortly & reuenge his worde▪ & iudge the world by fyre: wythout you had rather thus to expounde it, that in all places wher this fyre was ſene, the fire of ye goſpel ſhal ſo purely cleanſe the people

that all ſparkes and aſhes ſhalbe blowen quite away. But at Bauar and Auſtria where this fire did not appeare, they ſhall peryſhe in darkeneſſe, excepte God be mercifull vnto them.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of certayne other ſtraunge tokens and wonders.
               THe day before the fyre was ſene in the ayre, that is the ſeuen and twenty day of December, in the ende of the yere. M. D. LX. betwene the towne of Tubinga and the duke dome of Wirtenberge and the village of Ieſingam, which is two miles diſtant from Tubinga, ſoddenly in a certaine fielde there appeared a golfe which was ſire and thirty fote depe, twenty fote broad. and about ye earth no more then a common pitte, round of compas, cōteinyng of depth in water nine fote. Other ſpreade falſe rumors abrode & ſay that it was of ſuch a depth that it could not be expreſſed. Alſo it is ſayde, that it rained bloode about the ſame time in many places of Germanye.
               
                  The thirtene day of December, the yeare. M. D. LX. at Vienna and Auſtria, there was an earthquake and a great tempeſt, and fearefull lightenyng. Towres, houſes, and the Cathedral church of Sainct Steuen was burnte with lightenynge. The ayre was ſene burne a longe tyme, as a certayne noble man of Vindelicke in his letters doeth witnes vnto vs.
               We knowe for a ſuertye that lately in Fraunce, when the king had aſſembled ye head men of a citi together into hys owne preſence: behold there appeared a great comet ouer the city which continued as long as ye aſſemblie endured: that is. xxviii. dayes, in the yeare. M. D. LX. in the moneth of December.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of vvonders or ſtrange thyngs ſene in the countrey of Pymont. Taken our of the letters vvritten to a certain prince in the yeare. 1560. in the moneth of December.
               AT Chiraſyn a fyre was ſene in ye aire which laſted thre houres. At

Trauilla it rayned bloode as manye houres, that is to wit, thre hōures. At Foſan were ſene as it were, thre fyry cometes. In the plaine next vn-Sentaly there appeared a great numbre of horſemen in the ayre. At Caragnan ther was ſene an earthquake which ſounded lyke the wheles of a waggon. At Pinaroly was ſene in ye aire the maner of a fyry linnen cloth: and many other ſtrang wonders wer ſene in ſundrie other places.
               Of the heauenly goat (for ſo Ariſtotle calleth it) there was ſene at Cathaline, a notable towne of Fraunce commonly called Cholos, in the yere of our lorde. M. D. L. IIII. the ſyxte day of the moneth of Marche, betwen ſeuen and eyght of the clocke at after none, aboute the Moone a burnynge fyre, in the which was ſene, as it had bene the poynt of a ſpeare, going frō the Eaſt vnto ye Weſt, & caſtyng out flames and fearful great burnynges. As Conrade Lycoſthenes writteth in his boke of monſterous and ſtraunge wonders.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧ Of ſtraunge wonders and prodegious thynges, ſene in the ayre in the begynnyng of the yere. 1556.
               IN the begynnynge of the yeare of our Lorde, a thouſande, fyue hundred fiftye and ſyxe: On a Sondaye after Chriſtenmas day about the euenynge tyde, was ſene with vs that dwell about Lauinga (as a certayne contre man of ours writ in a letter to a frende of hys) a great lyghtnyng and it thundered erceadinglye, and not farre of from vs, a houſe ſtandyng in a village was ſtrycken with lyghtnyng and burnte downe.
               And the ayre opened verye wyde and brode, and dyd belche oute great and bright flames of fyre. The whiche tempeſt was about nyne of the clock at nyght, manye of the people were wonderfully aſtonied and ſore afrayd in ſo muche that many of them were domme a longe tyme after.
               Out of another Epiſtle or letter of the ſame wonder: the ſame daye at nyght in Bohem, Sileſia, and Miſnia, there was a terrible tempeſt,

and many men, cattell, great towres and churches wer ſtricken with lightnyng and periſhed with fyre. Alſo it rayned bloode and fyre. A towne of Melnicca foure myles diſtant from Praga, all the grounde of it was wel nigh conſumed with fire. The church of our Lady at Praga was burnte with lightnyng: and the church of S. Anne that is in the mount was lyke wiſe burned. Two Churches beyng about two mile diſtant from Lipſia, were alſo burnt with lightning. And it rained blood abundantly in ye ſame place: and two camelles were ſene in the ayre deuouring a harneſſed man.
               In the ſame yere. M. D. L. U
                     •
                  . the eleuenth day of Ianuary, at Auguſt and Vindelick towarde the Alpes, in the night the air opened, and burned for a while moſt fearefull to beholde, and ſemed to threaten to be the latter day. At Miccenhuſa in Bauaria, ther was ſene in ye night ſuch brightnes, that ye candle light in Zeta waxed darke, and when the candles were put out, the brightnes of the aire ſufficed thē for light, thre houres ſpace.
               
                  The ſame yere of our lorde a thouſand fyue hundred and thre ſcore, the fyfth day of September in the towne of Marchia and Cuſterine, at nyne a clocke at after noone. Innumerable flames of fyre dyd ſhyne on euery ſide in the aire wt great brightnes. And in the myddes of the element there appeared two fyry beames. To cōclude, as I read moreouer, in an vnknowen author, a voyce was heard which ſaid woe, woe, vnto the churche. Thus ſayeth Iames Fincelius, writyng of the wonders done in hys tyme
            
         
         
            
            Of certaine vvonDERFVLL STRAVNGE viſions and merueylous tokens.
            
            ¶ Out of the Prolongue of Ioachim Camerary of Pabe, in the Chronicle of Nicephorus, tranſlated by him into Latine and expounded, which boke was printed at Baſill by Iohn Oporinus.
            AFter that I chaunſed to liue in that tyme in the whiche the common wealth hangeth either in miſerable ruine, either in pernicious alteracion, or els in very vehement and troubleſome affayres. Trulye (good reader) I can not heartely reioyce, nor inwardly be merye, wyth any ryches or honour that is coueted or deſired in the publik weale. For I pray you what is done or attempted almoſte in any place, that pertaineth not vnto ye decay of ye comon wealth? What obſtinacie is in men? What malyce and hatred? What couetouſnes and gredy gatheryng? What deſire

of reuengement? What ambitious luſt to rule? Not withſtanding theſe things be couered, and do cloke them ſelues vnder moſte honoſte names, as conſtancie, magnanimitie or baliaunt corage, ſeueritie, and dignitie or honour. And by the law of God and man, many are compelled to obei theyr malice. Amonges theſe thyngs nothyng almoſt is done by deliberat counſell, and neither is any paynes taken in prouidyng and lokyng diligently to things of importance, neyther any chaungyng of ſentence or any correction for vice. All thinges be lawfull to them that be in authoritie and are mightye. Holye thynges are made vnholye: publycke thynges are made priuate: peace is tourned into ſtryfe: ſo that there is no order ſet in thinges. Euery ſtate, and degre, and condicion, is geuen ouer to mocking and diſdeyning. Deadly hatred is exerciſed in euery place: to the fulfilling of the which hatred helpe is ſone called from euery ſyde. They do practiſe crueltie and tyranny lyke vnto the brutiſhe Barbarians. The which being

of them ſelues moſte ſilthye and vile, doe all thynges contrarye to the lawes and ordinaunces of the elders: the common wealth which the good men left vnto their poſteritie, among theſe, muſte of neceſſitie peryſhe and vtterly decaye. But although the ſituation of the ſtarres, and manye ſtraunge and monſterous things doe foreſhe we and warne vs of this: not wythſtandyng the moſte euident tokens of the mutations of the former cauſes, by the whyche may lawfully be taken moſte certayne coniectures of that which is to com. Which to declare in a few wordes ſhall not be (as I thynke) diſagreable to the matter. And the foretellings of aſtrologic, of the mouing of ſtarres, of the eclipſis and coniunction of the Sun & moone and of the flames of the comets, be almoſt knowen vnto euery man: other wonders alſo for their oftenes do the leſſe moue mens mindes. But what viſions haue bene ſene aſwell by the that waked as them that ſlept (enter pretated by ſothſaiers) it wer to long to declare or rather infinite.
            
               One thynge I doe remember well, (if a mā may lawfully ſpeake on this faſhion) I did ſe in my dreame one holy and heauenly likenes or picture. A certayne good and godly man dyd ſee with in theſe fewe yeres in a viſion (as it ſemed vnto hym) a great armye of men dyd ſkermiſhe and fyghte together, and were ready with theyr weapons in their handes to fyre villags, townes, & cities, and to waſte & deſtroye the fieldes: manye men fell down: yet not wythſtandyng it could not be perceyued who had the victory Alſo this battel was ſo intermeddled that it coulde not clearely be ſene of whome it was done nor agaynſte whome. In one place alſo he behelde, and ſawe fyue wrytynges or ſcriptures, of fyue diſtincte and chaungeable coloures, in ye whiche was ſhewed diuers names & diuers ſentēces, which were ſene in ye aire after this maner.
            Blacke for the Iewes, and Moſes lawe. Whyte for the Chriſtians and onely fayth of Chriſte. Yelowe of the pardons of the byſhop of Rome. Red for the Turkes, Saracenes, Mahometh

the meſſanger of onely God. Yelowiſhe, for the workes and liberties of the Anabaptiſts. What theſe thynges do ſignifie can not be hyd to any man that wyll ſtudye to knowe what ſhal happen wythin theſe fewe yeres, and what is nowe done.
            Aboute the ſame tyme, the maner of a longe hiſtorye was ſene in the cloudes: whiche afterwarde was ſet furth in a picture, drawen out and publiſhed at Belgicke, in thys maner hereafter folowyng.
            There appeared an armed man on horſebacke wyth a ſpeare charged in his hande, and readye for to runne a courſe. And beſydes thys, was ſene the lykeneſſe of the Emperour Charles the fyfth, with a crowne vpon his heade: and neare vnto it a hogges ſnoute, ſomwhat hygher there was ſene two Lyons rampynge and leaping agaynſt thre other Lions: and a lytle beneth them, two great Dragons ſpuyng out flames of fyre.
            And after thys was ſene great armies of men of warre, aſwell by ſea as by lande, and euerye where was

cruell burning of townes and caſtels and villages. And ther was alſo ſene in the ayre a Pecocke wythout feete hauyng no wynges: and neare vnto hym there was a Dragon. Alſo in the ſame place was an Egle hauyng the greateſt parte of hym hyd behynde a banke: and aboute the banke was a lytle Egle. Lykewiſe was ſene a Lion crowned lying on hys backe, whō a Cocke dyd ſtrycke on the throte. After this there were gathered together many and diuers beaſtes, wyth horrible formes and ſhapes: and all monſterous beaſts, except the wylde Vnicorne which the Grekes doe call Monoceros and a verye fayre and great huge Elephant. By and by another armye of men appeared agayne burnyng and deſtroying: and a Cocke defendyng hym ſelfe agaynſt a Lyon whoſe head was ſemed to be cut of.
            And laſte of all, there was ſene a great lake, in the whych were drowned (as they doe declare) townes, and great Churches, theyr ſteples beyng ſene to appeare aboue the water: and a Camell was ſene alone vpon the

bancke, with his head in yt lake drynkynge. Wonderfull many flamyng Dragons were ſene, breathynge out flames of fyre and much venym euery where.
            Vnto me truly theſe thynges ſeme not vnpoſſible to chaunce, ſpecially and chiefly to thoſe people whyche doe trouble and moleſt the worlde in this oure age, with great vexations and ſore afflictions.
            Furthermore, it is declared vnto vs, that thys yere there are very manye monſterous byrthes, bothe of mankynde, and alſo of many and diuers other kyndes of beaſtes.
            Amonge the which, was the notable great Monkecalfe (that is a calle like a Monke) and before hym an Aſſe, a man, and a fiſhe, of mixed formes and diuers ſhapes. And after that there came furth another monſter whiche was a fyſhe lyke a Monke.
            For in the bowels of the man was founde iron (as we haue often tymes proued it trew) what doth that ſignifie but inwarde commocion or ciuill hatred or ſtryffe?
            
               Therefore theſe thynges ſhewyng them ſelues ſo often tymes, and ſo wonderfull, verelye we ought to vnderſtande and to thynke, that the mouing and workyng of nature is wraſted out of frame, and the ſtate and condicion of men to be tourned out of courſe, & that the effectes of nature being weake & ſicke may no longer continue nor endure: for euen as monſterous byrthes doe not lyue longe, ſo likewyſe the degenerate and monſterous ſtate of thys corrupt world ſhall not laſte longe.
            As I doe remembre (and as I ſayd before to certayne men whiche tolde me, that a mayde at Rhenie lyued wythout meate and drynke) I dyd tel thē how that ſhe could not lyue long nor continue without foode: as if one ſhoulde ſaye, it were a wonderfull and a merueylous thyng to be done, yf that common wealthe ſhoulde not decaye and peryſhe, where the rulers (which ought onely to noriſhe and to vpholde the ſame) eyther be not able to gouerne it, or elles be farre abſent and a great way from it.
            
               But we ſee moſt manifeſt ſignes and euident tokens of forewarnyng.
            For as by the ryſyng and the goyng downe of the Sunne, we knowe the commyng of the day & the nyght. So in lyke maner I doe ſuppoſe, that after the breakyng vp and diſſoluynge of the lawe and diſcipline of the chriſtian common wealth, ſome great fall and deſtruction muſte of neceſſitie folow, and after lyke ſort we maye coniecture other ieoperdyes and daungers for to come.
            ¶ To God be all honor and glory, for theſe and all other his wonderful workes, declared and ſhewed vnto vs. So be it.
            
               PSALME. 19.
               The heauens declare the glory of God, and the fyrmament ſheweth the worke of hys hand.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Imprynted at London by Roulande Hall dvvellynge in Goldynge Lane at the ſigne of the three arrovves. 1561.
            
         
      
   