
      
         
            
            
               
                   SERENISSIMA ISABELLA CLARA EVGENIA INFANTA HISPANIARUM.&c.
                  
                  portrait
                  The pourtraicture of the most Illustrious Iſabella Clara Eugenia, Infanta of Spain Ducheſse of Austria and Burgundie: And Princeſse of Belgia
                  R E ſculpt
               
            
         
         
            
            A true Coppie of the tranſportation of the Lowe Countries, Burgundie, and the Countie of Charrolois:
            Doone by the King of Spayne, for the Dowrie of his eldeſt Daughter. Giuen in marriage vnto the Cardinall ALBERT, Duke of Auſtria, vvith the Articles and Conditions of the ſame, ſigned by the King in Madrill.
            
            
               ❧ Tranſlated out of Dutch by H. W. Nouember. 1598.
            
               AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Paule Linley, dwelling in Paules Church-yard, at the ſigne of the Blacke Beare.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Coppie of the tranſport done by his Maieſtie, to th' Infanta his Eldeſt Daughter: of the Netherlands, Burgundie, & the Countie of Charolois in the yeere. 1598.
            
               PHILL. Rex.
               To all preſent and to come, which ſhall ſee or heare theſe preſents: greeting.
            
            
               WHereas wée haue found to be moſt behoouefull not onely to our Prouinces of the Low-countries, but alſo, vnto all Chriſtendome in generall, no longer to delay the marriage of our deere and beloued eldeſt Daughter th' Infanta, Iſabel Clara Eugenia, béeing moued thereunto, as well for the conſeruation of our Houſe, as diuers other good reſpects: as alſo, for the great good affection, which we beare vnto our beloued Brother, Nephew, and Coſin, th' Archduke Albert, (a
                  •
                this preſent) Lieuetenant, Gouernour, and Captaine generall, for vs in our Netherlands, and Burgundy, we haue caſt our eyes on him, and chooſing him for the future Huſband of our ſaid Eldeſt Daughter, the whole, aſwel with the conſent & pleaſure of our holy Father the Pope, who condiſcendeth, and graunteth the diſpenſations thereunto belonging, as alſo with the agréement and conſent, of the moſt high, excellent, & puiſſant Prince, our beloued Brother, Nephew, and Coſin, Rodolph, the ſecond of that name, Emperour of the Romaines, together with our welbeloued Siſter the Empreſſe his Mother: which beeing conſidered, and to the ende that our ſaide Daughter might bée furniſhed with reaſonable means, ſuch as are required for her great calling and merrits. Alſo to ſhew and make knowne, the loue which we haue and doe beare, vnto our ſayde Netherlands and Burgundie, wee

haue reſolued (to th' aduanncement of the ſaide marriage) to giue and tranſport all thoſe ſaide Countries, vnto our ſaide Daughter, and all thereunto belonging, in the manner which ſhall be ſpecified héere-vnder. The whole, with the conſent and good will, of our deere and welbeloued good Sonne, the Prince Phillip, our onely Sonne and heire: according to the aduertiſement, which (by vs and our ſayd Sonne) hath béene giuen vnto the principall Lords and Knights of our order, Gouernours and Eſtates of our ſaid Netherlands, which are in our obeyſance, together with thoſe of our Country of Burgundie. All the which haue witneſſed and declared by theyr aunſwer, the ioy & contentment which they receiued at our ſo kinde reſolution, which they knowe and confeſſe, to be for the reſt and tranquilitie of our ſaid Netherlands, and that it is the true and right courſe to attaine to a good and firme peace, and to bee deliuered from ſuch a troubleſome warre: which quiet and tranquilitie, wee haue alwaies wiſhed vnto them. And conſidering that (which vnto all is moſt manifeſt) the greateſt felicitie which may happen to a Country, is to be gouerned by the ſight and preſence of theyr naturall Prince and Lord, God is witneſſe of the trouble and care which we haue had, becauſe we haue not beene able in that ſort to do it perſonally, as (trulie) we well wiſhed, if other great and important affaires of our Realme of Spaine, had not forced and conſtrained vs to make a continuall reſidence therein, without moouing anie thing from thence: as alſo at this preſent they conſtraine vs. And although the age of our ſaid Sonne, ſeeme more fitte to trauaile then dooth ours, notwithſtanding, it hath béene the pleaſure of the Almightie, to giue ſo many other kingdomes and Counteies, for the good gouernment of which, there will neuer want affaires of great importance, for the which alſo his preſence ſhall heere be needfull. Wee haue then founde moſt conuenient to take this reſolution, to he end that our ſaid Low Countries be not left in the fore-paſſed inconueniences, together with the reaſon that we haue to appoynt the portion of our ſaid Daughter th' Infanta according to her merrits, and the greatnes of her birth. As alſo perticulerly, that next vnto

the ſaid Prince our Sonne, (vnto whom God confirme with long yeeres & proſperitie to his ſeruice) our ſaid eldeſt Daughter is the firſt and neereſt heyre vnto the ſaid Countries, and therefore, by vertue of the will and pleaſure of our ſaid Son, ſhee may frō this time be conſtituted in the ſame. The more becauſe we haue choſe theſe meanes, hoping that thereby our ſaid Netherlands may returne, to their auncient flower, reſt, and proſperitie, which heeretofore they haue had.
            
               VVherefore we make knowne, That deſiring at this preſent to put in execution, that, whereon we haue ſo ripely conſidered, and in reſpect of the voluntarie conſent, which our ſaid Sonne the Prince hath ſo liberallie giuen thereunto, after hee had vnderſtood, the ſubmiſſion wherewith our ſaid Countries did confirme our will and intention, wée haue reſolued and decréed, to cede and tranſport to our ſaid Daughter th'Infanta, and to the aduauncement of the ſaide marriage, all our ſaide Prouinces of the Netherlands and Burgundy, in the forme, manner, and conditions heere-vnder expreſſed.
            
               I.
               THE firſt condition is, and not otherwiſe, that our ſayde Daughter is to take in marriage th'Archduke Albert, in vertue of the diſpenſations which our holy Father the Pope, hath granted to that end, that ſhe ſhall accept for her Dowrie, the ſaid Low Countries, and the County of Burgundie. And in caſe that the ſaide marriage were diſturbed for any cauſe whatſoeuer, the ſaid donation and ceſſion, ſhall be voyde and of none effect: as in ſuch a caſe (at this preſent) we recall and anullate the ſame.
            
            
               II.
               Item on condition & not otherwiſe, that the Children and deſcendents of the ſaid marriages, Males and Females, ligitimates, and borne in true marriage, (and not the vnlawfull) although by ſubſequent it were in marriage, the Elder procéeding the Younger, and the Male the Female: in like degrée they ſhall be Heires, from hand to hand of all the ſaid prouinces,

conioyntly without eclipſing or ſeperating them, declaring that the Sonne or Daughter, of the Eldeſt Sonne or Daughter deceaſed, during the life of their Father: the ſame ſhall be preferred vnto the Vncles, or any other of the collaterall line.
            
            
               III.
               Item on condition, and not otherwiſe, that in caſe (which God defend) that there were neither Sonne nor Daughter of this mariage, or that they ſhould be deceaſed, in the time of the deceaſe of one, either of ye ſayd Archduke Albert, or our Daughter th'Infanta, which ſhal be married: The ſayd donation and conceſſion ſhal be from hence-forward voyde & of no effect. In which caſe if our ſayd Daughter remaine a Widdow, ſhe ſhal be furniſhed with the lawfull portion from the Fathers ſide, & the Dowry of the Mothers ſide, ſuch as appertaines vnto her: Ouer and aboue, what wee or our ſaide Sonne the Prince, might doe in ſuch caſe in her behalfe, for the loue which wee beare her. And if the ſaid Archduke our good Nephew ſuruiued our ſaide Daughter th'Infanta, he ſhall remaine Gouernour of the ſaid Netherlands, for, and in the name of the Proprietary vnto whom the ſayde Countreyes (as then) ſhould be due.
            
            
               IIII.
               Item on condition, and not otherwiſe, that if all the deſcendants, Males, and Females, procreated of the ſame marriage in ſuch ſort, that none (of thoſe which ſhould be called to thoſe goods) ſhould remaine in ſuch caſe. They ſhall returne all to the kingdome of Spayne, vnto him who ſhall be deſcended from vs, which make this donation and conceſſion: As in ſuch caſe at this preſent we giue it him.
            
            
               V.
               Item on condition, and not otherwiſe, that neither our ſaid Daughter th'Infanta, nor any other of the Succeſſours, ſhal not (for any cauſe or prete
                     •
                  e ſo ouer) tranſport, giue, nor allienate

the ſayd Countries without our conſent, or the conſent of our Heires, and Succeſſours in theſe kingdoms.
            
            
               VI.
               Item on condition, and not otherwiſe, that ſhe which ſhall be Princeſſe or Lady of the ſayd Low-Countries, ſhal marry with the King of Spayne, or with the Prince his Sonne, which as then ſhal liue, keepe alwaies furniſhed with the due diſpenſations, in what ſhal be needfull. And if (as then) they had no mind, or meanes to make the ſaid marriage, nor to haue them Countries in Dowry, (in ſuch caſe) the ſaid Lady may not take any other huſband, nor bring him in Dowry any part of the ſaid Netherland, except it be with our aduice and conſent, and of our Heires or Succeſſors in the ſaid Kingdome of Spaine, which ſhal be deſenceded from vs, and in caſe of contrauention: All which ſhal haue been giuen and granted, ſhal returne vnto them: as if this gift, conceſſion, and tranſport, had not beene made.
            
            
               VII.
               Item on condition, and not otherwiſe, that each and euery one of the Princes and Lords of the ſaid Netherlands, ſhal not marry his Sonnes nor Daughters, but with our aduice and conſent, or of our Heires and Succeſſours Kings of Spaine.
            
            
               VIII.
               Item on condition, and not otherwiſe, that neither our ſaid Daughter th'Infanta, her Huſband, nor any of his Succeſſours (vnto which the ſaid Countries ſhal be due) ſhall not in any wiſe make any Trade, Traffique, nor Contract to the Eaſt or Weſt-Indies: neither ſend thether any ſort of Ships, vnder what title, colour, or pretext ſoeuer: on paine that the ſaid Countries, in the caſe of the ſaide contrauention ſhall be confiſcated. And if any of theſe Subiects ſhould (againſt this defence) trade or trauaile to the ſaid Indies, the Lords of the ſaid Countries ſhal puniſh them with paines, confiſcation of goods, and other more ſeuere, yea with death.
            
            
               
               IX.
               Item on condition, and not otherwiſe, that if the ſaid Archduke Albert our beloued Nephewe ſhould ſuruiue our ſaide Daughter th' Infanta leauing a Sonne or Daughter, he ſhall haue the gouernment of the ſaid Sonne or Daughter Heires, and the vſe of all his goods, as if our Daughter th' Infanta were yet aliue: And ouer and aboue, our Nephewe (in this caſe) ſhal enioy (during his life) all the ſaide Countries, and ſhal be Vſufructier of the ſame, ſo farre forth, that he entertaine and nouriſh (all ſuch Children) honourably according to their calling and quality, & that vnto the Elder, (be it Sonne or Daughter) he giue the Dutchy of Luxembourgh, and the County of Chime, which dependeth thereon to haue and enioy the ſame during the Fathers life, after the which, he ſhal haue all, as his vniuerſall Heire. Being heere expreſly declared that this clauſe of th' Vſufruict be onely vnderſtoode in fauour of our good Nephew th'Archduke Albert, and that it may not be drawne in conſequence, that none of his Succeſſours might alledge any example, nor pretend any right there-vnto in any ſuch like caſe.
            
            
               X.
               Item on condition, and not otherwiſe: This being aboue all others the principall and chiefeſt obligation. That all the Children and Deſendants of the ſaid marriage, following the piety and Religion which ſhineth in them, ſhall liue and dye in our holy Catholique faith, as our holy Romaine Church teacheth, and before they take poſſeſſion of the ſaide Netherlands, ſhal thereof take their oath in the forme and manner as is expreſſed after this Article. And in caſe (which God defend) that any of the ſaid Deſendants, ſhould goe aſtray from our holy faith, and ſhould fall in any hereſie: that after our holy Father the Pope ſhal haue declared him for ſuch:) he ſhal be depriued of th' Adminiſtration, Poſſeſſion, and propriety, of the ſaid Prouinces, and that the Subiects & Vaſſals of the ſame, obey him no more: but that they receaue and admit, the néereſt

Catholique, following by degrée, who in caſe of deceaſe, or ſuch fault, ought to ſuccéede him: and the ſaide Hereticke ſhal be reputed, as if he were deceaſed by naturall death.
               
                  EGo iuro, ad Sancta Dei Euangelia, quod ſemper ad extremum vitae meae ſpiritum, Sacroſanctam Fidem Catholicam, quam tenet, docet & predicat Sancta Catholica & Apoſtolica Romana Eccleſia (omnium Eccleſiarum Mater & Magiſtra) conſtanter proſitebor, & fideliter firmiterque credam, & veraciter tenebo: Atque cam à meis ſubditis teneri, doceri & predicari (quantum in me erit) curabo. Sic me Deus adiuvet, & haec Sancta Dei Euangelia.
               
               
                  The tranſlation of the aboue written oath.
                  I Sweare, by the holy Goſpell of GOD, alwaies, euen to the laſt gaſpe of my life, ſtedfaſtly to profeſſe, truly and aſſuredly to beleeue, and vnfainedly to maintaine, the holy Catholique fayth, which is held, taught, and preached, by the holy Catholique, and Apoſtolick Romiſh Church, (of all Churches the mother and miſtriſſe.) And to take care (as much as in me lyeth) that the ſame ſhall be vſed, profeſſed, taught, and preached to my ſubiects. So helpe me God, & his holy Goſpel.
               
            
            
               XI.
               Item on condition, and not otherwiſe, that the greateſt ſtabilitie of peace, the loue, and coreſponce, which ought to bee betweene the Kings of theſe kingdomes, ſhall bee betweene our deſcendants ſucceſſors the Princes, and Lordes of the Countries on the other ſide. Alſo our deſcendants and ſucceſſors, and euery one of them, which in time ſhall enter into the poſſeſſion and demaine of the ſaide Low Countries and Burgundie, ſhall praiſe, approue, and ratifie of ſuperaboundance, all what is contained in this article:
            
            
               XII.
               And béeing, that our intention and will is, that the aboue written conditions, ſhall be fully accompliſhed, together with

the ſame we giue, cede, abandon, tranſ-fer, renounce, agree, and conſent, indowrie, feeft, or reedefeeft, (and by what better way or forme by right may or ought to bee doone, without that the forceleſſe forme, may be any way preiudiciall to that which is forcible, profitable, or aduantagious) to the ſaid Infanta, Iſabel Clara Eugenia, our deere and welbeloued eldeſt Daughter, all our Netherlands, and euery Prouince therof, and the County of Burgundie, therein comprehended the Countie of Charrolois, and the Dukedomes, Principalities, Marquiſats, Counties, Barronies, Shieres, Citties, Caſtles and Forts, which are in our ſaide. Netherlands and Burgundie, together with all regals, leanes, homages, rites, liberties, freedoms, rites of patronage, rents, reuenues, domaines, aydes, confiſcations, and forfeitures, with all and whatſoeuer rites and actions, which we may or might pretend in the cauſe of the Netherlands, and Countie of Burgundie, together with all preheminences, prerogatiues, priuiledges, exemptions, 
                     •
                  dnoueries, iuriſdictions, reſorts, & other ſuperiorities whatſoeuer, and in what ſort they may bee, or for what cauſe and occaſion they may appertaine vnto vs, be it of patrimonie or otherwiſe in any title or howſoeuer it may be. To enioy them wholy, and in ſuch ſort as we haue enioyed them, without any exception, ſo farre foorth (alwaies) that they be kept inuiolablie all and euery one of the aboue ſpecified conditions. And the conditions made by the immortall memory the Emperor, my Lord and Father, in the month of Nouember, Ann. 1549. touching the vnion of the ſayd Low Countries, not any way conſenting nor agreeing any diuiſion, or ſeparation in ye ſame, for what cauſe, nor in any manner whatſoeuer.
            
            
               XIII.
               And our intention is, as wee declare and expreſly ordaine by theſe preſents, that notwithſtanding this our gift, conceſſion and tranſport, our ſaide Daugther the Infanta, and her future huſband, the Archduke Albert, ſhall be bounde to pay and to ſatiſ-fie to all ſuch debts and obligations, contracted by vs, or in our Name, or by the late Imperiall Maieſtie, vpon

our patrimonie and domaine of the ſaid Netherlands & Countie of Burgundie. And that alſo they ſhall bee bounde, to ſuſtaine, beare, and maintaine, all ſuch rents, penſions for lyfe, and all others whatſoeuer gyftes, recompences, and others, which his ſaid Imperiall Maieſtie, vs, and our Prediceſſors, hath, or doe giue, grant, and aſſigne vnto any perſons whatſoeuer. And alſo we make, create, conſtitute, and name (by theſe preſents, in the forme and qualitie aboue mentioned) our ſaid Daughter the Infanta, for Princeſſe and Lady of the ſayde Netherlands, and the Countie of Burgundie, together with the aforeſaiyd Countie of Charrolois. Graunting moreouer, vnto our ſaid Daughter, that ouer and aboue the particuler titles of each Prouince, of the ſaid Netherlands and Countie of Burgundie, ſhee may name and intitle herſelfe Dutcheſſe of Burgundie, although that wee haue kept for vs, and the ſayd Prince our Sonne, (as long as it ſhall pleaſe vs) the ſame title of Duke of Burgundie, with all the rites which thereby are due to vs: together with the name of chiefe and ſoueraigne of our order of the Golden Fleece, with full power and authoritie to diſpoſe thereof in time to come, as we ſhall finde moſt conuenient.
               Wee alſo further conſent, agree, and grant vnto our ſaide Daughter the Infanta, and gyue her abſolute power and vnreuocable, of her owne priuate authoritie, without any other requiſition or conſent of her ſayd future huſband, or other, to take, and ceiſe, the entire and full poſſeſſion, of all the ſayde Netherlands, and Countie of Burgundie and Charrolois, and to that effect, cauſe the generall Eſtates of the ſaid Countries to be aſſembled, and the perticuler Eſtates of euery Prouince. Or to vſe any other order or forme, which ſhee ſhall find moſt requiſite and conuenient, to declare this our conceſſion and tranſport. As alſo to doo the oath which ſhall be needfull vnto the ſaid ſubiects, and Eſtates of the ſaid Countries, and to demaund inueſture of the péeces and ſigniories which ſhall bee needfull: and like-wiſe to receiue of them the due oath, and to binde them vnto all, according to all whereunto by their precedent oathes they were reciprocally bound.
               
                  And vntill ſuch time as our ſaid Daughter ſhal haue taken, (or cauſe to be taken in her name) the full poſſeſſion of the ſaid Netherlands, County of Burgundy, and Charolois, in the forme and manner referred by theſe preſents, we ſet and poſe our ſelues as Poſſeſſors of the ſame, in the name and behalfe of our ſaid Daughter: In witneſſe whereof we ordaine, and commaund theſe Letters Patents to be deliuered vnto her: conſenting and graunting (moreouer) vnto her, to detaine, commit, and inſtitute, in the ſaid Netherlands, and Burgundy: Gouernours, Iudges, Iuſtices, and Officers, either for the Guard or defence thereof, or for th' adminiſtration of Iuſtice, policy, receite of the Demaines, or otherwiſe. And for the reſt, to doe as a true Princeſſe and naturall Lady, and Proprietary of thoſe Countries ought, either by right cuſtome, or otherwiſe, to doe, as we haue done, and might haue done. Notwithſtanding, alwaies obſeruing the ſaide conditions aboue inferred. And to this effect we haue and doe quitte, abſolue, and diſcharge by theſe preſents, all Biſhops, Abbots, Prelates, and other Church-men. Dukes, Princes, Marqueſſes, Counts, Barrons, Gouernours, Chiefetaines, Captaines of Countries and Citties, Cheefetaines, Preſidents, and other of our Counſaile. Chauncellors, and other Iuſtices and Officers. Captaines, men of Warre, and Souldiours, of Forts and Caſtles: their Lieuetenants, Knights, Squires, and vaſſailes: together with the men of law, Cittizens, inhabitants of Citties, Boroughs, freedoms, & villages, and each and euery one the ſubiects of our ſaid Netherlands, Countie of Burgundie and Charroloies, and each of them, reſpectiuely of the oathes of fidelitie, faith, homage, promiſe, and obligations, which they ought to vs, as to theyr Lorde and Soueraigne Prince. Charging, willing, and commaunding expreſly vnto them, that they ſweare and receiue the ſaide Infanta our Daughter, for their true Princeſſe and Lady, and to ſweare vnto her, the due oathes of fidelitie, fayth, homage, promiſe, and obligation, in the manner accuſtomed, according to the nature of the Countries, Lands, & Signories, and that (moreeuer) they beare vnto her, and her ſaid future Huſband, all

honour, reuerence, affection, obeyſance, fidelitie and ſeruice, as good and loyall ſubiects ought, and are bound to doe, to their true and naturall Princeſſe, and as vntill this preſent they haue doone to vs. And with ſupplition and amendement of all and euery defaults, as much of right as deed, the which might happen betweene this our domiation, conceſſion, and tranſport. And of our owne mouing and incitation, full and abſolute royall power, (which herein wee will and doe vſe) haue and doe derogate, vnto all and any lawes, conſtitutions, and cuſtomes, which may or might contrary here againſt: for ſuch is our expreſſe will and deſire.
               And to the end that all what is aboue ſaide, may be plaine, and manifeſt matter, and which may continue, alway faſt, ſure, and ſtable, wee haue ſubſigned the ſame with our owne Name, and cauſed our great Seale to be hung thereat. Willing and ordaining, that inregiſtration be made hereof, to bee held in great eſtimation and value, in all and euery our priuie Counſailes, and Chambers of account where it ſhall be requiſite. Giuen in our Cittie of Madrill, Realme of Caſtile, the ſixt day of the Month of May, 1598. and of our raigne of Naples and Ieruſalem, the 45. of Caſtile, Arragon, Cicile, and others, the 44. and of Portingall the 19.
               
               
                  Paraphed thus. N. D. V.
                  
                  Subſigned, PHILLIPPVS.
                  
                  And more vnder, By the King.
                  
                  And vnder written, A. de la Loo
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            Approbation, Aggreation, and the Oath of the Prince of Spayne, in the tranſportation of the Netherlands and Burgundie.
            
               
                  PHILLIP by the grace of GOD, Prince, onely ſonne and heyre to the Kingdoms, Countries, & Dominions, of the King PHILLIP, the ſecond of that name, my Lord and Father.
               Vnto all preſent and to come, greeting.
            
            
               MY ſaide Lorde and Father, hauing reſolued to eſpouſe my Lady th' Infanta Iſabel Clara Eugenia, our deere and wel beloued Siſter, with the Archouke Albert, our beloued Vncle and Coſin, and that according to the ſame, his Catholique Maieſtie hath alſo determined in our cōmunication and with our conſent, béeing there-vnto perſwaded through great reſpects of the common good, yea, to the reſt and tranquilitie of all Chriſtendome in generall, and perticulerly to the reſt and quietneſſe of the Netherlands. As alſo to the end that our ſaid good Siſter, be furniſhed according to her qualities and highnes of her birth. To make a gift vnto our ſaide Siſter of the Netherlands, and the County of Burgundy, in the forme and manner appearing by the open Letters which my Lorde and Father to that end diſpatched: ſigned with his own hand, and ſealed with his great ſeale, whereof the tenor followeth from word to word.
            
               
               Phillippus &c. Make knowne, that after hauing perticulerly vnderſtoode, what is aboue ſaide, and mentioned euery point of the matter, conſidering the common good, (which is lyke to proceede thereof,) vnto all Chriſtendome. Yea, the ſame by reaſon of the perticuler loue which we owe and beare vnto our beloued Siſter th' Infanta, through her great woorthines: We ſtrengthen, approoue, and confirme, for good by theſe preſents, notwithſtanding any preiudice which might belong to vs, our Succeſſours now preſent or to come: and for the ſame reaſons we conſent, and agrée by theſe preſents, that the ſaid Netherlands, and Counties of Burgundy and Charloys ſhal be ceded, tranſported, and giuen vnto our beloued Siſter th' Infanta, in the manner as my aforeſaid Lord and Father hath done it, and as it may beſt continue, and for the more ſecurity, coroboration, and aſſurance of what his Maieſty dooth diſpoſe and ordaine, in the fauour and furtherance of our beloued Siſter. Euen ſo doe wee diſpoſe and ordaine there-vnto (if ſo it be néedefull) by theſe preſents alſo in fauour of the ſame, in the ſame forme and manner in all: the whole, procéeding of our owne free will, without that wee haue any way, there-vnto béene incited, compelled, either by deceite, falſhoode, nor any reſpect of paternall reuerence, nor any feare, or other, but iuſtly and truly: being our intention that the ſaid Countries ſhal belong and appertaine to our deere and beloued Siſter th' Infanta Iſabell Clara Eugenia, and her Succeſſours, in the forme of the ſaide diſpoſition of the King my Lord and Father. And to the end that all may haue his full enteere effect and perfection, and remaine for euermore faſter, and more ſtabler, we haue renounced, and renounce by theſe preſents (in fauour of our ſaid beloued Siſter) for vs and our Succeſſours, all Benefices which may or might be, by right, giuen or aſſigned vnto vs, or them, which might contrary vnto theſe: nor although it were by right of reſtitution in Integrum, in the which we haue likewiſe renounced, and by theſe preſents doe renounce. For our concluded and determined will is, that no manner of things ſhall haue any force or power againſt this donation, conceſſion, and tranſport, which

is done of the Netherlands, in the forme and manner before written.
            Wherefore we haue done and giuen our oath vpon the holy Euangilan Goſpel, which we haue touched with our hands, to hold and obſerue, maintaine, and accompliſh: and to cauſe to be held, obſerued, maintayned, and accompliſhed, all what is aforeſaid, without euer to bring there againſt any manner of excuſe or exception: nor to ſuffer that any ſhall bring them in our name, the which we affirme and promiſe with princely words, and that we wil giue any ayd & aſſiſtance, to the fulfilling of what is ſaid. Such being (as is ſaid) our earneſt will and deſire: In witnes wherof, we haue diſpatched theſe preſent open Letters, the which wee haue ſubſigned with our owne hands, and cauſed to be contraſigned by the Secretaries infraſcripts of the eſtates of the King my Lord and Father, in the ſaid matters of the ſaid Lowcountries and Burgundy, and cauſed them to be ſealed with the great Seale of Armes of his ſaid Maieſty, hanging at a golden ſtring, being preſent (and as witneſſes ther-vnto requeſted) Don Gomes de Auila Marques of Velada, our Gouernour, and great Steward Don L. H. t. a p. de mora Earle of Caſtel. Rodrigo G tand Commander d'Alcantara Gentleman of the Kings Chamber, and Cupbearer to our owne perſon, Don Iehan d'Iiaques great Commaunder of Lean, al thrée of the Counſaile of Eſtate, and Meſſire Nicholas d'Amant Knight, likewiſe Counſailour of Eſtate and Keeper of the Seale of his Maieſty, in the matters of the afore-ſaid Netherlands, and Burgundy, and Chauncelour of his Countrey and Dukedome of Brabant. Giuen in the Cittie of Madrill, the Realme of Caſtile, the ſixt day of the moneth of May: in the yeare of grace, 1598. Paraphe N. e. r. t ſigned Philippus. And more vnder, By order of my Lord the Prince: ſubſigned A de la Loo, and the ſaide Letters were ſealed with the great Seale of Armes of his Maieſty, in redde waxe, hanging at a golden ſtring.
         
         
            
            Procuration of th'Infanta to her future Spouſe, to receaue the Netherlands in her name.
            
               
                  
                     ISabell Clara Eugenia, by the grace of God Infanta, of al the Kingdoms of Spaine, Dutches of Burgundy, Lorrayne, Brabant, Limborch, and Artoys, Counteſſe Pallatin of Haynault, Holland, Zealand, of Namen, and Zutphen, Marqueſſe of the Romiſh Dominion, Lady of Freeſland, of Saliues, and Machelen, of the County, Citty, and Country of VVtrecht, Oueryſſel and Groeninghen.
               To all preſent and to come which shall ſee or beare theſe Preſents.
            
            
               KNow that, as well for the welfare of Chriſtendome ingeneral, as the perticuler of the Netherlands, and for other good conſiderations, it hath pleaſed the King my Lord and Father, for the furtherance of our future marriage (by the diſpenſation of our holy Father the Pope) with our beloued Coſen the Archduke Albert, and with the conſent, agréeation, and agréement of the high and puiſſant Prince our déere and welbeloued Brother: to make vs a gift, conceſſion, and tranſportation of all the Netherlands, and Burgundy, by the open Letters thereof diſpatched, and reſpectiuely ſubſigned by their

owne hands, ſhe ſixt day of this preſent moneth of May, with other open Letters, touching the acceptation of the tranſport and donation, to the end that the ſaide Netherlands and Burgundy ſhould (by vs) be held and poſſeſſed: alſo our Heires and Succeſſours in forme and manner, and according to the conditions perticulerly expreſſed by the ſaide open Letters: And that by the ſame his Maieſty hath conſented, agréed, and promiſed vs, and giueth abſolute and inreuocable power of our owne authority, (without taking any other conſent) to ſeiſe our ſelues, (or by ſending of procuration to our ſaid future huſband the Archduke Albert,) the whole and entire poſſeſſion of the ſaid Netherlands, and County of Burgundy and Charoloys, and to doe in the ſaid effect all what perticulerly is ſaide in the ſaid open Letters.
            MAke knowne that we for the cauſes aboue ſpecified, and in euery thing to follow the will and ordinance of his Maieſty, to the furtherance of the ſame, all what in regard of the aboue written, is needfull for our voyage to the ſaide Netherlands, haue of our owne mind, and abſolute power, authoriſed, and giuen full, and inreuocable power and commiſſion with all faculty, (ſo generall as perticuler) to our future huſband the Archduke Albert, for, and in our name, and in our behalfe, to do, either through himſelfe, or through others, which he ſhal appoint there-vnto, or ſhal finde lawfull by vertue of theſe Letters, once, or at more times, all and in perticuler the thinges, as much as in our name and behalfe, as in the behalfe of all the Prouinces of the Netherlands, and County of Burgundy and Charoloys in generall, and through the Eſtates of euery Prouince in perticuler ſhall be required, and néedfull there to be done: for (reſpectiuely) to take, ſeiſe, to haue and to hold in our name, the whole and entire poſſeſſion of all the ſaid Countries, and of euery Prouince thereof, with all what thereunto belongeth, to vſe them, wholy, quietly, without any contradiction, obſtract, or hinderance, and to that ende to aſſemble the Eſtates of the ſaid Countries, be it in generall or perticuler, to doe (in our name) the requiſite oaths: as alſo to receaue of the

aforeſaide Eſtates and others, their vſuall oathes. And ouer and aboue, ſhal be done by our ſaid future huſband the Archduke Albert, all what we (to that end) in proper perſon ought to doe if we were there preſent: and although that there were any matter which ſhould require more eſpeciall commaundement, then is in the ſaid Letters mentioned. We then ſuffer, by Princely words, and by our Honours, to finde agréeable, to keepe faſt and ſure, and to obſerue, and cauſe to be obſerued, and inuiolably accompliſhed, and in good fayth alwaies: all what ſoeuer by the ſaide Archduke our future huſband, or by thoſe which he ſhal haue appointed or commit, by vertue of the ſaid Letters, ſhal be done, or paſſed in regard of the ſaid entire, full, and accompliſhed poſſeſſion, of the ſaide Netherlands and Burgundy, according to the forme and manner mentioned in the ſaide open Letters, of the ſaid donation, ceſſion, and tranſport: to the which we referre our ſelues without euer, to contrary the ſame, or ſuffer the ſame to be contraried, directly, or indirectly, in what manner ſoeuer, for ſuch is our will. In witnes wherof, we haue ſigned with our hand, and cauſed to be contreſigned by the Secretaries Infraſcript, of the Eſtates of the King my Lord and Father, in matters of the ſaide Netherlands and Burgundy: and ſealed with the great Seale at Armes of his Maieſty, hanging at a golden ſtring. Giuen in the Citty of Madrill the Realme of Caſtile, the xxx. day of May, the yeare of grace, 1598. Paraphed thus N. d. i. t. and ſubſigned the Lady Iſabell, and on the fold, By order of my Lady the Infanta. And more ſigned A de la Loo. And were the ſaid Letters ſealed with the Kings great Seale, in redde waxe, hanging at a golden ſtring.
         
         
            
            Demonſtration of the Archduke Albertus, done to the generall Eſtates.
            
               ALBERT by the grace of God, Cardinall, Archduke, Lieuetenant, Gouernour, and Captaine Generall.
            
            
               DEere and welbeloued, the two Letters héerevnder ioyned, are of the King my Lord, and of the Prince his Sonne, for aſſurance in our behalfe: to declare vnto you a reſolution which his Maieſty hath taken, to the welfare and conſolation of theſe Countries, by the accord and conſent of the ſaid Lord the Prince. And becauſe wee cannot perſonally accompliſh, the ſame being a waighty matter, vnleſſe we abſent our ſelues from hence, we are therefore by theſe to giue you vnderſtanding of our great charge, which in effect is: that his Maieſty hath found good, as well for the generall welfare of all Chriſtendome, as eſpecially for theſe Countries, no longer to prolong the marriage of the woorthy Infanta his Eldeſt Daughter, as wel for the conſeruation of his houſe, as diuers other reſpects: he hath (to this effect) caſt his eyes on our perſon, and that by the conſent of our holy Father the Pope, of the Empreſſe our honourable Lady and Mother, and of the Emperour my Lord and Brother: And that moreouer to giue better commodity vnto his Daughter and vs, to manifeſt the perticuler inclination which hee beareth theſe Countries, will tranſport them ouer, as a gift to his Daughter, to the furtherance of the ſaid marriage, together with the County of Burgundy, without detayning or parting any thing thereof, in any manner whatſoeuer, aſſuring himſelfe, that you and al others will reioyce of this his kinde reſolution, being the ſame, ſtretcheth to the common welfare, & reſt of the ſaide Countries, as being the onely way to attaine to a good and ſure peace, and to come out of this miſerable warre, which is the thing which

his Maieſty hath ſo feruently deſired. Wherfore for our parts (ſince it toucheth vs) we are to eſteeme it greatly, as alſo wee greatly eſteeme the great honour and good which (by theſe) his Maieſty doeth to our perſon, chooſing vs aboue all other perſons, and onely for this reſpect, ought we to receaue an incredible contentment. And ſo much the more doe wee reioyce, that (by theſe occaſions) we may ſhew the effects of our good, and cordiall deſires: In following the paths of the Princes of Burgundy and Auſtria our Prediceſſours, labouring for the welfare and reſt of the ſaid Countries to the which we haue, and doe beare a perticuler inclination, eſtéeming thereof ſince our comming hether) to haue made a reaſonable proofe, although not wholy ſuch as we deſired, by reaſon of diuers troubles and miſhaps which are befallen vs: We know full well the heauy and burthenſome charge, which by this reſolution will fall on our necks. But aſſuring our ſelues that we ſhall (through you and others) be counſailed, ayded, and aſſiſted, we hope that (by the grace of God) the matter wil haue a good and proſperous ſucceſſe: and that we ſhall ſee theſe Countries to returne in their auntient flowre, greatnes, and proſperity, as they were in the dayes of our Prediceſſours, and they ſeeing with what courage the worthy Infanta and I ſhal employ our ſelues there-vnto, our perſons, mindes, and our meanes, we ſhal kéepe the ſame amity, the which their Fathers (vntill now) haue held: This is the ſumme of that which (by vertue of the ſaid credence) we deſired to declare you, and we ſhal be very glad (with the firſt) to receaue your Letters of aunſwer, as wel to his ſaide Maieſty as to the ſaide Prince, to the end they may be ſent them, and that therof may be double and triple Coppies, to ſhun the perils which are abroad, to ye end that they be not leſt by the way. And héere we beſeech God (deere and welbeloued) to haue you in his protection. In Bruſſells the 5. of December, 1597. Paraphed R. i. c. h. V. And ſubſigned Albert.
            
         
         
            
            
               The Letter OF THE KING.
            
               
                  
                     DEere and welbeloued, you often haue béene able to perceiue the good wil and affection which wee alwaies haue borne to our patrimoniall Netherlands, and vnto each Prouince of the ſame, through the great care we haue alwayes had, and inceſſantly beare, for the welfare, quiet, and tranquilitie of the ſame, and alſo through the paines and troubles, which therefore wee haue vndertaken: moreouer, the great coſts and charges which we haue béene at to maintaine them, without ſparing any thing to defend the ſame, againſt our enemies, and to bring vnder our ſubiection and obeyſance, thoſe which withdrew themſelues from you, rebelling againſt vs, theyr naturall Prince. All which ſhall yet more at large bée manifeſted vnto you, through the kinde reſolution which wee haue taken for your proper welfare, the which our good Brother, Nephew, and Coſin, Albert, Archduke of Auſtria, ſhall make knowne vnto you. Vnto whom, wee deſire and commaund you, to giue beliefe and aſſurance, as vnto our owne perſon, ſith it is a matter which toucheth you ſo much, and likewiſe the common good. And aſſuring our ſelues that you will doe it accordingly, and that you ſhall reape pleaſure and contentment, in that which hee ſhall declare vnto you, wee will not ſay any thing more thereof. But deere and welbeloued, the Lord take you in his holy protection. From S. Laurens the tenth of September. 1597.
                  
                  
                     Paraphed, N. D. V.
                     
                     Signed, PHILLIP.
                     
                     And more vnder, A. de la Loo.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               The Letter OF THE PRINCE.
            
               
                  
                     DEere and welbeloued, as I haue endeuoured and endeuour my ſelfe to follow and imitate the greatnes and excellencies, vertues, and pathes of my Lord and Father, in like ſort I haue alſo reformed my ſelfe in the inclination and loue towards you, for the welfare and contentment which I wiſh vnto you, as the effects ſhal cléerely manifeſt the ſame: by that, which ſhal be declared vnto you (in my behalfe) by our good Vncle and Coſen Albert Archduke of Auſtria, vnto whom you ſhal giue full beléefe and truſt, or aſſure your ſelues on him, gouerning and vſing your ſelues according to that which he ſhal declare vnto you, wherein (ouer and aboue the pleaſure you ſhall doe me) you ſhal your ſelues gather the chiefeſt fruites therof. Heerewith, déere and welbeloued, our Lord take you in his holy kéeping.
                  
                     From S. Lawrance 
                        the tenth of September. 1597.
                     
                     Paraphed. W. V. S.
                     
                     Signed. PHILLIP.
                     
                     And more vnder. A. de la Loo.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            A coppie of the Kings Letter to the Archduke of Auſtria.
            
               
                  
                     MY good Brother, Nephew, & Coſin, at the returne of the poaſt, Frans vanden Berghe, I aduertiſed you by my Letters of the 17. of March laſt paſt, how at his arriuall were receiued, certaine pacquets with Letters of aunſwere, the which the Lords and Knights of the Order, Counſellors, and Gouernours, as alſo the Eſtates of the Prouinces, (which are vnder my obeyſance) haue reſpectiuely, rendred and giuen vp, vpon my Letters of the month of September, the yéere paſt, according to the matter therein touched, the which I ſent ouer to be declared vnto thē, to your aſſurance. And afterwards to haue confeſſed (by theyr ſayde aunſwere) the great ioy and eſpeciall content which each one of them ſaith to haue receiued of my kinde reſolution, I haue béene yet mooued and occaſioned to procéede further, without forgetting, to further that which I haue ſo ripely intended, in making a gift ceſſion, & tranſportation, to my beloued Daughter the Infanta, of all my Netherlands and County of Burgundie, but haue moreouer (the ſixth of this Month, in preſence of my beloued Sonne the Prince, with his expreſſe conſent and aggreation, and through the acceptance of my good Daughter beeing preſent) paſſed the diſpatches of the thrée patents, which by theſe I ſend you, to the end you may be particulerly informed of all what they containe, in fauour of the marriage of the ſaide Infanta my good Daughter with you. And by vertue of her procuration ſent vnto your own perſon, (the which you ſhall find encloſed with the three patents) you may ſeiſe in her name, and in her behalfe, the whole & enteere poſſeſſion of the ſaid Countries, and euery Prouince of the ſame, in the forme as the ſaid procuration containeth, putting

the ſame to effect at what time, and when you pleaſe or thinke good. And to the end that this my intent may come to his full effect, and that all this may be doone with great content of my vaſſailes and ſubiects on the other ſide, ſo in generall as in perticuler, I write againe to the ſaid perſons and eſtates, as alſo dooth my beloued Sonne, in the ſubſtance as you ſhall ſée by the coppies ioyned here-vnto, by reaſon of the aunſwere they haue made reſpectiuelie on the ſaid my firſt Letters.
                  And although vntill this time no aunſwers haue béen receiued, of the Gouernour Parliament, nor from the thrée Eſtates of my Countie of Burgundie, (vpon my Letters ſent them in the ſaid month of September, in the yeere paſt) I haue found good to ſend them others, the which (with the coppies) you ſhall finde in this pacquet. It ſhall be very agréeable vnto mee to bee aduertiſed (by the firſt commoditie) the receit of all the aforeſaid Letters: and in what ſort you ſhall haue dealt therein, and how all the matters on the other ſide will paſſe. Heerewith, (my beloued Brother, Nephew, and Coſin) the Lorde take you in his holy keeping.
                  
                     From Madrill 
                        the laſt of May, 1598.
                        
                     
                     Paraphed M. D. V. Subſigned, Your good Brother, Nephew, and Coſin, Phillip.
                     
                     And more ſubſcribed, A de la Loo.
                     
                  
                  
                     The ſuperſcription was, To my good Brother, Nephew and Coſin: The Archduke Albert,Lieuetenant Gouernour of the Low Countries, and Burgundie.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     THE KING.
                  
                  DEere and beloued, by the contents of your Letters of the xxi. of December, the laſt yeere paſt, we were reioyced to haue vnderſtood the great ioy & contentment which you receiued at our kinde reſolution touching the matter, the which (in our behalfs) was cauſed to be declared vnto you, by our good Brother, Nephew, and Coſin, the Archduke

                     Albert, by vertue of our letters of credence. And becauſe our intent dooth tend onely to the reducing of the Low Countries to a peace and tranquilitie, through the marriage which we haue appointed, betweene our deerely beloued Daughter the Infanta, and our good Brother, Nephew, and Coſin, we therefore haue thought good, (as to the furtherance of thys good worke) to giue, cede, and tranſport, to our ſaide Daughter, all our ſayde Netherlands and Burgundie, according to the open Letters which (there-unto belonging) were ſent to our good Brother: as likewiſe thoſe of the aggreation and cō
                     ſent, of our deerely beloued good Sonne the Prince, and likewiſe of the acceptance of our ſaide Daughter. Whereof wee aſſure our ſelues you will reſt contented. And moreouer, acknowledge the loue and affection, which wee alwayes haue borne the ſayd Countries, as the ſame ſhall be more manifeſtly ſhowne (by Gods grace) by meanes of the ſayde marriage, and the ſending ouer of our ſaid Daughter thether, as ſoone as time ſhall ſuffer it. As alſo, through the aſſiſtance which we ſhall continue to doo, to the ſayd Countries, at all occaſions being needfull, ſince our intent is not any wiſe (as ſome vndiſcreet might conſtrue it) to abandon them: but to the contrary, to ſuccour and defend them, as of old we haue doone, vntil ſuch time as they ſhall be (by peace or otherwiſe) ſecure.
                  
                     Deere and welbeloued, remaine in the Lords keeping. 
                     From Madrill, 
                        the 31. of May, 1598. N. D. V.
                        
                     
                     Signed, Phillip.
                     
And vnder, 
A. de la Loo.
                  
                  
                     The ſuperſcription was. To our beloued, the Sherieffe, and other Magiſtrates and Counſellors, of the Cittie and County of Machlen.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE PRINCE.
            DEere and welbeloued, your aunſwere of the xxi. of December the laſt yéere, vpon my Letters of the precedent Month of September, in credence of that which (in my behalfe) my good Vncle and Coſin hath cauſed to be declared vnto you, haue giuen me full ſatiſ-faction and content: ſuch I alſo expect, according to the obedience you beare, to the good will of the King my Lord and Father. And becauſe the intent of his Maieſtie, referreth it ſelfe on the great good which ſhall happen to the Countries of the other ſide, the ſame ſeruing for the furtherance and concluſion of the future marriage of my deerely beloued good Siſter the Infanta with the ſaide Archduke, with my interuention, expreſſe conſent, and aggreation, vnto the gyft and tranſport, which his Maieſtie intended of the ſaid Countries, as more at large you may vnderſtand it by his Letters. Moreouer, hee will continue his affable and fauourable affection, which at all times you haue felt: and his ſaid Maieſtie ſhall not nowe ceaſe the ſame, but at any neede, proffer his aſſiſting and defending hande for the ſaid Countries, vntill ſuch time, as by meanes of a ſure peace, they ſhall finde themſelues wholy aſſured, (the which of my ſide) I will likewiſe procure for the ſayd cauſes.
            Deere and beloued, our Lorde haue you in his keeping, 

                  Madrill 
                  the tenth of May. 1598. N. D. V.
                  
               
               Signed, Phillip.
               
               And more vnder, A. de la Loo.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Demonſtration of the Eſtates of the Prouinces to his Altere.
            
               1.
               INprimis the firſt Article containes of the Aggreation of the tranſport, and gift of the Netherlands, and of the marriage.
               2.
               Secondly, to receaue the Prouinces, and to doe his oath.
               3.
               That his Altera ſhall ſhewe and manifeſt within ſeauen moneths, the accompliſhment of the marriage.
               4.
               That his Maieſty ſhall giue an Act, that the twelueth Article (comprehended in this tranſport) ſhall not be hurtfull to theſe Netherlands, Viz. that which is written touching the feeſle and Reere-ſeeffe.
               5.
               That all contributions, lodging of Souldiours, and other charges, ſhall be taken away, and that hence-forward his Altera ſhall helpe himſelfe with the Domaynes and loanes.
               6.
               That the Strangers from hence-forward ſhall remaine to the charge and payment of his Maieſty, and that they ſhall be imployed in the field, on the borders of the Enemy.
               7.
               All Souldiours, Germaynes, and ſuch like of the Country ſhall be maintayned and paide of the ſaid Loanes, as much as ſhall be poſſible, and the reſt ſhall his Maieſty pay.
               8.
               That all Offices and Gouernances of the Prouinces, Citties, and Fortreſſes, (at the furtheſt) within one yeare ſhall be ſet in the hands of the naturall Lord of the Country.
               9.
               All extraordinary Counſailes ſhall be reformed & ſet on their auntient foote. That likewiſe the Prouinciall Counſaile of Machelen, as alſo that of Brabant, and the Counſaile of Eſtate, ſhall be replaced by men of theſe Countries.
               
                  10.
               That all the Prouinces, Countries, and Citties, ſhall be mayntained in their old Priuiledges.
               11.
               His Altere ſhall endeuour himſelfe to returne to theſe Netherlands, within the next May now next comming.
               12.
               His Altere ſhall ſet in his place (during his abſence) a Gouernour of his blood, who ſhall be bound to ſweare to all what his Altere hath ſworne.
               13.
               That it ſhall be lawfull to the Generall Eſtates through interuention of his Altere, to ioyne in communication with thoſe of Holland and Zealand, to make peace.
               14.
               And ſith that the Countries are furniſhed with naturall Lords, there ſhall be three deputed to goe with his Altera to Spayne, to the end to thanke his Maieſty.
               15.
               That his Altera ſhall be bound to keepe all what is aboue ſaid, and that he in his returne, with th' Infanta, in all Prouinces ſhall doe the vſuall oath.
               16.
               That all Gouernours, Captaines, and men of warre, ſhall not enterpriſe any new thing, during the abſence of his Altera.
               17.
               That his Altera after his returne, ſhall be bound to aſſemble the Generall Eſtates, to the end (to gather) to labour, to bring the matters of the Netherlands in a good eſtate.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   