
      
         
            
            
            THE Olde mans Dietarie.
            A worke no leſſe learned then neceſſary for the preſeruation of Olde perſons in perfect health and ſoundneſſe.
            Engliſhed out of Latine, and now firſt publiſhed by Thomas Newton.
            
            Imprinted at London for Edward White, dwelling at the little North-doore of Sainct Paules Church, at the ſigne of the Gun. 1586.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Worſhipfull, Maister Thomas Egerton Eſquier, Sollicitor vnto her moſt excellent Maieſtie.
            
               WERE it not (Sir) that your rare curteſie and ſingular affabilitie is by ſufficient proof & daylie tryall generallie to the world already knowen, and in many a place, to many a mans comfort both felt and taſted: I ſhould haue bene at this time much abaſhed thus boldy to prefix your Worſhipfull name in the forhead of this poore Pamphlet. Wherein I haue not ambitiouſly hunted after any blaunched termes or picked phraſes, neither (to confeſſe the trueth) doth this Argument either allow or require it. But my purpoſe was with as much perſpicuitie as I could, to deliuer the meaning

of myne Author: which (I truſt) in ſome reaſonable meaſure, and according to ſuch proportion and pittance of ſkill as the Lorde hath endued mee withall, I haue faithfully performed. Accept it I beſeech you, as the gift of a poore Cheſſhyre-man (the Countrey where your worſhip was alſo bred and borne) and as an earneſt penny of that vnfayned loyaltie which I duetifullie beare vnto you. Aſſuring your ſelf, that although many things, farre better in valewe, and much finer for handeling, might haue bene preſented vnto you; yet with a more ſyncere good will and vowed hart, could not any thing haue beene poſsibly vnto you offered: As knoweth the Almightie, vnto whoſe good protection I doe with my humble prayer commende you.
            
               At Little Jlford in Eſſex, 
                  the viij. of Ianuarie. 1586.
               
               
                  Your Worſhips poore Countreyman, euer in the Lord to commaund. Thomas Newton.
            
         
         
            
            ¶To the friendly Reader.
            
               THE godlie trauailes and learned paines takē by ſundry our Coū
               treymen to acquaint the noble Art of Phiſicke with our vſuall phraſe, and to inueſt it with Engliſh attyer, occaſioned mee at the firſt to tranſlate out of Latine into Engliſh, a learned worke of Doctor Gratarolus, and to publiſh the ſame in the yeere 1574. vnder the title of A Direction for the health of Magiſtrates & Studients &c. Which, being of the wiſe & learned not altogether miſliked, J hoping for the like good ſucceſſe, was afterwards eaſily entreated by a worſhipfull Gentleman my very friend, eft ſoones to tread the like path, and to tranſlate Leuinus Lemnius his notable worke De Craſi: which firſt came abroad, vnder the title of The Touchſtone of Complexions, in the yeere 1576. Since which tyme, I haue not greatly dealt in any workes of this excellent, Arte otherwiſe then for

myne owne priuate ſtudie, wherein I haue found both eaſe and delight. Jt may not ſeeme ſtraunge to haue Phiſicke bookes in Engliſh, neither ought any man in my opinion to be thereat diſcontented. The very fathers of Phiſicke Hippocrates and Galene with others beeing Grecians, wrate their workes in the Greeke tongue: which to them was the mother tongue, as the Engliſh is now to vs. The Romaines wrate in Latine beeing their proper language, and the Arabians, as Auicen, in the Arabicke ſpeech: and others of other Countreis, in the language that there was vſuall. And wee cannot (without the note of more then ſauage ingratitude) but confeſſe and acknowledge the great benefite and furtheraunce that wee ſtill enioye by the painfull pennes and Engliſh treatiſes of many our owne Countreymen, aſwel in Phiſicke as Chyrurgerie. As namely, of that worthy Knight Sir Thomas Eliot, of Maſter Doctor Turner, of Maister D. Record, of Maister D. Phaer, of Maister D. Cunningham, of Maister D. Bulleyn, of Maister D. Caldwell, of Maister D. Iohnſon, of Maister D. Iones, of Maister D. Boord, Maister

Traheron, Maister Bright, Maister Barowe, Maister Securis, Maister Lyte, Maister Carye, Maister Coxe, Maister Hill, Maiſter Gale, Maister Baker, Maiſter Banister, Maister Hall, Maister Clowes, Maister Moore, Maiſter Paynell, M. Ʋicars, M. Hester, M. Baſebridge. and ſome others, whoſe works J either haue not yet ſeene, or at this preſent come not to remembrance. If therfore herein I haue incurred blame (which I truſt with all indifferent & vnaffectionate perſons I haue not) yet ſhould it bee to mee ſome mitigation of griefe, to march in rancke with ſo worthie, excellent and painfull men. If it be obiected, that this ſtudie ſitteth not with my profeſſion: ſurely I therein reſt reſolute, that Diuinitie as Ladie and Maistreſſe, refuſeth not (nay of duetie, claymeth & chalengeth) the ſeruice of all the other Artes, and Sciences: ſo as I thinke the ſurlieſt and waywardeſt Areopagite will not denye. Howſoeuer it is, thy curteous construction and friendly acceptance ſhall effectually ſatiſfie my deſire, and throughly counteruaile my trauaile.
            
               Farewell. Thomas Newton.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧The Old mans Dietarie.
            
               VEry aptlie and truelie is Phiſicke defined by Hippocrates, where he ſaieth:Lib. de flatibus. That it is the addition of thoſe thinges which lacke and are too little:Phiſicke what it is. and the withdrawing or ſubtraction of things which doe abound and are too much. For, ſeeing it hath pleaſed the Almightie Creatour in ſuch conſtitution to create and make the bodie of Man; that what through continuall wearing away and paſſibilitie of ſubſtaunce, it minutely and hourely waſteth and decaieth; & what through outward qualmes, accidents and cauſes externallie beetyding, it is ſoone altered, chaūged and quickly tranſpoſed: it had therefore neede to bee ſupported, guided and directed by the aduice of the learned and expert Phiſition, who as a

wiſe Counſellor and prouident Maiſter, may by his ſkill and knowledge bee able to recouer this loſſe, recure this decay, and in due time to repayre and reſtore in conuenient qualitie and quantitie, the eſſence and ſubſtance thereof, through daylie and continuall wearing, foreſpent and miſcaried. But for ſo much as there is great diuerſitie in Bodies, aſwell by their temperature proper & naturall, as alſo (through their diuers trades and kindes of life) accidentall and caſuall, wherby (either more or leſſe) according to the conſtitutions of their bodies, they bee ſubiect to inconuenient alteration: yet, as it were by a certaine neceſſarie and ineuitable lawe of nature, there is ioyned vnto them, a third kinde of bodie, which is that, in Old men: the which alſo in it ſelfe greatly differeth and is vnlike: and therefore the prouident foreſight and circumſpect care about the ſame, muſt not bee ſmall. For, this Age now ſtandeth at receipt, bearing, carying and ſuſtayning all the miſuſages, faultes, follies, diſdietes and diſorders of forepaſſed Ages: and ſo now by this reaſon, of it ſelfe is weake, feeble and vnweldie to all

actions of the bodie.Good diet, and wholeſome order moſt fit and needfull for Old men. And for this cauſe a ſpecial care for wholeſome Diet muſt bee had in this Age, rather then in any other. For thereby the body now ſtowping, doating and tottering with yeres, is kept and conſerued in luſtie, ſtrong and healthie plight, with the perfect and ſound vſe of the Senſes, euen till the very laſt caſt of extreeme Age.
            This profitable, wholeſome and neceſſarie Diet for Olde men, is tearmed in Greeke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , & is in vertue, working, operation and effect, in a maner like vnto that renutritiue and reſtoratiue diet, that is preſcribed vnto pueling and ſtill ſickly perſons: or to ſuch as haue beene lately recouered from their diſcraſies and maladies, to nouriſh and comforte their weake bodies, called likewiſe of the Greekes, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . For, theſe twaine (beſide that parte which is tearmed Gymnaſtique or exercitatiue, ſeruing only for recreation of them that bee ſtrong & healthfull) are the chiefe and ſpeciall partes of that Phiſicke, which is principally directed to preſerue the bodie, ſound, healthfull and luſtie by Diet.
            
               The Phiſition therfore that is to enter into this charge, and to deale in this behalfe, muſt bee no childe in knowledge, neither a rawe Scholler in his Arte, but muſt bee able perfectly and at his fingers endes,The Phiſition muſt knowe the diſpoſition and natures of bodies. to vnderſtande and knowe the natures of Bodies, and the vertues, qualities and operations of al Receipts, helps and things both good and bad, wholeſome and hurtfull. For it is no ſmall matter exactly to ſet downe and preſcribe a perfect platforme of Diet, agreeable and in each reſpect iumping with any one particular mans nature, much leſſe for an Old man: ſeeing the Complexions and temperatures of men bee ſo diuers, the compoſition of each of their bodies, ſo ſingular, and to euery particuler perſon his ſelfe qualities ſo appropriate, (ouer and beſides many ſodaine brayes, and caſuall happes befalling to them) that they cannot chooſe but ſuffer many alterations, and ſundrie chaunges. Neuertheleſſe, we at this time tying our ſelues to ye opiniōs of the graue and auncient Writers in this Arte, and following their learned iudgements, will take vnto vs for a patterne, and ſet before

vs as an example to imitate in this preſent Treatiſe & Dietarie, ſome one ſuch Old man, dealing yet in the affayres of the worlde, and matters of the Common wealth, as was Antiochus at Rome, in the daies of Galene: that by comparing the yeeres of that freſh & luſtie Old man, with old men of other Ages: the Phiſition (dealing in this charge of cheriſhing and w
                  •
               ll dieting Olde men) may the better knowe and the readier ſee, what thinges bee beſt to chooſe, and what to eſchewe: ſ
                  ••
               h Old age containeth in it ſelf no ſmall Latitude, according to more or leſſe: according whereunto his diet and fare muſt proportionablie in cōuenient qualitie and quantitie bee either encreaſed or abated.
            For a more plaine declaration therefore of this matter, we wil diuide the Age of Old men ſtepped into yeres, into three partes.Old age of three ſorts. The firſt is of ſuch as beeing yet luſtie in bodie, conſtant in minde and in ſtrength ſeruiceable and actiue, doe execute their accuſtomed buſineſſe and deale ſtill in their vſuall and wonted affayres: and theſe kinde of old men are very aptly tearmed by the Greekes 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,

that is to ſay,Greene and luſtie Age. freſh, luſtie and floriſhing Aged men, not much tainted, nipped, or bitten with yeeres. This luſtie greene Age may fitly bee called the Doore, or Entrie into a reuerend ſtowping Age: and it ſeazeth and catcheth ſome bodies ſooner, and ſome later.
            The ſecond is of ſuch, as for weakenes and want of ſtrength are growne to bee nummiſh in their limmes and vnweldie for any bodily trauaile:Graue, reuerent and honorable Age. which after ſome eaſie exerciſe, or now and then bayning, doe orderly feede: and after ſuch repaſt or meate doe quietly betake themſelues to ſleepe and reſt: and theſe ſorte of fatherly grayheaded men bee in Greeke tearmed 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . And the third kinde of Oldage is of them, which beeing riueled and wrinckled, and hauing the ſkinne of their faces and bodies, all crumpled, purſed and drawne together,Dotage. are not able any more for very feeblenes and impotencie to vſe any exerciſe, but contenting themſelues with ſome ſoft walking, leane and ſtaye them on their ſtaffe, or els by others are led by the hand: whom (for that they are now gooing toward their long home and

haue the one foote, and almoſt both, alreadie in the graue) the Greekes doe call 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Therefore, ſeeing wee haue in hand purpoſely to preſcribe a Dietarie for Oldmen, it ſhall not bee amiſſe nor vnprofitable to ſpeake firſt a fewe wordes of their naturall temperature, and mutuall difference among themſelues.
            Olde mens bodies by nature are colde and drye. For,Old men, colde and drye. the radicall humour and ſubſtantificall moyſture beeing in tract of time by litle and litle waſted, which (like Dewe) is diſtributed, and interſperſed in and among all the ſimilare and principall partes of the bodie; together with the naturall heate likewiſe by litle and litle waning and drooping away: the whole bodie cannot chooſe but decay withall & growe toward final diſſolution. So that now al the inſtrumental parts of the bodie being become too dry, the whole members muſt needes weakely, feebly, diſorderly, ill and out of frame or courſe performe and execute their appoynted actions and ordinarie offices. Wherefore the bodie now firſt lacking his naturall ſtrength and maintenaunce, beginneth to quaile and faile in

his neceſſarie & conuenient nouriſhment, and becommeth thereby ſlenderer, thinner and dryer then it was, or thē it ſhould bee: and therevpon the ſtrength, powers, and faculties thereof are enfeebled, and to expedient motions or exerciſes apparantly diſabled. But, when yet further and greater ſtore of dryneſſe enſueth and groweth vpon it, like as Trees and Plants wither away with rottennes and want of ſappe, euē ſo doth the body drowping with Age, finally waſt, decay and conſume: yet not in all perſons alike, but ſooner or later in ſome then in other ſome, according to the conſtitution, temperature, qualitie and complexion of their bodies: and alſo according to the vnruly, vnſeaſonable, and il dyet vſed, and things (of themſelues good and wholeſome) vntemperatly frequented. For, wee doe not all conſiſt, neither are wee all alike made from our birth in one equall and like meaſure of elemental qualities, and therfore neither doe we vſe one onely vniforme Dyet at al times and in all reſpects. And herevpon it commeth to paſſe that ſome ſooner then ſome, and others later then others, beginne to haue

Beardes and to bee hayrie: ſome ſooner growe to mans ſtate and ſtature: ſome bee treſh, luſtie, ſtrong, and beare their age gallantly: ſome waxe hoarte headed and will quickly be olde: and ſo conſequently become either weaker and feebler, or healthier and ſtronger.
            Wherfore, by the number of yeeres to make any certain diſtinction or difference of Ages, it is very hard, yea, vnpoſſible to doe it. For, it is often ſeene, that by reaſon of the natural diſtemperaunce of ſome one principal member, or moe: or for that,Why ſome growe old, ſooner then ſome. from the very birth, the ſame bee not proportionably mixed & ſorted, ſome doe liue all their life time ſicklie and diſeaſed, and ſo arriuing to vntimely olde age, doe pyningly languiſh and dye. Some againe, hauing ſound Bodies, and of as excellent good conſtitution as might bee, through vntemperate dyet and ryetous life haue haſtened Old age, & brought themſelues to graye heades before their time: who, if they had followed the good aduiſe and diſcreete counſell of the learned Phiſition, might haue continued themſelues in a more proſperous and longer health, till

they had come to the poynt of extreeme Oldage.
            He therefore that exactly and perfectly knoweth, that Drineſſe and Coldneſſe together, doe poſſeſſe Aged bodies: & that of olde men among themſelues,The beſt Phiſition for an olde man. there is great oddes and diuerſitie, whether we reſpect the courſe of their Age and number of their yeres, or the peculiar temperature and appropried complexion of euery one ſeuerally: that perſon (doubtleſſe) is a fit Phiſitiō and a good Nurſe for Old men. For hee will quickly deuiſe and find out a contrarie courſe to qualifie & meete with thoſe two qualities: that is to ſay, he will altogether apply himſelf to vſe ſuch helps and meanes, whereby to bring them to be hoate and moyſt. As touching the quantitie and meaſure of ſuch remedies as hee muſt vſe, he may as occaſion ſerueth, (accordingly either as the age of the partie, or as his cuſtome and ordinary dealings and faſhions do require) occupy and take: euer regarding and hauing an eye to the aforeſayd diſtemperance that raigneth in this olde Age. For by all theſe, hee ſhalbe much holpen and furthered, to knowe

more certainly the weake and foreworne diſpoſition of Olde folkes.
            Now, foraſmuch as our body is daily affected and continually groweth toward weakenes and debilitie: n
                  •
               edes muſt it in that reſpect, feele a double inconuenience, the one, of alteration: the other of continuall decay of it owne ſubſtaunce. For, ouer and beſides the ſundrie outwarde meanes of alteration, which many wayes happen vnto ye bodie, as though they were engraffed and naturally breeding therin: Doe wee not ſee, that through daylie and continuall decaying and waſting of ſome parte of the bodily ſubſtaunce, and of the diminiſhing and empayring of naturall heate, together with the expence of the ſpirits and of the ſimple & ſimilare parts, Age doth ſtealingly creepe vpon vs, and therewith drines & colones beſiegeth and aſſayleth vs? Wherevpon naturall heate beeing once abated, the ventres and offitiall members ſeruing for the conuenient conueighaunce of humours and diſtribution of nouriſhment, are vtterly vnabled from accompliſhing their offices and performing their actions: and the power attractiue

found either to bee very ſmall, or greatly depraued and out of frame: wherby the bodie becommeth bloudleſſe and cold, and all the ſtrength, comelineſſe and beautie thereof baniſhed and exiled: it aboundeth alſo & is full peſtred with great ſtore of phlegme, and whayiſh excrementall baggage, vnleſſe it bee (accordingly as ſtrength will permit) diſcreetely and temperatly dyeted.
            In this place therfore, the mark whereat wee leuell and ayme, for the good and orderly vſage of Olde men in their Dyet and trade, be manifeſt and plaine enough: namely, that there bee firſt a ſupplie and filling of thoſe places in the body which are emptyed & euacuated,Three ends to be obſerued in dyeting olde men. with ſuch nouriſhment as is agreeable and conformable to the ſubſtaunce decayed and waſted: ſecondly, that the diſtemperature of the bodie, whether the ſame bee naturall or accidentall, bee qualified and altered by his contraries: and thirdly, that there bee a conuenient and ſeaſonable expelling or purging of ſuperfluous excrements and noyſome humours, by the pores and paſſages, that ſerue to that end and purp
                  •
               ſe.

All theſe endes, are ſufficiently attayned vnto, and all theſe markes are rightly hit, by expedient receipt and conuenient vſe of meates and drinkes: by wholeſome bayning in ſweete waters: by moderate exerciſes: by gētle rubbings and frictions in the morning with Oyle: by orderly and ſeaſonable ſleepe: by moderate aff
                  •
               ctions of the minde: and by vſing ſometime (if neede ſo require) ſome milde and gentle medicines. Of all theſe, wee here purpoſe at this time particularly to entreate.
            The ſumme and effect of all holeſome dyet (ſaieth Galene) conſiſteth in theſe fower things:Lib. 1. de ſanit. tue
                     •
                  . lib. de conſtitut. 
                     〈…〉
                   Medicinae, & lib. ad Thraſibulū. in taking things conuenient to bee taken: in doing things expedient to bee done: in drawing out, things requiſite to bee drawne out: and in ſuch things as happen outwardly. Which fower poynts the Arabyan Auicen (though not very learnedly & eloquently, yet (certes) plainlie and orderly vttered and expounded of Old mens dyet: his wordes be theſe: The effect and ſumme of their regiment is, to applye and vſe that which may heate and humect: namely, nouriſhing meates, Bathes or Baynes, Drinks, large ſleepe,

long lying in Bedd, longer (I ſaye) then young men neede: continuall prouoking of vrine, expelling of phlegme from their ſtomackes by way of the Entrailes and Bladder, and carefully preſeruing, gently cheriſhing and mildly maintayning Nature in them.Tert. primi. doctri. tertie cap. primo. Thus much out of Auicen.
            
            Furthermore, the apt and profitable vſe of theſe wholeſome things, eſpecially conſiſteth in theſe three points: namely, in conuenient quantitie, expedient qualitie, and meete time and maner of vſing the ſame. Euery one of which, are briefly and after his accuſtomed maner appoynted and particularly ſet down by that worthie Hippocrates: where he ſaieth: Exerciſe, Meate and Drinke,Partic. 6. Epidem. Sleepe, Carnall knowledge, let al theſe be moderatly and meaſurably vſed. Againe, neither is fulneſſe and ſarietie good: neither long abſtinence and hunger: neither any other things,Partic. 2. Aphor. failing in the meaſure that nature requireth. And againe: Sleepe & watch, aſwell the one as the other, if they exceede meaſure,Partic. 2. Aphor. 3. be hurtfull and ill. And appoynting what tyme is fit and conuenient for exerciſe, he ſayth in an other place: Let

ſome conuenient exerciſe bee vſed afore meate.
            Wherefore, olde folkes muſt feede ſparingly and moderatly, not inf
                  •
               rcing them ſelues with much at once, but often in a daye, as twiſe or thriſe, as their ſtrength ſhall ſeeme to require, & be able to beare: and as by cuſtome they haue acquainted themſelues. For, if they exceede meaſure neuer ſo little, it doth them much harme.The Conſtitution of old folkes. Sometime, when as their naturall heate is ſmall and weake, they haue much adoe, and are not able to concoct & digeſt much meate and many meales. Moreouer, in this Age, the ſkinne beeing thicke and by reaſon of the pores of the bodie (beeing now in a maner cloſed vp) ſubiect to obſtruction, although ſome Old folkes that bee luſtie and ſtrong, doe now and then well enough digeſt the meate they eate: yet, for that the thinne excrements and ſuperfiuities of their bodie hath no iſſue or bent to paſſe out, they can not chooſe but be much encombred with ill humours, and haue their bodies peſtred and ſurcharged with abundance of crude diſeaſes, and maladies of no ſmall daunger.
            
               Wee therefore, herein ſpecially imitating Galen (who in his deſcribing of a familiar and (as it were) a peculiar directiō of health for his Countrymen of Greece, vſed for an exāple or patterne, Antiochus the Phiſition, Telephus the Grammarian, and certaine other Old men that liued till they were of extreme age) will likewiſe in this our preſcription of the Old mans Dietarie, aſſay ſo to order and deale with him, both for his tyme, turnes and ſeaſons, and alſo for the qualitie and quantitie of ſuch things as hee muſt vſe, that by conferring our aduiſe and direction, and the meanes of our vſuall and familiar Dyet with that tried rule and perfect ſquire and leuell of Dyet, vſed by famous Auncients of old tyme, we may be able certainly to knowe and vndoubtedly diſcerne, what is needfull to be added, and what is neceſſary and behoouefull to bee withdrawne and taken awaye from ſuch Oldmen, for whō we purpoſely write this preſent Regiment: exactly trying & duely conſidering withall, the habite, conſtitution, plight, diſpoſitiō, qualitie & ſtrength of their bodies: together alſo with the nature

of the Region or country where they haue bene bred and dwell, and alſo the cuſtome or faſhion wherunto they haue bene moſt acquainted and enured.
            For Aetius wordes (which he borowed out of Galens diſcourſe of Antiochus the Phiſition beeing nowe foure ſcore yeeres old) are theſe: Their meate muſt be as it were a litle pittance at once, but they muſt haue it thriſe in a day.Lib. 4. cap. 13. Let them haue therfore about nine of the clocke ſome newe bread well moulded and made, and moderately baked with ſome excellent good clarified, ſkummed, and deſpumed Honny. About one of the clocke: after friction and ſuch exerciſes as are fit for olde men, and after waſhing, let them haue their diner: and let them firſt beginne with ſuch things as be good to clenſe and keepe the belly ſoluble, as Beetes or Mallowes: and ſuch Fiſhes as ſwimme in a cleane Sea, ſkouring themſelues among the harde Rockes, and naturally toſſed and beaten with the winde and Sourges. After they haue dyned, let them reſt themſelues, taking a quiet nappe a while vpon their Bedde, and let them walke a little.

When they ſuppe at night, let them eate no Fiſh, but chooſe meates of the beſt nouriſhment, and ſuch as will not eaſily corrupt and putrifie: as namely a Chicken, or a Bird boyled in a ſingle broth.
            This ſentence, opinion and preſcription of Aetius is confirmed alſo by Auicen, and after his blunt and barbarous maner, auouched and ſet downe in theſe wordee: The nouriſhment of Oldmen muſt be giuen vnto them by litle and litle,3. Primi. Doctri. 3. cap. 2. and they muſt euery day bee twiſe or thryſe nouriſhed by litle and litle, according as they be of digeſtion, ſtrength and debilitie: and let them eate at eight of the clock ſome bread well made with Honny, and about one of the clock alſo after they haue bene conueniently bayned and waſhed. Afterward let them ſoften, mollifie, lowſe and make ſolluble their belly, with ſuch things as wee ſhal ſet downe: and toward night let them eate ſome good nouriſhing meat: & if they bee ſtrong of nature, and haue good digeſting ſtomakes, they may ſuppe the more largely. And in all their meates, let them eſpecially take heed they meddle not with any ſuch foode as engendreth Melancholy

or Phlegme: Let them alſo beware of al ſuch nouriſhment as is hoate, ſharp and drying, vnleſſe it bee purpoſely vſed for ſome ſpeciall reſpect of medicine.
            Thus ſomewhat confuſedly, diſorderly, vnaptly and vnreſpectively doth Auicen iumble and ſhuffle vp in a heape, as a generall rule for euery Olde man, that, which particularly and example ſake both Galen and Aetius ſet doune only for Antiochus: Whereas the ſame Galene, writeth not onely this: but that other Old men alſo liued long, with Milke and Hony alone, with bread and other ſtrong and ſolide meates.
            By this Ordinarie thus preſcribed and taught vs by Greekes and Arabians,Supper muſt bee larger then Dinner. this may we plainly gather contrary to the opinion of ſome later Phiſicions, that ſupper ought to be larger, and taken in greater quantitie then dinner: Which thing Celſus (treating of that diet which is beſt to be obſerued in Winter) ſeemeth to allowe, and in fewe words to approue. For his counſell is to eate meate in the day but onely once: and if that once, be a dinner, he affirmeth it to be ſo much the better.

If he haue eaten and drunke but litle in the day, or haue fed vpon ſuch foode as giueth but ſmall & weake nouriſhment, he may the boldlier eate fleſh and other ſtrōg nouriſhing meates in the euening to ſupper: for that the nights are at that time of the yere of a great length, and ſleepe alſo very long: Whereby their nouriſhment muſt by good reaſon be then the greater, and the more in quantitie. For by Sleepe in the night is digeſtion and concoction beſt performed: which in the day time vppon any light occaſion, through affection of the mind and vnſeaſonable exerciſes, are many tymes hindred and vnorderly done; as by Galene in his ſeauenth Method of curing the drie diſtemperance of the Ventricle is notably declared.
            But in preſcribing of any Diet whatſoever, aſwel for the whole, as for the ſick, wee muſt euer haue a regard (as Hippocrates counſelleth) to Cuſtome:1. Partic. Aphor. 17. & marke well how a man hath of long continuance enured himſelfe. For we ſee ſome, that at dinner will eate more largely then at ſupper: and cōtrariwiſe, ſome others that wil eate and drinke leſſe at dinner, then at ſupper.

Which cuſtome Galen in many places willeth at no hande to bee altered or chaunged in an Oldman.Cuſtome may not be broken and altered. 5. Sanit. tuend. And thus much for the maner and order of meates and drinkes, aſwell at dinner as ſupper, moſt agreeable for Oldmen.
            It remaineth now, that we likewiſe cō
               pendiouſly and briefely ſet downe what Meates be vnholſome, or be of ill iuyce, and giue naughtie nouriſhment. This therefore muſt firſt and principally be noted, that all Meates and drinkes in generall, yeelding groſſe,Groſſe meates of tough nouriſhment to be auoyded clammy and tough nouriſhment, are vnto old men very hurtfull & dangerous: as Frumentie, Cheeſe, roſted Egges, Cockles, Onions, Scallions, Muſhromes, Lintels, Oyſters, &c.
            Old men therefore muſt vſe to eate ſuch meates as be eaſie in concoction, quickly nouriſhing, ſoone alterable into the ſubſtance of the body: of good iuyce and commendable nouriſhment, without any ſtore of excrements. Let their bread be well baked, throughly moulded,Bread. ſufficiently leauened, and moderately ſalted, reaſonably boulted and fined from the Branne.
            And let them take heede they eate not

bread when it is newe, or when it is ill baked, or vnleauened, & that which is made of the fineſt Wheate Flowre and pureſt Meale. The bread yt is made of that kind of Wheate,This Zea or Spelta, is thought to be our Rye. which is called Zea or Spelt, is better, holſomer, and fitter for them, and ſo is Barley bread, although it nouriſh nothing ſo much as the other.
            
               Cakebread not wholeſome.They muſt alſo forbeare and eſchewe all Paſtlarie and Cakebread, that is made of fine Paſte, Butter, Milke, Cheeſe, Hony and Sugar.
            
               Fleſh.The fleſh of ſuch forefooted beaſtes as for hugeneſſe of body, Oldage, leaneneſſe, and hardneſſe of fleſh be any way notable, are likewiſe for thē noyſome and hurtfull. The beſt for thē, is the fleſh of a Chicken, of a yong Pullet, or wilde birds, breeding vpon Hilles and Mountaines: as againe, they bee the worſt, that liue and feede in Fennes, Ditches, Pondes, Pooles, and ſtanding Waters.
            
               Fiſh.All bigge bodied and great fiſhes, rammiſh in taſte and ſtrong in ſent, oyly, fattie ſlymie, tough and clammy in iuyce, are ſpecially to be auoyded. Thoſe that liue about cleare rockes, and ſtonie places, and

be much beaten & toſſed with the continuall Surges and waues of the Sea, (by meanes whereof they are not embroyned with filthineſſe) are greatly commended and accompted the holſomeſt.
            The beſt Egges be thoſe, that are reare,Egges. poched, and as it were halfe roſted, ſo that they may bee ſupped vp. The worſt are, thoſe that be fried, hard and roſted.
            All maner of Whitemeates made of Milke, is generally forbidden,Milkmeates as very hurtfull and vnholſome for Old men: for that they engender the ſtone in the reines, and otherwiſe eaſely and quickly procure obſtructions.
            But Cheeſe namely muſt be forborne,Cheeſe. and take heede of, ſpecially if it be old, hard or rotten. For ouer and beſide the toughneſſe and groſſeneſſe of the nouriſhment which it hath: there is in it alſo a iuyce engendring much ſtore of corrupt humors. Yet that Cheeſe that is made of ſower milke,Buttermilk Cheeſe. may ſafely be eaten with a little Honny, ſo it be afore other meate, to louſe and pourge the belly. Likewiſe, in Sommer when the weather is extremely hoat, newe milke warme from the vdder, may

be giuen them by it ſelfe, without any other meate ioyned with it: foreſeene, that a litle Sugar or Salt, or pure Honny be put vnto it & ſo ſtirred together, for feare leaſt it congeale and curdle in their Stomackes.
            
               Fruictes.Timely ripe Somer fruites may ſafely be eaten, ſo it be afore other meates, and at beginning of meales: as Cherries, Prunes, Peaches, &c. Otherwiſe there are none good & holſome, except ripe grapes hanged vp a while afore they be eaten, Damaſke, or rather Spaniſh Prunes, and ripe and drie Figges. Dates alſo, and Pyne Apples are not good, for that they cauſe gnawing in the ſtomack, make groſſe iuyce, and engender obſtructions or ſtoppings in the Liuer and Spleene.
            
               Pulſe.All maner of Pulſe is alſo to bee eſchewed, vnleſſe it be the decoction or Broth of Beanes, Peaſen and Chiches.
            
               Pothearbes growing in gardens, & good to eate.Among hearbes for the pot, and vſuall to bee eaten, the beſt in this caſe are, Lettiſe, Malowes, Orange, Blite, white Beetes, Sorrell, Borage, Bugloſſe, Cheruile and Parſely.
            
               Wine.Wine, to Old men is right ſoueraigne

and cordiall: and to their nature is moſt profitable and agreeable, becauſe it doth properly heate and moiſten the body. And that Wine is beſt cōmended for Old men which is thinne and fine in ſubſtance, and yellow or reddiſh of colour. For it heateth all their members, and it purgeth by vrine the watrie or whayiſh ſubſtaunce of their bloud.
            Ale and Beere for Old mens ordinary drinke is thought to bee nothing ſo holſome. Al water alſo, either drunke alone, or mingled with Wine, is accompted vnholſome and hurtful, vnleſſe (Cuſtome being to the contrarie) it hath bene vſed to be drunke and mingled with ſome ſuch meates as ſerue to louſe and mollifie the bellie.
            Olde men beeing much troubled with the Gout, and the Stone,Olde men troubled with the Gowte, or with the Stone. if now and then in their broths (which they vſe to prouoke vrine) they put ſome quātitie of oenomell or Meade, they ſhall find a ſingular eaſe.
            Thus much touching the qualitie of Meates and Drinkes moſt profitable for Olde men. Let vs nowe ſemblably ſet downe a fewe wordes, and ſhewe in what

meaſure and order it ſhalbe moſt expedient for them to take them.Order and meaſure for Old mens feeding. For ſeeing that al Old men for ye moſt part, are by nature coſtiue, and haue hard and drie bellies: it ſhalbe good for them, alwayes to eate and ſende before their other Meates, ſuch things as haue vertue, gently to louſe and mollifie their Bellies.3. Prim. Doctri. 3. cup. 2. 
               Auicen his counſell tendeth thereunto, where hee ſaieth: Such pot herbes and fruites as Old men ſhould eate, are the wild Carret, the white Beete, Parſely and a little quantitie of Leekes, which they ought to eate, beeing picked and condite with Almure & Oyle, and ſpecially at the beginning of their meales, that they may extenuate & clenſe the body, and make it ſoluble, and cauſe the wine to paſſe well. Thus much out of Auicen: which he, worde for word, borrowed out of Galen and Aetius in the places afore recited.
            
               Sundrie diſhes at one meale hurtfull.In meate therfore, let Old men moderately vſe themſelues, and let them in any wiſe eſchewe ſundry Diſhes and diuers ſorts of meate at one and the ſame meale: Let them eate no more at one time then their ſtomackes can well concoct & digeſt.
            
               Neither muſt oldmen bee careleſſe in the choyſe and 
                  •
               requenting of their exerciſes.Exerciſe▪
                For by idlenes and ſitting ſtill there commeth great inconuenience: whereas by moderate exerciſe and ſtirring, there commeth very much good and commoditie. In the morning therefore it ſhall doe them much good, before they fall to any meate, to vſe ſome moderate exerciſe, and ſome gentle walking abroade.
            But after Meate, all immoderate walking and vehement ſtirring is vtterly forbidden them: and in ſteede thereof they are to be enioyned to reſt, & to repoſe them ſelues, that the meate in their Stomacke may leiſurely and conueniently bee digeſted, and not too haſtily conueighed into the reſt of the members before they be ſufficiently concocted.
            If for ſome weakeneſſe, debilitie or infirmity of the feete, he be not able to walk, let him ride or be caried abroade a while. Fricaſies and Rubbings in the morning with warme Oyle,Fricaſie and rubbing, or ſoft ſtroaking ouer. and ſoft handes while he is yet faſting, may ſupply and ſtand in ſteede of other exerciſe.
            And this Fricaſie or Rubbing muſt be

done downward, that is to ſay, beginning at the upper parts of the body, and ſo bringing the hand downward toward ye lower partes. But for ſuch as be diſcraſed in the upper partes of their bodies, as they that haue the ſwimming in their Head, or bee troubled with the Headach or payne in their Necke, or greeued with the Apoplexie, it ſhalbe beſt to apply their Fricaſies, Rubbings and exerciſes to their neither partes onely. If they bee ſubiect to the Gowte and grieues in their ioyntes, it ſhall be very good for them, often to ſtirre and exerciſe their armes and hands. But as in all things els: ſo in this, ſpeciall regard muſt be had to Cuſtome: that Oldemen be not raſhly and ſodainly drawen by and by to a diuers courſe and contrary order, either in their vſage of meate and drinke, or in any other kind of exerciſe or reſpect whatſoeuer. For, to alter the habite and long continued cuſtome of an Oldman, is both hard and dangerous.
            Furthermore, Oldmēs bodies through impotencie and debilitie of the nouriſhing facultie, are encombred and peſtered commonly with watriſh excrements, and

rawe humours: whereby they haue neede of ſuch helps as may prouoke bryne, extenuate the clammineſſe and toughneſſe of thoſe humours, and alſo to vſe ſuch medicinable meates, as bee abſterſiue, and expell all daungers threatened thereby. But foraſmuch as all ſuch bee ſharpe and hoat in operation, it is therefore required in the Phiſition, to be therin very circumſpect and carefull, that hee direct the drift of all his hoat Medicines and meates to this ende, partly thereby to helpe forward concoction, and to make proportionable diſtribution of the meate into al the members of the bodie: and partly, to open obſtructions, and to expell all phlegmaticke and clammie matter: and not flatly to dry vp the bodie, and ſo conſequently to bring the whole Aged habite into a more coldneſſe and refrigeration: which thing wee ſee ſome ignorant Empericks and Practitioners in Phiſicke commonly to doe, who neuer thinke themſelues to haue ſhewed ſufficient proofe of their dapper ſkill vpon the bodies of their Patients, vnleſſe they ſtraight waies with ſome ſtrong ſolutiue, they make a cleane riddance of all

that is in their weake bellies.
            In Olde men therefore, to make them ſoluble, to purge phlegme and to louſe their bellies, it ſhall bee effectuall and ſufficient enough to vſe Oliues condite, and Capers pickled in Oyle, or Honny eaten with bread, Mercurie, Mallowes, Blite, the decoction of Colewortes or Cabages, a Figge now and then eaten with a little Sene, & ſome good Turpentine as much in quantitie as two or three Walnuttes. For, this not onely mollifieth and louſeth the bellie, but mundifieth alſo and cleanſeth the entrailes, openeth the obſtructiōs of the Lunges, ſknowreth the Kidneyes, and driueth out grauell: the proportion of his Receipt is appoynted to be one vnce.
            
               Things good to prouoke vrine.To prouoke vrine in Old men, Parſelie both roote and ſeede, & Saxifrage are of a ſingular vertue. And if they miſtruſt or ſuſpect the grauell in their Kidneyes, or bee ſubiect to the Gowte and griefe in their Ioyntes, it ſhall bee good for them (ſaith Galen) to vſe Meade or oenomel:
               3. De ſanit. 
                     ••
                  en. ſo that for the Gowte and ioynt ſickneſſe, they add thereunto Parſelie: and for the Stone and grauell, ſome Betonie.
            
               Beſide the premiſſes, there be yet other things no leſſe to bee reſpected: namely, ſuch as are outwardly incident vnto vs: of which ſorte are theſe: Ayre, Water, Fier, Oyle, Bathes, Sleepe, and Affections of the mynd.
            Ayre therefore muſt bee choſen,Beſt ayre for dwellings. according to the nature and ſeaſon of the yeere, and enterchaungeable ſtate of the weather and ayre encompaſſing vs, ſomewhile hoat, and ſomewhile but ſomewhat wharme. It muſt not be neere to any ſtanding Pooles, ſtinking Ditches, Fennes, Marſhes, common Sinkes, Draughtes or Priuies, ye ſerue for great multitudes of people: it muſt be ſuch as hath by turnes, one while the Eaſt, and an other while, the Weſt winde freely blowing ouer it.
            For vſes of the Kitchin:Beſt water. the beſt and wholeſomeſt is Fountaine or Well water, pure, cleare, hauing no euident qualitie or ſenſible ſigne, either of taſt or ſmell, and at the place of his ariſing out of the ground, looking toward the Eaſt. For if it runne on hard Stones and peebles, and haue his proſpect toward ye North, where the Sunne beames giue no ſhine nor heat

thereunto, it is to bee miſliked and attoyded, as raw, hard and vnpleaſaunt, engendring windineſſe and fretting in the Entrailes and hypocondricall partes.Partic. 5. Aphor. 26. 
               Hippocrates ſetteth downe ſundry notes and meanes, wherby to knowe and trye which is the beſt Water: for that (ſaith he) is the beſt water that is lighteſt. And the lighteſt water is that, which wil ſoone be hoat and ſoone colde. Alſo that, whereof commeth leaſt ſkumme or froath when it boyleth. Alſo dip linnen cloathes into ſundrie waters, & afterward lay them forth to dry: looke then which is ſooneſt drye, and that wherein it was dipped, is the beſt water, the pureſt and the wholeſomeſt. The lighteſt water (ſayth Celſus) is Raynewater:Lib. 2. cap. 17. becauſe it is moſt ſubtile, and of all others moſt penetratiue. The next is that, which guſſheth out of a Spring. The third is of a cleane running Riuer: The fourth is Cunduite water: The fifth, the water of Snowe and Yce: worſe then that, is the water of ſtanding Pooles and Pondes: and worſt of al, is that which is of Fennie Ditches.
            
               Bathes.Bathes or Baynes of ſweete waters in

the Spring, Sommer, and Autumne, enterchaungeably vſing therewith the decoction of hoat hearbes and rootes, be excellent good & profitable for Old folkes. For they open the pores being purſed and drawne together through drineſſe, they doe mollifie the hard and ſtiffe parts: they diſperſe by euaporation the abundance of humors: they leiſurely drawe out ſweate and excrementall matter: finally, they doe humect and calefie the ſubſtantiall and ſolide partes of the bodie, with a pleaſaunt, warme, vaporous, and dewie moyſture.
            In Winter & ſuch ſeaſons wherein the weather is cold,Winter. it ſhalbe good to kéep thē
               ſelues in a warme Chāber with a Chimney, hauing fire: for ſo doe wee reade that Antiochus at ſuch times vſed to doe.
            Competent and meaſurable Sleepe is beſt,Sleepe. beeing of ſeuen or eight howers continuance. But at any hand, Sleepe muſt bee forborne and not vſed immediatly after meate, neither muſt it bee either too much or too large.
            Affections and perturbations of the minde,Affections and perturbations of the mynde
                     •
                  
                as they greatly endamage and annoye euery Age: ſo to Olde folkes eſpecially

they bee moſt hurtfull and daungerous. For they alter their bodies, and vtterly diſpoſſeſſe them from their naturall conſiſtencie: they drye vp the bones, and baniſh away the vitall ſpirite. Old folkes therefore muſt by reaſon, maiſter their affections, and by diſcretion qualifie all accidents whatſoeuer: they muſt retaine a merry minde, and ſettle themſelues in the ſtate of tranquillitie. Let them recreate and ſolace themſelues with Hiſtories of notable things aforetime exployted, and with the cōference and companie of their aſſured louing friends: that, all dumpiſh, clowdie, ſorrowfull, ſullen, lumpiſh cares, and grieues beeing vtterly put to flight, they may with mery and cheereful minds the more quietly & feruently addict themſelues vnto godly meditations, and to the ſeruice of God.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            ¶To the Curteous Reader.
            
               TO ſupply ſome certaine boyd pages, which otherwiſe at this Impreſſion would haue bene blanck, I haue thought very cō
               uenient, (the matter and argument conſidered) to annexe hereunto a brief and compēdious Abſtract of a Phiſitions duetie, and of ſuch pointes as by Conſcience and Oath are lyable vnto his charge and function. The which I haue ſuffered here to paſſe abroad into ye world vnder the name and title of Hippocrates Oath. Meruaile not thou at the heathniſh names of thoſe putatiue Gods, by whom hee ſweareth, (which notwithſtanding I haue here ſimply and faithfully ſet downe and deliuered, euen as I foūd them in my original Copie:) but rather feare & tremble, and take thereby occaſiō to yeeld moſt

humble and hartie thankes vnto Almightie God for enlightening thee with a better knowledge: conſidering that in the ſeueritie of his Juſtice hee might likewiſe haue dealt with thee. Frame thy ſelf therfore in obedience to liue according to the ſquired rule of his moſt holy word: for better were it, not to know the way of righteouſneſſe at all, then after knowledge therof, to turne by prophane life from the holy Commaundement. Theſe articles are in number but fewe, and yet in them (fewe as they bee) there is nothing lacking: againe, they bee ſo ſufficiently large, that there cannot any (without ſome preiudice to the Arte, and diſcredite to the Artiſt) be well ſpared. As when thou haſt aduiſedly peruſed and read them ouer, I perſwade my ſelfe, thou wilt frankly and willingly confeſſe.
            Farewell. At Little Ilford 
                  this viij, day of Ianuary. 1586.
                  
               
               Thine, in the Lord, Thomas Newton.
               
            
         
         
            
            Hippocrates his Oath.
            
               I Take Apollo the Phiſition, and Aeſculapius, and Hygias and Panaceas, the ſonnes of Aeſculapius, and all the Gods and Goddeſſes to witneſſe: That I (ſo much as in me ſhal lye, and ſo farre as my iudgement and ſkill ſhall ſtretch) will obſerue & performe all the things contained in this Oath and in this Booke. viz.
            
            That I ſhall yeeld and giue vnto my Maiſter, of whom I haue bene taught, and by whō I haue bene trayned in this Art, no leſſe reuerence and duetie, thē to myne own natural Father that begat me. That I ſhalbe conuerſant in life with him: And that I ſhall to the vttermoſt of my power and abilitie, miniſter vnto him all ſuch things as I ſhall vnderſtand he hath need of.
            That I ſhall make no leſſe account of his Children, thē of myne own Brethren,

and ſo to repute and take them.
            That I ſhal not be ſqueimiſh to beſtow my ſkill in this Arte vpon the poore and needie, freely, without either fee or other couenant certainly agreed vpon.
            That I ſhal freely, faithfully, and truely deliuer all my Precepts and Secretes vnto myne owne and alſo to my Maiſters Children, and to other ſuch Scholers as haue addicted, vowed, bound, and ſworne themſelues to the Studies and Lawes of Phiſicke, and not to any others.
            In curing of the Sicke, I ſhall vſe to the vttermoſt of my power, knowledge, and iudgement, ſuch things as bee good, wholeſome, ſouereigne & profitable: That I ſhal not deferre, ne linger my cure longer then I neede, keeping my Patient thereby the longerwhile in grief & paine: and that I ſhall not offer any wrongfull dealing to any maner of perſon.
            That I ſhall not (although I be therevnto required) giue deadly poyſon to any perſon: neither counſell the ſame to any other: nor giue it to any woman being with childe, to kill the Infant in her wombe.
            That I ſhall preſerue and keepe both

my life and myne Arte, free and cleare from iuſt obloquie and ſlaunder, and from all ſuch occaſions as may iuſtly diſparage and emblemiſh the ſame.
            That I ſhall not preſume to cut any perſons diſeaſed with the Stone, but referre that action to others ſkilful therein.
            That, vnto what houſe ſoeuer I ſhall goe for the practiſe of myne Arte, I ſhall onely reſpect and carefully employe my ſelfe to relieue and recure the partie diſeaſed, my Patient, vnto whom & for whom I purpoſely goe.
            That I ſhall auoyde, eſchewe and renounce all wrong, all lewdneſſe, all filthineſſe, al wanton daliaunce and venereous actions, whether they bee womens bodies that I haue in cure, or mens bodies: and whether they be the bodies of Free, or of Bondmen.
            That whatſoeuer during the tyme of any cure I ſhall either ſee or heare, or otherwiſe (beſide my cure) ſhall knowe in any many life, vnderſtanding that thing to be ſuch as requireth ſecrecie and ſilēce, I ſhal not vtter nor be wray to any maner of perſon, but ſhal herein faithfully keepe

his counſell.
            To theſe Articles cōpriſed in this my preſent Oath, I proteſt myne obedience & aſſent: the which if I inuiolably & faithfully obſerue and keepe, my prayer and wiſh is, that all things aſwell in my life as in myne Arte and profeſſion, may haue proſperous ſucceſſe and happie ende; with perpetuall fame, renowne and glorie: as contrariwiſe, if I treacherouſly tranſgreſſe, or wilfully herein forſweare my ſelfe, let all things fall out vnto mee contrarie.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   