
      
         
            
            
            The 4. of Octob: 1622.
            A TRVE RELATION OF THE AFFAIRES of Europe, eſpecially, France, Flanders, and the Palatinate. Whereby you may ſee the preſent eſtate of her Prouinces, and coniecture what theſe troubles and wars may produce.
            TOGETHER WITH A SECOND ouerthrow giuen the French Kings forces at Mompelier, by thoſe of the Proteſtant League, wherein were ſlaine a great number of the KINGS Armie.
            Laſt of all.
            The remoue of the famous ſiedge before Bergen, vpon the 22. of September laſt, with the retreat of Spinola to Antwerp, as taking aduantage of the time, and not able to continue, for feare of vtter diſſipation.
            LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, and Nicholas Bourne. 1622.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A TRVE RELATION OF ALL THE AFfaires of Europe, eſpecially the buſineſſe of France, Flanders, and the Palatinate, wherein you may ſee what is now acted for the preſent, and coniecture, what theſe Warres and troubles may in time produce.
            
               From Naples.
               
                  I Begin with Naples, becauſe as neere as I can I will come orderly forward with the Prouinces as they lye, and in regard the ſeuerall Letters beare not one date, I haue thought good to Muſter the Newes, which belongs to the ſame place, as it were into one Armie, and ſo you ſhall receiue the occurrences all together.
               From hence they write, that the Catholicke Maieſtie vnderſtanding of the pacification of the troubles in this Kingdome, and accuſtomed to performe all the duties of a noble Prince in gratifying, or at leaſt recompencing the ſeruices of his worthy Captaines, Gouernours, and Souldiers, hath granted an annuall penſion of ſixty thouſand crownes to Aadiuta de Ciſta Duke of Brattana, and a preſent disburſement of a 100000. crownes, both for money laid out for the

prouiſion of corne in the time of famine, and disburſed to ſouldiers in the tumults of that Common-wealth.
               Secondly, that there are certaine directions for the leuying of two thouſand men at his Maieſties charge of Spaine to paſſe into the Valtoline.
               
               Thirdly, that diuers ſouldiers were leuyed about Otronto and Brindiſi in Apulta, but the Venetians would not let them paſſe ouer the gulph to land either in Dalmatia or Hiſtria.
               
               Fourthly, that the Popes Nuntio arriuing in Spaine aduerciſed the Conclaue of his welcome and entertainment, writing withall, that the Catholicke King had declared himſelfe concerning the 
                     Ʋaltolina, and indeed the whole countrey of the Grizons, that what he had gotten he would defend and keepe to the vttermoſt of his power, as minding to incorporate it to the Dutchy of Milcaine, and what was to be got he challenged, as formerly forfeited to the Duke de Oſanne; to whom the whole countrey was morgaged for 200000 crownes lent vnto them, when they firſt enterpriſed the warre againſt thoſe of the religion.
               Fifthly, and laſt of all, that the noble men of Naples are more ſtrictly lookt vnto for going at their pleaſure into the countrey, or maintaining greater guards and attendants, then the Viceroy hath limited them.
            
            
               
               From Rome.
               The Letters of Rome haue likewiſe ſeuerall dates, but after the ouerlooking, affoord vs thus much.
               Firſt, that the Pope hath created foure Cardinals, two of Spaine, one of Italie, and one of Poland, who hath commiſſion to determine the controuerſies betweene the Ieſuites and the Nobilitie.
               2 That the Dutcheſſe of Peteliano is deceaſed, being the Popes Neece.
               3 That there is a Nuntio ſent to the Emperour for the releaſe and deliuery of the Cardinall of Steall taken at Peang and now priſoner in the Aponte, the agreement is, that the Emperor is contented with the Popes mediation, and his Holineſſe will examine the cauſe, and ſo puniſh him, if he haue beene a delinquent in the matter accuſed of againſt his Imperiall Maieſtie.
               4 That there are certaine letters writ from Naples vnto his Holineſſe, about the dangerous ſickeneſſe of the Dutcheſſe of Montelione, who is very importunate for the prayers of the Church and the Popes bleſſing.
               5 That by reaſon of the want of corne in Naples, there was a great impoſition on all the Popes territories, and they that could not ſpare their graine, were contented to disburſe their money: ſo that at laſt Arnigo Antonio Captaine of the foote did conuey much corne to Abruzza, for the releefe of that Cittie, and countrey.
               6 That the ſolemnitie of the Exequies of the Duke of Parma were celebrated, and the Cardinall

                  Perneſe ſent thither to remaine with the widow Dutcheſſe for the eſtabliſhing of her eſtate▪ who ſo ordered the matter, that the Nobilitie, Officers, and better ſort remained in their places, but many inferiors were altered and diſcharged.
               7 That the Biſhop of Cortona in Tuſcane was dead, whoſe reuenues was a thouſand fiue hundred crownes a yeere, out of which the Pope challenged diuers arrerages, and other duties belonging to the Conclaue of Cardinals.
               8 That Count Robert Sherley Embaſſadour for the King of Perſia had particularly viſited the Cardinalls, and was on the day of Saint Rouo to paſſe to the ſeuen Churches, where were ſhewed him the reliques and treaſure; which ſolemnitie finiſhed, hee tooke his leaue and departed toward Perſia.
               
               9 That the Duke of Montileone remaining in Spaine deſired to bee diſmiſt from the Court, and that there was expected in his place Monſieur de Maſsimi as a new Apoſtolicall Nuntio.
               10 That his Holineſſe went in proceſſion to the Baſilica of Sancta Maria to celebrate the feaſt of the Aſcenſion of the bleſſed Virgine, and while he remained in the Chappell, he created the Cardinall Melino with the dowry of the Chappell, and ſo when hee had confirmed the company of Conſalone, returned home.
               But the day after the feſtiuall of Saint Rouo great paſtime was on the water, like the Regatius of Venice, with painted Boates, diuers ſorts of Muſicke warlike inſtruments, guilded Gallies, with Streamers and Penons, and, the Gentlemen well appointed.
               
                  11 Laſt of all, that preſently followed the death of Monſieur Marcabrow, which a little rebated this iollitie.
            
            
               From Venice.
               Becauſe commonly our Poſt lettters of Italy come from Venice, or at leaſt thoſe of Venice make mention of the affaires of the petty Prouinces, eſpecially Millaine: I haue therefore thought it conuenient to put in the Items of Italian affaires into this ſection of Venice, and ſo make vp as it were one bundle in this matter.
               Firſt, that it is written from Millaine, that the Duke de Feria, Leopoldus of Auſtria, and the Switzers haue agreed vpon a treatie of peace, and appointed a place of meeting at Loudray, the better to accommodate the company, which muſt needes be very great, conſidering there is expectation of ſeuerall Emboſſadours from France, Venice, the Archduke Leopoldus, the the Duke of Feria, the Cantons of Switzerland, and the Grizons, who ſhall bee commiſſioned to treat of conditions betweene Millaine and them: notwithſtanding the expectation of this faire weather, euery day almoſt hath had his interpoſition of clouds, & warlicke preparations: for there is nothing but killing, and intercepting of paſſages among the Grizons, and preparing of ſouldiers in Switzerland, ſo that they haue ſtill an army on foote of ſeuen thouſand, as reſolued to defend their countrey againſt the vſurpation of ſtrangers, whoſoeuer.
               
                  Secondly, That though the Archduke Leopold bee gone himſelfe to recouer his Townes in Alſatia; yet haue his ſouldiers forraged the Alpes, and the Valleyes of the Griſons, as farre as Tiroll, with the taking of 500 Head of Cattell, and ſtill and ſtill encreaſeth his Forces, as if he meant to ſubiugate that Countrey wholly to the vſe of the Spaniard.
               
               Thirdly, That for all this faire ſhew of Pacification, they write from Venice, That the Spaniard will haue no Peace, but are reſolued to continue the Warre, till eyther by force they make their owne way, or by compoſition free the Countrey, that his Armies may paſſe from Millan into Germanie, without interception.
               Fourthly, That whereas there was a payment of 25000 Crownes yeerely disburſed to the Valtolina, the Gouernor of Millan hath denyed the ſame, & ſtopped it in his Chamber of Accounts, by directions from Spaine; and therefore they ſuppoſe thoſe propoſitions of Peace to be in vaine, conſidering there is an Armie muſtring in Millan.
               
               Fifthly, That Monſieur di Sugli comming poſt from France with ſixe Horſes, and ſome carriages of Spaine, was ſurprized by the Huguenots neere vnto Molins, and all his Money and Carriages rifled, he himſelfe hardly eſcaping; the Countrey being euery where in an Vprore, and the people in Armes.
               Sixtly, That there came from Vienna by the way of Millan, to returne into Spaine, the Count Rambuldo Collulto, and that the Maſter of the Campe, Giou. Tornazo Carrauich
                        •
                     , comming from Naples to goe to Madrid, was requeſted by the Duke of Feria to be (as it were) a Remembrancer to his Catholike Maieſtie, that a new

Army were ſent to Millan, eyther vnder his command, or ſome other worthy Captaines, as his Embaſſadour ſhould giue directions.
               Seuenthly, That there was newly arriued from Spaine Doctor Peribelto, to goe as Commiſſioner into the Valtoline, well rewarded with a chayne of 1000 Crownes, and better furniſhed with ſufficient Treaſure, to defray his charges, and an annuall penſion for the honor of his place.
               Eightly, That the Diet, which was once appointed to bee held for the Switzers and Griſons in their owne Countrey, ſhall now be kept in Lindo, belonging to the French King, whither Leopoldus will come in perſon, and meaneth, as it ſhould ſeeme, to ſtand vpon higher tearmes, then in former times.
               Ninthly, That one of the Gentlemen of Venice, named Illuſtriſsimo Gironimo Lando, hauing bin their Embaſſador, was on a Sabbath day made a Knight of Saint Marks, and admitted into the Colledge of Ten, being wel gratified with a ſufficient recompence of Zecchinos.
               
               10. That in the Church of Sancta Maria, two yong Turks were baptized, who had brought to Venice great ſtore of Treaſure, and diuers Iewels.
               11. That the Letters of Bollogna aſſure vs, that among other priſoners, there were taken certaine vnruly perſons, who had in a riotous night ſpoyled the Image of our Lady, and diſrobed other Saints; but after great ſearch, they were found, and are likely to endure ſeuere puniſhment.
               12. That on a Tueſday in September, in the Piazz
                        •
                     
                   of S. Markes in Venice, there was a publication of the Baniſhment of La illuſtriſsima Signora Bianca, ſiſter to

the illuſtrious Almenio Balli, for poyſoning her Husband Illuſtriſsimo Gironimo Seranço; and whoſoeuer could bring in her Head, ſhould haue 2000 Liuers: her Goods were publikely ſold, her Vecchia bandited, and a ſeruant of truſt proſcribed.
               13. That in the open Market-place of S. Markes, one Antonio Strauariol did deadly wound in the head Giacomo Lauoradi, a Muſician of S. Marks Church: for which hee fled, and is not yet taken.
            
            
               From Vienna.
               You ſee what Method I haue vſed, to draw the account of Europes
                  ▪ Buſineſſe by Items, which I am perſwaded is not vnpleaſing, and therefore I will continue the ſame: For breuities ſake, and to auoide diſcourſing, know then, that the Letters from Vienna containe theſe particulars.
               Firſt, That the Emperour and Empreſſe are returned from the Diet of Hungarie, which was determined and ended to the applauſe of the Hungarians, and contentment of the Prince of Tranſyluania: For it was concluded, that all their Fortreſſes and Holds on their Confines, ſhould be naturall Hungars, and no ſtrangers; and that the Emperour ſhould preſently ſend to the ſolemne Meeting at Ratisbone, where all the great Lords and Princes of Germanie haue appointed an Aſſembly, for the ſetting vpright the ſtaggering affaires of the Commonwealth, and rectifying the diſorders of the Empire.
               
                  2 That Bethlem Gabor had entertained ſome ſuſpition againſt his Subiects, becauſe they repined at his impoſitions, and had bin hurried out to vnneceſſary and vnprofitable Warres, as hauing ſpent three yeares to no purpoſe. 3 That Ill Signeur Don Pietro Aldabrandino had diſmiſſed all his foot Souldiers, but retained his Horſe, with which he reſolued to paſſe into the Valtolina againſt the Grizons. 4 That there was a whiſpering of an innouation in Tranſiluania, by reaſon Bethlem Gabors Brother had Muſtred an Army of 30000. as if he meant to vſurpe ſome of his Prouinces from him. 5 That there is a Baſhaw ſent from the new Emperour Muſtapha in Conſtantinople with 300. Horſe well accompanied both to renue the League, which hath formerly kept theſe Princes in good order, and to affoord an accompt of the inſolency of the tumultuous Ianizaries in riſing againſt their Lord, which haue beene ſeuerely puniſhed, and ſeeme ſtrangely penitent, as wondring at their owne handiworke: but now all is quiet, and the Sacra Porta ſtands open, as in times paſt, yea the two young Brothers of Oſman are not Impriſoned in the 7. Towers, but onely well tutored, and guarded as it becommeth ſuch great Princes. 6 That about the 10. of September, the Empreſſe after her returne and Coronation in Hungary to Vienna, did ſolemnize a ſumptuous Maske, in which her greateſt Ladies were Actors, and to which the Noble Princes, Ambaſſadors & many Strangers were inuited. 7 That mong others, after great interceſſion, the Count Hollocke hath made his peace with his Imperiall Maieſty, but vpon very hard Conditions as it chanceth in all thriuing buſines, where the deiected muſt be at the will and pleaſure

of the Conqueror, 8 Laſt of all, that the Baſhawes of Buda and Belgrade, haue had an Army in readines of 40000. euer ſince that miſchieuous attempt vpon the perſon of the great Turke, as ſuſpecting ſome furions innouation by their owne mutinous Soldiers, or watching an opportunity to encroch further into Hungary, but of of that there is little feare, becauſe there wanteth a ſufficiet Maieſty to Commaund and controule them.
            
            
               From Prague.
               They write from hence. 1 That thoſe of Clerenbergh came to Compoſition with his Imperiall Maieſties Army, and had promiſe to depart like Souldiers with their Amour and prouiſion, but they were no ſooner out of their Trenches and faſtnes, but they were taken and carried Priſoners to Prague, both the Captaine and the Company, contrary to the faith propoſed, and the conditions of their Promiſe. 2 That the Emperours Soldiers returning from Hungary, Morauia, and Sileſia, were ſo tatter'd, torne, and in a manner out of countenance, when they came to ciuill places, that hee was compelled to take order for their new Arming and apparelling, diſburſing great ſummes amongſt them for their further ſatisfaction. 3 That the Emperour had new preferred Il Signeur Sluuato to the Gouernment of Morauia, who preſently aduertiſed his Maieſty of the reſolution of Glatz, which was, to holde it out to ſee the vttermoſt, though no ſuccour came to them at all. 4 That hither came certaine Letters out of Poland, whoſe originals belike were ſent to his Imperiall Maieſty, containing thus

much; that by the wiſedome of the Baſhaw of Aleppo, a man of great yeares and greater wealth, now the principall Viceer, the Gouernment of the Turkiſh Empire was caſt as it were in a new molde: For hauing wiſely ſetled a generall Peace with forraigne Princes, and iudiciouſly confirmed the gouernment of the ſeuerall Baſhawes, he by little and little got the vpperhand of the Ianizaries, and did ſo tractate with the Chawſe and Spahies that in one place or other hee put 2000. Ianizaries to Death: For after he had pollitickly proclaimed them all Trators, that were conſenting to the Death of Oſman, and as pollitickly promiſed great rewards to the diſcouerers of theſe mutinous Souldiers, many were detected, and as many Executed: yea ſuch was the miſchiefe, that euen powred downe a tempeſt of deſtruction vpon their heads, that their very Wiues (a cuſtome newly begun amongſt them to marry) did detect them to the Magiſtrate, wherein ſure the Iudgement of God was ſeene to puniſh ſuch audacious impiety in any one, that durſt boaſt they had layde violent hands on a Prince. 5 That there is newly come from Tabor 6. pieces of Ordnance, and 200. Souldiers: from Morauia 800. from Sileſia 800. from Saxony 1000. with 12. pieces of Cannon more, who are preſently to bee ſent to the ſiedge and battery of Glatz, which is now the onely Towne of ſame, that holdeth out againſt this Imperiall Maieſty. 6 That in the Towne of Glatz is the Count de Thorne, and in the Fieldes abroad the Marquiſe Ieggenſdorp, and the olde Count Thorne, who keepes as it were a running Army, whereupon the Father vnderſtanding what danger his Sonne muſt needes bee in, if the Emperour proceeded ſo violently

againſt the Towne, cauſed 2000. Foot and 500. Horſe of Crabuts to bee put into the ſame, for the better defending the place, and oppoſing their Enemies.
               7 That the ſaid Forces as they were Marching, encountred with many of the Emperours Souldiers, who were comming to the Siedge, and not onely defeated them, but rifled their Carriages, which when the young Count Thorne vnderſtood, hee preſently made a Salley with 200. Horſe and 1500. Foote onely, wherein hee ſo preuailed, that that Quarter of the Emperours Army was diſperſed, and the Cannon clogged, and ſo they returned with ſome booty and a great deale of honour.
            
            
               From the Palatinate.
               Theſe Letters come from Franckfort and certifie thus much, that the rumour after the taking of Heidelburgh of putting all to the Sword, is not true: For the 300. Engliſh and Scots, that were in the Towne had ſafe conduct to paſſe to Franckfort, where my Lord of Belfaſt was, and ſo by his directions either to goe into England, or diſperce themſelues, as they could to other places, onely they might not returne to Mainhem, nor Franckendale, for feare of further trouble or reſiſtance, if theſe places were ſo ſupplyed: That ſince the taking of Heidelburgh, Leopoldus and Tilley haue by a Counſell of Warre, reſolued to make an end of the troubles in this Prouince, by ſurpriſing or enforcing the reſt of the Townes, yet for a time they deſiſted from the ſiedge of Franckendale, and ſet themſelues downe before Mainhem, as caſting vp this

account, that if they could any way preuaile heere, the leſſer would be more eaſily obtained either by ſurrender, or compoſition: When they were thus reſolued, they marched forward with 12000. foot and 500. horſe, which when General Vere vnderſtood, & ſaw plainly that miſchiefes now followed one another, as the waues of the Sea, ſeeing hee had endured ſo much to his eternall fame and memory, he would ſure put vp the reſt in the account of his Honour, and beare all with patience whatſoeuer might chance: whereupon he ſends for two Companies from Frankendale, to adde ſome little ſtrength to the buſineſſe, which made vp 8. Companies of Engliſh, beſides 4000. Dutch and other Strangers, with whom hee is determined to preſerue the place to the laſt man, as long as any prouiſion or ſupply will laſt, vnleſſe he ſhal receiue further directions to the contrary form England. But before Mainhem was thus affrighted, Leopoldus and Tilly put in ſtronger Gariſons into Wormes and Spiers, for feare of new reuolts and hurliburlies: for they ſaw plainly, that the people bare a great good will to the Palatine, and would with all conueniency attend the reſtitution, and returne of their firſt Lord.
               
                  Bauaria on the other ſide was not ſo confident of his ſecurity, but that he fortified his owne Townes, putting certaine Cannons into Mriken, which he had taken from Amberg, and were once the Switzers, called the man and the woman, being Peeces of principall account: but when hee had ſalued this ſore of the diffidence of his owne Countrey and people, hee ſent the reſt of his forces to Tilly and Leopoldus, who were now marched from Heidelberg by Spiers to take in the Caſtle of Magdenburg
                  
which yet held out with diuers other againſt them, which when they perceiued, and that they ſhould be as much troubled with matters of leſſe importance as the greater, they left that courſe and returned (as you haue heard) toward Mainhem, where they reſolue to continue, vntill the affaires in the Palatinate be caſt in a new molde, or the Countrey ſetled to quiet: but here I cannot but remember a ſaying of Stephens King of Poland: Kings may commanud bodies and liues, but not hearts and conſciences: ſo may ſome other Prince preſume on the Emperours Donation of this Prouince, but the Inhabitants will euer loue their owne Prince, and burſt out (no queſtion) vpon any occaſion of reuolt or alteration: which the Archduke Leopoldus and Bauaria knowes too well; and therefore, whereas report hath beene lauiſh, concerning Tillies deſcending into Brabant: beleeue it, he cannot ſecond their expectation: For Bauaria will not ſpare him, nor Leopoldus conſent to his dimiſſion, conſidering the Countries are ſtill grudging and repining, and they muſt detaine them within obedience by ſtrong hand. Beſides: the Winter approacheth, and the Germanes expect ſome reſt after their great toyle, being euer as much encumbred with a long march, as with a furious skirmiſh. Therefore I conclude this point, there is no feare of Tillies comming into Brabant, or ioyning with Spinola.
               
            
            
               From Spaine.
               The Letters from Spaine haue great variety in them, and haue written into Italy concerning ſome things done in England; but becauſe I will meddle with nothing but

iuſtifiable actions, I will alſo tell you of nothing, but ſhall be befitting for any auditory; the perticulars then may be thus welcommed.
               Firſt, that the buſineſſe of the Valtoline ſuppoſed to raiſe a warre and diſturbance in Italy, is ouerpaſſed, from the Kings reſolution to haue the Countrey at his commaund: and whereas the French King by his Ambaſſadour made interceſſion for the appeaſing of the troubles, eſpecially that it would pleaſe his Catholick Maieſtie to forbeare their diſturbance, and giue way, that his great Fort might be demoliſhed according to a former treaty by his Ambaſſadour Monſieur Baſſompier with Philip 3. it pleaſed his Catholick Maieſtie to anſwer in this manner to the French Ambaſſadour, that he ſhould aduertiſe his King by Letters to appeaſe the troubles of his owne Kingdome, and ſeeke the quietting of thoſe tumults, before he intermedled with other Princes affaires: and therefore not to take further care, but leaue the diſpoſing of this warre to the Catholick Maieſtie and his Counſell.
               Secondly, they write, that Don Pietro de Lieua being dead, the Duke of Ferandina is made Generall of the Gallies of Spaine. Don Diego Pimentelli Commaunder of thoſe of Naples and Don Octauio de Aragon, Gouernour of thoſe of Sicila.
               
               Thirdly, that the Duke of Oſſuna hath the liberty of the priſon, yet vnder guard, ſo that his wife, children, and friends may come and ſee him.
               Fourthly, that the Duke of Alua is created a Counſellour of State, and ſhall preſently depart from Italy into Spaine.
               
               
                  Fiftly, that the Prince of Aſcoli hath an augmentation of 500. crownes a moneth, and is returning into Spaine either from Naples or Millane.
               
               Sixthly, that in Italy diuers Biſhops and Lords were newly dead, by name Monſieur Marcabrano, the Biſhop of Torcona in Tuſcane. Richardor Piauan the Rector of St. Nicolay: the great Maſter of Ruuenna Iohn Dominico Inquiſitor Generall of that Citie, of 77. yeares age, and continuing in that gouernment 22. yeares.
               Seuenthly: Laſt of all, that in the midday in Venice of late aroſe ſo great a tempeſt of winde with ſuch horrible and fearefull whiſtlings, that many Boates were ſplitted and drowned, many trees ouerthrowne, many men deſtroyed on the water, and diuers other ſtupendeous miſchies chanced, eſpecially the hurrying of the Prieſt of St. Vidal from the Port of the Pallace to the pillar (or very neere) of Angelo di Angoli: ſo that hee was caried home to his bed all bruſed and battered.
            
            
               From France.
               The Letters of France come from diuers places, as either the warres are proſecuted, or the King in perſon viſites the Prouinces and Cities: as they write from Lions, that the King tooke in all the Townes as he went round about Montpelier, but when he came thether, it ſeemed as a damme to an inundation, & ſo he was ſtopped a while, and enforced to tractate about conditions, demaunding 200000. Florins, and the raiſing of a Citadell for the commaunding of the Towne, which being denied, though that Madame d'Aguſta came vnder hoſtages to capitulate the matter: the King much incenſed,

commanded a generall aſſault, wherein fayling, he returned to Lyons with great loſſe, and greater diſcontentment.
               From Rochell the Letters giue vs to vnderſtand, that the Count Soyſons, Generall of the Kings Armie in thoſe parts, conſiſting of aboue 6000. hath loſt moſt part of the ſame this Summer, lying before it, without performing any great peece of ſervice againſt it: whereupon the King is enforced to raiſe a new ſupply out of Poiters, Gaſcoine, and Angoleſme, to the number of 6000. more, who are alreadie marched to maintaine the ſaid Campe, but they haue prevailed little or nothing: For the Rochellers paſſe and repaſſe to and fro at pleaſure, yea, day by day skirmiſh with them, killing thirtie or fortie at a time, and taking diuers priſoners.
               Beſides, though as yet their approaches are farre off, yet the Ordnance from the Towne, ſhooting at randome, kill many of them in the fields, ſo that they wonder, what the King meanes to doe, that he proceedeth not more orderly in the buſineſſe, then to come onely with ſuch a handfull of men, and they to lye ſo farre off, without endamaging them. As for the blocking vp their hauen, or intercepting their out-roades by Sea, true it is, that many Ships and Gallies from Burdeux, Marſelles, and other places, lye before their hauen, to intercept their paſſages, but to ſo little purpoſe, that the Ships of the Towne haue this Summer taken aboue a hundred Barkes and Ships, loaden with Salt, Corne, and other prouiſion, ſo that Corne is better cheape in Rochel, then in any part of France or England, yea,

theſe Ships lye in harbour for want of men to mannage them, or Marchants to buy them, that they know not what vſe to put them vnto, except burning, vnleſſe their troubles end, or that they may certifie the Hollanders, what good penni-worth may be had in marchandizing for them, and this they reſolue to put in practiſe by publicke Proclamation in ſuch Citties, as they can conueniently ſend vnto. Other Letters from hence aſſure vs, that they haue of their owne foureſcore men of Warre, well prouided, and manned, who haue at the leaſt this foure monthes giuen attendance on the Kings Armado, and Gallies, but ſtill they take the Sea and flie from them, as belike loath to hazard themſelues with reſolute men, and deſperate perſons: but in truth, the Gallies are not for theſe great Seas now Winter is approaching, and therfore they are retyred to Breſt in Brittaine, and there determine, either to watch for Subiſs, as he commeth home out of England, or take opportunitie by her hayry foretop to ſet vpon the Towne, or the hauen at advantage, &c.
               From Paris they write, that both the Queenes are at Lyons, whether the King meanes to come and feaſt with them, for which purpoſe many Embaſſadors repaire thither, and expect him daily, to whom at laſt, after great loſſe at Mompelier, he comes: yet ſome ſay, he went to Auignion, ſending an Embaſſador to his Holines, to allow him that Towne for his retyring vnto, vntill he had either expelled the Hugonits, or Heretickes, according to the Ieſuits phraſe, or compounded the Warre vpon honourable conditions for his Greatneſſe.
               
                  But notwithſtanding theſe affrightings of his Country, and threatning his people, while he was in Lyons he left the Conſtable Deſquiers with his whole Armie before Mompelier, and if need were, to goe alſo to Montalbon, yea, he was Commiſſioned, and had full power to treat with the Duke de Rohan about a Peace, or faire conditions of attonement, ſo it might be effected to his Maieſties honour, and the dignitie of the Common-wealth: the place appointed was named Arles in Prouence, whether it ſhould be lawful for al the Commiſſioners to reſort vnder ſafe conduct, and the royall word of the moſt Chriſtian King, which concluded, he went to Auignion; but ſuch is the chance of Warre, and the condition of Princes themſelues, to be ſubiect to misfortunes, that while he recided in thoſe partes, Monſieur de Rohan, with the Garriſon of Piſmes, Montalbon, and other Townes of the Religion, having vnited themſelues, marched a whole night, and came with ſuch ſpeedineſſe, and courage to Mompelier, that early in the morning they aſſaulted the Kings Armie, and ſo continued fighting till noone, which when they of the Towne perceiued, they made three ſeverall Sallies at the ſeuerall ports of the ſame, ſo that the Kings Armie was ſet vpon both behind and before, and the ſucceſſe thriued ſo well, that a great ſlaughter followed, and the whole Army was routed, ſo that if you would haue particulars, they ſay, there periſhed foure thouſand at the leaſt, ſome Ordnance ſurpriſed, ſixe peeces of Cannon clogged▪ the Popes Nuncio and his letters intercepted, and in a word, the whole Armie much diſſipated.
               
                  From Sedan the Letters certifie thus much, that it is true, that Mansfeild left moſt of his Carriages behind, and ſixe Peeces of Cannon, yea, the Duke of Bulloigne did alſo caſt downe the mount before the Towne, but with no intent, eyther to oppoſe his Maieſtie, maintaine any rebellion, or ſupport the Proteſtants themſelues in any violence againſt their King: but meerely to ſtand vpon his guard, leaſt ſuch as durſt enforme againſt him, might alſo procure his deſtruction by violent courſes, and force of armes.
               Beſides, a Prince in diſtreſſe, his kinſman, and a maintainer of the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt was come, as it were, vnder his roofe, and therefore the Law of Hoſpitalitie, Religion, and honeſtie, tyed him to obſervation, and tooke him out a leſſon of care and regard both to ſee himſelfe, and defend him, if need were againſt his enemies.
               In this manner as they will haue it, the Duke of Bulloigne iuſtified himſelfe, and the King was contented to be pacified, and admitte of the attonement, ſo that like a Noble Prince indeed, this effect followed, that the Duke was receiued into fauour; that the King of Bohemia might paſſe and repaſſe at his pleaſure; that the Duke de Nauers made a Retreat with his Armie, commanding the chiefeſt to retyre to their owne houſes, and ſending the reſt to attend the King, where he ſhould appoint.
               From Provence, Delphinate, and thoſe parts, they aſſure vs, that the Congregations of the Proteſtants mett daily with the reformed Miniſters, and continued the exerciſes of faſting and prayer, for the

good ſucceſſe of their brethren, and ſent one another reciprocall comforts, and gratifications, as farre as they could, or durſt: yea, when they found diſperſed Libells, and inuectiues, as though their ruine were threatned by Maſſacres, or other waies of circumventing, they ſent them to the new Conſtable, & intreated him for preuentiō, that although his honour was engaged to the Kings ſeruice, yet his ſoule was in the hands of God, who would limit his actions to the ſparing of blood, and deſtroying of innocents.
               To this they added certaine points of iuſtification, and diſcoueries of the Ieſuites doctrine, and cruell intents, to keepe France in an vprore, and combuſtion, not for the loue of Religion, which was none at all: but for political purpoſes, which time would bring to light. All which Leſdeſquiers ſhewed to the King, and in ſuch humble manner, that he tooke pleaſure in his conference, ſo that there is ſome hope, he will be more tractable, and looke vpon dilacerated France, with the eyes of iudgement and compaſſion.
            
            
               From the Low-Countries.
               
               There are ſo many Letters from the ſeuerall parts of the Low-Countries, and ſo much contradiction, as men on either ſide fauour the cauſe, that I know not how to ſatisfie the Reader: yet conſidering there is but one truth, and to be honeſt in a plaine enarration of the ſame, is allowable, therefore as neere as I can, I will relate, what is moſt probable and worthy of your acceptation.
               Know then, that the Eaſt India Company of Amſterdam
                  
haue taken a great Caricke from the Portingalls, ſuppoſed worth a million of Crownes; for therein is much gold, and rich Commodities, but neither the honour, nor profit of this exployt doth belong to them alone: for they had the helpe of the Engliſh, with whom they ſeeme now better to agree, then in times paſt. They are alſo building diuers men of Warre, and almoſt in euery Maritime Towne of Holland, the Ship-wrights are at worke; For the States are reſolued to man and ſet out ſundry Veſſels, as well to watch Dunkirke, as defend Sluice; but of late Sluice hath better confidence, that the enemy will not attempt her expugnation.
               From Bruſſels the Letters certifie, that the Marquis Spinola, lying before Bergen, reſolued vpon ſome Stratagem, as diſappointed in the attempts, which he had made by force, and ſeuerall aſſaults, therefore hee gathered together diuers thouſand loades of Caſſhes, or long Fagotts, eyther to dam vp the Riuer, or to make ſome Mounts, whereby he might neighbour their Trenches, and ſo annoy their Courts of guard, but as you ſhall heare, hee fayled in this likewiſe.
               From the Hage, the laſt letters aſſure vs of a Dutch man of Warre, to encounter with a well loaden veſſell of Spaine, going to Dunkirke with much prouiſion for the Armie, but after a long fight, ſhee was taken, and brought to Amſterdam, from whence by turnes, and in their ſeuerall watches, divers ſhippes tooke the narrow Seas, to attend their enemies, eſpecially, the Dunkirkers, amongſt whom ſome

three or foure lighted vpon a great ſhip, called one of the twelue Apostles, and built in Dunkircke, who being now at ſea, and lying at aduantage to catch the Hollanders, as they for them, was at laſt ſet vpon by them, and chaſed ſome fiue or ſixe houres, euen to the Coaſt of England: but when ſhe ſaw that her vnder-greatneſſe as being fiue hundred tunne, hindred her from ſayling, and that to fight it out, would returne to her dammage, and to bee taken, to her great diſhonour: ſhe firſt blew vp her deckes, and ſo thought to ſet her ſelfe on fire, which when the Hollanders perceiued, they made haſt to boord her, and ſhe made as much haſt to bee deliuered from them: but ſuch was the fortune of either, that ſhe preſently ſunke before their faces, and ſo that fight ended: But concerning the Land-buſineſſe; after his Excellency was reſolued to do ſomething, he muſtred his whole Army; that is to ſay, his owne, Count Mansfields, and the Duke of Brunſwicke, who was returned for all his wound vnto them againe. By whom, and a Councell of warre, it was thus determined; that if they did riſe at all, that they would order the buſines in this maner: To diuide each Nation by themſelues, and ſo the Germans, Engliſh, Scots, French, Dutch, and Wallons, might march with their ſeuerall colours, to be diſtinguiſhed apart: the groſſe ſumme, or if you will, the whole body of the Army, conſiſting of eighteene thouſand foote, and eight thouſand horſe, which were alſo to be diuided into two parts; fiue thouſand horſe, and eight thouſand foote to bee

left with Mansfield and Brunſwicke, to remaine on the North-ſide of Bergen, where Spinola lay about Steen Bergen: the other three thouſand horſe, and ten thouſand foote, he would take with himſelfe, and encamped betweene Antwarp and Bergen, compaſſing in the Fort of Lillo with his trenches, by which diuiſion of his Army, he determined to intercept all ſuccours and releefe, as well of victuall, as ſupply of men, which might come to Spinolas Campe on either ſide. Likewiſe, he alſo prouided three hundred Boates by water, with foure thouſand Mariners, well armed, and of great experience: but what his deſigne is vnknowne; vnleſſe to watch the Scheld, a riuer comming from Antwarpe, or terrifie that towne, which is not onely affraid of a ſiedge, but in a manner in an vprore, euen murmuring againſt Spinola, for ſending ſo many hurt Captaines, and Gentlemen, and dead bodies vnto them to be buried: and when they heard how many were buried, and vnburied in the Campe, they lamented out-right, and complained much on that diſaſtrous enterpriſe. But this determination, as you ſhall heare, was not put in practiſe: For the States came to Dort, and protracted this riſing of the Prince of Orenge, whereby Spinola had time to preuent the miſchiefe.
               
                  Mansfield and Brunſwicke yet beganne their buſineſſe very proſperouſly: for, they ſuppriſed the Villages, where Spinola laid in his prouiſion, whereby he was much diſppointed and appauled: then they came neerer and neerer to Bergen, and put him as it were out of all hope of receiuing any further ſupply:

For although Graue Henry Vanderbergh was on foot, and come downe from Weſell with 6000. foot, and 1500. Horſe, who lay about Horſtrat, within tenne miles of Mansfield; yet there was great doubt of his weakneſſe to doe any good vpon him, or cleare the paſſage, conſidering now he was ſo well appointed. But the truth is, the Prince of Orenge had left Graue Henry of Naſſau in thoſe Quarters, to watch his proceedings, and to attend his progreſſe, which way ſoeuer hee tooke. And in this perplexity ſtands the whole Countrey, and theſe Enemies continue watching one another, as a Hawke houereth ouer her prey; ſo that nothing is to be expected but blood and death, warre and confuſion, vnleſſe the God of mercy eyther take pitty vpon them, or will haue a puniſhment light vpon ſome offenders.
               Beſides all this, Count Erneſtus of Naſſau Gouer
                  
                     •
                  or of Freeſland for the States, is come downe to Emricke with 5000 Foot, and 1000 Horſe, to intercept the forwardneſſe of the Baron of Hanow, who is marching with 4000 Coſſackes, & certaine Dutch Horſe, vnder the pay and entertainment of the Biſhop of Cullen. The Coſſackes they will haue thoſe which the Duke of Bauaria eyther ſpared or caſheired in the Palatinate: but it ſhould ſeeme, they dare not encounter with Erneſtus, neyther in skirmiſh nor battaile. For as yet they only run vp and downe ſpoyling and forraging the Countrey without any ſetled reſolution to aſſault the Enemy.
            
            
               
               From Bergen.
               THE laſt Letters vvere altogether about a Myne, or if you will, two Mynes; the one made out of the Raueling into Spinolas Campe, which blew vp the mount, that ſo annoyed their Courts of guard, to which was added (after the blow was paſt) a ſalley from the towne, wherein many of the contrary ſide were ſlaine: the other was attempted by Spinola himſelfe againſt the towne, wherein hee had laboured aboue fiue weekes with exceſſiue paines, and charges, they will haue it ſo great and effectuall, that if it had taken, it would not onely haue giuen him enterance into the Rauelings, but blowne vp a great part of the wall, whereby it doth appeare, that they were almoſt in deſpaire of taking the towne any other way then by a Stratagem, which is the laſt act of the Tragedy of warre, and doth commonly bring with it all rerror and confuſion: But the God of mercy, who ſtayeth the rages of men, and with-holdeth the fury of bloody Souldiers, preuented this likewiſe; and it proued like Perillus Bull, to the deuiſer; for they within Bergen, as cautelous, and euery way as reſolute as themſelues, countermined and ſtopped them as it were in the middeſt, before they had placed any powder: only they had brought certaine barrels to the mouth of the Myne, which vpon the alarum of the enemies being in the earth, were at laſt by the haſty comming in of the Souldiers, ſet on fire, ſo that the blow was ſo violent and impetuous, that in a moment it deſtroyed aboue 1200 perſons which was both lamentable and fearfull for the time.
               But ſee the miſery of warre, and the dangers and

turmoiles this occupation is accompanied with; no ſooner was this ſmoake as it were ouerblowne, but they of the towne made a ſalley, and vvere ſo glorious in their forwardneſſe euen farre into the Campe, that beſides the ſlaughter of many Souldiers, they killed 40. principall officers, and commanders, amongſt vvhom the brother of the Duke of Aſcot vvas ſhot in the cheekes, ſo that the bones vvere broken, and the bullet made his vvay by ſliding by, not killing him out right.
               In this ſalley many of the Earle of Argiles, and the Lord Vaux his Regiment vvere ſlaine; but there vvas a commandement preſently, that all ſhould bee kept from the knowledge of the other ſide of the Campe, eſpecially that they in Antwerpe tooke no notice of the ſame, leſt the Souldiers might be altogether diſcoraged, and the towne diſtracted, vvho vvere more and more in continuall feares: yet it ended not thus neither; for the great Generall Spinola vvas ſo incenſed vvith this diſaſterous chance, that hee not onely laid the blame of the misfortune on the ignorance or haſtineſſe of the principall enginer, but preſently commanded him to be hanged vp, notvvithſtanding hee had performed his endeuor, and had formerly been a vvell deſeruer.
               Novv you muſt conſider, that all this buſineſſe and hurli-burly vvas done and ouerpaſſed before the rumor vvas that the Prince of Orenge raiſed himſelfe, and brought his armies to Spinolas quarters, or if you vvill, by vvay of interception to lye bevveene them and ſuch places, as vvere appointed to ſupply the vvants of the Campe.
               
                  But now that it was ſuſpected that Mansfield was come and Brunſwicke in the field, the Souldiers incenſed, and euery one ready to play their part, Spinola knew not what to ſay, or to doe, conſidering the martial court dibated the particulars of the buſineſſe in this manner:
               Firſt, that whereas they expected the comming downe of Mounſeur Tilley out of the Palatinate, the Letters came to Bruſſels to the contrary, that conſidering they intended the ſiege of Manheim, and that many towns in the Biſhoprick of Spiers and Worms, would not yeeld to Leopoldus, he could not be ſpared; beſides; the Germans were loath (winter coming on) to take ſo long a iourney, after their great toyle, but cried out already for reſt, and a Garriſon.
               Secondly, that the towne of Antwerp, from whence they had their greateſt ſuppliment, was almoſt weary of the warre, and beganne to finde fault with the enterprize, either that Spinola had ouerprized himſelfe in a preſumptuous reſolution to get the towne, or vnderualued the States, as weake and vnable to reſiſt the forces; or was not well informed of the ſtrength and ſituation of the place.
               Thirdly, that the ſlaughters were ſo great of his armies, and decay of his ſouldiers, that although it might be paſſed ouer with the chance of warre, and malignity of circumſtances, yet time would conſume them more and more; and which way could the wit of man inuent how other Souldiers ſhould come forward, as their enemies lay to affront them.
               Fourthly, that the wants of the Campe were intolerable, as enduring famine, and cold, euen to the

eating of horſes, yea many other inconueniences which muſt needs be aggrauated and increaſed both with the time, and diuers other circumſtances, wherein they ſaw no prevenſion, as the caſe now ſtood.
               Laſt of all, that if the States armies were rayſed, then would the Prince of Orenge lye on one ſide, and Count Mansfield on the other, who meant not to fight with them but when they liſt, and then vpon great aduantage, but were ſure to conſume them, and weary them out, or torment them with daily eruptions and encombrances, and that without any manner of preuention.
               All which conſidered, the Councell thought it meet by one meanes or other to raiſe the ſiege, and rather ſaue the liues of ſo many braue men, who might in ſome other proiect, and at ſome other time recouer this loſſe, and reintegrate their fortunes; then to endure a certaine deſtruction, and irrecouerable wretchedneſſe; and although the Marqueſſe Spinola obiected, that his honour was ſo farre ingaged, that he had rather periſh in the misfortune, then endure the indignity of being thus diſappointed; yet they anſwered, neceſſity was a commanding miſtreſſe, and there was no withſtanding of Fate and Deſtiny, yea there was iudgement and reaſon in enduring ſome inconueniences, rather then a miſchiefe or aſſured deſtruction.
               As for the honour hee enterpoſed, what was it more to him, then to the former Duke of Parma, who had raiſed his ſiege in the ſame place, after hee had layen there with 32000. men almoſt halfe a yeare: yea the great Turke went from Vienna and Malta, diſappointed; and diuers other Princes haue

beene enforced to caſt vp another accompt with the diſpoſing of a higher power, then their owne preſumptions at the beginning: whereupon when hee ſaw there vvas no remedie, hee vvith much adoe condiſcended to their importunities, and ſo taking the aduantage of a darke night, raiſed his campe indeed very couertly, the particulars you ſhall now knovv more at large.
            
         
         
            
            THE MANNER OF The raiſing of the Siege of BERGEN
            
            WHereas a little before, the Letters make mention, that his Excellency the Prince of Orenge, with Count Mansfield, the Duke of Brunſwick, and their Forces had a purpoſe to diuide themſelues and blocke vp Spinola in his Trenches, and as it were ſet downe the manner of their marches, if they ſhould 
                  •
               iſe indeed, and how they would quarter themſelues: the truth is, they did onely capitulate the matter, but not put it in execution, as eyther preuented by Spinola's couert eſcape, or the aduiſe of the States, who they ſay came to Dort for the ſame purpoſe, and to whom his Excellencie with ſome ſpeciall Commanders reſorted
            But this was not ſo effectually done, but that Her Highneſſe at Bruſſels had notice of the ſame iuſt in a manner at the ſame time as Letters came from Bauaria, that Mounſeur Tilly could not be ſpared out of the Palatinate: Whereupon, when ſhe conſidered the

danger eminent and imminent, and in what perill her whole Army ſtood, (beſides the infinite inconueniences it was ſubiect vnto, as you haue heard) if the Prince of Orenge ſhould come one way with his Forces, and Count Mansfield the Duke of Brunſwicke another way with their Armies, ſhe very conſiderately aduiſed the Marquiſſe Spinola, by ſpeedy meſſengers and ſeuerall Letters to raiſe his ſiege, and follow the Law of Nature, which teacheth all her Creatures the meanes of preſeruation.
            Whereupon, both this Impoſition and the neceſſity of the buſineſſe, with other malignant circumſtances, led him out of the wilde fields of peremptorineſſe and preſumption, into the orderly bounds of ſafety and ſecuritie; ſo that hee lay in waite for an opportunitie to paſſe quietly without interception; which (as it ſhould ſeeme) he effected in this manner: When he perceiued that his Excellency did not riſe, or was not ready, on Sunday our 22 of September he made a fayre ſhew of his Army before the out-workes of the Towne, both Horſe and Foot, yet ſomewhat more remote then hee was accuſtomed when hee determined any On-ſet: whereby, as it appeared afterward, his whole campe was blinded from the diſcouery of the Courts of Guard, and the Town, who prepared to defend themſelues, and thought vpon nothing leſſe then an eſcape.
            This done, by twy-light his Cariages were ready, which ſtill kept the left hand of the march; within them went the Ordnance which hee meant to conuey with the Army, and here attended the Pioners, the Camp-followers, and all ſuch vnneceſſary people, as

belongs to ſuch a buſineſſe. When they were ready, and the ſcoutes brought word the coaſt was cleere; for all it ſeemed a windy and duskiſh night, he ſeemed to welcome the opportunity, and ſet forward the munition with great ſilence, and taciturnity, allowing them a ſufficient conuoy of horſe, and the pioners conuenient armes for their purpoſe: they marched very neere ſix houres before hee ſtird, comming cloſe by the wet ground, and drownd land, on the eaſt ſide of Bergen, where as they ſay they met with Gonzales de Cordua, and that other part of his Armie, which lay betweene Antwerp and Bergen: Thus they goe on, and before noone the next day came within ſixe Engliſh mile of Antwerp, having ſpent aboue eighteene houres in the trauell.
            By that time the Armie was thus rid of her encumbrances, and all this while heard not of an enemie, and that the great Generall conceiued they had overgone their affrightings betweene midnight and one a clocke in the morning, the horſeboies and certaine men appointed of purpoſe, ſet fire on all their quarters, and burned thoſe things which were left, which made ſo great a ſmoake and ſmother for the time, that nothing was perceiued till the Army was very forward, and then the fire had ouergone the moiſture, making all things combuſtible, ſo that the flame ſhewed the glory of her brightneſſe, and the neighbour places ſaid apparantly, he was departed: this was the light that appeared in Zealand, ſo that the pinckes and paſſengers in the ſea, without ſearching further after particulars, only coniectured the ſiege was raiſed, and ſo gaue it forth accordingly.
            
               To this, may be added, that of a hundred peeces of ordnance, he caried away but 30, and what is become of the reſt, time will diſcouer, thoſe which he ſaued, are now brought to Antwerp: beſides they ſay, that having many wounded and diſeaſed people, he prouided for all manner of nations, but Scots and Engliſh, whom he left to the furie of the fire, and terror of extremitie, but that ſome recouered and creeped as it were to the towne, where they found a ſanctuary contrary to expectation, and the towne heard ſtrange things of them, not to be beleeued in the report. Laſt of all they relate, he was not fully 18000 horſe and foote: for hauing loſt very neere 10000 by one meanes or other, it was a good account to bring his Items to ſuch a reckoning; and thus much for the riſing of the Marqueſſe Spinola before Bergen. The next thing (as I ſuppoſe) will be the ſearches of his Campe place, the demoliſhing of his mounts, and fortifications, the refreſhing of the towne, the repairing of the decaied places, the watching of the Enemies actions, the muſtering of new forces, the prouiding of munition, and if the winter make much haſte, the Gariſoning of ſouldiers on all ſides; but as yet the eies of iealouſie are in euery corner, and therefore I beleeue they will bee ſure of Spinolaes ſetling his Army, before the States remoue theirs.
         
         
            
            A true Relation of the cruell Execution done in Ommelberg, a Towne in the Biſhopricke of Mentz vpon the perſons of two Miniſters, or Preachers of the Goſpell, by the inſtigation of the IESVITES.
            Hereunto is annexed, in what manner Count Henry of Naſſaw hath taken about VENLO in Gelderland, 400. Waggons loaden with certaine bags with Gold, beſides ammunition, victuals, and baggage, which were with a Conuoy going to the Campe of Count Henry of the Bergh.
            
               IT is manifeſtly knowne to all the world, that hatred, enuie, and diſſention reigne mightily now adayes: The ſonne is againſt the father, and the ſiſter againſt the brother, and in generall we are ſo exaſperated one againſt another, that if we could drowne one another in a ſpoone with water, we would not fetch a paile, as partly

appeareth by this preſent example. Iohannes vander Veeck and Lambertus Liber, being two Proteſtant Preachers, and hauing diſputed againſt certaine Prieſts at Kruyſganck, the Ieſuites cauſed them to be apprehended, and afterwards moſt cruelly to be executed within the Towne of Vmmelberg, the 30. of Auguſt 1622. where the Hangman with red hot pinſers pulled the fleſh from their bones, (ſo that a heart made of ſtone would haue taken compaſſion of them) and put them to death with great martyriſation. But they haue ſuffered it patiently, as a ſheepe that is brought to the ſlaughter-houſe. But three dayes after the ſame, one of the Ieſuites, called Pater or Father Iohn, aged 96. yeeres, was taken about 12. a clocke from his Table, and was neuer ſeene afterwards: wherein ſurely God had a hand. Therefore let vs pray vnto God that he will not iudge vs according to our deſerts, but grant vs the everlaſting ſaluation.
            
               
               COunt Henry of Naſſaw being aduiſed that a Conuoy was to be ſent to Count Henry Van de Berg, with 400. Waggons, which were loaden with money, ammunition, victuals, and other neceſſaries: He tooke with him 1000. muskettiers and 5. Cornet of horſe, to wait vpon them; and about Venlo he diſperſed and ſlew the ſame Conuoy, (whereof ſome retired to Venlo, Remunde, and Naſeijcke) and tooke the ſaid Wagons with their loading aforeſaid. Wee loſt not aboue 12. men, which were partly hurt and partly ſlaine. Whereby wee may ſee how miraculouſly God workes in our behalfe, and to the preſeruation of our and the neighbouring Countries, to whom we are therefore bound to giue thankes, and to mend our ſinfull liues, leauing all pride and bitterneſſe, ſo that we may liue in peace and amitie, and receiue Gods benediction and grace, auoiding the puniſhments which ten thouſand times we haue deſerued. Therefore let vs pray the Almightie, that he will forgiue vs our ſinnes, and aſſiſt vs with his mercy, that we may once be deliuered of all Tyrannies, and cruell Warres: Which God grant through his infinite mercy. AMEN.
            FINIS.
         
      
   