
      
         
            
            
            OXFORDS
Triumph:
            In the Royall Entertainement
of his moste Excellent
Maiestie, the Queene, and
the Prince: the 27. of August
last, 1605.
            With
The Kinges Oration deliuered to the
Vniuersitie, and the incorporating
of diuers Noble-men,
Maisters of Arte.
            
               LONDON
Printed by Ed. Allde, and are to bee solde in
Paules Church-yard by Iohn
Hodgets. 1605.
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE RIGHT VVORshipfull,
and worthy Louer of
learning & vertue, Sr. Thomas Middleton
Knight, one of the Aldermen of the
Honorable Cittie of London, A. N.
wisheth encrease of all Honorable
vertues.
            
               
                  SVch (Right
Worshipfull) as from
tim to time, haue imployed
their pennes in
publishing the praise of
good letters, haue likewise
for the most part
selected such patrons,
(as well strangers as of
acquaintance) as haue
bene knowne, and reputed
to be learned, well minded, and well discended: imitating
which custome, and prescription (aduenturing the

pardon of your discretion) I haue imboldned my selfe (vppon
good notice taken of your true generous disposition)
to present vnto your fauourable acceptance this little
Booke, being a true discourse of the Kings entertainment
at Oxford.
            I humbly intreate your Worshippe will bee pleased to
vouch of my labour, and fauour a Schollers penne, with
your gratious acceptation, who answers in affection,
what he wants in eloquence. So shall I
rest deuoted vnto you, and bestowe
my future studies to effect
matter of better deseruing.
Euer remaining:
            
               Yours Worshippes moste humbly
affectionate.
Anth: Nixon.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Oxfords Triumph:
            In the Royall Entertaynment of
his most excellent MAIESTIE, the
QVEENE & the PRINCE.
The 27. of August last:
1605.
            
            
               
                  POrphyrius recordeth
in a Treatise of his De vita
Plotini that when Plotinus
(a famous PHILOSOPHER
in Rome) entred into his
Schoole to performe his
accustomed vse of reading; casting his eyes
aside, he presently espyed Origen prepared to
be his hearer, At whose aspect rubore suffusus
blushing, Plotinus ceased to speake: which
Origen perceauing, requested him to proceed:
but the Philosopher replyed, that it was time
for a professor to holde his peace, when his

Auditours before hand knew what he intented
to teach.
            I make no doubt but the verie Title and inscription
of this little Treatise giues good notise
& inckling what shal be the subsequents,
wherin I might very well hold my peace with
Plotinus being an eye witnesse of so many
learned Philosophers & others in place, that
could both ornatius dicere, & concinius agere,
a matter of such worth then my selfe. But as in
causis vniuocis est semper verum, that nemo dat
quod non habet: So in officious performances
where there wants abilitie, the next degree
to well doing is to bee faithfully willing, and
desirous to doe well. For
Bona pars est probitatis, toto pectore
velle fieri probum.
            
            Therefore hauing bene a member of that
famous Vniuersitie, and fortunate Mother of
all learning, that from her fruitefull wombe,
hath sent foorth so many sufficient Schollers
to supporte her owne reputation, and to supply
the defects and imperfections of others: I
among the rest, (though the vnworthyest of

all) in gratefull remembrance of some former
benefits receiued from her, haue taken so vppon
me to set downe the true Ioye which she
expressed by externall actions, as voice and
gestures (the signes of eternall loue and passion.)
Through the windowes whereof a man
might easily passe with the sight of his vnderstanding,
and discouer the secret affection and
gladnesse conceited by the approach of his
most excellent Majesty, the Queene, & young
Prince, vnto that their worthie Cittie of Oxford.
            
            For vpon Tuesday the 27. of August laste,
his Maiestie comming from VVoodstocke to
Oxford, the Earle of Dorset Lord Chauncelor,
accompained with the Vice-Chauncelor, the
Doctors, Proctors & certaine Senior Masters,
rode foorth vpon their foote-cloath Horses,
verie richlye furnished to meete the King,
whome they expected about Aristotles Well,
where hauing intention that the Vice-Chauncelor
should first salute his Majestie
with a speech, Maister Maior with his company
passed by without regard to them, purposing

indeed that his Orator should first speak,
which when the Lord Chauncelor perceiued,
he presently sent to the Maior, and charged
him to surcease his purpose till the Vice-Chauncelor
had finished his Oration to the
King: with which message the Maior was little
pleased, yet his mends were small, for hee
retired with speede, and had no better excuse
for himselfe, then to say hee did not see them,
notwithstanding they were hard by him, and
all in their Scarlet Gownes.
            After this, his Maiestie drawing neere, the
Lord Treasorer and the Vice-chauncelor repayred
vnto him, who stayed his course, and
rayned his Horsse of State whereon he rode:
the Vice-chauncellor presenting him-selfe
with his speech vnto his Highnes, surrendring
vp the Keyes of the Vniuersitye, and the Beadles
deposing their Staues, and laying them
downe at his Majesties feet: Further deliuering
vnto him the New Testament in Greeke,
very fairely bound, and richly guilded: vnto
the Queene a Purse, & to the young Prince a
paire of gloues. With which Oration at his

first meeting, and the seuerall guiftes presented
vnto them, the King, Queene and Prince,
were so well pleased and delighted, that the
whole Vniuersitie receiued much content &
comfort.
            After the Lord Chauncelors, and the Vniuersites
salutation, Maister Maior addressed
himselfe towards the King: and by the mouth
of the Townes Orator, he & his bretherē pronounced
an English speech to his Majestie,
and presented three seuerall Cuppes: the
one to the King, another to the Queene
and another to the Prince. Maister Maior
rendring vp his Mace, striued with himselfe
to doe all duetifull obeysance that might be
accepted, which the King discouering, verie
graciously encouraged, and gaue him great
and heartye thankes for his good will and
louing duetie towards him.
            This finished, his Majestie passed along till
hee came before Saint Iohns Colledge, where
three little Boyes comming foorth of a Castle,
made all of Iuie, drest like three Nimphes,
(the conceipt wherof the King did very much

applaude) and deliuered three Orations: first
in Latine to the King, then in english to
the Queene and young Prince; which beeing
ended, his Majestie proceeded towards the
East gate of the Citie, where the Townes-men
againe deliuered vnto him another speech in
english.
            That speech ended, the King with all his
traine of Noble men and others, entred the
Cittie, where in the after noone about one of
the clocke, by the ringing of a Bell at Saint
Maries Church, the Schollers in their formalities
according to their seuerall degrees, were
gathered together and repaired towards
Christe-Church gates, where they began to
be placed and rancked. They stood all of one
side of the streete without any intermixion
eyther of strangers, Townes-men, or any others
that were not Schollers of the Vniuersitie,
and were of the left hand of the King as he
passed by. Next to the gates of Christ Church
(where his Majestie was receiued) stood the
Doctors of Diuinity in their Scarlet: next thē
the Doctors of Phisick, & then the Doctors of

Lawe: next them the Batchelers of Diuinitie,
and the Senior Maisters of Arte in their silke
hoodes: then the Batchelers of Law, and the
Regent Masters in their Miniuer Hoods, and
then the Batchelers of Arte. All which graduates,
reached from Christes Church to aboue
Carefex. Next to those Graduates, stood the
vnder Graduates, whose rancke thus placed
in this seemely decorum, reached to St. Giles.
            
            His Maiestie still passing along into the Cittie
by the Easte gate of it, where (as is before
remembred) the Townes-men deliuered a
speech and the Schollers gaue him a viuat.
            
            From the Easte gate, his Majestie marched
along till he came to Carefex, where Doctor
Perin was placed in a Pue, and saluted him
with a Greeke Oration, which while hee was
pronouncing, the Queene asked the King
once or twise what hee said? and he answered
her, that he spake verie well and learnedly.
            From Carefex, the King with the Queene on
his left hand, & the young Prince next before
them (all on their seueral great horses) marched
downe the streete, till they came to Christ-Church,

where at the gates, the Vniuersityes
Orator made an Oration vnto him.
            After the speech was ended, the Deane and
the Prebends with all the Students of Christ-Church,
were ready at the Gates in their Surplesses
and Hoodes to receiue his Majestie:
and carrying a Canapie ouer him, they first
conducted him to the Church, at the entring
whereof there was an Oration deliuered vnto
him: and in the Church the Deane himselfe
made another Oration, and so went to Prayers,
After which his Majestie accompained
with the Queene and the Prince, and a troope
of Lordes and Noblemen, was brought vnto
his lodging.
            The Prince hauing accompained the Kings
Majestie vnto the Chamber of Presence, departed:
and betaking himselfe to his Coach,
went straight to Magdalen Colledge, where
the President standing in the Gates, receiued
him with all joyfull reuerence and duety, and
passing into the Chappell, he had an Oration
pronounced vnto him. After which, the Prince
going vnto his lodging, heard disputations,

that were made before him by certaine Noblemens
Sonnes, which at this time are Students
in Magdalen Colledge, with the which
he outwardly shewed, how inwardly hee was
delighted.
            After Supper his Majestie, the Queene, and
Prince, with the Noblemen, had a Comedie
played before them in Latine in Christ-Church
Hall, which continued
the space of three
houres and
more.
         
         
            
            VPon Wednesday in the morning, being
the 28. of August, betwixt nine and ten
of the clock, his Majestie came into St. Maries
Church to heare the exercise: where first the
Kinges professor in Diuinitie, created the
Deane of Salisbury Doctor of Diuinity before
his Majestie, which being finished, they addressed
them-selues to Diuinitie disputations.
            
               The Questions being:
               VVhether the Saints and Angels doe know
the thoughts of our hearts?
               VVhether in the time of Pestilence the pastors
of the Church are tyed to visit the infected?
               
                  The Moderator.
                  Doctor Abbat Deane of VVinchester.
                  
               
               
                  The Answerer.
                  Doctor Aglionbye.
                  
               
               
               
                  The Opponents.
                  Doctor Gordon, Deane
of Salisbury.
                  
                  Doctor Holland the
Kings professor in diuinitie.
                  Doctor Tomson Deane
of VVindsor.
                  
                  Doctor Feild.
                  
                  Doctor Riues.
                  
                  Doctor Harding.
                  
                  Doctor Ayrie.
                  
               
               Wherof the Prior opponent, first proposed
the questions vnto the Answerer, then the answerer
after repetition made of the questions,
made also a short speech consisting of a briefe
preface vnto the King, and a shorte explycation
of the questions, and so entred into disputations,
which continued the space of two
houres and more: all which time the King
was verie attentiue, and much delighted and
pleased. The Proctors in the meane time, as
in all other disputations following, sat according
to their accustomed manner in their

formalities, and in their Pue, vsed the same
forme of speaking, as they did in all other vsuall
actes.
               On Wednesday after dinner, Law disputations
were had before his Majestie in Saint
Maries Church.
            
            
               The Questions being.
               1. VVhether the Iudge be bound to followe
the lawfull proofes, or euidence produced in
iudgement, against the truth priuately knowne
to himselfe?
               2. VVhether a truce or league is to bee considered
according to good meaning, or according
to the strictnes of Lawe?
               
                  The Moderator.
                  Doctor Gentilis.
                  
               
               
                  The Answerer.
                  Doctor Blincowe.
                  
               
               
                  The Opponents.
                  Doctor Weston.
                  
                  Doctor Bird.
                  
                  Doctor Martin.
                  
                  Doctor Husey.
                  
                  Doctor Budden.
                  
                  Doctor Lloide.
                  
               
               
                  
In these questions, his Majestie (as chiefe
Moderator) did speake some sixe or seauen
times in verie good Latine, and to verie good
purpose, and so sufficiently satisfied the standers
by of his learning & wisdome, that they
highly applauded the same with exceeding
admiration: for at euery time his Majestie
spake, all the people clapt their hands, and
cryed viuat Rex Iacobus.
               
               These disputations continued from two, till
fiue of the clocke in the after noone, which
Doctor Gentilis as Moderator, concluded
with a speech. Where obserue by the way,
that Doctor Martin (one of the Opponents)
after that he had giuen ouer disputing, and an
other had vrged his Argument, Doctor Gentilis
being forward to speake, and taking vppon
him, otherwise then was accustomed by
other Moderators to interpose his sentence,
and to answere to Arguments which were vrged;
Doctor Martin (I say) not liking well of
Doctor Gentilis his answere which hee made
to his Argumēt, did vpon a sudden rise vp, &
began to dispute againe, saying that he might

as well dispute out of order, as Doctor Gentilis
might moderate out of order. Wherwith
the King was wonderfully mooued to laughter.
               Vpon Wednesday at night after supper,
there was a Tragedie set out by Magdalen
Colledge men, acted before his Majestie in
Christ-Church Hall, which was verie long, for
it continued from nine till one of the clocke,
The subiect whereof was of Aiax and Vlisses,
But the deuice was so costly and curious in
setting the same foorth, that it was not
thought teadious, but the King
shewed himselfe verie well
pleased, and content
with
it.
            
         
         
            
            VPon Thursday in the morning, being
the 29. of August, betwixt nine and ten
of the clocke, Phisicke disputations were had
before the King in Saint Maries Church.
            
               The Questions being.
               Whether the manners and disposition of the
Nurse is taken by the Infant in sucking her
milke?
               VVhether the often taking of Tobacco
bee wholesome for such as are sound and in
health?
               
                  The Moderator.
                  Doctor VVarner.
                  
               
               
                  The Answerer.
                  Doctor Paddy Knight.
               
               
                  
                  The Opponents.
                  Doctor Aileworth.
                  
                  Doctor Bust.
                  
                  Doctor Guinne.
                  
                  Doctor Gifford.
                  
                  Doctor Ashworth.
                  
                  Doctor Chennell.
                  
               
               In one of these questions, Doctor Paddy being
answerer, held against Tobacco, being a
great drinker of Tobacco himselfe. Heere his
Majesty was exceeding merrie & pleasant, for
there were many jestes which ministred
laughter. For one in his speech did bring
forth a Tobacco Pipe, & vrged the manner of
the Phisitions in India, which was that they
should be drunke with Tobacco, & so goe to
their Patients: whereat the King laughing
heartily, said that our Phisitions should goe to
the Indians to be drunke, that so they might
minister Phisick. These disputations were cō
                  cluded
by Doctor VVarner, who made a learned,
judicious and well approued speech before
the King, which his Majestie did very
much applaud, and commend.
               
                  
After Phisicke disputations were ended, the
Kinges Maiestie, the Queene, and the Prince,
with all the Noblemen, rode to New-Colledge
to Dinner, being inuited thither, by the Right
Honorable the Lord Treasorer, Lord
Chauncelor of the Vniuersity: who of his Noble
minde, and loue to learning and her professors,
the same day sent to euerie Colledge a
Bucke, and twenty shillings a peece to be bestowed
in Wine, wherewith the Schollers did
so thankefully frolicke it, that by exterior
meanes they manifested their interior mindes
and gratitude for so great fauour frō so worthy
and Honorable a personage: for as
virtus laudata crescit: Soe doe Schollers then
moste striue to prooue absolute, when they
finde the Nobilitie, to supporte their studies,
and to cherish their indeauors, as did Virgil
by the liberalitie extended by Mecoenas. And
what made Alexander by learned pennes so
eternized to succeeding ages, but his bountie
in giuing giftes, and bestowing benefits? and
his magnificent deportmēt in powring foorh
his treasures to the encouragement of learning?

This wonne him incomparable Loue of
all that dealt with him, and of the learned professors
of his time. For the dignitie of any
principle, enchaunceth the effect. As a meane
worke proceeding from an excellent workeman,
winneth in regard of the Authour, farre
more credit, and reputation, then if it had
proceeded from an Artificer of lesser account.
So in like manner a smal guift comming from
the hands of a great person, carieth euer a sent
of a certaine greatnesse, and relisheth great
power to produce great effects in the receiuer,
and stirres him vp to a continuing desire
of deeper and further deseruing.
               Well, I will not be nimis curiosus in aliena
Republica, but returne to what proceeded in
the after noone.
               After dinner, his Majestie, together with
the Queene, made greate haste to Saint Maries,
where first of all, Naturall Philosophie
disputations were acted.
            
            
               
               The Questions being.
               Whether Golde may be made by Arte?
               Whether Imagination may produce reall
effects?
               
                  The Moderator.
                  Maister Porter.
               
               
                  The Answerer.
                  Maister Andrewes.
                  
               
               
                  The Opponents.
                  Maister Lapworth.
                  
                  Maister Baskeruile.
                  
                  Maister Clayton.
                  
                  Maister Mocket.
                  
                  Maister Pinke.
                  
                  Maister Boulton.
                  
               
               To these questions, his Majestie gaue great
heede, & many times interposed his opinion
of the Arguments, which were proposed very
learnedlye and Philosophically, especially of
this one question, which was:
               An Ars Chimica possit producere aurum?
               
                  
Concerning this, he made a long discourse
in Latine, which did so fill the Auditors with
wonder, and admiration, that they generally
concluded, and pronounced our Countrie to
be that Common-wealth, which Plato affirmed,
to be happie and blessed, vnder the gouernment
& protection of a King so learned,
wise, and vertuous: and euerie man prayed
that the poysonfull heartes of his enemies,
might no more preuaile against his might, nor
no more impaire his greatnes, then an Emetts
blaste the mountaines of Hircan, or Caucasua.
               
               After Naturall Philosophie disputations
were concluded by the Moderator, disputations
begunne in Morrall Philosophy.
            
            
               The Questions being.
               VVhether it be more to defend, or enlarge the
boundes of an Empire or Kingdome?
               VVhether that is iust and vniust, consisteth
vpon Lawe onely, and not vpon Nature.
               
               
                  The Moderator.
                  Maister Fitz Harber Senior
Proctor.
               
               
                  The Answerer.
                  Maister Ballowe.
                  
               
               
                  The Opponents.
                  Maister Barkham.
                  
                  Maister Langton.
                  
                  Maister King.
                  
                  Maister Winniffe.
                  
                  Maister Iuckes.
                  
                  Maister Thorneton.
                  
               
               In this also the King did speake with such
learning, as Apollo, if his Tripos were vp againe,
would pronounce him his Socrates, especially
in that question.
               An melius sit fines Imperij propagare, quam
tueri?
               Wherein hee many times vrged contrarieties
to finde out the certaintie, indeauouring

in knowledge to winne a full and compleate
perfection. And it seemeth that hee
had much accustomed himselfe to study and
disputations to attaine that inward comfort:
Quod nemo nouit nisi qui accipit. For as vse
had bred in him facilitie, and facilitie confirmed
Nature; So his nature seemes stronglye
inclined to vertue, and that can hardly be diuerted
from her common course, but followeth
still her vertuous determination. Therefore
greate hope (to a generall comfort) is
to bee conceiued of happinesse to the people,
where the King both by nature and
custome hath wrought in himselfe a perfection
of vnderstanding, which once purchased
is not easily supplanted: Whereunto agreeth
that vulgar Axiome of Philosophers:
Omnis habitus est difficile separabilis a
subiecto.
               
               But these Disputations, by reason of the
shortnesse of the time, were verie compendious

and briefe, For least his Majestie
should bee wearied with teadiousnesse or
prolixities, The Proctors did cut off the
Opponents verye suddainelye, insomuch
that before all the Opponents had disputed,
they spoke to the Moderator that he
should conclude: which the King perceiuing,
and that there was one left out, which
had not disputed, his Majestie gaue commaundement
that hee should dispute also,
so desirous hee was of hearing.
               After that, the Senior Proctor, which was
Moderator in the Morrall Disputations,
made conclusion of all. The which being
ended, and that being the last of the disputations
& exercises, his Maiestie did as heere
followeth make a moste gracious and pitthy
speech in Latine to the Vniuersitie, which did
so glad the hearts of the hearers, that euerie
man went away, and parted sorrowfull for
the Kinges so short tarryance and so sudden
departure. Which for that nothing is so curious,
and thirstye after the knowledge of
vnknowne matters, then the nature of Man,

(for so saith Chrysostome, Homil: 9. ln 1. ad
Thessa) Nihil it a curiosum est, et auidum ad
rerum incognitarum cognitionem, vt humana
Natura. I haue for the satisfaction of such
as vnderstand not the Latine, truely
set downe the same afterwards
in English.
            
         
         
            
               
               ORATIO
Regis in Comitiis Oxoniensibus.
               
                  NOn potestis à me comptam,
& politam orationem
expectare, ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   enim
vnquam otium habui
colloquendi cum
Doctis & disertis viris, & Oratoribus,
Ideóque disertus & literatus esse

non possum, Hoc verò expectare potestis,
quod vt sum, & semper fui, ita ero
literarum, & literatorum omnium
Mecaenas ornatissimus. Quod verò
ad illustrem vestram Academiam attinet,
hoc certo certius vobis persuadere
potestis, quod ei semper futurus sum
propitius. Vos verò debetis purū Dei
verbum retinere, Romanas superstitiones
fugere, & fugare & schismata,
ac nouellas opiniones remouere, respuere,
& aduersari, Inartibus autem
vestris, & disciplinis, (vt heri quidam
ex ornatis vestris Theologis dixit) nō
oportet vos gradum sistere, sed progressus
semper facere, & praxim cum
Theoretica coniungere, vt vita vestra
cùm professione vestra maneat recō
                  ciliata:

Sic, & eo modo viuendi, Dei
gloriam promouebitis, expectationem
meam implebitis; me
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Regem vestrum
gaudio replebitis, & vobis
ipsis fructum vberem
facietis, et locupletem.
            
            
               
               The Kinges Oration Englished.
               
                  YOu may not looke from me for
any polished or refined Oration,
for I haue not had leysure at
any time to conferre with learned
men, or eloquent Orators,
Therefore I my selfe cannot be eloquent, and

                     ••
                  arned. But this you may expect at my

                     ••
                  nds, that as I am and alwayes haue beene,

                     〈◊〉
                   will euer remaine a worthy, and faithfull

                     •••
                  caenas to learning, and the professors therof.
And as concerning this your famous Vniuersitie,
you may certainely be assured that
I wil alwaies be a fauourer vnto it. Then you
for your partes must be carefull to maintaine
the pure worde of God: to flye and put to
flight all Romish superstitions, and to remooue,
forsake and abolish, all scismaticall, &
new opinions.

And in your Artes, and Disciplines (as one
of your learned Diuines taught you but yesterday)
you ought not to stande at a staye,
but alwaies to goe forwarde, and to ioyne
practise with your Contemplation, that in
your life and profession there may a sympathy
and coherence. So shall you aduaunce
the Glorie of God, satisfie my expectation,
make me a ioyfull king, and reape vnto your
selues a most plentifull haruest, and a moste
worthy commendation.
            
         
         
            
               
With this speech thus concluded, his maiestie
arose, and gaue vnto the Doctors and
the rest, manie thanks, for their paines that
they had taken: and vnto all he shewed himselfe
so gracious, and with so louing a countenance,
that by his outward appearaunce
might be well discouered, how inwardlie he
was satisfied, and pleased, with their learned
answeares vnto the seuerall questions: and
so returned backe againe to Christchurch.
            Where vppon Thursdaie at nighte after
supper there was a Comedie plaied by saint
Iohns men before his Maiestie. The subiect
whereof was the foure Complexions. This
comedie was so richlie set foorth and beautified,
with such curious and quaint conceipts
and deuises, as that it made his Maiestie pronounce
himselfe as muche delighted therewith,
as with anie sight (of the like nature)
at anie time heretofore presented vnto him.
            The next morrowe, beeing Fridaie, the
thirtieth daie of August, was the daie of his

Maiesties departure from Oxforde, and as
soone as the Sunne had vailed the curtaine
of the night, he got vp, carrieng the opinion
of Caesar.
            
               Lucan. lib. 2. in fine.
Nil actum credens,
cum quid superesset
agendum.
            That he had done nothing, when any thinge
was left vndone: and mounted himself with
diuers of his Nobles to see the Vniuersities
Librarie, which is in length all ouer the Diuinity
Schoole. The scituation whereof is so
pleasant, that the grounde whereon it is seated
is Diapred with Floraes riches, yet is it
farre more glorious, hauing placed within
her circumference so famous a Monument
of such worke, and workemanshippe.
            Round about, in forme of an Amphitheater,
are placed Colledges, and in the forefrōt

thereof, in the place of Oakes, Elmes, and
Pine-trees, all which are comfortable trees
to defende her from the furious wrathe of
winde and weather, are planted the Schools
of the seauen liberall Sciences, to adorn and
beautifie her with the inward plenty of their
wisedome and treasure.
            As for the Lybrarie it selfe, it hath a verie
long, large, and spacious walke, ouer the
schoole of Diuinitie, inter-seamed on both
sides, from the one ende vnto the other, very
thicke with seuerall Partitions, with certaine
seates and Deskes before them to sitte
downe vpon and reade. These partitions are
in euerie place filled full of shelues, and vnto
the shelues are there many Bookes fastened
with chaines of Jron: euerie volume bearing
his name and title, written on paper or parchment,
in faire Roman letters, and euerie partition
hath an Jnscription of the Faculties,
As whether her bookes bee either of Theologie,
Philosophie, Astronomie, Geometry, or any
other Art, &c.
            The Bookes that are conteined within this

Lybrarie, are verie rare straunge and scarce,
seldome or not at all to be heard of or seene
in any place but there. All of them verie
richlie guilded, and manye of them bossed
either with Siluer or Golde.
            All these are so fairelie kept and maintaind,
as if the Goddesse of wisdome hadde selected
and reserued it a Paradice to entertaine the
Muses: Therefore J conclude of it thus, that
Dignitatem eius, difficile est vt homo explicet sermone.
            
            This obiect being presented vnto the sight
of his Maiestie, did so sensiblie discouer his
delight therewith, that he reported it a most
admirable ornament to the Vniuersitie: and
gratiouslie promised himselfe, a royal friend
and Patron for euer.
            Whilst his Maiestie was thus busied in taking
of this suruey of the librarie; the queen
and Prince were in the meane space, as much
delighted with an English Comedie, presented
and plaide before them in Christ-church
hall, by certaine Schollers: which was as rich
lie set forth and perfourmed, as with as great

applause, and commendation as any of the
rest that had beene before since the Kinges
comming to Oxford.
            Jn the meane time also diuers of the Noble
men went to Saint Maries in their hoodes,
and formalities, and were presented, and incorproated
Maisters of Arts. As

                  The Duke of Lennox.
                  The Earle of Northumberland.
                  The Earle of Suffolke.
                  The Earle of Salisburie.
                  The Earle of Pembroke.
                  The Earle of arundell.
                  The Earle of Oxford.
                  The Earle of Essex.
                  The Earle of Montgomerie.
                  The Earle of Rutland.
                  The Lord mounteagle.
                  The Lord Howard Baron of
Effingham.
                  The Lord Howard Baron of
Waldon.
                  The Lord Vicount Cranburne.
               
               
with diuers others, of the Noblemen and
Knights, that came in so confusedly that as
yet there is not a perfect register gathered of
their names.
            After his sighte of the Vniuersities Lybraries,
he betooke himselfe towards Magdalen
Colledge, to see that also: accompanied
with diuers of the Nobility, wheras the
president and diuers the rest of the fellowes,
stoode readye to receiue him, also at the
Chappell doore he was Royally entertained
and at his entrance, there was a Latine oration
pronounced vnto him.
            Which being ended, hee stoode a prettie
while reading the verses that were written in
Latine by certaine Noblemens sonnes students
in the same Colledges, and set thicke
on both sides of the chappell gate, as there
was also diuers others placed rounde aboute
the courts of other Schollers writings.
            
               
Thus when his Maiestie had viewed the
Chappell, he was forth with conducted into
the Cloysters, and from thence into the squadrant
Court within the Cloysters, wherehe
staied a good space, taking a thorow view of
all such seuerall Pictures as were there set vp
round about, and now against this entertain
were newly trimmed and painted, which caused
his Maiestie to demande the meaning of
them, wherein the President and others fully
resolued him.
            From thence he returned backe to Christ
church againe vnto the Queene and younge
Prince, and in the waie (as is credibly reported)
he woulde needes be guided to Brazen
Nose Colledge gate, that he might be made
an eie-witnesse of that, of which he hadde so
often heard, and that whereof the Colledge
carrieth the name.
            And both as he passed forth of Magdalen
Colledge gates, and so vpwardes all along,
the Schollers cried Viuat uiuat, &c. and the
others of the multitude, with a loude voice,
God saue king Iames, &c.
            
               
Much about twelue of the clocke the same
day he tooke his leave, and left the Vniuersitie,
addressing his course towardes Windsore
Castle. And a little on this side Whayt
ley, some fiue or sixe miles from Oxford, his
Maiestie and the Queene parted, the King
purposing that night to lie at the Ladie Russels
a little from Maiden-head, & the Queen
at Sir Francis Stoners, a little from Henly vpon
Thames.
            
               
Thus was Oxford left a mournefull place
for the suddaine departure of her most dread
Soueraigne. Crying,

                  
                     Oh istos (Augustae) dies, oh profer in annos,
                     & lustrum ex annis, elustris soecula surgant,
                     E soeclis aeuum, nullo numerabile motu,
                     Vt nostros dudum quot quot risere dolores
                     Gaudia iam numerent, intabescantque vicendo.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Oh Emperor draw forth these dais to years,
                     Yeares to an Age, Age to eternitie:
                     That such as lately ioyed to see vs grieue,
                     May sorrow now to see our perfect ioyes.
                  
               
            
            But all in vaine, For as Titan appeares not
from the East, to make one place only gorgeous
with his Sunne-beames. So his Maiestie
is nowe departed from thence, to make
other places also hapie and ioyfull at his royall
presence, and to present suche with the
brightnesse of his fauours, as haue muche
languished for his long absence. Thus as his
entrance into the Cittye, filled euerie parte

of it with great ioy and admiration, so likewise
his departure lefte the Vniuersitie thus
lamenting his short continuance and tarrying
amongst them.
            
               Oh think (Augustus) how the Muses moorn,
               Which ioyde of late to see thy soueraigntie:
               think how at this retire they wring their hāds,
               Distilling from their eies salt shewers of tears
               To bring in Winter with their sad lament?
               and to this purpose play their seuerall parts,
               For how can Sōmer staie, when sun departs?
            
            
               Think how Syluanus sadly sits, and grieues,
               to see that Autumn with his withered wings,
               wil bring in tempest, now thy beams are gon Leaves,
               and fill each Colledg-groue with wind-faln
               That did but lately flourish with green trees
               think how at this ech colledg feels hir smarts
               For how can Sumer stay when Sun departs?
               
                  
Thinke how thy learned graue Collegians
               which at thy entrāce shew`d their inward ioyes
               And smooth`d the waie, and strew`de it with sweet flowers,
               Now if they durst, would stop it with greene boughes,
               least by thine absence the yeares pride decay,
               Such griefe conceit thy scholers (mē of Arts)
               To see how summer slides, when Sun departs.
            
            
               Thy students weep, and Colledges mourne in blacke,
               Birds cease to sing, and euery creature wailes,
               to see the season alter with this change,
               And how thy going workes a suddaine woe,
               Turning our mirths to sable sad lament,
               our ioyes are now turn`d al to mournful parts,
               To see how Summer slides when sun departs.
            
            
               Returne then soone, oh soone return againe,
               For Summers parting is thy peoples paine.
               Oh come again, thou art thou art our worlds bright ey,
               
                  
Whose presence so adornd our Academy,
               Thou art our Sun, then bring againe thy light,
               Els doth thine absence make eternall night.
            
            Well: hope is a sweet stringe to harpe on,
which sends a second comfort to cure all discontent,
for his Maiesties most Royall fauor
and countenance considered, giues the whol
Vniuersity hopefull perswasion that hee will
alwaies remain her faithfull remembrancer.
Which God grant he may doe, and that he
may continue manye and most happie yeares,
to fauour and foster her, and all others
which doe truely loue, and honour him.
            FINIS.
         
      
   