
      
         
            
            
               The Gouernance and preſeruation of them that feare the Plage.
            
            Set forth by Iohn Vandernote, Phiſicion and Surgion, admitted by the Kynge his highneſſe. Now newly ſet forth at the requeſt of William Barnard, of London Draper. 1569.
            
            
               JMPRINTED at London, by Wyllyam How, for Abraham Veale, in Paules churchyeard at the ſigne of the Lambe.
         
         
            
            The preface.
            TO THE honour of Almightie GOD, and profite of al Chriſten people, and to maintein health in the hole bodies, and to remedie them that are corrupt and infect with the infections of the Peſtilence, I Iohn Vandernote, Phiſicion and Surgeon admitted by the Kinge his highnes: and ſworne vnto my Lord of Suffolke his grace, now abiding at the late graye Friers in London doo thinke it mete to wright certain thinges cō
               cerning the peſtilence, aſwell drawne out of diuers autentique doctors and experimenters, as of myne owne experience being conuerſaunt and a myniſter (vnder God) in the ſaid infection, in Rome, Italy, Lomberdy, Napels, Poelles, and Iowe countries, by the ſpace of many yeares.
            And becauſe gentle Reader that the great and long ſermons and prolixite of ſentences ar often occaſion of tediouſnes and ſmal frutefulnes to the Reader, becauſe ſo many circumſtances ar compriſed in one matter wherfore gentle reader, I thought it mete and expedient, briefly without any ambiguite to wright chiefly the moſt ſubſtance and effect of this peſtiferous diſeaſe, and to declare it ſhortly, to thintent it may be borne by hart away of them that ſhall haue nede of it, as I pray God no perſon after this haue, as graunt vs the holy Trinite.
         
         
            
            The contentes of this booke are theſe.
            
               ¶ The fyrſte.
               Of the Pronoſtication of the Peſtilence.
               The ſeconde.
               Of the cauſes whereof the plage dooeth engendre and come.
               The thirde.
               Of the remedies againſt the Peſtilence.
               The fourth.
               Of the comfortinge and ſtrengthning of the herte and other the ſpirituall partes.
               The fyfte.
               Of the Fleobothomie or letting of bloud in the time of Peſtilence.
               The ſixte.
               Of meates, drinkes, & ſawces to be vſed in the time of the Peſtilence.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               ¶The tokens and Sygnes which dooe Pronoſtyque the Plage or Peſtilence to come are ſeuen.
               i. The fyrſt token is, when the day in ſomer often dooeth chaunge: as in the morning inclinyng to rayne, after to darkenes and after to winde, ſpecially windes commynge fourth of the Southe.
               ij. The ſeconde when the daies in ſomer are darke, and like often to rayne and doo not rayne.
               iij. The thirde, when vpon the grounde are many Flies fliynge nere the grounde, that is a token that the ayre is corrupte.
               iiij. The fourth, when ye ſtarres are like ofte to fall or ſlippe, this is a token that the ayre is inflamed, and full of venimous vapours.
               v. The fifte, when there doth appere in the ayre a Comete or a ſlidyng Starre, as Ariſtotle ſaieth in Mytauris. It ſignifieth greate warre, ſheddinge of bloud, and the death of a greate multitude of people, the deſtruction of many Townes, drownynge of ſhippes thorow greate tempeſtes of the

Sea. And the darkeneſſe of the Sunne, ſignifieth chaunging of Regions. And that the common people ſhall haue dearth and Peſtilence.
               vi. The ſixte figure is, when it dooeth often lighten and thundre, and ſpecially when it commeth out of the South.
               vij. The ſeuenth, when many windes blowe or come forth of the South, for they corrupt the ayre.
               When theſe for ſayde ſignes doo appere, then it is to be feared of a greate Plage, or Peſtilence for to come, without the greate mercy of almightie God doo it withſtande.
            
            
               ¶The cauſe of the Peſtilence.
               ¶The cauſe of Peſtilence are three maners.
               i. Sometimes it doeth ingender thorow ye vapors and corruptions vpon the earth.
               ii. Sometimes it doth ingender thorow the vapors and corruption of the Skie and Elementes, or bodies

aboue.
               iii. Sometimes it doth ingender throw the mixting of them bothe.
               i. The plage is ſomtime ingendered, thorowe the vapours and corruptions coming of the earth, as we doo dayly ſe out of Priues, Dikes, filthy Canels, ſtandinge muddy waters, being neare ye place where the people doth reſt and ſleape a nightes, & thorow this the ayre becometh infect in hir ſubſtance and qualitie, and that onely in ſome places. And this particuler corruption commeth euery day. And thorow the ſame commeth often Peſtilente Feuers, whiche often doo deceyue the Phyſicion, which doo not take them for to be the feuer peſtilenticall. The Plage or Peſtilence commeth likewiſe ſometimes thorow the ſtinke of deade bodies, aſwell of mankinde as of beaſtes. Alſo it cōmeth thorow ſtanding Mudde, ſtinking Pooles and waters, and this dooeth corrupt the ayre, and this peſtilence is ſomtimes vniuerſall, and ſomtimes perticular.
               ij. Secondarely, the Plage is ſomtime ingendred thorowe the vapoures and corruptions

of the Skies and Elementes or Bodies aboue, and that thorow ye vertues of the Sterres and Bodies aboue, and thorow the ſame the ſpirituall liuinge ſpirites and bodies beneth are infecte. And of the ſame Auicen ſaith in his fourth booke ſayinge: that the bodies are often inflamed & corrupt thorow the infections of the bodies aboue, for the corrupte ayre doth infect the ſprites beneth, and ſo the liuing ſpirites in mankinde is often infecte.
               iij. Thirdly, the Plage doth ingender thorow the mixynge of them both: yt is when thorowe the impreſſion or influence of the bodyes aboue, the ayre being corrupt, and thorow the putrefaction of caryon liynge vpon the earth and ſtinking ayre, a ſyckeneſſe is ingendred in mankind. And the ſame ſickneſſe is often caled Febris Peſtilenci alis and ſomtimes & often an apoſtemacion, for ſumtimes the ayre that we do draw in our bodyes is corrupt and venemous. And ſo infecteth the hart, wher thorow it is agrauate ſtrongly, in ſo much yt ſhe doth eate & gnaw filthy infection: & then the vryne & the diſgeſtion is then often like for to be good, notwithſtanding that ye pacyent

is ſtill declining toward death. And thorow the ſame many Phiſycions are often deceuid. And therfore it is nedefull that euery body prouide him ſelfe of a good and expert Phiſicion: not onely ſeen in learning, but alſo well and better in practyſe, concerning the premiſſes.
               
                  A queſtion.
                  Wherfore doth the one dye and the other not, being both infect? lykewiſe more in one place then an other.
               
               
                  Aunſvver
                  ¶This may be thorow the meanes of two cauſes.
                  i. Fyrſt thorow it, that is working.
                  ii. Secondarely thorow it that is ſufferyng.
                  i. Fyrſt thorow it that is working, that when the heuenly influences regard more the one perſon then the other, and the one place more then the other.
                  ij. Secondarely, thorow it that is ſuffering, that is as when the one body is more inclined and diſpoſed to the Plage then the other is.
               
               
                  
                  Nota.
                  Theſe bodies are moſt inclined or diſpoſed to the Plage or Peſtilence. Fyrſte all thoſe yt are hot or warme, and thoſe that haue greate ſweatynge yſſues: and bodies that are corrupt. All thoſe that hath theyr ſweating yſſues ſtopped. And therfore are the bodyes fore inclined vnto the plage, wherin be come greate reſolucyons: lyke as in them that are greate medlers in Lechery, and them that ſerue in hot houſes: and all they that do lightly ſweate thorowe ſmall laboure or trauayle, or waxe hote, and all they that lightly waxe angrye, hote and fumous, al ſuche are inclined vnto the plage.
               
               
                  An other queſtion.
                  Whether ſuche infectyon of the Peſtylence be contagious or infectiue or not?
               
               
                  Aunſvvere.
                  Suche infection is infectiue and contagyous. For throughe the bodies of the infect

perſons, cōmeth ſuche venemous vapours and humours that doo not only corrupt the other hole bodyes: but alſo the ayer where thorowe commeth infectyon. And therfore ought euery perſon to eſchue the infect perſons. And moreouer when ye plage rayneth, you ſhall not ſtande emong many people for feare if any of them ſhuld bee infecte vnknowen. And therfore ſtandeth the wyſe Phiſycyons (whyche dooe viſet ſuche in the Plage tyme) a farre of from the pacientes, beholdinge with theyr face the window or dore. Alſo they ſhall doo likewiſe, that do ſerue them.
               
               
                  Nota.
                  It is very good for the paciente that he do often chaunge his chamber, and that his windowes ſtand and open toward ye eaſt, and north eaſt, but the windowes which opē toward ye ſouth, ſhall euer be cloſed or locked, for the ſouth winde hath in him two cauſes of corruption.
                  i. Fyrſt he debiliteth and weakeneth nature, as wel of whole people as of ſicke.
                  ii. Secondarely, like as it is written in

                     tertio Aphroriſmorum, the ſouthwinde aggrauate the hearing, hurteth the herte, for he openeth the ſweating iſſues of mankind and ſo entreth into the harte. And therfore euery hole perſon ſhall in the time of peſtilence, when the ſouth wind doth blow, tary in the houſe the hole daie. And he nedes muſt goo forthe, yet ſhal he tary within ſo long til the ſun be hie and longe riſen or vp.
               
            
            
               ¶The remedies againſt the Peſtilence.
               Here ſhalbe ſayd how euery body ſhal preſerue & keepe him from ye infection of the plage or Peſtilence.
               i. And firſt for the ſame euery chriſtian creature ſhalbe aduertiſed by the word of Ieremy the prophet, which commaundeth that euery creature ſhall eſchewe the euil and folowe the good waies, and that he repentantly with a meke harte ſhal confeſſe him of his offences and this is the moſt ſureſt medecine in the plage time.
               ii. The ſecond, that euery perſon flie the places infect if it be poſſible. And they that can not avoide the place, let them abſtain

of all thynges cauſing putrefaction, aſmuch as is poſſible, like as is ouermuch copulacion between man & woman, and the ſouth winde whiche naturally is infectiue. And therefore ſhall euery perſon kepe the windowes locked in the morninge till eyght of the clocke ſtanding againſt the ſouthe.
               Alſo they ſhall auoyde all maner of ſtinkyng ſauours, as of ſtables, ſtréetes, kanels welles, ſtanding mudde waters, and ſpecially of all maner of foule ſtinking carion, or dead bodies. And moſt of all of all maner of olde ſtinking Vrines and waters, for in ſome houſes, they doo keepe it two or thrée dayes longe, and in ſome houſes are ſome kanels running vnder or aboue ye grounde: where greate ſtinke ingendreth & remayneth, and all this doeth ingendre great putrefaction. And that is the cauſe that more people be infected & diſeaſed more in thoſe places where ſuche are, then in other places where none ſuche is. Likewiſe do the people more die and be infecte where places are where they doo ſell cabuſhe & wurtes, for that ingendreth a daungerous humour which doth infecte mankinde, when they be rotten or periſhed. And as thorow

odours aromaticke or good ſauours are the hertes and other the ſpiritual partes recreated, renued, comforted and ſtrengthened: Likewiſe thorow euell foule ſauours, are they debelitated and infected.
               Therefore euery perſon ſhal ſo vſe their houſes, that no ſuche ayre or ſauour come in beyng corrupte as is aforeſayde, for the corrupt ayre is moyſt, and ingendreth thorow his owne nature a putrifaction in the houſe and in the places wher they do ſlepe. And therefore ſhal you ayre and clenſe the houſes and chaumbers with light flames of fyre, beyng made with Oken wood. Alſo you ſhall after that perfume the place with theſe herbes folowynge, as Bayes, Iuniper buries, Organum, wormewood, Yſope, Rue, and Moogworte. Lignum Aloes perfumed is beſt of all, were it not ſo coſtly or dere. Al theſe ayres and perfumes conforte and ſtrengthen the inward parte of the body, when the ayre entreth thorow the mouth or noſethrilles.
               You ſhall alſo clenſe and abſtayne of all maner of fulſumneſſe or replecion of humors. For the bodies that are replete with humors are ſone infected and inflamed.

For Auicen ſaieth in quarto canone. That people whiche will be often filled with meate and drinke doo ſhorten their life. Alſo you ſhall avoide muche bathinge or ſweating in baumes or hote houſes. Alſo for to be conuerſant emong great congregacion of people to the intent other being corrupt and infecte: doo not corrupte and infecte you, you being cleane. And when you come not emong the congregacion or company of people, then ſhall you vſe this followinge.
               i. Firſte in the morning, when you doo riſe, you ſhall eate a quantitie of hearbegrace or rue, well waſhed with a litle ſalte and one or two cornels of nuttes wel clenſed. And when you can get none of this, then ſhall you take a crumme of bread depped in good vineagre and eate nexte your hert, and ſpecially when the aire is darke, miſty and not clere. And it is not good in the plage time for to walke in the townes or vilages, but rather to tary at home with in the houſe, then to goo forthe.
               ii. Secondarelye, you ſhal ſpreade or ſprinkle the houſe (and ſpecialy in ſommer) with vinegre, with roſes, with vine leues.

And it is good that you dooe often waſhe your handes in water and vineagre, and then often to ſmel the handes when they be dried. Alſo al ſoure and ſharpe ſauoures are then holſome for to be ſmelled on, as well in winter as in ſommer. And it was for bodden me to ſhew it vnto the cōmons in Rome, where I was conſtrayned for to go from houſe to houſe I beyng a ſtudient and prentes there, where I went dayly to miniſter and dreſſe the people, and tooke but onely a crumme of bread, or a pece of a ſpounge beyng depped in ſtrong vyneagre and the ſame helde I before my mouth & noſe for to ſmel. For all ſoure ſauours ſtop the fluxe of humours, and dooe not ſuffre the venemoſite or corrupcion to entre the bodye. And this dooyng I was (thorow the helpe of God) & the premiſſes, ſaued from the ſayde infection, at whiche my companions did maruaile.
               All theſe premiſſes haue I my ſelfe experimented and founde true, in diuers regions and countrees, as in Rome, Italie, Lumbardye, Naples, Poyelles, Calabers, Almanye, Flaunders, and likewiſe in Englande this .xvij. yeares. I beynge

ſworne vnto the noble late Frenche Quenes grace my Ladie Mary, and my Lorde of Suffolke his grace.
            
            
               ¶Here foloweth of the confortinge and ſtrengthening of the herte, and the other ſpirituall and ſpeciall members of the bodie.
               
                  THe comforters of the Herte are Safferon, Camphir, and Plantaine with other herbes, which do clenſe the liuinge ſpirites within, and conforte. And theſe are good for ye cōmon people, which are lightly infected one of an other. And therfore ſhall euery one beware that they doo not receue the breath comming out of the mouth or noſethrilles of an other, Alſo the ſight is darkened thorow the infecte ayre, when they do not beare ſuch like hearbes in their handes.
               It is very good that you do waſhe your face, mouth, eies, & handes with roſewater

myxt with vyneagre. And when you haue none of the premyſſes, & muſte nedes go emong the people, then take & vſe good vineagre, & then boldly go emong the people. Alſo ſolubelneſſe of the wombe is a greate helpe in this caſe. And when you can not haue by the waye of nature ſolubelneſſe, then prouoke hym with ſuppoſitories: or after the counſayle of learned and experte Phiſicions. And lykewyſe ſhal you finde at ye Apotecaries Pillule Peſtilenci ales, which are very good. And you ſhall alwaies kepe your houſes good fire, for that letteth the impreſſion of the ſky, & clarifieth the ayre,
               Item fine triacle is beſt for the ſame, as well for them that are in helth as for them that are infect, of this ſhall you take twiſe a daie in clere wine, or with roſewater, or with clere ale or bere. And euery time that you take Triacle, you ſhall not excede the quantite of a common peaſe at ones, and of the water ale or bere, the quantitee of two ſponefulles. The Triacle ſhalbe firſt diſſolued in a cuppe with the wine, water, ale or bere, and then ſhal you not eate after by the ſpace of foure or fiue houres, to the intent the Triacle may haue her due operacion

within the body.
               Then you ſhal eat good meates & drinke good drinkes, as good cleare Wine, Ale or Bere, and that ſhalbe ſoberly, for ſuperfluitie cauſeth corruption and putrefaction of the humours. Alſo you ſhall abſtain from all maner of thinge ingendring heate, as Peper, Garlike. And yet notwithſtanding that Peper doth pourge the flewme of the braynes, and the other membres of viſcoſe humours, yet it doeth to much inflame and cauſe heate. And to muche heate gendreth putrefaction. And therefore is the bitterneſſe better then the heate, ſmellyng or ſauoringe of the Peper, and Garlike pourgeth the Flegmata and euel humours, and prouoketh appetite to eate, and ſuffer not the drie ayre to entre into the body. Notwithſtanding, becauſe the Garlike perturbeth the eyes and the head with heate, to them that doo often eate or vſe it, therfore it ſhall be in this time abhorred and abſtayned.
               
                  ¶The Plage is oftentimes augmented and increaſed thorow hote cauſes.
                  Suche meates as are ſoneſt diſgeſted ar

beſt, the ſoner the better, & in the morning and at none ſhal they eate ſodden meates, and at nightes roſted. All maner of pape meates and caudels ſhall be abſtayned and eſchued, excepte they be acetouſe, or ſomewhat ſower. For ſower or ſharpe thinges are better in this ſeaſon of peſtilence, then any other medecines. Alſo you ſhall abſtayne of all maner of fruites beynge not ſharpe, nor hauing no ſoureneſſe in them, except Cheries, Pomgranates, Orrenges and few peares or appels dreſſed in ſteade of a medecine, for all maner of fruites doth ingendre putrefaction.
                  Spices beynge apte & good in this time, are Gynger, Cynamon, Commyn, Macis, Saffron, and of the ſame ar made good preſeruatiues for the riche people. And the poore ſhall occupie Rue, Salge, Nuttes, Parcely, and this ſhall they mixe with ſalt and vineagre. And ye meane people of ſubſtaunce, ſhall take Commen and Saffron & mixe them with vyneagre. This is maruelous good for to be taken inwarde, for it defendeth inward the putrefaction.
                  Myrth of herte is a greate comforte and helpe of health in the body. And therefore

feare of death is a daungerous caſe in this time, but only to be mery, and ſet the hole hope and confidence vpon God, and to cō
                     mende him to his godly pleaſure.
               
            
            
               ¶Here foloweth of the bloud letting in the Plage tyme.
               ONes in a moneth you muſt be letten bloud, when age, ſtrength, or any other cauſe doth not let, like pilgrims, ſicke and extenuated people, and ſuch as are verie ſolubel, or laxe. And the Fleobothomi ſhould be doone in the lefte or right arme, in the Liuer vayne, Baſelica, in the arme before meate. And when the Lyuer vayne is ſtriken then ſhall you be mery, & drinke good drinke, as good Wyne, Bere or Ale, temperatly, and that ſame day ſhall you not ſleape, and ſpecially when the Liuer vayne is let bloud.
               Item, when any doth feele himſelfe infecte or any curnell or Apoſtumations appere or pricke, then ſhal he wholy abſtaine from ſleape. But goe walkinge abrode, for

the ſleape leadeth the venemous hoteneſſe to the hert: and to the other ſpecial members, in ſo muche that no Hearbes can reſolue the ſame, and bringe it to the firſt eſtate, whiche woulde not be ſo, if the bodie were walking and ſturring.
               
                  A queſtion.
                  What ſhall a man doo, that hath his naturall ſleape after he be infecte?
               
               
                  Aunſvvere.
                  In the time when plage dooeth raygne when you will ſleape after your meate, you ſhall prolonge it with walkyng in the Feilde or Gardeins, and then ſleape an houre after meate. And therefore Auicen ſaith: when you be diſpoſed for to ſleape, it ſhall be holeſome then after the ſleape, to drinke a good draught of drinke. For that perſon that is ſleaping draweth vnto him many humours, and ſuche euill humours are letted thorow a good draught of drink.
               
               
                  A queſtion.
                  How ſhal you know whether any be infecte or no?
               
               
                  Aunſvvere.
                  He that is infect doeth eate that day but litle, for he is full of euell humours. And

when he doth eate he doth couet ſleape and doth fele great hotneſſe with cold and hath a great payne in the forparte of the head & thus ſhall he bring away by walking and going abrode. And that perſon that is infect doeth holy abhore walking, or to ride a horſebacke, or otherwayes, thorowe ſlouthfulneſſe and heauineſſe.
                  Euery perſon that is infecte, doeth require, deſire, and couet ſleape euery houre for that inward venim perturbeth the liuing ſprites, in ſuch wiſe that they euer require reſt. And of the ſame ſignes may euery perſon know whether they bee infected or not. And when any doeth not beleue this, lette him tary halfe a day after, and then ſhall he feele an impoſtome in his arme holes, in his gruinde or behinde his eares. And the beſt remedy is when they doo feele any of theſe in the time of Peſtilence, not for to ſleape. For in the ſleape do the liuing ſpirites reſt, as is aforeſayd, and then all the infections ſpredeth thorow the whole members of the body. All theſe premiſſes haue I proued before.
                  When any man or perſon féeleth himſelfe infecte that ſame day ſhall he immediatly

after, be letten bloud plenteouſly til ſwoninge, ſo ſoone as it be poſſible, or els till he waxe faynte, for a ſmall voydynge of bloud doeth ſturre and moue the bloud. And when the perſon will open but one vayne, and not many, ſo ſhall he let her bloud ſo longe as ſhe will, for a ſmal voydyng doth ſturre the venemous infection, as is aforeſayde.
                  Item euery perſon that is letten bloud: infecte or whole perſon, ſhall beware that he doo not ſleape that day till midnight. And the ſayde lettinge of bloud ſhall euer be done, in the ſame ſide where the apoſtemacion doth appere. And when the apoſtemacion doeth appere vnder the right arme then ſhall they bee letten bloude in the ſame arme, in the mediane. And when the apoſtemacion doeth appeare vnder the left arme, then ſhall the lettinge of bloude be in the ſayd left arme, in the mediane, or lyuer vaine, vpon the hand nexte the eare finger.
                  And when the apoſtemacion doth appere by the grynd or priuy members, then ſhal they be letten bloude in the ſame ſyde vnder the anckle or nerer the hele. And when

then the letting of bloud ſhalbe done in the head vayne, neare the thumbe, in the ſame ſide where the Apoſtemacion appeareth, or in the Mediane of the ſame arme, or els by the eare finger. And when the Apoſtemacion doeth appeare by the eares, then the letting of bloud ſhalbe done in the head vayne in the ſame ſide, or els in the vayne between the thombe and the next finger, to the intent that the venemous infection do not deſturbe the braynes, or in the vain by the eare finger, or els in the vayne, Baſilica named.
                  And when the Apoſtemacion doeth appere in the ſhoulders, then ſhall the bloud be taken forth, with Boxyng and Sacrification, howbeit afore ſhall the Mediane be opened: or the Harte vaine. And when the Apoſtemation doeth appere vpon the back then ye letting of bloud ſhalbe by the greate Toe, called Suger pedicā magnam, all the foreſayde Fleobothomyes or lettinge of bloud ſhalbe done before the infecte perſon hath ſleapt, or before the appearing in the prickyng of the Apoſtemacions.
                  When any doeth feele the Apoſtemacion after that they haue ſleapte, then ſhall the

Fleobothomies be in the contrary ſide, in the ſide where the Apoſtemacion doth not appere, like as here, if the Apoſtemacion doeth appere after the ſleapinge in ye right arme, then the letting of bloud ſhalbe in ye left arme, in the Liuer vayne, or Mediane, or els in the hand in the vayne called Baſilica.
                  
                  And when the Apoſtemacion doeth appere vnder the left arme, then ſhal the letting of bloud be in the right arme, like as is ſayd of the lefte arme. And likewiſe ſhal you do of all other Apoſtemacions; in what places they do appere, all times in the contrary ſide, if it do appeare after ſleape.
                  When the pacient is very faint & weake whiche is letten bloud, then he may ſleape ſomwhat, or els half a day, but euery ſpace of a halfe day muſt the pacient be ſturring, ſoftely riding or walking. And when the apoſtemacion doth waxe bigge and greate, that is a good ſigne, the nature doth expell the venemoſite outwarde, and maketh the body whole.
                  And to the intent the Apoſtemacion may be the ſoner ripened, matured and opened you ſhal make this medecine: Stampe the leaues of Elder, and do to it pouder of Muſterd

ſeede, and make of this a plaiſter, and lay it vpon the apoſtemacion. Some Surgeons do mixe vnto this triacle, which I do not like, for the Triacle will repercuſſe inward agayne the ſayde riſynge and venemoſite, howbeit I doo counſayle that they ſhal drinke it, to the intent the venemoſite may be driuen outwarde.
                  An other remedy, take Barbam Iouis or Houſeleke, or Senegren, ſcerpillum plantaine & a litle Rie flower, and rub all theſe together till you perceiue water comming forth, then mixe that water with womans milke, & giue it him to drinke that hath the apoſtemacion, but this muſt he doone before they haue ſlept, in an emptie ſtomack or faſting, for then it doth worke better in the body.
                  As ſoone as any doeth perceiue the curnels or apoſtemacions, they ſhal take haſel nuttes, Figges and Rue, and ſtampe them together and eate it, or lay it vpon it.
                  And euery perſon that doth gouern him after the premiſſes, ſhal wel inough auoide the daungers of the Plage or Peſtilence with the helpe and ayde of God, without whom nothing can be.
               
            
            
               
               ¶Here foloweth a gouernaunce or preſeruacion for all them that feare the Plage, in vſinge them ſelues in meates and drinkes.
               FYrſt, the ſubſtaunce of their breade ſhalbe white, one or two dayes olde, well leauened, and of pure wheate, well bulted from the Branne. In this breade ſhalbe baken the Anniſſeede & ſalt, and ſhalbe well baken.
               Your drinke ſhalbe white Wine, cleare ſhininge, of good ſauour, not to redde nor to hotte, nor to fumous, to the intent that the quicke ſpirites and the humours waxe not to hote, the wine likewiſe ſhall not be to ſmall. And if it be poſſible, drinke olde Wine, for that is beſt, for he clenſeth and drieth beſt. And is not ſo wateriſhe as the new wine is, and this wyne ſhalbe mixte with ſothen water, and that more in ſummer then in wynter.
               Item it is good that you ſhall take and drinke a draught of Malmeſey, or of other

ſtronge Wine, before you go into the ayre for by the meane of this, many euell ayres & vapours be dried vp, the ſprites be quickned and conforted.
               Item your ſothen water, ſhalbe running water, or els that cōmeth from the rockes or ſandy grounde, or Well water, and the ſauour of this water ſhalbe ſweet.
               
                  ¶The gouernaunce of ſauoures and ſauces.
                  ALl maner of Sauces in this time ſhalbe made with Lemans, Orynges, with ſoure garnate Appels, mixt with this pouder: Take the beſt Cynamon that can be had, Gynger, Cloues, of eche halfe a dagma, Bee white and redde of eche a dragma Corall white and redde of eche a dragma, Cardamomi two dragmas, Saffron halfe a dragma, and as much fine Suger, as of al the firſt, of al this ſhal you make a ſubtel pouder, and of this pouder ſhall you vſe in your meates, and more in Summer then in Wynter.
                  And when there is no lettinge or impediment, that doo hyndre, as coldeneſſe of

the ſtomacke, then ſhall you vſe Orynges, Pomgranates, and Sitrins. And the ſeedes of the aforeſayde haue a ſpeciall propertie in the premiſſes. And therefore in the Peſtilent time ſhall you often occupie the pouder of theſe ſéedes with Suger like a dredge, or els ſeeth the ſéedes with fleſhe or other meate or ſuppynge, when the ſtomacke is not hindred by the ſame, thorow coldeneſſe.
               
               
                  Of Vyneager.
                  When there is no impediment, then ſhal you vſe good vyneager, and with that ſeaſon your meate. And this vyneager ſhal be beſt, when it is made of good white wyne or Malmeſey. Saue thoſe that haue impediment in the Breſt, or Lunges, or Throte or Coughe, or ſhorte winde, and thoſe that haue colde ſtomackes, ſhall not ſo much occupy of the vineager, but moderatly.
               
               
                  Of Potage in this time.
                  The Potage whiche ſhalbe eaten in this

time ſhalbe made with wheat flower, or ryſe, or of lenttes. Howbeit, the firſt water ſhalbe caſt away. Or els you ſhall eate aleberies made with bere & bread or with red Cicers with ye ſhels. The root of Fenel of Smallach are good in pottage, & eaten, and all manner of meat made with egges, Saue potaige made with dough or other comon potaiges are not good, ſaue potaige of Spiniage, of Percele, of Burrage, hartteſtonge, ar very good. And all manner of herbes that haue a ſondry vertue, as Rue, Scabiouſſe, Iſop, Marubin, & ſuche lyke.
               
               
                  ¶Of Frutes and other meates that ſhalbe eaten in the peſtilent tyme.
                  Capers made wt vineger, are good to eate at the beginning of the meale. But in winter ſhall you myxt to it ſome of the ſpices beforeſaide. A ſmall quantitie of Onions with vineger eaten likewiſe is very good, for the Oniō doth ingender certē humores whiche dooe corrode the poiſō, & conſume. Auicen ſaieth in ſecundo canone yt all other ſcharp meates ſaue Onions in the peſtilēt

time, ſhalbe abhored, and forborne. The yolke of egges potched in faier water, are very good.
                  You ſhall abſtaine from all maner of fiſhe thorowe their moyſtneſſe, and ſpeciallye thoſe that haue greate ſcales. You may ſomtime vſe ſmall fiſhes of riuers, or ſmal ſea fiſhes, how be it you muſt ſcrape of the ſcales and caſt forthe their intraelles, and they ſhalbe well waſhed, and rubbed with aniſſeed and vineger. And then ſhal they be roſted and not fried in butter or oyle, and and after that they ſhalbe eaten with the foreſayd ſpices, and in ye winter ſhalbe put more ſpices to it then in ſōmer. And when you haue eaten of this fiſhe, then ſhal you drinke therupon good ſtrong wine, and like wiſe you ſhall eate with it almondes or haſell nuttes.
                  You ſhall abſtine of all maner of mylke for thorowe her cometh ſoone corruption.
                  After the meat or drinke you may eate theſe, for he comforteth the diſgeſtiue ſtrength. All manner of fruites are euell yt time & in the ſtead of fruite: it is good to to take confits of Coriāder Auicen ſaieth in ſecundo canone, that this is ſpecially good

and profitable.
                  In the beginninge of the meale, yt is to wete diner or ſupper, it is good to eate .iii. leaues of Rue two dry figges & one nutte together for this is a ſpecial medecine for the plage, and againſt al poiſon. And therfore all they that feare poiſon or peſtilence let them vſe it.
               
               
                  Of the ſuperfluitie of meates and drynkes.
                  EVery one ſhalbe ware of to much meat or drinke in the time of Plage, but ſhall be ſober in meate or drinke, more then you be vſed vnto in other times, for many ſuperfluities are ingendred thorowe muche eating and drinking.
                  Many and ſundry meates in one meale is not good, euery one ſhalbe content with one diſhe. And if you be where many diſſhes are, yet feede vpon one which is light of digeſtion, you ſhall keepe your ſelfe ſolubel, when nature will not, with gliſters Suppoſitories, or Pylles, which are ſayde in this preſent booke. Alſo you ſhall holde

open the vaines of vrine with drinkes or opening medecines.
                  Alſo you ſhall faſtinig rubbe youre ſkin to open the ſweate holes in the ſkinne, or with clawing.
                  Alſo you ſhall pourge your braines thorowe the noſethrilles and mouthe.
                  Alſo you ſhall pourge your body of all ſuperfluitie, as farre as poſſible ſhalbe.
               
               
                  Of the Fleobothomy.
                  When the bloud is ſuperfluous in the body, then ſhall you be letten bloud, to the intent it be to the better complexion, and ſpecially you ſhalbe let bloud in the peſtilent time once in a monethe, and that but litle, and that is good and helthfull. And when the other humours of the body are ſuperfluous, like as is Melancholy aduſt of the color, whiche is mixte with the bloud. So ſhall you bee diligent in driynge, in euacuacion or pourginge the ſame, and all ſuche pacientes ſhall beware of ſuche thinges as dooe ingendre the ſame.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The fyrſt medecine.
                  
                     THe fyrſt ſhalbe a certain of Pilles written by Auicen, in the fourth Canon de preſeruatione a Peſtilentia, and are made thus. Take Aloe Epitacum two dragmes, of Myrre and Saffron, of eche a dragma, and make of this foreſayd Pilles with the iuce of Myntes.
                  Take of theſe pilles euery morning faſting, for they doo reſolue and dry vp the euill humours, and letteth the putrifiyng.
                  Item when any that doth vſe thoſe pylles, is inclined or apte to take the ſyckeneſſe, in ſummer ſhall take and put to the ſayde confection of pylles, ſealed claye, called terra ſigillata one dragma, and thoſe Pilles ſhalbe made with Roſewater.
                  In other ſeaſons the Pilles ſhalbe made as is aforeſayde.
               
               
                  The ſeconde medecine.
                  Shall be good and fine Triacle, at the

leaſte .x. yeares olde, of this ſhalbe taken one dragma euery weeke in ſummer with Roſe water, and in Wynter with good ſtronge Wyne, or with the iuce of Roſes, or with water of Citrie. And this ſhalbe doone ſyxe houres before meate faſtynge in an emptie ſtomacke.
               
               
                  ¶The thirde medecine.
                  Shalbe Mythridatum a confection ſo named and of this ſhal you take more in quā
                     titie then of ye Triacle, & euery wéeke ſhal you take of it a dragma, howbeit you muſt faſt after it fiue houres, and it muſt be taken in an empty ſtomacke, this Mithridatum or confection ſo called, muſt at ye leaſt be a yeare olde.
               
               
                  ¶The fourth medecine.
                  Shalbe Coriander confittes, and of this ſhalbe taken euery morning a ſmall ſponefull faſting, and thervpon, or after immediatly ſhalbe dronken the thirde parte of a Goblet of good wyne. And alſo when any greate heate is or greate warme wether, then ſhall they take Suger of Roſes.
               
               
                  ¶The fifte medecine.
                  Shalbe againſt the wormes, wherfore al

they that are inclined toward the breeding of wormes, ſhall ſéeth wormewood in good Wyne, till halfe be ſothen in.
               
               
                  ¶The ſyxte medecine.
                  Shalbe a precious ſyroupe, allowed and made by diuers Autors and experimēters in the ſayde ſickeneſſes, & I my ſelfe haue founde this true, for ſhe doth clenſe the bodie of all ſuperfluitee, and drieth likewyſe the bodie, conforting the heart, the braines and liuer, and all other interior partes of the bodie, howbeit of this ſyrup ſhalbe takē but an ounce and an halfe at ones.
                  And this is the ſyrup, and is made thus Recipe cortici citri, Radicū Caparis, Berbaris, Sandalorum vtriuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Spodij of eche two dragmus, Gariofilate Bugloſſe, Meliſſe, Boraginis, Cicorie, of eche one ownce Acetoſe, Epatice, Marubij, of eche halfe an ounce, Lactuceſylueſtris two dragmus, ſeminum Communim, Violarum, of eche .i. ounce, Thimi epithimi, Sene Polipodij, of eche a dragma, Succi Abſinthij, ſucci Fumiterre, ſucci Rebulorū, of eche one ounce Diagredij, two dragmas, Succare albe .ii. pounde. Of this ſhall you make a Siroppe, and this ſhall you clenſe with the iuce Citoniorum

or Quinſhes til it be inough, and this ſhall you occupie.
               
               
                  ¶The vſyng of theſe foreſaid ſixe medecines.
                  The firſt day early in the morning ſhal you take of the Syrop, & after ſleape vpon it one houre or twayne.
                  The ſecond day ſhall you take a dragma of the Triacle.
                  The thirde day ſhall you take a ſponeful of Corianders confite.
                  The fourth day, ſhall you take the decoction agaynſt wormes.
                  The fift day ſhall you take a dragma of the Pylles.
                  The ſyxt day ſhall you reſt.
                  The ſeuenth day ſhall you take any of theſe.
                  And it is very good, for to take ones in a weeke one dragma of theſe Pilles.
                  When ſoeuer you doo take any of theſe Pilles, that day you ſhall take none other medecine.
               
               
                  ¶Of ſleaping and watching.
                  Beware of to muche ſleape and ſpecially

in the day, alſo you ſhall not ſleape immediatly after you haue taken your meate before the meate be digeſted, or before the fyrſt digeſtion is doone or paſſed. It is very euell to ſleape vpon your backe. In the firſt ſleape lye vpon the right ſide, and there after two houres vpon ye left ſide. And then agayne the whole night vpon the right ſide Alſo you ſhall lie hie with your head, and be well couered with clothes. It is good that you kéepe you waking two or thrée houres after your meate before you ſleape.
               
               
                  ¶Of reſting, or waking, or mouing.
                  When the peſtilence ſtrongly raigneth, then muſt you beware of greate trauayle and labour, and ſpecially in the open ayre. And when you will labour, ſo ſhall you doo it faſting and in a cloſe ayre. And in time of Peſtilence ſhall you keepe you temporate in labour, for to much quietneſſe, and to much labour is naught.
               
               
                  ¶Of the accidentes.
                  Euery man ſhalbe ware of angre, of ſorowfulneſſe, of dredefulneſſe, and of ſuche like, but you ſhalbe mery, glad, & be emong

mynſtrels Harpes, Lutes, and other melodies, reade fonde and mery ſtories and ſonges.
               
               
                  A medecine of Kyng Henry for the Plage or Peſtilence.
                  TAke Marigolds, Sorrel, and Burnet, of euery of them a handful, Rew and Fetherfew of euery of them an other halfe handfull, and of Dragons a quantite of the crop or of the roote, and waſh them in running water all cleane, and ſeeth all them ſoftly in a pot, with a pottell of runninge water, till it come to a quarte of licker, and then ſet it backe till it be colde, and then ſtrayne it in a fayre linnen cloth, and then drinke it, if you cannot drinke it for bitterneſſe, put therto Suger Candy. And if this drinke be taken before the markes of God be vpon them, he ſhalbe whole by the grace of God.
                  FJNIS.
               
            
         
      
   