
      
         
            
            
            The copie of a letter ſente to one maiſter Chriſpyne chanon of Exceter for that he denied ye ſcripture to be the touche ſtone or trial of al other doctrines wherunto is added an appologie and a bulworke, in defēce of the ſame letter.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the right worſhipfull and his ſyngular good Maiſter ſyr Peter Carewe: Philip Nicolles wyſheth the continuall fauoure of God.
            GReate cōforte is it to Chriſtes pore floceke (right worſhipful ſyr) among ſo manie hudge Rockes and wylde ſeas, as oure weſte partes are compaſſed with all: to haue ſome porte or hauē wher Chriſtes ſhippes mought caſt ancre, and for a ſpace haue ſuccoure, tyl ye ſtormes be paſte. This fatherlie prouiſion maketh the al myghtie and moſt mercifull Lorde al waies to helpe thē that be hys. And though Ionas ſincke yet is ye whale redie to kepe him frō periſhing & to brynge hym to land, as amonge ſo manye greate ſtormes, no meruaile thoughe ſome haue ben pluged vnder the water but of ſuche, gloriouſe ſhall the reſurrection

be. But in my contrey (my right deare ſir) where moſt daynger appeareth to be: ſcantly hath ther any wette their feete, prayſed may the name of God be therfore, yt ſo prouideth for yong ſuckelinges whiche elſe ſhoulde be ouer whelmed before they were weaned frō their milke. Your pure and yerneſt zeale toward gods truth and paynefull laboures infendeynge innocentes is not vnknowne to a great menye. But would to God it were farther knowne, euen tho rowe out. Not that you ſhoulde haue the prayſes of men for your laboure, for they belonge to God and it is wickedneſſe to ſeke them from hym, but that it myght prouoke other mē of worſhip, and honour alſo in all places, to ſo feruēt and godlye deſire of Chriſtes doctrine, to be publiſſhed among vs, Namely the whole bible, the ſcriptures of God, the newe and olde

teſtament. Which onely doctrine is a lone ſufficient to teache vs the true worſhip of God, fayeth in his promiſes, and in all good workes, to walke the waye to euerlaſtinge lyfe. To the defence of thys heauenly doctrine (I ſaye) woulde I prouoke all mē of honour and worſhipe, by your enſample, if wit and learneing failed not. Your gentleneſſe and liberalitye, towardes me and al thoſe that longe for that heauenly doctrine: I paſſe ouer wt ſilence, to cut awaye occaſions frō iuell tonges, althoughe the example be greatly to be deſired, in all men of worſhippe, yea in all them that profeſſe Chriſte accordinge to theyr power.
            Al theſe thinges nowe conſidered, beſyde the manyfolde labours and daylye trauaile that you take diuers waies to haue the veritye knowne, to bannyſhe lieinge and cloked holineſſe, to haue the Lorde

truly worſhiped, and to rote cut Idolatrie. Conſideringe alſo your yerneſte deſier to thys my ſmal laboure in writing to maiſter Chriſpyne a ſimple letter, for aſmuch as I perceyued that you were determinatly mynded to put it in print I thought I coulde not beſtowe my laboure better, then to ſet it furthe in your name chiefely to purg me from that euel ſuſpicion that is lyke to enſue the printinge of it. For ſeinge they begin to byte me priuilye all redye, for exhibitynge certayne Articles preached of oure learned men, and woulde perſwade men that I dyd it of a pretēced malice, ſekeinge their deſtruction: I knowe well they ſhall ſaye much rather, that it was my ſuite to haue this my letter ſpread a broad, and that I dyd it to ſeeke prayſe, as they alwayes ſeeke moſt preiſe to them ſelfe, ye leaſt deſerue it, or that I ſtād in mine owne cō
               ceite

as to thinke yt I haue done agreat acte, wheras I acknoweledge it in deede to be but counterfaite, in cōpariſon of a great nūbre that be wel leraned. Which if they had the matter in handlyng: theſe men myght haue been a ſhamed to ſhew their faces in a pulpit, to declare any ſuche matter agayne Nowe to preuente theſe biteinge ſerpentes of thys poiſone the lord knoweth whether it be my faute or no to haue it printed, and you partly can teſtifie. Notwithſtandynge▪ it ſhal not greue me to haue it prynted, but rathere I ſhalbe glad of it thoughe it were but for thys cauſe onelie. To declare vnto all other contreis, that deuenſher lacketh not ſome well wyllers (at the leaſte) as well amonge the pore creatures, as the riche and worſhipfull, ye deſier the glorye of God and furdraunce of hys word. As touchinge the articles offerred to

the viſitours, which they ſay to be done of malice, hatered, and manie other good morowes, let ſuche mē knowe that I hate theyr doctrine in dede. As for any malice that I owe to the men: I axe no more grace and fauour of the Lorde, to be geuen to my ſelfe, then I wyſh to the vileſt of them all, if it might ſo come to paſſe and pleaſe God. For I knowe there can no ſuche ranckor and malice dwell in any chriſten herte, as they iudge other men by them ſelues.
            And thys I ſaye more ouer, that I am aſſured of theſe miniſters and of the kynges counſayle alſo: that they be no ſuche bloude thurſtye tirantes, as haue pleaſur in ſhedynge of bloude. For if they were but as cruell in puniſheinge the blynde wycked and ſediciouſe. I nought ſaye, preachers, as the popes miniſters haue beene in tormentyng innocentes: I take

God to wytneſſe, I woulde neuer haue declared ſo muche as I haue vnto them, though I ſhould haue ſmarted for it. This much haue I ſayde, to declare vnto all honeſte hertes myne innocencie in ſuche thynges as they begin to laye to my charge: and to ſtope the mouthes of them, that can do naught elles but ſlāder, flatter, and diſſē
               ble, euen with theyr frindes, that they mought holde theyr tongues leſt if they paſſe theyr boundes. I opē them to theyr ſhame let them take thys for a warning. Neithere let them thynke this ſpoken of malice, for I ſpake it for theyr honeſtie and quietneſſe, as wel as mine owne commoditie.
            Now, to conclude in fewe wordes I haue added to thys my letter, a little appologie or defence, the better to wythſtande theyr cruel and ſubtyle deceite. And becauſe, they lye alwaye lurckynge in bulworkes

and wyll not come furth into the open fielde, I haue in the ende made a little bulworke, out of the whyche I haue ſhotte a fewe of theyr owne pellettes. Not that I thinke them neceſſarie to confoūd them wyth all: but euen to ſhame them whē they ſhal ſe them ſelues ſtriken with theyr owne weapons
            
               Eſai. xxix.Beholde, nowe appeare thoſe meruailouſe thynges that Eſaye ſpeaketh of ſo erneſtlie, in ſo much that he repeteth it agayne. Yea euen meruailouſe thynges and a wonder, ſayth he, and what is it? It foloweth. For the wyſdome of the wyſe ſhal periſhe, & the vnderſtandeinge of the wyttye, ſhal hide it ſelfe. But wherefore happeneth thys? Loke you a little before and you ſhal eaſelye perceiue the cauſe No man can open it more playne, then the prophet doeth hym ſelfe. Read the place.
            After this will I poure out my

ſpirite (ſaieth Ioel) vpon all fleſhe,Ioel. ii. and your ſonnes and daughters ſhal prophecie your olde m
                  •
               n ſhal dreame dreames, and, your yonge men ſhall ſe viſions. Yea in thoſe dayes I wil poure out my ſpirite vpon maidens and ſeruaūtes. & ct
            Nowe therefore,i. Pet. 
                     •
                  . ſeynge that S Peter affirmeth after the Prophete Eſay, that al fleſhe is graſſe,Eſaie. xi. and al ye glorye of mā is as ye floure of graſſe, the graſſe withereth and the flower falleth a waye, but the worde of oure God abydeth for euer: I woulde exhorte in you (ryght worſhippefull ſyr) all men frome the hygheſte to the loweſte, to cleaue faſte to the word of god. For it wyl come to paſſe, that who ſoeu
                  •
               r calleth vpon the name of the Lorde ſhall be ſaued. Who eeuer defende you Amen
            
               ☞Your humble and fayethful at your commaundement Phillip Nicolles.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶Here foloweth the copie of a letter writtyn to maſter Chriſpyn chanone of Exceſter concernynge thre queſtians put furth in hys ſermon, wherby he entended to declare all them heretickes, that would Gods word to be the touch ſtone:
            
               IT chaunced me, worſhipful maiſter Chriſpen, to be at your ſermō preached at Marledon, the .xxiiii. Daye of marche laſte paſte, at the monethes mynde of maiſter Otes Gylberd. In whiche ſermon, amonge other thynges, I remembre you enuied Luther verie ſore, onelye becauſe he woulde haue the ſcripture to be the touch ſtone, or triall of al other doctrines. And calling Luther, as it were, into diſputacions wyth al his diſciples, you put furth three queſtians whyche be theſe.
            Fyrſt, if ther roſe any hereſies or diſſentions before the Goſpel was

written (as ther dyd in dede, betwene Simō Magus and Simō Peter, and ouer the circumſicion) aſke Luther & hys diſciples, whoe nowe ſhall diſcuſſe the matter, and whoe ſhoulde be the touche ſtone to trie the mattier. The Goſpell, can not, for it was not then wrytten.
            The ſecond queſtian is. If one ſhoulde denye Mathewes Goſpel or ſay Mathewe wrote it not: how can it be proued by ſcripture? It can not you ſay, for ſcripture ſpeaketh not of it,
            The thyrd queſtiā dyd deceiue the ignorante people, which haue litle or no knowledge, which is. If ther be diſſenſion or ſtrife aboute the vnderſtandeynge of the ſcriptures, and both alledge ſcripture, as the Areans dyd, whoe brought to places of ſcripture for ye defence of theire errour, in ſuche caſe you aſke whoe ſhalbe iudge: or by whō
               
ſhall this be determined. Or rather to vſe your veri wordes: wher is Luthers touch ſton? The ſcripture can not be touche ſtone you ſaye, for boeth bringe forth ſcripture. Wherefore ther muſt nedes be an other touch ſtone. Where is Luthers now? quoth you.. What anſwer can be made to theſe queſtians? For Luthers touch ſton wyll not ſerue. Your anſwer was ther fore, that Luther muſt gyue place and ſaye wyth you, that it is the holye goſt that muſt be touchſton.
            Thus you triumphed vpon Luther and hys diſciples, meaneinge by Luthers diſciples, ſuche, (I ſuppoſe) as holde thys, opinion as though you had ouer come thē that they coulde anſwere nothing
            Thys is eaſye to do, when a mā hath all the talke hym ſelfe. But for as muche as you wyſhed Luther there at your ſermon or ſome of his diſciples, to anſwere to your

queſtians? I thynke verelye you wylbe contented to heare a pore man anſwere, though yet but ſimplye. But I do you to wyt, that I am none of Luthers diſciples, for I knowe not Luther. But that I thynke hym to be a man as you be and therefore of hym ſelfe a lyer. But if Luther ſpake the truth, I woulde beleue him as ſone as you or any other that ſpeake the truth For the trueth, by the whiche I meane gods worde, can not be ſpoken wyth out holye gooſte, if it be ſpokē to the glorye of God. But in dede, you or any other maye wyckedlye alledge the ſcripture of your ſelfe wythout the ſpirite, to the defaceinge of the glorie of god and hinderaunce of hys worde, as the deuyll dyd to Chriſte Mathe. iiii. But I wyl reſorte to the queſtians▪ wyth thys proteſtacion, that if I haue by any meanes myſſe reported your wordes, or

other wyſe vnderſtanded them, then you ment: I hertelye deſire you that you wyll charitably infourme me what were your queſtians, what ye ment in them, and howe you lyke thys my rude anſwere. In ſo doinge▪ I wyll be confirmable to your counſayle, or elſe I wyll ſhewe you my mynde why I ought not.
            Nowe to your fyrſte queſtian, whyche is thys. If ther aroſe any diſſention of hereſie before the goſpell was writen, as it happened in dede betwene Simō Magus and Simon Peter. Alſo ouer the circumſicion, where had ben then the touche ſtone?
            To this queſtiā. by your leaue mayſter Chripyne, I wyll in this maner anſwer, wyth Luther, and ſay the ſcripture muſt be the touch ſtone. If you ſaye it was not written: I anſwer. The worde was in the begyninge. You wyl ſaye that

Chriſte came accordynge to the ſcripture, to finiſhe a newe teſtament, whiche he cōfirmed and ſealed wyth his bloude and when the newe was come, the olde vaniſhed awaye as Saynte Paule affirmeth to the Hebrues. And you wyll ſaye peraduenture, that Luther alſo meaneth the newe teſta: mente, whiche was not written, when the queſtian of circumſicion was moued, wherefore it coulde not be the touche ſtone. To make many wordes about this queſtian in my cōceyt, wer but loſſe of time. But I aſke you, Maiſter Chriſpine, what difference is betwene ſcripture written and ſcripture ſpoken, if boeth be ſcripture? You wyl graunte I am ſure, that Peter, Paul and Iames wordes wer ſcripture, when they preached or taughte the Goſpell.
            Then if anie man had aſked for ſcripture it mought haue ben anſwerd.

Go to Peter, Paul, & Iohn wyth thother Apoſtles. For theyr preaching and coūſayle was ſcripture. So lacked not at that tyme Luthers tucheſtone, for the Apoſtles wryttinges and preachinges agreed, and all was ſcripture. Wherefore thys queſtian is ſufficientlye anſwered to the worthyneſſe of it
            To your ſecond queſtian which is. It any man ſhould denye Mathwes Goſpell, you aſke howe it coulde be proued by ſcripture, that Mathew wrote it. To this I anſwere, that if it be agreinge to the other ſcriptures, and diſſent in nothinge from it: what daynger is it to call it Mathewes Goſpell, who ſo euer wrote it? And though you coulde denye Mathewes Goſpell to be Scripture: yet there is Scripture. For Marke, Luke and Iohns Goſpell, Peter, Paule and Iohns Epiſtles, be ſcripture

But I doubt not you wyll graūt Mathewes Goſpel to be ſcripture. But you wil aſke me how I know it. I anſwere, by the reporte of the elders, holye fathers, mother holye churche. Howe ſaye you nowe? Haue I anſwered you wel? Doth not thys anſwere pleaſe you? I thynke yes. But if I ſhoulde are the turkes howe they knowe that Mahomete was an holye prophet whoe deuiſed and cauſed to be deuiſed, the Alcaron, what anſwere ſuppoſe you they coulde make? I thynke none other but as I haue made you before. That is we knowe it by oure elders or holye prophetes and fathers before vs. Nowe I wyll aſke you a queſtian whiche ſhall not be impoſſible, nor verie vnlyke. If it pleaſed God to moue the herte of a Iewe whiche wer neither chriſtian nor turke, to ſeke in the worlde here, the moſte perfecte religion. He goeth to the

Turkes and cometh to the chriſtians. Wherwyth woulde you perſwad hym to thys perfect religion? Woulde you preache to hym conſtitutions, coūſelles and cuſtomes of the elders? He mought then as well beleue the turkes as you. For they haue many thynges in their lawe, that ſeme to be verie godlye. And theyre authoritie, wythout authoritie of ſcripture, is euen as good as yours. But I knowe you wyl ſaye, what ſo euer you thinke, that you woulde preache the Goſpell vnto hym. Then muſt you nedes graunte, that the ſcripture is of greater efficacie and ſtrength, them oure fathers elleders and counſayles. If you wyll yet wyth your queſtians affirme, that the fathers whyche deſcended frome tyme to tyme frome the Apoſtles hither to: haue greater authoritye then the ſcripture: I wyl axe you an other queſtian.
            
               The Apoſtles of Chriſt, forſoke the ceremonies, cuſtomes and conſtitutions of theyr elders, forefathers, and of as holye mother holye churche in the iudgemente of the worlde at that tyme, as yours is wt the world at thys houre, and of as longe continuaunce of tyme. Yet folowed they Chriſtes doctrine, who was named of thoſe holye fathers, a ſediciouſe felowe, a newe tidinges bringer and an heretike. Anſwere me nowe, what touchſtone had they to trye Chriſtes doctrine wyth that they ſo erneſtlye folowed hym, and refuſed theyr forefathers, olde holye doctours, proceadynge from Moyſes to Chriſt? Ther were at that tyme auncient fathers which had great learneing, both byſhopes and prieſtes. The tradions, ordinaunces and ceremonies whiche they vſed, receyued they of theyr elders, lyke as you woulde haue vs to receiue

the conſtitucions of oure elders. Tell me nowe, how can you excuſe the Apoſtles? They were but pore fiſher men and net makers, they wer not brought vp in the ſcholes, they hadde not the leiſure toturne and toſſe thoſe greate volumes to be made doctours of deuinitie nor law.
            And yet within a whyle, they toke vpon them to teach the great doctours, and what mought thoſe holye fathers haue ſayed to theſe fiſhers? Take hede to your fyſheynge. What haue you to do wyth the ſcripture? It is not mete for euerie coblarde to be talkeynge of ſcripture. Howe were theſe men ſo lyghtlye perſwaded?
            What toucheſtone I ſaye had they? But ſeynge you woulde ſo fayne haue the name of the holye fathers and holye churche. I axe you thys queſtian.
            Thoſe Apoſtles and Diſciples

of Chriſte whyche were in hys tyme wyth hym preſente, whyche preached and wrote the ſcripture: were holy fathers and of the perfecte true churche.
            If the fathers ſyeth theyr tyme haue diſſented frome them in doctryne, maners, cuſtome, lawes, or in anye thynge partayneynge to Chriſtes relygion: whyche fathers woulde you folowe? If you denye that the fathers haue deſſented, as is a fore ſayed, I refer the proue of it tyll a tyme of more leaſure. Partely becauſe I thynke you wyll not denye it, but chiefelye becauſe my letter woulde be to longe.
            Wherfore I wyl come to your thyrde queſtion, whyche in dede includeth the matter of all the reſte whiche is thys.
            If ther aryſe anye contention in vnderſtandeynge the Scriptures wherein, boeth the parties

bringe ſcripture for them: whoe ſhall nowe diſcuſſe the matter? Where is nowe the toucheſton? The ſcriptures can not. For boeth bring ſcripture. And the ſcripture you meane cauſeth ye cōtrouerſye. But I aſke you whether the ſcriptures be deuided or no? If they be deuided: then accordinge to Chriſtes worde, they muſte be confounded. But that is an incōuenience and I knowe well you wyll not graunt that If the ſcriptures be not deuided, but agre in one, as they do in deede, for one place cannot be repugnaunte to an other, thoughe it ſo ſeme: then haue not boeth parties ſcripture for them, but ye one partie muſt nedes falſely alledge ſcripture.
            But you will aſke me who ſhal geue ſentence, or by whom the cō
               trouerſye ſhalbe appeaſed, and where is Luthers touchſtone? In dede at your ſermō, no man made

anſwer. Wherefore you made anſwere and ſayde, the holye gooſte muſt be tuchſtone. As who ſhould ſaye, Luthers anſwere were not the very ſame. When he ſayeth gods worde muſt be the touchſton as you reporte of hym. And I praye you maiſter Chriſpyn, what difference is betwene gods worde and godes ſpirite? Is not goddes worde the breath of gods mouthe? And call you not that the holye goſte? Howe be it, it is eaſilye perceyued what ye meane. Ye put in the holye goſt for a cloke to deceiue vs wyth albeit ye meane nothing leſſe then the holye gooſte If you aſke me how I proue it: I anſwer thus I proue it. Wythout fayeth it is not poſſible to pleaſe God, but fayeth cometh by the word of god Ergo, wythout the worde of God nothyng can pleaſe God. But you exclude the word of God from the ſpirite of God, and in ſtead of that

ioyne vnto it, fathers, counſayles, and oure mother holy churche for you ſaye the worde of God can not be touchſton▪ but onelie beare wytneſſe, but the holye gooſte is the touch ſtone, whoe was and is in the holye fathers, that haue alwayes gathered counſayles by whyche all thynges muſte be iudged and dermined. To proue thys ye alledge theſe wordes.
            Where ſo euer two or three be gathered together &c. Theſe holye fathers, you affirme to be the byſhopes and prelates. But thus to include the holye gooſte into byſhopes, you exclude ye word of god.
            If this be not to be diſceiued, ſure I am deceyued. But it were neceſſarie for you to proue the chur, that you ſpeake of to be the true-holye, and catholyke churche, before you perſwade men ſo erneſtye to belyeue and ſtycke vnto it. But I ſaye, the churche that taketh

awaye the authoritye of goddes worde, or diminiſheth it by anye meanes, is not of Chriſte.
            But you mayſter Chriſpyne, graunte youre ſelfe to be of thys churche, Ergo etc. And in myne opinion, you do naught to ſay that all holy fathers frō Chriſt to thys time, wer of the ſame opinion that you be of concernynge goddes worde. For I dare ſaye Auguſtine (whome you admytte to be of the verye holye church wyll not hold wyth you in thys matter.
            But if he woulde, the authoritye of Chriſte is greater. Whoe is it that wyll not ſuſpecte your churche, ſeynge you ſet it ſo high in Lucifers place aboue Chriſte, and ſeparate the hollye goſte from Chriſte, where as Chriſte ſayeth, I am that I ſay vnto you? What is yt he ſpake vnto vs? Is it not his word? He ſaith moreouer, the wordes yt I ſpeake, are ſpirite & lyfe. I

praye you, maſter Chriſpine, what ſpirite ment Chriſte here? What lyfe ſpeaketh he of? Can ther any man bring out of hys breaſt, either by writting, preachinge or otherwiſe teacheinge, or ſpeakeinge, the ſentence of the holie ſpirite wythout goddes worde? Is not the ſentence or worde of the holye gooſte the worde of God? Is it not to be vnſterſtand of the lyueynge fayth that the holy goſte worketh in the ſoule of man in beleuing the word Is not the ſcriptur called the two edged ſworde? Is it not alſo called the ſworde of the ſpirite? Maye ye ſeparate the ſpirite from the wordes, ſeynge he calleth them ſpirit and lyfe? I thynke not▪ No more than heate can be ſeparated from fire. Why then in the name of the holye gooſte, do you vndermine Chriſte? The churche, you ſaye, muſt be iudge, and the ſcripture muſte be wytneſſe onlye. So

muſt Chriſte be inferioure to mē. For I am ſure you wyll not denye but theſe holye fathers, which you cal the church, were & be men. And thoſe you ſaye muſt be the iudges. And Chriſte to be the worde and promiſe of the father, he hymſelfe wytneſſeth ſayeinge. I am that I ſaye vnto you, and hym you make but a witneſſe or iudge. Therefore I ſaye your churche is to be ſuſpected. As toucheynge the true ſpoſe and catholyke, churche of Chriſte, which are verye membres of hys bodye, and he the head: this churche hath ſo muche authoritie as the ſcripture geueth them, and take vpon them no more for the ſcripture and they are one, and for the ſcripture they ieoparde theyr liues, as many haue done, whome you and your forfathers, biſhopes and prelates haue alwayes put to dath. Who perſecuted ye prophets and put them to death. Who procured

Chriſte to the croſſe? Whoe the Apoſtles wyth manye othere holy men? Were they not byſhops and prelates of the churche? Howe manye godlye preachers wyth other good ſoules, hath the byſhop of Rome put to death by the helpe of prelates in diuers contries ſyth he came to the ſupremitye, and beareynge a rule ouer kynges and emperours? Hath there not ben ſome put to death here in Englād wythin theſe .xx. yeres, for ſpeakeynge agaynſte the Pops pardons and pylgrymages, wyth ſuche lyke abuſes? Was not the Pope chiefe of theſe holye fathers, whom you cal holye churche, and woulde haue them iudges? But I knowe what you meane. You would perſwad the multitude, that you and youre churche, be the verye true churche, and haue the holye gooſte and that what ſo euer you do is well. But whereby do ye perſwad

thē? By olde cuſtome (for you haue nothynge elſe) and longe continuaunce of tyme, the whyche if you coulde beate in to the heades of the communaltye: your reformacion of thynges that are amyſſe, ſhoulde be as you luſte. But maiſter Chriſpyne, if you were not in darckeneſſe you coulde not refuſe the light. Chriſt ſayth, if you cōtinue in my worde: then are you mi verye Diſciples, and ye may know the trueth, and the trueth ſhall make you fre.
            But he that refuſeth me, and receyueth not my wordes hath one alredye that iudgeth hym the worde that I haue ſpoken, ſhall iudge hym in the laſte daye. Beholde, Chriſte ſayeth hys worde ſhal be iudge. All that be of Chriſt, heare Chriſtes wordes.
            Mayſter Chriſpyne, my lettere is longer then I thoughe it ſhould haue ben, howe it ſhal lyke

you I can not tell, but hertily deſire you, if you loue the truth and deſire the glorye of God: anſwere wyth the trueth and defende the trueth, and do not wyllfully reſiſt the truth. But defend it not with the authoritye of men, but wyth the power of God, and that wyth charitie, For if I haue by any meanes ſpoken any thynge in this letter more rigorouſly then charitye requireth whereby you myght be offended at me iuſtlye: I am redie in ſuch caſe wyth all myne herte to be reformed. Wherfore I eftſones deſire you to anſwere me, as it becometh a true preacher, for quietynge of my conſcience. And ſo doynge I comitte you to Chriſt and hys worde. Amen.
            
               ¶ Yours lokinge for an anſwer. Philip Nicolles. 
               
                  Written, xxiii. of Aprile. MDxlvii.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               HEre haſte thou my letter (gentle reader) euen worde for worde as it was deliuered to mayſter Chriſpyne. And trueth it is, I wrote it inmediately after my retoune frome hys ſermon, euen whyle it was hotte. For it greued me that it had not been lawful for me to haue anſwered him euen incontinente before all the audience.
            For he perſwaded them al, for the mooſte parte, that nothynge coulde be ſayde to the contrarie. Which greued me to heare. Not wythſtandynge, when I hadde written my letter: I dyd not ſēde it furth wt, but pauſed a whyle, partelye, ſeeinge ther was ſuche a greate audience, to ſe whether any man of woſhip, or ſome better learned then I woulde take the mattier in hande. But after

I had reſted vpō thys a moneth or .vi. weakes and perceiued that no man buſied hym ſelfe in it (al though ther were preſent men of worſhip pretēding to haue knowledg) I ſent furth my letter, the laſte daie of Apriel or nere there aboute. And becauſe the meſenger dyd not in all thynges fulfyl my requeſt, I wrote agayne to maiſter Chriſpyne, deſireinge hym to ſende me an anſwere by the ſayede bearer of my letter, to whō he gaue thys anſwer. That he would not writ, but cōmune wyth me him ſelfe. I lefte him not thus, but wtin a while after he cam to a benefice yt he hath called Herbertō, beſyd Totnes, and preached there ye ſūday after corpus Chriſti day, as they cal it, & ye mūdaie in the morning: I wente to him and communed wt hym, and ſpent wel moſt ye whole day. In which cōmunicaciō, we ſwarued not frō theſe .iii. queſtiās. I

I reſorted vnto him againe, not long after ye, and had much talke wt him, al which cōmunicaciō, I haue not: nor wyll babble out, al thought it be reported yt I came to him for non other purpoſe, but to haue matter to talk of, and to accuſe him. But yet they be to blame ſo to reporte of me. For if Maiſter Chriſpine, or other yt be more buſie peraduēture in talking then he him ſelfe, can ſay▪ yt I haue accuſed him of any ſuch priuat cōmunicatiō: let thē lay it to my charge, elſe let thē for ſhame hold theyr peace, and ſay ye thing they knowe. As for the wordes that he or any other ſhal ſpeake in a pulpyt or any ſuche like audiēce. I am ſure they wilbe cōtē
               ted to heare of thē againe. If not let thē hēce forth deſire their audience to kepe coūſel or elſe truly, if I be preſente, & heare any thing ſpoken againſte god or my prince

eſpecially agaynſte the doctrine of Chriſte: I muſte needes diſcloſe it. If they wyll blame me for this: I am cōtented to beare it, howe be it vn worthye in my owne conceyte, let other iudge.
            But if he were able to defend it that he hadde preached, whye ſhoulde he feare to wryte to the defence of the ſame? Wherfore, ſeinge he hath receyued my letter, kepeth it, and wyl not write agayne, and yet blameth and fyndeth diuers fautes in it: why ſhoulde he be greued wyth me, for ſpreadeynge a broode myne owne doynges, to vtter myne owne ſecretes. And where as he was offēded wyth me (although I haue not, nor wyll laye anye ſuch priuate communicacion to anye mans charge, ſpecially of myne owne ſeekynge) yet I ſaye I muſte declare my meaneinge more playnely, in thoſe thynges

whyche he is ſo muche offended wythall, to thentente that no ſtublynge ſtocke be purpoſely layed in my brothers waye, that he ſhoulde not vnderſtande the trueth and prayſe God. For although I found mayſter Chriſpyne verye gentle and charitable to talke wythal (for yt which thynge I haue and wyll gyue him prayſe yet diſputeth he ſubtlelye, and eſpecially when he thynketh to haue yonge ſcholars in handelynge, as he dyd wyth me. For in thys he put me to my trumpe, becauſe I aſked him in my letter what difference was betwene ſcripture wrytten, and ſcripture ſpoken. Nowe truth it is, that accordyng to the Etimologie of the word, which cometh of Scribo, and ſo to Scriptura: it can not be called Scripture, vnleſſe it be written. And ſo euerye thynge written, maye be called

ſcripture. And in that ſentence, we ſhall fynde no difference betwene the bible and Robyn hod, by this name ſcripture, for both maye be called ſcripture I ſaye, after the verie nature of ye word Lo heare haue you an exāple of ſophiſtri. Let yong ſcholars take hede by me, howe they meddell wyth thē. For whereas I mente ſymply after the commone vſage and phraſe of oureſpeache, meaneinge by Scripture written and ſpokē: the prophecie of ye olde and newe teſtament the doctrine of Chriſte euen the verie worde of God, as well beynge opened by the mouth of the Apoſtles vnto the heares in thoſe dayes, as written wyth theyr owne handes, and reade vnto vs nowe in our time: he nowe takeinge hys aduauntage at ye nature of ye latine word Scriptura, out of whiche this engliſhe worde ſcripture is

diriued: denieth that it maye be called ſcripture, vnleſſe it be written What other thynge is thys then a mere ſophiſticall cauillacion? The ſcribes and phariſes in Chriſtes tyme (by lyke) had not learned their ſophiſtrie or els thei wer not ſo curiouſe as our mē be. For if thei had, thei mought haue aſked Chriſt, whē he bad thē ſerch the ſcriptures, what ſcripture he mēt.ii. Tim. iii. But Paule therfore preuē
               ting ſuch ſubtile diſputīg calleth it holy ſcriptur geuen by inſpiracion. Thus you ſe, a mā had nede (as the prouerbe goeth) to haue a long ſpone yt ſhal eate wt ye deuill. It is no maruaile, though maſter. Chriſpin in his leſſō not long ſēce, dyd ſo much cōmēd diſtinctions, & proued thē ſo neceſſarie yt we could not be wtout thē. For he that ſhal haue to do wt ſuch ſophiſters had nede to make diffiniciōs, & premeditat his words before

                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
pretacion. For the prophecie was neuer brought in by the wyll of man, but ye holy mē of god ſpake as they were moued of the holye goſt. Nowe if I ſhoulde aſke. S. Peter what he meaneth by ſcripture here, I thynke he woulde ſay the word of god. But it is the word of god writtine would you ſay, yet doth. ſ. Peter ſay it of the ſame written worde ye the holye men of God ſpake, as they were moued by ye holy goſte. But trulye I thinke it but a vaine thing and euen a loſſe of tyme to trifle in ſuche queſtians which can no waye edifye, eſpecially, ſeynge S. Paule doth ſo often diſwade Timoth frome ſuch foleiſhe queſtians:i. Ti. vt. & exhorteth him to cleaue faſte to the word of God If anye man ſayth he, teache other wyſe and agreeth not to the holeſome wordes of our lord Ieſus Chriſt and to the doctrine of godlineſſe: he is puffed vp, and knoweth nonothing,

but waſteth his braines about queſtians and ſtriueing of words, wherof ſprīgeth enuie &c.
            After a like maner alſo he toke me vp (how be it more erneſtlye for that I ſayde,Iohn. i. Iohn. viii. the worde was in the beginning and for alledging, Chriſtes wordes, I am that I ſay vnto you. Or euen ye ſame thinge that I ſpeake vnto you As thoughe I wente aboute to proue yt Chriſte was but a voice only, or a writtē letter in paper. Thus he dalyed wt me & was in wt his diſtīctiōs, whether I mēt bi ye word ye voice, ye breath, or the writtē word, with manie double doubtes. For mi words (he ſaied) as they ſtode in my letter, were hereſie. But I told him yt I mēt it by ye ſame word yt the lord Ieſus chriſt taught, as Chriſt hym ſelfe wittneſſeth. I am euen the very ſame thinge yt I ſpeake vnto you. He ſaied that the words were not as I alledged them

them. For the latyne hath (ſaied he) Ego ſum qui loquor vobis. Now as for the alledgeinge of thoſe wordes? I folow the Engliſh tranſlatours, whoſe lerneynge I can not correcte. If he can amende theyr doinges: he ſhal haue good leaue for me. Notwythſtanding ſeinge that, he maketh my wordes to dayngerouſe: I cānot but ſay more in it, although they can not be ſpokē (in my cōceyt) more playne to be vnderſtād, thē they be alredi writtē. For. ſ▪ Iohn ſayeth. The worde was in ye beginning & the word was wt god and God was the worde. Nowe, to denye that Chriſte is the worde of God, by whiche all thinges were made: I ſay is anhereſie in dead. Therfore it muſt nedes be graū
               ted that Chriſte was and is the worde of God.
            
               Pſal. CxviiiThy worde Lorde (ſayeth the prophete) is a lanterne to my fet

and a light to my pathes. Again he ſayeth.Idem. Cxiii. When thy worde goeth forth, it geueth lyght and vnderſtandeynge euen to babes. Nowe what meaneth he by this worde that geueth thys lyghte? Chriſte ſayth, I am come a light into ye world, that who ſo euer be leueth in me ſhould not abyd in darknes By theſe & many other it wyll appeare, Chriſte to be the true worde of God. But nowe wyll they graunte that Chriſte is the worde that came from the father, the lyghte of the worlde the life of the worlde,Deute. xxxii. as Moyſes ſaith: ſet your hertes on ye words that I teſtifie, ſayeth he, for it is no vayne worde but your lyfe. I am ſure I ſay, they wyl graūt Chriſte to be the worde, but not the worde wryttyn whyche we reade in the boke. In dede, to ſay that Chriſte maye be written in paper, or that the letters whiche

be made of incke & paper ſhould be Chriſte: were a fonde opinion and ſuche as I neuer harde of. But the wordes written in the boke, which we cal the ſcripture. As the prophetes from Moyſes to Chriſt, and the doctrine of the apoſtles, which is written we cal it the Goſpel, we call it the ſcriptures we cal it ye newe teſtament and the olde theſe wordes written in a boke, beinge reade vnto the people, to enſtruction & edifying of ye cōgregatiō is the word of god, yea Chriſt ye breade of life which came frō heauē ſo ye whoſo eateth therof,Io. vi. ſhal liue euer. The words that Moyſes dyd teſtifie vnto the children of Iſraell, and ſayed vnto them it is no vayne word but your life: be they not writtē? And be they not our life as wel as theyrs? But what life cā thei be vnto vs, if thei be kept frō vs ſo that we know thē not?

Dyd Moyſes hyde them away, and ſay they would make mē heretykes? But all ſuche as do euil hate the lyght,Iohn. iii. and come not to it that theyr dedes ſhould not be reproued but he that doeth the trueth cometh to the lyght, that his workes maye be knowen, for they be done in God.
            Agayne, I am the lyghte of the world ſayeth Chriſte. Whye ſhoulde theſe men refuſe goddes word to be their light, if they wer of god: whie ſhould they feare to ſaye ye Chriſtes worde is Chriſte the worde of the father,Eſai. viii. the light that lyghneth al men that come vnto hym? Eſaye ſayth. If anye man want light, let him loke vpon the lawe and teſtimonies. What meaneth he by the lawe and teſtimonies? meaneth he not the ſcripture or written word of God, ſhall we not ther fynde the lighte? I woulde aſke theſe diſputers

of the worlde. Whether the Goſpell be written or no? I thyncke they wyll graunte that it is written.Rom. i Well Saynct Paulle ſayth, he is not a ſhamed of ye Goſpell of Chriſte, for it is the powre of God, whiche ſaueth all that beleue. Nowe is this goſpel written for our learneing, & ſaueth as many as beleue. Marke wel the beleuers are not ſaued becauſe it is writtē but they be ſaued, becauſe they beleue ye which is writē. I aſke theſe philoſophers, whether ye wordes that Chriſte ſpeake be written or no? I trowe the Euangeliſtes haue written the moſte neceſſarye thynges, yea the verie ſecretes & hyd thynges. If Chriſtes wordes which he ſpake be writtē, then the word yt is written ſhal iudge theſe vnbeleauers in the laſte daye. For thus ſayth Chriſte.Iohn. xii He yt refuſeth me and receyueth not my wordes: hath one alredye yt iudgeth hym.

The word (ſayth he) that I haue ſpoken, ſhal iudge him in the laſt day. Vnderſtād nowe gentle reader, yt theſe fathers, would vnder colours plucke a waye the great authoritie of the ſcriptures, and diminiſhe (thorowe ſubtyle diſputinge) ye efficatie and ſtrength of the goſpell. Whether they do of hatred to gods word, or blindnes and ignoraunce in the ſame, or elſe for lucers ſake, I can not tell But to far wander they out of the waye. But I exhorte the though they be to far on the left hand, rune not yu to far on ye rigt hande. Enter in at the ſtrayte gate, for wyde is the gate, and brode is the way that leadeth to deſtructiō, & many ther be ye,Math. vii. go in ther at. But ſtrayte is ye gate and narrowe is the waye that leadeth vnto lyfe and fewe therbe ye fynd it. Thys is therfore the ſume of thys diſputaciō yt Chriſt

is the word and wiſedome of the father, in whom who ſo beleueth hath euerlaſteinge lyfe.Ioh. viii. Thys ſame word did he him ſelf preach and ſayeth.Iohn. xv. If you abyde in me any my wordes abyde in you: ye ſhall axe what you wyll, and it ſhalbe done vnto you. Beholde wheras he ſayde before. If you continue in my wordes: nowe he ſayeth. If you byd in me and my wordes abid in you. By this it is euident, that Chriſte is the worde, euen that worde whiche was preached frō the beginning is preached nowe, and ſhalbe to the ende. And although Chriſte be not, as is ſayde, incke and paper, or a worde cloſed in a boke as thought we mought ſaye, looe, here in thys boke is Chriſte, or in that boke is Chriſte: yet was it the wyll of God that thys heauenly doctrine ſhoulde be written, and that it ſhoulde remaine

wyth vs, and alſo that theſe wordes written beinge reade vnto vs, ſhoulde be vnto vs, euē that ſame worde that Chriſte ſpake when he ſayed. He that is of god heareth gods worde. And euen the verie ſame (to them that beleue) that he ſpeaketh of ſayeing If anye man kepe my worde, he ſhal neuer ſe death. And to them that beleue not: the ſame that he ſayeth ſhall iudge the vnbeleuers in the laſt daye.
            Now marke well,Iohn. x
                     •
                  
                I beſech the and conſider wyth thy ſelfe, the miſchiefe of theſe ſubtyle ſophiſters. They make it wounderfull dayngerouſe, to call the ſcriptur Chriſte. They be verye carefull to haue the true worſhip of god preſerued and kepte. And they feeare leaſte we wyll fall to worſhipynge of the verie boke wherin the teſtimonies of Chriſte be wrytten. And therfore do they

withdrawe all men from readeinge and heareing it as much as they can. But alas, why be they not ſo ware and dayngerous in theyr laye mens bokes (as they cal them) whiche al the ſcripturs crie out vpon, euen from the begininge of the olde teſtament to the later ende of the new. By the which bokes (or rather abominable Idoles) it is open and manifeſt, that muche Idolatrie hath ben cōmitted, yea & wilbe ſtil, ſo longe as ther is one left ſtanding in the temples.
            The word of god, the doctrine of Chriſte, whiche he and his Apoſteles ſo erneſtlye taught, exhorted & cōmaunded to harken vnto, to beleaue and folowe (almoſt al the bible is nothing elſe) this I ſay, they cānot ſuffer any man to haue to do with al. Thei haue burned it frō tyme to tyme they burned the readars of it, as

al the worlde can teſtifie. It is manifeſte, that they beare little good wyll to it vnto thys daye. But theſe mahomets puppetes & veri Idolles, which haue not one word in al ſcriptur for them, but contrarie, to the vtter aboliſhinge of them, theſe they can ſuffer to be called Chriſte ſaynte ſauioure, ſaynte Sundaye, the holye trinitie, oure ladye of Pitye our ladye of grace, oure ladye I can not tell wherof. Alhallowes wyth a thouſād like names. Yea they can abyde that the people ſhould worſhip thoſe ſtil, for they neuer preach agaynſte them, but rather defende them, to kepe the vnlerned in their blindneſſe ſtyl. Alas, to open is your doynge nowe (O you catholyke fathers) euerye chylde maye perceyue your blinde doctrine.
            Yet wyl not you ceaſe to exalt this falſe church & cōgregaciō of deceyceyuers,

euē aboue god him ſelfe For God was the worde,ii. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . ii. and aboue the rule of thys worde, ſete ye your owne tradicions, in the name of Chriſtes church. Thus dyd Chriſte prophecie that you ſhoulde come,Math. xxiiii. & that you ſhoulde dooe miracles and wonders. In ſo muche that euen the verie elect (if it were poſſible) ſhould be brought into errowre. And ſaint Paule ſayth you ſhal come with lieinge ſignes and wonders,ii. Theſe. ii. i. Timoth. iiii. and wyth al deceyueableneſſe of vnrightuouſneſſe. And to Timoth he ſayeth, you ſhall forbyde mariage and meates.
            So playne is it in al the ſcripture, that thei that read it muſt neades vnderſtand it. Moſt euident and playne it is, that ye be euen of the ſame ſinful ſinagoge For trulye the ſpouſe of Chriſte is obedient to hir bridgrome. The diſciples of Chriſte, herken

to theyr Maiſter. And doubtles we can not be Chriſtes verie diſciples, vnleſſe we continue in his doctrine. He yt is of God heareth goddes worde. and he that kepeeth thys worde, ſhall neuer ſe deathe.
            Moyſes ſayeth.Deut. iiii. You ſhall put nothinge to the worde whiche I commaunde you, neyther take ought ther from etc. Agayne.Ioſue. i. You ſhall turne neyther to the ryght hande, neither to the lefte but in the waye which your lord god cōmaundeth, ſhal ye walke. What more playne cōmaundemēt can ther before the eſtabliſhment of the authoritie of ye word of god? Moiſes had,Deut. vi.xxxii. the childrē of Iſrael ſhoulde write them vpon the poſtes of ther dores, & bynde them vpon theyr hādes to teach their children. He ſayeth they be oure lyfe.Iohn. vi. And Chriſte ſayth his wordes be ſpirit and life. Saint

Peter ſaith we haue a ſure word of prophecie, & ye do well to take hede ther vnto, as vnto the light that ſhineth in a darcke place &c
            If this worde were not wrytten, that we myght knowe whyther to reſorte for al thys: what ſhould it auaile al theſe wordes? What were we the nere for all theſe teſtimonies, if the ſume of Chriſtes doctrine were not writtē, and the certaynetie vnkowē? Whoe ſhould be certayne of hys fayeth, if we had not a preſcripte and certayne doctryne whereunto wee moughte reſorte to haue thys in fallible veritye.Math. vii. Howe ſhoulde we knowe theſe falſe prophetes to come in ſhipes clothing outwardly, & inwardly be rauenynge woulfes: if we had not a ſure touche ſtone to trye theyr doctrine wyth all?Galath. 1. If anye man preache vnto you (ſayeth Paul) other then ye which is preached

alredye, althoughe it were an angell frome heauen: let it be accurſſed. What be we ye nere of theſe wordes: if we be in doubte wher to fynde this Goſpell?Apoc. xxii. But I teſtifie vnto euerie man (ſayth ſaynte Iohn) that heareth the wordes of propheſie of thys boke If any man ſhal adde vnto theſe thynges: God ſhall ad vnto hym the plages that are wrytten in thys boke. And if anye man ſhal myniſhe of ye wordes of the boke of thys propheſie: God ſhall take a waye his parte out of the boke of lyfe. etc. To conclude therfore I ſaye playnelye, that to denye the ſcripture, the Prophetes and Apoſtles, whoſe propheſies are wrytten in the Byble, to be a ſufficiente doctryne and enſtruction neceſſarye for oure ſaluacion, or to ſaye that it oughte not to be the touche ſtonne and

trial of al other doctrines aboue all other doctrines of anye other men, aboue theyr lawes, decres and cuſtomes or ceremonies (beſide thys boke) whether it be of men or angelles: it is not only hereſie, but alſo a diuelliſhe and damnable doctrine. Nowe to our bulwarcke.
         
         
            
            ¶The bulwarke for defence.
            
               THis is chiefly to be noted, yt gods worde is neuer ſpred abrode, wythout contencion, ſtrife, and much troble, as Chriſte himſelfe affirmeth ſayeynge. Thinke you not that I come to ſende peace,Math. x. but a ſworde. For I am come to ſet variance betwene the father and the ſonne, the mothere and the daughter etc. For what agrement can there be betwene a beleuinge ſonne and vnbeleueinge father and ſo contrarye. Nowe ſayeth Chriſt. He that loueth father and mother more then me: is not mete for me etc. He yt findeth his lyfe ſhall loſe it. And he yt loſeth his life for my ſake ſhall find it. Marcke thys alſo, yt by no

thyng do theſe falſe deceiuers, be gilde ye ſimplicite of ye multitude ſo muche as by the name of our fathers, by cuſtome & longe continuaunce of tyme, by whyche thynges they confirme their church. For loke what hath bene done of our elders and forfathers that is theyr goſpell. To breake theſe tradicions and cuſtomes: is to breake theyr whole religion. The ſcribes and phariſeis, axed Chriſte why walke not thy diſciples after the tradicions of the elders,Math. vii. but eate breade wyth vnwaſhen handes? &c. Lykewyſe theſe Hypocrites, when they ſe anye man breake an olde cuſtom, thoughe it be but eateyng of an egge vpon a frydaye, howe greouſlye take they the mattier? But euen as Chriſte anſwered the phariſeis and ſcribes: ſo may I ryghte well anſwere theſe fathers ſayinge.Eſai. xxix. Full wel hath Eſai

prophecied of you Hypocrites as it is written (marke here, that Chriſte goeth to the ſcripture) Thys people drawe nere me with theyr lippes:Colos. ii. but theyr herte is fare frome me. But in vayne do they ſerue me whylſe they teache ſuche doctrines as are nothynge but the commaundementes of men. Ye leaue the commaundement of god: & kepe the tradiciōs of men. In the ſtead of waſhing of cuppes & cruſes: what a ſort of ceremonies haue we? what is holye breade? what is holye water? What be holye candeles? What are holye bowes? Touche not the water in the fonte, handle not the chaliſe nor the corporace. Good lorde what a ſorte of ſuche commaundementes haue we of oure fore fatheres? Oh, howe goodlye haue you caſte aſyde the commaundementes of God to maynetayne your owne

tradicions? I beſech the (good chriſtiā reader) marke how vehemente the Lorde Ieſus is hym ſelfe agaynſte the beggarly tradicions of men to bringe vs to the wyll and commaundemente of God. What can the grateſte doctour of thē all, ſay vnto this? Is it not open and manifeſte to all the worlde that for breakeing of theſe triflinge and foleiſhe tradicions, thei haue puniſhed men greuouſelye, euen wyth death? And haue we not ſene the breakars of goodes commaundementes vnpuniſhed at all? As ſwerars drunckardes, whoredome, and auoutrie with all the reſte? Beholde, all chriſtendome knoweth, that thys is no lye. My truſte is therfore, that the magiſtrates wyll nowe loke vpon this gear. For theſe felowes neuer go about any ſuche thynge. But becauſe they blinde the ignoraunt

ſoules wyth holye doctours, holy fathers, and holye churche from Chriſtes tyme hytherto: you ſhal ſe what the holye doctours ſay, euē ſuch as be moſt auncient and beſt learned, as they them ſelues will graunte.
            Auguſtine in an epiſtle to Fortunatus, hath theſe wordes.Epiſt. clxxxxviii. We ought not to regarde and eſteme the diſputacions of any, thoughe they be neuer ſo catholyke and well prayſed, as cannonicall ſcripture, but that we may ſaueing the reuerēce that ought to be geuen vnto ſuche men, reproue and ſpue out agayne, any thynge in theyr wryttynges, if perchaunce we fynde that they vnderſtande ought in theyr writinges, otherwyſe then the truth hath, whiche is perceyued by the helpe of God, nether by oure ſelues or other. &c.
            Suche a one am I in other

mens writtinges: as I would other men ſhould be in myne.
            If we had no moe ſayeinges of the doctours, but thys one, conſideringe the eſtimacion Auguſtine is in: it were inoughe to ouerthrowe all the confidence that they woulde teach vs to haue in mens writinges, beſyde gods worde. But heare an other He writeth vnto Hierome and ſayeth.Libr. iii. Fol. clxi. I haue learned to geue this feare and honoure onlye, vnto the writters whiche be called canonicall: yt I ſtedfaſtly beleue that none of them haue erred in writtinge. For if I finde anye thinge in thoſe letters yt ſemeth contrary to the trueth: either I thinke the boke not to be true, or the tranſlater hath not truelye folowed his copie, or elſe I think verilye I do not vnderſtande it. But I read al other writers, ſaieth he, after this maner, that I

thinke, be they neuer ſo holy and well learned, that it whiche they haue written is not ſtrayte way true becauſe they haue thought ſo: but becauſe they coulde make me beleue it either by thoſe canonical authoures, or elſe by ſome probable and ſure reaſone, which diſſenteth not frō the trueth.Libro. ii. Cap. xxiii. He writeth agaynſte one Creſonius the grāmariā ſayinge. I am not boūd by the authoritie of this Epiſtle, becauſe I do not cōpt and eſteme Ciprians letters as canonicall & of lyke authoritie wt the ſcripturs, but I way thē & pōder thē by the ſcripture. If I finde any thing in thē agreinge wt the authoritie of holy ſcripture: I receyue it with his praiſe. But if it agre not bi his leaue & fauour I refuſe & for ſake it. Againe in his treatiſe of ſhepherdes.Tractatu poſtorum. He hath ordeined ye hilles of Iſrael (ſayth he) ye authours of holy ſcripturs

There feade ye, that you maye feade ſalfelye. What ſo euer ye heare of that: let it ſauoure well wyth you, whatſoeuer is beſides that, ſpite it out agayne, leſte ye erre in the clowde. Addict youre ſelues to the meaneynge of the ſcripture.
            There is the deyntie of ye hert there is no poyſen, no ſtraynge thynge, ther onelye is the moſte holeſome feadeyng. Beholde the mynde of this great doctour, named to be one of the greateſte clarkes that wrot ſence the apoſteles tyme. He woulde haue no mans doctryne, what ſoeuer he be, to be compared to the holye ſcriptures.Auguſtinus in prologo tertu. lib. De Trinitate. In hys owne wryttynges he warneth vs, that we ſhoulde not geue ouer much credence, in the thynges, ſayeth he, that you thynke yourſelfe ſuer, vnles ye ſurely vnderſtande it: beleue it not ſo ſtidfaſtely. And

writyng to Vincentius, he graū
               teth that he hath wryten ſome thynges worthye to be blamed,Idem ad Vincentium. and therefore ſayth that he hath made a boke of retractacions, reuoking and caſting agayne that which he had made before, that the readers thereby maye learne that al his writinges in al points dyd not pleaſe hym. Thys diffidence had Auguſtine in his writynges, that in no caſe he would compare them wyth the ſcripture. And loke what opinion he had of his owne writinges: euen the ſame had he in al other mens beſides the canonicall ſcriptures For he ſayth in his boke of retractaciōs, I cā not nor ought to denie ſayth he, but, lyke as in myne elders ſo are many thynges in ſo many ſeuerall workes yt I haue made, whyche maye be blamed wythout rayſhnes, & with good iudgment.
            
               If Auſten wyl haue no credence geuen to mens writinges, whether they be byſhops,Epiſt. xlviii. or what ſo euer they be onleſſe they bringe the authorite of ſcripture wt thē as he writteth to Vincentius. We muſt make a differēce (ſayth he) betwene mens wryttinges He nameth Hilarie, Ciprian, and Agrippie, which be lyke were byſhopes, and the canonicall ſcriptures. For they ought not ſo to be reade (ſayth he) as though we might geuefurth ſuche teſtimonies of them that it ſhoulde not be lawefull to thinke other wyſe then they affirme. For peraduenture, they vnderſtande it otherwyſe thē ye truth requireth. He yt luſteth to ſearche Auſtēs workes ſhal find many thinges cōtrarie to their proud doctrine & kycking againſt ye ſcriptures, yea cōtrarie almoſt, to al theyr blind erroures In ſo muche that I haue meruayled,

that they haue had him ſo longe in ſuch eſtimacion, and had not rather condemned hym for an heretike. As for the authoritie of mens doctrine beſyde the ſcripture, he can not abyd. But in all thynges he wylleth vs to haue reſpect to the ſcripture euē in prayſeing god (ſayeth he) let it be done as he hath appoynted, leſt in ſteppinge a ſyde, we offend him that we would prayſe.Auſtinus ſuper Sſal. cxlxii. Libr. vi. Cap xiiii. And agaynſte fanſtus, be writeth euē the ſame we muſt not tourne, either to the right hand, neither to ye lifte, no not in ye prayſe that we geue to god. But euen the ſame praiſes, ſayeth he, muſt we frame according to ye wil of ye ſcriptur. And in ye xvi, Cha. he ſayth, that they which would teach ye people any other thing thē ye canonical ſcriptures are not only falſe prophets but theaues & robbars euē of our ſauioure. How cā our olde

catholike fathers abyde thys felowe? He calleth thē falſe prophetes, theaues and robbars. It is tyme the popes excommunication were out for hym. He writeth agaynſte the Maniches and ſayeth. Diſpiſe you the ſcriptures, whiche are commaunded and eſtabliſhed with ſo great authoritye? You do no miracles, whiche if you dyd, yet we would be ware of them in you, becauſe the Lorde teacheth vs to beware of ſuche ſaynge. Ther ſhall aryſe many falſe Chriſtes etc. Many mo places maye there be founde in this mans workes, which thei maye be a ſhamed to heare, if it were nedfull. But becauſe they ſhall not conceyue al ther maliſe againſt Auſten, and parauēture haue hym in examinacion, for ſlanderinge theſe holye fathers ye ſhal heare what Hierome ſayeth. He declareth. yt Chriſt ſpeaketh

in Peter, in Paule, and that of the people and princes, ye ſcripture is to be vnderſtanded of the doctrine of the Apoſtls. Of thoſe ſayeth he, which were in it, & not of thoſe which we beholde nowe.
            And marke what he ſayeth Thoſe that were, and not thoſe that be, that ye moughte vnderſtande that what ſo euer ſhalbe ſayed after the Apoſtles tyme: let it be cut a way ſayth he, for it hath none authoritie afterward. Therfore, if ther be any S. after the Apoſtles tyme he hath none authorite, for thei come to late to be alowed, quia nō fuerūt in ea, ſayeth he. If ye ſaints muſt geue place to the holie ſcripture, and haue none authoritye beſydes that: than what are they that make articles of our fayth? or at leaſt condemne thē for heretikes that wyl not receyue that doctrine that hath none authoritie

of ye ſcripture, but rather againſt the ſcripture. The ſame Ierome vpon Ieremie ſayth. And they haue gone after ſtraing gods, as theyr fathers taught them. etc. Therefore (ſayeth he) neither of our forefathers nor of our elders is the erroure to be folowed, but the authoritie of the ſcripture and the cōmaundemente of God which teacheth vs. The ſame Ierome vpon Ezechiel, ſayth alſo yt we maye ſinne as muche whē we think in our owne opinion yt we do wel: as whē we willinglye do naught. He writeth vpon ye prophet Nahum, & ſayth, yt againſt the cōing of Chriſt: ye people ſhall fle to the ſcripture, & their ſtudie ſhalbe allowed, becauſe they ſhal not find anye to teach them, and the ſlouthfulneſſe of their teachchars ſhalbe rebuked. Marcke wel thys propheci, for ſuerelye it byteth. He writeth vpon Math.

and ſayth. Anye thing that hath not authoritie of ye ſcriptur may as ſone be reiected & deſpiced, as approued and alowed.Tomo. v. Againe to Cteſiphō he ſayth. What ſoeuer we affirme we muſt do it by the teſtimonies of holie ſcripture. What ſoeuer is done without theſe bokes, is in nowyſe to be receyued. Do theſe doctours ſet ſo little by the authoritie of goddes worde,Capit. xlv. as oure men woulde perſwade vs?
            Do they not rather attribute al together to the ſcripture? Ambroſe alſo in the boke of paradiſe vpon this that Eue added to the wordes of the Lorde (Neythere ſhall ye touche the trye) We do learne by this preſent leſſone,Tomo. xi. Ca. pite. iii. ſayeth he, that wee ought to ad nothynge to the worde of God,Capit. xxiii. no thoughe wee do of it good intent or warines.
            For if thou either ad any thing

or take ought frome it: thou ſemeſte to be a trangreſſour of the commaundemente. Heare haue you Ambroſe alſo, which can not in any wyſe ſuffer the wyſdome of man to be equale with ye ſcripture, but that in all thynges we ſhould leane to that.
            For though our meaneing be neuer ſo good: yet muſte we not truſte oure owne wyttes. Thus he writeth vpon theſe wordes of the Epiſtle to the Romaynes, be ye all of one mynde, thys may be by God,Capt. i. ſayeth he, but by mans wyſdome can it neuer be. And vpon the beginnynge of the fyrſte Epiſtle to the Corhinthyans he ſayth that the philoſophers, whē they firſt began to preach Chriſt they preached hym by the wyſdome of the worlde, and reiected the lawe and prophetes. And agayne writing to Gratianus Auguſtus, he ſayeth, that ye Arrians

gate all the colour of theyr wyckedneſſe out of philoſopheie.De fide. ca. v. Yet woulde oure diuines perſwade vs, that they gote it by readyng of ſcripture, and expoundeinge it after theyr owne ſence. And therefore ther was no remedy to ouer come them, but wyth ſome other learneinge for they were perfecte in the ſcriptures. Notwithſtandinge. Gregorie, wryttynge vpon Iob ſayeth This canonicall ſcripture paſſeth all ſcience, all doctrine wythout compariſone. Thys onely preacheth the trueth, calleth to the heauen lye contrey, it entiſeth the herte of ye reader frō earthly deſires to heauenly thinges. Beholde, gentle reader, they boaſt them ſelues of the old holy doctours frō Chriſtes tyme hythereto and yet the doctoures thē ſelues make cleane agaynſte them. Originne wryttinge vpon the prophet Ieremy

ſayeth It is nedfull & neceſſary for vs to cal ye holy ſcriptures to witnes. For our ſēſes & our expoſitions (ſayth he) wtout theſe witneſſes, are not to beleued. After this ſorte alſo he expoūdeth this ſaying, vnder .ii. or iii. witneſſes vnder .ii yt is the newe & old teſtamēt, vnder thre yt is, ye goſpel, the prophetes & apoſtles. Againe vpon ye Ro. he ſayth. Paul gaue the doctours an enſāple to ſpeake no thyng but they could proue it by the ſcripture. For if he beinge ſo great & ſuch an apoſtle, did not beleue his ſayinges ſufficiently except he taught it to be writtē in the law & prophetes yt he ſpeake how much more ought we which be far inferiours to him to obſeue theſe thinges yt we do not bringe forth our owne doctrine whē we preache, ſayth he, but ye ſētence of ye holy goſt. Here haue you alſo the mind of Origen, agreat clark whō they alledge verie oftē. Cypriā
               
writeth to one Cecilius noting vpon theſe wordes of Chriſt.Libr. iii. Epiſt. iii. If ye do yt I cōmaūd you thē are ye my frēdes. And ye Chriſt onely ought to be harde: ye father witneſſeth frō heauē ſaying. This is my welbeloued ſon, in whō I am wel pleaſed, heare him. Wherfor if onely Chriſt muſt be heard we ought not take hed what ani mā hath thought good to be done before vs, but what chriſt hath firſt done which was before al mē. Neither ought we to folow ye cuſtom of mā: but ye truth of god. Seing god ſpaketh bi his prophet Eſa, & ſayth. Thei worſhip me in vaine teaching ye cōmaūdemētes & preceptes of mē. And againe in the goſpel. Ye caſt away ye cōmaūdementes of god, yt ye mought eſtabliſhe your owne tradiciōs. And therfore, deare brother If any of our fathers, other by ignoraūce or ſimplicitie, haue not obſerued this & kept yt ye lord hath taught

vs to do by his example and gouernaunce: pardone and forgeueneſſe thorowe the goodneſſe of the Lorde maye be graunted to theyr ſimpliſitie. But vnto vs it can not be ſo graunted, which be admoniſhed and enſtructed of the Lorde &c. He that luſteth to ſe more of thys, let hym loke the place and reade farther, and he ſhall fynde lyke wordes in hys thyrde treatiſe of the ſimplicitie of prelates. And whereas men be ſo muche addycte to theyr cuſtomes, ye ſame Ciprian ſayth. Nether ye cuſtome whiche hath crept in among ſome, ought to be a let whereby the trueth ſhoulde not preuayle and ouercome. For the cuſtome wythout the truth is an old errour. Therfore, let vs leaue the erroure and folow the truth All the doctours agree wholelye in thys, that the ſcripture is the touchſtone, a recourſſe for al chriſten

men to ſeke vnto, to be ſure of theyr fayeth, and to haue quietnes of cōſcience. And what exhortacions Chriſoſtom geueth to all men for the ſtudye of holye ſcriptures: appeareth in hys thred ſermon De Lazaro. And vpon Iohn the .xvi. Homelye, in the end. Alſo vpon Iohn the .iii. Homelie and .iiii. Chapi, and in diuers other places. Nothinge doeth he ſo erneſtlye beate into oure heades as the ſtudy of ſcripture. And I thynke there is no doctoure that writeth vpon the ſcripture: that doeth not lykewiſe and geueth it euen ſuche a rowme and preheminence, that all other doctrines muſte geue place. Ireneus ſayeth.Libr. i. Cap. l vi. To go about wyth ye diuine ſcriptures, whiche is the vndoubted trueth is to build an houſe vpon a ſtrōg rocke: but all other doctryne what ſo euer it be: is to builde

a weake houſe vpon an vncertaine place of quicke ſand, which wilbe lightli ouer throwē. Now if theſe authorities be not ſufficient to ſtope theyr mouthes: I thynke they wyll neuer be anſwered. For where as the ſcripture is ſo hard to be vnderſtand and therefore loke vpon the doctours (ſaye they) and beleue the catholyke churche whiche hath continued frome Chriſtes tyme hitherto, we can ſhewe (ſay they bi auncient writers from tyme to tyme ſence Chriſts aſcention. But what can theſe men ſhewe? Be not theſe writters whiche I haue reherſed, of the chieffeſt of thē? And al thes agre that their wrytinges muſt be tried by the ſcripture, and if that allowe thē not they would not in any wiſe that we ſhould beleue them.
            This is a wonderfull thynge yt they would haue vs geue ſuch

credite to the doctours whiche thynge the docters them ſelues forbyd But they haue alwayes this ſayeinge of Auguſtine in their mouthes. I would not beleue the goſpel, except the authoritie of the c
                  •
               urch did moue me. Nowe as ſone as they haue caught thys in theyr ſermons: thei triumph. Lo (ſay they) what authorite did this g
                  •
               eat doctour attribute to ye church in ſo much that ye goſpel is and muſt be iudged by ye church. For wtout the church, he would not beleue chriſtes goſpel manye wordes haue they which I cā not remembre. But me think, theſe mē mought be anſwered out of Auguſtines owne wordes before reherſed. For he wil geue no ſuch credit to any mans writtinges what ſo euer he be as he doth to the ſcripture neither would he yt any mā
               
woulde he that any man ſhould ſo eſteme his writtynges. For al hys wryttynges dooe not pleaſe hym. Therefore if they wil haue me beleue Auguſtines wordes: they muſte proue them true bye the ſcripture or elſe by ſome other probable and ſure reaſone that diſſenteth not frome the truethe, elſe maye not I beleue Auſtens wordes. For thys he counſelleth hym ſelfe. But admytte Auſtens wordes to be true wythout anye contradicion. What moughte then be ſayed to it? Theſe be Auguſtines wordes, I ſhoulde not beleue the Goſpell, onleſſe the authoritye of the churche moued me. Nowe I aſke you what the authority of the churche is. What cal you ye authorite of ye church? Is it long continuance of time? Thē was chriſtes doctrine doubtful. For the ſcribes and phariſeis

had that on theyr ſyde. Or is it the greater number? With lyke reaſone we maye refuſe Chriſtes Goſpell.
            For many be called, ſayeth he, and fewe elected. Or elſe was it the conſent of learned wiſe men? All thys had the great byſhopes and high priſtes in chriſtes time. For they were great learned and wyſe men.Corh. i. But ſaynt Paule axeth, wher be the wyſe? Wher are the ſcribes? where are the diſputers of the worlde? Hath not god made the wyſdome of the worlde foleiſheneſſe? Therfore let them declare vnto me the verie true authoritye of the churche. And I make heare diſtinctiō of churches. For Chriſte and the Apoſtles haue prophicied that theyr ſhal come falſe prophetes in Chriſtes name, and ſhal riſe euen frō amonge our ſelues & ſhall ſpeake peruerſe doctryne. Theſe men

come in Chriſtes name and ſaye they be chriſtes chruch. But I am aſſured, they be not Chriſtes true ſpouſe.Math. xix. For Lira writinge vpon Mathe ſayth. The church ſtandeth not in men, by the reaſon of ſpirituall powre or ſecular dignitie. For many princes and many popes and other inferiour perſones, haue ſwarued frome the fayth. Wherfore the church doth ſtande in thoſe perſones, in whom is ye true knowledge and cōfeſſion of fayth and veritie. Therefore it muſt nedes by Lira his wordes conſiſte in the ſcriptures. For the gyfte of fayeth and vnderſtandeynge the veritye, is the worckeynge of the holye ſpirite, that confortour which the Lorde promiſed to thoſe that beleue hys worde. But becauſe they alledge me Auſtens wordes I wyl anſwere thē with Auſten him ſelfe, wrytinge

vpon the .lvii. Pſal. Wee ſpeake true thynges (ſayth he) which haue heard true thinges that the lorde ſayth, not that mā ſayth. It may be that man may lie, it can not be that god ſhould lye. By the worde of trueth do I knowe Chriſte the ſame verie trueth. By the worde of trueth do I knowe the church to be partaker of the trueth.
            Nowe lette them ſcan theſe wordes and tell me where the true toucheſtonne is. Then alledge they theſe wordes of Chriſte.Math. xx.
            
            I haue yet muche to ſaye vnto you, but you can not nowe beare it a waye. Nowe be it, when the ſpirite of the trueth commeth: he ſhall leade you into all trueth. & etc.
            And agayne. Manye other tokens dyd Ieſus before hys

his diſciples. Which are not writen,Iohn. xx. in this boke. Here ſtaye they and go no farder, for it foloweth. But theſe are written, that you ſhoulde beleue. etc. But ſeynge we haue begone wyth Saynte Auguſtine, we wyll ende wyth him. He wryteth vpon this ſame place of Iohn and ſayeth.Tractatu. xlix Capit. ix. They were choſen and pycked out, as many as were thought neceſſarie and ſufficient for the ſaluacion of the faythfull.Sup
                     •
                  r Iohn Capit. xii. Cirillus alſo affirmeth the ſame, and ſayeth more ouer, that althynges that the wrytters thought ſufficient, boeth for the fayeth and beleue, and alſo for ye cōuerſaciō of men that wee myghte ſhyne wyth a ryghte and perfecte fayeth, and wyth true workes and vertues, and ſo come to the Kyngdome of heauen thorowe oure Lorde Chriſte be wryten ſayeth he, and therefore it is a newelye,

inuented in ye diuilles ſhop, to ſaye that all the articles of oure chriſtian fayeth can not be proued by ſcripture, and mens tradicions byſyde the ſcripture be goode workes and pleaſe God Theſe be Cyrillus workes. And therefore ſayeth Saynte Ambros, in hys fourth boke of virgines. All newe thynges that Chriſte hath not tought we lawfully condemne. For vnto faythful men ſayeth he Chriſte is the waye. If Chriſte therefore haue not taught that we teache (ſayeth he) we iudge it to be deteſtable. Nowe let theſe holye fathers turne and toſſe theſe olde holye doctours, and let them fynde me out a touchſton ſome other wher For theſe doctours ſay playnely the worde of God the holy ſcripture, the word of truth is ye rule wherby Chriſtes true church is ordered, gouerned & enſtructed.

For whoſoeuer ſercheth findeth The holy goſt faileth not ſuch as ſeke him ther but to ſeke him in anye other, place: is no promiſe made. As for theyr general counſayles that they ſticke ſo muche vnto: is but a weake foundacion For ſaynt Auſtine writtynge agaynſt the donatiſtes ſayeth.Capi. iii. Who is it that knoweth not the holy canonical ſcriptures, boeth of the olde and newe teſtamente to be conteined within certayne limettes and boūdes? And that they be ſo put before al the wrytinges of biſhopes yt ſhal come afterward, that it can not be doubted at all neyther can we be, deceyued of the whether it be true or whether it be ryght and good or not what ſoeuer is knowen to be writen in them. But al other wrytynges of byſhopes or elſe, which either haue writtē or ſhal write, after the confirmacion of

the cananicall wrytynges, maye be reprehended, both by the wordes or wyſe ſentēce of ſome more knoweynge man in that matter as well as by the ſage authorite of their biſhopes, and by the prudence and learneinge of learned teachers, and by counſayles, if bi chaunce anye thynge be ſtrayed from the trueth. And thoſe counſelles, ſayeth he, that be done in euerie prouince or region, ought to geue place without any doubtes, to the authoritie of the full counſayles, whiche are done of the whole companie of Chriſtian men. And thoſe generall counſayles that go before, maye often tymes be amended by thoſe that folowe after, when ſoeuer anye thynge ſhall appere by anye experience, whiche was before ſhet vp, when ſo euer anye thynge, is knowen that before was hyde wythout anye coloure of falſe

holy pryde, wythout anyē puffed vp ſpice of Arrogancie, without anye▪ condemnacion of enuye or malice wyth pure humilitye, wyth vniuerſall peace and quietnes, and wyth Chriſtian charitie. Theſe be Auguſtines worde, whiche beinge charitably vnderſtande are ſurelye goode and profitable. For the fyrſte he ſetteth goddes worde, euen the canonicall ſcriptures, to be the very perfect and vndoubted touchſtone. As it were an euerlaſting trueth, agaynſte the whiche no man maye repyne or ſtande. Then of mens writtinges he declareth, what the nature is, and howe they ought to be vſed. After that, of generall counſayles to whyche thoughe he attribute much: yet layeth he ther no ſuer foundacion, but they maye conclude vpon matters, that maye be afterwarde reformed. But aalas,

when was ther any ſuche generall counſayle, as Saynte Auguſtine here ſpeaketh of? But what ſhoulde we doubt of ſuche perilouſe tymes ſpoken of in ſo manye places of the ſcripture to be euen nowe, wherein that aduerſarye is opened? Whyche hath ſo longe tyme ſate in the ſteade of God, aboue all that is called God or goddes ſeruice. The abhominacion of deſolacion, ſtode in the holye place. That gallāt whore trimmed wt purpel hath ben drunke with the bloude of the Sayntes, but the Lord hath ſhortened thoſe daies for hys electedes ſake, and hath deſtroyed this wycked wyth the bryghtneſſe of his comeing, with the ſpirite of hys mouth. For the Goſpell is preached. Bleſſed are they, which are called to the lambes ſupper.
            Among ſo manye fine and captiouſe

wyttes, among ſo many ſwifte and diuers iudgmentes of men as are nowe regninge in the worlde: harde ſhall it be for a right wel learned mā, to pleaſe the multitude of them that be learned. Wherefore I maye not nor wyl not, loke for it. But vnto you, dearlie beloued brethern, which onely deſyre the glorie of God and the lorde Ieſus, and in the ſame lorde, the muſt charitable reformacion and retourne of his elect frō blindnes & errour vnto the perfite knoweledge of ye lordes heauenly doctrine: to you bretherne I ſaye, I make thys declaraion concerninge this my ſimple labour, in thys wyſe. As touchynge my letter, I dyd it, God is my wytnes, euen of a feruente zeale, knowyng for a ſuretye, that thought Maiſter Chripyne be learned, and a greate ſorte more which haue & do hold

the ſame opinion that he doeth yet am I certen that none of them is able to defend it, either by ſcripture or doctours. As cō
               cerneing ye authoritye of the doctours: I take them euen as thei yt ſelues deſier. That is If they expoūde anye place of ſcripture, declareynge to be ſo wyth the helpe of other manyfeſte places of ſcripture, or wyth a ſure and probable reaſone, whiche is not contrarye to anye places of the ſcripture: then I accepte it and prayſe God for hys gyftes in them.
            If not: I let them paſſe as I fynde them. For I haue not alledged them here to thentente that anye man ſhoulde thynke that the ſcripture is the more eſtabliſhed thorow theyr learnenyge (For all men are vayne and curſed is he that putteth hys truſt in them) But becauſe

theſe mē ſticke ſo muche to them that in thys poynte are theyr enimies If they thinke I haue ben to quicke wyth them in any thinge: let them knowe that the Lorde hath opened his wyſdome euen vnto babes And in thoſe thynges, we maye not nor wyll geue place to ſuch wyſe and prudente, from whome they be hyd. If they can finde in their hertes to geue place to the infallible veritye of Chriſtes doctrine. If they can be contented to caſte awaye the hye eſtimaciō that thei haue in theyr muche readynge and longe continuance of tyme wyth the titles of honoure geue them by men. If they can thorowe pure charitye and deſyre of vnitie, caſte them ſelues into ſuche an humilitie, as to thynke that God hath opened that vnto ſimple men, whiche thorowe theyr hante mynde is kept from

them: If they woulde I ſaye, haue theyr whole reſpecte to the laſte wyll and teſtamente of the lorde Ieſus Chriſte in ſo muche that if it were an aſſe that ſpeake vnto them any of thoſe wordes they woulde yet here hyr and regarde the wordes for hys ſake, who ſo they be if they were thus minded: I would wyſhe to ſpēd a greate parte of my lyfe wyth them, I woulde reuerence theyr learneinge, and geue them as much honoure as appartayneth vnto ſuche men. But beinge other wyſe puft vp contrarye to ryght charitye and in a wronge eſtimacion of them ſelues, and deſpyceing Chriſtes ſimplicitie: the Lorde cut ther combes And therfor I hertely exhort al faithfull bretherne, to lyfte vp theyr hertes wyth me vnto the lyueinge God, in pure fayeth, geueing hym moſt erneſt, hertie, and

humble thankes, for that he of his tender mercie, hath geuen vs ſo towardelie a yonge kynge ſo graciouſe a gouernour, ſo vertuouſe a counſayle, by whoſe meanes all cruell tirannye and murderinge of innocentes is baniſhed, pure chriſtian charitye put in vre and practiſe, the lordes doctrine brought in agayne into the ſeate a poynted, ſtraūge learneinge baniſhed and put awaye, the true worſhip and ſeruice of God foūde out, the Idole ſeruice and falſe worſhippynge driuen out of the church of God. Thys waye ſhall the filthy and vncleane conuerſacion of men be purified, and ye vncharitable and vnfayethfull dealynge of neyghbours ſhalbe reduced into vnitye fayethfulnes, and immutable loue whiche alwayes ſhal continue in the lyueynge God throughe Ieſus Chriſte. Whoſe

name be magnified, prayſed and exalted for euer. Amen.
            ☞Written the .vii. of Nouembre Anno Domini. M.D.xlvii. P. N
         
      
      
         
            
               Imprinted at London by Iohn Day and Wyllyam Seres, dwellynge in Sepulchres Pariſh at the ſigne of the Reſurrection a litle aboue Holbourne Conduite.
            Cum gratia & priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
      
   