
      
         
            
            A
CHRISTIAN
FAMILIAR COMFORT
AND INCOVRAGEMENT
vnto all English Subiects, not to dismaie
at the Spanish threats. Whereunto is added an admonition to all English Papists, who
openly or couertly couet a change. With requisite praiers to almightie God for the preseruation
of our Queene and Countrie. By the most vnworthie I. N.
            
            Printed at London for J. B.
1596.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HIGH AND
MOST VERTVOVS PRINCESSE
Elizabeth, by the especial prouidence of the Almighty,
Queene of England, France, and Ireland, chiefe
protector of the right Catholike
Religion.
            
               ALbeit I may be iustly censured
(most gracious Queen) to
haue committed a two folde
fault in this mine enterprise:
first in vndertaking it, being most vnworthie:
next, in exhibiting it to your Highnes,
beeing most worthie: I beseech your
roiall patience to heare mine excuse, and
as it may sound with your knowen clemencie,
I may receiue pardon for my boldnes.
To commit the first, I had a two folde incouragement,
the occasion of the time, and
a continuall secret instinct vrging mee to

doo mine indeuor in this kinde, not intending
thereby to preuent anie better able:
To aduenture the second, I was moued by
discretion, namely, to commend the consideration
of it (silly as it is) vnto your
high Maiestie, aboue all others: and that
for two causes, the one, in regard none
hath better power to protect it, beeing in
anie measure worthie: next, none hath
like authoritie to pardon it, being faultie.
And in these regards especially, my most
gracious Soueraigne, dutie and loue being
witnesses of mine inward zeale, I humbly
presume to leaue this my poore offering at
the feet of your most prudent censure.
            
               Your Maiesties loyall
poore Subiect,
IOHN NORDEN.
            
         
         
            
            To my Christian countrymen, faith
in God, loue to her Maiestie, constancie
in Religion, watchfulnesse & magnanimitie,
bee for euer more and
more increased & continued.
            
               SAint Ierome beeing in Bethleem, at the
time when the Turkes inuaded and most
cruelly wasted Asia the lesse, Arabia, Aegypt,
and part of Syria, declared that the
sins of the Christians there, were the cause of
all that miserie, and of the feare which possessed
their hearts, & gaue courage & victorie to the enemie.
And that there was no assurance of the mittigation of that
fierce furie of the one, or restitution of comfort to the other, before
there were in the Christians humiliation, and a true returning
vnto vertue and righteousnes. Which ancient counsel
of that famous father may be renewed now amongest vs, when
the professed enemie of the true Catholique religion hath stirred
vp an apparant indignation in the pretended King Catholique,
against England, and many other partes where the
Gospell is sincerely preached, and that surely for the sinnes of
Christians, in the iudgement of God, who looking vppon the
greene leaued figge tree of our profession, desiring to tast of the
fruit which it should beare, findeth it not answerable to his expectation.
And therfore, vnlesse we will returne from our hypocrisie,
and bring forth with our leaues good fruit, it is to bee
doubted, that our God powerfull and iust, will permit this professed
aduersarie to rouze vs out of our secure thoughts, and either
winne vs to more sinceritie, or giue vs into the handes of
our aduersarie. And to the end we may all find out our selues
to bee faultie, that seeme now to bee shrouded with securitie, it

is fit that we should examine euery one himselfe, and amend
what the word of the liuing God willeth to be amended in euerie
particular person: so, howsoeuer the causes of this Spanish
Hoobub may appeare to be in the man of sinne, in malice, &
in his chiefe agent the pretended king Catholik, in ambition,
we shall preuent thē both of their vaine purposes, being strongly
shrouded with hope of the performance of the promises of
our God, who will vppon our reconciliation become againe on
our side, howsoeuer yet our sins may deserue to haue the shield
of his protection taken from vs, and to drawe the enemie
to inuade vs. And therefore it is now required, and that
with speed, that we should denie our selues, & acknowledg him,
forsake our selues, and cleaue vnto him, disclaime the confidence
of our owne strength, and depend wholy vppon his vn
               
                  •
               anquishable
power, who shall be to vs all in all, and who shall
strengthen vs, & weaken them: fight for vs, & against them:
And to this end haue I (though most vnworthie) sent vnto
you this simple Eccho, to that subtill Hoobub, not that it
should sound to mine owne vainglorie, but to incourage vs all

                  •
               o shape a new course in our liues, and such prouidence in our

                  •
               roceedings, that we all may answere our duties to God, loialty
to Queene Elizabeth, and loue to our countrie. And so may euerie
man rest truly resolute in a good conscience, to withstand
the practises of this roring beast of Rome, and all the power of
his professed adherents, the enemies of God and vs,
with an assured hope neuer to bee
ouercome.
            
               Yours in Christian good will,
I. N.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A
CHRISTIAN COMfort
and encouragement vnto all
English subiects, not to dismay
at the Antichristian
threates.
            
               Cap. 1.
               Wee must examine the speciall causes, why God hath stirred
vp the Nation of the Spanyards to pursue England.
               
                  THough in the iudgement
of God, there be
many causes that maie
moue him to take displesure
against vs the people
of England: yet before
I proceede to examine
them as behooueth,
to the ende they
may be reformed: I will briefely (as necessarie it is)
shew the chiefe causes that meerely mooue the Spaniardes
to this loud hoobub, without regarde of the
occasions, why God would make them the executioners

of his wrath against vs,The Spaniardes 
                        •
                     egard not the 
                        •
                     ause why God 
                        •
                     oueth them 
                        •
                     o inuade vs. and the instruments to
put vs in minde of the breach of our league with him,
who hath so long preserued vs in peace, and giuen vs
freely the vse of his Gospell: the neglect whereof, and
our contrarie fruites, no doubt, is the principall cause
that God hath called this nation from farre,They haue a 
                        •
                     wo fold blinde 
                        •
                     eale in theyr 
                        •
                     esire to inuade
vs, who yet of themselues are drawen thereunto, as rauished
by two blinde deuotions: the first and principall
is, in that hee is the Popes vizeroy, lieutenant, and
chiefe martiall man, and hath the title generall of the
Catholike King.
                  The king of 
                        •
                     paine ye Popes 
                        •
                     hampion In regard whereof hee is to stand as the
Popes champion, to aunswere anie challenge that his
holynesse shall vndertake, for defence and preseruation
of his vsurped title and Empire. And in that respect
this mightie Goliah, this blasphemous Rabsakeh, pretendeth
a sufficient warrant from Senacherib of Rome,
to pursue Hezechia of England with this hoobub, that our
God shall not deliuer vs out of his hands, but that he onely
as the chieftaine Catholike of that man of sinne, hath
the sole power from him to conquere kingdomes,
and therefore soundes vp this hoo and crie, Am I
now come vp without the Lord to England, to destroie it?
As if hee should saie, My Lord and master, Christs vicar,
hath commanded mee, and therefore howe dare
English Hezechiah, or anie other, that trusteth not in
the power of my masters holynesse, despise mee, his
grand chiefetaine, or the least Captaine of his vnder
mee? who are to pursue heretiques that haue robbed
him of his honour and glorie,
                     
                        •
                     ngland hath 
                        •
                     obbed ye Pope 
                        •
                     f his credite of his power and
authoritie, holynes, and credit, whereby hee is become
of lesse estimation among the kingdomes of the world.
The supposed slanders which England hath wrongfully

laide vpon him, the dishonour and demerites which
his locusts haue condignly receiued in England of latter
times, for their treasons, conspiracies, and murderous
practises, are pretended to bee so high a blemish
vnto that painted beast, that by no meanes the quarell
is to bee qualified but by open force, and forcible inuasion,
that can take no better successe by deuillish deuises.
It is not vnknowen to all, how many secret practisers,
euen of our owne vnnaturall countrymen and
others, hee hath sent to subuert the quiet of our state,
pretending openly the winning of men to the church
of Rome, wherein, and not else where (as they saie) is
saluation: but couertly haue stirred vp rebellious
thoughts and deeds in many, which otherwise myght
haue shewed themselues loyall subiectes. And this generall
practise hath appeared to be a deuice to steale awaie
the harts of the subiects from their due obedience
to our most gracious Queen: wherby we might grow
into ciuill rebellions within our selues, and so giue him
the more ease to make spoile of all. And sith these secrete
workers haue not, nor can take no effect in their
treasons, but condigne reward, deserued iustice, wherby
many haue bene rid most happilie out of our common
weale: and their dispatch (no doubt) to vs most
beneficiall: and howsoeuer they be enchanted by the
vaine conceite of canonization and reward at Gods
hands, the whores deceiuing baytes,What reckning the Pope maketh of the death of our Seminaries. their confusion
is no more regarded of his holines, than the fall of a
drop from his nose: he loueth not the name of an
English man, but flattereth them, onely to vse them
to worke secret mischiefes, and that they may come to
the more speedy confusion, And sith I say, by their

secret meanes he cannot get againe and redeeme the
decaies, that the trueth of the Gospell heere receiued;
hath brought vpon his kingdome of darkenesse: he
hath sent out this hellish hoobub, with his blasphemous
coniurations, commanding heerein aboue all
the rest of his adherents,The thinges whereof wee 
                        •
                     aue robbed the Pope. this capitall King Catholique
to take knowledge first, of his iniururies sustayned
by the English Nation, who haue dispoyled him of
all his Abbies, Priories, Monasteries & other reliques,
of his forged deuotions: and with all, of our detayning
of the annuall reuenues, and pensions which he vsurped
from vs, greate summes of monie to maintayne
his high abhominations: and which is more, that we
haue bewrayed his darkenesse, which he would haue
the whole world to imbrace as the true light: which
things haue so deepelie discouered him, that he will
be seene to pursue vs as robbers, with this peeuish
hoobub, the destruction of England. This no doubt is
the first cause that inkindleth a blinde deuotion in the
king of Spaine, dignified with the high title of King
Catholike, to pursue the matter, vi & armis, to discharge
himselfe of the truste reposed in him. The
other cause inuested meerelie in him selfe, without
hauing anie eye at all on anie other end,The second 
                        •
                     ause moouing 
                        •
                     he king of 
                        •
                     paine. is the desire
and thirstinesse, wherewith he hath been long tossed
to subiect this land to his dominions: for since his atchyuing
the gold of India, his thoughts haue neuer
beene quieted, but still seeke howe to increase his
power, and to become sole Monarch of Europe. And
to this his ambitious desire, the holie father bringeth
more stubble to maintayne the fire, to serue his owne
turne, the better to support his blacke kingdome, well

shaken by the thunder of the Gospell, which hee
by the Spanish Inquisition, the court of hellish furies,
endeuoreth (but in vaine) to extinguish.The Spaniard longeth for England. And forasmuch
as England hath been the best benefactor (in
ignorance) to the Sea of Rome: and of whose sweetnes
this Catholike king hath some thing tasted, and
finding it plausible for his stomack to digest, he lōgeth
for it, as the purple whoore wyth child of ambition,
longeth for her owne glorie: which ambitious thirste
can hardly be quenched, as appeareth, till the throats
of more of his inuincible troopes be stopped, with the
waues of our narrow Seas. The remembraunce of
whose former successe in the same, may argue in vs,
if we retire to our helping God, an assurance of the
like issue of his blinde ambition now. Which maketh
him swell in regard hee seemeth to be master of land
and sea, in both which hee is deceiued, and yet pricketh
him forward to equalize his territories with the
great and large scope of the pristine Romaine Empire,
which extended it selfe ouer three parts of the world,
and yet could not satisfie the ambition of Casar and
Pompey, whilst the one could abide no equal, the other
no superior. The Pope for his part wil be king of kings,
and will accepte neither superiour not equall, in causes
either diuine or humane: the Spaniard priuiledged
by his title of king Catholique, coueteth superioritie
ouer all the rest, not only of the Popes vassall kings, but
ouer others, & therefore he wrestleth hard for Flanders
and other prouinces of Germanie,
                  How the Span
                        •
                     ard fis
                        •
                     eth fo
                        •
                      kingdomes he practiseth subtilly
for France, suborneth impiously Ireland, and audaciouslye
threatneth England. But (no doubte) as the
fountaine of ambition yeeldeth no better licour

than thus to vsurp other mens territories & kingdoms,
so it will affoord no better end than it did to the Lacedemonians
and Athenians,
                  The end of 
                        •
                     mbition the one being master of the
sea, the other of the land, whose glory as it tooke beginning
by ambition, so by the same they were brought
both to confusion in the end: and therefore need wee
the lesse to feare this ambitious hoobub, wherein wee
seeme to be pursued: first for that which belongeth to
God himselfe, namely, all glorie, power, vertue, veritie,
sanctitie, and holinesse, which this beast of Rome vsurpeth
to himselfe, and woulde inforce vs to yeeld it vnto
him from our louing God, whose cause wee shall defend,
and not our owne, in resisting his chieftaine this
Catholike king: secondly, seeing it pursues vs for our
owne kingdome, countrie, lands, libertie, wiues, children,
and liues, thinges peculiar (vnder God) to our
Queene, and vnder her vnto our selues, he hath no colour
to chalenge anie propertie, title, interest or hope
in them, and therefore in defending them we shall preserue
our selues, and that which is meerely our owne.
And yet therunto will not that beast intitle him? Thus
we see the causes that moue this loud hoobub against vs
in the meere desire of the Spaniardes.
               But forasmuch as we are in dutie and christian policie
to looke backe into our selues, and to take surueigh
of the occasions which may bee argued to bee in our
selues,The occasion is 
                        〈◊〉
                      our selues which hath stir
                     
                        •
                     ed vp this hoo
                     
                        •
                     ub why God in iustice should moue this Antichristian
host against vs, hauing the title of Christians, and
to examine whether wee deserue to tast of the plague
which is threatened by this fearefull hoobub, or whether
wee may securely followe that which wee haue
hetherto practised without reformation of our liues:

It is found by experience, that the bodie may be most
sicke when it feeleth no griefe at all, and a man that is
most secure, may bee sodainely striken, as appeared by
Herod in his greatest pride: a citie most carelesse and
wicked may be confounded, as Sodome, Gomorrha, Seboim,
and the rest,Causes of da
                        •
                     
                     ger are not s
                        •
                     
                     perficially to be glanced at when they least suspected perill, were
destroyed with fire from heauen: so may secure kingdomes,
as was the secure world by the floud: and therfore
much more may daungers bee feared, when there
are apparaunt causes, which yet cannot vpon a suddaine
viewe so plainelye appeare, as when they are
duelye considered. Our superficyall thoughtes of
the causes of this rumour of warres, may bee compared
to the iudgement of a Phisition,The diseases of a common wealth must be cured in time. who looketh
neither vpon the partie grieued, nor vpon his state,
and what counsell then can he giue to the patient?
And therefore saith the wise man, A disease knowen
is in manner cured; and as it fareth with the diseases of
the bodie, which not beeing preuented, may suddaynly
kill the person: so a common wealth diseased, by vnpunished
vices, and ouermuch libertie, standeth in
danger of sudaine subuersion. These causes therefore
ought to be both knowen and cured: Fore-seene mischiefes
hurt not so much as such as come vnlooked for; and
therefore wisedome premeditateth by discretion, before
what maie happen afterwarde. But securitie,Al things haue a chaunge.
which deeming all partes of the bodie well, may bee
suddainely touched with a feuer, which groweth by
reason of the superfluous and grosse humours that
haue growen by fulnesse of the best daynties. So it falleth
out with common wealthes, which foster securitie,
beeing full of Gods blessings: whereby they become

sick of superfluous abundance, & loose the true
taste of the best things, and so fall sodainly. Euery thing
vnder the Sunne hath a change, a time to grow, and
a time to wither, a time to bud, and a time to be ripe▪ &
when a common wealth is risen to the top of all glorie,
then it is good that all men, but the magistrates
especiallie, looke into the superfluityes and diseases
thereof, and hauing duelie considered all thinges, to
seeke how to roote out the superfluous, and to foster
and cherish the best humors:Euery man must looke into him selfe. not onelie in a generalitie,
but euerie priuate man in himselfe, least euerie
thing hauing his course freely in the commonwealth,
the violence of type mischiefes breede a loathing
therof, as it were, in God, who cannot abide such negligence
in anie commonwealth, especially of Christians,
no more than hee coulde abide Adam and Eue in
paradise after they had sinned:The fire of Adams disobedience must bee quenched in vs. and surely the fire of the
auncient disobedience of them lyeth yet couertly couered
with the ashes of drousie securitie, not onelye
in euerie priuate man, but in euerie calling: so that it
seemeth our commonwealth, howsoeuer it seeme to
go in gouernment and true religion before other nations,
requireth a kinde of necessitie, that this fire bee
quenched before it flame foorth, to the consumption
of our whole nation. If therefore wee looke to continue
safe (howsoeuer slender account wee seeme to
make of these Spanish vauntes) wee must looke both
euerie man into himselfe, and the magistrates into
the whole state: so (no doubt) if they be not partyall
in theyr searches, they shall finde in euerie man, in his
particular examination of his owne deserts, as also the
magistrates in their generall viewe of the whole, cause

inough, whereby it cannot bee denyed but God may
without iniurie vnto anie one, not onely fraie vs with
this hoobub, but suffer vs to tast of the swoord of this ambitious
and blasphemous nation.
               To begin the examination, although I bee the vnworthiest
to call men thereunto, yet in regard I am the
worst, I cannot but acknowledge, and in deed I finde
that in my selfe, whereof woulde God all others were
free, namely, sufficient cause why I wretch should bee
rouzed vp and pursued by this pernitious generation,
& if I should flatter my self, to deserue to be freed from
their tyranies, if I looke vnto my disobedience to God
I should deceiue my selfe: and yet mine imperfections
perchance no farther seene in the world, than of such
as seem to stand in this dangerous time, as men worthy
for their honest, zealous, & religious behauior, in their
owne conceits, to be iustified by the mouths of all their
neighbors. And therefore surely it will hardly appeare
that we haue deserued to be punished, if wee looke no
further thā into other men, & so let our selues passe like
the scape goats: for if euery one couet to find the cause
in others, and prie not into himselfe, there wil be neuer
a free man, yet all free, for euerie man will condemne
all but himselfe, and yet though none will condemne
himselfe, hee shall bee condemned of all. And therefore
let euerie man acknowledge himselfe worthie to
bee punished, so all men shall be condemned by theyr
owne mouthes, and seeke no further witnesse. And this
(no doubt) is the waie to finde the cause why God
hath called this nation agaynst vs,Euery mā must looke vnto him selfe, and not vnto others as Ionah was founde
guiltie by casting of lots. For doubtlesse if wee seeme
to seeke the cause of this daunger without our selues,

we doo wrong to the iustice of God, who is not as enuious
man, that will strike one for an other, but the soule
that sinneth shall die. Lo then it is sinne that draweth on
this hoobub to pursue vs,Sinne the cause of this hoobub euen to our subuersion, if wee
repent not of our sundrie euills. Wee are called Christians,
and our aduersaries Antichristians, but if wee
looke into the fruites of both, a man may bee in doubt
who is lykest Christ, by the outwarde fruites. And
surely, for that wee haue the fire with vs, and yet shewe
no heate: for that wee are true Gospellers in knowledge,
if wee shewe our selues hypocrites in practise,Our fruits must approue vs.
it must needes bee graunted, that our profession wyll
not excuse vs: then must our fruites approue vs, or reproue
vs. It is as true as the Gospell is true, that wee
haue the Gospell, and as true it is, that there is no true
faith without it, and no saluation without faith in
Christ, which faith if it bee not liuely and bring forth
not onely leaues, but fruit, it is not onely lyke the figge
tree that Christ cursed, but a tree that shall bee hewen
downe and cast into the fire: so shall wee stande in
greater daunger in our account, hauing receiued much,
than the aduersarie that hath receiued lesse. And
therefore it had beene better that England had neuer
receiued the Gospell, nor the title of Christians, rather
than not bee seene practisers of Christian religion,
whose effectes are not as the religion which is in
the aduerse, that are doubtlesse Antichristians, for that
the one is in spirite and truth, whose obiect is Christ
onely, the other outward, carnall, and altogether false,
making more Mediatours than hee: the one is cherished
in the heart,The difference betweene christian and Antichristian religiō
                   by a liuely working of the inwarde
vertues, the other in the tongue by outwarde behauiour

onely: the one in all things is diuine and heauenly,
inspired into the soule by grace, the other is prophane
and earthly, layde as heauie burdens vppon the
consciences of men by force. Now then sith wee are
in ours, as in a large field of libertie, hauing freedome
to performe all things without scruple, doubt, or danger,
onely in Christ, how farre should wee excell in sincere
practise, those that flatter themselues wyth the
outward action of superstitious zeale, wherein they are
restrayned to wade anie further in knowledge, than
may keepe them in obedience, not vnto God whom
they ought to knowe first, and then to honour him in
spirite as hee is spirit: but vnto the pretended church
Catholike, whose honouring God, who is a spirite, is
by the traditions of men that are meerely carnall. God
forbidde therefore that wee,In Gods mercie wee inioye the gospel of Christ who assuredlye in the
franke mercie of Almightie God inioye this admirable
treasure, the Gospell, whence proceedeth the
true religion propounded by Christ Iesus himselfe,
and practised by doctrine and example of the Apostles,
shoulde so lagger in our liues, that Pharisies and
meritours shoulde goe so farre before vs, that wee
shoulde bee censured not onely of GOD himselfe,
who seeth the heartes, but of men, who see onelye
our workes, to deserue punishment in his iudgement,
by our vnholye liues, at theyr handes, whome wee
knowe most assuredly are enemies vnto the crosse of
Christ Iesus, who pretend in themselues so much the
more holynesse of lyfe, by howe much the more they
see vs come short of them in zeale. And the greatest
and assuredst hope which they haue of their conquest

is grounded vppon theyr owne deseruinges,The Spaniardes build the hope of conquest vppon their owne deseruings whereby
they seeme to challenge a speciall assistance of God,
& vpon our fruitlesse profession, whereby they seeme
to coniure the high power to conforme it selfe to their
wills, and thereupon they build strong hope to bee reuenged
vppon vs. And surely, if wee reforme vs not,
and conforme our liues more aunswerable vnto our
profession, it is much to bee feared, that, as for sinne
and disobedience hee suffered his owne peculiar people
to be destroied, the citie which he chose vnto himselfe
to bee sacked, and the house wherein hee seemed
himselfe to dwell, to bee burned by the barbarous nations,
hee wyll deliuer vs vp to the will of this vncircumcised
people, whose heartes are highly inflamed
against vs, and whose hands tingle to bee in our bloud.
The Lord of hoasts bee on our side, whome they blasphemed
in their last frustrate expedition, affirming that
hee was become a Lutheran, in regard of his helping
vs and confounding them. But howsoeuer they blasphemed
then, and howsoeuer they consult agaynst
God himselfe and agaynst his chosen now, there is no
doubt but it is to some wonderfull end, in the secrete
wisedome of God:The Spaniardes blaspheming God and for our partes, let vs forecast
the worst against our selues, and say, that for our sinnes
for our neglygence, and for our disobedience, God
may iustly delyuer vs into theyr handes, so shall God
turne his purpose, which although it were to consume
vs, as it was towardes Niniue, hee will spare vs, if we repent
lyke Niniue, and let vs incourage our selues in the
renewing of our affections, so shall that God drawe
them on euen vnto the redde sea of theyr owne confusion,

as hee dyd Pharaoh and his hoast, that his glorie
may appeare, both in the force of his Gospell, which
we professe, and whereby we reforme vs vnto his will,
by casting awaie sinne, and apprehending true righteousnesse,
as also by confounding them that seeke to
persecute him in vs.
               Now it is expedient that there be some examination
of the especiall euills,An examinatiō of the speciall euils, which in ye iudgement of God draw on the Spaniard. which seeme, aboue the rest, to
call this nation in the iustice of God agaynst vs, for it
is plaine that sinne is the cause in generall, which both
preuenteth well dooing, and arraigneth vs before the
tribunall seat of God, in regard of it selfe. But to make
rehearsall of all the euills which are growen strong amongst
vs, were a tedious labor, and beyond my purpose,
and therefore I will briefely call to our consideration
some particular sinnes, that seeme to bee as nurseries
to all the rest,We make slender reckning o
                        •
                      grosse sins and such as glide thorough our
thoughts, as oyle thorough our throates, without seeling,
and yet more lyke Elephants than gnats. Who
seeth not, and yet who considereth the most capitall
sinne of blaspheming GOD? Where is there anie
lawe to punish swearers, cursers, abusers of the person,
the maiestie,Blasphemie no
                        •
                      punished the sanctitie, and the sacred worde and
name of God? How freely doo the lewde Atheistes
in this lande, such as by theyr liues argue there is no
God, behaue themselues in most vnreuerent taking
into theyr vncircumcised lippes the name of God?
How doo they rent him, as much as in them lyeth, in
peeces? his heart, feete, nayles, soule, bodie, flesh, and
euerie parte and member of him is abused and dishonoured,
taking therein delight, as in a feast, And this

sinne is not without some colour of a vertue. Heere is
great magnanimitie pretended to bee seene in these lustie
fellowes, nay, vngodlye wretches and cowardlye, I
would it were free from great persons. And this is as
farre from being punished amongst vs, that he is counted
too foolish and too precise, that will argue the same
to bee a fault. God reforme it, for the faulte is greater
than that which wee account fellonie, which robbeth
but man of his goods, and is hanged: and this robbeth
God of his glorie, and our selues of all shewe of the
feare and reuerence of God, & yet is vnpunished. May
not the lyke bee sayde of vnpunished dronkennesse,
which is a most pernitious vice,Dronkennesse not punished. and the more intollerable,
because it hath no shew of vertue, as other vices
haue, and yet of late it hath gotten a coate, but a beastly
coate, yet the best it hath, and that forsooth, in drinking
carouse, it must bee to the health of some greate man,
and sometime great men will vse the name of greater
persons in this swinish sinne, vnder colour of wishing
health to them, as if health could bee maintained by so
grosse a sinne. It is intollerable, yet tollerated to the
high dishonour of God, who of Christians requireth
Christian sobrietie. Doth not this helpe to pull on the
Spaniardes? Yes surely. And is this all that is amisse?
Nay let pride come into the ranke of vnpunished vices.Pride vnpunished
But by your leaue this is a neate vice, it is a comely
vice, it is a courtly vice, and it is a vice that aboue all
the rest may challenge place with vertue, if vice maye
bee so bolde as nowe a daies it is, and it is so plausible,
that they that should seeke to kill it by spirituall disswasion,
haue taken it by the hand also, and walke as courtly

as the best: the verie clowne will snatch at it too, and
euerie man exceedeth so farre, as if it were one of the
cardinall vertues. And although many lawes seeme to
tend to stop it, such is the force of it in all, that al drinke
of one cup, and like birdes of a feather, holde all together:
they strayne curtesie who shall begin to reforme
it, and yet contend who shall exceed in it. I haue
no more to saie, but to assure you that this is one of the
ankers that holdeth fast the shippe of our perill to the
shores of our seas. And are these all? Alasse no. Let not
couetousnesse be forgotten, which is a thirstie sinne, the
sinne of the wiser fellowes, a husbandly sinne, & therefore
is not to bee punished in anie case, being condemned
of none but of the beggerly minded, as affirmeth
the vsurer,Couetousnesse vnpunishable the mannor-monger, the farme buier, the
hoorder of golde and siluer. But alas, what fooles are
these, either they neuer reade it, or neuer heare it, or els
they forget it, that Christ cries Wo vnto the rich, for that
they haue their consolation heere. But if this did turne but
to their owne euils, it were the more tollerable. It reacheth
to the ruine of the poorer sorte, and it is seene so
apparantly, & held so dearly amongst vs in these daies,
that it is a fault to be frugall, and therefore to spend all
or spare all, are most imbraced: the one consumeth
what another hath gotten, the other hoordeth vp what
by force and fraud hee can get, and this is meere prodigalitie
in the one, and idolatrie in the other: the one
spends lewdly, & is praysed for a gentlemanlike mind,
and the other keepes wretchedly, and is counted to be
a good husband: two horrible euils, but maiden euills,
for neither of them was euer punished by any lawe, yet

meerely against Gods lawe, and argumentes that they
are nothing seasoned with the continuance and long
vse of religion, which teacheth loue: where the rich is
to support, relieue, comfort, and stead the poore that
want his aide. And so farre are they from these vertues,
that they not onely not comfort them, but seeke how
to vncloath them, howe to vncouch them, and howe
to vnfurnish them of landes, liuing, and all other necessaries.
And it is not lightly to be passed ouer, which
by meanes of these cormorants hath euen nowe taken
holde (as in the iudgement of God) vppon this lande:
wherein (no doubt) and as is helde euen of such cutthroates
themselues, there is sufficient plentie of
corne, butter, cheese, and all other necessaries, and yet
such is the decay of loue as it will not be brought forth
but vppon prices at their owne wills, as though they
only were Lords of Gods blessings, and that the poore
haue no share in them but to stand at their colde deuotion.Coldnes of loue appeareth by ye present dearth where plentie is.
And thus to rest vnreformed, and the crye
of the poore not heard, is a maine cable to pull the enemie
vpon vs.
               It is a heauie iudgement of God, when there shall
bee a common dearth in a common plentie, as nowe
there is, and who so affirmeth the contrary is no good
member of the common wealth, but sauoreth alltogether
of priuate gaine, who grinde the faces of the
poore with want of that wherewith they abound. But
surely, as for disobedience to God, there may be a feare
where no feare is, so by our fruitles profession, whose
effectes are loue, there may bee dearth where plenty

is. And surely it were good it were considered why such
a iudgement should light vpon vs in the time of the Gospell,
and that the decay of loue should appeare so farre,
as to shut vp, not onely Christianitie, but all humanitie
among mē. Why may not a man glance at a great cause
of this iudgement, which as (no doubt) it is one and the
same with that which calleth our enemies, euen our
sinnes? Yet there is a peculiar cause which stinketh in the
nostrils of God, namely, the consuming of corne, the
meere earthly blessing of God to preserue man,Spending of corne to make starch, a cause of dearths in plenty in Gods Iudgements. abut
the strengthening of pride, in making of starch. A toeration
intolerable. Woe vnto him that brought the deuise
first into our land. For it crieth out mainly to God,
who will not abide that about our neckes, in pride, that
should bee consumed which should feede our bodies in
penurie. But it is made (they say) with the coursest part
of the wheate. Alas, let not Magistrates bee deceiued, it
is the most purest of the purest corne. Oh that it were
reformed: for it is a wofull euill, drawing with it both
famine and warre: and yet this among many other sins,
trippeth on like a vice that maketh not only the vitious,
but the virtuous to taste of her vanitie. Infinit euils there
accompanie these former vnpunished sinnes, and they
are assuredly the maine winde that filleth as it were the
sailes of the Spanyards to inuade vs, whom the Lord
hath stirred vp either in mercie to reforme vs, or in
iudgement to punish vs. And surely as euery one hath
his hand in these euils, and none can excuse himselfe
from bringing, and heaping one sinne vpon another,
bewraying thereby the breach of al our duties to God in
generall, in not performing what we professe; let vs not
perswade our selues of safetie, vnles wee can frame vs to

repentance, and reformation. And as no doubt in this
the negligent Minister hath much to answer, by whose
careles discharge of his dutie,The negligent minister hath much to answere. & function, many of these
euils haue crept in and taken deepe roote: So they must
thinke that now is the time wherein they must redeeme
what they haue long omitted, and so by their new diligence
endeuour to roote out sinne, and plant faith, that
there may appeare fruits of euery mans profession; that
the cause of this fearefull hoobub being taken away, wee
may still possesse our libertie; and that our religion bee
not in shew onely, but in the simplicitie of our hearts: so
shal it be vnto vs as the bloud of the paschall Lambe, striken
vpon the shores of our seas, that the destroying Angell
may passe by vs, and cast our enemies into the deuouring
gulfe. Yet let mee speake a little more without
suspition of being too officious, or too forward. Surely
the delayes of poore mens causes in our courts of
England,Delayes of sutes. and the procrastinations of dispatch of causes
before Magistrates, hath a share in this matter, & the free
oppressions of the poore by the rich, without remedie:
doe crye among the rest to God for iustice, and God againe
calleth the Spaniards to execute the same. Would
God wee could shew our selues no lesse tractable then
children, who can leaue their wantonnes, if they see but
the rod. And if wee could leaue our vices, and imbrace
religion, God would not proceede further to strike vs,
but like a louing father would cast this his rod into the
fire.
            
            
               
               CAP. 2.
               What is to be done to escape the iudgements of God,
intended by this Antichristian hoobub.
               
                  FOrasmuch then, as no man can denye, but
that the cause of this daungerous hoobub of
the Spanyard is our sinne, which foldeth vp
our feare as it were in a foure folde mantle,
answerable to the foure folde causes thereof: whereof
two are in the aduersary meerely, and two in our selues,
as before is proued. It is time for vs, in regard of these
dangers, to call our selues home againe, who haue long
strayed in the course of our Christian profession: and
for that we are now found out by the iudgement of him
that seeth vs,We must reforme quickly or be punished seuerely. being able no longer to dissemble our sins,
but either to reforme them speedily, or to bee punished
for them seuerely. Who seemeth to bee called into the
action against vs? not meeke Moses, but blasphemous
Senacherib, whose Captaines are more furious then Orestes,
more hastie then Aiax, more tyrannous then
Phalaris, more beastly then Sardanapalus. But seeing
that religion is the gift of God, and the work of the holie
spirit, which cannot be brought in, or driuen out, by
the violence of these men; how is it to bee feared that
these wicked ones, out of whose nostrils proceede the
furious flames of madnes, and out of whose mouthes issue
fountaines of blasphemies against our alsufficient
God,Religion can neither be brought in or driuen out by man. shall preuaile against this pure religion which wee
imbrace? Surely there is nothing more true, then that
the force of man can neither bring it in, or banish it out:

for then had the tyrannous Emperours long since, vtterly
ouerthrowne it. But the sinne that we commit, & the
neglect of our calling, hath force and power to lose it
quickly, which hath been many yeares in obtayning.
And though the Gospell be a more inuincible protector
then an inuincible enemie, yet may we by abusing it, be
punished seuerely, and yet the Gospel continue safe. And
therefore there must bee a speedie meane vsed, that sinne
may bee reformed, and godlines imbraced, that our profession
bee not in shew, but in deede, and in righteousnes.
But alas will some say, what a world of busines wil
this be? what an impossible thing is it to make such a
sudden change now,What naturall reason flesh & bloud will argue in this dā
                     gerous time. when the enemie is at the gate? we
must now looke into our Armories for Munition, into
our stables for horses, into our prouinces for men, and
into our treasuries for monie, to withstand the force of
the aduersarie. Wee haue no leisure to looke into our
thoughts, and actions for sinne, or to measure our liues
by religion, hauing matters of warre in hand. We must
haue more care of Captaines then desire of Preachers;
we must stand to the sword more then to the word; we
must flie to the field to fight, and not to the Church to
pray. These things indeede are to be regarded: but is it
not to be feared that this is the consultation of many in
these dayes, that are awake? And truely the most I feare
are yet slumbring, who see no occasion to steppe out of
their secure thoughts, out of their counting houses, out
of their worldly studies,The conceyts of the worldly. who think this as merry a time
as euer came. While there is peace they dreame not of
warre: while they be ful, they feare no famine. Therefore
it behoueth that there should be a very diligent care
had, how the people in generall seeme to stand affected,

both to warre and peace. And although few haue tasted
the one, and all haue had the fruites of the other: let none
be left secure, and let the least care be of worldly things,Our duties to God carry with it a great traine of virtues.
which no doubt will be well supplied, if there bee due
respect had of our dueties to God. For that carieth with
it such atraine of vertues, as there seemeth nothing wanting
to supply any place in warre and peace. And without
that efficient duetie, what auaileth all the prouision
beside? which will stand as a man without legges, and
steede vs in fight, as a man without hands. And where it
may seeme an harde thing for vs, being so great a multitude
to reforme vs in so short a time before the ariuall of
the Spaniard, which is sayd to bee at this next spring:
Let vs call to minde that Nineueh, a bloodie citie full of
lies, and robberies, Nahum. 3. 1. for which the Lorde
threatned to make it desolate, and wast like a wildernes,
Zeph. 2. 13. which Ionah published in the streetes, saying,The repeatance Nineueh
                  Yet fortie daies and Nineueh shalbe destroyed. Ionah.
3. 4. Yet such was their obedience to the Lords message,
that they generally repented & obtained Gods mercie,
before the fortie daies came, and were spared. And
shall we thinke that God was more mercifull then, then
he is now? nay his mercie seemeth greater to vs, for that
Nineueh sawe no daunger, but were all secure. But hee
sheweth vs before hand that hee hath stirred vp a nation,
a puissant people against vs, who seeme to threaten,The practise of Nineueh an example for vs to follow. 
                  Yet
this sommer and we will destroy England: and therefore
what is to be done? The king of Nineueh proclaymed
a faste, let the Queene of England proclaime a faste, and
what more? he caused his people to crie mightily vnto
God, and commanded euery man to turne from his euill
way, & frō the wickednes that was in him. Let Queene

                  Elizabeth command all men to crie vnto God, and command
them, yea compell them to turne euery man from
his euill waye, and from the wickednes that is in him.
Let her constraine her subiects to bring forth the fruites
of loue one towardes another; and let vs all submit our
selues vnto her proclamations therin: to shew our selues
not onely good subiects vnto her, but good Christians
vnto God. And what then? may we say with the Nineuites,
It may be God will haue mercie on vs:
                  What wil follow vs, in our following the reformation of Niniueh. nay we may
assure our selues that God will spare vs, God will defend
vs, God will continue vs, and God will confound our
enemies. And doth this require so long a season? no:
for not onely in what yeare, in what moneth, in what
weeke, in what day, in what houre wee rep
                     ••
                  t God will
pardon vs, but in what minute of time w
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  urne vnto
him, he will receiue vs. Oh then let vs detra
                     ••
                   
                  
                     •
                  o time,
but with speed returne home againe into our owne consciences:How we must reforme vs.
let vs examine euery one his owne waies, his
disobedience to God, his greedie following his owne
will, his rashe receiuing the pleasures which flesh and
bloud, the world and sinne doe offer. And his obstinate
refusall, not onely to heare, much lesse to practise the
words of the Lord, which he hath sent vnto vs as it were
from farre, to the vttermost bounds of the earth, as if his
peculiar care,Gods peculiar loue to England. loue, and mercie were such to England, as
that hee would teach vs onely and leaue so many other
nations ignorant. Oh, who can measure the depth, the
height, length, and breadth of his wisedome, his mercie,
his iudgements, and his prouidence: if wee looke into
the huge circuit of the earth, & measure in our thoughts,
the quantitie thereof, distinguishing this little angle from
the maine globe of the earth, wee shall see that it is not

the hundreth part of the whole: and yet hee hath vouchsaued
himselfe to be known in this little part, more then
in all the worlde beside:England not the 200. parte of the earth. And therefore expecteth of vs
to be serued in sinceritie and trueth, more then of all the
rest. What fruites expecteth he of the Turkes, who are
his professed enemies? who yet possesse the greatest part
euen from Transiluania, to Persia, East and West, and
from the southmost parts of vnhappie Arabia, (as it may
bee called) to the sea Euxinus Northward, wherein are
those holy places where God was first honoured,The Turkes possesse the places where Christ was borne first preached. nowe
most blasphemed, as Palestine which was the holy land
the land of Canaan: where were sometime his peculiar
people the Iewes, whom he for their disobedience, hath
cast out, not onely of this blessed land, but into a reprobate
sense: and hath made them runnagates vpon the
face of the earth: not allowing them any peculiar countrie
or citie to dwell in. The Turke also possesseth those
seuen Churches of Asia, mentioned in the Reuelation:
and in their places, GOD hath most gratiously chosen
England farre from thence, among fewe others in these
northerne and northeast partes, many leagues from the
place where he was first honored: which indeed might
strike in vs the more admiration of his prouidence,
and the more duetie and reuerence in our callings to
his maiestie. For that hee hath cut off the naturall to
engraffe vs the vnnaturall braunches into his loue. It
were needlesse to shew how hee suffereth the most part,
yea almost al the world to cōtinue blind, & yet giueth vs
light, for there is no light without the truth, and no truth
without the spirite, and the fruits which proceede from
that spirit againe, is the true light. And therfore no common
wealth in generall, can so farre be charged as England,
                  
who only hath had the free vse therof many yeres.England is more to be charged for breach of our league then any other nation.
If we should bee found yet in darknes, which is argued
by the fruites of sinne, we could not haue so much hope
of safetie, as they that neuer had the light. Alas shall we
be then more blind then the Papists, who are zealous in
carnall ceremonies? Shall wee suffer the Turke in zeale
of his Mahomet, to go beyond vs in zeale of our Christ?
and shall the Iew bring forth the fruits of the law, more
precisely then we doe the fruites of the Gospell? Surely
if it be so, wee must thinke that God will deale no more
fauourably with vs, then he did with them: whom hee
cast out for not receiuing his sonne, borne among them,
preached, and preaching vnto them, whom they slewe
bodily,How we kill Christ againe. as we doe spiritually, if we speake of him truely,
and followe him falsely. What then is required of vs
now in this dreadfull hoobub? England shall bee destroyed?
for that no doubt seedeth the Spanyard that he
may possesse it. The way for vs, is to retire our selues to
the Gospell, and what wee are thereby taught diligently
to follow, both to the confirming of them that are alreadie
sealed, with the knowledge thereof, as indeede many
are in England: and to turne againe the most obdurate,
and wilfull sinners from their obstinate rebellions,
against so louing a God. And surely vnlesse the
dew of Gods spirit bee meerely dried vp in our hearts,
the word of God, ioyned with the reuerent and faithfull
vse of his holie and blessed Sacraments, shall worke our
regeneration, and shape in vs new thoughts, new affections,
new endeuours, and new hearts: so that we shall
so faire forget our old vanities and naturall inclinations,
as Abraham forgat his owne countrey and his fathers
house: and wee shall haue as longing a desire to frame

our selues, according to the will of God, and to goe to
him in well doing, as Abraham had to goe to the land
of promise.
               When God would stirre vp the children of Israel to
turne from their iniquities, which in their hearts they
had so long practised: hee vsed no other argument, but
putting them in minde of the miseries wherein they
were borne, namely, in idolatrie, and bondage in Egypt
a cursed citie, where they were made slaues, Exod. 3. 10.
and that their fathers were Idolaters, and themselues giuen
ouer to all voluptuousnes and pleasure, not regarding
God, nor seeking his religion. And surely the same
argument may hee make against vs, whom hee hath
brought out of Romish Egypt, and spirituall bondage
wherein our fathers liued, and many of vs were borne:
yet God in his diuine loue, beholding vs in this wofull
state, pitied our miserie and thraldome; and when wee
were greedily following our owne destruction in darknes,
he sayd vnto vs as vnto his children of Israel, ye shall
liue, and so anew (as it were) breathed into vs his diuine
light, by giuing vs the free vse of the Gospel. Whē
                  Iosua had brought them into the lande of Canaan, as
Queene Elizabeth hath brought vs into the lād of truth,
into the light out of darknes, he declared vnto them the
benefits that God had bestowed vpon them, to the ende
that they might bee the more stirred vp by the remembrance
thereof, obediently to follow GOD, that had
brought that mightie thing to passe for them.We must call to minde Gods blessings, which will giue vs cause to reforme out liues. Therfore
let vs also call to mind Gods wonderfull and many blessings
towards vs, which as they are infinite, so deserueth
he all our studies, thoughts and deuises to be bended to
his glorie. And among the rest of his mercies, let vs not

forget how he caused the winds and the sea to fight for
vs, against these pursuers in their former inuincible
strength: and how hee tooke the quarrell into his hand
and determined the same, both to his owne glorie and
our safetie. And if we remember this, we shal auoyd the
occasions to displease so mercifull a God, so louing a father,
so seuere a Iudge; who dealt with our enemies
as hee did with Pharaoh and his hoast. Let vs therefore
bee reformed in our actions, and renewed in our
mindes. For as GOD no doubt chose vs before wee
thought on him,God chose vs when wee thought not on him. so he will defend vs, if now we trust in
him, hauing such experience of the riches of his mercies,
wherein he loued vs, euen when wee were dead in
trespasses and sinnes, when wee were Idolaters. Let vs
not shew our selues now dead in sinne, but let vs bee
quickened in all obedience, and let vs no more bee allured
with the golden cup of our owne vanities, which is
full of poyson within. Is it not a sweete thing to remember
that wee were once bound, but now are free?
we haue been in danger, but now are safe, and is not the
contrarie dreadfull? and shall wee by our sinnes, which
are the death of the soule and the subuersion of kingdomes,
aduenture to liue in them for a moment, and bee
in danger of captiuitie, or the sword here, and after dye
for euer, rather then leauing thē for a moment, bee freed
from this present daunger and liue for euer? Oh let vs
make haste to returne vnto the Lord: let vs not lagger
behinde, and so our captaine Iehouah depart from vs,
and we fall into the enemies hand. But to whom doth
it belong to see this weightie and most worthie worke
of the reformation of our liues done?Euery one hath a court in his owne conscience. Surely to all in
generall, euery one of vs hath a court in his owne conscience,

wherinto all our thoughts, words and actions
must be presently summoned, and inquisition must bee
strictly made, what error is found in himselfe, and finding
himselfe guiltie of any negligence in performing
his dutie to God commaunded, or pronenes to offende
God in things forbidden, he must as a Iudge farre from
partialitie, giue sentence against himselfe, and commit
the euils done to true and vnfained repentance: & bind
himselfe by the law of obedience, not to sinne agayne.
Which were it performed of al men in particular, there
were no neede of the Magistrates sword, to compell the
same in generall. But sith our corrupt inclinations, doe
fight daily against this godly course,Now is the time for the Magistrate to shew himselfe zealous in the Lords good. the Magistrate,
who beareth not the sword for nought, must now, if euer
he did, shew himselfe zealous in the Lords cause, for
the good of al the land in general. Which as it seemeth
much missed with negligence of euery mans particular
dutie to God, and his Soueraigne, whereby God is not
honoured of vs as he ought, nor the lawes of the land obeyed
as they should be, there must be a generall care in
the Ministrie, to teach euery man his duetie: for hee is
bound to teach, to reproue, to approue, and improue, in
season and out of season:The worde and the swor must concur. and in the Magistrate an endeuour
to see euery man performe it, as farre as to his
power and authoritie belongeth, who must compell thē
by force, that will not doe their dueties in loue. And if
then the vulgar and inferiour sort striue not to amende,
and to cōforme themselues to the word of truth taught,
and to the example of the godly Magistrate, propounded
before them, they shall all dye in their sinnes but the
Minister and Magistrate shall be excused. But if there
appeare negligence in the Ministers, the watchmen of

the whole flocke, the people will also bee negligent: if
they be ignorant, the people will be ignorant: if they be
wicked, the people will be wicked: as Hosea saith, Such
priests such people. Therefore now call your dueties to
minde ye Ministers, and speedily with diligence performe
the same. And thinke it not enough to bee called
the messengers of God, vnlesse you speake & pronounce
the will of God truely: and disdaine none that shew
their good willes to speake as the occasion of this time
requireth: For they that feare the Lord vnderstand his
will. The feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisedome.
And therefore euery one from the highest to the lowest,
Prince and Ministers, Magistrates and subiects,Euery man must begin his dutie at the feare of God. must
here begin. As a Prince coueting to gouerne prudently:
as Ministers endeuouring to speake truly and boldly: as
Magistrates desiring to rule in their places righteously,
and couragiously: and as people willing to liue obediently
and religiously. So shall there bee a most happie
concord, and pleasant harmonie in al estates. There shal
be no want of blessings, no cause to feare the enemie, no
cause to complaine one of anothers wrongs in our land.
Sinne shall beare no sway, but godlines shall flourish in
all parts of this land: and then as we haue alreadie seene,
how God hath fought for vs, so he will giue vs new encouragements.
And as Christ sayd to Nathaniel, we shall
see greater things then these: not onely in his fighting
for vs, but in powring out his heart vnto vs, causing vs
to vnderstand his word,God wil keepe our aduersaries blinde, if we feare God and desire to see. Prou. 1. 23. when yet 
                     •
                  ee will
hold our aduersaries still blind, that seeing they shall not
see, in hearing they shall not heare, and nothing that
they imagine against vs shall prospet: but all shall turne
to their owne confusion. Therefore let the eyes of vs all

be towards the Lord, and with Dauid let vs all the day
stretch out our hands to him that is one and the same for
euer, louing and powerfull. And forasmuch as Princes,
and Magistrates, must in this necessary reformation giue
such examples, as may tend to the amendment of the inferiour
sort: it behoueth that they be learned and wise,
vertuous, and valorous: so shall the people follow their
steppes, as it were a light in the darke. And therefore
the Magistrate must pray for wisedome,What is required of the Magistrate. not to seeme
singular in policie, but religious in zeale: applying the
same to the glorie of God, to discerne betwixt good and
euill, that by them sinne (the cause of our daunger) may
bee remoued, and faith and religion, the strength of our
land, may bee increased: that the vngodly bee not more
set by then the righteous: that vice be not more aduanced
then vertue: so shall euery Magistrate be able to say
freely, Be thou my Iudge O Lord, for I haue walked innocently.
Surely as the Israelites thought themselues happie,A good song for a Magistrate if he sung it truely.
when they had gotten Debora to gouerne them: so
most happie are wee that haue Queene Elizabeth to gouerne
vs. For as Debora seemed so much the more to be
a carefull mother of Israel, by how much she liked those
gouernours which were likest her selfe, which appeareth
by that she sayed, My heart is set vpon the gouernours
of Israell: so doubtles the godly care of our gracious
Debora, to haue all the causes of Gods displeasure
to bee taken away appeareth, in coueting,Moses and Aaron, the Magistrate and Minister are to be Martialed together in a christian common wealth. as much as in
her lieth, to place godly Magistrates vnder her: God
make them apt to answer it. She matcheth Moses the
Magistrate with Aaron the Minister, the Word and
the Sword: which both truely executed, must needes
make due obedience in the people to the Magistrate, and

like in the Magistrate to the law, and consequently in all
to God. And then as the Magistrates are placed aboue
other men in authoritie, so they will goe before the rest
in pietie: and then no doubt but our Common-wealth
shall be secure, and bee in the protection of the King inuincible,
who iudgeth them that iudge vnder him, and
he will subdue the disobedient hearts, to loue and reuerence
rulers, and to fight couragiously against the enemies
of our state, as he subdued the people vnto Dauid,
and made them all incline to his will: That whatsoeuer
the King did, pleased his people. Wee see then that wee
neede not feare this vaine hoobub of the Spanyard, if euery
one would forsake sinne, and conforme himselfe truly
to seek after God. And to the end that God may blesse
the hearts of all, it behoueth all to pray, which shall bee
considered in the end of this sillie labour.
            
            
               CAP. 3.
               That all men ought to yeeld their vttermost power to
resist the pursuers of this blasphemous Hoobub, by experience
of the power of God, shewed vnto our fathers of old.
               
                  HAuing, as it is before sayd, taken away
the causes why God hath intended to
moue this fierce nation against vs, by a
general reformatiō of our liues, which
if it appeare by the fruites of our regenerate
mindes, let vs rest resolued, that
God, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, the God
of Israel, the God of the faithfull, will bee assuredly on
our side. The Lord our God as saith Moses, shall fight

for vs, therefore let vs not be afraide of them, that in so
high a malice haue lifted vp their thoughts, and prepared
their weapons, not only against vs, but against Christ
himselfe, & let vs take courage by the euidence of things
before done, for VVhatsoeuer is written before time, is
written for our vnderstanding.
                  All things are written for our instructiō. And for our better encouragement
wee may examine some particular examples
out of the sacred scriptures, imploying them to assure
vs of Gods loue towardes his, and of his power to
confound his enemies by vs, if wee yeeld our hearts to
follow him as our guide. No doubt but this spanish hoobub
may something dismay the weake, in regarde that it
soundeth with so open an exclamation, as if the breath
of their mouthes could ouerthrow our Churches, and
their little fingers great mountaines. But let vs thinke,The Spaniards in strength are not like the sonnes of Anake.
and we know them to bee but men, and men of no such
stature as were the Anakimes, whom the little Israelites
did master at their willes, as long as they feared God, although
at the first they were afraid of them, because the
spies returned such newes of their terrible strength and
fiercenes. But the newes dismayd not their captaine Iosua,
who by the spirite of the Lord gaue them such encouragement
as qualified their feare, when hee sayde,
Feare not the people of the land, for they are but bread
for vs. If such an inuincible courage came vpon them
that they feared not mightie Giants, and to enter into the
territories of such strong men, because they were assured
by Iosua that the Lord would fight for them,Which parte God taketh hath the victorie. being
assured that whose part the Lord God of hoast took, that
side should haue the victorie: It were more then weakenes
in vs, for whom the Lord most assuredly will fight
to feare these men of farrelesse puissance then these Philistines

who also come to inuade vs, who are more apt to
resist them, then they to oppresse vs: they must land, wee
are on shoare, they must pause and refreshe themselues
wearied, wee are readie suddenly to receiue them: they
are of number fewer then we, and therefore for any matter
in themselues, or of themselues, we need not to feare
them. And the lesse, for that as Iosua sayth, Their shield is
departed from them: they haue forsaken the Lords truth,
and they are led by a blind zeale on the one side, and by
ambition on the other: they are conducted by falshoode
and pride; and the Lord no doubt is with vs, his promise
assureth vs that he will be with them that feare him.Warre offered by inuasion, is fully furnished with militarie necessaries. Although
by the way it is fit to consider that warre offered
by inuasion, neuer commeth without absolute prouision
of military necessaries. He that will inuade commeth in
all points resolute, resolute to enter, resolute to fight, resolute
to die, and resolute not to retire: but to the last,
to hope for victorie. This resolution appeared in VVilliam
the last Conqueror,William the Norman, took from his men hope of retire. when hee fyred his ships to take
from his followers all hope of flying: and it may be said
that this resolution is in al that endeuour a conquest. Al
which being grāted, let vs enter into our own thoughts,
whether the theefe that commeth resolutely to rob, can
bee so freely resolute to fight as the true man, although
no doubt he be desperate, yet is he fearefull: but in the
other it is otherwise, who in true magnanimitie is truly
resolute to keepe his owne. So fareth it with vs, and
them that make this proude alarnm, to take away our
good, liues, and liberties, they come no doubt as men
desperate,Wisdome and trueth beare away the victorie. but wisedome and trueth beare away the victorie.
And were there in vs but ordinary hardines which
resteth in Paynims, and Moores, Turkes, and Barbarians,
                  
we should thinke our selues more able to keepe our
owne, then to bee dispoyled by force. But wee haue the
Lord himselfe on our side, who notwithstanding manie
of our imperfections who are but flesh and blood, will
not, though not for our sakes, yet for his gospels sake,God will defend vs for his Gospels sake.
which wee holde inuiolate in it selfe, and haue the true
seales of our obedience vnto his maiestie in our proceedings:
suffer this Antichristian power in their owne opinion
inuincible, and therein most weake, to preuaile
against him in ouercomming vs. And to assure vs further
herein, let vs looke into the time of king Hezekia,
in whose daies the blasphemous hoast of the proud Senacherth
made inuasiō vpon the inheritāce of Gods childrē in
Iuda; hauing like right as the spanish Senacherib to
England, but only to enlarge his dominions: & therfore
did good Hezekia by helpe of his counsell call together
his captaines and souldiers, preparing them against this
mightie king and huge armie, who were not to come by
sea, as this king Catholique must; but he was come as it
were to the walles of Ierusalem alreadie to besiege it.
But bee strong saith Hezekia vnto his people, Be strong
& couragious, feare not, neither be afraid for the king of
Ashur, neither for al the multitude that is with him: for
there be moe with vs then is with him: with him is an arme
of flesh, but with vs is the Lord our God. So doth our
good Hezekia Queene Elizabeth, by the aduise of her
discreet Counsell, prepare against this threatning hoast
of Spayne,Queene Elizabeth goeth forth in person to incourage her people. and in her we are al encouraged to withstand
the same, who in person goeth foorth with her armies,
and consulteth not onely with her Counsell, and expert
martiall men: but with the almightie, of whose power,
mercie, and prouidence, she hath deepe experience both

before she tooke on her the Diademe of gouernment, as
also since: and therefore she saith also, Feare not the
Spanyards (my English subjects) whose strength is flesh, the
Lord is with vs that will fight for vs. But loe Hezekia
prayed against this mightie multitude, and the Lord out
of heauen fought for him, who by his Angell slew all
the valiant men of Ashur, the princes, captaines & souldiers,
to the number of 185000. men: and in like manner,
as we haue had experience, shall he doe with this inuincible
nauie and mightie hoast: for hee is that consuming
fire that shall deuour our aduersaries as dry straw,
and by the breath of his mouth confound them that
stand against his word, to peruert his trueth. And therefore
Queene Elizabeth (no doubt) humbleth her self in
prayer, as Hezekia did, an argument of like victorie, Let
vs all ioyne with her Maiestie therein, and then assuredly
shall that God that sought against Ashur for Israel,
fight against Spayne for England. Yet some amongst
our selues, our vnnaturall contrimen, I know, seeke to
put feare in the hearts of our people, saying most blasphemously
that wee are heretikes, and that God cannot
prosper vs; wee are sinners, and God cannot blesse vs.
These are English Antichristians,Our secrete Papists discourage our people. Spanish hirelings, and
deceiued and deceiuing papists: who lurke amongst vs
as snakes in a corne field, no more deseruing the libertie
of English lawes, her Maiesties protection, or benefits of
our peace, then did the Philistines amongst the children
of Israel, to whom they were as prickes in their eyes, and
thornes in their sides, because they preferred humane
policie in preseruing them to Gods commandements in
extirping them. They argue against our trust in God euen
to our faces, affirming vs to haue no such cause of

hope of our deliuerie as Israel had: and yet say they, and
it is true, Israel was plagued with sword, and captiuitie
for their sinnes, being the peculiar people of God; and
how can we escape that are (as they say) fallen from the
Catholike Church?Whence we are fallen. Which is false: but from Rome,
which is Babell, from papistrie, which is bondage, and
from the traditions of men, meere idolatrie: and idolatrie,
worshipping strange gods, was the cause why Israel
was within the space of 339. yeares, six times oppressed
by their enemies: when they went a whoring after
straunge gods, then and not else were they oppressed.
And although, no doubt, wee cannot excuse vs of offending
our good God, by our manifolde sins, which doth
deserue correction: yet assuredly God is amongst vs,
and by many true Christians of England sincerely honoured,In regarde of the truth imbraced, notwithstanding our sins, God is with vs.
his Gospell truly preached, his word freely imbraced,
and thereunto the liues of many truely conformed.
And on the contrary, let these Locusts that are
flowen abroad out of the bottomles pit, into this land,
not onely the wicked Iesuits, but also obdurate papists,
who so much obrayd vs with our euill liuing, learne
this, that they only in their idolatrie, blasphemie, & spiritual
whoredome, are aptly compared to Israel in their
falling from God, and not in the weakenes of flesh only
falling, as did Dauid, Salomon, and many other, whose
kingdomes in the best seruice of the liuing God, were
not free from sinne, wherein no flesh can be cleered. But
holding the maine point, the Christian and true Catholike
religion sincerely preached amonst vs,The true catholicke religion is with vs, an argument of Gods presence. and generally
imbraced of the most, (vnles it bee of such as like
subtile serpents stoppe their eates) confirmeth strongly
that the presence of God himselfe is still with vs: assuring

vs also that his hand for their rebellion against his
trueth, is turned against them. And therefore let no man
beleeue them, howsoeuer they dispute to defend their
owne holines which is onely outward, their hearts being
inwarldly seared with the yron of obstinacie, the
marke of the beast of Rome, deprauing vs by reason of
our frailtie. But it is necessarie such prickes should be amongst
vs, to the ende our liues, but especially our religion,
should bee the better approued: for trueth appeareth
then most plaine, when it is opposed by error.
How is the Romish religion discouered by the sincere
writings of sundrie learned and deuout men, to bee a
spirituall bondage? who seeking the sincere trueth in
the light of the sacred word, haue left testimonie vnto
all posterities thereof, which the most learned of the aduersarie
can neuer confute: but in striuing to maintaine
their darknes, they haue vndermined themselues, & are
readie to fal by their wonderful stumble, at the view of
the heauenly light, which glimmereth in their eyes as a
candle farre off in the darke. How many sillie men,
whose hearts haue been inwardly taught by the holie
Ghost, without learning, haue stopt the mouthes of
these Catholike Doctors? approuing their faith by the
fire,Poore vnlearned Christians haue stopt the mouthes of Romish doctrine. The truth will confound Antechrist. which they haue imbraced without feare or fainting,
not as desperate Seminaries, suffering as Iudas did,
for treason: but as patient Christians testifying their
faith, builded vpon the vnresistable trueth by martyrdome,
as Stephen did? This truth hath broken the neck
of Papisme, and this trueth will put him from his glorie,
and his glorie from him, that seeketh to depriue vs
of this trueth. Why then should wee distrust God, and
thinke that hee will deliuer vs into the hands of this Romish

nation? Admit our sinnes do deserue puhishment,
and surely we cannot, nor dare iustifie our selues, as they
that haue nothing but meere deseruings in them,The enemie standeth on his owne strength, we on the blessing of God: they on the popes power we on Christs merrits. &
can of themselues atchieue hauen by their own works: we
only rely vpon Christs merits, and disclaime our owne
worthines, wee stand to bee defended by the power of
God, and not by our owne strength, like this inuincible
nation, whose trust is in themselues: wee trust in God:
they stand dissolute by the delusions of Antichrist, who
pretendeth to coniure the seas to be calme, & the winds
to be prosperous vnto his Catholike armie: and we rely
vpon the meere blessing of God, that by the breath of
his mouth did lately blow them from our coasts, as hee
did the swarmes of lice from the Egyptians, at the praier
of Moses and Aaron; hee cast them into the sea, as
Christ did the swine, And let vs assure vs that in the
same his mercies, hee will performe it in a greater measure:
that his glorie may more appeare, in being the
protector of his owne. But what if wee please our aduersaries
in his vaine hope a little, & confesse our weaknes,
as they pretend it? saying, our gouernour is a woman,
and therefore weake, and the people in her not
strong, our Nobilitie are not many, and our Martiall
men fewe, and therefore the kingdome weake. But let
them know withall, that wee haue in her Maiestie, vnder
GOD, whom she serueth,Queene Elizabeth shall cut off the power of Antechrist. absolute hope that she is
the Iudith that GOD hath ordayned of cut off the
head, namely, to dispoyle the man of sinne of all his
glorie: she is the Iael that shall pearce his stemples with
the naile of consufion, if at last he refuse to haue his hart
pearced with the trueth of Christ, whō now now he persecuteth.

And if weak Debora got such honor in deliuering
Israel from Iabyn king of Canaan by Barake, notwithstanding
his 900. chariots of Iron, will it not bee honourable
to Queene Elizabeth, to breake the force of
the inuincible nauie of Spaine? and if it pleased the
mighty of mighties to assiste Deborah beeing a woman
of no such reckoning for the shewe of her outwarde
glorie, dwelling but vnder a palme tree, yet
fearing God: shall hee not assiste Queene Elizabeth
his annoynted, his chosen, and her that hee of meere
prouidence preserued and aduanced to that high calling?
the gouernour of his people of England? whom by her
as by the hands of Moses, he brought out of most cruell
bondage, vnder that purple harlot of Rome, and vnder
her hath this 37. yeares preserued vs from all forraine
inuasion, affoording vs peace in his apparant truth. But
these Romists degenerate not from the ground of their
religion which is al outward, they relie only vpō flesh &
bloud,The romish hope al in outward things. They are strong inough and neede not God. arguing therein that God is exempted out of their
companie, that is full alreadie: they are mighty enough,
and strong enough, and need not his helpe. They reason
as Senacherib did, that because he was strong, God could
not resist him, and therefore shall they receiue as Senacherib
did. They forget how God chose Gideon a poore
labourer to be a captaine of his people, who also at the
first began to reason with flesh and bloud as they do, saying,
Oh my Lord, whereby shall I saue Israell, beholde my
father is a poore man in Manasseh, and I am the least of
my fathers house: wherein he reasoneth against the power
of God as they do, but the Lord answered him, I will
therefore be with thee, and thou shalt smite the Midianites
as one man, therefore will I be with thee (sayth the

Lorde) because thou art meane and weake. What saye
these inuincible Giants to this? do they thinke our God
is not that God that spake this to Gideon?
                  God is strong in weakenes. do they thinke
it is not that God that gaue them successe in the frustrate
last expedition? They know not that God is strong in
weaknes, but let them dally with God, God will be earnest
with them in our behalfe: and let vs not feare them,
for God chooseth the weake to ouercome the strong,
who sayth, Looke not vpon his countenance or stature:
for that is not it that fitteth the glory of God, who seeth
the heart, wherein resteth the fitnes to performe the
things of God He fought by vnarmed Dauid, and ouercame
armed Goliah: he fighteth by a few, and ouercommeth
manie: hee regardeth not the number inuading,
not the weakenesse of the inuaded. Iosua with a small
companie destroyed 31. Kings and their people: Dauid
with 400.Few ouercōe many. men encountered the Amalechites, and slew
of them a huge companie, hauing the killing of them
from the twilight, to the euening of the next day. Eleazer
one of Dauids captaines, alone smote so many of
the Philistines, that the people followed to spoyle and
not to fight. Admit then that the number of our nobles
were lesse then theirs, and wee had fewer captaines and
souldiers then they, should we yet dismay? God forbid,
for we see the inuincible hand of the Lord shall destroy
them: but we exceed them also in number. They proceed
to feare vs yet with another skar-crow,They feare the weake in diminishing our munition. that they
exceed vs in munition and experience of warre: for the
first, who amongst vs all doth not see the contrary? for
all are by due regard of her Maiestie and Counsell, sufficiently
furnished: but admit it were not so, and that wee
had nothing but the protection of our professiō, which

euer hath beene in it selfe a forte offensiue, and defensiue
in all ages sufficient, being testified by true fruites, and
warranted by God as was Gideon, who with 300. men
discomfited the Mydianites a strong people, not with
canon, bow, or sword, but by blowing of trumpets, and
breaking pitchers, with burning lampes, as appeareth by
the storye glorious to God, and comfortable to vs, mentioned
Iudg. 7. What weapon had Shamgar when he
slue 600. Philistines, but an oxe goad? wherewith did
Iosua ouerthrow Iericho, but with the sound of Rams
hornes, and the shout of mens voices? Iosu. 6. And surely
these are necessarie examples for vs, whereof we may
make a twofold profite; for thereby is seene the power
of God performed in weaknes, which may also bee applyed
to a spirituall vse: namely, that as by blowing of
trumpets, and shoutes of men, the walles fell downe: so
by the sounding of the trumpet of the gospell, by the
voices of his preachers, the defence of Romish Babylon
shall fall, the earthen pitchers, carnall conceits being broken,
the lampe of the trueth shall giue light vnto their
hearts.Queene Elizabeth a chosen woman to confound Romish Ihericho by the protection of the word. And surely to this weightie enterprise (as God
alwaies dealeth by the weakest to performe the greatest
action for his owne glorie) is Queene Elizabeth, a chosen
woman of God, ordained in the meere prouidence
of the almightie; and therefore let vs all yeeld our harts,
hands, and helpe thereunto, as well as to withstand theis
loud Hoobub, the pursuers whereof, no doubt God
hath sent to beginne the way of their own confusiō, towards
the destruction of Babell. For a small companie
of the house of faithfull Abraham will serue, not onely
to withstand this antichristian king, but put downe that
red Dragon, and turne the vsurped glory, power, and authoritie

of that purple whore into shame, and to lay open
her filthines which she now so cunningly cloaketh,
to cause not onely the Spaniard, but many other kings,
nations and people to commit fornication with her. For
the promise of the Lorde is generall to the godly, who
warre either in defence of his trueth professed in themselues,God will assist such as war either to defend his truth professed, or to winne anye thereunto.
or to procure it to be receiued of others: that fiue
shall chase an hundred, and an hundred shall put 10000.
to flight. And therefore assuredly, if we truely serue this
our God, this threatned inuasion shall turne to the glory
of God, and our notable comfort: for God shal no doubt
giue them their deserued hyer, who as they are become
drunke with the wine of Romish inchaunements, so shal
they fall into deserued shame. And their hoped victory
shall turne to their owne ouerthrow, though they haue
alreadie cast lottes of euery mans land: nay the kingdom
it selfe is disposed in conceite, and cunningly by the aide
of some notable diuell intituled falsly, to beare the better
colour, as did the French buy and sel our English nobilitie
at the field of Agencourt in France,
                  Agencourt fielde. in the time
of Henry the 5. where the French in regarde of their
multitude, and the paucitie of English men, cast lottes for
their furnitures before the victorie: but such was the
power of God in abating their pride, that the English
got the field, and slue a mightie companie of them, together
with the most of their nobilitie slaine, or taken.
This is the reward of pride, let vs therefore so much the
lesse feare this cacholique king, by how much he vaunteth
of his inuincible power. And where they seeme to
flatter some with the conceite of our want of militarie
experience, although therein there is no such necessitie,
as that without it there is no hope to stand before these

supposed Martialistes: yet let them know,The Spaniard hath tasted English power and policie, to his paine. The Spaniards no doubt would not admit the tryall of the contrauersie to equal multitudes. as indeed they
haue wel paid for the trial, that the English natiō cōmeth
not short of the Spaniard, neither in policie not courage.
And were the quarrell to be referred to the encounter of
equall multitudes, who dreameth but that if the equitie
of the cause seemed indifferent, the Spaniard woulde
stand? they haue too well tasted the sharpnes of English
valour. But as is prooued before, God is seene to bee
strong in weaknes: yet for that we stand not vpon myracles
now, wee no doubt are so sufficiently prouided in
all things, as behooueth watchfull Christians: If not,
what resteth but a speedie supply of the wants? And referring
then the issue of the matter to the wisedome and
mercie of God, who finding the prince, the ministers, the
magistrates, and subiects euery one in his place watchfull,
with reformed hearts and prepared hands, hee shall
neuer giue vs a pray vnto the enemie.
            
            
               CAP. 4.
               A Christian caueat to English Papistes, how to answer
this Antichristian Hoobub.
               
                  ONely thus much for the loue I beare
you, in regard you are my countrimē,
I aduise you, whome GOD forbid to
stād in these perilous times, either zealous
papists, in regard you would bee
seene constant in error: or not dutifull
to your Queene, Gods annoynted, in regarde of any secret
vow made to be true to Antichrist. To reason much
of the controuersie of the religious, I leaue to the learned.

But I will only speake of the danger whereinto you
fall, if you in the least degree harbor any desire, liking, or
loue to the enemies of your countrie.Inward desire of the Princes danger or subuersiō of your country, is before God high treason. If your thoughts
haue entertained but a willingnes to see the subuersion
of your naturall countrie, your prince, & people, vnder
whatsoeuer colour; albeit you haue in shew kept your
hands from armes, your tongues from speech, & al your
outward actions from suspition of being disloyall subiects:
you are ipso facto within the compasse of high treason
to your Prince, before God, who knoweth aswell
your harts to harbour it, as he knew what Anna desired
when she spake nothing. In this short discourse I will
not only cōfirme what I speake, by approued exāples of
sacred scripture; but also of others witnessed elsewhere.
And by the way, before I proceede further, know this,
that the Spanyard, who seemes to haue your hearts, and
to bee sure of the vse of your hands for his purpose, although
he finde you fit agents to sound vp this hoobub,
howsoeuer he may vse plausible and kind words by his
ministers, to draw you into this his societie; as Achitophel
secretly wonne Dauids people to affect Absolon,
and to rebell against Dauid their annoynted King: bee
you assured, that you shall finde no more fauour in his
faunnes, or better wages for your wickednes, then Baanah
and Rechab had of Dauid for killing their master.The Spaniard abhorreth traytors, though he make much of thē for a time.
For howsoeuer euill this nation bee, in most capitall offences
els: it, of all other nations, is noted to abhorre trytors,
and treasons. No Chronicle reporteth of any such
matter among themselues, not being done in their behoofe,
can endure it, but to make vse of it, only flattering
the parties for a time, but at last giues them what they
deserue. And therefore let this bee sufficient, you shall

haue the reward of traytors of them, for your treasons
done against your Queene. It may be, you take view of
some English runnagates, that haue thought themselues
bound by their alleagiance to their holy father, to break
their sworne obedience to their naturall prince, and to
conuey themselues to these people, with aduertisements
against their countrey, prince, kinsfolke and friends: and
you haue a will to follow them in hope of large entertainement:
they haue been most coursly handled, euen
the best of them, the Earle of Westmerland, the Lord Paget,
and others of highest estimation, who as your selues
haue heard,The course entertaynement of the best of our English runnagates. if you be not willingly deaffe, haue, and doe
receiue hard measure at the hands, not onely of such as
were in calling their equals, but of Spanish slaues, who
haue called them trayterous villaines to their faces: and
they kindly digest it, making necessitie a vertue, abiding
that perforce that they can not amend. You also know
they liued there in poore estate, for men of their place
in England, yea more base then an Artificer vnder Q. Elizabeth.
If these men had so colde comfort amongst
them, being great, what thinke you to receiue? It may
bee you may thinke that if traytors were so odious vnto
them, they would giue them their condinge rewarde
quickly,The cause in policie why the Syaniards hangeth not traytors presently. and not foster them at all. But their policies
teach it otherwise, and so doth cōmon reason. As if you
couet to take vp two dogs, if whē you haue one, you begin
to beare it, be assured the other wil flie you, but if ye
cherish the first, the other will fawne vpon you, and offer
himself vnto you. So it fareth with you traytors, and
their policy: they make of thē that they already haue, but
stales to allure you; & when you are al in his net, as your
selues desire, he then will make short worke with you,

hee will handle you like dogges, and the stales too: for
then he shall haue no more vse of you, & therfore soone
dispatch you. If you beleeue not this, but play about his
allurements, like a flye about the flame, when you feele
it, it wil be too late to cry Solon Solon: your end is miserie
in the best sense,The best end of our traytors if the Spaniards should preuaile. if this good master should preuaile,
whose shamefull end and yours will first appeare. In the
meane time, what shall become of you? you will neuer
be quieted in thought. Will your desires be so smothered
in the ashes of hypocrisie, that you shall not appeare
at all? Truely either you will flame out at some narrow
chink of your hot desires, or els you wil consume within,If God haue wrought a meane beyond reason to dicouer a murder, much more will he discouer treasō.
and burne as Iudas did. For thinke, that if God in iustice
hating murther, haue ordayned so admirable a
meane to discouer the murtherer, as your selues knowe,
by the bloud of the murthered: how much more shall
he discouer a traytor, that seeketh to murther Gods annoynted?
whereof you haue seene proofe enough, if
you could beware. If you say you goe not about it, you
belie your owne consciences: for if you desire a stranger
to come in, to take the Crowne, you cannot but acknowledge
you desire the subuersion of the state, and
consequently the death of your gratious Queene: for
either you must loue, or hate, there is no third. If you
loue, your loue will appeare in obedience: which if it be
not counterfeit, and so no obedience, it cannot but wish
well to your Soueraigne:There is in al subiects loue or hate, which will show it selfe by the fruits. and in that regard to none els.
If you hate, your hate will be seene by the contrary: and
if your obedience be such as it ought, you wil conforme
you also to her proceedings, which are most holie, founded
on the true Catholike religion. If it otherwise appeare
in your conceits, referre you to the learned and

godly of your owne countrey, and if you can conuince
them of error, your worke is done: and no doubt but
Queene and Councell, Ministers and people, will shake
hands with you, and imbrace that which appeareth by
the trueth to be palpable error. But if they conuince you,
as you are conuinced, become one and the same with
them, and flie from error. Lye not in such secret wayes,
seeke no couert, come foorth and appeare, you haue the
most merciful Prince that euer raigned vnder the Sunne:
therefore feare her not, if you doe well: and shew not
your selues one thing without, another within: for Cicero
that knew not God, sayth, that all they that speake
one thing and meane another, ought to be takē for faithles,
wicked, and malitious men: whereas a good man will
neither faine nor dissemble in any sort, either to buy the
better cheape, or to sell the dearer.
                  The difference betweene plaine dealing and dissimulation. Therefore it is a great
fault in you, and a blemish to your wisedome, that doe
dissemble to buy your owne destruction deare, and to
sell your saluation cheape. It is ill for you to aggrauate
your fault, by denying this, sith your consciences bewray
this. And howsoeuer you flatter your selues, that
all your desire argueth your Catholike zeale, the confusion
of your countrie, the spoyle of your Prince, the
losse of your lands and goods,The end of blinde zeale. the destruction of your
wiues, children, kinsfolke, and friends, and your owne
perpetuall thraldome, you purpose shall tend to Gods
glorie, thinking you shall please God therein. Alas sillie
deceiued wretches, you shall please God as they that in
the like blinde zeale burned their owne children, & sacrificed
their owne bodies to diuels. But bee not deceiued,
your inward thirst is but the drouth of treason: and
although you carrouse not with Ballard and his heroicall

crue,The thirst of papists is the drought of treason. to quench yet the least drop of your desire to
see this wicked practise performed, is high treason. For
whosoeuer followeth not Pauls counsel to submit himselfe
to the higher powers: let him thinke in resisting
them, he resisteth the ordināce of God. If you wish prosperitie
to the Spanyard, you obey not your Soueraigne:
If you disobey her in so high a measure, how can you
be free in your soules from wishing her death? which
is meerely treason. And in whose behalf doe you it? in
the enemies of God, the professed enemie of the English
nation, who, howsoeuer hee seeketh your loue, for the
time, with promise to loue you still; assure you hee will
not only answer you,A glasse for traytors. as Caesar Angustus did Kymetalces
King of Thracia, who had forsaken Antonius to ioyne
with him: and boasting of his treacherous act, Caesar
dranke kindly to the rest, and said to him, yea Kymetalces
I loue treason well, but I loue no traytors. Marke
what was the rewarde of a King, who breaking his
faith with one to whom he was not bound, as you to
your Queene. And what, will you thinke that this
newe master will loue your treasons lesse, or you
traytors more, then did Caesar? Nay assure you, hee
will not onely not drinke vnto you, but hee will vomit
you out of his conceipt euer to be true to him, that are
false to your lawfull annoynted Soueraigne.The Spaniard thinke them neuer true to him, that are false to your anoynted prince. It is not
your painted religion, beautified with counterfeit zeale,
that can draw him to dreame of your loyaltie, and therefore
be sure your reward shal be as of deseruing traitors:
and thinke in the degree of his loue what wil be offered
by the basest of his people, who will not cease bee sure
to giue you your right titles trayterous villaines, wherewith
our former ignobled rūnagates are wel acquainted

in Spaine, as Lasthenes was in Olintham, where hee was
an inhabitant: who hauing betrayed the towne to Philip
king of Macedon,
                  The spaniards are rude like the Macedonians, to call a traytor a traytor. was to his face by euery raskall
called traytor, who complaining to the king for remedie,
had this conceited answer. The Macedonians (saith
he) are naturally rude and grosse, calling a spade a spade,
and all things else by their proper names: by which answer
the king couertly called him traitor too. And therfore
you may thinke that if you seeke reformation of
such slanders, by actiō of the case against the Spaniards,
the iudge in your action, is as rude as the Macedonians,
to approue traytors to bee traytors: and so to giue
you the rewarde of traytors. Loe what a glorious thing
is it to bee a traytor,The state of a trayor. whose beginning is blinde zeale,
whose continuance is vaine hope, & whose end is death,
and whose death is death eternall. Be not therefore still
like such as sharpen their tongues like a serpent, for all
your stings you see are in vaine to hurt whom God protecteth:
for the poyson that is in your thoughts doth but
inuenome your soules to destruction. But it may be you
wil say that your Romish schoole master telleth you, that
you must not hearken to any other scripture then to his
decrees, for that hee hath power to dispense with the
scriptures, and with your treasons as he list. And it is he,
as he makes you to beleeue, that knoweth more then the
auncient, more then the wise, and more then the learned.
But take heed, for hee that cannot say with Dauid,
My heart meditateth a good matter: cannot say, My
pen is the pen of a direct writer. So that all his decrees
are counterfeit zeale, not written by the pen of the holie
Ghost: they are founded vpon the fonde inuention of
man like Mahomets. And that spirit teacheth not him

to write a dispensation of your disobedience, that taught
Peter to say Christ was the sonne of the liuing God.Distinguish the spirits. So
flesh and bloud teacheth him, and the holy ghost taught
Peter: hee plaies the serpent with you, If you will eate
the forbidden fruite (sayth he) your eyes shalbee opened:
                  The pope is like the serpent that commandeth forbiddē thinges with promise of rewarde.
If you will followe his forbidden lies, and refuse the
word commanded, you shall be saued. He will not haue
you associate your selues with the godly; nor reade the
scriptures that testifie of Christ, and teach you obedience
to your prince, and whereby you may prooue what
the will of God is. And this i
                     •
                   you bee not blinde, you
may see tendeth to no other ende but to intrap you,
not only with treason against your Queene, but in rebellion
against the high GOD, that will haue the Kinges
whom he hath ordained to be truely obeyed. It may bee
wondered at,A wonder that Papists wonder not at their blindnes. that you wonder not at your selues, that
you should degenerate by his magicall enchauntments,
not onely from the rules of humanitie, but from the naturall
disposition of bruit beasts, who euer loue the place
of their education:Beasts loue the place of their education, shewing better loyaltie thē papists. a dogge affecteth that house, a horse
loueth those fields, a lyon that desart, and all other beasts
those places where they haue had their beginning or
bringing vp, and do as it were respect there allies and familiars.
But you countrarie to all naturall ciuilitie, seeke
to dispoyle your owne countrie farre beyond the libertie
of the affections of heathen men, who haue beene
moued to abhor to do il to their vnkind countrey from
which they haue beene banished by their cruell countrimen.
Themistocles a heathen man, being vniustly banished
from Athens, and kindly receiued of the King of
Persia, from whom he receiued so great benefits, as that
he to comfort himselfe and his children in banishment,

sayd, VVe had beene vndone, if we had not been vndone:
Could not yet be wonne to serue the Persian king in his
warres, which was betweene him and the Athenians,
although hee were offered a place of great honour, but
chose rather voluntary death then to bee treacherous to
his countrie. How vnnaturall are you thē, that being not
onely not banished, but fostered, euen in the bosome of
your naturall and louing countrie, should so farre imbrace
the counterfeit loue of a straunger,The pope fawneth on papists like a Crocadile, who sheds teares when he will destroy. that fawneth
vpon you like a weeping crocadile; as that you should
in heart wish, much lesse by armes offer any shew of disloyaltie
to your countrie or gratious Queene? Thinke
this, that beside the sweete affections which nature it
selfe hath imprinted in the hearts of all men towardes
their country, the benefits that you haue receiued within
yours, and the protection which her Maiesties lawes
hath yeelded you,Benefits receiued in our natural countrey, is an obligation to bind vs to be true vnto it. should bee vnto you as an obligation
to bind you (if religion and diuine equitie were not) to
serue the publique wealth of your owne countrie, to the
vttermost of your powers. Much more are you tyed to
this duty, sith the truth it selfe, the bond of al obedience,
calleth you back from your disloyall thoughts, wherein
you seem to steale couertly away from the substance of
naturall loue, to run after the shadow of impious zeale:
zeale not onely without knowledge, but zeale builded
vpon meere treason,Antechrist the head corner stone of blind zeale. 
                  Antichrist himselfe being the head
corner stone. And therefore doubtlesse your vnderstanding
is much obscured, how wise soeuer you seeme in
your selues, and howsoeuer you bee flattered by them
that would make vse of your wickednes. And you can
no more perceiue their cunning, as appeareth, then Dauid
could conceiue of the cause why God prospered the

wicked in his daies, and punished the godly.The waye to finde out the cause of blindnes, is to repaire to the truth. But as hee
found it out by entring into the sāctuary of God: so seek
you how to apprehend your true duetie, by becomming
conformable to the true word of God, casting away the
idle inuentions of the man of sinne. And as Aaron might
not enter into the sanctuary where God did answer, vntill
he had sanctified himselfe: So sanctifie your obedience,
and enter into league with Christ, by becomming
loyall subiects to his annoynted. And beleeue them not
that giue you counsell to lie as you do, lurking to looke
for a good houre, as you are made to beleeue it: beware
it will bee a dismall day vnto you, that you so greedily
gape for:The daye which the papists wish to see, will be to themselues most fearefull. by what badge soeuer you seeme to be distinguished:
you will be vnknowen to the Spaniards, your
speech will bewray you: you will not bee able to pronounce
Shibboleth, as the Spanish Gilliadices doe, but
Sibboleth like English Ephramites: you will as easilie be
discerned as the Guelfes from the Gybelines: they are a
subtill generation that shall deale with you. And therefore
gather your selues together, and before that daye
come, ioyne with God against Beliall, take parte with
Christ against Antichrist: receiue light and abandon
darknes: flie treason, and become euery man true vnto
Queene Elizabeth & your countrie. Take counsell not
o
                     •
                   me, but of Zephaniah the Prophet, Seek righteousnes,
seeke lowlines. Submit your selues to her Maiestie, before
the fierce wrath of the Lord come vpon you: Imitate
the counsell of the wise man, who willeth you to
Put away a froward mouth, and let all your waies bee ordered
aright. And thinke not your owne blind conceits
to be the way of life:The waye of the foole is right in his owne conceit. for the way of the foole is right in
his owne conceit: but he that is guided by counsel is wise.
                  
And therefore refuse not to knowe this, that if the people
of Israel were commanded to pray for the peace of
Babylon, wherein they were held captiues, and to pray
for him that had dispoyled them of all their goods and
possessions: how much more ought you not onely not
to rebel or wish euil vnto your so gracious a soueraigne?
but to pray for her, and for the peace of your countrie,
wherein also you may haue peace.We ought all to pray for the peace of our countrey. Learne of Dauid
who said, God forbid that I should lay hands vpon Gods
annoynted: for (who saith he) can lay his handes vpon
the Lords annoynted and be guiltlesse? It is needlesse to
tel you how the pope, that lyar doth yet encounter Dauid,
and saith, goe and lay thy handes on the Lordes annointed,
and thou shalt merit heauen: oh impious wretch
that commaunds forbidden things, and forbids thinges
commanded. And yet alas wretches, how are you blinded
that will not see? Learne therefore that it is your dutie
aboue all things to beware of contemning or violating
the authoritie of your prince, who is replenished
with vertue, religion, and Maiestie amongst you: and
all confirmed by God, whose ordinance you breake in
contemning her, much more in your treasons against
her.How our papists might become happie. Therefore most happie were you, if after these your
dangerous consultations, and rebellious practises, you
againe would returne and imbrace obedience: consecrating
your soules to God onelie with vnfained dedication
of your bodies, liues, and goods to the seruice of
her: that in so doing will louingly imbrace you; and
God most assuredly will pardon you. Come out from among
them then and be saued.
            
         
         
            
            A dutifull admonition, not only to all inferiour
Magistrates, but to all loyall subiects,
to shew themselues watchfull in these dangers, and with
carefull diligence to seeke to preuent all occasions, which may
moue the vnaduised multitude to any sudden, and vndiscreet
hurly burlies: with an exhortation to
all men to be valorous.
            
               HE that seemeth worthie to bee a
Magistrate,Euery magistrate ought to know what duty belongeth to his charge. or to bee termed a fit
man to gouerne the least charge in
a Common wealth, not onely a
kingdome, a prouince, a hundred,
yea a familie, must endeuour himselfe
to know what dutie is required
at his hands, and the same to
performe, with premeditate discretion. And for that I
wish wisedome to all, being able to teach none: I will
omit the superiour, and giue my best aduise to the lower
sort. He is indeede a sillie man, and not worthie to beare
the burthen of a Tithingman, much lesse of a high Constable,
least of all of a superiour Magistrate, that cannot
examine how he standeth in his place: whether he bee
as a hande, an eye, a finger, or a foote of a Common-wealth:
knowing that euery Common-wealth is a bodie
politique, compared to a bodie naturall. And as the

head is the chiefest part,Euery commonwealth is a bodie pollytique. the guide and superiour gouernour
of the bodie, and all the members are as officers vnder
the same; some of a higher qualitie and authoritie
then other, as the heart, the eyes, the hands, and legges,
which are principall members, seruants in office to the
superiour; so are the fingers, toes, &c. petie officers vnto
the former, euery of them being bound to his next superiour:
and so all by a naturall dutie, are seruants to the
head, and that for the preseruation and supportation of
the entrailes and maine bodie; which is so much the
more safe from daunger, by how much euery member
hath ablenes, and skill to performe his place, in true duetie,
not one part whereof is void of some necessarie function;
as reason it selfe accompanied with our dailie experience,
doth plainly witnes vnto vs. So is our superior
Magistrate,As euery part of the bodie hath a necessarie place, & in his place steadeth the body, so euery man in a common wealth. the head and gouernour of vs, who being
many in number, make vp a compleat bodie politique:
some in Magistracie and superiour authoritie, and some
in inferiour functions, and all in true dutie to one head:
who being by our negligence, or vnaduised proceedings
in our seuerall places, any way endangered, the daunger
cannot but descend from it to our owne confusion. And
therefore doth policie dismember a bodie, of a legge, an
arme, a hand, or foote, desperatly infected, to preserue the
rest of the bodie: So a Common-wealth cutteth off euery
euill member thereof as wee see by the lawes of our
land, lest it should infect the rest▪ and so endaunger the
whole state politique. And as it fareth with a Common-wealth
in generall,Sundrie pettie bodies within the whole body of the commonwealth. so it doth with the parts thereof: as
with a prouince, shire, and countie, whereinto a kingdome
is diuided, & with Hundreds, Rapes, & Wapentakes,
wherinto prouinces are diuided; with Tythings,

Borowsheads, & such pettie limits, wherinto Hundreds,
Rapes, and Wapentakes are diuided; yea with families,
and h
                  •
               uses, wherinto Parishes, Tythings, Borowsheads,
and such pettie liberties are diuided: euery of which is
of it selfe a pettie bodie politique, of the vniuersall politique
bodie of the kingdome. And this for the better
mannaging, rule and gouernment of the whole, euery
of these seuerall bodies haue like members: the Earle or
Shiriffe of the shire,Diuers inferior heads of diuers inferior bodies. is the head Magistrate of the prouince,
shire or countie: The Constable, of the Hundred:
the Headborow, or tithingman, of the parish, or tithing:
the master, and father, of the familie. These seueral charges
thus politikely distinguished, ought to bee disposed
all to the good of the supreame head: from whom proceedeth
by her lawes, a kind of spirituall power, whereby
they all worke liuely, as members powerfull, in their
places. And he that beareth the name of chiefe in any of
these, and yet is either negligent or ignorant, is foorthwith
to be cast out, and a more fit to be placed for him.
For this kinde of politique diuisions,Peace dangerous, without car
                     •
                  in Magistrates. is an experienced
rule to be preserued inuiolate, both in peace and danger
of warre. For as peace may breede securitie, and securitie
emulation, and emulation discord: so may peace bee
sayd to vrge cause of sedition. And therefore peace must
be regarded, preserued, and maintained, by diligence of
officers, when there appeareth no suspition of warre:Officers, as also euery subiect ought to discouer a dā
                  gerous person.
But much more are officers, and men of all sorts subiect
to any politique bodie, to be watchfull, carefull, diligent,
and circumspect when there is feare of warre, least that
among them, and within their seuerall charges, there
lurke any dangerous member, whose concealemēt may
be hurtfull, not onely to that familie, Tithing, Hundred,

and Prouince, but vnto that kingdome wherein hee is.
As hath appeared vnto vs all, in sundrie places of our
Common-wealth, in our daies. And no doubt, although
in the kingdom of God (as Paul saith) there is neither Iew,
nor Grecian, bond nor free, Scithian nor Barbarian, but
Iesus Christ is all in all: yet amongst vs there are stil both
loyall subiects, and couert traytors; good Christians, and
dangerous Papists: and therefore euery man must waite
in his office, and performe his dutie to reueale the euill,
to take them away: & to approue the good and to foster
them.Inferior Magistrates haue their power frō the higher power. And forasmuch as these ciuill offices cannot bee
performed by man onely, as they ought, without some
further working of a better spirit: Let euery man subiect
himselfe to the higher powers, knowing that they are
of God. So shall they learne euery man his owne dutie by
the ordinance of God: wherby he teacheth al men both
how to gouerne, and how to bee subiect, how to command,
and how to obey. Aristotle saith, to command
and to obey, are necessarie and profitable. So that Magistrates
must learne how to obey the power aboue them,
that they may know the better how to command such
as are vnder them: both which doe tend to the preseruation
of ciuill iustice,Ciuill iustice is the commō wealths publike benefite. which is the Common-wealths
publique benefit. And sith it is apparant that religion is
the foundation of all Common-wealths, of the execution
of good lawes, of the obediēce of subiects towards
their Magistrates, of their reuerence towards princes, of
mutuall loue among themselues, and of iustice towards
others. And that it hath pleased the Almightie, to lay amongst
vs this sound foundation, let euery one build
thereupon such affections, and such obedience, to God
and man, as may season their places, whether they bee

Magistrates to rule, or subiects to be ruled, as may stand
with their allegiance to both: which no doubt may easily
appeare in all,Warre appreueth or reproueth the faith all men towards their country. euen in the worst, while peace affoordeth
all safetie: but warre and the noyse of warre will
approue or reproue what now seemeth indifferent. And
therefore it is to bee carefully considered, how euery of
these before sayd chiefs or heads, ought to behaue themselues
in the time of triall, of their wisedomes, care, and
loyaltie, which will then be seene when any occasion of
sudden tumult among the rude multitude, shall bee offered.
Discreet premeditation therfore is of al things most
to be regarded in Magistrates, what, and when they are
to command; and in people what and when they in dutie
to the highest and chiefe head, are to obey: least the
Magistrate discouer his weaknes, by saying, non putabā,
I did not thinke it would haue fallen out so:Premeditation of euery mans dutie is necessary before the run to far vnder a good intent. and the people
their disloyaltie by their rash and vnaduised tumult,
saying afterward, we did it in a good intent. Therefore
there must appeare neither ouermuch negligence in the
one, nor ouermuch rashnes in the other. But as euery
man hath two eyes in his face to see the things present:
so the Magistrate ought to haue the eye of the mind alwayes
open to foresee things to come.The Magistrats ought to foresee things to come. And this is the
eye of wisedome, and prouidence, that seeth in the time
of peace, what is to bee done against the time of warre:
and in the danger of warre, what is to be done to redeem
peace, or to preuent warre. The rumors of warre are to
the weake fearful, to the rude dreadfull, or desperate, and
to the wise, a cause of watchfulnes. The report then of
inuasion, must of necessitie draw in all men either courage
to resist, or a present bewraying of the cowardly
minded. For the examination of euery mans affections

in himselfe, cannot but testifie one of these in him. And
as I take it,The English alwaies valorous. none of our English nation can retaine the
last, sith all their progenitors haue so resolutely in deedes
witnessed the former. And therefore sith all (no doubt)
as it were with one minde, one heart, one hand, and one
consent, will bee readie vpon occasion to encounter the
enemie: so shall their magnanimitie the more bee approued,
by how much they shall proceed by discretion,
and militarie direction: and not by a desperate hardines
according to euery mans conceit,Rashnes to be auoyded. and inward humour,
whereby they may seeme to couet, to shew their forwardnes:
which being rashly put in execution, without
regard of the matter reported, or forme to be vsed in the
proceeding, will either discouer them to bee wilfull, tumultuous,
& ouerhastie: or els procure vnto themselues
the daunger of seditious people. For it behoueth vs to
thinke, that as the enemie boasteth of his strength, so he
standeth vpon his policie: wherein, as hee hath many
wayes practised by secret treasons to moue, and stirre vp
ciuill sedition among our selues, which God hath reueiled,
and our watchfull Magistrates discreetly preuented:
so hath he published by his wicked ministers, lurking
amongst vs, sudden reports, daungerous brutes, and
open hoobubs,
               A subtil practise of the enemie to moue tumults amongst our selues. to moue an vndiscreet tumult among the
rash multitude, to the ende that by reason thereof, some
factious people might drawe the rest to violate their
sworne obedience, and by their forcible rashnes bring a
daunger in conceit of the rest, where none is indeede:
which kinde of practise is new in our thoughts, most
friuolous for his purpose, praised by God. Yet hee that
hath been so long his open prompter, the blasphemous
beast, he, euen he, will leaue no mischiefe vnpractised, to

pull on the vndiscreet multitude, vnder colour of some
publique good for them, or of some imminent daunger
towards them, to runne out like men vnaduised, to the
end they might worke their owne confusion, and yeeld
the more ease to the enemies purpose. And therefore it
highly behoueth all men, both Magistrates, and priuate
people,Pryuate men must not stirre before the Magistrate. to haue an eye to euery alarum, and not vpon the
sudden to be ouer rash, nor too secure: but to looke into
the cause, and shape their proceedings accordingly: and
in euery of the particular limits, before rehearsed, to play
the Bees, not to swarme before the master Bee: and whē
the Magistrate shall sound a call, and enter into the action,
as the king of Bees, going forth first, then ought the
inferiour to follow, and to keepe themselues in diligent
attendance, performing what is commaunded onely:
wherein whosoeuer, Magistrate, or common person,
shall shew himselfe more forward, then shall be warranted
from the superior Magistrate, shal no doubt incur the
danger of disobedience: & therfore must euery inferior
haue an eye vnto the superiour: so by degrees shall there
be true obseruation of dutie in euery place her Maiestie
and Counsell is as it were primum mobile,
               Her Maiestie & her counsell the first mouers. whatsoeuer
moueth must begin from thence, and by direction from
thence, must all the rest moue as vpon the axetree, which
carieth about al the gouernment of this commō-wealth:
and as all inferiour Magistrates, namely the chiefe of euerie
prouince, citie, town ecorporate, cunstable of hundred,
and the rest, are to moue by degrees: so must the
priuate multitude moue, but as the first mouer shall direct:
and which can not immediately bee sensible vnto
them, vntill it bee by the ordinary motious of the other
mouers intimated. And whosoeuer seemeth to moue

of himselfe and to moue others, without this ordinarie
motion, he cannot but bee censured a vsurper of that office,
an vntimely comet which would shew light being
darknesse it selfe, and therefore to be abondoned out of
all the true constellations, which haue their due motions
and light from the first. It is a daungerous thing in
these daies to admit anie newes of matters of inuasion to
flie abroad,Suddayne newes dangerous. whereby extraordinarie motions may bee
stirred vp amongst the people. Howsoeuer it seemeth
necessarye that truth shuld bee deliuered, to the ende
it may bee apprehended of such especiallie as haue authoritie
and discretion to mannage a course accordingly.
And because none ought to set his hande vnto the
arke, but he must be called thereunto: so none must vndertake
as of himselfe, to lead any tumultuous crue vpon
anie supposed alarum, without superiour direction.
And for that the great charge lieth most, yea altogether
vpon the Magistrates: how farre behooueth it them to
be both wise to direct,Three things to be auoyded in followers. and couragious to goe before the
rest? wherein they must flie three things: feare, whereby
they should be moued to flie: cowardlines, whereby
they may discomfite their followers: & rashnes, wherby
they may endaunger themselues and others: but to bee
truely magnanimous, dismaid at no tidings, fearing no
danger, nor admitting no occasion to absent them from
the face of the enemie. For to liue or die are not of themselues
good, but to doe both of them rightly and in a
good matter, bringeth honour. And therefore Cato Senior
to encourage a man to true fortitude without too
much feare, or too much rashnes, faith, that there is great
difference betweene much esteeming of vertue, and little
waying of life: whereby he sheweth that it is a commendable

thing to desire life to be vertuous: rather then
rash without discretion to bee famous. But if you shew
your selues prouident in your charges, and as occasion
serueth, forwarde in true fortitude for your countries
safetie, you shall be reuerenced, and be worthily famous:
and not for desperate running on with a furious crue
of brainesicke people, but for your discretion, which
more preuaileth by a fewe, then hastie furie by a multitude.
         
         
            That prayer must be added vnto all the former meanes
which in Christian policie we are allowed to make, to resist
this Antichristian hoast.
            
               IT cannot be denied, but weapons
are fit and very necessary for wars,
walled cities, fortes, and castles,
for defence, policie is a requisite
matter in martiall affaires. But all
these are to no more effect then a
wooden dagger to defende one,
or offend another, as of thēselues,
without GOD blesse the vse of them. For hee can frustrate
euery action by his power:Weapons and pollicie nothing vnles God blesse the vse of them. hee can withstand the
proud, and defend the simple: vnarmed Dauid by him
was able to smite armed Goliah, and kill him with his
owne sword. And as therefore it is most expedient, that
in his feare all thinges bee carefully prouided in a Common-wealth
fit for the warres: so to put no more confidence
in the same, then in a reede, vnlesse withall wee
craue God to blesse them: who by his prouidence and
power can conuert al things as he wil, namely the sword

of him that trusteth therein, to kill himselfe. A horse is
a vaine thing to saue a man: whereby Dauid proueth all
militarie implements friuolous, if God giue not power
thereunto: and vnlesse hee teach a man to fight, strength
or policie can preuaile nothing. And although we may
see daily that the sword of the wicked preuaileth against
the wicked, and sometimes against the godlie, which
may argue a vertue in the same thing: it must not so be
taken,God giueth the victorie in a combate betwene two sparrowes. for that the prouidence of God hath a share in a
combate between two sparrowes, and whether of them
he will, preuaileth. And therefore we that pretend to bee
true Christians, haue a peculiar promise to be defended
and preserued by him: and betweene him and vs is such
a spirituall affinitie, that if we adde vnto these outwarde
things inwarde faith, and faithfull prayer to him, hee
will so blesse our weapons and our proceedings against
the enemie, that we shall accōplish that admirable matter
which hee hath promised vs to performe, namely, ten
to chase an hundred,The force of prayer more then the force of weapons. and one hundred to put 10000. to
flight. The Israelites fighting with the Amalekites, preuailed
more by Moses prayer, then Iosua and the souldiers
did by battell, Exo. 17. 11. The like did they against
the Philistines, by the prayer of Samuel, 1. Sam. 7. 3. The
prayer of the iust person auaileth much: and therefore
saith Dauid, Cal vpon the Lord in the day of trouble, and
he shall heare thee, and thou shalt glorifie him. The eies of
the Lord are ouer the righteous, and his eares are open
vnto their prayers. Whereby wee may assure vs of his
presence with vs, in this daungerous Hoobub, if we pray
to him. And for our further encouragement against this
wicked nation, he saith: The Lord is against them that
rise against his. Prayer is a most victorious vertue, a hidden

power, whereby God himselfe is as it were ouercome;
yea when he hath determined the destruction of
a rebellious people,God is moued by prayer to alter his decree. he is wonne by praier to repent him
as it were of his decree: as appeareth by Nineueh, who
ioyning repentance with prayer, appeased God. And because
praier in faith is of such a force with him, he saith
vnto Ieremie, Pray not for this people: as though hee
should haue said, though I haue decreed to destroy thē,
yet I may bee ouercome by prayer to spare them, and
therefore pray not for them, that will not pray for themselues.The prayer of one preuaileth with God to preserue a multitude. It appeareth then that the prayer of one preuaileth
with God to preserue a multitude: as amonge
many other examples is seene by Iudith, who praied for
the deliuerance of the people of Bethuliah, and obtained
not that alone, but a mighty destruction of the enemie.
Hereby was the counsell of Achitophel made void, and
tooke no effect against Dauid: and if we therein repare
vnto our God, all these threats, great prouision, and huge
hoast of Antichrist shall be made likewise frustrate, as it
hath beene once, fresh in our memories, whē he fought
for vs by his windes, and brake their power by his prouidence.
Therefore let vs set not onely this his late mercie
before our eies, wherein hee defended vs and confounded
them: but applie the example of Hezekiah, who
prayed against the inuasion of his enemies, with their
inuincible armies, at whose petition GOD slue of the
Assyrians 185000. men, 2. Chron. 32. 25. So did Iehosaphat
obtaine against his enemies, a mightie and memorable
victorie: how shall we then dismay at this foolish
Hoobub, whereby onley the weake are daunted:
such as know not the power of the highest are afraide?
But let vs aboue the multitude of our men, the furniture

of our munition, take holde of this assured anchor, and
pray to God, who will heare euen before we speake, he
considereth the thoughts,Prayer a sure anker in danger. and will giue eare to our
sighes. And let vs thinke that if one haue preuailed for
many, surely he will heare many for England, wherein
there are many godly that pray continually for the preseruation
thereof, not vnto the helples Saints, but to the
helping God, to the God alsufficient. To whom let vs
onely runne in a liuely confidence, not omitting the necessary
implements of warre, which by faith God will
so blesse in euery mans hand, that we shall haue the victorie,
and God the glorie. Let vs begin to hate sinne, and
continue constant in righteousnesse, and let vs not doubt
but that he which hath freely imbraced vs with so great
fauour alreadie, will defend vs also most mightilie, and
to our great comfort deliuer vs from the wicked.
            Now my louing countrimen, why should wee feare
the force and threatnings of these men, seeing wee haue
the Lord himselfe to be our king? Let vs not be afrayd,
but trust vpon the sure protection of this our alsufficient
God. Let vs magnifie his mightie name, which is most
terrible to our aduersaries: it is holie, and therefore all
honour, power, mercie, praise, and thankes bee giuen to
him, by whom we are onely saued.
         
         
            
            An humble petition to God, for the preseruation
of Queene Elizabeth, and the
protection of the Church of Christ, not vnfit to
be daily vsed of euery Christian, but also
in euery Christian familie.
            
               OH most high, mightie, and inuincible
God, king of all the kings &
kingdomes of the earth, wee fall
downe before thy maiestie, not as
though wee would dispute with
thee, why the heathen doe rage against
vs, and why the Antichristian
crue do mutter within themselues,
as if we were ready to become a pray vnto them:
we come not to charge thee with iniustice, in that thou
sufferest the kings of the earth, and the multitudes of malitious
men to band themselues against vs, the sheepe of
thy pasture, and against our Queene, thine annoynted:
No, father, mercifull, and louing, we come vnto thee as
wretches deseruing thy heauie displeasure, wherin thou
maist, without doing vs any iniurie, bring vpon vs this
vnciuill people, by whom if thou wilt thou maist iustly
punish vs for our sinnes: yea thou maist doe with vs
what thou wilt, who haue not done in our callings to

thee, as thou hast commanded. Yet Lord for thine owne
names sake, cast not out of thy mercifull remembrance
thy sweete promises annexed vnto thy Gospell, which
thou hast giuen vs long time to enjoy. The fruits wherof
we doe acknowledge, haue not so fully appeared in
vs, as is required at our hands: and therefore are we the
lesse assured of thy protection. But Lord, sith thy mercie
exceedeth thy iustice, consider that we are but flesh, and
therefore prone to fall as were our fathers. Looke not
so narrowly, oh Lord, into our corruptions, neither take
thou such vengeance against vs, as that wee should become
captiues to such as seeke to persecute vs, not for
our faults, but euen thy Sonne, in the truth of his sacred
Gospell in vs: although thou only knowest vs & them.
Thou searchest aswell their imaginations, as our sinnes:
wherein as we haue offended thee, so Lord let vs by thy
mercie reforme vs, or at least receiue punishment from
thee in loue, and not in their futies, whose harts are bent
against thy true Catholike Church: and who couet to
bereaue vs of our Queene, whom thou hast in meere
loue to thy chosen children, placed as a mother in thy
Church of England, whose life they haue by many
wicked and rebellious practises sought to take away:
shewing thereby, oh Lord, that there is no true religion
in their proceedings, no true faith in their workes, nor
true zeale in their desires: but all that they doe is by the
power of sinne, as if they should openly vow to preuent
thy prouidence by their power, to pull downe and set vp
whom they list, when they list, and inioyne them to doe
what they list, pretending in all their deuises, be they neuer
so bloudie, and sterched with open massacres with
dispoyling of thy people, eating vp euen innocents as if

they did eate bread, to doe thee great seruice. Oh high
and louing father, consider this, and look into their thirstines,
wherein they will neuer be satisfied with bloud,
if thou giue them scope, yea but a little to preuaile. And
therefore giue them not the power to worke what they
haue imagined, least that thine elect bee turned through
the bitternes of their tyrannies, to doubt of thy mercies.
But for asmuch as thou broughtest vs out of that cruell
bondage, wherein wee were tyed and fettered with humane
precepts, which are contrary to thy word, by the
hands of our Queene Elizabeth thine annointed, as were
thy children of Israel from Egypt by the hands of Moses
and Aaron: so Lord giue her long life to gouerne
vs, and power vnder thee to protect vs from these cruell
men, whose hearts are hardened, and whose consciences
are seared, as appeareth that they wil not be pacified, but
(if thou preuent not) will seeke to swallow vs vp. We
acknowledge, oh Lord, our weakenes, and appeale to
thee for strength: we confesse our sinnes and fall downe
to thee for pardon; heare vs and deliuer vs. Let thy Gospell
deere father for thy Sonnes sake, not onely continue
amongst vs, but let the fruits of our true zeale bee so watered
with thy holy spirit, that they may become acceptable
vnto thee: that thou maist be vnto our Queene an
high tower, and a safe refuge to vs that are afflicted Rise
vp, rise vp, oh God inuincible, list vp thine hand in our
behalfe against the power of this mightie Senacherib,
who in his vaunts declareth that there is no helpe for vs
in thee. But thou canst smite them, oh Lord smite them
vpon the cheeke bones, breake their hairie scalpes, and
make their deuises vaine. Our fathers trusted in thee, oh
Lord, they trusted in thee, and thou didst deliuer them.

Strengthen our faith deare Father, that we may likewise
trust in thee, and be deliuered: So shall not the praise redound
vnto our selues, but vnto thy glory. And all the
worlde seeing how thou protectest vs, shall likewise
come vnto thee, seeke thee, honor thee, and as thou hast
beene, art, and shalt bee vnto vs all in all; so all nations
frame their obedience to thy will, as vnto the al-sufficientito
whom be immortal praise, as thou only deseruest.
            oh Lord increase our faith.
         
         
            A priuate Prayer to be sayd of Magistrates,
that they may be fit to performe
in these dangerous daies, what their seuerall
places shall require.
            
               OH Father full of wisedome, power, and
Maiestie, for as much as euery man in
himselfe, and of himselfe is so far from
all ablenes to performe what is required
of him to the discharge of his dutie, not
only to thee in regard of his seruice due
vnto thee, but also to his countrie, in regard of his place
wherein he is to liue in the common-wealth, as that he
can performe nothing aright: and therefore I do come
vnto thee, beseeching, that as thou hast found mee out,
howsoeuer vnfit of my selfe to discharge it, and hast laid
vpon me the function of a Magistrate, to rule thy people
in the place whereunto thou hast appointed me: Let
me now be shaped and framed anew: let my thoughts,
my heart, soule, and bodie, be changed from vanitie to
truth, from sin to repentance, from weaknes to strength,

from ignorance to knowledge, from pride to humilitie,
& frō all things that I ought not to be, to that I ought to
be. That as mine eies are to bee set on all, to the ende I
might see al, approue or reproue al, and punish or defend
all within my charge; and as euery mans eies are on me
to note my steps, how I walk in my function: so I may
conforme my selfe not only to the precepts of superiour
powers, in performing thē to the publike example of others,
but also in true zeale to thy word, I may be a lātern
of light vnto them, & not by my slacknes in my calling,
in breach of any duetie giue example to any to followe
that is euill. Therefore teach me thy statutes oh Lorde,
that I may walke in thy waies: guide me in my pathes,
that I may practise righteousnes, and execute iustice truly.
That I may appeare to be as I ought to be, and not to
followe mine owne will, which is prone to euill euermore:
supply all my wants oh Lord, in giuing me an vnderstanding
heart, a mercifull heart, a contrite heart, and
an humble spirite, the spirite of meeknes, the spirite of
knowledge, the spirit of loue, the spirit of faith, and the
spirit of true fortitude. That as now the man of sinne is
busie, his ministers diligent, and his most dangerous practises
readie to bee put in execution, to subuert iustice,
equitie, truth, religion, and to suppresse thy word by violence:
So make euery man, but especially such as thou
hast made rulers ouer any, to bee vigilant and full of true
wisedome and courage, all which as they are thy giftes,
so graunt vnto me oh Lord, and to all other in authoritie,
that we may not beare the name only of Magistrates,
but may bee endued with all vertues requisite for Magistrates.
That by our negligence, nothing may be done
to thy dishonour, or dangerous to thy Church, and that

nothing may be omitted which may aduance the same.
And as religion is the best and most glorious robe and
ornament that a Magistrate ought to bee decked with,
for that out of it as out of a pure fountaine, thou causest
to flowe wisedome how to gouerne, and all other vertues
answerable to that high functiō: grant that we may
all flie thereunto, and imbrace it in such sorte, as like a
light the fruites thereof may in our proceedings, shine
to the inferiour by our examples: and vouchsafe that
our obedience to our superiors may learn the lower sort
how to obey, and as wee are taught by thee, know how
to gouerne. And farre be it from vs to glory in our high
callings, but to reioyce only in this, that thou hast taught
vs how to performe our dueties both to them that doe
well, and to the offenders both in peace and warre: and
that we accordingly performe the same, that in the ende
when wee shall giue account of our bayliwickes; thou
maist acquite vs in the mercies of thy sonne, as faithfull
dispensers of our seuerall callings. Amen.
            Oh Lord increase our faith.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   