
      
         
            
            
            THE WARRES OF SWETHLAND. WITH THE GROVND AND Originall of the said VVarres, begun and continued betwixt SIGISMOND King of Poland, and Duke CHARLES his Vnkle, lately Crowned King of Swethland. As also the State and condition of that Kingdome, as it standeth to this day.
            
               LONDON. Printed for Nathaniel Butter, dwelling in Pauls Churchyard by Saint Austins Gate. 1609.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE AND Most Noble minded louer of Learning PHILIP, Earle of Mongomerie.
            
               SVch (Right Honourable) as haue purposed to please Hector, haue still presented him, with Horse and Armour, because his chiefest delight was in Martiall Discipline, and such oblations best fitted his humour. For by this, and the like presidents is noted, how all haue sought in their presents to keepe a Decorum: Hauing therefore composed this little Treatise that concernes the dessignes of two Kingdoms: I haue thought good (aduenturing the Pardon of your Lordships discretion) to passe the same vnder your Honourable N
                  •
               me, as well for that your Expe
                  •
               ience is already

knowne to be sufficiently instructed in the affaires of our owne Countrey: Being descended of most Honourable Parents, educated in the most liberal Sciences, and mannaged in one of the most Royall and famous Courts of Europe. As also for that the custome of Honorable dispositions, hath alwayes (next after that) labored the knowledge and insight of forraine Estates and cōditions. That they may not only deserue well of their owne Countrey, by this their industrie, but also spread their owne fame, as farre as their Countrey is knowen.
            Your owne worth is the principall motiue that emboldens me to shroude it vnder your Patronage, as one that is a fautor and fauourer of vertuous Actions, and whose Honourable loues growne from the generall applause of the Common-wealth for your high desert, may keepe it from the malice of bitter tongues.
            Commaunded thus with this consideration, I presume to present my Booke vnto your Lordship: And humbly intreate, your Honour will bee pleased to vouch of my Labors and fauour a Schollers penne

with your gracious acceptation, who answeres in affection, what hee wants in eloquence. So shall I rest deuoted vnto you, and bestow my future Studies to effect matter of better deseruing, Euer remaining
            
               Your Honours most humble affectionate. ANTH. NIXON.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            The true Copie of a Letter Certificatorie, written in commendation of Captaine King of Ratcliffe, M. VVilliam Bardwell and Alexander Child of Redriffe, Masters of three Shipps of London, for their memorable seruice against the Swethens, being thereto compelled in Summer last, 1608.
            
               
                  IOhannes Carolus Chodkiewich Earle of Seckloro Bychor, and of Misra, Captaine of Samogitia and Porpatie, Generall Commissioner of Lyffeland, and chiefe Generall of the Army of the great Dukedome of Lytawe. To all and singular, to whome it may appertaine, or that shall reade these Presents, I doe let to weet, that whereas VVilliam Bardwell, VVilliam King, and Alexander Childe English Gentlemen, came

with three Shippes at Riga, when the Earle of Mansfielde Generall of the Army of Duke Charles Suderman, periniuriously breaking the Truce, made warre in Lyffeland, I helde them there, and employed them in the seruice of Warre for the most excellent King of Poland, my most gratious Lord, and they vndertooke to defend the Dunn, wherein they did behaue themselues very faithfully, manfully and valiantly, so that the said Earle of Mansfield was often by them driuen backe againe to his great losse and shame, and likewise hee was often assaulted by them, so that hee lost not onely his strength of men and his courage, but also lost some Shippes with many men and goods, which the saide Englishmen with a memorable courage, and to the notable glory of the English Nation, did set on fire and burne. And therefore I haue thought good to grant vnto them this Testimoniall, to the end that they may haue great thanks for their deserts, purchased by their good renowne and name▪ and that others may see, that as fame & immortality belongeth chiefly to noble minds, so also it is gotten by vertuous and valiant deedes: 
            
               Written in the Campe at  the new Mill in Lyffeland 
                  the seauenteenth of Nouember, Anno Domini 1608.
                  
               
               And is subscribed by Iohannes Carolus Chodkiewicke, manu propria, and sealed with a Seale in Redde waxe, Printed thereupon, Ita testatur Carolus Demetrius, Notarius Publicus.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE ORIGINALL GROVND OF The present Warres of Swethen.
            
               Chap. I. The daungerous plots laid against Gustovus in the life time of his Father: His flight to Lubeck in Germanie in the habite of a slaue, His strange entertainment there, &c.
               
                  THis is like a briefe Cronicle, that comprehends in it much matter in few lines, and various businesse in little circumstance. It presents to your reading the dessignes, and affaires of a spatious kingdome, and reacheth to the beginning of many yéeres past. Understand therefore that the Countrey of Swethen, before if was aduanc'd to the dignitie of a kingdome, by the allowance of thē Empire, and generall consent of their owne State, was a long time gouerned by the authority of foure Dukes, bearing the Titles of the foure Prouinces, into which the Country is deuided, The first is the Dukedome of Doland, hauing in it

a Regall Castle, called Vpsale, where the kings of Swethland be Crowned and buried. The second is the Dukedome of Newland, where the Castle of Newkeeping stands. The third is the Dukedome of Finland, where the Dukes seat is called, Oua Castle. The fourth is Warmland, where stands the Castle of Wasten vpon the Mediterrenian Sea; being the strength, and Bulwarke of the kingdome. The Countrey being (as I say) a long time ruled by these foure Dukes, in the kind of an Aristocratie, that is, The gouerment of the Nobilitie, as was the gouernement of the first and former Romane Peeres and Consuls: was in the end of the Raigne of Henrie 7. King of England, made a Monarchie or kingly gouernment.
               The first Monarke or King hereof, was called Gismond. whose Sonne, named Gustovus succéeded his Father in the Kingdome. This Gustovus (being in the life time of his Father, Duke of Doland) was a Prince very absolute, both in the perfections of his body, and his mind, excellently composed in the one, and honorably disposed in the other. Of an indifferent stature, neither too high, nor too low. His complexion sanguine, his haire bright, his countenance chéerefull, and pleasant to looke vpon, full of grace, and Maiestie. In warre stout, and industrious, in Counsell wise and full of respect, in the Court he carried such a Port and State, as attracted all eyes to gaze vpon him. In priuate places full of affabilitie and delightsome recreation: To conclude, it seemed that Nature and vertue had both ioynd together to frame in him the most absolute patterne of a Prince in his time. But as no excellency whatsoeuer is without malignant opposites, so this Prince found that olde saying to bee true, Virtutis comes inuidia, plerun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      bonos insectatur. For the Dukes of the other Thrée Prouinces, being ioynd with him in Commission (for you must vnderstand, that the foure Dukes did still retaine their titles, and authoritie vnder the King, as the Senate of Rome did theirs vnder the Soueraintie of Caesar, though it were subordinate:) The other

thrée (I say) enuying that greatnesse, loue, and opinion, which his vertues, as well as the Nobiliti
                     •
                  e of his blood had got him, sought by many deuises to betray him, whom no honourable mind, but would haue defended, and to this end, they bent all their courses: A plot (no doubt) ful of honour and regard vnto the State, the proiect whereof was either the murther, or disinheritance of so lawfull a Prince; Falshood and Enuie the accusers, Suggession and Subornation the informers. Thus was the plot laid, The Quéene (being mother in law of Gustovus, and hauing a Sonne by the King, and borne since the kingdome was erected) as farre as she durst (for she yet feared the greatnesse of Gustovus) did many times buze matters of iealousie and suspition into the Kings eares, of his sonnes cariage of himself in the kingdom, which at first he did not either beleeue, or dissemble. The thrée Dukes knowing the Quéenes mind towards the Prince, added fuell to her fire, alledging that she should neuer finde a sure estab
                     •
                  ishment for her selfe and her sonne in the kingdome, if Gustovus were not made away. The heart, that before began to burne with this desire, was now more incensed, hauing those thrée Noblemen, the principall Counsellours of State in the kingdome, to further her intendments. The Quéene being throughly instructed by the Lords, takes the aduantage of time, in her complaint to the king, Tels him that his sonne aspired, and would shortly aspire against him, that he affected popularitie, receiued like Absolom his subiects Petitions, not in loue, but Ambition: That he kept a Court, and Port greater then the King, and that all his actions did more sauour of Soueraigntie, then subiection. The Lords, they second the Quéene in her vniust information, alleadge matters probable to confirme it, The King beleeues, and in the error thereof, hates Truth, imbraceth Treason. Thus all being inuerted, Nature rebels in the Father, but Loyaltie remaines in the Sonne▪ The plot was hereupon laid for his apprehension, Gustovus being then at Court, who noting a straunge alteration in his Fathers

countenance towards him, began to suspect the drift of the Queene, vpon the distrust of the Noblemen about her: Himselfe being almost abandoned, deuiseth with himselfe how to auoyd the daunger. A Gentleman of the Kings, comes secretly to Gustovus, and tels him that the plot was laid that night, for his Attainder. The Prince being amazed at the suddaine immiuence of such a perill, posteth presently from the Court with a few of his Retinew, and the next day recouers his Dukedome of Doland, where he meant to stay, till he heard further of the Kings proceedings. His departure was soone made knowne, at which the Queene, and the Lords (though they mist of their purpose) were not much sorry, foreknowing that his suddaine flight from the Court in that manner, would strongly confirme their accusation. The King by them againe is incensed, and messengers sent into Doland, by whom the Prince was Summoned by a certaine day to make his appearance in Vpsale Castle: which the Prince refuseth to doe: affirming by his submissiue Letters to the King, that though he knew his cause to bee iust, and his heart loyall, no probable suspition of any misdemenour from him, either in act, or intent, that yet neuerthelesse he durst not hazard his life in the heat of the kings displeasure, for that he knew his aduersaries were so great in power, and in so gratious account, that it would be an easie matter to haue his Maiesties grace, and Nature her selfe peruerted to his vntimely and vniust destruction: And that the onely cause why he retired himselfe into his owne Countrey, was to stay the time, vntill these mists of his Maiesties iealousie and suspition were blowen away, that the Sunne of his alleagiance might shine cleere, farre from the cloudes of all distrust, or disloyaltie. This answere being returned, but not accepted, the King by the Queenes continuall instigations was more, and more prouokt, insomuch that a great power was suddenly raised to fetch him by violence out of his Dukedome. Which the Prince perceiuing, and being neither able, nor willing to resist his Fathers forces, giues way

to necessitie, and in the habite of a slaue, purposeth secretly to goe into Germanie. And hauing past some daungers in his flight by the Kings pursuers, at last he crossed the seas, and holding on his course for Lubeck in Germany, not many dayes safely arriued there, All this while he kept his disguise, for though he knew that the Lubeckers were heretofore beholding to him, yet he doubted what minds they would put on in this chaunge of fortune, Remembring Pompeyes vsage in his flight by Ptolomie King of Egypt, and the like of Hanniball by Prusius king of Bithinia.
               
            
            
               Chap. II. Gustovus is discouered in Lubecke: The Lubeckers take his part, The King his Father dies, He recouers by their meanes the Kingdome of Swethland.
               
                  THe newes (being arriued in Germany) of Gu
                     
                        •
                     tovus his flight out of Swethland, before his comming thither, was diuersly intertained in Lubeck: Some pittied the state and condition of the young Prince, that so Noble a Gentleman, so full of hope, and expectation, euen in the prime of his youth, should in this vile manner suffer violence: Others spake against him, supposing that his owne naturall Father, and others of his blood, would not in this manner haue proceeded against him, if he had not showne himselfe dangerous vnto the State, as the mindes of the people are in this case diuersly distracted. The Prince after his comming to Lubeck staied certaine dayes in a common Inne, not daring to discouer himselfe, and to auoid the suspition of a stranger in such common places, found meanes to preferre himselfe vnto a rich Merchant of the Towne (if such a place in the meanenesse of his fortune at that time may be called preferment.) Being there entertained, he contented himselfe to doe any bodily labour

in the house, striuing to suite his minde vnto his misery, yet could hee not so well counterfeit this part of his sinister fortune, but that the Merchant did soone suppose him to be a better man, then hee seemed to bee, and perhaps the man hee was. So hard a thing it is for Nature to learne to forget her custome. Staying some few moneths in the Merchants house, hee heard of a Gasant sent from the king to the State of Lubeck, being supposed hee would bend his course thither. The tenor of the Gasants message, was to deliuer to the Lubeckers that the kings desire was, that either they should not entertaine him at al, or els send him backe to Swethland, for that hee was knowen and proclaimed to bee an enemie. But they being at that time ignorant of the Princes abiding, answered for the time to those things, that might stand with the Kings pleasure. The Gasant being dispatcht, Gustovus liued in a continuall feare of being discouered, as well for that many great men in the Towne had before seene him in Swethland, and might then remember him: As also for that his Master would many times prie into his countenance, and behauiour, and vtter strange words, and shew strange passions, euen in his presence, sometimes repeating the name of Gustovus.
               
               The Prince holding thus a Wolfe by the eares, in doubt whether to stay or goe, (in both which he found danger) was wondrously perplexed: Sometimes he thought to discouer himselfe, opposing his mind against the worst of fortune, that if the Towne did betray him, his blood should be shed in Innocence, and he be rid of that torment: wherin his mind was diuersly distracted betwixt Hope, and Feare, and Feare the predominant: but at last resoluing with himselfe to stay, hee still framed his mind vnto his businesse. One day cleauing of wood, in the strayning of his bodie, a button that held the flappe of his Ierken, brake, and there withall a little Chaine of gold, whereon did hange a Iewell of inestimable price, fell from his necke: Which a maid seruant in the house (beeing by) perceiuing, was desirous to see it: but hee suddainely

snatching it vp, told her that it was a thing of no worth, but giuen him by a friend of his, in the remembrance of her. The maide dissembled her opinion for the present, but soone after told it to her master. The Merchant vpon this accident, confirmes his former suspition, and hauing now matter more relatiue then before, enformed the State of Lubeck with this circumstance. The Burgomasters of the Towne, sitting then in Counsell, sent for the stranger by a guard, to come before them, How the Message was entertained by the Prince, let them iudge that haue vndergone the like aduenture. There was no deniall, nor possibility of escape, Obey he must, And it is a hard thing when Princes must obey. Being brought before the Magistrates, it was demaunded of whence he was? he answered, of Swethen. They askt him of what degree? He told them, as meane in birth as in fortune: what mooued you (quoth they) to forsake your Countrey? The Prince replied, my vnkind vsage there. A principall Senatour of the Towne looking all this while stedfastly vpon his countenance, perceiued that it was Gustovus, and whispering the rest in the eare, assured them, that it was the Prince. The matter was before concluded what they meant to doe, Whereupon this great Citizen began to speake in this manner. Your birth (quoth hee) is farre better then your fortune, Therein you dissembled, but your fortune beares the blame, your first and last answere is true, for we know that you are of Swethland, and your name is Prince Gustovus, and the vnkind vsage of your Countrey hath driuen you from thence: what we meane to doe, you shall vnderstand shortly. In the meane time repose your selfe securely and hopefully in the rulers house. The Prince acknowledged himselfe, and thankt them for these signes of their good will. And if you shall find (quoth he) my protection, or defence to prooue dangerous vnto your State, Let my life rid you from that feare: I shall be well content, so I may free you from danger, to be your Sacrifice; Whereupon they all imbraced him, with the teares standing

in their eyes, euery one honouring him▪ and putting him in great hope and comfort, They caused him presently to be inuested with royall ornaments and in all honourable and louing manner, conuayed him that night to the 
                     •
                  ulers house. The Prince stayed as prisoner, but honourably attended about two yeeres in Lubeck. During which time, the king his Father sent diuers Gasants with faire words, and large promises to haue him deliuered, but it would neuer be granted; Howbeit they promised that they would keepe him safe from attempting any innouation. The Prince during his stay there would often visite his old master, whom he would alwa
                     •
                  es call his kind master, affirming that if his discouery had not bene made knowen, he could as contentedly haue liued a poore seruant in his house▪ as he did then a princely prisoner in the Towne: The Merchant would many times tell him, he had much adoe, to keepe himselfe, from the sinne of pride, for that it was his fortune, to be master of such a seruant.
               Within two yeeres after, the king his Father died, and the State of the Countrey proclaimed the Queenes Sonne, King of Swethland. Gustovus had quickely intelligence thereof, as such newes flies euer with the Swallows wings, receiues Letters from many Noble men, and other of his friends in the Countrey, wherein he was aduised to vse all means possible for his return, with assured cōfidence of their assistance The Prince shewes the Letters to ye 
                  Lubeckers, solicits them in his own behalfe for aide, giues them princely pomises of their requitall. The Prince returnes to Swethen full of hope and encouragement, His friends meete him in great multitudes with all signes of loue and obedience: His enemies are disperst without battaile: some fled, some taken prisoners, the Queene with her sonne conuaied to Vpsale Castle, The three Dukes beheated, and all the rest pardoned. When all things were established, and the summes of money paid backe to the Lubeckers, Gustovus was shortly after with all solemnitie Crowned king of Swethland, and

not long after was honourably married out of Germanie, His Queene being nobly borne in that Countrey, By whom he had foure sonnes: Prince Erick the eldest, Duke of Doland, Iohn Duke of Finland, Magnus Duke of Warmland, and Charles the youngest Duke of Estergutland, that now liues and inioyes the Crowne of Swethland.
               This Gustovus Raigned peaceably and happily, Laden with many yeeres, but with many more Trophies of honors, The care and loue hee bare vnto his subiects was well seene in their reciprocall respect to him. His sonnes brought vp in all princely knowledge, acknowledged faithfully their naturall duties during his life, Though after his death they fell at vnnaturall debate, one with another.
               In the last of his yeeres he shewed the best of his affections, different from the obseruance taken in other Princes, who after a long continued Soueraignetie, doe much decline from the gentle behauiours of their beginnings. But at last (as euery thing is vnstable, & each estate, that hath being in this world, holds his vncertaintie) This noble king deceased, at that time, wherein his life was most desired of his subiects: whose loue had bene the like vnto his sonnes, had it not bene crost by the nature of the tumultuous times that followed: The dead corps being now the sadde remnant of a king, was with all solemnitie conuaied and enterred in Vpsale Castle: His friends following it with all tokens of sorrow, calling him the proppe and protector of Religion, the defender and preseruer of his Countrey, the honour and glory of the Swethen Nation. His fame went before him, dilating his Noble acts, and princely vertues, that (not buried in the graue with him) returned backe, posting through the world, and still sounding foorth the prayses of Gustovus, whose name shall neuer die, so long as the memorie of the Swethen State indures.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III. Ericke is crowned King of Swethland, after the death and Funerall of his Father: A marriage is plotted with Elizabeth Queene of England, That failing another is tendered to the daughter of the King of Poland, His brother Duke Iohn conspires against him.
               
                  AFter the death of Gustovus, Erick his eldest sonne is with all generall applause, and the Countries ceremonie, crowned king of Swethland about the yeere of our Lord 1559. and in the same yeere an ouerture of mariage was made with Elizabeth Queene of England in the beginning of her raigne. Duke Iohn his brother sent Ambassadour (princely appointed) in this negotiation, who safely arriuing in England with his whole Fleete, was honourably intertained. Howbeit the matter of his Embassage, was rather flattered, then graunted, rather fairely countenanced, then embraced, For some noble men at that time, great in their places, either in their owne respects, or the honour of the Queene, stood against it, But the Queene her selfe did fairely intreate the Prince, royally feasted him, gaue him many princely gifts, Told him in conclusion, that she tooke the Tenor of his Embassage in very gratious manner: Sent kind commendations to the king his Brother, with this hopefull message, that if it pleased him to take the paines to come into England, she would take such order for his entertainement, that hee should haue no iust cause to returne discontent. For (saith she) I haue made this vow, neuer to con
                     •
                  ract my selfe to any, whom I haue not first seene. The Duke thus furnisht with this answere▪ takes his leaue, imbarkes

himselfe, boyseth sayle, arriues in Swethland, and deliuers to the longing languishing King this hopefull doubtfull answere▪ of the Quéene. The young King imbraceth this newes, and his brother for them, flatters his fancie, kisseth the Quéenes picture, beguiles imagination, buildes Castles in the ayre, rigges his Fléete at Sea, exhausteth his Treasure, makes himselfe poore to enrich his hope, which proued indéed, farre aboue his Fortune. The Winter following was spent in this preparation for England: During which time Frederik then king of Denmarke, a Wise and politike Prince stoodmuch against this Alyance with England, foreséeing the danger that might redound to him in his neighbours marriage, with so potent a Princesse: sendeth Ambassadours to King Erick, shewing both the inconuenience that would happen by marriage in a Countrey so farre remote, as also the dangers that were like to ensue, in ioyn
                     •
                  ng with a Quéene, more strong then himselfe. But the king gaue a deafe eare to this Embassage, Continuing his preparations still for England: Some say, that in that Winter ryding betwéene Vpsale, and Wasten Castle, a Maide of excellent beautie, but obscure parentage, whose name was Gondole comming amongst others to behold the king, who by chance, casting his cies vpon her, was so sodainly ensnared in her beautie, that that poyson which he drew then into his heart by his eies, did so corrupt the whole body of his affaires, that at last he loste both his life▪ and kingdome: but others say it was the winter after. But to returne to our voyage for England, The kinges fléete being royalty rigd, and all thinges ready for so great a busines, the king tooke shipping about the beginning of May▪ leauing Duke Iohn his brother Uicegerent in his place, and sayling along the Coasts of Norway, Report saith that Frederick king of Denmarke had procured certaine Witches in that Country to drowne, or dispearse the Fléete of king Erick, and by their spelles, and deuillish incantations to Confound this intended Uoyage, whether this bee true or no, I know not,

but this is certaine, that the king being vpon the coast of Norway, such a strange foggy, thicknes did so cloath the ayre that the kings Fléete had soone loste sight of one another: And then followed such horrible thunders, and vnheard of Tempests, that it séemed heauen and earth had met together in the disturbance of this intendment. The king being at his wits end long before hée came to his waies end was so perplexed in his thoughtes, that he knew not what to do, either to goe forward or to returne: The sight of y• Eye was so taken away by the the thicknes of Aire, the beneūt of the Eare was consounded by the noyse of the thunder, the waters rose so high as if they meant to kisse the Cloudes: Noe light but what the flashes of lightning made which amased them all, the raine fell so thicke that they could scarce kéepe the Hatches, the maister calles to the Boatson, and is not heard, the Sternes-man cryes to the Maister, and is not regarded. Thrée daies togeather, continued these thrée nightes of darknes, wherin was séene neither sunne Moone, nor starre: the kinges Fléete was diuersly dispearst, some into the coast of Denmarke others back againe into Swetland, the king himselfe vpon the Coast of Norway looks euery hower for his buriall in the Sea. At last entering into cogitation with himselfe, he thought that God had suffered his pride to be thus punisht, for that he vndertook a Mariage with such a Quéene, whose fame and glory was so great, as well from her State, and gouernment, as for the riches and strength of her Crowne, and kingdome: that entering into cosideration of it, he held himselfe much vnworthy of such a fortune. Upon this, the king rashly vowes that if it would please God to deliuer him from that daunger, he would giue ouer his ouer high attempt, returne into his Countrey and learne hereafter to suite his desires to his estate. At last these stormes haue end, the king returnes according to his vow, shortly after arriues in Swethland, And thus fayled this Negotiation for England.
               
               The king soone after his landing beginnes (say some) renewes

(say others) his loue to his faire Gondole: that afterward prooued as fatall to him, as Cleopatraes loue to Anthony: His eies were seldome off either her person or her picture: His minde museth on nothing but the pleasures of her body, his tongue speakes of nothing but her delightes, and praises; all publicke affaires are abandoned, the pallaces are like a wildernesse desolate, the Court is kept where Gondole hath her byding; reason, and regard of gouerment, are now banished, pleasure and sensuallitie made his Counsellors of Estate. The Noble men would oftentimes aduise him, but all in vaine, his brother Duke Iohn did still smooth the Kings humors, not as being enamoured o
                     •
                   his delights, but as from hence drawing a subiect that happyly hereafter might serue his turne, in case the Nobility (as they beganne a little) should afterwards wholly withdraw their affections from him. Thus whilest the king followes his pleasures Duke Iohn pursues his purposes, would oftentimes complaine to certaine of the Rexen-Roade, which we call The Blood Royall, of his brothers effeminate and vnlikingly gouernement, but especially to Duke Charles his youngest brother, yet no further engaging himselfe to danger then he knew meanes how to wind out againe. Not long after, another Mariage was tendered of the Polands Daughter, which the king Coulorably entertained to satisfie his Nobility, whilest his heart doted vpon his Paramour. Duke Iohn his brother was imployed in this businesse, and it fell out as he desired: For if the cardes were dealt aright, he might happely himselfe mary the Polands daughter. And thus with a false heart taking a faire leaue of the king his brother being furnished with all accowtrements fit for such a busines shortly after arriued in the Court of Poland, where after the solemnitie of such entertainements he deliuered his Message with such a Maiesticke grace both in his spéech, countenance and cariage of himselfe (as sure hée was a most accomplisht Gentleman) that it wan him great commendations in the kings Court especially with the yong princesse,

in whose tender heart there was such an inward breach made, as was soone outwardly perceaued, for her eyes that conuayed these pretie assaultes vnto her heart, did soone betray her hidden affections: which the Duke perceiuing laies hold vpon the occasion, Winnes by rewardes many tongues to speaken in his behalfe, ioyes with the greatest of the Kings Counsell, and in especiall with one Fe
                        •
                     nsbecke Duke of Leif-lande. He told them that the condition of his Countries disordered estate, occasioned by the discordant disposition of his brother, mooued him rather to looke with a publike, then a priuate eye: If he ought nature and dutie to his Brother, he ought no lesse vnto his Country, and it was his countries cause (to the which hée was most bound) that made him inueigh against his brother? Let no man (quoth he) rashly ce
                     •
                  sure me, but comparing the State of the kingdome to the condition of the King, let him then iudge whether all is not like to ruine, if preuention be not made, which in the Kinges person (quoth he) will neuer be, for that he séemes to be buried in his his owne delightes, and the breath which he himselfe should drawe, lies not in his owne, but in anothers body. The most and best part of the Nobility being by these and the like suggestions wonne vnto his party, a way was quickly made for the Duke to Wooe for himselfe, which was not long a doing for the heart, that was already so strongly assaulted, was soone framed to yeeld. To bee short the young Duke Weddes and beddes the princesse with great honour, and delight, so easily is the pollicie of a state drawne to obey the necessity of the time: the newes hereof is soone brought to Swethland, wherein the wise lookt into the danger of the King, how be it the King himselfe foresaw no peril: But as a Man wholly deuoted to his delights, doth against the aduise of all his friendes, quickly after Marrie the said Gondole, whereby he did sodainly runne into such a scandalous hatred of his owne Subiectes, that they euer after held him vnworthy of his Crowne and kingdome: Within a yeare after his

Mariage he had a Sonne, not long after whose byrth Duke Iohn hauing assured promises from his youngest brother Duke Charles, procures an Army to be leuied by the King of Poland, his Father in law, and arriuing in the Dukedome of Estergutland, was louingly entertained of his brother Duke Charles, who ioyning their forces together, hauing also the ayde of other Noble Men in the Country, gaue battaile to his brother King Ericke, who being ouercome, and flying to Stock-holand, was there by his two brothers taken, and made away, no man euer knew how. A noble man in the Countrey, brother to Herrerick Gusterson, and deare vnto the King was at that time honorably slaine in the defence of his Prince. The Quéene had before sent her young Sonne out of the Land, foreséeing the danger that was like to happen. Who now liues as an Exile in the great Duke of Moscouias Court, and the Quéene her selfe confined to Stickborrow Castle, where shee yet liues a sad and solitary life. Thus ended the vnfortunate Raigne of King Erick, who might long haue liued and gouerned in the Land, had he but subdued his owne affections.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII. King Iohn is crowned king of Swethland: hath a Sonne borne called Sigismond: The King of Poland dies: young Sigismond is sent for to be King of Poland: Hee staies there certaine yeares till the death of his Father, and is then sent for by his Vnckle Duke Charles to receaue the Crowne and kingdome of Swethland.
               
               
                  DUke Iohn hauing thus by his brothers murther attained vnto the Crowne, disposeth with his best Counsell the affaires of the kingdome, disperseth his Army, satisfies his Subiects in the cause of these indirect procéedings, against his brother, and hauing set all things in order, sendeth for this Quéen out of Poland,
                  
who with an honorable traine being conducted into Swethland, was there Royally entertained, and shortly after with Duke Iohn her husband, in all princely manner, Crowned King and Quéene of Swethland at Vpsale Castle: Many Statutes he repealed which the King his brother had made, being found preiudiciall vnto the Country, and others hee enacted, that were held more profitable: To all Sutors he shewed himselfe very gentle and gracious: And because the treasure of the kingdome was much exhauste in his expedition into Poland, he was driuen to borrow many great Summes of money both there, and of his Friends at home: Hee kept a Princely port, and was very liberall in his rewardes, delighting much in all Martiall exerrises. His liberality was equall to that which was so highly commended in a worthy Captaine of Thebes, who when hee had obtayned a victory against the Lacedemonians, tooke onely of all the spoile but one sword, distributing the rest amongst his Souldiors, saying, Fellowes in Armes this I Challeng because I wrong it out of the hand of mine Enemie. Whatsoeuer else is yours, as the reward of your trauells, for, the Theban Senatours warre for honour, not for treasure. The Mercenary Man that beareth Armes for hier, and for his ordinary Paye, feareth not to venture his life in the face of his Enemy, hauing but his wages, hath but his due: So that if hope of spoile, and the bounty of his Captaine did not encourage him in his attempts, he would both doubt the danger of his person and scorne for so little gaine to ranne vpon such imminent perills. His liberality towards his associats in Armes, and his experient wisedome and valour in Martiall enterprises made him both honoured feared, and held in worthy estimation. Thus by this and his other vertues Duke Iohn in short time Crept into the hearts of his Subiectes. The first yeare of his raigne the Quéene brought him a goodly Boy which was Christened by the name of Sigismond, the Emperor beeing his Godfather, which Sisgismond, is now King of Poland.
                  
About the Tenth yeare of his raigne, King Iohn made an honorable iourney into Russia, vpon the breach of a League made betwixt them. From whence he returned victorious. The rest of his raigne was quiet and peaceable: And set a side the staine of his brothers death, he was doubtlesse a most excellent Prince and worthy of the Crowne and kingdome, and although there were many times iarres betwixt him, and his brother Duke Charles, yet alwaies the matter was so handled, that they were soone reconcilde againe. By which were cut off all occasions of Ciuill warre. In the twelfth yeare of his raigne his father in law the King of Poland dies, for whose death the Quéene his daughter mourned heauily. The young Prince Sigismond her Sonne was elected King of Poland, and with an honourable conuoy being guarded thither was with all solemnity in all Princely manner Crowne King of Poland: Shortly after Marries honourably into the house of Austria; and in the twelth yeare of his raigne in Poland, King Iohn his Father dies: whose death being much bewailed of his subiects, he was with appertaining solemnitie buried in the Chappell of the Kings in the Castle of Vpsale. Duke Charles of Estergutland after the death of his brother sends into Poland for his Nephew Sigismond to come to receaue the Crowne of Swethland, Sigismond takes heauily the death of his Father, and deuines before hand of the troubles that followed in that kingdome: Great preparation is made for his iourney into Swethland, and doubting of his vnckles minde & proiectes, carrieth a great power of Poles with him to preuent all daungers. The king arriues safely in Sweathland, is with all honor and signe of loue receaued by his vnckle Duke Charles, and the rest of the Nobilitie of Swethland, He is honorably conueyed to Vpsale Castle, where hee was louingly receaued of the Quéene his Mother, whom he comforteth being a sorrowfull widdow for the death of King Iohn her husband. Shortly after he was crowned K. of Swethland without any disturbance. A Rex-day was

held in the castle of Vpsale, where all things being established, Duke Charles is made vicegerent of the kingdome: hauing with him ioynd in Comission foure Noblemen, of the Rexen-road whose names were Hergusten Bonner, Hersten Bonner, his brother, Herrerick Spare, and Hartor Belk: These fower Noble men, being great in the kingdome but not very great with the Uicegerent, were of purpose ioynd by the King in commission with the Duke to curbe or Controule all ouer haughty and headstrong attempts, that the Duke might happely Commit by the greatnesse of his place and power in the absence of the King, who was then ready to returne to Poland. The Duke perceaues the drift, but dissembles it. before the Kings departure, order was set downe by the King with the Duke and the Commissioners for the payment of certaine sommes of money, which King Iohn his Father did owe vnto many Souldiours, that were yet vnpaide since the time of expedition into Russia, and vnto many Merchants of England, Scotland and other Nations for the prosecuting of that warre. After all things were thus setled and ordered, the King returnes to Poland, leauing behinde him that fire that afterward consumed the peace of the whole Kingdome: for the Noblemen, the Commissioners being commanded by the King, (that was euer iealous of his Unckle Charles) to obserue and enforme his Maiestie of the manner of his gouernment, did so oppose themselues against him in all his procéedinges, and especially in the payment of this money, that the Duke plainely perceiued, that this new gouernment was but laide as a trap to ensnare his life, A Rex-day was holden at Vpsale, no order Concluded, nor money paide, and much adoe there was to kéepe them from factions, the Commissioners would haue these summes paid out of the Subiectes purses, the Duke out of the Common Treasury: which the commissioners refuse, alleaging the Kings want of money, The Duke writes faithfully, The Lords falsly to the King. To whom they intimate feare of innouation, and that the Duke

by all likelyhoods aimed at the Crowne, that he had paid parte of the money due to the Souldiours out of the Reuenues of the Dukedome, to draw their affections to him, that he sought to further the State, and wealth of the Commons more then stood with the loyall nature of a Subiect, that he kept the Porte and State of a King rather then a Deputie, and that it was not like he would long yeeld his honors vnto Uassalage, whose fortunes in such a minde and State as his might attaine to Soueraignty, if preuention were not spéedily made. The Duke intercepts these letters, and sends them inclosed in his own vnto the King, to whom he writes very humbly, and with all protestations of duty, and alleagance: the king receaues the letters, but beleeues the Lords and dist
                     •
                  usteth the Duke, sendeth secretly to the Commissioners that they should sodainely surprise him, depose him from his gouernement, and to that end he sent his authority: and finally to kéepe him prisoner, his wise and children, during life in a castle built of purpose for that stratageme within the dukedome of Litto: Oh that the nature of fortune should be so fickle and vncertaine, neuer singular either in her frownes or fauours, but that commonly in the height of any hope it produceth some crosse accident of vnhappy misfortune.
               The Duke notwithstanding hauing intelligence of this plot, beganne to looke about him, hasted into his owne dukedome and raised a great power of men, Some say that if hee had but staide one hower longer in Vpsale, the plot had beene effected, and the Duke vtterly vndone. The Lords were in a maze vpon the Dukes departure, knowing that their deuise was discouered, they now perceaued their owne weakenesse to resist the Duke, being in power, place and opinion, and farre aboue them, And though they had the Kings authority, yet was he farre from them, and they néer vnto their danger, they knew not well what course to take, sometimes they purposed to flie to the King, and then they feared the waies were forelayd. To stay in the Castle of

                  Vpsale were no safety, it being a place of pleasure, not of defence: whereupon they determined to depart from thence: Thrée of them vnto the Castle of VVasten in the Dukedome of Finland, and Hartourbelk to Calmer Castle. Hauing theis▪ Castles deliuered vnto them, they purposed to stay there to vnderstand the Dukes procéedings, and in the meane time dispatcht letters vnto the King of the particulars of these troubles: The Duke (as I sayd before) hauing raised a great power of men, marcheth spéedily towardes the castle of Vpsale, but vnderstanding of the Lords departure towards Wasten, bends his course thither. It is a world to sée what numbers of men came vnto the Duke from all parts proffeting their seruice to him: All which hee gently welcomed. Some he entertained, and the rest sent home againe with speciall charge to looke vnto the Kinges peace, signifying further that the cause why hee was now vp in Armes, was but to right himselfe of such wronges done by those Lords, who neither loued the King nor him. The Lords that were in the Castle of Wasten vnderstanding of the Dukes approach with such a power of men, sodenly forsooke the castle, and not being able to defend it, fled in all hast to Poland, whome the Duke would not pursue, but taking the castle put in a strong Garrison, and presently hast
                     •
                  d to the castle of Calmer, which Hartourbelk had a little before taken in the Kings name, who standing at defence and defiance with him, the Duke besiegeth both the Citie and castle, the cittizens more willing to entertaine him, then resist him. The Duke plants his ordinance against the Gates of the Citie, and thereupon the Citizens resisting the command of Hartour Belk, open the citie Gates and recaue him in: The Duke besiegeth the castle, and in short time by the helpe of the Towne Winnes it, takes and keepes Hartour Belk prisoner, and dischargeth all the rest.
               From hence the Duke sent letters to the King, informing truly the cause of these troubles, That the vniust attempts of the Commissioners against him, did moue him to raise

these powers in defence of his state and liberty, not in the disturbance of his Maiesties peace, nor to make any innouation in the Land, & beseeching him that no false or fained suggestions of his aduersaries, might stand as a barre betwixt his Maiesties grace towards him and his owne fidelitie: Affirming further that it lay in his power to stopp their passage into Poland and that hee would at the Kings pleasure disperse his forces, surrender vp the castles, that he had taken, be content to resigne his charge of gouernment, to whōsoeuer it pleased the King, Prouided that hee might bee assured of the quiet enioyment and peaceable possession of such Lands and honors, as he was born vnto by Nature: and this (quoth he) I learne of necessity, which teacheth euery creature to defend it selfe.
               The King receiues the Dukes letters, but giues no credit to his protestations. During the time of the Dukes stay in the City of Calmer, and vnderstanding of many disorders, and misdemeanors that were commited in a Nunnery, standing in the Towne, One daye Came to visit the Nuns, accompanied with certaine gentlemen of his house, and vnderstanding some of their mindes to be discontent with their orders, and some of their bodies well knowne to the Friers, dissolues the Nunnery, and transposeth the Nunnes, according to their own disposing, Some into other nunneries, many to their Friends, the most to Mariages. The King by this time had answered the Dukes letters very coulorably, that hee was sorry for the tarres that happened betweene him, and the Lords, That as soone as his businesse would giue him leaue, he would visit the Lordes, and him. In the meane time he requested that hee would deliuer Hartourbelk, or intreat him kindly. The Duke though hee beléeued not what the King had written, yet hee receaues the letters gladly, and honourably feasted the messenger. In this time another dangerous plot was laide, to entrappe Duke Charles, and to enforce him Prisoner, in the Castle of Litto aforesaid, whereupon there were forces very secretly, and

sodainely raised in Finland, The king hauing a purpose to winne to that powre, other forces that he meant himselfe to bring out of Poland, and appointed a day of meeting in Stock-holland.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V. The Duke hath intelligence of the plots that the King and his aduersaries had deuis'd against him. He encounters part of the Kings army, and discomforts them, with other accidents.
               
                  THe Duke hauing intelligence of this dangerous plot, deuised against him by the king, assured himselfe to finde no fauour at his hand & that no submissiō would serue ye turne: For him to disperse h
                     •
                  s powers, and to stand rather vpon the protestation of his allegeance then his guard, were to put his neck vppon the block, and to indure the stroke: for raging str
                     •
                  ames are not stayed with gentle hands. Wherefore calling his friends about him, hee told them that it was now no time to dally. That the king by his aduersaries was so prouokt against him, that nothing but his death or depriuation would satisfie the kings displeasure. These vnwilling armes (quoth hee) that I now beare, are for the defence of you, and my Country, vnto which I owe my life, and wha
                     •
                  soeuer else is deere vnto mee. I sée (quoth hée) the drifte of the king, and my aduersaries, is to ouerthrow our customes, and to gouerne you according to the Polish Pollicy, which is vnfit for any frée state. To pursue this, and to lay heauy yoakes vpon your necks, my life is sought after, which I shall bée alwaies ready to spend or end to doe you or my Country seruice.
               His friends embrac't him, willed him to go forward, promised their aide, to the vttermost of their powers, and the

Duke lets slip no time, but presently seizeth vpon the Nauy of Swhethland hauing it before vnder his command, maruelling much that the King had not before that sent to seize vpon it himselfe, but thereby belike hee thought hee should haue ministred matter for the Duke to suspect his deuice, The Finland Fleete being vpon the Coast some few daies before the day appointed, the Duke hauing furnished the Nauy with men and munition, tooke the Opportunitie of Time, and with all expedition made hast to meete them before their ioyning with the Kings power, with whome had they met, they had put the Duke to a great hazard, The Finland Fleet consisted of thrée score and ten saile most of them vessels of great burthen, and in them 14 thousand fighting men, the Dukes forces by Sea were scarce so many. The Duke deuides his Nauy into two parts, the Fiulinders into thrée. The Duke bearing as great a breadth in the front of his Nauy, as his aduersaries did, doubting least he should be engirt. The charge being giuen by the Duke was semblably answered by the contrary party, and now the voice of the Ordinance, (that was many yeares a stranger in those parts) carried such hideous noyse in the Land, as much amazed the quiet mindes of the inhabitants, when they heard that the haruest of their Peace was now like to be reap't by the vngentle hand of warre: Then began they to forethink the troubles that were like to follow these fearfull beginnings, but happely not to remember the causes thereof: it is either a naturall or Customary stupidity in man to be senselesse in the vnderstanding of their owne offences, Pride, Blasphemy, Auarice, Extortion, Luxury, and other the like enormities are in particular men the generall causes of the disturbance, nay sometimes of the depopulation of a whole kingdome, when the mindes of Princes corrupted with Ambition are stirr'd vp, though in their owne respects, euen by the power and sufferance of the almighty to plague (by warre his consuming Minister) the vnrepented sinnes of the people. But to returne to Sea, where the fight continued

little more then two howers, during which time the ayre was so troubled with smoake, that the shippes at Sea could not see one another, and the beholders at lande might iudge by the eye, that they were turn'd into a clowde. But at last the Admirall of the Finlanders béeing struck betwéen winde and water, did sinke in the midst of them all: Their fléete began to take about to hoise vp their Sayles and flye, the Duke followed them as far as he durst, but being doubtfull of the Kings approch, made his returne the sooner, Landed his powers, and hasted with his army to Stockholland.
               
               Upon his comming to Stock-holland hee vnderstood of the Kings landing at Ca
                        •
                     mer Castle, his whole Nauy consisting of a hundreth Sayle, or there abouts, whereof there were eight and twentie English shippes, which the King had hired of the Marchants being then resident in that coast bearing in the whole Fléete eight and twenty thousand fighting men: Duke Charles béeing aduertised of the newes, doubted what hee were best to doe, Sometimes hée was in minde to giue place vnto his aduersaries, considering the miseries that were like to attend this vnciuill warre, And though hee knew himselfe well lyned with friends, in the kingdome, and that it might bee in his power to resist the king, yet when he reduced into his mind the Calamities that might happen vnto the Land by the maintenance of this warre, He did often perswade himselfe with Otho, rather to giue place to Vitellius, then to resist a Tyrant to the ouerthrow of his Counter, but being otherwise aduised by his friendes, that counselled him either to take vpon him the soueraigntie, or at least to maintaine himselfe in his place, as well for their liues as his owne, hauing all gone so farre that they could not retyre without irreuocable danger, His courage ouercomming his feare, and the respect of the generality aboue his own particular, he resolued to prosecute the war but yet in such manner, that al the worlde might vnderstand hee did it rather to defend himselfe then offend the king howsoeuer

his actes might be mistaken. Whereupon the duke remooues from Stock-holand into the hart of ye countrey to a hold called the castle of Lynnkeeping. By the way the King had taken the castle of Calmer, and detained the Captaine of the castle (placed there by the Duke) close prisoner. And though the Town was surely guarded by the King, and alwaies by him forelayd, to intercept all newes, yet a certaine Townesman vndertooke to carry the Duke intelligence therof, with the consent of the principall in the Town, such was the loue they bare vnto him. The Messenger because he could not passe the ports was let downe at a priuie, ioyning to the Towne Walle, and hauing past the kings Scowt-watch, that lay in diuers places houering about the Town, tooke so circumspectly the aduantage of the time, yt in two daies he recouered the Dukes Army being vpon march, to the castle of Linnekeeping, The tenor of his message was, that on no conditions hee should trust the King, for that as well by the vsage of his officers in the castle of Calmer, as other principall intelligence giuen to some (that loued the Duke too well to keepe it close) that the king purposed his vtter destruction, and that there was no agréement to be made but onely coulorable (vpon any reconcilement) to foregoe a further mischiefe. The Duke though sad to heare these newes, yet imbraced, and rewarded the messenger. And vnderstanding there of the kinges remooue from Calmer to the castle of Sterborrow to his sister Preking Anne, he bends all his forces thither, and within three daies after came w
                     •
                  thin sight of the castle: he pitcht his Tent within a myle of the Towne, before hee attempted any thing in any hostile maner, sent some of his principall friends vnto the king, and humbly desired him to know the cause of th
                     •
                  se vniust warres vndertaken: If the fault lay iustly in the Duke or any of his adherents, they were content either to submit their liues to the law, or to the kings mercy, If any fault were supposed, or but suggested, they desired an indifferent Iudge: And if the fault were found (where in déede it lay)

they desired the same vpon their aduersaries. Finally he besought his Maiestie that he would measure the nature of ill tōgues, not by their sound but by their quality, for there were some about him, that nether loued him nor them, nor ye land. The king receiued these messages, gaue faire but dissembled words, that if he would disperse his Army he would discharge his, Confirme vnto him his place of gouernment, and other offices he enioyed in the kingdome, Prouided that Hartourbelk whom he detained as a prisoner, might be deliuered, and he with the rest of the Lords reconciled. The Duke answered to the first, that if it would please his Maiesty to disperse his Army, hée would doe the like, and for the other vpon due consideration he should find him conformable. Twelue daies were thus spent in messages interchangeably between them The Duke meaning faithfully, the King otherwise, Both their Armies they still retaynd during which time, the trapp was laid to intrappe the Duke. That vpon an interuiewe betwixt them in the sight of both their Armies Fe
                        ••
                     becke Duke of Leif-lande should rush in, and vpon the sodaine surprise the Duke, take him prisoner, and carry him to the Castle aforesaid. But missing of his purpose beeing throughly countercharged by the Duke, his minde was much perplexed in the vncertaine euent of his expectations, His cogitations fought within themselues, when sometimes hee would lay the fault vpon such, as hee imployed in those businesses, Sometimes he would place one, somtimes displace another. In his owne iudgement thinking such a man fit to bee a Commander and sometimes another: Hée would like one to daye, and to morrow vtterly distaste him. To submit hee thought dishonorable, and worse then death, for by open disgraces, the fame of men growes odious. In this conflict of minde, the King retyres with the Duke Ferns-becke to Steckborow, knowing that the fortune of warre had not so done her worst, but that she might beginne a new Tragedy, and the rather for that his strength was weakened in the former assaults, hauing lost two thousand of his men in the

same: The Duke returning to the Leager, and resting there that night.
               The next day the sonne had no sooner stept from the bed of Aurora, but the Dukes Fléet remoues from Finland to Stock-borow, beeing distante an hundreth leagues. The Kings fléete lies in a ha
                     ••
                  n betwéene two rockes. Duke Charles his Fléete ryding in the Mayne, and the King perceiuing how he was charged by Sea and Land began to be diuersly distraughted, sometimes hee resolues to vndergoe a meane estate, alleaging that medium est tutissimum, and Auli ca vita, splendida miseria. Cares are the Contiunall Companions of a Crown, when rest remaines in a lowe condition and fortune. Low shrubs féele least tempest, In valleys is heard least thunder. In Country rooms is great rest, and in little wealth the least disquiet. Dignitie treadeth vpon glasse, and honor is like a fading herbe, that when it bloometh most gorgeous then it blasteth. Sometimes hee thought to disguise himselfe & with his cloathes to change his thoughts, that beeing poorely attyrde, hee might bee mearely minded, and measure his actions by the present fortune, not by his former estate. Yet in the summons of these diuers thoughts and cogitations hee had some respectiue regard of his honour, though all false, yet his heart should not faint, for the courage of a man is shewed in his resolution. In the middest of his extreames hee held it his safest course, to flye by night with all his power, sister, and friends, with a full purpose to attempt the winning of Wasten Castle, being thrée or foure daies iourney from Steckborow. But the Duke that had waded through many dangers, and in many aduentures both prosperous and lucky, had gotten such reputation, that he was highly preferred in the estimation of that Country put the King into such a Continuall feare of his pursuite knowing his strength vnable to match his Enemy.
               The Duke vnderstanding the King to be vnstayed in his resolution, and to stand thus wauering betweene warre and peace (which danted the hearts of his people to bee seene in

field, leades his Army, plants his ordenance against the Castle of Steckborow and takes the kings fléete with seuen tunne of Gold, and all his regall Ornaments. The King had conuaied himselfe to the Castle of Linnekeeping, and was there royally entertained, howbeit in the middest of Solemnities, the sad newes of that vnhappy accident was brought thither vnto him: At the hearing & relation wherof, though hee was much agast, yet with that kingly courage that his vnfortunate successe had left him, he burst out into this or the like passion.
If my moderation (quoth hée) in prosperity had béene answerable to the greatnesse of my birth, and state, or the successe of my last attempts to the resolution of my minde, I might haue come to Linnekeeping, in my accustomed honour, and Royalty, and not as a man thus wasted and spoiled, and to be rather gazed vppon, then honourably entertained. But what cloud soeuer hath darkned my present state, yet haue the heauens, and nature giuen me that▪ in birth & mind, which none can vanquish or depriue me of. I sée that my enemies make their triumphs, the subiect of my miseries, and in my calamity as in a myrour may bée beheld their owne glory: yet let them know this, that I am, and was a prince, furnished with strengh of men, and abiliments of warre, and what maruell is it, if it be my chance to loose, séeing experience teacheth, that the euents of warre are variable, and the successe of policy guided by vncertaine fates: The desire of souerainty admits no limitation, and if Duke Charles must command all, then all must obey. For mine own part whilst I am able, I will make resistance, and will bee vnwilling to submit my neck to a seruile yoake: For so farre the law of nature alloweth euery man to defend himselfe, and to withstand force by force.
This passion of the King filled the peoples hearts and eies with wonder, and delight, and with their best comfort and encouragement they promised their ioynt performances of duty. Insomuch as the King did therewith attempt the taking of Wasten Castle. But

hee whom fortune had before striued to make vnfortunate did in this also faile, and hath nothing left him to glory in that attempt, but his lossé of men, and of much expectation. These crosse accidents sat néer the Kings heart, who with much cares and trauells had wearled his spirits, and greatly spent the strength both of himselfe▪ and his people. For whatsoeuer hee determined, was not carried with any such secret or politike course, but that by some meanes or other the Duke had some notice thereof, and still apprehended his drifts. For this was no sooner plotted, but the Duke sends letters secretly to the Captain, that he should not deliuer the Castle with his priuity.
               The King lying in Linnekeeping sends fiue hundreth men secretly to surprise the Castle, yet was the same able to defend it selfe as indéed it did, and the Captaine therein performed the Dukes will, and retainde his credit, without impeaches of his valor. Questionmēt were made whether they might enter into the Castle in the kings name, but a peremtory answere was returned, that without mandatory letters from the Duke, there was nothing there to be expected but resistance: vpon this the kings mind was disquieted, and a world of inward Conflictes encountred his cogitations, as he stood doubtfully distract, what he were best to doe: at last as fire cannot he hid in straw, nor the nature of man so concealed, but that at last it will breake out, and haue his course: Soe fares it with the king, who perceiuing his pleasure to be like Sicke-mens wills that are parall (which hauing no hand nor seale, are the lawes of a Citie written in dust, and are broken with the blast of euery wind) commanded that forthwith the Duke and all his adherents, should bee proclaimed to stand in the state and nature of Traitors.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI. The Kings Armie, and the Dukes ioyne: Many on the Kings side slaine, and taken prisoners.
               
                  IT Was not long before this newes of the Kings procéedings, in this manner against the Duke was made knowne vnto him: at which the Duke beganne to put on a furious countenance, able to amaze any that made attempts against him, and looking like Hercules when hee aduan
                     •
                  te himselfe against Achelaus, he followes the King to Linnekeeping with all his power: 
                     〈◊〉
                   in a mi
                     ••
                  y morning the morrow before Micha
                     ••
                  mas day, ryses early, calles his Souldiours togeather, deuides his Army (consisting of fiftéene thousand men) into thrée seuerall bodies. One Iames Hill an English m
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the leading of the first: Captaine Scot being his Lie
                     •••••
                  nt,  
                     
                        •
                     ndreas Lemeston Leades the second the Duke himselfe with the thirty takes a wood within a mile of the Kinge lodging: Here might you sée these thrée, shine like thrée meteors in the firmament, all in steele, their Courtes were campes and none Court
                     •••
                  s, but Souldiours. Such effect did the fier of discention worke in the hearts of these Enimies. Fortune turned the whéele of the Swethen and Polish state with vnsteady hand, and had now almost brought it to the point she meant they should sit: shee tooke her fauours from them? Or rather, to speake of a power that controules fortune, and whose very finger throwes downe kingdomes to vtter confusion, or holdes them vp in their greatnes, whether the generall sinnes of the people deserued this, or whether the people were punished for the particular faults of the Princes, or for what other causes soeuer, the rodd of vengeance was laide vpon these Nations,

It is in man to thinke vpon, and feare, but not to examine. Yet sure it is, that as fire catching hold at first but of some meane cottage in some end or corner of a City, hath oftentimes (ere the fury of it could bée put out) swallowed vp in his flames the goodliest and most beautifull buildings, that stood euen farthest out of reach: So did the Clouds of discention burst open th
                     •
                  ir vaines, and let fall the poison of them on these seuerall kingdomes.
               In the expedition of these warres, one Lucas Righter vndertakes to performe the Dukes pleasure in the proclamation of his intended procéedings vnto the Kings Army, (which consisted of foure and twenty thousand men). The tenor of the Dukes proclamation made knowne his greeuances which although it be not answered to expectation, Yet Lucas Righter making his returne, is royally rewarded by the Duke, and appoin
                     •
                  ed that day to attend the Dukes person. The next day following the mist breakes vp, and Armies discouer one another, A ryuer being betwixt the King and the Duke, right thousand of the Kings Souldiers were appointed to make good the bridge. Captaine Scot full of Courage and valour, giues the Charge, but receaues the ouerthrowe: the like successe had Captaine Hill Andreas Lemerson seconds them, and bides the Shock.
               The Duke perceiuing this, issues out of the wood alone hartens his Souldiers, fills his ordinance (wanting shot) with pibbie stones, and makes choice to encampe himselfe and his hoast, euen on the top of a Hill naturally defenced from passage and if any were, those hee stoppped vp with heapes of stones in manner of a Kampier: neare the foote whereof ranne a Riuer, with an vncertaine ford▪ where a troope of his 
                     ••
                  st Souldiours were set in order to receaue the Enemy, and the more to animate the mindes of his men, the leaders went about exhorting, and encourageing the Souldiers, taking all occasion of feare from them, and putting them in hope with all inducements of warre. And the Duke himselfe coursing

hither and thither, protested that that day should bee the full end of their misfortunes, and the beginning of their happinesse, or else his owne perpetuall seruitude and bondage. The Souldiers vpon this shewde as great forwardnesse, and as Ecchoes redoubled his wordes, vowing neuer to yeeld, eyther for woundes or for life, which they were all ready to sacrifice in the cause of their Country: which resolution appearde in the squadron of Captaine Hill, who leading his Army, mette the Enemy with such a showre of shot, that many were slaine, and many wounded: Andreas Lemerson giues the second charge, and that with so fierce an encounter, that he seizeth vpon the enemies ordinance, and turnes the same vpon them. In this conflict the Kinges Army is discomfited, eight thousand of them being slaine, drowned, and taken Prisoners. Upon this sad successe, the King being in the Castle of Linnekeeping calles a Parley. The Duke vpon knowledge of the Kings pleasure, is willing to entertaine it, Messengers are sent enterchangeably, and vpon hearing and debating the gréeuances one of another, the conditions are agréed vpon, the Duke to haue pardon for what was past, and whereas hee had one of his aduersaries already in his custody, it was likewise agréede, that he should haue the other These deliuered into his hands, being the fowre Commissioners that disturbed the peace of Swethen, which was performed accordingly, so as the Duke detaines them prisoners with their wines and children: After this friendly coherence, the Duke rides to the King with sixeteene of his men, leauing charge notwithstanding with Lemerson, that if hee returned not, nor sent word to the contrary within halfe an howre, hee should come to him with his whole Army. The King and the Duke doe so well concord and agree, as they dine together, and are feasted very royally: all matters are pacified on eyther side, so as a Rex-day is appointed, and it is determined that the King shall haue his owne, the Duke

his, and the disturbers of the peace their due. The King returneth to Steckborow to his Fléete, the Duke to Carborowgh where the Dutches lay. The Peace being thus concluded, the Duke dismisseth his Souldiers, and receiues Letters from the King, 
                     •
                  hat hee purposed to passe into his Country with a thousand men, and desires prouision for them: The Duke receiues his message very kindly, and returnes this answere to the King, that if it pleased him, hee should finde prouision for two thousand. As this prouision was preparing, Fernsbecke Duke of Liefland perswades the King to returne with his power to Poland, and not to stand to the Articles of agreement, but to renew the warre, alleadging that he could neuer be absolute King of Swethen, so long as D. Charles liued: And this was the onely ground of the Ciuill warre that followed.
            
            
               CHAP. VII. The King returnes to Poland, Duke Charles renues the warre against the King his Nephew, winnes the City and Castle of Calmer, and setleth the state of the Dukedome of Finland.
               
                  THe King hauing thus falsified his own promise, and deceiued the Dukes expectation, returned with all expedition into Poland, landing at Danske with his Army, leauing the Castle of Calmer and certaine other holds adioyning, strongly manned and victualed for a yeare: Duke Charles being much discontented with this vnkingly breach of his Nephewes promise, knew now that it was no time to capitulate, and that no solicitation, nor any submissiue meanes would serue to appease the Kings anger, and to reintegrate himselfe into his loue and good opinion, called his

chiefe friends about him, to haue their aduise what was best to bee done in this weighty businesse: They all agréede that if it were possible they should recouer the Castle of Calmer that winter, and certaine other holds lately manned and victualed by the King: whereupon the Duke with his Army marcheth to Greenekeeping, a little City in Swethland, where hauing certaine dayes rested and refreshed his Army, he hasted to besiege the Castle of Calmer. The City being indefensible, yeelded vnto him at his first approach: The Duke hauing made his entrance into the City, deliuered sayre speeches to the Citizens, the iust cause that was giuen him to renue the warre, and that no ambitious desire or turbulent spirit of his owne, drew him so violently to these actions of hostility, but that he was full Master of his owne affections, and the necessity of the time in the Kinges incensed hate against him, did moue him to these Armes, that being (quoth he) at the first but priuate betwixt him and the three Dukes his aduersaries, that alwayes maligned his estate, might very well without the generall disturbance of both kingdumes, haue been ended long agoe, and nexther hee helde guilty, nor the land defiled with the shedding so much Polish and Swethish blood, But sith the king had so vnkindly taken part with strangers against a kinsman, and had so vnnaturally laid their treacherous plots against his loyalty, nature and iustice were the faire protectors of his quarrels, that should defend the equity of his cause against the mouth of enuy, or any such calumnious tongues whatsoeuer.
               The Citizens that alwayes affect peace rather then war, looking into the condition of the disturbed States, were much perpleed in mind, and seuerally distracted in their opinions, being vncertaine how to stand affected: They knew that the right and title was in the King, but the power and authority in the Duke: The king had the commaund of the Castle, the Duke the possession of the City. Their feare exceeded their distrust, for both the Dukes Army that lay in the City committed many outrages, notwithstanding the Dukes

strict Proclamation, and againe the ordinance of the Castle augmented their feare, and if Hergusten Boner that commaunded the Castle had had his wil, the Ordenance had béene bent against the Towne. The Duke satisfying aswell as he could the feare of the Citizens, beleaguers the Castle of Calmer, there being a great mutiny within the Castle betwixt the Poles and the Swethians, which serued excellently well for the Duke, for Hergusten Boner that commaunded the Castle vnder the King, agréede with the Poles to haue battered the City, which the Swethean Souldiers resisted, insomuch that from wordes they fell to blowes, in which conflict the Swethens hauing the better, tooke Hergusten Boner Prisoner, together with all the Poles, being to the number of thrée hundreth, and knowing this Act to bee unanswerable to the King, submitted themselues, yeelded the Castle, and gaue vp their Prisoners to Duke Charles. The Duke gently entertaines al but Hergusten Boner (his old enemy) whome hee sent Prisoner to Greephollam, where hee remaines to this day. All the Poles hee sent new apparrelled with white staues in their hands, fairely entreated, to the King. The Duke hauing thus fortunately recouered the City, and Castle of Calmer, did strongly Manne them both, and comforting the Ditizens in the best manner he could, with the rest of his Army marched into the Dukedome of Finland, it being a part of Swethland, bordering vpon Russia, and there beleaguerd the Castle of Oua, and in few dayes wanne it, still fairely entreating the Kinges Souldiers, which in all places wanne him great commendations, & hauing in short time quieted the Dukedome returned backe with his Army to Stockehollam, where he rested the remainder of that winter.
            
            
               
               Chap. VIII Duke Charles inuades the Dukedome of Liefland, surpriseth most of the Townes and Castles of that country, and is in a manner absolute possessor of the whole Dukedome.
               
                  DUke Charles knowing his principall aduersary with the King to bee Fernes beck, Duke of Liefland, (which countrey notwithstanding it ioyneth with Swethland in law and language, had neuerthe lesse a kind of absolute power and authoritie within it selfe) thought it best to beginne the warre in that countrey, that the eye of his aduersaries looking into his actions there, the Kinges forces might not be bent against his owne countrey, the peace whereof hee much desired, and to this end in the beginning of the Sommer following hauing reinforced his Army, Marched into the dukedome of Liefland, The chiefe Citie whereof called Rauell yelded vnto him, into the which he triumphantly entered. The Cittizens themselues, whether for feare of his power, or loue of his person, shewed such tokens of submissiue dutie, that there little letted a Contestation of their allegiance. Hauing there rested certaine daies he rayseth his Army and marcheth towards the Castle of Whettensten, which in short time was yeelded vnto him. From thence he came to the City of Perno, which he likewise tooke in, placing there a strong garrison. He marched from thence to another strong Citie called Durpe, and in fiue daies forced the Towne: fiue hundreth Polish Souldiours within the Towne submitted vnto him with tender of their seruice, whom he gently intreated, & entertained. They euer after seruing him in all his wars very faithully. The Lieflanders themselues, noting the gentle behauiour of Duke Charles wisht in their hearts all good successe vnto him, though they durst not shew it outwardly, forfeare

of their Lordes displeasure, who in his rule bare euer such a rough hand ouer them, that hee séemed a Tirant or an vniust Usurper, rather then an honorable gouernour, or a naturall prince.
               Duke Fernesbeck hauing some intelligence of the sodaine inuasion of his countrey, raiseth with all the hast hee could, all the powers hee could make, being constituted by the King, Generall of his warres, and within a few daies landed in Liefland, whereof Duke Charles hauing vnderstanding, and fearing to be preuented, sent very secretly and spéedily fifteene hundreth souldiours vnder the command of coronell Hill to surprise the citie of Venden, but (I know not how) the plot being discouered, and Ambuscadoes laide in the way by Fernesbeck, they were sodainly charged, and being weary and faint through a long marche, were soone ouerthrowne, and slame, only the Coronell with seauenteene of his fellowers, the poore remaine of so many hundreds, making way with the sword, through the fury of the Enemy, did wounderously escape, bringing this sadnewes backe to their Lord. The Duke, though it somewhat troubled him, yet shewed no signe either of feare or sorrow, but hartned on his souldiours to the reuenge of their fellowes deaths. There was nothing that aduantaged him more then his Celeritie in all his attempts, for whensoeuer any aduantage was proffered, hee would neuer pretermitte the least occasion. Duke Charles vpon the newes of this ouerthrow, vnderstanding of new succours shortly to come out of Poland in the aide of Fernesbeck sodainly raiseth his (Army, his Enimies supposing that the late ouerthrow had much quaild his courage, and nothing lesse suspecting then what he intēded) marcheth with all spéed to the Citie of Venden, into which Duke Fernesbeck but two daies before had made his triumphant entrance. The march was so speedily and secretly made, that they of the Towne vnderstood not of his remooue from Durpe, till they saw him with his Army before the walls of Venden.

Ferns-beck staying within the Towne, euery hower looking for his new supplies, when he saw himselfe (thus vnlookt for) confronted by the Duke, and his Army, stood so amazed that a long time he was in doubt what it were best to doe. At last made a shew of resistance of the Enemy, and defence of the Towne; till the approach of the night following, In which time he deuised such a plot, that vtterly lost his honor, and the Loue of all his friends within his Dukedome. For in the beginning of the night hauing throughly instructed his Commanders, and followers, what hee meant to doe, No Townesman supposing what he purposed, made an absolute spoile of the Towne, ransacking euery mans house, and carying away their plate, money and iewels, flyes closely away and leaues the Towne abandoned. Duke Charles had sodaine intelligence hereof, and with all hast pursues him, and in the way he takes certaine of Fernesbeckes Espials, whome hauing threatened, was by them conducted to the place where Duke Fernbecke that night encamped, and hauing giuen the charge to Coronell Hill, that was desirous to reuenge himselfe of his late ouerthrow, sodainely set vpon them being at rest, slew the most part of them, recouers the goods taken a little before so violently and dishonourably out of the City, Fernsbecke himselfe with a few of his followers hardly escaping.
               Duke Charles hauing thus recouered his late losse, returnes with his Army to the Citie of Venden, where, with all acclamation of ioy hee was honorably entertained: Being thus seated in Venden, within two daies after his aboad in the Town he sendeth Eight hundreth men vnder the cō
                  duct of one Peerslompe, a gallant Swethish Captaine, to surprise the Castle of Newhall bordering vpon Russia, which was by him fortunately atchieued, who returning to the Duke gaue him presently the command of fiue thowsand men, Coronell Hill being Steward of the feeld. The proiecte was to besiege Cokenhouse, being then and at this day the strongest Castle in christendome. The duke thought

if he could gaine this castle, he were then thoroughly possest of all the dukedome, hee himselfe purposed shortly after to second him. This gallant young gentleman with all speed, and with a full spirit marcheth to this honorable exploit, and encampeth his Army close to the walles of the Towne, which being very strong, & faithfull to their Lord, endured a long siege with great effusion of blood on both sides, but at the comming of the Duke, the Towne was taken, and vpon a breach in the entrance of the Towne, this young captaine was vnfortunately (but honorably) slaine with the shot of a Musket in his priuities, sent from the castle: Duke Charles was very sorry for his death, making a vow that he would neuer raise his Army, till he had either forced the castle, or followed the fortune of this gallant captaine. Three moneths the Duke lay before the castle with continuall batterie, and in the end takes it, and keepes it at this day. Upon the taking of the castle he was sufficiently reuenged for the death of Peereslompe. Thus all the castles, houlds, and fortresses, in Liefland, were in this Summer brought vnder the command of Duke Charles, onely the castle of Ree, which was second to none but Cokenhouse, was yet left vnassaulted. Duke Charles hauing thus in a manner the entier possession of Liefland, and being now wearied with this long toyle, hearing no newes of Duke Fernesbeckes returne, in the latter end of the Sommer, hauing ordered his affaires in that countrey returned to his dutchesse into Swethland, lying then in Stock holland, before his going he left the cities & castles in the dukedome, being thoroghly maned, vnder the gouernmēt of his friends. The rest of his Army rested vnder the command of Coronell Hill, who hauing directions from the Duke at his departure, to attempt the taking of the Towne of Ree, together with the castle, set forwarde with hope and courage, while the Duke was vpon his iourney into Swethland, and encamped before the Towne of Ree, burnt the suburbes, assaulted the Towne, battered the walles, &c. But finding it stronger manned, then either it was supposed, or

stood at that time with his power to force, returned according to his directions to the Duke.
            
            
               CHAP. IX. Duke Charles winters in Swethland: takes order for the renewing of the warre: The Sommer following is fought withall in Liefland by Duke Fernsbeck, and discomfited: His strange escape, and recouery of Swethland.
               
               
                  DUke Charles made his abode with his Dutches the Winter following in Swethland, hauing still priuy intelligence from Poland of the Kings plotts, & procéedings. That Winter nothing was attempted, but in the prime of the Spring following Fernesbeck returned to Liefland with fiue thousand men. A greater power beeing appointed shortly to second him. Upon his landing he marched to the Towne and Castle of Ree, where he reposed himselfe to vnderstand what Duke Charles intended to doe: Manie blamed the Duke for that hee let slip the taking in of the Castle, which if it had béene, Fernsbeck had had no place to haue retyred to in all his kingdome. But it is an casier matter for a man to Censure then to act: wordes are soone spokē, so are not deeds performed, for Coronel Hill Attempted with the remainder of ye army, to do what was possible to be done, but the winter being at hand, which in that coast is very extreame, his men wearied and weakned with a long sommers toyle, euery mans naturall desire in ye Country to rest thēselues in their stones, the winter season tooke away al possibility of winning the Castle Duke Charls vnderstā
                  ding of his Enemies arriuall at Ree, let slip no time, but suddenly raised his powers to the number of fiftéene thousand men, tooke shipping at Stock-holland and landed with his

whole Army safely within two daies, within 15. myles of Ree. His purpose was to haue sodainely beleaguerd the Castle before the rest of his enemies forces were Landed out of Poland, which he vnderstood were ready to bee shipt: and to that end (hauing refreshed his Army) hee marched speedily and out of order, in the latter end of the day towards the Castle of Ree, supposing by the benefit of the night following, the better to haue ensconc't and fortified himselfe. But as no man, though neuer so circumspect, can warrant to himselfe the assurance or continuance of successe, and especially in the actions of warre, where fortune bears a sway so this noble Duke found the nature of her fauours, which shee had powred vpon him, to be so vnstable, that in a Minute she snatcht from him, what a long time before she had prodigally bestowed. For Fernsbeck hauing intelligence of the Dukes landing, sodenly issued out of the Castle with thrée thousand of his followers, and hauing a place of great aduantage about thrée myles from the Castle, the way that Duke Charles must of necessity passe, tooke the benefit of the place and the night, lying there in Ambush for the Dukes comming, and giuing directions not to stirre till the vant guard of the Dukes Army had past them, and then sodenlie to charge the battaile, and the Rereward to giue the Alarum to the Castle, At which time a Polish Captaine with thrée thousand Poles was appointed to charge the vantguard of the Dukes: which on all sides was accordingly accomplisht. The Duke being in the Battaile, finding himselfe so sodainely and dangerously inuiron'd, gaue (according to the Tyme) the best directions, resist hee must of necessity, Retyre he could not▪ wherfore ryding chéerefully vp & downe his Army, gaue encouragement to his Souldiours, making still the danger lesse then it was, But Fernesbeck stirrd vp with a desire of reuenge, and recouery of his dukedome, and hauing aduantage of the place, so violently assayled, that at the first Charge he made a great breach into the body of the Dukes battaile, she like was performed at the instant vpon the rereward by one Stockland, a gallant young Polish Captaine.
               
                  Thus all parts of the Army beeing assaulted, that before was weary, weake, and fainte, through a long Marche, they were sodenly put into such a fear, as begat much amazement in them, so as men desperate of all hope to resist, they flong away their weapoas and fled, hoping to saue themselues that way, wherein was least hope of safeguard. The Duke did what lay in his power to stay his flying Souldiers. But in this perplexed face of flight, where nothing but the Caracters of feare and despaire could be séene, no words could suffice, nor any commanders tongue be regarded, but in this confused manner they ran vpon their deaths, whilst the enemy stood ready to receaue them. And in this horrour of blood and massacre, the Dukes horse was slain vnder him, he himselfe hurt, and perceiuing no hope either by fight or flight, hee fell downe (as dead) among the dead Carcasses, reteyning a hope that way happely to saue himselfe. Of fifteene thousand men, fourtéen thousand and odde were put to the sword, the rest fled to their shippes. Euery man supposing the Duke to be slaine. The sad newes of this fatall ouerthrow and of the Dukes supposed death, was soone brought into Swethland, which vpon the hearing thereof, shewed such a general face of sorrow, as if the whole land had put on one entire mourning garment, to attend his sad and vntimely funerals They now saw their Prince sodēly snatcht from them in the spring time of their hopes, & in the prime of all his glory, they found themselues naked, and open to the Polish Tyranny. They feared their Religion and gouernment would now be forced and adulterated by the tyrannous command, and superstitious customes of Poland, wherewithall they knew their King was wholly corrupted. No heart so Noble, no head so circumspect, no hande so victorious, to order the state, manage the affaires, and fight the battailes of their Countrey, Now he was dead all hope was buried, and all their happines, and fréedom should be laid in the graue with him, and last but not least of their sorrow, they wanted his body to giue it honorable funerall.
               
                  But as this false newes made them true mourners, so this passion of sorrow for his supposed death, was afterward turned into the contrary passiō of ioy, for the Dukes strange and vnknowne deliuery: to whome wee will now returne, hauing left him before among the dead carkases of his Souldiers. There was a young Gentleman of Swethland, attendant to the Duke (whose name I could not learne) that saw the Duke when he fell, thinking him with the rest to haue beene slaine, and desirous to doe the last seruice to his Prince, kept close (hauing a place fitte for his purpose) hoping to recouer the body of the Duke, and finding in the darke of the night, a certain Gentleman of Poland, newly slaine, shifteth armour and apparrell with him, and hauing the Polish tongue, vndertooke as one of Fernsbecks souldiers to rifle the dead bodies, and hauing found the place where the Duke lay, all imbrued with the bloud of his Souldiers, and comming neere to raise the body, the Duke beganne to striue: The Gentleman amased, askt in fayre termes if he were aliue: to whome the Duke replyed, Art thou my friend? the Gentleman told him his name and purpose, and sith he was aliue, he should horse him selfe vpon the Gentlemans horse, and flie vnto his ships, vsing the benefite of the night for his escape, while hee himselfe would make what shift he could to follow after. The Duke being thus raysed from this graue of bloud worse then Golgotha, embracced him, thankt him, and spake these words, God prosper thee, whome if it please, that thou shalt liue to out liue the fortunes of this night, there was neuer man so deare, as thou shalt be to thy Lord: wherevpon the Duke mounted, and with all speed hasted to his shippes, where the ioy of his comming was so much the greater, by how much the feare before of his death was the stronger.
               The Gentleman whom hee left behind, being vnluckely discouered, was vnfortunately slaine, which though the last, was not the least honour he atchieued, to die in the safegard of his Prince. The Duke stayed long for his returne,

but at length suspecting that which had happened, hoyst saile and safely arriued in Swethland. It is a world to heare the concourse of people that from all parts came to sée him: Upon the newes of his landing, they strewd flowers in the way, as thinking the Earth vnworthy to beare him: they shewed all signes and tokens of ioy, as now holding themselues free from those feares, which the report of his death had before possest them with. Now as men newly reuiued, they beganne to entertaine new hopes, and to flatter themselues with a perpetuall stability of their estates: The Sunne, which they supposed had made an eternall Set from their Horizon, did now shine againe in the middest of their H
                        •
                     mispheare, and this glad day, after their sad night, they made a generall vow sor euer to consecrate. Thus as in a triumphant manner the Duke helde on his course, to Stockeholland, where the triumphes for his deliuery he found doubled, with the Dutches his wife, his kindred and his neerest friends, that in ioy of his returne feasted many dayes together.
               Duke Fernsbecke proud of the late victory, let slippe no time▪ but hauing the seconds of his power, safely landed out of Poland, recouered many of his townes and Castles which hee before had lost, and which he holdeth at this day: Duke▪ 
                  Charles did little that Summer, but that hee sent certaine forces to strengthen those principall townes and 
                     〈◊〉
                   in Liefland, which he yet holdeth. And in this Summer, not from any ambitions desire of his owne, but the policy of the time, in the state of the Kingdome, so requi
                  
                     ••••
                  , at the speciall instigation of his friends, for the coun
                  
                     ••••
                  s good, but principally vpon respect of the churches peace, 
                     〈◊〉
                   tooke vppon him the Crowne and Scepter of Swethland, in the yeare of our Lord God, 1604. which hee doth still no
                     •
                  ly and peaceably gouerne, as the state of the Time doth suffer. The wars being for the most part transferred into the Dukedome of Leifland. And thus as I 
                     〈◊〉
                   enformed, standeth the condition of the affaires of that kingdome at this time.
            
            FINIS
            
         
      
   