
      
         
            
            
            LONDONS DOVE: OR A Memoriall of the life and death of Maister Robert Doue, Citizen and Marchant-Taylor of LONDON, and of his seuerall Almesdeeds and large bountie to the poore, in his life time. He departed this life, on Saterday the 2. day of this instant Moneth of Mar, 1612.
            LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede, for Ioseph Hunt, and are to be solde at his house in Bedlam, neere Moore-field Gate. 1612.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR IOHN SWINNERTON KNIGHT, ONE of the Aldermen of the honorable Citie of London.
            
               HAuing drawne certaine particular remembrances, of the bountie and charitable Almes-deedes of Maister Robert Doue, lately deceased (done all for the most part in his life time.) And they being digested into a volume (although little for quantitie, yet not vnworthy to be committed to memorie) I thought they could not be better bestowed then vpon such as held commerce with that company, or were Heads of that body, whereof he continued a long time a worthy member.
            Amongst which, I haue selected you from a number of others, and am bold to present this little labour vnto you, as a brother of that Societie, and one that can well iudge both of the Relation, and the truth thereof.
            The chiefe and farthest point that my intention seekes to arriue at in this, is but to leaue to Posteritie

a deserued Testimonie, and commemoration of his s
                  ••
               erall liberalities, to the intent that the hand of M
                  •
               rcy which Heauen (in him) hath stretcht forth ouer distressed people, being duly considered: Others (to whom God hath plentifully giuen his blessings) may be stirred vp to trace him in the like steppes of true Cha
                  •
               i
                  •
               ie, and be encouraged to looke into their owne Sou
                  •
               es betimes, and to imitate him in the works of pietie.
            It is my Loue that makes tender of this vnto you, which I pray receiue with such good acceptation: As with my best affection, it comes and is bestowed vpon you: Thus humbly referring my selfe to your censure, I rest
            
               Deuoted vnto your worship, Anthe: Nyxon.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            LONDONS DOVE, OR THE MIRROVR OF MARCHANT-TAYLORS.
            
               CAlling to minde the finall end of mans Creation, (which is) to glorifie GOD, and to edifie one an other in the wayes of true Pietie; I thought it a dutie, as well in respect of the one, as in regard of the other; to publish this care & wonderfull exāple of the vertuous life, & Christian death of M. Robert Doue; Citizen & Marchant-Taylor of London: who whilst he liued, was a Mirrour of Charitie, and now being dead, is a true patterne of perfect Christianitie; But how I may be bolde to lay colours of commendation, (though neuer so fresh, true, and liuely) on the picture of his Bountie; drawen foorth by the cunning hand of his worthie déedes, (or at least, the déedes of his hand, vpon the seuerall Tables of needie persons; I am in doubt, since by these colours of mine, his glorious Picture may be much obscured, that of it selfe is so faire and beautifull, as the hearts of all admiring it; Their Pennes in priuate, and Tongues in publique, are busied to write in short, and speake at large, of the worthines of the same.
            Notwithstanding, It being such▪ that extracteth from the Tongues of euery one, this Confession:

               Huic similem non vidi; I haue not seene anie like to this man: And more also:

                  Nulla fere
                        •
                     t similem Secla futura tibi.
                  The Age to come (it's like to bee)
                  Will neuer bring the like to thee.
               
            
            And such being the condition of euery good worke of bountie (as Almes-déedes, or such like) that it leaues a perpetuall Impression behinde, that Posteritie may see in succeeding times, the venerable foot-steps of such, as haue trode the pathes of precedencie in true Loue, and Charitie: Let vs now behold, what liuely Prints this happy man made (euen in his life time) by the sundry stamps of his manifold bounties; That the times present, & future Ages, may both imitate and admire the same. This Phrase of Scripture may be duely attributed vnto him,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 3.
                
               Manie haue done vertuously and bountifully, but thou surmountest them all: What Trée may more iustly make compare with the T
                     •
                  ee of this mans blessed life,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . then that which like an Heauenly plant, growing vp in an earthly soyle, beareth twelue manner of Fruites, euen t
                     •
                  elue-times monethly in the yéere. The very Leaues being for Medicine, as the Fruit is for meat; For hee in good works was so fruitful
                  •
               , that hee spread-foorth his braunches, with their fruits,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                after seuerall manners, vnto thirtéene sortes of persons:
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  -men.
                Feeding them twelue times also monthly in the yeere: that is, All the yéere long, with meat & medicine; As wc such Fruite & L
                     •
                  aues, as his Tree affoorded. Preseruing the sound in health, ridding the diseased of infirmities, and so continuing both in life. By which they cease not with chéerefulnes, to lifte vp this voyce to Heauen: Oh how happie Creatures are wee, that euer hee was borne? And thrice blessed hee, that euer hee so liued, to helpe (in number,) more distressed members of the Mysticall bodie of CHRIST, then were the members of his owne naturall bodie.
            
            
               To speake of his godly life, it was such, as gained the rare commendation of all that knew him, aswell for his wisedome, As for his honestie, gentlenes, and affabilitie: And aboue all, for his feruent zeale which he bare vnto Gods word: For his whole heart was bent to séeke the Lord, His legges were alwaies willing and readie (so long as they had abilitie to performe their dutie, to carrie his aged bodie to frequent Sermons, and heare diuine seruice: His whole delight was to be conuersant in the Scriptures, and to meditate vpon them day and night. Insomuch (as while his sight serued) he was seldome or neuer found without a bible or some other good booke in his hands: And when that failed him, he would spend his Time in conferring, talking, and reasoning of the word of God, and of Religion, and especially of places and points that did most concerne his latter end, and mortalitie: Asking what is the Sense of this place? what of that? How may this place be expounded, How that? What obserue you of this point, and what of that? So that he séemed to be as it were rauished with the same Spirit that Dauid was, when he said,
The Zeale of thine house hath eaten me vp.
            
            Oh happie Doue, whose soule is a sacrifice to God, and in whose flames so many poore mens prayers are flowne vp to heauen.
            Blessed maist thou be, as by beholding thy selfe to be so graced of thy God, as by seeing thy sinnes, to cleaue vnto the pauement through humilitie: and by bestowing thine Almes, to reach vnto the firmament through thy liberalitie, and bountie, hearing the words of that message once brought to Cornelius his eare, sounding a fresh in thine heart.
                  Acts. 10.
                
               Thine Almes haue 
                     •
                  scen
                     •
                  ed before the face of God. Ascending vp, to be rewarded, and yet abiding below to be

renowned. Ascending vp, That God may shew his faithfulnes in performing no lesse 
                  •
               hē he hath promised in rewarding more tenne thousand solde then is deserued: And yet abiding belowe to be renowned. That thy workes staying here amongst men, God may thereby be glorified, who is in heauen amidst his Angels. Good workes here outwardly performed, declare and shew forth Gods great graces, wherewith his Saints on earth are from heauen inwardly beautified. Euery good worke of theirs swéetly spiced with faith, abiding with the distressed members of afflicted Iesus,
               
                  Phil. 4.18.
                beeing as a comfortable ball of Balme vnto them: but ascending vp vnto God, comes to be in his Nostrills: the very odour that smelleth swéet. It were to be wished, that his good minde might be a motiue to men of greater Reuenues and abilitie to imitate the like déedes of charitie, and that the saying of Ierom (verified in his daies) touching the pietie of people, may not be alluded to our Time. Parsinebecillior vincit robustiorem. The weaker part doth ouertop the stronger. Meaning in relieuing the poore, and yéelding succour to the distressed.
            
               
               Of 13. aged men, to whom he giues yearely 20. nobles a peece, and at the end of euery three yeare, to each man a gowne.
               WHat the Monuments are of his bountie and liberalitie, the tongues and prayers of poore and aged men doe iest
                     •
                  fie, (whereby there are some of them almost become infants againe,) & doe declare, and the meate in their mouthes, and cloathes to their backes doe actually testifie vnto the eye, that which their words doe openly giue testimonie of vnto the eare. They that before had taken vp this Lamentation, We are aged, succourles, & fallen into distresse and miserie, may now cease their dolorous complaynings, and for the comfort they receiue by their bountifull Benefactor, they may turne it into this swéeter songe of ioy, Loe: It is not with vs as it hath béene: We that were afflicted, are now comforted, our heauenly father hath cast a louing looke vpon vs, and hath sent vs, a second father better then our first father vnto vs. Oh what greatnes is this? vera magnitudo, Euen very greatnes indéed: Tueri infirmos: Thus to defend the weakest; Thus to maintaine the poorest; This is the very ablen
                     •
                  s, and the most true power a man can haue giuen of God, Eos defendere qui nihil possunt: To defend them from the rigour of distresse & extreamitie, who are least able to resist necessitie. Oh goodnes truely good, & surely great in him, Benefacere sine merito remunerationis▪ & ab
                        •
                     que spe omni 
                        〈◊〉
                      ributionis. To doe good, (yea and so much good, without all desert of theirs that might call for reward at his hands, or without hope of his, to receiue recompence at theirs. But his hearts loue to God (which being true loue, is the very desire, & delight in doing his commandements) constrained and vrged him (oh blessed constraint & happie

violence) to doe all the good he hath done. This vertuous man knowing these poore aged and impotent men, to be least able to helpe themselues, dealt with them, as Iacob did with Ephraim, of whom we read thus: That when Ioseph had set his two sonnes, Manassah,
                  
                     Gen. 48.
                   and Ep
                        •
                     raim, the elder on his right hand, and the younger on his left, for his father to lay his righthand on the head of the elder, and giue him the principall blessing, Iacob, beyond the expectation of Ioseph, crossed his Armes, laying his right hand on the younger, and his left hand on the elder, being led thereunto by a foresight of things to come, that was cléerer and better, then was his insight into any thing present.
               So this most godly father, being presented by the world, both with rich and poore, The rich at the right hand, (euen his able friends and kindred) and the poore at the left (euen aged persons, and impotent widowes) he beyond the expectation (because beside the custome of the world) crossed his armes (as it were) of abilitie laying his right hand of bounteous liberalitie on the poore, and giuing them his principall blessing. But his left hand of gratuitie, on his well able kindred, and friends: the foresight of his Soule (illuminated by diuine inspiration) being cléerer to behold future things, then were the eyes of his humane reason to behold things present. Beholding euen for the very present, this honorable title, Pater pauperum, miserorum adiutor, The father of the poore, and the helper of men miserable: Engrauen on Gods fatherly helping hands, as well as Dominus Dominantium, & Rex R
                        •
                     gum, The Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
                  
                     Reu. 19.16.
                   
                  engrauen on his powerfull thigh. And beholding also for the which is to come, The day of the Lord, called Magnus ille dies, That great day. And the

Lord himselfe at that day pronouncing the sentence of his Iudgemēt on all, according to their works of mercie, or obduracie, towards his poore distressed mēbers, giuing or denying them the ioyes of heauen, as they haue giuen or denyed the comforts of this earth, vnto the indigent and néedie. Taking all good or euill, as done vnto himselfe.
               Thus he hauing shewed his bountie and charitable Liberalitie vnto his impotent, and aged creatures, Wormes and no men;
                     Psal. 22.6.
                   
                  euen the children of men that are but Wormes.
                  
                     Iob. 25.6.
                   They to cléere themselues of vnthankfulnes towardes their good God, for him doe acknowledge his wonderfull rich gift and worthy Talent, which he gaue in his life time, into the hands of his Companie, to endure for euer; Namely, to each of them, (being 13. in number,) the yéerly pension of sixe pounds, thirtéene shillings and foure pence, and to euery one of them a seuerall Gowne, at euery thrée yeeres ende. Bringing not onely meanes to maintaine their bodies by the staffe of his Bread,
                     Chap. 31. 20
                   but their Loynes also (as Iob speaketh,) to be warmed with the Fleeces of his Sheepe.
               
            
            
               Of his Charitie to threescore poore Widowes, in the Parish of Saint Buttolphes without Algate, and to sixe men, who haue euerie three yeeres seuerall Cloakes, and foure Nobles a 
                     •
                  eere for euer.
               
                  AMongst many others whome hee hath relieued, let it not be forgotten what he hath done to p
                     ••
                  re distressed wi
                     •
                  owes: who hauing receiued an Annuall portion frō this their godly Benefactor, doe continue their thankfulnes in that remembrance.

Their néede suc
                     •
                  oured, cryeth euery houre in their hearts, to put them in minde of their dutie, and their reliefe vrgeth them not to be vnthankfull for so great a ben
                     •
                  fite. They from whome God had taken the helpe of their Husbandes, being left in care and sorrowe for their losse, and in distresse for want of maintenance, were often enforced with teares to lament their miserable estate, forsaken of Friends, and through pouertie despised of kinred. They had no abilitie to helpe themselues & olde age denied thē strength of body, to labour for their liuing.
               In this extremitie they were comfortles, sauing in the hope they had of Heauen, and Celestiall ioyes, oftē wishing it would please God by ending their liues, to giue end to their miseries But as the Lorde neuer forsaketh such as trust in him. So in his good time, he prouided meanes for their succour, styrring vppe the heart of this his déere Seruant, to regard them with compassionate affection; and to stretch out his merciful hands, to succour their bodies beaten with sorrow. God blessed them by his earthly giftes, whome he had blessed by his heauenly Graces; By his handes hath the Lord wip't away their teares, and breathed newe life into their hearts laden with griefes.
               The loue of Ionathan neuer more appeared to his deare friend Dauid then his loue hath bene manifested to CHRISTS poore members; wherefore it may be saide of him, that the candle of his Faith was not hid vnder a Bushell, but hath burned most bright, to the good example of others. Hée like a true Steward, hath performed his dutie; Hee hath nourished Children; Hee hath lodged the Harbourlesse; Hee hath giuen comfort to the succourlesse; Hee hath ministred to them that were in aduersitie; and continually giuen to euery good worke. It resteth now that these released

persons doe yéelde continuall praise to GOD, for so gratious a Benefactor; & daily pray that the number may be increased, that the poore may be respected of those that are honored in the Gates, and the crie of the needie may cease in the stréetes. And to the ende that this charitable déede may not be thought vnworthilie bestowed vpon them who are now relieued, that before were distressed, It is expedient they should so behaue thēselues in their actiōs, as God thereby may be glorified, & others by their exāple, brought frō vice to vertue. Their mindes that before were clogged wt care, wanting ye which was necessary; by which they were made vnapt, either in outward action, or inward thought, to serue their God; is now freed from that heauy burden, by the works of this reuerend citizen. So as they haue now no let, but as the P
                        •
                     almist saith, To set their delight in the Law of the Lord, & to exercise themselues therein all the dayes of their life.
               
               Besides his yéerely Pension allowed to these thréescore Widowes, which is, vi. s. viii. d. per annum, foreuer: besides other allowances; He hath also left order towards the cōtinuall maintenāce (which was begun in his life time) of▪ poore widowes in Merchātailors Almeshouses on Tower hill. And to sixe poore men euery third yeere, cloaks a piece, & to each of them xxvi. s. viii. d. a yeere, to be continued for euer. And as anie of these Almes-men shall die, & their places g
                     •
                  ow voyde, then these Cloake-men by Election to stand, and possesse the former p
                     •
                  ace, and beneuolence in reuertion.
               In regarde whereof, they may (with the Prophet) crie out and say, Oh what shall wee giue vnto GOD for all his ben
                        •
                     fites, and the Blessings hee hath bestowed on the Sonnes of men?
               
               If wee would knowe howe to please him, and bee readie to followe his will and Commaundement,

though wee be not able to performe what we would, yet doing what we can, our vnperfectnes shalbe mad perfect through CHRIST, and estéemed as righteous in the merites of his Passion; Neither doth the Lord 
                     ••
                  quire more then a thankfull heart, as the Scripture test
                     •
                  fieth. Hee that offereth praise shall glorifie mee, and to him that disposeth his wayes aright, will I shew the Saluation of GOD.
               
            
            
               Of his Charitie to Bedlam and Bride-well, The Hospitall of S. Bartholmews, and Saint Thomas Hospitall in Southwarke.
               
               
                  NOw turne your eyes vpon wounded, and vlcerous Laz
                        •
                     rs, that lye vnder the handes of Chyrurgicall Physitians; (made miserable, by their owne grieuous, and Eye-wounding sores, and made happie againe, through present hope, and after happe, to be perfectly Cured, by the prouidēt meanes of this godly Benefactor) and you shall sée their woundes and Ulcers to stand wide open before you; Oh looke in at them, & you shal beho
                     •
                  de Miserie her selfe, to haue taken possession of their earthly bodies, (being Houses of Clay, as Iob calleth them,) for to dwell therein. And when you are gone, come againe within a while, & beholde their woundes closed and sores skinned, and séeing nothing but bare scarres & Prints in their places; pronounce, that Mercie hath beene there, and displacing Miserie, (nothing to be seene, but her foote-steps) hath set ioy, health, and comfort, as ioynt Tenants in possession, assigning them to pay for their Rent, Laude and praises vnto the HIGHEST; It being his goodnes that

sent his seruants Charitie to doe all the good is done vnto them. And séeing it is God, which hath striken them, (as Iob felles them) bringing on them vulnera per alium, wounds by something from without, or making to rise vp in them vulnera perse Sores frō something within; It is for them to know, and acknowledge, that Ipse medetur qui vulnerauit, &c. He which woundeth them by one meanes, healeth them by an other: And he which hath striken them by his instruments of equitie, salueth them by his hands of Mercie. Striking them, that their hearts may see into their sinne, and acknowledge his iustice, heartily crying, Iustus es Domine & iustum iudicium iuum. Righteous art thou (Oh Lord) and iust is thy Iudgement. And healing them againe that they may behold his mercifull goodnes, sweetly singing, Gratia dei est, misericordia Domini est: This is the fauour of God, This is the mercy of the Lord: (that is) euen that they perish not.
               Vpon swéet experience of which great Mercy, Dutie laies vpon them (that are thus relieued, if shamefully they shake it not off) this humble confession of Iacob, I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies. And this great mercy which they finde comming vnto them from God, they may cōceiue, that through this godly Benefactor, as through a Conduit pipe. It is deriued vnto them from their good God: the fountaine of mercy: yea rather brought vnto them in him as in a vessell of mercy: That so God shewing them mercy by him, and they returning him honour, and praise from him: He may aswell from them to Godward be vas honoris, A vessell of honour: as he from God to them, vas misericordiae. A vessell of mercy. Who as he was alwaies, a charitable relieuer of diseased or maimed persons: So did he but at Easter last, not

thrée wéekes before his happie departure out of this miserable world, sent to each of the places a
                     •
                  oresaid Thirtie and odde pounds a peece, to be imployed to the ease and comfort of such as were there detained.
            
            
               That Prysoners haue beene relieued and released out of the prisons of Newgate: The Counters and Ludgate by the riches of his gift.
               HEre may you behold the further care of this vertuous man, in his continued déedes of charitie in his life time, and a little before his death, extended to the comfort of distressed prisoners: who if euer men had cause to magnifie the Maiestie of God for his gifts bestowed by the hands of his seruants: Then may not they be bashfull to speake, or bury in silence the bountifull fauour of so good a Benefactor, who through his charitie hath not onely relieued them being in prison, but hath also loosed the lockes of the prison doores, and made the bolts flie open by his bountie.
               They whose debters made them captiues, and cast them into loathsome prison, where the bordes were their beds, where the prospect was but I congrate, and the swéetest ayre infectious smell, at length by his meanes found ease of their extremities.
               Oh that hard hearted people would be but moued (as this good man was) to enter into a charitable consideration of the extremitie of Prisons, and the distressed estate of Prisoners.
               They heare nothing there but mones, nor haue sight of any other thing but miserie: Their smiles choakt with sighes, and their mixth ouercome with

morning: carefull complaints are their communication, Oppression and extreame dealing, is the tale they tell of, and euery one knowes better how to declare his griefe, then which way to redresse it. Fraude, deceit, and faithles friends, bring most men in, and hardnes of heart, crueltie and lacke of mercie kéepe them there, where many moneths together they feede on the bread of affliction, and drinke the water of sorrow.
               Let no man speake of extremitie, that hath not knowne Captiuitie, nor brag of friendship & friends, till he haue béene bolted in prison: This is the fire that purgeth the gold from the drosse, and the touchstone to trie a faithfull friend from a fawning flatterer: There dwelles the melancholy Muses of sad petitions, who like Briarius with an hundred eyes write swiftly, but the messengers that carrie them, may be fitly compared to leaden héeld Saturnus, that finishes his course but once in thirtie yeares: Thus the poore mans thoughts which runne as swift as Pegasus, expecting an answere, doe in vaine make a thousand long lookes out of the yron grate to sée the backe returne of this slow worme: At which time it often comes to passe, that his hopes are vtterly frustrate.
               Then sends he for his brethren, and they looke big▪ for his kindred and they will not know him; for his friends, and they will not come at him; but with coy lookes, and scornefull termes they all forsake him, and no man pitties his afflictions.
               Flintie hearted Creditors haue threatened to make dice of poore mens b
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  s, but they would be paide, and the while their poore wiues, and succourles children, haue béene readie to starue at home. But in the middest of all this miserie, when hope of helpe

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
hath béene past and nothing lookt for, but continuall calamitie; Then hath the Lord by his seruant sent helpe, as he did to Danie
                        •
                     
                   in the Lyons denne, and to Peter being in prison. This elect seruant did not onely like Abacuck, feede the hungrie Captiue, but like the blessed Angell of God he hath also taken by the hand, and brought forth the poore, and miserable Prisoner, paid his debt, and set him free. Hereby they haue enioyed the sweete blessing of libertie, and béene cleered of that crueltie, which they were lately before afflicted with.
               God increase the number of such charitable men, and soften the flintie hearts of cruell oppressors: Before whose eyes this worthie man hath set an euerlasting president: Aswell to be continued in these places for euer: As by his godly gift at Easter last, being but three weekes before his decease, who gaue to each of the prisons afore named 50. pound a peece to be disposed of, either to the poore prisoners reliefe, or enlargement.
            
            
               Of his Charitie to poore young beginners of the Company of Marchanttaylours.
               AS he was generally well disposed towards all, So was he especially vnto the company: Into which he was worthily incorporate: And in his many good déedes towards them (as in a Christall glasse) you may behold his godly care to poore young people of that Societie: who not forgetting such as haue béene newly made frée, & haue béene beginning to trade in their professions, to helpe them forward in the world (making them goe ye were scarce able to créepe) and to further them in so laudable an action, hath also

stretched forth his bountifull hand towards their reliefe.
               Those who in their beginnings, haue not beene able to ensconce themselues against pouertie, (resting in the feare of GOD, on his prouidence for their preferment) his heart hath the Lorde stirred vp to helpe, and to regard their want, and relieue their necessities: Hee like a kinde Father, hath prouided portions for them, and hath not let them passe into the worlde without some gifts from his bountifull hand: that they might thereby, (either the better profite themselues, or otherwise prouide for their necessarie imployements: Following the example of CHRIST, at the marriage of Canaan: where séeing their néede, hee shewed his first myracle, by turning water into Wine; That gifte is small that doeth no good, and the good will very slender that deserues no thankes.
               
               As the young Damsells and Maydens of Ierusalem sung the praises of King Dauid for his déedes: So may the Young-men of this companie, sing in the commendations of this good mans Charitie; For by his meanes haue their Preferments beene furthered, and their weake estates and conditions often raised.
               And as it was saide to the Gouernour of the Feast, Thou hast kept the best Wine till nowe; So may these young beginners say:
The best gifte came not till now;
               
               For which benefite, they are to yéelde vnto GOD due thankes, and continuall glorie.
            
            
               
               Of his bountie to the Prisoners of New-gate, and his prouision for the Tolling of the Bell, at S. Sepulchers, for condemn'd persons, which gifte is to continue for euer.
               
                  SEeing the Prayers & teares of the needy doe pearce the Heauens, and that Iosephs afflictions are regarded of GOD, why should I not set downe these poore mens miseries, & magnifie Gods mercies, which doe comfort them in the same.
               The wretched and Forlorne men, forsaken of the world, and despised of the multitude; who with hungrie bellies haue bene cast into Prison, without either money or Friendes to helpe them, haue not bene left destitute in their extremities, but prouided for, beyond deserts or expectation.
               Among many Faithfull seruants of CHRIST, pittying the Poore, they haue not beene least bounde to this their godlie Benefactor for their reliefe, who hath bountifully fedde CHRIST, (in his Members.) His chéerefulnes in giuing, hath from time to time, made well knowne, that hee was beloued of GOD, who loueth a chéerefull giuer.
               The Haruest of his happines shall be most plentifull, because hee hath not sowne his séede sparingly, but hath beene made rich vnto all Liberalitie: which hath caused in many poore people a continuall thanksgiuing vnto the ALMIGHTIE.
               
               Oh happie man, Oh Heauenly Doue; so may we call him and so shall hee finde, taking part in the first Resurrection: For, Blessed are they that consider the poore and needie: the Lorde shall deliuer them

in the day of Trouble.
               
               He fedde these men in Prison, and gaue them c
                     •
                  mfort in their deepest distresse; But the Lord shall deliuer him out of the Iawes of Hell, and his soule shall be filled with gladnes.
               
                  Ahasuerus Feasted the Princes of Persia, and had much praise of men for the same; But Marie and Martha Feasting CHRIST, were blessed of GOD for euer. Manie make Banquets, but the poore haue no part in them.
               So did Holofernes for Iudiths sake, but perished in his excesse. The rich Glutton fared daintilie euery day, while the poore man died at his gate, for want of foode. Couetousnesse would suffer him to giue nothing, like churlish Naball, and Vnmercifulnesse, threwe him headlong to Hell.
               
                  Pittie, and tender Compassion, doe declare the Children of men to be the Sonnes of God, who doth admonish them thereunto; saying: Bee you mercifull, as your heauenly Father is mercifull. Herein is God pleased, and his Maiestie honoured, by doing and shewing the true markes of his deere Children.
               This stirred vp Maister Doue in the godly remembrance hereof, not only in his life time to relieue these distressed persons, by his manie continued déedes of Charitie, but to leaue a worthy commemoration of his Religious intention
                     •
                  , to remaine for euer after his death, by the gifte of Fiftie pounds, to bee employed in the perpetuall behoofe of such as shall be condemned to die. That is, in hauing the great Bell at Saint Sepulchers Church without New-gate, to be Tolled (on euery Execution day,) till the condemned Prisoners haue suffered death; and also a small Hande Bell, to bee Rung at Midnight, vnder Newe-Gate, the Night after their Condemnation;

And the next morning, at the Church-wall; To put them in minde of their mortalitie; with a Prayer to be saide touching their saluation.
               Oh admirable Deuotion, and worthie to be recorded in the Monuments of Antiquitie; who whether he liued or died, gaue maintenance by his bountie, that this should continue for euer: for the comfort of them, and all succéeding them.
               Oh what a vertuous man was this? whose care was not onely to preserue their bodies from fainting, by ministring ordinary supplie of sustenance, but to giue them spirituall foode; and to awake their sléepie senses from securitie, to saue their soules from perishing.
            
            
               Of the maintenance giuen by him vnto certaine Schollers, in Saint Iohn Baptist Colledge in Oxford.
               
               
                  BEsides the many memorable déeds of Deuotion which he did to poore aged men, to comfortles widowes, to destitute and néedie yong-men, to distressed Prisoners, and to diuers others, (yet vnknowne,) in farre larger measure then my Instructions haue hitherto ledde me vnto; He was also a charitable and carefull Patron to poore Schollers, where the abilitie of their owne Friendes was not able to reach to yéelde them exhibition. And (besides what he had formerly done vnto them) he gaue an hundreth pounds at Easter last, and a Latine Bible, written in parchment, to certaine Schollers, in S. Iohn Baptists Colledge in Oxforde, for their maintenance and vse, and for their further

preferment in learning (the high way to honor:) Oh happie Schollers, borne in such a time, where bountie and vertue calleth you to promotion. Spend not therefore pretious time idely, nor withdrawe your selues from the happines of your future hopes. Now is a golden treasurie opened vnto you, which farre surmounteth Craesus wealth, make your selfe rich in learning, and honor shall be your reward. This your good Benefactor hath loaden you with better treasure then gold, siluer, or pretious stones, which are subiect to many casualties, gottē with griefe, kept with care, and lost with a thousand sorrowes. These riches are seldome possessed in peace, but are the cause many times of cruell murthers, thefts, and an hundred deadly daungers of body, and often proue the destruction of the Soule: But learning shall whilest you liue euer last, and remaine with you: No théefe shall be able (leauing your life) to robbe you of this treasure. Had king Priamus sent his Sonne Polidorus with no other treasure to his supposed friends: The young Prince had neuer felt the force of inhumaine murther and crueltie, nor his Parents had cause to lament so grieuous a mischance, with so many sorrowfull and bitter teares. Therefore be gréedie to gaine learning, and knowledge, be earnest, and carefull to purchase wisedome, the which shall crowne you with honor in the daies of your perfection, and raise you to the high Seate of dignitie. Imbrace this benefit with gladnes, and praise God for him that gaue furtherance vnto it.
            
            
               
               Of the bountie and charitie of Maister Doues to the Schoolmaister and Schollers of Christs Hospitall in London.
               
                  OUer many Orphanes & poore children, did he become a carefull father standing in stead of their owne naturall Parents, in affording meanes to haue them trained vp in the exercise of good letters, to bring them to preferment, and to kéepe them from the snares of Idlenes (the path to perdition) hath in tender regard of their good, and the Commonwealths benefit, giuen furtherāce to ye Schoolemaister of Christs Hospitall, to nourish them in the knowledge of the latine tongue, and such as are not capable thereof, to be instructed in wryting, and casting account, and to be placed and preferred to seuerall trades and mysteries, wherby they may grow in time to be happie members of this honorable citie. Oh yée children, carrie thankfull mindes, first to God for his goodnes in preferring you hereunto, and next vnto such Benefactors, as haue so charitably prouided to instruct you. Through his bountie shall you be trained vp, either in the latine tōgue, that you may proceed vnto further knowledge, or in writing, that you may be able to set downe that wc your penne, which your memorie is by no meanes able to preserue. And whether you be in prison restrained from libertie, or separated by the Sea, from the sight of your countrey, by your penne you may helpe your selues in the one, and satisfie your selues in the other. What honors you may attaine vnto by learning, or what good you may come to by hand-writing, you are not able to conceiue, before you haue made experience of it. By the one you may be both beatified, and beautified with all yt inward graces of the minde, by the other, you might speake, if you had lost your

tongues by tyrannie, as many did in the bloody daies of Dioclesian: Or did your legges faile you, or were you made cripples by the warres, (as Scipio was) yet your writing might get your liuings, and procure both rayment for the backe, and foode for the belly: were your mindes troubled and vexed, and that your memories were as weake, as Mesala
                        •
                     s braine was féeble, yet the propertie of your penne might serue to helpe you in yt imperfection. Wherefore it is no small benefit bestowed vpon you (oh yee child
                     •
                  en) that may be inriched with so excellent a qualitie, onely by vsing diligence without any charge to your Parents.
               For this cause suffer not occasion to ouerslip you, but take hold of her fore cop, least neglecting méete opportunitie, you afterward snatch in vaine at her bald hinder part, and so with griefe, and repentance, bewaile the losse of that which can neuer after be recouered, according to that of the Poet,
                  Volat irreuocabile Tempus.
               
               
                  That Time is bald, and being but once past, cannot be call'd againe, for all thou hast.
               
            
            
               Of his charitie to the citie of Bristow, and a relation of some other his seuerall bounties.
               BEsides many other places that can yéeld a plentifull testimonie for him in his behalfe, and make a condigne Relation of his good workes, we may not here forget the religious care, and prouident order which he tooke in his life time for the reliefe and succour of the poore people of Bristowe: Who hearing that the same citie was fallen into some decay, and pouertie, out of a féeling remorse, and charitable inclination he had to yeeld helpe to their deiections, fréely bestowed vpon the same citie, the summe of one hundreth pounds.
               
                  As his bountie was great towards this Citie, so were his hands euery where reached out to the necessities of all sortes. Yea such was his charitie, that if he had seene poore men addicted to labour, he would set them on worke, and cause them to be imployed to their better furtherance, and encouragement. If he heard that any of his poore neighbours, were decrepit, or destitute of meanes to follow their professions, he would supply their needes in one condition or other, and not faile by his money to make way for their good intentions. Wherein he dealt no worse with them, then a Reuerend father dealt with a poore kinsman of his; who being solicited to aduance him: And he thereuppon inquiring, what course of life he followed, and receiuing answere, that he was an Husbandman: Why then (quoth he) if his plough be broken, I will repaire it, or rather then faile, bestow a new one vpon him, whereby he may goe on in his course of life: But so to aduance him, as to make him idle, or to forsake his trade, or condition, in which he was brought vp, that I meane not to doe.
               He was milde and gentle to all, and his purse euer open to such as were petitioners vnto him for his reliefe, so as he might iustly be compared to Titus, Qui neminem vnquàm à se tristem dimisit. Such as were sutors vnto him for succour, did not at any time depart from him without contentment, he dismissed no man sorrowfull for lacke of successe, nor sent any man from his presence full of griefe or sadnes, for want of his helping hand, to giue ease and enlargement to their heauines.
               As he was deuoutly carefull to relieue both aged, and impotent old men, so was he alwaies religiously mindefull (as is aforesaid of the wel tuturing and good education of poore, and indigent schollers, following

the example of a godly Patron, who estéemed Hospitale adsubleuandam pauper tatem, & Scholam, ad instruendam inuentutem, esse optima opera, quae aliquis potuit efficere. That an Hospitall, to sustaine the poore, and a Schoole, to traine vp youth, were the worthiest works that a man could leaue behinde him.
               
               Insomuch, as (led by these motiues) hée left to the benefite of Posteritie, an euerlasting memorie of his Saint-like minde in these behalfes, Allowing sixtéene pounds a yeere for euer, to Christs-Hospitall in London: to be imployed towards the vse and maintenance of a Schoolemaister, to traine vp and instruct tenne young Schollers, in the knowledge and learning of Musicke and Pricksong.
               
               Eightéene pounds a yéere, to be continued for euer; for the Examination & Approbation of certaine Schollers yeerely, out of the Frée-schoole of the Companie of Marchant taylors in London.
               
               Twenty pounds a yéere for euer, To the Prisons of Ludgate, Newgate, & the two Counters. And certaine Fées and Allowances, to the Officers of Marchant-tailors-Hall, to remaine to perpetuitie: to sée these things duely obserued, according to the purpose of his charitable and religious intention.
               All which he performed with such Alacritie, that it may bee saide of him, Merces eius copiosae est in Coelis; His reward is very great in the Kingdome of Heauen.
               
               In the sight of God, hee enioyeth the fulnes of all Felicitie, which neither eye hath séene, nor eare heard, nor mans heart atchieued; For Resurrectio immortalitatis pullulat foecundius, cùm in pauperum auxilio seritur: The Resurrection of immortalitie springs more fertillie, when it is sowne in helpe of the distressed and needie. And he liuing and dying (no doubt) a chosen and beloued seruant of God, and one, who (as it may

be truely said of him,) had deuoutly consecrated both his whole life to God, and his carefull endeuours to the reliefe of the poore.
               
               After hee had performed his Oblations of Prayer and Thanks-giuing to God, as Abraham, (of whome he was a true Sonne) yéelded vp the Spirit, and died in a good Age, an olde man, and of great yéeres; Committing his bodie (which was but lately the mansion of a most excellent Soule,) vnto his graue, where it rests, in assured expectation of a glorious resurrection.
            
            
               The manner of his Departure out of this World, and his desire to bee with God.
               
                  IN all his sicknes (which was not long by reason of the weaknes and disabilitie of his bodie, being fourescore and fiftéene yeeres olde,) hee neuer shewed signe of discontentment, or impatience, neither was there one word heard come forth of his mouth, sounding either of dispaire or infideliitie, of mistrust, or distrust, or of any doubting or wauering in the Faith of Christ, but alwayes remained faithfull, and resolute in his God; and so desirous was he to be with the Lord, that these golden Sentences were neuer out of his mouth. I desire to be dissolued, and to bee with Christ; And oh miserable wretch that I am, who shall deliuer me from this bodie, subiect to sinne? Come quickly, Lord Iesus, Come quickly.
               
               
                  Like as the Hart desireth the Water-springs, So doth my Soule thirst after thee (Oh God.)
               
               
                  
                  I had rather bee a Doore-keeper in the House of my GOD, then to dwell in the Tentes of the wicked. With manie other Heauenly spéeches, which least I should séeme tedious, I will omit
               Hee would alwayes pray absolutely, that God would take him out of this miserable Worlde. And whē his Kinred or Friends would séeme to pray for his health (if it were the will of God) He would answere;
               
                  I beseech you pray not that I should liue: For I thinke it long to bee with my God; CHRIST is to me Life, & Death is to me aduantage; Yea, the day of death is the birth day of euerlasting life; and I cannot enter into Life, but by Death; Therefore Death is the dore, or Entrance into Euerlasting life to mee.
               
               I know and am certainly perswaded by the Spirit of God, that the Sentence is giuen alreadie (by the great Iudge) in the High Court of Parliament of Heauen, that I shall now depart out of this life; and therefore pray n
                     •
                  t for mee, that I may liue here, but pray to God to giue me strength and Patience to perseuere to the end; and to close mine eyes in a Iustifying Faith, in the Blood of my CHRIST.
               
               With that, he saide, I thanke my GOD, through IESVS CHRIST; Hee is come, Hee is come, my good Iaylour is come, to let my soule out of prison;
               
                  Oh sweete Death thou art welcome, welcome sweete death, Neuer was there any Guest so welcome to mee as thou art; Welcome the messenger of euerlasting life: Welcome the dore and entrance into euerlasting glorie; Welcome I say, and thrice welcome: My good Iaylour, doe thine office quickly, and set my soule at libertie; Strike sweete Death, strike my heart. I feare not thy stroke: Now it is done; Father into thy blessed hands I commend my Spirite: Into thy blessed handes I commend my Soule and my bodie.
               
               
                  At which wordes his breath stayed, and so neither moouing hand nor foote, he slept swéetly in the Lorde. The second day, of May. Anno. 1612.
               
               Thus haue you heard the vertuous life, and Christian death of M. Doue; whose many deedes of Charitie, are more acceptable to God, and more memorable to men, in that they were done in his life time: God stirre vp the hearts of Rich and Able men to follow his steppes, and giue them grace to imitate his good example; That they may come to those vnspeakable Ioyes, wherein hee now resteth, through Christ our Lorde.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   