
      
         
            
            EPISTOLAE HN.
            The Principall Epistles of HN / which he hath set-foorth through the holy Spirit of Loue· and written and sent them ⁏most-cheefly; vnto the Louers of ye Trueth and his Acquaintance.
            And are by him newly perused, and more-playnly declared.
            Translated out of Base-almaine.
            
               All Scripture geeuen by the Inspiration of God▪ is profitable to Teache, to Rebuke, to Amendment, and to Information in Righteousnes, for that the Man of God may be perfect, prepared to all good vvorkes.
               2. Timo. 3.
               No Prophecie in the Scripture / cometh-to-pas by priuate Interpritacion. For ther vvas yet neuer any Prophecie brought-forth out of manly VVill: but the holy Men of God haue sproken it / being mooued by the holy Goste.
               2. Pet. 1.
            
         
         
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
               
               Now goeth the Iudgment ouer the World▪ Now is the Prince of this World cast-out.
               
                  Iohn. 12.
               
               Now is the Saluation, the Power, and the Kingdom / becom our Gods: and the Might his Christes.
               
                  Apoc. 2.
            
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE.
            
               LYke as an Apotecary doth ⁏by his apotecaries Arte; prepare many-kinde of Medecine
                  •
                / to the Health of the naturall Bodyes of sick Men: and diuers delightfull Tastes, and also sundery sweete Sauors of Spices / to the Delighting of the Children of Men: Euen so doth likewyse a Man of God / prepare ⁏by the Wisdom of ye godly Vnderstanding; many-kinde of godly Medecines, which he ⁏in the Ministration of the godly Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of Loue; bringeth vnto the falne Man ⁏who is captiued thorough the Sinne / with sundry Sicknesses and Infirmities in the Soule; to the Health of his Soule▪ and many sweete Tastes of the spirituall and heauenly

Foode, to the Refreshing and Delighting of his Mynde, and to the great Ioye of his Spirit in ye secret hauenly Goodes: Lyke as one may euidently perceaue in the many and sundry-sorts of distinct and groundy Instructions / touching the true Godlynes and euerlasting Ioye in Iesu Christ / which are witnessed and set-forth by HN ؛Gods elected Minister
                  
                     
                  
                  punctel
                in these his Epistles and in all the Testimonyes of his Wrytings / to a perpetuall Health and Lyfe of the Soule, and to the Welfare of the Children of Men.
            2. To the which true Godlynes and euerlasting Ioye / all Louers of the Trueth, and all hungery and thirstye Soules after the Righteousnes, as likewyse all People / be ⁏by the godly Testimonyes of these Epistles; called and bidden: to thend to leade them all [namely, those which vnder the Obedience of the Loue / do beleeue the Godlynes]

into the Howse of Loue, and to nourish and bring-them-vp in all Godlynes.
            3. For-that-cause / these Epistles are likewyse to a Teaching and Edifying of all Beleeuers of the godly Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of Loue, and of the Comunialtee or Church of Christ: and are also very profitable and seruiceable vnto all Men / to giue an vpright Knowledg Wherunto the Man is created of God, and called or bidden through Christ: To thend that all those ⁏which haue a Lust or Will to God and his Righteousnes; mought ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; giue themselues vprightly to their Calling through Christ· and so becom godly mynded / according to the Requyring of the holy Scriptures· and well exercised or prepared to all good workes.
            Take it to heart.
         
         
            
            A TABLE. Contayning the Matter ⁏and Redie finding of the begining; of eueri-one of these Epistles.
            
               
                  The First Epistle.
                  
                     A Crying-voyce of the holy Spirit of Loue, where-with all People are called / to repentance for their Sinnes.
                  
                     Fol. 1.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Second Epistle.
                  A Short and pithie Instruction, contayning the Misterie of the Loue.
                  
                     Fol. 10.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Thirde Epistle.
                  A Groundlie Instruction, Declaring the difference betwixt God, the Father, and his Sonne / the Lorde Iesu Christ.
                  
                  
                     Fol. 19.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Fourth Epistle.
                  Of the Mediation of Iesu Christ / in the Spirit, for a Reconciliation, betwixt God / and the Man.
                  
                     Fol. 39.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Fifth Epistle.
                  A Stirring-vp of the hearte to the Immitation of Christ, in the tyme of suffering and affliction.
                  
                     Fol. 65.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Sixt Epistle.
                  A Groundlie Instruction / and a Difference of the vnderstandings, according to the Truith / of the holy Scriptures.
                  
                     Fol. 79.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  The Seuenth Epistle.
                  A True Iudgment or Sentence / out of the Seruice of Loue, agaynst the false Iudgment, out of the fleshe.
                  
                     Fol. 137.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Eight Epistle.
                  A Distinction of the Submission / and Vnsubmission, in the Spirit.
                  
                     Fol. 159.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Nineth Epistle.
                  Of the Seruices and Ceremonies / of the Christians / and of the vnchristians, and of the right and false vce of them.
                  
                     Fol. 189.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Tenth Epistle.
                  A pure Instruction / howe one shalbe obedient to the woorde of Lyfe and Trueth, in the Seruice of Loue.
                  
                     Fol. 205.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Eleuenth Epistle.
                  A Rebuke and Exhortation, seruing to a Reformation / and to a Repentance for their Sinnes, vnto all those that thincke them selues to bee wyse, and Therfore blaspheame / and iudge falslye, our Seruice / and Comunialtie in the Loue: also a warning to the Simple Hearts.
                  
                     Fol. 223.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Tvvelueth Epistle
                  A Reproouing Instruction / and exhortation ⁏out of hartie loue; to the vnitee of harte / in the Loue.
                  
                     Fol. 251.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Thirteenth Epistle.
                  Loueing Informations vnto a Louer of the Trueth, which before-tyme had bine a Blaspheamer of the Seruice of the Loue / and of the Ministers ther-of.
                  
                     Fol. 265.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Fourteenth Epistle.
                  A Breefe Exhortation / vnto a Disciple in the Seruice of the

Loue: wher-with he is exhorted / to keepe a sharpe watch towards the Spirits / that make-vp themselues in him.
                  
                     Fol 287.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Fifteentb Epistle.
                  An hartie Exhortation / vnto all Louers of the Trueth, To awarning Touching all false Spirits / that make-vp themselues: and Iudge falsly agaynst the Trueth.
                  
                     Fol. 293.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Sixteenth Epistle.
                  An Instructionable Exhortation to the good-willingous, whearin is Distinguished the vpright Obedience, and the Godlie / and ongodlie beeing.
                  
                     Fol. 314.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Seuenteenth Epistle.
                  Of the Mans Lordelines / in the beginning: of his affall, Death, and Condamnation: and of his restoring agayne vnto his former Lordelines.
                  
                     Fol. 337.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Eighteenth Epistle.
                  A loueing Exhortation vnto an house-holde / that haue ioyned themselues to the Familie of Loue, to be obedient to the Trueth.
                  
                     Fol. 352.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Nyneteenth Epistle.
                  An hartie Exhortation / to the mooste-zealous good-willing hearts to the Righteousnes: also to the Elders and Ministers of the woorde, for a warning vnto them of all deceayt, that maye chance vnto them / by the an-commers.
                  
                     Fol. 365.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Tvventith Epistle.
                  Reproouinge of the VVhoordom, with good Doctrine / and groundelye Instructions, howe one shall turne hym self / to Iesu Christ, and the woord of his holie Spirit of Loue and Trueth.
                  
                     Fol. 386.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The First Epistle. A Crying-voyce of the holy Spirit of Loue / wherwith all People are ⁏out of meere Grace; called and bidden by HN / to the true Repentance for thier Sinnes· to the Entrance into the vpright christian Lyfe· and to the Howse of the Loue of Iesu Christ.
            
            
               
                  Ther shalbe more Ioye in Heauen ouer one Sinner that repenteth / then ouer nyntie-and-nyne-Iust-persons / that neede no Repentance.
                  Luk. 15. b.
                  O, how louely are the Feere of the Messengers that publish the Peace, preache the Good, and witnes or declare the Saluation.
                  Esa. 52. b. Rom. 10. c.
                  Beholde, I wil sende myne Angel or Messenger / which shall prepare the waye· or pathe the Streete / before Mee.
                  Mala. 3. a, 4. a. Math. 11.17. Mar. 1. Luk. 7.
                  To-daye if ye heare his Voyce / then harden not your Hearts, that ye byde not without the Rest of ye People of God.
                  Psal. 95. a. Heb. 3.4. a.
               
            
            
               
               The First Chapter.
               
                  
                  THis is the Crying or Voyce / which cometh-to-pas, and is heard now in this present Daye / through the holy Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ: and wherwith all People▪ are ⁏by HN; called and bidden to the Repentance for their Sinnes, and to the Howse of the Loue of Iesu Christ 
                  ؛the 
                     Esa. 32. 
                        
                           •
                        . Heb. 3. b. 4. c.
                   Rest of all the Saincts or Children of God
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   / (And not alone with this Calling: but also with all the Scriptures· heauenly Testimonyes· and spirituall Voyces of the eternall Trueth / which are gon-forth from the holy Spirit of Loue, and brought-to-light by HN) like as ye holy Gost hath sproken therof, and warned all People / yt they in thatt present Daye ⁏when they heare his Voyce; shoulde in no-wyse harden 
                     Psal. 95 b. Heb. 3. a.
                   their Hearts [namely, that they shoulde not 2. Cor 6. a.
                   refuse nor resist thesame proffered Grace·
                     Heb 12. b.
                   but humbly indeuour them therunto to thend they mought enter into the godly Rest / which ⁏till vnto thissame Daye of Loue; is reserued for the People of God / for to rest them therin.
               
                   2. The Mosthighest hath also ⁏after such a long tyme that He had promysed the 
                     Psal. 95. b. Heb. 3. b.
                   Rest to the People of God; yet once-more appoynted a

Daye / on the 
                     Act. 17. 
                        •
                     . which / the vniuersall Earth shoulde be iudged with Righteousnes.
               3. Therfore ⁏as the holy Gost sayeth; 
                     Psal. 95. b. Heb. 3 b.
                   Todaye if ye shall heare his Voyce [that is: when the Tyme now is fulfilled / that the Daye of Loue ⁏which the mosthighest hath appoynted to be a Rest for the People of God; declareth itself / then shall ye heare / that yee ⁏ 
                     Esa. 42.51. a
                   O all ye People; are called and bidden to thesame Grace and Mercie] then harden not your Heartes.
               4. Let eueryone 2. Cor 6. a. Heb. 12. b.
                   take-heede to thissame gracious Tyme / that he may liue· and rest him in thissame Daye / from his Workes, Trauayle, and 
                     Apo. 14. b.
                   Labour.
               5. Seing then that ther is yet a Rest 
                     Psa. 32 
                        
                           •
                        . Heb 4 
                        •
                     · at-hande  / for the People of God / which is made-many-fest and inherited in the Family of Loue: and that without thesame or without his Seruice / ther is nothing but all 
                     Deut. 
                     
                        ••
                      
                     a.
                   Good-thinking, 
                     Esa 59. a.
                   Tedious-trauayle, Labour, and Misery / Therfore doth not the holy Spirit of Loue ceasse this Daye ⁏by his Minister HN; to call and bidd all People to thesame Family of Loue / 
                     Psal 16. b. 84. a. Eccl
                           •
                        . 24. c. Apo. 2
                        •
                      
                     a.
                   full of all louely Beeing, and to his safe-makeing Seruice / to the Preseruation of them all in the Godlynes. And to warne them eueryone / of the 
                     Esa. 13. a. 3
                        •
                      
                     c 47. b. Dan. 12. b. Math. 24 b▪
                     
                   Wo and Misery, and of the Plagues of Good-thinking that shall com vppon them / that remayne without thesame, or that wil not suffer themselues to be leadd into thesame / through the Seruice of thesayde Family of Loue / To thend that they mough
                     •
                  all now ⁏in ye Seruice of Loue, and in the Obeying

of his Requyring; doo vpright Repentance 
                     Math 3. a Luk. 3 a. 13. a. Act. 2. f. 3. c.
                   for thier Sinnes· and enter into ye Rest of ye Lorde.
            
            
               The Second Chap.
               
                   BEare Sorrow for your Sinnes, and 
                     Eze. 1
                        •
                     . c Math 3. a.
                   shewe vpright Fruits of Repentance, the great 
                     Esa. 13. a. b. Ioel. 2 a. c. Abel. 1. c.
                   Daye of the Lorde is com hard-by, and wil now ⁏as a righteous 
                     Ier. 46. c. Soph 1.2. a
                   Iudgment of God; appeere ouer the whole Earth.
               2. Let eueryone now turne him away from the wicked Worlde, and from the Abhomynation 
                     Dan 9 c. Math 24 b.
                   of her Desolation / and make his Repaire hether / to the 
                     Esa 2 a. Mich 4. a.
                   Hill of the Loue, wheron the Lordes Howse is buylded / that he may be preserued in thissame Daye of the righteous Iudgment of God.
               3. Yea, turne you hether betymes / to the Howse of the Loue of Iesu Christ, and to his safe-making Seruice: beare Sorrow rightly for your Sinnes, 
                     Math. 3. a. Luk 3 a. 13 a. Act 2. f 3. c.
                   and shewforth vpright Repentance or Amendment for thesame ⁏O ye strayed People; er-euer the 
                     Soph. 2. a. Mal. 4. a.
                   Daye of the Lorde fall vppon you / to the Recompencing of your Wickednes.
               
                   4. COm now all hether / whear the heauenly Day-light ؛ 
                  
                     Esa 60. d. Sap 5 a
                   the Sunne of Righteousnes
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   shyneth, and whear the Waters 
                     Eze. 36. c. Apo. 
                     
                        •
                     2. d.
                   of Lyfe flowe-forth out of ye Fōntayne of the liueing Godhead / to the Purging of your Sinnes.
               5. Let eueryone now forsake his owne Woord, Doctrine, and taken-on Knowledg / and also

the Woord, Doctrine, and Knowledg of all 
                     Ier. 23 d. 2
                        •
                      29.32. c. Eze 13 a. b. Mich. 3. b.
                   vnsent Preachers and Good-thinking-wyseones / wher-through ye be seduced· blynded from ye true Fruits of Repentance· and estranged from the true Sainctification of your Spirit and Mynde: and com now all to thissame 
                     Ier. 19. b. 31. f. Mich. 1. a.
                   Sainctuary of God, out of the which / the Lordes liueing 
                     Esa. 2. a.
                   Woord is witnessed· the true Repentance for the Sinne / made-knowen· and the vpright 
                     Ephe. 4. c. Col. 3. a.
                   Righteousnes and Holynes of Iesu Christ
                        •
                     
                   / taught / wherthrough ye be brought to the right Quyeting of your Consciences· to the 
                     Math. 11. c.
                   Health of your Soules· and to the Sainctifycation or 
                     Rom. 12. a. Ephe. 4. c.
                   Renewing of your Spirit and Mynde.
               6. For-that-cause com now all to thissame 
                     Esa. 2 a.
                  
                   Hill or Howse of Loue: and in his out-flowing Water / 
                     Eze. 16.36. clense and amende or hallow your Beeing / vnder the Obedience of ye Loue of Iesu Christ / that your Sinnes may be 
                     Act. 3. c.
                   wyped-out. and ye
                     •
                   becom lead euenso into the 
                     Esa. 32. c. Heb. 3.4. b.
                   Rest of all ye Children of God and Saincts of Iesu Christ.
               
               7. COm now all likewyse / which ⁏through your 
                     Rom. 1. c. EPhe. 4. b.
                   ignorant Knowledg or Misunderstanding; haue turned-away your selues from thissame 
                     Esa. 16. 
                        
                           •
                        . Heb 5. a.
                   Seate of Grace and louely Howse of the Loue of Iesu Christ, and from our 
                     Iohn. 17 b. 1. Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     a.
                   Communialtee· growen-offended at our Meannes or 2. Cor 1. c.
                   Simplenes, and at the godly Testimonyes of our Sayings· and so made-vp yourselues 
                     
                        •
                      
                     Tim. 
                     
                        •
                     .3. b.
                   resistant against vs and our good Doctrine and Exercises· seperated yourselues

from vs· and growen bitter or wrathfull towards vs / together withall yee that haue mistrusted vs· and 
                     Ioh. 8.10. c. 2 Tess. 2. b.
                   not beleeued the holy Woord of the eternall Trueth ⁏which wee by Gods Grace / do administer vnder the Obedience of the Loue; / but doubted therof· and so for-that-cause ⁏through som Peruers-conceaueing towards thesame or towards vs; refused the 
                     Pro 1. c. d.
                   proffered Grace, or kept yourselues ba
                     •
                  h: and repent 
                     Eze. 18. d.
                   you for your Sinnes / to your Sainctification, and to the Health of your Soules.
               
                   8. COm likewyse all yee / which ⁏through any Opinion of the Self-wyseones, or through any Good-thinking or Imagination of the Knowledg; haue bin 
                     Pro. 18. a.
                   vnregarding towards thissame gracious and godly Seruice of Loue and towards his Requyring / and also yee / which haue heard or read the Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ· and shewed no right Obedience: as likewyse all yee / which haue ouerreached pourselues in any disorderly 
                     Sap. 14. c. Rom. 1. c.
                   Dealing or false 2. Pet 2. b. Iudae. 1. b.
                   Freedom, or in hearing and beleeueing of any 
                     Ier. 23.27. c.
                   vnsent Preachers: and so are falne to your 
                     Ier. 7. c. 
                     
                        •
                     8. a.
                   owne Counsayle ⁏or to the Counsaile of those that stande not submitted to the Howse of the Loue of Iesu Christ, nor to his Seruice and Requyring, or are Straingers ther-vnto; / or yee yt ⁏through your 
                     Pro. 6.24. d.
                   Negligence or Little-regarding of the Requyring of the Seruice of Loue; are becom vaynly-mynded / with the wicked Worlde, and with the vayne or false 
                     Rom 1. c. 2. Pet. 2. a.
                   Praters / through the

Imagination of the Knowledg ؛that false Light
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                  : Com and 
                     Eccli. 7 b. 1 Pet. 5. a.
                   humble you / and let all your Vnderstandings be renewed· and ⁏to thobtayneing of a good 
                     Ephe. 4. b.
                   Knowledg of Iesu Christ and his Godlynes; brought-to-right / vnder the Obedience of the Loue: and vnder thesame 1. Pet. 1. c. d.
                   Obedience / 
                     Eze. 36. 
                        
                           •
                        .
                   wash your Bodyes with the pure Water of the Loue: and so cleanse your▪ Hearts from all vngodly Beeing 
                     Esa. 1. c.
                   and wicked Thoughts.
               9. Com now all hether, and 
                     Gal. 6. b. Ephe 5. d. Apo. 2.3 b.
                   neglect not your  tyme: To-daye becometh the Grace of the Loue of Iesu Christ / proffered yet vnto you all, and the Hande reached-forth seruiceablely with thesame, to a peaceable 
                     Ephe. 4. d. Col. 3. b.
                   Reconcilement with each-other in Iesu Christ, to an Vnitee of Heart with vs / in all Loue.
               10. Yea, To-daye (er-euer the Punishiment of the last Iudgment go-forth ouer all Vngodlyones
                     Pro. 1. c. Math. 25 d.
                   / to thier Condemnation in the hellish Fyre) ye be yet all called and bidden ⁏euen out of meere Grace 
                     Eqhe. 1.2. a.
                   and harty Loue; to the Communialtee of Saincts / which haue thier 1. Iohn. 1. 
                        
                           •
                        .
                   felowship with Christ / in the Howse of the Loue of Iesu Christ. and that altogether / to the Preseruation of you all in the Godlynes.
            
            
               The Third Chap.
               COm likewyse all ye People: Gouernours  / and Subiects, Noble / and Vnnoble Ritch / and Poore, Wyse / and Simple, as also all 
                     Math. 9. b.
                   Men-sinners and Women-sinners:

Turne you about betymes to 
                     Heb. 5. a.
                   the Mercie-seate / er-euer that ye be quyte and cleane swallowed-vpp by the wicked Worlde, or with seducing Babbling / through the false Light· and ouerwhelmed with the Cursse / by the Wrath 
                     Eccli 5. b. Mal. 4 a. Rom 2. a
                   of God.
               2. Com now all hether, and confesse your Sinnes: laye-open 
                     Pro. 18. b. Eccli. 2. a.
                   the Inwardnes of your Heartes: and bring-forth right 
                     Math. 3. a. Luk. 3. a.
                   Fruits of Repentance: and so then suffer yourselues to be 
                     Eze. 36. c. Heb. 10. c.
                   washed with the pure and safe-making Water of the Loue / in the Fonte of 
                     Sap 3. a. Eccli 2. a.
                   Humiliation / To thend that ye may be 
                     Rom. 5.8. a. Heb. 9. c.
                   iustifyed or cleansed from all your Sinnes· receaued into the holy Comunialtee of Loue / to be 
                     Rom. 12. b. Ephe 4. b
                   Fellow-members of the Bodye of Iesu Christ· and byde-standing in holy 
                     Psal. 45. b. Sap. 5 a.
                   Garnishing: and not perrish with the wicked Worlde / when-as she now in thissame Daye / is iudged with the Lords mighty Hande.
               
                   3. Which wicked Worlde / is kept 
                     Pet. 3. b.
                   to the hellish Fyre / till vnto this Daye of Loue / for to condempne thesame for euermore / in thesame Daye of Loue: to her eternall Curssing and 
                     Math 25. d. 2. Pet. 3. b.
                   Iudgment of the Fyers Crueltee / together with all those that mayntayne the wicked Worlde, as also are affected to thesame, and wil not turne them to Repentance.
               4. Verily, in thesame Daye / when-as now all Vngodlyones 
                     Math. 15. d. Tess. 1.2. b. Iudae. 1. b.
                   and all Self-wysones, with all Vnrepentantones, and false Hearts of the Scriptur-learned ⁏which in their owne Opinion

/ haue 
                     Math. 24 c.
                   falsly bosted themselues very-stoutly, to be Christians; do inherit the tirrible 
                     Psal. 13.47. Rom. 2. a.
                   Condemnation / with many Smarts / in the Crueltee of the hel
                     •
                  ish Fyre / Then shall the People of God [namely / the whole Comunialtee of the Loue of Iesu Christ, and all those that haue turned them penitently from thier Sinnes / to thesame Comunialtee or Family of Loue] 
                     Esa. 35.65. c
                   reioyce them in all Loue. and obtayne a perpetuall Rest / 
                     Esa. 32. c. Sap. 3. a.
                   in the euerlasting Lyfe / according to the Promyses of God the Father and his Christ.
               
               5. FOr-that-cause ⁏O all ye People vppon  Earth; take-heede to this my Voyce or Calling· to this proffered 
                     Pro. 1. c. Esa. 49. 
                        
                           •
                        
                     
                   Grace· and to my Warning / all yee ⁏sayth the holy Spirit of Loue; which wil remayne preserued, and be saued / now in thissame last Daye.
               6. For after the Daye of Loue (inasmuch as it is the last or newest Daye / on 
                     Act. 17. d.
                   the which the whole Earth shalbe iudged with Righteousnes) ther shall no 
                     Apo. 10. a.
                   Daye of Grace appeere anymore vppon the Earth. but a seuere or harde 
                     Heb. 10. c. Pet. 3. b.
                   Iudgment ouer all Vngodlyones, as is before sayde.
               
                  Take it to heart.
               
            
            The Ende of the first Epistle.
         
         
            
            The Second Epistle. Ashort and pithy Instruction of the Mistery of the Loue.
            
               
                  Labour for Loue: Earnestly couet spirituall Gifts: but cheefly / that ye may prophecye.
                  1. Cor. 14.
                  The Ende of the Commaundement and the Cheef-summe of Fayth / is Loue with a pure Heart, and with a good Conscience, and with vnfayned Fayth.
                  1. Timo. 1.
               
            
            Ther was demaunded· and an Instruction requyred ther-vpon in Wryting / which is the Secretnes or Mistery of the Loue. And ther-vpon is answered by HN / in Wryting ⁏according to the Declaration of the spirituall and heauenly Trueth; this Instruction Heer-following.
            
               Hee that hath Eares to heare / 
                     Math. 13. a. Luk. 8. a. b. Apo. 
                           •
                         a. 3. a.
                   let him heare:
               Hee that hath Wisdom / let him conceiue Vnderstanding.
            
            
               
               The First Chapter.
               
                  WIth whom shall I  
                  
                     P
                           •
                        o. 8. 
                        •
                     . speake (sayth the Wisdom) that shall vnderstande my Woordes?
               2. To whom shall I reueale the Mistery of the Loue / that shall conceaue or knowe it?
               3. Who are those that giue-eare vnto my Doctrine, and haue founde my Wayes?
               4. Who hath marked whear my Dwelling is, and followed-after Mee / in my Out-going and In-going?
               5. Who hath borne ye Contempt, Blaspheamy, and Shame / with Mee, when I laye in the 
                     Pro. 1. a. Esa. 59. b.
                   Streete / whear the People shaked their Heades at 
                     Psal 22. a. 109. c.
                   Mee (as at a 
                     Esa. 53. a. Sap. 2. b.
                   filthy thing / that is worthy to be cast-awaye / ) and as madd and frantick Men / ranne ouer Mee with Feete?
               6. Who hath had his Pleasure in Mee / when I was so 
                     Esa. 53. a. Sap. 2. b.
                   filthy and so lothsom to looke-vppon or to beholde / before all Wisdom of the Flesh and of the Vnrepentantones?
               7. Who hath denyed 
                     Math. 10. 
                        •
                     . 16. c. Mark. 1. d. Luk. 9.14. c▪
                     
                   himself, and is ⁏for the Loues sake; gon-out-of Himself with Mee / when I did ⁏in the Loue; requyre the Mans Saluation, and was condempned to ye Death 
                     Math. 26.27. Mar. 15. Luk. 22. Iohn. 1
                        •
                     .
                        ••
                     
                   of the Crosse· and killed with thesame Death / by the Wyseones of the Earth / as a Dispised-one or an Outcast vppon the Earth?
               
                  
                  8. Who hath borne such a Death 
                     Rom. 6. a phil. 2. a
                   of the Crosse with Mee / in all Shame, Dispiscing, Blaspheaming, and wicked Defamation / and shewed Patience therin / euen vnto the Death?
               9. Who hath suffered himself to be buryed in the Hart of the Earth with Mee / like One that is deadd?
               10. Who hath beleeued my Ryseing 
                     Iob. 19. c. Dan 12. b. 1. Cor. 15. b. c 1. Tess. 4. b.
                   from the Death, or trusted theron / for to ryse also with Mee / with his Bodye?
               11. Who hath seene myne 
                     Math. 16. b. Luk 24. f. Act. 1. a.
                   Ascension to God my Father / vnto his Right-hande in ye heauenly Beeing: and wayted my Coming 
                     Esa. 25.30. b Mich. 7. b. Phil. 3. d.
                   from thence / to a Righteousnes vppon the Earth?
               12. Who hath marked that I liue and raigne with 
                     Eccli. 24 b.
                   God / and that my Greatnes is more then 3. Reg. 8. c. 
                     
                        •
                     . Pa
                           •
                        . 2.6. b.
                   all Heauens can comprehende: whear also no 1. Cor. 2. b.
                   earthly Vnderstanding· nor all whatsoeuer is borne out of the earthly Blood / can knowe Mee?
               
                   13· ANd if now ther be anyman that is passed-thorow all these things with Mee, or that doth now presently / go-thorow this narrow 4. Esd. 7. a. Math. 7. b. Luk. 13. Waye with Mee / to the Lyfe / Hee shall vnderstande and knowe the Misterye of the Loue.
               14. Hee shall likewyse taste and feele the Pèrfection of all Goodnes: and approch to the Loue / in her vertuous Nature, and becom of one-beeing therwith.
               15. Beholde and consider / Thatt is the

Grounde of the holy and godly Vnderstanding / touching the Mistery or Secretnes of the vpright Loue.
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               DYe lustfull Soules to the Mistery  of Loue, gather out the 4. Esd. 8. 
                        •
                     . Mynde: and search no farder. For doutles ye Loue suffereth not herself to be approched-vnto, vnderstoode, nor knowen / neither for this nor thatt / nor through any-maner of Cause (let it be by what Meanes soeuer it wil) nor thorough any-maner of Mynde or Will: but only / by her owne vertuous Nature and louley Beeing / as through herself or through her Seruice. For shee ؛the euerlasting Good
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   excelleth it all farr-away.
               2. Also / she receaueth nothing of anyman: but Shee herself ⁏out of her almighty and vertuous Nature and Spirit; is a plentifull Distributrix of her owne aboundant Ritches / as an infinite flowing Ryuer of all godly Goodes, alwayes 
                     Gen. 2. b.
                   refreshing the Paradise of the Lorde.
               3. The Loue is herself / a Nourice vnto her  Children, and a sure Bande / vnto all those that are incorporated to the euerlasting Lyfe: and a mighty Strength, which is able to suffer and to endure 1. Cor. 13. a.
                   althings.
               4. The Loue is also an 
                     Exo. 3. 
                        •
                     . 19. b. 20. b.
                   holy Mountayne, the which noman being vnhallowed or vnprepared

/ may touch or com-neere. For whosoeuer toucheth thesame Mountayne / and is not of her Part, to him is she a consumeing Fyre▪ Whose burning Heate 
                     
                        
                           •
                        sa. 33. b.
                   noman can endure / but he which is of her lyke Nature or Seede. Whoso resisteth her, and submitteth not himself vnder Her and her Seruice / Hee shalbe broken and battered to-peeces / like 
                     Psal. 2. 
                        •
                     . Esa. 30. b. Ier. 1
                        •
                     . a. 
                     
                        •
                     9. b.
                   a Potters Vessell.
               5. THe Loue in her Seruice / is an Originall or Begining of all good and vpright Lyfe. For through her Seruice / She draweth the Myndes and Thoughts of the Heart away from all that is vayne, corruptible, and euell.
               6. She vnbyndeth or looseth the euerlasting Perfection, for to com into the Lyfe of the eternall Vncreatednes / in the Kingdom of the God of Heauens / full of all pure Beawty / wherin all earthly and corrupt selfmynded Thoughts / do ceasse / and whear the corruptible Mortalitee / is not beholden.
               
                   7. For in the Loue / is nothing-els but all Good and Lyfe, as also the heauenly and endles Kingdom of Iesu Christ / in full vndisturbable Power / wherin the Myndes of the pure Hearts do dwell free without care or feare / with all 
                     Esa. 35.51. a. Apo. 21. a.
                   Glory and Ioye, and with christian Tryumph.
               8. Which Freedom of the Children of God / which Fulnes of the godly Delytes and of the godly Lyfe / noman can obtayne / that hangeth

his Delyte, Will, and Lyfe· and tyeth or byndeth himself / on the earthly, visible or corruptible Beeing. But they remayne vaynly-mynded / in ye Darknes of the vnbeleeueing Myndes▪ whose 
                     Rom. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                        ••
                      
                     Ep
                           •
                        e. 4. 
                        ••
                     
                   Hearts are blynded / with the vayne Comfort of this Worlde, and of the good-thinking Wyseones. For which Ignorances cause / they cannot vnderstāde ye right Grounde of the secret Loue.
               9. BVt Saluation and 
                     Luk. 
                     
                        •
                     . Pea
                     •
                  e / be vnto all those that are good of Will, and that take-heede to the Tyme of 1. Cor 6. 
                        ••
                      
                     Heb. 12. 
                        ••
                     
                   Grace: that giue thier Vnderstanding captiue vnder the Obedience of the Loue: and that do euenso with Humble and obedient Hearts / beleeue or trust the Loue in her Seruice.
               10. Happy are they / whose Deuotion of  Heart / God stirreth-vp ther-to· For through the Loue of God the Father / it shall all be 
                     Act. 
                     
                        ••
                     . 
                        •
                     . restored-agayne / whatsoeuer is estrainged or turned-away from God / from the Begining of the Worlde· and that is wel-mynded to the Conuertion vnto his God / To thend that it may all ⁏through the Loue; stande firme in his vpright Estate / for euer.
               11. Euenthus it shall all be accomplished in the Loue / whatsoeuer God hath spoken in 
                     Act. 3. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   tymes-past / by the Mouth of all his holy Prophets. For all what is gon-forth 
                     Math. 22. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪ 
                     Ma
                           •
                        . 12. c. Luk. 10. 
                        ••
                     
                   from God in tymes-past ⁏euen from Adam / till vnto Christ; reacheth to the Loue / Because that the Loue may in the last tyme ⁏as an euerlasting

Remnant; growe and blowe, and bring-forth her Fruit aboundantly. For the Loue / is the Inheritance of the euerlasting Kingdom, as an endles safe-makeing Seruice, according to the Promyses, vnto all and ouer all those that beleeue theron.
               12. THesame veryly is the 
                     Gen. 12. a. 13. b. 15. a. 17. c. 22. b.
                   Blessing / whic
                     •
                   the God of Heauen hath promysed t
                     •
                   
                  Abraham and his Seede / to the Blessing· o
                     •
                   all Generations of the Earth.
               13. Of thesame Blessing and vpright Beeing  of the Loue / we haue witnessed and set-forth it wryting ⁏with more and fuller Instruction or larger De
                     •
                  laration; in the Glasse of Righteousnes / to thend that eueryone ⁏which with our Comunialtee / giueth himself to the Loue▪ and to the Requyring of her Seruice; mought be satisfyed in his Vnderstanding. And likewyse to the Peace and Ioye of all Louers of the Trueth which are furthersom to the Seruice of Loue / to the Saluation of many Men / Because that euenso ⁏through 
                     Esa. 32.6 a. b
                   the Loue; the Peace may be prepared vppon the Earth / which hath long lyne 
                     Esa. 24. a.
                   waste.
               13. For the Ende 
                     Rom. 13. b G
                           •
                        l. 5. b. 
                     
                        •
                     . Timo. 1. a
                   or the Perfection of all Things [namely / the Cheef-somme of all Good, or all what one can name for Righteousnes and Trueth] thatt is the Loue: Yea / all what is to be knowen or vnderstood of the godly Things, 
                     Cor. 13. a. b. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     Iohn. 2. b. 3. b. 4. a. b.
                   thatt is the Loue: and her Mistery / is the euerlasting Lyfe.
            
            
               
               The III. Chap.
               BEholde and consider: To that  ende hath the Trueth her Flowing-foorth (like-as thesame is ymage-lyke or figuratiuely set-foorth or patterned-out⁏ 
                     Exo. 25.
                        •
                     . c. Act. 7. c. Heb 
                     
                        •
                      
                     a.
                   by Moses; in the foremer Example) for to drawe it all vnder the Loue / euen as thesame is now likewyse ⁏by the holy Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ; openly and nakedly declared vnto Vs / in the true Beeing. But not by Figures, Images, nor out of the Letter: but by the Cleernes and Appeering of the 
                     Mal. 3 a. 4 a Math. 16. c. 24. d. 25. d. Mar. 1
                        •
                     . c. 2 Tess. 1. b. Act. 1. b. Apo. 1. a.
                   Coming of our Lorde Iesu Christ / in his Glory. In which Daye or Cleernes of the Coming of Christ in his Glory / the Resurrection of his 
                     Dan. 12. b. Iohn. 5. c. 1. Cor. 15. f. 1. Tess. 4. b. Apo. 20. b.
                   Deadd cometh-to-pas: who do also liue with Christ / in Glory / and do keepe the Iudgment with Him / against all Vngodlyones.
               2. This veryly is the true 
                     Esa. 3. b. Sap. 3. a. Math. 19. c. 1. Cor. 6. a. Iudae. 1.6. Coming of Iesu Christ, who appeereth and cometh now vnto vs / from the Right-hande of God the Father ⁏who is almighty; to keepe a righteous Iudgment vppon Earth / euen as is written therof.
               3. In which Righteousnes / the true Loue of God the Father standeth comprehended or grounded: and out of thesame Righteousnes / hath the Loue her Seruice vppon the Earth / to a perpetuall Bannishment of all wicked and euel-willing Nature, and to an euerlasting

Implanting of the Holyones of God / into his Loue / To thend that the Earth may euenso ⁏through the Loue and her Seruice; be renewed· and cleansed from all her Vnrighteousnes.
               
                   4. But all those that are vnbeleeueing touching the 
                     Rom. 2. a.
                   Trueth· and vngodly or euell of Will / shall also be iudged in thissame Daye / through the Loue and her Seruice.
               5. Ther shall noman likewyse remayne standing in thesame Iudgment / that resisteth the Loue, and dispeth her Seruice. For the 
                     Esa. 40. a. 60.62. a.
                   Glory of God is reuealed / through ye Reuealing of ye Coming of Iesu Christ / in the Obedience of the Loue / for that the Earth may be full of the 
                     Num. 14. c. Psal 72. b.
                   Glory of God, according to the Promyses / and that all People may walke in the Loue: and that the Loue in her Seruice / may euenso ⁏as a Light of Lyfe; flourish for euermore / among the Children of Men, and gett the 
                     Col. 3. b.
                   Superioritee in their Hearts / to an euerlasting Thanksgiueing vnto God / for their Saluation of Lyfe in the Peace: which ⁏by Gods Grace; is com vnto them vppon the Earth / through the Loue.
               6. Thissame (euen as we haue heere witnessed and declared it) is assuredly the right Mistery of the Loue. It is also the true Laude of the Lorde▪ and the Tryumph of Christ with all his Saincts / to an euerlasting Establishing of the Promyses of God the Father: and that altogether / through the 1. Cor. 13. Loue and her Seruice. Which Loue and her Seruice / 

shall ⁏according to the Promyses of God the Father and his Christ; continewe from euerlasting to euerlasting. It is verytrue.
            
            The Ende of the second Epistle.
         
         
            The Third Epistle. A groundly Instruction, wherin the Difference betwixt God / the Father, and his Sonne / the Lorde Iesus Christ, is declared / according to the spirituall and heauenly Vnderstanding.
            
               
                  Holy Father, this is the euerlasting Lyfe: That they knowe Thee / that thou only art very true God, and Him whom thou hast sent / Iesus Christ.
               
               Iohn. 17.
            
            Ther was demaunded by a Louer of the Trueth, and an Instruction desyered / touching the Difference betwixt God / the Father, and his Sonne / the Lorde Iesus Christ. And ther-vppon is answered

by HN / in wryting ⁏according to the Declaring of the spirituall and heauenly Trueth; this Instruction heeraftter following.
            
               The First Chapter.
               
                  
                  I Haue thus-long deferred forto answer thee thy Demaunde in wryting ⁏which thou Beloued Brother desyredst of mee / when I was last with thee; because of certen Matters that were needfull for me first-of-al to further. Wher-through I ⁏by that occasion; haue not ⁏hetherto; had conuenient tyme to accomplish thesame.
               2. But I haue not for-al-that / forgotten thy Demaunde, nor through Slothfulnes / neglected to wryte vnto thee: neither do I desyre in any-wyse / to deny thee thy Request: but am alwayes wel-willing to witnes thesame vnto thee ⁏according to that Vnderstanding which the Lorde giueth vnto mee; so much as it is profitable for thee to Edification. Notwithstanding, I am burdened in my Heart / because I haue promysed ⁏vppon thy Demaunde; to wryte thee an Answere.
               3. But not that the Grounde of the Matter

⁏about the which thou hast questyoned with mee· and desyred of mee / to answer thesame in wryting; is so hard or profound-of-vnderstanding / to answere. O No: but because that the Vnderstanding of thesame Mynde / is so vtterly vnknowe 
                     Math. 11. c 13. b Iohn. 14. b. Ephe. 3. a.
                   before all Sence of the Flesh.
               4. Yea, how naked and bare soeuer the Scripture sheweth it / according to the Mynde of the Spirit / yet can it not for-al-that / be vnderstood 1. Cor. 2. b.
                   nor conceaued by Flesh and Blood / Vnles the Man must first ⁏according to the Counsayle of the Scripture; be turned into another Mynde.
               5. SEing now that the Scripture of the  Apostles of Christ / is spirituall, 
                     Iohn. 5. 
                        •
                     . 6. g.
                   and witnesseth of Spirit and Lyfe: and that the Man ⁏which readeth ye Testymonyes therof / in the Letter; standeth captiued with a Fleshly Mynde / vnder 
                     Rom. 7. 
                        •
                     . the Sinne and his owne Good-thinking: and so taketh vppon Him ⁏out of thesame Mynde of the Flesh and his owne Good-thinking; to vnderstande the Mynde of God out of the Letter / 1. Cor. 2. b.
                   So can He not doutles bring it to-pas. For his Fleshly Sences and good-thinking Thoughts / do surely stretch no farder / but likewyse to such an Intelligence or Knowledg of the Fleshly Vnderstanding.
               6. For-that-cause also / the Mynde of Man doth not ⁏out of the Letter of the Scripture; vnderstand nor comprehende the Mynde of God / rightly: By-meanes-wherof / ther is

likewyse now at this present daye (like as cam-to-pas also in tymes-past / among 
                     Ier. 26. b. 28. a. b. 29. c. d. Math. 12. c. 23. b. c. d. 26.27. the worldly Wyse and Scriptur-learnedones) much Contention, Variance, and Controuersie / founde among the Children of Men / who do contende about Thatt which they themselues vnderstād not: and wil seeme to knowe Thatt / which according to the Mynde of their Vnderstanding ⁏wherin they are comprehended; is not to be knowen nor Vnderstood.
               
                   7. THe whilst now that the ritch bountifull God ⁏out of the Loue of his Grace / vndeserued; giueth vnto Vs ⁏in 1. Cor. 2. b.
                   our inward Mynde; another Spirit for to discerne and to vnderstand with-al / 1 Cor. 1.2. b
                   which is nor of Flesh and Blood. nor-yet mynded according to the earthly and fleshly Wisdom of this Worlde, nor according to ye Prudence of ye Ingeniousnes of ye worldly Wyse and of the cōtentions Scriptur-learned or those of famous Schooles / Therfore do we perceaue / that it is perillous to wryt-ouer vnto any man / of the Secretnes of God 
                     Ephe. 3. a.
                   and Christ: And that therfore / we do dayly beare a Care or a Suspicion / whether Those that aske after the Vnderstanding of the godly Trueth / do not desyre to knowe thesame 
                     Act. 17. c.
                   out of Curyousnes or Sensualitee, or 
                     Iohn. 8. b.
                   to iudg it according to their Good-thinking.
               8. Therfore it is daungerous in this perillous Tyme / to discouer or to wryt-ouer the groundly Depthes 
                     Rom. 11. d.
                   of the godly Wisdom / vnto anyman / because that we do now fynde many

Men that do aske / to thend to knowe much / Yea they seeke many Knowledges / wherby to vnderstand, and to iudg the godly Things / out of their Sharpwitednes or Industry. And thatt lyketh all those well / which haue no Lust to doo the Lordes Will. For therin lyeth the olde Roote 
                     Gen. 3. b. Rom 5. b.
                   of Adam, wherout the disobedient Knowledg springeth or cometh-foorth.
               9. But to 
                     Iohn. 8 c.
                   submitt themselues obediently to the Requyring of the gracious Woord of the godly Wisdom· and to the right Seruice of the Loue of Iesu Christ / also to cleaue vnto ye liueing God / in his godly Nature or Beeing / 
                     Exo. 20. 
                        •
                     . Deut. 5. a.
                   and to serue, to prayse, and to honour Him / as He is a God / in his Christ / thatt lyketh fewe or none. Yet is thesame the newe Fruit of the Planting of Iesu Christ, wher-vnto the Scripture poynteth vs / which neither the 
                     Math. 11. c. Iohn. 14 c. 1. Cor 1.2. b
                   Worlde nor her Wyse or Scriptur-learnedones do vnderstand, nor-yet conceaue the Mynde. For they knowe not thesame.
               10. ALthough I do thus rehearse these  things / my Beloued: and that my Carefulnes standeth to such a Suspicion towards Many / Yet do I notwithstanding hope and trust somwhat better of thee / as that thou art more inclyned to vnderstand the Will and Mynde of God / to the intent to 1. Pet. 5. a.
                   submitt thyself obediently ther-vnto / to thy Saluation, and to the 
                     Ephe. 1. b.
                   Laude and Prayse of the godly Glory: and so to beleeue the liueing God and his Christ· to inclyne vnto Him· and to becom

                  2. Pet. 1. a.
                   partaker of his Beeing / then for to knowe much therof / according to the Pleasure of thyne Owne-mynde.
               11. Therfore also I wil not think it tedious vnto me to answer thy Demaunde / with Dilligence / out of feruent Loue / If haply God would vouchsafe ⁏through my small Seruice; to open 
                     EPhe. 1. c.
                   thyne Vnderstanding, and ⁏through his Increase or Blessing; to endow thee in thy Spirit / with his Grace, and to stirr-vp thy Heart to a pure Mynde towards God, and towards his Loue in Iesu Christ.
               
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               
                   THus was then thy saying vnto me ⁏as I remember; that the Woord which ye Apostles of Christ do wryte / was darke or incomprehensible for thee to vnderstande. namely, 
                     Rom. 1. a. 1 Cor. 1. a. 2. Cor. 1. a. Gal. 1. Ephe. 1. 
                  God our Father, and the Lorde Iesu Christ. And that in certen Places / Christ ⁏in steed of the Sonne; is also vttered-forth for a Father and God.
               2. Forasmuch as thy Vnderstanding supposed that ther-was nomore but 
                     Deut. 32. d. Esa. 44. a. 4
                        •
                      
                     b. 46. b. 1. Cor. 8. a.
                   One God (as it is also true) therfore was thy Demaunde thus vnto mee / wherof thou requyredst an Answer in Wryting: Seing now that ther-is nomore but One God / wherfore is He then pronouced-forth in two-maner of States? The which seemeth ⁏according to the sounde of the

Scripture; as though the Apostles published Two Gods.
               3. Veryly, the Difference of this Matter ⁏wherof thou desyerest the Instruction; could not likewyse 
                     Iohn. 6. d. c. 7. c. 8. b. c.
                   certen Iewes in tymes-past conceaue according to their Vnderstanding out of the Flesh / Yea, thesame is yet also rightly vnderstood of Feawe. Yet do many perswade them selues notwithstanding ⁏because that they in historical-maner / are mynded after the New-testament; that they haue thorowly-well conceaued the Vnderstanding of this Mattier: and do for-that-cause perswade themselues / that they do farr exceede and excell the Iewes: supposeing that they haue the Fayth and the Saluation. and that the Iewes remayne by the Workes of the Lawe. Now this passed-ouer, we wil proceede to further the Intent of our Matter.
               4. VEryly, as we haue spoken before / of God / the Father / and the Lorde / Iesu  Christ, these are hard things before the Man / for to search-out the Vnderstanding of them / in his Knowledg, if he do not knowe God and Christ and the true Righteousnes of the godly Beeing / in Himself / but imagineth of God and Christ / without Him / and so goeth-on according to his owne Good-thinking / without the Administration of the true Light and his Loue. Yea, it is 
                     Math. 11. c. 13 b. 19. c. Iohn. 14. 
                        •
                     . vnpossible ⁏after that maner; to vnderstand the right Mynde cleerly. And although likewyse / He

woulde search-out all the Knowledg of the Worlde, yet is it all in vayne / for to vnderstande thesame.
               5. Although the Man shoulde imagine of thesame Mynde / in the deepest-grounde of his Reason, yet can he not doutles ⁏with any-maner of Prudence of the Flesh; conceaue that Vnderstanding. For it is an Vnderstanding / 
                     Esa. 57.66. b Sap 1 a. Math. 11. d.
                   that ryseth not vpp in the Knowledg· but to the Lowely and Poore of Spirit▪ namely, in the Beleefe of the holy and gracious Woord / vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
               6. For God / the Father, the Lorde / Iesus Christ, nor-yet the true Light of the godly Wysdom / shall 
                     Sap. 1. a. 
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 2. b.
                   not be knowen / out of the Blood or Will of Man, nor out of any deepe Searching with the Knowledg. For God is a 
                     Iohn. 4 c.
                   Spirit, a verytrue Light, 
                     Iohn. 1. a. 8. b. 9. a. 11. c. 12. c. 14. a.
                   and an euerlasting Lyfe: which God also / is not knowen▪ seene, nor vnderstood / but in his owne Spirit, and in his true Light and godly Beeing.
               7. SEing then that the only God / is 1. Iohn. 1. a.
                   a verytrue Light / that no Darknesses do knowe nor beholde: and is not to be knowen nor behealde / but in his 
                     Psal. 36. Light / therfore is not Hee knowen likewyse / but by Those that do Heare and beleeue his gracious Woord, and that submitt them obediently 
                     Iohn 
                     
                        •
                     . d.
                   vnder the Requyring of thesame Woord and Will: and so do carry the Image 1. Cor. 15. c Ephe. 4. c.
                   of his godly Beeing, or do beholde thesame 2. Pet. 1. c.
                   in their Spirit / as a Pattern of God, and hope theron / through

Fayth. And the Spirit of thosesame obedient Humbleones / is the Spirit that giueth respect to the seruiceable Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of Loue / to thend to be 
                     Ioh. 15.17 
                        •
                      
                     Ephe. 3. c.
                   incorporated to the lyke Beeing of God [namely, the Brightnes of the Cleernes of the godly Beeing / the vpright Righteousnes 
                     Ephe. 4. c.
                   and Holynes that God esteemeth]. and then to knowe God the Father and his Sonne Iesu Christ / rightly and according to the Trueth / and to vnderstand the 
                     Iohn. 17. a. Math. 13. b.
                   Secretnes of the Kingdom of God and Christ.
               
               8. But seing now that the Man is gon-back  or falne-away 
                     Gen. 3. a. Deut. 32. c.
                   from his God, and from this pure Beawty and Cleernes of the godly Beeing· and 
                     Rom. 1. c. Ephe 4. b.
                   estrainged from the Vnderstanding of the Wysdom of Iesu Christ / therfore is he also becom disinherited of this Cleernes or Brightnes of the godly Light / and hath neither knowen the Father nor his Sonne ؛the Lorde Iesus Christ
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                  . By meanes of which Estraingin
                     •
                   / He hath not borne or carryed in his Spirit / 1. Cor. 15. g. Ephe. 4. c.
                   the Image or Like-being of his God▪ namely / Iesus Christ / to which effect / the Gospel 
                  
                     Math. 28. d. Mar. 16. b
                   or ioyfull Message / is published, wherby to bring the Man agayne to Christ, and to establish him in Him. But 
                     Gen. 3. 
                        •
                     . the Man is ⁏vp the Self-wisdom of the Flesh, and by his owne Opinion; quyt lead-away from the vpright Mynde or Vnderstanding of the Gospel, and from the Incorporating or Establishing in Iesu Christ / and brought to the Corruption:

and hath ⁏with Smart and Calamitee; borne the vngodly Beeing or the Contrary-nature vnto his God / 
                     Sap. 1. b.
                   to the which / he is neither created nor called.
               9. This Contrary-nature vnto God or Darknes / hath captiued 
                     Mar 6. f. 8. b Rom 1. c. 
                     
                        •
                     . Cor 4. a.
                   his Sences and Thoughts, and stolne-away his Heart and Vnderstanding / so that he can conceaue or vnderstand very-little / of the true Light or Christ of God: and that only / because he is so vtterly estrainged 
                     Ephe. 4. b. Col. 1.3. from the Beeing of God, and hath grounded him on the Knowledg.
            
            
               The III. Chap.
               
                   NOw for to discouer the Mynde a-little / How or in what Beeing or Foorme / the Woord ⁏God our Father, and the Lorde Iesus Christ; is witnessed by the Apostles of Christ / So must I rehearse a-little of Adam / to what ende he was created / wherby men may vnderstand the Intent / wher-to Christ is preached.
               2. WHen the almighty God ⁏who is full of Wisdom and Righteousnes; had finished 
                     Gen. 1. a
                   Heauen and Earth, and all their Garnishing / then did He also create Him a Man / 
                     Gen. 1. c. 2. a. Sap 3. a. Eccli. 17. a.
                   according to the Likenes of his Godhead / who shoulde carry or beare the very-like Beeing of God and the Image of his Glory / as a fellow-partaker-of or being-lyke-vnto the godly

Nature and Kynde. Through which like Beeing of God / God would be knowen euerlastingly in the Man / as a true God.
               3. Heer-through was God in the Begining ⁏as a Light of Lyfe; of one-substance with the manly Creatures. And out of his like Beeing in the manly Creatures / God 
                     Gen. 2. c.
                   brought-forth the Memory, for a good and holy Vnderstanding / Because that his lyke Beeing shoulde not be alone in the manly Creatures. but that the Memory shoulde ⁏in all good and holy Vnderstanding; be an Helpe 
                     Glas. 1
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   or Ayde to the like Beeing of the Godhead in the manly Creatures / to all Peace and Concord, and to all Loue and Welfare vppon Earth.
               4. BEholde, according to all Lyke-resemblance  / euen-as God is a very-true 
                     Iohn 1. a. 1. Iohn. 1. 
                        •
                     . Light and euerlasting Lyfe / so is also his like Beeing / a true Light and euerlasting Lyfe / in the manly Creatures ⁏that are comprehended in the vpright Estate of their manly Beeing, and in Christ;: in such like-maner also in them / the Memory / that God hath brought-forth out of his like Beeing. Which Memory / in thosame manly Creatures [namely, being in their right Estate] is likewyse a Light / of the true Light, and a Lyfe / of the true Lyfe: and that altogether / to Peace and Righteousnes vppon Earth.
               5. This / in the foremer Kingdom / was Gods Glory in his manly Creatures / whom He had chosen to himself / to thend that they

shoulde 1. Pet. 3. b.
                   inhabite the Earth with Righteousnes: and that euenso ther-through / the Highest God ⁏as a liueing and true God; and his holy Beeing and vertuous Nature / shoulde ⁏as-well vppon Earth / as in Heauen; be knowen for euermore / in the Spirit of the manly Creatures, and haue his Shape in them, and so liue in them.
               
                   6. BEholde: Thatsame true and like Beeing of God, which is flowed or borne out of the eternall and liueing Godhead / is the First-borne 1. Cor. 15. c. Gol. 1. b.
                   of all Creatures: and is the true and liueing Christ of God, which cannot be 
                     Psal 16. b. Act 2. d. 13. d
                   corrupted: but He continueth alwayes 
                     Psal 9. a.
                   and euerlastingly. For He is ye 
                  
                     Iohn. 3. b. Rom. 1. a.
                   only-borne Sonne of God, and a very-true 
                     Iohn. 1.14. 
                        •
                     
                   Light and eternall Lyfe for euermore / like vnto his Father.
               7. Heer-from hath the Man turned him, and seene and tasted the Corruption. But so hath not the Christ of God. For Gods very-like Beeing ؛the true Christ of God
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   
                  
                     Ephe. 4. Col. 3. is the vpright Righteousnes and Holynes / which is euerlasting and 
                     Sap. 
                     
                        •
                     . b.
                   immortall / also vndestroyable, vnchaingable, and vncorruptible. But the Vnrighteousnes / is the Obteyning of Death, and of the Corruption. Which Corruption or deadly Mortalitee / 
                     Gen 3. a. Rom. 5. b. 1 Cor. 15. c.
                   the Man hath taken-on. and ther-through / hath horne the Contrary-beeing to God ؛
                  
                     Sap. 2. c. Iohn. 8. c.
                   that Antichrist / the like Beeing of the Deuill
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                  : and so is dreeuen from the Beholding of God / 
                     Gen. 3. c.
                   without the Ritches of the

godly Goodes: and hath lost the Mercy-seate of his Saluation.
               8. Which Saluation of the Mercy-seate / is 
                     Gen. 12.22. 
                        
                           •
                         Act. 3. c. Gal 3. a.
                  
                   couenanted and promysed agayne ⁏by the God of Lyfe; vnto Abraham and his Seede. And through thatsame / the Blessing of all Generations of the Earth. After which Saluation / many 
                     Math. 13. b Luk. 10. c. 1. Pet. 1. b.
                   Kings and Prophets haue sought and inquyred / which they saw-into a farr-of / as coming: but they coulde not attayne vnto it▪ but haue witnessed and prophecied therof / that thesame shoulde be inherited in all Loue▪ Peace, and vpright Righteousnes / in the last tyme.
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               THis Grace of Saluation, and this  like Beeing of God / which became vnknowen through Adam, did in tymes-past appeere in Israel / out 
                     Math. 1. c. Luk. 1. g. 2. a.
                   of the Howse of Dauid, of the Trybe of Iuda, like as God had promysed 
                     Psal. 58. g. Esa. 9. a Ier. 23.30. 
                        
                           •
                         Dan. 9. c.
                   through the Lawe and the Mouth of all his Prophets: and He is published 
                     Act. 2. d. 3. b c. 13. d.
                   to the whole Generation of Israel / to be their King, Sauiour, and Messias. and that God had shewed the Mercy 
                     Luk. 1. f. g.
                   on them, for to help-vpp Isarel his Seruant. And so at thesame tyme / God was merci-full vnto his chosen People. and hath not for gotten his Couenant / euen-as He had promysed to Abraham and his Seede.
               
                  2. Euenthus veryly was this like Beeing of God / the true Christ and only-borne Sonne of God from eternitee / borne of the 
                     Luk. 2. a. Rom. 1. a.
                   Seede of Dauid according to the Flesh / to be a Sauiour to the Generation of Israel / for to set-vpp Israel in his Righteousnes. But certen of the Wyse and Scriptur-lernedones after ye Lawe / 
                     Math. 12. c 15. a. 21. c. d. 27. &c. Act. 2. c. 3. d.
                   haue neither beleeued nor receaued thesame Iesus Christ according to the Flesh: but haue withstood Him, and refused both Him and his Requyring, 
                     Math. 23. d.
                   and not alowed of Him: but haue delyuered Him ouer vnto the Heathen / 
                     Math. 27. to the Death of the Crosse.
               3. Yea / so farr is the vnregenerated man differing from the Mynde of God ⁏although he be wyse, prudent, or vnderstanding in the Knowledg and Scriptur-learnednes; that he ⁏for his owne Wisdoms cause; doth vnderstand 
                     Math. 11 c. 1. Cor. 2. c.
                   nothing-at-al of the Mynde of God, nor of the Seting-vpp of Israel
                  ▪ neither-yet can he attayne therunto / with his owne Wisdom: like as it hath also com-to-pas with the Wyse and Scriptur-learnedones of the Lawe. And this Christ of God 
                     Luk. 24. c. Act. 3. b. 17. a
                   hath bin forced to suffer (Yea / from the 
                     Apo. 13. a.
                   Begining of the Worlde forth) for the Wisdom of the Flesh and the Sinnes cause. And it went with Him / 
                     Math. 26. c Luk. 22. as was written therof: and He was killed on the Earth / with the contemnable 
                     Sap. 2. c. Math. 27. Death of the Crosse, and buryed in the Heart of the Earth.
               
                   4. SEing now that it was vnpossible / that the Death coulde holde Him, or that

He shoulde see the 
                     Psal 16 a Act. 2 13 d
                   Corruption / to a Consumation▪ therfore is He rysen agayne 
                     Mar. 16. b. Luk. 24 c Act 2. c 10 
                        
                           •
                        
                      1 Cor. 15 a
                   from the Death / for a perpetuall Conquering of the Sinne and Death / through his Death of the Crosse / and hath made himself manifest vnto his Freendes / that loued Him, and were his Disciples: and renewing them in the Woord of his Doctrine / He 
                     Luk. 24 c
                   shewed them ⁏through his Suffering and Death of the Crosse; the Victory 1 Cor. 15 g.
                   against the Sinne, Death, Deuill, and Hell.
               5. Now when-as these his Disciples were renewed and established in the Woord of his Doctrine· and armed 1 Pet 4 a
                   with thesame Mynde of the Suffering of Iesu Christ / 
                     Mar 16. b Luk 24 f Act 1. a
                   then was He taken-vp from them to the Right-hande of God his Father / in the heauenly Beeing. From thence hath He comforted his Disciples, and comprysed his Shape in them / out of the heauenly Beeing. powring-foorth 
                     Act. 1 
                        •
                      2 
                        •
                     
                   his holy Spirit into them, as a newe and true 
                     Apo. 21 a
                   
                  Ierusalem, which is not prepared by Men / but by God, like a garnished Bryde for her Husbande. And euenthus became God the Father / thorough his only-borne Sonne ؛
                  Christ
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   of one-substance agayne 
                     Act 
                     
                        •
                     
                   with the manly Creatures: And to that ende also, because that all manly Creatures / shoulde ⁏through Christ; be 
                     Iohn. 17 c
                   one-substance with God the Father / is Christ preached. And in such a State doth God requyre to haue his People, or the Congregation of Iesu Christ.
               
               
                  
                   6. BEholde, These Disciples of Iesu Christ ⁏who through Christ / were sealed with the holy 
                     Act. 2. a Rom 8 b 2 Cor 5 a
                   Spirit of Christ / from the Right-hande of God· 
                     Math. 13. f
                   taught to the Kingdom of the God of Heauens· and established in God the Father and in the Lorde Iesu Christ; were the right Christians / not out of the Letter or Flesh / 
                     Math. 26. c. Luk. 22 c Iohn. 6. f. 1 Cor. 11. c
                   wherwith they had bin serued till vnto the Coming of thesame Clernes of Christ: but out of the Power of God / 
                     Luk 24. c Act 1. a. 2. a 1 Cor. 2 a b
                   in the Spirit: and did beare euenthus 2. Cor. 4. a
                   a costly Treasure / in earthen Vessels. namely, the very-like Beeing of God the Almighty.
               7. Which Beeing of God / 2. Cor. 4. a. Phil. 2. a. Col. 1. b. Heb 1. a
                   is the true Christ himself / according to the Spirit: with whom they had their Fellowship. And through Him ⁏seing He was One with God; their 1. Iohn. 1. a.
                   Fellowship was also with God the Father. Wherby they vsed that Woord: God our Father, and the Lorde 
                  ؛his Sonne
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   
                  Iesu Christ. The which also Many nodout / do speake or witnes in-that-maner / out of the Letter, and out of the Imagination of the good-thinking Knowledg: but they are wyde of it / according to the Trueth. But These ⁏who 
                     Act 2.3. 1 Cor 2 a b 1 Iohn. 1. a.
                   witnessed that Woord / out of the Spirit and Trueth; haue witnessed the Grace from God the Father, and from the Lorde Iesu Christ / in the Trueth of God. And yet notwithstanding / haue confessed nomore but one God: but haue witnessed the Wonderful-acts of God / shewed on them through Iesus Christ. And 
                     Ioel 2. d. Act. 2▪ 
                     b.
                   it

shall com-to-pas ⁏sayeth God; in the last Dayes.
               8. THis Grace of Saluation / that was 
                     Luk. 1. f. g 2. a b. c Act. 2.3.4. &c.
                   apeered to the Iewes ⁏which Many  of them in that tyme refused; is published to the Heathen / 
                     Math. 3. a. Luk. 2. d Act. 13. c
                   to a Repentance for their Sinnes / to thend that they shoulde 
                     Iohn. 1. c.
                   beleeue on the like Beeing of God the Almighty / that was appeered vnto them· and so becom partakers likewyse of the Gifts of the holy Gost ⁏through Iesus Christ; out of the fatherly Grace: and that their Fellowship mought be one 1. Iohn. 1. a.
                   with God the Father, and his Sonne Iesu Christ / in one-maner of Fayth.
               9. And to that ende was the Seruice of Christ ministred 2 Cor. 10. a
                   vnder ye Obedience of Fayth ⁏by the Apostles of Christ; to the vnbeleeueing Heathen. namely, in the Woord of the Preaching of the Disciples and Apostles of Christ / To the intent that thesame Lyfe of Righteousnes ⁏that was refused 
                     Act. 3. c.
                   by the Iewes; shoulde be set-vpp among ye Heathen / through Fayth: and so they sought to confirme ye Lawe among ye Heathen / through Fayth. and to bring forth the Righteousnes ther-by / 
                     Rom. 3. c. Gal. 2 b. 3 b Phil. 3. b.
                   that is requyred by ye Lawe.
            
            
               The V. Chap.
               BEholde, euenthus / for a 
                     Luk. 2. 
                        •
                     
                   Light  and Saluation of the Heathen / is thissame ⁏only out of Grace / vndeserued; published vnto the Heathen / for a Gospel
                  
/ to a Mortifying of their vayne Vnderstanding, 
                     Rom 1.6.8 1 Cor 5.6. Gal. 5 6. and of the corrupt vngodly Beeing. and to an Incorporating to the newe Man, whom the Apostles of Christ did publish. namely, Christ 
                  ؛the Like-beeing of God
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   
                  
                     Luk. 1. g. Ephe. 4. c.
                   in vpright Righteousnes and Holynes. In whom ⁏and in none Other; standeth 
                     Act. 4.10. c
                   the Forgiuenes of Sinnes.
               2. These Publishers of the holy Woord or Gospel of the Kingdom of God (seing now that Iesus Christ had a Shape in them / as a verytrue Light and Lyfe of God, and that Gods Shape / was in Christ: wher-thorough they lykewyse were in Christ
                  ▪ and God in them) haue published that Woord ؛
                  Grace and Peace from 
                        •
                     od our Father, and ye Lorde Iesu Christ; in the Trueth.
               
                   3. But although the Apostles did publih this after-this-maner / yet haue they notwithstanding / spoken no otherwyse then of One God / who had shewed his Procreation or Generation in them / as a 
                     Iohn. 1. c
                   Glory of the only-borne Sonne of ye Father / full of Grace and Trueth: namely, that God the Father had begotten and declared in them / his like 
                     Iohn 1. a 1. Iohn. 1. a
                   Lyfe of God / out of his Lyfe, and his like Light / out of his Light.
               4. Seing then that they did beare this like Beeing of the Godhead / in them / therfore haue they ⁏through thesame; knowen the liueing God / who was their Saluation: namely, through the Lyfe of God / Iesu Christ, being

appeered vnto them 
                     Ephe. 3. 
                        •
                     
                   in the Spirit. Wherthrough they also published the Lyfe that is euerlasting: and so witnessed likewyse, that Those which had 
                     
                        •
                     . Iohn. 5. b.
                   not the Sonne of God / coulde not also haue the Father / and that they were without 
                     Ephe. 2 b.
                   God / in this Worlde. For the like Lyfe of God / 
                     Iohn 1. a 1 Iohn 1. a 5 b.
                   is the only-borne Sonne of God himself. And whosoeuer refused Him / mought not obtayne the Grace before God. For it is so concluded by God for euer / that in the Sonne / is the Lyfe of Saluation, 
                     Iohn. 10.14. a.
                   and that it shall also be obtayned in Him.
               5. THis is veryly the Grace of God the  Father ⁏which was published in tymes-past / vnto the Children of Men / vnder the Obedience of Fayth, and which is also published now in the last tyme / vnder the Obedience of the Loue; that the Lyfe of the liueing Godhead / is appeered vppon Earth, and that ⁏through thesame; the Vnitee in the Peace with God the Father / is to be obtayned / wherby to 
                     Iohn 8. c 14. b. 17. b.
                   knowe Him / in his Glory, and his Vniformnes with the Manhod / through the Lorde Iesus Christ. Reade. Iohn. 17.
               6. Beholde, This is the Difference ⁏with a breefe Instruction; betwixt God the Father / and the Lorde Iesus Christ.
               
               
                  Take it to heart.
               
               7. MY Seruice / to content thee ⁏my Beloued; vouchsafe to take in good part / with a Regard to ye God of the Liueing.

And this my Wryting ⁏to the Answering of thy Request; haue I reharsed in this maner: seing other wyse no Meane / for to open the Vnderstanding of the Godhead of Christ, and to content thee, or to satisfy thy Demaunde.
               8. Beholde, I haue heere witnessed ye Mynde vnto thee / in Ful maner: so that in this Instruction ⁏so far-forth as the Lorde 
                     Ephe. 1. c.
                   do illuminate thyne Vnderstanding; ther shalbe sufficient / to answer thy Request. And thy Intent of Heart in the Spirit / shall likewyse through the Beleefe of the Trueth ⁏if thou hast a right regarde heerunto, 
                     Pro 4. a
                   and takest thissame to heart; be wel-mynded to our mostholy Seruice of Loue. The almighty God leade the into his Righteousnes. Amen.
               
            
            The Ende of the Third Epistle.
         
         
            The Fowrth Epistle. A cleere Instruction of the Mediation of Iesu Christ, that cometh-to-pas in the Spirit / for a Reconciliation betwixt God and the Man.
            
            
               
                  Iesus speaketh to his Disciples:
                  I am the Waye, the Trueth, and the Lyfe. Noman cometh to the Father / but thorow Mee.
                  Iohn. 14. a.
                  If any man enter in thorow Mee▪ hee shalbe saued.
                  Iohn. 10 b.
                  I am the Light of the Worlde. Whoso followeth after Mee / walketh not in Darknes: but he shall haue the Light of Lyfe.
                  Iohn. 8. b.
                  If any man wil follow-after Mee, let him forsake himself: and take-vp his Crosse on him / and follow after Mee.
                  Math. 16. c. Luk. 9 c.
                  He that taketh not vp his Crosse on him, and followeth after Mee, hee is not worthy of Mee, or he may not be my Disciple.
                  Math. 10. d. Luk. 14. c
               
            
            Ther was demaunded by a Louer of the Trueth, and an Instruction in wryting / desyred theruppon / how the Mediation of Iesu Christ ⁏according to the Spirit, or spiritually; cometh-to-pas in vs / 
                  Rom. 
                  
                     •
                   
                  a. b.
                to our Reconciliation with God the Father: and how Christ is an 
                  Heb. 1. a
                Heire of all Things: and how 1. Cor. 15. c.
                God is all in all.
            
               Wher-vpon this present Letter is written by HN / out of an Inclynation of the Loue: very profitable and needfull to the Vnderstanding therof / for all those that hope vpon God· vpon Christ· and vpon their Saluation / To thend that they may vnderstand which is the right Grounde of the Beleefe in Iesu Christ / wherthrough one is iustifyed from the Sinne / for to be in-that-sort / reconciled with God in a newe Lyfe, according to the Scripture.
            
               The First Chap.
               
                  
                  FOrasmuch as I haue alwayes founde my self willingly-bent to do thee Seruice / my beloued Brother. so do I also still fynde my self redy-prepared therto. namely, in thatt wherin I may be seruiceable vnto thee / to a Guyding into the holy Vnderstanding / To thend yt thou ⁏if God vouchsafe thesame; moughtest ⁏through my small Seruice; be a little furthered to the good Knowledg in God and his Christ.
               
               
                  2. But seing I am alwayes carefull, and do stand in feare to wryte much of the deepe Groundes of the 
                     Rom. 11. 
                        
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                     
                   secret Knowledges of God and Christ / so am I alwayes carefull / lest that thesame (if we should wryte boldly therof) mought thrust-back anyone from Vs and our godly Doctrine, or offende him therby: or that anyone shoulde desyre to glory or to boste therin / as in a Knowledg of the Flesh. and not before althings or with his whole Heart / to be partaker in the Spirit / 2 Pet. 1. a.
                   of the Beeing wherof we do wryte or witnes.
               3. For albeit that we do knowe well ⁏according to the Comprehention of our Natural-reason; that ther is a God, a Christ, and a holy Gost / and so do talke of Them: and yet do not ⁏through that Knowledg; beleeue, serue, nor loue thesame God / as He is a God, and his Christ / as He is a Christ, and the holy Gost / as He is an holy Gost / nor-yet desyre to becom partakers of his Beeing: but to liue in a 
                     Rom. 1. 
                        
                           •
                         Ephe. 4. b.
                   strainge Beeing / which is none of Gods Beeing, and to cleaue-vnto thesame / So is then the Knowledg of the holy Secretnes of God / more hurtfull then furdersom vnto vs. For if we knowe in what Foorme or Beeing / that ther is a God: and yet do not honour nor serue Him / as He is a God: but haue a Lust to the Contrary-beeing vnto God / Then is thatsame to a 
                     Mat. 25. c. Luk. 12. c
                   more-greeuous Condemnation vnto vs.
               
                  
                   4. SEing now that I ⁏through the Light; do beholde these Perills / so am I likewyse carefull therin / to wryte of the Secrets of God / before Many. And if thou lookest with me into the Perils / then knowe I well / that thou wilt not disalow me in my Carefulnes. For I haue much-more delyte in the Obeying of the Requyring of the Seruice of Loue / and whear Gods Beeing, Light, or vpright Righteousnes / doth euenso then ryse-vp in 
                     Esa. 58. b.
                   Power / in the inward Man / then whear as men do with Speakable-woords ⁏out of the Knowledg; talke much of the Secretnes of God / according to the outward Maner.
               5. Thou also knowest partly my Conuersation / in what sort it was with thee, and how fearfully touching many Woords / I haue behaued myself with thee: shewing thee / that the 
                     Math. 13. Secretnes of the Kingdom of God or Christ / consisteth not 1 Cor. 2 a.
                   in the Multitude of Woords, nor in the Ritches of the Knowledg / Because that thou shouldest not suffer thyself to be bewitched by Anyman with outward or strainge Woords or Sayings of plentiful-store of Languages / as to let thyne Heart committ Whordom therwith. But that thou moughtest haue a much-more regard vnto the Power of God, and vnto the vpright Righteousnes that God worketh through the Ministration of his gracious Woord and Seruice of Loue / in ye Spirit of the inward Man / to thend for to liue vprightly therin / with a meeke-mynded Spirit.

For a meekemynded 
                     Psal. 
                     
                        •
                     . b Esa. 57. b 61. a. 66. a
                   Spirit ⁏which hath his Proceeding obediently / according to the Requyring of the Lords Woord; is very precious and acceptable before God.
               6. And although that we do ⁏in thesame Spirit;  go-on in Scilence / as touching the outward Maner, and are poore of Spirit in Tongues or Languages / Yet is not for-al-that / the Ritchnes of the spirituall and heauenly Knowledg of God▪ euer-the-lesse among Vs. but rather the greater: And thesame, and all Thatt which is of God and Christ / do we esteeme very 
                     Iob. 28. b. Psal. 19 b. Pro. 3 b 8 b Sap. 7. b.
                   precious / Yea much worthyer then all the Ritches or costly Treasures of this Worlde: for thatsame ⁏of worthynes-part; excelleth it all. For which Occasion / we let our Woordes be feawe / because that thesame which we speake / may not proceede out of the Knowledg. but out of the 1. Cor 2. a. b
                   Power of God, and out of the Trueth of Iesu Christ.
               
               7. And in thesame Speech of ye godly Things / we do also take-heede with Foresightfulnes ⁏so much as we may therin; of the Looseones of Heart / to thend that ther be not one godly Saying of the precious secret Wisdom / spoken-out in Vayne. O / how 
                     Eccli. 14.25 Ieam. 5 a
                  happy is hee / that falleth not in his Tongue, and whose Woordes 
                     Col. 4. a.
                   are tempered with Salt.
               8. NOw this being omitted. I reioyce me doutles / of the, and of the Communialte  that is with thee: and I hope to reioyce me yet more with the / with greater Ioye, by

meanes of the Answere vnto mee / that I haue hearde from thee / As that yee altogether / are wel-mynded to Thatt which is the Beeing itself / wherof the Scripture witnesseth ⁏as personally; of God, of Christ, and of the holy Gost. Which Beeing ⁏for those that be partakers therof; are the secret Treasures and 
                     Math. 13 c
                   heauenly Ritches of God / wherof the Worlde· the ritch Scriptur-learnedones· nor the Good-thinking-wyse ⁏with all their deep-groundly Knowledg; do neither knowe nor vnderstand 
                     Math. 11 c 1. Cor. 2. a.
                   anything-at-al.
               9. It is true, they haue the Scripture of the godly Witnesses: wher-through they suppose to be wyse and vnderstanding. But seing they giue not their Vnderstanding captiue vnder the Obedience of the Loue of Iesu Christ, and com 
                     Iohn. 5. not euenso to the Beeing / wherof the Scripture speaketh, nor-yet beleeue theron / 
                     Iohn, 7. d
                   as the Scripture sayth / So is-ther likewyse no Light, nor Trueth, nor-yet Spirit nor Beeing of God / among them / and they also do neither knowe nor 
                     Math. 22 c. 1. Tim 1. a
                   vnderstande Thatt which they themselues speake therof.
               10. But the God of Lyfe ⁏
                     Ephe. 2 a
                   who is ritch of Mercie; hath ⁏out of his harty Loue; 
                     Ephe. 1. a 2. a 3. a. Col. 1. d.
                   reuealed the Beeing of his Glory vnto vs· renewed our ignorant Vnderstanding ⁏vnder the Obedience of his Loue; to a spirituall Mynde of the vpright Righteousnes· and ⁏when we were full of Infirmitees, 
                     Rom. 5. a. b. Ephe. 2. a. Col. 1. c. 2. b
                   and deadd / for the Sinnes cause; begotten vs agayne / 

out of his Loue / 
                     Tit. 1. a. 5. a▪
                     
                   to a sure Hope of his Lyfe.
               11. Seing then that 
                     Heb. 12. 
                        
                           •
                        .
                   such a Clowde of holy  Deawe / is ⁏by Gods Grace; appeered in our Sight / according to the Spirit· and com from Gods Right-hande / as an heauenly Blessing / and wherout also the right Beeing of God ⁏wherof we speake; 2. Cor. 4. 
                        •
                     
                   aryseth vnto vs / as a Light and Cleernes: Therfore haue wee ⁏although the Scripture witnesseth theron, and that we do heare many speake therof; more regarde vnto Thatt which is the vpright Beeing itself ⁏wherin our Ioye standeth; then vnto Thatt which witnesseth theron.
               12. For thesame Light that shyneth now vnto Vs / out of the heauenly Trueth / 1. Ioh
                           •
                        
                      1. a.
                   is the euerlasting Lyfe, which was with the Father / in the Begining: and it is 
                     Psal. 45. a Heb. 1. a.
                   the Mercie-seate of the godly Maiestee, which continueth from euerlasting to euerlasting: Euen-as I likewyse haue talked with thee of thesame / when I was last with thee.
            
            
               The II. Chap
               FOrasmuch then as thy Request was vnto me at that tyme / to wryte  thee an Instruction of the Mediation of Iesu Christ after the Spirit: and how thesame cometh-to-pas in vs / 
                     Rom. 3. 
                        •
                      2. Cor. 5. b. Ephe. 2. b. 1. Iohn. 2.4. 
                        •
                     
                   for a Reconciliation betwixt God and vs: and how Christ is 
                     Heb. 1. a
                   an Heire of all Things: and how 1. Cor. 15. c
                  
                  
God is all in all / Therfore wil I open a little of thesame vnto thee: and I hope also to satisfy the well with this Instruction.
               2. Inasmuch then as I haue partly marked thyne Inclynation to the holy and spirituall Vnderstanding of the vpright Righteousnes / therfore can I not of Natures-part omitt / but must witnes vnto the of thatt which thou desyrest at my handes / also reueale the 
                     Ephe 3. a
                   
                  Mistery
of Christ / and make-knowen vnto thee / thatt which is hidden 
                     Rom. 15. c Ephe. 1 a 3 a Col. 1. c.
                   before the Worlde and all her Wyseones / and discribe it vnto thee in wryting / accordingly as the Lorde illuminateth myne Vnderstanding therto, and as it may be profitable for thee to Edifycation.
               
                   3. THer is testifyed in the Scripture ⁏the which according to the Spirit / is also verytrue; that God is 
                     Iohn 4. c. 2 Cor. 3. b.
                   a Spirit▪ and a 1 Iohn. 1. a
                   verytrue Light / with whom no Darknesses or Sinnes are mingled. But seeing that the Man is falne 
                     Gen. 3. a Esa. 59. b.
                   into a strainge Contrary-beeing vnto God, and goeth-on and liueth therin / So is he likewyse 
                     Ephe. 4 b. Col. 1. c
                   estrainged from God and from his Light: and walketh according to the Flesh or Outward, and according to the Requyring and Desyres of the Foreskinne of his vncircumcised Heart / and not according to the Spirit, or according to the Requyring of the godly Beeing: and so He 
                     Psal. 82. a Ephe. 5. a
                   walketh in the vngodly Beeing of the Darknesses: and thatsame vngodly Beeing of the Darknesses 
                     Rom. 1. c. Ephe 4. b.
                   hath blynded his Heart. And thatt veryly is the Sinne, 
                     Esa. 59. a.
                  
                  
which seperateth the Man from his God: and it is the 
                     Ephe 2 b
                   Middle-wal / as an Enimitee betwixt God and the Man. By meanes of which Middle-wall / both God and the Man / are growen into two Parts, and are partially-mynded against ea
                     •
                  hother. Yet ought they both ⁏God and the Man; to be 
                     Iohn. 17. 
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                      
                     Ephe. 5. d
                   One, like as it was 
                     Gen. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . in the Begining.
               4. SEing now therfore that they are deuided ⁏either of them in his owne Mynde; 
                     Gal. 5. b.
                   against each-other / so is God ⁏
                     Iohn. 4. c. 2 Cor. 3. b.
                   who is a Spirit; spirituall and mynded to all vpright Righteousnes / against the Mynde of the Man: and the Man ⁏who is 
                     Gen. 6. 
                        •
                     . Flesh and Blood· and not yet circumcised 
                     Gen. 10. b. Ier, 4. a. 9. c.
                   on the Foreskinne of his Heart / to a Laying-away of the Sinne; 
                     Rom. 8. a.
                   is fleshly and vngodly mynded / against the Mynde of God.
               5. Now doth Gods Loue and Mercie extende  towards the Man / as alluring 
                     Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                     . c.
                   and drawing him dayly ⁏by his gracious Woord and Seruice of Loue, and by his Ministers; vnto Him and to his spirituall Mynde of vpright Righteousnes. But seing that the Darknes / the sinfull Flesh or vngodly Beeing / is growen betwixt God and the Man / as a Foreskinne 
                     Esa. 59. 
                        
                           •
                         Ephe. 2. or Middle-wall, and as an Enimitee: and that God / is spiritually mynded, and the vncircumcised Man / fleshly mynded / according to the Mynde of his Foreskinne of the sinfull Flesh / Therfore doth not the 
                     Rom 
                     
                        •
                      1 Cor▪
                      
                     
                        ••
                     
                   Man vnderstande the spirituall Mynde of God the Father,

neither-yet knowe the good Will of God / that loueth him to Saluation: and he beleeueth not God in his Woord nor Seruice: but he beleeueth the Darknesses which haue inclosed him: and following thosesame Lustes 
                     Ephe. 4. b
                   of Errour / he goeth-back: and so sinneth dayly against the Father. And thatt is the Sinne that is 
                     Math 12. d.
                   forgeeuen the Man / in his Repentance for the Sinne, because of his Ignorance / through Vnbeleefe.
            
            
               The III. Chap.
               
                   NOw moughtest thou demaunde: What Spirit or Beeing is this God / of whom the Scripture witnesseth, or vnto whom / we ought to turne vs in the Spirit? the Answer: Of thesame haue we rehearsed in the 
                     Intro. 22.23 Introduction to the holy Vnderstanding of the Glasse of Righteousnes. But now for to com to the Knowledg of ourselues, and to a good Knowledg of our God and his Righteousnes / So wil we (to a larger Declaring of our Vnderstanding / touching thatt wherof we speake, and to a Distincting of the true Light / ye liueing God / who 
                     Heb. 13. a.
                   was, and is, and continueth for euer) rehearse and testifye heere in this place also / of the Beeing of the only God.
               2. This God ؛the Liueing and Verytruone
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   is the true 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      3.1 God of Abraham, through whom the 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 12. a Rom. 4. a b
                   Promyses of the Mans Saluation or

Blessing do com-to-pas / in his Fayth. the true God 
                     Math. 22. d.
                   of Isaac, in whom the 
                     Gen. 21. b. Heb. 
                     
                        •
                     1. Promyses be inherited, and in whom the Seede of Blessing / is named. and the true God of 
                     Act. 7. g.
                   
                  Iacob or Israel, in whom the Promyses of the Glory 
                     Num. 14. Esa. 40 a.
                   of God and of the Mans Saluation or 
                     Ier 23 33. 
                        •
                     . Blessing / becom established· and 
                     Luk. 1. g.
                   Gods true Righteousnes erected. This self-same God / 
                     Sap 5. a. Eccli. 24. a. 1. Pet. 2. b. Ieam 1. c.
                   is a verytrue vnchaingable Light. a cleere 
                     Ephe. 1.4. b. Apo. 21.22. Daye. and a glistering delytfull Beawty.
               3. This Light / is the 
                     Iohn. 14 a.
                   euerlasting· Lyfe of the vpright Righteousnes / an ouerflowing 
                     Psal 42. a. Ier. 2. c. Iohn. 4. b.
                   Fountayne of liueing Waters / full of Ioye, full of all Sweetnes, full of Loue, and full of Peace / abounding with Plenty of Grace and Mercie.
               4. This Lyfe / is the 
                     Iohd. 1. a.
                   euerlasting firmestanding  essenciall Woord / 1. Cor 2. a. Heb. 4. b.
                   full of Power and Possibillitee.
               5. This Woord / is the 
                     Iohn. 6. g. Ephe. 1.6 4 d. Intro. 23. true Spirit, with full Power of Sealing, or to an euerlasting Establishing of the liueing Godhead / with the Manhod. And thatt is vnto the Man / the Certentee of the Trueth / that Hee ؛thesame God
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   is only 
                     Psal. 116. b. Iohn. 3. d. Rom. 3. a.
                   a very true God.
               6. This Spirit / is 
                     Sap. 7. c.
                   the holy Wisdom, and the vpright Vnderstanding / full of all spirituall heauenly Goodes.
               7. This holy Wisdom and vpright Vnderstanding / is 
                     Eccli. 1. 
                        •
                     . the Prouidence, which foreseeth euery-thing / that is good: and discerneth Lyfe and Death / and giueth Knowledg

of the Good / 
                     Pro. 2. 
                        •
                     . to a Warning from the Euell.
               8. This Prouidence / is the Will, 
                     Sap. 1. b.
                   which willeth that all thatt which is good / shoulde bee, and com-to-light.
               9. In thissame good Will / is 
                     Heb. 11. a.
                   the Beleefe grounded, as a sure and firme Confydence / that all thatt which is good, and foreseene to the Good / shalbe performed or com-to-light: the which the good Will desyreth / that all thatt which is good / may bee, becom manifest, and liue.
               10. The Beleefe / 1. Cor. 2. a. Ephe. 1. c. 3. c Phil. 3. c.
                   is the Power, as mighty to bring-to-light all Good / ther-through.
               11. This Power / is the Deede or the Worke of all Good, and 
                     Phil 2. b.
                   the Accomplishment of all the Workes of God.
               12. BEholde: Such a Spirit or Beeing /  is the true God / of whom the Scripture speaketh, and vnto whom the Man ought to turne him. For Hee ؛thesame God
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   is the right Father, who ⁏out of himself and through the like Beeing of his Godhead; hath made 
                     
                        
                           •
                        en. 1. a. Psal. 3
                        •
                     . a. Iohn. 1. a. Ephe. 3. a.
                   all that is anything. And all his 
                     Psal. 19. a. 
                     
                        •
                     9. a. 97. a. Rom. 1 c.
                   Workes do testifye of Him / that Hee ؛thesame God
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   is an euerlasting, liueing, and true God / To thend that Hee only / shoulde be 
                     Deu. 6.10. b
                   serued, honoured, and worshiped in all his Workes / as a great gloryous God, 
                     Psal. 10.29. b
                   who only is the Lorde and King.
               13. This euerlasting God, seing that He hath made 
                     Pro. 8. b. Iohn. 1. 
                        •
                     . all that is anything / through his like Beeing (for that thesame like Beeing / shoulde

he 
                     Heb. 1. 
                        •
                     . an Heire in all Things) hath also in the Begining / foormed 
                     Gen. 
                     
                        •
                     . c. Sap. 2. c.
                   Thatsame ؛his very-like Beeing
                     •
                   in the Man: And so hath God made and ordayned euery-thing 
                     Eccli. 39. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   well / through his godly Beeing. And 
                     Iohn. 1. a.
                   without thatsame Beeing / God hath made nothing that is any what, nor ordayned anything / without thesame: and thatsame lyke Beeing of his Godhead / 
                     Iohn. 1.6. g
                   is his only borne Sonne / Iesus Christ, and is the 1. Cor. 15. c. Col. 1. c.
                   Firstling or the First-borne of all Creatures / whom God hath foreseene therto / 
                     Pro. 8. c.
                   ereuer the Foundation of the Worlde was layde, 
                     Heb. 1. a.
                   and to be an Heire of all his Workes.
               14. Hee is promysed 
                     Iohn 3. b. Rom 8. d.
                   and geuen vnto vs by God the Father ⁏as a Christ of God; for a Lyfe and for a Saluation: and is likewyse so 
                     Psal. 19. a. Act. 2.3. &c.
                   preached and published to the Worlde. But the Worlde hath not beleeued in Him: and therfore also 
                     Ihon. 8.9. 
                        •
                     . remayneth her Sinne and Death.
               15. For in noman els but in thatsame only  
                  Christ, 
                  
                     Iohn. 1. is the Lyfe. Which Lyfe / is a Light of Men: and that Light shyneth in the Darknesses: and the Darknesses haue not comprehended it.
               16. Thatsame is a verytrue Light, 
                     Iohn 8. b.
                   which lighteth all Men / through his Coming into this Worlde: and He was in the Worlde, and the Worlde was made through Him, but the Worlde knew Him not.
               17. He came into his Owne, and his Owne receaued Him not. But so many as receaued Him / to them gaue He the Power to be Children

of God. namely, Those that beleeued on his Name / which are not borne of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor-yet of the Will of Man / but of God.
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               
                   OF this selfsame only-borne Sōne of God the Father / the Prophet Esay doth also witnes: 
                     Esa. 9. a
                   A Childe (sayth hee) is borne vnto vs, a Sonne is geeuen vnto vs: whose Dominion / is vppon his Shoulders: and He is called / Wonderfull, Counsayle, Power, Gyant, euerlasting Father, a peaceable Prince / Because that his Dominion may be great, and no Ende of the Peace / vppon the Seate of Dauid and his Kingdom.
               2. Him hath likewyse the Prophet Dauid seene in the Spirit, and witnessed of Him / that God hath 
                     Psal. 110. a. Heb. 5. b. 7 b
                   sworne ⁏and it shall not repent Him; that Hee is a Preest for euer / after the Order of Melchisedech: and He continueth also an High-preest 
                     Heb. 3.10. c
                   ouer the Howse of God / for euer / as 
                     Heb. 8.9. b.
                   a Minister of the spirituall and heauenly Goodes. Which Ministration cometh-to-pas in the Spirit / and not in the Letter, euen as is written of Him.
               
                   3. But seing now that the Man is. falne-away 
                     Gen. 3. a. Ephe. 4. c. Col 1. 
                        •
                     . or estrainged from this vpright Beeing of his God / Therfore hath this Christ 
                  ؛the true Lambe of God
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   suffered 
                     Phil. 2 a.
                   the Death of

the Crosse in the Man. Which Lambe of God / was killed 
                     Apo. 5.13. b
                   from the Begining of the Worlde / for the Sinnes cause. But seing He is not of the Death: but of the liueing Father / the God for euer / therfore is He also rysen 
                     Mar. 16. b. Luk. 24. c. Act. 2. c. 10 c 1. Cor. 15. 
                        •
                      
                     Col. 1. b.
                   agayne, and as the 
                     Math. 2
                        •
                     . a.
                   Firstling / rysen-vp from the Death. 
                     Act. 1. a. 2. c. 10. c. 13. d. 1. Cor. 15. a. Psal. 110. a.
                   and hath shewed himself alyue vnto his Disciples and Beleeuers, and set himself at the 1. Cor. 15. c.
                   Right-hande of God his Father / in the heauenly Beeing, bearing the Dominion / till that all his Enemyes be layde vnder his Feete, to a Conquering of Sinne and Death / through Fayth.
               4. THis is that Iesus Christ / which ⁏like as He was preached before, and 
                     Act. 1. 1. Tess. 5. c. 2. Tess. 1. a.
                   shoulde be seene in his Coming; is 2. Cor. 4. a. 2. Timo. 1. b.
                   appeered and com vnto vs / in ye Obedience of the Loue / according to the Scripture. Who must possesse the Heauen / 
                     Act. 3. c.
                   till vnto this tyme / wherin all becometh restored agayne / that God hath spoken by the Mouth of all his Prophets / from the Begining of the Worlde.
               5. Thissame was in tymes-past published in  the Worlde / 
                     Mar. 16. b. Luk. 24. f. Act. 1.2. &c.
                   for a Gospel or ioyfull Message / to thend yt all those which were burdened with Sinne and captiued with Darknesses / shoulde be baptised or washed 
                     Rom. 6 a. Col. 2. b.
                   in his Death of the Crosse / according to the inwarde Man· and planted into Him 2 Cor. 4. b▪ Phi. 3. b.
                   with his like Death / for that all those which beleeued in Him / shoulde be borne-agayne out of thesame Death· and so becom partakers of the 
                     Rom. 6. a. 2. Cor. 4. b. Phil. 3. b.
                   Resurrection of

                  Christ 
                  ؛the very-like Beeing of God / the Righteousone
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                  : and that they mought euenso then ⁏in the Spirit; haue their fellowshipp with Christ / 
                     Ephe. 2. a.
                   in the heauenly Beeing / in the Kingdom of God his Father· and so reioyce them in his Coming / in the euerlasting Lyfe.
               6. Beholde, thatt is the vpright 
                     Luk. 1. Ephe. 4. c.
                   Righteousnes and Holynes / which cometh to the Man in the Spirit / through Christ, to an euerlasting Reconciling of the Man with God, or to an 
                     Iohn. 17. c. Ephe. 2. b.
                   Vnitee / betwixt God and the Man / to thend that God may in that sort / be 1. Cor. 15. c.
                   all in all / according to the Promyses.
            
            
               The V. Chap.
               
                   BVt seing now that thy Questyon is: how or in what maner / thesame shall com-to-pas in vs / so can I not omitt / to giue the a full Instruction therof.
               2. Therfore beholde, and consider in thyne Vnderstanding / my Beloued, how that now in the last tyme / thesame liueing God ⁏out of Grace / vndeserued; is 2. Cor. 4. a. 2 Timo 1. b.
                   appeered vnto vs / out of his holy Heauen / and dwelleth, 2. Cor. 6. b. Apo. 21. a.
                   liueth, and walketh among Vs ؛the Family of his Loue
                     •
                  : And how that Hee and his vpright Righteousnes / is ⁏by his gracious Woord; administred in the Family of Loue: and how that likewyse in thesame Administration / 2. Cor. 10. a. 1. Petr. b. c.
                   the Beleefe and the Obedience to the Requyring of thesame

God / is requyred of all Men, 
                     Ephe. 4. 
                        •
                     
                   to an Vnitee of Heart with Vs / in all Loue.
               3. So consider then, whearsoeuer thesame liueing God of Heauen and his Goodnes ⁏as an vpright Beeing and verytrue Light, and as the right Father of his like Beeing and 
                     Ieam. 1. 
                        •
                     
                   Light for euer; and his Will and Requyring ⁏as a fatherly Loue / to the Mans Preseruation in the Godlynes; is administred / in the Ministration of his gracious Woord vnder the Obedience of the Loue (of whose Beeing and vpright Forme / we haue witnessed before) and that then likewyse in thesame Administration / Beleefe and Obedience is shewed by the Man / in thesame Will and Requyring of God / euen-thear ⁏in the Beleefe; is thesame liueing God seene and knowe / like as Hee ⁏according to the Spirit; is an vpright Beeing 
                     Ioh. 1. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . b. 1. Iohn. 1. 
                        •
                     . and verytrue Light / for a Lyfe of Men· and the right Father of his like Beeing and Light: thear is also seene and knowen that thesame Gods Procreation or Seede / is likewyse his vpright Beeing and verytrue Light / and is euenso ⁏in the Beleeueing and Obeying of thesame Administration; proceeding from thesame Father / and that thesame is wholly and altogether of one-mynde and 
                     Iohn. 17. c. Col. 8. 
                        •
                     . of one-substance with the Father / and is the true Christ himself / and geteth in-that-sort / his Foorme in the Man.
               4. To whomsoeuer now thesame Christ doth com thus in the Spirit / essentially / 1. Iohn. 1 
                        •
                     . to those is He also seene and knowen rightly in

the Spirit: and He is likewyse of 
                     Iohn. 17. c.
                   one-substance with them / in all Loue and vpright Righteousnes.
               
                   5. This self-same Christ / the true Sonne and like 
                     Col. 1. b. Heb. 1. a.
                   Beeing of God his Father (although Hee ⁏from eternitee; be the 1. Cor. 15. c. Col. 1. b.
                   First-borne of all Creatures· and the 
                     Math. 16. b Luk. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     c. Iohn. 6. g.
                   only-borne Sonne of God) is also ⁏according to his Birth of the Seede of Dauid after the Flesh; named the Sonne 
                     Math. 8 12. c Luk. 6. a. 
                     
                        •
                     . 21. of Man / because that Hee ⁏as the true Seede of the Promyses of God the Father; is sowne or planted in our Manhod / through the Ministration of the gracious Woord of the Lorde, and through the Beleef and Obedience to thesame Woord: also manned with our Manhod: and so ⁏after our Passing-ouer his like Death of the Crosse / vnto the 
                     Iohn. 3. a. Rom. 12. a. 
                           •
                        . Ephe. 4. b. c.
                   second Birth from the Death; borne agayne out of our Manhod.
               6. And thatt is the verytrue Seede of God from Heauen / which is sowen in our 
                     Math. 13. b Mar. 4. b. Luk. 8. b.
                   Manhod / through the Administration of the holy and gracious Word / vnder the Obedience of the Loue· and ⁏at the appoynted tyme; borne agayne by vs and out of vs / as a 
                     Iohn 15. a. b
                   Fruit of the ouerflowing good Lyfe and of the vpright Righteousnes and Holynes: and wherthrough wee are then likewyse ⁏according to the Woord of our Lorde Iesu Christ; the 
                     Math. 12. .c Luk. 8. c.
                   Moother, Brothers, and Sisters of Christ / which doo the Will of his heauenly Father.
               
                  7. Thissame Man of God from Heauen according to the Spirit, and the Sonne of Man 
                     Math. 1. c. Rom 1. a.
                   of the Seede of Dauid according to the Flesh / is in all poynts mynded 
                     Math. 26. d. Iohn. 4. d. 6 d. 8. c.
                   according to the Will of God his Father: and his Will is / that all what is good / shoulde bee: and He beareth in vs / the 
                     Phil. 2. a. Heb. 2. b. 5. a
                   Image of the earthly Man, and suffereth with vs for our Sinnes.
               8. But now when the Beleeuer of his gracious Woord / hath.2. Pet. 1. b.
                   regarde obediently vnto his gracious Woord / according to the Requyring of his Seruice of Loue: and that euenso ⁏in his Beleefe and Obedience; thesame Woord beginneth to appeere or breake-thorow / as a verytrue 
                     Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                     . a. 2. Cor. 4. a.
                   Light of the vpright Lyfe and like Beeing of the perfect Cleernes of God· and as a 2. Cor. 5. b. Gal. 6. b.
                   new Creature from Heauen / Then hath God the Father his Pleasure 
                     Esa. 42. a. Math 12.17. b 2. Pet. 1. b.
                   only in thesame Light and Lyfe of his lyke Cleernes and vpright Righteousnes. For thatt is his beloued Sonne ؛his spirituall heauenly Beeing
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   whom He hath geeuen vnto vs for an euerlasting 
                     Heb. 1. a.
                   Heyre, to thend that we shoulde liue through Him.
               9. SEing now that the Lorde ؛the God  of Heauen
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   is spirituall· and mynded to the vpright Righteousnes / and that the Man of the Earth is fleshly 
                     Gen. 6. a. Rom. 7. b· 
                     
                        •
                     
                   and mynded to the Sinne· and vnbeleeueing and disobedient to the Requyring of God in the Ministration of his gracious Woord and Seruice of Loue / 

Therfore hath God ⁏according to such a Mynde of the Man; no 
                     Rom. 
                     
                        •
                     . a.
                   pleasure in the earthly Man / nor-yet the earthly Man / in God, nor in his Requyring.
               10. But seing now that the only-borne 
                     Math. 16. b. Luk. 9. c. Iohn. 6. g.
                   Sonne of God the Father according to the Spirit [namely, Christ / the like 
                     Sap 7. c. Col. 
                     
                        •
                     . b. Heb. 1. a.
                   Beeing of God] is also the only-borne Sonne / out of the 
                     Math. 1. a. Rom. 1. a.
                   Manhod / of the Seede of Dauid according to the Flesh, and beareth in vs the Image of the earthly Manhod / as-wel as the Image of ye heauenly Godhead / Therfore it is not his Will that the Man ⁏whom He hath created 
                     Sa
                           •
                        . 1. b. 2. c. Eccli. 17. a.
                   to be an Image of his like Beeing; shoulde perish in the Disobedience of the earthly Man· 
                     Eze. 18.3
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                      2. Pet. 3. a.
                   nor in the Sinnes of the earthly Beeing: but shoulde liue for euer and euer / with Him and with his Spirit / in the vpright Righteousnes of his heauenly Beeing / and that all Men likewyse ⁏which loue God and his Righteousnes; shoulde be assembled into thesame Beeing, and be saued both in Soule and Bodye.
               11. Beholde, thesame forementioned Christ
and Sonne of God ⁏who for our Sinnes cause / hath suffered in vs the Death 
                     Rom. 6. a. Phil. 2. a.
                   of the Crosse, and armeth vs 1. Pet. 4. a.
                   with thesame Mynde of his Suffering and Death; maketh knowen vnto vs (as is before sayde) through his Seruice of Loue / his vpright Beeing of Righteousnes. And in our good Will to thesame / He bringeth his Beleef vnto vs: and so in the Beleef / He himself
                     Esa. 53. b. 2. Pet. 2. beareth our Sinnes, and iustifyeth 
                     Rom. 3.8. 
                        
                           •
                        . Gal. 2. b.
                  
                  
vs from thesame / through the Beleef. And so takeing our Sinnes vppon him / in Patience, He 1 Iohn. 1.4. reconcileth vs before his Father, and maketh his 
                     Iohn. 14 c▪ Apo. 
                     
                        •
                     1. a.
                   Dwelling in vs.
               12. Euenthus veryly with Patience doth Christ com before the Man ⁏for his 
                     Rom. 
                     
                        •
                     . a. 2. Cor. 12. 
                        
                           •
                        . Heb 5. 
                        •
                     . Ignorance  and Weaknes cause; in the Ministration of the gracious Woord of God his Father: and in thesame Patience / Hee ⁏through his Seruice of Loue; draweth the Man away from all that is vngodly and vnreasonable, and wherunto he is bounde, or wherwith he is bewitched / according to his earthly and manly Mynde.
               13. Beholde, in this sort doth Christ ⁏in the Obeying of the Requyring of the Seruice of his Loue; 
                     Oze. 13. b. Rom. 8. a. 1. Cor. 15. f. Timo. 1. b. Heb. 2. b. 1 Iohn. 3. b.
                   breake all the Bandes of the Deuill and of the Self-myndednes of the Flesh: and bringeth the beleeueing and obedient Man / to his spirituall and heauenly Mynde of the vpright Righteousnes, according to the Mynde of God his Father: and euenso ⁏as the 1. Tim. 2. a. Heb. 9. b.
                   true Mediatour / to our Reconcilment with God the Father; He putteth-away the 
                     Esa. 59. a. Ephe. 2. b.
                   Middle-wall betwixt God and Vs: and procureth the Man / that he vniteth him with a good Will / with the Godhead, 
                     Iohn. 17. c.
                   and God / to an Vniting with the Manhod.
               14. BEholde, and haue a good regard heerunto / my Beloued. for euenthus (as is rehearsed) is 
                     Rom. 5. a.
                   the Peace and Reconciliation with God the Father / prepared

for vs through Christ: and so He maketh of Two / 
                     Ephe. 2. b.
                   that they be One. Namely, the Godhead and the Manhod.
               15. But in the meane tyme that we do suffer with 
                     Rom. 8. b. 2 Cor. 4. b. Phil. 3. b. 2. Timo. 2 b
                   
                  Christ / for the Sinnes cause, and do dayly take our 
                     Math. 16. c. Luk. 14. c.
                   Crosse vppon vs / with Him / So do-ther yet dayly nodout / many Temptations meet with vs / through the Vnbeleefe of the earthly Man: and we do stumble or fall, and do sinne also yet somtymes / by reason of our Ignorance and Weaknes. Which Sinne we do not then committ in the Father / but 
                     Math. 12. d.
                   in the Sonne. But if we be good of Will, and continue stedfast therin / then is the Sinne 
                     Act. 10. 
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     
                   forgeeuen vs / through his Name.
               
                   16. For inasmuch as He himself beareth in vs our Sinnes / therfore hath He 
                     Heb. 5. a.
                   Compassion with our Weaknes: and suffereth likewyse with vs / in the Beleefe, till that all the Contrary-beeing that is agaynst the vpright Beeing of God the Father / be ouercom through the Beleefe / in the Like-suffering with Christ / 
                     Rom. 6. a. Phil 2. a.
                   of the Death of the Crosse, and that Christ with his Father / haue gotten 1 Cor. 15. c.
                   the Dominion against the Sinne. Which Crosse or Suffering of Christ / is the Alter of the Offering of Christ / 
                     Heb. 9. b. c. 10. a. b.
                   in the Holy, wheron our Sinnes be offered-vpp / through the Offering of Christ / as a Sinne-offering, Death-offering, and Debt-offering. Through which Offering of Christ ⁏wherin we do obediently follow-after 1. Pet. 2. Him / till vnto the second Birth from the

Death; we be 2. Cor. 3. b. Ephe 1. a. 2. b Col. b. Heb. 9. b. 
                           •
                        
                     
                   sprinckled with his Blood of the true Testament, to the Forgiuenes of Sinnes, and to an euerlasting Reconcilment with God the Father / through Fayth. and thatsame is the Fulfilling of the true God-seruice in the Holy.
               17. Through which Fulfilling of the foregoing Seruice in the Holy / the godly Vnderstanding 1. Cor. 13. b. Ephe. 4. b.
                   of the true Age of the manly Beeing of Iesu Christ / is inherited by vs· 2. Cor. 3. b
                   the Vayle before the Mostholy / put-away from vs· and the 
                     Esa. 16. c. Heb. 1. b. 5. a.
                   Mercie-seate / vncouered and declared vnto vs: and likewyse all the costly 
                     Col 2. a.
                   Ritches of the vpright spirituall and heauenly Goodes / in the verytrue Mostholy.
               18. When-as we now are thus renewed 
                     Rom. 12. a. Ephe. 1. b.
                   in  
                  Iesu Christ / through Fayth· also com to thesame 
                     Ephe. 4. b.
                   Age of the Man Christ· and becom one Body with Iesu Christ / so is God the Father then likewyse / 
                     EPhe. 2. b
                   one-substance or manned with vs / through Christ: and 1. Cor. 15. c.
                   is all in all: and we haue the 2. Cor. 1. c.
                   Paune of his Inheritance. namely, the holy Gost / wherwith we be grounded, sealed, and established 
                     Ephe. 3. d.
                   in God / through Iesus Christ. And all thatt godly Beeing ⁏euenas we haue witnessed before of God the Father; doth then liue substancially in vs: and so we haue our 1. Iohn. 1. 
                        •
                     
                   Fellowshipp with God the Father, and with his Sonne ؛the Lorde Iesu Christ
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   in the euerlasting Lyfe, wherin our Ioye is perfect.
               
                  19. BEholde, Thatt is the true Ioyfulnes with Christ / which we do inherit in the Kingdom of God his Father: and do knowe nomore of the Sinne. For in that we are deadd / 
                     Rom. 6. b.
                   that are we deadd vnto the Sinne. and in that we liue / that liue we vnto God / in Iesu Christ: and so haue a good and quyet Conscience / through Iesus Christ / in his Dominion ouer the Sinne and Death.
               20. Which Dominion of Christ and 
                     Luk. 16 c.
                   Kingdom of God / is as-then com inwardly into vs: and it is with vs in all poyntes / one God / in one Beeing. namely / the Father, the Sonne, the holy Gost / with the Manhod / in all Loue. And thatt is the Lyfe and Peace, and the 
                     Gen. 21. a Rom. 4. b. Gal. 3. b. c.
                   Seede of Promyse, to the Bleessing of all Generations of the Earth.
            
            
               The VI. Chap.
               
                   MY Beloued, Thissame (euenas I haue heere witnessed vnto thee) is the right Mediation of Iesu Christ / inwardly in vs, to our Safe-making and Reconciliation 
                     Rom. 3. c. 2. Cor. 5. c. Col. 1. c. 1. Iohn. 2. b.
                   with God the Father: wherthrough also Christ is an 
                     Heb. 1. a.
                   Heyre of all Things, and God / all 1. Cor. 15. c
                   in all. It is verytrue.
               2. And with this Instruction out of the heauenly Trueth / do I hartely salute thee in the Lorde, 
                     Ephe. 4. a.
                   to an Vnitee of Heart in ye Loue: and looke thou with spirituall Eyes of a pure Heart / into the Grounde of thatt wherof I wryte vnto thee / To thend that thou mayst comprehende

the secret Vnderstanding of the spirituall and holy Knowledg / wherof I wryte vnto thee: and let thyne Vnderstanding awake / to the Loue, and to her Seruice.
               5. I desyre likewyse of thee / that the Comunialte  which is with thee / may also reade this Letter: and salute them all in my behalf / 
                     Rom. 16. b. 2. Cor. 13. b.
                   with a Salutacion of the Loue. And if ther be any among you / that are acquaynted with Any-people / whom they knowe to seeke God with Heart, or that are no vndiscreet Blaspheamers, but stande wel-mynded to the Vnitee of Heart in the Loue / let them also freely reade-ouer this Wryting: and loue alwayes the Vnitee of Heart in the Loue, to an Increasing of the holy Knowledg: and reioyce you among each-other in the Loue / through the spirituall 
                     Ephe. 1. a.
                   heauenly Goodes, which do com vnto vs in the Spirit / out of the godly Loue.
               4. The Loue of God the Father / 
                     Col. 3. b.
                   gett the Victory in all your Hearts. Amen.
               
               5. Pray for me / that the Lord wil strengthen me in my Spirit / with his Loue / To thend that I may be strengthened in Him / without Feare, and so may stand-fast against all myn
                     •
                   Enemyes: and that the Concord of Peace may be prepared vppon Earth / through the Loue and her Seruice, according to the Promyses.
            
            The Ende of the Fowrth Epistle.
         
         
            
            
               
            
            Our Heart / is the Minde of God most-hie.
            Our Beeing amiable / as the sweete Lillie.
            Our Faithfulnes / Loue / and Trueth vpright / 
            Is Gods Light / Life / and Cleernes bright.
         
         
            
            The Fift Epistle. A Stirring-vp of the Heart to the Immitation or Following of Christ / in the Suffering of his Crosse: Written and sent by HN in the tyme of his Suffering and Affliction / vnto his Freende. Wherwith he informeth him / with Vnderstanding and Woordes of Humilitee / because that he shoulde not growe-offended in any thing· but alwayes hope on the Goodnes of the Lorde.
            
               
                  My Freends hast thou ⁏O Lorde; put farr from me, thou hast made me loathsom vnto them: I lye captiued, and cannot com-foorth.
                  Myne Eye is sadd with Misery: Lorde / I call dayly vnto thee, and I stretch-out my Hande to thee.
                  Psal. 88.
               
            
            Health and Saluation / be vnto thee my Freende, whom I loue to the Righteousnes.
            
               
               The First Chapter.
               
                  
                  FOrasmuch ⁏thou Beloued; as I haue had certē Woordes with thee / touching myne Afflictiō and Wofulnes of Heart in the Spirit, and touching the 
                     Psal. 18. a. 2. Tess. 2. a.
                   Breaking-thorow the sinfull Beeing / for to com to the Kingdom of God: and that thou (as farr as I coulde perceaue) hadst little Sight or Discerning therof: and that me thought also / that thou ⁏vp reason of myne Affliction; didst more estrainge thyself from me / then gett an Hearty-affection towards me / So is therfore my Spirit becom inclyned to wryte a little vnto thee. Wherwith I do shewe / that I rest still in hope that God woulde lighten thyne Heart a little / with the holy Light of his godly Beeing, 
                     Ephe. 1. c.
                   and graunt thee to see or to discerne / the right Meaning of my Wordes that I haue spoken with thee.
               2. For I am very certayne and sure of this / if the Lorde open the Doore of Vnderstanding vnto thee ⁏wherby to see-into the vpright godly Beeing / 
                     Gal. 4. a. Ephe. 4. a. Apo. 21. a.
                   that ought to haue a liueing Foorme in vs; that thou likewyse / shalt knowe thesame wherūto I am inclyned with Desyre and with all my Heart. and after the which / I ⁏in the Hope; do carry a Zeale or apply my Dilligence / 

for to obteyne thesame of the God of the Liueing, if Hee ؛the Almighty
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   vouchsafe the Grace vnto Mee Vnworthyone.
               3. But now am I in many Mens Eyes ⁏as also haply in thyne; very ougly and loathsom. and therfore 1. C
                           ••
                        . 4. b.
                   contemnable and reiectable with Many. But all this cometh vppon mee / because that I am so exceeding weake 
                     Psal. 6. a. 2. Cor. 12. b Apo. 3. c.
                   and feeble: and of myne-owne-part / haue no Righteousnes with me. nor any Esteemation / according to the outward Man of the Flesh.
               4. ALthough ⁏my Beloued; that I seeme  thus loathsom: as also of myne-owne-part / am so altogether weake and voyde of strength: and am contemned by all Goodthinking-wyseones, false Setters-forth-of-religion, and Hipocrites· and defamed 2. Cor. 6. 
                        •
                     
                   by them / with many false Bruits / Yet wonder not thou neither be offended at thesame, as yt thou shouldest therfore turne thy Heart from the Seruice of Loue and from Mee.
               5. For truly / in that all this cometh-vppon me, or in that I am a little whyle 
                     Psal. 8. 
                        •
                     . forsaken by the Power of my God: and do fynde myself ⁏of myne-owne-part; 2. Cor. 3.
                        •
                     2. so vnmighty to the Righteousnes of God: and am contemned, blaspheamed, and falsly defamed or accused by Many / it hapneth because that I shoulde not in-any-wyse be stout in my Heart· nor boast myself vppon myne owne Knowledg and Workes, nor-yet vppon any 
                     Tess. 2. a. Gal. 1. b.
                   Prayse or Comendation of Men· but highly esteeme of the Grace of God / 

to thend that the Lorde ⁏and not I; mought euen so haue 
                     Psal. 114 b.
                   all Laude, Honour, and Prayse. For Hee only is the Lorde, to whom only / all Honour doth likewyse appertayne.
               
                   6. FOr-that-cause / be not thou offended at the Workes of God / with his Saincts. nor-yet at the Contempt which I suffer and beare at the handes of many false Hearts, and good-thinking Wyseones and Scriptur-learned: But note that the Lorde 
                     Psal 4 a.
                   leadeth his Holyones wonderfully: and how that God 
                     Psal. 129. b. Apo. 15. a.
                   is wonderfull in his Workes.
               7. For 1 Reg. 2. a. Psal. 113. a. Luk. 2. f.
                   He maketh ritch, and poore agayne: and then He maketh ritch agayne / because that men shoulde euenso knowe his Ritches rightly, and loue them according to their Value.
               8. He bringeth the Man into a wyde 
                     Psal. 18. c. 31. a. 119. c.
                   Roome, and agayne into great Straightnes and Contempt. and out of the Straightnes and Contempt / into a wyde Roome agayne / because yt he shoulde rightly knowe his wyde Roome· and liue therin vprightly.
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               
                   THis wryte I vnto thee out of hearty Loue / my Beloued / for that thou shouldest not be discouraged in any thing, nor offended in mee. neither-yet dismayed in thy Heart in any-wyse / because of my Mysery and Contempt, which I do endure or suffer in the like 
                     Rom. 6 a. Phil. 3. b.
                   Death of the Crosse of

                  Christ, wherin I follow-after 
                     Math. 16. c. 1. Pet. 2. c. 4. a
                   
                  Christ. But trust firmly vpon him that is the only God.
               2. Therfore let not thy Heart be mooued for any-maner of thing that thou seest or hearest outwardly: but submitt thyself ⁏1. Pet. 5. b.
                   with all Humilitee; vnder the mighty Hande of God, and giue-ouer thyself altogether vnto his Will.
               3. Choose not also any perticuler thing in Gods Workes: But looke that thou stand 2. Cor. 12. b.
                   contented in all the Workes of God. For 
                     Deut. 10. b Act. 10. c. Rom. 2. c.
                   God respecteth not anyman: but He worketh all things 
                     Psal. 114.135 according to his owne Pleasure.
               4. If-so-be now that thou holde thyself quyet  in the Workes of God: and therto / indeuourest thy self to 4. Esd. 7. a. Math. 7. b.
                   passe-thorow the strayt 1. Cor. 4. b. 2. Cor. 4. b. 6. a. 11. c. d
                   Waye with all the Saincts of Christ / in Shame, Blaspheamy, and Contempt / and therin ⁏following after Christ; dayly takest-vp thy 
                     Math 16. c. Luk. 14. c.
                   Crosse ⁏in the Obedience to the Requyring of the Seruice of Loue; till vnto the second Birth 
                     Rom. 6. a. Ephe. 2. a. Col. 1. c. 2. b
                   from the Death / So shalt thou then likewyse wel knowe and vnderstande / 2. Cor. 3.4. a
                   that the Power for to accomplish the Righteousnes of God / is not the Mans· but ⁏so much as it remayneth with vs; only the Lordes.
               5. For / for his owne sake, and for the Prayse of his holy Name / He wil not 2. Pet. 3. a.
                   forslowe himself to performe his Worke / to our Saluation / to thend that He may establish his Promyses in vs / if we stand plyable vnto Him with submitted Hearts.
               6. But not for our Workes cause▪ for that no

Flesh 1. Cor. 1. c. Ephe. 
                     
                        •
                     . a.
                   shoulde bost itself; but for his owne cause, and for his holy Names sake / because that Hee ؛the great and almighty God
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   and his 
                     Math. 6. b.
                   holy Name / shoulde be hallowed and praysed in his Workes.
               7. Wherfore, Because now that no Flesh of Adam, or of the earthly Man / 
                     Psal 14.53. a. Rom. 3. b.
                   hath any Vnderstanding of the Works of God / I can therfore talke very little of thosesame / with the Children of Men: but must stretch-out my Heart vnto my God, and speake before Him:
               
                   8. O God of deepe and vnsearchable Wysdom! Who hath euer bin 
                     Esa. 40. b. Sap. 9. b. Rom. 11. b.
                   thy Counsayler. or geeuen thee to knowe before / 
                     Esa. 45. Rom. 9. c.
                   worke this thus, or so?
               9. Art not thou thesame which thou art, the God of Abraham and his Seede / which was from eternitee, and remayneth a liueing and true God for euermore: Who also worketh euery Thing without Respect of Persons, or Counsayle of anyman? For thy Will goeth-forth / according to thy Pleasure: and thy Worke 
                     Sap. 11. d. Rom. 9. c.
                   can noman withstande.
               10. Therfore must I laude thee / O my God. For thou hast brought my Soule 
                     Psal. 30. a. 50. b 86. b 116. a.
                   out of the Deapth of Hell. and kept me / when I was in the Extremitee 
                     Psal. 18.116 of Death.
               11. O my God, seing thou hast hetherto / kept me from the Destruction / so let not thy Grace now likewyse depart from me (although I be a Loathsomnes and 
                     Psal. 31. b. 44. b. 79. a. 88. a. 1. Cor. 4 b.
                   Reproach before many Men:) but holde me alwayes by 
                     Psal. 10
                        •
                     . a.
                   thy Right-hande:

hande: and 
                     Psal. 119. d.
                   teache me through thy Lawe / for that myne Enemyes ⁏which make-vp themselues against me / for to destroy me; may depart from me: and make knowen vnto them / that thou hast chosen Mee to be an Instrument for thy Worke.
               12. When-as now ⁏O my God; myne Enemyes do perceaue that thou dost teache and gouerne me. And that it is thy Worke / which thou ⁏to thend to performe it; hast begonne with me / Then shall they wel vnderstand / that thou ⁏O Lorde; art my God▪ and I / the 
                     Ephe. 2. b
                   Worke and Instrument of thy Hande, which thou hast accepted vnto thee / for to accomplish thy Will.
               13. Now ⁏O Lorde; leade me on-forward  into 
                     Psal. 5. a.
                   thy Righteousnes / that I ⁏through thy Grace shewed on me; may prayse thy holy Name· and highly laude and thanke thee / in thy Righteousnes.
               14. For truly / the Vngodly 
                     Psal. 14. a. 53. a. Rom. 3. b.
                   knowe thee not: the Dispisers and Blaspheamers / fynde not thy Dwelling: the Sencles and Self-wyseones / aske not after Thee O God: in the 
                     Psal. 6. a. 
                     
                        •
                     8. b. 115. b. Esa. 32 b.
                   Death / men do not remember thee: thy Song-of-prayse / is not soung in the Hell: the Hipocrites or fayned Holyones, nor-yet the false Hearts and Scripture-learnedones ⁏which blaspheame and contemne thy holy 
                     Heb. 10. c.
                   Spirit and Seruice of Loue, or murmur ther-against; seeke not thy Grace: neither do any of all those likewyse / which iustifye or account themselues

faythfull / 
                     •
                  om to be a Foote-bench vnder thy Feete.
               15. Seing then that all these are Straingers vnto thy Righteousnes and Holynes / therfore art thou also ⁏O my God; only holy, only righteous, and only true.
               16. Therfore ⁏O my God; giue thy Spirit into my Inwardnes: 
                     Psal. 51. b.
                   create in mee / an vpright Heart / that is louely before thee, and that walketh vnfalsly: and giue likewyse thy Woord alwayes into my Mouth / so may I then prayse thee / before all those that loue thy Trueth, also declare thy Righteousnes, and magnifye thy Name. For otherwyse ⁏O God; it is all nothing before thee.
            
            
               The III. Chap.
               
                   BEholde ⁏thou Beloued; / Shewing-forth Patience / in this my Distresse, Wofulnes, and Sorrow: and in Prayer and Supplication vnto my God: in 
                     Rom. 6 a 
                     
                        •
                     . Cor 4. b. 2. Cor. 4. b. 6. a. 11. c.
                   Dying-from and Forbearing all sinfull Beeing: in Death, Suffering, Shame, Blaspheamy, and in all Contempt, with man
                     •
                   false Bruits: and in many Conflicts or Stryueings against all the Temptation of the Sinne / I do dayly follow-after the crucifyed Christ / my Lorde and Sauiour / who is gon before mee, and all his Saincts / in thesame contemptible 
                     Sap. 2. b. Rom. 6. a. Phil. 2. a.
                   Death of the Crosse / y• which is reiected by the Worlde and by all her Wyse and

Scripture-learnedones, 
                     Esa. 53. 
                        •
                     . Sap. 2. c.
                   and dispised as a Foolishnes.
               2. In which Death of Christ / we must all be baptised or washed, and euenso ⁏drinking the 
                     Math. 20. c.
                   Cupp with Christ; becom 
                     Rom. 6.
                        •
                     . a Gal. 3. c.
                   incorporated vnto Christ / if we shall ryse with Christ / in the Godlynes, or be 
                     Iohn. 6. d.
                   raysed-vp and made-alyue by Him in the last Daye / as 
                     Rom 12. 
                        •
                     . Ephe. 5. d.
                   a Fellow-member of his Body. For in Hym that sheweth Patience therin, ther shall be seene / that Christ is 
                     Ephe. 5. c.
                   his Bodyes Sauiour: That is / Theirs which be plāted into Him with the like Death, 
                     Rom. 6. a. Col 2. b.
                   and so are baptised or washed in his Death. and not Theirs / that remayne without thesame.
               3. In which Daye of the Gloryfication 
                     Luk. 17. 2. Tess. 1. a.
                   of Christ / in his Coming, wee likewyse [namely, which are incorporated vnto Him / euen as the Scripture sayth] shall obtayne the Gloryfication of Christ· and liue and raigne with Him 1. Cor. 15. 1. Tess. 4. b Apo. 21. a.
                   in Ioye / for euermore. It is verytrue.
               4. IF-so-be now ⁏thou Beloued; that the Lust of thy Heart be sett to liue euerlastingly  with Christ and his Holyones / in the louely Being of God the Father, 
                     •
                  nd to raigne 
                     Apo. 5. b.
                   vppon the Earth with Righteousnes: and if thou wouldest gladly haue thy Fellowship with Christ and his Communialtee of Saincts / with perfect Ioye / So let not then the Crosse of Christ (wherin all the Saincts of Christ do follow-after Christ / vnder the Obedience of the Loue) be any Stumbling-block or Offence

vnto thee, 1. Cor. 1. c.
                   as it is vnto the Worlde and her Wyse and Scripture-learnedones. But take-vp 
                     Math. 10. d. 16 c. Math. 8. d. Luk. 9.14. c.
                   thy Crosse: That is / Forsake thyself, and all Honour and Ritches of this Worlde / for Christ-his sake: Beare thou in-that-sort / all Shame, Contempt, and Blaspheamy / as One that is reiected for an Vnchristian / by those Men that knowe not Christ: and therin 1. Cor. 4. b. 10. d. Phil. 3. b. 1. Tess. 1. a.
                   follow-after Mee, euen as I therin do follow-after Christ.
               
               5. If thou now followest-after Christ heerin / with mee: and seekest no other Waye vnto thyself ⁏according to thyne owne Pleasure; nor desyerest to go into any other / Then shall wee accorde well with eachother, and reioyce vs rightly in the christian Ioye, and in the vpright louely Beeing of the Loue.
               
                   6. But beware in-any-wyse ⁏thou Beloued; that thou takest no Lyfe on thee / er-euer thou art first 
                     Rom 6. a. 2 Cor. 
                     
                        •
                     . b. 2. Timo. 2. b
                   deadd with Christ: and that euenso thy Flesh 
                     Gal. 5. c.
                   be crucifyed and killed, as also his Lusts and Desyres.
               7. Take likewyse no Ioye on thee / er-euer thou hast first suffered 
                     Luk. 6. c. Iohn 16. c. Iam. 4. a.
                   Sorrow and Wofulnes or Distresse in ye Flesh of Sinne / for thy Sinnes cause, and so in the Obeying of the Requyring of the Seruice of Loue / hast 
                     Rom 6. a. Col 2. c.
                   layd-away and buryed the Sinne in the Flesh.
               8. Take also no Freedom on thee / er-euer thou hast first ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Seruice of Loue; continued 
                     Math. 10. a. 24. b.
                   stedfast in the Seruice of the holy Woord of the Spirit of the

Loue of Christ ⁏in all Obedience; like a faythfull 
                     Iam. 1. c.
                   Disciple of the Woord, and Louer of the Trueth / euen 
                     Math. 19. d. Rom. 6. till vnto the seconde Birth from the Death. and so in-that-maner / knowest the Trueth in Christ / So shalt thou then likewyse / be rightly made-free 
                     Iohn. 8. d.
                   by the Trueth. For thatt Freedom / 
                     Rom. 6. b. 8. a.
                   is the vpright Freedom of all the Children of God and Saincts of Christ.
               
               9. And what Freedoms soeuer be taken-on, set-forth, and vsed / without this vpright Freedom / are all false Freedoms: and do proceede out of the Deuill / 
                     Ioh. 8. 
                        •
                     . the Father of Lyes, and out of the deuiled fleshly Lusts and Desyres, 
                     Rom. 1. 
                        •
                     . according to the Imagination of the Knowledg / that false Light.
               10. Take also no Honour or Dignitee, nor  Inheritance of the Saincts / on thee: as to inherit and to vse anything with the Saincts of God ⁏much-les / for thyself; er-euer thou hast first borne all Dishonour, Shame, and Contempt: Wherin thou art euenso go
                     •
                  -out-of, or dead-from / all Dignitee, Self-honour, and all Takeing-on: and fyndest thyself wholly submitted / in the 
                     Math. 19. c.
                   forsakeing of al-things, and wel content or satisfyed therin. and so in all other things like vnto these.
               11. O Thou Beloued: If-so-be that thou dost wholly giue-ouer thyself heerunto in Christ / vnder the Obedience of the Loue / then shalt thou be wel contented with mee· and likewyse in all what cometh-vppon

me and meeteth me by myne Enemyes· or with what Iudgment soeuer Men 
                     Iohn. 8. b. 1. Cor. 4. a.
                   do iudg me: and our Hearts shall also in one Mynde / with eachother, and with all those that loue the Trueth in Christ / becom incorporated to the only and true Beeing of Iesu Christ / euen to be one 
                     Ephe. 2. b.
                   Man of God.
               O Yea: That com-to-pas euenso.
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               
                   MY Beloued, I haue written and sent-ouer thissame vnto thee / out of Good-will to thy Edifying, and out of the hearty Loue of my God / wherwith I do loue thee / To thend that it may be a Memoriall vnto thee / of the Suffering, Sorrowfulnes, and Dispiseing / which all the Electedones of God and Saincts of Christ do passe-thorow / 
                     Act. 14. c.
                   to the Kingdom of God their Father.
               2. If now therfore thou loue the Wayes of our Lorde Iesu Christ, wherin Hee ⁏in suffering-maner; is gon 
                     Luk 24 f. 1. Pet. 2. c. Heb. 6. c. 12 a.
                   before vs, and euenso ⁏preparing 
                     Iohn. 14. a.
                   vs the Waye; is com into the Kingdom of the God of Heauēs / to his Father / So keepe thou then thissame in thy Remembrance: and indeauour thyfelf also / to passe-thorow 
                     Luk. .13. these narrow Wayes / which leade to the Lyfe.
               3. I hope likewyse to doo euenso. and in my Tribulation, Sorrow, and Affliction / alwayes to think vpon the Goodnes of ye Lorde / and to

laude and thanke Him / for yt He is gracious vnto me / in my Weaknes and in my Sinnes.
               4. HEer-vnto let vs be of
                     Rom. 12. b. 15. a. 1 Cor. 1. a. Phil. 2.3. b.
                   one-mynde with  eachother / and not looke-vpon, conceaue, nor construe or report anything to the worst / that hapneth vnto me / to thend that we 
                     Num. 11. d. Psal. 106. c. 1. Cor. 10. b.
                   murmur not against the Lorde nor his Ministers, nor-yet blaspheame his Holyones / whom He leadeth wonderfully: but may liue peaceably and vprightly / in his Grace· and stande 
                     Gen 21. a. Act. 9. b.
                   submitted vnto Him ⁏so-much as we may; to an Obeying of his Will or Requyring.
               5. But if we be weake, and as-yet / altogether feeble or vnable for to accomplish the Righteousnes of God: as that we do yet dayly stumble much, and fall still often-tymes into Sinne / Yet let vs not 
                     Ier 
                     
                        •
                     . a.
                   lye-still in the Sinne, nor in-any-wyse doubt in the Grace of God, nor-yet iudg or condemne ourselues 1. Iohn. 3. c.
                   by the euell Conscience. but with penitent Hearts / ryse-vp agayne out of the Fall of the Sinne (so oft as it chanceth) / and cōfesse our 
                     Psal. 6. a. 32.38. a. Pro. 28. a.
                   Sinnes and Weaknes: and pray vnto God / that He wil be our Strength: and so confesseing our Vnablenes and Weaknes / in our Assaulting or Temptation, let vs still continue in 
                     Rom. 12. b 1. Tess. 5. c.
                   Prayer / till that the Lorde leade vs ther-out, and 
                     Math. 6. b.
                   deliuer vs from the euell and contrary beeing that is against Him. Thatt graunt vs the Lorde / who liueth for euermore. Amen.
               
               6. HEer-with-al ⁏thou Beloued; I committ  thee to the Lorde: and pray thou

for Mee, likeas I also do still remember thee / in my Prayers. Fear-well, and behaue thyself valyantly. The Lorde giue thee Health in Soule and Bodye.
               7. My Salutation in the Loue / is alwayes vnto thee, and vnto all those that loue the Trueth in Christ.
               
               8. The Lorde which is the 
                     Iohn. 1. a. 8. b. 9. a. 12. c
                   Light of the Trueth, 1. Iohn. 4. a.
                   the Loue, and the 
                     Ioh. 1.14. a.
                   euerlasting Lyfe itself / nourish vs all vpp in his Righteousnes. Amen.
               
            
            The Ende of the Fift Epistle.
         
         
            The Sixt Epistle. A groundly Instruction and a Distinction of Vnderstandings / according to the Trueth of the holy Scriptures: Wher-with HN answereth a Letter written vnto hym.
            
               
                  Beholde, I wil vtter-foorth my Spirit vnto you, and cause you to vnderstand my Woord.
                  Pro. 1.
                  
                     I wil not hyde the Secrets of God from you▪ but search-out the Wisdom / from the begining of Generations: and wil giue her foorth apparantly to be knowen, and not keepe scilence of the Trueth.
                  Sap. 6.
                  God hath graunted me to speake wysely, and to think right / of those Things that He hath graciously geeuen Mee.
                  Sap. 7.
               
            
            
               The First Chapter.
               
                  THe God of Heauen  ⁏which is Israels
God and liueth for euer; be a Light 
                     Esa. 6
                        •
                     . c. Apo. 
                     
                        •
                     2. a.
                   and Lyfe of the Trueth vnto thee, and a Wisdom and Foresightfulnes to thy Vnderstanding / my Beloued / to thend that the right Distinction of the Lyfe 
                     Eccli. 
                     
                        •
                     5. a.
                   and of the Death / may be knowen vnto thee: and that thou mayest euenso ⁏with a cleere Sight; looke-into the Preseruation of Men / in thissame horrible and daingerous Tyme.
               2. In which horrible 1 Tim. 4. a. 2. Tim. 3. a. 2. Pet 2. a. 3. a.
                   and daingerous Tyme / all Errours, Misunderstandings, and all Spirits of the false Light / do now exceedingly beare-swaye. Wherthrough ther-is now also verytruly knowen vnto mee / the manyfolde

Ignoraunce, and the ignorant Confidence of the Children of Men / vpon the vayne or vnprofitable Wisdom: and how vtterly the Vnderstanding of Man / hath corrupted 
                     Gen. 6. a.
                   his Waye / in the Knowledg. The Ende of which corrupt ignorant Knowledg ⁏which is an Horrour to think vpon; is com before the Lorde.
               
                   3. Seing then that all manly Vnderstanding is so vtterly corrupted / with so many-maner of false Knowledges / therfore is-ther likewyse nothing but all Wo and Misery at-hande. For therfore is the Wisdom hidden· the true Light / darkened· 
                     Esa. 5. d. 8. b 13. b. 24. c Ezech. 32. a. Ioel. 2. b. 3. b Math. 24 c.
                   and the Moone of Vnderstanding / couered: but the strainge Lights ⁏which are deuided against eachother; are becom many.
               4. Which strainge Lights or Starrs of the darke 
                     Math. 24. c. Apo. 6. b
                   Heauen / do now fall by many Multitudes vppon the Earth [namely, euen after that maner / 
                     Esa. 34. a.
                   as the Figgs do fall vppon the Earth / when their Stock or Tree is shaken or mooued by ye Wynde] and each strainge Light / walketh in his owne Light.
               
                   5. But now when 
                     Esa. 60. Apo. 22. the Light of the Lambe / spreadeth-foorth itself ⁏with his cleere Heauen; ouer the Earth, and that the Sunne shyneth out of the Heigth / then do men nomore see the Starrs of the darke Heauē / vppon the Earth: neither do they giue anymore Schimmering of Cleernes vppon the Earth. For the Light of the cleere Heauen / is much to forcible for them all / with his Light and Cleernes, and doth farr excell them eueryone / in Cleernes.
               
                  6. Now ⁏thatt being omitted; I wil ⁏in breefe-maner; answer thy Letter / like-as thou doest Request / euen according to thatt Sight wherwith I looke into it. Consider thou on the Mynde of the Vnderstanding.
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               THou wrytest vnto me / that thy  desyre and Longing hath bin to talke with me by Woord-of-mouth: and that partly / because ther was a Man at thy Howse / that shoulde seeme to haue tolde thee wonderful-things of Mee: That is to saye / that I was quitt of tha
                     •
                  t which is Myne, and had geeuen it all ouer: and that I ⁏acknowledging all thesame to be as Dirt; sought Grace, Help, and Comfort / in the Outward-things: and desyred to be subiect ther-vnto▪ The which ⁏as thou wrytest; was an Admiration vnto thee: and that thou couldest not beleeue it.
               2. Thou Beloued, looke rightly into the Trueth of this Matter. For whear no Distinction is witnessed / as that one distincteth not the Things wherof he speaketh / with Sensiblenes of Woords, but speaketh them foorth only with Boasting and Pryde and out of Partia
                     ••
                  
                  tee or Dispyte / So is theare likewyse / the right Difference hardly to be conceaued / by those that heare thesame.
               3. It is true nodout / that it hath gon wonderfully 
                  
with Mee. For thatt which is happened vnto mee / is also wonderfull to myself 
                     Psal. 118. c.
                   in myne owne Eyes. But to be quitt of all thatt which was Myne ⁏which was myne owne / and not the Lordes, and had captiued me; / after thatt haue I doutles had a great Longing: and haue alwayes ⁏seing I haue loued the Righteousnes; bent my self goodwillingly / to giue-ouer 
                     Math. 16. b. 19. c.
                   and to forsake it all / so farr-foorth as I coulde knowe it· and obtayne the Grace before God therto. but not the holy Vnderstanding / which is com vnto me out of the liueing Godhead / vnder the Obedience of the Loue. Of the which (as I suppose) hee happly that hath tolde thee of this Matter / hath not distinctly vnderstood the Grounde therof / in his Secretnes, and therfore hath not tolde thesame rightly vnto thee. but as his good-thinking Mynde did iudg it / according to his owne Conceaueing.
               
                   4. Because of this wrong Iudgment and of the false Reporte, I am partly constrayned to witnes thatsame apparantly vnto thee / which is happened vnto mee: and do confesse before thee, and before all those that loue the Trueth / that I ⁏from that Tyme-foorth that I sought Gods Righteousnes; haue looked-into and esteemed thatt which was Myne ⁏so much as I sawe into it; and all thatt which I knewe that was not Gods / for 
                     Phil. 3. a.
                   Dirt. and likewyse longed with Desyre / for to be quitt of it. as also haue laboured ther-after in tymes-past / 

with Ignorance, and without any Difference.
               5. But the God of Heauen / who is ritch of vpright Vnderstanding and godly Wisdom / hath looked vpon me with mercifull Eyes / in myne Ignorance: and caused me ⁏through his Grace: to see-into myne Ignorance, and into my vntymely or vnfruitfull Zeale. And so by the Discerning of myne owne Ignorance / I also sawe into the vayne Race, 
                     Rom. 10. a. Gal. 4. b.
                   and the ignorant Zeale of many Men, wherin they sought the Saluation.
               6. Now when I sawe into all this, and hoped dayly vpon Gods Mercie, and vpon the Coming of his 
                     Math. 6. b. Luk. 11.17. c
                   Kingdom / then did the God of Heauen illuminate my Heart / with his Cleernes: and the 
                     Luk. 17. Rom. 14. b. Apo. 12.21. 
                        •
                     . Kingdom of God in his perfect Beawty and Garnishing / came from on High into my Sight, and I behelde in the Spirit / Gods most-pure Beeing, the Mostholy of the true Tabernacle of God and Christ, and the most-vpright louely Lyfe of Peace / in the which / I ⁏with the Beholding therof; reioyced me to-exceedingly: and thought not once / that ther mought yet som Vnpeaceablenes lye hidden.
               7. When I now reioyced my self so wholly  heerin, I did sett all thatt which I had hated / quyte and cleane out of the Thoughts of my Soule: and ther stoode likewyse no Horrour nor Perrill before myne Eyes: For I had all my respect 
                     Fig. 1.2.4. 
                        •
                     
                   vppon the Kingdom of the perfect

Beawty and of the vpright louely Lyfe and Peace.
               8. But now when I loued 
                     Caut. 5.4.5 thissame as my Best-beloued, I made none accounte of al myne Enemyes: neither had I also any Feare that-ther shoulde be anything that coulde hurt me.
               9. But in this my Boldnes / myne Enemyes were subtill and crafty: and played or dallyed with me as my Freends, and were very freendly vnto me. Wher-with they deceaued mee, and trayterously tooke me captiue, wherof I was not aware.
            
            
               The III. Chap.
               
                   BVt when I now was wel-at-quyet in all thissame, and mistrusted no Deceit nor any Falshod in myne Enemyes / 
                     Psal. 32. b. c. 33. a.
                   which were dayly conuersant with me according to the Flesh, and which were also my Freendes according to the Flesh / then did the Sleepe in the meane tyme / take-holde of me: and I rested boldly with them / as with my Freendes.
               2. Thewhiles now I yet slept, and that the Night was com-on er-euer I awaked / so bounde they me very-fast / 
                     Psal. 40. b.
                   with strong Bandes, and brought me whether they woulde.
               3. But now when I was awakened-vp from my Sleepe, and opened myne Eyes / then was it altogether darke in the Place whear

they had brought me: and I knew not whear I was, neither-yet knew the Place whear I founde myself.
               4. I likewyse sawe no Beawty nor Lyfe of Peace / in thesame Place: For thatt was then hidden from me, or I was brought out of it / in my Sleepe: but I sawe that those which seemed to be my Freendes / had turned 
                     Psal. 
                     
                        •
                     8. b.
                   themselues about against me / as Enemyes.
               5. Then was I sore greeued, and wofull of Heart: and I missed the sweete Waters which I before-tyme had tasted out of the liueing Fountayne. And in my Suffering and Wofulnes / my Refreshing was with bitter Waters.
               6. And the heauenly Beeing of the liueing Godhead ⁏wherout the louely Deaw and the Ioyful-oyle came vnto me in tymes-past; did I wel remember: but thatt was to my greater Greefe. For I coulde not fynde thesame. But an hellish horrible Beeing / shone-about me / wherin I behealde nothing-els but Wo, Sorrow, and Misery. And round-about me / it was full of horrible Enemyes: and eueryone sought after my Lyfe / for to deuoure me. And those that before / seemed to be my 
                     Iob. 19. b. Psal. 38 b
                   Freendes / did also rage all at me / like hellish Doggs: and crying-out their owne Wickednes / they did eueryone 
                     Apo. 12. accuse me. and that I was full of Vnrighteousnes or Wickednes, and must be damned in the euerlasting Payne of the hellish Fyre.
               
                  
                   7. Against all these Accusers ⁏myne Enemyes; I coulde nothing-at-al resist: For I was bounde with their Bandes.
               8. But when I was aware that I was bounde by them, then I lamented sore ouer my Bandes / because that I ⁏by reason therof▪ mought not smyte-doune myne Enemyes. For I was kindled with Wrath towards them / because I had shewed them nothing but Freendshipp, and that they recompenced it me with Euell.
               9. But when-as I ⁏in my Sorrow; thought vpon the Light and Lyfe of Peace / which I myssed, then was I out-of-measure sorrowfull. And then cryed I to the Lorde, and my Lamentacion and Complaynt was heard farr-abroade among the People.
               10. I wrote also my Moorning-songs, and ther went-out from me / a dolefull Dittee: but ther came none that did release me from my Bandes / wherin I was trayterously bounde.
               11. Somm now lamented my Case: and I was also by Somm / mocked and laughed-at
                     •
                   and many grew offended at me, and spake all Euell of me, and brought-vpp many euell Bruits of me, wherwith they falsly belyed me. And whearsoeuer I went or stoode / thear did myne Enemyes incompas 
                     Psal. 22.
                        •
                     8. b. 109. a.
                   me, and were still rounde-about me.
               
                   12. But when I founde myself without Comfort / in this Forsaken-estate / then sought I

agayne 
                     Cant 4.5. and asked in euery Waye / after thesame louely Beeing of Gods heauenly Beawty / which I ⁏in Cleernes and Righteousnes; had both seene and loued. The One tolde me this, the Other poynted me on Thatt: but noman satisfyed myne Vnderstanding. For I had seene greater and more-gloryous things / then those wherof was tolde me and wherunto I was poynted. Therfore likewyse I founde nowhere any Refreshing nor Comfort: For I founde not Thatt which I had seene before, and loued with my Heart.
               13. Beholde, after thissame louely and true Beeing of God / haue I sought in myne Extremitee / to thend to be released by thesame / from my Bandes and wicked Enemyes, and to be subiect to thesame Beeing / if I mought obtayne that Grace. I haue also asked after it / of Mē, to see if happly I coulde fynde it among Any-people: and haue dilligently sought the Wayes that leade therunto / To thend that I (for to inherite euenso the Lyfe of Peace) mought haue com agayne into the right Path, and that myne Enemyes mought be rooted-out· and thatt recompenced them / which they had 
                     Psal. 2
                        •
                     . a. 62. b. Ier. 17. b. Lamen. 
                     
                        •
                     . g.
                   deserued on mee.
               14. THou Beloued: Vnderstande now heerout / which it is that I haue accounted for Dirt, and what hath bin my Seeking and  Desyre. For which such afflicted Seruants of the Lorde ⁏which do loue the vpright Beeing / with all their Hearts; I do alwayes make

Supplication and Prayer vnto the Lorde: and do saye out of all my Soule:
               15. O Lorde, breake-asunder the Bandes of the Vngodly I beseeche thee: and vouchsafe to giue Strength vnto thyne inclyned Seruants / to raigne with thee ouer all their Enemyes.
               16. O God, let thy Seruants go ouer them, and tread vppon them with 
                     Esa. 41. c. Mich. 7. b.
                   their Feete / like Lome / To thend that they may euenso ⁏with thy Wisdom and Foresightfulnes; enter boldly into thy Loue ؛thy Paradise of Lyfe
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   for to possesse ye worthy and restfull Lande of Peace, and the holy Citee Ierusalem / 
                     Ier. 30. b. c. Zach. 1. b
                   buylded anew vppon her olde Foundation, wheron thou ⁏O God; hast in tymes-past foreseene to buylde thesame / for that thy 
                     Psal. 51. b Esa. 56. a. Mal. 3. a.
                   Offering may be made thear, and thy Laude-song of Sion, be soung thear for euermore. and not in Babylon, nor in the North Landes / euen-as thou ⁏O God; hast 
                     Ier 3.16. b 23. a. Mich. 4.5. b
                   forespoken thesame by thy Prophets.
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               
                   FArdermore thou writest vnto me / that thy Longing was for to talke with Mee thy self / because that thesame which I had written vnto thee / made thee so exceedingly to wonder, and was beyonde thyne Vnderstanding: and for that I complayned me of the Accusers / because they complayned on Me and accused me so falsly before

the Iudgment / for to be condemned and rooted-out.
               2. Thissame seemeth that it hath bin a Wonder vnto thee / because (as thou wrytest) such a Light and Knowledg was risen-vp vnto Me before. And fardermore: When thou then rememberest the Songs that I haue made, thou sayest vnto Me / demaunding: Had the Spirit quyt forsaken thee / in thy Forsaken-estate? Oh, what shall I saye! I must keepe-s
                     •
                  ilence heerof, inasmuch as I haue neuer founde myself in such great Forsakennes.
               3. O Thou Beloued / If thou hadst considered well on the 
                     Psal. 22. a. Math. 27. c.
                   Forsakennes of Christ, and on the Forsakennes of all his Saincts / who do follow-after Him in the Forsakennes of his Crosse / Then wouldest thou not haue wondered. For euenso sayth the holy Scripture vnto vs likewyse / 
                     Act. 14. that we must enter into the Kingdom of God / thorow much Tribulation and Affliction.
               4. For such-a-matter (if we suffer-out thesame with Patience) is the Death 
                     Rom. 6 c. Phil. 2. a.
                   of the Crosse of Christ, wherby we be planted into Christ
(as the Scripture sayth) with the lyke Death. Wher-through we do also inherit with Christ [namely, in the secōde Birth from the Death] the godly Ritches of God the Father / in the euerlasting Lyfe, and be worthy to raigne vppon the Earth / 
                     Apo. 5. b.
                   with Christ and all his Saincts.
               
                  
                   5. But touching ye Complayning ouer myne Accusers / I haue sufficiently distincted vnto thee before. But let not my Tribulation and Calamytee cause thee to wonder: For inasmuch as it neuer happened vnto thee / therfore is it all doutles whatsoeuer thou hearest therof / the strainger before thyne Eares.
               6. But like as thy Longing hath bin towards Mee / so haue I in-like-maner / longed after thee / for to talke with thee of this Matter: but it is not so com-to-pas. Notwithstanding / I hope the Lorde shall once bring vs together / so wil I then vtter-foorth my Heart alittle with thee / of all that is chaunced vnto mee. For I fynde very-feawe of those / with whom I dare be bolde or openhearted.
               7. But thou knowest from the begining / the Course of my Zeale to the Righteousnes: euen-as I do thyne also: and I haue neuer kept my Mynde secret from thee. nor-yet thou thyne / from Mee. Seing then y• thou hast alwayes bin openhearted with mee / therfore am I likewyse / the-bolder to talke with thee of althings.
               8. Howbeit / if the Mynde of certen Vnderstandings or of somme Sentences had remayned hidden from many Ignorantones / it had bin good for them / because that the Ignorantones do seeke nothing-els but their Selfnes. But doutles, whatsoeuer doth not in al-poynts / giue-ouer itself obediently vnder the gracious Woord and his Seruice of Loue / thatsame doth alwayes turne itself out either

to the one syde or to the other / for to follow-after the 
                     Rom. 
                     
                        •
                     . c.
                   Lusts of his Errour.
               9. For-that-cause, seing it is now knowen  vnto vs / that the Disobedientones to the holy Woord, and the Ignorant and Lyghtmyndedones / are alwayes mynded to Errour / Therfore let vs vse Foresightfulnes in all our Woords: and so before all Things / couet after the 1. Cor. 14. c.
                   Loue. and drawe the Deuoutones / vnder the Loues Obedience.
               10. Whosoeuer then do submitt them vnder the Obedience of the Loue· cleaue vnto the Loue in her Seruice / with all their Hearts· and ⁏with naked Hearts; wholly giue-ouer themselues ⁏in the Comunialtee of Saincts; to the Howse of Loue / to all Concord, and to the 1. Pet. 1. b. c.
                   Obeying of the gracious Woord / To Those shall men ⁏in all Loue; disclose the 
                     Math. 13. b.
                   Secretnes of the holy Vnderstandings and of the Kingdom of the God of Heauens / To thend that Gods secret Ritches, and the Vnderstandings of his holy Wisdom / may be knowen to the Obeyers of his Woord / in the Nature or Beeing of his Loue. For veryly, the Disobeyers of the Woord, as also the self-seeking Ignorantones, and those that think themselues to be wyse or skilfull / They 
                     Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . iudg the secret Mynde of the Loue and of the Kingdom of God / cleane-contrary in euery-behalf.
               11. And if-so-be then that they stande not  submitted obediently ⁏with all their Hearts; vnder the Woord of Information / according

to the 
                     Pro. 1.2.3.4. Eccli. 4.8. b
                   Counsayle of the Wisdom / so do they then ⁏with Misunderstanding; take euery thing quyt contrary / according to their owne good-thinking Mynde of the earthly Wisdom: and do therin corrupt themselues, and likewyse all their Vnderstanding / through their Self-seeking and fleshly Lusts and Desyres.
               12. Therfore let the Wisdom be esteemed more-precious / then anything that may be imagined in the Worlde: For ther is nothing in the Worlde / to be compared 
                     Pro. 3 b. 8. b Sap. 8. a.
                   to the Wisdom and to her secret Treasures.
               13. Inasmuch now ⁏thou Beloued; as that thou knowest thissame / therfore be thou in-any-wyse farr from the Mockers / which walke according to their 
                     Rom. 1. c
                   owne Desyres: and be a Strainger to the Lyghtemyndedones: and auoyde thou from all those which do seeke only the earthly Things. Heer-vppon let vs alwayes think / in thissame euell and perrilous Tyme.
            
            
               The V. Chap.
               
                   THou wrytest also vnto me / that thy Sight is / that thou doest not so knowe God / as that He shoulde still deale rygorously with his People, likeas He hath don in the olde Testament, euen as ther standeth written.
               2. I haue not doutles written vnto thee / that God hath dealt rygorously with mee. but that

his Enemyes (as is also before rehearsed) haue dealt rygorously with me / with Crueltee and Accusation, euen as they haue likewyse shewed in 
                     Psal. 42.44. b. 69 b 
                           •
                        
                      102 b. 109. e. Math 26.27. Act 22 23. tymes-past / on Christ and his Saincts.
               3. These woulde gladly haue satisfyed their Lust on me / to my Destruction: Of whom I had written vnto thee / that I hoped to see my Desyre on myne Enemyes and Accusers. namely, that they / all those that accused me, and woulde gladly haue seene my Destruction; shoulde be iudged into the Condemnation themselues.
               4. Looke into the matter rightly: For euenso  soundeth the Letter that I haue written vnto thee. and not that God dealeth rygorously with his People / neither hath He also at any tyme ⁏as neither now presently nor-yet in the olde Testament; dealt rygorously· but alwayes graciously with them: but I haue bin constrayned by myne Enemyes ⁏for my Sinnes cause; to suffer my Punishment for a certentyme / like as the Lordes People also / in the olde Testament / were constrayned by their Enemyes ⁏of whom they were captiued; to suffer-out their Punishment / for their Sinnes cause. For, for their Sinnes cause / the holy Citee Ierusalem, 
                  4. Reg. 2
                        •
                     . 2. Par. 36. Ier. 5
                        •
                     . and the Temple of the Lorde were layd-waste / and they lead-away captiue, and very-sore punished / vnder the Power of Babel.
               
               5. But after thatt / when they obtayned the Grace agayne before their God, 
                     Ier. 32. Zach. 8. and that their

Harts were cleansed / both from the Sinne and the sinfull Desyres / they were brought agayne out of the strainge Nations / to their owne Lande and Heritage, and to the holy Citee Ierusalem / the which ⁏and also the Temple of the Lorde; was buylded 1 Esd. 3. Ezech. 40. Agg. 1.2. Zach. 2.4.6. agayne anew / in thesame Tyme, for to offer holy Gifts and Offerings euen-thear vnto their God / that are delytfull vnto Him: the which they coulde not doo among the strainge People, nor in forrayne Landes: neither coulde they likewyse sing 
                     Psal. 137. a.
                   their Songs of Sion / in their Captiuitee in Babilon: but they must thear beare their Contempt / for their Sinnes cause.
               
                   6. Consider well of the Mynde, and looke into the Images of the olde Testament / according to the Spirit, and according to the Trueth: and how that it shall all now that is set-foorth 
                     Ezo. 25. c. Act 7. c. Heb. 8. a.
                   image-lyke in the Olde-testament / be 
                     Math. 5. b.
                   accomplished in the true Beeing. Besydes-this / so consider also / how that God hath neuer dealt rygorously with his People: and 
                     Psal. 13.6. how that his Goodnes endureth for euer.
            
            
               The VI. Chap.
               
                   BUt thou wrytest: Hath He not taken on him the manly Nature, and therin geeuen vs a Promyse: in such-sort / as that his Sonne shoulde performe or satisfy all for vs? And for those that rightly vnderstande it / He hath performed

it all / according as thou Vnderstandest the matter.
               2. OH! Heer-vpon mought I take occasion to wryte much / because ther is so much and many-kyndes of Misunderstanding risen-vpp out of such Sentences or Iudgments. But I hope well of the best Vnderstanding / in thee: Neuerthelesse / with doubt.
               3. It is true: Hee which is all that is ؛the God of Glory
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   hath ⁏in Christ; taken on him the 
                     Phil. 2. a. Heb. 2. b.
                   manly Nature, and geeuen vs a Promyse therin: but thatsame is don with Difference.
               4. Therfore looke into the Scripture / according to the Mynde of the Wisdom. and not according to the Vnderstanding of the earthly and fleshly Myndes.
               5. For God taketh not on him / the Seede of  the Heathen, nor the Nature of the Vncircumcisedones. but / 
                     Heb. 2. b.
                   the Seede of Abraham, which beareth in him / the Couenant of Gods Circumcision: and in thatt Seede 
                     Gen. 12.21 b 22. b. 26. a Act. 3. c. Gal. 3. a. b
                   is the Promyse of Saluation, or the Blessing of all Generations of the Earth / geeuen.
               6. And euenthus hath the Seede of Abraham the Promyse / to possesse the 
                     Gen. 12.17. Psal. 105. b.
                   Lande of Canaan [namely, the Kurnell or the Heart of the Heathen] as an Heritage / for euer. For inasmuch as Abraham beleeued / therfore is he likewyse chosen of God / 
                     Gen. 17. a. Rom. 4. b.
                   to be a Father of Fayth: and called out of the Heathen or Vncircumcision / into the Couenant of Gods Circumcision:

and euenthus in his Fayth and in his Seede / is the Promyse made, to the Blessing of all Generations of the Earth.
               7. Which Promyse standeth-firme for euer / in the Woord of Lyfe, and in the Fathers of the Couenant: Wherout also all Gods Prophets haue had their cleere Sight and Testymony of the Trueth, and 
                     Esa. 40.60.62. Ier. 13. a. 30. a. 31.33. so haue prophecied 
                     Luk. 1.8. 1. Pet 1. b.
                   on the Establishing of the Promyses.
               8. Beholde, this Promyse (euen as God had  spoken to the Fathers of the Couenant· 
                     Act. 30. and by the Mouth of all his holy Prophets) is sealed, confirmed, or established on the Stock of Iuda 
                  
                     Math. 1. Luk. .1.2. b.
                   the Sonne of Iacob / wherout Dauid is borne. From whom / 
                     Gen. 49. b.
                   the Rodd is not taken, nor a Master from his Feete / till that the Iust com: For to Him shall the People inclyne, and obtayne their Saluation in Him, according to the Promyses.
               9. This Iustone (consider wel of the Vnderstanding) is the 
                     Sap. 7. c. 
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 4. a. Col 1. b.
                   very-lyke Beeing of God the almighty Father: And Hee ⁏in his Birth out of the liueing Godhead according to the Spirit, 
                     Rom 1. a. 1. Tim. 3. c▪
                     
                   and out of the Seede of Dauid according to the Flesh; is verytruly the Sonne of God and Man, and the true Sauiour 
                     Luk. 2. b. Phil. 3. c. 1. Tim. 4. c.
                   of Men / to the Blessing of all Generations of the Earth, according to the Promyses.
               10. Therfore also hath the Power of God named 
                     Luk. 1. 
                        •
                      2. c
                   Him Iesus: and He is by his Disciples / published among all People / 
                     Act. 2.3 4.5. &c.
                   to be a Christ which saueth.
               
                  11. Beholde, this vpright and true Beeing 
of God the Father (which according to the Flesh / is 
                     Esa. 53. a b. Sap. 2. b. Math. 27. mocked, contemned, and killed by the Children of the wicked Worlde, and by her Wyse and Scriptur-learnedones) woulde God ⁏according to his Promyses and the Affirmation of his Prophets; that the Man shoulde carry 1. Cor. 15. c
                   or beare / to his owne Blessing, and to the Honour of God, and to the Prayse of his holy Name. And not the Sinne / 
                     Sap. 2. c. Iohn. 3. 
                        •
                     . that very-like Beeing of the Diuell.
               12. With which vngodly or lyke Beeing of the Diuell, and also with Offenciuenes and wicked Imaginations / many Men do runne-on: and so do suppose ⁏through their corrupt Vnderstanding and vngodly Beeing; to be saued for-al-that▪ they do likewyse comfort 
                     Ier 8 
                        •
                     
                   themselues with Lyes, and saye / Christ hath performed it all: and so they continue going-on in 
                     Ier. 4. 
                        
                           •
                        
                      
                     
                        •
                     . a.
                   their Sinnes and Abhominations or wicked Imaginations.
               13. AH beloued, Consider I pray thee / of such a great Misunderstanding / that is flatt against all the Preaching of the holy Gospel of Christ. For the Scripture of the holy Gospel mentioneth and witnesseth cleerly vnto vs / that Christ is obediently gon-before 
                     Phil. 2. a. 1. Pet. 2.4. 
                        •
                     . vs / in the Death of the Crosse / to thend that wee likewyse shoulde follow-after Christ therin / to ye Mortifying, 
                     Col. 2. or to a Consumeing of our Sinnes and of all vngodly Beeing [the which is the true Burnt-offering]:

as also shoulde be incorporated vnto Him / with his lyke 
                     Rom 6. a. Phil. 3. b.
                   Death, and euenso to the Establishing of the gloryous Name of God ⁏according to his Promyses; shoulde becom saued. Theron likewyse do all Gods Prophets witnes.
               
                   14. And if thou doest consider rightly from the Begining of the Promyses of God / till vnto their Ende or Fulfilling in the Saluation / Then shalt thou perceaue / that we be informed and taught with the Promyses of God, and with the Figures 
                     Rom. 3.4. Gal. 3.4. Heb 7.8.9.10. and Seruices of the Lawe / to the Fayth of Iesu Christ and the Seruice therof, and to the Requyring of the Preaching of the holy Gospel. And so foorth from the Seruice of the Fayth of Christ and of the holy Gospel / till vnto the 
                     Iohan. 13. d. 14. c. 15. b
                   Loue and her Seruice: And thesame is the Perfection, 
                     Rom. 13. b. 1. Cor. 13. a. Gal. 5. b. Col. 3. b. 1. Timo. 1. a
                   and the Establishing or Fulfilling of the Promyses of God and Christ.
               
               15. Therfore is the Seruice of Loue / the Very-last and Most-holy / wherin 
                     Math. 22. d.
                   it is all fulfilled / whatsoeuer is written of the Righteousnes of the Lawe, and of Christ and his Beleeuers. For in the Loue and in her Children / God 
                     Apo. 21. is all in all, and the Kingdom of the God of Heauens with his Glory.
               16. BEholde, This true Beeing of God the Father (like as is sayde therof) is the Stone that is layde in Sion / 
                     Esa. 28. b Act. 4. b. 1. Pet. 2. a.
                   for to trust vpon it: wherof ther is also written: 
                     Esa. 59 c. Rom. 11. 
                        •
                     . He shall com out of Sion / which shall put-awaye the vngodly Beeing from Iacob.
               
               
                  17. And thatt is the seconde Testament ⁏the which is the gracious Woord; 
                     Ier. 31. d. Rom. 11. e. Heb. 8.10. b
                   that is promysed to the Howse of Israel and to the Howse of Iuda / in the last tyme: For then shall the Punishment for their Sinnes / be ended: and their Sinnes shall God nomore remember. For in thatt Daye ⁏
                     Iohn. 12. d.
                   wherin the Sonne of Man is exalted; shall ye Sonne of Man drawe it all vnto Him, seing that the Inheritance doutles appertayneth vnto Him.
               18. In this-self-same ⁏which is the very-likie and true Beeing of God the Father; standeth the Blotting-out 
                     Act. 4. b 10 c Heb. 1. a
                   and Cleansing of our Sinnes / through Fayth, euen as is written of Him.
               19. To be incorporated vnto Him with the  Spirit / is veryly the right Satisfaction of the Sonne of Promyse / the right 
                     Heb. 5. 
                        •
                     . Heyre of all godly Goodes.
               20. Of Him hath likewyse Esaias witnessed / whear he sayth: 
                     Esa 9. c.
                   A Childe or an Heyre is borne vnto vs: a Sonne is geeuen vnto vs: whose Dominion is vppon his Shoulders / and He is called / Wonderfull, Counsayle, Power, Gyant, euerlasting Father, a peaceable Prince, for that his Dominion may be great, and no 
                     •
                  nde of the Peace / vppon the Seate of Dauid and his Kingdom.
               21. Him hath God sett to be an 
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   Heyre ouer all Things: Through Whom / He hath also made 
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   the Worlde: and He maketh the 
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   Cleansing of our Sinnes / through Himself: and euenthus

standeth his Satisfaction according to the Promyses, like-as is written of Him. and not according to Mans Good-thinking or Imagination.
            
            
               The VII. Chap.
               
                   THou wrytest likewyse vnto mee / that it is wel knowen vnto mee / that God hath created all Things / each-one according to his Kynde: in 
                     •
                  uch-sort, that all Creatures haue their Nature or Kynde / wherin they liue / and cannot transgresse / and that thou doest also half cal-to-mynde / that thou hast heard it so of mee.
               2. It is true / that all Creatures are created 
                     Gen. 
                     
                        •
                     . according to their Kynde: and that each-one hath his Ordinance / according to his Kynde, which ⁏of Natures-part; it cannot transgresse.
               3. Whatsoeuer now is incorporated vnto his owne Nature, and is not turned ther-out nor estrainged ther-from, but bydeth ther-in / thatt liueth then in his vpright 
                     •
                   Nature, Beeing, and Kynde / wherin it is created and wherto it is ordayned or foreseene of God.
               
                   4. COnsider ⁏thou Beloued; God hath created all earthly Creatures, and ioyned each-one to his lyke / according to his Nature and Kynde.
               5. After thesame maner also / the Creature of the Manhod: but the inward Man / hath

God created to Himself, and ordayned him to be a 
                     Leui. 26. b Ier. 31. 
                        
                           •
                         Iohn. 14. c. Apo. 21. 
                        •
                     
                   Dwelling for his Glory.
               6. And God woulde not that this inward Man / shoulde be subiect to the outward created or to the vayne Things, nor cleaue vnto them to a Bondage / to thend that the great Name of the almighty God / shoulde alwayes and euerlastingly byde sealed and stand-fast in the inward Man.
               7. God hath likewyse foormed the 
                     Gen 1. c. Sap. 2 c
                   very-like Beeing of his inuisible and liueing Godhead / in the inward Man / because that the Man shoulde liue according to the Requyring of his vpright Beeing, to the Laude and Prayse of his godly Maiestee.
               8. Beholde and vnderstande: Thissame Beeing  of God and Christ / is the Mans Nature and Kynde / according to the inward Man / wherunto he is created by God· and chosen through Iesus Christ, as also ordayned therunto / to thend that he shoulde euenso haue all his Ioye, Delyte, and Lyfe / in thesame Godhead· and remayne incorporated to the 
                     Sap. 1. b.
                   Immortalitee of the euerlasting Lyfe.
               9. To liue in thissame godly Nature and Kynde / is the vpright Nature and Kynde of the Man, as is sayde: And thatt is the Commaundement of God and the Lawe of the Lorde / which is geeuen or appoynted Him: and it is likewyse Gods 
                     Math. 3. 
                        •
                     . 17. a. 2. Pet. 1. b.
                   Pleasure that the Man shoulde liue therin for euer.
               10. This Commaundement, Lawe, Will,

Nature, and Kynde / can noman ⁏of his Natures-part; breake. but he may I graunt ⁏according to the Lusts of his owne Thoughtes, and according to the Lusts of his Transgression of the Ordinance of the Lorde; stepp out of 
                     Gen. 3. a
                   it, and fall from thesame, or estrainge himself ther-from: euen-as we now do euidently or apparantly fynde that it is so com-to-pas with the Man / and that he perisheth therin / if he repent not.
               
                   11. For he hath forsaken the 
                     Ier. 2. b.
                   Fountayne of his Lyfe, and is becom subiect to the deadly Things: and so hath mingled himself with the corruptible Mortalitee: By which meanes / all Destruction raigneth ouer the vnrepentant Man: and the vnmeasurable lying Beeing hath corrupted his Vnderstanding / with the Knowledg. and so hath stolen from him the vpright Mynde of his God: in such-sort, that hee for-that-cause knoweth or vnderstandeth too-to-little of his godly Nature and Kynde. Thissame is the Mans Fall, and his Deepe-sinking vnder the Sinne: and thatt is the vngodly Nature / against Gods Loue and Nature, and agaynst the Loue and Nature of the Man.
               12. In which vngodly Nature and corrupt Beeing / the Man cannot 1. Cor. 2. b
                   taste the Ioye of the euerlasting Lyfe / which is godly, heauenly, and spirituall. For in the vngodly Nature / he is generally 
                     Iohn. 8. e
                   nothing but deuilish and fleshly 
                     Rom. 8. a.
                   mynded: and euenso tasteth only the Earthly,

and not the Heauenly / and so ⁏out of his Good-thinking; taketh on Him thatt which is one with his 
                     Rom. 1. c. Ephe. 4. b
                   owne Sensualitee, and not thatt which is one with the Outflowing of the Trueth of God / vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
            
            
               The VIII. Chap.
               BVt according as thou wrytest /  thou knowest not what thou shalt saye of ye outward Man. But it seemeth / yt thou demaunding of mee / sayest: Is not hee likewyse a seruiceable Instrumēt to his God / in thatt Nature wherunto he is created.
               2. It is true: Hee is likewyse a seruiceable Instrument to his God▪ namely, in thatt Nature ⁏whether it be then the godly or the vngodly; to the which he is subiect: like-as thesame is sufficiently rehearsed and distincted vnto thee before.
               3. Therfore haue regarde vnto the Woord: and vse a Difference betwixt the inwarde and the outward Man. and in what an vpright Estate / the outward Man is likewyse a seruiceable Instrument to his God. namely, in his vpright Foorme or Estate / as is sayde.
               4. But without his vpright Foorme or Estate / the Man ⁏for his Sinnes cause; is like vnto a marred Instrument, 
                     Sap. 2. c. Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                     . c
                   which is subiect and seruiceable to the Deuill or to the Enimite towards God.
               
                  
                   5. Thissame hath the kingly Prophet Dauid rightly looked-into / when he saw-into the Mans Fall, 
                     Psal. 51. a
                   and acknowledged his Sinnes or Transgression: wher-through he lamented his Sinnes and Corruption / in many Afflictions and Sorrowes. and that he was like vnto a marred Instrument.
               6. Euenso haue likewyse the Prophets and Men of God / lamented thissame eueryone / 
                     Esa. 33.59. a Ier 10 a 14 c Dan. 9. a. b
                   when they saw-into the Fall of Men. namely, the Fall from their God.
            
            
               The IX. Chap.
               
                   FArdermore, thou wrytest vnto mee / that thy Vnderstanding or Con
                  
                     •
                  eaueing is / that Christ is the Headd of vs all, and so must haue many Members: and that euery Member is seruiceable to his Headd / in his Kynde.
               2. Erre not heerin in-any-wyse / thou Beloued. Many do saye indeede / out of a lying and vngodly Beeing / Christ is our Headd: wheras doutles the deuilish Nature ؛that Antichrist or Childe of the Deuill
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   is their Headd, and they / his Members. but not / out of the Creation of God, but out of the false Beeing 
                     Iohn. 8. Ephe 
                     
                        •
                     . a.
                   of the Deuill: the which they haue take-on willingly ⁏according to their owne Pleasure; as a Contrary-beeing vnto God, and do carry or beare thesame / as a Contrary-nature to their vpright Nature or Kynde.
               
                  3. Veryly, such are swallowed-vpp by the earthly Corruptiblenes, in whom all Blyndnes and Vnbeleef 
                     Ephe. 2. 
                        
                           •
                        
                     
                   hath is Worke.
               4. Therfore also / they are all mynded according to the comon Course of the wicked Worlde. and not according to the Nature of the Loue / the heauenly Trueth of God.
               5. NOw seemeth it likewyse ⁏according to  thy wryting; that thou wilt not excuse the Flesh of his Sinne / Because that much innocent Blood is sheadd ⁏through thesame; with his Knowledg and misunderstanding Wisdom.
               6. Ah, looke-into the matter of fellowship / according to the Trueth: How shoulde I pray thee / the innocent Blood be sheadd, and liue so wholly in all Wrong and Contrarynes / thorough the Flesh and his Wisdom? Vnles that it were estrainged from his right Headd· subiect to the Contrary-nature vnto God / wherof the Deuill is the Headd· and incorporated and seruiceable to thesame / as a Fellow-member of Antichrist / the Deuils Childe: and that euenso the Deuill gouerned ouer him, who vseth the Flesh ⁏as his seruiceable Instrument; to the Iniquitee / according to his Will.
               7. So long then as any Flesh / is ⁏with his Will; inclyned to the Iniquitee, and doth not beleeue to be iustif
                     •
                  ed or released 
                     Rom. 3 8. a Gal. 2. b.
                   from the Sinne / through Christ / So hath it not Christ to be his Headd: nor he is not in all his Nature, Beeing, and Kynde / natured nor

mynded 
                     Rom. 
                     
                        •
                     . a
                   according to Gods Beeing and Nature: vnles it were so that the Man had ⁏with Good willingnes; turned him to God and his Righteousnes, and did vpright 
                     Math. 3. a. Luk. 3.13. a
                   Fruits of Repentance / in the Obedience of the Requyring of the Seruice of Loue, and that Christ did in that maner / get 
                     Cal. 4. c.
                   his Foorme in Him / wherby to vse the Creature ⁏as his Instrument; to all good and profitable Workes / according to his vpright Nature.
               
                   8. BVt / that Flesh and Blood may not possesse 1. Cor. 25. f.
                   the Kingdom of God (as thou wrytest) thatt is right nodout: Flesh and Blood hath no Inheritance nor Dominion or Lordshipp in the Kingdom of God. For Flesh and Blood ؛that earthly Beeing
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   is in his right Ordinance / the 
                     Esa. 66. a Act 7. c.
                   Bench for the Lordes Feete: ouer the which / the Kingdom of God beareth his Dominion, and Christ / his Glory.
               9. Of which Glory / the Members of Christ haue spoken in tymes-past (when-as the Lyfe of God or Christ was com vnto them / for to possesse them, and to be incorporated with them) saying and testifying: 
                     Iohn. 1. b
                   The Woord is incarnated or becom Flesh, and dwelt among vs. Wherthrough they sawe his Glory, euen a Glory of the only borne Sonne of the Father / full of Grace and Trueth.
               10. Beholde: This Glory of Christ / was the Kingdom 
                     Luk. 17. c.
                   of God inwardly in them: the which had inherited them for a Possession / as

his Heritage: and their Spirit also / thatsame. and not / Flesh and Blood.
               11. Consider well of the Mynde that I wryte vnto thee: and vnderstande the Resolution of my Vnderstanding: and 
                     Iohn. 7. 
                        •
                     . iudg with a right Iudgment.
            
            
               The X. Chap.
               THou sayest likewyse / out of the  Wryting of Ecclesiastes, 
                  
                     Eccle. 12. a
                   how that euery Thing must returne agayne / from whence it is com. Thatt which is out of God / shall returne thether agayne: and thatt which is of the Earth / shall be Earth agayne.
               2. Oh ⁏alas; heer-out is much Misunderstanding taken-on: and many do runne-on in that sort / with this one Sentence, and haue no Discerning nor Consideration / to what ende the Sentence soundeth, nor wherto the whole Scripture stretcheth. And wil nodout ⁏out of ther owne Good-thinking; include the Mynde of God ⁏which they vnderstand not; in this one Sentence of the Scripture. And out of thesame they iudg euenthus: Let them liue how they wil liue, when they dye / their Spirit shall com agayne to God, and th
                     ••
                  r Body to the Earth.
               3. Heerwithall do the lightmynded Hearts deceaue themselues, who haue no Lust to Gods Righteousnes: and yet for-al-that do

rest perswaded / that their Spirit ⁏which is vngodded or not of God; shall com to God.
               4. No ⁏Beloued; No. God wil none of the wicked Spirits: but He putteth them away, and poynteth them from Him / 
                     Math. 25. 
                        •
                     
                   into the Condemnation of the hellish Fyer, which is prepared for the Deuill and all wicked Spirits.
               
                   5. FOr-that-cause ⁏thou Beloued; looke rightly into the Alteration of the Man. and in what maner / the Spirit of God which God hath formed in the Man; cometh to God.
               6. For if it were so / that the Spirit of God ⁏which God hath formed in the Man; shoulde alwayes vppon the Earth / remayne estrainged or seperated from God, and from the Mans Beeing: and that the Man shoulde not ⁏vppon the Earth; be incorporated to thesame / for an euerlasting Assurance 
                     Rom. 8. b
                   of the Inheritance of Christ and of the Kingdom of the God of Heauens / in the eternall Lyfe: and so ⁏without Vniting 
                     Eqhe. 4. c.
                   with the Mans Beeing / in Righteousnes; shoulde go to the Incorporating vnto his God first / when-as the Creature were passed-thorow the naturall Death / Who coulde then I pray thee / witnes and publish vppon the Earth / the Glory of God and the Powers of his Goodnes / to the Blessing and S
                     •
                  luation of the Man· and be seruiceable to the Man / to an Incorporating to thesame Goodnes of God?
               7. Therfore haue now in consideration / how,

and wherin the Fulnes of the Mynde of the Scriptures concisteth: and whether that the Vnderstanding of God be wholly declared in the Man / when-as he so taketh vnto him one Sentence out of the Scripture / according to his Good-thinking, and so goeth-on therwith / without Discerning of the godly Wisdom: and doth not once consider / wherto that one Sentence serueth, from whence it proceedeth, nor to what ende it stretcheth.
               8. Euenthus ⁏thou Beloued; let vs consider  rightly on the Mynde of the Scriptures: Standeth-ther not written also / 
                     Sap. 1. 
                        
                           •
                        .
                   that the Wisdom dwelleth not in a Body that is subiect vnto Sinne? Therfore cannot likewyse an vngodded Man· nor-yet one that remayneth without the Comunialtee of the Family of Loue / iudg one Sentence of the holy Scripture / rightly according to the Trueth, nor-yet out of the Wisdom.
               9. But wheras Ecclesiastes speaketh 
                     Eccle. 12. a.
                   of the Earth and of God: as that each-one that is Earthly and of God / goeth to his owne Incorporating / Therof I wil aske thee somwhat:
               10. When now this Alteration cometh-to-pas with the Man, shall then the Nature of the Iniquite haue his Possession with the Man, or be mingled with him as an Heyre? Or shall he be thrust-out with the Vnfreeone? 
                     Gen. 21. b Gal. 4. 
                        •
                     . I do veryly suppose / Yea, according to the Promyses. For beholde:
               
                  11. Wil not God inhabite his Tabernacle 2. Cor. 6. b
                   or Temple alone: and dryue-out of it / all 
                     Esa. 35.52. a. Apoc. 21. c.
                   that is vncleane, or that defyleth the Howse of the Lorde? Is not the Heauen also / his Seate. and 
                     Esa 66 
                        •
                      
                     Act. 7. c.
                   the Earth / the Bench for his Feete?
               
                   12. BEholde, to this Glory of God, and for that thesame shoulde raigne ouer the Man / is the Man chosen: and likewyse in his Fall / called and bidden therunto agayne / by Christ / Because that he shoulde serue and liue-vnto his God only / in all 
                     Luk. 1.8. Righteousnes and not cleaue-vnto the wicked Spirit▪ nor-yet iudg thesame for the Spirit of God: through the which / he keepeth God, as also his good Spirit / out of his Dwelling.
               13. And whosoeuer then / through his Good-thinking, and through his wicked Spirit or vngodly Beeing / keepeth the God of Lyfe out of his Dwelling, and with a false Opinion
                     •
                   or with an Enuyousnes towards any Man / doth comfort or quyet himself therin / Hee doth willingly giue-ouer himself to the Curssing and perpetuall Condemnation.
               14. For what other Dwelling for God / wil anyman imagine I pray thee: or what other Tabernacle or Temple of God / wil anyman make 2. Pa
                           •
                        . 6. d Esa. 66. a Act. 7. e.
                   ⁏wherin God wil dwell; but the Man / 
                     Iob. 14. b. Psal. 138. a.
                   that Worke of his Hande? For thatt is the Lordes Lust, 
                     Pro. 8. d. Iohn. 14. d.
                   for to dwell therin / with his vpright Beeing or Christ. But most-tymes (when the Lorde mooueth the Man ther-to / 

by his Ministers) the Man remayneth captiued vnto his owne Knowledg, and so denyeth to yeelde himself 
                     Ier. 7. c 16 b 27.29. b &
                           •
                         Act 7. c. 17 c
                   to thesame Grace of the Lorde: so that most-tymes / ther-are Feawe that suffer themselues to be prepared for an Habitation of God, the which is greatly to be lamented.
               15. THerfore I saye vnto thee veryly (like  as all Gods Prophets and Holyones haue also witnessed:) God dwelleth not in Tabernacles or Temples 
                     Act. 7.17. 
                        •
                     . that are made with Mens Handes. but in the Worke of his owne Hande. For looke into the matter:
               16. Wherin hath God ⁏I pray thee; euer had a Pleasure to dwell ⁏for to be aswell vppon Earth as in Heauen; 
                     Leuit 26 Pro. 8. d. 2. Cor. 6 b Apo. 21. a
                   but in the Man, whom He himself hath made? And to what Temple or Tabernacle hath He had a Lust to haue it cleansed from the Idoles· and from all vngodly Beeing, but to the Man / wherby to be God and the Lorde alone / in him.
               17. Consider: Are not these the 
                     Esa. 4
                        •
                     . a 6
                        •
                      61. b 62. a 2. Pet 3. b. Apo. 21. .
                        •
                     . Promyses / that God wil inhabite the Earth ⁏or the Man of the Earth; in Righteousnes?
               18. Yea, euen in the Man / wil Hee ⁏through his gracious Woord and Seruice of Loue; distinct and deuid-a sunder / the Earthly / from the Heauenly / To thend that euenso in the Mans Inwardnes / Thatt which is of God / may com to 
                     Eccle. 12. 
                        •
                     
                   God / in the heauenly Beeing. and the Earthly / to his earthly Beeing: And He himself ؛the God of Heauen
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   
                  
                     Esa. 60. 
                        •
                     . c Apo. 2
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . wil in this

sort haue his Dwelling 
                     〈◊〉
                   in the Mans Inwardnes / with his godly Beeing, and shyne in him euerlastingly with his Cleernes / as a Day-light from Heauen, and euenso lighten the Earth with Righteousnes. And thatt is the Newe Heauen 
                     Esa. 65.66 b 2 Pet. 3. b. Apo. 21. a
                   and the Newe Earth / in which the Righteousnes dwelleth: and they are now coming to all Beleeuers of Christ / which do submitt them obediently vnder the Loue and her Seruice / to the Cleansing from their Sinnes, according to the Promyses.
            
            
               The XI. Chap.
               
                   THou wrytest moreouer boldly vnto me / that thou hast no God whom thou needest still to feare yt He shoulde vse Rygorousnes with thee: neither doest thou also ⁏as thou wrytest; desyre to haue any such Lorde.
               2. I knowe not wel what I shall saye heervpon: but my Conceaueing is / that thou vnderstandest not rightly the Feare of God, nor-yet his Rygorousnes, nor his Kyndnes.
               3. For / to feare God / 
                     Psal. 111. b. Pro. 1. a. 9. b Eccli. 1. b
                   is a costly Treasure / because that therout springeth the holy Wisdom. For the Feare of God 
                     Pro. 16. a Eccli. 7. c
                   dryueth-out the Sinne.
               4. She is a Worke full of all Vertue / a Foresightfulnes / to a good Protection from the Destruction: and begetteth in the Man / a

good Vnderstanding / to a Guyding-in of him to the vpright Lyfe.
               5. But to knowe and to loue God in his godly  Nature and Beeing / 
                     Sap. 15. a
                   thatt is perfect Righteousnes: and this Perfection in the Loue / 1 Iohn. 4. b dryueth-out Feare: wherthrough the Man doth euenso then / fulfill the Requyring of the Lawe of Moses and of the Fayth of Iesu Christ, and loueth God with all his Heart, and all Men as himself.
               6. Therfore ther-is likewyse no Feare of God anymore needfull to such a Man / which hath inherited the Perfection in the Loue. For God dwelleth in him: and thesame Gods Spirit 
                     Iohn. 16. b.
                   leadeth him into all Trueth: and declareth all things vnto him.
               7. The Man now being a Dwelling for God / in all his Inwardnes 1. Cor. 3.6 b 2 Cor. 6. b.
                   ⁏in whom / God with his Christ and Spirit / liueth and worketh; he hath no cause to be afrayde of God nor of his Rygorousnes: For 
                     Col. 3 b
                   the Loue is the Bande of their Vnitee. namely, the Godhead with the Manhod. Therfore also the Man needeth not to feare: For all his Nature, Beeing, and Disposition / is like vnto God himself / who suffereth his 
                     Math. 5. d.
                   Sunne of Righteousnes to shyne ouer Good and Badd.
               8. And if now it be so with thee likewyse, then hast thou wonne the Crowne 4. Esd 2. c. Iam 1. a. Apo. 2. b.
                   of Lyfe: and all Ignorance is swallowed-vp in thee.
               9. But now it appeereth by thy Woords ⁏according to the sounde of thy wryting; that thou

art not yet com heerunto. For thou desyrest yet Releasment from thy former Ignorance: and wishest that it had his Going-vnder in thee: or that it were quyt out of thee, that thou moughtest then reioyce thee aright.
               
                   10. Thou Beloued, looke once rightly into thyself: and let thy Bosting be accordingly. For consider: So long as the Man beholdeth his Ignorance and his Enemyes / which do raigne ouer him besydes God and his Doctrine or Requyring / so is it meete doutles / that the Man shoulde feare God· inclyne vnto Him and his Requyring· and submitt him obediently vnder the Ministration of his gracious Woord and Seruice of Loue / to thend that God may be his Headd 
                     Psa 27 47. a 96. a b 97. a 99. a.
                   and King· and his Protecter and Helper / against his Enemyes: and that his Enemyes mought euenso ⁏thorough the Power of his God; go-vnder, or com-to-nothing: and that 
                     Math. 25. d.
                   God only mought ⁏with his Wisdom or Vnderstanding; heare the Dominion in him, or obtayne thesame against them.
            
            
               The XII. Chap.
               
                   FArdermore / thou sayest ⁏by thy wryting; that thou must yet suffer thy Brother Esau, seing he is still to-mighty for thee.
               2. I knowe not whether I do well vnderstande thy Mynde in this Matter / or no / because

that thou hast heer-to-fore written so franckly vnto me / of thy Deliuerance and Freedom. And yet now thou wrytest of the Power of Esau / ouer thee: and that thou must yet suffer him / seing he is to-mighty for thee.
               3. Ah ⁏Beloued; looke rightly into the matter I pray thee / whether the Procreation of Esau and Iacob / be also com-to-pas with thee / according to the Trueth. For I saye vnto thee veryly: With whomsoeuer Esau and Iacob are brought-foorth out of Isaac / the S
                     •
                  ede of Promyse / thear cannot Esau doo anything against Iacob: For Iacob is much-to-prudent for him.
               4. Howbeit, whear Esau and Iacob are not brought-foorth / thear are they not present likewyse: and the Man also is vtterly vnacquaynted with the Vnderstanding therof. For-that-cause ther is likewyse no Power vsed with him / neither by Esau nor-yet by Iacob: but they are all vayne Things / whatsoeuer he perswadeth himself to knowe or to feele therof.
               5. For both these [namely, Esau and Iacob] are of one Father, 
                     Gen. 25. 
                        •
                     . and of one Moother: and are also conceaued both at-once in their Moothers Wombe. But the Birth ⁏wherin they make-manifest themselues, and seperate themselues asunder; cometh-to-pas / the One before the Other: of the which now Esau hath the Fore-going, and after-that / Iacob / who is made 
                     Gen. 27. 
                        •
                     . a Lorde ouer Esau, and

an Heyre in the Promyses of his Fathers. Therfore consider now of the Vnderstanding touching Esau and Iacob:
               6. Must not Esau 
                  
                     •
                  eare the Yoke of Iacob
                  ▪ and not Iacob / the Yoke of Esau?
               7. Hath not Esau also the Promyse ⁏to com-to-pas at his tyme; 
                     Gen. 27. c.
                   that he shall lay-off the Yoke of his Brother, and shake it from his Nerk? Esau hath not deceaued or begyled Iacob. but Iacob / Esau.
                  
                     Gen. 25· d. 27. d.
                   And so are the Promyses of God established on Iacob / who is likewyse named 
                     Gen. 32. 
                        •
                     . 
                  Israel: and he became a Lorde ouer Esau, who was also named Edom.
               
               8. Therfore is Esau likewyse / figured-foorth or figuratiuely resembled vnto vs / 4. Esd. 6. b.
                   for the first or fore-going Worlde / in like-maner
                     Rom. 5. b.
                   
                  Adam also. and Iacob / for thatt which is to-com / and so likewyse / Christ.
               
               9. Because now this Secreat is great / therfore heare a cleere Similitude, wherwith the Birth of Esau and Iacob is vttered-foorth.
               
                   10. IN ye Begining / God created 
                     Gen. 1. Heauen and Earth at-once: but when the Heauen and the Earth were seperated a-sunder / then went the Heauen / aboue the Earth. And then did God sett a great Light and Cleernes / in the Heauen: and it was also hanged with Clowdes, Deawe, and Rayne / wherthrough Hee ⁏to the Welfare of the Earth; garnished the Earth, and made it fruitfull / to bring-foorth all good Fruits.
               
                  11. Thatsame now which hath the Foregoing with the Man / out of the Begetting of the Seede of Promyse, and is first seene / thatt is a naturall Bodye: but thatt which is to Com, or thatt which is last seene / is a spirituall Bodye: Yet out of one Conception or Begetting.
               12. For if we haue out of God / 1. Cor. 15. 
                        •
                     .a naturall Bodye / then haue we likewyse out of Him / a spirituall Bodye: But the Naturall / which hath the Fore-going to thatt which the Seede of Promyse requyreth / is the Image of ye Spirituall, or of the seconde Generation according to the Spirit, which accomplisheth the Requyring of the Seede of Promyse.
               13. If wee now / haue euenso likewyse / borne the Image of the earthly or naturall Man / 1. Cor. 15. 
                        •
                     . then shall we also veryly / beare the right Image of the heauenly or spirituall Man.
               14. Gather-out the Mynde, and comprehende Vnderstanding: The fore-going Kingdom / is the Image of the Beawty and Louelynes of Thatt which is to com.
               15. Thatt which goeth before / hath procured to itself / the Death or the Mortalitee: it  shoulde also haue remayned deadly or mortall / if Thatt which is following / had not ⁏to a Safemaking; appeered ouer it.
               16. In which true Beeing / the Death with her Destruction / passeth-away: wherin then likewyse / her Death or Mortalitee / is losened or rent, and her Destruction / swallowed-vpp / 

euen-as the Prophet Ozeas hath forespoken thesame: 
                     Oze. 13. b.
                   O Death, I was thy Death: O Hell, I was thy Sting. Wherof also Paul hath sayde: When 1. Rom. 15 f
                   the Corruptible / shall put-on the Incorruptible, and the Mortall / the Immortalitee / Then is the fore-mencioned Woord fulfilled: as that the Death is swallowed-vpp in Victory. O Death / whear is now thy Sting, or thy deadly Worke? O Hell / whear is now thy Victory? For the 
                     Esa. 25 a.
                   Death is swallowed-vpp by the Lyfe: wher-through / the Hell loseth her Victory.
               
                   17. Euenthus is likewyse the Enimitee risen-vp in Esau: but swallowed-vpp by Iacob. by Adam is the Death com into the Worlde: 
                     Rom. 5. b 1. Cor. 15. b
                   but by Christ / the Lyfe, to the Conquering of the Death.
               18. In the first Creation or Generation / the Earth was waste and empty, and it was darke vppon the Deepe. 
                     Gen. 1. and after ye God sayd: Let it be Light, and it was Light. And God behealde the Light for Good: And by thesame Light / the Garnishing and the Beawty of the Kingdom was seene, to a gloryous Name of the almighty God, who hath prepared him all thesame.
            
            
               The XIII. Chap.
               
                   EArdermore thou sayest: Oh (think I somtymes▪) how earnestly is the lost Sheepe of the Howse of Israel sought-for! Notwithstanding, of the

Meaning therof (as thou wrytest) thou knowest not whether thou hast a right Discerning / or no. And therfore thou desyrest of mee that I would wryte somwhat vnto thee of that Matter / according to my Discerning.
               2. O Thou Beloued, the Secret of this Matter is very great / according to my Discerning. Neuertheles / I wil ⁏according to thy Request; disclose a little vnto thee of my Sight touching the Meaning therof: For I cannot hyde it from thee. Haue thou a regard on the Meaning:
               3. The Howse of Israel / is the Stock of Iacob: which Iacob / is the Second Kingdom of the former Beawty, which surmounteth all Power and Glory. Beholde and consider of thatt which is rehearsed before of 
                     Supra. 1
                        •
                     . 
                  Adam and Christ, of the Earthly and Heauenly, and of Esau and Iacob. So marke then:
               4. When now Esau and Iacob were borne, and a little growen-vpp together in Vnderstanding / then did Iacob
                  ▪ ouercom Esau ⁏his Brother; with Prudence and with Deceipt:
                     Gen. 27. c. d
                   and so with Prudence / he gott the Kingdom of Promyse, and became an Elder and a Father in the Couenant of the God of his Fathers / Isaac and Abraham.
               
               5. Heerin he also deceaued Isaac his Father / through the Counsayle of Rebecca his Moother: 
                     Gen. 27 a. b
                   and so is becom an Heyre in the Promyses of his Fathers. Therfore he is rightly called Iacob: 
                     Gen. 27. d.
                   which Name signifyeth

vnto vs / A Deceauer, or a Suppresser.
               6. Now when Iacob was becom a Lorde ouer his Brother Esau: and had receaued the Blessing of the Promyses of his Fathers / Then did he not only loue the Inheritance of the Promyses: but much-more the God of his Fathers. And God 
                     Mal. 1. a. Rom. 9. b
                   had likewyse a Pleasure in Iacob. Which God of his Fathers / appeered also vnto him, and hath sealed or established the Promyses vppon Iacob: so 
                     Gen. 28. b. c
                   that Iacob sawe nothing-els vppon the Place / but the Howse of God.
               7. After-that / Iacob wrestled 
                     Gen. 32. c.
                   with God: and leaft Him not (although the Daye came-on) before He had blessed him: and so he ouercame God likewyse / to his Will.
               
                   8. Now when Iacob was com to such Power and Lordshipp with God / God asked him his Name. He answered God, and sayde / that he was called Iacob. But God gaue him the Name / that he shoulde be called Israel / 
                     Gen 32. c.
                   Because that he had strouen with God and Man, and kept the Victory. And Israel signifyeth vnto vs / A Gods Lorder, or One that lordeth with God, or preuayleth.
               9. According to this-very Name, hath God also named his owne Name. For like as God named himself after the Name of Abraham and Isaac / his Fathers, euenso did He likewyse name himself a God of Israel: that is / a God of those that lorde or preuayle with God / vnder

whom Esau standeth seruiceably submitted, and yet is no Heyre in the Testaments of God.
               10. Beholde, Thissame / which is the second Birth or Procreation after Esau, and which ⁏in his Ouercoming; is by God / named Israel, is veryly the true and right Howse of Israel. And all that be borne ther-out / are the Lambes and Sheepe of the Howse of Israel.
               
               11. Veryly, thesame Sheepe that is lost or strayed from this Howse (vnderstande the Meaning rightly) is the Sheepe
                     Math. 10. 
                        •
                     . 18. b. Luk. 15. a.
                   that is sought with earnest Loue / to thend that the Promyses that are made to the Fathers / shoulde be established on thesame. For God wil also be a God and Sheapheard of ye lost strayed Sheepe of the Howse of Israel: and bringing thesame agayne to his 
                     Esa. 56. a Eze. 37. c. Iohn. 10. b
                   Folde / He wil likewyse be a God and a Sheapheard vnto his Seede / euen for euermore.
               12. And if thou now hast rightly vnderstood  thissame / then looke-vpon the whole Generation of Iuda, and the Remnant of the People of Iacob. and how that thosesame, together with the Generations of Men (inasmuch as they are estrainged from their right Stock: namely, from the Fellow-lording with God) are the right lost or erring Sheepe of the Howse o
                     •
                   
                  Israel. Then agayne, looke-vpon the Testament 
                     Esa. 4
                        •
                     .41. &c. Ier 30.31.32 33. Eze. 34.35.36.37. of Promyse / that is promysed to the Howse of Israel and to the Howse of Iuda: and how God hath sworne vnto them / that

Hee is their Heritage: also 
                     Deut. 4. c 32. a Psal. 28.47 a
                   how that they all / are Gods Heritage.
               13. Beholde ⁏thou Beloued; Thesesame / Israel and Iuda that are heere rehearsed vnto thee / are the right Heyres and 
                     Act. 3. c.
                   Children of the Testament in the Promyses of their Fathers, wherin God wil establish them / in the last Tyme.
               14. To which Heritage ⁏according to the Promyses; the Heathen are ⁏by Gods Grace; 
                     
                        
                           •
                        sa. 42. a 49. 
                        •
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1 d. Iohn. 8 b. Act 13. c
                   called and bidden / To thend that they ⁏as Fellow-heyres of the Howse of Israel; shoulde liue and raigne with Israel, and Israels God / in the true Circumcision / which God hath fe
                     •
                  t or ordayned betwixt Him and Abraham and his Seede / 
                     Gen. 17. a
                   for an euerlasting Couenant, and that-ther shoulde be nomore but one God. namely, among the Iewes and Heathen.
               
                   15. Beholde, this Grace is chaunced to the Heathen: howbeit / not as those that are borne of the Howse of Israel: but that are called therto by Gods Grace / because that the Heathen shoulde euenso ⁏by Gods Grace / out of the Beleefe in Iesus Christ; be likewyse the Seede of Abraham / in Righteousnes and Holynes 
                     Luk. 1. 
                        
                           ••
                        phe. 4. c.
                   that pleaseth God, and shoulde possesse the Citizenshipp in Ierusalem / according to the Promyses.
               16. Lo, heer-vnto is the Man ⁏which is so wholly lost or estrainged from this Dominion with God or Howse of Israel; sought and called with earnest Loue / for that he shoulde com

to the Heritage of God and Christ, which is the Health and Saluation of his Soule, as also liue with God, and that the God of Israel / shoulde likewyse be his God.
               17. Consider now / thou Beloued: Heer-vppon (as I haue rehearsed vnto thee) standeth my Sight / touching the lost Sheepe of the Howse of Isarel / that is sought with great Dilligence / by the Lorde and his Ministers / for to bring him 
                     Math. 10. a. 1
                        •
                      
                     b. Lu
                           •
                        . 15 a. Iohn. 10 b.
                   agayne to his right Sheepefolde.
            
            
               The XIIII. Chap.
               MOreouer, thou wrytest vnto me /  how that thou hadst wel hoped that the whole Worlde shoulde once be cleansed from all her Blyndnes and Ignorance: so that the Song Allelu-ia / mought ⁏with Ioye; be soung heere generally.
               2. Thatsame is still all my Hope and Longing: but the 
                     Esa. 65. b. 2 Pet. 3 b.
                   Cleansing of the Worlde, and the Reioycing 
                     Apo. 19 a
                   of the godly Men / cometh not to pas according to Mans Good-thinking: but according to the Lords Woord and his Promyses / namely / through the Crosse of Christ, wherthrough the Man ⁏in the Cleansing of his Sinnes; becometh altogether humbled and abased· and begotten 
                     Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     a. Rom. a. Tit. 3. a
                   agayne or a-newe / out of thesame Death of the Crosse· and made alyue 
                     Rom. 5.
                        •
                     . a. 1. Cor. 15. c.
                   in Christ.
               
               3. For like as the Golde is purifyed in the

Furnace of the Golde-smith, or thorowly-tryed to fyne Golde / 
                     Sap. 3. a. Eccli 2. a.
                   so is the Man likewyse cleansed in the Furnace of the Humiliation of the Crosse of Christ.
               
               4. Out of which Humiliation / the Man cometh to the Obedience of God and Christ, of whom he learneth the Humilitee 
                     Math. 11. d.
                   and Meeknes of Heart.
               
                   5. In which Humilitee and Meeknes of Heart / the Man is blessed and anoynted with the Oyle of Loue: That is, with the holy Gost / in all Goodnes and Louelynes.
               6. Beholde, this goeth first ouer the Howsholde of God, who in their Cleansing from the Sinne / do 
                     Rom. 6. b. 1. Pet. 2. follow-after Christ / in his Death of the Crosse / vnder the Obedience of the Loue: and after-that ⁏in their Makeing-alyue in Iesu Christ; cometh the Ende 1. Cor. 15. c.
                   ouer the Worlde. For so hath it pleased God / to cleanse the Worlde 
                     Ephe. 2. b. Col. 
                     
                        •
                     . c
                   through the Crosse, and to saue the Man, according to the Scripture.
               7. Whosoeuer now therfore taketh 
                     Math. 16. c. Luk. 14. c.
                   his Crosse vppon him / in the Obedience to the gracious Woord and his Requyring: also ⁏in the Beleefe; followeth-after Christ 
                  ؛the Godlynes
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   vnder the Obedience of the Loue: and so learneth the Humilitee, and the Vertue to the 
                     Math. 11. c.
                   Meeknes / Hee likewyse ouercometh the Worlde: and the Saluation cometh vnto him with Ioye.
               
                   8. And a Man that is altogether cleansed from the Worlde and from all vnprofitable

and corruptible Things [namely, by the Baptisme 
                     Rom. 6. 
                        
                           •
                        . Col. 2. b.
                   in the Death of Christ, which is the right Fount 
                     Tit 3. b.
                   of Regeneration] hee singeth in his right tyme ⁏according to the True
                     •
                  h; that 
                     Tob. 13. 
                        •
                     . Song / Allelu-ia: Which signifyeth vnto vs / Laude the Lorde.
               9. Beholde, thatsame (as I haue heere rehearsed vnto thee) is my Sight / touching the Cleansing of the Worlde, and the Reioyceing of the Righteous / in the last tyme. But howsoeuer the Lorde appoynteth it / let it so content vs in any-wyse.
            
            
               The XV. Chap.
               ACcording to thy Request ⁏thou Beloued;  I haue heere ⁏as in breef-maner; written a little vnto thee / how my Mynde standeth, or how I am mynded.
               2. I knowe not also any Light 
                     Iohn. 1. 
                        •
                     . of Lyfe / but the 2. Cor. 4. 
                        
                           •
                        . Col. 1. b. Heb. 1. 
                        •
                     . inuisible true Beeing / the gloryous and louely Lyfe of the liueing Godhead: wher-vppon likewyse my Hope standeth, euen-as wee haue also talked therof in tymes-past.
               3. I seeke not likewyse neither haue sought (since that tyme forth / that we spake last together) any Saluation of the Soule / in any Outward-thing: but ⁏through the Beleefe in Iesu Christ, and through the Loue and her Seruice; I withdrawe my Mynde from all

what is outward, and which is drawing me to Corruption.
               4. Heer-vnto doth my Soule bende itself / so much as I may in the Lorde: and I do loue the inuisible Beeing of God / to thend that my inward Mynde should in nowyse stand bounde to the vayne Creatednes: but that my Spirit mought euenso / liue in the Spirit of the true and liueing Beeing. namely / according to the Nature of Christ, 
                  
                     Iohn. 13. d. 15. b 1. Iohn. 3. c.
                   who directeth or poynteth vs vnto the Loue ؛the vnchaingable Godhead
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                  .
               5. But thatt Seruice which hath his Mini
                     •
                  
                  tration to thesame Loue / for the Saluations sake of Men, and requyreth all Orderlynes and Reasonablenes / wil I not dispise, nor-yet in any-case forsake: but wil ⁏so much as the Lorde enableth me therto; further, mayntayne, and minister thesame to the Saluation of Men / inasmuch as the Lorde hath chosen Mee ther-vnto.
               
                   6. Oh / that God woulde graunt / that the Seruice of Loue mought flourish without Hinderance; and that euenso the right Vnderstanding of the Wisdom mought com-to-light / vnder the Obedience of the Loue! For to the louely Lyfe in the Loue / 
                     Gen 1.2. Sap. 1. b. 2. c
                   is the Man created, like as is witnessed and administred out of the Seruice of Loue: and therfore is also my Soule inclyned to thesame Seruice / to thend that 
                     Ephe. 4. 
                        •
                     . the Vnite of Heart mought be in ye Loue / among all Louers of the Trueth.
               
                  7. Beholde, yet at this present / thus standeth my Mynde: and I likewyse knowe not yet any better, neither haue I also mett with any better.
               8. BVt it seemeth now ⁏by thy Wryting; as though thou hast heard by Somme / that I shoulde be outwardly mynded (as are Somme whom thou namest vnto mee) O No / thou Beloued: My Heart, Mynde, and Being standeth not grounded vppon any outward Thing / neither do I also desyre to cleaue-vnto and to vse anything that is Outward / which leadeth-away 
                     Rom. 1. 
                        •
                     . Heb. 3. b.
                   from the liueing God and his Righteousnes.
               9. But though I now ⁏for the Vnitees sake in the Loue; shoulde conuersate myself with Somme that were yet outwardly mynded, or did yet sett their Confidence vppon any Flesh / yet doth not their weake Grounde concerne mee. But I haue for-that-cause / a lyke-loue towards them / when they cannot attayne vnto the inuisible Trueth any farder, and desyre to haue Conuersation peaceably with Mee / and yet for-al-that I do not contemne the Outward.
               10. I woulde also willingly leaue them free  in their weake Grounde / if I mought by-that-meanes / conuersate myself in the Vnitee of the Loue / with those that are zealous to the good Beeing, or that are Louers of Vertue, of Wisdom, and of Vnderstanding: let them be then / whosoeuer or of what Grounde of Fayth and

Opinion soeuer they bee: if the Loue 
                     Col 3. b.
                   were our Bande and Concord· and that we conuersated ourselues with each-other therin: as also woulde willingly heare one-another / through Loue: and that-ther were in-that-sort a good Inclynation to the Trueth / among vs all / Then shoulde the right Vnderstanding com-to-light nodout, and the vayne Vnderstanding, together with all euell Imaginations and Blaspheamings, vanish-away of themselues or consume to nothing.
               11. For, to deale in the Loue / with such as are adioyned to the Loue / were more acceptable vnto mee, also much-more delytfull and ioyfull / then with those that haue no Lust▪ Will, nor Desyre to the good Beeing of the Loue, and wil in-that-maner conuersate themselues with mee.
               12. For though anyone of the goodwilling Hearts / shoulde ⁏by reason of his small Vnderstanding; trust yet vpon som Outward-thing yet if he haue a Lust to God and his Righteousnes, and is no Blaspheamer nor Contemner towards another / then cometh thatt Vanitee to an Ende doutles / in the Vnderstanding. Therfore men ought not to contemne anyone for the outward Seruices or Ordinances cause.
               
                   13. For it is much better, and much-more acceptable before God / to loue the good Beeing / through som Outward-thing / then to cleaue vnto the Worlde or to the vayne and vnprofitable

Things / through the Affection to the Worldly outward Things: the 
                     Eccli. 15. b. Rom. 1. c Ephe. 4. c.
                   which nodout is altogether strainge from God and his Trueth. and therfore likewyse ther-are Many now / which dispyse the outward Seruices or Ordinances· speaking much Reproche of euery-one· also blaspheaming and with Falshod defameing the Ministers therof: but in that they bynde their Hearts vnto their owne Creatures, or vnto som other outward Things / thatt wil they not once consider.
               14. And thesame Estrainging from God and his Trueth ⁏through the Affection to the worldly and outward Things; do we now ⁏alas; fynde among many Men / who do also very franckly bost themselues / that they are not snared by any Man, nor with outward Seruices or Ceremonyes: and so do perswade themselues / that therfore they are not outwardly mynded 
                     Gal. 4. a. Col 2. c.
                   like those that seeke Righteousnes in outward Things.
               15. Yeas assuredly: and yet much-more and worse: For they suffer themselues to be captiued 
                     Rom 1. c. Ephe. 2. a 4. c.
                   with the earthly Things of this Worlde: and ⁏their Hearts growing vayne therthrough, and turning-away themselues from the Lust to the Guyding into the Righteousnes; they hang their Vnderstanding and Mynde on thosesame, and on their owne Good-thinking: so that they for-that-cause / do vtterly lose all Lust or Zeale to the vpright Beeing of God, and becom cleaueing to the earthly

corruptible Things; and euenso do quyt corrupt their Vnderstanding.
               
                   16. Seing then that they are corrupted in their Vnderstanding / therfore seeke they likewyse ⁏according to their owne Pleasures; to liue to the corruptible Things / for a Recreation of their Hearts: and in no-wyse desyre to be leadd into the true Lyfe / through Gods Ordinance. For the godly Things are as deadd vnto them. and the Seruices of the holy Woord, and to shewe Obedience therin ⁏wherwith the Man is assisted to the godly Knowledg; are as though they had no Signifycation: which thing I commend not.
               17. For my Heart hath much-more Affection to those that with Ignorance / do seeke God and his Righteousnes, and that shewe Obedience therin / then to those that with Vnderstanding / do estrainge them from God and his Seruice, and are strainge and disobedient vnto all Righteousnes / according to the Requyring of the holy Woord of the holy Spirit and Seruice of Loue, and so do liue after ther owne Mynde 
                     Ier 7. c. 23. b. 18. b
                   and Good-thinking.
            
            
               The XVI. Chap.
               
                   FOr this cause / my Beloued ⁏as is before sayde; and for that I do now fynde Many / which ⁏according to their owne Good-thinking; do liue

in all Disobedience / against the Requyring of the holy Woord, and which bost them falsly of the Vnderstanding of the spirituall and heauenly Things: and so ⁏
                     •
                  leaueing-vnto or loueing the Worlde and the corruptible Things· or the Following of the false Libertynes; desyre to conuersate or to haue fellowshipp with mee: and for more such-like things cause, and for that I do neither seeke nor desyre any such matter / I haue indeuoured myself to be conuersant with certen zealous Hearts: To thend that I in my Zeale / mought not haue my Course with the Vnwillingones ⁏which take-on a false Freedom / to seperate themselues from the Requyring of the Seruice of Loue, and cleaue to the earthly corruptible Things; but with the Good-willingones to the Righteousnes: and that the Vnderstanding of the godly Trueth and of the peaceable Loue / mought ⁏by that Meanes; beare-swaye among the Louers of the vpright Vnderstanding / which do loue the Treasures of Wisdom, and the Obedience to the Requyring of the Seruice of Loue / aboue Golde and Siluer, 
                     P
                           •
                        o. 8. 
                        
                           •
                        . Sap. 7 a.
                   and aboue all what is in the Worlde.
               2. For whosoeuer loueth the Wisdom or  the holy Vnderstanding, and the Obedience to the Requyring of her Seruice of Loue / aboue all earthly Things / and doth not contemne, enuye, nor blaspheame anyone / that also laboureth ther-after with Ignorance / To him 
                     Pro. 8 
                        
                           •
                        . Sap. 6 b. 7. 
                        •
                      
                     Math. 7. 
                        
                           •
                        .
                   wil likewyse the Wisdom or holy

Vnderstanding / appeere: But whos
                     •
                   loueth anything aboue the Wisdom / or whoso contemneth and blaspheameth anyman / in his Zeale to the Righteousnes, and seperateth himself from him / is not wyse: neither shall hee also fynde, vnderstande, nor inherite the Wisdom. For the Wisdom is much-to-noble, to-honorable of Lynage, 
                     Pro. 8. a. b. Sap 7 a. b. Eccl
                           •
                        . 24. b.
                   and to-precious / for to ioyne or shewe herself vnto those / yt do not loue her with all their Hearts / aboue all Things.
               3. Oh ⁏alas; I fynde too-feawe of those which loue the Wisdom aboue all things. But let it go how it will / with the Wysdom and the vpright Righteousnes, the Man doth in-any-case take good heede to the earthly Things / which doutles are nomore to be esteemed then as 
                     Phil. 3. b.
                   Dirt / in comparyson to the Preciousnes or Worthynes of the Wisdom and Righteousnes of God.
               4. Vnderstande now ⁏thou Beloued; wherfore I haue indeuoured myself to haue my Conuersation in Freedom / with those whom thou wel knowest, and also with others more. namely, for the Wisdom and the Righteousnes sake, as is before rehearsed, and as I wil yet partly rehearse vnto thee / because that thy Heart shoulde in-nowyse doubt that I haue sought or liked anything-els / but the Vertues of the vpright and true inuisible Beeing.
               
                  5. For in all Things and Dealings that I  haue has with them / this hath bin all my Grounde and Intent / for to heare-ouer their Vnderstanding and Wisdom / vnder the Obedience of the Loue· to question with them· and to answere agayne / To thend that we mought therby becom agreeable, or concordable 1 
                        
                           •
                        or. 1. a Phil. 2. a.
                   mynded / in the Loue and in the Vnderstanding, and to the vpright Righteousnes / and that we shoulde not take or construe anything of each-other / to the worst: but I haue not yet vsed thesame Course among them, nor-yet the Speeche that tendeth therunto.
               6. I haue not yet lykewyse bin in any Communialtee among them / wherby to deale boldly with them: But the Lorde do with vs according to his Will, and thatt which serueth most vnto Peace, and to the Vnitee of Heart in the Loue.
               7. O Thou Beloued / Although I haue ⁏out of Loue; submitted myself heerunto among Somme, wherby to informe the Louers of the Trueth / to all Vnitee in the Loue, and so haue not contemned nor blaspheamed the Outward / Yet am I not therfore outwardly mynded: but this do I veryly acknowledg, that it is much-more Pleasure vnto mee / to deale with the Loue of the Wisdom, and to talke therof / among those that loue the Loue and the Wisdom / because that the Righteousnes appeereth vnto Such; then

to inherit all the Ritches and Pleasures of this Worlde: or to deale among those which loue the earthly Things or their owne Good-thinking / aboue the Wisdom, and aboue the Vnitee of Heart in the Loue / and so to dissemble with Men / as though all were inward and heauenly Things that they loue / wher-with they deceaue both themselues and other moe / which heare them, and do seduce them from the true Seruices that leade to the Lyfe.
               
                   8. And like-as thou wrytest / that it is vnpossible for thee to cause thyne Eyes and thy Heart to hope / as to waight for Deliuerance through any outward Things: euenso is thesame likewyse vnpossible for mee. Yea, although it were so that I woulde do it / yet coulde I not. For the Light of the heauenly Trueth ⁏wherwith God hath illuminated 1. Cor. 4 a.
                   my Heart / out of his holy Heauen; is an Against-shyning vnto mee / against thesame. But the Ministration of the Good / by the godded Men or Olde-fathers in the Famyly of Loue / is awayes very profitable, and a good Preparation to the Deliuering of the Man from his 
                     Rom. 7. c
                   Bandes of the Sinne. and that men haue familyer brotherly Conuersation together to that ende / is also very louely, and likewyse greatly edyfying to the Vnitee of Heart in the Loue.
               
                  9. Beholde ⁏thou Beloued; like-as I haue heere written vnto thee in naked and bare maner / Euenso standeth my Mynde: and I hope not to forsake thesame / till I haue founde or gotten all what I seek-for, and desyre among the Louers of the Trueth. The Lorde graunt me Mercy: and doowith mee / according to his Will. Amen. Fare-well: and behaue thyself vprightly.
               
                  Heere-with I do thee heartly greete,
                  In the Lyfe of the Loue most-sweete.
               
            
            The Ende of the Sixt Epistle.
         
         
            
            
               
            
            Our Heart / is the Minde of God most-hie.
            Our Beeing amiable / as the sweete Lillie.
            Our Faithfulnes / Loue / and Trueth vpright▪
            
            Is Gods Light / Life / and Cleernes bright.
         
         
            
            The Seuenth Epistle. A true Iudgment or Sentence / proceeding out of the Seruice of Loue / against the false Iudgment or Sentence / proceeding out of the Flesh. Wherin also certen good Exhortacions and Informations to the vpright Beeing of the Loue / be rehearsed and witnessed.
            
               
                  Therfore canst thou not excuse thyself ⁏O Man; whosoeuer thou bist that iudgest. For wher in thou iudgest another, therin condemnest thou thyself.
                  Rom. 2.
                  Take-heede to the Tyme, and learne Wisdom and holy Vnderstanding: for it is better then Golde and Siluer, Yea / much worthyer then all costly or precious Stones. For therby / the secret Iudgments of the highest God / be vnderstood.
               
            
            
               
               The First Chapter.
               
                  
                  OUt of the Inclynation of the Loue / I HN do wish a good Peace and Saluation / vnto the Communialtee of Saincts of the Howse of the Loue of Iesu Christ, and vnto all good-willing Hearts / that for the Glory of Gods sake / do submit them obediently vnder the Loue, and mayntayne her Seruice / to 
                     Esa. 65. b 2. Pet. 3. b Apoc. 21. a.
                   a Renewing of the Earth with Righteousnes / to thend that God may obtayne the Superioritee / with his Loue and vpright Being: and that all what God hath spoken in tymes-past 
                     Act 3. c.
                   by ye Mouth of all his holy Prophets, and published 
                     Math. 28. d. Mar. 16. b.
                   in ye Worlde / by ye 
                  Christ of God / for a Gospel of the Kingdom, and as is written therof / may now in the last tyme / be fulfilled 
                     Luk. 18. d.
                   or accomplished / through ye Loue, according to the Promyses.
               2. Happy are all those 
                     Esa. 25.30. b
                   that long after thesame, and ⁏for the Glory of God and his Loues sake; do 
                     Math. 10. d. 16.
                        •
                      
                     Mar. 8. d. Luk. 9 17. d Iohn. 12. c.
                   forsake, hate, and leaue themselues / that God ؛the true Lorder
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   may only haue the Superioritee, 1. Cor. 15. c.
                   and so be all in all: and no Flesh to account anything 1. Cor. 1. d.
                   of itself anymore.
               
                  3. FOrasmuch then as 1. Cor. 25. 
                        
                           •
                        . 1. Tim 1 b.
                   Mercy is chaunced  vnto Mee ⁏out of Grace; through the Loue of God the Father: and that the God of Lyfe hath permitted the Light of his Cleernes to shyne in my 2. Cor. 4. b.
                   Heart / by the Rysing of the Light from on High / wherby to reueale his Glory, and to defende his Honour and Beawty / to all vtter Puting-downe of all Glory and Honour of the lying Flesh: Therfore cannot I endure to hyde Gods Honour / which only belongeth vnto Him. For to that ende is the Seruice of the Woord vnder the Obedience of the Loue / com-foorth 
                     Ephe. 1. b.
                   ⁏to the Laude and Prayse of the godly Glory; for to defende the supreame God in his Honour ⁏because that all thatt which belongeth vnto Him / may be geeuen agayne vnto Him, and be drawen vnder Him; and not to excuse any Flesh of Sinne therin, nor-yet ⁏for any Loue of the Fleshes cause; to couer any Flesh / in his Shame: but to discouer thesame naked and bare. namely / all his Whordom, 
                     Ier 5. b 7. b 8 14. b 23 c. 1. Tim. 1. b.
                   Adultery, Theeuery, and Killing or Murdering, together with all his false Witnessings, and 
                     Esa. 1. a 5. c. 52. a. Mar. 3. Blaspheamy against God and all Gods Holyones.
               4. For thus sayth the holy Spirit of Loue, whose Daye 
                     Esa. 66. b. Mal. 4 a.
                   burneth like a Cresset-of-flameing-fyer against all his Enemyes: Looke vpon yourselues, and consider of your Vnchastitee, and of the Vncleannes and 
                     Eze. 24. b. Math. 15.23. 
                        
                           •
                        .
                   Wickednes of your Hearts, and what yee all are by Nature / O all thou Flesh that art borne of Adam.
                  
Wherwithal ⁏I pray you; or by what Kynde of Righteousnes, or Vnderstanding of Wisdom / wil ye iudg the vpright Wisdom or the holy Spirit of Loue, and accuse his Ministers? And wherwith ⁏I pray you; wil ye excuse or defende yourselues / that ye shoulde not all ⁏how prudent-wyse soeuer ye bee; com to Shame before the Iudgment-seate of the Christ of my God? which Daye of his Iudgment / doth now breake-thorow, and his Coming approcheth 
                     Math. 24. c.
                   like a Morning-starr out of the East or Rysing-of-the-sunne: and is seene like ye Lightening / into ye West or Going-downe therof: Whose Lighting / maketh-manifest all Flesh of the Darknes ⁏in his Vncleannes; through the Coming of his Beawtyful-cleernes.
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               
                   O All thou Flesh of the falne Adam, wherin wilt thou now excuse 
                     Rom. 2. thyself before the righteous Iudg, as to be vngilty in anything / wherin thou condemnest another? Therfore beholde and consider: The Iudgment of God in his Iustice / is sett before thee, and thy Sinne or Offence / made naked and bare before thyne Eyes / how that thou art faulty and wrong in euerything: not only in thatt which is manifestly euell or wrong: 
                     Esa. 64. c. Math. 23. a. b Rom. 10. a 1. Cor. 1. b. c Col. 2. b. 
                           •
                        
                     
                   but also in all thy Wisdom, Holynes, and Righteousnes.
               
                  2. Therfore com ye all foorth hether / before the cleere Iudgment or Daye 
                     Math. 25 d. Rom. 14 b. 2. Cor. 5. b.
                   of the Sentence of God: make-manifest yourselues eueryone / before his Maiestee, and let your inward Nakednes appeere: But what auayleth it, ther shall none be 
                     Psal. 14.53 a Rom 3. a
                   founde clea
                     •
                  e / No not One righteous. but all / full of Spotts and Wrinckles.
               3. Seing then that all of you ⁏which are borne of the sinful Flesh of Adam; are 
                     Psal 51. a.
                   vncleane and vnrighteous, and haue nothing-at-all in your Members / that is like vnto the Beawty of the Bryde of Christ / So doth-ther not then likewyse any Iudgment belong vnto you, neither-yet to giue Sentence of the godly Things. Or-els do ye think to sitt vppon the Seate of the Iustice of God / with your Iniustice, and so to pronounce-foorth the Iudgment? Or do ye still think / that yee can iudg right in any Matters? Veryly / I vtterly deny it: for all sinful Flesh in his Vanitee / is false 
                     Psal 116. b. Rom. 3. a.
                   and lying. Therfore it belongeth not to him / to iudg anything: but to be iudged himself / by the Iudgment of God / to thend that the Vnrighteous / may receaue the Iudgment of their Vnrighteousnes. 
                     Math. 13.25. d Rom. 2. a 2 Tess. 1 a.
                   and the Righteous / the Iudgment of their Righteousnes / Because that it may euenso be witnessed / that God only 
                     Psal 116. b Iohn. 3 d. Rom. 3. a. Apo 19. a b.
                   is righteous in his Iudgment.
               4. Thus sayth the holy Spirit of Loue: I  haue to deale with thee / O all thou Flesh / that art borne of the falne Adam▪
                   and likewyse with you all that wil excuse or defende thatsame.

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
For this is the righteous Iudgment of my God / ouer you: that ye all are 
                     Rom. 2. a.
                   resistant against the Kyndnes of the highest God. Who wil now I pray you / iustify or excuse himself against thesame. For according to your owne inclyned Mynde / ye haue all doutles fleshed yourselues with the Deuill: and so are incorporated to all Euell and Wickednes: wherthrough ye haue eueryone ⁏how prudent-wyse soeuer ye be; 
                     Apo. 17. b.
                   fought against God and the Lambe / with your owne Wisdom or Good-thinking. and 
                     •
                  o haue troden-downe the Loueing-kyndnes of God in yourselues / with Feete· shedd the Blood of the Righteous· and accounted the holy Blood of the true Testament of the Lorde Iesu Christ / for 
                     Heb. 10. f.
                   vncleane: shutt ye Glory of God quyt out of your Hearts: and so are becom replenished 
                     Math. 23. c
                   with all Vnrighteousnes, Wickednes, Maliciousnes, Mocking, and Blaspheamy.
               
                   5. Ouer-and-aboue this / ye haue couered your euell Deedes / with Hypocrisie, wherby to hyde your Vncleannes and Craftynes. And in this Falshod / ye haue also sought 
                     Ioh. 5.12. d·
                   Prayse and Honour / on-of-another▪ s
                     ••
                  t yourselues in Iudgment / which belongeth 
                     Esa. 3. c. Sap. 3. a. Math. 19. c. 1. Cor. 6. a. Iude. 
                     
                        •
                     . b
                   only to God with his Saincts· and dealt coueredly, trayterously, and deceitfully / in your Counsayle of priuy Conspiracies / for to accuse and defame the 
                     Esa. 53 b. Sap. 2 b.
                   Vpright of Heart therby / with wicked Deedes, and so wil haue right / in your owne Wickednes and Lyes.
               
                  6. But in all this your Vnrighteousnes / ye haue loued and defended the Creatures / aboue God: attributed the Honour vnto the 
                     Iohn. 5. c.
                   Creatures / which only belongeth vnto God: and so haue among-each-other / ascrybed the Vertues of God / vnto the Flesh▪ and drawen the gloryous 
                     Iohn. 8. Rom. 6. c, 8. b. c
                   Freedom of the Children of God / vnto yourselues: so that all your Iudgment is false / and proceedeth out of the Lye, and not out of the Trueth.
               7. Beholde, This false Iudgment proceeding  out of the Wisdom of the Flesh, and out of the crafty and wicked Sight / is com before the Eares of the supreame God: 
                     Gen. 6. a.
                   and thesame hath greeued Him. For-that-cause hath He now in the last tyme ⁏or in this Oldnes of the tyme; taken the righteous Iudgment vnto himself / against all lying Flesh, 
                     Psal. 96.98. a.
                   for to iudg with Righteousnes vppon the Earth: namely, vnto the Good / to a Reward of all Good: 
                     Rom. 2. a.
                   but vnto the Euell / to a Reward of all Euell and Wickednes. And thatsame is the Light of Trueth, and the true 
                     Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                     . c.
                   Iudgment that God hath now in the last tyme / sent into the Worlde / through his Loue / to the Declaring of ye Righteousnes / for to iudg 
                     Psal 96. b Act. 1
                        •
                     . d. Iude. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     b
                   the Circuit of the Earth with Righteousnes / through thatsame Light / vnder the Obedience of y• Loue: and so to make-manifest the Self-wyseones / with their owne Wisdom· the wicked crafty Sights / with their Wickednes and Craftynes· and ye Prudent and Subtilones / with their Prudēce and Subtiltee.
            
            
               
               The III. Chap.
               
                   COm all hether therfore to the righteous Iudgment of my God / O all ye Flesh of the falne Adam. Com and let yourselues be seene in the Light: But what auayleth it / ye shall all now be made-manifest before thesame Iudgment / what ye are. For all your Nakednes ⁏although ye think to couer yourselues; becometh theare layd-bare: and ye cannot also with all your owne Power / 
                     Psal. 76.130. Mala. 3. a. Apo. 6. b
                   byde-standing against the vertuous Nature of the Loue.
               2. Beholde, such a Glistering of Cleernes hath the Loue in her Beawty and Righteousnes / that no Vncleaneone can ⁏with Ioye; endure with her nor with her Comunialtee. For his Wickednes or Craftynes is manifest ther-against, euen-like as it doth also appeere with Many now in this present Daye. Therfore hath likewyse no Flesh of the falne Adam / any pleasure therin: Wherby it is knowen and manifest / 
                     Esa. 40. a 1. Pet. 1. c.
                   how vayne all Flesh of Adam is / in all his Knowledg, Sight, and Wisdom.
               3. Who wil now I pray you / defende the sinfull Flesh any longer / to a Couering of his crafty Nature? Who wil▪ I saye; excuse it / in his Subtil-wylynes? For ther dwelleth 
                     Gen. 6 a 8. c Ier. 17. b. Math 15.23 b Rom. 7. c
                   no Good-thing in it: but nodout / all Hypocrisie and Deceit.
               
                  4. Truly / it shall not be excused / before the  Spirit of Lyfe, neither-yet can men also excuse thesame before Mee / wherby I shoulde alow it in any Thing (let it then appeere as good or holy as it will): but that it is 
                     Rom. 3. d.
                   false and lying / in euery-poynt, and can witnes no Trueth / of any godly Things.
               5. Seing now that the Deceit of the sinfull Flesh, with all his Inclynacion according to his owne Sensualitee / is ⁏euen in Experience by the Deede and Trueth; becom knowe vnto Mee / through the Light / So cannot I likewyse for-that-cause / trust any Flesh of Sinne, neither-yet beleeue nor alow any Iudgment 
                     Deut. 1. b. Iohn. 7. c 8. b
                   that it iudgeth according to the Sight of his owne Eyes, or according to the Hearing of his owne Eares: but am altogether against thesame, as that it is wrong in all his Iudgments that are according to the Sight of the Eyes, or Hearing of the Eares / and iudgeth Gods Trueth falsly and out of the Lye: and I do also testifye against all Iudgment of the sinfull Flesh / that it vseth all his Industry and Prudence / 
                     Phil. 2. c.
                   to the preferment of his Selfnes, and euenso iudgeth to his Self-seeking·
               6. Beholde / so false, lying, and deceitfull· and so full of Dissimulation and Hypocrisie / it is in all his Dooing and Leaueing. Not only in that ⁏which hath an euell showe: but cheefly in thatt wherwith it wil showe itself ⁏with a Shyne of holy Speeches; to be holy and vpright, and wherin it wilbe alowed.
               
                  
                   7. To conclude, ther is nothing but 
                     Psal. 14. a. 58. a. 116. b. Rom. 3. a. b.
                   Lyes and Falshod / in all Flesh of the falne Adam, and in all what is borne out of the sinfull Flesh, and that hath no Lust to performe the Requyring of the gracious Woord of the Lorde: and whatsoeuer it witnesseth, affirmeth, or speaketh / is all to the Couering of his Craftynes, and false Selfnes: let it iustifye or cleere itself then / somuch as it will: let it transforme his Countenance to be so woful-hearted / as it will: let it sobb, let it sigh or lament then / somuch as it will: let it speake then so sweete or flatteringly / as it will: let it testify then his Sight and Hearing / so perfectly as it will: let it also be then so vnderstanding or skilfull / touching ye new Birth· the Loue· the Trueth· and ye Secretnes of God or of the heauenly Things / as it will ⁏if it be not obediently mynded to the Requyring of the gracious Woord and his Seruice; So is it doutles all false, and nothing but Poyson that it speweth-foorth against the vpright Lyfe of the Soule / wherby to 
                     Iohn. 10. a.
                   kill and to spoyle the Peace of the Soule, 
                     Rom. 16. b.
                   and to rende ye Concord of the Goodwillingones towwards the Loue.
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               
                   THerfore / O ye young Children / which are borne out of the Seruice of Loue and out of her Spirit / to the God of Lyfe / to the Lande of his

Glory / together with ye Disciples and on-coming Men / in the holy Vnderstanding of the gracious Woord of the Lorde / Beware of all sinfull and lying Flesh of Adam, and of all Myndes that take-part with thesame, 
                     Rom. 
                     
                        ••
                     . 
                        
                           •
                        . Gal. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        
                           •
                         Col 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . or which do excuse, defende, or alow thesame in his Vanitee and Falshod / To thend that ye do not committ Whordom therwith, nor-yet becom spoyled of the Peace / which ye do inherit vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
               2. For all sinfull Flesh / dealeth in Couerednes and Craftynes / with his Lyes and Deceit: and those that cleaue-vnto thesame, and defende or excuse it for anything that is Vpright / 
                     Act. 7. f.
                   are all Traytors and Imaginers-of-euell towards the vpright vncorrupt Good / which cometh-forth or is witnessed out of the Loue / to an Vnitee of Heart / in the Loue.
               3. Therfore be mistrustfull towards all sinfull  Flesh / as also towards all vnregenerated Men / which turne them away from the Obedience to the Requyring of the Seruice of Loue / beleeue not the Very-best of them / much-lesse / those whom ye knowe to turne-away themselues from vs and our Doctrine vnder the Obedience of the Loue,1. Iohn 2. 
                        •
                     . and to stand-vpp against the Loue and her Seruice, and to vse their Hypocrisie / towards the Comunialtee of Saincts in the Loue. For no Flesh 
                     •
                  that is borne of the falne Adam; 
                     Psal. 143. a▪ Rom. 3 
                        •
                     
                   shalbe 
                     •
                  ounde righteous / when it is iudged according to the Trueth.
               
                  4. For-that-cause let noman com-before mee with any Mynde of the Flesh, for to excuse the sinfull Flesh / how lamentable or wofull soeuer it maketh itself, or how holy and vnderstanding soeuer it appeereth.
               5. Oh, let noman tell me any good or vertue / of the lying Flesh, nor-yet of the vnregenerated Man / which seperateth himself from the Loue and her Seruice: but let eueryone take-heede in the Spirit / to the true spirituall 
                     Iohn. 3. b.
                   Birth of the Children of God, which cometh out of Heauen / to the Beleeuers of the holy Woord of the Spirit of Loue / vnder the Obedience of the Loue: which spirituall heauenly Children of God / are full of all Goodnes and Vertue· and of-one-mynde with Vs / to all Concorde in the Seruice of Loue.
               
                   6. Therfore 
                     Math. 24. c. Mark. 13. c. Luk. 17. c.
                   beleeue no Men of the Earth / which com vnto you out of yt Flesh and Blood of Sinne, and are without the Famyly of Loue: but beleeue the Men of God / which com vnto you out of the Seruice of Loue, and which descend-doune to you 
                     Iohn 1.3. d. 2. Pet. 1. b. 1. Iohn. 1. a.
                   from Heauen / who / are Spirit and Lyfe, and haue had their Rest in the Bosom of the Almighty Father / till vnto this last Tyme. And from thence do they ⁏in the Obedience of the Loue; com agayne now with their God / in Glory, 
                     Esa. 3. b. Iude. 1. b
                   for to bring the Iudgment ⁏with Righteousnes; ouer the Worlde.
               7. Beholde, thatsame 
                     Iohn. 12. d.
                   Iudgment is now kept against all sinfull Flesh. For Hee which

iudgeth righteously / hath sett himself vppon his gloryous Iudgment-seate: 
                     Math. 24. d, 25. d. 2. Tess. 1. a. Iude. 1. b
                   And all his Saincts com with Him / in great multytudes of Hosts, for to possesse the Earth with Righteousnes. For it is geeuen vnto them 
                     Math. 11. c. 28 b Lu
                           •
                        . 10. d. Iohn 
                     
                        •
                     . d
                   by that God / who hath made it all.
               8. For the Prayer 
                     Apo. 6. b
                   of the Saincts is now  hearde, and their God cometh to take Vengeance / to a Righteousnes 
                     Psa 96.98 a Apo. 19. a
                   vppon the Earth, euen-as is written therof / because that the Will of God the Father / may be don vppon 
                     Math. 6.26. c.
                   the Earth likeas it is in Heauen, and that his vpright Beeing with his Saincts / may also beare-swaye thear· the Scripture 
                     Math. 26. f. Luk. 24. e
                  becom fulfilled· and that God may bee all 1. Cor. 15. 
                        •
                     , in all, according to the Promyses.
               9. Beholde, Thatt is Gods Glory, and the righteous Iudgment of my God. Who wil open his Mouth / to speake against thesame? lest he com to shame / in his Tongue.
               10. Therfore shut-too your Mouth / with a Bitt, 
                     Psal. 39. a. Luk. 3. a.
                   that ye fall not through your Tongue: but 
                     Esa. 30. b.
                   in Stilnes / take-heede vnto God, who appeereth and cometh 
                     Iude. 1. b.
                   on the Earth with all his Saincts / in great Glory, euen-as is written therof.
            
            
               The V. Chap.
               WHat hath God to doo with you, or what careth Hee for your Wayling and Lamenting / O ye flattering Tongues, or all yee that wil excuse

or defende the Flesh of Sinne? For beholde, the Lorde shall in thissame Light of the Loue / shame you all in 
                     Psal. 5
                        •
                      
                     a Math. 25. d.
                   his Beholding: and his mighty Hande of Iustice / shall stand ouer you / to a Suppressing of you / till that ye be confounded, and remayne confounded for euermore.
               2. True it is, I haue heard a mighty Crye with a great Lamentation and Waylling / vppon the Earth / wher-through / I was almost mooued to Compassion. But I went alittle neerer to that Howling and Lamenting. And lo / when I considered theron, It was the Flesh of Sinne / that wayled and lamented excedingly / 
                     Apo. 18. b
                   because that his Worthynes mought be nomore of Value, and for that it was nomore esteemed, nor coulde gett any Prayse or Honour anymore, and that God with his Saincts / did only gett the Glory.
               
                   3. But when I vnderstood the Lamenting and Wayling / then was I not mooued to Compassion ouer ye lamenting Flesh of Sinne / as to fauour or defende thesame / in his sinfull Lusts and vnchast Desyres. For it was mynded against God / in all his Lamenting and Wayling: but my Heart was compassionably-bent with the Godhead. For looking-vpon the Falshod and Deceipt of the sinfull Flesh / I hoped to reioyce me in Gods Glory: and so myne Affection stood-bent with the God of Lyfe / to thend that his Glory mought breake-thorow / ouer the Darknesses of Men.

And I coulde not bemoue the Generation of the euel-willing Men / in their Howling and Weeping, because they did not repent. For all their Howling and Weeping was / because they mought nomore vse their Vnrighteousnes and their Pleasure of Whordom and Theeuery / according to their owne Will. And to leaue thesame / was their Payne and Greef which they suffered.
               4. Beholde, thatt is the Reward of the Vngodly / wherin they now at the last / be punished, according to the Woord of our Lord and God. For all Vngodlyons shalbe punished 
                     Sap. 11.12. 
                        •
                     . Apo. 18. 
                        
                           •
                        
                     
                   in their owne Wickednes / wherin they haue liued / according to their owne Lusts.
               5. Do ye Vnderstand this well / O ye Lamenters and Defenders of the Sinful-flesh? Ye do lament the Flesh greatly / in his Wayling, because it fayleth him in his Will or Lusts: but ye do not aboue-al / lament the Goodnes of God, which hath bin forced to suffer from the begining 
                     Apo. 15. a
                   of the Worlde / for the Resistances cause of the sinfull Flesh.
               6. O Ye foolish Lamenters, yee which saye  to the Flesh, and to those which ⁏according to ye Flesh; seeke nothing 
                     Phil 2. 
                        •
                     , but their Selfnes: Oh, how are ye burdened against your owne Myndes and Vnderstandings / and what a matter haue ye to beare, to endure or to suffer! Oh, ye cannot do it: and it goeth altogether euell with you doutles / because ye may not vse your Sensualitee and your Lusts / 

in Freedom: Ah, cast from you all Burdenings / that com vppon you against the Flesh / as also the Seruice of Loue / which is against you in all your Myndes of the Flesh: and take not thosame Burdenings on you: but take-heede to the 
                     Sap. 2. 
                        •
                     . Lusts of your Flesh, and leade your Lyfe according to the maner of the Worlde / for your Peaces cause, and so liue in Freedom / concordablely.
               7. Beholde, such things do the Enemyes 
                     Phil. 3. b.
                   of the true Crosse of Christ speake: wherwith they shewe how well they are contented that the Man shoulde liue in a false Freedom and in a false Concord: and that Christ 
                  ؛the Goodnes of God the Father
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   shoulde still suffer, 
                     Rom 6. a. Phil. 3. b. 1 Pet. 2. c 4 a
                   and be crucifyed and killed: but / to suffer with Him, and to be planted into 
                     Rom. 6. a
                   Him / with his lyke Death / for the vpright Lyfes sake, wherby to inherite the euerlasting Lyfe with Christ / in the s
                     •
                  conde 
                     Iohn. 3. a Rom. 6. a Col. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     b Tit. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     a.
                   Birth from the Death▪ they wil none of thatt: but desyre to liue in the Sinne / 
                     Psal 81. b. Ier 7. c.
                   according to their owne Will or Desyres of the Flesh, and to go-on according to their owe Good-thinking.
               
                   8. Yet do these Lamenters of the Flesh notwithstanding / talke likewyse somtymes / of the Suffering or Crosse of Christ / euenas the Knowledg prefigureth thesame vnto them: but to follow-after Christ obediently therin, and to be partakers 
                     Rom. 6. a Phil. 3. b.
                   of his Resurrection in themselues / to a new Lyfe of their Mynde / thatt do they forsake / because they seeke their

Delyte of Lyfe / 
                     Rom. 16. 
                        
                           •
                        . Phil. 3. c.
                   in the Flesh, and not in God, who is the 
                     Iohn. 4. b 2 Cor. 3. b
                   Spirit of Lyfe himself.
               9. But vnto those that sett all their Consolation of Lyfe vppon God, and which 
                     Math. 19. b.
                   ⁏for the Kingdoms sake of the God of Heauens; do circum
                     •
                  ise themselues in the Obeying of the Loue and her Seruice / cometh Saluation, Peace, and Ioye. For the Kingdom of the God of Heauens / cometh vnto them 
                     Apo. 2
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   with Beawty and Glory: and it shall with his Heate / cause▪ all the Beawty of the 
                     Esa. 40. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   Flowers of the Flesh to wither, and so shall make-manifest the liueing Soules of Righteousnes / with their Garnishing / to an euerlasting Tryumph of the Glory of God, to his Honour, to the Ioye and Peace of his Saincts, and to ye 
                  
                     Esa. 65 b. 2. Pet. 3. b Apo. 21. 
                        
                           •
                        
                     
                   Renewing of the Earth with Righteousnes: whose growing Beawty / withereth not / vnder the Loue: but it remayneth-ouer in the euerlasting Lyfe.
               10. Beholde, my beloued Freendes in the Loue: This wryte I vnto you all / for a Warning from the Destruction / to thend that ye may knowe the 
                     Gen. 3.8. Subtiltee of the sinfull Flesh, and the Perills of thesame / which are hidden in the Delytes of the Flesh: and for that it inought alwayes go-well with you / vnder the Obedience of the Loue, and that ye mought not be deceaued by any Straingers 
                     Pro. 6. c. 7. a
                   or Declyners from the Seruice of Loue.
            
            
               
               The VI. Chap.
               
                   WHerfore / O ye little and young Children / yee which are borne out of the Loue, and be yet 
                     Esa. 66. 
                        
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        Pet. 2. a
                   suckled with the Milke of her Brests, for a Foode of Lyfe / in all Sweetnes / Take-heede ⁏I aduyse you; of the Straingers, and of the Declyners from the Seruice of Loue: Let not the Milke of their Brests 
                     Pro. 5. c. 7. b
                   delyte you, that ye suck not the strainge Brests of the adulterous Whoores, who are growne with childe in Whordom / through their Vnfaythfulnes, Fall, and Adultry / wherunto they haue suffered themselues to be prouoked by their crafty Eyes and wicked Thoughts: and so do bring-foorth the strainge or 4. Esd. 6 c.
                   vngodly Seede vppon the Earth / out of the Lust to their owne 
                     Deut. 12. a.
                   Goodthinking.
               2. Forasmuch then as they do bring-foorth the vnfaythfull and adulterous Seede / out of their adulterous Fruitfulnes / Therfore do they also giue-forth nothing out of their Brests / but Poyson / in steade of Milke.
               3. Heer of beware ⁏ye Deerly-beloued; that ye do not in-any-wyse suck such Whoores-brests, nor receaue any of their Milke / that-ther be no Poyson sucked into your Soules, for the which / ye shoulde be constrayned to wade-thorow or suffer many Paynes of Death / er-euer ye coulde be sounde agayne.

But with submitted Hearts / vnder the Obedience of the Loue / holde yourselues 
                     Math. 10. 
                        
                           •
                        
                      24. b Heb. 12. a
                   constantly to the single and vertuous Nature, which floweth out of the Loue and her Seruice / as an vncorrupt Milke. For with the Loue and her Seruice / ther-is nothing false, 1. Cor. 13. b.
                   euell, nor wicked / neither-yet anything deadly, nor condemnable: but the Fulnes of Lyfe and Peace. And whosoeuer is in the Loue, and standeth submitted to her Seruice / to shewe Obedience / in him ther-is no Euell, Wickednes, nor Craftynes.
               4. But if anyman do imagine any Wickednes  or Euell therof: and that the Wickednes doth euenso gett place in his Heart / against the Loue and her Seruice / Hee veryly is an Adulterer,
                     Math. 5. 
                        •
                     . and committeth Adultry with the Euell, against the pure Wedlock of the vpright Loue.
               5. Thosame Adulterers and Adultrisses / must beare 
                     Gal. 6. 
                        
                           •
                        .
                   their owne Burden or Fault / for their Adultry and Whordom, and be afflicted with Greefs / in thosame Workes of their Whordom, till that they do acknowledg and confesse their Fault / in the Comunialtee of Saincts / among the Children of Loue, and so do submitt them vnder the Obedience of the Loue / to a 
                     Rom. 6.12. a Ephe. 4. e.
                   Renewing of their Hearts or Spirits / To thend that they may euenso be washed and puryfyed / through the Floodd or 
                     Iohn. 3 a Tit. 3. a.
                   Water-fountayne of the Loue / to the Forgiuenes of their Sinnes· and turned-about in

their Spirit / to be innocent Children / that imagine neither Euell nor Craftynes. And whosoeuer then turneth him about in that sort, 
                     Math. 18.19. b Mark. 10. b.
                   to him cometh the Kingdom of Heauens, and the euerlasting Lyfe.
               6. Therfore let our Conuersation 
                     Eph 4. a. b
                   be vpright in the Loue: and let noman knowe nor imagine any Euell, nor any Guyle or Wickednes: but becom in that maner altogether playne or innocent 1. Cor. 14. c
                   in Euell / so shal-ther no Euell nor Deceit be founde among you.
               
                   7. Growe-vp in 2 Pet 3. c
                   the Vertue and in the godly Wisdom, and becom prudent and vnderstanding therin▪ as also Men and Elders with graye Heare. For among those that are growne olde or aged therin / 
                     Eccli. 8.9.
                   is the Wisdom, and the Concordablenes with the Elders in the holy Vnderstanding. Therfore be ye alwayes agreably 
                     Rom. 12. b. 
                     
                        •
                     5 a 1. Cor. 1. a 2. Cor. 12. b. Phil. 2. a.
                   mynded to all Vnitee of Heart in the Loue, and take ye all therin your Delyte of Lyfe.
               8. Also couer not 
                     Pro. 28. b.
                   your Hearts before the Elders in the Famyly of Loue, and let noman deale priuily in anything, nor hyde anything in secret: but let eueryone make-manifest himself as he is: and of all what God hath foreseene 
                     Gen. 1. c. 9. a 1. Tim. 4. a.
                   for good and vpright / from the Begining, and is edifying towards the Righteousnes / let noman be ashamed / in the Comuniattee of Saincts / whose Hearts stande submitted vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
               9. But let not any Contention,
                     Ephe. 4.5. a. 1. Pet. 2. a. 
                     
                        •
                     .
                        •
                     
                   Euell, Subtiltee

to Wickednes, nor any Deceit or Craftynes / be harkened-vnto by you: but let it all be layd-doune among you / vnder the Loue. And the Loue of God the Father / get the Victory in that sort in all your Hearts. Amen.
               
            
            
               The VII. Chap.
               THese Testymonyes, euen-as they  are reuealed vnto me in Heauen / by the holy Spirit of Loue / according to the Sentence of the righteous Iudgment, haue I ⁏out of inclyned Loue; written to the Seruice of you all / my beloued Hearts, and to a Declaring of ye righteous Iudgment / wherby to reueale and make-knowen before you all / that no Flesh of the falne Adam / is vngilty 
                     Iob. 4. b 9 a 2
                        •
                     . a Psal. 143. a.
                   before God, neither-yet hath it any right in his Iudgment / To thend that it may all becom submitted vnder the Loue and her Seruice: and that it may all euenso ⁏thorough the Loue and her Seruice; be 
                     Esa. 65 b. 2 Pet. 
                     
                        •
                     . b
                   renewed according to Gods Trueth / to an vpright Knowledg and Vnderstanding, and to the Amendment and Makeing-wholl of all thatt which is marred or made-euell: and that likewyse through the Loue and her Seruice / all Offenciuenes or Euel-conceaueing of the Flesh / mought be 
                     Ephe 4. c. Col. 3. b.
                   layd-doune· and all thatt which is of God and Christ / restored or brought-to-right: and that all People mought ⁏through the Loue and her Seruice; acknowledg

the Goodnes of God and his Merry, to an euerlasting godly Tryumph of our God, and to the Blessing of all Generations of the Earth, according to the Promyses made to the Fathers.
               
                   2. HEer-with I do salute you eueryone / with a Salutacion of the Loue, yee which haue your fellowshipp with vs / to the Obedience in the Loue: and euenso with Exhortacion to the Good / salute you all one-another likewyse / with a Salutacion of the Loue.
               3. Receaue one-another in-like-maner / with Lessons and Exhortacions to the Loue and her Concord: and let your Hearts be set-at-quyet / through the Loue: and think vpon no other Righteousnes nor Holynes / but vpon thatt which is requyred by the Seruice of Loue, and which bringeth all Loue with it. And all whatsoeuer ye doo and leaue, all 1. Gor. 10 d. 16. b Col 3. b.
                   thatsame / doo and leaue / in the Name of the Loue, or for the Loues sake.
               4. Heer-vnto / becom you all agreeably mynded, as loueing Children in the Loue / then can-ther no Discord nor any Euell nor Offenciuenes / gett any place among you. But your Course-of-lyfe shalbe in the Loue and in Peace: and God shall be with you: and ye shall vnderstand
                     Math. 13. the Iudgments of God and their Secrets. And noman shalbe able to spoyle you of the right Freedom / which we haue in the Loue of Iesu Christ. With which Lyfe of

the vpright Beeing of the Loue / God hath shewed Mercy on vs / to the end that we shoulde liue loueingly, sweetheartedly, and peaceably therin / vnder the Obedience of the Loue. To the which God of Loue only / belongeth 1. Tim. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     b. 6. b.
                   the Honour, and all Laude and Prayse for euermore. Amen.
               
            
            The Ende of the Seuenth Epistle.
         
         
            The Eigth Epistle. A cleere Distinction of the Submission and Vnsubmission in the Spirit: With certen groundly Informations and Instructions. Sēt vnto a Louer of the Trueth / at his hearty Request. Very profitable and seruiceable / to the Knowledg of the Godlynes.
            
               
                  Beholde how that I haue not laboured for myself only. but also for those that desyre Information.
                  Ecclesi. 33.
               
            
            Heer-with be vnto the my Beloued LW / Health and Saluation.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               
               The First Chapter.
               
                  
                  FOrasmuch as Mercy is chaunced vnto mee / thorough the Loue of God the Father / therfore is also my Spirit inclyned to thesame Loue of God the Father. and likewyse to the seruice of my Neighbour: and that altogether to thesame Loue.
               2. But seing the Tymes are now perillous ⁏my Beloued; and that ther are also many Harmes to be feared to ensue / if one shoulde minister the Woord of Lyfe vnto anyman vnforesightfully / Therfore doth it oftentymes seeme perillous vnto vs / to handle, to speake, or to wryte of the Woord of Lyfe, and of his se
                     •
                  ret Clernes / before eueryone that woulde desyre it. For it is not euerymans Matter / to comprehend thesame in his Cleernes or Secretnes: but 
                     Math. 12.13. c. 1 Cor. 1.2. a
                   Theirs / whose Hearts be 
                     Iohn 6. 
                        •
                     
                   stirred-vp ⁏by God; to a Deuont-meditation of the Woord and his Righteousnes, and haue intended Loue and Peace.
               
                   3. For which Causes / we deale with godly Care / in the Seruice of our Neighbour. and are likewyse to consider / what is most-profitable or necessary to be adminis
                     •
                  red vnto eueryone

/ out of the Seruice of the gracious Woord / to thend that he mought by that meanes ⁏without doing him any Harme; be furthered to the good and vpright Knowledg of the true godly Things / through som Seruice shewed towards him by vs, according to that Estrainging wherin he standeth comprehended: but cheefly towards those that with feruencie of Heart / desyre or seeke any Information at our Handes.
               4. And seing that we ⁏through the Light; do beholde the many-maner of Perils in this Matter, as that it is hurtfull vnto Many / to reueale the Secretnes of God vnto them / therfore do not we open the Iewels of the Secretnes of God, or the Secretnes of all godly Things / vnaduisedly or vnforesightfully / before eueryone.
               5. And although likewyse / that many are our Freendes / who also nodout woulde gladly knowe the Fulnes of the Instruction of all Things / yet do not wee oftentymes follow their Will for-al-that / in our Seruice which we shewe on them out of Loue: but do deale with them / in Longsufferance, and with great Carefulnes / 1. Tess. 2. 
                        •
                     . like-vnto a Moother / with her Children, for to be seruiceable vnto them in thatt which is most profitable or needfull for them. For thatt which the one can abyde / the other cannot: and thatt wherby one farethwell, and wherthrouh he is amended / therby

mought another fare euell, and be made worse therthrough.
               
                   6. NOw mought som man saye: One shoulde not of right hyde anything from the Freendes: For ther-is sayde for a Prouerbe: One ought not to lock-vpp any Bread from the Freendes.
               7. It is true, It shoulde be so indeede / if the Stomacks were eueryone so sounde that they coulde endure the Bread in them, or were accustomed to the Taste of Bread.
               8. But seing now that we do perceaue by Experience / that many Stomacks are not accustomed vnto Bread, and for-that-cause growe soone 
                     Iohn. 6. offended / through the 1. Cor 3. a. Heb. 5. b
                   strong Foode of Bread: and that Many of them likewyse / haue receaued or taken no Bread into them for a certen-tyme / to a Foode of Lyfe, but haue swallowed-in somwhat heere-and-thear / out of the Wildernes / in the Darknes / Therfore are also the Stomacks generally defyled / by the Multytude of strainge Meates, and Mens Complexion growen very weake and tender: and cannot therfore 
                     Iohn. 16. b. 1. Cor. 3. a Heb. 5. b.
                   endure the Bread of the liueing Woord: cheefly / because they are nourished-vp with so many-maner of strainge Meates ⁏in the Darke; in the Wildernes. By meanes wherof / their Stomacks haue corrupted their right State serueing to the Taste of Bread: so that they haue no Hunger nor Lust at-all / to 
                     Num. 21. b
                   the Bread of the liueing

Woord· neither-yet any sweete Taste in thesame. For their Lust standeth alwayes bent towards thatt wherunto their Tastes are accustomed.
               9. And thatsame is likewyse the Cause / why the secret Bread of the holy Woord / doth not oftentymes serue for eueryones Stomack.
               10. For one may fynde many Men / for  whom it is much more profitable and better at-the-first / to receaue good Medecine out of the holy Woord / for their vnsounde Stomacks cause, then any strong Meate / to thend that their Stomacks mought be cleansed therby· and accustomed vnto Bread agayne.
               11. Whosoeuer then is com alittle vnto Health, and is yet but weake and tender / to him ther serueth nothing-els at the first / but to receaue Hony 1. Cor. 3. a Heb. 
                     
                        •
                     . b. 1. Pet. 1. a
                   and Milke / out of the holy Woord, to a Sustayning of him in his Weaknes. For he cannot as-yet endure strong Meate.
               12. But when Strength cometh vnto him, and that he can beare the Weaknes of his Neighbour / so doth. it then serue him very-well / to receaue of the 
                     •
                  ec
                     •
                  et Bread of the holy Woord / for a Foode of the strong Lyfe / that he may yet growe stronger· and haue the 
                     Iohn. 10. a.
                   Lyfe in Fulnes: and that nothing may hurt 
                     M
                           •
                        r. 16. b Luk. 10. 
                        •
                     
                   nor lett him for to liue.
            
            
               
               The II. Chap.
               
                   THis wryte I vnto thee ⁏my Beloued; because thou shouldest not stumble or growe-offended at our Littlenes or Childishnes, nor at the Seeming of our Foolishnes / in the Ministration of the holy Woord, nor-yet at our mostholy Seruice of Loue / because it is 1. Cor. 1. b. 
                           •
                        
                     
                   playne· and not according to the Course of the Wisdom of this Worlde· nor of the Scripture-learned.
               2. Notwithstanding, although our Seruice of Loue be playne / yet is it vnto vs / a godly Seruice in the Woord of Lyfe. Which Seruice / wee ⁏out of Courtesie 2. Cor. 4. a. Tit. 3. a
                   and a good Conscience; do minister in the Woord of Lyfe ▪vnder the Obedience of the Loue; to eueryones Welfare and Health of his Soule. namely, 1. Cor▪
                      1. b. c
                   vnto all and ouer all those that beleeue theron.
               3. For truly, in all this our mostholy Seruice of Loue / we do not follow-after the Wy
                     •
                  e of the Worlde / in their Wisdom, nor-yet the high-bosting Scripture-learned / in their Knowledg, nor any Chosen-spiritualtee / in their Holynes, nor any taken-on God-seruices / in their Controuersie: but we witnes the Wisdom that auayleth before God, which seemeth to be a 1. Cor. 
                     
                        •
                     . b
                   Foolishnes before their Eyes / and do make-manifest the vpright Righteousnes and Holynes which God esteemeth: which

seemeth before the Eyes of the Worlde, and before all her Hipocrits, fayned Holyons, and Scripture-learned / to be 
                     Esa. 15. 
                        •
                      
                     S
                           •
                        p. 2. b. 5. 
                        •
                     
                   nothing but Sinne, Vnrighteousnes, or Seduceing.
               4. For in all thissame / all Hipocrites, fayned  Holyons, and Wyse or Scripture-learned ones of the Worlde / haue ⁏through the Bewitching of their Hearts; accounted the Darknes / 
                     Esa 5 c. 5
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                      59. b
                   for Light, and the Light / for Darknes / and grounded all thier Vnderstanding / vppon their Knowledg / in the Darknes: and so haue intangled themselues in many-maner of Prudencies / through their owne Knowledg: and brought the whole Worlde euerywheare / into so many erring Blyndnesses: in-such-sort, that for-that-
                     •
                  au
                     •
                  e / all Vnderstanding of Men / hath corrupted 
                     Gen. 6. 
                        •
                     
                   his Waye, euen-like as all Flesh did / in the tyme of Noe. Therfore is also their Destruction com hard-by.
               5. And seing now that we haue founde-out in the Deede and Trueth / that all manly Vnderstanding hath corrupted his Waye in the Knowledg / So do we likewyse ⁏through the Light of the eternall Trueth; beholde a great Wo and Greefe among Many: 
                     Ez
                           •
                        
                      7. b Luk 19.
                        ••
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   the which is coming euerywhear ouer the Children of Men. And thatt is the great Destruction ouer the manly Generacion / in the Last tyme.
               6. For the Destruction hath taken-holde of them, and shall make-vp itself to a Destruction

among them, and fall vppon them all speedely. namely, because that their noble Vnderstanding / hath forsaken 
                     De
                           •
                        t. 32. 
                        •
                     
                   the liueing Beeing of God· and intangled itself with so many-kyndes of ignorant Knowledg or Good-thinking: so that the Children of Men haue therthrough / plucked 
                     I
                           ••
                        
                      23. f. g
                   a heauy Burden vppon their owne Necks / to their Destruction. Which Burden also / they shall not be able to beare nor accomplish; but must perish therin.
               
                   7. Heerwithal goeth the Man burthened, combered, and greeued / and cannot fynde the
                     Math. 11. d
                   Refreshing of his Soule / in the Knowledg of his corrupt Vnderstanding, although he notwithstanding seeketh it therin. He thinketh to fynde the Lyfe / in the Knowledg of his corrupt Vnderstanding: but thesame Knowledg / 
                     Gen 3. a
                   is nothing-els but to a Death and Condemnation vnto him. But the Lyfe in the Loue / is the Saluation and Peace.
               8. Seing now that the Worlde standeth comprehended 1. Iohn. 5. c.
                   in the Destruction of the ignorant Knowledg: the which she doth neither see nor marke / so is therfore the Affection of our Heart / ouer all tho
                     •
                  e and vnto all those / which do see or knowe the Destruction ouer themselues, and which desyre our Seruice / to theobtayning of a godly Knowledg / wherby to be partakers 2. Pet▪
                      1. 
                        •
                     
                   of the godly Beeing of the Loue: and which seeke their Preseruation with vs / in the Loue.
               
                   9. For vnto those afflicted Hearts / do we

shewe our Seruice 2. Cor. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                        
                           •
                        
                        ▪ Tit. 3. a
                   courteously / witnessing vnto them / the Passage to the Lyfe: Wherwith we do meete or com-before them with a good Conscience, against their corrupt Vnderstanding or euell Conscience: and so do reacheout the Hande vnto them / to a Guyding of them into our Comunialtee of Loue and of the good Vnderstanding / To thend that they mought therby / be drawen out of the damnabl
                     •
                   
                  
                     Esa 47. 
                        
                           •
                         Apo 1
                        •
                     . b
                   Plagues of the vnbeleeueing and insensible Worlde· and to an Health in their Soules / wherby to serue and to liue-vnto our 
                     Luk. 1. g
                   God ⁏with Them; concordably / vnder the Obedience of the Loue ⁏with a cleane or vndefyled Conscience; in all Loue / as being free or vnbounde from all Diuisions or Schysmes, and vnbewitched from all chosen and counterfeyt God-seruices and false Holynesses.
            
            
               The III. Chap.
               BEholde ⁏my Beloued; this haue  I written for the Answering of thy Letter / as meeting with thee, and giueing thee to vnderstande therwithal / how erring-blynde the Children of Men are growne in these last Tymes. Not only the Worlde / that liueth in Wyldnes and in Bruitish-sort: but cheefly / those that haue chosen them som God-seruices, Righteousnesses, and Holynesses / through the Knowledg of their 
                     •
                  wne corrupt Vnderstanding, or haue counterfeited

them according to the Prefiguration of the Letter: wherthrough Many of them haue made vnto themselues / a wicked and naughty Conscience, by the which / they suffer themselues to be iudged / out of the Darknes: and so do 
                     Isa. 2. a I
                           •
                        r. 
                     
                        •
                     . b
                   feare and serue those Gods which they themselues haue made.
               2. And although they be somtymes rebuked by their euell and darke Conscience / yet be not the Darknesses made-manifest in them for-al-that, neither becom they also any Light: For they cannot / because that their euell and darke Conscience (although it be esteemed for Light and Trueth) is Darknes and Lyes itself. Therfore it is a certayne Testi
                     •
                  ony / that such a Conscience is vntrue / and doth neither iudg right, nor rebuke to Amendment.
               
                   3. But God 
                     Iohn. 1. a. 5. c. 14. a
                   which is the Light and Lyfe itself / is much greater 1. Iohn. 3. c
                   in Power / then the darke Conscience. For He himself / doth ⁏thorough his Light and Seruice of Loue; seperate in vs / the Light / 2. Cor. 4. a
                   from the Darknesses, and so 
                     Iohn. 17 c.
                   sainctifyeth his Name / in vs: and sheweth that He himself / is the Lorde and the right 2. Tim. 4. b A
                           ••
                        
                        ▪
                      10. f
                   and true Iudg / in our Consciences.
               4. Therfore shoulde not the Man take any Iudgment vpon him / out of his darke Vnderstanding or euell Conscience, although the euell Conscience wil seeme to execute the Iudgment / out of the Darknesses: But alwayes to long after som better thing, and to sett the Comfort of his Hope 
                     Rom. 15. a.
                   vppon thatt which

God hath promysed. namely, vppon the Light of Lyfe / administred in the Seruice of Loue / for that he mought euen so by the God of Lyfe ⁏
                     Ephe. 1. a
                   whose Hand-worke he is; be accepted and receaued in the Seruice of Loue / to a Nourtering with Righteousnes: and so mought ⁏to his Saluation; take-heede to the Rebuke and to the nourterable Information / ministred by the Light. namely, through the Seruice of the holy Woord / vnder the Obedience of the Loue. For in that sort doth God rebuke and 
                     Pro. 3. b Heb. 12. a
                   nourter euery Sonne / whom He accepteth or receaueth.
               5. Whatsoeuer then is so rebuked by the 
                     Iohn. 3. c Ephe 5. b
                  
                   Light, thatt is manifest: and whatsoeuer is manifest, thatt is Light: and we vnderstande or knowe / that the Rebuke by the Day-light of the Righteousnes of God / is very profitable and good for vs / to Amendment and to Saluation.
               6. For God 
                     Deut 32. d 1. Reg. 2. a Sap. 16 b Tob. 13 a
                   killeth, and maketh alyue agayne / because He woulde euenso by his Killing / depryue the 1 Cor. 15. f 2. Timo 1. b Heb. 2 b
                   Death of her Power.
               7. He leadeth into Hell, 1. Reg. 2. a Tob. 1
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   and leadeth therout agayne / because He woulde euenso / rende the Kingdom of Hell· and depryue the Hell of her Victory: shewing that Hee only is the Lorde, and hath the Power ouer the Death and Hell.
               8. Beholde, thatt is the Iudgment of the Righteousnes of God, and the Coming of the Lorde Iesu Christ / to our Preseruation, and

to the Saluation of vs / which hope vpon God and Christ / for that the Death and the Hell / shoulde nomore haue any Dominion ouer vs: but that the Lorde only / mought ⁏as our God and King; raigne ouer vs· and wee ⁏as his People; to serue Him 
                     Luk. 1. g
                   in Righteousnes and Holynes / to his Prayse and Glory, and to our Ioye.
               
                   9. Whersoeuer then / God doth ⁏through his Light and Seruice of Loue; execute the Iudgment [namely, as a Death to the Death / 
                     Oze. 13. b 
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 15. f
                   and as a Sting to the Hell / to a Conquering both of the Death and of the Hell] euen-theare is put-on the Incorruption / the Lyfe of the euerlasting Immortalitee / to thend that the Scripture shoulde be fulfilled in the Woord of Lyfe / which God hath spoken in tymes-past by Ozeas / his holy Prophet: O 
                     Oze· 13. b 1. Cor 15. f
                   Death, I was thy Death. O Hell, I was thy Sting.
               10. Heerin haue we to prayse our God, for that Hee ⁏through his Light and Seruice of Loue; prepareth vs the Victory against the Death and Hell. For those are 1. Cor. 15 a
                   the last Enemyes of the Lyfe / from the which / God wil cleanse vs / according to his Promyses.
               11. For the Daye or Light of the Lorde / in his Seruice of Loue and righteous Iudgmēt / is like vnto the Gold-smithes Furnace, and like the Sope of a Laundresse. Beholde, the Furnace of the Gold-smith / 
                     Mal. 3. a
                   purifyeth the Golde in the Fyre. The Sope of a Laundresse / 

cleanseth the Clothes in the Water. Euenso is the Man cleansed also in the 
                     Pro. 17.27. 
                        •
                     . Sap. 3. a Eccli. 2. 
                        •
                     
                   Furnace of Humiliation / in the Daye or Light of the Lorde.
               12. NOw this passed-ouer. I reioyce me  for thy Thankes, for yt thou ⁏as thou wrytest; art not a-little taught and informed / by the little Booke that we haue sent vnto thee. Of the which thou wrytest-ouer vnto mee / that thou vnderstandest som of the Sentences which thou hast read therin.
               13. But ⁏my Beloued; learne to haue a consideration / betwixt a godded and an vngodded Man: and iudg thou accordingly. For in that Pl
                     •
                  ace whear a godded Man standeth, in such a State of thesame Beeing / 
                     •
                  an no vngodded Man holde himself, nor-yet be so. And though that he woulde so, or if that anyone shoulde mooue him thertoo, hee did vnwysely. For an vngodded Man hath no Substance / wherwith he can stand submitted vnto God. He hath 
                     Rom. 7. b.
                   the Will I graunt: but ther-is neither the Power nor 
                     •
                  he Accomplishment / with him.
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               THerfore ought not the Man to  take-on any-thing / neither Submission, nor Vnsubmission. If he be estrainged in the Absent-beeing from

God, and that he knoweth his Estrainging / yet doth not the Knowledg bring with-it any Submission vnto him / in the Beeing of the Estrainging from his God.
               2. Yea, how submitted soeuer he wil seeme to behaue himself / yet is it doutles no Submission: but an Vnsubmission. For the Longing resteth not / 
                     Psa 42· a.
                   for to com to the Beholding of God: and thesame Vnsubmission is vpright and good. And now when the Man is com to the Beeing of his God / by the Obedience to the Seruice of Loue, and knoweth that same in his Beholding / as a Light of Lyfe / Then doth that Beeing / bring-forth the Submission itself. For God is with him, and 
                     Psal. 16. b
                   is alwayes in his Beholding.
               3. If he be in the Kingdom of Heauen / then is God thear also with him: If he be in the Hell / then is he thear well and safe: For God is 
                     Psa. 139. a
                   thear likewyse with him. If he go-about to-and-fro with the Creatures / then is God thear in like-maner with him. And in such an Estate / the Man is euerywhear and in all poynts / submitted vnto his God.
               4. For God is alwayes with him 
                     Psal. 16. b
                   at his Right-hand: and his euer-liueing Beeing / is also a Light still / in his Beholding: Therfore he feareth not. And euenso in the true Beeing / the Submission is vpright and good. And whosoeuer taketh-on another Submission, or if that anyman shoulde think to content himself with another Submission / without

the true Beeing: and so hunteth-after the Submission / he shall not fynde the right Submission.
               5. Wherfore, because that we shoulde not  comfort ourselues with the Vanitee nor with any foolish Submission / the Scripture teacheth vs thus: 
                     Esa. 55· a.
                   Seeke the Lorde / whylst He is to be founde: Call to Him / whyles He is neer-by. I wil be founde (sayth the Lorde / by the Prophet Ieremy) when ye 
                     Ier. 29. b
                   seeke me with all your Hearts.
               6. To thesame doth Peter also exhort the Bretheren of Fayth: 2. Pet. 1. b.
                   We haue (sayth he) a sure propheticall Woord, and ye do well that ye haue regarde ther-vnto / as vnto a Light / which shyneth in a darke Corner / till the Daye breake, and the Morning-light ryse-vp in your Hearts.
               7. BEholde, These Doctrines, and more such like / do all teache the Vnsubmission / thewhyles one is yet in the Absent-beeing from God / because that the Longing towards our God ⁏in Longsufferance; shoulde not ceasse. Therfore noman hath the right Submission, neither is also the Submission promysed to anyman / in the Estrainging from his God: but only in Gods Beeing / the Light of Lyfe.
               8. But thewhyles we do yet walke vppon  the Earth in the Absent-beeing from God / like Geasts 1. Par 29 d Psal. 39 c. 1. Pet. 2. b. Heb. 11. c.
                   and Pilgrimes / so haue we our Comfort ⁏
                     Rom. 15. a
                   in a firme Hope; vpon the Promyses

of God / through his gracious Woord, and do credite God / that He is true in his Woord and Promyses: and do 
                     Rom. 8. c Tit. 2. waight euenso with Patience / vpon the Coming of the Lorde Iesu Christ. Whose Coming / cometh with Light and Cleernes, and with the Fulnes of Lyfe. And so in an assured Hope on the Appeering of Christ ⁏who is coming vnto vs in the Spirit; we haue our Consolation 1. Tess. 4. b. Heb. 10. 
                        •
                     
                   with each-other / thewhyles the deadly Things haue yet captiued vs: and so we 1. Cor. 11. c.
                   confesse the Suffering and Death of Christ / for our Sinnes cause. And euenthus through Fayth / we becom armed likewyse with thesame 1. Pet. 4. a
                   Mynde of the Suffering and Death of Christ, for to be planted into 
                     Rom. 6. a
                   Him with the like Death / vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
               
                   9. And wee which be in-that-sort planted into Christ / with the like Death / do wayte for Him to com 
                     Rom. 8. b Tit. 2. a
                   with a Gloryousnes of Lyfe / ouer the Death / wherby to make vs ⁏which suffer with Him; alyue 
                     Rom. 6.8. 2. Tim. 2. b.
                   with Him likewyse. namely, in the Appeering of his Coming / to the Renewing of our Lyfe / For to inherite euenso in the Resurrection 
                     Iohn. 3. a. Rom. 6. a 1. Cor. 15. e. f Phil 3. b Col. 2. b.
                   out of the seconde Birth from the Death / a sure Confession of the Resurrection of Christ / to our Iustifycation, and to raigne with Him for euer in the heauenly Beeing. namely / ouer Sinne, Death, and Hell / and ouer all the Enemyes of the Lyfe. And thatt is the Gospel of the Kingdom,

                  
                     Math. 28. c Mar. 16. b Rom. 10. b. Apo. 14. which is published in all the Worlde / now in the last tyme, according to the Promyses.
            
            
               The V. Chap.
               FArdermore ⁏my Beloued; thou  wrytest vnto me / that the Hell in processe of tyme / vanisheth-away in thee: but the Hauen cometh not agayne in the Pl
                     •
                  ace of the Hell. In which state (as thou wrytest) thou canst not well somtymes stand submitted, and yet of-right-it ought to be so, like-as thou perswadest thyself or rememberest / that thou shouldest haue learned and vnderstood it so of mee.
               2. For which Cause sake / thou makest an hearty Request vnto me ⁏by Wryting; to informe thee therof: and demaundest of me therwith, and de
                     •
                  yerest an Answer ther-vpon / how I haue behaued myself in the Passingouer or Wading-thorow thesame, for that thou moughtest likewyse follow-after mee.
               3. Veryly, I cannot answere thee according to thy Request / how I haue alwayes behaued myself / in the Making-vp of the euell Conscience and erring Ignorance in the Darknesses. But to shew-forth 
                     Heb. 10. c Iam. 5. Patience / in our Affliction, thatt is profitable and good for vs all: and to haue a firme Hope vpon God / in our Tryall or Temptation.
               
                  
                   4. For veryly / the Tyme cometh, and is com / that the Iudgments of the euell Conscience / shall all be seene and knowen / for Darknesses, and not for Light· for Lyes / and not for Trueth. In like-maner / it shall also be seene and knowen / that the Hell 
                     Sap. 1 b.
                   and Condemnation ⁏which ryseth out of the vnmeasurable lying Beeing, or maketh-vp itself ther-out; are all Lyes and corruptible. For none of all these euell Things / wherwith the Man is 
                     Sap. 11. b
                  punished in Darknes ⁏for his Sinnes cause; hath God 
                     Sap. 1 b.
                   made. Therfore it is all / Death and Lyes / whatsoeuer is not Hee himself, neither-yet that Hee hath made. For all what God hath made / 
                     Gen. 1 a. Sap. 1 b Eccli. 40. a
                   is good: and is euerywhitt / Lyfe and Trueth, to the Blessing and Ioye of the Man.
               5. But if-
                     •
                  o-be now that thou doest not knowe or see all these euell Things ⁏which do tempt or besett the Man; to be Lyes and Darknesses / then art thou yet much-to-weake / for one to talke anything with thee of the Trueth. and as-yet to-ignorant of the Trueth / for to vnderstand anything therof, or to comprehende anything of the Light of Lyfe.
               6. But seing that these euell Things ⁏which are all Lyes and Darknes; do captiue vs, and bewitch our Hearts: and that we haue accounted of them to be somwhat / therfore haue they brought vs to Suffering and Greefe: and do likewyse seeme vnto vs to be somwhat / so long as we do beleeue the Lyes and Darknesses.

But in this Tribulation and Heauynes ⁏in the tyme of our Temptation; let vs shewforth 
                     Eccli. 2. 
                        
                           •
                        . Iam. 5. a
                   Patience / in the Hope of Deliuerance. And thatt is it wherof I haue comoned with thee: But not so playnly as I do now wryte thesame vnto thee.
               7. Now for to be altogether deliuered 
                     Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                     . Rom. 7.8. b
                   or  made-free from these euell Thinges / which are risen-vp in thee, and haue captiued thee / for that thy Soule may escape the Perills / into the which she is brought / through thy defyled Conscience / So is-ther nothing more profitable or furdersom for thee to the Lyfe / then that thou shouldest forsake the dark Obiect / vnder whom thyne Vnderstanding hath stoode captiue: the which thou hast beleeued / to the Wounding of thy Soule: and so ⁏giueing thyne Vnderstanding wholly and altogether 2. Cor. 10. 
                        •
                     
                   captiue vnder the Obedience of the Loue; shouldest only heare, beleeue, and be obedient to the true vndeceaueable Light, and 
                     Pro. 4. a. 5▪ 
                     a
                           •
                        
                     
                   to the Counsaile and Seruice of the holy Spirit of Loue: and so shouldest in thy Spirit / 2. Pet. 1. c.
                   take-heede to the Light of Grace, euenas thesame is now in the last tyme / reuealed vnto vs / in the Woord of Lyfe ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; out of the heauenly Trueth / To thend that thou mayest be renewed in thyne Vnderstanding / to a good Knowledg: and so mayest with a good Conscience / clea
                     •
                  e only to the Seruice of Loue, hearing nomore nor beleeueing anything / wher-with thou

wart before-tyme bewitched in the Knowledg.
               
                   8. When thou hast forsaken 
                     Math 10.16. c Luk. 9.14 c
                   all thissame / according to this maner, wherby to giue eare and credite ⁏wich an humble Heart; to the vncorrupt Loue in her Seruice, and to be obedient therunto / so haue then a good regarde vnto the 
                     Math. 24. c 1. Cor. 15. f. 1. Tess. 4. c
                   Noyse or Sounde of thesame Trump [namely, vnto the Seruice of Loue, and vnto the first Entraunce into his Doctrine and Requyring] To thend that thou mayest euenso vnderstande in thissame Daye of Loue / the Distinction of this last Trump, and what is requyred therby.
               9 For this Daye or Light of Loue / is the Daye which God hath appoynted or ordayned, on the 
                     Act. 17. d.
                   which He wil iudg the Circuite of the Earth / with Righteousnes / because that in thesame mostholy Daye of Loue / it may 
                     Act. 3. c.
                   all be restored agayne / what God hath spoken by the Mouth of all his Prophets / from the Begining of the Worlde.
               10. In which mostholy Daye of Loue / all Soules ⁏which in the Obedience of the Seruice of Loue / do 
                     Math. 5 a
                   hunger and thirst after the vpright and pure Beeing of the Loue; shall obtayne their Saluation and Health: and all Vnderstandings ⁏which giue themselues captiue▪ 
                  2. Cor. 10. 
                        •
                     
                   ther-vnder, and which do not harken nor aske after anything-els; shalbe healed and made-sounde / touching the 
                     Gen. 3 Sap. 16 b
                   But of the destroying Knowledg of Adam, and be brought

to the Vnderstanding of the holy and godly Knowledg / and so shall feele and 1. Pet. 2. a
                   taste liueingly in the Spirit / the mostholy Beeing of the supreame God.
            
            
               The VI. Chap.
               MOrouer ⁏my Beloued; Forasmuch  as thou doest now desyre to knowe som larger Instruction at our hands / then thatt which we haue alredy spoken vnto thee / to thend thou mayest com to the simple Trueth, and so to be partaker of the 2. Pet▪
                      1. a.
                   godly Beeing / Therfore do not I desyre also to withholde thesame from thee: but to figure it foorth vnto thee in Wryting / according to the Gift of the Grace of God / which is chaunced vnto Mee out of his Light of Lyfe, and which is profitable vnto thee to Edification. For-that-cause beholde and consider, and giue eare 
                     Pro. 4. to the holy Vnderstanding.
               2. First-of-al / submitt thyself to the outflowed gracious Woord of the Lorde, wherby to enter obediently into the Requyring of his Seruice of Loue: and so in thy Obeying of the Requyring of thesame Woord and Seruice / take-heede to the Wisdom of the Woord / 
                     Iam. 1. c
                   in the Meeknes of the Loue / in thy Spirit and Mynde: For thesame Wisdom / in the Meeknes of the Loue / is much humbler / then all Knowledg of the Good and Euell / much better

/ 
                     Psal. 19 b Pro. 3. b 
                     
                        •
                      
                     b Sap. 7. a
                   then all Golde and Siluer / and much-more of value / then all precious Stones. Whosoeuer fyndeth her / he hath a costly Treasure: For the Wisdom in the Meeknes of the Loue / is the principall and euerlasting Good, and excelleth it all.
               3. This Wisdom ⁏seing it is of God; 
                     Sap. 7· c Iam. 3. b.
                   is also 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ courteous, and freendly: For it is the true Christ of God, the liueing Woord of the Father, and the euerlasting Lyfe.
               
                   4. Beholde, this is the Lyfe that was with God the Father / from the Begining: 
                     Gen 1 a. Psal 33. a Pro 8. c Sap. 1. b Iohn. 1. a.
                   thorough the which / God hath made all Things: and without thesame / God hath made nothing / that is any-what.
               5. This Lyfe 
                     Iohn. 1. d.
                   is for a Light of Men / to thend that the Man shoulde liue the Lyfe / that proceedeth 
                     Rom. 6. a 1 Pet 4. a
                   out of God. And this Lyfe is in Vs: 
                     Iohn 1. a
                   and we are made through thesame, and grounded or sett ther-vppon / as vppon a liueing Woord 
                     Esa. 40. b 1. Pet. 1. c
                   that continueth for euer: And to thesame Woord in his Seruice / we be all called and bidden / because that we shoulde euenso through his Seruice / beleeue theron.
               6. Thissame was in the Worlde also, 
                     Iohn. 1. b Heb. 1. a
                   and the Worlde was made by thesame: but the Worlde knew it not.
               7. Thissame Woord or Lyfe / doth likewyse beare euery-thing / 
                     Heb 1. a
                   with the Beeing of his Power: and maketh the 
                     Ephe. 1. a.
                   Cleansing of our Sinnes / through Himself.
               
                  8. Beholde, by thatsame hath 
                     Gen. 1. 
                        •
                     
                   God made all Things well / in the Begining: and ther was nothing made in the Begining / of all that God had made / but it was all good. And God did also beholde it all for good.
               9. And so from the Begining / ther was no  euell nor d
                     •
                  mnable Thing / with the Lyfe that is of God: and this Lyfe was vniforme ⁏as one like Beeing; 
                     Gen 1. c Sap. 2. c Eccli. 17. a
                   with the Godhead. And in Beholding it / ther was no Difference: For it was in euery-poynt / godded with God: and so in the Begining / ther was nothing-els but one God, one Light, and one Lyfe.
               10. Out of this Lyfe / did God bring-foorth the Memory or Vnderstanding, 
                     Gen. 1. b 
                     
                        •
                     
                   to be an Help to the Lyfe / to thend that euery-thing shoulde be handled and gouerned well and orderly / by the Memory or Vnderstanding· and by the Lyfe / wher-out God had brought the Memory. Therfore did likewyse the Lyfe / inclyne to the Vnderstanding, and cleaue vnto her: for she was a Light / of his Light, and a Lyfe / of his Lyfe. Therfore was she also the Most-beawtyfull and the Most-delytfulone to the louely Lyfe.
               11. Thewhiles that this Vnderstanding / turned-not-out or fel-not-away from the Life: but did alwayes stand-firme in the Lyfe / for 
                     Gen. 
                     
                        •
                     . b 
                           •
                        
                     
                   an Help to the Lyfe / so was-ther Ioye and Peace with God and the Man: and ther was no Diuision or Middle-wall / betwixt God

and the Man: neither had the Vnderstanding any other Knowledg / but that she liued to the Lyfe, and stood obedient / to the Seruice and Welfare of the Lyfe, and to the Rest and Peace of all Generations of the Earth.
               
                   12. Beholde, this was the former Kingdom of God / full of all pure Beawty / wherin God ⁏before the Man fel-away from Him; was knowen / as a 
                     Iohn. 1. b
                   Lorde in his Glory: and the 
                     Math. 24. a Act. 1. a
                   Setting-vp of thesame Kingdom agayne / those are the Promyses of God the Father. namely, to establish thesame / through his Loue and her Seruice / in the last tyme.
               13. But when the Memory or Vnderstanding turned-away from the Lyfe, taking-vpon-her to knowe somthing / that was not the Lyfe itself, nor that stood grounded in the Lyfe, neither-yet was for an Help vnto the Lyfe / Then did the Vnderstanding mingle herself with thatt which was nothing, or which God had not made: and thatt was the Euell / against the Good, the Lye / agaynst the Trueth, and the Death / against the Lyfe. And thus did the Vnderstanding committ Adultry, and she was inflamed with the knowing of somthing without the Lyfe. And she became subiect to the Vanitee or Thatt which was nothing: and then was the Transgression brought-to-pas, and the Sinne was in-that-sort brought-forth / 
                     Iohn 6. 
                        •
                      17 2. Tess. 2. a
                   as a lost Childe of the Deuill and of the Condemnation.
               
                  14. Beholde, euenthus was the Man captiued in his Memory or Vnderstanding / 
                     Rom. 1. c. 2. Cor. 4 a. Ephe. 4. c.
                   with a blynde Knowledg, or with an Vnderstanding of the Darknesses: which Darknesses are 
                     Iohn. 3. 
                        •
                     
                   beloued of the Man· and taken-on for Couerings 
                     Esa 25. a. 2. Cor. 
                     
                        •
                     . b.
                   or Aperus, to a Couering of the 
                     Gen. 3. a.
                   naked Cleernes of the manly Foorme / which God had created to be 
                     Gen. 1.2. his Image: and so ⁏in the Taking-on of the Couerings; God was nomore for a Light of Lyfe vnto the Man, nor for a Delyte in his Paradise: but for a Dryueing-out 
                     Gen 3. from his Face.
               15. And now when the Man was estrainged  from the Beholding of his God / then was the Lyfe also / nomore for a Light to the Vnderstanding: for the Darknesses had 
                     Exo. 10. c Psal 105. c Sap 17. a
                   captiued her: and ye Lyfe and Trueth was vnknowen / by reason of the Darknesses: and so the Death 
                     Sap. 2. c Rom. 5. c.
                   gott the Vpper-hande.
               16. The Deuill or the Contrary-nature to God / tooke the Vnderstanding captiue in his Bandes: and thus did the Kigdom of Death, of the Deuill, and of Hell / gett his Foorme in the Man / and increased in Preuayling. Wherout all false Spirits 3. Reg. 22. c
                   or Spirits of Lyes / haue had their Coming-foorth / to worke Deceipt and Seduceing: and haue ⁏in sondry maners; had their Worke 
                     Ephe. 2. 
                        
                           •
                        
                     
                   and Errour / in the Children of Men.
               17. And euenthus did the Lye ⁏who is a Father of the Darknesses; gett the Dominion / to the Destroying of the Children of Men: and

the 
                     Esa. 60. a.
                   Earth was filled with Darknes. And the People that were borne vppon the Earth / were all 
                     Rom. 1. c 2 Cor 4. 
                        •
                      
                     Ephe. 4. 
                        •
                     
                   couered likewyse vnder thesame Darknes. For when-as now the Darknes / was growen to be a Middle-wall betwixt the Lyfe and the Vnderstanding▪ and that the Lyfe of God / gaue no Cleernes to the Vnderstanding / then was it all Errour / whatsoeuer the Vnderstanding tooke-on out of the Knowledg. For when the Lyfe stood not for a Light vnto her / then was also the Trueth of God / altogether hidden from her: and she coulde bring nothing-els to the Lyfe / but all deadly Things of the vngodly Beeing.
               
                   18. Beholde, all these Burthens and Calamytees, and all this deadly vngodly Beeing / hath the Lyfe borne / 
                     Esa. 53. a. 1. Pet. 2 c.
                   for the Sinnes cause: and the Man hath bin vtterly 
                     Iohn 1. c. 1. Cor 2. a 1. Iohn. 3. a.
                   ignorant of the Lyfe / by meanes of the ignorant Knowledg which the Man himself hath taken-on: and thesame ignorant Knowledg / is the Darknes and 
                     Esa. 59 a. Ephe 2 b. Col 2. b.
                   Middle-wall betwixt God and the Man, and the destroying Errour / wherin the Man walketh.
               19. Out of which Errour or Wa
                     •
                  es of Darknes / we are called 1. Pet. 2. b
                   to the Light of Lyfe / through the Seruice of the holy Woord of Christ / for that we shoulde 
                     Math. 18. a. Mar. 10. b.
                   turnes vs about from the Errours or Wayes of Darknes· and so becom turned 
                     Esa. 55. b. Ioel. 2. c.
                   to the Light of Lyfe▪ and shoulde nomore loue, heare, nor beleeue the

Darknes: but the Light of Lyfe / in the Obeying of the Requyring of his Seruice, the which ⁏in thesayde Obeying of the Requyring of his Seruice; 
                     Iam. 1. c
                     ▪
                   saueth our Soules / To thend that we mought euenso be brought agayne out of the deadly Things / to the Lyfe of God / in his Glory.
            
            
               The VII. Chap.
               BEholde ⁏my Beloued; for to satisfy  thee in thatt which thou didst request at my hands / so coulde I not keepe secret from thee / this spirituall and heauenly Vnderstanding / wherby to assist thee to the 
                     Ephe. 3. a
                   Fulnes of the secret Ritches of God: and I hope that thou shalt also be well satisfyed with this my Resolution.
               2. And thissame which I haue testifyed vnto thee in wryting / out of an Inclynation of Loue / I haue sent-ouer ⁏by these Bretheren / that are com from thee to vs; to do thee seruice therwith / To thend if God vouchsafe 1. Cor. 3. a
                   his Increase therto / that thou ⁏through my small Seruice; moughtst be furthered alittle to the Lyfe and to the Knowledg of ye godly Goodes / to the Prayse of God, to his Honour and Glory, and to our Ioye.
               3. For out of a fauourable Heart / which I haue to thy Saluation, I haue testifyed thissame thus naked and bare: the which I do not giue-foorth in such naked-maner before eueryone.

But I haue so looked into it for the best / that this is most-profitable and needfull for thee / because thou shouldest vnderstande whervppon the Comfort 
                     
                        •
                     . Pet. 3. b
                   of our Hearts standeth grounded, and wherin thy Soule shalbe wholl.
               
                   4. For the Conclusion or the Somme of all thatt wherof we speake / for to becom godded with God, and to be turned into the principalest Good / is this: That the Man shoulde altogether 
                     Pro. 1.3.4.5 1. Pet 1. b. 1. Ihon. 3. b
                   indeuour himself to the Obeying of the Requyring of the Seruice of Loue: and so ⁏in thesame Obedience; to turne-
                     •
                  waye his Memory or Vnderstanding from all Knowledges that are without the Doctrine of the Seruice of Loue and the true Lyfe, or which God hath not grounded or foormed 
                     Gen. 2. a. Sap 1. b.
                   in the Lyfe / from the Begining: and although they do still dayly assault him / yet let him not in-any-wyse heare nor beleeue them, as to account anything of them: but let him becom quyte turned-about 
                     Math. 18. 
                        
                           •
                         Mar. 10. to a simple Beeing: and so labour dilligently after the 1. Cor. 13.14 Col. 3. b.
                   vertuous Nature of the Loue, till that the Loue haue a Shape in him.
               5. Beholde ⁏my Beloued; heerin shall the Man take his 
                     Math. 16. c. Luk. 9.14. c.
                   Crosse on him, and euenso to suffer with Christ 
                  
                     Rom. 8. b. 2. Tim 2. b. 1. Pet. 2. c. 4. a
                   obediently / in the Seruice of the holy and gracious Woord. namely, to be planted into Christ / with his lyke Death of the Crosse· and baptised or washed in his 
                     Rom. 6. a Phil. 3. b. Col. 2. b.
                   Death▪ and so in that sort / to walke,

passe-thorow, or wade-ouer the small 
                     Math. 7. b. Luk. 13. c.
                   Waye that leadeth to the Lyfe.
               6. After this maner / euenas I haue heere  witnessed vnto thee, let vs with willing Hearts / be 
                     Iohn 15.17 b. Rom. 6.8. a. Ephe. 3. b
                   incorporated-vnto and 1. Pet 2. c.
                   follow-after Christ: 
                     Math. 10.16 c. Mat. 9.14. c.
                   forsake all whatsoeuer meeteth vs agaynst thesame / out of the Darknes▪ and so stand submitted simply and obediently / vnder the Seruice of Loue, till that the Lyfe ryse-vp 
                     Esa. 58. b. 2. Pet. 1. c
                   vnto vs / as a Light, and that the Vnderstanding do flowe ther-out vnto vs.
               7. Wherfore, To thend that we mought com 
                     〈◊〉
                   our right fatherly Inheritance / so haue we to forsake and to hate it all / for Christes sake. namely, all the 
                     Ephe. 6. b. 1. Pet. 5. a.
                   Assaulting and Temptation, as likewyse all the Spirits of the Knowledg, who ⁏as if they were 2. Cor. 11. b Ephe. 6. b.
                   Lights; haue their Worke in the 
                     Ephe. 2. a
                   Children of Vnbeleefe / Because that they do beleeue the Knowledg as a Light: and not the Lyfe, 
                     Iohn. 1. 
                        •
                     . which is for a verytrue Light / vnto all those that beleeue theron.
               8. Therfore let vs take-heede 2. Cor. 6. a
                   to the acceptable Tyme / wherin God doth illuminate vs. For in extending Mercy / He 
                     Exo. 
                     
                        •
                     3. b Rom. 9. b.
                   sheweth Mercy on vs: and leadeth vs from the Death / 
                     Psa. 56. b. 116. a.
                   to the Lyfe, euen to the Sheapherd 1. Pet. 2. c
                   of our Soules.
               9. HEer-with ⁏my Beloued; I do hartely  salute thee / with a Salutation of the Loue: and see that thou ⁏with an humble Heart; do giue a regarde vnto thatt which I

wryte vnto thee, and ponder well the Sentences therof. For they do poynt thee 
                     Pro. 4. a.
                   to the Lyfe.
               10 And if thou doest yet desyre larger Instruction at my hands / then wryte ouer vnto me. I do alwayes ⁏for the Loues sake; proffer myself willingly to doo thee Seruice / in all what I may in the Lorde / to thy Edifying.
               11. Farewell: and sett thy Comfort wholly and altogether / on the Loue. And salute me with a Salutation 
                     Rom. 16. b 1. Cor. 16. c▪
                     
                   of the Loue / to the Bretheren and Sisters that are with thee, which do submitt them with humble Hearts / vnder the Obedience of the Loue. And the Comunialtee in the Loue / that is heere with Vs / doth likewyse salute you all hartely with the Loue.
               12. The Vnitee of Peace 2. Cor. 13. b. Ephe 4 a. Col. 3. b.
                   be alwayes among you all: And the Loue of God the Father / take the Victory in all your Hearts. Amen.
               
            
            The Ende of the Eigth Epistle.
         
         
            The Nynth Epistle. Of the Seruices and Ceremonyes of the Christians and of the Vnchristians, and of the right and

false Vce of them: with certen groundly Informations and edifying Instructions. Written and sent vnto a Louer of the Trueth / at his Request.
            
               
                  Exercise thyself in Godlynes: For bodely Exercise [which stretcheth to the Outward / that concerneth the Nature] profiteth little. But the God-seruice [which stretcheth to the Inward and Spirituall, and to the true Godlynes] is profitable to all things: and hath the Promyse both of this Lyfe, and of thatt to com.
                  1. Timo. 4.
               
            
            
               The First Chapter.
               
                  THe Loue of God  the Father ⁏through the Reuealing of the Coming of our Lorde Iesu Christ; be with thee / my Beloued: and 
                     Ephe. 1. b. 3 b.
                   illuminate thy Spirit to a true Knowledg of the Lyfe / in the Spirit / wherby thou mayest ⁏with a right Discerning; see-into and knowe liueingly ⁏according to the Spirit; the secret 
                     Sap. 9. b Rom. 11.
                        •
                     2.2 Counsayle and Will of God / To thend

that thou mayest iudg 
                     Iohn. 7. c
                   according to the Trueth / with a right Iudgment. Tha
                     •
                  t graunt vs the almighty Lorde / through his Loue. Amen.
               
               2. My Beloued: Our Fauour out of the Seruice of Loue ⁏to thy Saluation; standeth alwayes willingly-bent towards thee, for to be seruiceable vnto thee / to thy Edifying, and to a good Knowledg of the true Light (For that thou mayest be illuminated with the Illumination of the Cleernes of God, which ⁏out of the Grace of his Loue; is reuealed
                     Rom. 16. c Ephe. 1.3. a Col. 1. c 2. Tim. 1. b
                   and appeered vnto vs in the Spirit, according to the Promyses of God the Father) and with Wryting / to rea
                     •
                  he thee the Hande to thesame / according to thy Request, to a Gyding of thee into our holy Comunialtee / vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
               
                   3. In which Comunialtee / wee haue our Fellowshipp 1. Iohn. 1. a
                   with God the Father, and the Lorde Iesu Christ / in the euerlasting Immortalitee: wher-through all 1 Cor. 15. f
                   Corruption, and all 
                     Esa. 25. a. 2 Cor. 3. b.
                   Couerings, Middle-walles, 
                     Esa 59. a Ephe. 2. b.
                   and 
                     Psal. 146. b
                   Bandes / be taken-awaye: wher-in all Patterns, Images, Shadowes, and Figures / do 
                     Col 2. b Heb. 9.10. ceasse: and wher-in ther is nothing-els behealde / but the euerlasting 
                     Heb. 12. c
                   vndisturbable Kingdom / full of all Power of God / full of Lyfe, Loue, and Peace / full of Cleernesses 
                     Math. 24. d 25. d. 2. Tess. 1. a.
                   of all the Holyons and Children of God / and full of all heauenly Treasures 
                     Col. 2. a.
                   and godly Ritches / euen-as God hath in tymes-past / 

promysed to com in Glory, for a righteous Iudgment vppon the Earth.
               4. O thou Beloued: Forasmuch as we haue shewed our Fauour of Loue on thee ⁏with Seruice and Assistance; to these heauenly 
                     Ephe. 1. b 2. a. 3. a Col. 1. 
                        
                           •
                        . 2. a.
                   Ritches in the eternall Beeing of Immortalitee / So haue we now the second-tyme / receaued Wrytings from thee: and haueing perused-ouer and considered of them ⁏so much as we can; we do vnderstand therby ⁏according to the Mencioning of thy Wrytings; that thy Opinion or Conceaueing standeth towards vs, or thou shouldest seeme to haue vnderstood so by Others / that we shoulde not vse the Christian Ceremonyes, or shoulde account them to be vnprofitable.
               5. No ⁏my Beloued; we are not so presumptuous  / that we shoulde not acknowledg all Gods Ordinances ⁏in their right Foorme or V
                     •
                  e; to be good 
                     Eccli. 39. c
                   and profitable / being ministred in their due tyme. Yea, we esteeme them very worthy and commendable in their Seruice, so farr-forth or to such an ende as their Seruice reacheth: the which we haue sufficiently witnessed ⁏with sencible Distinction; before all Vnderstandings / in the Glasse of Righteousnes.
               6. But ⁏my Beloued; if thy Heart shoulde yet stande captiued vnto anything of thatt which hath had his Fore-going (the which also had the Ministration of his 2. 
                        
                           •
                        or. 3, a.
                   Cleernes to the to-coming Daye of the Reuealing of the

Coming of Christ: that is, till that the Refreshing shoulde appeer 
                     Act. 3. c▪
                     
                   from the vncouered Face of God / for a gloryous Kingdom of God, and for a Ioye and Peace of all the Saincts of God / in the euerlasting Lyfe) so consider then / by Whom, and out of what Spirit / the Christian-ceremonyes are ministred / by the Illuminated, or by the Vnilluminatedones: out of the Letter of the Scripture, or out of the Woord of Lyfe.
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               
                   SEing now then that many Instituters of Ceremonyes / do minister ye Office of Ceremonyes / out of the Prudence of their owne Vnders
                     •
                  anding, or out of 
                     •
                  he Knowledg of the Letter / altogether to Controuersie: and haue not receaued the Office of their Ministration / through the Woord of Lyfe / Veryly, so is likewyse their Office of Ceremonyes / no 
                     Ier. 23. b. 27. a. 29 a.
                   Commaundement of God, nor-yet their Seruices / any christian Ceremonyes. For those Scriptur-learnedones do setfoorth the Ceremonyes ⁏which they administer for christian Ceremonyes; out of their owne Opinion and 
                     Ier. 23. b.
                   Good-thinking: and therfore is also their Office against Gods Commaundement. For they are vnmeete to the Seruice of the Lorde / which God esteemeth-of: for they knowe not his 
                     Psal. 95. a Sap. 5 a 
                           •
                        eb. 3. b.
                   Wayes, neither do they knowe the Waye of

                  
                     Psal. 14. a Psa 59 b Rom. 3. b
                   Peace: but they are blynde, dumme, and deafe / thouching the Lyfe that proceedeth out of God: and so in their Seruices / are 
                     Math. 15. b▪
                      23 b Luk 
                     
                        •
                     . d
                   Blyndeguydes: and do likewyse leade the People into Captiuitee / with the Bandes of their Blyndnes.
               2. They breake not the 
                     Iohn. 6. c.
                   Bread of Lyfe vnto the People: they baptise not also in the 
                     Math. 28. b
                   Name of the Father ⁏who is the liueing God; nor in the Name of the Sonne of God ⁏who is the true Light and Lyfe of his Father; nor-yet in the Name of the holy Gost, who is the heritable 
                     Ephe. 1 b
                   Paune of the Godlynes.
               3. Forasmuch now veryly / as these holy spirituall  Ritches are not among them / therfore do they not likewyse keepe 1. Cor. 11. c
                   the Supper of Christ / according to the Trueth: For the Bread 
                     Iohn. 6. d
                   from Heauen / is not with them. For-that-cause also / they knowe not the Woord of Lyfe, nor the Spirit of Agednes 
                     Ephe 4. c.
                   or of the Man Christ: nor they 
                     Esa 40. b Sap. 9 b Rom. 
                     
                        ••
                     . 
                        •
                      1. Cor 2. b
                   vnderstand not his Death, 
                     Rom. 6. a Phil. 3. b.
                   nor his Resurrection, nor the Counsayle of God, nor-yet the Wisdom, nor the Christianitee.
               4. Seing then that they haue not receaued the Bread of Lyfe fro
                     •
                   Heauen: neither are 
                     Ier. 14.23. c
                   sent by God nor by Christ: and are Straingers from the secret Counsayle of God: and vnderstande 
                     Sap. 9. b 1. Cor 
                     
                        •
                     . b.
                   nothing-at-all of the godly Things / How shoulde they then be able rightly to minister the Beginings 
                     Heb. 6. a
                   of the christian Doctrine, or the Christian-ceremonyes / wherwith

the vpright Righteousnes is requyred?
               
                   5. Veryly, they haue not the louely Feete of the 
                     Esa. 25. b. Nahu. 1. b. Rom 10. b
                   Messengers / which com from the Hill of the Lorde: they bring also no good Message: they publish not the Peace: neither do they likewyse make-manifest the Saluation that auayleth before God: but they are quyte darkened in their Vnderstanding / through 
                     Rom. 1. c. Ephe. 4. c.
                   the Blyndnes of their Hearts, and through the Vnbeleefe that is in them. Therfore are they all likewyse / Ianglers, Stryuers, and Contenders against one-another / for the Ceremonyes and for the litterall Scriptures cause: and do make among each other / Disturbance and captiued Consciences, chooseing priuate 
                     Rom. 10. a Col. 2. c.
                   Righteousnesses vnto themselues / according to the Good-thinking of their owne Hearts.
            
            
               The III. Chap.
               
                   FOrasmuch then / as that the Kingdom of Peace / is ⁏out of Grace; 
                     Math. 11. c 13. c. 1. Cor. 2. b. Ephe. 1. b. Col. 1. c.
                   reuealed and geeuen Vs to see-into in the Woord of Lyfe / through the Loue of God the Father / Therfore is not the Counsayle of God vnto vs now / to take-in-hand nor to vse anything of thatt which is past / according to Mens Imagination.
               2. Yet do we well perceaue this / that the former Seruices ⁏at that tyme when they were ministred through the Woord of Lyfe, and vsed out of the Trueth; were profitable nodout

/ vnto Saluation, and serued for an Hand-reaching 
                     Gal 3. c. Heb. 6. a. 7. b
                   or Gyding-in of the Little or Youngones of Vnderstanding / to the Woord of Lyfe. Howbeit / now it is also well knowen vnto vs / that many Scriptur-learnedones do now striue and contēde their-about / in their good-thingking Knowledg / and vse much Disputing and Arguing about them. And thatt woulde not God haue: 1. Cor. 7. b.
                   For we are called vnto Peace.
               3. If wee then shoulde likewyse bring-in and  vse the former Seruices ⁏which are passed-thorow; according to the Order and Opinion of the contentious Setters-foorth of Ceremonyes or Scriptur-learnedones: and shoulde not declare the Requyring of the right Seruices and Ceremonyes / So shoulde wee haue then to stryue, to contende, and to dispute with Them.
               4. But no, thatt is not our Seruice. Wee haue all our Regard / to note what a louely Beeing in the Peace / the Word of Lyfe holdeth before vs / as a Light: and do follow his Commaundement 
                     Iohn. 6. d. 1. Tess 4. a
                   and Will: and do labour after the attayning to thatt which the Ceremonyes do requyre, or thatt wherunto they were ministred in tymes-past / To thend that our Seruice (wherunto God hath called vs in these last Dayes / through the 2. Timo. 1. b Tit. 1. a.
                   Reuealing of the Coming of the Lorde Iesu Christ) shoulde not be darkened 2. Cor. 6. 
                        
                           •
                        
                     
                   with any Intanglement.
               
                  
                   5. For God woulde not yt anyman shoulde stryue or contende for Seruices, nor-yet for Ceremonyes: but that eueryone shoulde bow 1. Pet. 5. a.
                   and submitt himself vnder the Obedience of the Loue / our mostholy God-seruice: and shoulde receaue the Administration of the Counsayle of God / for a Lyfe of Saluation: follow-after 
                     Pro 4. b. 5 a 2 Timo. 3. b.
                   thesame Counsayle: and so shoulde ⁏out of the Beginings of his simple Chyldhod; increase in the christian Doctrine or Ministration of the Loue▪ or grow-vp therin 
                     Ephe. 4. c.
                   to the Age of the M
                     •
                  n Christ: that is, till that the Loue haue a liueing Foorme in him: not looking-about after thatt which is past, but haueing regard 
                     Phil. 3. b.
                   vnto thatt which is to com: that is, to the Inheritance of the Peace / to the Saluation of the Soule.
               6. But if anyman be mynded heer-against, or resteth self-wyse: and wil alledg much out of the Scripture / with his darke Vnderstanding / hee shall burthen his owne Conscience, intangle his Senses and Thoughts, and not fynde the Refreshing of his Mynde, nor the 
                     Act. 3. 
                        
                           •
                        
                     
                   Comfort of his Soule.
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               
                   FArdermore thou testifyest / that thou vnderstandest not certen Sentences which are rehearsed in the Testimony of the Mediation of Christ: and seemest to affirme ther-out / that thatt which the Prophet Esaias 
                  
                     Esa. 7
                        •
                     .11. hath spoken of

                  Christ / shoulde be only of Christ / that was to com 
                     Math. 1. 
                        
                           •
                         Rom. 1. a. 1. Tim. 2. 
                        
                           •
                        .
                   in the Flesh.
               2. Thatt is suerly very-right: But not as thy Mynd conceaueth it. Therfore consider of the Meaning: and vnderstand what I wryt vnto thee. For this do I testifye vnto thee as a Secret of God, that the Woord of Esai / is a liueing Woord of God.
               3. So consider then ⁏thou Beloued; yt Gods  liueing Woord / is an euerlasting Beeing / which was 
                     Heb. 13. 
                        
                           •
                        .
                   in the Begining, which is now, and which shall com.
               4. Whersoeuer or vnto Whomsoeuer Gods liueing Woord hath a Breaking-thorow / thear doth then thesame Woord / witnes of Christ / according to the Trueth: And whatsoeuer it doth then speake of Christ 
                  ؛
                  
                     Iohn. 3. 
                        
                           •
                        .
                   the euerlasting Day-light
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   / thatt doth it not speake / that thesame Christ is then begining, nor-yet then ending: but thatt Christ of whom it then speaketh / Hee was in 
                     Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     a.
                   the Begining: and is likewyse then present, 
                     Iohn. 9. c.
                   euen-as ye Woord speaketh of Him. And vnto all Those / which haue not yet receaued the Woord, neither that it is 
                     Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     e.
                   declared vnto them, Christ is likewyse for to com. And not otherwyse. It is verytrue.
               5. All what Esaias speaketh of Christ, thatt  speaketh hee 
                     Esa. 7.9.11. as present / who notwithstanding / was in the Begining: who likewyse hath 
                     Esa. 53. 
                        
                           •
                        . 1 Pet. 2. c
                   suffered for the Sinne of Adam. Who was euenso 
                     Iohn. 1.2. b Act 2 c. 10. e 1. Cor. 15. a
                   reuealed likewyse after-that / in the Tyme that was to com.
               
                  6. Euenthus is Christ in all poynts / 1. Cor. 15. c.
                   the First, and also the Last: who in his Coming / is manifested 2. Tess. 1. b 1. Timo 3. b 1. Pet. 1. b.
                   gloryously in Power, according to the Promyses.
            
            
               The V. Chap.
               
                   ALso thou desyrest a Resolusion of mee, Whether yt yee likewyse among yourselues / may ⁏with Speakable-woords; informe one-another to the Knowledg ⁏thewhyles ye are not yet com to the Beeing that is spoken-of; and may admonish each other therunto with Reuerence: and so may exhort-one-another for to com to the vertuous Disposition and Nature of God.
               2. I can but meruell that thou demaundest that Question of me. For all our Doctrine, Hearts-lust, Will, and Desyre is (like-as I haue also talked with thee therof) that all Bretheren and Sisters which are comprehended with vs vnder the Obedience of ye Loue / in one Fayth· and entred into the first Schoole-rule of the christian Doctrine of ye Seruice of Loue, or which submitt them ther-vnder / shoulde ⁏with Dilligence and Affection to ye good Beeing; assist 
                     Rom. 15. b. 1 Tess. 5. b. Heb. 10. c.
                   and exhort one-another to thesame. as-likewyse to the Knowledg that is the right Knowledg / which stretcheth to the Loue and to the Obedience of her Seruice: and so with Reuerence 
                     Rom. 12. b. Phil. 2. a. 1. Pet. 5. a.
                   to admonish each-other: giueing the Honour to the Elders in the holy Vnderstanding,

as Fore-goers of the Congregation / to the good Beeing:
                     Phhil. 2. c. 1. T
                           •
                        ss. 5. b. 1. Tim. 5. b. Heb. 13. b. vnto whose Woord or Exhortation / ye shall also ⁏to a Seruiceablenes of the Loue, and to the Saluation and Peace of the Congregration; giue-eare / with Deuotion to the Good, and with Longsufferance / to thend that noman speake rashly: but 1. Cor. 14. 
                        •
                     
                   orderly and peaceably, to the Edifying of each-other.
               3. Beholde, thatsame ⁏as is sayde; is our  Will and Counsayle vnto all those yt heare vs, and submitt them vnder the Seruice of Loue.
               4. If-so-be then that thy Heart and the Heart of those that are with thee / haue a Lust to the good Beeing / then deale in this maner among eath-other: and tarry one for another: and let your Woords be loueing:
                     Rom. 12. b. Col. 4. a. 1. Pet 3. 
                        •
                     . and talke dayly with each-other / of the Peace: and so increase in the vertuous Nature of the Loue.
               5. Thus doing, the christian Ceremonyes shall haue their right Ministration among you according to the Trueth / to an 
                     Iohn. 17. b. Ephe. 4. a.
                   Vnitee in the Loue. For thatt is it which God requyreth. And so shall ye increase from the 
                     Math. 18. a.
                   simple Childhod of the spirituall Generation, and grow-vp to the Age of Christ, 
                  
                     Ephe. 4. 
                        •
                     . or to the Perfection. But 
                     Gal. 1. a. 5. b.
                   intangle not your Consciences / among each-other.
               6. Let the Eldest in the holy Vnderstanding / informe the Youngones, and serue them with Foode 
                     Math. 24. c. Ephe. 6. a. 1. Pet. 5. a.
                   of Nourishment / ther-after as they can beare it.
               7. Let the Strong go-before 
                     Rom. 15. a. 1. Cor. 9. c. Gal. 6. a. 1. Tess. 5 6. the Weakones:

and help to beare their Burden / in their Greefe.
               8. The Good-willingones to the Loue / ye shall not greeue with any Burdening. but shall holde-foorth all Loue and Peace before them.
               
                   9. To the Vnwilling and 2. Tess. 3. Slothfulones to the Obedience of the Woord and his Trueth / ye shall holde-foorth the right Obedience of the Trueth / shewing them that they are not 
                     Rom 8. b.
                   Debtors to the Euell, nor to the slothfull Idlenes· but vnto God: If they then becom good-willing to the Loue and her Seruice / with all Dilligence, then are their 
                     Iam. 5. c.
                   Soules wonne.
               10. But the Blaspheamers, 1 Timo 6. a 2 Timo. 2 c.
                   
                  
                     •
                  he Contenders with the Scripture, and all 
                     Pro 
                     
                        •
                      
                     b. Esa. 5 c.
                   Self-conceited-wyseones, together with those that turne them away 1. Iohn. 2. b.
                   from Vs and our Doctrine, and besydes thesame / bring-in or cause Offence: and so do make 
                     Rom. 16. c.
                   Breache or Diuision / ye shall let-passe, and not deale▪ anything-at-al with them, till that they do see or / knowe their Fault, and haue gotten a conuerting Heart to our godly Doctrine· and to the vertuous Nature of the Loue: and so are wel-mynded with Vs / 
                     Iohn. 17. c. Ephe. 4. a.
                   to the Vnitee of Heart in the Loue, and do submitt them vnder the Loue and her Seruice / to shewe concordable Obedience.
               11. According to all this maner / let vs dayly ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; obserue and vse such things, to the Prayse of our God, and to our Peace and Saluation / and let vs comfort the 1. Tess. 5. b.
                   Feeble-mynded and Sorrowfulones / with godly Exhortacions. For thatt is the

Loue which we ought to haue one towards another / through the Loue of God the Father, wherwith He hath shewed Mercy on vs.
            
            
               The VI. Chap.
               HEerwithal my Beloued ⁏as with  this small Instruction; be thou therin content for this tyme. I hope that thou shalt also be well satisfyed therwith.
               2. And if thou doest ⁏with Deuotion towards God; looke into this Instruction / according to the Trueth / then knowe I well / that our Loue and Fauour shewed vnto thee / shall breede in thee no Dispiseing or Contrary-sight against thesame that is ministered vnto thee: and thou shalt likewyse wel vnderstande / that we do not account the Seruices of the christian Ceremonyes / vnprofitable, nor-yet in vayne. but do esteeme them of great Value / in their right Vee.
               3. But veryly, the Seruices and Ceremonyes of ye Vnchristians and of ye Straingers / which are 
                     Rom. 1. c Ephe. 4. 
                        •
                     . darkened in their Vnderstanding, and estrainged from ye Light of Lyfe (let them then take-on thosame out of their owne Imaginatiō, or out of their Knowledg which they frame out of the Letter) all those do we account vnprofitable and in vayne / Yea, for an harmfull Institution, and for an arrogant 
                     Ier. 5. b 
                     
                        •
                      
                     a. 14 b. 23 c
                   Presumption against Gods Commaundement. The which is an Abhomynation 
                     
                        
                           •
                        sa 1. b. Luk. 16. b. Tit. 1. b
                   before the Epes of our Lorde and God.
               
                  
                   4. But the Seruices and Ceremonyes which God esteemeth, which be ministred out of his Light and Lyfe / in the Seruice of Loue / according to his owne Commaundement / those are acceptable vnto God: and are 
                     Rom. 1. b
                   to the Saluation and Peace of the Beleeuers of ye Woord. For the vpright Godlynes, and the true Light of Lyfe of the godly Cleernes / is made-manifest in thosame Seruices.
               5. And although that they ⁏according to the outward Action; are not like vnto the Ceremonyes of the contencious and vnilluminated Scriptur-learnedones ⁏wherwith they stryue and contende; or be not vsed after that maner / yet are they notwithstanding ⁏before God; agreeable to the Seruices and Ceremonyes which God hath willed and commaunded, and which auayle before Him.
               6. Thewhiles then that the Childhod ⁏or the Youngnes of Vnderstanding; in the Inheritance of the Lorde / doth 
                     Gal 4. a.
                   yet remayne / so are the Seruices and Ceremonyes (which be ministred by the Elders in the holy Vnderstanding ⁏through the Light of Lyfe; vnder the Obedience of the Lawe, or vnder the Obedience of the Beleefe, or vnder the Obedience of the Loue) as 
                     Gal 4. a.
                   Tutors and Keepers vnto all Littleones of Vnderstanding, wher-through they receaue Assistance, till that the Daye com-on vnto them, 2. Pet. 1 c.
                   and that the Light of Lyfe ryse-vp in their Hearts / who as-then, haue ⁏thorough the Light of Lyfe and his Seruice of

Loue; exercised Myndes / for to 
                     Heb. 5. b.
                   discerne ⁏thorough thesame Light; the Good and Euell, the Lyfe and Death, the Preseruation and Destruction: and so to be meete to all good Exercises.
               7. When they now are com to this State / so  are they as-then nomore Childrē or Littleones-of-vnderstanding / in the holy Vnderstanding, to whom the Hande must be reached with Seruices and Ceremonyes, and that must be informed or taught to the Enterance into the holy Vnderstanding, or to the Beginings 
                     Heb. 5. b.
                   of the christian Lyfe: but they are with the Agedones / growen likewyse to be aged Men, Elders, 1. Cor. 4. 
                        •
                      
                     Heb 13. b.
                   and Fathers of the Howsholde or Comunialtee in the Loue / who do knowe how to be seruiceable vnto the Little and Weakones, 2. Cor 6. a 1. Pet. 4 b▪ Heb. 13. b
                   and to go before them with the Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of Loue / to all Concord vnder the Obedience of the Loue: and to informe the Congregation to the Lyfe and Peace / with thatt which is fordersom vnto them to 2. Pet. 1. a.
                   the Lyfe and Peace.
               8. Beholde, and consider: These are the Seruices and Ceremonyes which God regardeth in his Congregation: the which shall continue foreuer in our mostholy Seruice of Loue / to a 
                     Heb 7. b
                   Gyding-in of People to the vpright Righteousnes and Godlynes. For 
                     Luk. 1. b
                   the Saluation▪ and the Peace of the People / in all Loue, and Gods 
                     Rom. 1
                        •
                     . c.
                   Will and Counsayle / is made manyfest and knowen therby. It is verytrue.
               
                  9. Heer-with I do hartely salute thee / with a Salutacion of Loue: and with thesame Salutacion / salute me also to the Comunialtee that is with thee, as likewyse to all those that submitt their Soules vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
               
                   10. MOrouer ⁏my Beloued; I shoulde haue rehearsed a larger Answere vnto thee / touching certen Things wherof thou wrytest vnto me: but I haue had no tyme to accomplish it. No, I haue scarsly had so much speare tyme / as to wryte this little vnto thee. The Cause / our Brother whom we haue sent vnto thee / shall also tell thee by Mouth. But if thou bist yet vnsatisfyed in anything, then giue him to vnderstand of the Matter, and aske his resolusion therof. And if thou bist not satisfyed so in thyn Vnderstanding, thē wryteouer the Matter vnto mee. I proffer myself alwayes ⁏out of an Inclynation of Loue; to doo thee Seruice. The Loue of God the Father / get the Victory in all your Hearts. Amen.
               
            
            The Ende of the Nynth Epistle.
         
         
            
            The Tenth Epistle. A precious Iuell of pure Instructions and loueing Exhortations / how one shalbe obedient to the Woord of Lyfe and Trueth / in the Seruice of Loue· and grow-vp therin / to the Perfection or Age of the manly Beeing of Christ.
            
            
               
                  Let vs now leaue the Doctrine of the Begining of the christian Lyfe, and go to Perfection.
                  Heb. 6.
                  Harken vnto mee / O ye holy and vertuous Children, and bring-foorth Fruit like a Rose planted by the Ryuers-syde: and giue a sweete Sauour from you / lyke vnto Libanus. Growe and blowe lyke a Rose-garden: and giue a Sauour / lyke a Lilly. Sing a Song-of-prayse, and laude God in all his Workes.
                  Eccli. 40.
               
            
            To my courteous Freendes / which are comprehended with Vs / in one Light of the Loue / be Health and Saluation.
            
               
               The First Chapter.
               
                  
                  ALL my Hearts Wishing is / that it mought in all respects / go well with you eueryone: and that ye mought ⁏vnhindered; increase in the Godlynes, and in the Light of the heauenly Trueth and of the holy Vnderstanding / which is appeered and declared vnto vs out of Grace / through the Loue of God the Father.
               2 Out of which Light of the godly Cleernes / wee haue now in this last Tyme / receaued 
                     Gal. 1 b. 1. Timo. 1. b
                   such a godly Office / from the eternall and liueing God / through the holy Spirit of his Loue. namely, the Seruice of Loue / wherby to minister in thesame Seruice ⁏with the true Light and heauenly Vnderstanding; the Mostholy of the true Tabernacle of God / vnto all Louers of the Trueth / vnder the Obedience of the Loue: and so to make-manifest vnto them ⁏out of thesame Mostholy;
                     Exo. 25. c. Rom. 3. c. Heb. 5. a.
                   the Mercy-seat, with the sundry costly Garnishings of the spirituall and heauenly Ritches.
               
                   3. Into which Mostholy / the High-preest is gon, for to sprinckle euenso out of the Mostholy / the Holy of thesame Tabernacle, and to cleanse and sainctify 
                     Heb. 9. a. b.
                   it all with his Blood: the

which is the newe or true Testamēt / 
                     Math. 26. c. Mar. 14 c. Luk. 22. b.
                   to y• Forgiuenes of Sinnes. namely, vnto all those which do follow-after Christ / 
                     Heb. 10. c
                   in the Holy, and be planted in to him / 
                     Rom. 6. a Phil. 3. b.
                   with his like Death. The which is the true Offering for the Sinne ⁏through Christ; which is acceptable vnto God the Father / as a sweete 
                     Rom 12. a Phil. 4. b. 1 Pet. 2 a.
                   Sauour: wher-through all the Beleeuers of Iesu Christ / do inherite ⁏in the seconde 
                     Iohn 3. a. Tit 3. a.
                   Birth from the Death; the heauenly Ritches of God and Christ / in the Mostholy.
               4. But these spirituall Ritches of the heauenly Goodes, and of the Mostholy of the true Tabernacle of God / were not hetherto / made knowen vnto the worlde, 
                     Rom. 16. c. Ephe 3 a Col. 2. c.
                   like-as God doth now in thissame Daye of his Loue / disclose, make-knowen, and bring th
                     •
                  same aboundantly vnto Vs ؛his elected Holyones
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                  . Yea, for Vs (wee which ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; be planted into Christ / with a lyke 
                     Rom. 6. a. Phil. 3. b.
                   Death of Christ and ⁏through the 2 Tim. 1 b.
                   Appeering of his Coming; begotten out of thesame Death / 
                     Rom. 8. b. Ephe. 2. a. Col. 2 b.
                   to be Children of God) hath God kept and left thosame spirituall Ritches of the heauenly Goodes / for an heritable Kingdom / 
                     Heb. 4. b.
                   to thend He woulde euen so ⁏through his Loue; bring Vs to his Rest, and establish Vs therin.
               5. Which vnspeakable 
                     Apo. 21. a.
                   Kingdom ⁏full of all  Louelynes and Lyfe 'and full of all gorgyous Beawty; was prepared 
                     Math 25. d. 1. Cor. 2. b.
                   from the Begining / for an euerlasting Rest and Peace / for all those that loue God / for to herit them ⁏as Gods beloued

                  
                     Rom. 8 b.
                   Children, and Heires of his Kingdom; in thesame / now in the last tyme, according to the Promyses.
               6. And with thosame Holyones and Elect of God / God 
                     Act. 17. d. Iude. 1. b.
                   wil now in thissame Daye / execut his righteous Iudgment / against all Vngodlyones of the wicked worlde / which haue not 
                     Math 22. a. 23. c Luk 14.19 b
                   lyked of Him. and against all those which wil shewe no 
                     Rom. 2. a.
                   Repentance for their Sinnes / accordding to the Requyring of his gracious Woord / for that they may be rooted-out· and condemned in ye hellish Fyre / 
                     Math. 25. d.
                   which is prepared for the Deuill and all his Seruants. For the Condemnation in the hellish Fyre / 
                     Apo. 21. a.
                   is the Heritage of all Vngodlyones, and vnhappy Men, which contemne God and his Seruice of Loue, and refuse the 
                     Pro. 1. c.
                   proffered Grace of the Lorde and the Requyring of his gracious Woord.
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               
                   FOrasmuch then ⁏ye Beloued; as that wee ⁏through Gods Mercy / out of his bountifull Grace; are delyuered from the horrible and 
                     Apo. 18.20. tirrible Condemnation of the Vngodly / in our Obeying of the Requyring of the gracious Woord of the Lorde and his Seruice of Loue: and haue attayned to thissame precious 2. Cor. 6. a.
                   Tyme of godly Grace towards all Deuout-people / which loue Gods Righteousnes: and that the 
                     Heb 12. c. Apo▪
                      12, 21, a
                   Kingdom

of God the heauenly Father, and the true Beeing of his loue / hath shyned about Vs / as a Power of God / Therfore haue not wee also bin negligent nor slothfull in thissame Daye of the Grace of our Illumination / for to further the Good: but haue indeuoured ourselues with great Dilligence / for to serue eueryone with our godly Illumination, and to reache them the Hande toward the peaceable and godly Lyfe, and toward the holy 
                     Heb 4. a.
                   Rest of all the Children of God. namely, all those whom God mooueth into our Waye, and which desyre Assistance at our hands / to thesame Rest of the godly Lyfe· and to the Cleernes of the Mostholy of the true Tab
                     •
                  rnacle of God.
               2. Beholde, From this Mostholy ؛the true  Perfection of the Righteousnes of God
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   the 
                     Esa 25. b 2. Cor 3. b.
                   Vayle [the which is the 
                     Heb. 10. c
                   Flesh of Christ] is now in thissame Daye / put-away among vs / through the Death and Suffering of Christ / 
                     Heb. 10. c.
                   in the Holy, wherin we are followed-after Christ / with the lyke Death 
                     Rom. 6. a. Phil. 3. d.
                   and Suffering. and all his Holynesses and Garnishings / nakedly disclosed vnto vs / out of thesame / to thend that wee ⁏which are dead with Christ, 
                  
                     Rom. 6.8. b. Phil. 
                     
                        •
                     . b. Col. 2. b. 3. a
                   and risen agayne with Him from the Death; in heauenly Ioye; shoulde likewyse walke with Christ / in thesame
                     Iohn 
                     
                        •
                     2. c.
                   Light of the Mostholy ⁏with naked Hearts; before God ⁏or in the Presence of the vncouered Face of our God and heauenly Father; in 
                     Ephe. 
                     
                        •
                     . a. b.
                   all Loue.
               3. Haue a good regard heerunto / O ye beloued

and good-willing Hearts: For to such a godly Ende, and to be 
                     Iohn. 15. a. Ephe. 3. b
                   incorporated ⁏with Spirit and Mynde; to the God of Lyfe and his Christ / therto stretcheth our mostholy Seruice vnder the Obedience of ye Loue: or therto hath it his Ministration among the Children of Men / To thend that they mought all now ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; be incorporated to 
                     Iohn. 15.17. 
                  Christ and so 
                     Act. 3. d.
                   restored agayne to thatt wherunto they are chosen of God and called by Christ.
               
               4. To thesame God which hath prepared all this for vs / through his Loue· and chosen vs to such a gloryous Maiestee / 1. Timo. 
                     
                        •
                     . c
                   be La
                     •
                  de, Honour, and Thanks / for euermore. Amen.
               
               5. HEer-with-al I giue you to vnderstand ⁏ye Beloued; that I haue read-ouer the Letter / written by you vnto our Fellow-brother: wherout I do note many Woords of godly Matters. Through the which / I do also greatly reioyce me, and do giue God Thanks 
                     Ephe 1. c. Phil 1. a Col 1 a. 1. Tess 1. a. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     Tess. 1. a.
                   for his Grace extended towards you, and for your Dilligence which ye bestowe one-towards-another / in thatt wherin we are seruiceable vnto you, and wherunto we exhort you. Wher-through we do likewyse perceaue / that our Seruice and Labour shewed on you / is not bestowed in vayne.
               6. We do also exhort all the Commers-on to the Famyly of Loue, and all those that deale or conuersate themselues with you in the Woord / yt they likewyse wil loue the Trueth

with Heart· take-heede ⁏with Lust and Dilligence; to the godly Seruice of Loue and the Requyring therof / wheron we witnes· and shewe good-willing Obedience to the Loue: and that they wil not slenderley nor lightmyndedly esteeme of ye proffered Grace / 2. Cor. 6. a.
                   in thissame precious Tyme / which is full of Perills.
            
            
               The III. Chap.
               MOreouer, Ye do all of you with  one-accorde / seeme ⁏by your wryting; to request at our Brothers hande / that he wil procure mee to wryte a small Exhortation vnto you / according to the Requyring of your Letter: the which is so performed by our Brother, and to doo thesame / hath also bin my Good-will euen from my Heart.
               2. But when I looke-into your Wryting, or do consider therof / ye Beloued / so is the Cheefest-thing that ye wryt of, and wherin you do likewyse complayne / that ther are no auncient Elders nor Fathers among you / that mought exercise the Woord of Exhortation / to the Edifying 
                     Ephe. 2.4. b Tinno. 3. b
                   of the Howse of God.
               3. Oh! to heare this Complaynt made by you ⁏ye Beloued; goeth somwhat neere my Heart: And most-of-al / for that the Vnderstanding and the Experience in the Woord (which is 1 Tess 1. a. 2 Pet. 
                     
                        •
                     . b.
                   administred vnto you by the holy Spirit of Loue· and heald-foorth before you / vnder the

Obedience of thesame Loue) is yet so little fruitfull among you, or for that ye are yet so 1. Cor. 3. a▪ Heb. 5. c
                   young and chyldish therin.
               
                   4. Ah-beloued: How remayne ye ⁏I pray you; thus young or of smal-vnderstanding in this our Ministration of the holy Woord / yt ye take not thesame to heart ⁏with Dilligence and Feruencie; to a 
                     Ephe. 4. b Col. 1. b.
                   Growing-vp in the holy Vnderstanding / wherby to becom auncient Elders and vnderstanding Fathers yourselues / in thesame holy Vnderstanding and Woord of Grace / which is ministred vnto you out of the liueing Godhead, and out of the Seruice of his Loue and heauenly Trueth?
               5. Beloued, looke ⁏of-fellowship; rightly into to the Woord that is ministred vnto you: and consider / Whether is-ther anything wanting or withhealde from you / of any of that which is needfull for you / for to be nourished-vp therin to becom Elders and Fathers?
               6. Is not the Woord ministred vnto you / with full Instruction? Is-it not all groundly and cleerly discouered vnto you in Wryting / whatsoeuer is profitable for you to knowe to your Saluation? Or is-ther noman among the Congregation / growen so bolde in the Woord / to exhort the others for to be 
                     Math. 7 c. Lu
                           •
                        
                      6. c. Iam. 
                     
                        •
                     . c.
                   obedient to thesame Woord / in thatt which it requyreth (wher through he mought edify 
                     i. Timo. 4 b
                   and teach both the Congregation and also himself / to the Obeying of the Woord) to thend to obtayne in that maner / 
                     Rom. 12. b. 15 a. 2 Cor, 13. b.
                   an vpright Mynde, and a

louely Beeing, with eachother? The which is the Principallest-thing wherunto the holy and gracious Woord of the Lorde is administred / out of the Loue and through thesame Spirit. Or woulde ye much-rather haue the Elders in the Woord / alwayes among you / outwardly according to the Flesh, for to haue Instruction of all Things / according to the Desyres of your Knowledg?
               7. O no ⁏ye Beloued; Sett not the Desyres  of your Hearts / only to the Knowledg: but much-more to 
                     Iāhn. 13. b 1. Pet 1. b c.
                   the Obeying of the Requyring of the Woord. For the Instruction tending to the Knowledg (although the vayne-mynded People haue almost eueryone a Lust ther-vnto / at the hands of their Wyseones) is not the Cheefest-poynt of our Seruice. But the Cheefest-thing that the Woord and our Seruice requyreth / is 1 Reg. 15. b. Oze 6. b.
                   Obedience / to thend to enter euenso ⁏in Obedience; into the vpright Lyfe, through the Death 
                     Rom. 6. and Suffering of Christ / like-as we haue rehearsed before in many Places, and also in the Glasse of Righteousnes.
               8. Heer-unto exhort 
                     Rom. 15. b. 1▪ 
                     Tess. 5 b. Heb. 10. c.
                   you one-another, and let the Eldest or he that is Most-obedient in the Woord, or ye Boldest / haue the Preheminence, for to speake of the Woord / with all Humilite ⁏like-as thesame is 2. Pet. 1. c.
                   ministred vnto you through the holy Spirit of Loue; and of thatt which the Woord requyreth: and so to exhort the Congregation / to the Obeying of the Requyring of thesame Woord.
               
                  
                   9. Whatsoeuer now the woord requyreth▪ therin shewe you then Obedience / good-willingly and concordably to gether / like obedient 1 Pet. 1. b.
                   Children, and like right Disciples of the Woord: and so indeuour you toward the Age of the holy Vnderstanding, and to grow-up 
                     Ephe. 4. b.
                   therin / simplely / To thend that yee (when ye do attayne to the Dayes of Agednes) may with like Ioye / reioyce you with Vs / and wee with you / in the louely Beeing of God, and vertuous Nature of the Loue / which is heald-foorth before you / out of Fauour / vndeserued.
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               
                   Euen-thus veryly ⁏ye Beloued; like-as I do heere rehearse vnto you / out of Loue, and exhort you therunto / 
                     Ephe. 4.6. Col. 1. b 1. Pet. 2. a.
                   so growe-up in the Woord of Trueth of the holy Spirit of Loue. namely / out of the Youngnes or Weaknes of your Beeing / into the Age 
                     Ephe. 4. b
                   of the manly Beeing of Christ [that is to be incorporated to God / according to the inward Man· and herited with Christ / in the Kingdom of the God of Heauens] To thend that yee / as Fathers in the Famyly of Loue ⁏who are taught to the Kingdom of God;
                     Math. 13. 
                        •
                     .. may bring-foorth out of the Treasure of your Hearts / the Newe and the Olde [namely, the True and the Figuratiue]. But thatt altogether

to the Seruice of the Congregation of the Howse of God.
               2. Beholde; if ye growe-up thus Heerin / then shall ye alwayes haue auncient Elders and Fathers among you / which shall minister the Woord of Exhortation vnto you / with holy Vnderstanding: and you shall not also fayle nor want anything 
                     Math. 6. c.
                   of all what is needfull for you.
               3. Therfore ⁏ye Beloued; be you one-with-another wel satisfyed Heerin: and proceed-on 
                     Phil 4. a.
                   concordably in the Woord of the Doctrine of the holy Spirit of Loue.
               4. Exhort likewyse one-another dayly to  Quyetnes and Vnitee of Heart. For any of all thatt what is profitable for you to knowe / we desyre not to withholde from you: but to bring vnto you / all that is needfull for you, and that your Vnderstanding can reache. For the Tyme cometh and is now alredye com / that the Foode or the Bread of Lyfe shalbe 
                     Math. 24. d
                   ministred and heald-foorth open-ly in Cleernes / vnto eueryone that beleeueth the Woord of the Seruice of Loue, and that sheweth faythfull Obedience therunto: To the Young Children / 1. Cor. 3. c. 1 Pet. 2 c. a
                   according to their Youngnes / to the Weake / 
                     Rom. 14.15 a. Gal 5. a.
                   according to thier Weaknes / to the Strong-youngmen / 
                     Heb. 5. b.
                   according to their Abillitee or Strength / and to the Elders / according to their Auncientee or Oldenes.
               5. Euenthus shall now in thissame Daye of Loue / the right Foode ؛ 
                  
                     Iohn. 6. f.
                   the Woord of Lyfe
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                  
                  
be ministred 
                     Math. 24. c. 2. Timo. 2. b.
                   in the right tyme· also prepared for eueryone / according to his Stomack· and distributed for a Nourishment of his Soule. And thissame Bread or Woord of Lyfe that is com-downe out of Heauen / vnto vs Littleones and Elected of God ⁏for a Foode of Lyfe; 
                     Exo. 16. a. Psal. 78. b. Sap. 16. c. Iohn. 6. f.
                   shall likewyse be for a Taste of Foode vnto eueryone / according as he would willingly eate.
               6. Happy are those which now in thissame Daye / haue sounde and strong Stomacks▪ and can beare the Foode (howsoeuer it be prepared, or in what maner it is ministred / out of the Woord of Lyfe) and can receaue or eate thesame to a Nourishment of their Soules, and so can indeuour them 1. Cor. 14. a. Col. 5. b.
                   to the Loue.
               
                   7. Yea, thosame ⁏if they growe vp 
                     Ephe. 4, b.
                   therin obediently / till vnto the Age of the holy and godly Vnderstanding; shalbe founde the auncient Elders and Fathers in the Family of Loue: who also shall vnderstande 
                     Math. 11. c. 13. b. Ephe. 3. a. Col. 1. c.
                   the Secretnes of the Woord· and minister 
                     Math. 24▪ 
                     b
                   or bring the woord of Lyfe ⁏out of the Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of Loue; vnto the Disciples of the Woord / in the right or conuenient tyme / according to eueryones Nature or Estate. namely, to the Youngones or to the New-borne Babes / 1. Cor. 3. a.
                   the Milke of the woord / to the Sick or Weakeones / 
                     Rom. 14. a.
                   the Medecinable-broth of the Woord / and to the Youngmen or Strongones / 
                     Heb. 5 b.
                   the Bread and strong Foode of the Woord: And that altogether / to a Growing-vp 1. Cor. 13. b. Ephe. 4. b.
                   into the manly Age of Christ.
               
               
                  8 O Ye Beloued, according to this Pattern, euen-as I do Heere prescribe thesame vnto you in Wryting / see that you indeuour yourselues among each-other in the Loue: and haue a good regard vnto thatt which is heald-foorth before you / to a Consolation of your Soules.
               9. Turne your Hearing therunto, and comprehend  or cōceaue thesame in your Thoughts: and so out of the goodwilling Obedience to the Requyring of the Woord and his Seruice of Loue / learne to knowe in the Spirit of your Inwardnes / the right Oldestone, the right Father, and the true Sheapherd, 1. Pet. 2. c.
                   or Bisshopp of your Soules / which is the 
                     Iohn. 17. b.
                   spirituall Woord of the heauenly Trueth, the holy Spirit of Loue, the Light or the Daye of Loue, 
                     Iohn. 14. a.
                   and the euerlasting Lyfe itself / wheron we do witnes and poynt.
               10. For wee are nomore but 
                     Iohn. 1. a.
                   witnesses of the true Beeing of the Loue / which we minister vnto you / and 1. Cor. 4. 
                        •
                     . 2. Cor. 6. a.
                   Ministers of the holy and gracious Woord / for to declare ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; the godly Cleernes and heauenly Ritches of God the Father ⁏which out of Grace / are appeered and brought vnto vs out of Heauen / by the Father of Light; among the Children 
                     Ephe. 3. a.
                   of Men.
               11 Which Grace, Light or Cleernes▪ and thosame heauenly Goodes / all they 
                     Ephe. 3. a. 2. Pet. 
                     
                        •
                     . a.
                   likewyse do enioye and be Co-partakers therof / which submitt them with vs vnder the Obedience of

the Loue, and haue their Fellowshipp with our Fellowshipp / in all Loue.
            
            
               The V. Chap.
               
                   MY intyrely beloued Freendes and Bretheren in the Loue of Iesu Christ, Vouchsafe for this tyme / to be content with this my harty Exhortation and small Seruice: and ensue or performe first-of-al / thatt which is heald-foorth before you 
                     Math 
                     
                        •
                      
                     a. Luk. 3 13. a A &▪
                      2.
                        •
                      
                     c
                   for a Begining of the christian Lyfe: and so then growe-vp ther-out / 
                     Ephe. 4. b.
                   to the Perfection of the christian Lyfe, and to the Oldnes of the hol
                     •
                   and godly Vnderstanding: and minister you dayly the Woord of Trueth vnto eachother, euen-as thesame (like-as it is also before sayd) is ministred vnto you through the holy Spirit of Loue, and as it is yet dayly heald-foorth vnto you.
               2 Add not any Prudence of Natural-reason therto. Defend nor couer not likewyse 
                     Gen. 3. 
                        •
                     . Math. 25▪ 
                     c
                   ye Craftynes of the Flesh / with the Natural-reason: as that ye shoulde ⁏with the Industry of your Good-thinking; drawe-awaye 
                     Deut 4.12 d
                   or take-out anything or any Sentence therfrom / tending to an
                     •
                   Pleasure vnto the Desyres of your Flesh: but receaue or accept it all 
                     Ephe 6 a Col 5. c.
                   wi
                     •
                  h simple Hearts / to your Edifying, and to the 
                     Ier 7. a. 25. a 35. b.
                   Amendment of your Lyfe and Beeing: and remember vs alwayes to the Good. Wee wil not also forgett the Ministring of the Woord / vnto you all.
               
                  3. But although ye coulde quyte forgett Vs /  yet cannot wee forgett You. For we haue borne you in our Hearts: and ye haue druncke 
                     Cant. 
                     
                        •
                     .
                        •
                     . Esa. 66. b.
                   of the Milke of our Breasts, and eaten of one Bread with vs.
               4. Therfore are wee likewyse dayly carefull ouer you, like vnto a naturall Moother that alwayes beareth a Care ouer her Children / for to prouide thatt with Dilligence / which is needfull for them.
               5. If now the naturall Moothers haue such a Care ouer their naturall Children / shall not then the spirituall Moothers / now in these perillous Tymes / beare much-more a godly Care dayly ouer their spirituall Children of Sion / 
                     Esa. 66. a.
                   which they beare to the God of Lyfe / for to bring-them-up in all Health and Godlynes / to their full Age / vnhindered? Yes nodout. For veryly / the spirituall Procreation, and the spirituall or inward Mootherly-loue / doth farr exceede the naturall. It is verytrue.
               6. For-that-cause ⁏ye Beloued; inclyne not to the earthly and 
                     Rom. 6.12. 
                        •
                     
                   corruptible Beeing: but suffer yourselues to be nourished and taught by the Seruice of Loue▪ and through thesame / drawe-away 
                     Rom. 13. b Gal. 5. b. 1. Pet. 2. b.
                   your Myndes and Thoughts / from the earthly, fleshly, and corruptible Beeing / and incorporate or ymplant them to ye heauenly and spirituall vncorruptible Beeing / for to bring-foorth 
                     Iohn. 15. b.
                   Fruits of Lyfe / like 
                     Psal. 144. c Esa. 17.60. louely Plants of Righteousnes.
               7. Heer-vnto exhort one-another in-anywyse:

and let all your Myndes and Thoughts stand alwayes submitted to the heauenly Trueth: and 
                     Col. 3, a.
                   taste euenso in the Spirit of your Mynde / the spirituall, heauenly, and euerlasting Good: and take therin your Ioye among each-other.
            
            
               The VI. Chap.
               THe Lorde which is the 
                     Iohn. 1, 8, b 1 Iohn, 1 a. Iam. 1, b.
                   Light of the euerlasting Vncorruptiblenes, giue  vnto you all / Eyes of Cleernes / that ye may see and perceaue, 
                     Math. 13, b. Lu
                           •
                        
                      8, 10, c
                   and Hearts of Vnderstanding / that ye may vnderstande and comprehend the great Acts and wonderfull Workes of God, which God worketh in these last Dayes.
               2. For now ⁏out of the Power of God; the 4. E
                           ••
                        , 6. 
                        •
                     , Apo, 5, a,
                   Prophecies ⁏which haue bin shutt 
                     Esa, 29 b, Dan, 22 b,
                   or sealed-too a long tyme; becom opened / through the Seruice of his holy Spirit of Loue, and their Secretnes / playnly declared: 
                     Rom. 16, c. Ephe 1 3. a Col. 1. c 2. Timo. 1. b.
                   also nakedly seene into and knowen in the Trueth: and euenso published likewyse.
               3, The Booke of the Lambe ⁏that is written within and without; is also seene and read: and his seauē Seales ⁏
                     Apo. 5.6 
                        
                           •
                        . b
                   wherwith it was shutt or sealed-too; opened. Through which Opening of his seauen Seales / 
                     Apo. 14. a.
                   the Iudgment of God is appeered, and com ouer the Worlde / for to iudg thesame with 
                     Act. 17. b.
                   Righteousnes.
               
                   4. And after the Opening of the seauē Seales / the seauen Angels of God [namely, from the First Angeel foorth / till vnto the Seauenth]

haue all likewyse sounded with 
                     Apo. 8.9.1
                        •
                     . their Trumpets. And wee haue heard with our Eares / that the seauenth Angell hath sounded the seauenth Trumpet.
               5. For after the Sounde of the seauen Trumpets / the greate Voyces in Heauen became saying: 
                     Apo. 12. 
                        •
                     . The Kingdoms of this Worlde / are becom our Lordes, and his Christs: and they shall raigne for euer and euer.
               6. Haue a good regard theron: and Vnderstand the righteous Iudgment of God / 
                     Iohn. 12. c.
                   which now in thissame last Daye goeth ouer the Worlde.
               7. HEer-with ⁏ye Beloued; I salute you  eueryone / with a Salutation of the Loue. Imbrace and kisse you likewyse one-another to all 1. Pet. 5. b.
                   Concord and Peace / in thesame Loue: 
                     Col. 3. b.
                   forbeare also one-another in the Loue: haue Compassion likewyse with 
                     Rom. 13.14 1. Cor. 9. c. Gal 6. a.
                   eueryones Ignorance: and informe eueryone also 
                     Rom. 12. b.
                   with Reuerence. and that altogether / in the Loue.
               8. And when any speciall Matters com before you / wherthrough ye are burthened or wherwith ye are combered / then be bolde therin in-anywyse / to wryte-ouer thosame vnto mee. I proffer my self alwayes to doo you seruice.
               9. Also, when ye haue attayned vnto the Tyme that it is needfull that the Seruice of Loue be more-lardgly declared vnto you / then ye haue yet heard / then shal-ther nothing be with-heald from you, but be all brought vnto you / out of Loue.
               
                  10. Fare-well, and be you valyant. The Loue of God the Father keepe the 
                     Phil. 4. b. Col. 3. b.
                   Victory in all your Hearts. Amen.
               
            
            The ende of the Tenth Epistle.
         
         
            The Eleuenth Epistle. A Rebuke and Exhortacion out of harty Loue / serueing to a Reformation vnder the Obedience of the Loue, and to a Repentance for their Sinnes / vnto al those that think themselues to be wyse: and do therfore blaspheame our Seruice and our Comunialtee in the Loue, and iudg vs falsly. Also for a Warning vnto all simple Hearts / that submitt them obediently with vs / vnder the Loue and her Seruice.
            
               
                  An open Rebuke / is better then secret Loue.
                  Prou. 27.
                  Curssed be hee that smyteth his Neighbour

priuily or trayterously: and all the People shall saye / Amen.
                  Deut. 27. e.
                  A Backbyter / bewrayeth all what he knoweth in secret: but who so is of a faythfull Heart / hee hydeth thesame.
                  Pro. 11.
                  The Woordes of the Backbyter are lyke vnto Strypes: and they enter into the innermost-part of the Heart.
                  A venomous Mouth and a wicked Heart / is lyke vnto an Earthen-pott / couered-ouer with Siluer-drosse.
                  Psal. 101. Pro. 26. Iam. 4.
               
            
            Health and Saluation / be vnto all those that submitt them with vs / vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
            
               The First Chapter.
               
                  WHERfore do the People rage or 
                     Psal 2.59. a. Act 4. 
                        •
                     . murmur? why do they constreu our Woordes to ye worst / wherwith they be exhorted to the 2 Pet, 1. b.
                   Entraunce into the good Lyfe? Why do they think 
                     Math. 
                     
                        •
                     . a.
                   Euell of vs in their Hearts? Why do they 
                     Deut 27 
                        
                           •
                         Ier 18. c.
                   smyte vs priuily / with their Backbyting?

Why shoote they out their venemous 
                     Psal. 11.57. a
                   Arrowes after vs / behynde our backs? And wherfore do many mock at Vs, as though the God of Israel / were not our God· and the Lorde Iesus Christ / our Sauiour?
               2. O ye Backbyters with your false Tonges, and ye Declyners from the true Doctrine of the Seruice of the Loue of Iesu Christ, as also ye ignorant People / which do now make-vp yourselues against Vs and against our Loue shewed on you / 
                     Ioel. 2. b. Act. 3. c.
                   Turne you about and repent: and torment not yourselues so-much I aduise you / with your Ignorrance, least ye 
                     Gal. 5. b.
                   consume your owne Hearts. Keepe your venemous Arrowes in your Quyuers hardly, and your false Seede / in your Basketts.
               3. For doutles ther are more then too-many of the venemous Arrowes shott-foorth: an
                     •
                   ther is more then enough of the contencious euell 4. Esd. 4. c.
                   Seede sowen. Let it once suffy
                     •
                  e I pray you / to spit-out your Venom and naughty Seede / against God and his holy Maiestee / the Howse of his Loue.
               4. Wherfore ⁏I praye you; wil ye murmur against God and his Holyones· dispyse Gods Maiestee ؛the Habitacion of his Loue
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   and ⁏through the Wickednes or Enuye of your Hearts; 
                     Rom. 8. d.
                   blame his chosen Ministers? seing yt ther is no euell happened vnto you by them.
               
                   5. Looke into yourselues I beseeche you: Is-it not your owne Euell yt seperateth you from vs and from our Loue which we beare towards

you, and which falleth vppon you / thorough your owne Opinions or Good-thinking: and which likewyse bringeth all Trouble, Sorrow, Payne, 
                     Sap. 11.12. 
                        •
                     
                   and Greefe vppon you· and all peruerse Opinions or euell Imaginations towards vs? But wee for our parts / haue neither don Harme nor 2. Cor. 7. a.
                   Wrong vnto you nor-yet vnto anyman-els. Also / God hath not iniured you. But yee for your parts / wil seeme to raigne aboue God and his Requyring· and aboue the Testimonyes of his holy Spirit of Loue / with your 
                     Ma
                           •
                        h. 15. b 23. c.
                   vncleane Hearts, and earthly Spirit· and with your Imagination of ye Knowledg: and so wil iudg Gods Trueth and his Holyones / with your owne corrupt Wisdoms and taken-on Knowledges. Yea / ye wil also in your disobedient Knowledg ⁏which is the euell 
                     Gen. 3 b. 4 Esd. 4. c. d Math. 13. c,
                   Seede and false Light of the olde Serpent; seeme to vnderstande Gods Workes and his Perfection. But ye wil not enter into the Begining 
                     Math. 3· 
                        
                           •
                        . Heb 6. a.
                   of the good Lyfe / that reacheth to the Perfection, nor accomplish his Requyring.
               6. O Thou olde corrupt Adam ⁏which art almost consumed to Dust and Earth; wilt thou yet ⁏in thissame Daye of the Loue 
                     Dan. 8. c. Math. 25. a Iude 1. b.
                   and of the righteous Iudgment of God and Christ; make-vp thyself against God and his Saincts? Thatt shall not prosper with thee. Thou art of Dust and Earth / and thou shalt now in thissame Daye of the Glory of God / 

becom Dust and 
                     Gen 3. b. Eccli. 12. a
                   Earth agayne, according to the Woord of our Lorde and God.
               
                   7. Therfore ⁏O all ye People which haue your Course-of-lyfe / in the olde corrupt Beeing of Adam; turne-awaye your Hearts, Myndes, and Thoughts betymes / from all what is vayne and destroying, and repent: and 
                     Eccli 7. b. 1 Pet. 5. a. Iam. 4. a.
                   submitt you vnder the Obedience of the Loue of Iesu Christ, and vnder the Aucthoritee or Seruice of his Holyones: and so lay-downe yourselues as a 
                     Psal. 110. a. Esa, 66. a. Math. 5. c.
                   Bench for the Lordes Feete / er-euer ye be vtterly swallowed-vpp by the Euell· and by your owne Self-seeking. For doutles ye shall not benefite yourselues anything, nor-yet keepe any Victory / against God and his Holyones, nor against our mostholy Seruice of the Loue of Iesu Christ. For the highest God is our 
                     Deut. 10. b. Psal. 7. g. 75. a.
                   Iudg: Hee is our 
                     Psal. 47.96. King, our Arme or 
                     Psal. 28.31.46.62. a
                   Strength.
               8. Why wil ye then murmur, backbyte, mock, deryde, and enuy so much I pray you / and ⁏for to excuse yourselues and your owne Opinions to be good and vpright / before Men; to report and wryte so many Lyes of vs / O ye Dust and Earth, and ye 
                     Math. 23. c.
                   paynted Walles? Ye can surely do nothing against our God. For Hee is the Lorde, and the Mightyone ouer all Flesh: and without Him ther-is no God more.
               9. Ther is also none other God / neither in Heauen nor vppon Earth / but the God of the Family of Loue / the true God of Israel,
                  
which is our God / who hath 2. Cor. 4. a.
                   declared himself vnto vs / as an euerlasting light. and hath likewyse ⁏in the true Light of his heauenly Cleernes; gloryfyed vs in 2. Cor. 3. b.
                   Him / to be his Saincts: and hath moreouer chosen vs / for to 
                     Psal. 9, 96. b Act. 17. d.
                   iudg with vs and all his Saincts / in this mostholy Daye of Loue (as a righteous Iudgment vppon the Earth) the vniuersall Earth / with Righteousnes.
               10. Ther is also none other Christ, nor any  
                  Christ more / that is true / but the only-borne 
                     Iohn. 1. b.
                   Sonne of God the Father / our Lorde and Sauiour: who ⁏as a Sauiour of People; is com vnto vs from the 
                     Act. 1. b.
                   Right-hande of God his Father / in the Obeying of the Seruice of his Loue / and so hath declared 
                     Iohn 12.13 b 17. a.
                   himself vnto vs / out-of and with 
                     Iohn 17 c.
                   thesame Cleernes of his Father / the God of Israel / for to make his Saluation 
                     Ephe. 3. a.
                   manifest through Vs / vnto all Generations of the Earth / in these last and perillous Tymes, according to the Promyses: and so ⁏in this his Coming; to possesse the Kingdoms of this Worlde / as the right Heyre, and to performe his Worke agaynst all his Enemyes / which haue not 
                     Math. 25 b. Luk 19, b▪
                     
                   lyked of Him nor of the Seruice of his Loue / that they mought be saued.
               11. In which Preuayling agaynst all his Enemyes / in the Coming of his Glory / Hee shall giue-ouer 1 Cor. 15. c.
                   the Kingdom, as likewyse all Aucthoritee and Lordshipp / vnto his Father,

that God may be all in all, according to the Promyses.
               21. Ther is also non other holy Gost, nor any holy Gost more / but ye 
                  
                     Iohn. 14.15.16. b.
                   Only holy Gost of the Loue of God and Christ, who hath declared himself vnto vs / out of the Cleernes of the Father / the God of Israel, and out of the Cleernes of ye Sonne of God / our Lorde and Sauiour. Which holy Gost / is the euerlasting Lyfe, also the Loue, and the true Beeing of God and Christ itself: and is lykewyse the assured 2. Cor. 2. c. 5. a. Ephe 1.4. d
                   Pawne of our godly Inheritance. With whom / wee haue our fellowshipp in the spirituall and heauenly Beeing: in-suchsort / that wee do also with him / inherite the 
                     Math 13. b. Apo. 21. a.
                   Treasures or Ritches of all spiriuall and heauēly Goods. and ther-too / the euerlasting Lyfe.
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               FOrasmuch now as this gloryous Maiestee of God / is reuealed vnto vs / in the heauenly Beeing / as an euerlasting Light 
                     Esa 60. c. Apo. 21. a.
                   or vnchaingable Daye of Cleernes / Therfore cannot I also endure to hyde the Goodnes and louely Glory of our God: but must / out of the good Nature of God ⁏which is manned with mee; witnes his Righteousnes euerywhear, alow of his Wisdom, and declare his 
                     Dan 3. c.
                   Wayes ⁏as the Wayes of the Righteous or Godly; against all Self-wyseones according to the Flesh, and agaynst all good-thinking and ignorant People / 

which turne them awaye from vs, and dispise or contemne this gloryous Daye of ye Cleernes of the liueing God / which is reuealed vnto vs out of Grace, according to the Promyses of God the Father: also take no heede to the true Light: 
                     Psal. 35, 41. a
                   mock at Vs: shoote-out their Derydeing towards vs, with a priuye Hatrid: and so do smyte vs 
                     Deut. 27. c.
                   priuyly / cleane against the Lawe and the gracious Woord of ye Lorde: not considering of Gods Light / that giueth his Cleernes in vs / ouer the Darknesses: nor of Gods Wisdom / which floweth-foorth so aboundantly in vs / ouer the Foolishnes: nor of Gods Righteousnes / which is so safe-making in vs / ouer the Sinne: nor-yet of the manly Power of God / which is so like-chyldish in vs / ouer the Childishnes.
               2. But seing that ther are Somme now /  which thinck themselues to be 
                     Esa 5. c. Pro. 3. a. Rom. 12. b
                   wyse, and so do figure-foorth a Cleernes vnto themselues / according to the Mynde of the Flesh and Imagination of the Knowledg / Therfore haue they stumbled or taken-offence at our Chyldishnes, and at the Appeerance of our Foolishnes: and turning themselues awaye from vs, and falsly reporting som euell matter of vs / behynde our backs, they haue shot-out their false Testimonyes and Lyes / against vs: and so haue made-manifest their false Hearts / against our chyldish and simple Kyndnes shewed towards them / as that ther is nothing-els in their Hearts / but Backbyting and Traytory, and al-maner of

Venom 
                     Psal. 14.140 Rom. 3 b.
                   vnder their Tongues: and that they ⁏with their subtill Knowledg; are thorowly-mynded to 1 Timo. 4. a 2 Timo. 3. a
                   seduce those of small Vnderstanding / from our safe-makeing Ministration, and to bring them into errour / wherthrough the erring Sheepe becom then scattered or skared frō each-other, also rent 
                     Esa. 53. b Eze. 34. Iohn. 10. 1. Pet. 2. c.
                   and strangled, and not gathered-together ⁏to a Concord; into their right Sheep-folde, nor-yet saued.
               3. Therfore haue not Such, nor-yet their euell Nature / any Power nor Vnderstanding to informe the Ignorantones with the safe-makeing Testimonyes of Christ, nor to assist the Sinners with the true Vertue and Righteousnes / to a Repentance for their Sinnes, wherby to gyde them into ye perfect Righteousnes which God esteemeth / nor to informe the Vnwyseones / with the true Wisdom / nor to poynt the Erringones / 
                     Eze. 34. a.
                   into the right Waye / nor through Loue / to take al-things in Patience / concerning the godly Matters / not-yet to couer 1. Pet. 4. b. Iam. 5. c.
                   the Multitude of Sinnes: that the miserable People mought be holpen-vp out of the Pitt of their Fall, and becom 
                     Psal. 34.51. b 147. a. Esa. 57.61. a
                   saued. but according to their vnreformed Nature ⁏like-as it appeereth; they are much-more inclyned to reporte euerything to the worst / that meeteth them agaynst their owne Myndes, and to rayle-at and blaspheame thesame.
               
                   4. For-that-cause, seing that they in their Contrarynes / are growen wrathfull towards vs / therfore do they likewyse much-rather cry-out

in euery Streete and Corner / that Wrong is offered them / and that wee and all simple Hearts / which ⁏to there Cleansing from the Sinne; do cleaue vnto the Doctrine and Concorde of the Seruice of Loue / are wicked / and y• it is all Wrong, Misunderstanding, and Foolishnes / wherafter we labour and are zealous: and so then 
                     Psal. 10.64 Ier. 11.18. b Sap. 2. b.
                   they knowe how to iudg, ieste, mock, enuye, and to speake much euell against vs / and to fome-out and spredd-abrode althings to the worst / that is against their owne Myndes / and with false Bruits / to make their Neighbour ⁏towards whom they haue conceaued a Mislyking; to be reprochfull euerywhere.
               5. SEing then that I haue respect vnto my God / and how beneficiall, loueing, faythfull, True, and 
                     Eze. 1
                        •
                     . c. 1. Timo. 1.2. a 1. Pet. 3. a.
                   safe-making / He standeth-mynded / and how He hath illuminated and endowed mee with thesame Loueing-kyndnes: in-such-sort / that I for-that-cause haue no regard at-al to ye vayne and false Babling of many People: but to the Ministration which is profytable and needfull for ye Man vnto Saluation / Therfore doth Hee also keepe 
                     Psal. 17.63. 
                        •
                     
                   my Soule vnder the Wings of his Loue / because that I shoulde cleaue vnto Him and his Maiestee, and be seruiceable vnto all Men / to their Preseruation in the Godlynes. and not regarde the Backbyters / that speake Euell of me, and mock me / nor the Deryders / that walke in Lightmyndednes / 2 Pet 2.3. a. Iude. 1. 
                        •
                     , according to their

owne Desyres and Good-thinking: Who do likewyse turne-away themselues from vs and our godly Doctrine· dispise the Dominion of God· as also the 
                     Iohn. 17. b.
                   Comminialtee in the Vnitee of Heart / vnder the Obedience of the Loue. Yet do Many of them bost that they for-al-that ⁏in their false Deedes; do stande at concord· cleaue to the Woord of the Lorde and his Loue· and desyre to holde Peace with all Men.
               
                   6. It is true: they cleaue indeede to their good-thinking Woord and their owne Mynde of Loue, neither do they also fall very-soone from thesame: and with the Worlde / Many of them are likewyse at concorde: and they seeke their Peace nodout / with the Children of the wicked Worlde, and with those that are cleaueing to thesame and that giue eare and respect vnto them: in them they see no Euell, neither do they contende against them, nor-yet blaspheame them: for they are most-like vnto their owne Heartes.
               7. But those that haue submitted their Soules vnder the Obedience of the Loue / for Gods Righteousnes cause: and which do dayly ⁏with Christ; 1 Math. 16. d. 2. Cor 4. b. Gal. 6. a.
                   carry the Crosse and Suffering in their Hearts / with them they stande not at concorde, neither do they desyre also / to be one Heart and Mynde with them: but to contende boldly against them: and knowe alwayes how to rehearse much Wrong and Ignorance of them. Yea / vpon them they haue dayly all their sight bent, 
                     Psal. 41. a.
                   to see if they mought

spy-out anything by them or heare anything of them / that were not right in their Eyes or Eares / to thend that they mought then spreadd thesame abroade, and bring them to Shame.
               8. Beholde, Thatt is the Nature of all Self-wyseones, and Declyners from the Obeying of the Requyring of the Seruice of Loue, and of all false concordable People, and false Hearts / which take vppon them arrogantly out of their vnrenewed Hearts / 
                     Esa. 30. b. Mich. 2.3. to witnes of the godly Matters / for Trueth, and to institute or to vse any Seruices.
               9. Ah, consider I pray you / what a false Concorde, and what a false Christianitee and false Loue such do carry. and what a common Peace / they do all very gladly desire to holde with the wicked Worlde and all Vngodlyones.
               10. OH ⁏my beloued Hearts; consider well  of Such I pray you / how vtterly their Vnderstanding is 
                     Sap. 2. c. Rom. 1. c. Ephe. 4. b
                   corrupted through their good-thinking Knowledg / Wher-through they do also take their occasion to blaspheame our Comunialtee of Saints in the Loue, and to defame vs with al-maner of Euell: and so ther-vnder ⁏as in a 
                     Math. 
                     
                        •
                     .23. Showe of som better thing; they couer their owne wicked or euell Hearts.
               11. Seing then that my God ⁏who only is the Lorde; giueth nothing-els into my Heart / but Wisdom 
                     Sap. 7. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . and holy Vnderstanding: and sheweth and teacheth me nothing-els but all Dooing-of-good / Therfore cannot I forbeare

/ through the Nature 1. Cor 3. a.
                   of his Loue / but I must shewe vnto myne Enemyes / Freendship / for Enimitee, and Loue / 
                     Math 5. c. Rom. 12. b.
                   for Hate: declare vnto them the Saluaciō and Blessing / for Blaspheamy and Curssing / and figure-foorth before them / the Vniformnes of Heart in the Loue / for the Seperation: and so to proffer the Grace of my God / vnto myne Aduersaryes / which do hate, blaspheame; and cursse me: and to reache them the Hande / for to drawe them to the Loue of my Lorde and God: and to shewe all Faythfulnes and Loue / towards those that haue smittē me priu
                     •
                  ly or trayterously· spewed-out many Lyes and false Testimonyes / after me· and shewed all Vnfaythfulnes towards me and the Seruice of Loue / informing them 2. Timo. 2. c 3. b. 4. a.
                   with Rebuke, Doctrine, and Exhortation / for that they mought 
                     Act. 17. d.
                   repent: be set-vpp from their Fall of the Sinne: and mought liue with Mee / in the Vnitee of the Loue / wherby to serue 
                     Luk. 1. b. 1. Tess. 1. a.
                   the leueing God, and to vse all Concorde and Peace among each-other.
            
            
               The III. Chap.
               
                   FOrasmuch then as the open Rebuke / is alwayes better 
                     Pro. 27. a.
                   then secret Loue: the chastenable Information / muchmore blessed / thē for one to smyte anyman priuily: and the Seruice of the holy Woord vnder ye Obedience of the Loue / much-more edifying and profitable / then the Backbyting

/ Therfore is likewyse all my Desyre in our Seruice of Loue / to further 2. Cor. 13. b. Phil. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . thatt which is most-edifying and Most-godly.
               2. Wherfore ⁏O ye Resisters of our mostholy Seruice of Loue, as also ye ignorant People; consider once rightly I pray you / of the Loue and Kyndnes shewed on you / out of our mostholy Seruice of Loue: Receaue you my Rebuke and Exhortatiō: and take-heede vnto my chastenable 
                     Pro. 4.
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   Information. Com hether and harkē after the right Knowledg, and learne 
                     Pro. 1.2. a. 3.4.5. a.
                   Vnderstanding and holy Knowledg: and 
                     Eccli. 6. c.
                   
                  
                     •
                  ow your Backs vnder the Rodd of the Lorde. For the Strypes or the sharpe Woords of Louers / are much meeter 
                     Psal. 141. 
                        
                           •
                        . Pro. 27. 
                        •
                     . then the Kisses or the Flattering-woords of Enuyers.
               3, For-that-cause com now all hether / into the Howse of Informacion, 
                     E
                           •
                        cli. 6.8. 
                        
                           •
                         Math. 11. c
                   and learne to humble your Hearts vnder the Obedience of the Loue, and to open them nakedly before the Elders / To thend that ye may be cleansed from the Wickednes or Euel of your Heartes.
               4. Suffer yourselues now to be 
                     Deut 1
                        •
                     . c. Ier. 4. 
                        •
                     . circumcised  on the Fore-skinne of your Heartes / in this holy Daye of Loue: which is ye Eigth or Newe Daye / to the Renew
                     •
                  ng 
                     Esa. 65.66. c. Ephe 1. b 2. P
                           •
                        t. 3. b. Apo. 21.▪
                   of the Worlde with Righteousnes. and so▪ through the Light of Loue and his Seruice ⁏put-awaye the 
                     Ier. 4. a.
                   Fore-skinne [namely, the Darknesses] from your Hearts / Or-els ye shall not com to the Glory of God, nor to his Sainctuary. For no 
                     Esa. 35.52. 
                        
                           •
                        . Eze. 44. 
                        •
                     . Vncircumcisedone

/ shall enter into the Sainctuary of God.
               5. BVt Many of you do refuse this Grace / which is proffered vnto you, and do bitter and harden your Hearts against thesame. Therfore is also my Complaynt against you / vnto my God, for that ye are yet so vtterly 
                     Ier 6. b. 9. c Act. 7. f
                   vncircumcised on your Eares, Lipps, and Hearts: as likewyse for that ye sett yourselues so presumpteously in Iudgment, and wil seeme to iudg Gods 
                     Esa. 30. b. Mich. 2.3. b
                   Matters / out of your vncleane Hearts / according to ye Imagination of your owne Knowledg.
               6. I woulde aske you / on the behalfe of my Lorde and God / who hath prouoked you therunto, or what Spirit hath mooued you to iudg such Matters. The Cause I haue cheefly to demaunde of those that conuersate themselues dayly with vs / in Hipocrisie, and that shewe towards vs or ours ⁏in our Beholding; a laughing 
                     Psa. 28. a. 37. b. Ier. 9. a.
                   Mouth or fauourable Countenance, and in secret / speake all Euell of vs.
               
                   7. Ah-beloued, speake it out boldly I pray you / yee which are so wyse now 
                     Pro. 3. a. Esa 5. c. Rom. 12. b.
                   in your owne conceites: With whose Spirit, and with what Toungs / do ye thus smyte vs priuily, and slaunder and blaspheame vs behynd our backs / where we haue None to reply against you? Out of what Nature haue ye thatsame I pray you? Or out of whose Brestes do ye suck such Venom of corrupt Milke? And wherout do many of you frame such a false Freedom / that ye

haue shewed vs a fayer Face / before our Eyes, also haue flattered vs with your Toungs / whilst ye were present / and do now with such a false Heart / mock vs priuily or behynde our backs / among those that do gladly giue eare vnto you, and so boldly smyte and blaspheame vs / with your false Spirit and Blaspheamous-toungs? No
                     •
                   Vs only: 
                     Luk. 10. b. 
                     
                        •
                     . Tess. 4. 
                        •
                     . 2 pe
                           •
                        . 2. b.
                   but also the godly Wisdom and holy Vnderstanding / wherwith God hath ⁏through his hearty Loue; 
                     Ephe. 1 a. 2 pet, 1. a
                   endowed vs: and so in blaspheaming 
                     Heb. 10. d.
                   the holy Spirit of the Loue of God and Christ / ye dispise the precious Treasures of the spirituall heauenly Ritches, as likewyse ye highest Cleernes of God.
               8. Which gloryous Light or godly Cleernes ⁏wherin 2 Cor. 4.
                        •
                      
                     a
                   the Mosthighest hath comprehended vs / vnder the Obedience of his Loue; doth ouershadow, or farr exceede all the Lightes of this Worlde. Yea all Vnderstandings of this Worlde / 
                     Psa. 37.46. b Esa, 
                     
                        •
                     0, b. Aba c. 
                     
                        •
                     . b, S
                           •
                        ph. 1. a. Zach. 2. b.
                   must be dombe before thesame, and 
                     •
                  ow them eueryone vnder thesame gloryous Cleernes of God / which is made-manifest vnto vs. And all those that loue the vpright Righteousnes / must saye: Thatt Light is verytrue.
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               O Ye foolish People: Do ye dispise  the precious Pearle / because thesame is 
                     Math. 
                     
                        •
                     3. c,
                   founde in an earthen Feelde / wherin it was hidden: or for that it is by

God / layde in an earthen Vessell / 
                     Rom. 9. c. 2 Tess. 2. c.
                   that seemeth before you to be too-dishonourable, and for that Hee also / declareth thesame ther-out?
               2. Do ye dispise the costly Treasures / 
                     Rom. 9. c. 2. Cor. 4. a.
                   for that they likewyse / be carryed in earthen Vessells, and declared vnto you ther-out, and brought vnto you out of entyre Loue?
               3. Do ye dispise Gods Righteousnes / because it ryseth-vp so gloryously / ouer the sinfull Flesh, and dealeth so 
                     Rom. 8. a. 1 Timo. 1. b 2. pet. 3. a.
                   longsufferingly and graciously with the Sinners?
               4. Do ye dispise the Wisdom of God / because that thesame ⁏euen with the Fulnes of the holy Vnderstanding; is com so bright in gloryous Cleernes / ouer the Foolis
                     ••
                  es of Men?
               5. Do ye dispise the Age of Christ / because He raigneth so 1. Tess. 2. a b 1. Tim. 2. c. 1. pet. 5 a.
                   graciously ouer the Childhod, for to nourish-vp thesame ⁏in Meeknes; to the Age of the Man Christ?
               6. Do ye dispise the Knowledg and holy Vnderstanding / because they haue their fellowship among the Ignorantones, for to bring them into the vpright and godly Vnderstanding.
               7. Do ye dispise the 
                     Mal 4. a. Sap. 5. a.
                   Sunne ؛the heauenly Day-light of the highest God
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   because she shineth in the Waters / 
                     Iohn. 7. d.
                   that flowe from our Body. and for that God also suffereth thesame 
                     Math. 5. c.
                   to shyne as wel ouer the Euell or Sinners which submitt them with Vs / to the Concord of the Loue / as ouer the Good or Righteous▪
               
               
                  8. How is your Folly clymmed-vp so high  in you / that ye lyke not that Gods Wisdom shoulde gouerne 
                     Math. 25. b. Luk. 19. b.
                   ouer you / with his Loue: but that ye yourselues / wil gouerne yourselues / with your owne chosen and fleshly Wisdom? Wher-through ye do likewyse ⁏seing doutles that ye vnderstande 1. Cor. 2. b.
                   not our secret Mynde of God; dispise and enuy Those / ouer whom the Wisdom of God doth gouerne and raigne / with his Loue.
               9. But ye do iudg our Foolishnes, or tha
                     •
                  t which seemeth to be Foolishnes / in your 
                     Math. 6 c. 20 b. Luk 
                     
                        ••
                     . 
                        
                           •
                        .
                   crafty Eyes: but ye are not 
                     Math 7 a. Luk. 6. c.
                   aware of your owne greatest Foolishnes. And therfore ye knowe it not.
               10. But veryly, if Those which submitt them with vs vnder the Doctrine of the Seruice of Loue / woulde giue eare vnto your Foolishnes / which yee through the 
                     Rom. 1. c.
                   Blyndnes of your Hearts / do esteeme for greate Wisdom, and woulde follow you therin / Then woulde ye not likewyse see their Foolishnes nor their Ignorance / Euen like as Many of you do not see nor vnderstande the Worldes Foolishnes and Ignorance.
               11. But seing now that many good-willing Hearts do see into the Ignorance of the wicked Worlde, and the Errour of many People: and so do 
                     Eccli. 6. d.
                   submitt them with vs / to the holy Vnderstanding / for to becom 
                     Ephe. 4. c.
                   taught and vnderstanding ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; in the vpright Beeing of the Loue / therfore do ye

mock them, and vpbrayde them with their Ignorance, because they do not follow the Self-mynde of your Foolishnes.
               
                   12. WHerfore / O ye Self-wyse and Scriptur-learnedones, and all yee which ⁏through the Knowledg; do perswade yourselues to be 
                     Rom 1. c. 2. Cor 3 b.
                   vnderstanding / Looke once rightly into yourselues I pray you: Beare 
                     Act. 17. d.
                   sorrow ouer your Ignorance, and suffer yourselues to be renewed in your Vnderstanding / through the Seruice of the holy and gracious Woord / vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
               13. Do not stomble or wax offended at our 
                     Math. 18. d.
                   Childishnes, nor at the Seeming of our Foolishnes: but remember that the Childishnes of the Holyones of God / is manlyer, and procureth more Fruits of Righteousnes / among the Beleeuers / then the manly Glory of the wicked Worlde.
               14. Remember also / that the Foolishnes of the Elect of God / is 1. Cor. 1. b.
                   much wyser / then all the Wysdom of the wicked Worlde.
               15. For whosoeuer doth not seperate himself from the Worlde and from her Wisdom, and so becometh 1. Cor. 3 b.
                   foolish before the Worlde / for the Wisdom of Gods sake / Hee likewyse shall not com to the Wisdom of God, nor-yet vnderstande the secret Counsayle of God.
               16. Also, whosoeuer turneth not himself about, 
                     M
                           •
                        t 18 a. 1. Cor. 1.4. c Ephe▪
                      4. b.
                   and becometh childish before ye Worlde / for the manly Ages cause of Christ / Hee likewyse shall not com to ye Age of the Man Christ.
               
               
                  17. Knowe ye not that ther is written: 1. Cor. 
                     
                        •
                     . Not  many Wyse / after the Flesh, not many Prudent nor Ingenious / but what is foolish before the Worlde / thatt hath God chosen.
               18. But ⁏alas; ye wil not consider heeron, because ye are too-to-arrogant and prowde vppon the Knowledg of your darkened Vnderstanding.
               19. Ye go-on with stiff 
                     Esa. 3. b.
                   Necks, and are much-to-wyse in your owne conceites / for to submitt you simply with Vs Littleones and elected Holyones of God / vnder the gloryous 1. pet. 5. b. Iam. 4. a.
                   Maiestee of God: and much-to-olde, self-righteous, and too-renowned in your owne Sight, and also before the Worlde and her Wyseones / to submitt yourselues so simply in the 
                     Math. 
                     
                        •
                     8. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . p
                           •
                        r. 2. a.
                   childish and single-mynded Beeing / with vs vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
            
            
               The V. Chap.
               Oh ⁏my beloued Hearts; take-heede  to that which I wryte vnto you / to your Reformation: harden 
                     psal. 95. a. Heb 3 a
                   not your Hearts / through the 
                     pro 
                     
                        •
                      
                     b. Heb 12. a.
                   fatherly Rebuke, wher-with the Loue informeth you seruiceably / by her Minister HN. For hee that ⁏out of the gracious Woord of the Lord and his Seruice of Loue; setteth-forth before your Eyes / your Sinnes and Thatt which ye do yet want in the Loue, and despereth to leade you ther-out / with Rebuke

and Informacion, also holdeth-foorth the Wayes to the godly Lyfe / before you, and so is your Seruant / that you may com to God ؛the euerlasting Lyfe
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                  , and to be incorporated vnto his vpright Righteousnes and Holynes: Thatsame is Hee that rightly loueth you, and which is rightly seruiceable vnto you to the true Loue both of God and Man / to your Preseruacion in the Godlynes.
               2. But your owne Wisdoms or Good-thinkings, and all those / which ⁏out of the Imaginacion of their owne Knowledg; do 
                     ••
                  ow you
                     •
                   in ye Foolishnes of your Hearts, and speake to 
                     Mich. 2.
                        •
                      
                     a.
                   you according to your owne Myndes / Those do steale-away your Hearts: and so do leade you (the which ye consider not) 
                     pro. 7. c.
                   into their Netts. They laye Clothes vppon your Eyes, soft Pillowes / 
                     Eze. 13. b.
                   vnder your Armes, and leade you captiue in darke Wayes.
               3. Therfore turne you from all thatt / wher-through ye haue seduced and deceaued yourselues: and com to thissame true Light of Loue, which by Gods Grace / is 
                     Esa. 60. a. Iohn. 1. a. 1 Iohn 1.2 a
                   appeered and com vnto Vs / out of Heauen.
               
                   4. SEing then that God hath ⁏now in these perillous Tymes; shewed Mercy on vs ⁏with his Light; through his harty Loue / Therfore do we acknowledg likewyse through the Loue of God the Father / that ther is now presently / no other Light nor Lyfe more ⁏that is true; neither hath bin heertofore, nor-yet shall com / neither in Heauen,

nor vppon Earth / but thatsame Light which is reuealed and com vnto vs now in the last tyme / through the Loue of God the Father: and thatsame is the true Light / wheron 
                     Deut 18. b. Esa 60 a. Iohn. 5. c. Act. 3. c.
                   
                  Moses and all the holy Prophets of God haue witnessed, and which the holy 
                     Act. 2.3.4.7.10.13. ct.
                   Apostles of Christ and Euangelists haue published / to the Blessing and Saluacion of all Generacions of Men / that beleeue theron.
               5. All whatsoeuer is against thesame, and that doth not submitt itself ther-vnder▪ but turneth itself away ther-from / thatt is all Darknes, 
                     Esa. 59. a.
                   Conceited-light or False-light, and nothing but Deceit and Seduceing. For the Waye of thesame / leadeth to the 
                     Math 7.25. d.
                   Hell and euerlasting Condemnation.
               6. Therfore be not you seduced by your owne Knowledg, nor by anymans Good-thinking, nor chosen Holynes: but turne your Hearts to the Seate of Grace, and to the euerlasting Day-light from Heauen / that is appeered and com vnto vs now in the last tyme ⁏by Gods Grace; according to the Promyses.
               7. THerfore com now all hether / to this  true Light of the vpright vndeceaueable Loue: Suffer yourselues to be shyned-on and lighted therby / through the Seruice of Loue: and so becom Lights / 
                     Psal. 36. b.
                   in ye Light: and let the Loue be planted in you / with Meeknes.
               8. Take now heede to thissame Daye of Loue, to thend ye may be cleansed from all what is agaynst the Loue.
               
                  9. For I saye vnto you veryly, that after thissame Daye of Loue / ther shall 
                     Apo. 10 a.
                   no Daye more appeere out of Heauen / vppon the Earth: neither haue we to wayte for any other Daye more / for euer. It shall likewyse all perrish / whatsoeuer 
                     P
                           •
                        o. 1. c.
                   refuseth the Grace / in thissame Daye, and so contemneth Gods Mercy.
               10. For this Daye is the Daye which God hath sett or appoynted / 
                     Act. 17. d.
                   in the which He wil iudg the Circuit of the Earth with Righteousnes / through one Man, in whom He hath concluded it: and holdeth-foorth the Beleefe before eueryone, inasmuch as God hath raysed Him from the Death. By whom / the 1. Cor. 15. b.
                   Resurrection of the Deadd / is now also reuealed and made-knowen vnto vs.
               
                   11. Beholde, this is held-foorth vnto you out of harty Loue / 
                     Iohn. 20. g.
                   for that ye shoulde beleeue, and becom saued, 
                     Apo. 20. a.
                   and mought haue a Parte in the Resurrection of the Righteous· and reioyce you with vs and all the Saintes of God / in the euerlasting Lyfe.
               12. Take 
                     Pro. 2.3.4. a
                   thissame to heart I pray you ⁏to a Reformacion in the vertuous Nature of the Loue; O thou louely Comunialtee, thou (meane I) which standest submitted ⁏with Heart, Mynde, and Delyte; vnder the Loue / to shewe all Obedience.
               13. Haue now a sharpe regarde on the gloryous Maiestee of God, and on the Mercyfulnes of his Loue, which is now declared vnto vs / 
                     Math 24. d. Act. 1. b.
                   out of the heauenly Beeing, and hath his

Foorme vppon the Earth. Submitt you alwayes ther-vnder: and let not his Loue be turned-away from your Heartes: but let thesame be alwayes vnto you / to a 
                     Math. 11. d.
                   Refreshing of your Soules / Then shall ye not be deceaued by the earthly, fleshly, and good-thinking Men / nor by the false Hearts of the Scripture-learnedones. For all their Wayes 
                     Esa 59▪ 
                     a.
                   are false, lying, and deceitfull.
               14. They wil not submitt them also / but to their owne Good-thinking / or to the earthly, fleshly, and bloody Things / and to Those / which ⁏lyke vnto themselues; are mynded to the earthly Flesh and Blood, and which bring-foorth their Good-thinking ther-out.
            
            
               The VI. Chap.
               OH, what a perrillous 
                     Amo
                           •
                        . 
                     
                        •
                     . b. M
                           •
                        ch. 2. a.
                   Tyme is  it now presently / for the Preseruacion of Soules. namely, for Those that be borne 
                     
                        •
                      
                     Pet. 1 c. Iam. 1. b.
                   out of the Loue and her Seruice / and with what 
                     Heb. 1
                        •
                     . b.
                   Care and Foresightfulnes / must now the Elders in the godly Vnderstanding of the holy Spirit of Loue / bring-vp 1. Pet 5. a.
                   their Children of Loue / to thend that the gloryous Freedom of the Children of God mought be manifested vnto them, and they not to be lead-away ther-from / For the Theeues or Stealers of Men / are now becom many: and the Deuourers sleepe not.
               2. Oh, looke to it / looke to it: keepe you likewyse

eueryone a sharpe Watch ⁏my beloued Children; sayth the holy Spirit of Loue: and in the Ryseing-vp of the Vyolent-dooers and Destroyers / then keepe yourselues quyet in-any-wyse: 
                     Esa 26. c.
                   byde within your Doores: go not without the Walles nor Gates of the Citee / till the Destroyers he passed-by, that ye be not deuoured.
               3. Shewe not yourselues naked in-any-case / before the Enemyes: be not seene of them: bee now among them ⁏whyle the wicked Worlde doth yet raigne; euen as though ye were deadd and were not, 
                     Psal. 38, b.
                   and had no Speeche in your Mouth: and so walke vnseene and vnknowen / before all those that are with out the Family of Loue, and showe themselues as Enemyes agaynst thesame: as also before those that turne them awaye ther-from. Be not 
                     Esa. 52. .b.
                   hasty in-an-wyse / to take-on anything: runne not before the tyme: and 
                     Luk. 9.17. d
                   looke not about after anything / for to imagin any better thing / then the Loue, and thatt which is administred out of her Seruice.
               
                   4. O thou precious Manhod / looke only vpon thy God, and vpon the Kyndnes of his Loue shewed on thee / Otherwyse / thou must perrish. Giue no eare in-any-wyse / to those that are borne 
                     Iohan. 3. b.
                   out of the earthly Blood, and are Straingers 
                     Ephe. 2. b.
                   from the Family of Loue. God hath not sent them, neither are they any Prophets that go-out from God.
               5. O precious Man / 
                     Mat. 22. b. Apo. 3. b.
                   becom now clothed

with the Loue, and be prudent and vnderstanding in ye vertuous Nature.2. Cor. 12. b
                   For it is altogether aboute thee / wher-after men do hunt, course, or runne. For now is the tyme com / that thou shalt be 
                     Mat 24. a. Mar. 15. a. Luk 19.11. b
                   besett, assaulted, and persecuted▪ namely / by the Worlde, by the Flesh, and by all perditionable Lusts and Desyres: as likewyse by all deuided Sects and good-thinking Men, and by all false Holynesses. All these shall spread their Netts before thee / for to drawe thee into thesame.
               6. All Lightmynded Spirits / also all Scorners and 1 Timo. 4 a 2 Timo. 3. a. 2. Pet. 2.3. a. Iude. 
                     
                        •
                     . b.
                   Mockers / all Fallers-away from the Seruice of Loue / likewyse all those that do make manifest their Craftynes, Villany, and false vnfaythfull Nature / against the Loue and her Comunialtee / together with all Backbyters and Blaspheamers / that defame vs with much Falshod / shall also runne-after thee, for to drawe thee vnder their false Nature.
               7. Lykewyse all Flatterers, Whoores and Knaues, Lyers, Adulterers and Adulteriees, Betrayers, Vsurers, and Couetousones / also the Idolaters, and all those that vse false God-seruices / together with the Killers, Theeues, and Murderers: Yea / all whatsoeuer is false, vnfaythfull, or deceitfull / shall make-vp himself / for to drawe thee vnto him. But make none accounte of any of them all / 
                     Math▪
                      1
                        •
                     , b. 2. Timo. 3. a
                   in the tyme of thyne Assaulting, Tryall, and Tribulacion: but praye vnto God 
                     Ma
                           •
                        . 6, b. Luk
                           •
                        
                      11. a.
                   that He wil keepe

thee from their perditionable Wayes / wherinto they woulde leade thee.
               
                   8. THerfore ⁏O thou precious Man; remember now in thy Temptacion / the Suffering and Death of our Lorde Iesu Christ, how that Hee hath suffered the Temptacion of the Wicked· and the 
                     Phil. 2. a. Heb. 12. a.
                   contemnable Death of the Crosse / at the Sinners Handes / when the Glory was heald-foorth or proffered vnto Him: and so ⁏after his Ryseing from the Death; is com agayne 
                     Luk. 24. c. Act. 1 d, 1. Cor 15 c.
                   to his Glory and Dignitee: and so hath ⁏through 
                     Rom. 6. a. Phil. 2. a.
                   his Death of the Crosse; conquered the 
                     Oze. 13 b. 1. Cor. 15. f.
                   Death. and broken their Bandes / 1 Timo. 1 b Heb. 2. b.
                   that had the Authoritee of Death.
               9. Thus byde now constantly in the Loue of Iesu Christ: and let it not greeue thee ⁏O thou precious Man; to suffer with Christ / wherby to be in like maner in his Suffering or 
                     Rom. 6 a. Phil. 3. b.
                   Death of the Crosse / baptised or 
                     Rom. 6. a. Col. 2. b. Tit. 3. b.
                   washed with the pure 
                     Iohn, 3.7. d.
                   Waters of the Seruice of Loue· and euenso cleansed from the Sinne. For ther is no other Waye / for to bring thee agayne to thy Dignitee.
               10. Therfore / ponder well now thissame Waye: and looke-into the Death of the Crosse of our Lorde Iesu Christ, wher-thorow 
                     Iohn. 10.14 thou must go, and offer-vp vnto the Lorde / thy Gift or Offering / in the Gift 
                     Heb. 9. b. c.
                   or Offering of Iesu Christ, if thou wilt com to the Lyfe.
               
                   11. Be not seduced with any other vayne Babling, nor deceaued by the subtill and crafty

Tongues, nor-yet by Flesh and Blood. Inasmuch doutles as Those and all Such / do 
                     Phil. 5. b.
                   mock at the right and true Death of the Crosse of Christ. and do also saye very boldly vnto thee: Cast the Crosse ⁏or the Passe-ouer to the Entrance into the Lyfe / that is taught thee out of the Seruice of Loue; from thee, and fauour thyself, and liue free.
               12. With these or such-like seduceing Woordes / they steale thy Heart from the Lyfe that proc
                     •
                  edeth out of God: and so thou remaynest bounde with the Bandes of Death, and 
                     Rom. 1. e. Ephe. 4, 6. estrainged from the true Lyfe of the newe Birth in Iesu Christ. From which Death ⁏that doth alwayes gnawe, accuse▪ and captiue thee; thou canst not be released / without the Death or Passe-ouer of the Suffering of Christ.
               
               13. Therfore let noman seduce thee: but be thou obedient to the Requyring of the Seruice of Loue: and so take-vpp thy Crosse▪ 
                  
                     Math. 16. d Luk. 9.14. c. 1. Pet. 2. c. 4 a.
                   and follow-after Christ / in his Death: and com euenso thorow his Death 
                     Rom. 6. a.
                   to the Renewing of the Lyfe. namely / to the newe Birth, or Resurrection of Christ from the Death: ye which is the true 
                     Rom. 6.8. c
                   Freedom of all the Children of God, and Gods vpright Glory in Iesu Christ, and in all his Holyones.
               14 O Ye beloued Hearts / com now all in-that-maner  / to the Glory of God the Father: and be not afrayde to 
                     Rom. 
                     
                        •
                     . b. 2 Timo. 2. b
                   suffer with Christ / in the Holy. For by his Suffering in

the Holy / He wil make you 1 Pet. 2. a. Apo. 1. a. 5. b
                   Kings and Priestes vnto his God: and Gouernoures vppon Earth / for to beare the Dominion vppon Earth / with ye liueing God and his Righteousnes / to the Treading-downe of the Sinne, Death, Deuill, and Hell / which haue corrupted the Earth / with their Iniquitie and Vngodlynes· and raigned ouer thesame with Vnrighteousnes / To thend that they may 
                     Rom. 6. b.
                   nomore raigne ouer thesame: but that God with his Saintes / may raigne vppon the Earth for euermore, and that the 
                     Mat. 6. b.
                   Will of God the Father may be don vppon Earth / as in Heauen.
            
            The Ende of the Eleuenth Epistle.
         
         
            The Twelueth Epistle. An Information and Loueing Exhortation of Reproofe / written and sent vnto One / out of harty Loue: Wher-with he is loued to the Concorde of the Loue, and to the Vnitee of Heart in the Obedience of the Loue.
            
            
               
                  O Lorde, how kynde and sweete is thy Spirit / in all things. Therfore doest thou chasten those measurably / that do erre: and exhortest those with Correction / that sinne / because they shoulde hate their Wickednes, and beleeue ⁏O Lorde; in thee.
                  Sap, 12.
               
            
            
               The First Chapter.
               
                  WIth this my  Wryting ⁏as a Salutacion of the Loue; I do hartely 
                     •
                  a
                  
                     •
                  ute thee to the Loue / my beloued Freende: and do wish thee to haue obtayned in one Spirit with vs 
                     Math. 11. d.
                   Little and Electedones of God / thesame Cleernes of the true Light / wherwith God ye Father hath shewed Mercie on vs / through his harty Loue. For this Cleernes of the true Light ⁏ 
                     Iohn. 17. c. 1. Iohn. 1.
                        •
                     . which God hath with Vs / and wee with Him; is the Daye of Loue / of his righteous Iudgmet.
               2. Which Daye is com and declared vnto vs / by the 2 Timo 1. b. Tit. 2. b.
                   Appeering of the gloryous Coming of the Lorde Iesu Christ, who cometh now from the Right-hande of God his Father / 
                     Act, 1. b. 7. g Ephe. 1. c. Col. 3. a. Heb. 1. a. 10. 
                        •
                     . 11. 
                        •
                     . out of Heauen, according to ye Scripture / On which Daye / the Circuit of the Earth [namely, eueryone

in thatt which he is: the Liueing and Dead, the Good and Euell, the Lightes and Darknesses, the Trueth and Lye, the vpright Vnderstanding and the Ignorances of Men] shalbe iudged 
                     Act. 17. d·
                   with Rightousnes. For in thesame shall eueryone receaue his Rewarde / according to his Nature 
                     Ier. 17 b. Math. 16 c. Rom. 2.14. b. 2 Cor. 5.6. Apo. 2. c.
                   or frui
                     •
                  t of his Workes.
               3. Happy is hee that submitteth himself humbly and obediently vnder thissame Daye of Loue: also giueth 
                     Pro 1. a. 2. a 3. a. 4. a. 5. a. Eccli. 6. c.
                   eare to ye Seruice of Loue, and to thesame holy Woord that is ministred therout: and setteth not himselfe to be a▪ Iudg ouer the Workes of God, nor ouer the Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of Loue, neither-yet is wyse 
                     Pro. 3. a. Esa. 5. c. Rom. 12. b.
                   in his owne conceit: but giueth God the Honour / that He himself is the very-true Lorde and Iudg / in his Daye, and in the Seruice of his Loue: and so taketh-heede to the Loue of God the Father / to his Preseruation. Amen.
               
               
                   4. MY Beloued, as I haue vnderstoode by the Mouth of thy Freende / when I was with him in Friesland / thy Request was vnto mee / that I woulde wryte a little vnto thee: But I coulde not wel comprehend nor perceaue by his Woordes / what mought be thy Seeking or Desyre therwith: As whether thou didst desyre to be taught or edifyed by the holy Woord / which we minister vnder the Obedience of the Loue: or-els whether thou desyeredst to iudg thesame / according to thyne owne Good-thinking.
               
                  5. Seing then that many Heartes do com before vs now / with Deceipt (notwithstanding / I hope otherwyse of thee) and that wee by-that-occasion / do not willingly wryte vnaduisedly or vnforesightfully vnto anyman that desyereth it of vs / Therfore woulde we gladly at the first / heare to what ende Those that seeke any Seruice at our Handes / do desyre our Seruice / 2. Cor. 5. 
                        •
                     . 1. Tess. 
                     
                        •
                     . b.
                   which proceedeth out of Gods Counsayle and Wisdom.
               6. And besydes thatt / because I coulde not vnderstande thy Mynde or Intent / by the Message that was don vnto me by Mouth / therfore haue I refrayned from wryting vnto thee at that tyme: but did by him returne Message vnto thee / by woord-of-mouth / that I woulde com to thee about Sainte Martines-tyde / for to talke with thee myself by Mouth.
               7. But because ther is now somwhat-els  com vnto me / which hath hindered me from coming to thee / therfore haue I heere now by this Bearer / written the Cause vnto thee / why I did omitt to wryte vnto thee at that tyme.
               8. But I hope that thou wilt not be offended heerby. nor-yet think / that my Will is therfore to forsake the Seruice of the holy Woord / wherunto the God of Lyfe hath 
                     Gal. 1 b. Ephe 1. b 3. 
                        •
                      1 Timo. 1. a.
                   elected Mee / through his Loue / for to assist, and to be seruiceable vnto my Neighbour / toward thesame Loue of God the Father [namely, to the Needy, 
                     Esa▪
                      58. a.
                   or Poore of Spirit, and to the

Broken or 
                     Psalm 34 b 51. b. 147, a Esa. 57. b.
                   Striken of Heart] Or-yet tha
                     •
                   I woulde not vouchsafe to wryte vnto thee.
               9. O No ⁏thou Beloued; my Heart or Mynde standeth not so bent / as to forsake the Good and his Seruice: or that I shoulde not vouchsafe to serue eueryone ther-with: but I stande alwayes good-willingly bent therto. For I do not serue nor labour for myself only: 
                     Eccli. 24. d. 33. c.
                   but likewyse for all Those that loue and desyre Informacion.
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               
                   HOwbeit ⁏my Beloued; I woulde doutles very-gladly haue spoken with thee by Mouth myself / if the tyme woulde haue serued therto / Because that I haue heard by Somme / that thou art not well content or satisfied with the sincere Wisdom or Vnderstanding / which is com vnto vs Littleones and Lowely-hearts / 
                     Sap. 6. b. Iam 3. b.
                   out of Heauen / from the Right-hande of God, and which we do minister vnto the Children of Men / to their Saluacion: but makest many Woordes vpon it / for that thou wouldest iudg the godly Wisdom and holy Vnderstanding / according to thyne owne Imaginacion, and so to withstande thesame / according to thy good-thinking Iudgment: wherwith thou 
                     Rom. 16. b. 2 Cor. 11. a.
                   stealest-away the Simplicitee in Christ, as also the true Obedience to the Loue, and to the Requyring of her Seruice / from the Hearts of

the Simple: and ⁏euen in Contempt towards the Trueth of God; gloryest and commendest thyself therin.
               2. O thou Beloued, if thou perseuerest heerin / then wil it fal-out greeuous vnto the / to withstande the Mouth of God, and the Grace of his Loue / wherwith God presenteth thee and all Men / 
                     Luk. 24. c. Rom. 2 a. Act. 17. d.
                   to a Repentance for their Sinnes.
               3. Therfore do I exhort thee ⁏out of the bounteous  Loue of God; to thy Preseruacion and Saluacion / sett not thyself against the Trueth of God, nor apply not thy Natural-reason and Prudence therunto: but turne thee from the euell Acts of thy Lipps and Toung: and submitt thyself humbly with vs ⁏euen 1. Pet. 5 a. Iam. 4 a.
                   with a simple Heart; vnder the Obedience of the Loue / so shalt thou fynde Grace before God.
               4. But if-so-be thou desyrest larger Instruction of anything / then th
                     •
                  se Wrytings which proceede-out from vs / do witnes vnto thee: or if Those that com vnto thee from Vs / do not satisfy thee / in thyne Vnde
                     •
                  standing / Yet do not therfore reiect anything: but aske after the right Distinction. And when thou hast inquyred after the right Grounde of the Trueth of our godly Testimonyes / then vnderstande likewyse the Mattier first rightly ⁏according to the Trueth; er-euer thou dispise or speak-against anything of the holy Testimonyes of the Trueth.
               
                  5. If then ther be any Sentence to-secret before thee: or if thou want anything / then wryte-ouer thesame boldly vnto mee / as one that loueth 
                     Eccli 6. d. 8. a.
                   the Informacion, and desyereth the cleere Instruction of the 
                     Math 13▪ 
                     b.
                   Secretnes of the Trueth. I hope thou shalt alwayes fynde me seruiceable / for to assist thee to the Vnitee in the Loue, and to liue concordably with thee / in the vpright Vnderstanding.
               
                   6. If now thou giue thyself heerunto, and doest euenso / then wil I ⁏through the Grace that is shewed on mee; most-groundly instruct thee, and also shewe thee with Sensible-reason / that we haue no want of anything / in our Seruice of Loue: but do / out of the Cleernes of God ⁏2. Cor. 4. a.
                   which hath shyned about vs; shewe vnto eueryone sufficiently / in Plentiful-store of Instructions (were it rightly vnderstoode) the 4 Esa. 
                     
                        •
                     . a. Mat 7. b Luk. 13. c.
                   Waye or Course that leadeth to the L
                     •
                  fe, wherof thou wil
                     •
                   seeme to saye much with Misunderstanding / as being vnexpert in the Matter.
               7. But if now it be vnknowen or to-darke before anyman, as that our Gospel ⁏which we publish vnder the Obedience of the Loue / out of the highest Cleernes of God / 2. Cor. 3. b.
                   from the vncouered Face of Christ; be to-couered or to-secret for him / 2 Cor. 4. a
                   Then veryly is it hidden to those / which with the vnbeleeueing Mynde of this Worlde / do not beleeue nor vnderstande the Trueth of God: also before all those / which perswade 
                     Pro. 3, b. Esa. 
                     
                        •
                     . c.
                   themselues that they 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
wyse, and for-that-cause / are not subiect to the sincere Doctrine of the Loue.
            
            
               The III. Chap.
               FOrasmuch now then / as that the  Seruice of Gods Loue / is ⁏by Gods Grace; com vnto Mee, and comitted 
                     Gal. 1. d. 1. Timo 1. b
                  vnto me to minister / wherby to declare vnto the Man / with good Instruction ⁏through thesame Seruice; the true Tabernacle or Temple of the Lorde ⁏
                     Leuit 26 b Eze 37.43. a. Apo. 21 a
                   wherin God wil dwell, liue, and walke; and the true God-seruice in thesame. namely, for to distinct the Forefrunt of the true Tabernacle of God ⁏wherin the vpright Circumcision cometh-to-pas / which is 
                     Ier. 4. a. Rom 2. c. Phil. 3. a. Col. 2. b.
                   according to the Requyring of the Obedience of the Lawe of the Lorde; from the Hea
                     •
                  thenshipp or Vncircumcision: the Holy ⁏wherein the vpright Baptisme cometh-to-pas / which is 
                     Rom. 6. a. Col. 2. b.
                   according to the Requyring of the Obedience of the Fayth of Iesu Christ; from the Forefrunt: and the Mostholy ⁏wherin the vpright Fulfilling 
                     Heb. 9.10 b.
                   and Establishing of the Promyses cometh-to-pas / which is according to the Requyring of the Obedience of the Loue of the holy Gost; from the Holy: as also eachones Seruice, Office, and Order / So am I likewyse obediently inclyned therto / to thend to shewe euenso vnto the Man / the true God-seruice in the Spirit / which he oweth

vnto God, and which is profitable to his Saluation.
               2. But first-of-al / the Man ought to take-heede what the gracious Seruice of Loue and of the holy and gracious Woord requyreth of him / in his Heathenshipp or Vncircumcision / to his Saluacion: For by thesame Seruice of the gracious Woord in the Vncircumcision / God calleth or requyreth the Man ⁏with his true Promyses of Saluacion, and assured Graunt of eternall Lyfe; out of the 
                     Gen. 22. a.
                   Heathenshipp or Vncircumcision / to the Good-willingnes to the Entrance into his Sainctuary: and so then the Man (if he becom good-willing to the Obeying of the Calling of ye Lorde, and hath a regarde vnto ye gracious 2 Pet. 1. c.
                   Woord) is drawen or leadd out of the Heathenshipp / into the Forefrunt of the true Sainctuary or Tabernacle of God, and to the Departure out of the Sinne, and to the Entrance into the godly Lyfe. And thesame Departure out of the Heathenshipp, and Entrance into the Sainctuary / is the Seruice or the Requyring of the holy Woorde / in the Heathenshipp or Vncircumcision.
               
                   3. But the Seruice or the Requyring of the holy Woord / in the Forefrunt or Entrance into the godly Lyfe, is the 
                     Rom. 2. c. Phil. 3. a. Col. 2. b.
                   Circumcision of the Heart / in the Feare of God [namely, 
                     Col. 2. b.
                   the Laying-away of the Sinne in the Flesh.] Which Forefrunts Entrance ⁏and to shewe Obedience therin / according to the Lawe of

the Lorde; is the right 
                     Math. 7. b. Luk. 13. c.
                   Waye and the first Stepp / that leadeth the Man ⁏out of the Heathenshipp; to the Entrance into the Sainctuary of God, and into the godly Lyfe of Christ. And so out of the Forefrunt of the Tabernacle of God and the Seruice of thesame / the Man is leadd into the true Holy of the Tabernacle of God, or vpright Beleefe of Iesu Christ.
               
               4. The Seruice or the Requyring of the holy Woord in the Holy, or Beleefe of Iesu Christ / is the Putting-on or 
                     Iohn. 6. f.
                   Receaueing of the Body of Iesu Chrst, and so to dye vnto the Sinne / 1 Pet. 2. c. 4. a.
                   in the Following of Christ in his Death of the Crosse: and 
                     Rom. 6. a. Col. 2. b.
                   euenso to be baptised in thesame Death of Christ, and to drinke his Blood / out of thesame 
                     Luk. 22. Cupp / to the Forgiueing and Burying of the Sinne: and to shewe Obedience, and to continue 
                     Math. 10. c. 24. b.
                   stedfast therin ⁏according to the Woord of Iesu Christ; till vnto the 
                     Iohn. 3. a. Rom. 6. a.
                   seconde Birth from the Death. And thatt is the right 
                     Math. 19. d. 26 c
                   Passe-ouer with Christ / vnto his Resurrection: and it is the right Fulfilling of the dayly Offering and God-seruice in the Holy / to an euerlasting 
                     Heb. 10. b.
                   Forgiuenes and Burying of the Sinne, and to an euerlasting 
                     Rom. 5. a. Heb. 9. b.
                   Reconcilment with God the Father.
               5. Which vpright Offering and his Fulfilling  in the Following of Christ in the holy: and so to lay-away and to bu
                     •
                  y the Sinne / through the Death of the Crosse of Christ
                  
(as to be planted into Christ / with the like Death in the Holy, or to be baptised 
                     Rom. 6. a. Col. 2. b.
                   in-that-maner / in his Death) the Man oweth vnto God the Father. For thatt is the right 
                     Rom. 3. c. Ephe 1. 
                        
                           •
                        . Heb. 9.6. Forgiuenes of Sinnes, the true Conquering of the Death, the godly Iustifycation, 
                     Rom. 8. a Heb. 9.10 b.
                   and the Satisfaction of Christ with the Manhod / through his Suffering and Death of the Crosse: wherthrough the Vayle 
                     Math. 27. betwixt the Holy and ye Mostholy / is put-away from the Man. And so he is leadd out of the Holy of the Tabernacle of God, and his Seruice of the true Offering / into the Mostholy of the Tabernacle of God, or into ye vpright 1. Cor. 13. b Col. 3. b.
                   Loue of God the Father. namely, into the Perfection or Accomplishment of all the Workes of God, and into the Fulnes of all ye spirituall and heauenly Goodes.
               6. But the Seruice or the Requyring of the holy Woord in the Mostholy [namely, in the Loue of God the Father, or Perfection of all the Workes of God] is / to declare the true Resurrection with Christ, and to publish thesame for a Gospel or ioyfull Message of the Kingdom of God and Christ: and that the euerlasting Lyfe / is to be inherited 
                     Eph. 1.2. 
                        
                           •
                        . Col. 1.2.3. a
                   therin, as also ye spirituall and heauenly Goodes of Christ and of his Father / in the heauenly Beeing. And thatt is the true Seting-vp of the Perfection, and the Declaring of the Kingdom of the God of Heauens / in his Glory, for a righteous Iudgment of God vppon the Earth.
               
                  7. In thesame Mostholy, and to shewe Obedience therin / according to the true Beeing of the holy Spirit of Loue, or to liue 
                     Iohn. 17. d.
                   vniforme with God and Christ obediently / is the Declaring of the 
                     Math 24. a. 25. d 2. Tess. 2. Tit. 2. b.
                   gloryous and true Coming of our Lorde Iesu Christ / from the Right-hande of God the Father / in the Resurrection of the Righteous, and the great 
                     Esa. 2. c. 13. 
                        •
                      
                     Ier 46. Mal. 4. 2. Pet. 3. b.
                   and tirrible Daye of the Lorde / of the righteous Iudgment.
               8. Seing now that thesame Howse of the  Lorde, or this true Tabernacle of God ⁏wherin God, together with all his Saincts / wil dwell for euermore; is declared vnto mee ⁏in his Glory, and with the Fulnes of the Ritches of his Garnishing; in the Seruice of Loue· and thesame Seruice committed 
                     Eph. 3. a.
                   vnto me to minister / out of the heauenly Trueth / So do not I also desyre anything-els (God is my Witnes) but to assist thee ⁏if thou bist good-willing to the Loue; and likewyse eueryone / to thesame Seruice / To thend that the Seruice of Loue mought be furthered and spread-abroade among all People / to their Saluacion, and to the Peace and Vnitee of Heart· the 
                     Ephe. 2. b. 2. Pet. 2. a. Apo. 
                     
                        •
                     1. 
                        •
                     
                   Howse of Loue or the Tabernacle of the Lorde, and his vpright Seruice / declared euerywheare· and so all Fayle and Discord / layd-downe or taken-away / among the Louers of the Trueth: and that we mought concordably together ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; take-heede-vnto and declare the foremencioned 
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        . 1. 
                        
                           •
                        . Phil 3. c. Ti
                           •
                        . 
                     
                        •
                     . b.
                   Daye of the Coming of the Lorde Iesu Christ
                  
and the Resurrection of the righteous Deadones, to an euerlasting Tryumph of the Glory of God ouer vs, according to the Promyses.
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               
                   BEholde ⁏my Beloued; to this Vnitee of Heart in the Loue, and to assemble thee with Vs / to thesame gloryous Maiestee of God ؛the Mostholy of his true Tabernacle
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   art thou likewyse loued / out of Grace vndeserued. And this write I also vnto thee / out of harty Loue, for to assist thee to this Louelynes of God, and to the Comunialtee of his Saintes / for that our Fellowshipp mought be one with each-other / in the Concord 
                     Iohn. 17. b. 1. Iohn 1. a.
                   of the Loue.
               2. O thou Beloued, 2. Cor. 6 a.
                   disdayne not this proffered Grace / which is presented vnto thee / to an Vnitee of Heart. For veryly / if thou doest ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; 
                     Pro. 1.2▪ 3. a. 4. a. 5. a. Eccli. 6. c.
                   giue-eare with vs Littleones and Elected of God / to the Woord of Trueth, and submittest thyself therunder / Then shalt thou also with vs Little and Simpleones / vnderstande 
                     Mat. 11. d. 13. b.
                   and inherite the secret Treasures and heauenly Ritches. But in-nowyse without our Comunialtee of Loue.
               
                   3. For in our Comunialtee of Loue / ther is vncouered, 1. Cor. 2. c. 2. Cor 4 a.
                   opened, and aboundantly brought vnto vs / out of Gods Grace ⁏for an euerlasting Heritage of God; the Fulnes of the Wisdom of God, 
                     Ephe. 1. b. Col. 1 c. 2. a
                   and the perfect Vnderstanding

of the holy Spirit of Christ. and not vnto any that are without thesame.
               4. Which Secrets of God ⁏with ther full Cleernes; God hath geeuen vnto Vs before any other / as his elected Saints 
                     Rom. 16, c. Eph 
                     
                        •
                      
                     a. 3. 
                        •
                      
                     Col. 1. c. 2. Timo. 1. b
                   and beloued Children / To thend that thesame heauenly Trueth, and thesame Saluacion in Christ / shoulde ⁏now in the last tyme; be declared by vs / 
                     Esa. 49. a. 60. a 66. b. Act. 9. b. 13. a. Rom. 1. a.
                   among all People, to the Laude and Prayse of the Glory of God, and of his holy Name.
               5. To thesame God of Glory / who hath prepared such a great Name vnto himself / in the last tyme· and ⁏through his Loue; chosen vs to the holy Vnderstanding / for to lighten many Mens Vnderstanding / be Laude, Honour, and Thanks / for euermore. Amen.
               6. Heerwithall / thou Beloued ⁏wherwith  thou art bidden and assisted to our holy Comunialtee of Loue; I commit thee to the Lorde and his Grace and salute me ⁏with a Salutation of Loue; vnto all thyne Acquayntance / that are wel-mynded to the Loue, and to the Obeying of her Seruice. The Goodnes of the supreame God / be with you all. Amen.
               
            
            The Ende of the Twelueth Epistle.
         
         
            
            
               
            
            Our Heart / is the Minde of God most-hie.
            Our Beeing amiable / as the sweete Lillie.
            Our Faithfulnes / Loue / and Trueth vpright / 
            Is Gods Light / Life / and Cleernes bright.
            
         
         
            
            
            The Thirtenth Epistle. Loueing Informacions vnto a Louer of the Trueth / which before-tyme was a Blaspheamer of the Seruice of Loue and the Ministers therof: and afterward ⁏with great Sorrow for his Sinne; turned him to thesame Seruice / for to shewe Obedience therin.
            
               
                  Ther shalbe a Ioye in Heauen, and before the Angels of God / ouer one Sinner that repenteth.
                  Luk. 15.
               
            
            To him whose Soule loueth my Soule / in all Loue / be Health and Saluation.
            
               
               The First Chapter.
               
                  
                  FOrasmuch ⁏thou Beloued; as I haue receaued thy Salutacion and Wryting / written vnto mee (wherin thou doest expresse / yt thou hast wholly turned thy self to ye Good / with all thy Sences and Thoughts: and art wel-mynded with Mee / to the 
                     Ephe. 4. a.
                   Vnitee of Heart in the Loue, to the Peace, and to the Righteousnes) So haue I indeuoured me with Dilligence of my Heart / for to perceaue to what ende thy Mynde and Intent mought stretch in thissame: or which is the Cheefest-thing that thou seekest or intendest therwith.
               2. If-so-be now that I do fynde in the Deede and Trueth / that thy whole Heart, Intent, and Mynde / doth (as thou wrytest) stande-mynded with Mee / to the Loue / that euerlasting and inuisible heauenly Good: Then wil I not also be mistrustfull towards thee, nor-yet conceaue otherwyse of thee / then thou wrytest. but wil hope all good of thee.
               
                   3. But forasmuch now as that almost all Flesh of the earthly Manhod is captiued with secret Craftynes / which itself oftentymes seeth not: also / that it seeketh in althings / himself, or his owne 
                     Phil. 2. c.
                   Benefite / in what Humiltee and

Holynes soeuer it turneth or giueth-ouer 
                     Esa. 58.59. 
                        •
                      
                     Col, 2. b. c.
                   itself vnto: and that all his Conuersion is nothing-els oftentymes / but an Inclynation to his owne Sensualitee / according to his owne Pleasure / Therfore haue I doutles to consider well theron, and to vse a great Circumspection to the things that the Man giueth-foorth of himself: and likewyse for to perceaue out of what Grounde of the Heart / the Mans Conuersion, or his Mynde to the Good / cometh-to-pas, or out of what Intent he calleth Thatt the Good / wherunto he turneth him. namely, whether ye thesame which he turneth him vnto / do 
                     Rom. 6. b. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     a. 13. b. Gal. 5. b.
                   delyte him according to the Flesh of Sinne, and according to his fleshly Will: or whether that he turne-away himself from all what is a Delyte vnto the Flesh, and so hath a 
                     psal. 40. Desyre with all his Heart / to doo the Lordes Will.
               4. For-that-cause ⁏thou Beloued; inasmuch now as all s
                     •
                  nfull Flesh is generally ⁏in his Conuersion; so 
                     Gen 6 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   self-chooseing, and is also oftentymes / founde deceitfull therin / Therfore cannot I so simply beleeue nor trust thee / at the first / because yt I may yet perhapps haue som Suspicion / whether that thy Conuersion may proceede out of a 
                     Rom. 8. a. 13. b.
                   Delyte of the Flesh / or no, and therfore cannot continue stedfast with thee. Notwithstanding / by thy Wryting / I hope the Best of thee.
               
               5. But seing that it is all 
                     Pro. 11. b.
                   vnstedfast / whatsoeuer is taken-on out of the Pleasure of the sinfull Flesh / therfore must I needes wryte

vnto thee of thesame, and of my Mistrust that I haue towards it. For doutles I can trust no Flesh of Sinne, nor anything that the Man inclyneth-vnto / according to the Mocions or Pleasures of the Flesh / as to thinck that his Humilitee and Lowelynes or Littlenes / is so wholly inclyned to the Loue of God the Father / with an vpright Heart / as his Woordes and Wrytings do import. Also / none of those things can perswade me to trust firmly theron / that it shalbe found euen so in the Deede.
               6. Notwithstanding, although I do mistrust the Man / according to the Inclynacion of his Flesh, and do not so simply beleeue him at the first / yet do I wel vouchsafe vnto him with all my Heart / all the Good wherof he bosteth him. Yea, I woulde also that he had obtayned such Mercy at the hands of the highest God / as his Woordes do speake-of, or as his  Wrytings do import.
               7. But veryly, all whatsoeuer is testifyed, enterprysed, or begonne / out of the Will and Pleasure of the Flesh / without the Spirit of God, or without our Mostholy Seruice of Loue. or whatsoeuer is beleeued, accepted, and deuised / out of anymans Doctrine and Counsayle / that standeth not wholly submitted to the holy Spirit of Loue and his Seruice (let it be then in the accomplishing, erecting, or obeying of what Holynes or Righteousnes soeuer it be) therin shall noman ⁏whosoeuer he be; be able to continue stedfast: but they must all

needes be varyable and com to shame therin.
               8. For seing it procedeth out of the Flesh of Lyes / 
                     Rom. 7. b. c▪
                      8. a. 
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 3. a.
                   therfore also is not the Power to the vpright Righteousnes and Holynes / with thesame: but it is only with the highest God: Which God / bringeth or sendeth his Power / 
                     Ephe. 3. b. Phil. 2. b. 3. c Col 1. c.
                   vnto his Beleeuers or Holyones / that heare his Woord, and giue-ouer themselues with all their Hearts / vnto Obedience vnder the Spirit of the Loue of Christ, and to the mostholy Godseriuce of thesame.
               9. Vnder which vpright Seruice and godly Righteousnes / God doth not fauour any Flesch, as to honour thesame with any fleshly Righteousnes or Holynes / 1 Cor 1. c.
                   for that it shoulde in nowyse bost itself of his owne Goodnes.
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               SEing then that ther belongeth no  Honour to the Flesh of Sinne / therfore doth God likewyse now in his gloryous Daye of ye Coming of Christ bring all sinfull 1. Cor. 1. c.
                   Flesh to shame ⁏in the Purpose of his owne Holynes or Righteousnes through the Seruice of his Loue; and sheweth that Hee ؛the Lorde
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   is the vpright Righteousnes of the true Lyfe, and the Loue itself. Which God / permitteth not himself to be approched vnto nor reconciled / in his Righteousnes (let it be then by what meanes it wil) 
                     Psal 
                     
                        •
                     5.24 a Esa 33. b. Heb. 12. c.
                   but only by his owne vertuous Beeing, and godly Nature, or Spirit of Loue.
               
                  2. But this doth the Flesh dislyke-of: for-that-cause also / it hath no pleasure in the God of Heauen, nor in his Glory, nor-yet in the Iudgment of his Righteousnes. For ther-through it fyndeth itself altogether vayne and weake / before God and his Trueth. also vtterly 
                     Iob. 9. 
                        
                           •
                         b. c Psal. 126. b. Rom. 3. a.
                   vnrighteous, false, and lying / in his owne Iudgment.
               3. And the Flesh, or the Wisdom proceding out of the Flesh / doth likewyse growe-offended at the true Light of God ⁏the which notwithstanding / is Christ / 1. Iohn. 4. c
                   the Sauiour of all the Worlde himself; because that all his Fleshes owne-proper Righteousnes 
                     Col. 2. b. c.
                   and self-chosen Holynes and Wisdom / auayleth not with the true Light, neither-yet is it esteemed as to make any account therof.
               
                   4. But seing now that the Flesh of Sinne / woulde so fayne haue Prayse or Honour for his Holynes, Wisdom, or Righteousnes / therfore doth it seeke thesame among the Children of Men / in diuers maners. By which occasion / ther is so many Diuisions of chosen Holynes / growne euerywhear 
                     Rom. 10. a. Gal. 3 a. 4. b Col. 2. b c.
                   in the Worlde or among the Children of Men.
               5. But Gods Saints ⁏which dwell in Heauen; shall laugh the Flesh of Sinne to-scorne / with his foolish Bewitching, and with all the Hipocrisy of his forged Holynes. For the Man hath therthrough forsaken the louely Righteousnes of the vpright Lyfe in the Peace. and ⁏with his owne Righteousnes; plucked much

Stryfe and Controuersy vppon his owne Neck.
               6. He hath also lest to giue 
                     Ier. 2. 
                        •
                     . Rom. 1. 
                        •
                     
                   to the God of Lyfe his Honour / 
                     Iohn. 5. 
                        •
                     
                   that belongeth only vnto Him. and hath sought and defended his owne Honour. Therfore hath he likewyse dealt with so many Wickednesses, and Killings or Murderings. By which occasion / he cannot also vnderstande or conceaue any-thing-at-all 
                     Math. 23. Rom. 10. 
                        •
                     
                   of the vpright Righteousnes which auayleth before God, which notwithstanding / bringeth-the Loue and the Peace vnto him.
               7. Seing then that the Man ⁏in his Ignorance;  is thus vtterly 
                     Gen. 6. a. 
                        •
                      
                     Rom. 1. 
                        •
                     . Eph. 4. b.
                   corrupted / through the Bewitching of the sinfull Flesh, and hath geeuen a great Respect vnto his owne good-thinking Knowledg / so hath he likewyse turned all his Dilligence towards thesame / to 
                     Rom. 10. a.
                   set-vp his owne Righteousnes / according to the Goodthinking of his Knowledg. and hath generally had a pleasure in his owne Workes.
               8. But thatt God which liueth for euer, and is my God / shall now in thissame Daye 
                     Math. 24. d 25. d. 26. g. 2. Timo. 1. b
                   ⁏through the Appeering of Christ in his Glory; bring all Flesh of Sinne 1. Cor 1. c.
                   to shame / in his owne Wisdom and made Holynes. In which Daye of the gloryous Cleernes of God / God wil iudg 
                     Psal. 96. b. Act. 17. d.
                   the Circuit of the Earth / with Righteousnes.
               9. Therfore shall now likewyse in thissame Daye / all Generacions of the Earth ⁏which sett their Confidence vppon their owne Wisdom,

Righteousnes, and Holynes of the sinfull Flesh; 
                     Esa. 13. a. Ioel. 1.2. Sap. 5. a. Lu
                           •
                        
                      21. c Apo. 18. b. c
                  howle and weepe. For Gods Doctrine / serueing to the Entrance into the true christian Lyfe / shall appeere vnto them / to an Offenciuenes· his Righteousnes / to Sinne· his Lyfe / to a Death· and his Saluacion / to a Condemnacion.
               10. Although I wryte thus vnto thee / thou Beloued: and do not regarde any Flesh of Sinne / in his owne Righteousnes / yet do I account this of great value / that all Flesh with all his earthly Beeing / do lay-downe itself on his right Place [namely, 
                     Psal. 110. a. Heb. 1.10. b.
                   to be a Bench for the Lordes Feete] and so submitt itself to the Requyring of the Spirit of the Loue of Christ / to thend that the God of Lyfe may gett the Dominion 
                     Esa 24. c. Sap. 3. b.
                   ouer him / with his vpright Righteousnes.
               
                   11. I do also wel vouchsafe vnto thee with all my Heart / to haue obtayned all that thou louest / out of the vertuous Nature 1. Cor. 13. of the Loue: and do likewyse hope that thy Heart standeth-mynded / euen according as thou wrytest. Wherby also it shall not be greeuous vnto me / to conceaue the Best of thee: and that thy Wryting proceedeth not out of thyself, nor out of any prudent Counsayle of the Flesh. but out of a 
                     Sap 1. a. Ephe. 6. a. Col 3. c.
                   single Heart / through the Mercy of God, wherwith God hath pittied thee / to the Lande of his Glory, and to our Ioye in the Vnitee of Heart / for that we may lyue together

in the vpright and louely Beeing of Iesu Christ.
               
               12. But if now it be Flesh, or if it proceede out of the fleshly Beeing / then shall it surely 
                     Iob 14. a.
                   chainge and be vnconstant, and vanish-away vnder the Hande: and my Spirit ⁏which is the Lordes; shall not bynde itself vnto the Fleshes Beeing.
               13. And if it be Spirit, or if it proceede out of the Beeing of the true Spirit of Loue / then shall it likewyse continue, and remayne constant with thee. and all myne Inclynacion / shall stande affected to thy godly Will. For thatt be farre from me / that my Heart, Mynde, and Soule / shoulde mynde or affect anything-els / but only the spirituall and true heauenly Good, and those that with mee / do loue only the Heauenly, and are godly of will.
               14. Therfore also perswade thyself thorowly  ⁏thou Beloued; that my Mynde and all the Inclynacion of my Will (although I do conuersate myself with Many outwardly) is inclyned only to Those that are wel-mynded to the Spirituall and Heauenly, and are godly of Will: and that my Heart and Spirit desyreth to haue Fellowship with none other / but those that with all their Hearts and Soules / do giue-ouer themselues to all Obedience of the Loue, and so do stande wel-mynded to all Concorde with the Spirit of Loue and our Comunialtee.
               
                  15. For to that ende / hath the Lorde illuminated me with his Light, and endowed me with his 
                     Sap 7. a.
                   Wisdom, and chosen me to be a 
                     Col 1. c. 1 Timo. 1. b.
                   Minister of his holy Woord / wherby to assist eueryone that ⁏for ye Vnitees sake in the Loue; do forsake 
                     Math. 16. 
                        
                           •
                        .
                   themselues· follow the Loue / in her Seruice and vertuous Nature· and are mynded with all their Hearts / to learne the 
                     Math. 
                     
                        •
                     1. d.
                   Humilitee and Meeknes / of the Loue and her Seruice: and to proceed-on after thesame ⁏without Murmuring or imagining any euell; till that the Meeknes of the Loue / haue a 
                     Iam 1. c.
                   Shape in them.
               16. Consider well heeron / thou Beloued. For we are all created to the Vnitee 
                     Ephe. 4. a.
                   in the Loue / for to liue peaceably with each-other in all Loue, and ⁏through the Seruice of Loue; called and chosen therunto / by God / to thend that we shoulde laude God / in ye Loue· and ⁏like loueing Children of Peace; liue and walke together / 
                     Eph. 4.5. a.
                   in all Loue.
            
            
               The III. Chap.
               
                   BVt albeit now that many Multitudes of the People of this Worlde, or almost all those that wil vse God-seruices ⁏out of their owne Enterprises; do not 
                     Math. 13. b. 1. Cor. 2. b. 2 Cor. 4. 
                        
                           •
                        .
                   vnderstand nor conceaue thissame / by reason of their Vnbeleefe and Blyndnes of Heart, and are altogether Straingers therfrom or 
                     Rom. 1. c. Ephe. 4. b.
                   ignorant therof / Yet doth not thatt

concerne vs, as to trouble ourselues therwith (For what doth the Blyndnes or the Ignorance of the Vnbeleeuers touch vs) but this concerneth vs: That we haue to laude and thanke our God ⁏who is the eternall and liueing God; for his great Grace and Mercy / which He hath shewed so aboundantly on vs Little 
                     Esa. 66. a. Math. 11. d.
                   and Pooreones ⁏in these last perillous Tymes; from all the Thowsandes in this Worlde. namely, for that He hath ⁏through the holy Spirit of his Loue; illuminated Vs in our 1. Cor. 4. a. 2 Pet. 1. c.
                   Hearts / as his Elect: and giueth Vs dayly more-and-more / to see-into and 
                     Math. 11. d. 13 
                        •
                      1. Cor. 2. b. Eph. 1.2.3. a
                   vnderstande the Secretnes of his vpright and louely Lyfe: so that wee / through Gods Mercy towards vs ⁏aboue all the Wyse and Vnderstandingones in this Worlde; are neerest to the heauenly Trueth: and do euenso knowe in the Spirit / that we are made 
                     Iohn. 8. c.
                   free / through thesame Trueth.
               2. For all wee / which ⁏through the true  Spirit; are 1. Cor. 4. b. Cal. 4. b. 1. pet 1. c.
                   begotten to be Children of God / out of the Loue and her Seruice / are not Seruants of Men, nor of the Letter like-vnto the earthly Generacion out of the Flesh ⁏who are 
                     Rom. 1. c. Ephe. 4. b▪
                     
                   altogether Straingers and ignorant of Gods heauenly Trueth; but 2. Cor. 3. Ministers of the holy Woord, 2 Cor. 4. 2 Pet. 1. b.
                   and Witnesses of the spirituall and heauenly Goodes.
               3. And so through Gods true Beeing, and his spirituall and heauenly Goodes (in 
                     Rom. 8. b. Ephe. 1. b.
                   the which / God hath herited vs / as his beloued

Children) wee ⁏which are comprehended in the Comunialtee of Loue and 
                     Ephe. 4. b.
                   Age of the holy Vnderstanding; are eueryone / 1 Pet. 2. a. Apoc. 1. a. 5. b. 20 a.
                   Priestes, Kinges, or Gods / 
                     Exo. 22. a. Psal. 82. a. Iohn. 10 d.
                   and Children of the Most highest / which are not com of the Earth / but of Heauen, and 
                     Iohn. 1. a. 3. a.
                   borne out of God, for to raigne vppon the Earth / with Righteousnes.
               4. Therfore are wee likewyse / 
                     Rom. 8. b. Ephe. 1. b.
                   Gods Heyres with Christ our Sauiour / in all 
                     Esa 33. a. Ephe. 1 b. 2. a. Col 1. c. 2. a.
                   the Treasures and Ritches of his spirituall and heauenly Goodes / as free borne Children, who do all 
                     Ier. 31. d. 
                     
                        •
                     1 Iohn. 1 
                        
                           •
                        . Hed 8. b.
                   knowe God / from the Least to the Greatest: vnto whom also / God hath ⁏to a more Aboundance of his· Grace; geeuen to 
                     Math. 1
                        •
                     . d. 13. b. 1 Cor, 2. b. Ephe 3. a. Col. 1. e.
                   vnderstande the Secretnes of his Kingdom and of Christ, and his secret Counsayle and Will / To thend that the true and perfect Beeing of God the Father· the Secretnes of the Kingdom of Christ· and the endles Ioye of the heauenly Delytfulnes and of the euerlasting Lyfe / shoulde ⁏by vs; be declared vppon the Earth / now in the last tyme.
               
                   5. Beholde, thatt is the Brightnes of the vertuous Cleernes / which all the Children of God haue now / through the Loue. It is also the vpright Rest / which God hath 
                     Heb. 4. b.
                   kept or reserued for his Children / for to herite them therin in thissame last Tyme: and it is likewyse / the vpright Righteousnes of the heauenly Trueth / against the which / the Worlde can do nothing, neither can any Flesh / lett thesame in-any-wyse.
               
                  6. For all the Darknesses, Vnrestfulnes, and all the Foolishnesses and Vnrighteousnesses of this Worlde / cannot 
                     Act. 9. b. c.
                   bring-to-nothing / Gods Light, Rest, nor his Righteousnes and Wisdom / which cometh ritchly and aboundantly vnto vs / through his Loue: neither can likewyse all the false God-seruices, chosen Holynesses of the Flesh, nor the false Heartes of the Scripture-learned / 
                     Mat. 16. c.
                   destroy the vpright God-seruice ⁏which cometh-to-pas with vs in the Spirit / through the Loue; nor-yet our vpright Holynes which God esteemeth.
               7. Therfore are wee likewyse wel-at-quyet in our God, and in the true Beeing of his vndisturbable Power / wherin all Myndes and Thoughtes 
                     Psal. 15.24. 
                        
                           •
                        . Esa. 33. b.
                   of pure Hearts / do liue and dwell. For those Things wherof we speake, and wherwith God illuminateth vs / are not vncertayne to our Consciences.
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               WE confesse also out of a good  Conscience / before God, and before all those that desyre to heare vs in Humilitee, that now in thissame Daye / it is altogether the Will and the Precept or Commaundement of God / 
                     Esa 1. b. 55. a Ier. 7. a. c. 18. b. 25. a. 35. b. Eze. 18. c. Math. 3. a. Act 2.17. d
                   that eueryone shoulde turne him from all his Vnrighteousnes, and with a penitent Heart / giue his Vnderstanding captiue 2. Cor. 10. 
                        •
                     
                   vnder the Obedience

of the Loue: and euenso shoulde ⁏vnder the Wings of the Loue; leade an vpright Lyfe with vs Little and Electedones of God / both before God and Man, wherby to inherite and possesse with Christ / for euermore ⁏like Children 
                     Rom 8. b. Ephe. 1, c.
                   and Heyres of God; all the heauenly Ritches of God our Father / through ye Loue. Haue a good regarde therunto.
               2. VEryly / This is now the Sounde of the last Trumpet, 
                     Ioel. 2. a. b. 1. Tess. 4. b. Apo 12. a.
                   and the Trumpets-noyse of the righteous Iudgment of our God / which we do witnes in the Worlde before the Eares of all People, and do publish it generally 
                     Mat. 24. d. Apo. 14. b.
                   in the Worlde / vnto all Louers of the Trueth / as a ioyfull Message.
               
                   3. But if now we be not beleeued heerin / by reason of the Blyndnes of the People, or because of their self chosen Holynes: but much-rather resisted 
                     Act. 7. f. 2. Pet. 2 b. Iude. 1 b.
                   and blaspheamed / through the Disobedience 
                     psal. 95. a. Ier 
                     
                        •
                     . e. Heb 3. a.
                   and Hardnes of their Heartes / What doth thatt concerne vs / Gods 
                     Iohn 12. c.
                   Iudgment goeth neuer-the-lesse ouer the Worlde for-al-thatt: but to take-heede to thesame Iudgment, and to haue a good regarde vnto the Sentences of his righteous Iudgment / thatt veryly doth concerne vs much. For now in thissame Daye / it yeeldeth vnto vs eueryone / either the euerlasting Saluacion, or the euerlasting Condemnacion.
               4. But let vs not therfore feare, nor be dismayed. For the Iudgment of God chauneth

to all vs ⁏Wee / which vnder the Obedience of the Loue / do beleeue Gods Trueth, as likewyse all the Saincts of God; to an euerlasting Ioye and Saluacion in the eternall Lyfe. 
                     Dan. 12. b. Mat. 25. c. Iohn. 5. c. Rom. 2 a.
                   but to the Vnbeleeuers, and all Vngodlyones, together with all erring Spirits or Children of the Deuill / to a perpetuall Condemnacion in the euerlasting Death: among whom / the Flame of the hellish Fyre and the 
                     Esa. 
                     
                        •
                     6. c. Mark. 9. 
                        •
                     . Gnawing of the Worme of the euell Conscience / shall endure / euen for euer and euer. It is verytrue.
               5. BVt though anyman now shoulde beleeue  our Testimonyes of the true Spirit of Loue / which we do witnes with Courtesye / before all Consciences of Men: and in the Beleefe ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; shoulde be 
                     Iohn 3. d. 6. c. 20. d. 1 Iohn. 5 b.
                   saued, and shoulde therfore be protected from the last 
                     Apo. 18. a. 20. c.
                   Plagues of the Vngodly, or be ridd ther-from / Yet is not thatsame then our Worke, nor-yet his that beleeueth: 2. Cor 3. b.
                   but the Worke of our God / in his righteous Iudgment.
               6. Therfore is the Beleefe / 
                     Rom. 12. a. 1 Cor. 12. a. b Ephe. 2.4. a
                   a Gi
                     •
                  t of God, wherwith God sheweth Mercy on vs, and so draweth vs out of the Aboundance of our Darknesses / 1. Pet. 2. b.
                  vnto himself into his Loue▪ that euerlasting vnchaingable Light
                     •
                  .
               7. Beholde, euenthus in his Loue / doth the Lorde accepe vs 2 Cor. 6. b.
                   for his Sonnes and Daughters, for his Seruants and Hand-maydens: and leadeth vs with his Right-hande / into the

Daye of the true Light of his heauenly Cleernes / for to power-out his holy Spirit 
                     Esa. 44, a. Eze. 36. c. Ioel. 2. c. Act. 2. b.
                   vppon vs / in thesame Daye, according to the Promyses / To thend that it may all be 
                     Luk. 24. c.
                   accomplished / whatsoeuer is written of the Righteousnes of our God / in the Lawe of Moses, in the Prophets, and in the Gospel of Christ.
               
            
            
               The V. Chap.
               O Thou Beloued, Consider well of  this holy Vnderstanding / which is witnessed and held-forth vnto thee / out of the Seruice of Loue: and then if Mercy be shewed on thee by God: as that He openeth the Doore of Vnderstanding vnto thee: and that thou ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; doest see-into the true Beeing / wheron we witnes / then shal-ther also an vpright Sorrow 2. Cor. 7. b. 1. pe
                           •
                        . 2. b.
                   for thy Sinnes cause / be founde in thee. namely, most-cheefly for the Resistance and Blaspheamy / wherwith thou hast ⁏with many euell Imaginacions; spoken against the Loue and her vpright Seruice· and 
                     Rom 16. b. Cal. 1. a. 3. a 6 b.
                   quayled other moe single Hearts· and made them wauering in the Beleefe towards the Loue: so that they likewyse ⁏through thy Blaspheaming; are becom captiued with euell Imaginacions towards our godly Seruice of Loue, and the Ministers of thesame: and so haue likewyse ⁏by reason of thy Resistance and Blaspheamy; dispised ye Seruice of the holy Woord

vnder the Obedience of the Loue. and euenso haue much-more commended the false Testimonyes of the good-thinking Wyseones, and the Institucions of the wicked Worlde (because they mought hyde themselues and walke couered ther-vnder / with their euell Consciences) then the true Light and the vpright Doctrine of the Seruice of Loue, before the which / the Heartes of Men must appeere 
                     Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                     . c. Ephe. 5. b.
                   and becom manifest vncouered or naked / if they wil be saued.
               2. But seing now that ther-is an vpright  Doctrine and Order among vs, which is not according to the Order of the wicked Worlde: and that wee ⁏by Gods Grace; haue obtayned a greater and more-godly Light / then is among the worldly Wyse and her Scripture-learnedones / Therfore also be all those which are mynded against thesame / manifest vnto vs / in their craf
                     •
                  y Hearts, and that they are wicked or euell of Nature or Disposition / and not good: and how that they do in all respects / seeke and loue their Selfnes, or thatt which concerneth the Flesh. and 
                     Phil. 2. c.
                   not the Lorde, nor his vpright Beeing of Loue.
               3. Because of which Craftynes and Dissimulation of the People (wherwith they think to couer their Wickednes) we must oftentymes be blaspheamed· and iudged for Euel-dooers and 2. Cor. 6. 
                        •
                     . Seducers of Men. But veryly / they cannot couer their Wickednes and Craftynes therwith / before vs: but they becom so-much-the-more

manifest / what they are, and by what Spirit they are directed.
               4. But although now it be manifest / that all lying Flesh / vnder a Cullour of Vertue and of Seemly-maner ⁏wherwith it couereth his wicked Nature; hath alwayes sought his owne 
                     Iohn. 5. c.
                   Honour: And although that it be brought-to-shame therin / with his Wickednes ⁏which ryseth-vp in itself / against our vndeceaueable Seruice of Loue; and must acknowledg in his Heart / that the vpright Beeing of the Loue / is the 
                     Math. 22. d Mark 12. d. Rom. 13. b. 1. Gor 13 Gal. 5. b. 1. Timo. 1. a
                   Verytrue / Yet is notwithstanding / the lying Flesh of Sinne ⁏or the good-thinking Man; with his wicked and peruerse Nature / still so desperous of Honour in himself / that he woulde much-rather blaspheame the good Beeing of the Loue, and reiect or condemne it for euell / then to iudg or to confesse his owne Wickednes / for euell.
               
                   5. And with such an euell Conscience doth the Man oftentymes / blaspheame or iudg 
                     Pro 17.24 c Esa. 5. c.
                   the Light / for Darknes, ye Right / for Wrong, and the Good / for Euell, and the vpright Ministers of the holy Woord of Iesu Christ / 2. Cor. 6. a.
                   for Seducers / wherby to defende his owne Euell therwith / as Good, and to excuse himself 
                     Math 6. a. 23. a.
                   before Men / as to haue Right on his syde.
               6. But all this do Wee endure with Long-sufferance, and do not desyre to reuendge ourselues on anyman: but do giue-ouer the Reuendgment

                  
                     Deut 32. d. Rom. 12 b Heb. 1
                        •
                     . d.
                   to the Lorde, who 
                     Ier. 17. d. Math. 16. c Rom. 2.14. b.
                   rewardeth eueryone according to his Workes.
               7. For thatt God before whom we stande / doth recompence eueryone his Euel-deedes / 
                     Sap. 11.12. c
                   with his owne Wickednes / that doth arrogantly set-vp himself against vs. And euenso is now in this Daye of Loue / eueryone that imagineth and practiseth Euell or Mischeef towards vs / rewarded agayne with his owne Euell and Mischeef. And beareing his 
                     Gal. 6. 
                        •
                     . owne Burden therin / from the Hande of the Lorde, he must be vexed and punished by his owne Wickednes / till that he acknowledg himself giltye, and turneth him to the Obedience of the Loue. In whose Seruice / the Forgiuenes of Sinnes, and a good and quyet Conscience is obtayned / through the Loue.
            
            
               The VI. Chap.
               ALthough I wryte vnto thee of these  things / thou Beloued / yet do I not wryte thesame to any such ende / as to retayne anything of all 
                     •
                  hat which was don or sayde by thee or through thee in tymes-past / against vs and our mostholy Seruice of Loue / to vpbrayde thee therwith: but for that thou shouldest knowe wherin the Health 
                     Math. 11. e
                   of thy Soule shalbe founde: and with what-maner of Assistance or Helpfulnes / I desyre to help thee in thy Extr
                     •
                  mitee and Misery, wherof thou bewaylest thyself vnto me / to thend I

shoulde shewe thee som Helpfulnes. Out of which Extremitee and Misery ⁏wher-into thou hast brought thyself; thou art not to be ridd / except thou hast first knowen and perceaued all thy Sinnes, 
                     Math. 3. a. Luk. 3. b.
                   and borne Sorrow· and performed a right Confession and Repentance for thesame.
               2. But that which I do heere rehearse vnto thee / I rehearse it not to any euell intent. but to thy Amendment. For I desyre not to retayne any euell Opinion towards thee nor anyman-els / for all what is 
                     Math. 16. b.
                   don or spoken against vs. But this is all my Desyre / that-ther may a true 2. Cor. 7. b.
                   Sorrow and Amendment be shewed: and that men may be of one-mynde with each-other / 
                     Rom. 12. b. 15. a. 1. Cor. 1. a. 2 Cor. 13. b. Phil. 2 a.
                   in the Loue / wherby to liue peaceably in all Loue / to laude and thanke the God of Lyfe / for all his Goodnes / and to giue the Honour only vnto Him.
               
                   3. Beholde, heerunto do all wee ⁏which stande submitted vnder the Obedience of the Loue / the mostholy God-seruice; stand concordably inclyned, and in-that-sort ⁏to the 
                     Iohn. 17 d. Ephe. 4 a.
                   Vnitee in the Loue; loueingly to receaue into our Armes of the Spirit of Loue / our Enemyes which turne them to the Loue and her Seruice / to a Reconciliation with each-other / To thend that they mought escape 
                     Math. 3. a. Luk. 3. b.
                   the Vengance of God· and be kept from the 
                     Luk. 21. b. Apo. 18. a.
                   Plagues which shall now in thissame Daye / fall vppon all Vngodlyones ؛our Enemyes
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                  .
               
                  4. Thissame is all our Lust and Desyre / for to shewe Mercy likewyse vnto eueryone / out of Loue (inasmuch as Mercy is shewed on Vs) and not to remember anymās former Sinnes: but cheefly towards those / that giue themselues penetently to our Comunialtee vnder the Obedience of the Loue / for to bring-foorth good 
                     Mat 13. a. Luk. 
                     
                        •
                     . a. Iohn 15. b
                   Fruits of Lyfe.
               5. Oh, That it mought once com-to-light·  and gett the 1. Cor 3. b.
                   Prehemynence in the Heart of Man / that hath so long-tyme remayned in secret. namely, the vpright Beeing of the Loue / 
               6. To thatt God now / 
                     Ephe. 3. b.
                   who hath thesame in his Hande, and bringeth it bountifully vnto eueryone that turneth vnto Him / be Laude, Honour, and Thankes / for euermore. Amen.
               
               7. This Letter ⁏thou Beloued; with more other Wrytings which thou desyerest / do I sende vnto thee to thy Edifying: and my Desyre is / that thou ⁏through the Goodnes of the Loue of God; wilt 1. Tim. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     b.
                   exercise thyself therin / with an humble Heart: and haue a regarde vnto the Trueth, for to vnderstande this our holy Mynde rightly. Thatt graunte vnto thee / the God of Lyfe: and thesame God establish thee in his Loue. Amen.
               
            
            The Ende of the Thirtenth Epistle.
         
         
            
            The Fourtenth Epistle. A breefe Exhortacion vnto a Disciple in the Seruice of Loue: Wherwith he is exhorted ⁏in the Lande where he dwelt; to keepe a sharpe watch towards the Spirits that make-vp themselues in him, or that be borne in him.
            And also that he shoulde learne to descerne with good Vnderstanding / the euell Hearbe ⁏which is destroying and deadly; from the good Hearbe of Lyfe: and the false Spirits ⁏which aryse out of the Flesh; from the good Spirits / that are of God / to thend that he mought therby growe-vp in the good Beeing of the Loue / without any Harme.
            
               Ye Beloued: Beleeue not euery Spirit: but proue the Spirits / Whether they be of God or no
               1. Iohn. 4.
            
            Health and Saluacion be vnto Him / who ⁏in his Spirit; hath intended Loue and Peace / with our Spirit.
            
               
               The First Chapter.
               
                  THE God of Heauen  [who out of his bountefull Mercy / hath herited mee in the 
                     Ephe 4. b
                   Olde-age of the holy Vnderstanding of Christ, and in the spirituall 
                     Ephe. 1. b. 2. a. 3. a Col. 1. c 2. a
                   Ritches of his heauenly Goodes / for a good Confession 
                     Math. 10. d. Luk. 12. a.
                   before all Men / that in the Loue / is an vpright Beeing] be vnto thee ⁏my Beloued; a Light vnto thy Waye, a Lyfe vnto thy Spirit and Mynde, and a Cleernes vnto thy Vnderstanding / That thou mayest ⁏in thissame Daye of his Loue; vnderstande ⁏according to his heauenly Trueth, and not according to the Mynde of the Flesh; the ouerflowing Vertues and godly Wisdoms / which He hath declared 2. Cor. 4. a. Ephe 1. b. 3 a. Col. 1. c.
                   and brought vnto vs· also giue-ouer thyself with all thy Heart / to thosame and their Requyring / for to liue therin· and laude and thanke thesame God / in an vpright Beeing. Amen.
               
               2. O my Beloued, I haue a long tyme ⁏out of a fatherly Heart that I beare towards thee; had a greate longing to knowe how it may go with thee / in the Lande where thou dwellest: and that for because thou hast neuer written vnto me / how it standeth with thee: or wherin

thou hast thy Mayntenance, or wherby thou liuest.
               
                   3. For if thou hadst written anything heerof vnto mee / then mought I haue vnderstoode or perceaued therby / Whether that thy young 1. Cor. 3. a. Heb. 5. d.
                   Manhod / did yet liue or no: Whether it were succoured or nourished-vp with the vpright 
                     Math 24. c. Iohn. 6. f.
                   Foode of Lyfe: and whether that thou also didst in-like-maner growe-vp to the manly Age 
                     Ephe 4. b.
                   in the godly Vnderstanding: or-els / whether thou hadst bin choked with any Poyson or deadly Hearbes / that do growe out of thesame Earth where thou dwellest, or bin weakened, or vtterly dead / in the Lyfe which proceedeth out of God. For it is certaynly well knowen vnto mee / that the Earth and all Countryes of the Kingdom-of-the-earth / are 
                     Gen. 3. b. Heb. 6. a.
                   of themselues ⁏for the Vnrighteousnes cause; full of Poyson, deadly Hearbes, and naughty Fruites.
               4. SEing then that all Disciples of the Loue (that be nourished-vp in the holy Vnderstanding of the Spirit of Loue) must passe-thorow many Perills vppon the Earth / which is 
                     Gen. 3. b. 5. c
                   curssed for the Wickednes cause of her Inhabitours / So do I therfore beare so-much-the-more a greate Care for thosame Disciples / thewhyles they are yet young, and cannot discerne the deadly Hearbes / 4 Reg. 4. Math 13 d
                   from the right Foode of Lyfe.
               
                   5. Wherby nodout ⁏if they shoulde be suffered to go-on in their Youngnes / according to their owne Goodthinking; they woulde rashly

or vnforesightfully ⁏out of their owne Affection or Lust of their Hearts; receaue the one or the other of the deadly Hearbes· and swallow them in / in steade of the Foode of Lyfe: wherthrough then likewyse / the precious Manhod mought be strangled, and such Disciples of the Woord / which ⁏following their owne Counsayle; are vnexpert heerin / mought most lamentably betraye, spoyle, or kill themselues / and disenherit themselues of the Lyfe that proceedeth out of God.
               6. Wherfore ⁏my Beloued; inasmuch as it is now a perillous Tyme / to nourish-vp the Youngnes of Vnderstanding / to the vpright 
                     Ephe 4. b.
                   Agednes of the holy Vnderstanding / so is this my Exhortation and Counsayle out of the liueing God / vnto thee, to thy Preseruacion: that thou wilt dayly vse Foresightfulnes 
                     Ephe. 5. b.
                   or dilligent Heede, and haue a sharp regarde vnto the Spirit or inwarde Manhod of thy Mynde: Consider or search out what is ingendered or borne thear within thee / as Spirit, and spirituall / 
                     Rom 8. a. Gal. 5. b.
                   or as Knowledg: and 1. Iohn. 4. a
                   prooue or trye whether ye Spirits and Birthes of the Knowledges ⁏which be borne in thee; be of God or no, and do bring the heauenly Powers of the holy Gost and godly Vnderstanding / with them: 
                     Rom 8. a. Gal. 5. b. Ephe 5. b.
                   or-els / whether they be false Spirits, and deceitfull Knowledges, which proceede out of the Flesh / and so do kindle, prouoke, or mooue thee / with earthly and fleshly Desyres.
            
            
               
               The II. Chap.
               
                   O Thou Beloued, Consider effectually of this Mattier: and beleeue not euery Spirit, or Imagination of the Knowledg / that presenteth itself vnto thee. For many false Spirits and deceitfull Knowledges / 
                     Math 24 a. 1. Iohn. 4. a 2. Iohn. 1. a. 2. Pet. 2. a.
                   do now go-foorth / for to deceaue all Hearts of Men / that stande mynded on the earthly and fleshly Things.
               2. For-that-cause haue a Discerning heerin. For if the Spirit, or the Imaginacion of the Knowledg which is borne or brought-foorth in thee / be spirituall, and that thesame do proceede out of the godly Wisdom of the true Light / 
                     Rom. 8. a Gal 5. b.
                   Then wil it veryly be altogether against the Flesh and the Workes of the Flesh. and wil chasten, crucify, and kill the Flesh 
                     Rom. 13. b. Gal. 5. c. Col. 3. a. 2 Pet. 2. b.
                   with his Lusts and Desyres.
               
                   3. But if the Spirit and Fruit or the Imaginacion of the Knowledg / be fleshly, and that it proceede out of the Wisdom of the Flesh / then wil thesame likewyse make-manifest itself with the Workes of the Flesh / to the Lusts of Errour / 
                     Gal. 6. b.
                   that stretch to Destruction: also be vtterly 2. Timo. 3. a
                   against the Spirit of Godlynes, and the Counsayle of the Wisdom: and wil likewyse desyre to suppresse and to kill or destroye / all what cometh before her in her Heart and Thoughts / touching the godly Wisdom of the Seruice of Loue.
               
                  4. For whearsoeuer the Flesh with his Wisdom or Imaginacion of the Knowledg ؛that false Light
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   hath the Superyoryte / theare is the false Freedom / 
                     Sap. 2.14. b. Cal. 5. b.
                   according to the Lusts and Desyres of the Fleshly Men, for to cause the Man to liue euenso in his perdicionable Lusts and Desyres.
               5. But whearsoeuer the Spirit of the Wisdom of God ؛that true Light
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   getteth the Superyorytee / theare is the vpright Freedom of the spirituall Men: vnder 
                     Rom 8. b.
                   whose Power / the Flesh or the naturall Man is subiect, and is sustayned therin / to all Seemlynes and Resonablnes.
               6. BEholde ⁏my Beloued; because I  knowe not now how it may go with thee / whear thou dwellest / therfore haue I ⁏out of harty Loue; written this little porcion vnto thee / to thend that thou shouldest alwayes be myndfull of the vpright Beeing of the Loue· and not ⁏through any deceitfull Meanes / which may com before thee out of the Flesh and his Wisdom; neglect the godly Grace / which is com vnto vs in thissame 1 Timo 4. b 2. Timo 3. a. 2 per. 2. a.
                   perillous Tyme, nor estrainge thy self ther-from. but to haue the more-dilligent regard ⁏with all Subiection to the Loue; vnto the Seruice of the holy Woord / for to consider with Vnderstanding what an vpright Beeing thesame Seruice requyreth: and in what maner, or to what an vpright▪ Effect of the godly Lyfe / all former Seruices ⁏which are gon-out from God euen

hetherto; do leade 
                     Math. 22. d. Mark. 12. d Rom 13 b. Gal. 5. b 1 Timo. 1. a.
                   to thissame Seruice of Loue. namely, for that we shoulde now in this Daye of Loue ⁏with Fulnes of the holy Gost and with pure Hearts; liue vprightly in 
                     Ephe. 1. a.
                   all Loue / according to the Trueth of Christ.
               
               7. If wee now therfore do looke into thissame rightly / thē shall wee likewyse exercise ourselues therin / to all Sainctifycation 2. Tess▪
                      2. b. 1. Pet. 3. b.
                   in the Spirit, according to the Promyses of God the Father: and not 2. Cor. 6. b
                   touch or receaue anything / that mought make our Hearts vncleane· or drawe vs to any false 
                     S
                           •
                        p. 14. b. Rom. 1. c. 2. Pet. 2. b.
                   or disordered Freedom.
               
                   8. Therfore is also myne Exhortacion vnto thee / out of harty Loue / that thou wilt dayly exercise thyself in our mostholy Seruice of Loue ⁏with all Humilitee 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1. b.
                   and Obedience; in the Feare of the Lorde.
               9. And if now thou indeuourest thyself heerunto / then shalt thou nodout 
                     Ephe. 4. b. Col. 1. b. 1 Pet 2. a.
                   grow-vp likewyse in all holy Vnderstanding, and be well preserued from the false Desyres of the Flesh, and from all inconstant Spirits and false Freedoms / which bring the Man to the Disobeying of the Loue, and to all Confusion.
               10. The Lorde vouchsafe to strengthen 
                     Col. 1. b. 2. Tess. 2 b. 1. Pet 5. b.
                   thee in his Righteousnes, and to leade thee ⁏with his Wisdom; into all Trueth and vpright Righteousnes. Amen.
               
               11. Heerwith ⁏my Beloued; I do hartely salute thee in the Loue / wherthrough God hath shewed Mercy on vs: and salute me also in thesame Loue / vnto our good Freendes. namely,

all the Acquayntance / that loue the vpright Beeing in Iesu Christ. The Loue of the supreame God / gett the Victory in all your Hearts. Amen.
               
            
            The Ende of the Fourtenth Epistle.
         
         
            The Fiftenth Epistle. An harty Exhortaciō vnto all Louers of the Trueth, and vnto all those that submitt them vnder the Obedience of the Loue:
            To a Warning of them touching all contrary Sights and false Spirits / which make-vp them selues out of the wicked Worlde / in these last perillous Tymes: also iudg falsly / against the Trueth and against the Seruice of Loue, and so do bring-in or cause Discord and Offence / contrary to the peaceable Famyly of Loue.
            
               I admonish you ⁏beloued Bretheren; that ye wil marke those that cause Discorde and Offence / contrary to the Doctrine which ye haue learned: and auoyde from them.
               Rom. 16.
            
            
               
               The First Chapter.
               
                  
                  THrough the Loue of God the Father / which ⁏out of Grace; is 
                     Rom. 16. 
                        
                           •
                        . Eph. 1. a, 3. a Col. 1. c.
                   declared vnto vs / by the Reuealing 2. Timo 1. b
                   of the gloryous Coming of our Lorde Iesu Christ / we wish a good Peace and Concorde vnto all Louers of the Trueth / which ⁏out of an Inclynacion of Loue and of a pure Heart; haue their fellowshipp with our Comunialtee vnder the Obedience of the Loue. For They ⁏yea thosame; shalbe founde happy. For our Comunialtee is the One vndeuided 
                     Rom. 12. a. Ephe. 4. b.
                   Body of Christ, with whom we haue our fellowshipp 1. Iohn. 1. a.
                   with God the Father / the Headd of thesame Christ.
               
               2. To thatt God which ⁏through the Spirit 1. Pet. 5. b.
                   of his Loue; hath chosen vs to such a Maiestee of his Glory / be Laude, Honour, 
                     Apo. 4.5. b
                   Prayse, and Thanks / for euer. Amen.
               
               3. BEholde, my beloued Freendes in the Loue: This Loue of God the Father ⁏wherin God hath gloryfyed Vs; is the bounttyfull Mercy of the highest God: with the which He hath taken-pitie on vs now in these last perillous Tymes, and elected vs to Saluacion, 
                     E
                           •
                        he. 4. a.
                   to the Lande of his Glory. In which perillous Tymes / al-maner of venimous

                  
                     Ephe. 4. b.
                   Wyndes, false Knowledges, deceiptfull Witts, contrary Sightes, 
                     Math. 24. b. 2. Timo. 4. a 2. Pet. 2. a.
                   with many erring Spirits, and all wrong Iudgers or False-sentence-giuers ⁏to the Hurt of the Soule; do flourish.
               4. Seing then that all false Spirits do now  ⁏in many Controuersies, ryse-vp out of the wicked Worlde, and out of those Wyscones that cleaue vnto her, and do make-vp themselues agaynst the Trueth / for to take 2. Timo 3. a
                   captiue in their contencious Knowledges ⁏with their Craftynes and deceitfull Witt; those that loue the Trueth / So is-ther likewyse in this perillious Tyme / 1. Timo. 1. b.
                   greate Grace shewed on vs / against all false Spirits, and deuided Knowledges. For to that ende haue we obtayned the mostholy Office or Seruice of Loue: but not from ourselues, nor from Men. but from 
                     Gal. 1. b. Ephe. 3. a▪
                     
                   the liueing God himself / by his Woord of Lyfe / because that wee ⁏like faythfull Ministers of thesame; shoulde ⁏through the Woord of Lyfe; warne all goodwilling Hearts ⁏that loue ye Trueth of Christ; of all 
                     Math. 24. b Act. 20. c.
                   false and contencious Spirits of the Knowledg· reache them the Hande seruiceably / with the Woord of Lyfe· and gyde them into our holy Comunialtee vnder the Obedience of the Loue / wherby to drawe them out of the Perills of Destruction (which proceed out of the wicked Worlde / that is reserued 2. Tess. 1. a. 2. Pet. 3. a.
                   vnto Fyre) and to defende them therfrom.
               5. Ouer which wicked Worlde, and ouer all 
                  
Guydes / that 
                     •
                  yse-vp ther-out with their false Spirits and contencious Knowledges: and ouer all those that cleaue vnto thesame / the Iudgment of God goeth righteously, to the Confusion of them all, and 
                     Math. 25. to their Condemnacion in the hellish Fyer. For God wil now in his Daye of Loue / condemne the wicked Worlde, with all her Wyseones, Adherents, and Louers.
               6. Yea assuredly, now cometh the Lorde ⁏out of his holy Heauen; 
                     Esa. 29 a. Ec
                           •
                        li. 13. b. Luk. 17. Apo. 4. a. 8 a.
                   with Lightenings and Thunders, and with a forsible Noyze of Wyndes: wherat the Earth shall 
                     Psal. 77 b. Esa. 13. b. Agg. 2. a.
                   feare and tremble: and thatsame shall fall vppon all false Spirits and wicked Hearts / to their Destruction. Yea, now in thissame Daye of Loue / the Lorde wil mooue the 
                     Heb. 12. d.
                   Earth, and it shall be forced to quake at his Thunders. And so the Lorde wil then make an 
                     Esa 10. c.
                   Ende of all ye Falshod of the Earth.
               7. For now in thissame Daye of Loue / the 
                     Eccli. 16. b. 2. Pet. 3. b.
                   Elements shall melt with the Heate of his Lightening. and the Lordes Thunder-boltes shall fall very greeuously vppon the Pate of all arrogāt Heartes, Self-wyseones, and all false Witnesses. Yea, all those that be touched therwith / shall nodout make-manifest themselues, and let it appeere / that they are touched, and are not of the Loues Nature.
               
                   8. But Saluation and Peace / cometh to the Lowely and Humble of Heart / 
                     Rom. 12. b. 1. 
                        
                           •
                        or. 3. b.
                   which are not wyse in themselues, but do submitt them

humbly vnder the Loue and her Seruice: also do take-heede to the Doctrine and Informacion of thesame, and indeuour them obediently therunto: and do seeke no Pleasure nor Ioye without God and his Seruice of Loue, nor-yet in the Worlde, nor in the Flesh: but only 
                     Esa. 61. b. Luk. 2. c.
                   in God their Saluacion. For it shall go-well with them, and in the Iudgment of God / they shall obtayne their Preseruacion or Saluacion.
               9. For in the Iudgment of God, when the Thunder-clapps do fall vppon the Arrogant and Self-wyseones / to their Destruction / then shall the holy Spirit of Lyfe / fall vppon the Littleones, and the Electedones of God / that haue humbly submitted them vnder the Obedience of the Loue / to their Preseruacion: and shalbe 
                     Num 11. c. Esa. 44. o. Eze 36 c. Ioel 2 c. Act 2. b.
                   poored-forth vppon them ⁏with all Louelynes; out of the euerlasting Lyfe and heauenly Beeing / 
                     Iohn. 4.7. b
                   like floweing Waters of Lyfe: and so shall then likewyse / 
                     Ioel. 3. c.
                   Milke and Hony, and liueing Water of the holy Spirit of Loue / flowe among them.
               10. Haue you all a regarde heerunto / ye good-willing Hearts and Louers of the Trueth. For Gods Iudgment / 
                     Esa. 11. a. Iohn. 7.8. b
                   is not according to the Sight of Mens Eyes, nor according to their Knowledg (although notwithstanding they do perswade themselues somtymes / that they knowe it well, and are assured of the Mattier of it) but only according to the Trueth.
            
            
               
               The II. Chap.
               
                   FOrasmuch then as such a Daylight ⁏the which is the true Iudgment of God; is ⁏by Gods Grace; appeered vnto vs out of Heauen· and the gracious Woord of Lyfe vnder the Obedience of the Loue / geeuen vs to minister in thesame Light / to the Saluacion of the People / Therfore were it also very right and conuenient / that they shoulde giue eare vnto vs therin: and that noman shoulde so peruersly looke-into or construe the Workes of the Lorde / which He bringeth to light by vs Little and Electedones of God. For veryly / thatt which wee speake and wryte, and bring-foorth, or set-out 
                     •
                   vnder the Obedience of the Loue; to the serueing of all Louers of the Trueth / is not our owne Worke, nor-yet our Indighting nor Wryting: but the 
                     Ier. 31 d. Ezech. 36. c 1 Cor. 2. a. 2. Tess. 1.2. b.
                   Worke of the Lorde / which He himself wryteth according to his owne Mynd, Spirit, and Will / and with his owne Finger.
               2. And whatsoeuerthen the Lorde himself bringeth-foorth / thatt do wee acknowledg to be good and vpright: And although it be looked-on and iudged for Ignorance or to be foolish / before the Children of Men, or before all those that account themselues wyse / Yet do wee confesse and shewe ther-against / that Gods Ignorance and his Foolishnes / is 1. Cor. 1.3. b
                   wyser,

and procureth more Fruits of Righteousnes vppon the Earth / then all the Ingenious-witt of Mens Prudencie.
               3. Therfore we regarde not how Men ⁏out  of the Knowledg of their corrupt Vnderstanding; do 1. Cor. 4 a.
                   iudg Vs and the Seruice of Loue / which we minister. For it is well knowen vnto vs doutles / that all the Iudgments that the Man ⁏out of his Ingenious-witt; iudgeth of the Wisdom and Workes of God / are false and Lyes: 
                     Psal. 116. b. Rom. 3. a.
                   and that God with his Saintes / is only true / in his Iudgment.
               4. And forasmuch as wee now in thissame Daye of Loue / are appeered before the Iudgment-seate of Christ, and do carry the righteous Iudgment of God in our Hearts / therfore can no outlandish Men, nor any Estraingedones or Fallers from the Seruice of Loue / iudg vs / although they woulde neuer-so-fayne. For how shoulde they ⁏I pray you; be able to iudg vs rightly / inasmuch as they cannot see vs?
               5. Forasmuch then as they do 
                     Exo. 33. c. Iohn 5.14. b. 1. Iohn. 3.4. b
                   not see the liueing God / in the Maiestee of his Glory / therfore can they not likewyse see Vs. For Wee, together with all the Holyones of God / do liue and tryumph vniformly with God / in his Glory, 
                     Esa. 3. b. Sap. 3. b. Math. 19 c. 25. d. 1. Cor. 6. a. Iude. 
                     
                        •
                     . b.
                   and do with Him / iudg the Worlde / with Righteousnes and Trueth / vnder the Obedience of his Loue.
               6. Therfore also the Children of Men ⁏that are without our Comunialtee or without the

Famyly of Loue; do vnderstande nothing-at-al ⁏according to their Iudgment; of our holy Vnderstanding / which we suck out of the  Breastes of the Loue.
               7. Veryly / therin do we acknowledg the Goodnes of God towards vs / that none of the foremencioned Men can ether see or iudg vs. But He himself / 1. Cor. 4. a.
                   the true God of the Liueing ⁏who is a God with vs; iudgeth euery thing by Vs, and his heauenly and spirituall Wisdom: and we vnderstande that his Iudgment is true.
               8. If anyman then haue a Lust to doo the Will of the Lorde: also to be a Disciple of the Loue / in ye Schoole of Christ: and to vnderstande the secret Iudgment of God / let him go-out, or seperate his Heart / 1. Cor. 3. b.
                   from all the Wisdom of the Worlde: and so com to our Comunialtee, and to the Wisdom that we shall showe him / vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
               9. He being com to our Comunialtee vnder the Obedience of the Loue / so let him ⁏for the Loue and her holy Vnderstandings cause; forsake 
                     Math. 10. d. 16. c. Mark. 8. d. Lud. 9.14. c
                   himself, and all his Industry, Wisdom and Knowledg: and so haue regarde to ye Seruice  of Loue / what it requyreth.
               10. Now when-as he forsaketh himself for the Loues cause, and hath wholly geeuen-ouer himself to the Wisdom and to the holy Vnderstanding of the Loue / for to be obedient to thesame: and so taketh-heede to the Doctrine

of the Loue / in our Schoole of the christian Doctrine (not as a Iudg of thesame Doctrine, but as a Disciple / which is content to be informed and taught by the Doctrine of the holy Spirit of Loue) Then shall he 
                     Math. 13. b.
                   well vnderstande the right Mynde of the Secretnes of the Loue, and the secret Iudgment of God. as also well perceaue / that God hath distincted and declared euery-thing wysely and vnderstandably / with vs. and shall in-nowyse be able to see nor fynde / that-ther-is any Fault in our Wrytings and Ministracion of the Woord. as likewyse very-easely perceaue / that we do apparantly shewe the Submission, the Trueth, and the Patience / each-one in his right Place, and according to his right Order. in like-maner / the Beleefe, the Loue, and euery-thing ⁏each-one in his; whatsoeuer serueth the Man to his Saluacion.
               11. For how shoulde wee possible shewe anything contrary or vnrightly / out of the Testimonyes of God, inasmuch as they stande so cleere and vpright before vs / in our Sight, and that God is 
                     Deu. 8 b. Phil 2. b. Ephe. 3. c. Heb 13 c.
                   the Worker, and the Bringer-foorth of thosame Testimonyes himself?
            
            
               The III. Chap.
               BVt, Albeit now that anyone of  the vnrenewed Men / do yet for-the-present-tyme ⁏by reason of his Ingenious-witt or Blyndnes of Heart;

looke peruersly into the Loueing-kyndnes of God, and the vpright Vnderstanding ⁏witnessed out of Gods mostholy Seruice of Loue; or construe it to the worst / yet is not the Worke of God, nor the vpright Vnderstanding ⁏which we bring-foorth out of God; peruerse for-al-that: neither-yet is God, nor Wee ⁏his Ministers; to be blamed / for such a peruerse Sight: but hee which ⁏out of his peruerse 
                     Math. 5.6. c 18. a.
                   Sight; Iudgeth falsly.
               2. For if the Earth ⁏which doutles is altogether blynde and ignorant in the Arte or Worke of the Potter; do iudg a 
                     Esa. 2
                        •
                     .45. b. Rom. 9. c.
                   Potters Worke wrong / then is it no-dout greatly to be blamed, because that it knoweth not the Honorablest / from the Dishonorablest, nor the Foremost / from the Hindmost, nor-yet any of the Workmasters Tooles. For-that-cause also / it knoweth not how to distinct them rightly.
               
                   3. Euenso is likewyse the earthly Man to be blamed / that iudgeth the Worke of the Lorde peruersly / because that he seeth so purblyndly: and therfore he 
                     Esa. 59. a. 2. Pet. 1. b.
                   gropeth or coniectereth after it / like a Blynd-body: or-els ⁏out of the Purblyndnes of his Sight; he iudgeth the Hindmost / for the Foremost, and the Foremost / for the Hindmost, the Wagon / for the Horsses, and the Horsses / for ye Wagon, and Men / for Trees. And so through his Ignorance / he also nameth the Carpenters Tooles contraryly. For like as the Sight and Discerning of

the Man is peruerse, euenso is also his Iudgment.
               4. Seing then that his Eyes are not cleere, and 
                     Ier. 4. a. 
                     
                        •
                     . b Math. 6. 
                        •
                     . 7. a. Luk. 6. c. 11. d. Act. 7. f. 1. Iohn. 2. b
                   that his Eares are thick, and that his Body is yet darke: and that therfore he beholdeth not the Sunne of Righteousnes: neither-yet standeth in thatt Place whear she giueeth her Cleernes: but is altogether a Straunger therfrom / Therfore doth he neither knowe nor vnderstand anything-at-all of the Cleernes of the Sunne. For-that-cause he cannot also iudg in the Light, nor according to the Trueth.
               5. Now when an illuminated Man ⁏with the Cleernes of his Eyes; seeth into the Trueth of God: and that he likewyse witnesseth of the Beawtyfulnes of the Daye-light of ye Sunne: also giueth such high Honour and Prayse vnto thesame Light: and therfore testifyeth / that no vncleere Eyes, 
                     Math. 6. c.
                   nor darke Bodyes / haue 
                     Iohn 5. d.
                   euer seene or knowen such a gloryous Light / in his Cleernes: and that then thosame Testimonyes do com before the Eyes and Eares of the earthly Man, 
                     Pro. 3. a. Esa. 5 c. Rom. 1.12. b. 1. Cor. 3. b.
                   who thinketh himself to be wyse, or to be illuminated / through his Knowledg / So doth then thatt earthly or self-wyse Man suppose ⁏according to the Imaginacion of the Knowledg or false Light; that the illuminated Man / doth not testify rightly of the Cleernes of the true Light of God.
               6. Therfore, because that the vnilluminated  Man / seeth so poreblyndly, and cannot see nor

endure Gods Light / in his Eyes, he iudgeth ⁏out of the false Light / that hath captiued his Heart; the illuminated Vnderstanding / to be wrong.
               7. Then when an illuminated Man / testifyeth of the Loue of God, and of the Spirit of thesame▪ and that eueryone ought to submitt them obediently ther-vnder: and then when thosame Testimonies do com before the Eares of those ▪ that looke vppon the Flesh, and not vppon the Spirit / Then do they iudg the Loue▪ and the Loues Spirit and Requyring / vppon an outward Man, euen as though the outward Man himself / requyred the Obedience and Loue, and ⁏according to the Flesh▪ named himself / the Spirit of Loue, or tooke Gods Dignitee vpon him.
               8. Therfore veryly, a fleshly or earthly Man ⁏that liueth without the Seruice of Loue / according to his owne Goodthinking; is altogether false, 
                     Psal. 116. b. Rom. 3. a.
                   lying, and ignorant [namely / in godly Things] in all his Sightes, Knowledges, and Iudgments.
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               
                   BEholde, my beloued Hearts in the Loue: This coulde I not hyde from you / To thend that ye may beware of the false Iudgments of the deuided Men. and for that ye shoulde not ouer-reache yourselues / in iudging anything rashly.

For-that-cause let eueryone let the Iudgment alone, and gett first a 
                     Apo 3. c.
                   cleere Sight, and a pure Soule / in the Loue / That he be not iudged before the Iudgment-seate of Christ (before the which we stande) for a false Iudg.
               2. Oh! How well is he mynded / that iudgeth not, and that construeth and accepteth all in good part / that is witnessed or spoken to him / vnto good: and so walketh in stillnes, and keepeth his Mouth / 
                     Psal. 3
                        •
                     . 
                        〈…〉
                     . as if ther hung a Lock before it, that he lye not: and which falleth not 
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   through his Tongue.
               3. Therfore canst thou not excuse thyself / 
                     •
                   Man, 
                     Ro
                           •
                        
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   whosoeuer thou bist that iudgest. For wherin thou iudgest another / therin condemnest thou thy self, inasmuch as thou thyself act gilty in thatt / wherin thou iudgest another.
               4. By diuers of these false Iudgers / am I greatly impugned: so that I haue had great cause geeuen me by Many / to wryte against them: but thatt haue I not vsed hetherto ⁏as against any Person or Company perticulerly; nor named them by Name. but haue witnessed generally / the Ignorance of the Blaspheamers and Resisters of the Loue▪ and made it knowen to the Vnderstandingones.
               5. Forasmuch then as our Seruice hath his  Ministracion vnpartially / through the Loue / therfore is it not also our Vce / to wryte against anyman perticulerly ⁏as by any name of Person and Company; nor-yet to disprayse, or to prayse them / by their Names: but to shewe

generally ⁏according as the vnpartiall Seruice of Loue requyreth it; what is Good or Euell for eueryone: and wherin the Man hath Right or Wrong: and that altogether out of God, 2. Cor. 3. a.
                   and not out of ourselues.
               6. For the Lorde himself ⁏as a righteous and vnpartiall God; hath ⁏according to his Promyses; made his Iudgment / 
                     Esa 28. b.
                   a Measure-lyne, and his Righteousnes / a Ballance / among vs. Therfore wee do neither receaue nor-yet giue-foorth anything / vnles we do measure it all vnpartially / with the Measure-lyne of the Iudgment of God: and weigh it all likewyse according to his Value / 
                     Eccl. 21. c. 28. d.
                   in the Ballance of the Righteousnes of God.
               7. Oh! That yee all did so likewyse, and according to thesame maner / stoode concordably and vnpartially mynded with vs / vnder the Obedience of the Loue: and that euen so eueryone did first learne ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; to keepe-scilence, and then to speake rightly: also learned first to suffer Wrong, and so to knowe therby / thatt which is Right / er-euer he gaue any Sentence of the Right / to thend that he mought speake according to the Trueth, and iudg 
                     Iohn 7. c.
                   rightly: As likewyse learned first / to endure 2. Cor. 6. a.
                   Shame, Dishonour, and Dispising / with Christ, and therby to knowe Gods Honour / er-euer he tooke-vpon-him to defende Gods honour, and to alow himse
                     •
                  f to be right in his Iudgment. Consider effectually heeron.
               
                  8. SEing then that the many-maner of  Perills ⁏growing by the Iudgments of Men; are knowne vnto vs / therfore do wee ⁏with this small Instruction; exhort all Louers of the Trueth / that noman vndertake or set-forward himself to iudg / 1. Co
                           •
                        . 4. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   before the tyme, nor-yet speake to-soone: but that eueryone do first ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; becom 
                     Luk. 14. c.
                   a Distiple of Christ: and so 
                     Ephe. 4. b. Col. 1. b. 1. Pet. 2. a.
                   growe-vp in the holy Woord of the Spirit of ye Loue of Christ / to the Age of the holy Vnderstanding of Christ.
               
               9. Then when he is becom a Christian or an Elder of Christ / in ye holy Vnderstanding / so can he then likewyse ⁏through his new Birth; iudg rightly / 
                     Sap. 3. a. Math. 19. 
                        •
                      1. Cor. 6. a.
                   with Christ, and with all the Saintes of God / but otherwyse / all his Iudgments are false.
               10. If anyman be now (as is before sayde) becom a Disciple in the holy Vnderstanding of Christ / vnder the Obedience of the Loue, and so ⁏euen vnto the Regeneracion; be growen an Elder therin / Hee shall then well vnderstande the Elders in the holy Vnderstanding, or the Ministers of the holy Woord in the Famyly of Loue / in their secret Wisdom: and in no-wyse stryue nor contende ⁏with his Vnderstanding; against the Elders in the Loue of Iesu Christ / which do minister the Woord of Lyfe vnder the Obedience of the Loue: but shall likewyse himself ⁏as an vnderstanding Elder with the auncient Elders; informe the Disciples of the

holy and gracious Woord or Christ ⁏in the christian Schoole of Loue; 1. Tim. 4. b. 2. Tim. 1.2.3. with holy Vnderstanding, and with Lessons of Wisdom / to all Concorde in the Famyly of Loue / To thend that thosame Disciples / mought also attayne to the Dayes of their Agednes· and so be nourished-vp ▪in the godly Wisdom of the Loue; to the full Age of the Man Christ.
               
               
                   11. Therfore it is sayde to the Elders / that they shall execute the Iudgment / according to the Trueth: 
                     Exo. 21. c. Leuit. 24. b. Deut. 19 c. Math. 5 b.
                   Eye / for Eye, Tooth / for Tooth. But to the Disciples it is sayde: 
                     Math. 7. a. Lu
                           •
                        . 6. d.
                   Iudg not, and resist 
                     Math. 5. d. Mom 12. b. 1. Tess. 5. b.
                   not also the Wicked.
               12. Therfore sayth the Age of the Man Christ / to the Disciples: 
                     Math. 11. c.
                   Learne of Mee: for I am humble and meeke of Heart.
            
            
               The V. Chap.
               
                   TAke this effectually to heart, all yee that perswade yourselues / that ye are com to the Age of the Man Christ / by meanes of the Knowledg: and looke well into yourselues / whether that yee likewyse / haue (in maner as is before sayde) bin 
                     Luk. 14. c. Iam. 1. c.
                   Disciples of Christ: and are in that sort / com to ye humble and meeke Hearts in Iesu Christ, and to his holy Vnderstanding.
               2. But if it haue not gon so with you / then take not vpon you also / to iudg any godly Matters, nor to defende Gods Honour, nor-yet to teache anyman: but be content to be

taught and enformed first yourselues, and submitt you euenso 
                     Eccli. 6. c. Math 11. c. 1. Pet 5. a.
                   to all Humilitee / vnder the Obedience of ye Loue / for to be rightly taught: and so learne of the Loue / the holy Vnderstanding of Iesu Christ.
               
               3. And let not him likewyse that is yet young in this Doctrine of the godly Wisdom / iudg nor reprooue: but let him aske, and suffer himself to be taught: and so 
                     Ephe. 4. b. Col. 1. b. 1. pet. 2. a.
                   growe-vpp in the godly Age of Christ, to all Strengthening and Increasing of the Peaceable-kingdom in the Loue / So shall he then becom vnderstanding in all godly Things, and the Kingdom of Peace shall increase, and spread-foorth itself into farr Countryes.
               4. If wee now do in that maner / growe-vp peaceably in all Loue and Righteousnes / then shall the contencious and deuided 
                     Esa. 21. a. Ier 51. a▪ Apo. 14.18. a.
                   Kingdom of Babel / be shutt without our Hearts, and without our Comunialtee of Loue: and we shall beholde the Howse or the Temple of the Lorde / in Heauen / perfectly buylt in all poynts, 
                     Amos. 9 d. Mich. 7 b. Agg. 1 a. 2 b Apo. 21. a.
                   and furnished with all his Garnishing. and that the Glory or Dignitee, and the Teaching-office in the Seruice of Loue / is only the Lords, according to the Promyses, and not the Mans.
               5. HEer-with I do heartely salute you  all / yee good-willing Hearts and Louers of the Trueth / with a Salutacion of the Loue: and I beseech you take this to heart which I wryte vnto you: and therin haue respect

to the Loue. For ther-is nothing wyser nor more prudent / then the Loue.
               6. Therfore is the Loue in her Follishnes / much godlyer to heare and to beleeue / then all the Wisdom of this Worlde.
               7. For-that-cause it hath likewyse so pleased God / to bring-foorth his Wisdom / 1. Cor. 1. b.
                   like Foolishnes, his holy Vnderstanding like Ignorance, and the Foremost / as if it were the Hindmost / before the Worlde and before all her Wyse and Scriptur-learnedones / wherby to confounde the prudent Wyseones: and so the out-flowing Woord of the Lorde, together with his Seruice of Loue, and Gods holy Vnderstanding / to be a 
                     Esa. 
                     
                        •
                     . a. 1. Pet. 2. a.
                   Stumbling-stone vnto them: wherthrough all Self-wyseones (like as in the 
                     Cen. 11. a.
                   Buylding of Babel) do intangle and scatter themselues. For in-that-sort wil God now in the last tyme / bring his Kingdom vnto his Saints and Electedones: and they shall raigne 
                     Apo. 21. b.
                   vppon the Earth.
               
                   8. But all Self-wyseones, and all those that growe offended at the out-flowing Woord of the Lorde, and at his Seruice of Loue: and wil therfore out of their euell Hearts / contende or dispute against thesame· and make 
                     Rom. 16. c.
                   Deuision, together with all those that set-vp themselues against the Loue and her vpright Seruice / God wil shutt without his Kingdom, and vtterly

roote them out / to thend that the Vniuersal-earth and all what is therin / may be 
                     Esa. 66. c. 2 Pet. 3. b.
                   inhabited vprightly for euermore.
               9. Farewell: and be alwayes of good-cheere in the Loue. The Loue of God the Father / keepe the Victory in all your Hearts. Amen.
               
               
                  Take it to heart.
               
            
            The Ende of the Fiftenth Epistle.
         
         
            
            
               
            
            Our Heart / is the Minde of God most-hie.
            Our Beeing amiable / as the sweete Lillie.
            Our Faithfulnes / Loue / and Trueth vpright / 
            Is Gods Light / Life / and Cleernes bright.
         
         
            
            The Sixtenth Epistle. An instructionable Exhortacion vnto the Good-willingones / which do wholly giue-ouer themselues to the Obedience of the Loue: Wherin the vpright Obedience to the Loue, and the godly and vngodly Beeing / is distincted.
            
               
                  Beloued Breth
                        •
                     ren, reioyce you: be perfect: be of good comfort: be of one Mynde and Intent: and be peaceable, So shall the God of Loue and Peace / be with you.
                  2. Cor. 13.
               
            
            Health and Saluacion be vnto the Comunialtee in the Loue, to whom I wish much Happynes in the Lorde.
            
               
               The First Chapter.
               
                  
                  TO your Seruice / ye Deerly-beloued, I do alwayes⁏ euen one of harty Loue; fynde my self very willingly bent / in all what I maye out of the Power of my God: and to wryte often vnto you / greeueth me not / to thend if God vouchsafe thesame / yt ye mought ⁏through my Seruice; vnderstand the Ground of the Loue / to the vpright Saluacion, and that God mought establish his holy Name in vs. O Yea / that com-to-pas euenso, to the Laude and Prayse of the godly Glory. Amen.
               
               2. O how happy is hee / that hath the Lorde 
                     Psal. 33. b. 144. b.
                   to be his God, or which seeketh and loueth Him with 
                     Ier. 29. b.
                   all his Heart: and which desyreth with all his Soule / to cleaue vnto the Vertue / hee shall knowe / that the Wayes of the Lorde / are pure and cleere. For the Lorde is 
                     Psal. 34. a.
                   freendly vnto all those that loue Him, also faythfull and true vnto all those that haue a Delyte and Pleasure in the Wayes of his Loue.
               3. But to the Dispisers of his Loue / which do arrogantly contemne, blaspheame, and resist his Will / He is as Indignacion 
                     Eccli 5. a.
                   and

Wrath. For whosoeuer disdayneth the Lorde and his 2. Cor. 6. a▪
                     
                   Grace: as also shutteth God and his Woord / 
                     Tob. 6. b.
                   without his Heart: casteth ye Seruice of the holy Woord, and the instructionable 
                     Pro 5. c. 15. 
                        
                           •
                        
                     
                   Chastisment / from him: and so refuseth the Loue / hee veryly shall likewyse be reiected by the Lorde· and 
                     Apo. 22. b.
                   shute without the louely Beeing of God.
               4. For seing that God doth now present vs  with all Loue / therfore wil Hee likewyse⁏ in the Obedience of his Loue; be loued of Vs agayne.
               5. Wherfore ⁏my beloued Children; giue-ouer yourselues to the Lorde / with vpright Loue (euen as I haue often sayde vnto you, and as our Wrytings do mencion in many Places) namely, 
                     Eccli. 6.7. 
                        •
                      1. pet. 5. a.
                   in Humilitee and Lowlynes of Heart / So shall ye taste that the Lorde is freendly: The which our Lorde Iesus hath also taught vs / wheare He sayth: 
                     Math. 21. c.
                   Learne of Mee: For I am humble and meeke of Heart, and your Soules shall fynde Rest.
               6. Com vnto 
                     Math. 11. c.
                   Mee (sayth Hee) wit
                     •
                   your Loading or Burden / I wil ease you, or take your Burden from you. And take you on my Yoke or Burden. For my Yoke is sweete: and my Burden is lyghte for to beare / sayth the Lorde.
               7. This is the liueing 1. Pet 1. c.
                   Woord of Grace /  proceeded-out from our Father / the liueing God, to the Saluacion of all People. namely / those that beleeue in his Name, and 2. Pet. 3. b.
                   wayte

for the Coming of his Christ / to their Saluacion.
               8. Out of thissame Woord of Grace / ther appeereth vnto vs now in the last tyme⁏ thorough the Reuealing 2 Timo 1. b
                   of the Coming of our Lorde Iesu Christ; 
                     Rom. 8. b Ephe. 1. b.
                   the Paune of our godly Inheritance. namely / the holy Spirit of Loue / full of all Graces and Amiable-delytfulnesses: which Spirit of Loue / is 
                     Iohn 14 c. 25. c. 16. b.
                   the right and true holy Spirit of Christ, which proceedeth or cometh from the Father and the Sonne, and hath his Flowing-foorth from them.
               9. The Children of thissame Spirit / which He 1 Pet 1. a. b
                   bringeth-foorth out of the Loue / are chosen for to possesse the 
                     Esa. 33 a Ephe 1. b 2 a. 3. a. Col 1. c 
                     
                        •
                     . a.
                   Treasures and the Inheritance of the Ritches of Christ of the heauenly Father / for euermore.
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               
                   FOrasmuch then ⁏ye Deerly-beloued; as that yee likewyse are now called and bidden to thissame highworthy Maiestee of God, and to be 
                     Rom 8. b Ephe 1. a.
                   Co-heires⁏ with Christ and his Saints; in the Treasures of the heauenly Goodes / therfore take-heede to thissame gracious 
                     Eccli 27. b 2 Cor. 6. a Ephe. 5 b
                   Tyme: and 4. Esd. 2. d. Rom. 12. a. 1 Iohn. 2. b 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 4. a
                   flye the Shadowes of the wicked and blynde Worlde. Loue not her Darknesse inanywyse: but loue the Light of Lyfe / which

is healde-foorth vnto you through the Seruice of Loue / to your Saluacion.
               2. Depart out from the Vncircumcised, and let your Hearts 
                     Deut. 10 c. Ier 4. a.
                   be circumcised in thissame New or Eigth Daye / vnder the Obedience of the Loue / that the Foreskinne of the worldly and fleshly Desyres / may be 
                     Esa. 25. a. 2. Cor. 3. b.
                   put-away from your Hearts.
               3. Therfore let all those pas now / that would drawe you to their Good-thinking or Knowledg, or to their chosen 
                     Gal. 3. a. 6. b. Col 2 b. c.
                   Holynes· or allure you to any 
                     Tob. 3. b. Ephe. 4. a▪
                     
                   Light-behauiour.
               4. Endeuour you to enter into the good and vpright Beeing of Iesu Christ, euen-as thesame is ministred vnto you out of the Loue and her Seruice: and make none account of it / although ye be mocked, blaspheamed, and contemned / for thesame cause, or for your single-mynded Obedience to thesame.
               5. But against all your▪Aduersaryes / 
                     Math 10. d. 16. c. Mar. 8. c. Luk. 9.14 c
                   take  vnto you the Crosse of Christ⁏ the which is Patience or Forbearance / in the Obedience of the Requyring of the Seruice of Loue; and so 1 Pet. 2.4. a.
                   follow-after Christ. For in that sort is He gon before vs: and hath ⁏through his Crosse; ouercom 
                     Phil 2 a. Col. 1. c. 
                     
                        •
                     
                   his Enemyes.
               6. To which Ouercoming / yee shall also com ⁏through Christ; if yee ⁏in the Following of Christ; do pos
                     ••
                  sse your Soules 
                     Luk 21. b
                   with Patiēce: and had rather 
                     •
                  uffer Cōtempt, Reproche, and Blaspheaming / with the Children of God / 
                     Heb. 11. c.
                   then to inherite all ye Treasures of this Worlde.
               
                  7. Therfore ⁏my beloued Children; let it not greeue you / although the 
                     Iohn. 15. b.
                   Worlde do hate you, or though you be contemned and blaspheamed by her Wyse and Scriptur-learnedones: but beholde or consider 
                     H
                           •
                        b. 11. c.
                   of the Rewarde of the Children of God.
               8. For I do acknowledg, and testifye vnto you truly⁏ according to the Grace of the Knowledg that is chaunced vnto mee; that it shall now in the last tyme / go-well euerlastingly with all good-willing Hearts which haue a Lust to God and his Righteousnes / vnder the Obedience of the Loue: and that their Labour in the Lorde / shall 1. Cor. 15. f.
                   not be founde in vayne.
               9. But whosoeuer doth wilfully contemne the Lorde and the Righteousnes of his louely Beeing, and inclyneth to the Worlde or to his owne Good-thinking / hee shall beare his Iudgment / whosoeuer he bee.
               
                   10. Inasmuch then ⁏ye Deerly-beloued; as that wee haue now⁏ vnder the Obedience of the Loue; sett our Hope / towards God, and our Beleefe / towards his Saluacion / Therfore let vs now likewyse⁏ through the Seruice of the holy Spirit of Loue; take a 
                     Heb. 5. a.
                   cheerfull Passage ⁏in Iesu Christ; to God the Father, and to his gloryous and louely Maiestee. and not regarde the Temptacions of the wicked Worlde and of our Resisters.
               11. For happy is hee 
                     Iam▪
                      1. b.
                   that endureth Temptacion, and snareth or byndeth nor himself vnto

the Euell. For therin lyeth the 4. Esd. 2. c. 2. Timo. 4. a. Iam. 1. b. Apo. 2. b.
                   Victory, and the Crowne of Lyfe of the perfect Saluacion.
               12. But if anyman now be yet weake, as that he is yet somtymes drawen-back by the Euell, and dismayed or made wauering in his Beleefe: and seeth that he is falne ther-thorough / let him stande-vp agayne, and suffer himself to be renewed in the Seruice of Loue, and praye vnto the Lorde for Strength and Constance / so shall He be gracious vnto him, and giue him Strength against his Temptacion: For God is almighty.
               13. For-that-cause let noman iudg or condemne  himself, 
                     Luk. 6. d.
                   much-les another: For although that God do otherwhyles hyde 
                     Esa. 54. a.
                   himself from vs for a certen-tyme / yet is Hee notwithstanding (if we wayte vppon Him 
                     Heb. 10. c. Iam. 1. a.
                   in Pacience) our Strength at the last: and leadeth vs out of all our Distresse. For He is an Assister or Helper / to the Little and Lowelyones, 
                     Luk. 18. a.
                   if they call vnto Him Night and Daye, and hunger and thirst vprightly 
                     Math. 5 a.
                   after the true Righteousnes. Yea thosesame veryly / shall He mercifully pitie.
               14. But not for any Righteousnes 2. Timo. 1. a Tit. 3. a.
                   that anyman mought haue don. O no: but for his holy Names sake / to thend that thesame shoulde 
                     Ma
                           •
                        . 1. b. Math. 6. 
                        •
                     . be hallowed and magnifyed in his Saintes and Electedones / which call vnto Him Night and Daye. It is verytrue.
            
            
               
               The III. Chap.
               
                  
                  THis wryte I vnto you⁏ ye Deerly-beloued; for that ye mought ⁏with single Hearts; be stirred-vp to a good Zeale 
                     Gal. 4. b.
                   towards the good Beeing of the Loue / for to obtayne⁏ through the Loue; a good Increase to the Righteousnes· and⁏ in the Loue; the sweete Deawe and Wynde or Spirit of the holy Beeing of God: and so mought⁏ with vpright Hearts; increase in the holy Vnderstanding, or growe-vp 
                     Ephe. 4. b.
                   therin / to a godly Age of Christ.
               
               2. Therfore (because your Vnderstanding shoulde not be troubled with any deepe-mynded Knowledg) I haue also written vnto you in chyldish 1. Cor. 3. a. Heq. 5. b
                   and playne-maner: euen-as my Woords were / when I was with you. For the Childishnes, and the 2. Cor. 11. a.
                   single Obedience to the Loue and to the Requyring of her Seruice / in a good Will to the holy Beeing of our Lorde Iesu Christ / is most needfull for vs.
               
                   3. And although it seemeth to be a small or simple Wisdom / yet is it a Wisdom that is 
                     Math. 11. c 13. b.
                   secret before all Self-wyse and Good-thinking-ones / for to com therunto.
               4. Therfore is the simple Wisdom of God ⁏that is obtayned in the Obeying of the Loue; a Wisdom / wherwith the Wyfe, the Scripture-learned, and the Great-knowers in this

Worlde / 
                     Esa. 29. b 1. Cor. 1. b.
                   be made ashamed, and caught in their Wysdom.
               5. For those that seeme to knowe much: and all those which perswade themselues that they are wyse / Thosame doutles / knowe nothing-at-al / if they do not knowe nor enter into 
                     Math. 11. c.
                   the Meekenes, nor the childish 
                     M
                           •
                        th. 1
                        •
                     . a▪
                      1. Cor. 14. c
                   Simplicitee in the Lorde Iesu Christ.
               
               6. But whosoeuer hath learned the Meeknes  of the louely and simple Lyfe / in ye Schoole of Christ / vnder the Obedience of the Loue / his Wisdom (although it seeme to be the leaste) doth farr excell 
                     Sap 7. all the worldly Wisdoms and Learnednesses. It it verytrue.
               7. Take heede to it I beseech you: and retayne thatt in your Vnderstanding / which I wryte vnto you.
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               O Ye good-willing Hearts ⁏my beloued  Children in the Loue; In that I wryte this Letter vnto you / therunto hath your Loue, and good-willing Obedience occasioned me.
               2. For when I was last with you (hearing your Woords) I perceaued that ye stoode 
                     Rom. 12. b. 15. a. 1. 
                        
                           •
                        or. 1. a. Phil. 2. a. 3. b.
                   agreeably-mynded together / for to shewe Obedience in all what I mought commaunde you out of the Woord of Grace and his Seruice of Loue. In which your Goodwillingnes and inclyned Mynde to the Obedience of the

Loue / my Soule hath greatly reioyced / because I fynde so feawe of thatt Disposition.
               3. If yee now ⁏O ye Deerly-beloued; be altogether inclyned to the Obaying of the holy Woord / then let thesame likewyse be founde so in the Deede: and feare not any thing. For in all thissame / 1. Cor. 7. d.
                   I wil cast no Snare about your Necks (like as is happened to Dyuers among you / by Sommein-tymes-past): nor laye any Burdens vppon you / 
                     Math. 23. a.
                   which ye shoulde not be able to beare: neither-yet requyre anything of you / that I my self woulde not doo: but gentlely and courteously (euen as God requyreth out of his Loue) intreate you: and that altogether / vnto Peace and Vnitee with each-other / in God the Father, and in his Loue.
               
                   4. Therfore harken and take-heede / what I commaunde you. 1. Cor 7. b.
                   howbeit not I / but the Lorde.
               5· In all your Obedience to the Seruice of Loue / 
                     Pro. 28. b. Eccli. 4. c.
                   make-manyfest your whole Heart, Myndes, and Thoughts· and your Falling into the Sinne / before your Elder and Minister of the godly Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of Loue: and so discharge yourselues, 
                     Rom. 12. a. 13. b.
                   or depart ⁏with all your Hearts; out of all worldly Behauiour, Dealing, and Abuce. and out of all what is created in the Worlde / being vayne and corruptible: as 
                     Tob. 3. b. Ephe. 5. a.
                   Light-behauiour, Wantonnes, vnprofitable Babbling,

Mocking, Prouokeing, Rygourousnes, Dissimulacion, Lying, Couetousnes, Pryde, Self-myndednes, and 
                     Ier. 7. c. 11. a 13. b. 18. b.
                   Good-thinking, and those things that are lyke vnto these: And enter into the euerlasting liueing Vncreatednes, the true Good of the godly Perfection: take vnto you a constant Disposition, and vse decent Woordes among eachother / 
                     Ephe. 4. c. Col 4. a. 1. Pet. 4. b.
                   that are profitable, conuenient, and serue to edifying: also Loueingnes, Famylyaritee, Openheartednes, the Trueth, Contentednes, and Peaceablenes, or Submission.
               6. In all thissame / loue you one-another to the Good: talke dayly of the Trueth, and of the Loue / which God doth now in the last tyme⁏ out of his Grace; showe vppon vs.
               7. Be you likewyse 
                     Rom. 12. b.
                   constant and humble in  your Prayers, and pray vnto the Lorde / that He wil strengthen you to his Righteousnes: and trust vppon Him, He 
                     Eccli 2. b.
                   wil not forsake you.
               8. To these louely Commaundements of Loue (which are the light 
                     Mat. 1
                        •
                     . c. 1. Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                     . a.
                   Burden or the sweete Yoke of Christ, and do bring vs to a louely peaceable Beeing: wherthrough we haue the Peace in God / with eachother) prepare your Soules / for to be obedient therunto. For in the Obeying of the Loue / is hidden the Treasure of all Wisdom, and the Head-somme of all Righteousnes.
               
                  9. What is now this Loue / which in her Seruice / requyreth such Obedience? mought som man demaunde. The Answere:
               10. The Loue is a verytrue Beeing, out of the which / the Beleefe doth growe and blowe, and becometh fruitfull therthrough / to bring-foorth the vpright Righteousnes.
               11. The Loue 1. Cor. 13. a.
                   is able to doo and to obeye all what God requyreth / in the Seruice of his gracious Woord: and likewyse to bring-foorth all what is seruiceable to the Peace and Vnitee of Heart in the Loue: For by her almighty and vertuous Nature / she begetteth 
                     Rom. 13. a. Gal. 5. b. 1. Timo. 1. a.
                   or bringeth-foorth the perfect Righteousnes of the Beleefe of Christ.
               
               
                   12. The 
                     Iohn. 4.7. d
                   Water of Lyfe that floweth from her Body / is the vpright Doctrine in the Wisdom, wherwith she 
                     Gen. 2. b.
                   watereth the whole Paradise of the Lorde, and refresheth his Planting.
               13. Her Fruit which the Righteous do bring-foorth out of her Doctrine / 
                     Gen 2. a. Pro. 3. b. 4. Esd 8. f. Apo 2. a.
                   is a Tree of Lyfe: whose Leaues do 
                     Psal. 1. a. Ier 17. a. Ez
                           •
                        . 47. b. Apo. 22 a.
                   not wither: neither is her Rooting-out founde. Of which Loue and the Seruice of her Doctrine / we haue rehearsed more-at-large in the 3. Glas 31. c d.
                   Glasse of Righteousnes.
               14. The Lorde bring vs all to thesame vpright Beeing of the Loue / To thend that we may enioye the Frui
                     •
                  s of the heauenly Kyndnes / in all Loue. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               The V. Chap.
               MOreouer ⁏my beloued Freendes in the Loue of Iesu Christ; I must  yet wryte a little-more vnto you, and disclose or declare vnto you / the two-maner of Kingdoms [namely, of God and of the Deuill] which do make-manifest themselues in our Inwardnes as spirituall, or inuisible / Because that yee may also learne to knowe them with Distinction / according to the Spirit / wherby you may with an vpright Discerning (when they make-manifest themselues against eachother / in you) cleaue vnto thatt ⁏with your Spirit; which is godly, heauenly, and true / and which saueth you: and may forsake and leaue thatt / which is deuilish, deceitfull, and false / and which bringeth to the Condemnacion.
               2. For-that-cause, inasmuch as it is Spirit / 
                     Iohn. 3. 
                        •
                     . that condemneth, and saueth vs / therfore haue now a regarde with good Discerning / vnto Spirit and Spirits: and learne to knowe those well / 
                     Iohn. 4. a.
                   that are of God and true, and those that are deuillish and false or lying.
               3. But if ye wil descerne them rightly according  to the Trueth / then becom first-of-all circumcised to the Lorde / 
                     Deut. 10. 
                        •
                     . Ier. 4. a. Col. 2 b.
                   on the Fore-skinne of your Hearts [the which is the Laying-away of the Flesh of Sinne] and so then becom 
                     Rom. 8. a.
                   spiritually mynded / in all your Vnderstanding of the godly Knowledges: and continue

stedfast in the Obedience to the Woord / till vnto ye seconde Birth: like-as ye be taught by the Seruice of Loue / according to the Trueth of Christ.
               
               4. If-so-be now that ye continue in the Woord of the Loue of Iesu Christ: and do not turne-away neither to the left nor to the right syde / 
                     Iohan. 
                     
                        •
                     . d.
                   then shall ye knowe the Trueth, and the Trueth shall make you free.
               5. Therfore giue-eare now, and vnderstande / what the Spirit of Loue and Trueth sayth:
               6. Knowe in your Spirit ⁏O ye goodwilling Hearts to the Righteousnes; how that God ؛the true Father
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   is 
                     Iam 1. c.
                   an euerlasting vnchaingable Spirit, a stedfast Power, a 
                     Gen. 1. a.
                   Creator of Heauen and Earth, and of euerything that shall continue for euer: 
                     Heb. 1. a.
                   also an Vpholder of his Workes / with the 
                     Sap. 7 c.
                   Woord of his Beeing: a cleere Light and liueing Fountayne, wherout all Vertues and Righteousnesses do flowe.
               
                   7. Euenthus according to thesame like Beeing of God the Father / so knowe likewyse ⁏according to the Spirit; his Sonne / our Lorde Iesus Christ, 
                  
                     Gen. 1. a. Psal 33. a. Pro 8 c.
                   through whom / God hath made all his Workes: and He is out of God the Father published vnto vs ⁏by the 
                     Rom 10. a. 1 Pet. 1. c.
                   Woord of Preaching of the holy Gospel; 
                     Iohn. 1. a.
                   to be a true Light / that lighteth all Men through the Coming of his Appeering, and is set-before vs / for an euerlasting Sauiour, 
                     Math. 1. c. Rom 3. c. 2. Cor. 5. b. Col. 1. c. 
                     
                        •
                     . Iohn. 2.4 b
                   and a Reconciler for our Sinnes. namely, for all those

Sinnes 
                     Math. 12. d. Luk. 12. b.
                   that are committed against the Father and the Sonne.
               8. Knowe also the holy Gost, 
                     Iohn. 14. c. 15. c. 
                     
                        •
                     6. b.
                   which cometh vnto vs / out of the Father and the Sonne ⁏as a Spirit of Trueth and Loue; in the Obeying of the Woord of God and Christ: which establisheth vs therin, and declareth the Kingdom of the God of Heauens vnto vs: and in what Foorme and Beeing / that the Father, and the Sonne, and the holy Gost / is one true God.
               9. Beholde, thatt is veryly the true Kingdom of God / 
                     Luk▪
                      17. c.
                   inwardly with in vs: and his Righteousnes is / that the Man shoulde ⁏with his Spirit; be incorporated to thesame Godhead, and liue therin for euer.
            
            
               The VI. Chap.
               VNderstand now according to the  Trueth ⁏ye Deerly-beloued; which is the Kingdom of God and his Righteousnes / 
                     Math. 6. d,
                   that we ought first or before-al / to seeke.
               2. But seing that the Man doth now generally / seeke the Kingdom of God and his Righteousnes / contraryly, and not rightly: 
                     Ier. 19 d. Iohn. 7 d.
                   and for-that-cause cannot fynde thesame / through his owne Vnderstanding / Therfore hath the Goodnes of God / looked vpon our Ignorance, and declared his Kingdom, and the Righteousnes therof / vnto Vs / through his Loue.
               
                  3. To which Kingdom of God, and his Righteousnes / and godly Maiestee of the euerlasting, spirituall, and heauenly Beeing / and to all his Holynes, Beawty, Ritches, and to his euer-liueing Ioyfulnes / Wee be all now called and bidden / by the holy Spirit of the Loue of God the Father / to the Preseruacion of vs all / in thissame last and perillous Tyme. For Hee / thesame God ؛ye Father, the Sonne, the holy Gost
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   presenteth vs now with his Loue, and wil 
                     Leui. 26. b. Eze. 37. c. 2. Gor. 6. b. Apo. 21. a. 
                     
                        •
                     
                   dwell, liue, and worke in vs. Let eueryone take-heede to thissame gracious Tyme.
               4. The Father draweth 
                     Iohn. 6. 
                        
                           •
                        
                        ▪ g
                   or allureth vs to him / by his gracious Woord and Seruice of Loue: and whosoeuer yeeldeth himself to be drawen by the Father / cometh to the Sonne / the out-flowen gracious Woord of the Father.
               
                   5. And whosoeuer cometh to the Sonne, and 
                     Iohn. 3.6. c.
                   beleeueing Him / remayneth 
                     Iohn. 8.1
                        •
                     . a
                   in Him / He saueth.
               6. And Whom the Sonne saueth / 
                     Iohn. 3.6. f.
                   hee hath the euerlasting Lyfe: and is 
                     Act. 1. a. 2. b.
                   annoynted with the holy Gost.
               7. And whosoeuer is annoynted with the holy Gost / hee is established 
                     Rom. 8. b. Ephe. 1. b. c. 
                           •
                        ol. 1. b. 
                     
                        •
                     
                   or altogether godded in the euerlasting liueing Godhead, and is vniforme with all what concerneth the Godhead or is of God: and inheriteth the Kingdom of the God of Heauens, and all the Ritches of Christ of the heauenly Goodes.
               
                  8. Beholde, euenthus doth the holy Gost ⁏which is the Spirit of Loue; confirme the Kingdom of the God of Heauens, and the Promyses of God the Father and of Christ: and 
                     Iohn. 16. b
                   leadeth the godly Man into all Trueth, and declareth euery-thing vnto him that is in Heauen and vppon the Earth.
               9. But whosoeuer hath bin negligent in the 
                     Iohn. 6. c. 
                           •
                        .
                  
                   Drawing of the Father· and ⁏through his Ignorance; contemned, or bin disobedient vnto Him and his Lawe or seruiceable Woord: and whoso likewyse hath not taken-heede to the Saluation in Iesu Christ / through the Belee
                     •
                  e
                     •
                   but ⁏through the Blyndnes 
                     Rom. 1. c. Ephe. 4. b.
                   of the Vnbeleefe; resisted or blaspheamed thesame / Hee doth yet in thissame Daye / through the Ministracion of the godly Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of Loue ⁏the which is the Office of the holy Gost; fynde Grace and Forgiuenes of Sinnes / if he submitt 1. Pet. 5. b. Iam. 4. 
                        •
                     . himself 
                     Math 3. a. Luk. 3. b.
                   penitently vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
               10. But whoso neglecteth him in the holy Spirit of Loue, and resisteth and blaspheameth thesame or his mostholy Seruice of the spirituall and heauenly Goodes / 
                     Math. 12. d. Heb. 6.10. c
                   Hee continueth in Indignation, and shall neuer 
                     Iohn 
                     
                        •
                     . a.
                   see the Kingdom of God▪ For the Spirit of the Loue of God and Christ, or holy Gost ⁏who is the Perfection of all the Workes of God; hath and vseeth his Seruice ⁏the which is the last Seruice of Grace; now in thissame last gracious Tyme or Daye of Loue. After

which gracious Daye of Loue / ther-is 
                     Apo. 10. a.
                   no Daye of Grace more for to com: but 
                     Heb. 10. c.
                   the righteous Iudgment of God, to the Condemnacion 
                     Math. 25. d.
                   of all Vngodlyones / that haue refused the Godlynes through the holy Spirit of Loue and the Ministracion of his godly Testimonyes· and euenso contemned and blaspheamed his most holy Seruice.
               
                   11. THerfore ⁏all ye good-willing Hearts; take-heede now ⁏according to the Counsayle of the Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of Loue; to the Kingdom of God 
                     Luk. 17. c.
                   inwardly within you / To thend that ye may be incorporated to thesame / with your Spirit: For thatt is the Righteousnes which auayleth before God.
               12. But take you good heede of the Kingdom of the Deuill, which also sheweth itself inwardly ⁏before the Eyes and Thoughts / that are earthly 
                     Rom. 
                     
                        •
                     . a.
                   and fleshly mynded; as a Kingdom of God: and deceaueth the Fleshly-myndedones / with his false 
                     Esa. 59. a.
                   Light and 
                     •
                   Good-thinking, and with his false 
                     Ier 7. b. & Sap. 2. 2. Pet 2. b. I
                           •
                        de 1. b.
                   Freedom / which it bringeth to the Flesh / according to his Fleshly Lusts and Disyres, and seduceth the Hearts of Men.
            
            
               The VII. Chap.
               
                   KNowe likewyse thatsame Kingdom of the Deuill / inwardly / according to the Spirit: For his Generacion is also inwarde / but not out of

any Beeing or Lyfe that is spirituall and heauenly: but out of thatt which is nothing and earthly or corruptible: and therfore is likewyse the Generacion of thesame / earthly, and not heauenly / fleshly / and not spiritually mynded / according to Gods Spirit / therfore doth it also growe offended alwayes / at those things that are against their Myndes or Thoughtes, and maketh-vp itself 2. Tess. 2. against thatt which is of God and of his Seruice of Loue.
               2. Thesame Generacion of the Deuill / wil not also stande submitted vnder the Obedience of the Loue, nor of the holy Woord: but refuseth the Requyring therof / and so wil liue according 
                     Ier. 7.
                        ••
                      
                     a. 13. b. 18 b
                   to their owne Will and Good-thinking, and wrest 2. Pet. 3. b.
                   and construe the Scripture / according to their false and Fleshly Mynde / and so wil liue vnto themselues, and loue themselues / according as the Knowledg imagineth in them.
               3. Therfore is the Deuill / in his Kingdom (although he appeere before all fleshly Myndes / as if he were a 2 Tess. 2 a.
                   God of Light) not els-what but a Nothingnes of the Lye: and is likewyse for-that-cause / a 
                     Iohn. 8. a.
                   Father of all secreet or inward Wickednes, and a Render or Parter-asunder of all Concorde / whearas he is harkened-vnto and beleeued and accepted as good and true.
               4. Beholde, thesame Father of Wickednes  
                  ؛the God of the 2. Cor. 4.2. wicked Worlde and of all Vngodly

or impenitent Men
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   is / in all his Beeing / a 2. Tess. 2. b.
                   Contrary-beeing vnto God▪ and his Sonne / a Contrary-beeing vnto Christ, a Destroyer, 
                     Iohn. 17. b. 2. Tess. 2. a.
                   a Childe of Wickednes, which maketh the Hearts of Men / stout vppon their Knowledg: and bringeth also a false Freedom vnto Many / for to sinne boldly, and to continue in the worldly Abhomynacions and Foolishnes / with vnaccused Consciences, and to make-vp themselues 
                     Dan. 22. a.
                   resistant against the Trueth, and the godly Loue of God the holy Father.
               5. And their Spirit [namely, of the Father of Wickednes, and of his Sonne or Childe of Wickednes] is a wicked Spirit 2. Tess. 2. a.
                   of Lyes, which confirmeth the Man ⁏being in his Vnrepentance, and in his Disobedience to the Requyring of the gracious Woord of the Lorde and his Seruice of Loue; in the Beeing of Lyes: and leadeth him into all Lye and Errour▪
               
               6. Thesame false God and Father of Wickednes / doth also ⁏with his wicked Self-willednes; allure 2. Tess. 2. a. b
                   or drawe vs vnto him / through the priuate Loue of ourselues: and whosoeuer doth yeelde himself to be so drawen by him / cometh to his Sonne ؛his Childe or Being of Wickednes
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   the false Christ or 1 Iohn. 2. c 4. a.
                   
                  Antichrist, the Destroyer, which is the Christ of the wicked Worlde and of all Vngodlyones, and worketh in his People an inwarde or 
                     
                        •
                     . Tess. 2. b.
                   secret Wickednes

/ which they themselues cannot wel perceaue.
               7. And whōsoeuer then cometh so to the Sonne of the Deuill, as also becometh incorporated to thesame Beeing of Wickednes, and bydeth therin / hee is quyte and cleane corrupted / in all his Mynde / by the Wickednes and by the priuate Loue of himself, and by the Disobedience and Resistance to the Loue and her right Seruice. Yea, so quyte corrupted / that he is inclyned to nothing-els / in all his Mynde / but to his Self-wilednes, and to all Destructionablenes: and to destroye the Family of Loue / wherin the liueing God of Heauen dwelleth, liueth, and gouerneth / and the Good-willingones to the Obedience of the Requyring of thesame God: or to stande against them in euery-behalfe, and to drawe them awaye from the single Obedience which they shewe in the Requyring of the Seruice of Loue, and to corrupt their Vnderstanding / with the good-thinking Knowledg.
               8. And whosoeuer then is thus corrupted by  the Sonne ؛the Childe 
                     Iohn. 17. b. 2 Tess 2 a.
                   of the Deuill and of Wickednes
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   or by his Ministers / vnder the Power and Will of the Deuill, and is growen of one-mynde with the wicked and vngodly Nature / for to be plyable to thesame, and so is becom enuyous towards the Famyly of Loue / hee is borne a Childe of the Sinne and of the Deuill, and an Heyre of the hellish Beeing and of the perpetuall 
                     Math 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Condemnacion. and annoynted

with the wicked Spirit of 3. Reg. 22. Esa 18 b. 2 Tess 2. Lyes. Which Annoynting / is a false Freedom, or a false free Mynde and Beeing of the Deuill. And thatsame is the false Freedom which the Disobeyers and Resisters of the Loue / do willingly accept-of in their Vnregeneracion, and do much sooner and rather inclyne-vnto / then to shewe Repentance for their Sinnes, and to submitt them to the Doctrine of the Loue of Iesu Christ.
               
               9. And whosoeuer then taketh vppon him to liue free / being vnregenerat, and so in his Vnregeneracion / is annoynted or quyeted with the false Spirit of Lyes or of Good-thinking· taught to the Kingdom of Hell· and made free in vseing all Wickednes and Resistance against the Loue / Hee is likewyse a Fellow-member of the Deuill and of the Wicked Nature or Antichrist: wherthrough he is then in that fort / wholly and altogether deuiled with the 
                     Sap. 2. d. Iohn. 8. c.
                   Deuill· natured with the wicked Nature of Antichrist· and leadd by the false Spirit of 2. Tess. 2. b.
                   Lyes / into all Falshod and Lyes, into all Disobedience to the gracious Woord, and into all worldly and vngodly Abhomynations: and so inheriteth the Desolation of al horrible Abhomynation. And thatsame is the Kingdom of Hell, 
                     Sap. 1. c. Math. 2
                        •
                     . d. 2. Pet. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . and of the he
                     ••
                  ish Fyre / wherin all wicked and seduceing Spirits haue their Dwelling, and do com-foorth their-out for to seduce.
               
                  10. BEholde, such a wicked Ende and horrible  Beeing of the Hell and of the Darknesses ⁏wher through one inheriteth nothing-els but all Lyes and Wickednes, and vseth all Wickednes / in Freedom; is looked-into and knowen by all the Children of the holy Spirit of Loue / that thesame is the whole Kingdom of the Deuill himself. But by all good-thinking Wyseones and Children of the Flesh and of the wicked Worlde ⁏who haue a Lust and Desyre to the Iniquitee and Works of the sinfull Flesh; it is 
                     Sap. 2 a. Apo. 13. looked-into / as a Light and Kingdom of Pleasure, and as a good Freedom for all Disobedient and Vnregeneratedones.
               11. Take you heede of this wicked Nature / ye Deerly-beloued, and keepe your Hearts pure from thesame / through the Woord of Trueth / that is ministred vnto you in the Obedience of the Loue. And although it do make-vp itself in you somtymes / against thesame Woord of Trueth / yet becom not of one-mynde with thesame in-any-wyse: but hang your Hearts on the vpright godly Beeing of the Loue, and to be obedient to his Requyring: and so ⁏in the Obedience of the Loue; ouercom the Euell / 
                     Rom. 12. c.
                   with the good Being of God.
               12. If now ye do 
                     Eccli 6. c. 1. Pet. 5. a. Iam. 4. a.
                   submitt your Hearts vnder the Obedience of the Loue / with all Humilitee / then shall ye also in thissame perillous Tyme / not be seduced nor deceaued by the

wicked Beeing: but byde preserued with the Good.
               13. To your Preseruacion / ye Deerly-beloued ⁏to thend that ye mought loue the good Beeing, and be warned of the Euell; so coulde I not omitt to wryte a little vnto you of this Matter also, and to set it forth before your Eyes and Eares / Because that ye shoulde ⁏with a good Vnderstanding; vnderstande a right Difference betwixt the godly and vngodly Beeing. The Lorde vouchsafe to preserue you all from the Euell, and to leade you into all Trueth. Amen.
               
               
                   14. THis haue I written with Dilligence and feruent Loue, and thought good to declare it befor you all / my beloued Freendes in the Loue: Especially before all you which haue geeuen-ouer your Hearts and Myndes / with Vs / to all Obedience and Concord in the Loue and her Seruice: Whose Soules likewyse I do loue / to the perfect Righteousnes, for to liue with you all in the Kingdom of God the Father / in all Loue and Vnitee of Heart, euen-as God and his Woord and Seruice of Loue / requyreth thesame of vs: To his renowmed Prayse, Honour, and Glory / and to all our Ioye and Saluacion / in the euerlasting Lyfe.
               15 Heerwith ⁏ye good-willing Hearts to the Loue; ye be altogether hartely saluted.
               16. Take-heede I pray you / to thissame freendly 1. Cor 16 c. 2 Cor. 13. b
                   Kisse, wherwith I do imbrace you in

the Spirit / to the Vnitee of the Loue: and 
                     Ephe. 4. a.
                   walke like loueing Children / in all Loue.
               17. Be myndfull lykewyse of these my Woordes and Wrytings: and 1. Timo 4. 
                        •
                     
                  exercise yourselues obediently therin / to all Godlynes / To thendethat I may fynde you alwayes according to the Sence and Mynde of my Souls· and reioyce me euenso with you all ⁏in the godly Ioye; in the euerlasting Lyfe. That graunt vs the Lorde / the almighty God. Amen.
               
            
            The Ende of the Sixtenth Epistle.
         
         
            The Seuententh Epistle. A groundly Instructiō of the Mans Glory / in the Begining: of his Fall, Death, and Condemnation: and of his Restoring into his former Glory agayne.
            Written and sent vnto the Louers of the Trueth / which submitt them with vs / vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
            Vnder which Obedience of the Loue / all Men are ⁏now in the last tyme; called and bidden

to assemble them to one Man of God / in the only and true Body of Iesu Christ: to a perfect Glory / both of God and the Man.
            
               Let vs be vpright in the Loue, and growe in all parts / in him which is the Headd / euen CHRIST: by whom the whole Body is ioyned together.
               Ephe. 4. b.
            
            To those / whose Spirit is one Spirit with Vs in the Loue / be Health and Saluacion.
            
               The First Chapter.
               
                  
                  THE Cleernes of ye true Light ⁏which is appeered 
                     Act. 2. a. 2. Cor. 4. a. Col. 1. b. 2 Timo 1. a
                   and com vnto vs from the Right-hande of God the Father / out of the heauenly Trueth▪ growe and increase more-and-more among you all / my beloued Hearts in the Loue, euen till vnto the most-perfect Cleernes / 
                     Ephe. 3. d. 2. Pet. 1. b.
                   in the Inwardnes of your Hearts / To thend that ye may ⁏through thesame Cleernes; see, knowe, and vnderstand / to what a Noblenes and Kingdom of God of concordable Louelynes / God hath 
                     Gen 1. c. Sap. 2. c. Eccli 17. a
                   created the Man· and chosen and loued thesame Generation:

like-as our Wrytings ⁏set-foorth by vs / vnder the Obedience of the Loue; do sufficiently ⁏with full Instruction; shewe the Cleernes of thatt Matter / were it rightly vnderstoode.
               2. Although ⁏ye Beloued; that ye haue often hearde of this Matter by vs, or readd therof in our Wrytings: and do also partly see-into and knowe thesame / yet am I forced notwithstanding / out of the Heart of Loue ⁏that standeth affected towards all your Hearts / to an Vnitee in the Loue; to wryte a little-more vnto you / of the vpright Beeing / wherin the Man was created, wher-from he is 
                     Gen. 3. 
                        •
                     . Sap. 2. c.
                   falne, and wher-vnto he is called agayne / by Christ / to thend to stirr-vp the desyre of your Spirit the-more, and to procure all your Will the-more, towards the vpright Beeing of the true Light, and to the Incorporating 
                     Iohn 15. 
                        •
                      17. b.
                   to one concordable Man of God / in whom / God with his Christ, and with all his Saintes, Spirits, Prophets, and Angels / dwelleth, liueeth, and tryumpheth with Glory and all Delytfulnes / as a 
                     Rom 14. b.
                   peaceable and
                     Heb. 12 b.
                   vndisturbable Kingdom. To him thesame God / 
                     Ephe 1. b.
                   to the Laude and Prayse of his Glory, and to him thesame godded Man / to his perfect Ioye. Amen.
               
               3. BEholde and consider / ye Beloued: In the Begining / 
                     Gen 1. c
                   when God had made al-things well / then was the Lorde / a Lorde of his Kingdom, and a God of his

Workes. Ther was not also in his Kingdom, nor-yet in all his Workes / any-more then one God, and one Man: and they were One, and had in all respects / one Kynde, Beeing, and Nature: And so ⁏at thatt tyme; God was all what the Man was, and the Man all what God was.
               4. And when God looked vpon the Man / 
                     Gen 1. c. Sap 2 c. Eccli. 17. a.
                   whom He had created according to the like Being of his Godhead, and with whom He was manned / then looked He vpon himself, as thesame Cleernes of his liueing Godhead / vniforme with the Manhod.
               5. Beholde, thus vniforme with the true Beeing of God / was the Man in the Begining: and this was all one Beeing / the Man and God. And so God behealde 
                     Gen. 1 d.
                   his Worke which He had made / that it was Good.
               6. And when the Man likewyse behealde his God / with whom he was godded / then sawe he ⁏in thesame Cleernes of his God; the noble and pure Cleernes of his Manhod / vniforme with the Godhead, and perfect in all Vertues and Beawty▪ namely, according to all the Frome and Beeing of thesame Godhead. Lo, this was likewyse all One / 
                     Iohn 17 c. Ephe 2 b
                   God and the Man.
               
                   7. Seing now that These ⁏God and the Man; were One / so was-ther likewyse nomore but one Kingdom / in Heauen, nor vppon Earth: and thatt was the Kingdom of the God of Heauens, and the euerlasting Lyfe / 

which had his perfect Beawty and Cleernes both vppon the Earth and in Heauen / with the Man, and in the Man. And ther-was nowheare any 
                     Sap. 1. c.
                   Kingdom of Hell, nor Death, nor-yet any Vnrighteousnes / neither in Heauen nor vppon Earth. For God had made all Things good and well / which He had made: and also created him nomore but one Man, who was as God himself. And God blessed this Man: and hath sayde vnto him / that he shoulde growe or increase him, replenish 
                     Gen. 1. c.
                   the Earth, and bring it vnder him.
               8. Also God gaue no other Customs, Rytes, Lawes, nor Commaundements vnto the Man / in the Begining / but to liue with Ioye and an 
                     Gen. 2. b
                   vncouered Heart / in the naked or vncouered Cleernes of his God, and likewyse to walke alwayes naked or vncouered / before Him: and that he shoulde euenso beholde all the Workes of God / for good / and not for euell· knowe nothing but Good / and not any Euell· and taste or feele nothing-els but Lyfe / and not any Death· Saluation / and not any Condemnacion.
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               BEholde: Thatt woulde God, and  that thesame shoulde continue in that maner and euerlastingly with the Man / to thend that his Kingdom

[namely, the Man / with the Godhead] shoulde ⁏as one only peaceable Kingdom / in all Louelynes; beare 
                     
                        
                           •
                        en. 
                     
                        •
                     . c. d
                   the Dominion ouer the vniuersall Earth / to the Welfare of all Creatures.
               2. But as-soone as the Man turned-away the Sight of his Eyes / from his God, and looked vppon himself: and so turned-vnto and loued himself / thē perceaued he that he was not altogether the highest Godhead himself· but with the Godhead / a Man also, 
                     Gen 3 a.
                   and became tempted to the Knowledg of Good and Euell, for to bee ther-through in euery-respect / as God himself.
               3. When the Man had geeuen-ouer himself ther-vnto· and taken-on such a Fruit / of the Knowledg of Good and Euell / then came Blyndnes ouer him, 
                     Gen. 3. a.
                   and he estrainged or seperated himself from the louely Cleernes of his God. By meanes wherof / he coulde not endure the Woord or the Voyce of his God· nor appeere before Him / with his naked Manhod: but was 
                     Gen. 3. b.
                   ashamed before God / of his naked Manhod.
               4. He coulde not also beholde, nor conceaue any other Light or Cleernes / but thatt which he framed to himself / out of the Knowledg of Good and Euell: or, euen-as thesame Knowledg imagined it in him. The which was all Ignorance and Darknes: and was alwayes to a more Leading-awaye or Estrainging of

the Man from his God, who is the 
                     Iohn 1. a 8. b. 9. 
                        •
                     . 12. 
                        •
                     
                   euerlasting Light and the true Wisdom.
               5. He fealt likewyse no other Lyfe of Righteousnes, nor Peace or Rest in his Conscience / but thatt which he himself forged and tooke-on out of the Knowledg of Good and Euell. The which was all wrong, and nothing but Sinne, Death, and Vnrestfulnes.
               6. He knew not also any other God, Kingdom of Heauens, nor Saluacion / but such as he prefigured vnto himself / through thesame forenamed Knowledg / which the Man himself had taken-on. The which was nothing-els / but the Deuill himself· the Kingdom of Hell· and the euerlasting Condemnacion. 
                     Sap. 1. 
                        •
                     . whom / God woulde not that they shoulde bee vppon the Earth.
               7. And euenthus did the Darknes and the Deuill ؛ 
                  
                     Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                     . c.
                   the Father of Lyes
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   as also the Kingdom of Hell ⁏as a deadly and damnable Beeing; gett a Foorme in the Man: and so became the Man, and all what was borne of him / 
                     Gen. 
                     
                        •
                     . b. Rom. 5. b. 1 Gor 15 c.
                   subiect to the Death and all Destruction: and he gott in that maner / the 
                     Ier. 17. a.
                   craftiest Heart / aboue all the Beastes vppon Earth / by which meanes / the whole Worlde is growne so 
                     Eccli. 37. 
                        •
                     . full of Falshod.
               8. COnsider well now ⁏ye goodwilling Hearts; what a destructionable Heritage the Generacions of Men haue inherited / through the Knowledg of Adam: wherthrough the Man (who is created by God / for to be

One with God, and ought to be One with each-other) is falne or growen into so many kyndes of Deuision and Destruction. Which Destruction of the harmfull Knowledg / we may now easely perceaue / through the Cleernes of thissame Daye, and through the Declaring of the Seruice of Loue / if we haue regarde theron: and that cheefly eueryone in himself.
               
                   9. Now for to bring thissame falne Man ⁏which is so vtterly corrupted in his Vnderstanding· deadd 
                     
                        
                           •
                        en. 3. d. Sap 1. c.
                   from the Lyfe of God· and estrainged from the Kingdom of the God of Heauens; againe to his God / in his vpright Estate / So hath God out of 
                     Iohn. 3. b.
                   his Loue (euen-as He had promysed / to the Saluacion of the manly Generacion) brought-forth a new Mā / according to thesame Likenes or Foorme of his Godhead, 
                     Mat. 1. 
                        
                           •
                        . Luk. 2. who is called / Iesus Christ: which signifyeth vnto vs / the safe-makeing Oyle or Annoynting of the godly Beeing. This Man is gon-out 
                     Iohn. 13. a. 16. 
                        •
                     . from God, and hath showed himself vppon Earth.
               10. He is entered into the Knowledg of Men, and hath founde the much knowing Wisdom, together with her Scripture-learnednes / false and lying / in all what she knewe.
               11. This false Knowledg (inasmuch as she 1 Cor 1 b
                   vnderstood not the Trueth of God rightly / by all her Wisdom nor Scripture-learnednes) hath Christ 
                  
                     Math 23. rebuked. also brought-in a true Knowledg / besydes thesame, and taken 2 Cor 1
                        •
                     . a
                   captiue

the Knowledg of Men therwith: wherthrough God hath euenso ⁏by his Christ; made all the Knowledg or Wisdom of Men / 1. Cor 1.3. c
                   Foolishnes / to thend He woulde in that sort ⁏in thissame tocoming Daye of his Glory; release or make the Man free from all his foolish Knowledg / vnder the Obedience of his Loue.
               12 In this like-maner hath Christ don also  with the 
                     Math. 12. c. 15. b. 21. d.
                   Sinne, and with the false Righteousnes of Men.
               13. He is likewyse entered into the Death 
                     Math. 27. of Men: and hath also brought-in a Death besydes thesame [namely, his 
                     Rom. 6. a. Phil. 2. a.
                   Death of the Crosse] to the Makeing-alyue of Men: and so hath ⁏through his Death; taken-captiue 1 Cor. 15. f.
                   the Death of Men / for that He woulde now in the last Daye ⁏in his Coming-agayne; 
                     Rom. 6.
                        •
                      
                     b 1 Cor 15. c. 2 Cor 4. b. Ephe. 2. a. Col 2. b.
                   rayse-vp the Man from the Death / through his Death of the Crosse· make him alyue through his Spirit of Loue· and bring him to his God / in his vpright Estate.
               14. Euenso hath He don likewyse with the Deuill, Darknes, Hell, and Condemnacion: in whose Bands the Man hath walked, and bin so bounde therin / that he coulde not escape the Condemnacion. Whose 
                     Oze. 1
                        •
                     . b. 1. Cor 15 f Apo. 20. b.
                   Power is now ⁏in thissame Daye of Loue; altogether broken· and the Man ⁏which beleeueth and giueth-eare to the Loue in her Seruice; made safe.
            
            
               
               The III. Chap.
               
                  
                  AND now when Iesus Christ had 
                     Psal 68. b. Ephe. 4. a.
                   taken-captiue the Power and Dominion of all pernicious Things ⁏which burdened the Man, and were destroying; and 
                     Psal 8 a. 11. c. 28. b. 
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 15. c Ephe 1. c Heb. 2. a
                   had brought them all vnder him / through his Death of the Crosse / Then did He ryse agayne from the Death / with his Power and Dominion ouer the Destruction, and was seene alyue / 
                     Math. 28. b Iohn. 20. d. Act 2. c. 10. c 1. Cor. 15 
                        •
                     . by his Freendes: and so hath ⁏through the Declareing of his Resurrection; caused his Freendes and Desciples that beleeued in Him / to see, and made-knowen vnto them / the obtayning of the Power and Victory / against all the destroying Things wherwith the Man was captiued.
               2. Now when He had commaunded his Disciples / that they shoulde publish thatt which they had seene, heard, and learned of Him / for a Gospel in all the Worlde / to the Saluacion of Men / in his Coming-agayne / 
                     Mar. 16. b Luk 24. f. Act. 1. a.
                   Then did He ascende from them / to the Seate of his godly Glory: and hath possessed the Heauen, and sett himself at the Right-hande of the Maiestee of his God / in the-Heigth. From thence hath God ⁏by thesame Christ; poored-out his 
                     Act 2. a.
                   holy Spirit / vppon the Disciples of Christ / which beleeued in Him, and obserued his Woord / for to make them vnto Him / a true Comunialtee of his Saintes.
               
                  3. Beholde, euenthus hath God / beholding 
                     Act. 17. d.
                  
                   the Ignorance of Men) caused the 
                     Math 3 a. Luk. 3.24. 
                        
                           •
                         Act. 2. d. 3. b
                   vpright Repentance for Sinne / to be published vnto all Men / by these Saintes of God and Christ, and to giue them to vnderstand / that He hath sett or appoynted a Daye ⁏which is the Daye of Loue; 
                     Psal. 96.9
                        •
                     
                     ▪ 
                     Act. 17. b.
                   on the which He woulde iudg the Circuit of the vniuersall Earth / with Righteousnes / by one Man / in whom He hath concluded it: who holdeth-foorth the Beleefe before eueryone, inasmuch as God hath raysed Him vp from the Death.
               4. Forasmuch then as God is true in his Promyses, 
                     Luk 1. e g.
                   and doth continually shewe his Mercy on the Generations of Men / to the Establishing of his Promyces / so doth He likewyse declare vnto vs in thissame last Daye of his Loue ⁏which God hath sett and appoynted for a Daye of his righteous Iudgment; how or in what maner his Promyses do stand firme and he accomplished: and that God is 
                     Psal. 139. b. Apo. 15. a.
                   wonderfull in all his Workes.
               5. Seing now then that the last Tyme is  com, and that this Daye / which God himself hath sett or appoynted (of the which was spokē long before) is com and declared vnto vs Little and Electedones of God / by the 2. Timo. 1. 
                        •
                     
                   A
                     •
                  peering of the Coming of our Lorde Iesu Christ / So wil God likewyse now in thissame Daye / accomplish all 
                     Act. 3. c.
                   what He hath spoken and promysed in the former Tymes. namely, reward 
                     Math. 25. c. Iohn 5. c. Rom. 2. a.
                   ye Good / their Goodnes / with the Rewarde

of all Good / in the euerlasting Lyfe: and recompence the Euell / their Euelnes / with the Reward of all Euell / in the euerlasting Death and Condemnacion. For the Daye ⁏wherin eueryone shall receaue 
                     Ier. 17 b. Math. 16. c Rom. 2. a. 14. b. 2. Cor 5. b. Apo. 2. 
                        •
                     . his Reward / that he hath deserued; doth now spread-foorth itself ouer the whole Worlde: and his Cleernes ceasseth not / before all this be accomplished.
               6. THerfore ⁏my beloued Hearts in the Loue; take-heede to thissame Daye 1. 
                        
                           •
                        or 15. c f Ephe. 5 b. 1. Tess. 4. b.
                  
of the Makeing-alyue from the Death. Yea, take-heede also (sayth the holy Spirit of Loue) to the Gospel of the Kingdom / that is now in thissame Daye / published 
                     Math. 24. b
                   in all ye Worlde / for a Witnes of the Resurrection of the Deadd.
               
                   7. For in this Daye of the Publishing of this Gospel / shall now all the Members of Christ ⁏which 
                     Eze. 37. a.
                   as Deadones, and dismembered Bones / are broken and deuided into many peeces from each-other; be ioyned-together ⁏by that only Man Iesu Christ; 
                     Rom▪
                      12. a. 1. Cor. 12 c Ephe. 4. b. 5. c.
                   as one true Body of Christ and Man of God· couered-ouer 
                     Iob. 19 c. Eze 37. a.
                   with Sinowes and Flesh· made-alyue with the liueing 
                     Gen. 2. a. Eze 37. a. Iohn. 20. c.
                   Wynde or Breath of Christ· and assembled eueryone into the holy Spirit of Loue: wherthrough all wee now likewyse ⁏1. Tess. 4. b.
                   which are remayned-ouer, and do beleeue the Coming of Christ, and the 1 Cor. 15. b.
                   Resurrection of the Deadd / and hope theron; do ioyne vs to thesame one Man of God / 
                     Ephe. 4. b.
                   in that one Body of Christ.
               
               
                  8. Beholde, euenthus is the Man ⁏which beleeueth in Iesu Christ; set-vp 
                     Math. 24. 
                        
                           •
                         Act. 1. a.
                   agayne in his former Dignitee / now in thesame Daye of Loue: and the Worke of God is declared / that it is euen-lyke as it was in the Beginning: One God / and one Man: and thatt altogether / in the one Body of Iesu Christ.
               
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               O Ye Beloued: Looke now into  this gracious Tyme, and consider well theron: For the Tyme is now fulfilled, and the 
                     Iohn. 12. 
                        
                           •
                        . Apo. 14. a.
                   Daye of the righteous Iudgment of God / declared among vs: In the which / God doth now ⁏through the Coming of the Kingdom of Christ; set-vp the former Kingdom full of all pure Beawty: and the falne Man ⁏who is broken and deuided into many peeces; doth He now also ioyne-together / 
                     Ephe. 2. 
                        
                           •
                        . 4. b.
                   to the Incorporating to the only Body of Christ.
               
               2. Beholde, euenthus doth God bring the Man agayne to his Dignitee. namely, to the gloryous Maiestee of his leueing God head / wherby to 
                     Num 14. 
                        
                           •
                        . Psal. 72. b. Esa 6 a. Aba. 
                     
                        •
                     . b. 4. a.
                   fill the whole Earth with his Glory and Righteousnes, according to the Promyses.
               3. YEe good-willing Heartes in the Loue / take-heede I beseech you to thatt which I wryte vnto you, and exhorte you vnto. Be not in-any-case 
                     Pro. 3. a. Rom
                   self-wyse in your owne Conceits:

but remember and consider / what the Seruice of Loue requyreth of vs / in thissame newe Daye of the Coming of Christ. namely, that eueryone shall haue regarde / in whom Christ hath manned himself▪ and out of whom He shyneth / as a Day-light, to the Lighting of the whole Vniuersal-earth with Righteousnes. For theare ⁏in thesame godded Man or 
                     Leuit. 26. b Eze 37. c 43. a. 1 Cor. 3.6. b 2 Cor. 6. b. Apo. 21. a.
                   Habitacion of God; is the Maiestee of God and Christ / vnto whom God willeth that eueryone ⁏which seeketh or desyreth Gods Freendship; shall submitt himself, and ⁏in Concord; assemble him therunto / to be one Man of God in Iesu Christ / wherby to becom one Heart or Mynde with him / in all Loue.
               
                   4. Beholde, and consider Heeron: and seeke not ye Freendship of this Worlde, 
                     Iam. 4. a.
                   wherthrough ye geet the Enimitee of God, and the Enimitee of his Saintes.
               5. Therfore yeeld-ouer yourselues to the Maiestee of God, and com all now to the Temple of the liueing God / the 
                     Psal 122. a Esa. 2. a. Ier. 31. a. Zach. 8. c.
                   Howse of his Dwelling / To thend that ye may be all assembled to the 
                     Math 24. d Ephe. 2. c. 4. b
                   one Body of Christ, and may heare the Woord of the Lorde ⁏out of the holy Temple of his Dwelling; and doo therafter / for that your 
                     Iohn. 15. b.
                   Ioye may be perfect. To which Saluacion of Soule and Body / we be all now called and bidden / vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
               6. According to thesame maner / so consider

likewyse on the loueing peaceable Heart / wherin God hath sett his Heart ⁏full of all Grace; and Christ / his holy Spirit ⁏full of all Loue;: and assemble you with all your Hearts / 
                     Act. 4. d.
                   to thatsame one Heart: and so it shalbe one 
                     Ephe. 2. b.
                   God, one Man, one Heart, one Fayth, 1. Cor. 12. a Ephe. 4. a.
                   one Spirit, and one true euerlasting Lyfe / to be one true and vpright Righteousnes vppon the Earth, according to the Promyses. O Yea / that com-to-pas euenso.
               7. HEer-with / my beloued Freendes  ⁏which loue the Trueth in Christ; I do hartely salute you / with a Salutacion of the Loue, and a Kisse of Peace. 
                     Rom. 16. b. 1. Cor. 16. c
                   Salute you also one-another with thesame Salutacion▪ namely, all yee that are Fellow-companyons of the louely and peaceable Howse of Loue.
               8. The Lorde graunte vnto you all / Grace and Mercy / to be incorporated ⁏with Heart, Spirit, and Body; to the only and true Body of Christ. The Loue of God the Father / take the Victory in all your Heartes. Amen.
               
               
                  Take it to heart.
               
            
            The Ende of the Seuententh Epistle.
         
         
            
            The Eightenth Epistle. A loueing Exhortation / written and sent vnto an Howsholde / that are ioyned to the Famyly of Loue, and agreeable or concordably mynded to the Seruice of the holy Woord of the Spirit of Loue / for to be obedient to the Trueth.
            
               
                  Beholde / how sweete and louely it is / that Bretheren dwell to gether concordably.
                  Psal. 133.
                  How deere or precious is thy Kyndnes ⁏O God; that the Children of Men seeke Protecton vnder the Shadow of thy Wings.
                  They shalbe satisfyed or filled with the Fattnes or Plenty of thy Howse: and thou giuest them drink with the Ryuer or Fountayne of thy Delyte,
                  Psal. 36.
               
            
            To my good-willing Freendes and Loners of the Trueth / which do with mee / loue the true Beeing in one Spirit of the Loue / be Health and Saluacion.
            
               
               The First Chapter.
               
                  AS I haue hearde  now ⁏my goodwilling Freendes to the Loue; by our Brother / which hath bin with you / so is the Will and Request of you all vnto mee (like as our loueing and faythfull Brother in the Loue / the Father of your Howsholde ⁏who is com to me with our Brother / for thesame purpose; hath also sayde and freendly requested) that I woulde once com vnto you / Because that ye mought recreate yourselues alittle with Mee / in the Woord of Lyfe· and from the Bottom of your Hearts / handle and talke of thatt which is com or appeered vnto vs ⁏out of the heauenly Trueth; through the Grace and Power of the Mosthighest.
               2. Veryly ⁏ye Beloued; All thissame is likewyse my whole Will and Desyre: Yea, and all my Longing. I woulde also very gladly haue com now vnto you / because that I myself likewyse / longed greatly to talke with you by mouth, forasmuch as I haue hearde so much of your Good-will and Zeale that ye beare to the Loue and her Seruice. The Lorde graunt vnto you eueryone / Grace and Mercy

/ to continue 
                     Math 10. c. 24. b. Mar. 13. b.
                   stedfast therin / till that the true Light of Loue 2. Pet. 1. c.
                   com vnto you, and ryse-vp in your Hearts / as a Daye of ye perfect Beawty of God.
               
                   3. But ⁏ye Beloued; as touching my Coming / I shall desyre that ye wil yet haue patience for a whyle. I hope to com vnto you shortly / and to talke with you of all things / according to your Request.
               4. But in that I haue now deferred the tyme / it cometh-to-pas by reason of much Busynes, Seruice, and Laboure / wherwith I am now laden, and which out of great Necessitee, I haue first to further and dispatch. Therfore hath not the tyme so serued / as to com vnto you now.
               5. Howbeit, because I cannot now com vnto you: and yet that all my Will hath bin bent so to doo / yet wil I not for-a
                     •
                  -that forgett you: but wil alwayes remember you to the Good, and to all thatt wherin your Welfare and Saluacion consisteth.
               6. For-that-cause ⁏ye Beloued; to thend that yee one-with-another / shoulde be the better content for this tyme / I do wryte this loueing Exhortacion ⁏with groundly Instructions; vnto you, to the Edifying and good Informacion of you all. With which this my Wryting / my harty Request is vnto you all / that yee ⁏with Dilligence of your Heartes; wil alwayes take-heede, and ⁏with willing Obedience; 
                     Pro. 1. a. 2 a 3. a. 4. a. 5. a Eccli. 6. d.
                   giue-eare / vnto thatt which is

heald-foorth before you ⁏out of the Loue, and out of her Seruice; in these last Dayes and perillous Tymes / to your Preseruacion and Saluacion. Yea, once-more I saye vnto you all / out of harty Loue: Take-heed vnto it I pray you, and take it effectually to heart, and consider of it / 
                     Eccli. 6. d.
                   search-throw or measure-ouer likewyse substancially / thatsame Spirit of this true Seruice of Loue.
               7. Ponder well the heauenly Sentences / that  proceed-out from thesame: and prooue the Taste or the Mynde of them rightly. For they do open som speciall Matter: and wil also in this Tyme / tell or expounde som singuler thing vnto vs. Yea, they declare and bring vnto vs / the godly Ritches of Christ, and the spirituall Treasures of his heauenly Goodes, 
                     Math. 11. d. 13. b. Rom. 16. c. Ephe. 3. a. Col 1. c.
                   which haue bin hidden till vnto thissame Daye / from the Worlde and her Wyseones, and from all Eyes of the Flesh.
               8. This mercy Seate / in the Mostholy, this true Light with his perfect Garnishing of pure Beawty, 
                     Apo. 21. and all these costly Ritches of God, with the sumptuous Royaltee and godly Tryumph of all the Saints of God and Christ / cometh now vnto vs in Glory, for to liue vniforme with thosame for euermore.
               9. Beholde, all these Beawtyes, and yet many-thowsand-tymes more then men can vtter with Tongues, or wryte with Penn and Incke / be declared and brought vnto vs now

in thissame Daye / through the Appeering 2. Timo. 1. b
                   of the Coming of our Lorde Iesu Christ 
                  ؛the euerlasting and true Woord of the liueing God
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                  .
               10. This euerlasting and true Woord and liueing Breade / 
                     Iohn 6. 
                        •
                     
                   which cometh vnto vs from Heauen / for a Foode of Lyfe vnto all hungry Soules:
               
                   11. This faythfull Sheapheard / which cometh vnto vs out of the Bosom of his heauenly Father, for to seke his erred or lost Sheepe / which are strayed from the 
                     Math 10 a. 15. c. Luk. 19. b.
                   Howse of Ilrael, and ⁏vnder the Obedience of his Loue; to bring them agayne 
                     Esa, 6 a. Ioan. 10. b.
                   to their right Sheepfolde:
               12. This true Redeemer / which cometh vnto vs from the gloryous and most souereigne Maiestee of God, for an euerlasting Freedom, for 
                     Psal. 130. a. Esa. 61 a. Tit. 2. b.
                   to delyuer His / that are healde-captiue. namely, all those that moorne, and suffer Sorrow or Greefe / for their Captiuites cause to the Sinne, and because of the Bandes of the Deuell:
               13. This cleere and true Light of the spirituall Heauen / that cometh vnto vs in all Loue ⁏as the 
                     Mal 4 a. Sap. 5. a.
                   Sunne of Righteousnes; for an eternal-continuing Day-light, for to 
                     Esa. 9. a. 42 b 43. a. 49 
                        
                           •
                        . Mat. 4. b. Luk. 1. h.
                   lighten all those / which ⁏because of the Fruits of Death; dwell or walke yet in Darknes, and do hope vppon thesame Light:
               
                   14. This peaceable King, 
                     Esa. 9. a.
                   Lorde, and Prince / which cometh vnto vs ⁏with full Power of the almighty God; for a good and

louely Gouernement, namely / ouer all those that submitt them 1. Pet. 5. a. Iam. 4. a
                   vnder Him, and ⁏in all Obedience of his Loue; do loue the Peace, for that euerything shoulde be restored 
                     Act. 3. c.
                   agayne / in his right Order:
               15. This-very Iesus Christ ⁏who also is the Wisdom of God· the vpright Righteousnes and Holynes· the heauenly Trueth· 
                     Sap 7. c. 2. Cor. 4. a. Col. 1. b. Heb. 1. a.
                   and the true Beeing of God; Is now com vnto us in Glory / from the Right-hande of God the almighty Father / out of the heauenly Beeing, 
                     Act 10 c. 1. Pet. 4. a.
                   to be a righteous Iudg ouer Liueing and Deadd. namely, to the Condemnacion of the liueing Vngodlyones, and 1. Cor. 15 c
                   the Resurrection of the dead Righteousones: vnto all of vs ⁏which beleeue in Iesus Christ· and the Safe-makeing in his Loue; to the 
                     Rom. 12. 
                        
                           •
                        . Ephe. 1.4. b
                   Renewing of our Lyfe and Mynde, and to an euerlasting 2. Pet. 3. b.
                   Righteousnes vppon Earth, euen-as is written of Him.
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               FOrasmuch now ⁏O ye beloued  Heartes; as this pure and spirituall· and this heauenly and true louely Beeing / is 
                     Eph. 3 a. 2. Timo. 1. b
                   appeered vnto vs Poore and Littleones / among so many Thowsandes in this Worlde: and is ⁏out of Gods Mercy and his Loue; administred and presented vnto vs / by Christ 
                  ؛the true Minister 
                     Heb. 8.9. b.
                   of the

spirituall and heauenly Goodes
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   in his Coming / Therfore let vs take-heede with all our Heartes / to the Seruice of thesame Grace / to our Amendment, and to the 
                     Rom. 12. a. Ephe. 4. b.
                   Renewing of our Hearts and Myndes: and euenso therthrough / lay-away 2. Cor. 7. a. Ephe. 4. c. Col. 3. a. 1. Pet 2.4. a. Heb. 12. a.
                   all earthly and fleshly Pollution, and all vncleane Thoughts / which in tymes-past ⁏when we walked yet in Ignorance; haue drawen and leadd our Hearts to the Flesh and Blood of Sinne, and to many-maner of Errours: and also to many-sorts of Bewitching with visible and corruptible Things.
               2. From all these, and from all what is not agreeable to the Woord of Trueth and his Requyring / let our Hearts be 
                     E
                           •
                        e. 36. c.
                   cleansed / thorough the Seruices, Doctrines or 
                     Iohn. 4.7. b
                   Waters of Lyfe / which do now flowe from the Body of Christ and his holy Spirit of Loue / To thend that we may with pure Hearts / cleaue to the Loue and her louely Beeing· becom incorporated therunto· and so may be heauenly and spiritually mynded / with all our Myndes and Thoughts.
               
                   3. THerfore submitt yourselues eueryone / 1. Pet. 5 b. Iam. 4. a.
                   vnder the mighty Hande of God: and indeuour you moreouer / for 
                     Heb. 3. b.
                   to heare ⁏with meeke Hearts; now in this present Daye / the Voyce of the holy Spirit of Loue, which doth now giue-foorth her Sounde and speaketh vnto you / out of Heauen / with a spirituall Tongue: and which likewyse despereth to

drawe you all with your inward Man / to the spirituall, heauenly and true Being / for that yee mought in like-maner / haue your fellowshipp with our Comunialtee: For our Comunialtee is vniforme 1. Iohn. 1. a.
                   with the spirituall Comunialtee of the Saints of God. namely, with the louely heauenly Company / which walke with vs in all Loue, and so wee do all one-with another / eate the true 
                     Iohn. 6. e.
                   heauenly Breade with Christ ؛our Headd and King
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   in the 
                     Luk 22. d.
                   Kingdom of God our Father: and so drinking with Ioye / of the new Fruit of the true Vyne / we are ioyfull in the euerlasting Lyfe. To which louely Beeing ⁏for to liue all therin / with one Heart, Mynd, and Delyte; we are eueryone created· and called therunto ⁏out of Grace; by 
                     Rom. 10. b 1. Pet. 1. b.
                   the Preaching of the holy Gospel of Christ.
               
               4. If yee now ⁏O ye Beloued; do see into thissame  / according to the Trueth: and that ye do consider / to what an excellent Maiestee ye be called and bidden now in thissame last Daye / through the Seruice of Loue, wherby to 1. Esd. 
                     
                        •
                     0. 3. Esd. 9 renew you eueryone / through the Woord of Lyfe, and to confirme you in your Calling wherunto ye are chosen by Iesu Christ / So consider then likewyse / how 2. Pet 3. b.
                   pure or cleane your Heartes ought to bee from all earthly and corruptible Things / wherin 
                     Leuit. 26. b. Apo. 21. a.
                   the liueing God of Heauen will dwell, liue, and walke / with such a Glory of God and heauenly Kingdom of Christ, euen-as is witnessed vnto you by the

Seruice of Loue, and as is now heald-foorth before you / with this loueing Exhortacion.
               
                   5. When-as we now do consider and perceaue thissame / how pure and cleere our Heart or inward Mynde ought to bee: and that we contrary therunto / do fynde ourselues still defyled: and that we likewyse for-that-cause / do not yet for the present tyme / fynde thesame Cleernes· nor the vpright Being of the louely Beawty of God / perfectly in vs: but that the vncleane Being, and the 2. Tess. 2. a
                   Contrary-nature vnto God / doth yet generally dwell in vs, and doth yet dayly 
                     Rom. 7. c. Gal. 5. b.
                   mooue our Myndes and Thoughts / with euell Inclynacions / So let vs then ⁏to ye Purifying of our Hearts and mynds; submitt ourselues with all our Hearts / before 
                     Eze. 43. a Heb. 5. a.
                   the Seate of the Maiestee of God, and before the Tabernacle 
                     Apo. 21. a
                   of his holy Dwelling / out of the which / He doth now let his Woord of Trueth, and his holy Will / be hearde vppon the Earth: and so in Humilite ⁏with the 
                     Math. 1
                        •
                      
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Lu
                           •
                        . 14. c
                   Forsaking of all our Selfnes and Self-wisdom; let vs take-heede ⁏with Beleefe and firme Confidence; to the Seruice of ye holy Spirit of Loue and his Requyring / proceeding out of thesame: and giue-eaxe, and with whole Heart 1. Pet. 1. e.
                   be obedient to the Woord of Trueth / that is administred ther-out: 
                     Act. 
                     
                        •
                     . c 1 Cor. 9. breake, destribut, and feed-vpon thesame Woord ⁏the which is 
                     Iohn 6 c
                   the heauenly Breade; among eachother / for a Foode of our Soules: and as often as we doo this / 

let vs publish the Death 1 Cor. 11. c
                   of Christ [namely, of thissame holy Beeing of God, or Woord of the heauenly Father / that ought to liue, and to raigne or gouerne in our Inwardnes, and yet notwithstāding / is as deadd, or killed with the Death of the Crosse / For our Sinnes cause] and 
                     Math. 3 a. Luk 3. c.
                   confesse our Sinnes, till that our sinfull Members, together with ther euell Lusts and Desyres / be 
                     Rom. 6. a Gal 6. a Phil. 3. b Col. 3. a.
                   crucifyed and killed with thesame or the lyke Death of the Crosse of Christ: and that we be in that sort / planted into Christ / with the lyke Death, 
                     Rom. 6. a. Col. 2. b.
                   and buryed with Him: passe-ouer and suffer-out thesame Passe-ouer of his Crosse, Death, and Buryall / in that maner with Him / till that the heauenly Beeing of God, or Christ according to the Spirit / do com vnto vs ⁏liueingly and mightely; to the 
                     Rom. 16. c.
                   Treading-downe and Rooting-out of all vngodly Beeing: and that we do euen so through the second Birth from the Death / 
                     Rom. 6. 
                        •
                     . 1. Cor. 15. c f. Col. 3. 
                        
                           •
                        
                     
                   ryse with Him in a new Lyfe / out of our Buryall▪ to be an holy 
                     Iohn. 14. 
                        
                           •
                         Apo. 21. 
                        
                           •
                        
                     
                   Dwelling of God and Christ: the which is the Saluacion, the Ioye, and the Rest of our Soules with all Gods Saintes / in the euerlasting Lyfe.
            
            
               The III. Chap.
               BEholde and consider ⁏ye Beloued;  This is now Gods righteous Iudgment / in thissame Daye of his Loue, which is the Newe Daye of the

                  24. Esd. 6. b.
                   Worlde to-com: Yea, a Daye / which God himself hath ordayned or appoynted / to the Saluaciō of his Saintes, and to the Condemnacion of all Vngodlyones / in the which likewyse / all Saints and Righteousones do reioyce them. For vpon thesame / 
                     Act 17. d.
                   the Circuit of the Earth is iudged with Righteousnes, according to the Promyses of our God and Father. It is verytrue.
               2. O ye beloued Hearts ⁏which do with vs / loue the vpright Beeing of Christ; haue a good regarde heerunto: exercise 1 Timo 4. b
                   yourselues dayly in the Woord of Trueth / vnder the Obedience of the Loue: exhort 1. Tess. 5 b Heq. 3.10. c.
                   one-another also / to the vpright Beeing of Iesu Christ: and strengthen yourselues among eachother / to continue stedfast 
                     Act. 11. c. 13. c. 14. c.
                   in Fayth, till vnto the Ende of the Suffering and Stryueing agaynst the sinfull and corrupt Nature. For 
                     Math. 10. 
                        •
                     . 14. b. Mark. 13. b.
                  whosoeuer continueth stedfast till vnto the Ende (as is written) hee shalbe saued.
               
                   3. With thissame ⁏for a Recreacion vnto your Hearts; cōfort and cherrish yourselues among eachother. I hope ouer a little whyle / to com vnto you, and to talke with you by Mouth / of all what is ⁏by Gods Grace; 1. Timo. 1. b
                   committed vnto Mee, and is profitable vnto you to Edifycacion. For that is doutles the Delyte and all the Desyre of my Heart.
               4. Heerwith ⁏ye Beloued; with Laude and Thankes-giueing vnto God / for your Zeale and Dilligent-care that ye haue to the Righteousnes

of the Loue / I do salute you all very hartely [namely, euen the whole Howsholde of you, as my beloued Bretheren and Sisters in the Loue] with a Salutacion and Kisse of Loue.
               5. I do also giue Thankes vnto the Lorde / for the Benefites, Gifts, and Beneuolence / that ye haue sent vnto mee / to an Helpfulnes and Furtherance of the Seruice of Loue.
               6. The Lorde giue Strength vnto you all: 
                     Ephe. 3. b. Co
                           •
                        . 1. b. 1. Pet. 5. b.
                   and strengthen your Spirit / in his Trueth. The Loue and the Goodnes of our God and Father / establish you in his louely and true Beeing. Amen.
               
               7. Salute me hartely likewyse ⁏with a Salutacion of the Loue; vnto all our Freendes, and Louers of the Trueth / which are adioyned to the Famyly of Loue: and with whom ye haue dayly your Fellowshipp / in the Seruice of Loue.
               8. Thatt God / who is the Loue and the euerlasting Lyfe / bring his godly Beeing plentifully vnto you all. namely, his 
                     Ephe. 1. b.
                   holy Spirit, which is the Pawne of our Inheritance. And his Loue take the Victory in all your Heaets. Amen.
               
            
            The Ende of the Eightenth Epistle.
         
         
            
            
               
            
            Our Heart / is the Minde of God most-hie.
            Our Beeing amiable / as the sweete Lillie.
            Our Faithfulnes / Loue / and Trueth vpright / 
            Is Gods Light / Life / and Cleernes bright.
         
         
            
            The Nyntenth Epistle. An harty Exhortacion vnto the most-zealous good-willing Hearts to the Righteousnes, and vnto the Elders and Ministers of the Woord / in the Comunialtee of the Loue: For a Warning vnto them all / of all Deceit that may chaunce vnto them by the new Commers-on to the mostholy Seruice of Loue.
            
               
                  Open not your Heart vnto euery Man, lest any Falshod be don vnto you by the Strainger.
                  Eccli 8.12.
                  If a Freende ioyne vnto thee / prooue him first, and beleeue him not ouersoone. For ther are many false Freendes, which continue not ⁏as Freendes; in the Dayes of Tribulacion: but they turne them a-bout to Enimitee, for to stryue against thee. And if th
                        •
                     n they knowe or remember any shamefull thing by thee / thatt do they vpbrayde thee with-al.
                  Ier. 9. Mich. 7. Eccli. 6.8.12. Math. 10.24. 1 Iohn. 4.
               
            
            To the Kingly Seede of the holy Comunialtee vnder the Obedience of the Loue / be Health and Saluacion.
            
               
               The First Chapter.
               
                  
                  MY BELOUed Bretheren in the Loue, which are groweing-vp vnder the Obedience of the Loue ⁏in the holy Woord of the euerlasting Trueth; to the 
                     Ephe. 4 b.
                   Age of the manly Vnderstanding of Iesus Christ: and with whom I haue had my Conuersation in speaking of the Woord 
                     Iohn 
                     
                        •
                     .6. g. 1 Iohn. 1. a
                   of Lyfe / which is com and reuealed vnto vs / by Gods Grace, wherwith God hath shewed Mercy on vs / according to his Promyses.
               2. My Exhortacion is hartely vnto you all, that ye wil also in my Absence from you / be alwayes 
                     Iohn. 15. c.
                   myndfull of the Speeche touching the Godlynes / euen as I haue vsed thesame with you: and breake, 
                     Act. 2 e.
                   distribute, and feede-vpon thesame 
                     Iohn 6. e.
                   Bread of Lyfe ⁏among eachother; that is geeuen vnto vs from Heauen ⁏by God the heauenly Father; and brought vnto you / for a Foode vnto all your Soules. And so becom you all feedd with thesame Bread / to an vpright and louely Lyfe in the Loue.
               
                   3. Drincke all now 
                     Math. 26. 
                        
                           •
                        . Luk. 22. b. 2. Cor. 11. c.
                   out of thissame Cupp of the Loue / full of ye pure Blood of Iesus Christ (out of the which / the holy Blood or Lyfe of

                  Christ / is now ⁏in the Passe-ouer with Christ in his Suffering and Death / till vnto the seconde 
                     Math. 19. 
                        
                           •
                        . Rom. 6. a.
                   Birth from the Death; geeuen vnto vs to drincke / for a true Testament and euerlasting Forgiuenes of Sinnes:) and becom now all washed and cleansed ⁏in your Inwardnes; 1. Pet. 1. a. Heb. 9.10. b c. 12. c. Apo. 7. b.
                   with thesame pure Blood of the Loue of Iesu Christ / the true Testament, which shall continue for euer. Which Testament / God himself / hath ⁏as an eternal-continuing Beeing; sealed with himself / in the Seruice of his Loue.
               4. O my beloued Hearts and Bretheren in the Loue of our Lorde Iesu Christ, take-heede in any-wyse 
                     Eccli. 4. c. 27. b. Gal. 6. b.
                   to this gracious Tyme: and haue a good regarde vnto my Sayings of the godly Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ: And in euery-poynt / according as I in tymes-past haue talked with you by mouth / of this Passe-ouer with Christ / 
                     Rom 6. a. Phil. 3. b. Col. 2. b.
                   in his Suffering and Death / till vnto the Kingdom of the God of Heauens, and of all the Perfection 
                     Apo. 21.2. and Garnishing of thesame Kingdoms Beawty / euē so is likewyse his Foorme / whear it is manifest in all Loue. And according to thesame Foorme or Beeing / see that you all haue 2. Pet. 1. c.
                   a regard therunto / as being to com in the Spirit: euen as wee also haue witnessed of thesame Kingdom of the God of Heauens· of his vpright Righteousnes· and of the sumptuous Garnishing of his pure Beawty / in lardge and plentifull maner ⁏with Fulnes

of Instruction; in the Glasse of Righteousnes, and in the spirituall Lande of Promyse.
               
                   5. Take it therfore to heart, and knowe in your Vnderstanding / the High-worthynes of this louely and gloryous Daye of the Loue / wherof we speake, which by Gods Grace / is reuealed and com vnto vs / 
                     Esa 60. b. Zach. 14. a. Apo 21 22. a
                   as the most cleere Day-light from Heauen. In the which also ther is geeuen vs to 
                     Math. 11 d 13. b. Rom. 16. c. Ephe. 3. a. Col 1. c.
                   vnderstande / all the Treasures and Riches of Gods heauenly Goodes· as likewyse the Secretnes of the Kingdom of God, and brought vnto vs / for an euerlasting Inheritance.
               6. To thatsame God which hath prepared it all for vs / be 
                     Apo. 5. b.
                   Laude, Prayse, Honoure, and Thanks / for euermore. Amen.
               
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               
                   FArdermore ⁏my beloued Freends in the Loue; I must yer wryte a little vnto you / for the necessitees-cause of this present Tyme. Which Tyme is now full of Perills / 2. Timo. 3. a 2. Pe
                           •
                        . 2. a.
                   to the Hurt of the Soule, and to the Hinderance of our Seruice of Loue, which is the vpright and true God-seruice / that reacheth to the euerlasting Lyfe.
               2. Therfore looke sharply to it: O Yea ⁏ye Deerly-beloued; looke sharply to it in anywyse: and haue alwayes a watchfull Eye / with a cleere Sight. For this saye I vnto

you / out of a liueing Sight of the Trueth, that it behoueth vs now to haue a sharpe Circumspection / in our mostholy Seruice of Loue, and for the crafty Subtiltees cause of the Flesh (which we ⁏alas; do fynde to abounde) not to beleeue anyone to-simply at the first, nor-yet to trust the On-commers or Disciples ⁏which giue themselues to our Seruice of the Woord; to-much at the first, as to thinke that they are so altogether playne and vpright· simple and deuout / as they make showe for.
               3. Although likewyse that they do loueingly  adioyne vnto vs, and make a fayer Showe / as if all their Lust were bent towards the Woord of Lyfe / Yet do not for-al-that accept them 1. Timo. 5. 
                        •
                     
                   ouer-hastyly / for vpright Brothers or Sisters in our holy Comunialtee, as to giue any such respect vnto them at thesame instant / for to talke or to deale with them ⁏like-as with the Elders; touching all the Secretnes of the heauenly Kingdom: but let them ⁏for a tyme; 
                     Col. 1. b. 1. Pet 2. a.
                   growe-vp among you / in the Woord, and shewe faythfull 1. Pet. 1. b c
                   Obedience in all what the Woord ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; requyreth: and then if thesame do appeere in thē / ye shall well perceaue therby / whether they also desyre with vs / to liue the vpright Beeing of Iesu Christ / in all Loue and Concord. For in the Tryall ⁏when-as they be chastenably informed with the holy Woord· and taught to the Obedience of the Requyring of the Woord / and must beare Reproche, 1. Cor. 6. b.
                   Blaspheaming,

and Affliction / at the handes of the Wyse and Scriptur-learnedones of ye Worlde; they shall thorowly becom manifest / what they are, and what they loue, or haue intended.
               4. But in all this / loue you them / to their Saluacion and Preseruacion: and carry alwayes a fauourable Heart of Loue towards them, and marke whether that they do also intende the vpright Beeing of the Loue / with all their Hearts / or no: and so do neither seeke, loue, nor desyre anything-els at our handes / but to liue the vertuous Nature of the Loue, to walke therin, and to growe-vp 
                     Ephe. 4. b.
                   to be Elders in the holy Vnder standing of the gracious Woord.
               
                   5. Therfore / for to marke thessame now / ye shall let them ⁏in the Growing-vp to the Oldnes of the holy Vnderstanding; conuersa
                     •
                  e thē
                  selues among you in stillnes for a certen tyme, and haue a circumspect regarde vnto them / whether they likewyse are 
                     Math. 2
                        •
                     . c.
                   faythfull in the Woord: and so marke what is the Cheefest-thing that they seeke and desyre at our handes / in the Seruice of the holy Woord: 1. Cor. 10. c. Phil. 2. c.
                   whether it be their Owne-selfnes, or whether that they desyre to serue the God of Lyfe / in his Loue. If you haue in-this-maner a regarde heerunto, ye shall soone perceaue / whether it be Flesh / or Spirit· Earthly / or Heauenly· and Corruptible / or Euerlasting, that they 
                     Gal. 3 
                        •
                     . seeke or desyre at our handes.
               6· Seing then that the Tymes are now daingerous,

wherin we perceaue and fynde so many and sundry-sorts of Wylynes and Subtiltees of the Flesh / therfore be you also carefull or suspiceous at the first (yet hopeing of som better) whether ther mought be likewyse any Subtiltee or Deceit / in the on-coming Desciples, or whether they mought not seeke or desyre anything-els besydes the gracious Woord and Seruice of Loue, as namely / the Honour and 
                     Gal. 
                     
                        •
                     . b. 1. Iohn 2. b
                   Delyte of the Flesh, and to haue a Loue to themselues or to their owne-priuate Good-thinking, for to liue to themselues therin / according to the Pleasures of their Flesh, or of their owne Sensualitee.
               7. Looke and consider aduisedly heeron: for  thesame shall ye for-the-most-parte / fynde euen so among many On-commers: and that also many wicked Generacions or corrupt Natures of Men ⁏although they talke of the Loue; do meane nor thinke or intende nothing-els among vs. Therfore many likewyse wil see nothing-els / but according to the 1. Iohn. 2. b.
                   Lust of their Eyes. nor-yet heare anything / but thatt wher-after their Eares do 2. Tim. 4 a
                   itch / for to heare: and wil not also liue anything-els / but according to the Worldly-maner [namely, in 1. Iohn 2 b
                   Pryde or Arrogancie of Lyfe] desyering to serue the 2. Ti
                           •
                        
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      1 Pet. 2. b. Iude. 1. b.
                   Deuill ⁏in the Flesh; according to their owne Lustes and false Freedom, and not the God of Lyfe / in the Spirit.
            
            
               
               The III. Chap.
               
                   HEer-with-al becom you warned / ye Auncients in the Seruice of Loue. For of these false and 2. Timo. 3 a 2 Pet 2. b. Iude. 1. b.
                   self-seeking Spirits, and fleshly-mynded Men / haue I ⁏in the tyme of my Ministring of ye Wo
                     •
                  rd; founde so many and dyuers / among the Children of Men / that they ⁏through their deceitfull Nature; haue made me mistrustfull towards all Flesh or Children of Adam / which turne them not about to the 
                     Ma
                           •
                        h. 18 a.
                   childish Simplicitee / with all their Hearts.
               2. But wheare we haue founde it with Many, as that the on-coming Disciples / do ⁏with all their Hearts; 1. Pet. 5. a. Iam. 4. a.
                   submitt them obediently vnder the Loue and her Seruice· turne them wholly and altogether about / to the childish Simplicitee· willingly 
                     Pro. 3.4.5. a. Eccl. 6. c
                  heare and follow the Counsayle of the Elders / in the Seruice of the Woord / vnder the Obedience of the Loue· and that their Hearts becom euenso vncouered or manyfest before vs· and so do neither seeke nor desyre anything-els / but to liue with vs in the vertuous Nature of the Loue: Let vs highly laude and thanke God the Lorde / for such On-commers, and for such vpright Disciples of the Woord and Louers of Vertue.
               3. For verryly, such a Man / who doth in that sort ⁏in the gracious Woord and Seruice

of Loue; seeke and intende the Nature of God / with all his Heart (although he were yet laden with many Sinnes) is a 
                     Iohn. 1. c.
                   right Isralite, a Sonne or Daughter of Abraham 
                  
                     Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                        
                           •
                        . Rom. 9. a. Col. 3. c.
                   through Fayth▪ according to the Promyses.
               4. But all what refuseth the Loue, or whatsoeuer  turneth vnto vs with a false and vnrepenting Heart, and all what is not inclyned ⁏with an humble Heart; to the Seruice of the holy Woord / vnder the Obedience of the Loue: all what conuersateth with vs / in Couerednes of Heart: together with all that which doth not with whole Heart / turne itself 
                     Gal. 5. b. 6. 
                        
                           •
                         Col. 3. a.
                   quyte and cleane awaye from all 
                     Ier. 7. b.
                   Good-thinking, Wickednes, and 
                     Tob 3. b. Ephe. 5. a.
                   Lightmyndednes / and from all fleshly Lustes and Desyres: and all those / which ⁏in the Desyres of their Flesh, in the Lust 1. Iohn. 2. b
                   of their Eyes, and in the Pryde of Lyfe; do not forsake themselues· take not vp 
                     Math. 16 c. Luk 9.14. c
                   their Crosse against thosame· loue not the vertuous Nature of the Loue ⁏which is pure and peaceable; with all their Heartes· nor confesse 
                     Pro 28. b. Eccli 4. c.
                   their Sinnes / which make-vp themselues against thesame / in their Flesh / and do not sigh, 
                     Math. 5. a. 2. Cor. 7. b.
                   lament, nor moorne ther-ouer: but go-on arrogantly and carelesly with ympenitent Heartes / like those that shewe no Sorrow nor Amendment touching the Sinne, and so do make no Difference betwixt the Freendshipp with the Worlde / and the Freendshipp with the Famyly of Loue: All thosesame / seeke nothing-els

but their Selfnes, and thatt which concerneth the Flesh / 
                     Phil. 2. c.
                   and not the Lorde, nor the Righteousnes of his gracious Woord.
               
                   5. And such 
                     Deut. 9. o. Ier. 4. b. Act 7. f.
                   Vncircumcised of Heart, which also are vncircumcised of Lippes and Toung: Yea, such goodthinking Spirits, 2. Timo. 3. 2. Pet 2. b. Iude. 1. b.
                   and fleshly Myndedones / which com to vs with couered and disobedient Heartes / and do seeke, loue, nor desyre nothing-els / but to serue their owne Sensualitee according to the Flesh / together with all those which neither will nor desyre anything-els / but to follow their Lustes and their Owne-myndes-delyte: Thosame do not you in anywyse accept in that state ⁏as in Vnrepentance; for Bretheren in the Famyly of Loue: but let the Elders and Ministers of the Seruice of Loue / be against them therin, and 
                     Leui
                           •
                        . 19. b. Eccli 17. exhort them to som better thing: or informe them with a better Loue to the righteous Beeing, hoping if the Lorde vouchsafe thesame / that they mought once be mooued vnto Repentance for their Sinnes.
               6. Forthatcause reiect them not: 2. Tess. 3 b.
                   nor hate not anyone / what Sinners soeuer they bee: but 1. Tess. 5. b. Heb. 3.10. c
                   exhort you still one-another to Amendment: and carry alwayes an Heart of Loue / for to drawe the strayed Sinners out of their Sinnes, and to leade them 
                     Pro. 3.4. b.
                   into the Path of the vpright Lyfe / to thend that they mought obtayne a godly Lyfe / vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
            
            
               
               The IIII. Chap.
               BEholde and consider: This is the  right Seruice of Loue / which we are debtors 
                     •
                  o shewe vnto the Sinners and vnto all strayed 
                     Iam. 5. b.
                   Men / to their Saluation: and not to hate, to reuyle, nor to blaspheame anyone / nor-also to keepe-in-mynde and to vpbrayde anyman with his Sinnes or Errours / neither-yet to reiect or to seperate anyman from vs / that giueth-eare to the chastinable Informacion.
               2. Forasmuch then as the Loue doth make-manifest herself so vprightly and loueingly / in her Seruice, and hath no pleasure in those 1. Cor. 13 a.
                   that deale falsly: but with her Seruice / informeth eueryone with all Discreetnes and Courtesye / by the Ministers of her holy and gracious Woord / So doth she likewyse deale generally after thesame maner ⁏in her Seruice; by the Ministers of her Seruice: and passing in-that-sort / thorow 
                     Eccli. 24. 
                        •
                     . all Nations of People / she draweth all those vnto her / that are of her Nature or Beeing: and all those likewyse that loue her, and haue turned all their Lust towards her and her Seruice.
               3. Therfore ⁏my beloued Hearts; vse likewyse  ⁏with the Loue and her Seruice; a Difference betwixt those that are good of will / or euell of will: and accept none for Disciples of the Woord (much-les account them for Brothers

or Sisters in the Loue) which wil liue 
                     Deut. 12. a. Ier. 7 b.
                   according to their owne Good-thinking or 
                     Sap 2.14 b. Rom. 1. c.
                   Brutishnes, and are 2 Timo. 3. a
                   disobedient to the Woord of Lyfe in his Seruice / yet much-lesse / those which make 
                     Rom. 16. c
                   Deuision, and do resist the Concord in the Loue and her Seruice.
               4. Keepe a good watch in-any-wyse towards the Seperatedones, which do alwayes bring-in much Questioning and Contencion about the Knowledg / and do not first-of-all / giue themselues to the Doctrine of the Seruice of Loue, nor to 
                     Pro. 28. Math. 3. b. Luk 3 b.
                   confesse their Sinnes / according to the Requyring of thesame Seruice, and to repent ther-fore / wherby to com to a cleane Heart, and to a louely Beeing or pure Spirit. Which louely Beeing / is the Head-somme of all Wisdom and Knowledg. Haue a sharpe regarde heer-vnto / for that the Kingdom of Loue may increase in all Concord, and be spread-abroade.
               
                   5. Therfore let not your Hearts stande-affected vnto Any / but those that seeke 
                     Ephe. 4. a.
                   Vnitee, Loueingnes, and Peaceablenes among vs / for to liue therin / with vpright single Heartes: and so are wel-mynded with vs / to the 
                     Eze 
                     
                        •
                     8. Reformacion of Sinne: as likewyse to those / that seperate themselues with all their Hearts / from the wicked Worlde, and from her Abhomynacions, and from all those that with their Will / do cleaue 1. Iohn. 2. c.
                   to the wicked Worlde and her Pompe or Pryde: Yea, although it were their

Father / or Moother, Husbande / or Wyfe, Brother, Sister, or Children.
               6. Whosoeuer then do thus (as is saydde) desyre with vs / to forsake, 
                     Math. 10. d 16. e. Luk. 9.14. e.
                   to hate, and to leaue all vngodly Beeing / and all the Desyres / according to the Will of the Flesh, with all the Lustes of the Eyes, and Arrogancie or Pryde of Lyfe / to mortify, to forgoe, and to 
                     Rom. 6. a. Col. 2. b. 3 a.
                   kill and bury thesame / in them / to thend to be renewed 
                     Rom. 12. a. Ephe. 4. b.
                   in their Spirit / through the Loue· and incorporated to the true Beeing of God▪ 
                  
                     Luk. 1. h. Ephe. 4 
                        
                           •
                        , 
                           •
                        ol. 3. a.
                   the vpright Righteousnes and Holynes ⁏the which is Christ himself in his Coming; / All those that are so mynded, and do proceed-on obediently after thesame / receaue into the Loue: and let our fellowshipp bee with such / To thend that we mought euenso eueryone / be planted concordably into the Loue of God the Father / with cleane or pure Hearts· and so leade an vpright and vncorrupt Lyfe ⁏like loueing Childrē, and like Sheepe and Lambes of the Famyly of Loue, and like a louely 
                     Iohn. 10. b.
                   Flock of Christ; vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
               7. For-that-cause / To thend that the Temple  of the Lorde, or the Howse of his Dwelling / may now ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; be purifyed, cleansed, and renewed / according to the heauenly Trueth 
                     Eze. 37. c. 43. a.
                   and nomore 
                     Esa. 52. defyled by the ▪Vncleane or Vncircumcised-ones / haue therfore a good regarde ⁏with a sharp Sight of the Loue; for to perceaue what

eueryone loueth or seeketh at our handes: and wherunto their Hearts are most affected.
               8. And beware likewyse of the wicked Generacions, which carry nothing but Falshod in their Heartes: haueing Hony 
                     Psal. 55. c. Psal. 5 a
                   in their Mouth, and Poyson 
                     Psal. 140. a. Rom. 3. b.
                   vnder their Tongue. as also the Loue / in their Woordes or Speeche, and the wicked Nature ⁏against the Loue; in their Heart or Inwardnes.
            
            
               The V. Chap.
               
                   BVt if any man be godly of will: or if Any stand-bent to ye meeke-mynded Beeing of the Loue / with all their Sences, Desyres, and Thoughtes: if they loue the Chastitee, the patient Long-suffering, and the humble Meekmyndednes: if they be obedient with all their Heartes / to the 1. Cor. 11. a. 2. Tess. 2. b.
                   Requyring of the Seruice of Loue / in all Constance: if they do willingly heare the chastinable Informacion: if they be wel content to be 
                     Pro. 3. b. Heb. 12. b.
                   reprooued for their Vice or Misdemeanure, and to be taught and exhorted to all Wel-doing: if they wil likewyse good-willingly with vs / beare Shame 
                     Math 5. b. Act. 5. c. Heb. 11. and Contempt in the Flesh / vnder the Obedience of the Loue: if they do lay-away from them / 1. Iohn 2. c.
                   all Pompe and Pryde of the Worlde, together with all Vanitee or Foolishnes, 
                     Ephe 4 c. Col. 3. a. 1. Pet. 2 a.
                   and all Wrath and Enuy: and if they be in this sort / de
                     •
                  yerous, hungry, and thirsty after the pure or cleane and

vncorrupt Beeing of ye Loue: In whomsoeuer ye finde this by ye deede, and whatsoeuer on-cō
                  ing Desciples / do cleaue in that-maner to the Seruice of the Woord / vnder the Obedience of ye Loue / towards all Those / let your Inclynacion be kynde and loueing / to their Saluacion.
               2. Receaue all such / into your Armes of the  Spirit of Loue: and accounte them for your Bretheren and Sisters in the Loue, as those that stande in your Comunialtee / with a lyke Fayth: and none els / Lest ye be Fellow-companyons to the Euel-willingones, and Fellow-witnesses to the Craftyones / like vnto all our Aduersaryes.
               3. For thatt be farre from vs / that wee (inasmuch as we haue obtayned or gotten such a gloryous 2. Cor. 4. a. 1. Iohn. 1.3. a.
                   Light of Lyfe, and godly Seruice of the holy Woord / through the Loue of God the Father) shoulde inclyne ⁏with the Loue and our godly Seruice; to the Vngodly and Impenitentones, or to those that are euell of will / for to serue them therwith / according to their Will of the. sinfull Flesh, or to feede them in their corrupt Nature, and to nourish them vpp therin. O no / ye Deerly-beloued: The Grace and Mercy / which is chaunced vnto vs ⁏in the Woord of Lyfe; through ye Loue of God ye Father / is farr-to-great: Yea, we do also esteeme thesame much to-precious and to be more-of-value / then that we shoulde cast the holy Bread of Lyfe (which is com and geeuen vnto vs / out of Heauen / as a 
                     Math. 1
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   Foode for the Children of

God, and for all 
                     Esa. 58. b. Math. 5. a.
                   hungry Soules after the Righteousnes) before the Vnbeleeuers, the Raueners of their owne Dirt, and the Swyne 
                     Math. 7. a. 15 c.
                   and Doggs: or shoulde feede and nourish such therwith / as are vngodly, wicked, and euell of will / according to the maner of the wicked Worlde: or those that seeke nothing-els / but Ease 
                     Rom. 16 b. Phil. 3 c.
                   in the Flesh, for to feede thesame / according to his Lustes.
               
                   4. Veryly, the Bread of Lyfe is not geeuen vnto them / to the Nourishing of their corrupt Nature. For it belongeth only to 
                     Math. 15. c.
                   the Children of Loue, and to all those that submitt them obediently to the Seruice of Loue, which are godly of will, and haue a Lust with all their Hearts / to fulfill 
                     Math. 3. a.
                   all Righteousnes.
               5. Therfore it is not meete / that the Bread shoulde be taken-away or withholden from the Children / 
                     Math. 7. a. 15. c.
                   and distributed to the Straingers / which are nothing-els but vngodly of will / who tread it downe so shamfully 
                     Math 7. a.
                   vnder their Feete / like vnto Swyne and Doggs: which Straingers or Vngodlyones / are also Mockers, Theeues, Traytors, and Murderers of the holy Woord: and which do likewyse turne them vnto vs / to our Destruction.
               6. Wo be vnto them, for that they 
                     Iude. 1. b.
                   go in the Waye of Cayne: and for the Rewarde or Treasure of Iniquitee / they crucify 
                     Heb. 6. 
                        •
                     . and kill in themselues / the holy Woord, or the innocent Beeing of God / with their Sensualitee of the Flesh: also esteeme it for vncleane, 
                     Heb. 10. 
                        •
                     
                   and as a

Mockery / and do ⁏with their false Testimonyes against vs; persecute Vs very vehemētly / which do minister the holy Woord or innocent Beeing of God / vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
               7. Wo be vnto them / that runnfoorth with their foolish Desyres and false Heartes / 2. Pet 2. b. I
                           •
                        de. 2. b
                   after the Workes of the Flesh, which are defyled with Darknesses / to thend to liue euenso in all Vncleannes, Voluptuous-pleasures, Wantō
                  nes and Wickednes: and vnto all those that giue Prayse and Honour to the vngodly Beeing, and accounte thesame to be a Freendshipp for them▪ not once careing for this / that they are the Enemyes of God / ther-through.
               8. Wo be vnto them / that for 
                     Iam. 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   the Worldes  Freendshipp or for the Pleasures cause of the Flesh / becom Gods Enemyes. Wher-with they shewe sufficiently / that they are Witnesses of the Craftyones. as also Witnesses / that they neither will nor desyre God nor his holy Beeing.
               9. Beholde, the Curssing 
                     Math 25. d. Heb 9.10. c 2 pet. 3. a.
                   and the tirrible Iudgment of the Fyres Crueltee / hangeth ouer thē / as a Snare / for their Sinnes cause: And thatsame wil fall 
                     Luk. 21. d.
                   heauely vppon the Pate of all Euel-willing and arrogant Highmyndedones.
               10. Therfore looke into it betymes ⁏O ye Children of Men; what a louely and godly Beeing ye haue forsaken, and how ye haue liued in all Vngodlynes and Vnmanlynes: and

repent / er-euer the seuere Iustice or the Iudgment of God fall vppon you. For when thesame ketcheth-holde of you, and letteth you see your wicked Deedes / 
                     Sap 5. a b.
                   then shall ye knowe / that the euell Things haue incompassed and caught-holde of you. By the which ye shalbe 
                     Sap. 12 c Apo. 18. a
                   punished▪ and not be able to escape the Hande of Dengaunce.
            
            
               The VI. Chap.
               
                   O ye beloued Hearts / which are yet healde or captiued with any vngodly thing / put-away now 
                     Iosu. 1. the Wickednes from you, and 
                     Iam. 4. cleanse your Hearts therof. Seperate your Myndes and Thoughts / from all what is vayne and corruptible in the Worlde. For-sake all thatt / whatsoeuer ioyneth not itself to a godly Lyfe. Circumcise yourselues 
                     Deut. 10. b Ier. 4. a.
                   on the Foreskinne of your Hearts: and put-away frō your Hearts / all what is vnpure, and hath defyled your Hearts. Turne you and com ⁏with naked Hearts; 
                     Ier 18. b. 25 a 35. b. Eze 18. d. Ioel. 2. b.
                   to the Lorde your God / vnder the Obedience of his Loue: and in thesame Seruice / learne the Sweetnes of Lyfe, the Humilitee and Meeknes of Heart, and the vpright Vertues.
               2. For thatt is the cleane or pure Lyfe of Iesu Christ / which cometh vnto vs out of the Loue / through her Seruice / to thend that we

shoulde liue vnto God in thesame, and laude and prayse Him therin.
               3. Beholde ⁏ye Deerly-beloued; ther-vnto strecheth our Seruice of Loue: which vndeceaueable  Seruice / is the mostlouely and holyest Seruice of God / the which / God willeth that it shoulde haue his Minis
                     •
                  ra
                     •
                  ion ouer all the Worlde; and that all People shoulde be obedient or subiect to the Loue / in her Seruice. For in the Loue, is the 
                     Gen. 13. 
                        ••
                     
                   Blessing of all Generacions of the Earth / according to the Promyses.
               4. Therfore is my E
                     •
                  hortacion and harty Request vnto you all / which are the Auncientest and Most-zealousones in our holy Comunialtee / that ye wil all likewyse haue regarde in that-maner / vnto the Seruice of Loue, and euen so accomplish his Requyring.
               5. And although it be knowen vnto me / that  ye do also partly with mee / see into the Difference of thatt wherof I wryte vnto you / yet am I notwithstanding constrayned / to wryte, and to present thissame vnto you / To thend that ye shoulde alwayes be myndfull / not to put to-much trust at the first / in the on-coming Disciples / which inclyne vnto vs in the Seruice of Loue, as to declare all the Misteryes of God / among them. 1 Cor 2. 
                        •
                     . but well among those that are growing-vp with vs obediently / in the holy and godly Testimonyes of the Spirit of Loue / to the 
                     Ephe 4 b
                   Agednes of the holy Vnderstanding: and those which we fynde faythfull therin / 

Because that we may therby ⁏so much-the-more-certenly and foresightfully; minister the mostholy Seruice of Loue ⁏wherunto God hath stirred-vp and chosen vs, to 1 Cor 14. d.
                   all good Order and Decentnes / vnder the Obedience of the Loue.
            
            
               The VII. Chap.
               
                   SEing then that ther are feawe now / that wil 2. Timo. 4. a
                   endure the godly Doctrine of the Loue / therfore is likewyse all my har
                     •
                  y Exhortacion vnto You / ye Elders and Wyseones ⁏to whom the Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of Loue are committed / for to minister in the Seruice of Loue; that yee ⁏in thesame Seruice; wil alwayes keepe a circumspect Watch towardes the vpright and louely Beeing: cheefly because of those that com-in besydes the Loue and her Seruice, 
                     Rom. 16. 2 Timo 3. a
                   and bring-in Contencion and Breache of the Concorde / with their Knowledg.
               2. But contende not you with them / aboute any Knowledg: but requyre alwayes the Loue, and the Obedience vnto her Seruice / to all 
                     Ephe. 4. a.
                   Vnitee of Peace. For if anyman knowe the Loue / hee knoweth all what he shoulde knowe: and whosoeuer knoweth not the Loue, nor is mynded to the Requyring of her Seruice / hee doutles 1 Cor. 
                     
                        •
                     . a.
                   knoweth nothing: No, nothing-at-al of the godly Wisdom, nor can in-anywyse

                  
                     Math 11 d 1 Cor 2. b
                   vnderstande the Trueth. It is very-true.
               3. Heerwith ⁏ye beloued Elders in the holy  Vnderstanding; my Request and Exhortacion is vnto you all / that ye wil alwayes be myndfull of the Requyring of the Seruice of Loue: and not leaue-of to 2 Timo 4. a.
                   rebuke and to exhort still / with Woordes of holy Vnderstanding, and with Informacions of Discreation. namely, those which holde with vs / in the Comunialtee of Loue, and are yet loofe or lightmynded of Heart: and cheefly 2 T
                           ••
                        s 3 a
                   those / which walke disorderly / as also yt Vnchastones, which wil serue the Flesh / with vncleane Hearts. For they marre their Vnderstanding, and corrupt their Sences and Memory / with their Fleshly and vnchast Thoughtes.
               4. Before these, holde-foorth the conuenient Orderlynes: and exhort them to a 
                     psal 
                     
                        •
                     1 b Math 
                     
                        •
                     . a
                   cleane or pure Heart / To thend that they may becom 2 Cor. 7. a
                   cleansed from all Pollution and Filthynes of the Flesh, and so ⁏growing-vp in the holy Vnderstanding; may be founde worthy / that the God of Lyfe may ⁏in Cleannes and Cleernes or Purenes; dwell and walke in 
                     Iohn 14 c Apo 21. 
                        •
                     
                   them: and so mought ⁏through the godly Beeing; be meete to vtter-foorth and to publish the Glory of God / to the 
                     
                        
                           •
                        phe 1 a
                   Laude of his Maiestee: and also to be seruiceable vnto their Neighboure / to thatsame Beeing / that it may all go vprightly 1 Cor 14 d
                   in his Course.
               5. Beholde, thus dooing / we shall be founde 
                  
                  
                     Math. 24. c 1 Cor 4 a
                   faythfull Ministers of God. also faythfull Ministers of the holy Woord, which do further the Saluacion or Welfare of Men. For after that maner ⁏as is before sayde; shall the Loue alwayes continue fruitfull among vs in her Seruice / out of pure Nature. and God shall sainctify his great and gloryous Name in vs· seale vs therwith to be his People· and accept vs 
                     Ier 31. a. 2 Cor 6 b
                   for his beloued Sonnes and Daughters: also 
                     Esa 66. b
                   playe and dandle with vs / as with his beloued Children, and keepe vs / 
                     Psal 17 a Zach 2 a
                   as the Apple of his Eye. And He shall leade and nourish vs vp in his Pasture / like 
                     Eze 34 b Iohn 1
                        •
                     . a
                   Sheepe and Lambes.
               6. All our Course-of-lyfe shalbe in Loue and Peace. Faythfulnes 
                     Zach 8 a b
                   and Trueth shalbe seruiceable vnto vs. Righteousnes and Holynes 
                     Esa 58 b
                   shalbe alwayes in our Beholding: and God shall alwayes go-before vs / as a Light. He shalbe an euerlasting King and Sheapheard vnto vs: and the Loueingnes in the Peace / shall alwayes be among vs, and haue no Ende, according to the Promyses.
               
                   7. Let all our Lyfe, and all our Course-of-dealing / be heerin / my beloued Hearts, ye louely Comunialtee of Saints in the Loue. For you ⁏ye louely faythfull Comunialtee of Loue; hath God chosen to be a kingly Seede vppon the Earth / according to his Promyses / for to bring-foorth by you / the Light of Lyfe / out of the heauenly Trueth, to the Blessing of all Generacions of the Earth, according to the Promyses.
               
                  8. Take-heede 2 Cor 6 
                        •
                      
                     Gal 6 a
                   now all to thissame Tyme of Grace. Be watchfull in ye Spirit. 
                     Esa 60 a Rom 13 b Ephe 5. 
                        •
                     . and stand-vp in the Righteousnes. The Loue of God the Father, and the Glory of Christ in his Coming / take the Victory in all your Hearts. Amen.
               
            
            The Ende of the Nyntenth Epistle.
         
         
            The Twentith Epistle. A Chastising and Reproofe of Whoordom / with sondry good Lessons, Informacions, and groundly Instructions / how the Man shall giue-ouer himself to Iesus Christ, and to the Woord of his holy Spirit of Loue and Trueth· forsake and leaue himself and all what he hath / for the Loue of Iesu Christ-his sake· and follow-after and only cleaue-vnto Iesus Christ and the Woord of his holy Spirit of Loue· and shewe

all Obedience, Loue, and Faythfulnes / to thesame Woord.
            
               
                  
                     Thus sath the Lorde IESVS CHRIST:
                  If any man com to Mee / and hateth not his Father, Mother, Wyfe, Children, Bretheren, Sisters, and also his owne Lyfe [That is: Whosoeuer doth not ⁏for ye Loue of Iesus Christes sake; forsake and leaue all wher-vnto he is bounde, or wher-vnto he hath sett his owne Affection and Will of his Heart / without the Requyring of the holy Woord of Iesu Christ and his holy Spirit of Loue] and beareth or taketh not his Crosse on him / and Followeth-after Mee / cannot be my Desciple.
                  Math. 10.16: Mark. 8. Luk. 9.14.
               
            
            
               The First Chapter.
               
                  
                  THIS IS THE Woord of the holy Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ / which HN hath witnessed ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; against the Whooring of the Generacion of Men:
               
                  2. O Thou Generacion of Men / How long shall I sett 
                     psal 108 a Cant 7. c.
                   my Loue on thee / without being loued agayne, and my 2 Cor 11 a
                   Faythfulnes / without being shewed Faythfulnes agayne?
               3. When wilt thou ⁏I pray thee; turne thyself away from thy Whoordom, and turne thee 
                     •
                  ightly ⁏ 
                     Ier 3 a
                   with a faythfull Heart; to thy 
                     O
                           •
                        e. 2 a 2 Cor 
                     
                        •
                     1 a
                   right Husbande?
               4. I haue ⁏sayth the holy Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ; sett all my 
                     pro 2 c
                   Loue towards thee / O thou Generacion of Men. But seing that I am not loued by thee agayne: and do perceaue / that thou whoorest with thyne owne Imaginacion 
                     Deut 12 a
                   of the Knowledg, and with almaner of Spirits, and 
                     Ier 2 d Eze 16 b. c. Rom 1 c
                   elementish or naturall Things: and doest not sett thy Loue and Faythfulnes / 
                     Ier 2. d.
                   firmly to my Loue and Faythfulnes ⁏which I shewe towards thee; to an vpright Obeying of the holy Woord / Therfore doth my Heart ⁏for Loues-cause; suffer somuch-the-greater Sorrow: and I must also be captiued the-more with 2 Cor 1
                        •
                     . a
                   Mistrustfulnes towards thee.
               5. OH / alas! Must not I alwayes ⁏like  vnto an Husband towards an 
                     Ier 2 d 3 a 2 Cor 12. a
                   whoorish Wyfe; haue a mistrustfull Eye towards the Man (which bosteth him of the Loue and of the Knowledg of the spirituall and heauenly Things, and yet committeth whoordom with 
                     Ier 2 d. Eze 16. b 
                           •
                         Iud. 1 b
                   strainge Spirits / without the Famyle of Loue) 2. Cor. 11 a
                   and not suffer thesame Mistrust

to be taken-away or denyed me / before I fynde that the Man do bynde or betroth himself ⁏with a faythfull Heart; vnto the holy Woord of Grace and his Spirit of Loue: and doth with an 
                     Deut. 16. b.
                   obedient Heart / vtterly forsake all his Whoordom, whether it be with Flesh or Spirit· with any-maner of 
                     Eze 16. b
                   Imaginacion of the Knowledg· or with anything that is Outward or Inward· or with anything of 
                     psal 49. c
                   Gods Sayings: and euen so goeth-thorow the Waye to the Lyfe / according to the Requyring of the holy Woord?
               6. Oh! How is my Heart thus greeued / by reason of greate Loue. and so perplexed / through great Mistrustfulnes?
               7. For like as a valyant Champyon / hath sett all his Loue and Hearts-lust towards an whoorish Wyfe, and bounde it vnto her / to the intent to with-drawe her from her Whoordom, and to drawe her with her Loue / into his Loue / to be an vpright Maryed-wyfe vnto him: and can obtayne no Looking-on nor Harkening-vnto ⁏or very-little; at her handes: and so for great Loue / suffereth such sore Greefe in his Heart, and is so exceedingly combered / that he cannot at any-tyme take any rest / for shewing his Loue still towards her: Euenso am I in-like-maner swallowed-vp in Loue / toward the Generacion of Men, for to withdrawe thesame from his Whoordom, which doth now committ-whoordom with so many-maner of Knowledges and strainge and erring

                  3 Reg 22. d. Esa 18 b Ier 23 c
                   Spirits, and elementish Things / and to drawe thesame 
                     Ier 3 a
                   with his Loue / into my Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ, and to the 
                     Ephe 1.4 phil 1 b
                   vpright Righteousnes and Holynes. But ⁏alas; I obtayne very little Looking-on and Harkening-vnto. 
                     Zach 7 c Ephe 4 
                        
                           •
                         Phil 1 b.
                   Therfore my Heart is so exceedingly combered through Loue / that I (to see if I coulde obtayne anymore Harkning-vnto) can at no tyme rest myself / for shewing my Loue still towards thesame.
               8. I had wel hoped (inasmuch as we haue  witnessed and declared the true Beeing of Iesu Christ, and his vpright Righteousnes / so cleere and euidently vnto Many ⁏with full Instruction; in all our Seruice of Wryting / vnder the Obedience of the Loue) that ther had bin enough witnessed and poynted-out in wryting / tending to the good Beeing of Iesu Christ, and to the vpright Righteousnes and Holynes of the holy Spirit of Loue / for to drawe all those yt haue read or hearde thosame written Testimonyes and Directions / to the Loue of the vpright Beeing of Iesu Christ and of the vpright Righteousnes of the holy Spirit of Loue, and to assemble them vnto Mee and my God, and to a Vnitee of one Heart and Mynde in the Loue▪ as all ioyntly together / to 
                     Iohn 17 c Ephe. 2. b
                   one Man in Iesu Christ;: and that they woulde euenso haue forsaked their 
                     Ier 23 c
                   vngodly Beeing, together with all strainge and erring 2 Reg 22 c Esa. 18. b 2 C
                           •
                        r 11 b Gal 6 b
                   Spirits, vnprofitable Knowledges, and all Bandage vnto the naturall Things / with 
                     Ier 2. b g Rom 1 c Iude. 1.
                  
the which they committ-whoordom, and ⁏vnder a Colour as if they had right in the Whoordom of their Vnchastitee; do vse their Falshod and Voluptuous-pleasure: also that they woulde haue wholly submitted them ⁏with Vs Elders in the Famyly of Loue; vnder the gracious Woord of the holy Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ 
                  1 pet 1 b c
                   and so ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; haue growen-vp in all vpright Righteousnes / to the 
                     Ephe. 4. c.
                   Oldnes of the holy and godly Vnderstanding.
               
                   9. BVt ⁏alas; it is all in vayne / to hold-foorth a Light, and to figure-out any gorgious Beawty / before the Eyes of the Blynde / 
                     Eze 1
                        •
                      
                     a
                   that will not see. and all lost-laboure likewyse / for to cry-out, and to publish any good Tydings or ioyfull Message / before the Eares of the Deafe / 
                     E
                           •
                        a 30 b Act 7 g
                   that wil not heare.
               10. For all whatsoeuer I wryte, cry-out, and teache / touching the 
                     Iohn 1 a b
                   true Light· and touching the 
                     Esa 
                     
                        •
                     4. b Apo 
                     
                        ••
                      
                     a b
                   gorgious Beawty of the Kingdom of the God of Heauens, and his vpright Righteousnes· and touching the 
                     M
                           •
                        th 3 a. Act 
                     
                        •
                     .3 Entrance into thesame / theron is had least regarde / for to take thesame 
                     Math 13. to heart / according to the Requyring of the holy and gracious Woord, and to indeuour them obediently 
                     Deut 4. b. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     a 11 b
                   ther-vnto. But they do almost eueryone thinke to committ their Whoordom therwith: and so becom likewyse Fornicators 
                     Num 12 g 2
                        •
                      
                     d. Iudi. 2 d ps
                           •
                        l 49. b.
                   with Gods Sayings.
               11. For-that-cause also they do almost all continue in their olde Course: and enter not into

the 
                     Deut. 
                     
                        •
                     . d. Esa 1. Ier 4. a
                   Waye / which ⁏to the Cleansing of their Hearts; leadeth to the 
                     pro 3 10 c Iohn 1 a
                   Lyfe of the true Beeing, and bringeth into the Kingdom of the God of Heauens.
               12. For like as they committ Whoordom with all erring Spirits 
                     Ier 23. c
                   and Knowledges of thee false Light, and with almaner of 
                     Eze 16. c Rom 1. c
                   naturall Things: Euenso do they also committ their Whoordom / with the high-worthy 
                     Num 23. g. 24 b. psal. 49. b
                   Sayings of God / which be heald-foorth before them ⁏out of the Seruice of Loue; 2 Tess 2. b· 
                           •
                         P
                           •
                        t 1. a.
                   to their Sainctificacion. And Many ⁏growing offended at them; do 
                     Pro 1. c
                   dispi
                     •
                  e them, and harden then Hearts agaynst them: and 
                     Ephe 4. c.
                   estrainging themselues altogether from the Trueth of God / they remayne without the holy 
                     Heb 2 3 4. c
                   Rest of the Children of God, which God hath reuealed and declared now in thissame Daye / in his Famyly of Loue, and wherunto He 
                     Esa. 9. a b, Ma
                           •
                        h 11. d.
                   calleth and biddeth all Men / to their Preseruacion in the Godlynes.
               13. I haue doutles hetherto / called and  knocked b
                     •
                  fore many Doores: but who hath let me in? Proffered the 
                     Apo. 3. d.
                   Foode of Lyfe / vnto Many: but who hath rightly taken-heede to the proffered Grace / for to receaue the Foode of Lyfe in Thankfulnes, and to feede-vpon it / to a Lyfe of Godlynes / wherby to submitt himself wholly vnder thesame / to a Nourishment of his Soule, and with an 
                     Math. 11. d
                   humble and obedient Heart / to com ⁏all in all; into the Loue and her Seruice: and so to be one Heart,

                  
                     Act. 4. d
                   Spirit, and Lyfe with mee / in Iesu Christ and in his holy Spirit of Loue? Truly / very feawe. Therfore are-ther Many also / that haue no 
                     Math 13. right regarde vnto the holy Woord ⁏which is heald-foorth before them / in the Seruice of Loue; what it requyreth. For they do almost eueryone / suffer themselues to lust to committ their 
                     Psal. 49. c.
                   Whoordom with thesame / as with their owne Imaginaciō of the Knowledg, and not to submitt them obediently ther-vnder / like 
                     Deur. 30. Ier 35. c. Iam. 1. d.
                   Disciples of the Woord.
            
            
               The II. Chap.
               
                   O Ye 
                     Gen. 3. a b.
                   Vnregarders of the holy Woord of Godlynes, ye Fornicators with Gods Sayings, and all yee which run-on so 
                     Rom. 2. a.
                   impenitently / contrary to the godly Testimonyes of the heauenly Trueth: and haue not once in mynde / 
                     Math 16. d. Luk. 9 14. d.
                   to forsake and to leaue yourselues / in your Whoordom, and in all your 
                     Rom 6. c d.
                   vnchaste Lusts and Desyres: and to be coupled obediently to your right Lorde or Husbāde / with 2. Gor. 11. a.
                   pure Heartes. Looke once rightly into it I pray you / how your Course and 
                     Ezech. 36. Eccli 18. c Rom. 6. c.
                   Dealing hath bin hetherto / towards the Woord of the holy Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ, and what Lust ye haue had to the Obedience of the Woord.
               2. Haue ye not euen hetherto / shutt your Doores the-faster / thewhylst I knocked at them / and aduaunced yourselues to be 
                     Esa. 30.35. Iudges

of the Woord? Are ye not ⁏thewhyles the 
                     Act. 13. Foode of the godly Lyfe hath bin proffered vnto you / to the Obeying of the holy Woord; becom the-more 
                     Num. 11 a. 14·26. c. &c.
                   vnlustfull and disobedient to the godly Lyfe, and the-more vnthankfull / for the Proffering of the liueing Gifts of God?
               3. I haue nodout cryed-out so loude vnto you  all / that I am almost (because ye do so vtterly stopp your Eares / from hearing what the Woord requyreth) becom 
                     Psal 38.68 a
                   hoarse· and 
                     Ier. 20. b.
                   weakened in the Sounde of my Voyce: And that altogether heerfore, euen because ye shoulde vnderstand the Requyring of my Crying· com with mee / into the Doctrine of the vpright Lyfe of Iesu Christ· and so 
                     Iob. 34. a b. Pro. 4. c.
                   harken after the Distinction of my Crying· giue-ouer yourselues 
                     Pro. 3. b 8. to be Disciples of the gracious Woord· shewe 
                     Math. 3. a Act. 3. c.
                   Repentance for your Sinnes· loue with mee / the Lyfe of Rest and Peace / with a 
                     Psal 33 c. Pro. 10. c.
                   Lust to the Righteousnes· haue all your 1 Pet 3. b.
                   Vnitee of Heart, Loue, and Sweet-delytfulnes / in the Famyly of Loue / with the Saintes of God and Children of the Loue of Iesu Christ· becom incorporated to the 
                     Ephe. 4. 
                        
                           •
                        . Col. 3. b. 2 Pet. 1. a.
                   vpright Righteousnes· and euē so enter into the 
                     Heb. 3.4. c.
                   Rest of the Lorde / with the Children of God and Saintes of Christ. But ⁏alas; I haue yet founde very-feawe of those that haue had their Affection bent heerunto: and yet many-feawer / which haue harkened-vnto and beleeued the godly Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of Loue / to that effect, or taken-heede to obeye thosame.
               
                  
                   4. O Ye Childrē or Generacions of 
                     Gen. 3. O
                           •
                        c 6 c. 4 Esd. 3. c 4 c.
                   
                  Adam, all yee which liue so boldly in the Vnchastitee 4. Esd 3. c. Math 13. Luk. 16. of your Whoordom, and in your Hipocrisie / against the Requyring of the holy Woord: and do not once ⁏like Disciples of the Woord; take-to-heart all our dilligent Seruice shewed on you / wherby to com into the Schoole of the Seruice of Loue, and to learne the vpright Righteousnes / 
                     Rom. 12. a. E
                           •
                        he 4. c.
                   to the Renewing of your Heartes and Myndes: Remember of fellowship / what ye do all 
                     Math. 22. a.
                   neglet in thissame 
                     Esa. 49 c. 2. Cor. 
                     
                        •
                     . a.
                   precious Tyme of Grace: how ye keepe yourselues back / agaynst Gods proffered Grace· shut-to and harden 
                     Psal 9
                        •
                     . b. Luk 1 
                        •
                      
                     d. Heb. 2. a. 
                     
                        •
                     . a.
                   your Hearts· keepe the Loue of God 1. Iohn 4 c
                   the Father, of the Lorde Iesu Christ, and of the holy Gost / quyte out of thesame· and do giue the lightmynded and vngodly Beeing / 2 Pet. 2. c. d Heb. 6. a. Inde. 1. his Roome / to your owne Destruction.
               
                   5. For beholde, and haue regarde on 
                     P
                           •
                        o 2. b. c. Ier. 7. a.
                   your Wayes / all ye Desobeyers and Resisters of the Trueth of God and of his godly Loue / together with all yee that are 
                     Ier 7. c
                   so goodthinking-wyse in yourselues: Haue ye not euen hetherto / wholly 
                     P
                           •
                        o. 8 a Ier. 7 c. d.
                   shut-too your Eares / before ye Voyce of the Wisdom of God· refused the proffered Grace of God· and 
                     Eze. 13. a.
                   followed your owne Foolishnes and Good-thinking, and heald-foorth or ministred thesame vnto others moe? and not the holy Woord of Trueth.
               6. Are ye not also still runne-back / when ye were 
                     Ier. 7 c 15. b.
                   called forward?
               
                  7. Haue ye not stil-apace couered yourselues more-and-more in your Hipocrisie ⁏when ther-was heald-foorth before you / that ye shoulde vncouer yourselues in your 
                     Psal. 36. 
                        •
                     
                   Hipocrisie, and confesse and dye from your 
                     Pro 28. b. Eccli. 4. b. Rom. 6. Sinnes; / and in your Sinnes / tak
                     •
                  n-on more sinfull-Lyfe: 1 Iohn. 2. c.
                   mayntayned the wicked Worlde: excused the Flesh / in his false and corrupt Nature, and committed-whoordom ther-with: and bin vnregarding towards the holy Woord 
                     Ier. 2. a. &c.
                   of the Grace of God the Father / as if it were an vnneedfull or vnnecessary Thing. and so made 1. Tess. 4. b Heb 10 c.
                   little-reckning-of or debased the holy Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ.
               
               8. OH, how vnfitly doth it accorde / that  ther should be such Disorderlynes (as is rehearsed) founde among Any-people / vnto whom the vpright manly Beeing ⁏euen according to the 
                     Sap. 7 d Col. 1 c. Heb. 1 a
                   very-lyke Beeing of God; is dayly presented so naked and euidently, and that are 2 Pet. 
                     
                        •
                     . a
                   called and bidden ther-vnto / out of entyre Loue.
               9. Yea / yet much-more vnfitly doth it accorde / that thosame do bost them of the Christianitee, of the Loue, and of the Freedom / because all 2 pet. 1 
                        •
                     
                   Discreation, and Obedience to the holy Woord / ought to be among such. al
                     •
                  o the right Knowledg, and the humble Thanksgiueing / for that God hath created and chosen the Man to be an 
                     Gen. 1 c 3 a Sap. 2 c Eccli. 17. a 2 Cor. 11 a
                   Image or Lykenes of his godly Beeing: and for that he ⁏in his
                     Gen. 3 a Rom. 1 Eph
                           •
                        . 2 b
                   Fall or Estrainging from God; is ⁏by Gods Grace;

called and bidden agayne to the 
                     Eph. 2 b 4 c Col 1 b 3 a 
                     
                        •
                      
                     pet. 1. a
                   Lykenes of God / through Iesus Christ and the holy Spirit of his Loue: and that all thesame / is farre from them.
            
            
               The III. Chap.
               
                  
                  FORasmuch now therfore / as that I do perceaue all this Abuce, Ignorance, and Vnthankfulnes / among Many of you / Oye Children of Men / that bost yourselues of the Christianitee and of the Loue, as also of the Freedom, and of the Knowledg of the heauenly Things / Shall I 1 Cor. 11 a
                   then prayse you heerin· account you for right and free Christians, or approoue you to be vpright and obedient Disciples or Children of the Famyly of Loue: and so laye soft 
                     Eze. 13 c
                   Pillowes vnder your Armes: and saye / 
                     Esa. 3 Ier. 6 ye are free: wheras ye are yet bounde to the 
                     Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     c
                   Deuill, also to the Myndes of the Flesh, and to the Imaginacion of your owne Knowledg: and that it is all well with you, 
                     Esa 3 Ier. 6 c d
                   wheras it is doutles ⁏in such a State; altogether euell: and so ⁏as though my Mynde and Spirit / were agreeable with you 
                     psal. 50. c
                   therin; suffer you to be leadd with the Bandes of the Deuill, and 
                     Sap. 17 a d
                   Chaynes of Darknesse / into Hell and Condemnacion? Veryly, so woulde it then go euell with you all.
               2. For / in thatt state, and so long as ye do liue in your owne Wisdom / and haue not

⁏with your Loue, Myndes, and Thoughts; altogether intended the vpright 
                     Matth. 32 
                        •
                     
                   Righteousnes of Iesu Christ 
                  ؛that godly Beeing of the Loue
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   for to be all in all 2 pet. 1 a
                   incorporated into thesame obediently: and to liue-vnto and to 
                     Deut. 6.10. d Math. 4. 
                        •
                     . 22. d▪
                     
                   serue only the liueing God / So is all your Freedom, Loue, Myndes, and Thoughts / and all your Appeasment of Heart which yee yourselues haue taken-on / proceeded out of the Flesh of Sinne, and 
                     Iohn. 8. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   out of the Deuill ؛the Father of Lyes
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   wher-through the Man still hunteth-after and loueth nothing-els but his owne Destruction.
               3. BUt seing now that my Loue / proceedeth  out of Gods Nature or Beeing, and stretcheth to all Preseruacion in the Godlynes, and loueth you all therunto / so cannot I ⁏out of ye Nature of thesame Loue; 
                     pro. 27. a Iohn. 1. c
                   omitt / but I must needes figure-foorth or describe before your Eyes / your Contrarynes and Destruction.
               4. For I saye vnto you verely, if ye com not into the Doctrine of the Seruice of Loue, and so stande submitted to the Woord of the holy Spirit of Loue / to shewe Obedience / and be not 
                     Rom. 12. a Ephe. 4. c
                   chainged out of your eart
                     •
                  ly Loue 
                     Rom. 6.7. Gall. 5.6. a
                   of the Flesh / into the godly Loue of the holy Spirit of Iesu Christ, nor becom vpright of Heart: as also becom not incorporated to 
                     Ephe. 3 c d 2 pet. 1. a.
                   the true Beeing of God and Christ / with your inwared Man· nor walke neither-yet be founde in all 
                     Ephe. 4. a phil. 4. a
                   Equitee and Loueingnes / vnder the

Obedience of the Loue: but do in that sort ⁏without the good Beeing; apply yourselues vnto much Knowledg of high heauenly Things, and to talke therof / So is-it all doutles false and Lyes / whatsoeuer ye speake: and proceedeth altogether out of the 
                     Iohn. 8. e
                   Deuill, who hath 3. Reg 22. c 2 Cor. 11. c
                   appeered vnto you / like an Angell of the heauenly Light, and so hath bewitched and seduced your earthly and fleshly Hearts: wherthrough ye do ⁏in a false 
                     Esa. 59. b.
                   Light, and false Freedom, or false 
                     Esa. 3. Appeasment of Heart; proceed-on and walke in all 
                     Ier. 8 b
                   Arrogant-stoutnes / against the 
                     Math. 11. b
                   Humilitee, Obedience, and vpright 
                     Iohn. 8. c
                   Freedom / which God requyreth by his holy Spirit of Loue.
               5. Through which Proceeding in the false Light of the Deuill, and in the false Freedom of the Flesh, and in the bewitched Subtil-prudence of the 
                     Rom 8. a b. Iam. 3 d.
                   earthly and fleshly Myndes or false Spirits / ye shall fynde yourselues at the last / 
                     Math. 7. d. 24. d. Luk. 13. f
                   vtterly seperated or estrainged from the louely Beeing and Face of God· and ⁏with all your high Vnderstandings, heauenly Knowledges, and wel-appeased Freedoms; be-wrapped in all Confusednes, Bitternes, and Maliciousnes of Heart / and in the hellish 
                     Sap. 5 a. Math. 25. d.
                   Condemnacion.
               
                   6. AH-beloued: tell me I pray you / how your Heart and Mynde, and al your Nature and Beeing / is setled in your high or heauenly Knowledges, and wel-appeased Freedoms?
               
                  7 Veryly, if ye stande 
                     Pro. 2. d. 2 Cor. 11. c Phil. 2. b.
                   not simply and peaceably grounded therwith / in the vpright and godly Beeing of the Loue / according to the godly Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of Loue: and that ye are not yet com into the first Schoole-rule 
                     Heb. 6. a
                   of the christian Doctrine / vnder the Obedience of the Loue, nor haue obediently performed it: That is to saye / if ye do not in the Schoole or Doctrine of the Seruice of Loue / dye-from all your contrary and corrupt Nature / in the Passing-thorow 
                     Rom. 6. a Col. 2. b.
                   the Death of Christ, nor-yet out of the second Birth 
                     Iohn. 3. a. Rom. 6. a b
                   from the Death / be not renewed in your Spirit and Mynde ⁏in all vpright 
                     Ephe. 4 c
                   Righteousnes and Holynes; by ye 
                  2. Cor. 4. b. phil. 3. b. c.
                   Resurrectiō of Iesu Christ: but / being vnrenewed, or ⁏without the holy Woord of the Spirit of Loue; haue of yourselues ⁏with your olde 
                     Ephe. 4. c
                   corrupt Nature; taken-on som high Knowledges or wel-appeased Freedoms / Then must ye nodout acknowledg / that all your high Knowledges, profoūde Understandings, and Freedoms / are false / and are brought-foorth out of the 
                     Iohn. 8. c 2. Cor. 11 c 1 Iohn. 3. b Iam. 3. c.
                   Deuill, and out of his false Light: and that also ye are not worthy / in thesame false and corrupt Nature ⁏if ye desyre to continue therin; to beare the Name of a Man, much-les / the Name of the Children of God or of the Loue.
               8. Therfore ye shoulde of right be ashamed / 
all you vncleane Hearts / for that ye stande not obediently submitted to ye Woord of the Trueth of God and of the holy Spirit of Loue / to the 
                     Rom. 12. 
                        
                           ••
                         Ephe 4. c
                  
                  
Renewing and Cleansing of your Spirits and Myndes / and for that ye shoulde suffer yourselues ⁏being in your wicked and corrupt or disobedient Nature; to be called Men or 
                     Luk. 16. d 
                           •
                        . 1. Iohn. 3. b
                   Children of God, and Members of the Loue or of the holy Spirit of Iesu Christ / and so shoulde ⁏in all 
                     Luk. 18. d Rom. 2 Disobedience; grow-vp to be a Blaspheamy or Reproche to the God of Lyfe and his Christ.
               
               9. Yea, be ashamed of thatsame / ye vncleane Hearts, which do so shamefully 
                     Heb. 10. c
                   contemne the pure and holy Testimonyes of God / and defyle or accounte them vncleane / with your polluted Knowledges: and deale so disorderly with Gods 
                     Num. 23.24 psal. 49. Sayings / as with an Whoore.
               
                   10. AH, consider I pray you: and remember / that-ther can be no right Obedience towards God / taught nor requyred / by the Disobeyers of the holy Woord· nothing cleansed / by the 
                     Eccli. 34. a
                   Uncleane· no Trueth spokē / by the Lyers· nor-yet any vpright Freedom liued / by the Unfree, nor by the Seperated-ones from the holy Woord of the Spirit of Loue.
               11. Forasmuch then as thesame is true: How wil yee then I pray you / cleanse yourselues or 
                     Eccli. 34. a.
                   another / with your vncleane Beeing. and publish the 
                     Psal. 49. c.
                   Lords Good, and his Rytes / with your vncleane Lipps. and take his Couenante in your lying Mouth? if yee yourselues do 
                     Psal. 49. c d Pro. 1. c.
                   hate the Chastisment of the Lorde, and cast his Woord behynde you, and so liue your owne

Freedom. Veryly, it shall not vantage you to the Lyfe: but all deadly Things and euell Inclynacions / shall ketch and captiue you.
            
            
               The IIII. Chap.
               FOrthatcause my beloued Heartes, receaue you my 
                     pro. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   Chastisment / to your Preseruacion in the Godlynes: Let my Warning from the Destruction / 
                     Pro 4 a
                   sinck into your Hearts: and 
                     Iam. 4. b.
                   submitt yourselues betymes vnder the gracious Woord of the godly Lyfe / Lest ye lament it afterward / that ye haue let the 
                     Sap. 5. a. b. c▪
                     
                   Tyme pas / that serueth to your Saluacion or to the Cleansing of your Hearts, and 
                     Eccli. 4 
                        •
                     
                   not taken-heede to thesame / according to the Requyring of the holy Woord and Seruice of the holy Spirit of Loue: and shall then fynde no Comfort in your Heartes.
               2. WHerfore, seperate now first or before-al / your 
                     Pro. 3. 
                        •
                     
                   Hearts, Myndes, and Thoughtes / from all your taken-on Knowledg / also from all 
                     Sap. 14 d.
                   Abuce and Disorderlynes: and becom 
                     Ier. 4. b.
                   circumcised to the Lorde / in thissame holy Daye and Seruice of Loue.
               3. Giue-ouer yourselues altogether to the holy Woord of the Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ ⁏to shewe Obedience therunto; to your Preseruacion in the Godlynes: and 
                     Psal. 32. a. Eccli 4. d. 1 Iohn. 1. b.
                   confesse your Sinnes and Faultes / before the Seate of the Maiestee of God: and 
                     Esa. 1. d. Eze 36. c. Iohn. 13. b.
                   wash and cleanse

yourselues / with the holy Water of the Loue / That ye may then in that sort ⁏with pure Hearts; vnderstande the spirituall Vnderstanding of Iesu Christ· inherit the heauenly Goodes· and so com or enter holyly into the vpright Freedom and 
                     Heb. 4. c.
                   Rest of the Children of God.
               
                   4. If now ye stand-mynded to giue yourselues to an vpright and godly Beeing of the Loue / vnder the Obedience of the Loue: and if ye woulde gladly with all what is vnder your Hande and Power / be preserued 
                     Eccli. 1. a
                   in Righteousnes, and becom fruitfull in the holy Woord of the Spirit of Loue / for to minister thesame vnto others moe ⁏to their Preseruacion in the Godlynes; who do walke yet in Darknes / So consider then / what is taught and presented vnto you ⁏for to doo euenso first-of-al; by the holy and gracious Woord in the Seruice of Loue / to your Preseruacion in Righteousnes, and to your Fruitfulnes in the Woord, and to a Guyding into the true and vpright heauenly Beeing: and indeuour you therunto / for to accomplish or obediently to performe thesame / To thend that ye may euenso then / be founde 2. Cor. 2.3. a 2 Tim. 2. a
                   profitable and fitt to the Seruice of the holy Woord / and may ⁏with all what is vnder your Hande or Power; be preserued in the vpright and godly Being of the Loue.
               5. If-so-be now ye consider thesame rightly, and indeuour you aright therunto / then shall ye likewyse well vnderstande / that the holy

Woord of Grace, and the godly Seruice of Loue / calleth and requyreth you all to the Famyly of Loue 1. pet 1. a. b. 2 Pet. 1. a
                   together with all what is vnder your Hande and Power / to this ende: namely, to your • Preseruacion in Righteousnes, and to an Vniformnes with the holy and gracio
                     •
                  s Woord.
               6. And moreouer / forasmuch doutles as it  shall all now perish / whatsoeuer bydeth without the gracious Woord and Famyly of Loue / therfore doth now the gracious Woord of the holy Spirit of Loue requyre [namely, of all you to whom thesame holy Woord / is this-daye administred] that ye shall first or before-al / 
                     Esa. 52. c. 2. Cor. 6. 
                        •
                     . seperate yourselues from the 
                     Rom. 12 a. 1. Cor. 2.5. b
                   wicked Worlde (which nodout ⁏with all what cleaueth vnto her; shall remayne without the Famyly of Loue 1. pet 1. a. b. 2 Pet. 1. a
                   and vtterly vanish to nothing and be condemned) / and depart-out-of and forsake all her Abhomynations:
               7. Sett yourselues 
                     Luk. 14. d Iohn. 12. Act. 4. f. 
                     
                        •
                     . and all whatsoeuer ye haue· and is vnder your Hande or Power / submitted ⁏with humble and simple Heartes; vnder the gracious Woord of God the Father, of the Sonne Iesu Christ, and of the holy Gost / in the Famyly of the Loue of Iesu Christ / to your Preseruacion in Righteousnes. and for the Loue of Iesu Christ-his sake / 
                     Math. 10 
                        •
                      16 c Luk. 14 d.
                   forsake and leaue it all ⁏for clayming Propertee therin; / and acknowledg 
                     Psal. 24 a
                   that it is all the Lordes, and is Proper vnto Him: Besydes thatt also / forsake▪ 
                  
                     Math. 1
                        •
                      
                     c Luk. 
                     
                        •
                     4 
                        •
                     
                   leaue, and hate / your

owne Lyfe which ye liue vnto yourselues, and which ye haue taken-on / according to your owne Will, Lustes, and Desyres:
               8. Humble yourselues likewyse good-willingly and obediently ⁏with entyre good-willing Heartes; before ye 
                  
                     Heb. 5 a
                   Seate of ye Maiestee of God and Iudgmēt of Christ (inasmuch as the holy Woord of God the Father and of Christ / is ministred ther-out· and all what assembleth itselfe therunto and loueth Righteousnes / preserued ther-vnder) / and submitt you to all Obedience:
               9. Make-manifest yourselues 
                     Psal. 37. a. Pro. 16 a 1 Iohn. 1 b
                   nakedly ⁏in the Confession 
                     Eccli. 4. c 17. c
                   of your Sinnes; before thesame Seate of the Maiestee of God and Iudgment 2. Cor. 5. b.
                   of Christ / and so then assemble you naked or vncouered / to the Comunialtee of Saintes or to the Famyly of Loue, and enter into the Doctrine of the godly Lyfe:
               
                   10. And from that Tyme forward / follow and obeye ⁏with all dutifull 
                     Phil. 2. a. 1. Tess. 5. b. Heb. 13. c.
                   Obedience and Concord / with the Elders of the holy Vnderstanding and Ministers of the holy Woord in the Famyly of Loue; the Requyring of the godly Doctrine of the holy Woord, and the 
                     Pro. 1 2 3 a. Heb. 13. c
                   Counsayle of the Elders in thesame: vntill that ye are growen-vp to the 
                     Ephe. 4 c
                   Agednes of the holy and godly Vnderstanding / in all Loue and vpright Righteousnes· and euenso rightly made-free by 
                     Iohn. 8. d.
                   the Trueth / according to the Testimony and Iudgment of the Elders· and 
                     Act 2 d
                   knowen for right Elders in the godly Vnderstanding·

or ordayned to be Ministers of the Woord.
               11. For thatsame / and for to giue themselues good willingly therunto with all their Heartes, and so to continue 
                     Pro. 6. 
                        •
                     
                   steadfast obediently in the gracious Woord of the holy Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ, and in his Seruice / till vnto the 
                     Ephe. 4 c.
                   Agednes of the holy Vnderstanding, is the first or fore-going Schoole-rule of the christian Doctrine / in the Famyly of Loue / wherin / all good-willing Hearts to the Righteousnes, and all vpright Beleeuers of the holy and gracious Woord / do shewe by the Deede / that they do 
                     Math 22. c Iohn. 24. loue the Lorde Iesus Christ with all their Hearts / and haue a good Will, Lust, or Desyre / to 
                     Math 16. c Lu
                           •
                        . 9.14. 
                        •
                     
                   follow-after Him with faythfull Hearts: and for-that-cause / haue a Lust ⁏with good-willing Hearts; to fulfill or to accomplish ye Requyring of the Obedience of the first or fore-going Schoole-rule of the christian Doctrine in the Seruice and Famyly of Loue / wherby to 
                     Ephe. 4. c
                   growe-vp out of the nethermost Place ⁏or out of the Turning-about to be like obedient 
                     Math 18 a 19. b. Mar. 9.10. Children; to becom right Elders in the godly Vnderstanding.
               12. BEholde ⁏ye Deerly-beloued; if now ye  wil 
                     Math 16 c
                   follow-after the Lorde Iesu Christ duly and rightly / with perfect whole Hearts: and 
                     Col. 1 a 1 Pet 2. a.
                   growe-vp in the godly Vnderstanding / according to the Trueth / then submitt yourselues obediently vnder the holy Woord of Grace, and so then 
                     Math. 16. 
                        •
                     . Mat. 8. d. Luk. 9 14. c
                   follow-after

                  Iesus Christ / according to the Counsayle and Doctrine of his holy Spirit of Loue.
               13. And if ye woulde gladly be delyuered 
                     Math. 6. b. Luk. 12. g.
                  
from the Euell· incorporated to the Lorde Iesu Christ, or one-substance 2. Pet. 1. a.
                   with Him· and so partakers with Christ ⁏in the Kingdom of the God of Heauens; of the spirituall Vnderstanding 
                     E
                           •
                        a. 45. a. Matth. 11 d
                   and heauenly Goodes ⁏for to minister them rightly; / and inherit ye euerlasting Lyfe / Then take this my good Doctrine 
                     Pro. 1.2 3. Math. 19. 
                        •
                      
                     Ma
                           •
                        . 10 c. Luk. 8. c.
                   and godly Counsayle of the Wisdom / to heart, and apply yourselues at the first therunto / in all Obedience and Faythfulnes.
            
            
               The V. Chap.
               
                   NOw when ye haue applyed yourselues heerunto· geeuen all 1 P
                           •
                        r. 29. c Psal 24.88 a
                   thatt ouer ⁏in the Seruice of Loue; vnto the Lorde and his holy Woord ؛
                  Iesu Christ
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   which belongeth vnto Him ⁏to a Preseruacion in Righteousnes; or sett it submitted ther-vnder, and vowed and promysed your Fayth and Loue / vnto Iesu Christ / 2. Cor. 11. a
                   your right Lorde or Husbande / So think then also vpon nothing-els / but 
                     Deut 6.10 a
                   with all your Hearts / to loue your Lorde or Husbande (to whom ye haue geuen-ouer your Fayth and whole Heart / for to loue Him only, and bounde or marryed yourselues vnto Him / in all Faythfulnes) and to shewe all Faythfulnes and 1. Reg. 15. c.
                   Obedience towards Him: in such-sort / that it may be a 
                     Psal. 40 a. Rom. 12. a. 1. P
                           •
                        t. 2.
                  
Delyte vnto you with all your Hearts / to doo all his Will, and to follow-after Him in his Wayes.
               2. But first-of-al / in the 
                     Ier. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     . Circumcision of your Hearts ⁏through the 
                     Eccli. 1.
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . 19 
                        •
                     . Feare of God; to the 
                     
                        
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        
                      
                     
                        •
                     2 
                        •
                     
                   Laying-away of the Sinne in the Flesh▪ or of all 1 Pet 
                     
                        •
                     .2 vngodly Beeing, and of the heathen
                     ••
                   Mis
                     •
                  urtour.
               3. Secondly ⁏through ye Fayth of Iesu Christ
                  ▪ 
                   in his Death of the Crosse or Suffering / to the Killing 
                     Rom 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      
                     b. Col 2. b.
                   and Burying of the Sinne or of all vngodly Beeing.
               4. Thirdly ⁏through the Loue of the holy Spirit of Iesu Christ; in the second 
                     Iohn 
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                      
                     Rom. 
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                      
                     b Tit b
                   Birth from the Death or the Resurrection of Iesu Christ / 
                     Rom 
                     
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     
                   to the Righteousnes of Lyfe, and 
                     Rom 
                     
                        ••
                     .1 Eph
                           •
                        
                      
                     
                        •
                     . c.
                   Renewing of your Spirits and Myndes.
               5. And so foorth-on vnto 
                     Act 
                     
                        •
                      
                     a. 
                           •
                        .
                   the heauenly Beeing / at the Right-hande of God his heauenly Father: from whence He doth now ⁏in this Daye of his righteous Iudgment ouer 
                     Math 1
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     . 2 
                        •
                      
                     g 
                     
                        ••
                      
                     d. Act. 1
                        •
                      
                     f Iude 
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     . Quick and Deadd; appeere 
                     
                        •
                      
                     Tess 4 d.
                   and com vnto vs / in Power and Glory / with the many Thowsandes of his Saincts, and with the aboundant Treasures 
                     Col 2 a.
                   or Ritches of his spirituall and heauenly Goodes / for to 
                     Matth. 24 
                        •
                      25. d.
                   assemble vs▪ as Fellow-members of his Body; vnto Him and his Saints / in the euerlasting Lyfe, to the Inheriting of his holy 
                     Heb. 4. c
                   Rest, and of all his spirituall and heauenly Goodes.
               6. FOr-that-cause ⁏my beloued Heartes; 
follow-after 
                     Math 16. c 1. Pet. 2. c
                   our Lorde Iesus Christ
                  
in such-a-maner, euen like as I do heere figure-foorth thesame before you: and apply you euenso at the first / to the first Schoole-rule or 
                     Heb. 5. c.
                   Begining of the christian Doctrine, and of the godly Lyfe / in the Famyly of Loue.
               7. Exercise yourselues first-of-al / thorowly and faythfully therin. And so in the Following of Iesu Christ ⁏in the Takeing-vp 
                     Math. 16. c Mar 8. d. Luk 9. d.
                   or Beareing of your Crosse / against all the Enemyes of the vpright Lyfe of Christ,
                  2 Pet. 2 c. Heb. 10. c.
                   and Blaspheamers of the holy Spirit of Loue; growe you vpp out of thesame / to the perfect 
                     Ephe. 4. c.
                   Age of the manly Beeing of Iesu Christ / and of his holy, spirituall, and heauenly Vnderstanding: That is, till that Iesus Christ 
                  ؛the true High-preeste / 
                     psal. 110. Heb 5 b.
                   after the order of Melchisedech
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   com vnto you from the 
                     Heb. 1. b.
                   Right-hande of God his Father. and hath ⁏with his holy Spirit of Loue and heauenly Goodes; gotten 2. Cor. 4. b. Gal. 2. d. 4. c.
                   a liueing Shape in you· and herited you in his spirituall and heauenly 
                     Col 2. a.
                   Goodes: and that likewyse thosame heauenly Goodes / do flowe agayne from your Bodyes / like 
                     Iohn. 
                     
                        •
                     .7. d
                   Floods of liueing Waters, to the Refreshing of all thirsty Soules after the Righteousnes. And so becom vpright Elders in the holy and godly Vnderstanding, and Ministers of the holy Woord.
            
            
               The VI. Chap.
               
                  TAke it effectually to heart / which  I wryte vnto you, and thatt wherunto 
                     Pro 1.2.4. 
                        •
                     
                   I do exhorte you: For it is the Lordes Woord and his Will / to your Preseruacion in the Godlynes.
               2. Also refuse not to assemble you with vs to the Famyly of Loue, wher-vnto ye be called / by Gods Grace / to your Preseruacion in the Godlynes· and requyred on the Lordes-behalf / for to fulfill 
                     Math. 5. c
                   all Righteousnes.
               3. For I saye vnto you veryly / that all those which refuse 
                     Math. 22. 
                        •
                     . thesame· growe-offended against it· inclyn-vnto or mayntayne the Euell· and so do seperate themselues from vs Little and Electedones of God, and from the Famyly of Loue / shall neuer vnderstande nor inherit the true 1. Iohn. 1. a.
                   Light or Beeing of God, nor the spirituall Vnderstanding of the heauenly Goodes of Iesu Christ, nor the 
                     Math 13. d. 1. Cor. 2. b Col. 1. c.
                   Secretnes of the heauenly Kingdom of God, nor the Fullfilling 
                     Ephe. 1. b. c Col. 1. c. 2. b.
                   of the Righteousnes in Iesu Christ, nor-yet the vpright 
                     Iohn. 8 d Heb. 4. e
                   Freedom or Rest of the Children of God: but shall dye in their Sinnes, and be 
                     Esa. 66. d. Math. 25. f. Apo. 21. c.
                   condemned in the hellish Fyre.
               4. In which hellish Fyre of perpetuall Condemnacion / their 
                     Apo. 16.20 
                        •
                      22. c.
                   Heritage shalbe the false Light or Beeing of the Deuill, and all Bitternes or Maliciousnes of Heart, together with all Blyndnes of the false and erring Spirits: wherin they shall beholde and inherit nothing-els but all 
                     Esa. 47. 
                        •
                     . Wo, Calamitee, and Misery / as

likewyse the euerlasting 
                     Ier. 30. a. 2. Tess. 2. b
                   Death ⁏which they themselues haue procured; and the perpetuall Bannishment 
                     Math. 7. d. 25. f. Apo. 6. b.
                   from the louely Beeing of God.
               
                   5. From which Abhominations and euell Things / all beleeueing Hearts of the holy Woord of the Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ ⁏which do submitt them 
                     Esa 6
                        •
                     . b.
                   obediently ther-vnder· dye in Christ their Sauiour· and in Patience / hope vpon the Godlynes; be 
                     Apo 
                     
                        •
                     .18.20.21. deliuered, and kept from all Destruction.
               6 THerfore take-heede to yourselues / to your Obedience and Godlynes / in the Loue of our God and Father / lest that yee ⁏remayning without the Body of Christ or Famyly of Loue; fall into the foresayde 
                     Esa. 65. b. c.
                   Abhomynations. For doutles I haue warned you all sufficiently / of all Abhomynacions, Destruction, and Condemnacion. and cleerly and euidently enough figured-forth before you / ye Preseruacion of you all, and wheare thesame is to be obtayned.
               7. I therfore 
                     Deut. 30. d. Act. 20. f
                   excuse my self this daye before you all ⁏which heare this my Testimony, and refuse to assemble you to the Famyly of Loue, or which turne yourselues ther-from; of the Condemnacion of you all in thissame Daye of the 
                     Soph. 1. c. 
                     
                        •
                     . Tess. 5. 2. Pet. 3. c.
                   righteous Iudgmēt of God / which passeth-out now swiftly ⁏in this Daye of the Loue; ouer the wicked Worlde / to her Condemnacion: and in like-maner 
                     Soph. 1 c. d.
                   ouer all those that 
                     M
                           ••
                        h. 22. 
                        •
                     . refuse the Obedience to the gracious

Woord· and to the Requyring of the Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ also are Enemyes to thesame· and mayntayne the wicked Worlde.
               8. For now in thissame Daye / shall the perpetuall Condemnacion / 
                     Soph. 1 
                        •
                      2. Tess. 5. a Apo. 3. fall vnwares vppon all those that remayne without ye Howse of the Lorde and without the Obedience to his Seruice of Loue, euen lyke as it came-to-pas with the Vnwillingones to the Trueth of God / in the 
                     Gen. 7. a 19 c. Math. 24. Luk. 17. f
                   Dayes of Noe, and of Loth.
               
               9. WHo soeuer now therfore / is ⁏with a  goodwilling Heart; adioyned to the Famyly of Loue, and which loueth Gods Righteousnes in thissame Daye / vnder the Obedience of the Loue: and which desyreth to be kept from the Destruction· and preserued in the Godlynes / Let him 
                     Eccli 18. c Luk 18.21. a 1 Tess. 5 c
                   watch and praye now Night and Daye: let him think vpon the 
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  rible 
                     Esa 47 65. c Ier. 30 a
                   Abhomynation that shall fall vppon the Resisters of the Obedience of ye Loue and of her godly Seruice: and so let him take-heede 
                     Heb. 2. 
                        •
                     
                   to the godly, spirituall, and heauenly Goodes / which com vnto the Beleeuers of the holy Woord of the Spirit of ye Loue of Iesu Christ / vnder the Obedience of the Loue: and let him 
                     Eccli 6.32 a. Act. 14. c. 1 Cor 3 4 
                        •
                     
                   esteeme nomore of himself / then he is: neither-yet let him seeke any Laude, Prayse, nor Honour / to 
                     Psal. 14 b. Iohn. 7. c. 8. f 1. Cor. 10. 
                        •
                     
                   himself / in all his Wel-dooing / but only to the Lorde. and to shewe all Obedience to the Lordes Woord and Will.
               
                  10 For all the Good that cometh to the Man / 
                     Math. 25. b. Luk. 19. b.
                   from the Lorde ⁏for to shewe all Good· or alwayes to doo well therthrough; therof ther belongeth 1. Cor 4. b 15. b. 2. Cor. 3. b. 1 Pet. 4. c
                   no Glory, Thanks, nor Prayse / vnto the Man ⁏although he dooeth or sheweth thesame Good; but only to ye Lorde / of whom he receaueth the Good.
               
                   11 For what Good or Weldooing can the Man doo I pray you / wherby any Glory, Thankes, or Prayse / belongeth vnto him / seing that he must receaue all the Good / of the 1. Cor. 4. b. 15. b. 2. Cor. 3. b Iam. 1. a.
                   Lorde and of his Grace?
               12 Doth it belong to the Man / to seeke or desyre Thankes and Prayse / because that he receaueth of God ⁏1. Cor. 15. b.
                   through his Fauour and Grace; 
                     Ephe. 1. b
                   Wealth / for his Pouertee, all Good / for his Euell, 
                     Ephe. 1. ye euerlasting Lyfe and Saluacion / for his Deserte of euerlasting Death and Condemnacion, and the 2. Cor. 5. a
                   Spirituall and Heauenly· and the euerlasting Vncorruptiblenes / for the Earthly and Corruptible? I think veryly / No. but 1. Cor. 15. b
                   highworthyly to laude and thanke the God of Lyfe / for his Graces-cause: and in no-wyse / to boste or to glory of himself.
            
            
               The VII. Chap.
               
                   THerfore looke wel to it / that ye drawe not vnto yourselues / 
                     Esa. 42 b 48. b Ier. 13. c. d Eccli. 7.13. b
                   thatt which belongeth to the Lorde. But submitt you obediently vnder his holy

Woord and Seruice of Loue: And so in the Accounting-nothing or Debaseing of yourselues / 
                     Tob. 4. a Psal. 33. a 102.103. a 144. a
                   alwayes laude and prayse the Lorde with Thankesgiueing / for the Grace of his Mercy towards you, and for all his Goodnes shewed on you: and endure, ouercom, or suffer-out ⁏for the Loue of Iesu Christes sake;
                     Eccli. 2. a. 1. Cor. 4. c. 1. Pet. 2. c
                   all the Temptacions / wherwith ye be tempted out of the Sinne, and out of your owne vncleane or defyled Knowledg, and by all the Ministers of Sinne / against 
                     Eccli. 2. a Heb. 12. a
                   your Passage towards the good Lyfe of Iesu Christ.
               
               2, For at what tyme soeuer ye be tempted / for to drawe you awaye ⁏
                     Heb. 12. a.
                   inticeingly; from the Obedience of the Loue of God the Father, and from the vpright and louely Beeing of Iesu Christ: and that they wil in that sort / procure your consent to the Sinne, or to her Ministers / then holde you fast or 
                     Eccli. 2. a Heb. 12. a
                   constant in-any-wyse / in the Beleefe of your Saluacion, and in Patience / vnder the Obedience of the Loue: and shrinke not back / That yee ⁏in the Growing-vp to the vpright Beeing of the Loue; becom not lead-awaye neither to the one 
                     Pro. 4. c.
                   syde nor to the other: but may ⁏in the Beleefe and 1. Tess. 5. b.
                   Hope of your Saluacion or Delyuerance from the Euell, and in the Passing-thorow the Patience / to the good Beeing of Iesu Christ; growe 
                     Ephe. 3. b. c.
                   strong, and becom still more stronger. and euenthus ⁏in the Course of your Patience / 
                     Heb. 10.12. vnder the Obedience of the Loue; walke in all

Faythfulnes, Loue, and 
                     Phil. 4. a.
                   Equitee / among all Men.
               
                   3. Beware likewyse of 
                     Exo. 23 a Eccli. 7. b Ephe. 4. d.
                   Lying one to another, and of all harmfull Speeche-of-reproche: and 
                     Tit. 3. a. 1. Pet 3. c
                   keepe your Tongues from 
                     Eccli. 23. a 27. b. Math. 5. c.
                   Curssing. For that which ye speake 
                     Eccli 10. b
                   priuily in eachothers Eare ⁏in reproch and curssing maner / with Backbyting of another; shall not com-to-pas so simply / without Lyes: and ye 
                  
                     Sap. 1. b.
                   Mouth that lyeth / killeth the Soule.
               4. Follow alwayes the 
                     Iob. 12. b.
                   Counsayle of the Elders and Wyse in the Seruice of Loue. and 
                     Eccli. 8. 
                        
                           •
                        . d. Heb. 13. d
                   submitt you obedienly vnder the Woord of their Doctrine, and confesse vnto them / 
                     Eccli. 4 d.
                   what is hidden· and becometh spoken among you / in secret / Then shall ye becom 
                     Iob. 12.32 a Eccli. 6 8. b
                   wyse. and shall euenso ⁏in your Obedience; out of the Doctrine of the Elders / first learne yourselues / er-euer ye teache another: first help yourselues / 
                     Math. 7. a
                   er-euer ye help another: first rebuke 
                     Rom. 2. a
                   and iudg yourselues / er-euer ye rebuke and iudg another. and shall fynde 2. Cor. 11. g.
                   Grace / in such tyme when-as others ⁏which iudg and deale falsly / and blaspheame, cursse, backbyte, and belye their Neighbour; shalbe punished.
               5. Therfore do nothing without 
                     Eccli. 32. d
                   Counsayle / so shall it not repent you / after the Deede.
               6. Blaspheame nor resist not also 
                     Rom. 13 a
                   the Gouernours, nor the 
                     Eccli 8. b
                   Preesies / in their Office: but shewe them 
                     Rom. 13 b. 1. Tim. 5. c.
                   Honour and Obedience: and

for the Peaces cause / obserue all the Ordinances of the Lande.
               7 Indeuour not your selues likewyse / to deale 
with your Neighbour / in anything that is 
                     Tob. 4. c. Math. 7. b
                  
Vniust: nor hinder not also the Straingers 
                     Exo. 23. b.
                   in any-case.
               8. Offende not the Little 
                     Math. 18. b. Rom. 14 d. 1. Cor. 8. d.
                   or Smipleones of vnderstanding: nor charge not the Weake / with any Burthens.
               9. Set not the Sight of your Eyes vpon any Flesh, nor vpon any Outward-thing, wherby to procure your lust towards anything 
                     Exo. 20. c Pro 6 c. Eccli 18 d 25. d
                   therof / to any Desyre for yourselues / Lest that your Hearts be kindled and defyled ⁏with Lust of Whoordom; towards thesame. But set all your Sight, Vnderstanding, and Memory / 
                     Pro. 3. a. Math. 22.
towards the Lorde your God, and towards the godly Testimonyes of his holy Spirit of Loue.
               10. Let al your Lusts, Desyres, and Delytes be set towards their Beawty 
                     Pro. 3. a. 4. 
                        
                           •
                         b. 5. a. b
                   and Louelynes in the Spirit / Then shall ye not be subdued vnto Whoordom.
               11. Haue likewyse ⁏in all your Sight, 
                     •
                  ealing, and Walking; the holy 
                     Tob. 4. a. Pro. 1. b
                   Feare of God before your Eyes. But beware that your Feare of God / be 
                     Sap. 1. a.
                   no Hipocrisye: and serue not God / 
                     Eccil. 2.3. d
                   with a false Heart.
               12. Take-heed alwayes of the Whoordom: 
                     Tob. 4. b. 1. Cor. 6. a. 1. Tess. 4. a
                  
                  
and remember that ye are not dett
                     ••
                  s to serue the Whoordom nor the Vnchastitee:

but only the Lorde your God / in all 1. Tess. 4. b▪
                     
                   Purenes of Heart.
               13 Remember also / that vnder the Obedience of the Loue / ye are called to the Godlynes in Iesu Christ / for to showe all 
                     Phil. 4. b. 1. Tess. 4· c. Tit. 3. a.
                   Edifying and good Order, and all Righteousnes, Loue, and Peace / among all People. and so through all Wel-dooing and good Conuersation / to stopp 1. Pet. 2. b.
                   the Mouth of the Gaynspeakers and Blaspheamers of the Famyly of Loue, and of all those that do belye and defame vs with al-maner of Falshod: and ⁏through all Goodnes; to winne the Louers of the Trueth and Righteousnes / to the Famyly of Loue / To thend that all those which loue the Trueth in Iesu Christ, and which hunger and thirst after 
                     Math. 5. a
                   the Righteousnes / mought ⁏through the holy and gracious Woord; which God hath 
                     Ier. 23. raysed-vp vnto vs Little and Electedones of God / according to his Promyses; be delyuered from their Sinnes, and becom saued.
               
                   14. BEholde ⁏ye Deerly-beloued; This is our vpright Grounde of Fayth in Iesu Christ. and also our vndeceaueable Seruice of Loue / euen like as we be taught and informed / in the godly Testimonyes of the holy Spirit of Loue.
               15 Therfore ⁏my beloued Heartes in the Loue; follow not in-any-wyse / your owne 
                     Deut. 12 a Eccli. 18. d. 25. d.
                   Good-thinking, Lustes, and Desyres / nor-yet your Imaginacion of the Knowledg: but

haue a right regarde / what the holy and gracious 
                     Deut. 4. a. b Iam. 1. b.
                   Woord of the Spirit of the Loue of Iesu Christ ⁏vnder the Obedience of the Loue; requyreth: and indeuour you therunto / So shall ye then growe-vp well and vprightly according to the Trueth / in the Sainctification of Iesu Christ, and in the spirituall and 
                     Col. 1. a. b 
                           •
                        
                     
                   heauenly Vnderstandings· walke in all godly Loue, Peace, and Ioye· and inherit the 
                     Math. 19. d. 25. d. Rom. 6. d.
                   euerlasting Lyfe. It is verytrue.
            
            The Ende of the twentith Epistle.
            Take it to heart. CHARITAS EXTORSIT PER HN.
            
         
         
            
            
               
            
            Our Heart / is the Minde of God most-hie.
            Our Beeing amiable / as the sweete Lillie.
            Our Faithfulnes / Loue / and Trueth vpright▪
            
            Is Gods Light / Life / and Cleernes bright▪
            
            
            
            
         
      
   