
      
         
            
            
            ¶The welſpoken Nobody.
            
               God that is all good and almyghtye
               Hath ſhewed his power vpon me Nobodye,
               For whear my mouth with locke was ſparred
               He hathe it burſt and my ſpeche reſtored,
               Wherfor I wyll ſyng prayſe vnto his name
               Bicauſe I may ſpeke withoute anye blame,
               And thoughe the pope with all his trayn
               Do me rebuke and againſt me ſayen
               That as tofore I ſhuld nowe holde my peace
               Yet Gods honour to ſet furth I can not ceaſſe.
            
            
               
                  Nobody is my name
                  that beyreth euery bodyes blame
               
            
            ☜Many ſpeke of Roben hoode that neuer ſhott in his bowe
            So many haue layed faultes to me, which I did neuer knowe,
            But nowe beholde here I am
            Whom all the worlde doeth diffame
            Long haue they alſo ſkorned me
            And locked my mouthe for ſpeking free
            As many a Godly man they haue ſo ſerued
            Vvhich vnto them Gods truth hath ſhewed
            Of ſuch they haue burned and hanged ſome
            That vnto their ydolatrye wold not come
            The ladye truthe they haue locked in cage
            Sayeng that of her Nobodye had knowledge
            For aſmuche nowe as they name Nobodye
            I thinke verilye they ſpeke of me
            Vvherfore to anſwere I nowe beginne
            The locke of my mouthe is opened with ginne
            Vurought by noman, but by Gods grace
            Vnto whom be prayſe in euery place
            My Iourneyes I make both far and nere
            To ſeke whear people Gods iuſtice fear
            In that place wolde I make my habytation
            Truſting there to haue a continuall manſion
            In print tofore I did neuer appere
            Yet many coulde me not well bear
            But no maruell for the prouerbe ſayeth
            All men can not abyde to here the truthe
            A companyon muſt he be with theſe good fellowes,
            As long as they wyll haue hym in theyr companyes,
            But ſometyme they forget hym, vntyll he be
            Moulded or wormeaten, and than for hereſye
            They do hym burne ſecretely as in the nyght
            The Iewes toke Chriſt, ſo theſe by theyr myght
            Followe the other, beyng ſore afrayed,
            Leſt theſe theyr prankes ſhuld be bewrayed.
            In the Dedication daye, than oute of the ſteple
            Do they hym hange to eſpye the people,
            And with a litle bell them for to warne,
            Becauſe the preſtes ſhuld catche no harme
            In ſtudiyng Gods worde the flocke to fede.
            No thys is ynough, they haue no other ſede
            To ſowe, therfore they ſhall reap
            Vvynde, as they ſowed wynde a great heap.
            Vvo be to me ſayth Paule, yf I ſhuld not preache
            No ſayth the Pope my ceremonyes teache.
            But what do they teache ſhew the meanynge?
            Vvel, Gods worde gyueth me ſmellyng
            That Paule and your opinyon contrary be,
            Shuld men leaue Paule, and followe the.
            On relyke Sondayes, than bryng you furth trompery
            Your relykes muſt be waſhen, that water ſaye yet,
            Is good for ſynne and ſicknes of beaſt,
            Thus of Chriſtes bloude make you a geſt
            So is thy ſoule ſpiritually fedde,
            With Chriſtes mooſt bleſſed bodye and bloude,
            Vvhich forthy ſynnes was offered on the rode,
            Vvith whiche oblacyon Gods wrathe is ſatiſfyed
            Neuer hereafter to be Reoffered
            For with one oblacyon by hym ſelf made,
            He hath made vs perfect, therfore be glad,
            For vnto perfection nothyng can be added
            Vvhere be now ſuche, as maſſes haue ſayed
            To be propiciatory God them forgeue,
            And conuert theyr hartes, whyles they do lyue
            That they loke for none other propiciation
            Than that which Chriſt made hym ſelf alone,
            In remembraunce, wherof to confirme our faythe
            He bade vs receyue as the ſcripture ſayeth.
            Thys holye communyon. No come and ſee
            Stare on it (ſayeth the Pope) and ones a yere take
            Nay not ſo neyghbour take not, but gape.
            Thy fynger wold rot yf thou touche but the chalyce,
            O holye Paule, thou bade men be wyſe,
            And ware of ſuche, as ſhuld admonyſh
            From hādlyng and touchyng, which thynges do peryſh,
            Euen with thabuſe thou ſayeſt. Vvell
            Nowe ſeynge that all men begyn to ſmell
            All you that be preſtes I Nobodye praye,
            To repent and be lerned, reſiſt not I ſaye
         
      
   