
      
         
            
            
            A THEATRE wherein be represented as wel the miseries & calamities that follow the voluptuous Worldlings, As also the greate ioyes and plesures which the faithfull do enioy.
            An Argument both profitable and delectable, to all that sincerely loue the word of God.
            Deuised by S. Iohn vander Noodt.
            Seene and allowed according to the order appointed.
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman.
            Anno Domini. 1569.
            CVM PRIVILEGIO.
         
         
            
            
               
                  HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
               
            
         
         
            
               
               In commendationem operis ab Nobiliss. & virtutis Studiosissimo Domino, Ioanne vander Noodt Patricio Antuerpiensi aediti, Carmen. M
                     •
                  RABILAE. Poetae Brabant.
               HAEc Babylon legat, & discat sustollere coel
                     •
                  
               
               Hactenus addictum terrae caput, hic rata vitae
               Semita, quam specimen Nothoeae nobile gentis
               Dat legere, ille domo patria, certis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   triumphis
               Contemptis, & quae poterant spondere Curules,
               Conscius haud vllo virtutem sanguine condi,
               Ad maiora animum tulit, & dat noscere mundo,
               Hoc opere insignem luctum, tristes
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   labores
               Vitae huius: legat haec Babylon, legat, imbuat aures
               Illius hoc opus, & si cui calligine coeca
               Mens cooperata iacet, qui deuia saxa pererrat
               Rectum oblitus iter: lic
                     •
                  t illi hic nube redusta
               Summum vestigare bonum: doctrina Sophorum
               Ven
                     •
                  ilat, & falso verum confundit inani.
               O stolidas hominum mentes! non iste Deorum
               Cultus: & quando hos crudeli fune flagellans
               
               Conscia mens corruptum animū ad meliora reducet!
               Vt iaceant idola! suus, quo cuncta mou
                     •
                  ntur,
               Restituatur honos! aliquando benignior astris,
               Deciderit fortuna tamen, nostros
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   labores,
               Terrarum vt fremitent furiata mente Tyranni,
               Respiciet miserans summi regnat or Olympi.
               At verae quicun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   viae dincscere Syd
                     ••
                  
               
               Ard
                     •
                  scisue ducem, doctos euolue labores,
               Quos doctus tibi Nothaeus vigilauit ad vnguem,
               E
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vaporato fumo, qui corda senebat,
               Cultor agri tristes nebulas, vti sole fugari
               Aspicit, & campos risum renouare iacentes,
               Lucem ita conspicies tibi diluxisse serenam.
            
            
               DOCTOR GERARDVS GOOSSENIVS Meditus, Physicus, & Poeta Brabant. mode
                     •
                  . in Zoilum Octastichon.
               ZOile cur palles? cur vultus s
                     •
                  mper amarus?
               Triste supercilium f
                     •
                  ons
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   caprata tibi?
               Displicet vt video luci datus iste libellus:
               Sed rogo cur oculis displicet iste tuis?
               An quia papicolum ritus & sacra reuelli
                     •
                  
               
               Idolis, viduam nec Babylona dole
                     •
                  ?
               Zoile, non curat morsus, nam sufficit illi
                     •
                  
               
               Perplacuisse bonis, displicuisse malis
                     •
                  
               
               Inoffensibilis Goossenij.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE MOSTE high, puissant, noble, vertuous, and righte Christian Princesse Elizabeth, by the grace of God Quene of Englande, Fraunce, and Ireland. &c.
            
               AFTER my departure oute of Brabante, (myne owne naturall Countrey) into youre Maiesties Realme of Englande (moste gracious Lady) as well for that I would not beholde the abhominations of the Romyshe Antechrist, as to escape the handes of the bloud-thirsty: In the meane space for the auoyding of idlenesse (the very mother and nourice of all vices) I haue among other my trauayles bene occupied aboute thys little Treatyse, wherin is sette forth the vilenesse and basenesse of worldely things, whiche commonly withdrawe vs from heauenly and spirituall matters. To the ende that vnderstanding the vanitie and basenesse of the same, and therewithall consideryng the miserable calamities that ensue therupon, we might be moued the

rather to forsake them, and gyue oure selues to the knowledge of Heauenly and eternall things, whence all true happinesse and felicitie doth procede. And for as much as the matter of it selfe is very good (deseruyng in dede to be handeled by men of farre better skil thā I) I could not deuise how any things whatsoeuer, of lykenesse and conueniencie mighte more properly bee resembled one to the other, than this boke for the aptnesse & conueniencie of the argument might be dedicated to your Maiestie, a most blessed and happie prince. Happy I say, not so much for that youre grace is lineally descended by the most high, puissaunt, mightie & victorious prince Henry the eight of famous memorie, from so many myghtie and puissant princes of this Realme, your Maiesties moste noble progenitours: which haue long agone, most valiantly & victoriously cōquered al France, and by dint of sword daunted their enimies, so that youre highnesse beareth in Armes as right inheritour thereunto, the royall scepter and Croune imperiall, most triūphantly, and the titles of Englande, Fraunce, and Irelande ioyntely in youre maiesties stile. Neither for,

that your highnesse as a rare Phoenix of your time, are singular and peerelesse in honoure and renoune, in princely maiestie, wisedome, skil, beautie, fauour, mildenesse, curtesie and gentlenesse: to be short, excellent in all kind of vertue. Nor in respecte of youre learning, knowledge, counsell, iudgement, and eloquence, as well in the Greeke, Latine, Italian, Frenche, Dutch, as in your owne natural English, and other languages, wherin your grace may be resembled not onely to Tullie, and Demosthenes, but to Mercurie, the God of eloquence, as is apparant by youre Maiesties most apte and wise aunswers giuen in your own person to al Embassadours, and to euery of them in their owne naturall language with a singular dexteritie and princely maiestie, & with maruellous swetenesse of tong. Nor bicause your grace is expert in song, & in the arte of Musike, skilful in al kindes of musical instrumēts, and according to the exact proportiōs of geometrie exquisite in the measures of the daunce: and besides al these, embraced of Apollo, and his nine sisters, by whome your grace is so instructed in the diuine Arte of Poetrie, that you may woorthily

be called the seconde Sappho. Neither for your great skil & iudgemēt in painting and imagerie, bothe for the cunnyng of the workmanshyp and the deuise and storie. In summe, perfecte in all good exercises of the wit, namely the artes and liberall sciences. Finally, not alonly for that nature of hir boū
               tie and goodnesse hath shewed suche grace and speciall fauour toward you, by enduing youre grace moste plentyfully with infinite graces and vertues more abundantly than any other Prince or Princesse in the worlde, so that it might serue me for a sufficient argument to fill large volumes, only to stande in commendation of your maiestie, not annexing therto any deuise of myne owne, of fained Emblemes or Poetical fables, and that without vsing flatterie or glosing, as they do most comonly, that ambitiously seeking after prefermentes and honoure, disguise rather than describe noble and honorable personages, whome they sette oute many tymes beyonde al truth, yea sometime aboue measure, and with as great inconueniencie as yf they should paynt an Asse tuning of a harp. For I do not accompt your grace happy for

these alonely (thoughe many and singular) giftes and graces, which your grace enioyeth in great plentie and abundance, consideryng they bee transitorie, and can not make any man or woman happie (albeit they seme diuine and supernaturall,) excepte they be accompanied wyth the loue and feare of God, according to the saying of King Lamuell, in the thirde of the Prouerbes: Fauour is deceiuable, and Beautie a mere vanitie, but the woman that feareth the Lorde, is to be beloued. But chiefly and principally when I consider that God intendyng to bestowe an excellent benefit peculiarly vpon your Maiestie more than vpon any other Prince or Princesse in the worlde, hath besides al the other forenamed his manifolde giftes and graces, lightened your vnderstanding with his holy spirit, and hath vouchesafed (by enclinyng youre graces heart, spirite and minde to humilitie, peace, mildenesse, and all kinde of louablenesse) to chose your maiestie, especially to be his champion to defend his beloued church. And in this respect, (like as all faithfull and true Christiā princes throughout all Europe do esteme and repute you) do I also, and that

of good right call your grace a moste happie and blessed Prince. Consider I beseche you, how God hath blessed your maiestie in thys worlde more than he hath done any of your progenitours. For neuer was it seene in any age or time heretofore, that this your realme of England hath flourished as it dothe at this present vnder your Maiesties moste happie gouernement. Firste in all kinde of liberall Artes and sciences. Secondarily in the abundance of treasure, as well golde and siluer, as all sortes of riche and precious iewels and ornamentes. Thirdely, in the free passage and trafike of all kinde of marchandise: Besides this, in good and politike lawes and ordinances, namely in the due execution of iustice, according to law and equitie. The worde of God is purely preached here in six or seuen languages. The Sacraments of Baptisme, and the holy Supper, sincerely ministred according to Christes institution. Christian discipline in due force in many places. Finally euery countrey and nation that will liue here according to his holy worde, is receiued, and findeth good entertainement. O how happy and blessed is that King or kingdome, where

these things are in force Contrarywise most vnhappie are those princes, that banishyng and reiecting Christ, receiue that Antechrist, the sonne of the Diuell, and forsakyng the truth, embrace errour: To be short, that do al things ouerthwartly & clean against the hair For it is moste certaine and sure, that sodaine ruine and destruction shall fall vpon all wicked and vngodly persons, as well nowe as in tyme paste, as experience hath well proued heretofore: Namely vpon Pharao, and hys kingdome of Egypt, vpon Ieroboam, Achab, Iezabell, and infinite other mo. Wher on the other part, the good kings & princes which feare the Lord, shal haue peace and comfort bothe in this worlde, and in the worlde to come: Like as had Iosua, Iuda, Gedeon, Dauid and diuers other in those days, and is also to be seene at this day most euidently in the realmes and countreyes vnder youre Maiesties dominion, whiche God hath blessed in suche sort, that it may truly be sayd, that the kingdome of Saturne, and the Golden worlde is come againe, and the Virgin Astrea is desscended from heauen to builde hir a seate in this your moste happie countrey of Englād.
               
For here is peace and quietnesse, where as the moste parte of foraine countreyes are full of great tumultes, and that (more is the pitie) with the sheding of much christian bloude. And where as many myghtie kings and potentates of the earthe haue banded and conspired together, & fight euery where against God his anointed, and his holy churche, bendyng their force vtterly to deface hys name, his glorie, and his Churche: Almightie God of his diuine prouidence hath nowe also in these days (like as he hath in all ages heretofore) raised vp diuers good and godly princes and states, and prouided certaine places, wherto the elect and faithfull haue resorted & bene preserued, during the time of persetion, to the ende that his holy name myght there be glorified, his worde purely and sincerely preached, and his Churche dispersed, in a manner restored. As it is also come to passe in these our most miserable days, in the whiche suche as syncerely loue and esteeme more derely the honoure and glorie of God than they doe their owne commodities, ease, and welfare, (after the counsel of Christ, saying in this wyse: Yf they persecute you in one

citie, flie ye vnto an other) haue bene cōtent to depart their owne naturall countrey, wholly to forsake their landes, inheritances, possessions, and dwellyng places, yea and some also, to 
                  •
               urrēder their offices, dignities, & worldly preferments. An other sort with their wiues children and parentes are departed into Germanie, namely into the territorie and dominion of Frederike prince Elector and coūtie Palatine, the floure of all Christian Princes in these dayes (that I knowe) in the feruent zeale and true feare of God, a man worthy to be compared with Dauid, or Iosias. Others are fled into other places elsewhere, some to one cuntrey, some to an other, euery one according to his abilitie, estate, condition, and facultie. But we a numbre of vs are arriued in saftie in this your maiesties realme of Englande, as into a moste safe and sure harborough, where we liue (God be thanked) vnder your Maiesties protection and safegarde in greate libertie to serue God in eyther language, the French or the Dutche, without al feare of tyrantes, or daunger of the gapyng throates of greedie rauening wolues. After the same maner hath God in time past preserued

& deliuered his elect out of the hāds of their enimies & persecute
                  •
               s by the ministerie of dyuers vertuous women. As is to be sene in the .4. chapt. of the boke of Iudges. How God deliuered his people of Israel out of the hāds of Iabin king of Chanaan, by Debora the prophetesse, by selling Sizara chiefe captain of his armie into the hād of a womā called Iahel. As he also preserued Dauid frō the furie of Saul, by Mich
                     •
                  l Sauls own daughter. As he deliuered the citizēs of Bethulia, frō the tiranny of Holo
                     •
                  ernes, by the hand of that most vertuous Ladie Iudith
               
                  •
                And as the childrē of Israel, were saued by the counsel of Mardocheus, at the instāce & request of the most gratious & humble Hester
               
                  •
                where they were lately before in peril of death & presēt destructiō by the conspiracie of wicked Haman. The like hath ben brought to passe by diuers other renoumed Ladies, whose fame shal endure for euer. And surely the graces & mercies that God hath shewed to his afflicted church in these later days by your maiesties means, ar no lesse thā those he hath shewed tofore by the late rehersed ladies: so that your grace deserueth equal praise and cōmē
               datiō
               
with them, cōsidering with what gētlenesse & with how louing & charitable affection you haue receiued the poore scattered flock of Christ. Is not your Maiestie then to be estemed infinitely more happy & blessed that are so specially elect of god to serue him for such an instrumēt, & in such a quarel, & that maugre the beards of the enimies, being enraged through the malice and obstinacy of their hearts do persecute the church of God? Yes assuredly, most happy, christiā, and vertuous princesse, euen in the highest degree. Howe shall I be able then to expresse with tong, or to endite with pen your praises sufficiently? verily I am confounded and put to silence, and do confesse my self to be altogether insufficient. Wherfore (moste gracious Ladie) I rest with my heartie and continuall prayer vnto God for your maiestie, that he turne not his face from you, but that it wold please him to continue and daily to encrease his grace and fauor towards you, and his holy spirite within you, as also in and towardes those that be of your Maiesties counsel, and all other Magistrates and officers whatsoeuer hauing authoritie vnder your highnesse

within your maiesties realms and dominiō
               
                  ••
                that walking in the fear & loue of him they may do al their endeuour through the preaching of his holy word to aduaunce his holy name, and aboue al things especially to seke the safetie and weal of his church. And therfore for the great benefit & good that God hath don vnto his church by means of your maiesty (most gracious prince) al tru faithful whatsoeuer they be, as wel strangers as your natural subiects seke to do vnto your maiestie most faithful and honorable seruice, according to their power. Besides, in al their assēblies & in euery congregation they make their hartie & feruēt prayers vnto almightie God for the helth of your soule, the safegard of your most royal person, & the prosperous estate of your realm long to cōtinue. And I especially for mine own part, bicause I wold not be vnthākful for the great benefits I enioy by your grace, abiding vnder your maiesties protectiō (forasmuch as ingratitude is a a most horrible and detestable vice) in consideration thereof (moste gracious Lady) I present your highnesse with this smal Treatise of mine, as the best Iewel that I haue in

store at this presente, in signification of my good wil, and for declaration of my duetie in this behalfe, beseeching youre highnesse moste humbly to accept it in good parte as (considering your maiesties natural bountie and your accustomed goodnesse) my trust is you will vouchsafe to doe. For I am persuaded (albeit the stile be rude) that the matter shall be fitte for your Maiestie to reade, and that the same shall not be vnpleasant vnto you, but minister vnto your grace great occasion of much ioy, peace, and contentation of minde and conscience. And these be the causes and respects for the which I presume to present the same to your maiestie, in most humble maner beseching your highnesse to accepte the same, and praying to almightie God to graunt vnto your Maiestie a moste happie reign in this world: and after this life to reigne with him for euer, for his only son our Lorde Iesus Christes sake.
            
               At London your Maiesties Citie and seate royal.
The .25. of May .1569.
               
               
                  Your Maiesties most humble seruan
                        ••
                     
                  
                  Iean vander Noodt.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               BEing one day at my window all alone,
               So many strange things hapned me to see,
               As much it grieueth me to thinke thereon.
               At my right hande, a Hinde appearde to me,
               So faire as mought the greatest God delite:
               Two egre Dogs dyd hir pursue in chace,
               Of whiche the one was black, the other white.
               With deadly force
                     •
                   so in their cruell race
               They pinchte the haunches of this gentle beast,
               That at the last, and in shorte time, I spied,
               Vnder a rocke, where she (alas) opprest,
               Fell to the grounde, and there vntimely dide.
               Cruell death vanquishing so noble beautie,
               Oft makes me waile so harde a destinie.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               AFter at Sea a tall Ship dyd appere,
               Made all of Heben and white Iuorie,
               The sailes of Golde, of Silke the tackle were:
               Milde was the winde, calme seemed the sea to be:
               The Skie eche where did shew full bright and faire.
               With riche treasures this gay ship fraighted was.
               But sodaine storme did so turmoyle the aire,
               And tombled vp the sea, that she, alas,
               Strake on a rocke that vnder water lay.
               O great misfortune, O great griefe, I say,
               Thus in one moment to see lost and drownde
               So great riches, as lyke can not be founde.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               TH
                     •
                  n heauenly branches did I see arise,
               Out of a fresh and lusty Laurell tree
               Amidde the yong grene wood. Of Paradise
               Some noble plant I thought my selfe to see,
               Suche store of birdes therein yshrouded were,
               Chaunting in shade their sundry melodie.
               My sprites were rauisht with these pleasures there
                     •
                  
               
               While on this Laurell fixed was mine eye,
               The Skie gan euery where to ouercast,
               And darkned was the welkin all aboute,
               When sodaine flash of heauens fire outbrast,
               And rent this royall tree quite by the roote.
               Which makes me much and euer to complaine.
               For no such shadow shal be had againe.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               WIthin this wood, out of the rocke did rise
               A Spring of water mildely romblyng downe,
               Whereto approched not in any wise
               The homely Shepherde, nor th
                     •
                   ruder cloune,
               But many M
                     •
                  ses, and the Nymphes withall,
               That sweetely in accorde did tune their voice
               Vnto the g
                     •
                  ntle sounding of the waters fall.
               The sight wherof dyd make my heart reioyce.
               But while I toke herein my chiefe delight,
               I sawe (alas) the gaping 
                     •
                  arth deuoure
               The Spring, the place, and all cleane out of sight.
               Whiche yet agreues my heart euen to this houre.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               I Saw a Phoenix in the wood alone,
               With purple wings and crest of golden hew,
               Straunge birde he was, wherby I thought anone,
               That of some heauenly wight I had the vew:
               Vntill he came vnto the broken tree
               And to the spring that late deuoured was.
               What say I more? Eche thing at length we see
               Doth passe away: the Phoenix there, alas,
               Spying the tree destroyde, the water dride,
               Himselfe smote with his beake, as in disdaine,
               And so forthwith in great despite he dide.
               For pitie and loue my heart yet burnes in paine
                     •
                  
               
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               AT last so faire a Ladie did I spie,
               That in thinking on hir I burne and quake,
               On herbes and floures she walked pensiuely.
               Milde, but yet loue she proudely did forsake.
               White seemed hir robes, yet wouen so they were,
               As snowe and golde together had bene wrought.
               Aboue the waste a darke cloude shrouded hir,
               A stinging Serpent by the heele hir caught,
               Wherewith she languisht as the gathered floure:
               And well assurde she mounted vp to ioy.
               Alas in earth so nothing doth endure
               But bitter griefe that dothe our hearts anoy.
               
                  
                  
               
               
                  MY Song thus now in thy Conclusions.
               Say boldly that these same six visions
               Do yelde vnto thy lorde a sweete request,
               Ere it be long within the earth to rest.
            
         
         
            
               
               IT was the time when rest the gift of God
                     •
                  
               
               Sweetely sliding into the eyes of men,
               Doth drowne in the forgetfulnesse of slepe
                     •
                  
               
               The carefull trauailes of the painefull day:
               Then did a ghost appeare before mine eyes
               On that great riuers banke that runnes by Rome
                     •
                  
               
               And calling me then by my propre name,
               He bade me vpwarde vnto heauen looke.
               He cride to me, and loe (quod he) beholde,
               What vnder this great Temple is containde,
               Loe all is nought but flying vanitie.
               So I knowing the worldes vnstedfastnesse,
               Sith onely God surmountes the forc
                     •
                   of tyme,
               In God alone do stay my confidence.
            
            
               
               ON hill, a frame an hundred cubites hie
               I sawe, an hundred pillers eke about,
               All of fine Diamant decking the front,
               And fashiond were they all in Dorike wi
                     •
                  e.
               Of bricke, ne yet of marble was the wall,
               But shining Christall, which from top to base
               Out of deepe vaute threw forth a thousand rayes
               Vpon an hundred steps of purest golde.
               Golde was the parget: and the sielyng eke
               Did shine all scaly with fine golden plates.
               The floore was laspis, and of Emeraude.
               O worldes vainenesse. A sodein earthquake loe,
               Shaking the hill euen from the bottome deepe,
               Threwe downe this building to the lowest stone.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               THen did appeare to me a sharped spire
               Of diamant, ten feete eche way in square,
               Iustly proportionde vp vnto his height,
               So hie as mought an Archer reache with sight.
               Vpon the top therof was set a pot
               Made of the mettall that we honour most.
               And in this golden vess
                     •
                  ll couched were
               The ashes of a mightie Emperour.
               Vpon foure corners of the base there lay
               To beare the frame, foure great Lions of golde
                     •
                  
               
               A worthie tombe for such a worthie corps.
               Alas, nought in this worlde but griefe endures.
               A sodaine tempest from the heauen, I saw,
               With flushe stroke downe this noble monument.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               I Saw raisde vp on pillers of Iuorie,
               Whereof the bases were of richest golde,
               The chapters Alabaster, Christall frises,
               The double front of a triumphall arke.
               On eche side portraide was a victorie.
               With golden wings in habite of a Nymph.
               And set on hie vpon triumphing chaire,
               The auncient glorie of the Romane lordes.
               The worke did shewe it selfe not wrought by man
               But rather made by his owne skilfull hande
               That forgeth thunder dartes for Ioue his sire.
               Let me no more see faire thing vnder heauen,
               Sith I haue seene so faire a thing as this,
               With sodaine falling broken all to dust.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               THen I behelde the faire Dodonian tree,
               Vpon seuen hilles throw forth his gladsome shad
                     •
                  ,
               And Conquer
                     •
                  rs bede
                     •
                  ked with his leaues
               Along the bankes of the Italian streame.
               There many auncient Trophees were erect,
               Many a spoile, and many goodly signes.
               To shewe the greatn
                     •
                  sse of the stately race
                     •
                  
               
               That erst descended from the Troian blo
                     •
                  d.
               Rauisht I was to see so rare a thing,
               When barbarous villaines in disordred heape.
               Outraged the honour of these noble bowes.
               I hearde the tronke to grone vnder the wedge.
               And since I saw the roote in hie disdaine
               Sende forth againe a twinne of forked trees.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               I Saw the bird
                     •
                   that dares beholde the Sunne,
               With feeble flight venture to mount to heauen,
               By more and more she gan to trust hir wings,
               Still folowing th'example of hir damme:
               I saw hir rise, and with a larger flight
               Surmount the toppes euen of the hiest hilles,
               And pierce the cloudes, and with hir wings to reache
               The place where is the temple of the Gods,
               There was she lost, and sodenly I saw
               Where tombling through the aire in lompe of fire,
               All flaming downe she fell vpon the plaine.
               I saw hir bodie turned all to dust,
               And saw the foule that shunnes the cherefull light
               Out of hir ashes as a worme arise.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               THen all astonned with this nightly ghost,
               I saw an hideous body big and strong,
               Long was his beard, and side did hang his hair
                     •
                  
               
               A grisly forehed and Saturnelike face.
               Leaning against the belly of a pot
               He shed a water, whose outgushing streame
               Ran flowing all along the creekie sh
                     •
                  are
               Where once the Troyan Duke with Turnus fought.
               And at his f
                     •
                  ete a bitch Wol
                     •
                  e did giue sucke
               To two yong babes. In his right hand he bare
               The tree of peace, in left the conquering Palme
                     •
                  
               
               His head was garnisht with the Laurel bow.
               Then sodenly the Palm
                     •
                   and Oliue fell,
               And faire greene Laurel witherd vp and did
                     •
                  .
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               HA
                     •
                  d by a riuers side, a wailing Nimph
                     •
                  ,
               Folding hir armes with thousand sighs to heauē
               
               Did tune hir plaint to falling riuers sound,
               Renting hir faire visage and golden haire,
               Where is (quod she) this whilome honored face?
               Where is thy glory and the auncient praise,
               Where all worldes hap was reposed,
               When erst of Gods and man I worshipt was?
               Alas, suffisde it not that ciuile bate
               Made me the spoile and bootie of the world,
               But this new Hydra mete to be assailde
               Euen by an hundred such as Hercules,
               With seuen springing heds of monstrous crimes,
               So many Neroes and Caligula
                     •
                  s
               Must still bring 
                     •
                  orth to rule this croked shore.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               VPon a hill I saw a kindled flame,
               Mounting like waues with triple point to heauen
               Which of incense of precious Ceder tree
               With Balm
                     •
                  like odor did perfume the aire.
               A bird all white, well fetherd on hir winges
               Hereout did slie vp to the throne of Gods,
               And singing with most plesant melodi
                     •
                  
               
               She climbed vp to heauen in the smoke.
               Of this faire fire the faire di
                     •
                  persed rayes
               Threw forth abrode a thousand shining leames,
               When sodain dropping of a golden shoure
               Gan quench the glystering flame. O greuous chaunge!
               That which erstwhile so pleasaunt scent did 
                     •
                  elde,
               Of Sulphure now did breathe corrupted smel.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               I Saw a fresh spring rise out of a rocke,
               Clere as Christall against the Sunny beames,
               The bottome yellow like the sh
                     •
                  ning land,
               That golden Pactol driues vpon the plaine.
               It seemed that arte and nature striued to ioyne
               There in one place all pleasures of the eye.
               There was to heare a noise alluring slepe
               Of many accordes more swete than Mermaids song,
               The seates and benches shone as Iuorie,
               An hundred Nymphes sate side by side about,
               When from nie hilles a naked rout of Faunes
               With hideous cry assembled on the place,
               Which with their feete vncleane the water fouled,
               Threw down the seats, & droue the Nimphs to flight
                     •
                  
               
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               AT length, euen at the time when Morpheu
                     •
                  
               
               Most truely doth appeare vnto our eyes,
               Wearie to see th'inconstance of the heauens:
               I saw the great Typhaeus sister come,
               Hir head full brauely with a morian armed,
               In maiestie she seemde to matche the Gods.
               And on the shore, harde by a violent streame,
               She raisde a Trophee ouer all the worlde.
               An hundred vanquisht kings gronde at hir feete,
               Their armes in shamefull wise bounde at their backes.
               While I was with so dreadfull sight afrayde,
               I saw the heauens warre against hir tho,
               And seing hir striken fall with clap of thunder,
               With so great noyse I start in sodaine wonder.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               I Saw an vgly beast come from the sea,
               That seuen heads, ten crounes, ten hornes did beare
                     •
                  
               
               Hauing theron the vile blaspheming name.
               The cruell Leopard she resembled much:
               Feete of a beare, a Lions throte she had.
               The mightie Dragon gaue to hir his power.
               One of hir heads yet there I did espie,
               Still freshly bleeding of a grieuous wounde.
               One cride aloude. What one is like (quod he)
               This honoured Dragon, or may him withstande?
               And then came from the sea a sauage beast,
               With Dragons speche, and shewde his force by fire
                     •
                  
               
               With wondrous signes to make all wights adore
               The beast, in setting of hir image vp.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               I Saw a Woman sitting on a beast
               Before mine eyes, of Orenge colour hew:
               Horrour and dreadfull name of blasphemie
               Filde hir with pride. And seuen heads I saw
                     •
                  
               
               Ten hornes also the stately beast did beare.
               She seemde with glorie of the s
                     •
                  arlet faire,
               And with fine perle and golde puft vp in heart.
               The wine of hooredome in a cup she bare.
               The name of Mysterie writ in hir face.
               The bloud of Martyrs dere were hir delite.
               Most fierce and f
                     •
                  ll this woman seemde to me.
               An Angell then des
                     •
                  ending downe from Heauen.
               With thondring voice cride out aloude, and sayd,
               Now for a truth great Babylon is fallen.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               THen might I see vpon a white horse set
               The faithfull man with flaming countenaunce,
               His head did shine with crounes set therupon.
               The worde of God made him a noble name.
               His precious robe I saw embrued with bloud.
               Then saw I from the heauen on horses white,
               A puissant armie come the selfe same way.
               Then cried a shining Angell as me thought,
               That birdes from aire descending downe on earth
               Should warre vpon the kings, and eate their flesh.
               Then did I see the beast and Kings also
               Ioinyng their force to slea the faithfull man.
               But this fierce hatefull beast and all hir traine.
               Is pitilesse throwne downe in pit of fire.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
               I Saw new Earth, new Heauen, sayde Saint Iohn.
               And loe, the sea (quod he) is now no more.
               The holy Citie of the Lorde, from hye
               Descendeth garnisht as a loued spouse.
               A voice then sayde, beholde the bright abode
               Of God and men. For he shall be their God.
               And all their teares he shall wipe cleane away.
               Hir brightnesse greater was than can be founde.
               Square was this Citie, and twelue gates it had.
               Eche gate was of an orient perfect pearle,
               The houses golde, the pauement precious stone.
               A liuely streame, more cleere than Christ all is,
               Ranne through the mid, sprong from triumphant s
                     •••
                  .
               T
                     •
                  ere growes lifes fruite vnto the Churches good.
               
                  
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            A BRIEFE DEclaration of the Authour vpon his visions, takē out of the holy scriptures, and dyuers Orators, Poetes, Philosophers, and true histories. Translated out of French into Englishe by Theodore Roest.
            
               
                  WAying and conside
               ring that many which are grieued and sore vexed in their myndes, grudgyng, and leding an vnquiet life, do not onely for the most part, mislike of their owne estate and calling, but enuiously (such is our frailtie) go about to enter into other men
                  •
                lyuings, so that now a days the fewest numbre of men are cō
               tented with their vocation and callyng, wherof we haue dayly too too much experience. As for example: Many souldiers

desire to be merchants: again many merchants loue warfare, for all that they 
                  〈◊〉
                what inconueniences folow oftentimes
                  •
                Lawyers woulde be husbādmen: agayn
                  •
                men of the countrey commende the voca
                  •
               tion of Iudges. Many maried folks wold be vnmaried, other not maried, and single persons trauaile to be. Poore men couet to be riche, the riche desireth more and more, and euery man laboureth to aduaunce him selfe. A knight or a gentleman would gladly be some great Lorde, or Earle. An Earle loketh to be a Duke, or prince, a Duke or prince séeketh to become King. A King (contentyng hymself yet least) studieth by what meanes he may amplifie his realme, and ioyne vnto it townes, cities, and countreys, so to increase his dominions daily, that at length he might attaine to the Monarchie of all Europe, and then to become Lorde of the whole worlde. Briefly, the hearts of carnall & voluptuous men are neuer at rest, haue neuer inough, but be driuen by the meanes of concupiscence, which reigneth in them, always to be careful, to watche,

to toyle and moyle, to wishe, to mistrust, to sue and busily to be occupied. For an ambitious and couetous carnal person is neuer contented with that he hath: for if he haue bene busy but ten dayes for that he hath, he will not refuse to woorke ten times ten other to attaine to that which he desireth and gapeth for
                  •
                although it be not pro
                  ••
               table, either for body or soule. This time of our pilgrimage is graunted of God to learne to knowe him, to serue and honor him, to laude and magnifie his name, to put oure whole confidence in hym, to leade oure life accordyng to hys blessed will, and to séeke our whole felicitie and blessednesse only in hym. Finally, to acknowledge (without the whiche also the condition of man is worse thā is of brute beasts) with heart & tong al goodnesse to procéede of him. This time (I say) for this purpose gyuen vnto vs, those mē aforesayd, consume and spend in vnquietnesse, to the seruice of wicked Mammon, and other vnlawfull and gréedie desires of earthly and transitorie riches, losing and forgoing therby the ioy & quietnesse

of the spirite and conscience, and most of al, true christian libertie. Wherfore with all righte they may be compared to the Dog, wherof Esope speketh, which going ouer a bridge with breade in his mouth, & spying his shadow in the water, thought to haue seene some other Dogge wyth a greater piece of bread in his mouth: wherfore, enticed by glutt
                  •
               ny and enuy, he let fall that that he had, and snatchyng after his shadowe, was fowly deceyued of al. In like maner I say, hapneth to those that are so wholy gyuen & addicted vnto those worldly and transitorie riches, that notwithstandyng they see 
                  •
               hem to be but vaine and idle, yet doe they prefer them aboue the perpetuall and heauenly. I put case there were an image made of clay, outwardly decked and layde ouer wyth gold very finely, but thinly, that it might séeme to be altogether of the fynest and purest gold that can be, so that euery mā woulde trauaile and end
                  •
               uor to get it to him selfe: one comming, breaketh a little piece of it, and so by that meanes the
                  •
                hidden deceipte being knowne, I doubte

whether any woulde be so foolishe as to make much a do about a thing so vile and vnprofitable, but that he woulde bestow
                  •
                his time to a farre better vse. Therefore (hopyng to moue such as doe vnderstand a right how deceitfull worldly things be, to auoyde them the rather, and to couete after the eternall and euerlasting) I haue thought it good, so compendiously as possibly I may, to shewe how vaine, transitorie, deceitfull, vnprofitable, and vncertain worldly things be, and that heauenly things only are euerlasting, immortal, excellent, good, and most to be desired, euen as God him self is the fountain of all goodnesse, and perfect in all things which can be desired, yea more a greate deale than oure vnderstandyng is able to vtter or to comprehende: to this ende and purpose, that men conuertyng vnto the Lorde, in hym o
                  •
               ely séeking their whole saluation and perfect blysse, myght leade their life paciently with a good conscience in all quietnesse of minde and spirite, and so to enioy the true christian libertie and spirituall gladnesse here in thys worlde,

that in the worlde to come they might be inheritours (by grace) of the euerlasting ioyes in eternall glorie, purchased thorough the bloud of oure Sauioure Iesus Christ. But before we enter any farther to speake of the vanities of worldly and transitorie Richesse, I will warne thée (gentle Reader) that when I speake of substance, riches, estates, bodily health, of wife and children, and other like, whiche all are the good giftes of God, I mean not in respect of the thing it selfe, nor yet the good vse of the same, (for in it is no suche default,) but onely I meane the great abuse whiche commonly is séene in the vnnatural and vnbrideled d
                  •
               sire, whervnto rich and worldly men ar inclined. Saint Augustine speaking of the nature of the thing, affirmeth, that health, strengthe, riches, grace, noblenesse, a faire and good wyfe, propre children, friendes, power, and other like, they are things naturally indifferent, whereof a man maye reape good or euyll. Euen so saythe S. Ambrose, that then they are good and profitable when they are wel vsed, otherwise hurtfull,

yea dampnable, when the vse of them exc
                  •
               edeth the lymits of reason and equitie, and rules of Gods holy worde. Neither meane I to touch those that are rich, or haue great possessions: but those onely which are possessed of their goodes, whose money is their maister, them (I say) whiche are of the propretie and nature of one named Gallio, which as Seneca reherseth,
                  Seneca in the treatise of the happ
                        •
                      life. 22. Ch
                        ••
                     
                  
                was not maister of his goodes, but he hym selfe was subiecte vnto them, that is to say, he was a bond slaue, and did serue vnto the occasions of euyl, whyche came vnto hym by hys owne goodes. Also I wil speake of the loue, confidence and inordinat lust, and of the chasyng and puttyng away of vertue and godlynesse, & the going astray from God, dependyng vpon his creatures, yea vpon vanitie it selfe. Which moste of all commeth to passe by the meanes of worldely substaunce, and the gréedie desire of the same, the very r
                  •
               ote of all euil: For they reduce men from true libertie to thraldome, and turne fréedome into slauerie,

pleasures into miseries, honour, and promotion into subiection & perpetual shame and confusion. This if we considered, it should not giue vs occasion to set by them as we do, but rather to abhorre and hate them, & be moued to follow the counsel of Dauid:
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     salm. 62.
                
               When riches abound set not thy heart vpon them. Consideryng then the nature and condition of wor
                  •
               dly things, whiche if they we
                  •
               e not of them selues most miserable, yet is ther not any thing in them that iustly might be called ours, vnlesse it be vaine & ydle. For though riches or authoritie yll gotten and vniustly possessed, make the possessor as it were happie: yet (as Plato sayth) vain and idle thyngs can not giue any felicitie or happinesse.
                  Lib. 5. de leg
                        •
                     bus.
                They séeme wel to be riches, but euen as po
               
                  •
               ertie consisteth not either in small possessions, or lackyng of any thyng, otherwise than in the gréedie desire or vnsaciable couetousnesse, euen so riches consyst not in hauing of goodes or greate possessions, but in the cōtentation of the minde. Whervnto Seneca agréeth very wel, saying:
                  Epist. 20.
                He is greate, who of riches maketh

none other accompte, than if he possessed none at all. But (sayth he) he that hath none, is of a more assurāce, and more frée from all daunger. For it is impossible (as the cōmon prouerbe goth) that the mouse touching the pitche or other glew, should escape, without he be either caught, or at the least defiled with it.
                  Homel. 21, super Mar
                        •
                     
                  
                To this end and purpose Chrysostom aduouched, that temporall and worldly honour and dignitie conuey men into diuers and sundry kindes of wantonnesse and other inconueniences. It is requisite therfore, that such as are enriched and come to great estate, be endued with singular vertues & great constancie, if they wil not be ouercome or defiled with them. For authoritie ingendreth arrogancie, temeritie & contempt
                  •
                of other, and commonly enticeth men to hastinesse and yre, yea & drowneth them in a whole masse of iniquitie, euen as a great tempest ouerwhelmeth a litle bote. It maketh them proude, and their myndes to wander so farre, that they can not consider their way, but goe quite otherwise than they be aware of: And thynking

to auoid troubles and miseries, they intangle themselues the more in it, much like vnto the Hare, who being caught in the nette, the more he struggleth, the faster he maketh hym self, & procureth his owne death, & as the small birde caught on the lime twig, the more it flyttereth, the faster it maketh it selfe. They séeme to séeke in none other thing any felicitie or blessednesse than in worldly prosperitie, which consisteth in good fortune of riches, honours, and great estimations, voluptuousnesse and other like, estéemyng themselues moste happy, and as to haue founde the righte waye vnto Saluation. But lyke as a droncken man is not able to fynde the waye homewarde, nor yet to go vprighte, euen so they wander and erre here and there, beyng ouercome of many and diuers kindes of l
                  •
               stes and desires of worldly and transitorie goods, and can not once come to the way of true riches, of euerlastyng goodes and felicitie. This is that, whiche Plato speaketh of,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ib. 10. de 
                        ••
                     ipub.
                when he sayth: Howe can a man be riche that occupieth nothing else than vile and

corruptible trashe? Or howe can he bée happie by transytorie goodes? What saluation is there in vnprofitable and vayne worldely Riches? Seyng there is neyther good honoure nor estymation but in GOD onely, and withoute hym beyng neyther lyfe, felicitie or Saluation, he then that will be happie indéede, continually muste searche after that, whiche is onely euerlasting and perfect, and auoyde and 
                  •
               lée al superfluitie and aboundaunce of temporall riches. Therefore sayth Christ vnto Martha:
               
                  Luke .1
                Thou carest and are troubled aboute many thinges, but one thyng is necessary (to haue quietnesse) Mary hathe chosen the beste parte (whiche is that one) whiche shall not be taken from hir. Héereby sheweth Christe vnto vs, that it is not good to be musyng and studying vpon worldely affaires, wherein is nothyng else but trouble and vnquietnesse of minde, but that wée shoulde laye vp oure treasure in Heauen, whyche is the surest waye: for true and heauenly ryches doe reioyse and comforte the spirites withoute any

carefulnesse or distresse: but goodes and riches of this worlde bryng with them great paines and troubles, as wel in the getting as in keepyng of thē, as Tullie reherseth in hys Paradoxes, saying: Riches & great estimation with great paine and trauaile gotten, are with much more and greater care maintained and kept. Therfore saith Iuuenal,
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     ty. 14.
                that the kéeping of tresure and muche goodes is but miserie and wretchednesse. When the rustical mouse (as Esope reherseth) dyd vnderstande the perils and daungers, wherin the Towne mouse was dayly, he sayd (as they wer in bankettyng) that such aboundance or superfluitie was more lyker poyson or gall than dayntinesse. So we might say of riches and great possessiōs, wherabout are so many and great daungers, that it is not possible for a riche and worldely man to escape any one of them. For as our Sauiour Christ sayth:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ath. 19.
                
               It is easier for a Camell to goe through the eye of a nedle, than for a riche man to enter into the kingdome of god. Riches and authoritie engender labour and paine, and make a man like vnto

a Squirell, which running to and fro in cage, 
                  •
               urneth oftētimes his whéele, but howsoeuer he toyleth & trauaileth, it auayleth him nothyng. Also it maketh a man muche lyke vnto one named Ixion, who was made faste to a whéele turning continually, because he was amorous of Iuno, a goddesse (as Poets do faine) of realmes, highnesse, & powers, which Ixion, when he saw a cloude somewhat like Iuno, tooke it for hir, but hée being deceyued, embraced nothing else but vapour & smoke. Which fable also noteth vnto vs the vanitie, vnprofitablenesse and wretchednesse of the ambitious couetous men which worship the shadow in stede of the true thyng, and in the place of good and sure things choose changeable and vncertaine. The same Ixion was he, which engendred the Centaures, halfe men, halfe horsses, after him named Ixionides. Here is also to be considered, that the couetou
                  •
                & ambitious persons are of the same cō
               dition, which being past al reason, turne their humaine nature into mere beastlynesse, and like vnbroken and wyld colts,

               
                  •
               trike out on euery side, hurtyng and vppressing almost euery body.
                  Lib. Ethi. ca. 13. & li. 10. 
                        ••
                     p. 8.
                
               Aristotle describing an happie and blessed man, would not he shoulde be riche to be suche a one. Riches are Sophistries of goodes wherewith that great Sophister the diuel doth deceiue the s
                  ••
               ple & silly soule. For euen as a Sophister séemeth through his sciēce to be wise, and is not in dede, euen so riches haue a semblant of bountie and vertue, where in dede they are farthest from all.
                  
                     
                        •
                     n hi
                        •
                     . 5. ser
                     
                        •
                     on of the 
                        •
                     orde of God.
                
               S. Augustine hath a goodly saying very apt to the purpose: He is wicked (saith he) whiche estéemeth riches to be good. Great rentes or reuenues, dignities and good fortune, keepe men companie onely their life time, but at the houre of deth, yea and oftentymes before, they leaue and forsake their possessours and louers. Fortune is worthy to be named Plagaria, and is called so of the learned, after one named Plagarius, which brought vnto seruitude and thraldome, suche as were fré
                  •
                before. Likewise fortune and riches maketh men very slaues, misers, & cowards, full of cares and mistrustfulnesse, yea she

maketh some to be lyke vnto ye Dog that will suffer none to haue part of the bon
                  •
                which he picketh at. Some other become thorough riches, like vnto the Dragon which kept the Golden apples of the Orchard of Hesperide, wherof he himself had no commoditie, n
                  •
               yther suffred any other to enioy any part of it.
                  In his apologie. ca. 29
                
               Tertullian sayeth, that riches resemble and are muche like vnto the Apples of Sodome and Gomorre, which séemed goodly and faire to the eye, but being once touched, fell and straightway turned into dust & ashes. This worldely prosperitie and estimation abasheth not onely the simple and silly soules, but eu
                  •
               n casteth downe and subdueth many learned and wise men.
                  Math. 1
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  Mark .4.
                They are thornes that hynder the good seede of Gods worde to growe and fructifie.
                  Luke .8.
               
               
                  Exod. 32.
                The chyldren of Israell forsooke GOD for Goldes sake, and fel a worshipping of the golden calfe, which being consumed by fire, was made to be a drinke, and euer since golde hath ben as it were in contempt,
                  In his apologie. ca. 2
                        •
                     .
                & very méete for the fire, as Tertullian dothe affirme. And what couetousnesse and ambition

hath broughte to passe since the Apostles time, shall somewhat be spoken of in his place.
                  Abac. 3.
                
               Riches (sayeth Abacuck the Prophete) are thick and filthie mire.
               
                  Chrysost.
                It is dong wherin wormes. &c. And Crates the Phisopher vnderstanding what greate enormities and inconueniences follow of couetousnesse and des
                  •
               re of money, sayeth:
                  In his boke of the ornamentes of women.
                O thou hurtfull and damnable couetousnesse, auoide from me, I shal drowne thée least thou ouerwhelme me.
                  Mart. where he disputeth that no man commeth in trouble but by himselfe.
                
               Martiall testifieth, that it is not possible to be riche like Croesus, and religious like Numa. I made a good & prosperous voyage (sayd the Philosopher Zeno) when I had lost al. Riches are copwebs, smoake hurtfull to the eye, which soone alter, vanish, & come to nothing.
                  1. Tim 6.
               
               
                  Prouerb. 23.
               
               
                  Math. 13.
                They that would be rich fall into dyuers and sundry tentations and snares of the diuell, and other foolishe and noysome desires and lustes, which drown men into perdition, for couetousnesse is the roote of all euil. The Foole dispraiseth things that be, as though they were not: againe,
                  In his H
                        ••••
                     o
                        ••
                     e.
                other that be not in déede, he desireth, as if they were. Damascene sayeth:

Things that be, are euerlasting, and vnchangeable: but thyngs that are not, be worldly and transitorie. Earthy & transitorie things are like vnto a cloude painted on a wall, whiche séemeth to be some thing, where as it is nothyng: as a foole foloweth the shadow of a cādle, thynking it to be some body, euen so doth the carnall and voluptuous man folow and pursue the earthly trashe in stede of heauenly treasures. These men I say, are lyke vnto the frantike man,
                  Li. 
                        •
                     . epistola
                        •
                     ū. Epi. 2.
                whereof Horace maketh mention, which supposed to haue séene a trim play, where he hearde goodly songs and pleasant melodies, and thought him selfe to haue bene in all kinde of voluptuousnesse: and althoughe it was nothing but his fansie, yet it was pleasaunt vnto hym: but this man beyng thorough the diligence of friends, delyuered of his phrenesie, & rest
                  •
               red to his health, founde him selfe frustrate of that which he in his disease persuaded him self
                  •
                to haue had. Euen so it goth with the worldely man, whome Christ aunswereth, saying:
                  Luke .12.
                
               Thou foole, this night thy soule shall be taken away frō
                  
thee, then whose shal those things be, which thou haste prouided? Euen so it is with those that lay vp tresure for them selues here, and be not riche in God: As if one should say with the Prophete Dauid,
               
                  Psalm. 38.
                The riche of this world are riche in their own conceits, but whē they shal perceiue it (as it is in déede) after they are gone out of this world, they shal finde them selues wholly destitute and naked of all. As for great estates, dignities and authorities in cō
               mon weales, Plutarke reherseth,
                  Of the life of Demos
                        •
                     .
                that the most famous Oratour Demosthenes was wont to admonish yong mē which resorted vnto him, that they shoulde not hunte after promotion dignitie or greate office, saying vnto them in this maner: If there were two wayes layd before thee, wherof the one shoulde lye vnto deathe, and the other vnto promotion and admynistration of a Common wealthe, and it were knowen what troubles, paines and grie
                  •
               es, iealousies, suspitions, enuie, publyke and pryuie hate, backbytinges and Sclaunders, noyse and Dyssentions are inclosed there, men woulde rather

choose the waye vnto Death, than the other.
                  Li. 8. de 
                        •••
                     
                     nita. cap. 85.
                Wherefore Sainct Augustine sayth: He whiche séeketh after promotion or authoritie is separated from God, not bycause of the diuersitie of the degrées or estates, but of the desire which procéedeth of ambition. They take paynes to aduaunce themselues temporally, but forgoe a gayne perpetuall.
            The Gyauntes (as it is sayde) b
                  •
               yng affectioned to raigne vnto heauen, 
                  •
               ayde Mountaynes one vppon an other to ascende vp thyther, but all in vayne, fallyng at lengthe headlong downewarde themselues. They are (as Saincte Ambrose sayth) like vnto those which would by the ladder of Worldly honour cl
                  •
               mbe into Heauen. Sainct Cyprian testifieth,
                  In his bok
                        •
                      of Noe and th
                        •
                      A
                        •
                     ke.
                saying: That which thou thynkest to be authoritie and power, is poyson 
                  •
               ydden vnder a faire shew, a
                  ••
                miserie vnder a costly couer. Whereby S. Austine sayth,
                  Epist. 2. li
                        •
                      E
                        ••
                     s
                        •
                     o.
                that the more a mā is lifted vp in authoritie the greater danger he is in.
                  Vpon the 106. psalm
                
               A
                     •
                  istophanes ye Poet describeth & setteth forth ye god of riches (which they cal Plutus) to be

fearful, and to trust no man, bicause that riches and promotions make men to doe so, and that bicause of the great daunger they be in continually. For to get goodes euery one looketh abrode: The thief lyeth in waite to steale: the crafty merchant, the dissembling lawyer, by guile and subtiltie to deceiue: Children and other that be inheritors, wish the death of their parents and friends, to possesse their goodes. Other ambitious persons do long for the death of suche as are in office, that they might enioy their places: Promoters and other officers searche and séeke narowly to finde any occasion to make the goodes forfaite. Wherby Iuuenal sayth:
                  Sa
                        •
                     y. 10.
                Riches gotten by greate care and labour, choake and kill oftentimes their possessor: whervnto he alleaged many ensamples. Seneca confirmeth also: That as wilde beastes or fishes are caught by the false hope of a daintie morsell, in snares and hookes: Euen so (sayth he) are men by the vayne trust of the gyfts of Fortune, whiche in deede ought not to be called gifts, but rather deceytfull shifts, yea snares & daungerous

rocks. Consider I pray you, howe many we sée goe to wracke bothe bodily and spiritually, temporally and euerlastingly. Howe many realmes and countreys haue ben subuerted and cast vpside downeward? What tirannie or crueltie hath not bene shewed? What robberies both vpon sea and lande? what peri
                  •
               ries, murthers, pilling and pollyng, viol
                  •
               nce and force, inceste, and all kyndes of myschieues are not committed of the greedie and insa
                  •
               iable desire to attaine to riches and estimation? yea of the most puissant kyngs and mightie men, whiche Daniell called Treasurers.
                  Daniell .11.
                And what shal we say then of worldely loue and carnall concupiscence? Also of the passions and vnnaturall affections whiche thence ensue? Plato sayth, that Loue at the beginning, giueth some swéetenesse, but in the ende engendreth one mischiefe vpon an other. Loue is the first whiche hath founde out, and brought forth the sundring and renting of the hart, and troubling of the spirite. And these things followyng, proceede from carnal loue, to wete, car
                  •
               , sorrowes

and griefes, weakenesse of the braynes,
                  Com
                        •
                     ed. 
                        ••
                     rcat.
                curiousnesse in apparell, madnesse, dreames, thoughts and sighyng, calamities, errours, anguish, vnquietnesse, trouble, foolishnesse, vncomlynesse, wantonnesse, mystrustfulnesse, iealousie, and other lyke. Men (I say) are intangled in these by loue, euen as Vlisses felowes, whiche thorough the melodie and swéete songs of the Syrenes woulde abide in Afrike, forgetting themselues and their natiue countrey. Loue maketh a man oute of hys wyttes, and cleane besyde hym selfe, it casteth hym backewarde, and seduceth hym thorough swéetenesse and flatterie, it counselleth nothyng accordyng vnto reason and equitie, but leadeth vnto al enormities, it robbeth a man of all temperancie, it is lyke to a hooke whiche plucketh all maner of things vnto it, it is a soft enimie, swéete sorrowe, and sadde gladnesse. Loue maketh men slaues, & diuideth them from themselues. He is hurte grieuously, & vtterly perished which falleth in loue, it is insatiable, neuer saying it is ynough. Terence sayeth

that it seduceth and leadeth oute of th
                  •
                way, euen those that se
                  •
               , and thē that are learned and wyse. 
                  •
               e is happie, that by other mens example wi
                  •
               l take warnyng, and through the spectacle of others fal, wareth wyse. 
                  •
               riefly, all and euery kinde of euyll procéedeth of those thrée wyth theyr adherentes, wherewith the whole worlde is polluted, as witnesseth saincte Iohn in hys Canonicall 
                  •
               pistles, saying: Loue not the worlde, neyther the thyngs that are in the w
                  •
               rlde: If any man loue the worlde, the loue of the Father is not in hym. For all that (sayeth he) whych is in the worlde, is the luste of the eyes, and the pride of ly
                  •
               e, is not of the father, but of the worlde, and the worlde passeth away, and the lustes therof, but he that fulfylleth the wyll of God abydeth for euer.
            Touching whiche thrée 
                  •
               ices I might rehearse of all sortes of people more than tenne thousande examples. Whereof some (I speak but temporally, and not of matters concernyng the soule) haue lost theyr money, goodes, and estymation,

some their friendes, libertie, life & goodes. But what neede I to spend my time, and to trouble my braines about it. Al bookes, whether they speake of the Assyrians, Egiptians, Persians, or Medians, Grecians, or Iewes, Romaines, or other countreyes, are full of it. Wherof rede Diodorus Siculus, Iosephus, Plutarch, Titus Liuius, & diuers other historiographers, which haue written vntil our age and time, and we shall finde that all kinde of euill, at the least cōmeth out of one of these thrée, and daily we find it by good experience, that al mischiefe springeth out of these, yea euen in such as had incorporated and ioyned them selues to the church of Christ, foreseyng persecution, crosses, and tribulations to ensue therby, and by and by for feare of a little losse of worldly goodes, commodities, honours, or otherwise, forsoke and turned againe like the dogge to their vomite, and like the sow, after she hath washed hir self, to hir puddle and mire. And to sette the vanitie and inconstancie of worldly and transitorie thyngs, liuelier before your eyes, I haue broughte in

in here twentie sightes or vysions, & caused them to be grauen, to the ende al men may sée that with their eyes, whiche I go aboute to expresse by writing, to the delight and 
                  •
               lesure of the eye and eares, according vnto the saying of Horace.
            
            
               Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci.
            
            That is to say,

                  He that teacheth pleasantly and well,
                  Doth in eche poynt all others excell.
               
Of which oure visions the learned Poete M. Francisce Petrarche Gentleman of Florence, did inuent and write in Tuscan the six firste, after suche tyme as hée had loued honestly the space of .xxj. yeares a faire, gracious, and a noble Damosell, named Laurette, or (as it plesed him best) Laura, borne of Auinion, who afterward hapned to die, he being in Italy, for whose death (to shewe his great grief) he mourned ten yeares togyther, and amongest many of his songs and sorowfull lamentations, deuised and made a Ballade or song, containyng the sayd visions, which bicause they serue wel to our purpose, I haue out of the Brabants speache, turned

them into the Englishe tongue.
            The first then is: That he being vpon a day alone in his window, where he saw as it were in his minde by a vysion a very faire hin
                  •
               , and also two swift hounds, one white and the other blacke chasing & pursuing 
                  •
               ir so long, that at length they caught and killed hir. Which sight caused him to burst oute into sighes and teares for the piteous destinie thereof: That is, for the apointed time of ye death of his loue Laura, w
                  •
               iche he ment by the faire hi
                  •
               de, as by the houndes white and black he vnderstode the daye and nyght, meaning the time passyng away, and not tarying for any one.
            Moreouer, he saw a faire ship or vessel made of yuorie & Hebene wood, wherunto also he cōpared his loue Laura, to wete hir whyte coloured face vnto Iuorie, and hir blackishe browes muche lyke vnto the wood of Hebene. The coardes and ropes were of Sylke, and the sayles of cloath of golde, whereby are meant not onely all hir costely rayement or app
                  •
               
               rell,

but also hir noble and excellent vertues wherewith she was beautified and adorned.
            Againe, he sawe a newe bushe oute of a faire Laurell trée, Holly bowes buddyng forthe, vnder whose shadowe little small birdes didde syng, wyth a verye sweete and melodious harmonie: Understandyng hereby, hir louyng and curteous talke, hir most pleasaunt and swéets song. And by and by he sawe the lyghtenyng and tempest to wyther and drie vp thys faire and goodly Trée. That is, that a burnyng sicknesse came, whiche tooke awaye the lyfe of this fayre damosell his loue Laura.
            
            The other thrée Uisions followyng, are in manner all one, notyfiing hereby that there is nothyng else in thys worlde but myseries, sorrowes, afflictions, and calamities: And all that man doth stay hym selfe vpon in thys worlde, is nothyng but vayne fansie, wynde, and smoake. And thus as he hadde passed ouer many a yeare in greate and vnfayned

loue towardes hir (duryng hir life time) what with flatterie and what in commendyng of hir beautie, caused him vpon a sodaine chaunge after hir departure (as it is sayde) so long a time to mourne and to lamente, but considering with him self, that th
                  •
               re was no comfort, hope or saluation in 
                  •
               orldely loue to be loked for, 
                  •
               urn
                  •
               d him
                  •
               elfe to Godwarde, lamenting and sorrowing the rest of hys lyfe, and repen
                  •
               ed hym of his former life so ydlely and vndecently spent.
            The other ten visions next ensuing, ar described of one Ioachim du Bellay, Gentleman of France, the whiche also, bicause they serue to our purpose, I haue translated them out of Dutch into English.
            First of all, he speaketh of a certayne Architecture or kinde of buildyng, gorgeously and magnificentlike made, as you may sée more plainly in the seuēth figure of our visions. Secondly he sawe a spire, thirdely an Arke triumphant. And then the Dodonian trée, spreading his shadow vpon seuen hilles, namely vpon the hill of Palatine, the h
                  •
               ll Capitolie, the mounte

               Vimiall, the mount Cely, Esquilin, Vimiel, and Quirinel. After that, the birde which is able to beholde the Sunne, that is the Eagle imperiall: and the great Statue, whom he saw leaning on a stone pitcher, whereout runn
                  •
               th a great water, wherby he meaneth the riuer of Tyber, with ye shee wolfe, giuing sucke to two children, which is the Armes of the Romains. The seuenth is a Nimph mournyng and wringyng of hir handes. Eightly, a thrée flaming fire, wherout a birde flushing moū
               ted on hie. Ninthly, a faire spring, and a hundreth Nimphes rounde about it, vnto whome came the Faunes, which brake the Fountaine, and draue them awaye. Last of all, hée telleth of Typheus daughter, whiche after hir greate presumption and pride was vanquished and slaine. With all these he goeth about to persuade, that all things here vpon earthe, are nothing but wretched miserie, and miserable vanitie, shewing also howe Rome hath bene destroyed, which of a base and low estate was lifted vp, and become very hie, and that by none other means than couetousnesse

and the great desire which that people and nation had to money and Ambition, that is, to be reg
                  •
               rded, and to haue authoritie and rule following the nature and condition of their progenitours and Predecessoures Romulus and Remus, whiche were (as histories do tell,) nourished and brought vp of a she wolfe, called Lupa. Oute of whose breastes they haue sucked all manner of crueltie and beastlynesse, gettyng so vnto themselues a woluish courage, yea worse than a Wolfe, as Mithridates Kyng of Ponte cast them in the téeth, bicause they were neuer satisfied of bloud, honour, dignities, and riches, but always indeuoured them selues to get other princes, nations, countreys and Cities, goodes and dominions, whervppon folowed the oppression of other nations, through many great robberies, with great labour and paine, yea to the perill and losse of their owne men and Capitains, and so amplified and augmented aboue mesure their empires, realms, and domynions, stuffed and furnyshed theyr Cytie wyth abundaunce of all maner

of riches, whervpon didde ensue all kinde of sup
                  •
               r
                  ••
               uitie and worldely pompousnesse. So that they adorned their Citie with all maner of sumptuous an
                  •
                costely buyldings, wyth all kindes of curious an
                  •
                cunning workes, as Theaters, Triumphall Arkes, Pyramedes, Columnes, Spires, and a greate number of grauen Images, Statues, Medalles and Figures, made of diuers and sundry kindes of stuffe, as Marble, Alablaster, Golde, Syluer, Copper, Pourphere, Emplaster, Brasse and other like mettall, some grauen, and other some cast. All whiche sumptuousnesse and superfluitie hathe oftentymes thoroughe dissention, discorde and sedition amongst them selues, also by their enimies priuie conspiracy, hate, and particular profite, & by childish and folish counsell, ben to their great hinderaunce and damage. As it is to be seene in their owne Histories. And as they procéeded in all wickednesse, abhomination, superstition, and Idolatrie from time to time, euen so after that CHRIST our Sauioure, and King of

al Kings was crucified vnder Pylate, president of Ierusalem, they ceassed not dayly to kill the poore Christians, persecutyng the church of God in al places, by al kinde of crueltie and tiranny, especially in the time of Nero, Domitian, Traian, Aurelian, Dioclesian, Maxence, & other like, bicause they woulde not obserue and keepe theyr false and superstitious worshyppyng of God, but rather rebuked them, & proued theirs to be false. And forasmuch as that auncient Rome would not amend it selfe, and renounce their enorme vices, Idolatrie and superstition, and conuerte vnto the Lorde Iesu Christe, to imbrace the true worshippyng of God, and the euerlasting Gospel, they haue bene iustly plagued, receyuing according to their desertes, such measure as they had measured to others. Therfore are the Persians, Huines, Frenchmen, Germains or Dutchmen, Vā
                  dales, Eastgothes, & Westgothes rysen against them and their Empire, & haue diuided it, and at lengthe haue they besieged Rome, and haue taken and subuerted, burned, spoyled, and wholly rased it. So the Lord

through his iuste iudgement hath reu
                  •
               nged the innocent bloud of his children. This is shewed vnto vs by these visions and sonets. O worldly vanitie, al things muste passe, saue the loue of God: That which was lifted vp into heauen, is fallen and brought euen to the grounde, & most miserably perished. As also before theyr time many other realmes, as of the Chaldes, and great Cart
                     •
                  age, and other, ar likewyse perished. So Rome neuer obtained the like estimation since, as it had before being in his floure, as it is to be séene yet by some auncient monuments, buildings columnes, & walles, which appere there as yet to beare witnesse of Gods vengeance which came vpon them for their sin and wickednesse, to the ende that all godly and well disposed persons mighte perceiue, that God can and will perfourme his promises, the which he hath thretned in his worde.
            Besides all this, the Romaine Empire hath ben without an Emperour .iij. hundred & twentie yeares, nam
                  •
               ly since Augustus vntill Charlemayn. In the meane

time the Bishop of Rome began to forget all maner of simplicitie, humblenesse and pouertie, and to neglect the seruice and administration of a true pastoure, and to put his minde vpon temporall dominion and rule, beginning so (through the liberalitie of many great Princes, as King Pepin and manye other great Lordes which he inchaunted vnder the pretence of holinesse,) to become so great, that at length he hath set him selfe in the cha
                  •
               re, as soueraigne aboue all the rest, that euen Emperoures were at his commaū
               dement elect and deposed. For the feruent zeale & deuotion was in many Christians already cold, & many of them were addicted and giuen to worldly quietnesse, great estate, and all maner of intēperancie and voluptuousnesse: so that they had more mind to securitie and idlenesse, than to labor and paine, to sleepe, than to work, to take,
                  Sig
                        •
                     bertus.
                than to giue, to banquet, than to preache:
                  Geniblacen.
                and had rather to take their pleasure in this wicked world,
                  Carolus Bo
                     
                        •
                     illu
                        •
                     .
                than to enioy the heauenly pleasures in the world to come. After this, dissention rose amongst

them for the supremacy: then sought they ambitiously to rule and gouerne euer all the whole world. They wold wel be confessors (as they termed them) but few or none woulde be Martirs, for preachyng was cast aside, and pride had occupied the roum of it: wherupon did folow of necessitie, as (Scripture speaketh: where as Gods word is not preached, ther the people perish) many and diu
                  •
               rs heresies, schismes, and sects: as Sabellians, Arrians, Emonians, Macedonians, Priscellians, Nestorians and Eutichians, which diuers and sundry wayes erred in the doctrine and faith, cō
               cerning the diuinitie. The Mani
                     •
                  hes contempned and made light of the olde Testament. The Donatis
                     •
                  s did holde it necessary to be rebaptised again. The Pelagians taught that men could deserue heauen by merits without grace, & other like to thē. Amongst the Bishops was discorde in all places. In the R
                  •
               mish church were many mutations about their el
                  •
               ction: Betwene Liberius & Feliciꝰ was great dis
                  •
               ord about y• popeship. Likewise was it betwéen Damasiꝰ & Vrcisiꝰ, Boniface & Aulatiꝰ, Simache
               
and Laurence,
               
                  Hieronymꝰ. Sigebertus. Ge
                        •
                     iblacenfis.
                
               Boniface and Dioscore, Constātine and Philip, Eugenius and Sisine, Formosie and Stephē, S
                     •
                  rgie and Christopher, Benedict and Leo,
               
                  Vincentius. Anthonius. Plan
                        •
                     ina.
                
               Gregorie and dyuers other. Amongest which, many were accused of heresies, some of incest, and some of other kyndes of euill,
                  Abbas Vrspergensis. Iacobus Bergen
                        •
                     is.
                of whiche some were banished, some deposed, some s
                  •
               landred, some had their eyes put out, other some miserably slaine and murdered no practises,
                  Herman
                        •
                     us Shedel.
                fraudes, guiles nor violence or oppression was left behind: to none other ende than to attaine vnto promotion, honor dignitie and great estate, and to obtaine their malicious purpose. After this sorte did the bishops procéede in al kindes of vanitie and idlenesse, to become loytering prelates puffed vp in pride and presumption, wherby veritie and truth was defaced, and quite abolished. The Sunne began nowe to be darkened and become blacke as a hairen cloath, and the Moone like vnto bloud, the starres of heauen to fall downe: For they dayly practised to get newe and more dominions, they attempted by al means possible to increase

their aucthoritie and power, all their whole study and labour was to aduaunce their h
                  •
               nour and dignitie héere vpon the earth, not without scattering of the commons and innumerable murthers of the people. Iohn Archbishop of Constantinople, debated to be Primate and soueraign of all other Patriarkes. Boniface the third of that name, Bishop of Rome, tooke vpon him to raigne and rule ouer all, and to be the lieuetenāt of God, vpon earth. Again, Mahomet comming afterward, would be adored as a great prophet, and messanger of God. So that by the meanes of couetousnesse, ambition, and carnall concupiscence, the truth is darkened, & the church of Christ moste miserably scattered and dispearsed. The I
                     •
                  wes by a craftie sleight, wrested the scripture to maintaine their Talmuith: the Sarazens their Alcorane: and these prelates and Bishops their Decretals, and all other errors and herisie
                  •
                which were vnder that false prophet Mahomet in Asia and Affricke, and vnder the Pope in Europe, with all their curssed traditions and trifles. They haue banished &

abolished Christe and his doctrine, euery where preferryng their owne ambition, profit, cōmoditie & ease. Whervnto & to obtain it the rather, they haue brought in many superstitions & traditions of men, as Latin seruice (bicause ye comon people should not vnderstād their doings) bells, organs play, cymbales, incense, palmes, candles, tapers, purgatori
                  •
               , masses for al soules, diriges, obsequies, Pilgrimages, indulgences to deliuer the soules out of purgatorie, after thei haue gotten money inough. Item, church holy days, Rogatiō dayes, Relikes, yea coales wherwith S. Laurence was broyled, Iosephs 
               
                  •
               osen, the armes of S. Cornelis, with many more trifles and other relikes. They proc
                  •
               ed further to the forbidding of mariage, meate, egges, butter: in lyke manner images, and crucifixes were sette vp, woorkyng thereby false miracles, alwayes foreseing to their Mao
                     •
                  in, that is, great shops, churches, temples, chapels and Altars, where they might sell their trumperie fréely, not without great gain, yea so wel that they were mounted 
                  •
               o hie in power,

riches, and voluptuousnesse, as we haue se
                  •
               ne by experience, and dayely is to be seene in places where they are, that they rule aboue emperors, kings, & princes: & all this vnder a shewe of pietie and holynesse, as we heretofore haue say
                  •
               e. Of these S. Iohn in his reuelation doth warn vs in his sixte chapiter,
                  Reuel. 
                        •
                     .
                where he sayeth manifestly, that whē the lambe had opened the seuēth seale, he saw a pale horse, and he whiche satte vpon it, was named death: for this cōgregation of hipocrites, notwithstanding their copper faces, and carbuncled noses, through their vnmeasurable gluttony and dronkennesse, are yet in their soule pale, deadish, black and blew, as vnholsom & dead bodies: for th
                  •
               i haue no true life within thē, nor ye blessednesse that co
                  •
               sistet
                  •
                in Christ Iesu,
                  Rom. 2.
                & his holy word.
                  Luke. 12.
                And he which sate on it was death.
                  Math. 6.
                Their doctrine and teaching is nothing but death and damnation. For hypocrisie eng
                  •
               ndreth nothing but des
                  •
               ruction of saluatiō, & their f
                  •
               uits are shame and confusion. For hell foloweth them to destroy those that are seduced by them.
                  Esay. 5.
               
               
               Daniel and Paule they haue foretold that Antechrist shoulde be borne of the subuersion of the Empire,
                  
                     
                        •••
                     uerb. 5.
                and desolation of Rome. And to the ende we myght speake more at large of the thing, I haue taken foure visions out of the reuelation of S. Iohn, where as the holy ghost by S. Iohn setteth him out in his colours.
            
               I saw a beast (sayth S. Iohn) rising out of the s
                     •
                  a,
               
                  
                     
                        ••
                     uel. 13.
                signifiyng the congregation of the wicked and proude hypocrites, which exalt and aduaunce them selues as the Ceder trées of Libanus, they are vnnaturall and beastly like vnto Elmas the inchanter, ful of fraude and guile, full of falshod and pride, they are whelpes and generations of the deuyll, subuerting the ways of the Lord. Thys beast is described here as the pale horse in the fourth age, & the cruel Grashoppers in the fift age, and the mad horsses with Liōs mouths in the vj. age.
                  
                     
                        •
                     poc. 6. 
                        •
                     poc. 9.
                This beast, meaning the odible, fals, & damnable errors & pestiferous inspirations of the diuel, which at this time reign in the beastly mēbres of that monstrous body of the beast, as namely in the outragious

bishops, spiritual lawyers priests, hypocrites, and false Magistrates, for their heads are their subtiltie, and their hornes signifie their tyrannous might. It had also ten crownes vpon his ten hornes, signifiyng their greate dominion and superioritie throughout the whole worlde. The diuell is their prince and Captayne most cruell, and that through the iniquitie and ingratitude of the people: but in this point differ the dragō and the beast, from the diuell and his membres, Sathan and his carnal and beastly congr
                  •
               gation, for he had seuen crounes vpon his seuen heades, and they haue ten crownes vpon their ten heads, mening, that that which he onely hath stirryng vp of the thyng, that haue they. The signification wherof is, that Sathan is only of abilitie and power to blowe into their eares the thing whiche they with violence, and by force maintayne: where as he is but able by fansies and inspiration, there are these his méete instruments to perfourme it & put in execution by violence, and power, by menaces and compulsion. Wher as he

he dallieth onely by playe, there do they seriously force and violently compell. When he hath only engendred and foūd out any error or false doctrine, they with al diligence, as an infallible truth, allow, confirme and stablishe it, and make of it a necessarie article to beleue on, as they haue put in practise their purgatorie, auricular confession, transubstantiation, worshippyng and carying about of dumb Idols, & Images, the hearing of latin seruice, Masse, and other abhominations. As he hath found out any lye (as he is the fat
                  •
               er of all lies, and hath ben since the beginning) so may they holde it for a perfecte written veritie, makyng it of good authoritie and might, as experience may testifie, they haue done. Hereout and such like, it is manifest, that they being hys ghostly ministers and spirituall instrumēts, may e
                  •
               ecute effectually more wickednesse than he him selfe alone, as their works may wel testifie. Sathā
                was not of power to put Christ to death, if it had not bē through Iudas, into whom he entred, & afterward by the bishops & Scribes who

persecuted him vnto deth. The Apostles, tru ministers & other witnesses of Christ shold neuer haue bē persecuted, whipped,
                  Math. 2
                        •
                     .
                scourged, tormēted and miserably slaine, neither shold they at this present, if these popish prelates did not folow & maintain their old & accustomed maners, and fulfil ye mesure of their fathers. And vpon his heads were names of Blasphemie against the Lord and his Christ. Al this is nothing else than their shining & glorious titles, wher with they suborne and make great their supremacie & their estimation, & as holy and blamelesse to bee regarded among men, and before the world, wherevnder is couered & comprehended all maner of iniquity. What ar Popes, Cardinals, patriarks, legates, chief heads, archbishops, pronotaries, archdeacons, officialls, commissaries, prebendaries, vicars, lorde abbot, master or doctor, and suche like, what are these I say else but names of blasphemie? for these offices & titles are not of the holy ghost, neither is there any mention made of them in the holy scripture. What is it I pray you else, than a great

abhomination & blasphemy that the Pope claimeth to him selfe to be the most holy father, to be the Uicare of Christ, God on earth, supreame head of the Church, the only steward of the gifts, graces, and misteries of God? What meaneth it that Priests and Bishops do arrogātly ascribe to thē selues to be Bridegromes, to stand in Gods stead, to haue power to pardon sinne, and to be our Ladies clean and vndef
                  •
               led knights? What be these else than names of blasphemie? For they are nothing else as Zacharie termeth thē (hauing no care of féeding of the flock, but through 
                  •••
               re negligence and slouth sette a side preaching of the word, through these vain titles) than very offending Idols. Their Decrées, Decretals, traditions, rules, ordinaunces, statutes, customes of the Fathers, general Counsels, Sinodes, and other of their vsages, not grounded on the word of God and his wil, are nothing else but dampnable hipocrisie, and diuelish dissimulation, blaspheming the name of the Lord. For the names of blasphemy on his heade is nothing else but to maintaine

vnder an honest and vertuous shew, that which is blasphemous, to his own aduācement. This beast was like the Leopard, spotted and blemished, tokens of inconstancie, chaungeablenesse, and temeritie. His feete like to a Beares feete, fearful and horrible, il fauored of fashion, and deformed, signifying crueltie, stubbornesse, stoutnesse and vncleanesse. And his mouth as the mouth of a Lion, declaring héereby the pride, theft, murther, and all kinde of wickednesse of those Prelates. Daniel saw in a vision, a Lion, wherto that proud kingdom of the Assirians and Chaldees were to be compared. Unto the Beare which he sawe, was likened the barbarous and rude realmes of the Medes & Persians. By the Leopard is meant the vnstedfast kingdome of the Grecians. The Assirians and Chaldees were for their stealing and Pride, rebuked and curssed of the Prophets Esay, Nahum,
               
                  Nahum .25 Esay. 13.
                and Abacuck.
               
                  Abacuck .1.
                The Medeans and Persians kept the people of God in captiuitie and bondage. As it is to be séene in the bookes of Hester,
               
                  Hest. 23.
                
               Paralipomenon and Esay.
               
                  2. Paralip. 3
                        •
                      Esay. 22.
                The Grecians also were very spitefull,
                  2. Macha. 2.
                and full of

reproche to the people of God, in the time of that cruell Tyrant Antiochus, as it appeareth in the Booke of the Machabees.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Macha. 2.
                But this beast whiche S. Iohn speaketh of here, dothe comprehende all these thrée which Daniel saw, namely the bodye like vnto a Leopard, pawes like vnto a Bear, and the mouth to the Lion. Whereby the holy Ghost teacheth vs, that within thys one curssed Popedom or kyngdom of Antechrist, should be as much, and more abhomination, Idolatrie, fornication, murther, and all kind of wickednesse, as were in all these thrée realmes aforesaid. As at this day it is to be séene, and we haue had good experience. No where raigned at any time more pride, idlenesse, cruelty, Idolatry, fornication, adultery, vncleannesse, Sodometrie, enuie, dissimulation, falshoode and inconstancie, vaine glorie, iniquitie, sorcerie, superstition and impietie, than doth in this one dominion of Antechrist. He alone hath more contaminated Gods holy Temple, than all the infidels together that euer were: they haue most shamefullye intreated and iudged

the very electe people of God,
                  1. Corin. 
                        •
                     
                  
                which are the vessels of his glory.
                  Rom. 9.
                They haue most miserably and narowly kept vnder, and as it were in prison, the true Minister
                  •
                of God by their Decrées and traditions. The seueritie and rudenesse of Pharao, Antioche, and Caiphas, is nothing in the comparison of theirs, for in them is all kind of beastlinesse, vncleanlinesse, wantonnesse, concupiscence and carnall securitie. No reason or humanitie hath any place amongst them, they are more lyke beasts than men. The rigorous Proclamations against the Iewes,
               
                  Hest. 3.4.
                (at the request of wicked Ammon and of Antioche,
               
                  1. Mach. 2.3
               ) are nothing to speake of, to the ordinaunces and statutes of the Antechrists, for those were only against the body, but theirs are against the soule and conscience of man also. After this sort doth the Popedō (which is the dominiō of Antechrist) bear the Image of the Leopard, of the Bear, & of the Liō, bicause it is not only partaker of al ye wickednesses with oth
                  •
               r realmes, but it excéedeth and surmounteth al other vi
                  •
               . times double in all kinde of iniquitie,
                  Psalm. 9
               
               
                  Rom. 3.
               
               
idolatrie,
                  Rom. 
                        •
                     .
                & abhominations yt euer were cōmitted vnder heauen. They haue the mouth of a Lyon, always blasphemyng, cursing and banning: Their feete lyke a beare, signifiyng their insatiab
                  •
               e couetousnesse, runnyng headlong to euery kinde of mischiefe,
                  Rom. 
                        •
                     .
                very ready to sheade bloud: as leopards are they polluted and spotted with dyuers and sundry inconstant mindes, institutions & obseruings, neuer stedfast or constant, but in al thinges chaungeable and foolishe:
                  
                     
                        •
                      Thess. 2.
                for suche as receiue not Gods truthe, are worthily forsaken of God. Therfore God shall sende them strong delusions, that they shoul
                  •
                beleeue lies, that all they might be damned which beleue not the truth, but haue pleasure in vnrighteousnesse. The D
                     •
                  agon (sayth S. Iohn) which is Sathan the Diuell
                  •
                
               gaue to the beast or cursed generation of Antechrist, his beastly membres, his whole power, his seate of blasphemie, and his great authoritie. To giue them his power is nothyng else, than to make them perfect and skilfull by all maner of crafte, subtiltie and dissimulation, cunnyngly

to seduce the simple & silly soules: and so forth to confirme and stablysh them in al kinde of wickednesse and falshods. To gyue vn
                  •
               o hym his seate, is to leaue him he
                  •
               e a glorious kingdome, full of vain glory, 
                  •
               is
                  •
               imulation, & other wickednesse.
                  2. Thess. 
                        •
                     .
                To giue him hi
                  •
                great authoritie, is to worke by false miracles, signes and wonders, and by false and 
                  •
               rr
                  •
               nious do
                  ••
               rine, to allure the p
                  ••
               ple, and to draw the vnb
                  •
               leuing infidels the rather to the p
                  •
               t of perditiō and euerlasting torments.
                  2. Thess. 2.
                On this maner is that greate Antechrist a king with Sathan 
               
                  •
               uer all the children of pride and darknesse. He occupieth and possesseth 
                  •
               alsly with Lucifer the seat and 
                  •
               oume of God, taking vpon hym euen to search and créepe into mens consciences: For he b
                  •
               steth him self to stand in Gods stede to deceiue th
                  •
               m that 
                  •
               well on the earth, to reigne and to beare rule ouer them, for so much as they (hauing a blind guide) are l
                  •
               d into the ditche of all errour and false doctrine, the very way vnto euerlasting pe
                  •
               dition. Touchyng the seat euen as Christe our Lorde (with his Father

raigning eternally) sitteth in heauen vpon the seate of his Maiestie in eternall glory & felicitie, euē so sitteth 
                  •
               ntechrist, the Pope of Rome, I mean
                  •
                with his 
                  •
               ather the Deuil, full of pride and blasphemie, in the seat of cōdemnation, in eternal darknesse, ignomie, and shame.
                  Mat
                        •
                     . 28.
                Cōcerning his power,
                  Iohn .17. Iohn .1.
                euen as Christ receiued his power of God his father, euen so hath he rec
                  •
               iued his authoritie of his father the Deuil. Euen as Christ is full of mercy & truthe: euen so is this Antechrist ful of enuie and hate, vntruthes and lies, and al other mischiefs: of whose abhominations & errors, the vnbeleuing and infidel hath tasted. As the holy ghost and the sprite of Christ openeth the misteries of the truth in his elect euen so on the other side hath the spirit of erroure, since the death and reuelation of Christ, darkned truth and set forth the secretes of his malice in the ennimies of Christ. Cōcerning his aucthority, as christ being man,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ohn .3.
                receiued his aucthority of god,
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Thess. 2.
                to doe such miracles as no man else could do: Euen so doth this Antichrist, by the Deuill and Gods permission amongs the

infidels and vnbeleuers. So that he in all power and aucthoritie vniustly vsurped, foloweth, yea passeth his father the deuil. For as he robbed the godly man Iob,
               
                  Iob. 1.2.
                        ••
                     
                  
                and spoiled him of all his substance, goods, children, seruaunts, and cattel, and tormēted him in his body with 
                  •
               oils and Botches, euen so doth this rauenous and greadye Leuiathan, and cruell murtherer, vexe, consume, and oppresse the poore people, by his spoiling Grashoppers, defrauding the poore of their sweat and bloud,
                  Psal. 73.
                of theyr paines,
                  Reuel. 9
                trauaile, necessitie, and liuing: no not sparing the féeble and sicke, neyther widow nor fatherlesse. No kind of good (be it neuer so vniustly gotten) being brought to them, in shriuing of some one burdened in conscience, but that they are cō
               tented to receiue it, and that by the way of restitution. Yet neuerthelesse do they, (which is worst of all) lead mennes mindes to dissimulatiō, false belief, and other diuelishnesse, doubtfull, desperate, and comfortlesse.
            Finally, euen as in the body of Christ, dwelleth fulnesse of the whole Deitie:

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
Euen so in this body of Sathan dwelleth the whole masse of impietie, subtilitie, fraud and malice, with power to worke all maner of mischiefe mightely, substantially and corporally. And I saw one of his heads, as it were wounded to death, with the sword of his mouth:
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Thessa. 2.
                that is, through the anouncing and preaching of the Gospell. Which thing is come to passe since the time of Iohn Hus in Boheme, & after that in Germanie, and is since (God be praised) daily more and more, that the head of the Beast is wounded, in places where gods word is preached. As in England, Fraunce, Scotland, Poland, and else where, as euery one may wel perceiue, except he will needes be blinde. For it is euident to al men, that in most places, Buls and Pardones of the Pope are little set by, hys power and might troden vnder féete, hys name blotted out, his Purgatory, Masses, Pilgrimages, Idols, and other like trumperies, cried out vpon. If this be not a deadly wound on the head of the beast, I think it to haue none at all. If this be not a manifest token of his fall to come, there is

none to be looked for. But his deadly woundes were healed. Although the Gospel hath ben preched in sundry and diuers places, and the popes abhominations cast vpside downe, yet remaineth (in some places) their false priesthood vows not to mary, Sodomish chastitie, auricular con
                  •
               ession, or at the least the fashion of it, and other more superstitions. For the beast seketh al meanes to recouer, yea & hath brought to passe, that the eyes of many learned ministers, and pastors waxe dimme, and as it were asléepe, so that they do not narowely searche, or diligently trie euery matter by the onely touchstone of Gods holy word, but weigh them rather by deceiuable custome, and take their course to the fathers, and their good intents. Although they are sure, and throu
                  •
               hly persuaded the Pope to be very Antechrist, & that these names are put out of their bookes, yet are these ceremonies, (before of no value or at the least indifferent) nowe of necessitie to be obserued and kepte, as godly rites, honorable and singular ornaments. Although they say, the Masse to

be of no value in Latin, yet in their own language to be a sacrifice propiciatorie: other haue a greate trust and confidence in saying Dimitte nobis, or any other like thing, not vnderstanded. Some will vpholde and maintaine the free wyl in man. Other some wyll not bee Papistes, but are well halfe, yea and worse than Papistes. Also the wounded head of the beast is healed and redressed in some places by force and power of worldly princes, the whiche muste fight for the Pope, and in suche tyme and place as it se
                  •
               meth him good, slaying, kyllyng, and burnyng all such as he commaūdeth, destroying their owne realmes, murtheryng and banishing their good and true subiects, bicause they séeke the honoure of GOD, and to serue hym arighte. These Princes bée as it were bewitched and drawne by a subtill kinde of flattery, in calling them ignominiously most christen princes, defendours of the vniuersall and catholike fayth, meanyng the Romish decrées. And after thys sorte is healed and cured the wounde of the Beast, by the meanes of

these oyntmentes and Chirurgians. And the whole worlde (sayeth S. Iohn) did wonder at the beast. &c. The foolish people, worldly and carnall minded, not vnderstanding the wysedome of the holy ghost, imbracyng all those glorious and ioylye sightes, as godly, meritorious, and spirituall matters, and wondryng at them, worshypped, exalted, and made muche of it, yea aboue the things ordeined and instituted of GOD. whose blyndenesse is growne to suche grossenesse, that they wyll not nor can forsake theyr olde and more than outragious kynde of worshippyng, whiche is rather custome than religion. For whē they haue any hope that theyr wicked custome shal continue, they clap their handes, and crie oute 
                  •
               or ioye with Baals priestes Gaudeamus. And they worship the Dragon, who gaue power to the beast, that is to say, they reioyce in their mindes, hoping that their kingdome shall abide and stande: chiefly when they sée his head againe whole and sounde that is their gouernour, the godly prechers burned, the Instructers of the people slayne

or banished, persecuted and put to silence as it hath ben practised in our natiue coū
               trey of low Germanie. All those that worshyp the Dragon, worship the beast also: for as those whiche honour Christ, honor hys father also, in lyke maner all those whiche adore Antechrist, that is to say, consent and holde of his traditions, masses, and ordinaunces, all those (I saye) worship the diuel, of whom they haue receyued all his wickednesses. Who is like vnto the beast? namely in out ward shew of holynesse, or obseruation of false rites and Ceremonies. Who is able to warre against him? say they, consyderyng that worldly princes are readie to defend his quarrell, and take his parte. The papists goe about by all meanes possible, be it by crafte or subtiltie, by force or violence to maintain their adulterous, fained, & disguised churche in hir diseased estate, power and holy shewe: no kinde of wickednesse, craftinesse, or policie leaue they vnassayed or vnattempted to make them to bée regarded of the people, for holy and spiritual men of gret power, worthinesse

and estimation. It foloweth in our text. And there was giuen vnto him a mouthe to vtter great and blasphemous things. When Gods truth was reueled vnto them, they thāked him not, but became vain in their imaginations,
                  Rom. 11.
                and therefore God gaue them ouer to vncleane lustes of their owne hearts, blinded with vnbeliefe and peruerted minds, so yt whē they thought to be very wise, becam then stark fooles. Now vtter they in their counsells, consistories & sermons, blasphemies agaynst God, and his Christ. They make the people by straight lawes to cleaue to them, and all their Romishe and beggerly ceremonies and vile borrowed trumperies: be it neuer so great a grief to them. The holy and sacred scriptures may not once be red, neither may it be had in the mother tong. For the Scripture (say they) must be expoūded as pleaseth them, & according as they think good for their own aduantage. And how trow ye, could thys wound of ye beast else wel be healed? for the infallible word of God (which be the Scriptures) hath giuen him this wound.

They wyll not that Christe be our alone and sufficient Sauior, without our owne merits & deseruings. The Lords supper (whiche in holy Scripture, is called the Communion of the body and bloude of Iesus Christ,) must be wyth them a new crucifiyng of hys bodie: Wherin, as in a play or Comedie, one creature alone, playeth fiue or sixe personages or players partes, namely of Iudas, Anna, Cayphas, Herode, Pylate, and the Iewes. We
                  •
               lorke is called of them vncleane, notwithstandyng it was instituted as a good and vndefiled ordinaunce of God him selfe,
                  Tim. 4. Tim. 4.
               
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     eb. 13.
                no papistica
                  •
                vowes of Monkes and Friers may be broken, although it be sufficiently proued to be most wicked and diuelish and hath ingendred a thousande Sodomites. Again, that without the blind mumbling and laying on of the priests hande, synnes can not be forgyuen, as they say: for in déede by this one vowe their kyngdome is maintained. And more other abhominations are vttered by his mouth, & y
                  •
               t dayly be, of which (to make it shorter) and not to trouble the reader ouermuch,

I wyll leaue rehearsing of them: yet muste I néedes touche by the waye, the great blasphemie whiche they commit in saying, that the entryng into the holy Church cōsisteth onely by the meanes of their greasing & shauyng, excluding herewithall all other of what estate or condition soeuer they be, calling them lay mē, and vnder the pretence of this false title, they take vppon them to bée sauiours of mens soules, affirmyng their Masses to be sacrifices propiciatorie for the quicke and the dead, iustifiyng, helping and comfortyng, and ex opere operato sauing and redéemyng man. And ouer their abhominable and stinkyng troupe of Antechristes, they create & make Emperours and kings chiefe gouerners, only to be maintained and defended by them in their malicious wickednesse. Kings & princes are ordeined of God to be heades and rulers in ciuile and pollitike matters: but God forbid, that a godly and vertuous Prince (whom they disdayn, and are rebellious & disobedient vnto,) should be called their head, and claym
                  •
                a title and supremacie

ouer them, 
                  •
               or that onely belongeth vnto Sathan: for the Diuell is (sayeth Iob) the onely chiefe head of the proude.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ob .41.
               
            
            
               And power was giuen vnto them (sayth our text) for .xlij. mon
                     •
                  ths to rule,
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Reg. 17.
                which are the thrée yeres and a halfe of Helias,
               
                  Dan 12.
                and one halfe tyme of Daniel,
               
                  Apoc. 21.13.
                and the thousande two hundreth and thrée score dayes of S. Iohn. He openeth his mouth to blasphemie against God and his name, and to blaspheme his holy Tabernacle and inhabiters of heauen. The tabernacle of God is Christ Iesu, in whom the fulnesse of the godhead abideth wholy and perfectly. By the inhabiters of heauen, is ment his true church, whereout the Aungels are not excluded. These inhabiters then, are those whiche leade an heauenly lyfe in a true and vnfained faith,
                  
                     
                        •
                     oloss. 3.
                séeking the things which are aboue,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ohn .4.
                and not on earth, worshipping god the father in spirite and truthe,
                  Math 24.
                abidyng stedfast and immoueable to the ende.
                  Luc. 9.
               
               
                  
                     •
                  phe. 6. Many haue entred into this heauen, but are not founde faythful and constant vnto the ende, whiche is lamentable.
            
               And to this beast, (or beastly Antechrist)

               was giuen power to fight against the Sainctes.
               
                  1. Corinth.
                They trouble and vexe continually,
                  Actes .4.6.
                with force and violence,
                  Exod. 1.
                by their wicked and vngodly Decrées, lawes,
                  Hest. 3
                and ordinances, by their worldly aucthoritie and power,
                  1. Machab. 
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  Math. 20. 1
                the true witnesses,
                  Luke .2.
                and godly preachers of Christ,
                  1. Peter .1
                instructed and taught (euen as the Apostles were) of God him self in the truth of his holy word, euē as the wicked Phariseis in the time of Christ, and his Apostles did. They persecute them by writs & proclamations, by banishments, fire, and sword, as the cruell tirant Pharao and Antiochus did, to shew manifestly that Christ is that stumbling stocke, and the stone of offense, whereat the world stumbled. They search and seeke héere, they hunt there, neuer ceassing vntill they haue him fast in prison, and forthcomming, wherat they are not yet satisfied, till such time as they haue procéeded openly before all men, (following theyr placcate) thereby to fortifie men in theyr error against them. And so vanquished (as they boast) to condemne thē, although they are otherwyse before GOD.

Then either they make him to recant, or else if he abi
                  •
               e constant in the faythe of Christ, they put him to most cruel death, either by fire or water. And power was giuen vnto the Beaste ouer euery kinred, tongue, and nation: For these wicked and abhominable Antechristes spare no man, small nor great, yong nor olde, high nor low, riche nor poore, sicke nor whole, learned nor vnlearned, but that they must bow before them, and become subiecte to their most wicked commaundements, either by force or otherwise: they must haue them, at the least once a yeare at shrift before them, to knowe their minde and intention, whether they be Towne dwellers or Straungers, Gouernours or common people. No excuse will serue or take any place in this behalfe, or else they must wyth Christ, raigne at the Barre among Théeues.
                  Math. 27.
                And thys power they haue not onely in one place,
                  Mar. 15
                        •
                     
                  
                but in all places,
                  Luke .23
                tongues, and in euery Towne,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ohn .19
                yea they must haue to doe amongst euery familie, destroying the true and godly fayth of all

men. For all that dwell vpon earth, shall worship the beast. They must all consent to their great abhomination. They muste blaspheme and offend God,
                  2. Tim. 3.
                obserue and keepe their most filthy traditions, and Romishe trashe. They that dwell vpon earth, are such as doe loue them selues more than God, their owne affection more than Gods truthe, putting theyr confidence, comfort, and hope, in the only beggerly merites and vile deseruings of these beastly and abhominable Hipocrites, and not vpon the swéete promises of God in his worde,
                  Luke .10
                
               Whose names are not wrytten in the booke of the Lambe.
               
                  Rom. 11
                They which are not confessed of Christ,
                  Philip. 3
                nor accepted by his word and promisses.
                  1. Corin. 6.
               
               
                  Iohn .15
                They which wyth the righteous as members of one spirituall body,
                  Psalm. 16.
                and 
                  •
               idden in him,
                  Iohn .14
                are not marked nor Registred, (whose part and portion is not in the land of the liuing) that are not of the nūber of those which the father hath giuen vnto Christ, to be participant of one spirit with him. They which are not ordeined, predestinated nor written in his forknowledge,

neither of him before the foundations of the world,
                  Rom. 9.
               
               
                  Ephes. 1.
                elected, & chosen to be hys childrē immaculate in Christ.
                  Iohn .1.
                Al these I say, must worship the Dragon.
                  Iohn .15.
                
               The Lambe is Christ Iesu,
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 2
                the which only taketh away the sinnes of the world, in whom is only life, for he is the life him selfe, of them namely which beleue on him, which was slaine from the beginning, for all them which are created to saluation. So that his only death, resurrection, and ascentiō, through the promise of God,
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Corin. 10.
                is the saluation of thē all, for they all haue tasted of one spirituall meat, & dronke of one spiritual stone. Albeit he came a long season after them in the flesh, he onely did tread downe the head of the Serpent. Also he hath bene slaine from the beginning,
                  Genes. 3.
               
               
                  Math. 23.
                in his members, as it is to be seene euidently in iust Abel, Ieremy, Iohn Baptist, & many more.
                  Genes. 3.
               
               
                  Math. 14.
                But those which are not written of the Lamb in the booke of life, be sealed in the booke of death,
                  2. Peter .2.
                and kept (as S. Peter saith) with the Diuel and his angels to eternal death, bicause of their vnbeliefe.
                  Iohn .1.
                
               He that hath cares to heare, let him heare, (sayeth the

text.) He yt hath any wit, let him giue place to ye admonition which followeth, he that will be wise, let him iudge according to the demonstration of these things. After this sort doth the holy Ghost certifie hys faithfull,
                  1. Corinth. 
                        •
                     
                  
                warning them to consider that all which is written, is wrytten to our learning and edification. He that leadeth into captiuitie
                     •
                   shall goe into captiuitie. Thys warning giueth the Lord, let them take héede i
                  •
                they lust, for he wil that his iudgments be knowne. They which doe afflict and vexe the faithfull in their bodies outwardly, shal be vexed and punished in the spirit with inward darknesse, and strickē with blindnesse of the minde, to abide the rather in the net of Sathan, and sinne: God wil leaue them in a reprobate sense,
                  Rom. 1
                and inordinate lust,
                  2. Thessa. 
                        •
                     
                  
                and suffer them to enter into great errors and diuelishnesse, to belieue all manner of lies, that they might be damned. If any kil with the sword,
               
                  2. Tim. 4.
                the pore and innocent for their faith,
                  2. Peter .2.
                
               must also be killed,
               
                  Ephe. 6.
                iudged and condemned throughe the sword of the spirite,
                  2. Thessa. 
                        •
                     
                  
                which is the worde of God. The word which I haue

spoken (saith Christ) shall condemne them at ye last day, as he testified also in his Reuelation in the eleuenth Chapter: If any will molest or trouble them, the fire shall procéede forth of their mouth, to consume their aduersaries. A
                     •
                  d I saw yet (sayth S. Iohn) an other Beast rising out of the earth, hauing two hornes like the Lambe. Signifying and representing all manner of false Prophets, vngodly teachers, which are in their intents & purpose wholy and altogither beastly, idle, carnall, and corrupted. They are also abhominable in the imagitions of their malitious harts, not seking god, but their belly, not ye honor of christ, but their own aduancemēt & vain glory. They rise out of the earth, enclined & giuen wholly to earthly & worldly wisdom. The desire and lust which they haue to raign in this world, maketh thē to preach not for any loue or zeale which they bear to truth. The desire of money & couetousnesse thrusteth them in. Thei go forward in al kind of wickednesse, & shall continue til the Lord destroy thē, euen as the godly goeth on in vertue & godlinesse til y• time

that they shall sée 
                  •
               od face to face,
                  2. Peter .2.
                in that euerlasting Sion.
               
                  1. Cori
                        •
                     . 1
                        •
                     
                  
                This beast was a murtherer from the beginning first of all in Cain,
               
                  Gene. 14.
               
               
                  Gene. 9.17. 21.57.28.
                and consequently in the carnal children of this world.
                  
                     
                        •
                     xod, 7.
                Namely in Cham the first vnshamefast sonne of Noe,
               
                  2. Timo. 3
                in Ismael & Esau, in Iames and Iambres,
               
                  Nume. 22
                in Balaam and al the false prophets of Baal,
               
                  Iudic. 22.2
                        •
                     
                  
                in Annas and Caiphas,
               
                  Ieremy. 20
                in Baricha and Diotrephe,
               
                  Math. 27.
                and is now a dayes risen again in Friers, Monkes,
                  Actes. 13
                Chanons, Priests and Chanters,
                  Iohn .1.
                as euery one,
                  3. Reg. 16.
                (haue he neuer so little a sparcle of light in him) may easily sée and perceiue: especially in their cathedral church where they haue their 
                  •
               ull course. Thys beast had .ij. horns like the Lamb, but coūterfaited & altogither fals. For she spake like th
                     •
                   Dragon. The horns of Christ are hie, & great, wherout only springeth the sweete comfortes of the promises of God, giuen to his Church, congregation and people. Gods word is right,
                  Psalm. 44
                        •
                     
                  
                and the Scepter of the au
                  •
               thority of Christ, and the rod of his righteous ordinaunces, that wheresoeuer this worde ruleth, there are none other strāge scepters, institutions, or customes.

The Lambe of God vpon the Mount Sion (signifying Christ Iesus) hath seuen hornes, for in him consisteth the fulnesse of al truth.
                  
                     
                        •
                     pocal. 14
                This beast hath but .i
                  •
               . hornes, and those counterfaited and false. They haue well a shew to be Christes hornes,
                  Iohn .16.
                but of a truth they are not.
                  Collos
                        •
                     . 2.
                These then do signifie the corruptyng and falsifiyng the meaning both of the old and new Testament, expounded and wrested to a worldly and carnal vnderstanding. Wherout it is too apparant and manifest, that it is but a false shew, ful of dissimulation, and altogither contrary to the Lordes meaning, not discearning the true meaning of the holy Ghost.
                  1. Cor. 2.
                This letter without the spirite of God,
                  2. Cor. 3.
                is death, and nothing agreable vnto Christ,
                  Iohn .14
                neither hath any regarde vnto him.
                  Iohn .6
                He is the truthe and life, this is very lies and death.
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 13
                His word is spirite and life, theirs is but sounding Erasse, or tinkling Cimbal, fantasticall, 
                  •
               ained, Sophistical and crafty: although they séeme to haue a likenesse to Christ, yet are they to none more vnlike. They are onely the hornes of the beast, to maintain the kingdome

of Antechrist, and not of Christe, for Christes 
                  •
               yngdome is not of thys worlde. They chaunge the true vsage of the good creatures of God,
                  Iohn .1
                        ••
                     
                  
                making Idols of trees,
                  Rom. 1.
                adornyng and deckyng stockes and stones, with golde, siluer, silke, veluet, and other iewelles, turning the holy estate of Matrimonie into shamefull whoordome,
                  Heb. 13.
                and to all kinde of vnchafte liuyng, to make vs to wander from that seruice which God hath commaunded vs,
                  Math. 15.
                to their false & moste abhominable superstitions, so to abolishe and make of n
                  •
               ne effect Gods commaūdement, and to establish their wicked traditions, to bring & leade men at length to detestable idolatrie, wherof they are ful, and to worship things forbidden. And for the maintenāce of their estate, they haue wyth the ayde and helpe of Sathan their chief captaine, wrested, chopped and chaunged the scriptures to proue the adoratiō of the departed Saintes to be necessarie, their masse meritorious, and their workes of supererogation profitable, their purgatorie to bee a fearefull and horrible thyng, and

other innumerable. These beastly asses and belly God byshops, are not ashamed to saye, that by the 
                  •
               yter whyche they doe weare, is represented the olde and newe Testamente, whiche to be true, they defende wyth toothe and nayle. They confesse (as it is in de
                  •
               de) that they do weare but the figure of the thyng: for it is but a shadowe in déede, and an outwarde shewe, not to the glorie of 
                  •
               od, but their owne ambition, profite, and cō
               moditie, séeking an occasion to persecute the very truthe.
                  Math. 7.
                They are, of a truthe, the false Prophetes,
                  2. 
                        •
                     hes
                        •
                     . 2.
                the very limmes of Sathan,
                  1. 
                        •
                     im. 3.
                deceyuers, Wolues, hie mynded,
                  1. Corin. 6.
                inconstant,
                  Math. 3.
                shakyng wyth all manner of wyndes,
                  2. Corin. 11.
                traitours, and very folowers of Iudas,
               
                  Ezech. 34.
                dreamers, liers, idolaters, enimies,
                  E
                        •
                     ay. 56.
                and aduersaries of truthe and veritie,
                  Philip. 3.
                serpents, and generation of vipers,
                  Esay. 6.
                Foxes destroying the vineyarde of the Lorde,
                  Iere. 2.
                deceiptful workers, 
                  •
               aintyng pastors, blynde watchmen, dumbe dogs, diuels incarnated, wycked or euill routes, insatiable beastes, whose belly is theyr god, and their end perpetuall confusion

and shame. All these, and many more names, the holy Ghoste doth attribute vnto them, bycause they myngle the swéetenesse of the word of God with the bitter worme wood of their Traditions, so that almost the whole worlde is defiled with the dregs of their inuentions. This beast did all that the first beast
                     •
                   coulde do before him. This beastly generation hath the selfe same lying power to deceiue the p
                  •
               ople, and vnder the shew of holynesse to continue and vpholde thoroughout all the worl
                  •
               e, the same abhohominations, as that greate Ant
                  •
               christe hath done euery where. Namely, vnder the Pope in Eu
                     •
                  ope and in Asia, and in Affrike vnder Mahomet. Fynally, there hath Sathan his chayre, whe
                  •
               e any s
                  •
               range wors
                  •
               yppyng or false seruyng of God is admitted.
            
               And he caused the earthe and them that dwell therin to worship the beast. They make not those onely to commit idolatrie that are ignorant and blinde, but force suche as haue knowledge and vnderstandyng. Oh how many are at this instant in Brabant,

Flande
                     •
                  s, and the low countrey, and else where, whiche agaynst their belefe, conscience, and the holy ghost, maintain, allowe, and permit the mani
                  •
               est 
                  •
               abylonicall abhomination, communicating the venemous dregges of the barbarous cup of these Baals priestes. They had rather to tarrie ignominiously in this beggerly trashe and filthie ceremonies, than to be depriued of this worldly fri
                  •
               ndshyp (to forsake father, mother, childrē, estate office and liuing,) banished & persecuted, or aduenture their liues, and if néede so require, to loose it for the truthe, so delectable and swéete these worldely pleasures are vnto them. They rather with Samuels sonnes wyll perishe, transgressing the ordinances of GOD,
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Reg. 12.
                and with Dathan, Chore, Abiron, be swallowed vp, and sinke into Hel amongst the wicked, than to suffer wyth Christe any trouble, contempte, reproche, pouertie, or other calamitie. Suche I say, as séeke and loue the commoditie, and ease of their owne fleshe, their honour, & profite, more than the aduauncement of Gods truthe, lette

them not persuade them selues to bée worthy of his grace, for they must worshyp the beast, whose deadly wounde was healed, hys olde and abolyshed Relygion polyshed and vernyshed vp a newe, and hys woren Romyshe trashe p
                  •
               tched and newly redressed, embrace vpon payne of death. To those hellishe dogges and infernall Cerberus must be rendred and giuen for a time, more honour, reuerence and worshyp than to GOD hym selfe. Their wicked and moste fylthie traditions must now be more (in our countrey) sette by,
                  Math. 15.
                than the pure worde of God and the eternall veritie. And why should it not be so? Haue not they erected a new sinagoge and congregation, wherein the wounded head of the beast is nowe altogether cured and made whole? They haue amended, botched, and renued agayne their Idols, to some they hau
                  •
                made a newe nose, hand, arme or legge, other some are paynted vp or coloured, vernyshed and made a new, so that they now (more like mad men) do carrie them rounde aboute the Citie in Procession,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
honouryng the same images (which they 
                  •
               aue so newly arayed and decked wyth silke, veluet, golde, pearles and precious stones, beades, gyrdles, purses, flowers, greene bowes, and all manner of swéete herbes) with song and sundry musicall instrumentes, torches, candles, offerings, and all other kynde of seruice, and knéelyng before them bare headed, they worship, serue, and holde vp theyr handes to them. They keepe and obserue nowe againe their diuelyshe feastyng,
                  
                     
                        •
                     phe. 4.
                solemne processions and church holy dayes. They eate, they drinke, they laugh, they quaffe, and run after whoores, they fight and pike quarels, their stewes are furnished wyth whoores: ruffians, and bauds are nowe good vittaylers, and are haunted fréely: yea all manner of filthynesse, iniquitie and wickednesse, are cōmitted with al greedinesse. Briefly, the kingdom of Sathan is in all things newly erected fortified and established: the head of the beast wel annointed and redressed: so lōg as the popish church stādeth, so long must they obserue his comaundementes of his

religion, and maintaine and vpholde his customes, so long shall the true seruauntes of God, the good Christians, be persecuted, bannished, blamed, slaundered, mocked, and scornefully intreated, cried out vpon, taken, imprisoned, killed, myserably slayne and burned, in suche sort that their corpses are cast here and there abrode, hanged on trées, g
                  •
               bets, and bushes, and no man will burie them. But thys diuelysh generation and fleshly mynded and wycked people clappe their handes together in token of greate ioy,
                  Psal. 79.
                they daunce and leape, they make mery and are gladde, they make great diners, and sende presentes one to an other, being wonderful wel disposed, bicause they sée those that dyd rebuke them of their wycked conuersation, and vngodly behauioures, so irkesomly intreated, they sing and make ballettes, they compose in metre, and sette forth bookes of greate slaunders, blasphemies and lyes, against GOD, his Christe, and his Churche, whyche thyng surely dothe sufficientely proue the wickednesse of their hearts:

they rage and fume, they are woode lyk
                  •
                bloud thyrstie Tyrantes, they gnashe as fierce and cruell Lyons, and they are very sorie that any shoulde escape theyr bloudy handes. Thys may those testifie whiche haue hearde the Sermons of one B. Cornelis y• 
               Hisper at Bruges, B. Iohn vanden Hagen at Gaunt, and that worthie knaue that preached at S. Goule, whiche for his behauiour was banyshed oute of the Haghe in Hollande, as the rest of them were woorthie to bée. But God be thanked, that the Papistes of oure countrey can none otherwyse clense them selues, than wyth suche 
                  •
               oule and filthie dishe cloutes, and fyght wyth such darts wherwyth they hurte them selues.
            
               And it was permitted to hym, to gyue a spirite vnto the image of the beast, so that the image of the beast shoulde speake. After thys sorte come they then, hauyng receyued power of the diuell, flatteryng to the Image to maynteyne their malycious wickednesse, saying after thys manner: Your maiestie is the most vertuous, the most gratious, the most valiant, the most

wisest, the most puissant, the most noble, the most blessed, and most learned of all Christian Princes and Potentates, all other are but Asses, yea nothing in comparisō of your highnesse. If it please your maiestie to cōmaund this or that, or establish & ordaine any thing in your realme and iurisdiction, who is he that dare withstād your maiestie? yea if it were against the commaundementes of God twentie times, it must be obserued and kept. Upholde then the old Catholike religion of our mother, the holy Church of Rome against these Heritickes, so can ye not doe amisse. God shall prosper you in all your affaires. Command therfore throughout all your dominion, and straightly charge them by law and Proclamation, sending one vpon an other, so straightly as it is possible, to shew manifestly, that you are the liuely Image of the Pope. It is our duetie to make the Image of the beast to speake. Therfore lift vp your voice, speak out with a corage, commaund and charge that against the word of God our old Decrées, traditions, and Ceremonies be obserued,

let them be published and cried abrode in your name and authoritie in euery streate, and cause euery one of your subiects to keepe your placate vpon paine of death. And albeit other Realmes or Princes blame or check you, for that you gouerne not well, and according to equitie: make ye no account of them, neither regard their sayings, but go forward stil, and obstinately persiste and stand to that which séemeth good in your owne eyes. Giue ye straight charge that all be put to death that wil not worship the Image of the beast, or how their knees before it, and keepe all his ordinaunces. Thus doing, ye shalbe our welbeloued sonne. Let no man escape your hāds. Let none of them liue, but slay and kill them, either by fire, water, sweard, rope, or any other torments: spare no man, neither olde nor yong, rich nor poore, great nor small, man nor wife, maried nor vnmaried, yōg man nor maiden, for they al speak against vs and oure Dragon, wherby our kingdom should fal, we should lose our best profits, and suffer great damage and losse. Cause also that

all and euery one, great and small, riche and pore, bond or free, be marked on their right hand, or on their forehead. And aboue this, that al Massemongers, Monks, Friers and Priestes be shauen, their fingers greased, and then holding vp theyr right hād (which they are not ashamed to call it the second baptisme) promise, and swear by othe, to obey and reuerence the Pope, and the Romish Church, and there to vowe chastitie. Moreouer that Emperoures, Kings and Princes, Archbishops, Bishops, and Doctors, scholes, and all estates, receiue also a token by oth, which they sweare to him, that they shall take nothing in hande which is agaynst the Pope and his Decrees, lawes and ordinaunces, his Seat, and priueledges: yea that all men receiue this marke in the forehead. For he that is not greased with Crisome or Creame (which they cal Confirmation of the Bishop) cannot be counted (though he be baptised, and beleue in God and Christ neuer so faithfully) for a right christian: but for aboue al, they are marked & graffed in the trust & confidence

               
                  •
               f their owne merites and deseruings
                  •
                For as the right mark of an vpright christian, is the faith working through charitie and loue, (for the pledge of the childrē of God, is faith vnfained,) euen so is the true mark and seale of the Popish Antechrist, to bragge and trust in their owne workes and deseruings, as Masses, Pilgrimages, shrifts, Buls, and Pardons, to be buried in a gray Friers coat, so many Pater nosters and Aue Maries, and an hundred more such dreames. And that no man might bie and sell, saue he that had the marke, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name. Whosoeuer doth not confesse or allow that which the Pope teacheth or cō
               maundeth, but is contented and willing to obserue, so much as in him lieth, al that which Christ teacheth, commaundeth and promiseth, is to haue no regarde to the Pope nor his trumperies, nor his Masses of Requiem, Diriges, absolutions, and other abhominations: those may neither bie nor sel amongst them. Yea they are excommunicated, persecuted, and condē
               ned to fire, sweard, gibbet or water. But

they that beare his mark, are al good children, especially those that haue the double marke, and Caracterem indebilem, (as they cal it) namely his greased and 
                  •
               hauen troupe. Those I say, may traffique and occupie fréely, practising Simon
                  •
               e, chaunging and selling of Bene
                  ••
               ces, Prebendaries, and all other of their Romish pedlary, and peuish trash. Iesus Christ cast out of the Temple the biers and sellers,
                  Math. 21.
               
               
                  Mar. 12.
                but Antechrist bringeth them into his Temple,
                  Luke .19.
                there to vpholde them. Here is wisdom.
               
                  Iohn .26.
                The true and heauēly wisdom consisteth in well vnderstanding of things, and iudging aright of the same: for when we doe not vnderstand things, we are fooles and not wise men. Therefore the Lord dothe admonish his auditors diligently to serch of Antechrist, to ye entent that they might kepe them selues from him. For these which receiue the marke of the beast, and worship his image, shal drink of the wine of gods wrath. But al those which (detest his Popedom from the very heart) folow and embrace Christ Iesu and his holy gospel, shall drinke altogither with him on

his table the drink of life, and of the gra
                  ••
                of God in his kingdom. Héereby we may cōclude what great wisdom it is, through which we escape the wr
                  •
               th of God, and attaine to euerlasting blessednesse. For the holy Ghost sayth here incontent by S. Iohn. He that hath wit, count the number of the Beast. That is, they (which are not altogither foolish and deafe, let them count and cast ouer the number of the beast, let them studie and meditate continually on the thing, find fault with it, & abolish that which seemeth maruellous in the sight of the world. Count (sayth the Lord) for it is the number of a man, that is such a number as the carefull and dilygent man may easily finde out. God commaundeth heere expresly, that we must search and count. Therfore they may wel keepe their peace (saith Aretes) which blame and slaunder our godly studie, diligent labor and great paines which we take to wryte against the Pope and his adherents, and his false detestable doctrine: saying that the time is not wel imployed, when we goe about to cast ouer the time, & count the number.

For they may euidently sée and perceiue here, that the holy Ghost doth commaund vs to search out, to trie, and to make an accompte, to know whom to hold for the right and wicked Antechrist: him namely which (hauing dismissed and put down three Kings,) is of nothing come vp and exalted aboue all, and especially to the subuersion and throwing downe of Christes true religion, hath begon to raigne and rule.
            
               And his number is six hundred, three score and sixe. For so many make these letters in the Greeke tong 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . The name Latinos, Latinus, comprehēdeth the number of sixe hundreth three score and sixe. And it is well and very credible (sayth the holy Martir Irene,) that his name should be so called, for so muche as hys dominion hath that name, and are all Latinists that rule and gouerne there. We sée héere of a truthe, that this godly teacher being full of the spirit of god hath not failed to foretel the true mening of the holy Ghost in this behalf. For it is euident that the Romish church, is called the Latine church,

and the Pope soueraigne and supreame head of the same. Wé sée also yt all things in this Church, are done in Latine. And in their spirituall courtes, (as they call them) nothing but Latin is vsed and spoken: no man may serue in this church, except he be a Latinist. Moreouer they call Hebrue to be Iudaike or Iewishe, and the Greeke erronious or heretiquish: yea they holde the Hebrue and Greeke Bible to be suspected, and straightly charge and commaund their Latine (falsly called Ieromes translation) to be of euery one imbraced and holden for the best. Which thing is so manifestly known, that it hath no néed of any further exposition. This number of 666. is signified by some Greeke wordes, (for this Prophesie was written first in the Greeke tongue) as Anthemos, that is: against the glory of god. Also it is signified by Aruine, wherby is noted a denier or forsaker of God. And Titan, that is the sonne or the name of Nemroth the tirant. These thrée names or wordes, although they sound diuers, yet they do comprehēd no more nor lesse than the iust number,

and all thys may be made agreable and approued by scripture and reason. For he that is not with Christe, is agaynst him. Some expositors leauing ye Greeke wordes, haue practised, to their own aduauntage a Latin woorde, namely Lux, containing the numbre aforesayd with the coū
               tyng letters, whych signifieth (as they name it them selues) the lyghte, or a spirituall companie, where in deede they resemble nothing lesse: for they are very darknesse which in no wise wyll receyue the light, but séeke to extinguish the light with al maner of crueltie and torments. We might bring in here besides these names two other names of Antechrist, namely Diabolus incarnatus, and Filius perditionis, which signifie Deuill incarnate, and childe of perdition: Where as in the one lacke but foure of the numbre, and the other six, coūting those letters, which are commonly numbred. But amongest so many words aboue mētioned, is none fitter and better to the purpose than the word Aruine, cōtaining a great mistery, an
                  •
                is asmuch to say, as I denie, or I forsake.

It is manifest then, that these haue receiued the mark and signe of the beast, or else are sealed with the numbre of hys name, which when they hear Gods truth reueled vnto them, say: I will not heare of it, nor beleeue any parte of it, so long as it agréeth not wyth the doctrine and gaye Ceremonies of our holy father the pope, & our mother the Romish churche.
            
               Vpon the .xij. Sonet or vision.
               
                  I saw (sayth S. Iohn) a woman sit vpon a scarlet colored beast.
                  
                     Reuel. 17.
                   This woman did a far off seeme to be honest & vertuous, but in deede she was farre otherwise, as ye shal heare.
                     Reue 12.14
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Thes
                           •
                        . 2.
                   This beast is that great Antechrist (of whom we haue spoken right now) or rather the bodie of the diuel, containyng within him the Pope, Cardinals, patriarkes, legates, bishops, doctors, abbots, priours, chanons, Monkes, friers prebendaries, priests, indulgences, bulles, Nonnes, and the reste of all suche diuelyshe sectes, beyng full of hypocrisie and dissimulation, reignyng wythin the whole Popedome. In lyke manner all Magistrates,

and secular powers (that fortifie and defende, as well the Pope him selfe, as also the abhominations and detestable idolatrie which the Romishe church doth vse) be he Emperoure, King, or Prince, Duke, Earle, or Lorde, Maior, Iudge, Chauncellor, Bailie, Constable, or whatso
                     •
                  uer, that maintaine, defende and vpholde by force and violence any thing against God and his truth. Of whose number I my selfe haue bene sometime, and that (to myne owne great griefe be it spoken) thorough méere ignorance, thinkyng to do God great seruice. Wherof I am now ashamed and most 
                     •
                  arnestly repent me, and am sory for it. And I pray God that this, nor any of the rest of my sinnes, be layde vnto my charge, but that he will pardon me thorough hys infinite goodnesse and mercie, in the name of his dearely beloued Sonne Iesus Christe, oure onely Sauioure and redéemer. And I thanke hym from the bottome of my hearte, that it hathe pleased hym of his mercie, without my deseruings, to haue called me wyth the Apostle S. Paule,

out of the shadowe of death and the companie of hys enimies, to the knowledge of his eternall wisedome in the felowship of his true spouse his churche. Of these I say, which seeke not themselues, nor any thing in this worlde, but seeke the glorie of him that bought them, and the accomplishment of his kingdom
                     •
                   counted in the sight of the world, as outcastes, but glorious in the sight of God. This beaste is whole of the colour of scarlet reddish, in token of greate tyrannie, sheddyng of bloud and murthers, which they cōmit against those which will not agree to their wicked & diuelish institutions. She is also ful of ignominious blasphemous names: as, your holynesse, your clemencie, your lordship, your fatherhod, your mastership, your serenitie, your worthinesse, honour, reuerence, magnificence, bounty, vicar of God
                     •
                   spiritual lord, phisition of the soule, defen
                     •
                  er of the faith, supreme head of the church, and many ot
                     •
                  er, as it is se
                     •
                  ne dayly by their letters and writyngs. Moreouer their too too mu
                     •
                  he know
                     •
                  e trumperies, and Iack an Apes plays, are no lesse

blasphemous than processions, confirmations, greasyngs, purgatorie, Masses for al soules, pilgrimages, pardons, mattins Aue Maria stella, or Salue regina, Placebo, Candlemasse, Palm sonday. &c.
               
                  This beast had seuen heades, and ten hornes, signifiyng all his subtil practises, his craftie fetches and false conspiracies, therby to impeche and withstande the graces of God, and giftes of the holy Ghost: And vnder a cloke of authoritie, through tyrā
                  nish violence resist the commaūdements of God. And this woman was aray
                        •
                     d in purple, and gilded with golde and precious stones and pearles. Which signifieth their coapes of gold, corporal, stoales, staues, miters &c. and other like trumperies of silk, purple, crimosin sattin, redde coloured, bordered wyth golde, pearles and precious stones, and aboue this, their counterfaite pietie and shewe of holinesse. This painted, pampred vp, and so gaily decked Romish churche bragged and boasted muche of hir Gospel and hir Apostles, of golde, siluer, wood or stone, decked and arayed wyth all kinde of costlynesse, whiche is

but an outwarde appearaunce, for they looke for nothyng lesse than to imitate or follow, and to expresse them in their conuersation.
               
                  She had a cup of golde in hir hande full of abhomination and filthinesse of hir fornication. This cup, is hir false and cursed Religion,
                     2. Tim. 4.
                   whiche she dayly communicateth, distributed aboute the Chalice,
                     2. Thess. 2.
                   whiche hir Merchauntes doe so wickedly abuse.
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Tim. 3.
                   It containeth all kynd of false and dyuelish doctrine, all kinde of erroures, lyes, and beastlynesse, all manner of craftie workes of hypocrites, all manner of inuentions of fleshly wysedome, all mans wittie deuises, eyther by crafte, arte, or otherwise inuented, as also all straunge kinde of worshippyng, of idolatrie, fornication, Sodometrie, and all other kynde of iniquitie. Outwardly she séemeth to be gilded, she reporteth yea & boasteth to sette forth the glorie of God, namely the magnfying of the name of Christ.
                     Coloss. 2.
                   They say,
                     Heb. 10.
                   they preache the sacred Scripture, they lyue in chastitie,
                     Rom. 2.
                   and all is nothyng

else, but a false, a counterfaite, and deceiptfull shewe of holynesse, full of hypocrisie and dissimulation, a couer or cloke of all mischiefe and abhomination,
                     2. Cor. 3.
                   it is but the bare letter, and the onely name, as the rest of all their doings are.
               
                  And in hir forhead was a name written, a mysterie, great Babylon. A name declaring what manner of woman she is. She is knowne wel inough by hir naughty fruites, of such as are skylful of godly knowledge, and haue also the spirite of vnderstandyng. So that they b
                     •
                  yng illuminated, conducted and ledde by the spirite of GOD, maye easily perceyue, iudge, and knowe, accordyng vnto the Scriptures, that shée is nothyng else but an vnshamefaste and pestyferous whoore, full of all iniquitie, abhomination and wyckednesse. But thys iudgement is hydden from the Infidels, the whyche are so bewitched and inchaunted by the meanes of their fayre outwarde shewe, their humble knéeling, creepyng, and gaye Ceremonies, that what soeuer

she doth, speaketh, or commaundeth and taketh in hand, they make muche of it, worship and imbrace it, as holy, honest & perfect good: which thing God permitted for theyr vnbeliefs sake.
               
                  She is called mother of whoredomes and abhominations of the earth,
                  
                     Reuel. 17.
                   muche passyng the towne of the Chaldees in all kinde of wickednesse, for she is the mother and fountaine both of spiritual and carnall whordome and abhomination. And I saw that she was the maried wyfe of the deuyll. For I saw hir dronke of the bloud of Sainctes, and with the bloud of the martyrs of Iesus, which she outragiously and most seuerely hath persecuted and slayne.
               
                  And when I saw hir so, I maruelled with great maruell, not onely bicause I saw hir defiled and sprinkled of murther and sheding of innocent bloude, but also bicause of hir greate and abhominable blasphemies.
                     Psalm. 85.
                   And most of al, I was aboue measure amazed and maruelled,
                     Iohn .4.
                  
                  
                     Rom. 2.
                   that almightie God coulde or woulde suffer or permit so long hir intollerable wickednesse and detestable and horrible impietie.

This woman is called of the Angell, the great whore: that great Citie which ruled ouer the kings of the earth, namely Rome. It is no meruaile though she be called that great whore, for no where was at any time more straunge and superstitious, worshippings, vaine institutions, cold & trifling ceremonies, bisides sectes, errors, and false Prophets, yea so many kind of vncleānesses raigned in hir, more than euer did raign in Sodome or Gomorre, or the miserable land of Egipt. This Babilonish whore or disguised Sinagoge of these shauen and greased ones, sitteth vpon many waters, which is, many foolish, inconstant, and wauering people, and not vpon those which are grounded vpon the sure rocke of Gods word, and the true doctrine of the articles of the christian faith. With this most wicked, vile, and stinking whoore and common strumpet to all men, haue the moste mighty Kyngs, Princes and Potentates, committed spiritual whoredom, in that they consent to diuers and sundry kinds of their straūge, new found, and altogither superstitious

Ceremonies, and other their most wicked decrées. Héere if I shuld make a discourse of al that might be spokē of in this place, time should faile me. My purpose & meaning at this present, is onely to make a shorte exposition and declaration vppon these oure visions, and that in as fewe wordes as is possible, to the consolation & edification of all godly and faithfull Christians. Séeing thē, what through the subtiltie & craftie fetches of Babels priestes on the one side, and what for the cruell & straight plackets of Princes on the other side: the dwellers vpō earth or the worldly minded, are all dronke of the wine of hir wickednesse and abhomination, and spirituall whooredom. They are al fallen without the prescript rule of Gods holy word, to a straunge and new found kinde of seruing of God. Moreouer, not only these as couetous, carnall, and other wicked and sinnefull persons haue folowed their abhominations, but also an infinite nūber euen of the elect and chosen of god, haue bene intangled, yea and haue giuen credite to their false lies and erroures.

They were so nusled, and busily occupied with their fonde and fained traditions, with their naughtie customes and inuentions, that they more like senselesse persons, without any discretion or vnderstā
                  ding, yea without any respecte of Gods holy word, wandred from all godlinesse & grace. Not only haue they stouped, bowed, and kneeled before stockes and stones, lighting candels before it, made Crosses, blessing it, kissing it, & held vp their hands to it, but also haue put their confidence in it. Neuerthelesse it shall not continue alwayes, for it foloweth.
                     Esay. 45.
                   
                  The .x. horns which thou sawest vpon the beast:
                  
                     Baruc. 6.
                   Signifying the Kings, Princes, and their subiects,
                     Ierem. 2.
                   which héeretofore were fauourers, seruauntes,
                     Reuel. 15.
                   and maintainers of the Romish churche, seeking to doe good to that whoore, yea to their owne damage and hinderaunce, bicause of the good will and blinde zele they bare vnto hir: Euen as a man which loueth a light and an vnhonest woman, is through hir loue and alluremēts, so blinded, that he considereth not hir vnhonest behauior, nor cā mislike any thing in hir,

but frameth himself alwayes to hir pleasure, frendship or seruice, and so much as in him lieth, hating, contemning, and putting to death, through vnlawfull loue, (wherewith she hath bewitched him) all them which (meaning his wealth) warne him of hir, and tel him of his fault how he is deceiued and greatly misused: setting before his eyes hir fraude, falshoode, vnshamefastnesse, fainednesse, and vnfaithfulnesse, all which he cannot iudge of, vntil his eyes be open, and his vnderstāding illuminated by the grace of God, so that when he perceiueth how he was beguiled and deceiued, he hateth and defieth hir the more. Euen so are now a dayes the eyes of many Princes and Kings, Countreis, Townes and Cities, and other wel disposed opened, and their hearts are touched by the mighty working of gods holy spirite, and by the meanes of preaching & hearing of the woord of God, so that now they defie the whoore with all hir traditions and abhominations which they were wont to maintain and defend so willingly. Yea those I say which for very blinde

zeale and loue which they bare vnto hir, were contented to kisse hir féete, shalbe as now hir mortall and deadly ennimies. They shal not passe vpon hir aucthoritie: they shall condemne hir vsages: they shall take from hir the Realme and dominion which she now vniustly possesseth: they shall deny hir tribute and obeisaunce, or to doe hir any homage, and at length shall leaue hir desolate and comfortlesse. This shall not Princes only do, but Kings and other temporal Magistrates, yea euen the Metropolitanes, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops and Prelates. Of which, many ensamples are at this instant to be foūd. And more followers of these ensamples, wil be héerafter. Which albeit they were the hornes of the beast to defend yt whoore withal, yet shal they so abolish hir, mislike hir, and forsake hir, that at length she shal be left whole naked. They shall chase, pursue, and hunt the Babilonish whoore of Rome, with the cleare trumpe of Gods holy word, that she shall become pale and colourlesse, ready to sound.
               Cal to remembraunce what God hath

wrought by his seruaunts, Iohn Wicliffe, Iohn Hus, Martine Luther, Oecolampadie, Zwinglie, Melancton, Capito, Bucer, Caluin, Theodore de Beza, Viret, Peter Martyr, Bullinger, Alasco, Brentiꝰ Regius, and other moe. All whiche haue brought low their Reliques, Crucifixes & Idols, (which they call sainctes,) Abbayes, Purgatorie, Masses for all soules and Indulgences. And moreouer God shall raise some not inferior to them, which shall make so muche a doe, and bring hir to such a fall, that she shal not be able to recouer againe, so that no man shall regarde hir any more, neyther shall there be any found to set hir vp againe. They shall strip hir naked, that so many as behold hir, may cry out vpon hir, & detest hir, and finally consume hir flesh. Moreouer they shal, bisides the taking away from hir al tēporal reuenues, rents, and al other worldly pleasures, confound hir peruerse and carnal iudgement of the scriptures, and so consequently consume and make weake the kéeping and obseruing of all hir whorish Ceremonies. Last of all, they shall all to burne hir with fire,

and bring to nought the whole masse of their Decrées, Decretalles, Canons, Customes, and all other kinde of Idolatrie. When as all these abhominations shall cease, and be gone by the meanes of the preaching of the Gospel, then this whoore shall not be seene any more, bicause the harlot continueth no longer than hir estimatiō lasteth. Take away their customs and Ceremonies, their iewels and costly raiment, their Images (the light of their dominion) their paternitie and estimation, kéepe back their Altares, their Masse, Bishops, Priests, Miters, Staues, Crosses and Banners: of what estimation (I pray you) shalbe their holy (as they terme it) wh
                     •
                  rish Church? which standeth in nothing else than in outward false shew of many gay trifling and vaine hipocritical Ceremonies.
               This kind of consuming of the flesh, or this maner of burning, is not only declared by external proues and euidēt examples, as it is come to passe in many places in our dayes to diuers Friers. Monkes or Priests, which setting themselues

for the defēce of the Romish church, were killed and slaine. And yet shall it be with them, euen as Baals Priests with the prophet Helias about the riuer Rison, but are yet spiritually by a mistery of that which hath bene foretold. For the Foules, as ye shall heare, shall consume hir flesh. For god hath (saith the Angell) put in their hearts to fulfill his will. God hath giuen by inspiration of his holy spirite in the minds of those aforsaid, and such like persons, to accomplishe in this behalfe his secrete will and pleasure. Namely to roote out wholy and altogither that false and hipocriticall religion, to suffer no longer the enormitie and foule abhominatiō of that Antechrist. After all these manifold Reuelations,
                     Reuel. 1
                           •
                        .
                   
                  I saw an other angel (saith S.Iohn,) signifying the true ministers and preachers sent in these our dayes. As also in the .vj. Chapter of the Reuelation,
                     Reue. .6.
                   is made mentiō of the Angell which had the seale of the liuing God. Again in the .x. chapter,
                     Reue. 10.
                   of the angel which was enuironed with the cloud, and in the .xiiij. Chapter,
                     Reuel. 14.
                   of the Angell which published and cried out the fall of Babilon,

comming from heauen downeward All which is to declare that the godly preachers are sent of God (hauing receiued great power,
                     Iohn .1.
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  
                     Actes .13.
                  
                  
                     Mar. 3.
                  
                  
                     Actes .18.
                  
                  
                     Rom. 12.
                  
                  
                     Iohn .6.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        say .11. Esay. 9. 10.
                   feruent zeale, and stedfastnesse of the spirite of God) to declare and pronounce the wil of god valiantly, to the ouerthrow of that pes
                     •
                  ilent whore. For like as the father hath the life within him, euen so hath his sōne Christ Iesu also, and in him liue his seruauntes, without any feare. And the earth was light of his brightnesse. Not of the Angell which was but a Messanger, was the earth lightned, but of the power which was giuen vnto him. Wher Gods word is once truely preached, there the whole earth is lightned of the brightnesse of the glory of God. And this Angell cried aloud, she is fallen. That great Babilon, which was so proud, hie minded, & so common a whore, that blasphemous sinagoge of the hipocrites, is turned vpside downe. She is by the iust iudgement of God, brought to great ignomie and shame. Hir first ouerthrow was,
                     Iohn .16.
                   when as the prince of this world was ouercome and vanquished through ye death of our sauiour Iesus

Christ. Consider and ponder we
                     ••
                   
                  
                     ••
                   your minde, the destruction of Ierusalem, after what sort the Iewish seruice ceased, and tooke an end: namely when the materiall temple was throwne down,
                     
                        
                           •
                        uke .19.
                   and not one stone left vpon an other. Now in this our time, she shal haue a more sharper and seuere iudgement through the publishing & preaching of gods word, to the comfort of all beléeuers. Which although it be somewhat as it were deferred, yet let them be as well assured of this hir iudgement to come, as we know and certainly beleeue the other to be come. Cal to remembrāce, and compare this place with the haling & plucking downe of Abbays, Frieries, and other religious houses (as they cal them) in Germanie, England, and in other places, and make your accompts, that more and more sorowes shal happen, and surely fal vpon hir shortly. The occasion of hir fall, and the desolation be
                     •
                  ore the lord, is this: She is become a dwelling place to deuils,
                  
                     Esay. 
                           •
                        2.
                   more than euer she was before hir first fall, for now enter they a great many at once, yea wel seuen for one.
               
                  
                  And she is become a keeper of vncleane sprites. For all manner of Idolatrie is maintained and kept by hir spirituall Courtiers and holy fath
                     •
                  rs (as they call them) as be their Bishops and pries
                     •
                  s. Here raigneth Simonie,
                     Actes .
                           •
                        .
                   bying and selling of benefices, sacriledge,
                     Galat. 5.
                   vsurie, ambition, fraude, couetousnesse, desire of money,
                     Ephe. 3.
                   & to shed bloud, enuie, malice, lecherie, gluttonie, pride, vncleannesse, and all other wickednesse. She is become a sauegard or cage of all vnclene and execrable birdes.
                  
                     Gene. 18.1
                           •
                        
                     
                   For in hir dwelleth the adulterous Bishops, the buggerous Cardinals, and lecherous Prelates, and a heape of Sodomitish Monks and Friers, Nunnes, and Sisters. All these compareth Esay the Prophet to wilde beastes:
                     Esay. 34.
                   namely to Dragons, Ostriches, Eagles, Monkeis, Owles, Mermaides, and other rauenous and greadie birdes, and monsterous and straunge beasts: for amongst them hath bene vsed alwayes, and is yet at this present, all manner of vaine and foolishe toyes, as mockings, scoffings and iestings, with crossing, coniuring, gasing, singing, playing, and diuers other folish &

straunge fashions to mocke God withall. Heere we might speak and reherse many things: Namely of the keeping of their stewes, and how they goe a whoring two maner of wayes: wher
                     •
                  unto we might ioyne and declare what gaine and profite the ruffian prelates get thereby. As it is to be séene, nam
                     •
                  ly at Rome, what reuenues and rents, that great and soueraign ru
                     ••
                  ian getteth by his whoores. And afterward of the drouning and killing of childrē, and secretly murthering, and casting in corners and ditches, as is vsually practised amongst these riggish and lecherous prelat
                     •
                  s.
               
                  It is 
                        •
                     allen. For all the kinreds and nations of the world, except a very fewe of simple and seely souls, which god through his vnspeakeable goodnesse, mercy and grace hath chosen and predestinated to him selfe, Haue dro
                        •
                     k
                        •
                     n of the wyne of the wrath of hir fornication, Bicause they haue not rendred thank
                     •
                  s to almightye God, when occasion, oportunitie and time serued, therefore they are fallen into that bottomlesse pit of all errour and abhomination,

to the losse both of body and soul. They haue very carefully and narowly searched to runne a whoring after their hurtfull and damnable witchcraftes and inchauntments, beleuing and crediting their false doctrine and teachings, and so consequently apply thē selues to expresse it in their conuersation and liuing.
               
                  And the Kings of the earth,
                  
                     Psalm. 13.
                   not hauing before their eyes the loue and feare of God,
                     Ierem. 3.
                  
                  
                     Eze 16.
                   
                  haue committed formcation with thys vile and filthie whoore.
                  
                     Oseas .2.
                   Yelding thē selues to many false,
                     Reuel. 18.
                   Idolatrous, and straunge worshippings. In such sorte, that by the teachings, admonitions, and persuasions of their holy fornicatours, they haue broken the bonde of peace,
                     Esay. 54.
                   and haue warred against the true children of God.
                     Eze. 17.
                   Which notwithstāding yt they haue wrongfully molested and troubled, scornefully intreated and mocked, viol
                     •
                  ntly oppressed and persecuted, haue yet (chasing and banishing them) confiscated their lands and goodes, turning their wiues and litle children out of the doores a begging. Aboue all this, so murther they and slay all such

as they can catch, and shed very much innocent bloud, as hanging, drowning, or burning them most cruelly without any cause, yea without any remorse of conscience,
                     Luke .16.
                   euen as if there were neither hell nor heauen, God nor deuil, life nor death, and as if there were no iudgement,
                     Rom. 4.
                   or no accoumptes to be giuen before God of all their doings and crueltie. Also their mitred Merchaunts, and shauen Massemongers, factors and sellers of mennes soules, are waxen very rich and welthy by selling of their Oile, Creame, Salte, Holy water, Shrift, Candels, Blessings, Crosses, Banners, Ashes, Palmes, Incense, Waxe, Beades, Bulles, and Pardons, letters of Dispensation to contract Matrimonie, licences to eat flesh, egges, butter. &c. All which not God, but they vpon paine of euerlasting damnation, to their owne commoditie and profite haue forbidden. Of like qualitie are their Images, Ringing of Belles, their Reliques, Bones of departed Sainctes, and other like things. Whereby, and by many other of their fained holinesse, they are become

(through the aboundaunce of their goods and richesse) so lusty, spiteful, proud and lofty, that they haue obtained the possession and gouerning of Countreis and Realmes, of Cities, Fortresies and Castels, and m
                     •
                  ny other pleasaunt places, Woodes, Warrennes, Parkes, Farmes, Conduits, Fountaines, Hounds, Horsses, and Mules. So that in aucthoritie and power, in riches, and substance, and in all kinde of plesant things, they are nothing inferior to Kings and Princes.
               Moreouer, they are not ashamed to take other mennes wiues to fulfill their most filthie and vnsatiable desires, yea honest mennes daughters, maidens, and seruauntes, yea and yong men too, which they most abhominably and shamefully defile, marre and spoile. I leaue you to consider what gaines Bishops & Prelats gather of the first frui
                     •
                  ts of the tenths, of Buls, Pardons, and resigning of benefices. Againe it can not well be tolde, what golde and siluer they get by singing and saying of their Collects, by going and gathering of their yearely Offerings, and

the great liuings, reuenues and rentes, which their Cathedral Churches, Abbeis, Religious houses and Couents haue, so that in al things they passe the welthiest. There is no kind of pleasure come it neuer so farre off, be it neuer so deare and costly, but they wil haue a tast of it. Notwithstāding, they cā play so wel the hipocrites at their sermons, yt it séemeth they regarde nothing lesse than the vanitie of this world, and praise aboue measure fasting and abstinence.
                     Math. 6.
                   But they haue their rewarde héere, and shall héereafter haue their portion with the dissemblers and hipocrites, where shall be wéeping, wringing of hands, and gnashing of teeth.
               
                  And I h
                        •
                     ard another voice, an other warning of the spirite, whereby the true and faithfull ministers of God are instructed and taught, warning vs and saying:
                     
                        
                           •
                         Esd. 
                           •
                        .
                   
                  Goe out of hir my people, come away with Esdras out of that wicked Babylon,
                  
                     Gene 19.
                   goe forthe with Abraham out of Caldee,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        say .52.
                   runne and flie with Lothe out of filthye Sodom
                        •
                     , and meddle no more wyth that whoorish Church of Rome, denie, forsake,

and detest wholly hir false and fained holynesse, hir foule and filthy ceremonies, abhorre hir dissimulation and hypocrisie, curse and ban their trifles and iestings, and haue no felowship more wyth these whooremongers, Nicolaites, & Balaamites. Lifte vp, and repent from the bottom of your hearts your former follie and abhominations which you haue done in times past, and come to me (sayth the Lord) all ye that trauail and are heauie loden, and I shall refresh you. Get ye away from among them, without looking behinde you, that ye be not partakers of their sinnes, which is the vē
                  geance and ire of Gods wrath, and indignation. At all tymes and seasons there haue bene holy and godly men, and well learned fathers, whiche through their excellent and diuine woorkes and writings haue exhorted and cried (especially since the comming vp of the Pope) for redresse and reformation of the churche, for the amendemente of many faultes, and to sée brotherly exhortation and christian discipline vsed in the same. As by Bertrandus Herebaldus, Berēgarius Thuronensis, Bruno

Andegauensis, Peter Damianus, Valeriane Medeburgensis, Bernardꝰ Clareualēsis, Robertus Tuitiensis, Ioachim Abbas, Cyrillus Graecus, Ioānes Salisburgensis, Gilbertꝰ Lātcestrius, Angelus Hierosolimitanꝰ, Guilhelmus de sancto Aniore, Guido Bonatus, Nicolaus Gallus, Hubertinus de Casali, Pelius Casali, Petrus, Ioannes, Marcilius Patauinus, Ioānes Paris, Arnoldꝰ de villa noua, Michael Caesenas, Gulielmus Occam, Nicolaus de Luca, Marcus de Florētia, Ioānes wiclefus, Ioā
                     nes Hus, Michael de Bononia, Ioannes Hildeshem, Dantes Aligerius, Frāciscus Petrarcha, Nicolaus Clemadis, Petrus de Aliaco, Ioannes Gerson, Laurentius Valla, Lodouicus Arelatensis, Ioannes Segebius, Thomas Redonēsis Gallus, Mattheus Palmarius, Dauid Boys, Dionysiꝰ Chartusianꝰ, Ioānes Miluerto, Ioannes Gorchius, Ioannes de Vsalia VVormacēsis, Ioannes Ghyler, Ioānes Crutser, VVessalus Groenegensis, Eneas Siluius, Redoricus Samorensis, Iulianus Brixiensis, and Hieronymus Sauonarola. Beside these there be other which are of oure time, as Ioānes Reuchlin, Baptista Mantuanus, Baptista Panetius, Iohannes Crestonꝰ, Erasmus,

Lutherus, Zwinglius, Caluinus, and more other. All whiche, the Papistes for the moste parte haue condemned for heretikes. To rehearse here their wrytings, their reasons and testimonies, it would require to much time, I muste therefore leaue it behynde. I haue onely rehersed some of their names to thys end and purpose, that it myght appeare to the Reader, that at all tymes God hath had one or other, that hath not ben in all poynts consenting to their blasphemies. Albeit, the light of Gods truthe was not then so perfectly reueled vnto them as it is now a dayes (God be praised) vnto vs. Many godly and vertuous Emperours & Princes, haue by generall Counsels, and by al other meanes possible assayed and proued to haue a refourmation and amendemente made of all absurdities, and abuses, whiche were crepte into the churche, but they haue alwayes met with wicked and vngodly princes which resisted them and letted them of their vertuous enterprises, whiche also maintained those Antechrists in their impietie & wickednesse,

defending them with toothe and nayle to the vttermoste: neuerthelesse it is without any doubt, that these, as Pharao, with all his power in the red Sea, and as that proude kinde of Phariseys and priestes of the Iewes in the Citie, bicause of theyr manifeste blasphemies perished, so shall likewise at the hour and time of God appointed, all these perishe and vanishe away. For the sinnes of this whoore, or the innumerable blasphemies of this false religion, the great abhomination and filthie idolatrie, the burning, hangyng, drowning, and sheading of innocente bloude, are come vp into Heauen,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        poc. 1
                           •
                        .
                   there to desire the vengeance of God, for their vncleannesse & vnsh
                     •
                  mefastnesse, hath caused & prouoked Gods wrath and indignation against them. And God hath remēbred their iniquities, The multitude & greatnesse wherof ar come vp into heauen Therfore haue they most iustly deserued the threatened plagues of the most righ
                     •
                  eous God, no lesse than Sodome and Gomorre,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        en. 19.
                   for their transgression and wickednesses: which when it was foretolde them, made light of it,

and went forwarde to al mischiefe, vntil God pouring out his vengeance, destroyed them with fire and brimstone.
               
                  Rewarde hir euen as she hath rewarded you, Measure vnto hir againe with such measure as she did measure vnto you. Take ye good héede, and looke narowly, ye that haue gotten the iudgement seate: Crie vpon hir, euen as she dyd crie vpon you, snare hir, as she hath snared you. Againe, as she hath heretofore wrongfully molested and troubled you, scornefully intreated, yea, and by hir Traditions iudged and condemned you euen vnto death, so nowe do ye likewise rebuke hir, and exhorte hir of hir wyckednesse,
                     Math. 5.10.
                   iudge hir like a very harlot,
                     Iohn .6.
                   and condemne hir by the mightie and true worde of God to euerlasting fire,
                     1. Corin. 4.
                   whiche can not be quenched. And giue hir double according to hir workes. And in the cup that she hath filled to you fill hir the double. That is, render vnto hir double in all punishmentes, and giue vnto hir euen for worldly punishements whiche she hath brought vpon the elect of God, hellishe torments. For corporal

and bodily troubles and vexations, eternal pains and torment of the minde: for the blame and ignomynie of thys worlde, perp
                     •
                  tuall shame and confusion: for temporall death, euerlastyng damnation both of body and soule.
               
                  And the cup. &c. That is al kinde of troubles, aduersities and miseries whiche she filled to you out of hir cup, that is, caused to come vpon you, shalbe doubled to hir againe: for (as it is sayd) she shall receyue for temporall euils, euerlasting. The holy Ghost calleth here double, that which is withoute comparison, euen as a little tyme to no time or euerlastingnesse. Hir pleasure and ioy shall be conuerted into sorowes and griefes, hir mery and pleasaunt talke, hir iestyngs and laughyngs into weepyng, mournyng, wringyng of handes and gnashyng of teeth. Hir commaundings shal be turned into crauings, hir reuerence into contempt, hir honoure into shame. &c. For she hathe pretended moste faynedly an holy kynde of priesthode, she boasteth and braggeth much o
                     •
                   that whiche they are furthest from. She

hath vsurped and wrōgfully taken vpon hir, and proudely claimed vnto hir a royall maiestie and highnesse. Whiche two kynde of dignities she hath yet worse vsed: lette hir there
                     •
                  ore wayte and attende on the plagues and punishementes due vnto hir pernicious temeritie and arrogancie. Take away hir pleasaunt Euphrates, wyth the spoyle and greate reuenues, wherewithall she hath hytherto so vniustly maintained and kepte hir selfe, and throw hir in the deepe pit of all mis
                     •
                  
                  ries and wretchednesse.
                     Esay. 47.
                  
                  
                     Math. 11. 2
                           •
                        
                     
                   
                  For she sayth in hir heart, I sitte being a Queene,
                  
                     Math. 16.
                   enuironned with ioy and pleasure, I am the chiefe of the vniuersall worlde, on me dependeth the Catholike and holy Churche, I haue authoritie and power in Heauen, earth, and Hell: I haue also might to binde and to loose, to saue and condempne: It standeth not with me, as it doth with th
                     •
                  se that be not of this worlde, for all thyngs here are at my commaundement.
               
                  I am no widowe, I am not d
                        •
                     solate. The hyghest powers and gouernours of thys worlde do assiste and defende mee,

putting to death al those that lay against me. Nero, Domitian, Traian, or Maxence were neuer more addicted to the defence of my predecessours, than are now adays the Princes of our tyme readie to maintaine wyth fire and faggot my Decrées, Traditions and Ceremonies. Therefore I shall see no mournyng. I shall continue alwayes, I shall be called Madame at all tymes:
                     Deut. 8.
                   my kyngdome shall abyde for euer, my seate shall no man take awaye from me, I shall neuer fall, nor any euil can come vppon mée. After thys sorte, boaste (wyth no small presumption) our Papistes also, saying: That the lyttle vessell of Sain
                     ••
                   Peter may wel by the reason of weather and tempeste be shaken, and with the waues of the sea troubled, but neuer can be ouerwhelmed or perishe: hereby goyng aboute to proue that theyr superstitious and Romyshe churche should abyde styll, and neuer be ouerthrowne. But they consider not of what abilitie and power the Lambe is, whiche abideth vppon the mount Syon, against whom they stick and make warre against

continually: whose congregation and little flocke they persecu
                     •
                  e daily with great tyrannie, crueltie, and rigorousnesse. Therfore shal hir plagues come at one day. God shall once poure vpon this wicked race & malignant 
                     •
                  hurch, Death, sorowes, hunger and sw
                        •
                     rde
                        •
                     
                   euen as he dyd sende vpon the 
                     •
                  ynfull Cities 
                     •
                  ire and Brymstone. They shalbe depriued for euer of the life w
                     •
                  iche is in Christe Iesu,
                     Gen 19.
                  
                  
                     Exod. 9.
                   they shall remaine in sobbes and teares,
                     Psal. 11.
                   t
                     •
                  ey shal not ceasse to mourne, to wring their handes,
                     Collos. 3.
                   and gnashe their teeth,
                     Math. 24.
                   they shall be inheritours o
                     •
                   eue
                     •
                  lastyng darkenesse,
                     Mark .9.
                   theyr worme shall neuer die, they shall hunger and neuer be sati
                     •
                  fied.
                     Math. 25.
                   And this whoore with the whole generation of hypocri
                     •
                  es shall be burnt with vnquencheable fyr
                     •
                  , pr
                     •
                  pared for the deuyl and his au
                     •
                  gels. This sent
                     •
                  nce is not so seuere as true, for the Lorde who shal iudge them, is of power and might:
                     Psalm. 50.
                   he is holy and fait
                     •
                  ful in mercie, true in his worde and promise,
                     Rom. 
                           •
                        .
                   maruellous in all his workes,
                     Dan. 5.
                   fearefull,
                     Leui. 10.
                   terrible and righteous in his iudgement
                     •
                   against the wycked.
                     Deut. 1.
                   No man then shall

be able in those dayes to withdrawe any part of the threatned vengeaun
                     •
                  e of hys wrath from the euill doer. Neither oure Lady with castyng of hir b
                     •
                  ades into the ballaunces of S. Michaell, neyther S. Iohn Baptist, with hys lambe holdyng a crosse, neyther S. Peter wyth hys Key, nor S. Paule, wyth his sworde (as they vse to make them) yea and if Moyses, Samuel, and the rest of the Prophetes, with Noe, Dauid, and Iob, would make intercession yet shoulde they not be hearde. And the Kings of the earth, namely the worldly and carnall Princes whiche haue committed fornication, and lyued in pleasure with hir, in all vncleannesse and filthynesse, shall bewaile hir, when they shall see hir ouerthrowen and so yll intreated, it shall grieue them sore, that they may or can not maintaine and defende hir with water, fyre and sworde against 
                     •
                  od and hys saincts, for they shall be nothyng well pleased with the ordinaunces and institutions of Christe, bycause they doe hate nothyng more than the workes of the spirite, that

is, to frame theyr liues according to the will of God. It shall anger them to the hearte, that they are not able to burne still and slay all those that speake, write, or preache agaynst the deedes of the fleshe and do reproue them of their fornication, adulterie, and theyr mischeuous and inordinate lyfe, and rebuke them of theyr moste abhomynable idolatrie.
               
                  And lamente ouer hir, when they shall see the smoke of hir burnyng.
                  
                     Reuel. 1
                           •
                        .
                   
                  And shall stande a farre of, for feare of hir tormentes, crying and saying: Alas, alas, that greate citie Babylon, that m
                        •
                     ghtie Citie. Alas, our mother the holy Churche of Rome, so many holy fathers, Popes, Cardinalles, and Byshops: Alas, for our Monkes, Chanons, and Friers with their so holy, so deuoute and straight lyu
                     •
                  s and rude garmentes. Alas, for so many Pardons, Indulgences, and confessions, so many principall bye Feastes, Holy dayes, and gay Coapes and Garmentes. Alas for oure holy Water, holy Candelles, holye Palmes, holye Ashes, hallowed Belles,

organs play, and prick song, and the res
                     •
                   of our so gay ceremonies. With these and the lyke wordes shall they bewayle hir, trembling and quakyng for feare, & crying out on this maner: Wo, wo, to that strong & great citie Babylon, y• mightie citie: for in one houre is thy iudgement come.
                     2. Thess. 2.
                   Thou art sodainly perished with ye sword of his mouth, before thou canst be aware of it. Alas, who shal now pray for vs? who shal now sing our Diriges, masses of Requiem, and do the funeralles for our soule? Whether shall we go nowe to 
                     •
                  hrifte? who shall now absolue and pardon vs our sinnes? where sh
                     •
                  ll we nowe fetche oure ashes? Who shall consecrate vs our Candles and Palmes? who shall sing or ryng and cast holy water at oure burials, and redeme vs out of purgatory? Suche shal be the complaints of the wicked and faithlesse persons.
               
                  And the merchants of the earth, whiche do make any trafike of the marchandise of their Temple (whiche place dothe serue them in steade of the market) as well amongest the Mahometistes, as the Papistes.

But bycause we are moste troubled and molested here in Europe, of that popishe Antechriste, we shall endeuoure to speake as we haue done hitherto most of hym. These merchantes then (I say) shall bewayle hir, and mourne ouer hir, very sore, and muche more than the Kyngs dyd. For no man buieth their ware any more. theyr pedlary is nothing set by any more The wares or merchaundises of theyr shoppes, are Masses, prayers, blessyngs, Crosses, theyr cakes, greate and small, whyche they sell (to get the more, as it is estéemed) in stéede of God theyr maker, Holy breade, holy water, Candels, relikes, Pardons, S
                        •
                     ala coeli, Diriges, Annuaries, and dyuers other lyke, whereby they get the very sweate and bloude of the poore silly soules. All whiche they sell for good mo
                     •
                  ey daily, and yet they keepe neuerthelesse: For the people haue but the hearyng, the eye syght, or a taste of trifles.
               
                  And euery Shippe maister, and all the people that occupie shippes, and shipmen, and whosoeuer trauaile on the sea, sh
                        •
                     ll stande afarre

of: That is to say, all Bishops, Ordinaries, Abbots, Parsons, Uicars and Massing Priestes, and other lyke, liuyng on the sea: Of these waueryng, blinde and zealous people, al these (sayth the voyce) stode a 
                        •
                     arre of, euen as the merchants did, and cried. In like maner When they saw the smoake of the burnyng, saying: What Citie was lyke vnto this great Citie in ryches, power, wealth, and voluptuousnesse? No Prince or lorde is better entertained, of al thyngs better prouided, and more attendance giuen vpon him than these shauelings be. For their truste and confidence is onely in this Citie, this is theyr God: Herein consisteth their whole felicitie and blessednesse.
               
                  These Shipmen shall (bycause of theyr greate losse) so weepe and wayle, that men shall cast duste vppon theyr foolishe and fond wytlesse heads, that is to saye. They shall be so wrapped in darkenesse, that they shall not see in theyr vnderstanding bycause of theyr vnbeléefe, and also their knowledge shall bée made dull, blunte,

and beastly, by the meanes of iealousie, furie, and rage. All this shall they do, to shewe theyr greate griefe: as for theyr repentaunce,
                     Gen. 4.
                   it shall be lyke vnto that of Caius, Pharao, Esau, Antiochus,
                  
                     Exod. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.
                   and Iudas, their predecessoures. And in theyr sorrowe,
                     Math. 26.
                   they shall complayne on thys manner: Alas, alas, that greate Citie, that woorthie and moste famous Rome, that sweete and pleasaunt Babylon, oure holy mother, wherein we were made so ryche, so proude, so myghtie and glorious, that al the worlde dyd dreade, honour and serue vs, and we felte no trouble, no kinde of aduersitie, or miserie, is now made desolate, she is fallen. The apples that thy soule lusted af
                        •
                     er, are departed from thee, the learned, the wyse and men of vnderstanding whiche thou for the maintenance of thy beautified whoordom desiredst (sayth the menacing voyce of the holy Ghost) are now departed from thée, and wil not (since they haue séene and considered thy great abhomination) haue to do with thée any more, but they shall forsake and leaue thée, cursse and abolishe thée quite: and where

as they were wonte to prayse, ma
                     ••
                   muche o
                     •
                  , and magnifye thee before the worlde, shall nowe defye th
                     ••
                  , yea, and (by the testimonie of the holy and sacred Scripture) rebuke, condempne and confounde th
                     •
                  e. Of the common sort also men of an 
                     •
                  onest and ciu
                     •
                  le lyse, whiche were wont to defende thee, nothyng suspecting but thynkyng that all these trumperies, and beggerly Ceremonies were profitable and necessarie to be obserued (notwithstanding that thy lyfe and conuersasation was wicked and too too haynous) shal speake agaynst thée, & flie from thée as soone as theyr eyes and vnderstanding by the vertue of the spirite of God shalbe opened,
                     Math. 6.
                   seyng that thou arte detestable and diuelishe.
                     Gala
                           •
                        . 
                           •
                        .
                   Briefly, no man, haue he neuer so little a taste of Gods holy word,
                     1 Tim 4
                   shalbe ab
                     •
                  e to abide thee,
                     2. Tim. 4.
                   or suffre thy m
                     •
                  
                  ny
                     •
                  es
                     •
                   whordom any lon
                     •
                  er: for thy vphol
                     •
                  ers are but dissemblers, men plesers, fl
                     •
                  tterers, ra
                     •
                  ling Sophistes, Scoffers, brawling Canonists, Sorbonists, Epicures, Libertines, and other vngodly and slaunderous persons, very Antechristes.

Touching honest, sober,
                     1. Tim.3.
                   discrete and vertuous persons, busie in godly works,
                     1. Tim. 5.
                   fearing God, and séeking his glory from the bottome of their hartes, which also desire with all their strength, zeale, and feruencie to set forthe the same, they shall leaue and renounce al thy pestiferous & dangerous wayes. These grosse and fat shippe men, and mariners shall say yet. Woe, woe, Alas, alas, that great Citie wherein we were m
                        •
                     de rich, all that had ships on the sea, by hir costlinesse, for in one houre she is made desolate. We which had Bishopriks, Abbays, Benefices, Prebendaries, and great Reuenues, amongst these foolish vnstedfast, and worldly minded people, waxed by al maner of wayes welthy and riche, through the deare and costly wares which oure shippes were laden withall on euery side, which ar innumerable. We (I say) are in great heauinesse, and in such a perplexitie when we remember of that so great and famous Citie, as we are not able to expresse, bycause of hir so sodaine fall, being in one houre.
            
            
               
               ¶ The .14. vision containing the iust iudgement of god ouer the assembly of Antechrist, and that gratious vengeaunce of the innocēt bloud of his good and faithful seruaunts: which I haue taken out of the .xix. chapter of the Reuelation, where it beginneth in this maner.
               
                  I Saw the heauens open: that is to say. The misteries of God were shewed me,
                     Reue. 19. 11.
                   and his secretes were fully declared and expoūded vnto me, I perceiue that through faith and humblenesse, great knowledge of the misteries of God wer
                     •
                   obtained.
                     
                        
                           •
                        say. 66.
                  
                  
                     Wysdom .11
                   For the heauens are opened when Gods word is fréely preached,
                     M
                           •
                        th. 11.12.
                   and are shut vp when it is not preached, or not regarded, but in the stead of it, men are fedde with dreames and lies. And behold a white horse appeared vnto me. Héereby are ment the true and faithfull ministers of the word of God: whose office and condition is, (as S. Paule saith) to announce throughout all the whol
                     •
                   world this heauenly doctrine,
                     2. Corin. 1.
                   and instruct, teach, & admonish both great

and small. And he that sate vpon him, wa
                        •
                      called faith
                        •
                     ull and true. This is the onely and true sonne of God which is called faithfull, iust, and true,
                     Math. 16.
                   bicause h
                     •
                   is founde faithfull,
                     Actes .9.
                   and vnfallible in hys promises and woorde,
                     Psal. 145.1
                           •
                         Psalm. 
                           ••
                        .
                   for the Lord (saith the Psalmist) is very righteous in all his wayes, true in his sayings, p
                     •
                  rfect in all his doings. He cannot but teach a right, and speake a trouth,
                     Rom. 9.
                   for he is the truthe him selfe.
                     Iohn .14. Iohn .16.
                   No more cannot those which are indued with his spirite, who leadeth and conducteth them in all truthe. He hath done according to iustice and equitie in condemning that wicked and abhominable whoore, in destroying that filthie sinagoge of Sathan, in d
                     •
                  liuering and exalting his poore afflicted Churche. First of all he did fight in his owne persone, as a worthy Champion against the deuill, hel, and damnation, whom he hath ouercome,
                     Psal. 23.
                   conquered and vanquished by his owne death, and glorious passion. And now doth he ouerthrow the Deuill,
                     Ioh. 16.
                   and all his adherēts, by the meanes of his faithful seruaunts, distributers of his holy

woord and mysteries,
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Cor. 15.
                   which he nowe graci
                     •
                  usly sendet
                     •
                   vnder the figure of the white horsse.
                     
                        
                           •
                        ohn .12.
                   For his seruaunts (as Abacuck testifieth) are lustie and wel animated horsses,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ba. 3.
                   whom the Lord condu
                     •
                  teth, which ar (as Ieremie calleth them) whiter than snow, by the meanes of their vnfained, and vndefiled faith. And his eyes were like as a flame of fire, mightie and cleare. Whereby is not only vnderstanded his godly wisdome and knowledge, whereby he knoweth and iudgeth al things, but also all the heauenly and spirituall giftes of the holy G
                     •
                  ost. Behold sayth Zacharie,
                  
                     Z
                           •
                        ch. 3.
                  
                  
                     1. Cor. 1.
                   vpon the only stone (which S. Paule expoundeth to be Christ,) shalbe .vij. eyes, which are the .vij. spirites of god, wherwith god doth lig
                     •
                  ten the hearts of his chosen, and kindleth the fire of his loue in ye minde of his faithful.
                     Psal. 119.
                   His word is a lātern to their f
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  e, hys law an
                     •
                   testimonies are pure, and vndefiled, giuing light to the eie. And vpon his hea
                        •
                      were many crownes. Euen as the same was séene (being a figure of Christ) vpon the head of Iesus the sonne of Iosedech the high Priest,
                     1. Esd. 3.
                  
                  
                     E
                           •
                        cle. 4 9.
                   to signi
                     •
                  ie that

Iesus Christ is the soueraigne and king aboue al kings, which hath power in heauen and earth for euer. He ruleth and gouerneth al nations with an ir
                     •
                  n rod. For he is the Lord of hostes, the euerlasting king of glory. He is a mightie and puissāt gouernoure, setting ouer the Mount Sion his holy hil. He giueth prosperitie and gouernment to Kings, and his elect and chosen are crouned in him with grace and mercie for euermore. For he reserueth in heauen for vs, an inheritance immortall and vndefiled:
                     1. Peter .1.
                   Againe, he hath layed vp for them that keepe the faith,
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Timo. 4.
                   a crowne of righteousnesse,
                     Reuel. 2.
                   and wil giue a crowne of life to them that be faithfull vnto the death. &c.
                     
                        
                           •
                        ames .1.
                   All warrefares and victories of the saincts depend vpon him only. And he had a name written, to wit, almighty, maruellous and feareful, Adonai, Emanuel, a name aboue all names, euen the holy one of Israell, the Lorde of Sabaoth, the Lord of hostes, our redemer, sauiour, and righteousnesse.
                     Math. 16.
                   
                  No man knewe this name but hym selfe and them whiche he hathe reueled it vnto, neither fleshe nor bloude, nor

Heathen, Turke, Iew, or false Christian is able to cōprehend thys name 
                     •
                  right:
                     Math. 16.
                   Albeit they haue good signes and tokens, yet no man can say that Iesus is the Lord,
                     1. Cor. 12.
                   without the inspiration of the spirite of God, who openeth the very truth of God. The number of Gods elect are also signified or comprehended vnder this name, which the world can not acknowledge nor vnderstand. And he was clothed with a garment dipt in bloud. His mortall bodie which he tooke vpon him for our redemption, was so sore beaten and greuously wounded, that from the soule of the féete to the very crowne of the head, euen from top to toe, nothing was lefte whole or sound. This mighty Champion is he which came from Edom and Bos
                        •
                     a, whose garmentes were sprinkled with bloud, his clothes were rayed, euen as of those that tread the wine presse. For his manhoode suffred most shameful & pain
                     •
                  
                  full death.
                     Esay. 63. Esay 53.
                   He him selfe alone trode the wine presse of his wrath,
                     Math. 8.
                   and had none to helpe him. He his owne self was woū
                  ded for our sinnes,
                     1. Peter .2.
                   and our infirmities

were layd vpon him, and by his stripes we are healed. And his name was called the word of God.
                  
                     Iohn .
                           •
                        .
                   Christ Iesu the sonne of god,
                     Ephes. 3.
                   is that eternall and euerlasting word of God,
                     Psalm. 33.
                   which was from the beginning by God,
                     Heb. 1.
                   by whom also heauen and earth are made,
                     Colloss. 1.
                   and all that in them is, the verye 
                     •
                  mage of his substance in whom the father is represented, wherby also we vnderstand and know the wil of the father, for the word of God is a true guid of the conscience. This word was made flesh:
                     Iohn .1.
                   that is, became mā for our sakes, sauing, ius
                     •
                  ifying, and glorifying all those that beleeue on him. And the warriers which were in heauen, followed him vpō white horses. These are the true & faithfull ministers which follow their maister and c
                     •
                  ief captain Christ Iesu vpon white horsses: that is in innocency of life and godly cōuersatiō which they professe. These horsses are nothing else than their mortal bodies redy to battaile. For true christiās mortifie their flesh, yt concupiscence therof,
                     Coloss. 3.
                   & bring their carnal lusts vnder subiectiō,
                     Gala. 5.
                   & their bodies obedient to ye spirit. They become

seruauntes to righteousnesse, and not to sinne,
                     Rom. 6.
                   they are worthy Souldiers of God, for they follow the Lord of 
                     •
                  ostes: suche an armie saw the seruaūt of the Prophet Elizeus in Doathim in a vis
                     •
                  on. They w
                        •
                     re clothed with fine linnen, white and pure, signifying the simplicitie and innocēcie which they haue in Christ Iesus their captaine, and good and perfect gifts which the Lord giueth them. As S. Iohn him selfe expounded them a little before, where he sayeth that the fine linnen are the true iustifications which they haue of none other, but from theyr head Christ. These are ye spirituall weapons wherof S. Paule speaketh, saying:
                     1. Cor. 10.
                   Though we walke in the flesh, yet we do not war after ye flesh, for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty through god to cast down holds: and out of his mouth wēt a sharp sword, which is that wonderful iudgment of his word. Through this sharpe sword are the faithful and beleuers saued to 
                     •
                  ife euerlasting, and the wicked infidels iudged to euerlasting death and damnation. For it is vnto some a sauior of life vnto life, and

to others a sauior of death, vnto death.
                     Iohn .15.
                  
                  
                     1. Corin. 5.
                   With this sword shall be cut of the dead braunches which in him beare no fruicts, and the rotted members from the body. In like manner shalbe the good from the bad,
                     Math. 24.
                   and the Goates from the shéepe,
                     Psal. 2. 45.
                   with this sword deuided and separated: Oh how terrible, fearefull, and sharpe shalbe the iudgement of the Lord, the rod and scepter of his dominion against the wicked in those dayes, as he shall say:
                     Mat. 25.
                   Goe from me ye curssed into euerlasting fire: Again, how comfortable & ioyful a thing shall it be for the elect to see them selues exempted of this condemnation, and to haue the fruition of that souerain blessednesse in eternal glory. For he it is that treadeth the wine presse of the fierc
                        •
                     nesse and wrath of almighty God. That is:
                     Esay. 63.
                   he shall poure forth his vengeaunce vpon the proud and infidels, and shall punish them most greuously with his strong & mightie arme, stretched ouer their heads, striking them in his rage & furie, wherunder all things are set. And I saw an A
                        •
                     gell standing in the Sunne, signifying the Apostles and al true

ministers of the word of god which stand in the bright & cleare sunne of righteousnesse,
                     
                        
                           •
                        al. 4.
                   
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        eue. 20.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        eb. 10.
                   which is Christ Iesu, that amiable and shining morning starre. And these worthy witnesses stand fast in a sted
                     •
                  ast assurāce of faith in his name, against the whole multitude of Antechrist,
                     1. Corin. 10.
                   without mouing of their féete from ye well grounded stone, which is Christ Iesu, which for nothing in this world,
                     Rom. 8.
                   be it persecution, paine, torment, or deathe, will shrincke therefro. And he cried with a loude voyce to all the Foules that did flie by the middes of heauen. This voice cried, and shall call vntil the worldes end,
                     Esay. 55.
                   with a feruent and constant mind,
                     Prouerb. 1.
                   vnto al foules which flie vnder heauen,
                     Iames. 1.
                   to them which are humble of mind,
                     Esay. 
                           •
                        1.
                   and be
                     ••
                  me spiritual through faith and heauenly giftes. These f
                     •
                  ying foules laying aside, & quite abolishing all worldly plesures or corruptiblenesse,
                     Philip. 3.
                   lift themselues vp aboue their affections on hie, and make their cōuersation to be in heauen, and lead héere in earth an heauenly life. These are the chosē soules which the father féedeth and sustaineth wyth
                     •
                  ute

their own deserts.
                     Gen. 11.12
                   Such a one was Abrahā
                   in Mesopotamie,
                  
                     Exod. 19.
                   
                  Moyses in Sinai, Helias vpon ye mount Carmelus,
                  
                     3. Reg. 1
                           •
                        .
                   
                  Daniel amōgst ye lions,
                     Dan. 6.
                   
                  
                     
                        •
                     aul in Damas
                        •
                     o, S. Iohn in Pathmos, and many moe euen herein England,
                  
                     Acts .9.
                   and in other places,
                     R
                           •
                        ue. 1.
                   and shalbe to the worlds end.
                     Ephe. 4.
                   The maner of their calling is:
                     Colloss. 3.
                   Come assemble you in vnitie of faith and mind, knit your selues togither in Christ Iesu, in loue which is the bond of perf
                     •
                  ctnesse, that the peace of god which passeth al vnderstanding,
                     Phil. 4.
                   kéepe your hearts & mindes in Christ Iesu our Lord. Prepare ye (sayth the Angel) to come to that great and supernaturall good supper of the Lord: Which is that eternall and euerlasting refreshing of the soul. Come on and tast of the most daintiest dishes, & most sumptuous fare,
                     1. Corin. 
                           •
                        
                     
                   which neuer eye hath séene,
                     Esay. 6 4.
                   neither care hath heard, neither came into mannes heart, which God hath prepared for them y• loue him,
                     Rom. 1
                           •
                        .
                   learne out of gods holy word what his good wil & pleasure is,
                     Ephe. 6.
                   folow the same in life & maners,
                     1. Peter. 5.
                   flie from al worldly pleasures. Liue soberly, temperately, chastly & righteously in the feare of god,

attending and waiting vpon the cōming of our Lord and God. Finally, order and frame your life so, that ye may eat t
                        •
                     e fl
                        •
                     she of kings, that ye may by exhortation and ensample, teach the worldly gouerners to conuert vnto the Lord, and to forsake all maner of filthie, carnall and sinnefull lustes. And that ye may eat the fl
                        •
                     sh of all captaines and mightie men, pluck down the hie minded hearts of tirāts, to bring vnder their 
                     •
                  rueltie and loftie stomacks, deuour also the flesh of the worldly rich and proud mā, cause him to leaue of al worldly pleasures, 
                     •
                  xcesse, and manifolde vanities.
               
                  And the fl
                        •
                     she of horsses, 
                        •
                     nd of them that sit on them. And the flesh of al fre men & bōdmen, and of smal and great Regard neither horsses nor them that sit on thē, but teare their flesh in péeces. Spare no man, neyther hie nor low, rich nor poore, bond nor frée, but checke and taunt them, that they leauing their old & wicked wayes, turne to the lord. As for the obstinate and stubborn which wil not bow but resist, break them and hew them in pieces, punish the

wicked and carnall worldlings of what degree so euer they be, and these beastly Antechristes & cruel Grashoppers which sit on them: take away the pride and loftinesse from these loitering prelates, and idle bishops, and also of thē that imitate and follow their mischeuous hipocrisie, deliuer the oppressed, and turne back the cruell persecution from the innocents, poure downe thy wrath ouer the wicked according to their desertes,
                     Math. 24.
                   and let none escape.
                     Luke. 17.
                   Imitate the Eagle and Kite, resort there where as the dead carkasses, (men without liuely faith, and drouned in sinne) be. Teache euery one to walke honestly in their vocation, let Princes vnderstand that it behoueth them to be learned and wise in all sciēces:
                     Psalm. 2.
                   but abo
                     •
                  e al in the holy Bible which be the Scriptures, and that it becometh thē to walke in the feare of god, not to do al things vnaduisedly, and according to their owne pleasure, but orderly, as reason and equitie doth require, not to oppresse the poore, innocents and fatherlesse, but to aid, succoure and helpe them, and to punishe the

wicked and malefactors, nor vse exfortion in taxing ouermuch their commens & subiects. The rich & welthy, that they be merciful, good stewards & distributers of ye gifts of God cōmitted to their charge. To the hipocrites & Idolaters, that they leaue of their vaine trust or confidence, in any creatures, & returne vnto the liuing God.
                     1. Cor. 7.
                   Again the whoremonger, that he goe no more like a beast and Mule in whom is no vnderstanding, after other mennes wiues, but rather take his own wife, to flie al occasions of euil. Cōmaund the ruler to be faithful in his calling,
                     
                        
                           •
                        om. 13.
                   and the Commons louingly to obey. The wife to be true and obedient to hir husband:
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Pet. 2.
                   againe,
                     
                        
                           •
                        phe. 5.6.
                   the husband to be friendable and louing to his wife,
                     Coloss. 3.4.
                   defend hir, cherish and nourish hir, euen as Christ defended his Church, and cared for hir. Children to be obediēt to their Parents, the Parentes not to prouoke their children to wrathe. And the seruaunts to obey them that be their masters. &c. Thou shalt eate the flesh of the Giantes,
                     
                        
                           •
                        zech. 39.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        sal. 67.
                   and drinke the bloud of the Princes of the

earth, of the Weathers, of Buckes and Bulles which shall be slayne at Basan. And I saw the Beast, and the Kings of the earth, and their armie. That is, these Ruffians and lecherous Bishops, Monkes, Abbots, and the rest of these shauelings of Antechrist, with the Princes of this world, cruel tyrant
                     •
                  , catchpols and hangmen of the Beast, are assembled together, to consult and gather souldiours, and set them out to fight against him which sate vppon the white horse, to make warre against Christ and his beloued Churche, his chosen and peculiare people, his seruaunts which without any kind of doubt or wauering, follow him. They séeke (I say) to kil and slay these pleasant birdes, bicause they did eate and consume their fleshe. They rebuked their euill corrupt maners and vnrighteous dealing, their wicked and abhominable life, therefore they make warre against Christ, where so euer the worde of God was sincerely preached and taught, the glorye of God preferred, and the securitie and naughtinesse of mannes sinfull and abhominable

life reproued, there hath alwayes insurrections, tumultes and seditions risen amongst the hipocrits of traiterous enterprizes.
                     Luke .2.
                   For the word of God is a signe of contradiction, and the stone of offence. These Princes and captaines with their most cruel souldiers are set on, prouoked and stirr
                     •
                  d by the malice of these Idolatrous Bishops and Prelates, euen as Pilate and Herode were moued of Annas and Caiphas to put Christ to death.
                     
                        
                           •
                        a. 27.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ohn .18.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ctes .28.
                   And as Felix gouernour of Iurie at the request & pleasure of Ananie the hie priest, kept S. Paule in prison. The Emperor Traian and other tyrants should neuer haue persecuted the Christians vntil this day, if their horsses had not bene pricked so fast and so often with the spurres of wicked and leu
                     •
                  e Prelats. And what diligence & endeuour they haue done to ouerthrow, vanquishe and roote out the truthe, may be seene by their letters, wrytten and sent to so many Kings and Princes. No small a doe had they to bring Iohn Wicliffe in discredite and slaunder with the people, the which (after he had ben buried

fortie yeares) toke vp his bones, and burned them with fire, and cast the ashes into the riuer, shewing their tiranny vpon his bones, whome they coulde not be reuenged of in his lyfe time, no not for all their requestes and sutes made to the kyng of Englande, Richarde by name.
               Againe, Sigismunde the Emperor wold neuer haue done contrary to his promise fortified by a safe conduct graunted vnto Iohn Hus, to goe and come safely to the Counsell at Constance, and in a manner forced hym: for if he would be the image of the beast, & an obedient child of the Romish church, he must doe all as it pleased them. It is manifest what diligence and trauaile they haue assayed, what violence and force they haue vsed, to banishe and chase the truth of the Gospell out of Germanie, what practises, craftie policies and fetches they haue sought to deface it here in Englande, and what crueltie and tyrannie they shewe in France, to the vtter destruction of the countrey we haue séene and see, and yet dayly at this instant seele they. And aboue all, haue we felte, and

                  
                     〈◊〉
                   yet féele the experiēce of it in low Germany (our natiue countrey) and Flaunders, where as soone as Gods worde was sincerely preached, and the Gospell of Iesu Christ opēly declared, O how Satās kingdome was rente & diminished? how idolatrie and superstition was brought low, & all excesse, surfetting & dronkennesse, all wickednesse and vice, all pride & naughtinesse beat down & forsaken. The whooremongers & adulterers began to be ashamed of their filthinesse: priests & Friers misliked of their estate, and durst not say Masse, go on procession & funeral, & other of their abhominatiōs: they couered their crounes, let grow their beards, hid thēselues, yea & demed yt they were such. Many light women were conuerted, many ruffians & baudes were astonied for yt they saw their houses not so much haunted as before. These with ye rest of the spiritual baudes and ruffians, were well ashamed and wist not where to hide thēselues, bicause of y• light, which did shine so bright in the worlde. On the other side, consider how the kyngdome of Christe increased,

augmented and multiplied daily, how the honor of God was set foorth, the name of the Lorde was magnified and inuocated, praised and blessed. Howe many people whiche hitherto haue liued like ignorant doltes in al securitie & beastlynesse, were then come to knowledge and vnderstanding, & leauing their former life, gaue thē selues to vertue & godlinesse, & cleauyng to that whiche they heard, expressed it in their life & cōuersation. Last of al, it was maruel to see how charitie, humilitie, sobriety, honesty, & al other godly exercises ye works of the spirite wer put in practise amongst this new springing churche: and contrarywise, the dedes of the flesh forsaken, & layed aside. But that great dragon the diuel, that olde serpent, who from the beginning hated the truth, & mans felicitie, seing his kyngdom go to wrack, hys gay & finely disguised church d
                     •
                  cay, hys pilferyng trashe & beggerly Ceremonies nothing set by: yea and seing his beastly bodie, & al his membres by ye preaching of Gods word so cleane vncouered, and beaten to the grounde, did waxe madde and

outragious. Wherefore he moued & stirred vp kings, who entring in allegiance and alliaunce with his Antechrist, gathered a counsell against the Lorde and his churche, to scatter and put asunder hys flocke, aud to kill and slay his chosen. Which thyng afterwarde they practising made them vp, and not without treason, inuaded the countreys there, not to gouerne accordyng to iustice and equitie, but violently and tyrānously to rule and reigne, yea notwithstanding their priuileages enacted and giuen by acte of parliament, confirmed and established by othe of the Prince him selfe, haue they yet against all reason and lawe oppressed the commons, and innocents. As for the christians, it is too well knowne howe they are vsed, therfore I leaue of to speake any more of that matter, not mistrusting but that it shall be declared at large of some diligent writer.
                     Psalm. 2.
                   But what is their purpose?
                     Acts .2.
                   The Lorde against whom they striue,
                     Prouerb. 1.
                   is too strong, he knoweth all theyr enterprises and imaginatiōs,
                     Psal. 37. Psalm .59.2
                   & laugheth them to scorne, He seeth their fall and ouerthrowe,

and the victorie of his chosen, and the deliuerāce of his people is in his hande. Let them rage neuer so sore, lette them murther and slay neuer so many,
                     Reue. 14.
                   blessed are they whiche die in the Lorde, they shall neuer be able to roote oute the truth, muche lesse to obtaine any victorie agaynste God, for the Lambe is strong, and abideth valiantly vpon that vnmouable & inexpugnable mounte Syon, hauyng wyth hym an hundreth and .4400000. These be as many as haue receyued hys true faith, and are the true séede of Abraham, hauing the seale of the holy Ghost,
                     Psalm. 2.
                  
                  
                     Math. 3.
                  
bearing the name of their father engraued on their forhead,
                     Iohn .8.
                  
                  
                     Rom. 4.
                   redéemed & bought from the earth, predestinated and chosen to life euerlasting,
                     2. Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 2.
                   whiche are not defiled with women,
                     Ephe. 1.
                  
                  
                     Rom. 9.
                   whose soules and faith are not spotted with false doctrine or idolatrie and superstition papistical.
                     Reue. 14.
                   These ar virgins which receiue not the false,
                     Ephe. 4.
                   hipocriticall and whoorish doctrine of ye Antechrist. These be the virgins whereof the holy Ghost speaketh, and not them only (as they saye) whiche neuer maried, else

                  Abraham, Moyses, Dauid, Zacharie, Peter, Philip, and the reste of the godly whiche haue bene maried, coulde haue ben of the number of those virgins: for they iudge mariage to be vncl
                     •
                  ane, and a deede of the fleshe. They are not ashamed to aduouch in their Decretals, that it is better and a smaller offence to kepe a 
                     •
                  ūdreth hoores, than to marrie or contracte matrimonie, after they haue vowed chastitie. Oh beastes that ye are, the spirite of Chastitie did neuer cause you to forbid holy matrimonie, but it was the spirite of vncleannesse Asmodeus, Beelsebub, and that spirit whereof the Sodomites, and them of Gomorra were driuen. These foule spirites made you to do it, to accomplishe the prophecies of S. Paule, and of Daniell, whiche amongest other wordes, speaketh of Antechrist on this maner: He shal 
                     •
                  xalt him selfe aboue all, which is called God.
                     2. Thess. 2.
                   For the God of hys predecessors he shal make no count of.
                     Dan 11.
                   He shal loue neither God nor woman,
                     Reuel. 15.
                   but only his Maosim, for he exalteth himself aboue all things. The naturall

duetie and affection whiche God hath graffed in man & wyfe, to loue and haue company comforte and healpe one of the other, to increase and multyplie, is the onely meane whych God hath prouided to preuent the decay of mankynde. It is also a greate kinde of beneuolence and friendeshyp, wherein the one parte of mās nature honoreth (aswel for the likenesse, as for the creatours sake) the other in the feare of God, whome they in the state of matrimonie, not onely serue, (if it be well vsed) but honour and worship. Then, the du
                     •
                  tie of a good husbande is, according to Gods worde, to labour, and with the sweate of his browes to get his bread, to care and prouide for hys familie, for his wyfe and chyldren, that shée neyther thorough pouertie, hunger, or other cause of wretchednesse, haue no occasion to committe or do any thyng agaynst the rule of honestie and prescript commaundement of God. A good wyfe agayne, wyll be diligent and carefull for all things necessary and belonging to the

house, she shall be sober, honest, faithfull and busie. This affection and kindenesse, wherof we speake here, procedeth out of the naturall loue, gyuen v
                     •
                  to vs by nature, and all men in generall are bounde to obserue it. This naturall kyndenesse and diuine loue hath not this monstrous beast and beastly monster Antechrist, nor his sodomitishe greasy ones. They lurke onely in their dennes, and wyth daintie dyshes and delitious meates fil their bellies, and make merr
                     •
                  e, they care for no bodie, they beare neither honest loue, nor heart, or any good wil to woman, neither for propagation
                     •
                   nor for the ordinance of God, who is the author & instituter of it. They labour not to maintain their wife. they seeke not to defēd any against dishonestie, rauishment or shame, they desire none for their owne, but when they lust, they take one nowe, and an other to morowe, and then sende hir packing, to haue neither trouble, cost nor charges of hir, nor of the childe, but like vnkyndely Cuckoes lay theyr egges into other folkes nestes. Whether these things tende

to the despysing & disgracyng of women or not, iudge you. And surely the rather for that they, not passing for the ordināce of God, but reiecting it, take one or other of their acquaintaunce after theyr owne minde, forsooth to cast hir of like a broken pot, and to take an other so often as they lust. But what great euyl and inconuenience dothe procéede and followe here hence, is to be séene in great Cities, where these belly gods for the most part vse to haunt, as at Rome, and in other places where any Byshoprikes or canonistes or colledges be, where ye may sée an infinite numbre of quean
                     •
                  s and painted Curtisās, which get their liuing by y• l
                     •
                  tting of their flesh and body to these beastly & vnnaturall kind of people, to whom they beare neither heart nor good will for abusing them selues. In that they haue to do with them, they loose their honestie & fame, they marre and destroy both body and soule. I le
                     •
                  ue the murtheryng and slayin
                     •
                   of chil
                     •••
                  n, whiche is no synne amongst them: 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  any other vnclean, vnnaturall and 
                     〈◊〉
                   abhominable filthy

déedes vsuall amongst them in theyr priuie chaumbres and celles. These bee the fruits of their promised sworné vnchast chastitie. For what I pray you is chastitie or virginitie more before God than marriage?
                     
                        
                           ••
                        b. 3.
                   no more than circumcision to vncircūcision,
                     
                        
                           •
                        om. 23.
                   one is neither better nor worse before god than y• other, cōcerning the life of a christian man. Christ Iesu requireth & demaūdeth only of vs tru faith working thorough charitie: so thē al they y• lead their lyfe in the holy state of matrimonie, accordyng to the word of God, are reputed virgins, as S. Paule testifieth: The Lambe whyche taketh away the sinne of the world stands with them,
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Cor. 12.
                   which y• father hath giuen him vpon that strong mounte Syon. Contrarywise, the Dragon and the beast with all theyr adherents, are set vpon the slyding sandes of the sea, their kingdome, their power their myght, their lawes, statutes, and ordinaunces, theyr frée will and wycked purpose, their proude titles haue no sure foundation, but are buylded only vppon

t
                     •
                  e waueryng sandes of doubtefulnesse and falshode, agaynst whiche when any tempeste or winde of Gods holy worde bloweth, sodainly it is moued and ouerthrowen: yea and these vile shauelyngs them selues are these sandes, wh
                     •
                  reon their captain the dragon stādeth
                     •
                   they are the chair and dwellyng place of the diuel. Thoroughe them, as instrumentes, and false prophetes, he vsed to speake, to commaunde, and execute all hys deceiptfull and false hypocris
                     •
                  es and idolatries. It is then moste sure and certaine, that this beast with all theyr beastlynesse, can neuer abyde long. For it followeth, that the Beast was apprehended and taken, and with hir the false Prophetes whyche did signes and wonders before them. As heretofore Iames and Iambres, the enchaunters of Egypt, wente aboute to counterfaite the sig
                     •
                  es,
                     Exod. 
                           •
                        .
                   whiche Moyses and Aaron dydde in the presence of Pharao:
                  
                     2. Tim. 3.
                   lykewy
                     •
                  e doe these false inchaunters peruert the truth in these oure days, namely in that they shew greater wonders, than any heretofore hath ben heard of: That is, that they

(as they affirme and violently holde) can turne very bread into naturall fleshe and bloud, and that so cunnyngly that it can not be once perceyued, neyther in beholdyng féelyng or tastyng of it otherwyse than breade. And more other: as to redéeme soules out of Purgatorie, by sacrifices and workes supererogations, and other shamefull braggs, wherwith he deceyued them that receyued the beastes marke and seale, and worship his image.
               
                  These both, namely the head and the bodie, the beast, and the false prophete, were aliue caste into a lake of fire, burning with Brimstone: These shall surely thorough the power and ryghteous iudgement of God, receyue theyr portion wyth the hypocrites and false Prophetes.
               
                  And the remnant which folow, of what state and condition so euer they be, were slayne with the sworde of him that sitteth vpon the horse, which commeth out of his mouthe.
               
               This sworde is (as is before sayd) his mightie and true word, which hath within hym spirite and life. Such then as are not afrayde of this worde, but obstinatly

cleaue faste to their false doctrine and ordinaunces, also those whiche beyng striken of this sworde, and beléeue not, nor repentyng them of their misdedes, frame their lyfe accordyngly, shall perishe without doubt with this sword for euermore.
                     Rom. 8.
                  
               
               
                  And all the foules are folkes whiche God of hys mercie, hathe chosen and plucked from these worldly pleasures and naughtie desires, shall be howesouer the matter goeth filled with their fleshe, whether they be saued or damned: For if they be saued these shall be gladde bycause that theyr numbre is increased. Againe, on the other syde, shall they reioyce, when that they sée the wicked and obstinate, through th
                     •
                   iuste iudgement of God punished. The righteous (sayeth Dauid) séeing the vengeaunce of God,
                     Psalm. 5
                           •
                        .
                   shall reioyce, and shall washe their féete in the bloud of the wicked: Euen so shal the vngodly, which resist God and his holy worde, with al their vainglorie and pompe, sodainly and with a greate noyse perishe. The Lorde shall destroy them for euer. The wicked doers (sayeth Dauid) fall, they are cast downe,
                     Psalm. 36.
                  
                  
and are not able to stande. Agayne, he sayeth:
                     
                        
                           •
                        salm. 37.
                   As for the vngodly, they shal perishe and come to naught: and when the enimies of the Lorde are in theyr floures they shall vanishe,
                     
                        
                           •
                        salm. 1.
                   yea euen as the smoke shall they consume away. They shall perishe in their wickednesse like a shadow, and wither away as the thistle, and lyke the chaffe and dust, which the winde scattereth away from the grounde, so lykewise the way of the vngodly shall perish. This wyll su
                     •
                  ely come vpon the wicked as it hath done in al ages, and as we haue séene it with our eyes, and dayly shall 
                     •
                  ée it more and more. But they which feare God and loue hym, shall obtayne hys grace and mercy, and shal enioy his faith
                     •
                  ful promises, the inheritance of his euerlasting kyngdome, as ye may heare nexte folowing.
               
                  I saw
                        •
                     
                   (sayth S. Iohn) a newe heauen
                        •
                      and a new earth.
                  
                     Reuel. 21.
                   S. Peter sayth also,
                     2. Peter .2.
                   that euery thing (going before the iudge) shalbe clensed and purified,
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Sap. 3
                  
                  
                     Psal. 50.
                   and not consumed, for al things must be changed and made cleane of all corruptiblenesse. He meaneth not

sayeth Aretes) that the creatures shoulde consume away, and be no more, but onely yt they seruing to a better vse, shoulde be renued, so the godly and chosen shall be deliuered two maner of wayes, that is to say: Here in this worlde from sin, & hereafter of death & damnation, & so shall be led & conducted vnto the true libertie & ioyfull inheritance of ye children of God.
                     Rom. 8.
                  
               
               
                  The first heauen defiled with the pryde of the angels, and the fyrst earth corrupted with the manyfolde wyckednesses of man, were passed away altogether, and shall be no more, not that the veritie of them shall vanishe, but the nature, complection, and qualitie of them shal change and turne into sinceritie and perfection. And there was no more sea
                        •
                     
                   yt is, y• vaine & inconstāt people were no more: for al prickings & remorse of conscience, al desperation, mistrustfulnesse & doubt, shall be taken quite from y• godly & chosen. All kind of anger sorow & aduersity shal be turned into ioye and peace of the holy Ghost, all hindrance, feare, persecution, tyrannie, violence, and aduersitie whyche we endure

héere in the troublous sea of thys worlde,
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Cor. 13.
                   shal ceasse at the day of the lord, when we shall sée hym face to face. And the sea shall be no longer subiect to vanitie, than all other creatures, but shall be purified from all corruption, and shall henceforth be so cleare as any christall, although it remaineth the same substāce.
               
                  And I Iohn sawe, by reuelation and permission of God, the holy Citie, new Ierusalem come downe from God out of heauen. By good reason is this holy Citie the congregation and churche of God called newe Ierusalem, come downe from God hir Creatour and maker, for she is holy, not of hir self, but of him that made hir, and chose hir to be his welbeloued spouse, prepared lyke a bride 
                        ••
                     immed for hir husbande, for she is purified and made newe againe,
                     
                        
                           •
                        phe. 5.
                   as the well trimmed bride for hir husband,
                     
                        
                           •
                        euel. 12.
                   the lambe Christ Iesus.
                     
                        
                           •
                        it. 3.
                   This bride shall hereafter through regeneration and renuing of the holy Ghost shew glorious & perfect holy:
                     
                        •
                     ath. 19. so long as she cōtinueth here, she maketh no accompt of any thing in this worlde, but doth gouerne hir selfe accordyng to

that rule which he hir husband hath lefte hir, namely his holy woord. But héerafter shall she (being deliuered frō sinne, wretchednesse, and all kinde of corruptions) more perfectly follow his steppes. She is called new héere on earth, for so much as she hath laide off, and put away throughe the vertue of Gods holy spirite, the olde man with all his lustes,
                     Colloss. 1.
                  
                  
                     Eph
                           •
                        s. 5
                           •
                        
                     
                   and hath no fellowship with the vnfruitefull workes of darknesse. But heereafter shal she be new by his fauoure and grace, for so muche as she shall be deliuered from sinne, deathe, and all manner of corruption. She is called the new Ierusal
                        •
                     m both héere and hereafter, bicause that all their Citizens are of one beliefe: yet shall they be heereafter of like glorie and vnitie. Héere hir Citezens are among the Sainctes,
                     Ephes. 
                           ••
                        
                     
                   and the familie of God, and there shall they be both children, and inheritors with Christ,
                     Rom. 6.
                   she came downe from god out of heauen:
                     Reuel. 21.
                  
                  
                     Math. 16.
                   hir Christian faith is neither of fleshe nor bloud,
                     Gala. 4.
                   but by the gratious Reuelation of the heauenly father.
                     Tit. 3.
                   But Ierusalem (sayth S. Paul) which is aboue, is frée and mother

                  
                     •
                  uer vs all. She is that Citie which God hath builded. She is furnished with the gift of faith, and wt the fountaine of life,
                     Ephe. 5.
                   prepared and trimmed to be a faire and glorious churche,
                     1. Peter .3.
                   without any spotte or wrinckle.
                     Iohn .1.
                   She is clensed from hir sinnes through his bloud, she is very costly, and wel fauoredly adorned & beautified with ioy, peace, long suffering, pacience, and other more vertues of the spirit:
                     Gala. 5.
                  
                  
                     Ephe. 5.
                   euen as an honest and true Bride is dressed and trimmed for hir louing & deare husband. The bride (sayth Dauid) standeth on thy right hand in a vesture of fine gold.
                     Psal. 45.
                   But hir raiments (so long as she is on earthe) are inuisible, they are spiritual iewels of the soule and m
                     •
                  nde, and not of the body. And I heard (sayth S. Iohn) in the midst of this last vision, a mightie voice out of the heauen, the euerlasting and onely throne of GOD, a voyce saying after this sort 
                     •
                  nto me. Loke vp and beholde, for your owne (and al other belé
                     •
                  uers) cōmoditie and instruction, the holy Tab
                        •
                     rnacle of the Lord, which shall be with the chosen for euer, is also héere wyth the Militant

Church vpon earth. Moreouer, consider that euery beleeuing soule is a Temple of the holy Ghost.
                     1. Corin. 6
                   As Christ him selfe testifieth:
                     Iohn .14.
                   He that loueth me, and keepeth my word, I and my father will come to him, and dwell with him. In like manner speaketh God by the Prophet Ezechiel:
                  
                     Ezech. 37.
                   saying, I wil make a bond of peace with them, which shall be vnto them an euerlasting couenaunt, I will set my sanctuarie among them for euermore. My dwelling shalbe with them, yea I wil be their God, & they shal be my people. The same also he confirmeth heere in this place, saying:
                     Reue. 21.
                   
                  He will dwell with them, and they shalbe his people, and God him s
                        •
                     lfe shalbe their God.
                  
                     Esay. 43.
                   In suche sorte that they shall neuer acknowledge any other, than him only. He shal alwayes comfort and strengthen thē heere by his holy spirit, and heereafter by his presēce so mightely defend and surely kéepe them, that they shall neuer faile him heere, nether afterward be seperated from him. And God shall wipe away all teares from their eyes, so cleane that no kinde of trouble or feare, shall make them afraid,

neither any aduersitie shrinke or make them heauie. The same also saith the lor
                     •
                   by his Prophet: I shall make a pleasant Ierusalem,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        say. 25.
                   and I my selfe wil be glad with hir. From that time forward shall there be heard within hir, no more sorrow nor paine, neither shall there be any death, for death shall be destroyed for euermore. The conscience of man shall not then be subiecte to any mistrustfulnesse or other infirmitie, but shall haue ioy in the holy Ghost. They shall through sinne, not die any more, but shall liue through faith in God. That cruel whoore shal drink drōke no more in the bloud of the Martirs, for she with al hir adherents, and wicked tirantes, shall be kept in that filthie lake which burneth with fire and brimstone for euermore: So that no kinde of trouble, persecution, slaunder, hatred, malice, anguish or pain, or any kind of aduersity, crueltie,
                     Mat
                           •
                        . 5.
                   or wretchednesse, which coulde be deuised,
                     2. Corin. 4.
                   can hurt or hinder them: for sorowes, wailing, and wéeping,
                     Esay. 25.
                   shall be put farre from them.
                     Reuel. 7.
                   The building of the frame,
                     Reuel. 20.
                   and the situation of this citie was

four square, which signified not only vnto vs the sure grounde, and stedfastnesse of the true Christian faith, which God kéepeth tenderly nourisheth and augmē
                  teth in his elect, but also sheweth yt euerlasting certaintie of that mightie and inexpugnable kingdom of Christ, and that hope which is neuer ashamed: for who so euer beleueth and dependeth vpō Christ, shall neuer be confounded.
                     Psal. 12
                           •
                        .
                   Whatsoeuer is foure square, abideth firme & vnmoueable,
                     Prou. 1
                           ••
                        
                     
                   and is not subiect to rolling or vnstablenesse, like a boule or speare, or any thing that is roūd. In like maner haue we to consider of the four squarenesse of 
                     〈◊〉
                   new Ierusalē, (wherof material Ierus
                        ••••
                     
                   b
                     •
                  ing also square was a figure) that none of what so euer kindred, language or nation he be, shall haue either preferment héere in this citie, or be lesse regarded, for whether he be frō the East or the West, from the South or the North, rich or poore, Grecian or Barbarian, if he be but a true beléeuer, he shall be receiued and accepted of God. Wherof we haue a manifest ensample in the Gospell, where

Christ teacheth by the Parable of a certaine housholder,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ath. 20.
                   which hired labourers into his vineyard, who calling them vnto him in y• euening, gaue as much to them that wrought but an hour, as he did vnto them that wrought the whole day. The walles of this Citie are strong and well furnished,
                     Math. 16.
                   wherout we may cōclude and gather,
                     Esay. 2
                           •
                        .
                   that the blessednesse of saluation or Gods promises are sure and strong, in so much that hell gates can not preuaile against, or withstand them. These walls are of such a height, that no enimie, be he neuer so craftie, subtile, or wise, by anye meanes of faire speach, dissimulation or hipocri
                     •
                  ie,
                     Reuel. 2
                           •
                        .
                   is able to get ouer them, onely must they enter through the gate which is Christ Iesu. This holy Ierusalem is glorious, blessed, heauenly and spiritual, not made by mans hande,
                     Heb. 12.
                   but it is made and builded of God the heauēly father, the father of light (of whom all good
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  nd perfect gifts onely do descend & are sent down) Therfore hath she a maruellous,
                     Iames .1.
                   and incomprehensible light and wisdome of almightie God. The Lambe Iesus Christ

is hir light,
                     Psal. 119.
                   and his word the lanterne to his f
                     •
                  ete.
                     Philip. 3.
                   And hir shining light and spiritual wisdom was like an oriental stone, most precious: for his word is more costlier than golde, yea than the moste finest golde.
                     Psalm. 119.
                   This Citie hath twelue gates for to open and to shut, with sundrie names, bicause of the diuers natiōs and languages. For from euery side of the worlde, come the people to the churche of Christ, yet passe they al through one gate, which is Christ Iesu. None (saith he) cōmeth to the father but by me.
                     Iohn .14.
                   I am the doore to enter into the shéepe folde. Who so euer entreth through me, shall be saued.
                     Iohn .10.
                   
                  Thys Ierusalem hath twelue gates. And on euery gate was a very costlye and precious Pearle, for the doctrine of the Gospell is precious and costly without comparison, whereby so many as are ordained from all coastes of the earth, enter into the kingdom of Christ.
               
                  And at these gates were set twelue Angels. In that respecte Dauid also did sing,
                     Psal. 33.
                   saying: The Angels of the Lord are about

the tents of them that feare him, to kéepe them. He did set a garde vpon the walles of Ierusalem,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        say. 62.
                   (sayth Esayas) to annoūce his worthy name: So that it is wel garded & fenced round about. The Diuel with all his bost haue no force against it.
                     Math. 16.
                   No man is able to draw any one out of his hands.
                     
                        
                           •
                        ohn .10.
                   And aboue these gates were written honorable names, namely the names of the twelue tribes of Israell, which are Iuda, Ruben, Gad, Assur, Nephthalim, Manasle, Simeon, Leui, Isachar, Zabulon, Ioseph and Beniamin. These names were wrytten héere, bicause the right inheritance was promised to the séede of Abraham, and Christ Iesus was the true séede of Abraham,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 4. and by him are we made children of the promise.
                     Reue. 22.
                   
                  The walles of the Citie hath twelue foundations, groūded vpon y• strong and mightie stone Christ Iesu, which is vnmoueable: for so much that from the beginning the Church of God vpon hym hath bene builded and grounded. Uppon him did Adam, Noe, Abraham, Moyses, Dauid, Helias, with the rest of the godly fathers that euer were, build, & remaine

stedfast,
                     1. Cor. 3.
                   although they were neuer so lōg before him, or shall be after him,
                     1. Peter .1,
                  
                  
                     Gen. 11.1
                           •
                        .
                   for they beleued certainly on the promises which God had wrought to thē by Christ.
                     Reg. 19.
                   They all, being vnder the cloud,
                     Exod. 2.
                   did eate of one kinde of meat,
                     3. Reg. 17.
                   and dronke of one spirituall stone which is Christ Iesu,
                     Luke .1.
                   which afterward is come into the flesh.
                     1. Cor. 10.
                   No man may lay any other foundation (sayeth S. Paule) than that which is layd alreadye,
                     1. Corin. 13.
                   which is Christ Iesu. Upon this one, strong, and euerlasting foundation, were laid and builded these twelue foundatiōs agréeable vnto him. Namely the twelue Apostles of the Lambe,
                  
                     Math. 10.
                   
                  Peter, Iohn, Iames, Andrewe, Philip, Bartholomew, Thomas, Mathew, Iames the minor, Simon, Thade
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     Acts .1.
                   and Mathie. These were prefigured by ye twelue stones whiche Iosue erected in Galgala,
                  
                     Iosue .4.
                   for a memoriall & remembrance of the passing of the children of Israell on dry land through the Iordan. They were also signified by other twelue stones, whereon Elias the Prophet builded an aultare vpon the mount Carmelus,
                  
                     3. Reg. 1
                           •
                        .
                   in the name of the Lord. The sure grounde of

these foundations,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ath. 16.
                   was, the Confession that Christ was the very sonne of the liuing God. Upon this foundation they all builded, by the announcing, preaching, and writing of that which the Prophets and true preachers did beleeue. Namely, that he, that is, Christ,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ohn .1.
                   was the Lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of the world, for they soughte the way of saluation, and laboured for the kingdom of God and his righteousnesse,
                     Math. 6.
                  
                  
                     2. Peter .2.
                   shewing them selues thereby to be the liuely workemen of this spirituall building.
               Heere we learne then that the faythe and doctrine of the Prophets and Patriarkes, is all one with the Apostels, & are all grounded vpon Christ Iesu. Wherevnto S. Paule accordeth very wel, saying:
                     Ephe. 2.
                   Now are ye no more straungers, but 
                     •
                  itizens with the Saincts: and are build
                     ••
                   vpon the 
                     •
                  oundation of the Apostles and Prophets. And by these twelue foundations ar
                     •
                   not onely vnderstanded they afore named, for then shold Paule (which him selfe did more laboure than they all)

of this number be excluded:
                     2. Cor. 11.
                   In like maner should be Barn
                        •
                     be, Sylas, Agabus, Iudas the righteous,
                     Actes .9:11 15. 21.
                   
                  Iohn which was otherwise surnamed Marke, with many other more of the like vocation and calling, and also all other faithfull and true ministers, which are of the like faith, and teach that doctrine. For ye must consider that the number of twelue in this place, is a perfecte and a common number, as the number of seuen and ten in other places, cōtaining the whole vnder the chiefest and principallest.
               
                  The buildings of the wall of it, was of Iasper. This signifieth, that in Christ Iesu, are the most costliest, the moste pleasantest, louingest, and surest things that can be deuised. For they which beléeue in him aright, shall alwayes abide freshe, greene, lustie, well fauoured and liuely, and they shall be verye mightie, yea great and strong pillers of his holy and vndefiled Temple. He that beléeueth on me, and kéepeth my worde, (sayth our Sauioure Christ) shall neuer taste of death.
                     Iohn .15.
                   
                  And the Citie was pure golde like vnto cleare glasse.
                  
The Church of God is without any spot or wrinkle.
                     Ephes. 5.
                   It is pure and vndefiled like the golde that is tried in ye fire .vij. times.
                     Prou. 17.
                   The light of the Citie is Iesus Christe,
                     1. Pet. 1.
                   which neuer did any sinne, neither in word or déede. His death and sheading of his bloud, hath made this citie more costly than pure golde. And the foundations of the wall of the Citie, were garnished with all maner of pretious stones, which preciousnes notifieth vnto vs the costlinesse of oure saluation.
               
                  1 The first foundation was Iasper, which being of a gréen colour, noteth vnto vs that the faith of the forfathers, is not yet dead nor withered.
                        Gen. 6.
                      The faith of Enoch appeareth vntil this day, the (first which called vpon the name of the Lord) and of more, which all are yet true, freshe and gréene.
                  2 The second foundation was of Saphire, whose colour is blew and somwhat whitishe, a stone in deede which at the firste looke seemeth to be of no great value, signifying vnto vs the simple and séely soules, the which although they be (wyth holy Iob and Thoby) of no value in the

sight of the world, yet are they highly regarded of God throughe their faith and good life.
                  3 The third of a Chalcedonie, which is yet lesse set by (to our séeming) then the Saphire, but of nature very costly, strōg, and vertuous.
                        4. Reg. 1
                              •
                           .
                      Of this nature were Helias, Iohn Baptist,
                     
                        Math. 3.
                      and such like,
                        Luke .1.
                      which liued in the desert painfully and very straightly, yet proued they most pretious at their appointed time,Math. 3.
                     Mark .1.rebuking and reprouing boldly the wickednesse and sinne of the people, drawing them frō the same, euen as the Chalcedonie pulleth and taketh away the duste from any thing, reprehending and iudging very sharply the Idolaters and hipocrites.
                  4 The fourth of an Emeraud, which of himselfe is not onely gréene, but maketh the aire round about him shew of ye same coloure.
                        Ierem. 2.3.
                      Of this condition was Ieremie and S. Paul, which without ceassing,
                        Zach. 31.
                      preached and spred abrode the doctrine of life,
                        Ac. 9. 16.17
                      after they had once receiued and known the same.
                  5 The fifthe is of a Sardonix, which word

is deducted of Sarda and Onix, and is of nature vnderneath blackishe,
                        Math. 5.
                      and red on the outside,
                        
                           
                              •
                           hilip. 9.51. 
                              •
                           30.
                      & white within: so all those that are meeke of heart,
                        
                           
                              •
                           uke .7.
                      which with Dauid and Marie Magdalene acknowledge & confesse their sinnes before God, through faith are pure and holy.
                        Cant. 1.
                      Althoughe I am blacke (sayth the true Church) yet am I neuerthelesse fair and cleane. Albeit our outward mā (saith S. Paule) perishe,
                        1. Corin. 4.
                      therefore doe we not goe forward, or are any thing weary, for the inward man renueth and augmenteth euery day.
                  6 The sixth of a Sardius, which is of the similitude of red earth. Euen so are those which esteeme them selues as vnworthy children of Adam,
                     
                        Luke .16.
                      notwithstanding that they haue receiued many goodly giftes & great benifites of God, which (as Philo expoundeth it) are the red earth. Of thys nature and companie was the virgine Marie the mother of Christ,
                        Luke .1.
                      which called and estéemed hir selfe to be but an handmaide. And for all the honoure, fauoure, and other great benefites which were shewed vnto hir, she saide that hir spirite

reioysed in God hir sauioure. Of this sort was Abraham also,Genes. 18. calling him selfe but duste and ashes before the Lord.
                  7 The seuenth of a Chrisolite, a stone of al kind of colours shining like golde, and as a burning fire, casting sparkes and a great shine from it. Héere vnder are comprehended those which hauing the wisedom of the holy Ghost, kindle and lighten other men therewithall, and make them altogither hot and burning, & bring them to the feruent loue of God & their neighboures.
                        Exod. 4.
                      So did Moyses and Esay,
                     
                        Esay. 2. 34.
                      
                     Barnabas and Paule,
                     
                        Actes .14.
                      in whom aboundantly appeareth the graces and glory of God.
                  8 The eight is of Berll, which is of a sad & deadish gr
                        •
                     ene: Signifying such true and faithful Christians, which through cōpassion & pitie, sorowfully haue bewailed & lamented the fall of their brethren. Of this good and diuine nature was Steuen,
                     
                        A
                              ••
                           es .7.
                      praying for them which did stone hym to death. Thus did Samuel in his time, which with great sorowes & complaints,
                        1. Re. 15. 16
                      mourned ouer Saul ye king, what time he sawe him cast out of the fauor of God.
                  
                     9 The ninth of a Topace, cōtaining in it the colour of al other stones. And this representeth all them which are adorned with al maner of vertues, as Daniel was a man full of godly desires, and Iohn the Euangelist whom Christ loued most of al, y• did write the Reuelation in Pathmos.
                  
                  10 The tenth of a Chrisophrasius, whose nature is to shine like gold, and yet greenish in the sight. Such are those, who hauing receiued good knowledge & perfecte wisdom of God, distribute vnto others according vnto the talent which god hath deliuered vnto thē.
                        Math. 25.
                      Therby to awake the sluggish and dreaming people, and bring to heauenly meditations. Amongst those, may Ezechiel wel be coūted, which in his time did sée maruellous things, and wonderful straunge Reuelations.
                        
                           
                              •
                           ze. 10.11.
                     
                  
                  11 The eleuenth of a Iacinct, the colour of which stone is like vnto water, hauyng stripes glistering like the bright shining beames of the Sunne. By this stone are represented, suche as doe séeme to be ignorant, and are counted noddies & fooles before the world, which notwithstāding

haue heauenly wisdom inough,
                        Iaco. 1.
                      although in sight very ideots,
                        Iohn .3.
                      voyde of all knowledge, yet neuerthelesse are they instructed and taught of God, to reueale hidden and secrete mysteries of the numbre. Of those are Ozee, Ioel, Amos, & whiche was but a poore shephierd, with the rest of the small prophets. Such were also Andrew, Peter, Philip, Thomas, and the rest of the Apostles of Christ.
                  12 The twelfth an Ametist, this is of a violet or purpure and roste colour, and this signifieth them, which abide zelous, meke and stedfast in the knowne truthe of the Lorde, whiche also are ready at all times to die and shed their bloude euen for the same: suche were the seuen brethren of the Machabees,
                     
                        2. Mach. 7.
                      with their mother. Such were also Iames the greater,
                        Actes .12.
                      and Antipas that faithfull witnesse,
                        Reuel. 2.
                      with many more disciples and martirs.
                        Iohn .18.
                      No man can shew any greater loue than this, when any mā bestoweth hys lyfe for hys friendes. All these sayth our Sauiour, are blessed, and the kyngdome of heauen doth belong vnto them. On this maner then is notified

by these fundations, the same which the true and faithfull ministers and pastors of the churche of Christ, according to the diuersitie of gifts giuen vnto them, haue buylded vpon, some gold, siluer, or precious stones: but such as haue added to this buildyng, any wood, hay, or stubble, which are customes, traditions, and other dūbe Ceremonies, or else vayneglorie, worldly honoure, riches, and pleasures,
                        
                           
                              •
                           xod. 28.
                      shall neuer be accompted among thys heauenly companie. These fundations haue ben prefigured by the precious stones, which were in the stomacher of Aaron the high Priest, and in the costely and royall garmentes of the Kyng of Tyrus. He whiche is desirous to know more of the nature, condition and propretie of these precious stones, may reade Plinie his .xxxvij. booke of naturall Histories, or Bartholomeus de proprietatibus rerum: and concerning the mysterie and allegorie, reade Saint Hierome vpon the .54. Chapiter of Esaye, or Beda, Haymo, Costasius, Bacōthorp, Eleyne Tilney, and dyuers more other, whiche haue written vppon the Reuelation.

It suffiseth vs, to haue shewed thée (according to the meanyng of Saint Austen) that these stones doe signifie the manyfolde gyftes and diuers grac
                        •
                     s of the holy Ghost: for the onely spirite of the lord worketh all these thyngs dyuersly. Hée measureth hys gyftes vnto euery one according to hys good will and pleasure, th
                        •
                      whiche altogether are singular, preciou
                        •
                      and moste excellente, as it shall well a
                        •
                     
                     peare in that great and ioyous day of the chyldren of God.
               
               
                  And the Angell (sayeth Sainct Iohn) whiche dydde shewe all those foresayde thyngs, moued me in spirite, to take the more heede to the gracious and mercifull purpose of the Lorde, and to bryng me to a more déeper knowledge of his misteries, shewed me a pure Riuer of water of life, whiche is therefore called the Water of Lyfe, bycause it maketh whole, and gyueth saluation to oure soules. Thys Ryuer is nothyng else but the fl
                     •
                  wing veritie and the worde of Saluation, or the myghtie doctrine of Christe. Thys is that swéete Ryuer, whyche proce
                     •
                  deth of

                  Edom, to refresh Paradise, which diuiding it selfe in foure, watereth the foure parts of the earthe. This runnyng water maketh the Citie of God very pleasant and delectable. This riuer is maruelous comfortable, springyng into eternall lyfe, it is here a spirituall comfort for the childrē of God, and shalbe hereafter that incomprehensible glory of the Sainctes in heauen.
                     
                        
                           ••
                        hn .6.
                   To whome shal we go (sayth Peter) but to thée, for thou hast the worde of eternall life. The vertue and nature of this water is to satisfie, purge and cl
                     •
                  
                  ̄se, to comfort, to make whole and healthful, for it procéedeth and floweth frō the maiestie of God, it commeth from that eternal and excellent schoole of the father, and thence procéedeth forwarde to the ouerfulnesse of the lambe Christ Iesu, and his diuine spirite. I will poure cleane water (sayth the Lorde) vpon you, and ye shall be frée from all your filth & vncleannesse, I will also gyue you a newe hearte,
                     
                        
                           •
                        zec. 36.
                   and plant in you a new spirite.
                     
                        
                           •
                        salm. 51.
                  
               
               
                  In the middes of the strete of it, and of either side of the riuer was the tree of life. This riuer signifieth

the two testamentes of the Lorde, wherby stode that moste pleasant trée of lyfe,
                     Iohn .6.
                   namely Christ Iesus the mediatour and pastour,
                     Math. 21.
                   the sauiour and redéemer of the worlde.
                     Rom. 1.
                   Out of the roote and progenie of Dauid,
                  
                     Luc. 1.
                  
                  
                     Gen. 2.
                   spryngeth thys tree (according to the fleshe) conceyued of the holye Ghost, borne of the virgin Marie. As the tree of life, in the beginnyng was planted in the middest of Paradise, euen so is hée spiritually in the middest of his Churche, whiche is his moste pleasaunt garden: if that grounde or earth which maketh the trées twice fruitefull in the yeare, be called happy, so may this garden by good rereason, well be called happy and blessed, Where this trée standeth, whiche neuer is without frute, nor drieth vp, or withereth, which dothe not onely beare twyce a yeare fruite, signifiyng all the vnspeakable giftes of the holy Ghoste, but rendreth his frutes euery month of the yere, that is, continually, bothe Sommer and winter. All they which are thys Congregation & people haue continually so long as they lyue, greate Consolation in all

theyr assaultes and trialles, and in all kinde of aduersitie bothe spirituall and temporall.
               
                  And the leaues of the trees serued to heale the nations with. The promises and the worde of GOD are spirite and lyfe, the nature propretie and vertue of them, are blessednesse and eternal saluation. These leaues can not by any meanes wyther awaye. When Gods worde is sincerely preached and taughte, then we remember the benefites of oure deliueraunce, then is oure conscience appeased and satisfied, and the minde mery and gladde, then dothe the soule of man reioyce, and rendreth therfore to GOD the Father moste heartie thanckes, worthie prayses, syngyng and magnifiyng hym for his eternall goodnesse and mer
                     •
                  ie. So then the Nations are quite healed and made healthfull thorough beléefe, and cleauing faste vnto the woorde, acknowledgyng and confessyng Christe Iesu to be their onely Sauiour, righteousnesse, and true holynesse. The woorde of GOD written, or preached, is lyke vnto the leafes,

which beyng well and reuerently receyued, by the woorkyng of the holy Ghost, is of muche importaunce and wayghtie, healthfull strong and myghtie in operation, muche lyke vnto the mustard séede. Aboue all thyngs (sayeth Zorob
                        •
                     bell) is the Truthe moste strong,
                     3. Esdr. 
                           •
                        .
                   and ouercommeth all: For it is the wyll of the Lorde whiche neuer shall perishe. This worde then (I saye,) is so myghtie and victorious, that the Congregation of Christe, and true beléeuers, what soeuer trouble, persecution or violence they doe suffer, shall yet euen in their extreme paine and distresse be comforted and quieted in cō
                  science and spirite,
                     Zach. 2.
                  
                  
                     Psal. 117.
                   be
                     •
                  ing well assured, that God keepeth them as the very apple of his eie: for they know 
                     •
                  hat they ar vnder his protection & gouernance: and that hereafter they shal inherite (how contēptuously so euer they lyued here) eternall glory, felicitie and blessednesse in the presence of God, in that new & heauenly Ierusalem. Of whiche glorie and blessednesse to make a discourse, I shold labor in vain, and bysides that neuer get my purpose,

nor finish mine enterprise: For neuer no eare hearde it,
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Cor. 2.
                   nor eye sawe it, neyther came it into any heart: And to say al, neuer any man was able to comprehend it, that God hath prepared for his elect that loue him.
               Ye haue nowe (gentle Reader) sufficiently (as I hope) herd, what wickednesse, thraldome, laboure, paine, and trouble, couetousnesse, concupiscence, and ambition bringeth to them that loue it, follow it, wishe for it, and séeke after it. Lykewise ye may consider here, howe and after what sort they draw man from God, from naturall reason, from all goodnesse, and mutuall and brotherly loue, vnto all kinde of iniquitie, crueltie and vnnatural vices: and oftentimes come so farre, that they not onely bryng other men in great danger to attaine to their purpose, but they themselues also body and soule. Ye haue hearde also, that the Deuill, the Prince of this worlde, is a father and the author of al wickednesse, & wicked doers, and how that that mischeuous Antechrist (whiche within a 
                     •
                  ew yeres hitherwards

hath ben reueled) did procéede and was borne of him: as ye may see more euidently out of this Genealogie folowing.
               
                  The booke of the Generation of Antechrist, the desolatour and childe of perdition.
                  FIrst the diuell begot Darknesse.
                        Ephe. 6.
                     
                  
                  And darknesse begot Ignorance.
                        Acts .17.
                     
                  
                  Ignorance begot error and his brethren.
                        1. Tim. 4.
                     
                  
                  Errour begot Freewill, Ignorance, and Selfe loue.
                        Esay. 10.
                     
                  
                  Frée will begot Merites.
                        Esay. 58.
                     
                  
                  Merites begot forgetfulnesse of the grace of God.
                        Rom. 10.
                     
                  
                  Forgetfulnesse of the grace of God begot Transgression.
                        Rom. 1.
                     
                  
                  And Transgression begot mistrust.
                        Gen. 3.
                     
                  
                  Mistrust begot Satisfaction.
                        Mat. 17.
                     
                  
                  Satisfaction begot sacrifice of the Masse.
                        Dan. 12.
                     
                  
                  Sacrifice of the Masse begotte Popishe Priesthode.
                        2. Thess. 3.
                     
                  
                  And popish priesthod begot Superstitiō.
                        Math. 15.
                     
                  
                  Superstition begot Hipocrisie the Kyng.
                        Math. 23.
                     
                  
                  And hypocrisie begot Lucre.
                        1. Timo. 6.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           euel. 9.
                     Lucre begot Purgatorie.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           . Cor. 15.
                     And Purgatorie begot the Fundation of Pentions.
                  
                     
                        Deut. 32.
                     Fundation of Pentions begot Patrimonie of the church.
                  
                     
                        Luc. 16.
                     And Patrimonie of the church begot Mā
                     mon of iniquitie.
                  
                     
                        Iob .12.
                     Mammon begot Abundance.
                  
                     
                        Esay. 28.
                     And Abundance begot Fulnesse.
                  
                     
                        2. Tim. 3.
                     Fulnesse begot Crueltie.
                  
                     
                        Math. 23.
                     Crueltie begot Domination.
                  
                     
                        Ezech. 34. Ezec. 16.
                     Domination begot Pompe.
                  
                     
                        Iohn .5.
                     Pompe begot Ambition.
                  
                     
                        Actes .8.
                     Ambition begot Simonie.
                  
                     
                        2. Thess. 2.
                     Simonie begot the Pope and the Cardinals his brethren in the transmigration of Abhomination.
                  
                     
                        Math. 7.
                     And after the Transmigration of Abhomination, the pope begot the Mysterie of iniquitie.
                  
                     
                        1. Tim. 4.
                     And the Mysterie of iniquitie begot Diuine Sophistrie.
                  
                     
                        Ierem. 17.
                     Diuine Sophistrie begot Reiection of holy Scripture.
                  
                     
                        Math. 24.
                     Reiection of holye Scripture begot Tyrannie.
                  
                     And Tiranny begot murther of Saincts
                        Actes .7.
                     
                  
                  Murther of saints begot dispising of god.
                        Psalm. 5.
                     
                  
                  Dispising of God begot Dispensation.
                        Psalm. 32
                     
                  
                  Dispensation begot Licence to sinne.
                        Reue. 15.
                     
                  
                  And Licence to sinne begot abhominatiō.
                        Esay. 1.
                     
                  
                  Abhomination begot Confusion.
                        Reuel. 1.
                     
                  
                  And Confusion begot Trauail of ye spirit.
                        Miche. 7.
                     
                     
                        1. Tim. 1.
                     
                  
                  Trauaile of the spirit begot Disputation and matter to séeke for the veritie, by the which that desolatour Antechriste hath bene reuealed.
                  You haue heard
                        •
                      also (gentle Reader) howe that the Diuell wyth all hys adherents, accordyng to the veritie of Gods holy word, and his righteous iudgement, shal be 
                        •
                     hrowen and cast into the pit of eternall pardition of vnquenchable fire, which hath ben prepared for him and hys angels, hys s
                        •
                     ruauntes and followers, marked with his marke from the beginning of the worlde: where shall be gnashyng of téeth, and wringyng of the handes eternally. Moreouer, it hath ben said, howe that neyther hée, nor all hys membres are able to do any thing against Ies
                        •
                      Christe, nor agaynste hys kyngdom
                        •
                     
                     
or Churche. Which bicause they are not of the world, there
                        •
                     ore the world and all that belongeth to 
                        •
                     he world, haue from the beginning hated them, persecuted and afflicted them, as well Sathan himself, as the world and ye worldly minded: as it is séene dayly, and shal be, so long as the worlde continueth: notwithstanding there hath bene sometime a little quietnesse séene and shall be, it is possible yet, namely so long as the malice and violēce of Sathan and his membres be bridled & tied shorte, so long shall the godly people haue peace & quietnesse, and shal sée some yeares of grace. Furthermore, it was shewed you, how that Christ Iesus became man for vs, and is now in eternall glory in the kingdome of his father, with al his Apostles his chosen, with all suche as beléeue through them in him, whiche hathe bene prepared for them from the begynning, where is and shall be vnspeakable ioye. Here you may sée and iudge of God, and the deuil, Christ, and Antechrist, the kyngdome of God, and of Sathan, the Churche of Christe, and the synagoge of

                     Rome, or the assemblie of the reprobate, the broade waye, and the straite gate, heauen and hell, eternall lyfe and euerla
                        •
                     tyng death. Nowe t
                        •
                     en, if euery one might choose the one or the other of these two wayes, I beleue that no man would be so foolishe or ignorant, that would not choose rather saluation than condemnation, to ascende into heauen, than to goe into hell. Neuerthelesse those that will be saued, and are desirous to be accompted vnder the numbr
                        •
                      of the elect, muste diligentely take héede, that they wander not, nor bée deceyued by euery wynde of doctrin. For lyke as cou
                        •
                     tousnesse, pride, arrogancie, ease of the body, voluptuousnesse, and plesure of the worlde, hath chased and dryuen away all maner of deuotion, zeale, and godly exercises pertayning vnto true christian religion at the primitiue churche: In lyke m
                        •
                     ner shall the Dyuell not yet ceasse or leaue o
                        •
                      to raign and rule in his membres, notwithstanding that the childe of perdition, that Antechrist is already manyfested, and openly shewed: yea he attemp
                        •
                     eth yet daily

by the meanes of suche vices, a little before mentioned, to rayse vp euen in the reformed Churches among the brethren, dissention and trouble. And it is to be feared, that in the ende he shall preuaile more and more.
                        
                           
                              •
                           ath. 24.
                      For it is writtē, that ini
                        •
                     quitie shal abounde,
                        
                           
                              •
                           dr. 15.
                      and haue the vpper hande, and the charitie of many shall wax colde. But so many as beare more loue to God, and séeke more to please hym than the diuell, they must take good heede to do that which pleaseth him, according to his reuealed wil: For whom, it is not sufficient to know Antechri
                        •
                     t, to blame him, to speake and reporte of him as his doings deserue, but it is requisit
                        •
                      for them most chiefly, to confesse the name of the Lorde euen from their very hearts, to honour & feare him, to beleue and put all confidēce in hym, to loue hym, and as neere as we can,
                        Iohn .14.
                      to expresse him in oure conuersation, thorough loue vnfayned, therby to shew oure selues to be hys Disciples: For not euerye on
                        •
                      (sayeth oure Sauioure Christe) that sayeth Lorde,
                        Marke .8.
                      Lorde, shall enter into the Kyngdome of heauen,
                        Luke .9.
                      but

suche as doe the will of my father.
                        Iohn .12.
                      Again, saythe Christe:
                        Luke .6.
                      Whosoeuer louethe hys lyfe héere in thys worlde,
                        Math. 5.
                      shall loose it, and who so hateth his lyfe here for my names sake, shal kéepe it to life euerlasting. Againe, he that will be my Disciple,
                        Iohn .17.
                      let hym folowe me, and where I am, he shal be also. Who so serueth me, my Father shall honoure hym.
                        Ioh. 15.
                      The seruaunte is no better than hys maister, and a messenger is no more than he that sente hym. If we kéepe the commaundements of Christe, we shall remaine in his loue,
                        Iohn .15.
                      euen as hée did the will of hys father, and remayned in his loue. Hys commaundement is, that we loue one an other, as he loued vs, let vs therfore henceforth leade a good lyfe & cōuersation, according to the wyll of the Lorde, and frame our lyfe to the doctrine and exaumple of our maister and Lorde Iesu Christ, in kéeping the commaundementes of the Lorde Christe.
                        Luke .6.
                      Lette vs not be wrathfull,
                        Math. 5.
                      but loue one an other. Praye (sayeth the Lorde) for them that persecute you, and speake euyll of you,

and be ye perfect as I am perfecte. That thys our sinful body might be destroyed, and that henceforth wée serue sy
                        •
                     ne no more: for he that is dead, is frée from sinne. Let vs then thinke, that we are dead to sinne,
                        Rom. 6.
                      and liue not to our selues, but to our Lorde and Sau
                        •
                     our Iesus Christ. Let not sinne (saith the apostle S. Paule) raigne in your mortall body, that ye shoulde obey the lustes thereof,
                        Rom. 6.
                      but be ye true seruantes of righteousnesse vnto life, & not seruaunts of sinne of the fleshe or the world 
                        •
                     o death, neyther gyue ye henceforth your mēbres, as weapons of vnrighteousnesse vnto sinne, but as weapons of righteousnesse vnto GOD. For when we were the seruauntes of synne we were not vnder righteousnesse, what frute had we then in those things, wherof we are nowe ashamed:
                        Rom. 6.
                      for the ende of those things is death, but contrarywise, the fruite of rightousnesse is euerlasting life. Brethren, it is now tyme to awake from sléepe, forasmuche as the nyghte is passed, and the day approcheth, and is euen at hande.
                  
                     God hath fréely sent his true and faithful ministers,
                        Rom. 1
                              •
                           .
                      and giueth his woord plētifully to be preached: let vs cast away then the workes of darkenesse,
                        Rom. 13.
                      and take vnto thée the armour of light,
                        Coloss. 3.
                      & walke honestly as in the daye time,
                        Luke .21.
                      not in gluttonie & dronkennesse,
                        
                           
                              •
                           phe
                              •
                           . 5.
                      nor in chambering & wantonnesse,
                        Iames .3.
                      nor in strife, nor enuying, but put ye on the Lord Iesus Christ, & take no thought for the fleshe, to fulfill the lustes thereof, but according to the good pleasure of God, in al spiritual exercises. The workes of the flesh are notorious & manifest,
                        Gala. 5.
                      as adulterie, fornication,
                        1. Corin. 3.
                      vncleanesse, wantonnesse, Idolatrie, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulation, wrathe, contentions, heresies, enuie, murthers, dronkennesse, gluttonie, and suche like. The workers whereof, are ye most wretches and miserable slaues that euer wer: yea they are threatned, that who so euer cōmitteth such things,
                        Gala. 5.
                      shall not enherite the kingdom of heauē.
                        1. Corin. 
                              •
                           .
                      On the other side, the fruit
                        •
                     s of ye spirit are loue,
                        Ephe. 5.
                      ioy, peace,
                        R
                              •
                           uel. 22.
                      long suffering, gētlenesse, goodnesse, faith, méekenesse, temperancie, and suche like.
                        
                           
                              •
                           phes. 5.
                     
                     
After this sort ought euery christian mā to walke,
                        
                           
                              •
                           om. 6.
                      being carefull to mortifie his own flesh, exercising himself in these good works which God hath prepared for him to walke in,
                        
                           
                              ••
                           he. 2.
                      casting of the old mā,
                        
                           
                              •
                           phe. 4.
                      which is corrupt through deceiuable lusts:
                        
                           
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           . 6.
                      be ye therfore renued in ye spirit of your mind, and put ye on the new man,
                        
                           
                              •
                           phe. 4.
                      which after god, is created in righteousnesse and true holinesse.
                        
                           
                              •
                           phe. 4.
                      Wherfore cast of lying & speak euery man true vnto his neighbour.
                        Colloss. 3.
                      For we are members ye one of the other.
                        
                           
                              •
                           . Peter .2.
                      Be angrie but sinne not:
                        
                           
                              •
                           ach. 8.
                      let not the Sunne goe down vpon your wrath,
                        
                           
                              •
                           sal
                              •
                           . 4.
                      neither giue place to the Diuell.
                        
                           
                              ••
                           co. 4.
                      Let him that stole, steale no more,
                        
                           
                              •
                           phes. 4.
                      but let him rather labour and work with his hands,
                        
                           
                              •
                            Thes. 3.
                      the thing that is good, that he may haue to giue him that néedeth. Let not corrupt communication procéed out of your mouth,
                        Math. 12.
                      but that which is good to edifie withal,
                        Ephe. 4.
                      that it may minister grace vnto the hearers.
                        
                           
                              •
                            Cor. 11.
                      And gréeue not the holy spirite of God, by whom ye are sealed vnto the day of redēption. Let all bitternesse, anger, and wrath, crying and euil speaking, be put away from you

with all maliciousnesse. Be ye courteous one to an other, and tēder hearted,
                        Coloss. 3.
                      forgiuing one an other,
                        Math. 6.
                      euē as god for Christs sake,
                        Eccle. 2
                              •
                           .
                      forgaue you.
                        Ephes. 5.
                      Be ye then followers of god as dear children,
                        Iohn .13. 1
                              ••
                           
                        
                      walk in loue euē as Christ hath loued vs,
                        Math. 5.
                      & hath giuen him self for vs,
                        Galat. 2.
                      to be an offring and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling sauor to god.
                        Tit. 
                              •
                           .
                      So then fornication and all vncleannesse,
                        Exod. 23.
                      or couetousnesse,
                        1. Corin. 6.
                      let it not be once named amōg you, as it becometh sainctes.
                        Galath. 5.
                      Neither vse ye filthinesse, nor foolish talking,
                        Colloss. 2.
                      neyther iesting, which are things not comely:
                        2. Thess. 2.
                      but rather giuing of thāks. For this ye must know, that no whoremonger neither vncleane persō, nor couetous person, which is an Idolatour, hath any inheritaunce in the kingdom of Christ, & of God.
                        Math. 24.
                      Let no man deceiue you with vaine wordes,
                        Ierem. 20.
                      for by such things cometh the wrath of God,
                        Mark .13.
                      vpon the children of disobedience.
                        Luke .21.
                      Be not therefore companions wyth them:
                        2. Thess. 2.
                      for so much as ye were once in darknesse but are now light in the lord: walk therfore as it becometh children of light,
                        Galath. 5.
                      for the fruite of the spirit is in all goodnesse,

righteousnesse and truthe.
                        
                           
                              •
                           ath. 18.
                      Approue and assay that which is pleasing to the Lord,
                        
                           
                              •
                           . Cor. 5.
                      and haue no fellowship with the vnfruitful works of darknesse, but euen reproue them rather:
                        
                           
                              •
                           ccle. 17.
                      take ye heede that ye walke circumspectly and wisely,
                        
                           
                              •
                           olloss. 4.
                      not like the foolish, but as the wise,
                        
                           
                              •
                           om. 12.
                      and redeeme ye time,
                        
                           
                              •
                           phes. 5.
                     
                     
                        Collo
                              ••
                           . 3.
                      for euen these dayes are euill and dangerous days.
                        
                           
                              •
                           . Thess. 5.
                      Therfore be ye not ignorant, but replenished with knowledge and spirite. Let the woord of God dwell in you plentuously in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your own selues in psalms & spirituall songs,
                        Psalm. 
                              •
                           8.
                      synging with grace in your hearts, giuing thanks always to god the father of our Lord Iesus Christ,
                        Ephes 5.
                      submitting your selues one to the other in the feare of God.
                        Colos
                              •
                           . 3.
                      Wiues submit your selues vnto your husbandes,
                        1. Peter .3.
                      as vnto the Lord: for the husband is the heade of the wife, euen as Christ is the heade of the Church, and is the sauioure of his bodie. Therefore as the Church is in subiection vnto Christ: Euen so let the wiues be to their husbandes in euery thing. Ye husbands loue your wiues,
                        1. Pet. 3.
                      dwel with them

as men of knowledge, giuing honor vnto the woman, as vnto the weaker vessell: euen as they which are heires togither of the grace of life.
                        Gala. 2.
                      Euen as Christ loued the Church, and gaue him selfe for it,
                        Ephes. 5.
                      that he might sanctifie it, and clense it, and make it vnto himself a glorious Church, without any spot or wrinckle, but that it should be holy and without blame: So ought men to loue their wiues as their owne bodies: for he that loueth his wife, loueth him self. For no man euer yet hated his owne flesh, but nourisheth & cherisheth it, as the Lord doth his Churche, for we are members of his bodye, of hys flesh, and of his bones. For this cause shal a man leaue father and mother,
                        Ephes. 6.
                      and shall cleaue to his wife,
                        Collos
                              •
                           . 3.
                      and they twaine shall be one flesh. Children obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.
                        Exod. 20.
                      Honour thy father and mother which is the first cō
                     maundement, with promisse. Againe, ye Fathers, prouoke not your children to wrath, but bring them vp in instructiō, & information of the Lord. Ye seruauntes must obey vnto them that be your bodily

maisters according to the flesh,
                        Ephes. 6.
                      with fear & trembling in singlenesse of your heart,
                        Colloss. 3.
                      as vnto the Lord.
                        Math. 15.
                      Not with seruice to the eye, as men pleasers,
                        Tit. 2.
                      but as the seruants of Christ:
                        1. Peter .2.
                      doing the wil of God from the heart, with a good will seruing the Lord, & not men:
                        Eccle. 33.
                      being well assured that whatsoeuer good thing any mā doth,
                        Colloss. 3.
                      that same shall he receiue of the lord, whether he be bonde or free. Therefore ye maisters, doe the same thing vnto them, putting away threatening, knowing that you haue a maister also in heauen, with whom there is no respect of persons. Finally, I beséech you all indifferent, of what estate, condition, or calling so euer ye be, that ye wil shew your self an ensample in word and conuersation in all good workes,
                        1. Tim. 4.
                      kéeping your selfe alwayes vnder discipline, and true doctrin, without any damage of preiudice to any, keeping the word whole & irreprehensible, yt the aduersaries might be ashamed, hauing no occasion to speake euill of you with the truthe. Therefore submit your selues to Princes,
                        Rom. 13.
                      rulers, and powers,
                        Peter .2.
                      and be readie to euerie good

worke. Accuse or blame no man, be ye not spiteful, cōtentious or wrathful, but amiable and peaceable, shewing louing kindnesse and courteousnesse to all men. Girde the loynes of your heart. Stande manfully, and put your whole trust and cōfidence in the grace which is now offered. Let your loue be vnfained.
                        Rom. 1
                              •
                           .
                      Abhorre that which is euill, and cleaue to yt which is good. Be affectioned to loue one an other with all reuerence. Be not slouthful or negligent to do seruice,
                        Ephe. 4.
                      but be feruent in spirite.
                        1. Peter .2.
                      Frame your se
                        •
                     fe according to the time. Reioyce in hope, be patient in tribulation, cōtinue in prayer, distribute vnto the necessitie of the Saintes, giuing your selfe to Hospitalitie. Blesse them which persecute you, blesse I say & 
                        •
                     ursse not, if it be possible, as much as in you is. Haue peace wyth all men.
                        Pr
                              •
                           uerb. 20
                              •
                           
                        
                      Be all of one minde,
                        Philip. 20.
                      of one concorde and one iudgement. That nothing be done throughe contention or vaine glory
                        •
                     , but that in méekenesse of minde euery man estee
                        •
                     e other better than him selfe.
                  
                     Let no man séeke his owne, but the profite of other men. Be 
                        •
                     eruent in loue, haue brotherly loue among you,
                        1. Corin. 13.
                      without the which,
                        Luc. 17.
                      al other things are nothing to speake of, of what faith so euer we boast our selues to haue. Loue is courteous, long suffering, not enuious, not guileful, nor puffed vp, desireth no dishonestie: It séeketh not 
                        •
                     ir owne, is not prouoked to anger,
                        Phil. 2.
                      it thinketh no euill, it delighteth not in vnrighteousnesse, but reioyseth in the truthe,
                        1. Peter .2.
                      endureth all things, hopeth in al things, and neuer faileth. Through very lo
                        •
                     e and charitie, is Christ Iesu become man for vs, and hath humbled him selfe in al kind of obediēce through loue, and suffered death on the Crosse to saue vs. So then let vs abide in charitie, and doe well without wearinesse:
                        Gala. 6.
                      for that which man soweth,
                        
                           
                              •
                           . Thess. 3.
                      that same also he shal reape. If he sowe in the fleshe, he shall reape againe of the fleshe, perdition. But if he sowe in the spirite, he shall reape of the spirite, life. Therefore continue in wel doing, although ye suffer rebuke and ignominie of the world. Be humble and

méeke with Abraham, Moyses and Dauid. Be long suffering and pacient with Iob and Thobie in al kind of troubles, aduer
                     
                        •
                     ities, & tribulations. The Lord alwayes vseth to send his rods first of all ouer his house: therfore when he chastneth vs for our sinnes which we haue done in times past,
                        Math. 6.
                      we must paciently beare it.
                        1. Tim. 3.
                      It must be of necessitie,
                        Iames .1.
                      that the godly suffer persecution to exercise their faith,
                        Genes.. 12.
                      and shew their loue and feruencie.
                        Iob .1. 2,
                      
                     Abraham was proued héere of the Lord,
                        Acts .4.
                     
                     
                        Prou. 17.
                      & Iob troubled and molested,
                        Wysdom .3.
                      and were both found faithful and cōstant. The Apostles were mery and glad, that they were foūd worthy to suffer iniurie, wrong, contempt & hatred for ye name of Iesu Christ. The Lord trieth and proueth the godly as golde in the fornace.
                        Iames .1.
                      He chasteneth al them which hée loueth,
                        Heb. 12.
                      and scourgeth euery sonne which he receiueth.
                        Prou. 3.
                      It is only faith which ouercommeth all euill,
                        1. Ioh
                              •
                            .5.
                      and obtaineth victorie through pacience. The fruite springing vnto eternall life, is maruelously assaulted in the godly, whilest we be héere in this world. The things must

néedes fall vpon vs, séeing we are vnperfect. Let vs therefore be stedfast and vnmoueable,
                        
                           
                              ••
                           hn .7.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              ••
                           mes 5.
                      hauing a good hope alwayes in our affliction,
                        
                           
                              ••
                            Corin. 13. 
                              ••
                           p. 3.
                      trouble, or persecution, in the losing & forgoing, be it of our friends or goods,
                        
                           
                              ••
                            Peter .1.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              ••
                            Corin. 5.
                      yea our bodies, yt we shalbe recō
                     pēsed greatly for a litle trouble which we heere indure:
                        
                           
                              ••
                           od. 16.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           eut. 8.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              ••
                           cle
                              •
                            2.
                      God wil proue & trie vs, and receiue vs (if so be we abide constant) as an acceptable sacrifice of swe
                        •
                     te sauoure. Let vs then depend wholy vpon him, and he shal kéepe vs, let vs hope and trust vpon him, and he wil not forsake vs, let vs stedfastly cleaue vnto him, & he shall not leaue vs destitute. Therefore my deare brethren, let vs consider and ouerrunne al ages and times, and diligently marke, if at any time any one was put to confusion and shame, which trusted in the Lorde. He which called vpon him in faith and confidence, was he euer forsaken or contempned of him? Was there euer any, were he neuer so wicked, which turned to the Lord, not receiued? No surely, for God is mercifull,
                        
                           
                              ••
                           al. 103.
                      long suffering, and readie to forgiue. He heareth in the

day of trouble, and he is at hande to all them that call vpon him. He is a protectoure and defendoure of all those that séeke him in truthe,
                        Psal. 91.
                      and trust in him. But fie vpon them, curssed are they that are faint hearted, inconstant, wauerers, vntempered braines, yea mockers and very libertines, fearing men, poore princes more than God, which haue a greater care of these transitorie goodes, and haue muche rather to please the worlde than God, bycause they looke for none other God héere, than to haue that they lu
                        •
                     te and desire for their belly: yea they say in their heartes, there is no God. They would gladly leaue to God the heauens, so that they might r
                        •
                     maine vppon the 
                        •
                     arth. They know none other heauen then héere on earth, which rather might be called an hel, than heauen, bicause we all are subiecte to many infirmities.
                        Esay. 26.
                      Bisides that, they cānot haue héere any rest or quietnesse in minde or conscience. Neyther can they haue things as they would, be they neuer so rich. These men, as they are altogether worldly & carnal,

so can they neuer come to any knowledge of God.
                        
                           
                              •
                           . Cor. 2.
                      For the worldly and naturall men canne not perceiue the things which are of the spirite of God, neither consider they the gloryous maiestie of God,
                        
                           
                              •
                           say. 26.
                      neither are they so muche as once carefull of the life to come. Woe be vnto the sinnefull lips, slouthfull hands, to the sinner which keepeth two wayes. Woe to the dissolute of heart, for they shall not be defended, bicause they beleeue not. Woe vnto the vnpacient, that haue lost and forsaken the right way to decline and wander in the crooked way. Woe vnto them, for what shall they say when the Lord shall searche them out? Let vs loue the Lord therfore all we that feare him. Let vs put our confidence in him, let vs remaine faithful, and let vs walke according to his holy will, let vs searche diligētly after those things which please him, let vs prepare our heartes, and frame our selues to be acceptable in hys fight, and humble our soules before his face, let vs paciently abide the time, vntil he send vs succour, helpe and comfort,

saying:
                        Rom. 5.
                      It is better to fall in the hands of men, than in the hands of the Lorde:
                        Iam. 1.
                      for as he is great and mightie,
                        Esay. 57.
                      so is he also merciful. Let vs then be pacient, and not shrinke, yea rather let vs manfully striue in the middest of our troubles, afflictions and miseries, knowing that aduersitie engendreth pacience, & pacience trial or probation, probation hope, & hope shall not be ashamed, for the loue of God is poured into our hearts. Goe forwarde then my brethren to all good works, and make your selfe sure to the Lord, and to the power of his might: Take vnto you therefore the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to resist in the euill day. Stand therfore, hauing your loynes girded with the truth,
                        Ephe. 
                              •
                           .
                      & hauing on the brest plate of righteousnesse, and your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospell of peace. Aboue all, take vnto you the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quenche the fierie dartes of the wicked.
                        Ephes. 6.
                      Take vnto you also the helmet of saluation,
                        Psal. 131.
                      and the sword of the spirite,
                        1. Corin. 1.
                      which is the worde of God,
                        Wisdom .5.
                      and pray without ceassing in all

your assaultes and necessities) making your prayers in hūblenesse of the spirite. Be diligent and watchfull. Be you wise and suttle like Serpents, & simple without fraude or guile as Doues. Be sober & watche,
                        1. Peter .5.
                      for your aduersarie the Deuil, who goth about like a roaring Lion, séeking whom he may deuoure. He vseth a thousand sleights & setches, many kinds of wayes, diuers and sundry meanes to entrap and snare by. Resist ye him therfore, be stedfast in faith, and defende thy selfe with the armor right nowe before mentioned.
                        1. Peter .5.
                      Beare your selfe manfully, confirm and refresh your self euery time with that excellent meat of the spirite, which doth not perish, which is the word of god,
                        Iohn .6.
                      that ye might withstand him both day and night like a good souldior, and all his assaultes. Take ye héede therefore to giue any place to euill, but set your selfe valiantly and couragiously against him, at what time he shall assault you, either by faire or foule meanes,
                        Math. 4.
                      by flatterie, in shewing you the riches, the glorye and

pompe of this world, to none other ende and purpose, than to entrap and deceiue you, or by crueltie, persecution, or trouble, to ouercome and vanquishe you, if ye hearken vnto him any manner of way.
                        2. Cor. 10.
                      And bicause he can transforme him 
                        •
                     elfe into an Angell of light, it is requisite and necessarie that euery sprite be proued by the touche stone of Gods holye worde, if so be that it agreeth therewith, so must it be holden for good, be beléeued and followed. But if so be that it in any parte be contrary to that, it muste according to the Apostle S. Paules saying be accurssed.
                        Galath. 1.
                      Let no euill take any roote in your heart, but pluck it out forthwith. God is meeke, holy, long suffering, mercifull, and altogither good, but féeling that any one bringeth any thing contrarye to these particularities appropriated vnto God, be ye sure that that spirite is not of God: from those refraine your selfe, resisting them wyth the weapons before mentioned.
                  Be sober and humble in mind, content

with a litle, not caried away of couetousnesse after the richesse and glorye of this world, neither be ye seduced by the pleasure of carnall concupiscence, and voluptnousnesse of this world, which are deceitfull, and bring great paines to them that folow after them. But to kéepe your self the rather cleane from the thraldom of them, way and consider how vain, vncertaine, and vile a thing it is: what euill procéedeth frō it. Againe, remember that all flesh is gra
                        •
                     se & hay,
                        Psal. 103.
                      and all the glory, honor,
                        Esay. 40.
                      force and might of it, as the floure of the field. The grasse withereth, and the floure fadeth away. Yea all Princes and people are but hay, where ouer, if ye breth of the Lord doe but blow, it becommeth dry,
                        
                           
                              •
                           say. 40.
                      & the floure of it falleth. But ye word of the lord abideth for euer.
                        
                           
                              •
                           . Peter .3.
                      Thou lettest man Lord (saith Dauid) passe away as the hearbe which is greene in the morning,
                        
                           
                              •
                           salm. 90.
                      and at night is cutte downe. The time of our life is thrée score and x. yeres and thoughe men be so strong that they come to foure score yeares, yet is their strength then but laboure and paine.

What is man (sayeth he) or what is th
                        •
                      wisedome of man? The numbre of hy
                        •
                      dayes are a hundreth yeres at the moste, and a thousand yeares compared vnto eternitie, are not so much as a drop of water to the whole sea, or as a little duste vnto the sandes of Affrike, for that commeth to an ende, and eternitie hath none ende, but continueth alwayes.
                        Esay. 4.
                      All fleshe waxeth olde as a garment, and all that is made and can be séene, shall perish in season. The generation of fleshe and bloude is suche, that when one is borne, an other dieth. One kyngdome increaseth, an other decreaseth: Who so euer committeth wickednesse, shall perish with them. Blessed is the man, which through wisedome exerciseth hym selfe in al goodnesse, and declareth holy things with vnderstā
                     ding. This many of the Heathen Philosophers, and other Pagans, could well discerne and iudge of, by naturall reson: the which also did contemne and forsake riches, greate estimation and authoritie, bicause of many labours, paines, and vnquietnesse, and other euyls, whiche herehence

procéede for to passe ouer & spende their time in more quietnesse, would not be intangled with any kind of thing that mighte hynder them of their studie and other exercises.
                  
                     Cecilius Metellus, a valiāt captain wold neuer receue the office of Dictator which was offered him, neither the charge of a Cōsul or magistrate, saying that he wold spend that in quietnesse, yt he had gotten by great trauaile and paine in ye warres. The Philosopher Anatillus dyd refuse to be gouernoure of Athenes, saying that he would be rather a seruaunt of good men, than a hangman of the wicked. Nicodius did not regarde nor made any accompt of the great tresure which kyng Cyrus sent him for a present to go with him to war. Aristotle forsooke the good entertainment of Alexander the great, bicause he had rather be at Athenes, to reade to his scholers after his accustomed maner, Philosophie. Apollon
                           •
                        us Thianeus leauyng hys owne natiue countrey, toke his iorney to go thoroughout whole Asie, to goe to sée the philosopher Hirarchus in Indie. M. Curius
                     
contemned the great sum of gold the Samnites offred him: The great Philo
                        •
                     opher Crates, mentioned in ye beginning of our boke, cast al his goodes & riches into ye sea. The inhabiters of the Isle of Varales being aduertised of the a
                        •
                     arice & couetousnesse of their n
                        •
                     ibors, threw al theyr tresure, their gold & siluer into the sea, bicause they shold not take occasiō to make warre against them for their goods. Upon a day in the presence of Phillip king of the Macedonians, was moued a question among the philosophers, namely: What was the greatest thing in this worlde? Whereunto one aunswered, It was the Sunne: the next sayd, the sea: the thirde, the mount of Atlas: the fourth sayd: that great and learned Poet Homere. Shortly, euery one 
                        •
                     ayd that which semed him best. But the wisest of them all, aunswered after thys sorte: The greatest and most cōmendable thing is, the heart and courage of Man, whyche dothe not regarde worldly and transitorie Riches. But I coulde rehearse here, a greate many more of examples, yf neede shoulde so

require, and tyme serue. But if the Heathen haue done thys, howe muche more 
                        •
                     ught Christiās to do that in knowledge & discretion, which they dyd in ignorāce? And to draw your selues the rather from all vayne and transitorie thyngs, whiche leade men vnto all euill, and to addresse your selfe with heart and mind towards the Lorde, ye must call to remembrance often, the wrath which shall come to the seruants of vnrighteousnesse, the childrē of the worlde, the fleshe and the deuill at the last day. Agayne, call to minde that worthie reward and glorious inheritāc
                        •
                      whiche the children and seruants of God haue prepared for them. The tyme passeth, and is turned from mornyng vntil euening. Therfore be ye wyse, and haue the feare of God before your eyes, kéepe your self from doing of euil, in these dangerous dayes. The foole hath no consideration of the time, but the wise man vnderstandeth all that belongeth to knowledge, and taketh héede to instruction. He which findeth wisedom, estéemeth it, and maketh much of it. A wittie man in talk

(sayth the wise man) walketh wisely. Also they haue knowen veritie and iustice, and haue searched after true iudgement. Withdrawe your selfe then, (if ye will b
                        •
                      counted wise before God) from the vanitie of this present worlde, and caste aside all manner of voluptuousnesse, pleasure, and carnall Concupiscence. For yf you folow the peruerse iudgement of the worlde, and giue the bridle to the wicked desires of the body, it will cause your enimies to reioice ouer you.
                        Ps
                              •
                           lm. 37.
                      Let it not greue you, to sée ye wicked prosper, to be regarded, and to come to high promotion: Be not ye abashed or displesed, for consideratiō of tēporall felicitie, which god gyueth here vpon earthe vnto the vngodly, wicked, and carnall libertin
                        •
                     s
                        •
                      to Epicures, bellygods, and other, seing they are of no continuaunce, they shal fall, vany
                        •
                     he, and come to naught, they shall consume lyke smoake, and perishe like the herbe and floure of the fieldes: But truste ye in the Lorde, and go forward from goodnesse to better. Christe Iesu our Sauiour, to the comfort of all troubled Christians, warneth

vs, saying: Feare not ye him which killeth the body, seing he can not hurt the soule, whiche is in the Lordes kéepyng, though ye body be neuer so miserably tormented or yll intreated, yet are we sure, that God shall raise it vp agayne, and so body and soule being ioyned, receyue euerlasting ioy and blessednesse. Contrary wyse, all the wicked which persecute the true membres of Christ, as doth at thys day, that wycked tyrant the Duke of Alba, with all his adherents very hangmen and cruel murtherers of the Pope, shall haue an ylfauored and shameful end here in this worlde, and hereafter haue eternall ignominie and confusion in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: The reward in deede of all such tyrantes and wicked ones, as nowe be, or euer were: as Ne
                           •
                        o, Dioclesian, Dioscore, Maximian, Iouian, Maxence, Licinus, Constantius, Phocus, and many more other, whose fearefull and terrible examples ought to moue the cruell tyrantes of our dayes, were it not that they by the iuste iudgement of GOD, were hardened in theyr

wycked malicousnesse. Examynyng then the naughtie ende of these wicked tyrantes, and waying again, our good end and 
                        •
                     ure consolation, which we gather out of the worde of God, we ought by good reson to reioyce and be glad of oure estate, & from the bottom of our harts to thanke the Lorde oure God, that it hath pleased him to cal vs to such a good state, and that he hath thoughte vs worthy to suffer any thing for his name sake. Then be of good cheere, and take courage, and takyng thy crosse on thy shoulder, followe stoutely Christ Iesu, thy kyng and only head. 
                        •
                     ut if thou wilt do this, thou must contemne, cast of and forsake (euen as Christ did) al couetousnesse, worldly honor, carnal lus
                        •
                     s & concupiscence, and thou shal
                        •
                      finde, that it is much easier to serue the Lord,
                        Math. 11.
                      thā to 
                        •
                     e a slaue to this wretched world:
                        Ierem. 6.
                      for hys yoke is light, & his burden is easy.
                        1. Iohn .5.
                      Be ye therfore strēgthned & cōforted by vertue of gods holy spirit: neither purpose or desire either by worde or déede any thing yt displeaseth him: put al thy trust & cōfidē
                     
                        •
                     e in him. Thus doing, let him be the marke

whereat thou shootest, the conductyng starre, the compasse & true token, wherat thou saylest, the way whereon thou goest, the rocke whereon thou stan
                        •
                     est, the sure grounde wheron thou buyldest, the strength and fortresse wherin thou trustest, the ende whervnto thou hastest, the good whiche thou desirest, the lyfe whiche thou séekest, the comfort which thou dost wishe for, the treasure wherefore thou labourest, thy glory, perfection, & all thy truste and confidence. So then it shall come to passe, that no kinde of euill shall hurte thée, neyther fyre nor water, l
                        •
                     sse of goodes or honoure, wife, chyldren, of friendes, lande, house, inheritance or any other possessions, neyther yet contempt, sclaunder, backbityng, persecution, banishement, or any other myserie sufferyng for hys name sake. Haue no regard vnto the inconstancie and variable
                        •
                     esse of Fortune, nor vnto the vncertainti
                        •
                      of richesse and time, then shalt thou in pouertie be riche, in reproche highly regarded, in distresse mery, in heauinesse glad, in prison at libertie and abroade. Therefore

bridle thy lust, and refraine thy heart from al worldly, carnal, and transitori
                        •
                      riches, and be lifted vp in mynde and spirite to heauenly and vncorruptible treasures: so shalte thou be regenerate of the holy ghoste, and being confirmed by the worde of God, may well be called Microcosme, that is, the whole worlde vppon the little foote. Ye shall be true Christians, Kings and Priestes, estéeming neuerthelesse youre selues as vnprofitable seruantes. Ye shall lyue happily and plesaunt, and quiet in conscience: ye shall knowe your owne: and being throughly persuaded of the truthe, ye shall abyde stedfast and vnmoueable, not waueryng wyth euery wynde. No kynde of affection, enuie, hate, anger, sorowe or payne, shal trouble you, ye shal put away al wicke
                        ••
                     esse, & make no accompt of worldly matters, but youre conuersation shall be in heauen: ye shall then continually meditate of God and his kingdome, that beyng busie therwithall, ye myghte contemne al worldly things from the heart. Nothyng then shall be able to separate

you from the loue of God, but ye shall go forewarde in all vertue and godlynesse, till suche time as it shall please Almighty God to take oure soules vnto hym, then shall we sée hym moste perfectely face to face. Unto the which perfection and ioyfull sight, vouchsafe to bryng vs O Lord Almightie, the father of our Lorde Iesus Christ, thorough the same his only and welbeloued sonne: To whom with the holie ghost be all honor and glorie, power and dominion euerlastingly. And to all faithfull christians here vpon earth peace and comfort of the holy gost, and hereafter life euerlastyng.
                  AMEN.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Imprinted at London by Henrie Bynneman, dwelling in Knight riders streat, at the signe of the Marmaid. ANNO. 1569.
            CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   