
      
         
            
               
                  
                  ¶A disclosing of the great
Bull, and certain calues that
he hath gotten, and specially
the Monster Bull that roared
at my Lord Byshops gate.
                  
                     ❧ Imprinted at London
by Iohn Daye dwelling
ouer Aldersgate.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     EXperience of the leud lustinesse
& vnchastitie of Popishe
clergie hath long agoe
ministred an olde tale, how
a person of a towne hauing
the lordship annexed to his
personage, as many haue, by reason therof
was by speciall custome charged, as in
many places they be, to kéepe a common
Bull for the towne, wherby theyr cattell
and his tithe might be encreased, which
Bull had great libertie and is by custome
not poundable. It happened that complaint
was brought to him by hys neighbors
of the insufficiencie of his Bull, that
he dyd not get calues so plentifully as in
tyme past they were wont to haue. The
person a wise man of good skill as it should
seme, c
                        •
                     used hys Bull to be tyed fast and
hys crowne to be shauen, and then let him
goe, saying, now goe thy way, there was
neuer any bad of thys marke, he will get
calues I warrant him. So is it happened
that of late a holy Bull, I thinke some Iupiter
is come for loue of hys Io, or rather
for iust to some leud Pasiphae arriued in
this land.
                  It is the great persons bull, which person
was wont by custome to finde common

Buls for all England, when he claimed
or vsurped the Lordship of England
as annexed to hys personage. It is the
same Bull that begat the famous Monecalfe
that of late yeares made the terrible
expectation. Of late being against custome
empounded, or kept from breaking of
hedges as he was wont to do, and from
spoyling of seuerall pastures, he grew to
some faintnesse. But now hath his owner
new shauen hys crowne & sent hym to get
calues agayne for encrease of the townes
hearde and the persons tithe.
                  And surely the experience is notable,
for since he came ouer so lately disguised,
he hath light vpon certaine ranke kyen,
who I thinke by their long forbearing are
become the lustier, that is, treason, superstition,
rebellion, and such other, and with
them he hath so bestirred him, that by the
helpe of maister Doctor Harding, Sanders,
and other, some there, some here,
iolly cowkéepers and herdemen of Popish
clergie, which sent and brought him ouer,
& brake open for him the seuerall hedges
and senses of true religion, obedience, allegeance,
fayth, and honestie, he hath begotten
a marueilous number of calues in
fewe yeares, that is, since the yeare. 1567.

he hath begotten multitudes of all the
formes of calues hereafter mentioned, beside
other in the wilde woodes not yet
knowen, & lastly he hath begotten a most
horrible monster, of whom shall hereafter
be entreated.
                  He hath begotten some traitorous
calues, as the practisers and vnderminers
of the state. Some rebellious calues, as
those that haue combred the realme with
vnhappy sedition. Some deinty calues
with white faces, as dissembling hypocrites
that watch their time. Some calues
with blacke faces, as black soule and his
fellowes common bleaters and railers at
true religion. Some Apostaticall calues,
that haue forsaken fayth and do impugne
the knowen truth. Some tame drousy
calues, that with their brutishe superstition
can not raise vp their heads from
ground, nor their eyes to heauen. Some
mad wilde calues, as Roges and Rumor
spreaders. Some running and gadding
calues, wiser than Walthams calfe that
ranne nine miles to sucke a Bull, for these
runne aboue nine hundred miles. And no
maruell, for they desire not to sucke milke
but bloud. Some calues with hornes,
and some without, some with power running

fiercely, some pushing with their vnarmed
heades as eluishly as they be able.
Some doctor calues, some proctor calues,
and some of other degrees. Some weyward
calues, euer running backward and
athwart, without regard of ditch behinde
them, or hedge before them. Some calues
whom no fense will hold, no not the brode
sea. Some cow calues, some bull calues.
Some calues that neuer wil be but calues,
though they liue these hundred yeares.
Some winking calues. Some suttle vndermining
calues. And some fonde licking
calues there he that be none of the same
Buls calues, but calues out of Gods own
hearde, seduced by leude companie of other
stray calues. These in séeking to licke
woundes whole, do not onely licke poyson
into their owne bodies, but also enuenime
other therby, and specially the good
damme with whose wholesome milke
them selues be fedde. This Bulles calues
since they receaued their sires blessing,
are waxen wilder then they were, no
heardman can rule them, but as if the gad
flye were in their tailes, they runne whisking
about, or of mere eluishnishe will
taste no wholesome and naturall foode.
                  The Monster of whom I tolde you,

is no way so fitly to be described, as by the
olde tale of the ancient Poetes, that seme
as it were to haue foreshewed him in figure,
as followeth. Pasiphae Quéene of
Creta, not sufficed with men, conceiued
inordinate, vnnaturall, and therewith vntemperable
lust to engender with a Bull.
Neither regard of vertue, honor, kindnesse,
nature or shame, in respect of God,
her husband, her countrey, her selfe, or the
whole world, could restrayne her violent
rage of vncleane affection. Yet wist she
neither how to wooe the Bull, nor how to
apply her selfe vnto him. A meane at
length was founde to make this vnkindly
coupling.
                  There liued then a cunning craftesman
Dedalus, the selfe same Dedalus of
whome it is famous how he made hym
winges, wherewith by cunning guiding
him selfe he passed seas & countries at his
pleasure. And winges he made also for
Icarus his sonne to fly with him. But the
vncunning Icarus, climbing to neare the
sonnes heate, his winges melting, fell into
the water and gaue name to the sea.
                  This fine Dedalus, to satisfie the wicked
Quéenes feruor of lust, & to match her
and the Bull in abhominable copulation,

framed a cowe, and so made couered and
vsed it with leud deuises, and therein so
inclosed and placed the good innocent and
vertuous Lady, that of the Bull she conceiued
the abhomination of the world,
and in time brought forth the monster Minotaurus
halfe a Bull and halfe a man,
fierce, brutish, mischeuous, cruell, deformed,
and odious.
                  To shroud thys monster from common
wonder, & yet therewithall to deliuer
him the foode and contentment of hys
crueltie the destruction of men, a Labyrinth
or Maze was builded by the same
cunning Dedalus, wherein Minotaurus
the Man bull or Bull man lurked, and
men passing in thether to him by entanglement
of the Maze & vncertayne error
of wayes, were brought to miserable end,
till at length valiant Theseus, furnished
with the policy of wise Ariadna, receaued
of her a clew of thred, by which, leauing
the one end at the entrie, he was continually
guyded and preserued from the deceauing
Maze, and hauing slayne the monster,
by conduct of the same thred safely
returned.
                  The appliance hereof to the experience
of our times hath an apt resemblance,

not to proue but to shew the image of
some doinges at these dayes, and therewith
by conference not onely to sharpen
an intentiue sight of that which we winck
at, but also to rayse a iust lothing of that
whereof by some hurtfull impedimentes
we haue not discerned or rather not merked
the horror.
                  Lecherous Pasiphae may well be applyed
to treason in hys estates addicted to
papistrie, forsaking Gods ordinance of
humane royall gouernement. Which
when so euer it happeneth, (for happe it
may and hath oft so chaunced) such treason
destroyeth good and naturall affection,
it kindleth vile and beastly desires, and among
all other none comparable in filthinesse
to the lust of yelding them selues to
beare the engendring of the great Bull of
Basan or rather of Babylon, the oppression,
incumbence, and tiranny of Rome,
the vsurpation of the Romaine siege the
siege of all abhomination. This principall
traitorous lust, that throweth downe
the person vnder this vncleane desire,
throweth away vertue & respect of God,
for Romane pride hath climbed into the
seate of God and shooued to shoulder him
out, and banished vertue by open dispensing

with vice. It expelleth remembrance
of honor and kindnesse in regard of husband,
for fayth of wedlocke hath no place
in adulterers, and by Romane practises
neither doth superstition permit the soule
to keepe her chastitie from idolatries and
from forsaking Gods rules of religion,
nor the wife her due fayth from wandering
lust, nor the husband his safetie from
traitorous violence. It driueth out naturall
loue of countrey, for it prostituteth all
dominions to the common adulterer, vnderminer,
and forcer of kingdomes, the
Bull of Rome. It banisheth shame, for
it boasteth her filthinese to the worldes
sight, soliciteth it publikely, practiseth it openly,
defendeth it impudently, and carieth
it in glorious pompe and triumph, not
as Iö ryding on a Bulles backe through
the water, but as it were carna
                        •
                     ly wallowing
with a beast on the toppe of Traianes
piller. And surely no more sodomiticall
is in nature the vnnaturall mixture
of a Bull and a woman, than is sodomiticall
in policie and religion the intermedling
of the popish vsurpation of Rome
with a temporall prince, yelding his or her
realme to Popish iurisdiction, or with the
spouse of Christ the vniuersall church rauished

by that Bulles force or desyled by
his abuses. But as in Pasiphae, so where
such rage of traiterous and superstitious
desire entreth, Gods grace forsaketh, honest
feare departeth, shame flyeth, and the
lust is vntemperable.
                  The Daedalus that must bryng the
enioyeng of this horrible lust to effect, is
the treason of Popish Clergie, full of cunnyng
workmanshyp, as the world hath
long had great experience, euen the same
Popish Clergie that hath framed to hym
selfe wynges, not naturally by Gods ordinance
growyng to the body therof, but
made of fethers pulled from temporall
Princes and from Byshops in theyr owne
Dioceses by vsurpation, fastened together
by art of symonie, and ioyned to theyr bodyes
with the glew of superstitious credulitie.
With these haue they passed landes
and seas, clymbyng & flyeng in ayre, that
is, vpon no stedfast ground, aboue mountaines,
trées and countries, that is, aboue
Emperours, kinges, iust prelates and
common weales.
                  The sonne of this Dedalus, that is, of
treason of popish clergie, is Icarus, that
is, aspiring treason of subiect, which following

his father and guide popish treason,
but not so well guiding himselfe for lacke
of experience, and desiring to sodenly to
climbe to nere the Sunne, or perhappes
mounting with more hast than good spéede
before his winges were well fastened, or
while himselfe could but yet flutter with
them and not perfectly flie, as God would,
his glew melting, and his winges dropping
away, fell downe in his climbing, and
no doubt will geue name to the place
where he lighteth for perpetuall memorie
of his vndue presumption, surely yet piteously
bewayled of papistes as Icarus was
of Dedalus his father.
                  This cunning Daedalus, Popish treason,
to bring this copulation to contentment
of the vnchast Pasiphae, encloseth
her in a counterfait cow, that is, such princes
or great estates as desire to lie vnder
the Bull of Rome, popish clergie turneth
into brutish shape to serue brutish lust, maketh
them beastly, forsakyng the dignitie
of man and womans shape, whom God
made vpright to looke to God and Gods
seate the heauen, & it maketh them cowishly
stoupe to earthward, without regard
of the nature of man, the dignitie of kyngdomes,

the reuerent aspect to diuinitie, or
any other manly and reasonable consideration,
without any more vigor, agilitie
of soule and industrie to do noblely than
is in a cowe: a beast in déede profitable for
worldly foode, as Papistrie is, but (as most
part of beastes be) redy to promiscuous &
vnchosen copulations, and specially méete
for a Bull, and among other prety qualities
hauyng one speciall grace, (as one of
theyr owne Popish Doctours preached) to
swynge away flyes with her tayle wett in
the water, as foolish papistes swinge away
sinnes and temptations with a holy water
sprinkle.
                  In this beastly likenesse, degenerating
from manly forme, and maiestie of gouernance,
by Dedalus workmanship, that
is, by popish clergies traitorous practise,
ensued the copulation of a Bull and a
Quéene in a cowishe shape, that is, Sodomiticall
and vnnaturall mixture of popish
vsurpation with and vpon royall gouernance
in brutish and reasonlesse forme.
                  Of this ingendring is begotten Minotaurus,
a compounded monster, halfe
a Bull and halfe a man, a beastly cruell
bodie, roaring out with the voyce or sound

of a Bull, and wordes of a man, the sense
of a deuill. The selfe same monster Bull
is he that lately roared out at the Bishops
palace gate in the greatest citie of England,
horrible blasphemies agaynst God,
& villanous dishonors agaynst the noblest
Quéene in the world Elizabeth the lawfull
Quéene of England, he stamped and
scraped on the ground, flong dust of spitefull
speches and vaine curses about him,
pushed with his hornes at her noble counsellers
and true subiectes, and for pure anger
all to berayed the place where he
stoode. And all this stirre he kept, to make
a proofe if hys horned armye of calues
would or durst come flyngyng about him
toward midsommer moone.
                  But he looked so beastly, and he raged
so vaynely, that though the whole wood
rang of hys noyse, yet hys syre the great
Bull, hys damme the prostitute cowe, and
hys children the foolish calues, were more
ashamed of hym than the noble Lion was
afraide of him. And therfore the Bull hys
fire, the cowe hys damme, and the wysest
of hys calues, fled once agayne to Daedalus
the treason of Popish Clergie, for succour
and good counsell, by whose good
workmanshyp this myngled monster is

closed vp in a Maze, that is, in vncertaintie
of vayne and false reportes, and (as it
happeneth in a Maze) by wayes leadyng
to other places than they seme to tend vnto,
by crokednesse of deuises, by spredyng
into sondry créekes of rumors, to hyde
whence the Bull came or where he lurketh,
euen as in the Maze of Daedalus
it happened, so it commeth to passe that
the Minotaure is not found out, and such
as enter into the Maze, that is, into folowyng
of Popish reportes and deuises, entangle
them selues so, that wanderyng
vncertainely at length they may hap to
perish in Daedalus engyne. And iudgement
they lacke (the euident proufes considered
that are in that behalfe to be ministred)
that beleue the report to be true of
transferring that Bull to Protestantes deuises.
But I feare a worse thing: for if
they haue no wisedome that say so, wise
great persons can not beleue them: and
if they lacke not witte, then can not them
selues beleue it, and so is their truth to
the Prince to be perilously suspected.
                  The remedie resteth that some Theseus,
some noble and valiant counseller,
or rather one bodie and consent of all
true and good nobilitie and counsellers

follow the good guiding thred, that is, godly
policie deliuered them by the virgine
whom they serue, and conducted thereby
not onely may passe without error
through the Maze and finde out the monster
Minotaure that roared so rudely, but
also destroy hym and settle theyr Prince
and them selues in safetie: so as, Pasiphae
duely and deseruedly ordered, Daedalus
vnwynged and banished, hys fethers
ryghtly restored, Icarus fayre drowned,
the cowe transformed, the Maze dissolued
& razed, the monster destroyed, the
calues (after the cow perished) sent with
Walthams calfe to sucke theyr Bull,
Theseus may be victorious, the virgine
Ladie most honorable, the land quyet, the
subiectes safe, and Gods prouidence euer
iustly praysed not vaynely tempted, hys
kyndnesse thankfully embraced, his name
louyngly magnified, hys policies wisely
folowed, hys Religion zelously mainteyned.
                  But till these noble enterprises be acchieued,
it is not good to be hedelesse. The
Monster may be let out of the Maze,
when it pleaseth Pasiphae and Daedalus.
                  
                  It is good to be awake. Some men be
wakened with tickelyng, and some with

pinchyng or pullyng by the eare, that is,
some with mery resemblances, and some
with earnest admonitions. Some be raysed
out of sléepe with noyse, as by the
spéech or calling of men, or by brute voyces,
as the roaring of Bulles and noyse
of beastes, that is, either by aduises of
them that warne with reason, or with the
bragges & threateninges of the enemies,
or inklinges slipped out of vncircumspect
aduersaries mouthes. Some be wakened
with very wisperinges, as with secret
rumors and intelligences. Some agayne
are so vigilant and carefull, that the very
weight of the cause and pensiue thinking
of it, wil scarcely let them sléepe at all. But
most miserable is their drowsinesse, or rather
fatall semeth their sléepinesse, that for
all the meanes aforesayd, and specially so
leude and loude roaring of so rude and
terrible a Bull, can not be wakened or
made to arme and bestirre them, till the
tumult and alarme in the campe, the clinking
of armour, the sounde of shotte and
strokes, the tumbling downe of tentes
round about them, the groning of wounded
men dying on euery side of them, treason,
force, and hostilitie triumphing in
their lustiest rage, and Sinon, that perswaded

the safetie of the traiterous horse,
insulting among them, yea till the very enemies
weapon in theyr body awake
them. Such may happe so to sléepe as they
may neuer wake.
                  Let vs all wake in prayer to God.
Let vs cry louder in sinceritie and deuotion,
than the Bull is able to roare in treason
and blasphemie. Let vs pray God to
arme our Quéene and Counsell with all
wisedome and fortitude, and our selues
with all fidelitie and manhoode, and to repose
our selues vpon confidence of their
most blessed gouernance, and redy with
our liues and all that we haue to follow
and serue them.
                  Let vs dayly and nightly pray God to
send a curst Cow and a curst Bull short
hornes, or to be well capped, or well sawed
of, that they budde no more, for els it were
better to take away head and all to be
sure, least honester then these calues be
made calues, or knocked on the head as
though they were calues. Surely as of
a body there is but one head that can not
be spared, so in a body may be many hods
that must néedes be spared, as perhappes
twenty byles & euery one hath a head, in
which case there is no perill but least they

goe into the body againe & then perchance
infect the hart bloud and put the body in
danger. And the onely perill of driuing
them in agayne you wote is colde and
colde handling. Some of our botches
be runne already, of some theyr heads
be broken, some ryping and I trust
shall be well launced or cleane
drawne out in time. In the
meane time beware cold.
And God send & maintayne
the warmth
of his grace.
                  Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  ¶An addition declaratorie
to the Bulles, with a searching
of the Maze.
                  ¶Seen and allowed.
                  
                     ❧ Imprinted at London
by Iohn Daye dwelling
ouer Aldersgate.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     THat ye be not deceaued,
good Readers, for I sée it
commonly mistaken, I
thought it good to let you
know, that the Bull which
is published in Print in
Latine and Englishe, together with the
forme of Absolution annexed vnto it, is
not the same Bull that was set vp at the
Bishops gate, as many suppose, but an
other. For plaine explication of the truth,
ye shall vnderstand that there be two
Bulles. The one conteineth a power and
forme to pardon, assoyle, and reconcile all
such as would returne from the Christian
Religion now taught in England, which
they call heresie, and from obeying our
Quéene and her lawes, which they sclaunderously
call schisme, to the bosome of the
Chirch of Rome which we may truely
call Helles mouth.
                  The dispensation publishing and employing
of this Bull was committed to
Doctor Harding, and so many other seuerally,
not onely to relieue those Popish
Patriarkes with the gaine of that pardon,
but specially to send out those Archepapistes
with that Bull of reconcilement

among the Quéenes saint subiectes English
Papistes, as it were capitaines to
strike vp their drommes to gather soldiers,
offering them great wages that
should fight vnder the Popes banner for
an other hed agaynst our Quéene, that is,
remission of their sinnes, as pure cleanenesse
as when they were baptised, restitution
to the communion of the faythfull, absolution
from all sentences, and from all
paynes of Purgatorye, and the enioying
of life and kingdome euerlasting.
                  With these Bulles and this proclaiming
of wages, they haue bene gathering
of rebelles euer since the yeare 1567. and
haue withall geuen to very many of them
prest money to be ready in rebellions, that
is, certaine papers, and badges of sondry
formes, some with a figure of Christ crucified,
some with fiue woundes, and some
other.
                  Since which time, namely in the ende
of Februarie 1569. when the late rebellion
was redy layed and in hatching, the
Popes holinesse hath decréed an other
Bull, no dout at the speciall sute, procurement,
instance, and importunate calling
on of our Englishe traitors, and among

other D. Harding and the rest that procured
the other Bulles.
                  In this is conteined an arrogant, tyrannicall,
and blasphemous taking to
himselfe the power, as committed to him
from God, to destroy, transpose, and alter
kingdomes at his pleasure, a number of
vile and horrible sclanders and vncomely
naminges of our Quéene, such as a good
subiect can hardly heare with pacience, the
very effect of a great part of the late rebelles
proclamation as it were translated,
& finally his lewd presumptuous sentence
of her maiesties depriuation, in so spitefull
abhominable, villanous, and traitorous
forme as is not to be rehersed. This is the
Bull that was set vp at the Bishops gate.
                  It séemeth by all probabilitie, and no
dout vpon examinations it will so fall out,
that the originall of this Bull sealed was
among our rebelles, and as it is thought)
brought them by Markenfeld or some
such other, or deliuered them vpon their
conference with strangers, and kept close
among them ready to be published so sone
as they should haue bene able to get into
their company such hed as they desired to
set vp after our Quéene, or such strength

as that they durst auow it. God so preuented
them that they neuer came so far.
                  In hope of the successe of this Bull,Pl. &c. a
number of Papistes, that sometime did
communicate with vs, or at least came ordinarily
to our publike prayers, haue of
late forborne, and by this note shall ye
know many of them.
                  In hope of the successe of this Bull,
were (as it is reported) letanies and prayers
in Rome for the good spéede of our
rebelles.
                  In furtherance of the successe of thys
Bull, was the spreading of false newes in
Spaine, of a great battell in Ireland betwene
Papistes and Christians, wherein
an Angell with a Chalice in his hand was
reported to haue discomfited many thousandes
of our Quéenes subiectes, for which
there were in Spaine publike gratulations,
ringing of belles, and triumphinges,
adorned with the greatest presences there,
or rather (as may well be suspected) prayers
for our rebelles successe, according to
the good meaning of the holy league or the
conspiracie of Trent.
                  In hope of the successe of thys Bull,
our Louanistes haue stayed their handes

from writing, and stand in suspense (better
it were they did hang in suspense) and expectation
what will become of these mischieues
whereof them selues haue bene
the proctors.
                  In hope of the successe of this Bull,Co. &c.
a number of Papistes haue fled of late, and
some of them with promising or rather
threatening by letters a recompensing at
their returne of such kindnesses as are
shewed to their friendes in their absence,
haue vttered their courage.
                  This is the Bull that maketh so many
Papists stand yet so stiffly in not acknowledging
her maiesties iust authoritie. And
whatsoeuer they pretend for ecclesiasticall
causes, the very truth is to be thought that
since the decrée and publication of this
Bull, the most part of them estéeme not
the Quene lawfull Quene of this realme,
sithe the Pope hath decréed the contrarie,
who they thinke can not erre. And
no dout if an othe were ministred in
thys forme that they should acknowledge
her maiestie lawful Quene of this realme,
notwithstanding any sentence that the
Pope hath geuen or can geue, and that if
he haue or shall presume to geue any such

sentence they estéeme if erroneous and
presumptuous, & will to their power resist
him, his adherentes, & fautors that shal attempt
to put any such sentence in execution
or affirme it lawfull: surely they would
likewise refuse such othe, vnlesse they wold
affirme the Pope to erre shamefully, iudicially,
presumptuously, seditiously, traitorously,
and in vilest maner, which they
would neuer sincerely confesse: but in answering
the interrogatories ministred in
the booke of warning they would shewe
them selues as euill subiectes in very déede
as they haue by some proceding, and specially
by setting vp of thys Bull, shewed
the same warning to be true and reasonable.
                  Because they neuer came in the rebellion
time to possession and habilitie to set
vp the Comete whom they meant to aduaunce
in stede of the Sunne rising, I
meane, they had not the person whom they
would extoll, nor the power to auow it,
neither by forein ioyning, nor by domesticall
strength, it seemeth they did forbeare
the proclaiming of thys great Bull, and
haue hidden him in the Maze. And yet hauing
some hope left that toward sommer

perhappes some fooles would be madde, or
yet at the least desperately at all a very
ventures to vtter their stomake, they set
vp a printed copie of thys Bull, whereby
they haue shewed that they not onely had
the originall to be proclaimed if time and
other circumstances had serued, but also
had prouided a number of copies printed,
sodenly to make it common, and therewithall
by the way a signification that our
bookemen are priuie to it.
                  Fayling yet of this hope, and the wiser
sort of them espiyng that the vnseasonable
setting it vp came not to so politike end as
they loked for, to supplie the fault of that
rashnesse, they haue found a new deuise.
Their complices, and the secret fauorers
of these treasons, or paraduenture such as
(for some respectes) are loth that to much
of the bottome of this treason should be
searched, haue spred or fauored a rumor,
and geuen insinuation that it is no true
thing, but counterfaited by protestantes
to bring the papistes in hatred.
                  No, no, this fetch is to farre set a great
deale. Treason it is, and vile and hie treason,
to auance such a thing, whosoeuer do
it, protestant or papist. And no protestant,

you may be sure, will traitorously ouerthrow
this estate, neither is any of them so
madde to thinke it a good excuse for himself,
if he should be arrained for traitorous
setting vp of such a Bull or paper, to say he
did it of an other intent to bring papistes
the Quéenes enemies in hatred. And so
may we well be bold to say, that there is
not a protestant in England of sufficient
wit and habilitie to forge such a Bull, that
would be content himselfe to be he hanged
drawen and quartered to spite a papist, or
that doth thinke he should spite a papist in
procuring to himselfe so great a danger.
                  But the thing being so traitorous and
perilous, euen in a protestant so intending
as these pretend, I would faine learne, or
rather haue it remembred of them to
whom it apperteineth, of what qualitie
the offence is in these qualifiers to concele
it. I do not meane of leauing it vndisclosed
when they know it, but of doing what
they can by perswasion that other should
not finde it, orby disswasion transferring
the suspicion an other way. Such are not
like to such concelers of felonies and treasons
as do not vtter the felonies, treasons
and offenders that they know, but they are

like vnto those that when a felon or traitor
is pursued, do helpe to hide him, and
conuey him into bie corners, and for the
felons or traitors easier escape do tell
them that pursue him that he is gone a
contrarie way or geue them contrarie
markes to kéepe them from knowing and
attaching him, or point them to a wrong
persone while the very these or traitor
may make shift for himselfe, yea and lend
him some of their owne clothes to disguise
him.
                  The thing is to euident, and thereby
the truth of such hiders is the more suspicious.
There are intelligences enow that
the effect of the thing it selfe was more
than a yere agoe decréed in Rome. The
ordinarie procéeding of the Pope in like cases,
and specially the folowing of the holy
league induceth it. The print is not vnknowen.
The very paper, after it was
taken downe, falling it selfe into the former
crestes & foldes and sise of the packet
wherein it came ouer, with a number of
other plaine euidences, disclose the thing,
and whence it came. Besides the very
thing is such that he may well be sayd to
lacke iudgement that discerneth it not to

be a very Bull. Be not therefore deceaued
ye good subiectes: and ye deceiuers, beware
ye deceiue not your selues.
                  Thus it is euident that such pérswaders
lacke either wit or truth, but I feare
me they are so vaine glorious, and stand
so much vpon vndeserued reputation, that
they can be better content to be traitors
than to be taken for fooles.
                  But let vs call to mynde, & gather some
frute of the olde tale of Cassandra king
Pryames daughter of Troy. She hauing
the gift of prophecie by Apollo, alway to
geue true warninges, had yet this punishment
anexed, that though she prophecied
truely she should neuer be beleued. So
happened it that when suttle Sinon had
perswaded the Troianes vnder false pretense
of religion, and specially a dissembling
shew of dedication to Pallas goddesse
of wisdome, that is, vnder colour of wisdome
and policie, to breake downe their
walles to receiue the horse that the Grecians
had framed and stuffed full of chosen
soldiars, Cassandra gaue warning what
treason the horses wombe conteined. But
by the ordinarie and fatall discredit that
was layed vpon her, and for that (as Poets

say) the fates and destinies of Troyes destruction
were not remoueable, she was
not beleued, the walles were broken
downe, the horse deuoutely receiued, and
though the armour within gaue sound
and noyse, yet was he vnsearched, in the
night Sinon opened the window, the armed
men issued out, the Citie was fired
and destroyed, and all (as the Poets tell)
by conduct of Pallas goddesse of wisdome
and policie.
                  I will not at this time prosecute the
tale of Laocoon, his office of priesthoode,
his speare, the serpent from sea, his children,
nor the rest, wherof euery poynt and
euery particle hath his apt resemblance
for our benefit.
                  Onely this I will say, that it may be
that for our sinnes we haue Cassandraes
plague, though truth be tolde vs, it is possibly
not beleued. The Grecians then
framed a horse. The Papistes haue now
framed a Bull. Their horse was stuffed
full of soldiers lurking redy to be let out to
set Troye on fire. This Bull is stuffed
with traiterous practises to destroy thys
realme. Sinon perswaded them to receiue
the Troyan horse without violating or

searching it. Our Sinons & lewd qualifiers
would haue the Bul estemed an other
thing, and take from vs the desire to haue
his belly searched. Their horse with remouing
shooke, and they might heare the
very sound of the armour within him. In
this Bull the euidences are plaine of open
treason, and the very effect of our rebelles
proclamation translated soundeth within
it, and semeth as it were out of the very
Bulles belly to roare and tell vs that
all they were priuy to it that were by any
appendance or deuise of coniunction or alliance
knit to the late rebellion: as also
hard it is to excuse Aeneas and Antenor
great Lordes of Pryames house for knowing
to much of the Grecians counsell.
Cassandra cryeth out agaynst the horse,
the fates will not let her be beleued,
Sinon opened the window, the horse vnladed
his treasons. Lay this to our case, I
will compare no more.
                  The Lord be mercifull vnto vs and
preserue our Prince, and contrey, which
without our prince can not in all likelihode
be preserued. God kéepe her noble
Counsellers, and geue grace to all her subiectes
to sticke fast and faithfully to her,

and graunt to her maiestie to continue to
sticke fast to true subiectes, and principaly
that we all by repentance wipe away
the sinnes that are the impedidiment
why Christian Cassandraes,
the preachers of Gods
truth, and good admonitions,
are not beleued and folowed
to our preseruation.
               
            
         
      
   