
      
         
            
            ¶ Orders for the redreſſe of abuſe in diet, by her Maieſties expreſſe pleaſure, and abſolute commandement, to be obſerued in the time of this ſcarſitie and dearth, both by the Miniſters, and others of the Laitic of this Realme, within this dioces of Norwich.
            
               
                  IN primis, euery miniſter ſhal reade and ſay publicke praiers, according to the booke of common praier, in euery ſeuerall pariſh church, and chappel, on all Weddenſdayes and Fridayes, orderly and deuoutly, at due and conuenient times.
            2 Item, all ſuch Miniſters as haue any benefices, ſhall reſide on their liuinges, keepe hoſpitalitie there, relieue their neighbours: and ſuch as haue pluralities, ſhall doe the like by their Farmers, and ſuch others as rent their liuinges at their handes.
            3 Item, all and euery the Miniſters within this Dioces, ſhall recommend the orders by her Maieſtie commaunded vnto the people, in their ſeuerall charges, carefully to be obſerued.
            4 Item, they ſhall in their ſermons, and exhortations, earneſtly and pithily exhort and ſtirre vp euery of their pariſhners to feruent praier, both publicke and priuate, to abſtinencie, faſting and true humiliation, and to forbeare all exceſſe in diet.
            5 Item, they ſhall exhorte, and mooue all and euery their pariſhioners, to releeue the poore and needie, by good houſekeeping, by ſetting them on worke, and by other deedes of almes, and brotherly compaſſion.
            6 Item, they ſhall exhort and moue all and euery their pariſhioners, to haue patience in this time of ſcarſitie, and not to giue eare to mutinies, and diſcontented perſons, or the perſwaſions of idle braines, who ſwarue or repine from the humble dueties of good ſubiectes, to the further oftence of God, and diſcontenting of her Maieſtie, that hath ſo tender a care of their welfare.
            7 Item, the pariſhioners within this Dioces ſhall orderly, ſoberly, deuoutly and diligently, frequent their ſeuerall pariſh Church, or chappell on all Weddenſdaies, and Fridaies, to heare publike praiers, there read according to the booke of common praier of this realme.
            8 Item, all and euery perſon ſuch as bee of better abilitie, ſhall vſe a greater moderation in their diet then heretofore they haue done.
            9 Item, none of what degree ſoeuer he or ſhe be, ſhall ſuffer any fleſhe to bee dreſſed or eaten in their houſes, on ſuch dayes as by law ſtand already prohibited, except that thoſe perſons by reaſon of infirmitie, be lawfully thereunto licenſed.
            10 Item, on Fridayes, and other dayes nowe already by lawe appointed, for faſting daies, no ſuppers at all ſhalbe by them prouided, or taken either for themſelues or houſhold.
            11 Item, all and euerie perſon beeing not let by greeuous ſickneſſe, ſhall abſtaine from ſuppers, altogither on each Weddenſdayes at night.
            12 Item, the collectors for the poore in euery pariſh, ſhalbe diligent to make the collection carefully for their relieſe: and the ſame ſhalbe increaſed, in reſpect of this preſent want, by thoſe who bee of good abilitie, and reaſonably beſtowed ſor the ſuccour of the moſt diſtreſſed.
            13 Item, no perſons which haue houſholdes ſhall for ſparing, diſcharge any of their houſholds, to ſhift for themſelues: or ſoiourne from their vſuall habitation themſelues.
            14 Item, whatſoeuer is ſorborne from anie meale, or meales: by abſtinencie or ſparing of any ſuperfluous diet or fare, ſhall be eſpecially by the vealthier ſort charitably conuerted to the 
                  〈◊〉
                of the poore and needie, ſo as not
                  ••
               e may be taken thereof according to her maieſties expectation.
            15 Item, no perſon ſhall vnder colour of theſe orders, forſake their owne pariſh church in time of praier, and aſſemble themſelues, as ſome heeretofore of their own heades offenſiuely haue attempted, vnder colour of generall faſtes, and repaire to other churches.
            16 Item, all and euery the ſaid Miniſters and Churchwardens, in euerie pariſh, or other charitable diſcreet men by them to be appointed and nominated, ſhal carry a watchfull eye vnto al Innes, Tauernes, and victualling houſes, how both the keepers of them, with their houſhold, and all their gueſtes and reſorters to their houſes, doe obſerue theſe here Maieſties commandementes.
            17 Item, the Miniſters and Churchwardens ſhal monthly make a true and iuſt 
                  •
               ertificate to the Lord Biſhop of the Dioces, containing aſwel the names of diſobedient delinquentes in any the premiſſes, as of thoſe well diſpoſed perſons, who haue had a duetifull regard to her Maieſties commaundement, touching a charitable compaſſion for the reliefe of the poore, as is preſcribed.
            
               Will: Norwicen:
            
         
      
   