
      
         
            
            
               ❧THE
TRAGEDIE OF GORBODVC,
whereof three Actes were wrytten by
Thomas Nortone, and the two laſte by
Thomas Sackuyle. ¶Sett forthe as the ſame was ſhewed before the
QVENES moſt excellent Maieſtie, in her highnes
Court of VVhitehall, the .xviij. day of Ianuary,
Anno Domini. 1561. By the Gentlemen
of Thynner Temple in London.
            
            
               ❧IMPRYNTED AT LONDON
in Fleteſtrete, at the Signe of the
Faucon by William Griffith: And are
to be ſold at his Shop in Saincte
Dunſtones Churchyarde in
the VVeſt of London. Anno. 1565. Septemb. 22.
         
         
            
            ¶Thargument of the
Tragedie.
            
               GORBODVC, king of Brittaine, deuided his
Realme in his lyfe time to his Sōnes, Ferrex
and Porrex. The Sonnes fell to dyuiſion and
diſcention. The yonger kylled the elder. The Mother
that more dearely loued thelder, for reuenge
kylled the yonger. The people moued with the
Crueltie of the facte, roſe in Rebellion and ſlewe
both father and mother. The Nobilitie aſſembled
and moſt terribly deſtroyed the Rebelles. And afterwardes
for want of Iſſue of the Prince wherby
the Succeſſion of the Crowne became vncertayne.
They fell to Ciuill warre in whiche both
they and many of their Iſſues were ſlayne, and the
Lande for a longe tyme almoſte deſolate and myſerablye
waſted.
            
               
                  W G
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶The names of the Speakers.
            
               
                  Gorboduc, kynge of great Brittayne.
               
               
                  Videna, Queene and wife to kynge Gorboduc.
               
               
                  Ferrex, Elder Sonne to kynge Gorboduc.
               
               
                  Porrex, Yonger Sonne to kynge Gorboduc.
               
               
                  Clotyn, Duke of Cornewall.
               
               
                  Fergus, Duke of Albanye.
               
               
                  Mandud, Duke of Leagre.
               
               
                  Gwenard, Duke of Cumperlande.
               
               
                  Eubulus, Secretarie to the kynge Gorboduc.
               
               
                  Arostus, A Counſellour of kynge Gorboduc.
               
               
                  Dordan, A Counſellour aſſigned by the
kynge to his Eldeſt Sonne Fcrrex.
               
               
                  Philander, A Counſellour aſſigned by the
kynge to his yonger Sonne Porrex.
(Both beynge of the olde
(kynges Counſell before.
               
                  Hermon, A Paraſyte remaynyng with Ferrex.
               
               
                  Tyndar, A Paraſyte remaynyng with Porrex.
               
               
                  Nuntius, A Meſſenger of thelder Brothers deth
               
                  Nuntius, A Meſſenger of Duke Fergus
ryſynge in Armes.
               
                  Marcella, A Ladye of the Queenes
priuie Chamber.
               
                  Chorus, Foure auncient and Sage
men of Brittayne.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶The Order of the dōme ſhewe before the
firſte Acte, and the Signification therof.
            ¶Firſte the Muſicke of Violenze began to playe,
durynge whiche came in vppon the Stage ſixe
wilde men clothed in leaues. Of whom the firſt
bare in his necke a Fagot of ſmal ſtickes, whiche
thei all both ſeuerallie and togither aſſaied with
all their ſtrengthes to breake, but it could not be
broken by them. At the length one of them plucked
out one of the ſtickes and brake it: And the
reſt pluckinge oute all the other ſtickes one after
an other did eaſelie breake, the ſame beynge
ſeuered: which beyng conioyned they had before
attempted in vayne. After they had this done,
they departed the Stage, and the Muſicke ceaſed
Hereby was ſignified, that a ſtate knit in vnytie
doth continue ſtronge againſt all force. But beynge
deuyded, is eaſely deſtroied. As befell vpon
Duke Gorboduc deuidinge his Lande to his two
ſonnes which he before held in Monarchie. And
vpon the diſcention of the Brethrene to whome
it was deuided.
         
         
            
               
               Of Gorboduc. Actus primus. Scena prima.
               Viden. Ferrex.
               
                  Viden.
                  
                     THE ſilent night that bringes the
                  quiet pawſe,
                  From painefull trauailes of the
                  wearie Daie:
                  Prolonges my carefull thoughtes
                  and makes me blame
                  The ſlowe Aurore that ſo for loue or ſhame
                  Doth longe delaye to ſhewe her bluſſhing face,
                  And nowe the Daie renewes my griefull plainte.
               
               
                  Ferrex.
                  My gracious Lady and mother deare,
                  Pardon my griefe, for your ſo grieued minde
                  To aſke what cauſe tormenteth ſo your harte.
               
               
                  Viden.
                  So great a wronge and ſo vniuſt deſpite,
                  Without all cauſe againſt all courſe of kinde.
               
               
                  Ferrex.
                  Suche cauſeles wronge and ſo vniuſt deſpite,
                  Maye haue redreſſe, or at the leaſt reuenge.
               
               
                  Viden.
                  Neither my Sonne, ſuche is the frowarde will,
                  The perſon ſuche, ſuche my miſhap and thyne.
               
               
                  Fer
                        •
                     ex.
                  Myne know I none, but griefe for your diſtreſſe:
               
               
                  Viden.
                  Yes: myne for thyne my ſonne: A father? no:
                  
                     
In kynde a Father, but not in kyndlynes.
               
               
                  Ferrex.
                  My Father: whie? I knowe nothynge at all,
                  Wherin I haue miſdone vnto his Grace.
               
               
                  Viden.
                  Therfore, the more vnkinde to thee and mee.
                  For knowynge well (my ſonne) the tendre loue▪
                  
                  That I haue euer borne and beare to thee,
                  He greued therat, is not content alone,
                  To ſpoyle thee of my ſight my chiefeſt Ioye,
                  But thee, of the birth, right and Heritage
                  Cauſeles, vnkindly and in wrongfull wiſe,
                  Againſt all Lawe and right he will bereaue,
                  Halfe of his kyngdome he will geue awaye.
               
               
                  Ferrex.
                  To whome?
               
               
                  Viden.
                  Euen to Porrex his younger ſonne
                  Whoſe growinge Pride I do ſo ſore ſuſpecte,
                  That beynge rayſed to equall Rule with thee,
                  Mee thinkes I ſee his enuious harte to ſwell
                  Fyllde with Diſdaine and with ambicious Pride
                  The ende the Goddes do know, whoſe Aulters I
                  Full oft haue made in vaine of Cattell ſlayne,
                  To ſende the ſacred ſmoke to Heauens Throne,
                  For thee my ſonne if thinges ſo ſuccede,
                  As nowe my Ielious minde miſdemeth ſore.
               
               
                  Ferrex.
                  Madame leaue care and carefull plaint for me.
                  Iuſt hath my Father ben to euery wight,
                  His firſte vniuſtice he will not extende
                  
                     
To me I truſte, that geue no cauſe therof.
                  My brothers pride ſhall hurt him ſelfe, not mee.
               
               
                  Viden.
                  So graunt the Goddes: But yet thy father ſo
                  Hath firmely fixed his vnmoued mynde
                  That plaints & praiers can no whit auaile,
                  For thoſe haue I aſſaied, but euen this daie,
                  He wyll endeuour to procure aſſent
                  Of all his Counſell to his fonde deuiſe.
               
               
                  Ferrex.
                  Their Aunceſtours from race to race haue borne
                  True fayth to my forefathers and their ſeede,
                  I truſte thei eke wyll beare the lyke to me.
               
               
                  Viden.
                  There reſteth all, but if they fayle therof,
                  And if the ende bringe forth an euyll ſucceſſe
                  On them and theirs the miſchiefe ſhall befall,
                  And ſo I praie the Goddes requite it them,
                  And ſo they will, for ſo is wont to bee
                  When Lordes and truſted Rulers vnder kynges
                  To pleaſe the preſent fancie of the Prince,
                  With wrong tranſpoſe the courſe of gouernaunce
                  Murders, miſchiefe, or ciuyll ſworde at length,
                  Or mutuall treaſon, or a iuſt reuenge,
                  When right ſuccedinge Line returnes againe
                  By Ioues iuſt Iudgement and deſerued wrathe
                  Bringes them to ciuill and reprochefull death,
                  And rootes their names & kindredes frō the earth.
               
               
                  Ferrex.
                  Mother content you, you ſhall ſee the ende.
               
               
                  
                  Viden.
                  The ende? thie ende I feare, Ioue ende me firſt.
               
            
            
               Actus primus. Scena ſecunda.
               Gorboduc. Arostus. Philander. Eubulus.
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  MY Lordes whoſe graue aduiſe & faithfull aide
                  Haue long vpheld my Honour & my Realme
                  And brought me from this age from tender yeres.
                  Guidynge ſo great eſtate with great renowme:
                  Nowe more importeth mee the erſt to vſe
                  Your faith and wiſdome wherby yet I reigne,
                  That when by death my liefe and rule ſhall ceaſe,
                  The kingdome yet maye with vnbroken courſe,
                  Haue certayne Prince, by whoſe vndoubted right,
                  Your wealth and peace, may ſtand in quiet ſtaie,
                  And eke that thei whome Nature hath preparde,
                  In time to take my place in Princelie Seate,
                  While in their Fathers tyme their pliant youth
                  Yeldes to the frame of ſkilfull gouernaunce
                  Maye ſo be taught and trayned in noble Artes,
                  As what their fathers whiche haue reigned before
                  Haue with great fame deriued downe to them
                  With honour they maye leaue vnto their ſeede:
                  And not be taught for their vnworthie life,
                  And for their Laweles ſwaruynge out of kinde,
                  Worthie to loſe what Lawe aud kind them gaue
                  But that they may preſerue the cōmon peace,
                  The cauſe that firſt began and ſtill mainteines
                  
                     
The Lyneall courſe of kinges inheritaunce,
                  For me, for myne, for you, and for the ſtate
                  Wherof both I and you haue charge and care.
                  Thus do I meane to vſe your wonted fayth
                  To me and myne, and to your natyue Lande,
                  My Lordes be playne without all wrie reſpect
                  Or poyſonous crafte to ſpeake in pleaſyng wiſe,
                  Leſt as the blame of yll ſuccedynge thinges
                  Shall light on you, ſo light the harmes alſo.
               
               
                  Arostus.
                  Your good acceptaunce ſo (moſt noble kinge)
                  Of ſuche your faithfulnes as heretofore
                  We haue employed in dueties to your Grace,
                  And to this Realme whoſe worthie head you are,
                  Well proues that neyther you miſtruſte at all,
                  Nor we ſhall nede no boaſting wiſe to ſhewe,
                  Our trueth to you, nor yet our wakefull care
                  For you, for yours, and for our natiue Lande,
                  Wherfore (O kynge) I ſpeake for one as all,
                  Sithe all as one do beare you egall faith:
                  Doubt not to vſe their Counſelles and their aides
                  Whoſe honours, goods & lyues are whole auowed
                  To ſerue, to ayde, and to defende your Grace.
               
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  My Lordes I thanke you all. This is the caſe
                  Ye know, the Gods, who haue the ſoueraigne care
                  For kings, for kingdomes, and for cōmen weales,
                  Gaue me two ſonnes in my more luſtie Age,
                  Who nowe in my deceyuynge yeres are growen
                  Well towardes ryper ſtate of minde and ſtrength,
                  To take in hande ſome greater Princely charge,
                  
                     
As yet they lyue and ſpende their hopefull daies,
                  With me and with their Mother here in Courts
                  Their age nowe aſketh other place and trade,
                  And myne alſo doth aſke an other chaunge,
                  Theirs to more trauaile, myne to greater eaſe:
                  Whan fatall death ſhall ende my mortall lyfe,
                  My purpoſe is to leaue vnto them twaine
                  The Realme deuided into two ſandrie partes:
                  The one Ferrex myne elder ſonne ſhall haue,
                  The other ſhall the other Porrex rule
                  That both my purpoſe may more framelie ſtande,
                  And eke that they may better rule their charge,
                  I meane forthwith to place them in the ſame:
                  That in my life they maye both learne to rule,
                  And I may Ioye to ſee their rulynge well.
                  This is in ſōme, what I woulde haue ye wey:
                  Firſte whether ye allowe my whole deuiſe,
                  And thinke it good for me, for them, for you,
                  And for our Countrey, mother of vs all:
                  And if ye lyke it and allowe it well,
                  Than for their guydinge and their gouernaunce,
                  Shewe ſorthe ſuche meanes of circumſtaunce,
                  As ye thinke meete to be both knowne and kept:
                  Lot, this is all, nowe tell me your aduiſe.
               
               
                  Arostus.
                  And this is muche, and aſketh great aduiſe,
                  But for my parte my Soueraigne Lord and kyng
                  This do I thinke your Maieſtie doth knowe,
                  Howe vnder you in Iuſtice and in peace,
                  Great wealth and Honour, long we haue enioyed
                  So as we can not ſeeme with gredie mindes
                  
                     
To wiſſhe for chaunge of Prince or gouernaunce,
                  But if ye lyke your purpoſe and deuiſe,
                  Our lykynge muſt be deemed to procede,
                  Of rightfull reaſon, and of heedefull care,
                  Not for our ſelues, but for our cōmen ſtate:
                  Sithe our owne ſtate doth nede no better chaunge
                  I thinke in all as erſt your Grace hath ſaide:
                  Firſte when you ſhall vnlode your aged mynde,
                  Of heuye care and troubles manyfolde,
                  And laye the ſame vpon my Lordes your ſonnes
                  Whoſe growing yeres may bere the burden long
                  And longe I praye the Goddes to graunt it ſo:
                  And in your lyfe while you ſhall ſo beholde
                  Their rule, their vertues and their noble deedes,
                  Suche as their kinde behighteth to vs all,
                  Great be the profites that ſhall growe therof,
                  Your age in quiet ſhall the longer laſt,
                  Your laſtynge age ſhalbe their longer ſtaie,
                  For cares of kynges, that rule as you haue rulde
                  For publique wealth and not for priuate ioye,
                  Do waſt mannes lyfe and haſten crooked age,
                  With furrowed face and with enfeebled lymmes,
                  To drawe on creepynge Death a ſwifter pace.
                  They two yet yonge ſhall beare the partie reigne
                  With greater eaſe, than one nowe olde alone
                  Can welde the whole, for whom muche harder is
                  with leſſened ſtrength the double weight to beare
                  Your eye, your Counſell, and the graue regarde
                  Of Fathers, yea of ſuche a fathers name,
                  Nowe at beginning of their ſondred reigne,
                  When it is hazarde of their whole ſucceſſe,
                  
                     
Shall bridle ſo their force of youthfull heates,
                  And ſo reſtreine the rage of inſolence,
                  Whiche moſt aſſailes the yonge and noble minds,
                  And ſo ſhall guide and traine in tempred ſtaie
                  Their yet greene bending wittes wt reuerent awe
                  And now inured with vertues at the firſt.
                  Cuſtome (O king) ſhall bringe delightfulnes
                  By vſe of Vertue, Vice ſhall growe in hate,
                  But if you ſo diſpoſe it, that the daye,
                  Which endes your life, ſhal firſt begin their reign
                  Great is the perill, what will be the ende,
                  When ſuche beginning of ſuche liberties
                  Voide of ſuche ſtates as in your liefe do lye,
                  Shall leaue them to free randon of their will
                  An open praie to traiterous flatterie,
                  The greateſt peſtilence of noble youthe:
                  Whiche perill ſhalbe paſt, if in your life,
                  Their tempred youthe with aged fathers awe
                  Be brought in vre of ſkilfull ſtaidnes
                  And in your life, their liues diſpoſed ſo,
                  Shall length your noble liefe in ioyfulnes.
                  Thus thinke I yt your grace hath wiſelie thought
                  And that your tender care of cōmen weale,
                  Hath bred this thought, ſo to deuide your Lande
                  And plant your ſonnes to beare the preſent rule
                  While you yet liue to ſee their rulynge well,
                  That you may longer lyue by ioye therein.
                  What furder meanes behouefull are and meete
                  At great leiſure maye your Grace deuiſe,
                  When all haue ſaide, and when we be agreed
                  If this be beſt to parte the Realme in twaine,
                  
                     
And place your ſonnes in preſent gouernement
                  Whereof as I haue plamely ſaide my mynde,
                  So woulde I here the reſt of all my Lordes.
               
               
                  Philander.
                  In parte I thinke as haue ben ſaide before,
                  In parte againe my minde is otherwiſe
                  As for deuiding of this Realme in twaine
                  And lotting out the ſame in egall partes,
                  To either of my Lordes your Graces ſonnes,
                  That thinke I beſt for this your Realmes behoſf,
                  For profite and aduauncement of your ſonnes,
                  And for your comforte and your honour eke:
                  But ſo to place them while your life do laſt,
                  To yelde to them your Royall gouernaunce,
                  To be aboue them onely in the name
                  Of father, not in kingly ſtate alſo,
                  I thinke not good for you, for them, nor vs,
                  This kingdome ſince the bloodie ciuill fielde
                  Where Morgan ſlaine did yeld his conquered parte
                  Vnto his Coſyns ſworde in Camberlande
                  
                  Conteineth all that whilome did ſuffice,
                  Three noble ſonnes of your forefather Brute,
                  
                  So your two ſonnes, it maye alſo ſuffice,
                  The moe the ſtronger, if thei gree in one:
                  The ſmaller compaſſe that the Realme doth holde
                  The eaſier is the ſwey therof to welde,
                  The nearer Iuſtice to the wronged poore,
                  The ſmaller charge, and yet ynoughe for one.
                  And whan the Region is deuided ſo
                  That Brethrene be the Lordes of either parte,
                  Such ſtrength doth nature knit betwene the both.
                  
                     
In ſondrie bodies by conioyned loue
                  That not as two, but one of doubled force,
                  Eche is to other as a ſure defence,
                  The Noblenes and glorie of the one
                  Doth ſharpe the courage of the others mynde
                  With vertuous enuie to contende for praiſe,
                  And ſuche an egalnes hath nature made,
                  Betwene the Brethren of one Fathers ſeede,
                  As an vnkindlie wronge it ſeemes to bee,
                  To throwe the other Subiect vnder feete
                  Of him, whoſe Peere he is by courſe of kinde,
                  And nature that did make this egalnes,
                  Ofte ſo repineth at ſo great a wronge,
                  That ofte ſhe rayſeth vp a grudgynge griefe,
                  In yonger Brethren at the elders ſtate:
                  Wherby both townes & kingdomes haue be raſed
                  And famous ſtockes of Royall blood diſtroied:
                  The Brother that ſhould be the Brothers aide
                  And haue a wakefull care for his defence,
                  Gapes for his death, & blames the lyngering yeres
                  That brings not forth his ende with faſter courſe
                  And oft impacient of ſo longe delayes,
                  With hatefull ſlaughter he preſentes the fates
                  And keepes a iuſt rewarde for Brothers bloode,
                  With endles vengeaunce on his ſtocke for aye:
                  Suche miſchiefes here are wiſely mette withall:
                  If egall ſtate maye nouriſhe egall loue,
                  Where none hath cauſe to grudge at others good,
                  But nowe the head to ſtoupe beneth them bothe,
                  Ne kinde, ne reaſon, ne good ordre beares,
                  And oft it hath ben ſeene, that where Nature
                  
                     
Hath ben preuerted in diſordered wiſe,
                  When Fathers ceaſe to know that thei ſhuld rule
                  And Children ceaſe to knowe they ſhould obey,
                  And often our vnkindly tendrenes,
                  As Mother of vnkindly Stubbornes:
                  I ſpeake not this in enuie or reproche,
                  As if I grudged the glorie of your ſonnes,
                  Whoſe honour I beſeche the Goddes to encreaſe:
                  Nor yet as if I thought there did remaine,
                  So filthie Cankers in their noble breſtes,
                  Whome I eſteme (whiche is their greateſt praiſe,
                  Vndoubted children of ſo good a kynge.
                  Onelie I meane to ſhewe my certeine Rules,
                  Whiche kinde hath graft within the mind of man
                  That Nature hath her ordre and her courſe,
                  Whiche (being broken) doth corrupt the ſtate
                  Of myndes and thinges euen in the beſt of all
                  My Lordes your ſonnes may learne to rule of you
                  Your owne example in your noble Courte
                  Is fitteſt Guyder of their youthfull yeares,
                  If you deſire to ſeeke ſome preſent Ioye
                  By ſight of their well rulynge in your lyfe,
                  See them obey, ſo ſhall you ſee them rule,
                  Who ſo obeyeth not with humblenes
                  Will rule without rage and with inſolence
                  Longe maye they rule I do beſeche the Goddes,
                  But longe may they learne ere they begyn to rule
                  If kinde and fates woulde ſuffre I would wiſſhe
                  Them aged Princes and immortall kinges:
                  Wherfore moſt noble kynge I well aſſent,
                  Betwene your ſonnes y• you deuide your Realme.
                  
                     
And as in kinde, ſo matche them in degree
                  But while the Goddes prolongue your Royal life
                  Prolongue your reigne, for therto lyue you here,
                  And therfore haue the Goddes ſo longe forborne
                  To ioyne you to them ſelues, that ſtill you might
                  Be Prince and father of our cōmon weale:
                  They when they ſe your children ripe to rule
                  Will make them roume, & will remoue you hence,
                  That yours in right enſuynge of your life
                  Maye rightlie honour your mortall name.
               
               
                  Eubulus.
                  Your wonted true regarde of faithfull hartes,
                  Makes me (O kinge) the bolder to preſume
                  To ſpeake what I conceiue within my breſt,
                  Althoughe the ſame do not agree at all
                  With that whiche other here my Lords haue ſaid
                  Nor whiche your ſelfe haue ſeemed beſt to lyke,
                  Pardon I craue and that my wordes be deemde
                  To flowe from hartie zeale vnto your Grace,
                  And to the ſafetie of your cōmon weale:
                  To parte your Realme vnto my Lords your ſōnes
                  I thinke not good for you, ne yet for them,
                  But worſte of all, for this our Natiue Lande:
                  For with one Lande, one ſingle rule is beſt:
                  Deuided Reignes do make deuided hartes.
                  But Peace preſerues the Countrey & the Prince.
                  Suche is in man the gredie minde to reigne,
                  So great is his deſire to climbe alofte,
                  In worldly Stage the ſtatelieſt partes to beare,
                  That faith and Iuſtice and all kindly loue,
                  Do yelde vnto deſire of Soueraigntie:
                  
                     
Where egall ſtate doth raiſe an egall hope
                  To winne the thing that either wold attaine
                  Your grace remembreth howe in paſſed yeres
                  The mightie Brute, firſt Prince of all this Lande
                  Poſſeſſed the ſame and ruled it well in one,
                  He thinking that the compaſſe did ſuffice
                  For his three ſonnes, three kingdoms eke to make
                  Cut it in three, as you would nowe in twaine:
                  But how much Brutiſh blod hath ſithence bē ſpilt
                  To ioyne againe the ſondred vnitie?
                  What Princes ſlaine before their timely honour?
                  What waſt of townes and people in the Lande?
                  What Treaſons heaped on murders & on ſpoiles?
                  Whoſe iuſt reuenge euen yet is ſcarcely ceaſed,
                  Ruthefull remembraunce is yet had in minde:
                  The Gods forbyd the like to chaunce againe
                  And you (O king) geue not the cauſe therof:
                  My Lorde Ferrex your elder ſonne, perhappes
                  Whome kinde and cuſtome geues a rightfull hope
                  To be your Heire and to ſuccede your Reigne,
                  Shall thinke that he doth ſuffre greater wronge
                  Than he perchaunce will beare, if power ſerue
                  
                     Porrex the younger ſo vnpaiſed in ſtate,
                  Perhappes in courage will be raiſed alſo,
                  If Flatterie then whiche ſayles not to aſſaile▪
                  
                  The tendre mindes of yet vnſkilfull Youthe,
                  In one ſhall kindle and encreaſe diſdaine:
                  And Enuie in the others harte enflame,
                  This fire ſhall waſte their loue, their liues, their land,
                  And rutheful ruine ſhal deſtroy them both,
                  A wiſſhe not this (O kyng) ſo to befall
                  
                     
But feare the thing, that I do moſt abhorre
                  Geue no beginning to ſo dreadfull ende,
                  Kepe them in order and obedience:
                  And let them both by nowe obeyinge you,
                  Learne ſuche behauiour as beſeemes their ſtate.
                  The Older, myldenes in his gouernaunce,
                  The younger, a yeldyng contentednes:
                  And kepe them neare vnto your preſence ſtill,
                  That they reſtreined by the awe of you,
                  Maye liue in compaſſe of well tempred ſtaie,
                  And paſſe the perilles of their youthfull yeares,
                  Your aged life drawes on to febler tyme,
                  Wherin you ſhall leſſe able be to beare
                  The trauailes that in youth you haue ſuſteined
                  Both in your perſons and your Realmes defence
                  If planting nowe your ſonnes in furder partes,
                  You ſende them furder from your preſent reache
                  Leſſe ſhal you know how they thē ſelues demaund
                  Traiterous corrupters of their pliant youthe,
                  Shall haue vnſpied a muche more free acceſſe,
                  And of ambition and inflamed diſdaine
                  Shall arme the one, the other, or them bothe
                  To ryuill warre, or to vſurpinge pride.
                  Late ſhall you rue, that you ne recked before:
                  Good is I graunt of all to hope the beſt,
                  But not to liue ſtill dreadles of the worſt,
                  So truſte the one, that the other be forſene,
                  Arme not vnſkilfulnes with princely power
                  But you that longe haue wiſely ruled the reignes
                  Of royaltie within your noble Realme
                  So holde them, while the Gods for our auayles
                  
                     
Shall ſtretche the threde of your prolonged dales
                  To ſoone he clāme, into the flamyng Carte
                  Whoſe want of ſkyll did ſet the earth on fire,
                  Time and example of your noble Grace,
                  Shall teache your ſonnes both to obey and rule▪
                  
                  Whan time hath taught thē, time ſhall make thē pace
                  The place that nowe is full: and ſo I praie
                  Longe it remaine, to comforte of vs all.
               
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  I take your faithfull hartes in thankfull parte
                  But ſithe I ſee no cauſe to drawe my minde,
                  To feare the nature of my louyng ſonnes,
                  Or to miſdeme that Enuie or diſdaine,
                  Can there worke hate, where nature planteth loue
                  In one ſelfe purpoſe do I ſtill abide,
                  My loue extendeth egally to bothe,
                  My Lande ſuffiſeth for them bothe alſo:
                  
                     Humber ſhall parte the Marches of their Realmes:
                  The Sotherne parte the elder ſhall poſſeſſe,
                  The Northerne ſhall Porrex the yonger rule,
                  In quiet I will paſſe mine aged daies,
                  Free from the trauaile and the painefull cares
                  That haſten age vpon the worthieſt kinges.
                  But leſt the fraude that ye do ſeeme to feare
                  Of flatteryng tongues, corrupt their tender youth
                  And wrieth them to the waies of youthfull luſt,
                  To climyng pride, or to reuengyng hate
                  Or to neglecting of their carefull charge
                  Lewdely to lyue in wanton reckleneſſe,
                  Or to oppreſſinge of the rightfull cauſe
                  
                     
Or not to wreke the wronges done to the poore
                  To treade downe trueth, or fauour falſe deceite
                  I meane to ioyne to eyther of my ſonnes
                  Some one of thoſe whoſe longe approued faith
                  And wiſdome tryed may well aſſure my harte:
                  That mynyng fraude ſhall finde no way to crepee
                  Into their fenſed eares with graue aduiſe:
                  This is the ende, and ſo I praye you all
                  To beare my ſonnes the loue and loyaltie
                  That I haue founde within your faithful breaſts.
               
               
                  Arostus.
                  You, nor your ſonnes, our ſoueraigne Lord ſhall want
                  Our faith & ſeruice while our liues do laſt.
               
               
                  Chorus.
                  
                     When ſettled ſtaie doth holde the royall throne,
                     In ſtedfaſt place by knowen and doubtles right:
                     And chiefely whan diſcent on one alone
                     Make ſingle and vnparted reigne to light.
                     Eche chaunge of courſe vnioynts the whole eſtate
                     And yeldes it thrall to r
                           •
                        yne by debate.
                  
                  
                     The ſtrength that knit by laſte accorde in one
                     Againſt all forrein power of mightie foes,
                     Could of it ſelfe defende it ſelfe alone,
                     Diſioyned once, the former force doth loſe
                     The ſtickes, that ſondred brake ſo ſoone in twaine
                     In faggot bounde attempted were in vaine.
                  
                  
                     Oft tender minde that leades the perciall eye
                     Of erringe parentes in their childrens loue,
                     Deſtroies the wrongfull loued childe therby:
                     
                        
This doth the proude ſonne of Appollo proue,
                     Who raſſhely ſet in Chariot of his ſire:
                     Inflamed the perched earth with heauens fire.
                  
                  
                     And this great king, that doth deuide his land,
                     And chaunged the courſe of his diſcending crowne
                     And yeldes the reigne into his childrens hande
                     From bliſfull ſtate of ioye and great renowne,
                     A Myrrour ſhall become to Princes all
                     To learne to ſhunne the cauſe of ſuche a fall.
                  
               
            
         
         
            ¶The order and ſignification of the
dōme ſhewe before the ſecond Acte.
            ¶Firſt the Muſicke of Cornettes began to playe,
during whiche came in vpon the Stage a kinge
accompanied with a nombre of his Nobylytie &
Gentlemen. And after he had placed him ſelfe in
a Chaire of eſtate prepared for him: there came
and kneled before him a graue and aged Gentilman
and offred vp a Cuppe vnto hym of Wyne
in a glaſſe, whiche the kynge refuſed. After him
cōmes, a braue and luſtie yong Gentleman and
preſentes the king with a Cup of Golde filled wt 
poiſon, which the king accepted, & drinkinge the
ſame, immediatly fell down dead vpon ye ſtage, &
ſo was carried thence awaye by his Lordes and
Gentlemen, & then the Muſicke ceaſed. Hereby
was ſignified, that as Glaſſe by nature holdeth
no payſon, but is clere and maye eaſely be ſeene
throughe, ne boweth by any Arte: So a faithfull

Counſellour holdeth no treaſon, but is playne &
open, ne yeldeth to any vndiſcrete affection, but
geueth holſome Counſell, whiche the yll aduiſed
Prince refuſeth. The delightfull golde filled wt
poyſon betokeneth Flattery, whiche vnder faire
ſeeming of pleaſaunt words beareth deadly poyſon,
which deſtroieth the Prince yt receiueth it.
As befell in the two brethrene Ferrex and Porrex
who refuſing the holſome aduiſe of graue Counſellours,
credited theſe yonge Paracites, & brought
to them ſelues death and deſtruction therby.
         
         
            
               Actus ſecundus. Scena prima.
               Ferrex. Hermon. Dordan.
               
                  Ferrex.
                  I Meruaile muche what reaſon leade the kynge
                  My father thus without all my deſarte
                  To reue me halfe y• kingdome which by courſe
                  Of lawe and nature ſhuld remayne to me.
               
               
                  Hermon.
                  If you with ſtubborne and vntamed pryde
                  Had ſtood againſt him in rebellious wiſe,
                  Or if with grudging minde you had enuied
                  So ſlowe a ſlidynge of his aged yeres,
                  Or ſought before your time to haſte the courſe
                  Of fatall death vpon his Royall head,
                  Or ſtained your Stocke with murder of your kyn:
                  Some face of reaſon might perhaps haue ſeemed
                  To yelde ſome likely cauſe to ſpoile ye thus.
               
               
                  
                  Ferrex.
                  The wrekefull Gods powre on my curſed head,
                  Eternall plagues and neuer dyinge woes,
                  The Helliſh Prince, adiudge my dampned ghoſte
                  To Tantalus thirſte, or proude Ixims wheele
                  Or cruell Gripe to gnawe my growing harte
                  To durynge tormentes and vnquenched flames
                  If euer I conceiued ſo foule a thought,
                  To wiſſhe his ende of life, or yet of reigne.
               
               
                  Dordan.
                  Ne yet your father (O moſt noble Prince)
                  Did euer thinke ſo fowle a thing of you
                  For he with more than fathers tendre loue
                  While yet the fates do lende him life to rule,
                  (Who long might lyue to ſo your rulynge well)
                  To you my Lorde, and to his other ſonne
                  Lo he reſignes his Realme and Royaltie
                  Whiche neuer would ſo wiſe a Prince haue done
                  If he had ones miſdemed that in your harte
                  There euer lodged ſo vnkinde a thought.
                  But tendre loue (my Lorde) and ſetled truſte
                  Of your good nature, and your nable minde
                  Made him to place you thus in Royall throne
                  And now to geue you half his realme to guide
                  Yea and that halfe within abounding ſtore
                  Of things that ſerue to make a welthie Realme
                  In ſtatelie Cities and in frutefull ſoyle,
                  In temperate breathing of the milder heauen,
                  In thinges of nedefull vſe, whiche frendlie Sea
                  Tranſportes by traffike from the forreine Portes,
                  In flowing wealth, in honour and in force,
                  
                     
Doth paſſe the double value of the parte
                  That Porrex hath alloted to his reigne,
                  Suche is your eaſe, ſuche is your fathers loue.
               
               
                  Ferrex.
                  Ah loue, my frendes, loue wrongs not whom he loues.
               
               
                  Dordan.
                  Ne yet he wrongeth you that geueth you
                  So large a reigne ere that the courſe of tyme
                  Bringe you to kingdome by diſcended right,
                  Which time perhaps might end your time before.
               
               
                  Ferrex.
                  Is this no wrong, ſaie you, to reaue from me
                  My natiue right to halfe ſo great a realme,
                  And thus to matche his yonger ſonne with me
                  In egall power, and in as great degree:
                  Yea & what ſonne? ye ſonne whoſe ſwellyng pryde
                  Woulde neuer yelde one poinct of reuerence,
                  Whan I the Elder and apparaunt heire
                  Stoode in the likelyhode to poſſeſſe the whole
                  Yea and that ſonne whiche from his childiſhe age
                  Enuieth myne honour, and doth hate my life,
                  What will he nowe do? when his pride, his rage,
                  The mindefull malice of his grudging harte
                  Is armed with force, with wealth and kingly ſtate
               
               
                  Hermon.
                  Was this not wrong? yea yll aduiſed wrong
                  To giue ſo mad a man ſo ſharpe a ſworde,
                  To ſo great perill of ſo great miſhappe,
                  Wide open thus to ſet ſo large a waye.
               
               
                  Dordan.
                  Alas my Lorde, what griefull thing is this?
                  
                     
That of your brother you can thinke ſo ill
                  I neuer ſawe him vtter likelie ſigne
                  Whereby a man might ſee or once miſdeme
                  Suche hate of you, ne ſuche vnyeldinge pride
                  Ill is their counſell, ſhamefull be their ende,
                  That raiſing ſuche miſtruſtfull feare in you,
                  Sowing the ſeede of ſuche vnkindly hate,
                  Trauaile by reaſon to deſtroy you both:)
                  Wiſe is your brother and of noble hope,
                  Worthie to welde a large and mightie Realme
                  So muche a ſtronger frende haue you therby,
                  Whoſe ſtrēgth is your ſtrēgth, if you gree in one.
               
               
                  Hermon.
                  If nature and the Goddes had pinched ſo
                  Their flowing bountie and their noble giftes
                  Of Princelie qualyties from you my Lorde
                  And powrde them all at ones in waſtfull wiſe
                  Vpon your fathers younger ſonne alone:
                  Perhappes there be that in your preiudice
                  Would ſaie that birth ſhuld yeld to worthines:
                  But ſithe in eche good gift and Princelie Acte
                  Ye are his matche, and in the chiefe of all
                  In mildenes and in ſobre gouernauce
                  Ye farre ſurmount: And ſithe there is in you
                  Sufficing ſkill and hopefull towardnes
                  To weld the whole, and match you Elders praiſe
                  I ſee no cauſe whie ye ſhould looſe the halfe,
                  Ne wold I wiſſhe you yelde to ſuche a loſſe:
                  Leſt your milde ſufferaunce of ſo great a wronge
                  Be deemed cowardiſhe and ſimple dreade:
                  Whiche ſhall geue courage to the fierie head
                  
                     
Of your yonge Brother to inuade the whole,
                  Whiles yet therfore ſtickes in the peoples mynde
                  The lothed wronge of your diſheritaunce,
                  And ere your Brother haue by ſettled power,
                  By guyle full cloke of an allurynge ſhowe,
                  Got him ſome force and fauour in this Realme
                  And while the noble Queene your mother lyues,
                  To worke and practice all for your auaile
                  Attempt redreſſe by Armes, and wreake your ſelfe
                  Vpon his life, that gaineth by your loſſe,
                  Who nowe to ſhame of you, and griefe of vs
                  In your owne kingdome triumphes ouer you:
                  Shew now your courage meete for kingly eſtate
                  That thei which haue auowed to ſpēd their goods
                  Their landes, their liues & honours in your cauſe,
                  Maye be the bolder to mainteine your parte
                  Iohan thei do ſee that cowarde feare in you,
                  Shall not betraye ne ſaile their faithfull hartes.
                  If ones the death of Porrex ende the ſtrife,
                  And paie the price of his vſurped Reigne,
                  Your Mother ſhall perſwade the angry kynge,
                  The Lords your frends eke ſhall appeaſe his rage
                  For thei be wiſe, and well thei can forſee,
                  That ere longe time your aged fathers death
                  will brynge a time when you ſhall well requite
                  Their frendlie fauour, or their hatefull ſpite.
                  Yea, or their ſlackenes to auaunce your cauſe
                  Wiſe men do not ſo hange on paſſyng ſtate
                  Of preſent Princes, chiefely in their age.
                  But they will further caſt their reachinge eye
                  To viewe and weigh the times & reignes to come
                  
                     
Ne is it lykely thoughe the kinge be wrothe
                  That he yet will, or that the Realme will beare
                  Extreme reuenge vpon his onelye ſonne:
                  Or if he woulde, what one is he that dare
                  Be miniſtre to ſuche an enterpriſe.
                  And here you be nowe placed in your owne
                  Amyd your frendes, your vaſſalles & your ſtrength
                  We ſhall defende and kepe your perſon ſafe
                  Tyll either counſell turne his tender minde
                  Or age, or ſorowe ende his werie daies
                  But if the feare of Goddes and ſecrete grudge
                  Of Natures Lawe, repynynge at the facte,
                  Withholde your courage from ſo great attempt:
                  Knowe ye that luſt of kingdomes hath no Lawe
                  The Goddes do beare and well allowe in kinges
                  The thinges they abhorre in raſcall routes.
                  When kinges on ſclender quarrels ron to warres
                  And than in cruell and vnkindely wiſe,
                  Cōmaunde theftes, rapes, murder of Innocentes
                  To ſpoile of townes, & reignes of mighty realmes
                  Thinke you ſuch Princes do ſuppreſſe them ſelues
                  Subiect to Lawes of kinde and feare of Gods,
                  Yet none offence, but decked with glorious name
                  Of noble Conqueſtes in the handes of kinges,
                  Murders and violent theftes in priuate men
                  Are heynous crymes and full of foule reproche:
                  But if you like not yet ſo hote deuiſe,
                  Ne liſt to take ſuche vauntage of the time.
                  But thoughe with great perill of your ſtate
                  You wil not be the firſt that ſhall inuade,
                  Aſſemble yet your force for your defence,
                  
                     
And for your ſafetie ſtande vpon your garde.
               
               
                  Dordan.
                  O heauen was there euer harde or knowen,
                  So wicked Counſell to a noble Prince?
                  Let me (my Lorde) diſcloſe vnto your grace
                  This heynous tale, what miſchiefe it conteynes:
                  Your fathers death, your brothers and your owns
                  your preſent murder and eternall ſhame:
                  Heare me (O king) and ſuffre not to ſinke
                  So highe a treaſon in your Princelie breſt.
               
               
                  Ferrex.
                  The mightie Goddes forbyd that euer I
                  Shuld once conceiue ſuche miſchiefe in my harte
                  Althoughe my Brother hath bereft my Realme
                  And beare perhappes to me and hatefull minde.
                  Shall I reuenge it, with his death therfore?
                  Or ſhall I ſo deſtroy my fathers lyfe
                  That gaue me life? the Gods forbyd I ſaye,
                  Ceaſe you to ſpeake ſo any more to me
                  Ne you my friende with Aunſwere once repeate
                  So foule a tale, in ſcilence let in die:
                  What Lorde or Subiect ſhall haue hope at all
                  That vnder me they ſafely ſhall enioye
                  Their goods, their honours, landes and liberties,
                  With whome, neither one onely brother deare
                  Ne father dearer, coulde enioye their lyues?
                  But ſithe, I feare my younger brothers rage,
                  And ſithe perhappes ſome other man may gyue
                  Some like aduiſe, to moue his grudging head
                  At mine eſtate: whiche counſell may perchaunce
                  Take greater force with him, than this with me,
                  
                     
I will in ſecrete ſo prepare my ſelfe,
                  As if his malice or his luſt to reigne
                  Breake forth with Armes or ſodeine violence
                  I may withſtande his rage and kepe myns owne.
               
               
                  Dordan.
                  I feare the fatall time now draweth on
                  When ciuyll hate ſhall ende the noble lyne
                  Of famouſe Brute and of his Royall ſeede
                  Great Ioue defende the miſchiefes nowe at hande
                  O that the Secretaries wiſe aduiſe
                  Had erſt ben harde whan he beſought the kynge
                  Not to deuide his lande, nor ſende his ſonnes
                  To further partes from preſence of his Courte
                  Ne yet to yelde to them his gouernaunce
                  Lo ſuche are they nowe in the Royall throne
                  As was raſhe Phaeton in Phebus Carre
                  Ne then the fiery ſtedes did drawe the flame
                  With wilder randon through the kindled ſkies
                  Then traiterous councell now will wherle about
                  The youthfull heads of theſe vnſkilfull kinges,
                  But I hereof their father will enforeme
                  The reuerence of him perhappes ſhall ſtaye
                  The growing miſchiefes, while thei yet are grene
                  If this helpe not, then wo vnto them ſelues,
                  The Prince, the people, the deuided lande.
               
            
            
               Actus ſecundus, Scena ſecunda.
               Porrex. Tyndar. Philander.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
                  Porrex
                  ANd is it thus? And doth he ſo prepare
                  Againſt his Brother as his mortall foe?
                  And nowe whyle yet his aged father lyues:
                  Neither regardes be him? nor feares he me?
                  Warre would he haue? and he ſhall haue it ſo.
               
               
                  Tyndar.
                  I ſawe my ſelfe the great prepared ſtore
                  Of Horſe, of Armours and of weapons there,
                  Ne brynge I to my Lorde reported tales
                  Without the ground of ſeene and ſerched trouthe
                  Loe ſecrete quarrelles ronne about his Courte
                  To bringe the name of you my Lorde in hate
                  Eche man almoſt can nowe debate the cauſe
                  And aſke a reaſon of ſo great a wronge,
                  While he ſo noble and ſo wiſe a Prince,
                  Is as vnworthie reſt his Heritage.
                  And whie the kinge miſlead by craftie meanes
                  Deuided thus his lande from courſe of right.
                  The wiſer ſorte holde downe their griefull heades
                  Eche man withdrawes from talke and companie,
                  Of thoſe that haue ben knowen to fauour you,
                  To hide the miſchiefe of their meaninge there.
                  Rumours are ſpred of your preparynge here.
                  The Raſcall nombres of the vnſkilfull ſorts
                  Are filled with monſterous tales of you and yours
                  In ſecrete I was counſailed by my friendes
                  To haſt me thence, and brought you as you know
                  Letters from thoſe, that both can truely tell
                  And would not write vnleſſe they knewe it well.
               
               
                  
                  Philander.
                  My Lorde, yet ere you nowe vnkindely warre,
                  Sende to your Brother to demaunde the cauſe.
                  Perhappes ſome trayterous tales haue filled his eares
                  wt falſe reports againſt your noble grace:
                  Which once diſcloſed ſhal ende the growing ſtrife
                  That els not ſtaied with wiſe foreſight in time
                  Shall hazarde both your kingdomes & your lyues:
                  Sende to your father eke, he ſhall appeale
                  Your kindled mindes, and rid you of this feare.
               
               
                  Porrex.
                  Ridde me of feare? I feare him not at all:
                  Ne will to him, ne to my father ſende
                  If daunger were for one to tarye there
                  Thinke ye it ſafely to retourne againe.
                  In miſchiefes ſuche as Ferrex nowe intendes
                  The wanted courteous Lawes to Meſſengeres
                  Are not obſerued, whiche in iuſt warre they vſe,
                  Shall I ſo hazarde any one of myne?
                  Shall I betraie my truſtie friende to hym?
                  That hath diſcloſed his treaſon vnto me?
                  Let him entreate that feares, I feare him not:
                  Or ſhall I to the kinge my father ſende?
                  Yea and ſende nowe while ſuche a mother lyues
                  That loues my Brother and that hateth mee?
                  Shall I geue leaſure by my fonde delayes
                  To Forrex to oppreſſe me at vnware?
                  I will not, but I will inuade his Realme
                  And ſeeke the Traitour Prince within his Court
                  Miſchiefe for miſchiefe is a due rewarde.
                  His wretched head ſhall paie the worthie pryce
                  
                     
Of this his Treaſon and his hate to me
                  Shall I abide, entreate and ſende and praie?
                  And holde my yelden throate to Traitours knife?
                  While I with valiaunt minde & conquering force
                  Might rid my ſelfe of foes: and winne a Realme,
                  Yet rather when I haue the wretches head,
                  Than to the king my father will I ſende,
                  The booteles caſe may yet appeaſe his wrath:
                  If not I will defend me as I maye.
               
               
                  Philander.
                  Loe here the ende of theſe two youthfull kings
                  The fathers deth, the reigne of their two realmes
                  O moſt vnhappy ſtate of Counſellours
                  That light on ſo vnhappy Lordes and times
                  That neither can their good aduiſe be harde,
                  Yet muſt thei beare the blames of yll ſucceſſe
                  But I will to the king their father haſte
                  Ere this miſchiefe come to that likely ende,
                  That if the mindefull wrath of wrekefull Gods
                  Since mightie Ilions fall not yet appeaſed
                  With theſe poore remnant of the Troians name
                  Haue not determinedlie vnmoued fate
                  Out of this Realme to raſe the Brutiſh Line
                  By good aduiſe, by awe of fathers name
                  By force of wiſer Lordes, this kindled hate
                  Maye yet be quentched, ere it conſume vs all.
               
               
                  Chorus.
                  
                     Whan youth not bridled with a guyding ſtaie fraie,
                     Is left to randon of their owne delight
                     And welds whole Realmes, by force of ſoueraigne
                     
                        
Great is the daunger of vnmaiſtred might
                     Leſt ſkilles rage throwe downe with headlong fal
                     Their lands, their ſtates, their liues, them ſelues & all.
                  
                  
                     When growing pride doth fil the ſwelling breſt
                     And gredy luſt doth raiſe the clymbynge minde
                     Oh hardlie maye the perill be repreſt,
                     Ne feare of angrie Goddes, ne Lawes kinde,
                     Ne Countrie care can fiered hartes reſtrayne
                     Whan force hath armed Enuie and diſdaine.
                  
                  
                     VVhan kinges of foreſet wyll neglecte the rede,
                     Of beſt aduiſe, and yelde to pleaſinge tales
                     That do their fanſies noyſome humour feede
                     He reaſon, nor regarde of right auailes
                     Succedinge heapes of plagues ſhall teache to late
                     To learne the miſchiefes of miſguydinge ſtate.
                  
                  
                     Fowle fall the Traitour falſe that vndermines
                     The loue of Brethrene to deſtroye them bothe
                     Wo to the Prince, that pliant eare enclynes,
                     And yeldes his minde to poyſonous tale, yt floweth
                     From flatterynge mouth, & wo to wretched lande
                     That waſts it ſelfe with ciuyll ſworde in hande.
                     Loe, thus it is poyſon in golde to take,
                     And holſome drinke in homely Cuppe forſake.
                  
               
            
         
         
            ¶The order and ſignification of the
dōme ſhewe before the thirde Act.
            ¶Firſte the Muſicke of Fluites began to plare,

during which came in vpon the Stage a companye
of Mourners all clad in blacke betokeninge
Death and ſorowe to enſue vpon the yll aduiſed
miſgouernement and diſcention of Bretherne,
as befel vpon the Murder of Ferrex by his yonger
Brother. After the Mourners had paſſed thryſe
about the ſtage, thei departed, and than the Muſicke
ceaſed.
         
         
            
               Actus tertius. Scena prima.
               Gorboduc. Eubulus. Arostus. Philander. Nuntius.
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  O Cruell fates, O mindfull wrath of Goddes▪
                  
                  whoſe vēgeaūice neither Simois ſtreined ſtreames.
                  Flowing wt blood of Troian Princes ſlaine
                  Nor Phrygian fieldes made rancke wt Corpſes dead
                  Of Aſian kynges and Lordes can yet appeaſe,
                  He ſlaughter of vnhappie Pryams race
                  Nor Ilions fall made leuell with the ſoile,
                  Can yet ſuffice: but ſtill continued rage,
                  Purſue our lyues, and from the fartheſt Seas
                  Doth chaſt the iſſues of diſtroyed Troye:
                  
                  Oh no man happie, tyll his ende be ſeene,
                  If any flowyng wealth and ſeemynge Ioye
                  In preſent yeresmight make a happy wight,
                  Happie was Hecuba the wofulleſt wretche
                  That euer lyued to make a Myrrour of
                  And happie Pryam with his noble ſonnes,
                  And happie I till nowe, Alas, I ſee
                  
                     
And feele my moſt vnhappie wretchednes:
                  Beholde my Lordes, reade ye this Letter here
                  Loe it conteines the ruyne of our Realme
                  If timelie ſpeede prouide not haſtle helpe
                  Yet (O ye Goddes) if euer wofull kynge
                  Might moue you kings of kinges, wreke it on me
                  And on my Sonnes, not on this gilties Realme.
                  Sende down your waſting flames from wrathful ſkies
                  To reue me & my ſōnes the hateful breath
                  Reade, reade my Lordes: this is the matter whie
                  I called ye nowe to haue your good aduyſe.
               
               
                  
                     ¶The Letter from Dordan the
Counſellour of the elder Prince.
                     
                        Eubulus readeth the Letter.
                     MY Soueraigne Lord, what I am loth to write
                     But lotheſt am to ſee, that I am forced
                     By Letters nowe to make you vnderſtande
                     My Lord Ferrex your eldeſt ſonne miſlead
                     By Traitours framde of yong vntempred wittes
                     Aſſembleth force againſt your yonger ſonne,
                     Ne can my Counſell yet withdrawe the heate
                     And furyous panges of his enflamed head:
                     Diſoaine (ſaieth he) of his inheritaunce
                     Armes him to wreke the great pretended wronge
                     With ciuyll ſword vpon his Brothers life,
                     If preſent helpe do not reſtraine this rage
                     This flame will waſt your ſōnes, your land & you.
                     
                        Your Maieſties faithfull and moſt
humble Subiecte Dordan.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Arestus.
                  O King, appeaſe your griefe & ſtaie your plaint
                  Great is the matter and a wofull caſe
                  But timely knowledge maye bringe timely help
                  Sende for thē both vnto your preſence here
                  The reuerence of your honour age and ſtate
                  Your graue aduiſe, the awe of fathers name
                  Shall quickelie knit againe this broken peece:
                  And if in either of my Lordes your ſonnes
                  Be ſuche vntamed and vnyelding pride
                  As will not bende vnto your noble Heſtes.
                  If Ferrex the elder ſonne can beare no peere.
                  Or Porrex not content, aſpires to more
                  Then you him gaue, aboue his Natiue right:
                  Ioyne with the iuſter ſide, ſo ſhall you force
                  Them to agree: and bolde the Lande in ſtate.
               
               
                  Eubulus.
                  What meaneth this? Loe yonder cōmes in haſt
                  
                     Philander from my Lord your younger ſonne.
               
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  The Goddes ſende ioyfull newes.
               
               
                  Philander.
                  The mightie Ioue
                  
                  Preſerue your Maieſtie, O noble kinge.
               
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  
                     Philander, welcome: But how doth my ſonne?
               
               
                  Philander.
                  Your ſonne, ſir, lyues and healthie I him left:
                  But yet (O kinge) this want of luſtfull health
                  Could not be half ſo griefefull to your Grace,
                  As theſe moſt wretched tidynges that I brynge.
               
               
                  
                  Gorboduc.
                  O heauens yet more? no ende of woes to 
                        〈◊〉
                     ?
               
               
                  Philander.
                  
                     Tyndar, O kyng, came lately from the Courte
                  Of Ferrex, to my Lorde your yonger ſonne,
                  And made reporte of great prepared ſtore
                  Of warre, and ſaith that it is whollic ment
                  Againſt Porrex for highe diſdaine that he
                  Lyues nowe a kynge and egall in degree
                  With him, that claimeth to ſuccede the whole.
                  As by due title of diſcedinge right
                  
                     Porrex is nowe ſo ſet on flamynge fire,
                  Partely with kindled rage of cruell wrathe,
                  Partely with hope to gaine a Realme therby,
                  That he in haſte prepareth to inuade
                  His Brothers Lande, and with vnkindely warre
                  Threatens the murder of your elder ſonne,
                  Ne coulde I him perſwade that firſt he ſhould
                  Sende to his Brother to demaunde the cauſe,
                  Nor yet to you to ſtaie his hatefull ſtrife.
                  Wherfore ſithe there no more I can be harde.
                  I come my ſelfe nowe to enforme your Grace:
                  And to beſeche you, as you loue the liefe
                  And ſafetie of your Children and your Realme.
                  Nowe to emploie your wiſdome and your force
                  To ſtaie this miſchiefe ere it be to late.
               
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  Are thei in Armes? would he not ſende for me▪
                  
                  Is this the honour of a Fathers name?
                  In vaine we trauaile to aſſwage their mindes
                  As if their hartes whome neither Brothers loue
                  
                     
Nor Fathers awe, nor kingdomes care can moue
                  Our Coūſels could withdrawe from ragyng heat
                  
                     Ioue ſlaye them both, and ende the curſed Lyne
                  For though perhappes feare of ſuch mightie force
                  As I my Lords, ioyned with your noble Aides
                  Maye yet raiſe, ſhall repreſſe their preſent heate,
                  The ſecrete grudge and malyce will remayne
                  The fire not quentched, but kept in cloſe reſtraint
                  Fead ſtil within, breakes forth with double flame
                  Their death and mine muſt peaze the angrie gods
               
               
                  Philander.
                  Yelde not, O king, ſo muche to weake diſpaier
                  Your ſonnes yet lyue, and long I truſt, they ſhall:
                  Yf fates had taken you from earthly life
                  Before begynning of this ciuyll ſtrife:
                  Perhaps your ſonnes in their vnmaiſtered youth,
                  Loſe from regarde of any lyuyng wight,
                  Wolde ronne on headlonge, with vnbridled Race
                  To their owne death and ruine of this Realme.
                  But ſith the God that haue the care for kinges,
                  Of thinges and times diſpoſe the order ſo
                  That in your life this kindled flame breakes forth
                  While yet your lyfe, your wiſdome & your power,
                  Maye ſtaie the growing miſchiefe, and repreſſe
                  The fierie blaze of their inkindled heate
                  It ſeemes, and ſo ye ought to deeme therof,
                  That louyng Ioue hath tempred ſo the time
                  Of this debate to happen in your daies
                  That you yet lyuynge maye the ſame appeaze.
                  And adde it to the glorie of your latter age
                  And they your ſonnes maye learne to liue in peace
                  
                     
Beware (O kynge) the greateſt harme of all,
                  Leſt by your wayleful plaints your haſtened death
                  Yelde larger roume vnto their growyng rage:
                  Preſerue your lyfe, the onely hope of ſtaie:
                  And if your highnes herein liſt to vſe
                  Wiſdome or force, Counſell or knightly aide:
                  Loe we our perſons, powers and lyues are yours.
                  Vſe vs tyll Death, O king, we are your owne.
               
               
                  Eubulus.
                  Loe here the perill that was erſt forſene
                  When you, (O king) did firſt deuide your Lande
                  And yelde your preſent raigne vnto your ſonnes.
                  But nowe (O noble Prince) nowe is no time
                  To wayle and plaine, and waſt your wofull lyfe,
                  Nowe is the time for preſent good aduiſe,
                  Sorowe doth darke the Iudgement of the wytte
                  The Hart vnbroken and the courage free
                  From feble faintnes of booteles diſpaier
                  Doth either ryſe to ſafetie or renowme
                  By noble valure of vnuanquiſſhed minde
                  Or yet doth periſhe in more happie ſorte
                  Your Grace maye ſende to either of your ſonnes
                  Some one both wiſe and noble perſonage,
                  Which with good counſel & with weightie name
                  Of father ſhall preſent before their eyes
                  Your heſt, your liefe, your ſafetie and their owne
                  The preſent miſchiefe of their deadlie ſtrife
                  And in the while, aſſemble you the force
                  Whiche your Cōmaundement and the ſpedie haſt
                  Of all my Lordes here preſent can prepare:
                  The terrour of your mightie power ſhall ſteye
                  
                     
The rage of bothe, or yet one at leſt.
               
               
                  Nuntius.
                  O King the greateſt griefe that euer Prince dyd here
                  The euer wofull Meſſenger did tell,
                  That euer wretched Lande hath ſene before
                  I brynge to you. Porrex your yonger ſonne
                  With ſoden force, inuaded hath the lande
                  That you to Ferrex did allotte to rule:
                  And with his owne moſt bloudie hande he hath
                  His Brother ſlaine, and doth poſſeſſe his Realme.
               
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  O Heauēs ſend down the flames of your reuenge,
                  Deſtroie I ſaie wt flaſſhe of wrekefull fier
                  The Traitour ſonne, and than the wretched ſire:
                  But let vs go, that yet perhappes I maye
                  Die with reuenge, and peaze the hatefull gods.
               
               
                  Chorus.
                  The luſt of kingdomes knowes no ſacred faithe
                  No rule of Reaſon, no regarde of right
                  No kindlie loue, no feare of heauens wrathe:
                  But with contempt of Goddes, and mans deſpite,
                  Through blodie ſlaughter doth prepare the waies
                  To fatall Scepter and accurſed reigne.
                  The ſonne ſo lothes the fathers lingerynge daies.
                  Ne dreades his hand in Brothers blode to ſtaine
                  O wretched Prince, ne doeſt thou yet recorde
                  The yet freſſhe Murthers done within the Lande
                  Of thie forefathers, when the cruell ſworde
                  Bereft Morgan his liefe with Coſyns hande?
                  Thus fatall plagues purſue the giltie race
                  Whoſe murderous hand imbrued wt giltles blood
                  
                     
Aſkes venge aunce before the heauens face,
                  With endles miſchiefes on the curſed broode.
                  The wicked childe this bringes to wofull Sier
                  The mournefull plaintes to waſt his wery life:
                  Thus do the cruell flames of Ciuyll fier
                  Deſtroye the parted reigne with hatefull ſtrife
                  And hence doth ſpring the well frō which doth ſlo:
                  The dead black ſtreames of mournings, plaints & woe.
               
            
         
         
            ¶The order and ſignification of the
dōme ſhewe before the fourth Acte.
            ¶Firſt the Muſick of Howeboies began to plaie.
duringe whiche there came forth from vnder the
Stage, as thoughe out of Hell three Furies. Alecto,
Megera & Cteſiphone clad in blacke garments
ſprinkled with bloud & flames, their bodies girt
with ſnakes, their heds ſpread with Serpents in
ſteade of heare, the one bearinge in her hande a
Snake, the other a whip, & the thirde a burning
Firebrande: eche driuynge before them a kynge
and a Queene, whiche moued by Furies vnnaturallye
bad ſlaine their owne Children. The
names of the kinges & Queenes were theſe. Tantalus,
Medea, Athamas, Ino, Cambiſes, Althea, after
that the Furies and theſe had paſſed aboute
the Stage thriſe, they departed & than the Muſicke
ceaſed: hereby was ſignified the vnnaturall
Murders to followe, that is to ſaie. Porrex ſlaine
by his owne Mother. And of king Gorboduc and
Queene Viden. killed by their owne Subiectes.
         
         
            
               
               Actus quartus. Scena prima.
               Videnſola.
               
                  Viden.
                  VVhy ſould I lyue and lynger forth my tune
                  In longer liefe to double my diſtreſſe?
                  O me moſt wofull wight whome no miſhap
                  Long ere this daie could haue bereued hence.
                  Mought not theſe handes by fortune or by fate,
                  Haue perſt this breſt and life with Iron reft,
                  Or in this Pallaice here where I ſo longe
                  Haue ſpent my daies, could not that happie houre▪
                  
                  Ones, ones haue hapt I which theſe hugie frames
                  With death by fall might haue oppreſſed me
                  Or ſhould not this moſt hard and cruell ſoile,
                  So eft where I haue preſt my wretched ſteps
                  Somtyme had ruthe of myne accurſed liefe,
                  To rende in twaine and ſwallowe me therin,
                  So had my bones poſſeſſed nowe in peace
                  Their happie graue within the cloſed grounde
                  And greadie wormes had gnawen this pyned hart
                  Without my feelyinge paine: So ſhulde not nowe
                  This lyuynge breſt remayne the ruthefull tombe
                  Wherin my hart yelden to death is graued:
                  Nor driery thoughts with panges of pining griefe
                  My dolefull minde had not afflicted thus,
                  O my beloued ſonne: O my ſwete childe,
                  My teare Ferrex, my Ioye, my lyues delyght.
                  Is my welbeloued ſonne, is my ſweete childe,
                  My deare Perrex, my Ioye, my lyues delight
                  
                     
Murdered with cruell death? O hatefull wretche,
                  O heynous Traytour bothe to heauen and earth,
                  Thou Porrex, thou this damned dede haſt wrought
                  Thou Porrex, thou ſhalt dearely abye the ſame,
                  Traitour to kinne and kinde, to Sire and me,
                  To thyne owne fleſſhe, and Traitour to thy ſelfe
                  The Gods on the in hell ſhall wreke their wrath,
                  And here in earth this hand ſhall take reuenge
                  On the Porrex, thou falſe and caytife wighte,
                  If after blode, ſo eigre were thy thirſt
                  And Murderous minde had ſo poſſeſſed thee,
                  If ſuche hard hart of Rocke and ſtonie Flint
                  Lyued in thy breſt, that nothing elles could like
                  Thy cruell Tyrantes thought but death & bloode
                  Wild ſauage beaſts mought not y• ſlaughter ſerue
                  To fede thy gredie will, and in the myddeſt
                  Of their entrailes to ſtaine thy deadlie handes
                  With blode deſerued, and drinke therof thy fyll:
                  Or if nought els but death and bloud of man
                  Mought pleaſe thy luſt, could none in Bryttain land
                  Whoſe hart be torne out of his louyng breſt
                  With thine owne hand, or work what death thou woldeſt
                  Suffice to make a Sacrifice to appeaze woldeſt
                  That deadlie minde & murderous thought in the?
                  But he who in the ſelf ſame wombe was wrapped
                  Where thou in diſmall hower receiuedſt life?
                  Or if nedes, nedes thi
                        •
                      hand muſt ſlaughter make
                  Moughiſt thou not haue reached a mortall wound
                  And wt thy ſworde haue perſed this curſed womb?
                  That the accurſed Porrex brought to lyght?
                  And geuen me a iuſt rewarde therfore.
                  
                     
So Ferrex, if ſwete life mought haue enioyed
                  And to his aged father comfort brought,
                  wt ſome yong ſonne in whom thei both might liue
                  But wherevnto waſt I this ruthefull ſpeche?
                  To the that haſt thy brothers bloud thus ſhed
                  Shall I ſtil think yt from this womb thou ſprong?
                  That I thee bare? or take thee for my ſonne?
                  No Traytour, no: I the refuſe for mine,
                  Murderer I thee renounce, thou art not mine:
                  Neuer, O wretche, this wombe conceued thee,
                  Nor neuer bode I painefull throwes for thee:
                  Changeling to me thou art, and not my childe
                  Nor to no wight, that ſparke of pytie knewe,
                  Rutheles, vnkind, Monſter of Natures worke.
                  Thou neuer ſuckte the milke of womans breaſte
                  But from thy birth the cruell Tigres teates
                  Haue nurſed, nor yet of fleſſhe and bloud
                  Formed is thy hart, but of hard Iron wrought.
                  And wilde and deſert woods breade thee to lyfe:
                  But canſt thou hope to ſcape my iuſt reuenge?
                  Or that theſe handes will not be wrooke on thee?
                  Doeſt thou not knowe that Ferrex mother lyues
                  That loued him more dearelie then her ſelfe?
                  And doth ſhe lyue, and is not venged on thee?
               
            
            
               Actus quartus. Scena ſecunda.
               Gorboduc. Arostus Eubulus. Porrex. Marccilla.
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  WE marueyle muche wherto this lingeryng ſtaie
                  
                     
Falles out ſo longe: Porrex vnto our Courte
                  By order of our Letters is retourned
                  And Eubulus receyued from vs by heſt
                  At his arriuale here to geue him charge
                  Before our preſence ſtreight to make repaire
                  And yet we haue no worde wherof he ſtaies.
               
               
                  Arostus
                  Loe where he cōmes and Eubulus with hym.
               
               
                  Eubulus.
                  Accordynge to your highnes heſt to me
                  Here haue I Porrex brought euen in ſuche ſort
                  As from his weried Horſe he did alighte,
                  For that your Grace did will ſuche haſte therein.
               
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  We like and praiſe this ſpedie wyll in you
                  To worke the thing that to your charge we gaue
                  
                     Porrex, if we ſo farre ſhulde ſwarue from kinde,
                  And frō theſe bounds which lawes of Nature ſets
                  As thou haſt done by vile and wretched deede
                  In cruell murder of thy Brothers life,
                  Our preſent hande coulde ſtaie no lenger tyme,
                  But ſtreight ſhould bathe this blade in bloud of the
                  As iuſt reuenge of thy deteſted cryme.
                  No. we ſhuld not offende the lawe of kinde,
                  If nowe this ſworde of ours did ſlaie thee here:
                  For thou haſt murdered him whoſe heinous death
                  Euen Natures force doth moue vs to reuenge
                  By bloud againe: But Iuſtice forceth vs
                  To meaſure Death for Death, thy due deſerte,
                  Yet ſithens thou art our childe, and ſithe as yet
                  In this harde caſe what worde thou canſt alledge
                  
                     
For thy defence, by vs hath not ben harde
                  We are content to ſtaie our wyll for that
                  Whiche Iuſtice biddes vs preſently to worke:
                  And geue the leaue to vſe thie ſpeache at full
                  If ought thou haue to laye for thine excuſe.
               
               
                  Porrex.
                  Neither O kyng, I can or wyll denie
                  But that this hande from Ferrex lyfe hath reft:
                  Which fact how much my doleful hart doth waile
                  Oh would it mought as full appeare to ſight
                  As inwarde griefe doth powre it forth to me,
                  So yet perhappes if euer ruthefull hart
                  Melting in teares within a manlie breaſt
                  Throughe depe repentaunce of his bloudie facte
                  If euer griefe, if euer wofull man
                  Might moue regreite with ſorowe of his fault,
                  I thinke the torment of my mournefull caſe
                  Knowen to your grace, as I do feele the ſame,
                  Woulde force euen wrath her ſelfe to pytie mee.
                  But as the water troubled with the mudde
                  Shewes not the face whiche els the eye ſhulde ſee,
                  Euen ſo your Irefull minde with ſtirred thought,
                  Can not ſo perfectly diſcerne my cauſe.
                  But this vnhappe, emongſt ſo many heapes
                  I muſt content me with, moſt wretched man,
                  That to my ſelfe I muſt referre my woe
                  In pynynge thoughts of myne accurſed facte:
                  Sithens I may not ſhewe here my ſmalleſt griefe
                  Suche as it is, and as my breaſt endures,
                  Whiche I eſteme the greateſt myſerie
                  Of all miſhappes that Fortune nowe can ſende.
                  
                     
Not that I reſt in hope with plaints and teares
                  Should purchaſe life: for to the Goddes I clepe
                  For true recorde of this my faithfull ſpeache,
                  Neuer this harte ſhall haue the thoughtfull dreade
                  To die the death that by your Graces dome
                  By iuſt deſarte, ſhalbe pronounced to mee:
                  Nor neuer ſhal this tongue ones ſpend this ſpeche
                  Pardon to craue, or ſeeke by ſute to lyue:
                  I meane not this as though I were not touchde
                  With care of dreadfull death, or that I helde
                  Lyfe in contempt: but that I knowe, the mynde
                  Stoupes to no dreade, although the fleſh be fraile,
                  And for my gilt, I yelde the ſame ſo great
                  As in my ſelfe I finde a feare to ſue
                  For graunte of lyfe.
               
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  In vayne, O wretche thou ſhewe
                        •
                     
                  
                  A wofull harte, Ferrex nowe lyes in graue,
                  Slaine by thy hande.
               
               
                  Porrex.
                  Yet this, O father, heare;
                  And than I ende: Your Maieſtie well knowes,
                  That whan my Brother Ferrex and my ſelfe
                  By your owne heſt were ioyned in gouernaunce
                  Of this your Graces Realme of Brittayne Lande
                  I neuer ſought nor trauaylled for the ſame,
                  Nor by my ſelfe, or by no ſcende I wrought▪
                  
                  But from your highnes will alone it ſpronge,
                  Of your moſt gracious goodnes bent to me,
                  But howe my Brothers hart euen than re
                        •
                     med
                  With ſwollen diſdaine againſt mine egali rule
                  
                     
Seing that Realme, which by diſcent ſhuld grow
                  Whollie to him, allotted halfe to me?
                  Euen in your highnes Court he nowe remaynes,
                  And with my Brother than in neareſt place
                  Who can recorde, what proofe therof was ſhewde
                  And how my brothers enuious hart appearde
                  Yet I that iudged it my parte to ſeeke
                  His fauour and good will, and lothe to make
                  Your highnes knowe, the thing which ſhuld haue brought
                  Grief to your grace, & your offēce to him
                  Hopyng by earneſt ſuite ſhuld ſoone haue wonne
                  A louynge hart within a Brothers breſt
                  Wrought in that ſorte that for a pleadge of loue
                  And faithfull hart, he gaue to me his hande.
                  This made me thinke, that he had baniſſhed quite
                  All rancour from his thought and bare to me
                  Suche hartie loue, as I did owe to him:
                  But after once we left your Graces Court
                  And from your highnes preſence liued aparte
                  This egall rule ſtill, ſtill did grudge him ſo
                  That nowe thoſe Enuious ſparkes which erſt lay raked
                  In lyuing cinders of diſſemblynge breſt,
                  Kindled ſo farre within his hates diſdaine
                  That longer could he not refraine from proofe
                  Of ſecrete practiſe to depriue me life
                  By Poyſons force, and had bereft me ſo.
                  If myne owne Seruaunt hired to this fact
                  And moued by trouthe wt hate to worke the ſame,
                  In time had not bewraied it vnto mee:
                  Whan thus I ſawe the knot of loue vnknitte
                  All honeſt League and faithfull promiſe broke
                  
                     
The Lawe of kind and trothe thus rent in twaine
                  His hart on miſchiefe ſet, and in his breſt
                  Blacke treaſon hid then, then did I diſpaier
                  That euer tyme coulde wynne him frende to me
                  Than ſawe I howe he ſmyled with ſlaying knife
                  Wrapped vnder cloke, then ſawe I depe deceite
                  Lurke in his face and death prepared for mee:
                  Euen nature moued me than to holde my lyfe
                  More deare to me than his, and bad this hande
                  Since by his lyfe my death muſt nedes enſue,
                  And by his death my lyfe to be preſerued:
                  To ſhed his bloud, and ſeeke my ſafetie ſo.
                  And wiſdome willed me without protracte
                  In ſpedie wiſe to put the ſame in vre.
                  Thus haue I tolde the cauſe that moued me
                  To worke my Brothers death and ſo I yelde
                  My lyfe, my death to iudgement of your grace.
               
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  Oh cruell wight, ſhulde any cauſe preuaile
                  To make the ſtaine thy hands with brothers blod
                  But what of thee we will reſolue to doe
                  Shal yet remaine vnknowen: Thou in the meane
                  Shalt from our royall preſence banyſhed be
                  Vntill our Princely pleaſure furder ſhall
                  To the be ſhewed, departe therfore our ſight
                  Accurſed childe. What cruell deſtenie
                  What frowarde fate hath ſorted vs this chaunce
                  That euen in thoſe, where we ſhuld comfort find
                  Where our delight nowe in our aged daies
                  Shulde reſt and be, euen there our onelie griefe
                  And depeſt ſorrowes to abridge our liefe,
                  
                     
Moſt pynyng cares and deadlie thoughts do graue yours
               
               
                  Arostus.
                  Your Grace ſhuld now in theſe graue yeres of
                  Haue founde ere this the price of mortall Ioyes,
                  Howe ſhorte they be, howe fadyng heare in earth
                  Howe full of chaunge, howe Brittle our eſtate,
                  Of nothynge ſure, ſaue onely of the Death,
                  To whome both man and all the worlde doth owe
                  Their ende at laſt, neither ſhall natures power
                  In other ſorte againſt your harte preuayle,
                  Than as the naked hande whoſe ſtroke aſſayes
                  The Armed breaſt where force doth light in vaine
               
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  Many can yelde right graue and ſage aduiſe
                  Of pacient ſprite to others wrapped in woe,
                  And can in ſpeache both rule and conquere kinde,
                  Who if by proofe, they might feele natures force,
                  Wold ſhewe them ſelues men as thei are in dede,
                  which now wil nedes be gods: but what doth meane
                  The ſory chere of her that here doth come?
               
               
                  Marcella.
                  Oh where is ruthe? or where is pytie nowe?
                  Whether is gentle harte and mercie fled?
                  Are they exiled out of our ſtony breaſts
                  Neuer to make retourne? is all the worlde
                  Drowned in bloode, and ſoncke in crueltie?
                  If not in women mercie maye be founde
                  If not (alas) within the mothers breſt
                  To her owne childe, to her owne fleſſhe and blood
                  If ruthe be baniſſhed thence, if pytie there
                  Maye haue no place, if there no gentle harte
                  
                     
Do lyue and dwell, where ſhuld we ſeeke it than?
               
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  Madame (alas) what meanes your woful tale?
               
               
                  Marcella.
                  O ſillie woman I, why to this howre,
                  Haue kinde and fortune thus deferred my breathe
                  That I ſhuld lyue to ſee this dolefull daye
                  Will euer wight beleue that ſuche harde harte
                  Coulde reſt within the cruell mothers breaſte,
                  With her owne hande to ſlaye her onely ſonne?
                  But out (alas) theſe eyes behelde the ſame,
                  They ſawe the driery ſight, and are become
                  Moſt ruthfull recordes of the bloodie facte.
                  
                     Porrex, (alas) is by his mother ſlayne,
                  And with her hand a wofull thynge to tell,
                  While ſlomberinge on his carefull bed he reſtes
                  His hart ſtalde in with kniefe is reft of life.
               
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  O Eubulus, oh drawe this ſworde of ours,
                  And perce this hart with ſpeede, O hatefull light,
                  O lothſome liefe, O ſweete and welcome Death,
                  Dere Eubulus worke this we thee beſeche.
               
               
                  Eubulus.
                  Patient your Grace, perhappes he liueth yet.
                  With wounde receued, but not of certayne death.
               
               
                  Gorboduc.
                  O let vs than repaier, vnto the place,
                  And ſee if that Porrex, or thus be ſlame.
               
               
                  Marcella.
                  Alas he liueth not, it is to true,
                  That with theſe eies of him a pereles Prince,
                  
                     
Sonne to a King, and in the flower of youth,
                  Euen with a twinke a cenſeles ſtocke I ſawe.
               
               
                  Arostus
                  O dampned deed.
               
               
                  Marcella.
                  But heare this ruthefull ende.
                  The noble Prince perſt with the ſodeine wounde
                  Out of his wretched ſlombre haſtelie ſtarte
                  Whole ſtrēgth now failyng ſtreight he ouerthrew
                  When in the fall his eyes euen newe vncloſed
                  Behelde the Quene and cryed to her for helpe
                  We then, alas, the Ladies whiche that tyme
                  Did there attende, ſeynge that heynous deede
                  And hearing him oft call the wretched name
                  Of mother, and to crie to her for Aide
                  Whoſe direfull hand gaue him the mortal wound
                  Pitieng, (alas, for nought els could we do)
                  His ruthefull ende, ranne to the wofull bedde
                  Diſpoyled ſtreight his breſt, and all we might
                  wyped in vaine with napkyns next at hande,
                  The ſodeine ſtreames of blood that fluſſhed faſt
                  Out of the gaping wounde: O what a looke,
                  O what a ruthefull ſtedfaſt eye me thought
                  He fixed vpon my face, whiche to my deathe
                  Will neuer parte fro me, when with a braide
                  Adeepe ſet ſigne he gaue and therewith all
                  Claſpinge his handes, to heauen he caſt his ſight▪
                  
                  And ſtreight pale death preſſyng within his face
                  The flyinge ghoſte his mortall corps forſooke.
               
               
                  Arostus.
                  Neuer did age bring forth ſo vile a facte.
               
               
                  
                  Marcella.
                  O harde and cruell happe, that thus aſſigned
                  Vnto ſo worthie a wighte ſo wretched ende
                  But moſt harde cruell harte, that coulde conſent
                  To lende the hatefnll deſtenies that hande
                  By whiche, alas, ſo heynous cryme was wrought,
                  O Queene of Adamante, O Marble breaſte
                  If not the fauour of his comelie face,
                  If not his Princelie chere and counten
                        •
                     unce,
                  His valiant Actiue Armes, his manlie breaſte.
                  If not his faier and ſemelie perſonage
                  His noble Lymmes in ſuche preparacion caſte
                  As would haue wrapped a ſillie womans thought
                  If this mought not haue moued the bloodie harte
                  And that moſt cruell hande the wretched weapon
                  Euen to let fall, and kiſte him in the face,
                  With teares for ruthe to reaue ſuche one by death
                  Should nature yet conſent to ſlaye her ſonne
                  O mother, thou to murder thus thie childe
                  Euen Ioue with Iuſtice muſt wt lightening flames
                  From heauen ſend down ſome ſtrange reuenge on thee.
                  Ah noble Prince, how oft haue I beheld
                  Thee mounted on thy fierce and traumpling ſtede
                  Shyning in Armour bright before the Tylte
                  And with thy Miſtreſſe Sleaue tied on thy Helme
                  And charge thy ſtaffe to pleaſe thy Ladies eie
                  That howed the head peece of thy frendly foe,
                  Howe oft in Armes on horſe to bende the Mace
                  Howe oft in Armes on foote to breake the ſworde,
                  Whiche neuer nowe theſe eyes men 
                        〈◊〉
                      againe.
               
               
                  
                  Arostus.
                  Madame, alas, in vaine theſe plaints are ſhed.
                  Rather with me departe and helpe to aſſwage,
                  The thoughtfull griefes that in the aged kings
                  Muſt nedes by nature growe by death of this
                  His onelie ſonne, whome he did holde ſo deare.
               
               
                  Marcella.
                  What wight is that whiche ſawe that I did ſee
                  And could refraine to waile with plainte & teares
                  Not I, alas, that harte is not in me,
                  But let vs goe, for I am greued anewe,
                  To call to minde the wretched fathers woe.
               
               
                  Chorus.
                  
                     Whan gredie luſt in Royall ſeate to reigne
                     Hath reft all care of goddes and eke of men,
                     And cruell hart, wrathe, Treaſon and diſdaine
                     Within the ambicious breaſt are lodged then
                     Beholde howe miſchiefe wide her ſelfe diſplaies
                     And with the brothers hande the brother ſlaies.
                     When blood thus ſhed, doth ſtaine this heauens face
                     Crying to Ioue for vengeaunce of the deede,
                     The mightie God euen moueth from his place
                     With wrathe to wreke, then ſendes he forth with ſpede
                     The dreadful furies, daughters of ye night
                     With Serpents girt, carying the whip of Ire,
                     With heare of ſtinging ſnakes and ſhining bright
                     With flames and blood, and with a brande of fire:
                     Theſe for reuenge of wretched Murder done
                     Do make the Mother kill her onelie ſonne.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Blood aſketh blood, & death muſt death requite
                  
                     Ioue by his iuſt and euerlaſting dome
                  Iuſtly hath euer ſo requited it
                  Theſe times before recorde, and tymes to come,
                  Shall finde it true, and ſo doth preſent proofe,
                  Preſent before our eies for our behoofe.
               
               
                  O happie wight that ſuffres not the ſnare
                  Of murderous minde to tangle him in bloode▪
                  
                  And happie he that can in time beware
                  By others harmes and tourne it to his goode
                  But wo to him that fearing not to offende
                  Doth ſerue his luſt, and will not ſee the ende.
               
            
         
         
            ¶The order and ſignification of the
dōme ſhewe before the fifthe Acte.
            ¶Firſte the Drommes and Fluites, beganne to
ſounde, durynge whiche there came foorth vpon
the Stage a companie of Hargabuſiers and of
Armed men all in order of Battaile. Theſe
after their Peeces diſcharged, and that the Armed
men had three tymes marched aboute the
Stage, departed, and then the Drommes and
Fluits did ceaſe. Hereby was ſignified tumults,
rebellions, Armes and ciuyll warres to folowe▪ as
fel in the Realme of great Brittayne, which by
the ſpace of fiftie yeares and more continued in
ciuyll warre betwene the Nobylytie after the
death of king Gorboduc, & of his Iſſues, for wante
            
               
of certayne lymitacion in the Succeſſion of the
            Crowne, till the time of Dunwalle Molmutius,
            
            who reduced the Lande to Monarche.
         
         
            
               Actus quintus. Scena prima.
               Clotyn. Mandud. Gwenard. Fergus. Eubulus.
               
                  Clotyn.
                  DId euer age bring forth ſuch Tirants hartes
                  The Brother hath bereft the Brothers lyfe,
                  The Mother ſhe hath died her cruell handes
                  In bloud of her owne ſonne, and nowe at laſt
                  The people loe forgettyng trouthe and loue,
                  Contemnynge quite both Lawe and loyall harte
                  Euen they haue ſlayne their ſoueraigne Lord and Quene.
               
               
                  Mandud.
                  Shall this their trayterous crime vnpuniſhed reſt
                  Euen yet they ceaſe not, caryed out with rage,
                  In their rebellious routes, to threaten ſtil
                  A newe bloode ſhedde vnto the Princes kinne
                  To ſlaie them all, and to vproote the race
                  Both of the kyng and Queene, ſo are they moued
                  With Porrex deathe, wherin they falſely charge
                  The giltles kinge without deſarte at all
                  And traiterouſlie haue murdered him therfore,
                  And eke the Queene.
               
               
                  Gwenard.
                  Shall Subiectes dare with force
                  To worke reuenge vpon their Princes facte?
                  Admyt the worſt that maye: as ſure in this
                  
                     
The dede was fowle, the Quene to ſlaie her ſonne
                  Shall yet the Subiecte ſeeke to take the ſworde?
                  Ariſe agaynſt his Lorde, and ſlaie his kynge?
                  O wretched ſtate, where thoſe rebellious hartes
                  Are not rent out euen from their lyuynge breaſts
                  And with the bodie throwen vnto the Fowles
                  As Carrion foode, for terrour of the reſt.
               
               
                  Fergus.
                  There can no puniſſhement be thought to greate
                  For this ſo greuous cryme: let ſpede therfore
                  Be vſed therin for it behoueth ſo.
               
               
                  Eubulus.
                  Ye all my Lordes I ſee conſent in one
                  And I as one conſent with ye in all:
                  I holde it more than nede with the ſharpeſt Lawe
                  To puniſſhe the tumultuous bloodie rage
                  For nothynge more maye ſhake the cōmen ſtate
                  Than ſufferaunce of Vproares without redreſſe
                  Wherby how ſome kingdomes of mightie power
                  After great Conqueſtes made, and flooriſhing
                  In fame and wealth haue ben to ruyne brought
                  I praie to Ioue that we may rather wayle
                  Suche happe in them than witnes in our ſelues
                  Eke fullie with the Duke my minde agrees
                  That no cauſe ſerues, wherby the Subiect maye
                  Call to accompt the doynges of his Prince.
                  Muche leſſe in bloode by ſworde to worke reuenge
                  No more then maye the hande cut of the heade,
                  In Acte nor ſpeache, no: not in ſecrete thoughte
                  The Subiect maye rebell againſt his Lorde
                  Or Iudge of him that ſittes in Ceaſars Seate.
                  
                     
With grudging mind do damne thoſe Hemiſlikes
                  Though kinges forget to gouerne as they ought,
                  Yet Subiectes muſt obey as they are bounde:
                  But nowe my Lordes before ye farder wade
                  Or ſpend your ſpeach, what ſharp reuenge ſhal fal
                  By iuſtice plague on theſe rebellious wights
                  Me thinkes ye rather ſhould firſt ſearche the waye
                  By whiche in time the rage of this vproare
                  Mought be repreſſed, & theſe great tumults ceaſed
                  Euen yet the life of Brittayne Lande doth hange.
                  In Traitours Balaunce of vnegall weight
                  Thinke not my Lords the death of Gorboduc
                  
                  Nor yet Videnaes bloode will ceaſe their rage:
                  Euen our owne lyues, our wiues and children,
                  Our Countrey deareſt of all in daunger ſtandes,
                  Nowe to be ſpoiled, nowe, nowe made deſolate,
                  And by our ſelues a conqueſt too enſue:
                  For geue ones ſweye vnto the peoples luſts,
                  To ruſſhe forth on, and ſtaye them not in time,
                  And as the ſtreame that rowleth downe the hyll,
                  So wil thei headlong ronne wt raging thoughtes
                  From bloode to bloode, from miſchiefe vnto moe,
                  To ruyne of the Realme, them ſelues and all
                  So giddle are the cōmon peoples mindes,
                  So glad of chaunge, more waueryng than the Sea
                  Ye ſee (my Lordes) what ſtrength theſe Rebelles haue,
                  What hugie nombre is aſſembled ſtill,
                  For though the traiterous fact, for which their roſe
                  Be wrought and done, yet lodge thei ſtill in fielde
                  So that howe farre their furies yet wyll ſtretche
                  Great cauſe we haue to dreade, that we may ſeeke
                  By preſent Battaile to repreſſe their power.
                  
                     
Speede muſt we vſe to leuie force therfore,
                  For either they forthwith will miſchiefe worke
                  Or their rebellious roares forthwith will ceaſe:
                  Theſe violent thinges may haue no laſting loude
                  Let vs therfore vſe this for preſent helpe
                  Perſwade by gentle ſpeache, and offre grace
                  With gifte of pardon ſaue vnto the chiefe,
                  And that vpon condicion that forthewith
                  They yelde the Captaines of their enterpryſe
                  To beare ſuche querdon of their traiterous facte
                  As may be both due vengeaunce to them ſelues,
                  And holſome terrour to poſteritie.
                  This ſhall I thinke: flatter the greateſt parte
                  That nowe are holden with deſire of home,
                  Weried in fielde with could of Winters nightes,
                  And ſome (no doubt) ſtriken with dread of Lawe
                  Whan this is ones proclaymed, it ſhall make
                  The Captaines to miſtruſte the multitude
                  Whoſe ſafetie biddes them to betraye their heads
                  And ſo muche more bycauſe the raſcall routes,
                  In thinges of great and perillous attemptes,
                  Are neuer truſtie to the noble race.
                  And while we treate & ſcande on termes of grace,
                  We ſhal both ſtaie their furies rage the while,
                  And eke gaine time, whoſe onely helpe ſufficeth
                  Withouten warre to vanquiſſhe Rebelles power
                  In the meane while, make you in redynes
                  Suche bande of Horſemen as ye maye prepare:
                  Horſemen (you know) are not the Comons ſtrēgth
                  But are the force and ſtore of noble men
                  Wherby the vnchoſen and vnarmed ſorte
                  
                     
Of ſk
                        •••
                     ſhe Rebelles, whome none other power
                  But nombre makes to be of dreadfull force
                  With ſodeyne brunt maye quickely be oppreſte
                  And if this gentle meane of proffered grace
                  With ſtubborne hartes cannot ſo farre auayle
                  As to aſſwage their deſperate courages.
                  Than do I wiſſhe ſuche ſlaughter to be made,
                  As preſent age and eke poſteritie
                  Maye be adrad with horrour of reuenge,
                  That iuſtly than ſhall on theſe rebelles fall:
                  This is my Lordes the ſōme of mine aduiſe.
               
               
                  Clotyn.
                  Neyther this caſe admittes debate at large,
                  And though it did: this ſpeache that hath ben ſaide
                  Hath wel abridged the tale I would haue tolde:
                  Fullie with Eubulus do I conſente
                  In all that he hath ſaide: and if the ſame
                  To you my Lordes, may ſeeme for beſt aduiſe,
                  I wiſſhe that it ſhoulde ſtreight be put in vre.
               
               
                  Mandud.
                  My Lordes than let vs preſentlie departe
                  And folowe this that lyketh vs ſo well.
               
               
                  Fergus.
                  If euer time to gaine a kingdome here
                  Were offred man, nowe it is offred mee:
                  The Realme is reft bothe of their kyng & Quene
                  The ofſpringe of the Prince is ſlaine and dead
                  No iſſue nowe remaines, the Heire vnknowen,
                  The people are in Armes and mutynies
                  The Nobles thei are buſied howe to ceaſe
                  Theſe great rebellious tumultes and vproars
                  
                     
And Brittayne Lande nowe deſerte left alone
                  Amyd theſe broyles vncertaine where to reſt
                  Offers her ſelfe vnto that noble harte
                  That wyll or dare purſue to beare her Crowne:
                  Shall I that am the Duke of Albanye
                  
                  Diſcended from that Lyne of noble bloode.
                  Whiche hath ſo longe flooriſſhed in worthie fame
                  Of valiaunt hartes, ſuche as in noble Breaſts
                  Of right ſhulde reſt aboue the baſer ſorte,
                  Refuſe to aduenture liefe to winne a Crowne,
                  Whome ſhall I finde enemies that will wtſtande
                  My facte herein, if I attempte by Armes
                  To ſeeke the Fame nowe in theſe times of broyle
                  Theſe Dukes power can hardlie well appeaſe
                  The people that alredie are in Armes.
                  But if perhappes my force be ones in fielde
                  Is not my ſtrength in power aboue the beſt
                  Of all theſe Lordes nowe left in Brittaine Lande.
                  And though they ſhuld match me wt power of men
                  Yet doubtfull is the chaunce of Battailles ioyned
                  If Victors of the fielde we may departe,
                  Ours is the Scepter than of great Brittayne,
                  
                  If ſlayne amid the playne this body be
                  Mine enemies yet ſhall not deny me this,
                  But that I died gyuynge the noble charge
                  To hazarde life for conqueſt of a Crowne.
                  Forthwith therfore will I in poſte depart
                  To Albanye and raiſe in Armour there
                  All power I can: and here my ſecrete friendes,
                  By ſecrete practiſe ſhall ſollicite ſtill,
                  To ſeeke to wynne to me the peoples hartes.
               
            
            
               
               Actus quintus. Scena ſecunda.
               Eubulus. Clotyn. Mandud. Gwenard. Arostus Nuntius.
               
                  Eubulus.
                  
                     O Ioue, Howe are theſe peoples hartes abuſde
                  what blind Furie, thus headlong caries thē?
                  That though ſo many bokes, ſo many rolles
                  Of Auncient time recorde what greuous plagues,
                  Light on theſe Rebelles aye and thoughe ſo ofte
                  Their eares haue hard their aged fathers tell
                  What iuſt rewarde theſe Traitours ſtill receyue.
                  Yea though them ſelues haue ſene depe death and blod
                  By ſtrangling cord & ſlaughter of the ſword
                  To ſuche aſſigned, yet can they not beware:
                  Yet can they not ſtaie their rebellious handes,
                  But ſuffring to fowle treaſon to diſtaine
                  Their wretched myndes, forget their loyall harte,
                  Reiecte all trueth and riſe againſt their Prince,
                  A ruthefull caſe that thoſe, whome duties bounde
                  Whome grafted Lawe by nature trueth and faith
                  Bounde to preſerue their Coūtrey and their king
                  Borne to defende their Cōmon wealth & Prince,
                  Euen they ſhulde geue conſent thus to ſubuerte
                  The Brittaine Land, & from the wombeſhuld bring
                  (O natyue ſoile) thoſe, that will nedes deſtroye
                  And ruyne thee and eke them ſelues in fine:
                  For lo, when ones the Duke had offred Grace
                  Of pardon ſweete (the multitude miſlead
                  By traiterous fraude of their vngracious heades)
                  One ſorte that ſawe the daungerous ſucceſſe
                  
                     
Of ſtubborne ſtandynge in rebellious warre
                  And knewe the difference of Princes power
                  From headles nombre of tumultuous routes,
                  Whom cōmen Countreies care and priuate feare
                  Taught to repent the terrour of their rage
                  Laide handes vpon the Capatines of their bande,
                  And brought them bound vnto the mightie Dukes
                  An other ſorte not truſting yet ſo well
                  The trueth of Pardon or miſtruſting more
                  Their owne offence than that thei could conceiue
                  Suche hope of pardon for ſo foule miſdede:
                  Or for that they their Captaines could not yeld
                  Who fearinge to be yelded, flead before,
                  Stale home by ſcilence of the ſecrete night,
                  The thirde vnhappie and vnraged ſorte
                  Of deſperate harts, who ſtained in Princes blood
                  From trayterous furour could not be withdrawen
                  By loue, by lawe, by grace, ne yet by feare,
                  By proffered lyfe, ne yet by threatened Death,
                  With mindes hopeles of liefe, dreadles of Deathe,
                  Careles of Countrey, and aweles of God:
                  Stoode bente to fighte as Furies did them moue
                  With violent death to cloſe their traiterous lyfe:
                  Theſe all by power of Horſemen were oppreſt
                  And with reuenging ſworde ſlayne in the fielde,
                  Or with the ſtrangling Cord hanged on the trees
                  Where yet the carryen Carcaſes do proche
                  The fruites that Rebelles reape of their vproars,
                  And of the murder of their ſacred Prince,
                  But loe, where do approche the noble Dukes,
                  By whom theſe tumults haue ben thus appeaſde.
               
               
                  
                  Clotyn.
                  I thinke the worlde wyll now at length beware▪
                  
                  And feare to put on armes agaynſt their Prince.
               
               
                  Mandud.
                  If not: thoſe trayterous hartes that dare rebell
                  Let them beholde the wide and hugie fieldes
                  With bloode & bodie ſpread with rebelles ſlayne,
                  The luſtie trees clothed with corpſes dead
                  That ſtrangled with the corde do hange therin.
               
               
                  Arostus.
                  A iuſt rewarde ſuche as all tymes before
                  Haue euer lotted to thoſe wretched folkes.
               
               
                  Gwenard.
                  But what meanes he that cōmeth here ſo faſt.
               
               
                  Nuntius.
                  My Lords, as duetie and my trouth doth moue
                  And of my Countrey worke and care in mee
                  That if the ſpendynge of my breath auaile
                  To do the Seruice that my harte deſires,
                  I would not ſhunne to imbrace a preſent death,
                  So haue I nowe in that wherein I thought
                  My trauayle mought perfourme ſome good effect
                        •
                     
                  
                  Ventred my liefe to bringe theſe tydinges here.
                  
                     Fergus the mightie Duke of Albanye
                  
                  Is nowe in Armes and lodgeth in the fielde
                  With twentie thouſand men, hether he bendes
                  His ſpedie marcke, & minds to inuade the Crowne
                  Dayly he gathereth ſtrength and ſpreads abrode
                  That to this Realme no certeine Heire remaines,
                  That Brittayne Lande is left without a guyde,
                  That he the Scepter ſeekes, for nothing els
                  
                     
But to preſerue the people and the Lande
                  Whiche now remaine as ſhip without a Sterne
                  Loe this is that whiche I haue hereto ſaide.
               
               
                  Clotyn.
                  Is this his fayth? and ſhall he falſely thus
                  Abuſe the vauntage of vnhappie times?
                  O wretched Lande, if his outragious pride,
                  His cruell and vntempred wilfulnes
                  His deepe diſſemblinge ſhewes of falſe pretence
                  Should once attaine the Crowne of Brittayn lande
                  Let vs my Lords, with tymely force reſiſt
                  The newe attempt of this our cōmon foe
                  As we would quenche the flames of cōmen fire.
               
               
                  Mandud.
                  Though we remaine without a certayn Prince
                  To weld the Realme or guide the wandring rule
                  Yet nowe the cōmen Mother of vs all,
                  Our Natiue Lande, our Countrey that conteines
                  Our wiues, children, kyndred, our ſelues and all
                  That euer is or maye be deare to man
                  Cries vnto vs to helpe our ſelues and her:
                  Let vs aduaunce our powers to repreſſe
                  This growynge foe of all our liberties.
               
               
                  Gwenard.
                  Yea let vs ſo my Lordes with haſtie ſpede,
                  And ye (O Goddes) ſende vs the welcome death,
                  To ſhed our bloode in fielde and leaue vs not,
                  In lothe ſome life to lenger out our lyues
                  To ſee the hugie heapes of theſe vnhappes,
                  That nowe roll downe vpon the wretched Lande
                  Where emptie place of Princelie gouernaunce
                  
                     
No certayne ſtaie nowe left of doubtles heire,
                  Thus leaue this guideleſſe Realme an open pray,
                  To endleſſe ſtormes and waſt of ciuyll warre.
               
               
                  Arostus.
                  That ye (my Lordes) do ſo agree in one
                  To ſaue your Countrey from the violent reigne
                  And wrongfullie vſurped Tirrannie
                  O
                        •
                      him that threatens conqueſt of you all
                  To ſaue your realme, & in this realme your ſelues
                  From forreyne thraldome of ſo proude a Prince,
                  Muche do I praiſe, and I beſeche the Goddes,
                  With happie honour to requite it you.
                  But (O my Lords) ſithe now the Heauens wrath
                  Hath reft this Lande the iſſue of their Prince:
                  Sithe of the body of our late Soueraine Lorde
                  Remaines no mo, ſince the yong kinges be ſlaine
                  And of the Title of the diſcended Crowne,
                  Vncerteynly the diuerſe mindes do thinke
                  Euen of the Learned ſorte, and more vncertainlye
                  Will perciall fancie and affection deeme:
                  But moſt vncertenlye wyll clymbynge pride
                  And hope of Reigne withdrawe frō ſondrie partes
                  The doubtfull right and hopefull luſt to reigne.
                  When ones this noble ſeruice is atchieued
                  For Brittayne Lande the Mother of ye all,
                  When ones ye haue with armed force repreſt,
                  The proude attemptes of this Albanyan Prince,
                  That threatens thraldome to your Natiue Lande,
                  When ye ſhall vanquiſhers retourne from fielde
                  And finde the Princely ſtate an open praye.
                  To gredie luſt and to vſurping power,
                  
                     
Then, then (my Lordes) if euer kindely care
                  Of auncient Honour of your aunceſtoures,
                  Of preſent wealth and nobleſſe of your ſtockes:
                  Yea of the lyues and ſafetie yet to come
                  Of your deare wyues, your children & your ſelues,
                  Might moue your noble hactes with gentle ruthe,
                  Then, then haue pytie on the torne eſtate,
                  Then helpe to ſalue the well neare hopeles ſore
                  Whiche ye ſhall do, if ye your ſelues with holde
                  The ſleayng knife from your own mothers throte
                  Her ſhall you ſaue, and you, and yours in her
                  If ye ſhall all with one aſſent forbeare
                  Ones to laye hande or take vnto your ſelues
                  The Crowne by colour of 
                        •••
                     tended right,
                  Or by what other meanes ſo euer it be
                  Tyll firſt by cōmen counſell of you all
                  In Parliament the Regall Diademe
                  Be ſet in certayne place of gouernaunce,
                  In whiche your Parliament and in your choiſe,
                  Preſerve the right (my Lordes,) without reſpecte
                  Of ſtrenght of frendes, or what ſo euer cauſe
                  That maye ſet forwarde any others parte,
                  For right will laſt, and wrong can not endure,
                  Right meane I his or hers, vpon whoſe name
                  The people reſt by meane of Native lyne,
                  Or by the vertue of ſome former Lawe,
                  Alreadie made their title to aduaunce:
                  Suche one (my Lordes) let be your choſen kynge
                  Suche one ſo borne within your Natyue Lande
                  Suche one preferre, and in no wiſe adinitte.
                  The heauie yoke of forreine gouernaunce,
                  
                     
Let forreine Titles yelde to Publike wealthe,
                  And with that hart wherewith ye nowe prepare
                  Thus to withſtande the proude inuadynge foe,
                  With that ſame harte (my Lordes) kepe out alſo
                  Vnnaturall thraldome of ſtraungers reigne,
                  Ne ſuffre you againſt the rules of kinde
                  Your Mother Lande to ſerue a Forreine Prince.
               
               
                  Eubulus.
                  ¶Loe here the ende of Brutus royall Lyne,
                  And loe the entrie to the wofull wracke
                  And vtter ruyne of this noble Realme.
                  The royall kinge, and eke his ſonnes are ſlaine,
                  No Ruler reſtes within the Regall Seate:
                  The Heire, to whō the Scepter longs, vnknowen
                  That to eche force of Forreine Princes power
                  Whome vauntage of your wretched ſtate
                  By ſodaine Armes to gaine ſo riche a Realme
                  And to the proude and gredie minde at home
                  Whom blinded luſt to reigne leades to aſpire.
                  Loe Brittaiue Realme is left an open praye,
                  A preſent ſpoile by Conqueſt to enſue,
                  Who ſeeth not nowe howe many riſyng mindes
                  Do feede their thoughts, wt hope to reach a Realm
                  And who will not by force attempt to winne
                  So great a gaine that hope perſwades to haue:
                  A ſimple colour ſhall for title ſerue.
                  Who winnes the Royal crown wil want no right
                  Nor ſuche as ſhall diſplaye by longe diſcent
                  A lyneall race to proue him ſelfe a kynge,
                  In the meane while theſe ciuyll armes ſhall rage,
                  And thus a thouſande miſchiefes ſhall vnfolde
                  
                     
And farre & neare ſpread thee (O Brittayne Lande)
                  All right and Lawe ſhall ceaſe, and he that had
                  Nothyng to daye, to morowe ſhall enioye
                  Great heapes of good, & he that flowed in wealth,
                  Leo he ſhall be reft of lyfe and all,
                  And happieſt he that than poſſeſſeth leaſt.
                  The wyues ſhall ſuffre rape, the maydes defloured
                  And children fatherles ſhall weepe and wayle:
                  With fire & ſworde thy Natiue folke ſhal periſſhe.
                  One kinſman ſhall bereaue an other life,
                  The father ſhall vnwittynge ſlaye the ſonne,
                  The ſonne ſhall ſlea the ſire and knowe it not:
                  Women and maides the cruell Souldiours ſword
                  Shall perſe to death, and ſillie children loe
                  That playinge in the ſtrea
                        •
                     es & fieldes are founde
                  By violent hande ſhall cloſe their latter daye.
                  Whome ſhall the ferce and bloudie Souldiour
                  Reſerue to liefe, whome ſhall he ſpace from death
                  Euen thou (O wretched mother) half alyue
                  Thou ſhalt beholde thy deare and onely childe
                  Slaine wt the ſworde while he yet ſuckes thy breſt:
                  Loe, giltles bloode ſhall thus eche where be ſhed:
                  Thus ſhall the waſted ſoile yelde forth no fruite
                  But derth and famyne ſhal poſſeſſe the Lande.
                  The Townes ſhal be conſumed & brent with fire,
                  The peopled Cities ſhall ware deſolate,
                  And thou (O Brittaine Land) whilom in renowme
                  Whilome in wealth and fame ſhalt thus be torne,
                  Diſmembred thus, and thus be rent in twayne,
                  Thus waſted and defaced, ſpoiled and deſtroied:
                  Theſe be the fruits your ciuill warres wil bring.
                  
                     
Heretoſt cōmes when kinges will not conſent,
                  To graue aduiſe, but folow wilfull wyll:
                  This is the ende, when in yonge Princes hartes
                  Flattery preuayles, and ſage rede hath no place:
                  Theſe are the plages, when murder is the meane
                  To make newe Heires vnto the Royall Crowne.
                  Thus wreke the Gods, whē ye the mothers wrath
                  Nought but y• blood of her owne child may ſwage.
                  Theſe miſchiefes ſprings whē Rebelles wil ariſe,
                  To worke reuenge and iudge their Princes facte:
                  This, this enſues when noble men do faile
                  In loyall trouthe, and ſubiectes will be kinges.
                  And this doth growe when loe vnto the Prince,
                  Whome death or ſodene happe of liefe bereaues,
                  No certayne Heire remaines, ſuche certentie
                  As not all onely is the rightfull Heire,
                  But to the Realme is ſo made vnknowen to be
                  And trouth therby veſted in Subiectes hartes,
                  To owe faith there, where right is knowen to reſt
                  Alas, in Parliament what hope can bee,
                  When is of Parliament no hope at all,
                  Whiche thoughe it be aſſembled by conſent,
                  Yet is it not likely with conſent to ende:
                  While eche one for him ſelfe, or for his frende
                  Againſt his foe, ſhall trauaile what he maye,
                  While nowe the ſtate left open to the man,
                  That ſhall with greateſt force inuade the ſame,
                  Shall fill ambicious minds with gapynge hope:
                  When will they ones with yelding harts agree?
                  Or in the while, howe ſhall the Realme he vſed?
                  No, no: then Parliament ſhould haue ben holden
                  
                     
And certaine Heires appoynted to the Crowne
                  To ſtaie their title of eſtabliſſhed righte:
                  And plant the people in obedience
                  While yet the Prince did liue, whoſe name and power
                  By lawfull Sōmons and auctorytie
                  Might make a Parliament to be of force,
                  And might haue ſet the ſtate in quiet ſtaye:
                  But nowe (O happie man) whome ſpedie death
                  Depriues of lyfe, ne is enforced to ſee
                  Theſe hugie miſchiefes and theſe miſeries,
                  Theſe ciuyll wars, theſe murders & theſe wrongs
                  Of Iuſtice, yet muſt Ioue in fyne reſtore
                  This noble Crowne vnto the lawfull Heire:
                  For right will alwayes liue, and riſe at lengthe,
                  But wronge can neuer take deepe roote to laſt.
               
            
            ¶The ende of the Tagedie of
Kynge Gorboduc.
            
         
      
   