
      
         
            
            
            
            A PRAYER
FOR THE PROSPEROVS
PROCEEDINGS
AND GOOD
successe of the Earle of Essex and
his companies, in their present expedition
in Ireland against Tyrone and
his adherents, Rebels there.
            
               Fit to be vsed of all loyall subiects,
aswell in that Countrie, as in England.
            By Iohn Norden.
            
               HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
               DIEV ET MON DROIT
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            Imprinted at London by Edward
Allde. 1599.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A motiue to the prayer.
            
               GOd the high guide of all godly attempts, & the
beholder of all the deuises of man, requireth of
all men obedience to his will, & prayer for his
ayde, without which, mans endeuours are but
as seed sowen on the sand, and as a foundation
laid vpon the waters. And therfore such as vndertake
so high & weightie a businesse as the businesse of warre,
must found it on the feare of God & wade in it vnder his power
in prayer for his presence and ayde. For so did Hezekiah against
the king of Ashur, 2. King. 19. and preuailed, and Jehosophat
beeing endaungered with enemies, 2. Cron. 18. 31. prayed and
was preserued. God no doubt is so well pleased with this exercise
of prayer, zealously and faithfully performed, as hee is
wonne so to regard the causes of his children, that although
they haue deserued the foyle by their sinnes, hee will yet giue
them the victorie in his mercies. The Israelites preuailed while
Moyses praied, and fell before the enemie when he was mute.
In many places it appeareth how needfull a thing prayer is, not
onely of them that are in the daunger of the battell, but of such
also as are secure at home in their houses, who if they neglect
the cause of God and their countrie, God will holde them not
onely vnprofitable droanes, but reprobates: and will giue them
the dregges of their neighbours daungers to drinke, and will
not affoord them the least shelter of his defending power in
their deepest perils. For if he in generall termes commaund vs
to pray at all times one for another: as Jam. 5. 16. much more
in the time of daunger and warre, especially for the cause of
Gods annoynted, and state of our countrie, 1. Tim. 2. 1. 2. Let
no man therefore thinke that it conscerneth not him to praye
for the good of such as the Prince hath appoynted, for
the restauration of the peace of Gods Church, and quiet of our
Realme, by the suppressing of the violence, and quenching of
the furie of that bloudie Tyrone, and his rebellious adherents in
Ireland: for God is a iealous God, and holdeth no man guiltlesse
that maketh no conscience of his brothers daungers. And
such is the regard which hee hath of his owne glorie and his

prouidence for the preseruation of his children, that hee will
not admit any attempt, bee it in our owne eyes neuer so lawfull,
to bee taken in hande without him, without whome all
things and meanes are vaine. Our owne power, and prouidence,
and counsell, and multitudes of men, and munition,
and money, and what else soeuer wee vse for defending our
selues, or offending the enemie, are all as cloudes in the ayre
of our owne vaine conceites, that will vanish with the winde
of his displeasure, without any deawe of good successe to comfort
our countrie. To pray for them that fight for vs, is the least
dutie, and an easie seruice: yet it preuaileth much if it be feruent.
And if we seeme colde in that, wherin can we be zealous
for our countrie? if carelesse of it, how can we say we loue our
owne liues, libertie, lands, wiues, or children? when all these
are subiect also to suddaine subuertion, without God that preserueth
them vnto vs, & vs in himselfe. Therefore as God hath
his eye of mercy fixed on his destressed people, to deliuer them,
and his eye of iudgement vpon the rebellious to confound
them: So let euery man make this generall cause his owne priuate
case. And for the preuenting of future perill, beare a part
with them that in our behalfes are employed in this seruice
abroad: let vs pray for them at home, while they encounter the
enemie abroad: Let vs I say, pray for them, that God will prosper
them, and that we may prosper by their blessed successe.
            
               PSALM. 7. 16.
               His mischiefe shall returne vpon his owne bead, and his
crueltie shall fall vpon his owne pate.
            
         
         
            
            The Prayer.
            
               OH Father full of power King of all
Maiestie & glory, the absolute worker
of all things euen as thou wilt; Be
pleased in mercie to bee present with
thy seruantes, whome thou hast appoynted
to goe forth against the enemies
of the peace of thy childrē in the
Realme of Ireland. And as thou art a
continuall most diligent beholder of
all the actons of men good and euill, shewing thy selfe a patient
God, euen towards thine enemies, suffering them to
fill vp a great measure of outrage, violence, and bloud, before
thou take vp the sword of reuenge against them: and
yet at the length, when in their owne conceites they seeme
most strong, and not to be vanquished, euen then thou liftest
vp thy deuouring sword, and consumest them. So deare father
be thou pleased to be a guide, a guard and a buckler vnto
thy seruant, whom thou hast chosen to go against that bloudie
enemy Tyrone, who thirsting for and shedding the bloud,
of many of thy people, endeuoureth all rebellions mischiefes,
to cast off the yoake of obedience both to thy word,
and to shine annoynted, to the great perill of thy Church,
which by his outragious wickednesse, standeth in daunger
of greater troubles, which violence of his (good father) and
the daungers by him and his adherents complotted, cannot
be stopped or preuented by man without thee.
            
               
Sée therefore and beholde their mallice, and let thy powre
weaken their powre, who else will boast themselues against
thée,and saye their owne powre hath gotten themselues
the victorie, and that by their owne pollicies, they are
become Lordes of thine heritage. Oh take part therefore
with thy seruants, and suppresse these rebels: then shall thy
praise be encreased, thy mercie and powre shall be séene, and
thy name shall be for euer glorified. And though (deare father)
our sinnes doe make vs vnworthie of this great benefit,
yet for thine owne names sake deale mercifullie, in giuing
good successe vnto their procéedings, that in thy name
haue vndertaken this worke of reducing that Realme to
Christian obedience. And the more the enemie séemeth to
swell eyther in furie or pride: weaken him so much the more
oh Lorde, and giue him sorrowe for his vaine hope. Let
nothing that he taketh in hand against thy people preuaile,
but let it appeare by his fall, how thou laughest his vaine
attempts to scorne. And let him know good father, that he
striueth against thée and against thine appointed in vaine.
Manifest thine anger against his deuises, by frustrating his
desires. Breake his enterprises, and bring his inuentions
as coales enkindled vpon his owne pate. Let him eyther
trulie conuert, or be suddainly confounded. And déere Father,
be vnto that thy seruant the Earle of Essex, and his associates,
as thou wast vnto Moyses, Iosuah, Gedion, Dauid,
and the rest that haue fought vnder thy protection. Be vnto
him and his companies a Father to comfort them, a Captaine
to conduct them, and their God to preserue them. Let
their armies marche vnder the shelter of thy wings, make
strong their armes to the battell, and teach their fingers to
fight. Frame their hearts to feare thee, and not to faint at
their enemies power, giue them thy light to follow thée,
and let them euer be preserued by thée, let nothing necessarie
be wanting vnto them, but blesse them in all things. Giue
them wisdome from aboue, wherein they may vse and dispose
thy meanes in their seruice rightly. And in an absolute

godly desire, to bring their cause to a prosperous end. Moreouer
most mercifull Father, blesse the shipping, which are
imployed in this action, and all other tending to the good of
thy church, make their Gouernours prudent and valiant,
the windes prosperous, and the successe to thy glorie: That
we thy children, tasting the swéet benefit of peace, both there
and héere at home, may giue glorie vnto thy name, and in
more godly zeale studie to serue thée in our callings,
and endeuour more effectually to plant thy sacred
word in those parts, to the encrease of thy
Church, and comfort of all the
members of the same.
Amen.
            
            O Lord increase our faith.
            
               
                  ER
               
            
         
      
   