
      
         
            
            
            
               A REPROVFE, written by Alexander Nowell, of a booke entituled,
            A PROVFE OF CERtayne Articles in Religion denied by M. Iuell, ſet furth by Thomas Dorman, Bachiler of Diuinitie: and Imprinted at Antvverpe by Iohn Latius. Anno. 1564
            
               Prouerb. 19. 4.
               
               Teflis falſus non erit impunitus: & qui loquitur mendacia non effugiet.
               A falſe witneſſe ſhall not remaine vnpuniſhed: and he that ſpeaketh lyes ſhall not eſcape.
            
            Set foorth and allowed, according to the Queenes Maieſties Iniunctions.
            Imprinted at London in Fléeteſtréete, by Henry Wykes.
            Anno Domini 1565. 13. die Iuly.
            Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
         
            
            M. Dormans preface to D. Harding (to whom he dedicated his booke) and to the Reader, are onely omitted, for that nothing materiall was conteined in them. Of all the reſt (ſo farre as I haue proceded) not one woorde of M. Dormans, either in the treatie it ſelfe, or in his marginall notes, is pretermitted.
            There is nothing in this Impreſſion altered from the firſt, ſauing onely that M. Dormans euyll handlyng 
                  Fol. 3. 5. 14. 22. 60. 72. &c.
                of the auncient Doctours, is in ſome places more at large explicated: and that ſome part of M. Dormans treatie ſomewhere before diuided, is now for more perſpicuitie and plaineneſſe ioyned togeather. 
                  Fol. 65.
            
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE to the Reader.
            THOVGH many ſimple ſoules may muche meruell at ſuche plentie of Engliſhe bookes, as are of late ſo ſodeinly ſente vs from beyonde the ſeas, by our countrey men there, and bothe the authors themſelues doo muche bragge M. Raſtell in his praeface: to continue the memorie of the chalēge &c. and to moue an expectation vvhich part ſhall firſte ſhovv her weakenes. &c.
                therein, and their fautors doo magnifie the ſame exceedingly: yet the learned and diſcrete Readers, accuſtomed rather to vveigh and iudge, then to counte and numbre, vvill eaſely conſider that it is no harde mater for our aduerſaries, aboūding vvith leaſure, And againe he ſaith: ſpecially vvhere the nūbreis great. &c. and multitude, by common conference of many to patche vp a ſorte of ſuche bookes in Engliſhe, vvherein there is nothing to any purpoſe vvritten, but that vvhiche vvas longe before vvritten in ſundry latine bookes, and readie to their handes, to tranſlate thereout into their Engliſhe bookes, as they thought meete for their purpoſe: ſo that they be but ſeely tranſlators, or borovvers of thoſe bookes, vvhoſe firſt authors they vvoulde appeare to be. In the vvhiche poincte yet M. Stapleton tranſlating Staphilus his longe Latin booke, ſo longe before vvritten, vvorde for vvoorde into Engliſhe, and not diſſembling the matter, hath dealt therin more ſimplie, thē the reſt of his felovves haue doone. By vvhoſe example, the meaneſt men in learninge and vvitte amongſt them all (haue they onely a litle vnder
               
                  •••
               nding in the Latin tongue) may lode vs vvith hauocke of bookes vvhen they liſt. For it is vvell kuovven to all that be learned, that nothing of vveight, or to any purpoſe, can novv nevvly be vvritten for the mainteinance of the Popes vſurped ſupremacy, or any other their matters, vvhiche they novv treate of, but ſuche as hath been alreadie both vvritten, and printed many yeres agoe, in bookes as vvell of the Latin tongue, as other languages, and the ſame to be fully anſvvered vnto alſo, to the ſatiſfiynge of the Readers, and daily vvinning of greate numbres of men and vvemen of all ſortes and degrees, from their popiſhe ſuperſtition, vnto the truth of the Goſpell: ſuch bookes as vvell of the one ſorte, as of th'other, beinge riſe in the handes of ſuch as vnderſtande, to ſuch decay of their ſaide ſuperſtition, and ſucceſſe of the truthe, as to the vvorlde at this day cannot be vnknovven. VVherefore our aduerſaries miſtruſtinge that ſuch kinde of vvriting, or rather tranſlating, ſhould not appeare vvoorthie to be accōpted the earneſt dooing of any learned, or

vviſe man: haue doone vvittely, ether to pretende that to be vvriten D. Hard. ſaith he did prepare his booke but for one friend, and M. Raſtell, his booke, for one friende alone, in their prefaces to the Reader.
                but lightly for a priuate friende or tvvaine, and not mente to be printed, but by perſvvaſion of friendes, againſt their ovvne purpoſe ſuffered to come abroade (vvhiche yet they in deede haue of longe, by common conference elaborated at conuenient oportunitie to be put in printe to the publike patrocinie of their decaied, and almoſt deſperate cauſe) or els to appoincte ſuche, to beare the name as the authors of their bookes, as may ſeeme moſte meete therefore, beinge accompted of all that knovv them, for learninge and diſcretion, the ſimpleſt men amongſt them. The ſame diſtruſt of their ovvne dooinges, (or rather other mens dooinges ſet foorth for their ovvne) may ſeeme a cauſe vvhy they directe their vvritinges either onely, or chiefely againſt the Biſhoppe of Sariſburie: thinkinge that though they ſhall abſolutely of the matters they take in hande be hable to ſay nothinge, but that is alreadie ſaide, and is likevviſe, or eaſely may be anſvvered: yet may they ſeeme abundantly to ſay to him, vvho chalengeth them that they can ſay nothinge at all: and vvho alſo doth not tie them ſtreightly to the triall of the ſcriptures, the certaine and onely iudges in controuerſies of Religiō, and vvherin in deede they can ſay nothing at all (as ſhall hereafter be plainly proued) but geueth them a moſte large ſcope of all Doctours of the Churche, vvho haue vvritten for the ſpace of ſixe hundreth yeres after our Sauiour Chriſtes beinge here in earth, and of all Councelles kept in the ſaide continuance of D. Harding in his preface to the B. of Sarum fol. 1. a. & 2. b. and M. Raſtell fol. 1. b.
                time. Out of the vvhiche Doctors and Councelles for that the ſaid Biſhop hath aduouched that the beſt learned of all the aduerſaries, or all the aduerſaries togeather, are hable to bring nothing to any purpoſe for them, he hath ſet all the aduerſaries learned, and vnlearned a vvoorke, by cōmon conference to deuiſe to ſay ſomthing for themſelues, and againſt him, vvho affirmeth they can ſay nothing at all. And yet fearing leaſt that ſomthinge, vvhiche they all are hable to ſay▪ vvill fall out at the lengthe to proue nothinge to purpoſe: they haue all, like vviſe men, agreed, that ſome fevv ſhall take vpon them to be the onely authors of that ſomething vvhich they all can ſay: leaſt if that ſomethinge, as it is deuiſed by them all, ſo it ſhould paſſe abroade in all their names, and in time proue nothing at all, all their eſtimation vvere loſt at once. And for more cautell, ſuche ſome alſo to be named for the ſaide authors, as haue not all learninge, vvit, nor diſcretion, but men of a diuers profeſſion,

vvho haue yet ſome fight in Diuinitie, as ſtudientes of the ſame, for ſo they profeſſe them ſelues. VVherin they ſeeme to me to deale vvith vs, as did the Phariſeis vvith Chriſte, vvho vvould not 
                  Math. 22. b. 16. &c.
                come them ſelues to diſpute vvith him, but ſent their Diſciples, (vvell inſtructed, and furniſhed vvith all, that themſelues coulde poſſibly ſay) to oppoſe him, to th'ende, that if their Diſciples ſhould obtaine the victorie, the glory of their maiſters, vvho had ſuche excellent ſcholers, might mount aboue the Moone. But in caſe the ſcholers ſhould be blanked, it might for excuſe yet be ſaide, vvhat maruell, if yonge men, and yet but ſtudientes in the Scriptures, tooke a litle foyle? But if the olde Doctors come themſelues, I vvarrant you, this nue Prophet ſhalbe othervviſe handled. And yet like vviſe men, they aduentured not to come aftervvard thē ſelues, aſſuredly knovving that all that they coulde ſay, vvas already vttered by their ſcholers mouthes, but yet truſtinge, that all men did not ſo knovv the ſame, but that they might ſtill mainteine vvith ſome, their olde opinion and doctoral eſtimation. And though one 
                  Math. 22. d 35. Doctor came, and vvas handled as vvere the diſciples, yet vvas the rebuke but one mans: but had he gotten the victorie, the prayſe had been cōmō to them al. This is the effecte of S. Chryſoſtome his 
                  Luc. 10. d. 25 expoſition vpon the ſendinge of the diſciples, and the comminge of one Doctor, vnto our Sauiour Chriſte. VVhiche our aduerſaries like men of muche diſcretion, haue politikely folovved. But all men that haue any vnderſtanding at all, may eaſely vnderſtande, that thei all vvoulde not commit the handlinge of matters of ſuche vveight (and for the vvhiche they all, as it vvere Pro aris & focis, for life and death, as one might terme it, doo fight) to thoſe fevv, beinge very yonge men, and of meane learninge, and ſmall experience, in compariſon, and of a diuers ſtudie, and profeſsing themſelues (vvhich they can not hide) to be yonge ſtudientes in diuinitie: all men, I ſay may vvell knovve, that they vvoulde not committe ſuche matters to ſuch men, vvithout their common aduiſe, and helpe ioyned vvith 
                  •
               hem. Seeinge that D. Hardinge himſelfe do the plainely confeſſe, In his preface. that he in the vevv of his vvorke vſed the aduiſe of his learned friendes: and that it is not credible, that M. Raſtell vvould let his booke lie by him foure yeres in a readineſſe, vvithout a ſuruey therof made Raſtell in praefat
                     ••
                  ne▪
                by ſome of ſo many remayning with him at Louane. VVherfore it is not harde for any of any vnderſtandinge, to vnderſtande that this

publiſhinge of their common deuiſe vnto the worlde, in the names of a few of the ſimpleſt ſorte among them, is but a practiſe of policie. For they perciuinge that they cannot write nor ſet abroade bookes worthy to be compted learned mens doynges, doo prouide authors meete for ſuche bookes, as they can ſet foorth. VVhereby they ſhall not onely keepe their owne autoritie and cauſe without all daunger, what ſo euer be iudged of theſe authors, or their bookes: but ſhall alſo maintein
                  ••
               n the mindes of men a great opinion and expectatiō of themſelues, as M. Raſtell in his preface & fol. 1. ſaithe: I am but a comon ſouldiour amonge the orders of diuines and therfore I muſt ſtande behinde ſo manie biſhops, Doctors, bachelers, and ſcholars in diuinitie. I vvill vvith a penknife deminiſh his luſtie bloud. Let the olde ſouldiours vvith great ſvvoordes and pikes kill his hereſie.
                Veteranes, and olde Souldiours: whoſe brunt, when they ſhall come to the matter, wil be, as may ſeeme, of greater force and violence, than that it can poſsibly be reſiſted, 
                  And againe M. Raſt. ſaith he will proue M. Iuell may be anſwered by a meane Scholer in Diuinitie, that he nedeth not to prouoke the beſt of the Catholikes lyuinge.
                ſeing theſe yonge ſouldiours haue geuen ſuch a freſh onſet. But I dare aſſure you that either theſe matters ſhal thus ſtil be handled by ſcholers and yonge ſtudientes (as they call thēſelues) or if th'olde doctors dare aduēture (which yet many doctors doubt of) they ſhal handle the ſaide matters but ſcholerlike, as hath that one Doctor already doone: and I doubt not, but it ſhall to the worlde be made moſt manifeſt, that he hath ſo doone. And to ſpeake more particularly: as it was no greate matter for D. Harding out of Pighius, Gropperus, Hoſius, and certaine others (who haue intreated of the ſame matters in common places before him) to haue tranſlated into Engliſh what he thought meete for his purpoſe, whiche he hath lately put abroade as his owne dooinges: ſo might M. Dorman with farre leſſe labour, and better right alſo a greate deale, out of his maiſter D. Hardinges booke, ſo lately before written, borow of authorities and reaſons ready framed to his hādes, as much as liked him, and ſo of a peece of his maiſters booke (conteining onely .iiij. articles of .xxvi.) with greate eaſe make vs an other new booke, as greate, as is his maiſters: the ordre here and there being a litle tranſpoſed, to obſcure the matter, and to make a ſhow of new inuention: and the ſtile ſomewhat flooriſhed with M. Dormans railing rhetorike. For they that doo know M. Dorman better than I doo, marueiling of his dooinges in Diuinitie matters, doo thinke that he hath all his learninge, not of inheritance, but by l
                  •
               gacie: ſuppoſinge that he hath mette with Doctor Smith his written bookes, who of late deceaſinge, did, as they ſay, put M. Dormā in ſome truſt. Els they thinke, he coulde not ſo ſhortly, and ſodenly, before he was knowen to be a ſtudent in Diuinitie, become a Bacheler of the ſame. Vnleſſe perhappes he ſometime ſtoode vpon

the bridge with others, whiles the creator ſaide, Omnes vos qui ſtatis in ponte, eſtote Bacchalaurei: dixit, & fatui ſūt. But the ſame his acqueintance, ſo marueiling of his new degree in ſchoole of Di
               
                  •
               initie, affirme, that in ieſting, ſcoffing, mockinge, and railinge, he is ſuche a Veterane, and ſo olde a practicioner, that he doth plainely raigne, yea and triūphe too, in the ſchoole of ſcolding: and though they helde their peace, his dooynges in this booke doo wel declare the ſame. And it is not vnlikely but that M. Dorman with others, vpon vew of D. Hardinges booke, iudgeing that he, as a graue and learned man, had ſufficiently reaſoned againſt vs, but had otherwiſe dealte to coldely with vs (as of purpoſe auoidynge glikes, nippes, D. Harding fol. 5. ſcoffes, bittes, cuttes, and girdes, for ſo himſelfe ſaithe) thought it good by common aduiſe, that M. Dorman takinge D. Hardinges reaſons, and ſo eaſed of that greateſt parte of the labour, ſhould ſet foorth the matter, and amplifie it (ſpecially that of the Popes ſupremacie, in the whiche he ſaw his Maiſter had profeſſed breuitie) after D. Harding fol. 75. b.
                his and certaine others deuiſe, and not only with nippes, and girdes pinche, and wringe vs, but alſo with whole cartlodes of railynges (in the whiche facultie M. Dorman excelleth) ſhould ouerwhelme vs, that wee might ſeeme to all their fauourers, not only borne downe and cleane ouerthrowen by D. Hardinge, but alſo by M. Dorman torne all to peeces, according as M. Dorman hath in this booke, for his parte well endeuoured himſelfe to accompliſhe.
            Novv if any doo maruell that I, not prouoked, as may ſeeme, doo purchaſe to my ſelfe ſo great and grecuous an aduerſarie, as is M. Dorman, by anſvvering his booke vvritten, as he profeſſeth, againſt the biſhop of Sarisburie, I make them this anſvvere: Though this and other like bookes appeare in name and vvoorde, to be vvritten againſte the ſaide biſhop onely, yet be they in deede and meaninge vvriten againſte vs all, as vvell as him: for that they doo oppugne and aſſaulte the cauſe, vvhiche is common to vs all vvith him, vnder his name onely: goeinge about through his ſides (as it vvere) to thruſt vs all through the hartes. Further, ſeeinge ſuche a number of bookes, as it vvere dartes, directed at his head, vvhereof the moſte parte are ſuche, that had he leyſure enough therto, yet vvould he neuer anſvvere them, but by contempte of them, vvhiche yet not anſvvered, might ſeeme therfore to be let alone, for that thei vvere not anſvverable, (ſuche is, either the ſclender diſcretion of ſome ſielie ſoules, either the bolde braggerie of many malaperte aduerſaries) I

thought for the ſatisfiynge of the ſymple, and repreſſinge of the inſolente, to ſay ſomevvhat to ſome one of thoſe bookes: and therfore to M. Dormās, rather than any others, for that it came abroade nexte in ordre after D. Hardinge his booke. Of vvhiche booke yet, had I, before I did beginne, vnderſtanded, (that I novve in proceſſe doo) that it had bene in ſubſtance ſo agreable vvith D. Hardinge his booke, that the Biſhoppe of Sarum ſhould in anſvveringe the one, in effect haue anſvvered bothe, (as he muſt needes doo) it ſhould for me haue bene let alone, vntill the biſhoppes anſvvere had come abroade in printe: and than, (the concluſion onely excepted, vvhiche is ſomevvhat ſeuerall to M. Dorman) ſhould it by me haue none othervviſe bene anſvvered, but onely by notinge in the margent, in vvhat places of the biſhoppes anſvvere to D. Hardinge, euery place of M. Dormans booke is anſvvered, vvhiche order I vvill hereafter folovve: and vvhere M. Dorman ſhall haue any thinge peculiar, that vvill I directly anſvvere my ſelfe. Novv as the ignoraunce of the affinitie betvvene the Maiſters and the ſcholers bookes cauſed me to beginne vvith M. Dormans booke, as an other nevve vvoorke vntouched before, intending verefy to goe through vvith the ſame: ſo in the proceſſe of the booke, the knovvledge therof did grovv more and more, and ſo much at the laſte, that I did not onely by the ſtyle (as did Tullie Theophraſtes Diſciple) but by the matter it ſelfe alſo, knovv D. Harding his ſcholar, ſo like to him, that he might ſeeme his ſonne alſo, and ſpitte out of his mouth, as they ſay: ſo that in deede he may profeſſe D. Hardinge to be his mayſter of very good righte, as of vvhome he hath the learninge that he ſhevveth in this booke. And had he not dedicate the booke to D. Hardinge, as to vvhome of right it apperteineth, beyng as a man learned in the lavve, not ignorant of the chiefe propertie of iuſtice, ſuum cui
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , he mighte haue bene iuſtly accuſed of ſome vniuſte compilation of his maiſters almeries: ſeeyng he is not yet his exequutor, as vvell as D. Smithes. This matter, I ſay perceiued, inforced me to ſtay, leaſt I might ſeeme of ſette purpoſe, though colorably, to haue haſted to preuent the biſhoppe of Sariſburie in anſvveringe D. Hardinge, by anſvveringe M. Dorman: and ſo to haue ſeemed vvillinge, to goe before him one vvay in haſtie dooynge, vvhome I muſt needes folovv a great vvay behinde in all vvell dooinge. And vvere not this cauſe, (vvhich yet is a great, and a iuſte cauſe) I haue not ſuche leaſure (vvhiche is the common caſe of vs all) as to anſvvere that, vvhiche I doo heare ſay is already

anſvvered, and ready to printe, as M. Dorman had leaſure to vvrite againe, that vvhiche vvas before vvriten by his Maiſter: neither had I ſuch leaſure, liſte I, as he dothe, blotte paper vvith other mens dooinges. Theſe are the very cauſes vvhy I haue ſtaied, and as yet haue proceeded no further in the anſvveringeof M. Dormans booke. But vvhen I had paſſed thus farre, and the biſhoppes anſvvere▪ as the reporte than vvent, vvas not fully finiſhed, and many good mèn muche deſired ſomme anſvvere, and as many aduerſaries as much bragged, that their bookes vvoulde neuer be anſvvered: the councell of ſome friendes, and ſuche continuall bragge of ſo many aduerſaries cauſed me to ſuffer this little taſte, as vntimely fruite, the ſooner to come abroade: that ſuche as finde double faulte vvith vs, for not anſvveryng ſpeedely, or fully, might in parte be ſatiſfied. And the rather haue I conſented to ſuche aduiſe of my friendes, for that by this taſte that I haue giuen the readers of M. Dorman, they ſhall knovv him throughly not a lyon (as they ſay) by his longe nayles, but a lyar by his leude tales. For by the vevve hereof, they may not onely iudge of his vvhole treatie: but alſo, this principall parte, and firſte fronte, (in the vvhiche M. Dorman, as a ſkilfull man, hath placed the chiefe ſtrength and force) or rather this, the very fundation of the vvhole beynge cleane ouerthrovven, (as I doubt not but it is) all the reſte muſte needes come to ruine vvith all. At the leaſt, I truſt, I haue ſo farre ſatiſfied the diſcrete reader concerninge M. Dorman, that it ſhall ſuffice hereafter to paſſe ouer the reſidue of his booke by briefe notes. And I doo truſte alſo, that ſuche as ſhall blame me moſte for not anſvvering the vvhole, ſhalbe greued moſte that I haue anſvvered ſo much: and that thoſe, that ſhall finde moſte faulte i
                  •
                vvoordes vvith our ſlacke anſvveringe, ſhall be moſte vexed in minde vvith our ſpeedy anſvvering. For as their bookes vvere not therfore ſodenly vvriten, for that they came ſodenly abroade, ſo ſhal M. Raſtell in his praefa econfeſſeth his booke to haue bene begun four yeeres agoe.
                they, I doubt not, be anſvvered ſpedely: that is, in ſhorter ſpace then they vvere vvriten in. And yet all ſpeede is not alvvay in moſt haſte. For it may ſo fall out that M. Dorman vvith the vvhole company of his adhaerentes the Papiſtes ſhall more eaſily write tenne ſuch bookes more at randon, as this is written, then be hable to mainteine and to defende directlie this little parcel of his booke, as eyther trulie or learnedly written. And thus muche I thought good to ſaie concerning our not ſpeedie anſweringe (as ſome men thinke) and my parcel anſwering (which ſome men wil blame) for the ſatisfiyng

of ſome, for all looke not to ſatisfie, though al Dormans, and al other Papiſts, were altogether already ſo anſwered as they al might be aſhamed of their dooinges, as I doubt nothinge, god willinge, but it ſhall ſhortely ſo come to paſſe, though peraduenture not one emongſt them all will euer confeſſe the ſame.
            Now that I haue ſo diligently and largely, and as it may ſeeme carefully alſo, anſwered M. Dorman (whoſe owne dooynges, I affirme to be more woorthy of laughter, than of any earneſt anſwere) which ſhall. I am ſure, be layde alſo to my charge, I doo certifie the reader, that I doo not anſwere the reaſons alleaged in this booke, as M. Dormans, but as the reaſons of D. Hardinge, of whom M Dorman hath borowed them: and not onely Doctor Hardinges, but Eckrus, Pighius, and Hoſius reaſons alſo, yea and of all thoſe, that haue written in Latine for the Popes vſurped power, and ſupremacie, in whoſe writinges the like reaſons are to be found, and out of whom D. Hardinge (as out of him M. Dorman) hath tranſlated adverbum almoſt, ſuch places as he thought for his purpoſe: wherfore I haue vſed the more diligēce, as vnder the name of one, anſweringe ſo many. An other and moſt weightie cauſe why I haue vſed ſuch diligence and prolixitie, is this: M. Dorman though he be a weake aſſaylant and ſclender reaſoner, yet is he a great lyar, and a venemous ſclaunderer: and therefore hath he ſette abroade a lewde booke in deede, but not ſo lewde as ſclaunderous: and ſclaunderous not to ſeueral perſons onely, but to our whole countrey, to our lawes, and to our gratious ſoueraigne, whom he chargeth as vſurping vndue authoritie: ſclaunderous I ſay, not here at home onely, but abroade alſo in foraigne countreis. VVherefore whom ſo euer M. Dorman ſheweth him ſelfe to be, and how ſclender an aunſwere ſoeuer might beſt become him: I thought it ſhould become me, not ſclenderly to eſteeme the honour of my prince, my d
                  •
               etie to my countrey, and to the lawes of the realme: but with earneſtneſſe to repell ſuche reproches, as M. Dorman hath attempted to blemiſhe them withall. Thirdelie for that the ſimple and vnlearned readers haue often beſt liking in bookes more boldely then learnedly written, and are moſt in daunger to creadite moſt lewde and ſclaunderouſe lyes (in ſo muche that a great many for the commendation of theſe vertues, doo praeferre the Scholar before the Maiſter, M. Dorman I meane, before D. Hardinge, ſuche is their iudgement) I haue therfore in anſwering more at large, applied my ſelf
                  •
                to ſuch as be

of meane vnderſtandinge, to whom the guilefull dealinges of the Papiſtes can not with breuitie be made manifeſt. For as a ſerpent at a touch thruſteth in his ſtinge and venime: but the miſcheafe in like wiſe can not be as ſodeinlie cured, but requireth longer time, and buſineſſe: ſo can not the ſclaunderous and venemous lyes by M. Dorman quickely tould, be ſo quickely and brieflie anſwered, with ſuch plaineneſſe, as is mete for ſuch who are moſt in daunger to credite ſuch falſe tales. VVherfore (good reader) if I ſhal ſeeme to be too prolix and tedious, yea and to careful too in anſweringe ſo largely and diligently ſuch a one as M. Dorman ſheweth him ſelfe to be, ſpecially in the beginninge till I haue made thee acquainted with his kinde of writing, I truſt thou ſhalt the better beare with me therein, if thou wilt beare theſe conſiderations in memorie. Yet haue I laboured to ſerue alſo the learned and occupied readers turne: For I haue in the concluſion of this mine anſwere 
                  fol. 119. in fewe wordes touched the ſumme of the whole proceſſe before, whereunto if it ſhall pleaſe them at the firſt to reſort, it may ſo ſatisfie them perhappes, that they ſhall not neede to ſtay about the larger explication of mine aunſwere in the formar proceſſe of this booke. And this for my earneſt aunſwere to ſo merie a mans booke as is M. Dorman. Now as I haue not dealt with him in his Raylinge, Reuilynge▪ Ribalrie. facultie, in the which I cōfeſſe him to be inuincible, and woorthy to be not onely Bachilar, but double Doctour thereof: ſo yet if M. Dormans outragious railinges, and ſhameles lyes ſhall cauſe me ſometime to ſhape him an anſwere meete for ſuch a man, as he is, I truſt the reaſonable reader wil conſider my not occaſion, but inforcement rather thereunto: not onely looking vppon my ſaiynges, and vewynge how meete or vnmeete they be for me: but how meete they be for his ſaiynges and him, to whom I doo make anſwere. VVho doth ſo confidently affirme, and ſolemnely aduouch that if our ſtomakes ſhall ſerue vs to replie, he is ſure that our euidence is 
                  Dorman. fol. 110. 
                     •
                  . ſo much, that ſixe lynes (to ſpeake with the moſte) wil receiue vvith eaſe all that vve haue to vvrite. vvhich hovv truely it is ſpoken, ſhall be tried, I truſt, by this litle euidence that I haue here geuen in, to thee (good Reader) againſt his counterfaite, and falſe forged vvritinges: vvherein is not of matter of truthe, ſo muche as ſixe lynes any vvhere to be founde.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Dorman.
            THE ARTYCLES VVHICH THE AVTHOR HATH TAKEN APON HYM TO PROVE, AGAINST M. IVELLES NEGATIVE.
            That the Biſhop of Rome, is the head of Chriſtes vniuerſal churche here in earth, and that within the firſte ſix hundred 1. yeeres after Chriſtes departure hence, he was ſo called and taken.
            That the people was then taught to beleue, that Chriſtes body is really, ſubſtantially, corporally, carnally, or naturally, in the 2 Sacrament.
            That the communion was then ministred vnder one kinde. 3
            
            That there was Maſſe ſayde at that time, although there wer 4 none to receiue with the prieſt.
            
               Nowell.
               1 M. Dormans firſt article, is the fourth with D. Hardinge. fol. 75.
               2 His ſeconde article, is the fifte with D. Hardinge. folio. 96.
               3 His thirde article is the ſeconde with D. Hardinge. folio. 3
                     •
                  .
               4 The laſt article is the firſte with D. Hardinge. fol. 9.
               And thus as you ſée M. Dorman diuers from his Maiſter in the order of the matters: ſo ſhall you finde his Maiſters reaſons and allegations in his booke by like arte diſpoſed, that you may know that M. Dormā, though bachiler of Diuinitie, hath not yet forgotten all his Logike, and that he hath his Rhetorike in perfect memorie.
            
         
         
            
            A REPROVFE OF M. Dorman in prima fronte libri.
            Auguſtinus contra literas Petiliani. lib. 2. cap. 16. Si quaeras, quibus fructibus vos eſſe potius lupos rapaces cognoſcamus, obijcio ſchiſmatis crimen, quod tu negabis, ego autem ſtatim probabo. Neque enim communicas omnibus gentibus, & illis eccleſiis Apoſtolico labore fundatis. That is to ſay. If thou demaundeſt (he ſpeaketh to Petilian the Heretike) by what fruictes I knovv you to be rather the rauening vvolues, I obiecte to you the fault of ſciſme, vvhich thou vvilt deny, but I wil out of hande proue. For thou doeſt not communicate with all Nacions, nor with thoſe churches founded by th'apoſtles labour.
            
               Nowell.
               M. Dorman had either no greate ſtore of choyſe, or ſome lacke of iudgement, whan he did chooſe S. Auguſtines ſentence vpon the woordes of our Sauiour of thoſe falſe Prophetes who comming in ſheepes clothing, 
                     Math. 7. c. 15. are in deede rauening woulfes: you ſhall know them by their fruites &c. For what ſentence of all other in the Scriptures or Doctors dooth more liuely repreſent the aduerſaries themſelues, who, folowinge the olde Iuiſhe prieſtes, Scribes and Phariſeis (of whom our Sauiour ſpake ye ſaide woords) in walking grauely in longe garmentes, pretending longe praiers, preferring 
                     Mar. 12. d. 38. ye amiable titles of ye Spiritualtie, of ye church, 
                     Luc 20. g. 46. that louing mother, yea and of fauorable fathers too: & profeſſing with their foreſaid forefathers, yt they may kill no man, that they may not enter into the iudgement place, for feare of pollution of that pure white 
                     Iohan. 18. e. 28. f. 31. fleeſe of their innocencie: yea and whan a condemned perſon falleth into their handes, to be committed to the fecular power, they pitifully make requeſt, that Domine i
                        •
                     
                     dex rogam vos &c. the wretch ſuffer no loſſe of life nor limme. And whan

they haue ſo ouerſpread and couered themſelues with Vt in actis Regiſt. Lō
                     dinenſi
                        •
                     . theſe and ſuche like ſheepiſh white flieſes, more ſofter than lambes wull, and haue ſo ſheepiſhly bleated with woordes abhorring bloud: than proceede they forwarde with their ſaid Fathers, than play they moſt the moſt rauening woulfes, & moſte ſhew their inſaciable thirſt of murder and bloudſheading. Let Hieruſalem, and the countreis about ſprinkled with ye bloud of our Sauiour Chriſte, and his holy Apoſtles and Diſciples teſtifie this as moſte true in their forefathers, the Phariſeis, Scribes, and high Prieſtes: and let all partes of Englande, Fraunce, Italie, Spayne, Germanie, yea of all Chriſtendome ouerſpread with the bloud of the innocent ſheepe of Chriſtes folde, men and w
                     •
                  men, yea yonge ſtriplinges, and maydes thoſe little lambes, ſhead by theſe rauening and bloudthriſtie woulfes, teſtifie the ſame moſte aboundantly in our Phariſeis, Scribes and high prieſtes, the ſucceſſours and children of thoſe their olde Iuiſh forefathers: of whō, with their ſaide forefathers as this ſentence was ſpoken, ſo dooth it moſte expreſſely repreſent and depainte them moſte liuely in their naturall colours, that ye maye well know them by their fruictes. For that they ſpoile poore wydowes houſes, vnder yt pretence of their longe prayers, their diriges, Maſſes of Requiem, Trentalles &c. is but a trifle with them: but the greatter ſhalbe their damnation, as our Sauiour ſaith. Now concerning 
                     Marc. 12. the ſchiſme which M. Dormā ſhooteth at chieflie: 
                     Luc. 20. We anſwere we haue made none other ſchiſme from you, than did S. Paule make from the ſaide high prieſtes, 
                     Act. 22. a. 3. Scribes, and Phariſeis your predeceſſours, from whom (though he were from his childehood brought vp

emongſt thē) he did wel, & vpon good grounde departe, for that they had before departed, & made a ſchiſme from God, and his moſt holy lawe, to the traditions of the mother churche of their Phariſaicall fathers: as haue likewiſe you Papiſtes departed, & made a ſchiſme from Chriſte, and his Apoſtles doctrine, and from the auncient churches, founded by the Apoſtles labour, to your mother the Romiſhe Sinagoge, and haue by your poyſoned Popiſhe traditions, ſlayne moe ſoules, than you haue by your crueltie murdred bodies of Chriſtian men and wemen, as we haue prooued, and wyll dayly prooue more and more moſt euidently vnto the world, vntill all godly in the worlde, knowyng you by your fruictes, dooe forſake you (as did the godly before, forſake the olde Phariſeis, Scribes, and highe Prieſtes, and folowed Chriſte and his holy Apoſtles) as we haue partely already brought to a good forwardneſſe.
               Thus you may ſée why we haue departed from you, and returned to Chriſte, and his holy Apoſtles, and the churches by them founded, from whom you haue departed. Returne you to them, and we will not ſwarue from you: take away the ſchiſme that you haue made from Chriſt our ſauiour & his holy Apoſtles, and the churches founded vpon their doctrine, and we wyll ioygne with you. Otherwiſe, as long as you ſhall thus ſwarue from Chriſte, and his Apoſtles, and their doctrine, cry you out againſt ſchiſmatikes neuer ſo much, we will neuer ioygne with you, beinge the very ſchiſmatikes in déede. And thus muche I thought to ſaye to the ſentence of S. Auguſtine againſt Petilian, by M. Dorman alleaged, in the fyrſt front of his booke, as againſt vs, but in déede moſte directlie detectinge the

ſchiſmaticall ſecte of all Papiſtes our aduerſaries, that I might leaue no one ſentence of any olde doctour by M. Dorman, though colourably and falſely alleaged, vnanſwered.
            
         
         
            To the Reader.
            I Doo vnderſtande ſith the firſt printinge of this booke, that muche mutteringe and whiſperinge is made by certaine Papiſtes, about certaine places of my booke, as falſe or faultie, and namely that place of S. Cyprian De ſimplicitate Praelatorum, It is to be founde fol. 49 b. of the firſt print and fol. 50. b. of this print. as by me guilefully alleaged, by omittinge that whiche maketh (as they ſay) for them and their Popes Supremacie. This Popiſhe practiſe by mutteringe, whiſperinge, poinctinge, quarellinge and liynge, to attempte the defacinge of the ſimple and plaine truthe, and to the maintenaunce of their owne vntruthe, is no new practiſe, neither happeneth it to me vnlooſed for at this time: whiche they faile not to doo to al men, and in all matters at all times. But as I can not certainely anſwearevncertaine corner mutteringes, ſo as ſoone as I ſhall ſee any certaine thinge ſet foorth in Printe to the worlde againſte my booke, I will, God willinge, not leaue it longevnanſwered, as well to the aduouchinge of my true dealinge, as to the declaration of theirvniuſtquarellinge, and conſequently, as I truſt, to the more full ſatisfaction of all reaſonable Readers, that doo looue truthe and ſinceritie.
            
               A. Nowell.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Dorman. Fol. 1. A PRAEFACE, OR INTRODVCtion to the firſt Propoſition.
            
               THE bleſſed Martyr of God S. Cyprian, Nowell. It is Epiſt. 
                     •
                  . writyng to one Rogatianus a Lib. epiſt. 3. Epiſt. 11. Biſhop of his prouince hath thieſe woordes. Initia haereticorum, & ortus atque conatus ſchiſmaticorum malè cogitant ium haec ſunt: vt ſibi placeant, vt praepoſitum ſupèrbo tumore contemnant. Sic de occleſia receditur ſic al
                     •
                  are prophanum for is collocatur: ſic contra pacem Chriſti, & ordinationem, atque vnitatem Dei rebellatur: VVhiche is in Engliſhe thus muche to ſay: The beginning of heretikes; the firſt ſpringyng vp, and enterpriſe of ſchiſmatikes thinkyng a miſſe in matters of faithe, groweth of pleaſure that thei take in themſelues, & of that, that beyng puffed vp with pride, thei contemne their head, and gouernour appointed ouer thē. By this meanes ſtraie thei from the Churche. Thus is a prophane altar placed without the doores, and thus rebell thei againſt Chriſtes peace, gods ordinaūce and vnitie.
            
               Nowell.
               Saincte Cyprian writyng this Epiſtle to Rogatian one of his felowe biſhoppes in Afrike, who had a diſobediēt deacon, hath in the beginnyng of his letter theſe woordes: Grauiter & dolenter. &c. I, and my felowe biſhoppes here preſent, were ſore moued, moſte deare brother (ſaieth ſaincte Cyprian) when wee had redde your letters: wherein you complaine of your deacon, that he forgettyng your prieſtly place, and his owne miniſterie, hath greeued you with his reproches and wronges. Thus farre S. Cyprian. By whiche wordes it appereth that the mattier was betwene Rogatian a

biſhop in Afrike, and his deacon diſobediente to hym: and therefore nothing apperteinyng to the biſhoppe of Romes ſupremacie at all. Whiche might well haue appeared to the reader, had maiſter Dorman written but the iiij. lines next before the place by him alledged, whiche are theſe: Ideo oportet diaconum. &c. That is to ſaie: Therefore it is mete that the Deacon, of whom you doe write, doe penaunce for his boldeneſſe, that he acknowledge the honour of the prieſt, and doo ſatiſfie the biſhop his ſuperiour, with full humilitie. For the beginnyng of heretikes, the ſpringyng vp & enterpriſe of ſchiſmatikes, beyng euill minded, are theſe: that thei doo ſtand in their owne cōceite, that thei deſpiſe their gouernour through ſwellyng pride. &c. As Maiſter Dorman hath out of ſaincte Cyprian alledged. This declareth moſte euidently, that the ſentence of S. Cyprian, alledged by M. Dorman, apperteineth to Rogatian and his deacon, beyng Africanes: and ſo generally, to all other biſhoppes, & their inferiours, of what countrey ſoeuer thei bee: and maketh nothyng for the Biſhoppe of Romes ſupremacie at all. If M. Dorman would proue hereby, yt euery inferiour miniſter ought to be obedient to his owne biſhop, as his ſuperiour: or that the diſobedience of ſuche is cauſe of ſchiſmes and hereſies, (for ſo doeth S. Cyprian meane) wee graunte the ſame. But if he would haue it apperteine to the biſhop of Rome, or to make any thyng for the Popes ſupremacie (as by that M. Dorman calleth this an introduction to the proufe of his firſt propoſicion, whiche is, of the Popes ſupremacie: and by the proceſſe of this his preface alſo, it doeth plainly appere, that he meaneth) he abuſeth ſhamefully the authoritie of S. Cyprian: and thinketh all the worlde, ſauyng hymſelf alone, aſleape, and blinde on bothe ſides too: Conſideryng that

that in all this Epiſtle, there is not one woorde of the biſhop of Rome, or his ſupremacie, nor he as muche as once named therein.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. I.
            And againe in an other place he writeth thus: Vndè enim ſchiſmata & haereſes obortae ſunt, niſi dum epiſcopus qui vnus Lib. 4. Epiſt. 9.
                eſt, & eccleſiae praeeſt, ſuperba quorundam praeſumptione contemnitur, & homo dignatione dei honoratus, ab indignis hominibus indicatur? Wherof [ſaith he] doo hereſies and ſchiſmes ſpryng, but of this, that the biſhop whiche is one, and gouerneth the churche, is through the proude and arrogant preſumption of certaine, contemned and ſet at nought, and beyng the man by Gods approbacion allowed, and honoured, is of vnworthie men iudged.
            
               Nowell.
               M. Dorman truſted that as ſone as theſe woordes, The biſhop vvhich is one, and gouerneth the churche is deſpiſed: the man by gods approbacion alowed, is of vnvvorthie mē iudged, ſhould be redde, or heard of the ſimple, thei would nothyng doubte, but that ye Pope of Rome deſpiſed by ſuche as we be, was meant thereby. But this epiſtle, as it is written by S. Cyprian to one Pupianus, ſo doeth it entreate of them twoo, and their matters: and nothyng concerneth the biſhop of Rome. For as before, by the head and gouernour appoincted, Rogatian was meante, and not the Pope: ſo in this place, by the biſhop, vvhiche is one, and gouerneth the churche: by the man by Gods approbacion allovved, and honoured, and of vnvvorthie men iudged, Sainct Cyprian hymſelf, biſhop of Carthage, is meante: who was abuſed by the ſaied Pupianus, and to whom he did write this epiſtle, reprouyng hym for his diſobedience to his biſhoppe, (S. Cyprian) who was the onely manne allowed by Gods approbacion, to gouerne the

Churche of Carthage: and ſo by the ſaied Pupian, as his inferiour, to be obeyed. Wherefore this place is as impertinente to M. Dorman his purpoſe, as was the former place. For neither in this long Epiſtle is there as muche as one woorde of the biſhop of Rome. I conclude therefore, that theſe places are by M. Dorman falſly and ſhameleſly alledged, to make a ſhewe, or as he calleth it, an introduction to the biſhop of Rome his authoritie, wherevnto thei apperteine nothyng at all, but onely to the euerſion thereof. And that M. Dorman hath thereby declared, what credite he deſerueth in the reſte of his booke, continued with like impudente lies. Touchyng S. Cyprian his phraſe of one biſhop of the churche, whiche M. Dorman taketh as ſignifiyng one biſhop ouer the whole churche, for that the falſeneſſe of that collection, is at large explicated after in a more pe
                  
                     •
                  uliar place, I pretermitte here to ſpeake of it. Onely this is moſte euident, in what ſenſe ſo euer S. Cyprian taketh theſe woordes (one biſhoppe that ruleth the churche) the biſhop of Carthage is that one biſhop, and not the biſhop of Rome: and therefore that phraſe of one biſhop rulyng the churche, can make nothyng for the biſhop of Rome his ſupremacie, but rather dooeth vtterly ouerthrowe it, as apperteinyng ſpecially to the biſhoppe of Carthage, in A
                     •
                  rike: not to the biſhoppe of Rome, in Italie: and declaryng in deede, the biſhops of all places to be equall in authoritie, and conſequently ouerthrowyng the ſupremacie of one ouer all.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 
                  •
               .
            The verie ſame thyng, although in other woordes, Epiſt. 61. 2
                     •
                   Epiſcopos Italiam & Galliam. 
               Nowell. It is Epiſt. 69. doeth S. Baſile in an epiſtle written by hym, to the biſhoppes of Italie and Fraunce, bewailyng therein the eſtate of his tyme, moſte plainely declare. Whoſe wordes, becauſe thei doe liuely repreſent vnto vs, the moſt

miſerable face of this our age: I haue thoughte good to allege, & ſet before your eyes. Ambitiones eorum qui dominū non timent, *praeſidentias inuadunt, et in propatulo de caetero impietatis praemiū propoſita eſt prima ſedes. Quare, qui grauiores blaſphemias protulit *ad populi epiſcopūpotior habetur. Perijt authoritas ſacerdotal
                     •
                  s, populi admoneri nolunt, praeſides dicendi libertatem non habent. Silent piorumora, permiſsumeſt autem dicere omni blasphemae linguae. Prophanata ſunt ſacra. That is to He ſhould haue ſaied, ſaie. The pride▪ and ambition of them whiche feare not our lorde thei inuade the chief roumes or places. doeth inuade and ſet apon their heades, and openly the chiefeſte place, is propoſed as a rewarde for wickednes. And therfore he that can vtter he is compted more worthie to be the biſhop of the people. againſt the biſhop of the people, moſte greuous and ſlaunderous blaſphemies, is accompted of greateſt price, and had in moſte eſtimation. Th'authoritie of prieſthood is loſt. The laite wil not be admoniſhed. The rulers be reſtreined of libertie to ſpeake. The mouthes of good menne kepe ſilence. Euery blaſphemous tōgue is ſet at libertie. Al holy thinges are made prophane. Hetherto S. Baſil.
            
               Nowell.
               M. Dorman dooeth not (as he ſaied he would) ſette Sainct Baſilles woordes before your eyes: but dooeth goe aboute (as muche as he can) to bleare your eyes, that you ſhould not ſee the truthe. For he is ſo deſirous to make ſome ſhewe for the Popes ſupremacie, that he would by falſe tranſlation wreſt places of the doctours, moſte impertinente, to make them ſeme to ſounde that waie: and therefore in this place, in ſtéede of theſe woordes, praeſidentias inuadunt, thei dooe inuade the chiefe roumes: he hath tranſlated, thei doe inuade and ſet vpon their heades. And againe in ſtede of theſe woordes, He that can vtter moſt greuous blaſphemies (to witte againſt Chriſt and the holie ghoſte) is accompted more

worthy to be the biſhop of the pople: he hath thus tranſlated, he that can vtter againſt the biſhop of the people, moſte greuous and ſlaunderous blaſphemies, is accompted of greateſt price, and had in moſte eſtimatiō. Thus hath M. Dorman tranſlated this place, whether negligently, as halfe a ſleape, according to his name: or ignoraūtly, as he that could not ſee, though broad wakyng: or maliciouſlie, wittyng and willyng did he falſifie it, to make it ſeme as ſpokē of the biſhop of Rome, whom he would haue to be taken for the head, and the biſhop of the people: And vs he would haue to be taken for the inuaders of the ſaid head, and the blaſphemours of that biſhop, as it were of God hymſelf, againſt whō properlie is blaſphemie. But let S. Baſill hymſelf bee iudge, betweene M. Dorman, and me: whoſe woordes in th'epiſtle folowing, where he entreateth of the ſame matter, and the whiche alſo M. Dorman hereafter allegeth, are theſe. Vnigenitus blaſphematur, & non eſt qui contradicat: Spiritus ſanctus ignominia afficitur, & qui poteſt redarguere fugatur. &c. To ſaie: The onelie ſonne of God (Chriſt) is blaſphemed, and there is none to gaine ſaie it: the holie ghoſt is reproched, and he that is able to reproue it, is chaſed awaie. Thus farre ſainct Baſill. Loe M. Dorman, who is blaſphemed, not the biſhop of the people, as you dooe dreame, but our ſauiour Chriſte, and the holie ghoſte are blaſphemed: and ſuche blaſphemers are iudged moſte worthie to bee biſhoppes of the people. This is the truthe, this is ſainct Baſilles minde, that the blaſphemer is made biſhoppe of the people, and not, the biſhop of the people blaſphemed. It is eaſie to perceiue therefore, good readers, that this is moſte farre from all purpoſe, that he allegeth by patching here and there, out of Baſilius Magnus his. 69 epiſtle, to the Biſhoppes of Italie and Fraunce, and

ouerpaſſing purpoſely ſentences, directly touching the aduerſaries them ſelues: where ſaincte Baſill declareth the miſerable ſtate of all the Eaſte Churches, euen from Illyrike, to Thebaida (as he there ſaieth) by reaſon of the diſturbaunce that all good and godlie biſhoppes of the ſaied Eaſte Churches (whiche were of the Greekes for the moſte parte) ſuffered by the Arrians, whoſe hereſies all the world dooeth knowe how muche wee dooe abhorre. And therefore euen the chief of the Hoſius contra Brentium lib▪ 1. folio. 24. & lib. 5. fol. 249. Papiſtes can not but therefore muche commende vs. What abuſe therefore is this of the readers, and of his own, and other mennes tyme, that M. Dorman ſhould charge vs with the crimes of thoſe menne, whoſe hereſies and wickedneſſe, it is well knowen, we doo moſte deteſt. But as before he abuſed certaine woordes of S. Cyprian: ſo here, becauſe mention is made by S. Baſill of theſe woordes: Praeſidentias inuadunt, prima ſedes, & populi epiſcopus. That is to ſaie, Thei inuade the higheſt roumes, the chief ſee, and the biſhop of the people: he truſted that the ignoraunte would take the ſaied woordes, as meant of the biſhoppe of Rome, and his authoritie, and of our contempte of the ſame. But bothe this. 69. epiſtle, and the epiſtle folowing, by maiſter Dorman alſo hereafter alleged, dooe manifeſtlie declare, all theſe woordes to appertaine to the Eaſte churches, and to the Biſhoppes of the Eaſte churches, and not to the Biſhoppe of Rome: and that the chiefe roumes ſo inuaded, bee the Biſhoprikes of the Eaſte churches, and not the Biſhoprike of Rome: and the ſet of euery of them, is that chief ſee, or place propoſed for a rewarde of wickedneſſe, and not Rome: and that the blaſphemous Arrian is that biſhop of the people: whoō if maiſter Dorman will haue to bee the Biſhoppe of Rome, I will not muche labour to let hym. And ſo all

this is altogether impertinent to his purpoſe, to make any ſhewe for the Popes authoritie, or any reſēblaunce of our doinges againſt the Pope. For if he would haue it to perteine to vs, as doing the like now as was dooen in ſainct Baſilles tyme by the Arrians (For he ſaieth, it dooeth liuelie repreſente our tymes) why maie not we with as good, and more reaſon, affirme it rather to apperteine to the Papiſtes them ſelues, and moſte liuelie to repreſent their doynges? It is their paſſyng pride and ambition, whiche ſheweth that thei feare not the Lorde. Thei haue inuaded preſidences, not onelie eccleſiaſticall, but temporall alſo, hauyng the titles of biſhoppes, leadyng the liues of temporall Lordes and Princes. The more wicked that any of them is, the more blaſphemous, the more likelie is he to clime to the higheſt place, as his due reward. Whiche hath been obſerued for a rule in the election to the Papac
                     •
                  e, the higheſte place of all, this many hundreth yeres. What ſpeake I of election? For the obteinyng of the whiche higheſt place among them, ſo many fraudes, ſimonies, poiſonynges, bloudie fightes, and murders haue been committed: as maie to ſuche, who will read their owne ſtories, well appeare. Yea the verſe Pope that now is, In oratione habita in conſiſtorio Romae 1564. Februario menſe typis excuſa. Pius the fowerth, dooeth pitifullie complaine, that not onelie Simonie, and corruption by largition of huge ſummes of money, but alſo force and armes haue been attempted, to depriue hym yet liuyng, of his Papacie, and to place an other. To proceede, the authoritie of Prieſtes is loſte emongeſt the Papiſtes, and turned into temporall lordſhip. The rulers of the clergie among the Papiſtes can not teache the people, thei are ſo ignoraunt: and their liues be ſuche, that thei haue loſt their libertie to ſpeake againſte vices, where of them ſelues are moſte guiltie: and the laitie doeth diſdaine to bee by

ſuche admoniſhed. Where ye Papiſtes doo beare ſwaie, there are all godlie mennes mouthes ſtopped by their exceadyng crueltie: onely blaſphemous Friers haue their tongues at libertie. The holie Sacramentes are prophaned by their ſuperſtitions: the holie woorde of God is corrupted by their gloſes, and Traditions. In ſumme, all holie thynges are by their vnholie dooynges polluted and defiled. And thus farre touchyng as muche as is by M. Dorman alledged out of S. Baſill, and howe it doeth right well agree with our aduerſaries. 
                     Baſil. epiſt. 69. Now S. Baſill hath more matter, whiche maiſter Dorman hath of purpoſe ouerpaſſed, as in his owne eares ſomewhat ſoundyng of Popiſhe properties: to witte, that the authoritie of Prieſtes was loſte, for that there Defecerunt qui paſcunt cū ſcientia ouile domini. lacked in the cleargie ſuche as could with knowledge féede the Lordes foulde: for that Aconomias pauperum in proprias voluptates īſumūt thei of the cleargie conuerted the prouiſiō, made in the churche for the poore, to their owne pleaſures: kepte Annihilata eſt canonum ſinceritas. not the Canons and rules eccleſiaſticall: Licentia peccandi multa. &c. vſed all libertie in ſinnyng: came to dignities Eccleſiaſticall by mennes fauoure, more then their owne worthines: and Serui enim ſunt eorū qui beneficiū contulerunt. ſo became their bonde men, who beſtowed vpon ſuche benefite or benefice. This hath alſo S. Baſill in that Epiſtle. Now what ignoraunce of Goddes lawe was in the Popiſhe cleargie, vntill we ſtirred thē vp to their bookes: what riotous waſting of eccleſiaſticall poſſeſſions vpon their owne pleaſure, before we did finde faulte with it: what breache bothe of Goddes lawe, and of the old Canons Eccleſiaſticall, yea euen of their owne Popiſhe decrées alſo: what libertie and impunitie of moſte wicked life, vntill all the worlde cried out vpon theim: what ſuite, ſimonie and ambition for Eccleſiaſticall promocions, was emongeſt the Popiſhe cleargie: how many of thē for bribes or worldlie fauour were promoted: how few

for their owne worthineſſe, was well knowen ouer all Chriſtendome, and can not yet be forgotten. I am ſure therefore, that this whole place of S. Baſill maie more iuſtlie be applied to the Papiſtes, then to vs. And it is not vnknowen to M. Dorman, that it is in reaſonyng the greateſt faulte that can bee, to bryng that for hym, whiche maie bee either common to his aduerſaries, or returned backe againſt hymſelf. Wherefore I beſeche thee good reader, conſider the ſinceritie of M. Dorman, who, vpon ſuche places as are theſe, taken out of ſainct Cyprian, and S. Baſill, as it were vpon good and ſubſtantiall groundes, concluded thus.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. I.
            To be ſhorte, there was neuer yet any heretike emō
               geſt Nowell. Hoſius againſt Brentius, lib 2 Fol. 42. hath the ſame. ſo many as from tyme to tyme, haue continually troubled the Churche of God, that made not his firſte entrie into his hereſies, by the proclaimyng [as it were] of opē warre, againſt the beautifull order of the church [whiche thei haue alwaies forſeen to be to theim, terribilis vt caſtrorum acies ordinata, terrible as is the froonte of a battell well ſet in ordre] and againſt the biſhop of Rome, appointed of God to be here in earthe, the lawfull gouernour and head thereof, not lackyng alſo therin greate policie, that by ſtrikyng the ſhepherde, they might the eaſelier ſcatter the flocke.
            
               Nowell.
               You ſee here the concluſion gathered out of that, whiche hetherto by hym hath been alledged out of S. Cyprian, and ſainct Baſill. And how the verie wordes written by ſainct Cyprian, in the places before mentioned, for the maintenaunce of biſhoppe Rogatian his authoritie, and for his owne authoritie alſo, thei being bothe Biſhoppes of Afrike, he is not aſhamed here in his concluſion, to place out of place, and to apply them

to the proofe of the biſhoppe of Rome his ſupremacie, whervnto thei apperteine nothyng at all: and to frame thereof this leude argument: The entrie into all hereſies is, to make open warres againſt the biſhop appointed by God, to bee the lawfull gouernour and heade of the churche. This is the maior, and is proued by S. Cyprian: now foloweth his minor, but the biſhop of Rome is the biſhop appointed by God, to bee here in earth the lawfull gouernour, and heade of the churche: the concluſion: ergo, The entrie into all hereſies is to make open warre againſte the biſhop of Rome. I ſai
                     •
                   the minor, is falſe, and a falſe concluſion doeth folowe of the ſame. For the biſhop (of whom S. Cyprian ſpeaketh) appointed by God to be lawfull gouernour, and heade of the churche, is in Carthage S. Cyprian hymſelf: and Rogatian, in his owne Dioceſſe: and not the Biſhop of Rome, otherwiſe then in his owne Dioceſſe onely. And therefore open warre to bee made againſte them, in their owne Dioceſſe, whereof thei be lawfull biſhoppes, is the beginnyng of hereſies, and not to reſiſte the biſhop of Rome, vſurpyng to be head of the vniuerſall Churche, ouer the whiche, of right, he hath no authoritie. For theſe woordes. [the biſhop appointed by God, to bee the lawfull gouernour and head of the churche] if thei make for any ſupremacie at all, thei make for the ſupremacie of Rogatian, and Cyprian biſhops of Afrike, of whō S. Cyprian ſpeaketh theim: and not of the biſhop of Rome, of whom in thoſe Epiſtles he ſpeaketh not one woorde. And if thei make not for the ſupremacie of Cyprian, & Rogatian, thei make for none at all: and if thei make for no ſupremacie at al, they were here without all cauſe alledged by M. Dorman, but onely to deceiue the ſimple, by ſuche a guilefull, and vntrue introduction to his firſte falſe propoſition,

of the Pope his ſupremacie. Now if he thinke yet that he might make ſuche a ſimple collection of S. Cyprian and S. Baſill his woordes, as this: That as the beginnyng of hereſies in their time, was the contempt of the inferiours towardes their owne Biſhops (for ſo S. Cyprian teacheth) ſo in likewiſe is the contempte of the Pope, as the higheſt of all biſhops, the beginnyng of hereſies now. Firſt I denie the argument, for that it foloweth not, though it be euill for the inferiour to diſobeie his owne biſhop, to whoſe obedience in all godlineſſe he is bounden. Therfore it is euill for a ſtraunger, not to obeie a ſtraunge foraine vſurpar, to whom he oweth no duetie of obediēce. Againe I ſaie, though it be the beginnyng of hereſie, to diſobey Cyprian, Rogatian, yea or Cornelius, beyng godlie and catholike biſhops: yet is it not likewiſe the beginnyng of hereſies, to diſobey any the late Popes of Rome: who were not onely no godlie biſhops (as were Cyprian, Rogatian, and Cornelius) but bothe moſte wicked, and in deede no Biſhops at all, but falſe vſurpers of worldlie tyrannie. Whom, for the ſubiectes of an other chriſtiā and lawfull ſoueraigne, to obeie, and not to diſobeie, is 
                     Baſilius Epiſtola. 70. Perſequutionem patiuntur paſtores, vt diſꝑgantur oues gregis.
                   the beginning of hereſies, treaſons, and all other euils and miſchiefes. In the concluſion it is to be noted, whē Baſill ſpeaketh of all the Biſhops of the Eaſte, as the ſhepeherdes ſufferyng perſecution: maiſter Dorman alteryng the number, ſpeaketh it of the Pope, as the onely ſhephearde: Remouyng the matter from many Greke paſtours perſecuted, to one Romane depaſtor diſperſyng the flocke, and perſecutyng, not ſufferyng perſecution.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 2.
            Thus did in the tyme of S. Cyprian, Nouatus that Lib. 6. ca. 30. 
               Nowell. It is cap. 3. and not. 30. The like is Euſebii libr. 6. cap. 43. and in ſundrie Epiſtles of S. Cyprian, vvho dooth ſpeake moſte of Nouatianus. greate heretyke, who as Nicephorus reporteth of hym,

holdyng betwene his handes, the handes of ſuche as minded to receiue of hym, the bleſſed Sacramente of th'altar: vſed to theim theſe woordes. A diura mihi per corpus et ſanguinem domini Ieſu Chriſti nunquam te a me diſceſſurum, et ad Cornelium (Romanus is Epiſcopus fuit) reredituruineſſe. Sweare to me ꝙ he, by the bodie, and bloud of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, that thou wilt neuer forſake me, nor retourne to Cornelius, vvho vvas then biſhop of Rome. So did in our tyme the ſcholers and folovvers of Martin Luther. So did Ihon Caluin vvith his congregacion at Geneua: So doe euen at this time, in our infortunate country, thoſe vvicked men [apon vvhom I beſeche almightie God to extende his mercie] vvho occupiyng the places, and roomes of catholike biſhoppes, beyng themſelues indurate heretikes, ceaſſe not daiely moſte cruelly to practiſe, that leſſon learned of their aunceſtor Nouatus. For vvhat manne admit thei to any liuyng, of vvhom thei exact not firſt this othe? VVhom ſuffer thei to cōtinue in his liuing, if he giue not this othe? For the onely refuſall hereof, hovv many notable men of the clergie, bothe for life and learnyng, ſuffer they to pyne avvaie in priſon? I remembre not heare, the greate nomber of gentlemen, and other mere laye men not included in the ſtatute, of pooer young Scholers of bothe th'vniuerſites, vvho vvitheout all face of lavve (for, for the other theie pretended The baniſhement of ſcholers from the vniu
                     •
                  rſities, for refuſing to ſvveare againſt the Pope. a colour) beyng not ſo muche themſelues ſpoiled of ther colleages, as ther colleages, vniuerſities, yea ther countrey ſelf (vvhiche had of the moſte parte of them byn likely to haue receiued bothe help and comfort) ſpoiled and robbed of thē: vvander novv abroade in diſperſion, lamentyng th'eſtate of their miſerable countrie.
            
               Nowell.
               
                  
As it is euident, that we are moſte farre from Nonatus hereſie, ſo is Nouatus his othe not onely vnlike, but cleane contrary to our othes. The controuerſie betwixt Cornelius and Nouatus was not, whether the biſhop of Rome was the ſupreme head of the churche, (as it is now betwene vs and the Papiſtes) but whether Cornelius or he was by right ye Biſhop of Rome. And Nouatus exacted of the Romaines, or Italians, an othe, that thei ſhould cleaue to hym as their biſhop, againſte Cornelius, who was their true Biſhoppe in 
                     Euſebius libr. 6. cap. 43. déede: whiche was vnlawfull to require. Our othes be of obedience to our naturall Prince, due by Goddes lawe: and of renouncyng of foraine vſurped power, or authoritie ouer our Prince and countrey: without the whiche, we cā not be faithful to our owne ſoueraigne. But let vs conſider his woordes. Thus did Nouatus, ſaieth M. Dorman, as though Nouatus had made his firſt entrie to his hereſies, by makyng open warre againſte the biſhop of Rome, appoincted by God to bee the lawfull gouernour, and head of the churche: and as though, he made them renounce the ſaid biſhop of Romes ſupremacie. For his woordes, thus did Nouatus. &c. (Whiche muſte needes haue relation to that, whiche goeth before) doo importe no leſſe. And his appliyng of this othe of Nouatus, to our othes, inforceth the ſame. But Nouatus made neither the beginnyng, nor endyng of his hereſies, about any deniyng of Cornelius ſupremacie, as biſhop of Rome: nor exacted any othe for that purpoſe. For ſuche vſurped authoritie of the biſhop of Rome, was then vnknowen and vnheard of, as ſhall hereafter moſte plainly appeare. But the 
                     Cyprianus li. 3. Epiſt. 13. Euſebius li. 6. cap. 43. Nicephorus lib. 6. cap. 3. othe whiche Nouatus required was, that thei ſhould acknowledge hym for their biſhop, and not Cornelius who was their Biſhop in deede. And further the ſaied

othe concerned the maintenaunce of Nouatus his hereſie: whiche was, that ſuche, as for feare of tormentes had renounced the Chriſtian faithe, or had offered Incenſe to the Idoles of the Gentiles, though thei repented therefore, were not to bée receiued into the churche againe: whiche cruell opinion, as well S. Cyprian biſhop of Carthage, as Cornelius biſhop of Rome, with all other godlie biſhops, condemned: and taught the cō
                  trary true doctrine, that ſuche alſo, vpon due repentaunce, might bée receiued againe into the churche: accordyng as wee this daie, doo alſo moſte earneſtly beleue and teache. Now as Nouatus beyng in Italie required an othe, that their adherentes Romaines, or Italiās, ſhould not turne to Cornelius biſhop of Rome, to acknowledge him for their biſhop, to be of his faith, and to communicate with hym: ſo did the profeſſors of the ſame hereſies trauell in Afrike with their diſciples there, beyng Africanes, that thei ſhould not returne to 
                     Cyprianus lib. 4. epiſt. 9. Cyprian Biſhop of Carthage, to communicate with hym. Whiche, as it maketh nothyng for any ſupremacie of S. Cyprian biſhop of Carthage, no more maketh the other for any ſupremacie of Cornelius biſhoppe of Rome. For though it be vnlawfull to exacte an othe of any, to diſobeie their owne godlie biſhops, what proueth that, that one maie not ſweare to refuſe the obedience of an aliene and wicked vſurpar, and to keepe hym in the obedience of his owne ſoueraine?
               And where Nouatus began firſt his hereſie in Afrik by ſtriuyng againſt S. Cyprian, as S. Cyprian hymſelf 
                     Cyprianus li. 2. epi. 8 Idēeſt Nouatus qui apud 
                           •
                        os primum diſcordiae & ſchiſma tis incendium ſeminauit &c.
                   doeth witneſſe, and not by ſtriuyng firſte againſte Cornelius biſhop of Rome, (as M. Dorman vntrulie reporteth) the beginnyng of hereſies is rather to make warre, and ſtrief againſt the biſhop of Carthage, then againſt the biſhoppe of Rome, as M. Dorman would

haue it. But there was then neither ſtriuyng, nor any othe required, concerning the biſhop of Rome, as head of the churche, as by that whole proceſſe in S. Cypriā, Euſebius, and Nicephorus it dooeth plainly appeare. Wherefore M. Dorman maie bee aſhamed to forge ſo manifeſt a lie, as that Nouatus exacted an othe againſt the Popes ſupremacie: or that we folowe Nouatus in exactyng like othe as he did. And ſeyng that wee doo moſte deteſte that cruell hereſie of Nouatus, and doo firmelie beleue, and earneſtlie teache as did S. Cyprian, and Cornelius, it is as maliciouſlie, as vntrulie doen of M. Dormā, not onely to applie to vs the example of Nouatus othe, exacted for the maintenaunce of his hereſies: but alſo to call Nouatus our aunceſtor, and our Biſhops as his diſciples, indurate heretikes: who doo moſte abhorre bothe Nouatus, and his hereſie, and moſte earneſtly, and pithilie in all their writynges and Sermons doo impugne the ſame, by ſettyng foorth to their power, the vnſpeakeable mercie of God towardes all ſinners truely penitent. Wherby it maie appeare to the diſcreate readers, that M. Dorman, and ſuche other malitious aduerſaries, paſſe not muche whether they lie, or ſaie truthe, ſo they maie bryng vs, by hooke or crooke out of credite, and into the hatred of the worlde. I beleue alſo that M. Dorman in the alleagation of Nouatus his othe, had a further reſpecte to that he maketh mention of the bodie & bloud of Chriſt: by the whiche, becauſe Nouatus cauſed thē to ſweare, M. Dormā thought belike, thereby to proue, or at leaſt to make an inſinuation, to the ſimple, that the bodie and bloud of Chriſte, ſhould bee corporallie preſente in the Sacramente: but the daiely othes of blaſphemous men, ſwearyng likewiſe in his corporall abſence, doo confute that collection. And to the ende, that M. Dorman

ſhould gaine nothyng in that matter of the Sacramente, by this place, I haue thought good to admoniſhe the reader, that the ſaid place of Nicephorus and Euſebius (of whom Nicephorus had it) is directlie againſt 
                     Nicephorus lib. 6. cap. 3. Euſeb. lib. 6. cap. 43. their tranſubſtantiation, and for our vſage now in the churche. The woordes of Nicephorus a little before the place by M. Dorman alledged, are theſe: Quum enim oblationes offerret, qui mos ſacerdotibus eſt, & iam ad diſtributionem panis perueniſſet, data cuilibet parte ſua, pro eo quòd cum gratiarum eam actione percipere debebant, iurare miſeros coegit. Vtran
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      enim percipientium manum comprimens, non prius eas remiſit, quàm iuratū ab eis eſſet: [vtar autem verbis eius conceptis] Adiura mihi per ſanguinem & corpus domini noſtri Ieſu Chriſti, nunquam te à me diſceſſurum, & ad Cornelium [Romanus hic fuit epiſcopus] rediturum eſſe. Miſeri autem illi non prius quod acceperant, deguſtarunt, quàm ſe illi deuouerunt. That is to ſaie, When Nouatus made his offerynges, as the maner of Prieſtes is, and nowe was come to the diſtribution of the breade, he, deliueryng euery one his parte, in the ſteede of due thankes geuyng in the receiuyng of the ſame, compelled the wretched menne to ſweare: for he laiyng holde on bothe the handes of the receiuers, did not let them goe, vntill thei had ſworne: (for I will vſe his owne verie woordes) Sweare to me by the bodie and bloud of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, that thou wilte neuer forſake me, nor retourne to Cornelius, who was then biſhop of Rome. And thoſe wretched mē did not taſte that, whiche they had receiued, afore they had by othe aſſured themſelues to hym. &c. Thus farre Nicephorus. Euſebius, who hath the verie ſame woordes, calleth it bread alſo. And ſo if M. Dormā thought this place by the waie, might ſerue for their purpoſe in the

matter of the lordes ſupper (whiche he here calleth the ſacrament of th'altar) he was farre deceiued. For both Nicephorus and Euſebius callyng it after the conſecration (as thei terme it) bread, and Nicephorus ſaiyng that thei taſted that whiche thei receiued, that is to ſay, bread: and by the circumſtances it appearyng, that the vſe of the primitiue churche than, was agreable to our vſe now, in geuyng the Sacrament into the receiuers handes, bothe is their tranſubſtantiation cleane euerted, by twoo witneſſes, euen by M. Dorman hymſelf choſen: and wee are declared by the ſame witneſſes, to bee the verie folowers of the primitiue churche, in that vſage of deliueryng of the Sacramente into the receiuers handes. For the whiche yet thei charge vs, as horrible profaners of the holie Sacramente. But to cloke theſe matters, where Nicephorus calleth it the diſtribution of the breade, M. Dorman calleth it the bleſſed ſacrament of th'altar. And where Nicephorus ſaith, he gaue euery one his part, before he cauſed thē to ſweare: M. Dormā ſaith, he cauſed ſuche as minded to receiue of hym the bleſſed Sacramente of the altar, to ſweare: where as in deede, thei had receiued it of him into their handes before: as is alſo in Nicephorus booke in the margente, noted by Ioannes Langus, the tranſlatoure Ioan. Langus. Ea tempeſtate laicis etiā Euchariſtiaī manus dabatur: quod poſtea in Eccleſia mutatum eſt. thereof, and councelour to the late Emperour Ferdinandus, that the cuſtome of the Churche then was, to deliuer the Sacrament into the receiuers handes. But in deede this is M. Dorman his ordinarie cuſtome in alledgyng of authours, to paſſe ouer with ſilence that whiche is againſte hym, and to take that whiche maketh a ſhewe for hym, and withall to adde that is not in the authour, in ſuche ſorte, as the ignorante would thinke it to be the authours verie woordes. I knowe, it is impertinente to entreate of the matter of the Sacramente,

in this controuerſie of the Popes ſupremacie: but M. Dorman, of purpoſe as it ſemeth, doeth mingle ſuche thynges by the waie: whiche, if thei be there anſwered, ſhal make a mingle mangle of diuers matters vnpleaſaunte to the reader: and if thei bee paſſed ouer not anſwered, as impertinent to the preſent treatie, he truſted it would ſerue to intāgle the ſimple, and withall to bee an occaſion to his fauourers, to triumphe in the meane tyme, as though wee diſſembled the matter by ſilence, for that wee could ſaie nothyng to it. But to retourne to the purpoſe againe: whereas M. Dorman hath here in one halfe leafe, heaped a greate number of euidente lies, as it were, in a packet together, I haue thought good to putte the reader in remembraunce of them, in order as thei lie. The firſt lie is, that after his diſcourſe out of S. Cyprian, of the Biſhop appoincted by God, to be the gouernour and head of the Churche, he ſaieth, the biſhop of Rome is that heade, whereas by S. Cyprian, the contrarie is euident: and that hymſelf, 1. or biſhop Rogatian is that head, whereof he ſpeaketh, as hath been fully heretofore declared. The ſeconde is, that to make warre againſte the Biſhoppe of Rome, is the firſte entrie to hereſie. Whereas S. Cyprian 2. teacheth, that the contempte of euery godlie biſhop in his owne dioceſſe, by ſuche as are their inferiours, is the beginnyng of hereſies. The third is, that he ſaieth: Thus did Nouatus: to witte, that Nouatus 3. made hi
                     •
                  yrſt entrie into his hereſies, by makyng open warr
                     •
                   againſt the biſhop of Rome, appoincted by God to be in earth the gouernour and head of the Churche: whiche is a double lie, and maieſtande for twoo. For Nouatus began his hereſies firſte in Afrike, and contended with S. Cyprian, before he troubled Cornelius 
                     Cyprianus lib. 2. epiſt. 8. at Rome, as by the teſtimonie of S. Cyprian is euidēt.

Wherefore his entrie to his hereſies, was his proclaimyng of open warre againſte S. Cyprian, appoincted by God, to be the gouernour and head of the Churche, as S. Cyprian hymſelf ſaieth. The other parte of this lie is, that he ſaieth, Nouatus made warre againſt him, as the gouernour and head of the churche: for his wordes, Thus did Nouatus, muſt nedes be referred to that whiche wente before: but Nouatus tooke not Cornelius, but hymſelf to be biſhoppe of Rome, as doeth by the ſtorie euidentlie appeare: wherefore the ſtrief betwene theim was not, whether Cornelius as biſhop of Rome was head of the churche (as M. Dorman would haue it ſeme) but whether he, or Nouatus were biſhop of Rome. The fourth lie is a double lie alſo: where he reporteth that Nicephorus ſaieth, that Nouatus holdyng 
                  4. 
                  betwene his handes, the handes of ſuche as minded to receiue of hym the bleſſed Sacrament of the altar, vſed theſe woordes. &c. For Nicephorus hath no ſuche wordes, but he ſaieth thus: when Nouatus was come to the diſtribution of the bread, he geuyng euery one his parte, cauſed them to ſweare. &c. And this doublelie, the receiuyng of the bleſſed Sacramente of the altar, in ſ
                     •
                  eede of the diſtribution of bread, and thei that minded to receiue it, where as thei had receiued it alreadie into their handes, he made of purpoſe to ſaue their tranſubſtantiation harmeleſſe, and to keepe it ſecrete, that our vſage in deliueryng the Sacrament into the receiuers handes, is agreeable to th
                     ••
                  rimitiue churche. The
                     •
                  ifte lie is, that he ſaieth, wee doo ſweare men in ſuche ſorte as Nouatus did: and that no manne 
                  5. 
                  can either gette any liuyng, or kept that he hath without makyng of this othe: Meanyng ſuche as Nouatus exacted. But Nouatus exacted an othe of the Romaines to cleaus to hym againſte their owne Biſhoppe,

whiche was vnlawfull. Wée require an othe of ſubiectes Engliſhemen, of obedience to their and our naturall Prince, and of renouncyng all forraine and vſurped power. Again Nouatus cauſed them to ſweare that his hereſie was the truth, and that Cornelius true doctrine was hereſie. Wee haue no ſuche matters in hande, but are on Cornelius ſide againſte Nouatus, teachyng the ſame doctrine that Cornelius did, abhorryng the hereſie that Nouatus taught. Wherefore in this manifolde fable of M. Dormans, amplified by his Rhetorike, looke how often he ſaieth, ſo did Luther, ſo did Caluine, ſo doo thoſe wicked men in our countrey: as ofte, as he ſaieth: Thei exacted this othe. &c. If he geue not this othe. &c. So many tymes as M. Dormā doeth repeate theſe woordes, this and ſo, ſo many loude, lewde lies hath he made, one vpon an others backe: whereas in deede it is neither ſo, nor ſo.
               This M. Dormans deceiptfull dealyng, moſte vſual vnto hym, was the cauſe why I ſaide once in publike place, that I had not found any one authoritie by him, (as farre as then I had redde) truely alledged, beſides his vntrue notyng of the places in ye margēt. Which, though it ſometyme happen by negligence of Printers, M. Dorman yet in this booke, beyng otherwiſe ſo diligently printed, maie ſeme of ſet purpoſe to haue doen, leſt ſuche as would be inquiſitiue, ſhould to ſpéedely finde out the lewdeneſſe of his allegations, ſeruyng nothyng to his purpoſe: vnleſſe perhappes maiſter Dorman did neuer vſe his owne eyes, in vewyng of theſe places, but did credite his collectours therein altogether, as in the proceſſe of his doynges doeth credibly appere that he did. For in one leaf, or little more, of foure onely places by hym alledged, three thereof be noted vntruely, that he might therein agree with his 
                     Fol. 1. Epiſto. 11. for 9.
                  
guilefull and vntrue appliyng of places of the doctors 
                     Fol. codē epi. 61. for. 69. Fol 2. in principio, cap. 30. for cap. 3. and authors, altogether impertinente to the matter he treateth of. Whiche as in all places he faileth not to doo, ſo hath he in this place, as you ſe, well performed the ſame. Who alſo procedyng therein, calleth Nouatus our anceſtour, and our biſhops, as his diſciples, at his pleaſure, he calleth, indurate heretikes: where it is knowen to all that vnderſtande, that we moſt abhorre Nouatus, & his hereſies: and goeth on ſaiyng, that for the onely refuſall of this othe, how many notable men of the cleargie, bothe for life, & learnyng, ſuffer thei to pine awaie in priſon? M. Dorman, this othe ye talke of, was neuer required of them: and thei pine not, but fare well, & of other mennes coſt too, a great many of them: thei be well fedde, and in good liking: & ſome of them ſo fat, as thei maie wallowe too. Thei neither ſit, nor hāg in ſtockes, by legges or fingers, nor haue their neckes in chaines: thei are neither whipped, nor ſcourged, as ſome of theim vſed others. In ſickeneſſe tyme thei had their progreſſes, bothe for health, & pleaſure too. Where M. Dorman ſaith, that gentlemen, laie men, and ſcholers of the vniuerſitie are put to the ſaid othe (which in deede is of due obedience to their naturall Soueraine) without all face or colour of law, & for refuſing therof are ſpoiled of ther countrey, and wander in diſperſion, lamentyng the miſerable eſtate of their ſayd countrey: I doubt not, but had thei refuſed to ſweare to that falſe Romiſh vſurper, in ye time of his tyrānie in England, there would haue béen face and colour of lawe enough founde, to haue ſpoiled thē of their liues alſo, by moſte cruell death. And ſuche gentlemen & ſcholers, as could ſo eaſiy ſweare fidelitie to ſuche a forrain falſe vſurper, & would wāder in diſperſiō, rather then take the othe of due obedience of their natural prince, doo worthily wā
                  der

in diſperſiō: & maſe more iuſ
                     •
                  ly bewaile their own wicked follie, the cauſe therof, then the miſcrie of their countrey: whiche, thākes be to God, is in no ſuche caſe, but in farre better then thei would haue it to bee. Had we feared no woorſe at your handes, then any of theſe, whoſe caſe you ſo lament, doo ſuffer, we would neuer haue forſaken our natural coūtrey, wandring in farre more miſerable diſperſion, then you doo: we would in our countrey haue bitterlie lamented, the pitifull caſe of our countrey, then moſte miſerably oppreſſed with Popiſhe ſuperſtition, and forraine tyrānie: and, would you haue been ſatiſfied with our teares, and not haue forſed vs moſte cruellie to haue ſhedde all the droppes of blou
                     •
                   in our bodies, and verie hartes, we ſhould not haue thought our ſelues to haue ſuffered any perſecution at all, but rather to haue receiued greate friendeſhip, and curteſie at your handes. But what fables ſo euer it doeth pleaſe M. Dorman to fourge aboute our lawfull othes, and what crueltie ſo euer he feigneth vs to vſe, makyng a greate matter of euery trifle, touching the Papiſtes, it is true, and to true, that for refuſyng of that moſte vnlawfull, and wicked othe of the Popes ſupremacie, and not acknowledgyng of his vſurped authoritie, a greate number bothe of learned, and vnlearned: as well of the laitie, as of the cleargie: of women, as men: of yong, as old, haue loſt not onely their liuynges, and all their goodes, but alſo as many of them as eſcaped not out of their countrey into miſerable exile, were apprehended and caſte into moſte vile priſon, beyng not ſet, but hanged, as I haue ſaied, in ſtockes, and yrons, by feete, handes, and necke. And after long puniſhmentes, and pinyng, moſte painfull, & pitifull alſo, to al, ſauing onely pitileſſe papiſtes, haue finallie loſte their liues, beyng moſt cruelly conſumed

by terrible flames of fire into aſhes, if thei might obteine ſo muche mercie, as to eſcape that vſuall, longe, lingeryng, and roaſtyng in ſlacke and ſmokie fire. And yet M. Dorman thinketh it muche that thei, who haue in this wiſe vſed others, for the refuſyng of moſte wicked othes, and thauthoritie of a falſe forraine vſurper, ſhould themſelues lacke ſome parte of their liuynges, and libertie, for refuſyng to acknowledge the lawfull authoritie of their owne naturall ſoueraine. And further, whereas M. Dorman doeth make ſuche a tragedie, about our moſte lawfull othes of due obedience to our naturall ſoueraine, and of the refuſyng of forraine vſurped power: I ſhall, in place cōuenient, make good proufe, that that falſe vſurper, the biſhoppe of Rome, hath bothe wickedly exacted moſte vnlawfull othes, not onely of ſubiectes, but of Princes, and emperours alſo: and hath more wickedly diſpenſed with the lawfull othes of ſubiectes, of obedience to their owne naturall ſoueraines, and procured them to rebell againſt their Princes, to the greate effuſion of Chriſtian mennes bloud, and vtter decaie of all chriſtendome.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 2.
            Of the whiche thei maie, and we all iuſtlie now ſay, Epiſt. 70. 
               Nowell. All this place hath M. Dorman trāſlated out of Hoſius lib. 2. contra Brentium fol. 92. b. muche more then did S. Baſill of the perſecution in his tyme. He onely complained that the Churche doores were ſhut vp, that th'altars lacked that ſpirituall worſhip, that ſhould haue been doen apon thē, that there were no aſſembles of Chriſtian men, that learned men bare no ſwaie, that there was no wholeſome doctrine taught, that the feaſtes and holie daies were not kepte, that the praiers in the night were ceaſſed. To that holie It is writen to the biſhops of Fraunce and Italie: whiche M. Dorman A cōpitiſon betwene the complaiure whiche S. Baſill made of his time, and that whiche vvee maye make of oures. diſsēbled, for that the biſhoppes of Fraunce are placed before the Italian biſhops: geuyng a ſhreude ſuſpition of no ſupremacie at Rome ī thoſe daies. But he expreſſed before, to whom S. Baſils other epiſtle vvas vvriten, the Italiā biſhops being firſt named. father it ſeemed a greate outrage, that the churches were ſhutte vppe: what would he (thinke ye) then ſaie were he aliue in theſe daies, when of our Churches he

ſhould ſee, ſome made the dvvellyng houſes of priuate men, other ſome tourned into barnes, or ſtables, other cleane ouerthrowen, and made euen with the ground, and thoſe that remaine vvhole [ſo muche vvorſe then if they had byn alltogether ſhut vp] left open for heretikes to pollute, vvith ſchiſmaticall ſeruice & deueliſhe doctrine? It grieued S. Baſill that th'altars ſhould lacke the ſpirituall ſeruice, vvhiche vvas not neither for any miſlike that men had therein, but bicauſe in that grieuous perſecution of the Chriſtians, they could not be found that durſt doo it. And could he haue takē it well to haue ſeen them broken, defaced, and quite ouerthro vven: yea (vvhiche is a crime ſo horrible, that to vvrite it I tremble) in thoſe places in whiche the altars ſtood, vvhereon vvas vvont in that ſpirituall ſacrifice to bee offered vp, the moſte pretious bodie, and bloudde of Chriſt: Oxen and beaſtes more vncleane, to bee fedde? He lamented that learned menne vvere not eſtemed, that thei vvere not prouided of liuynges: and vvould he not muche more lamente, to ſee theim depriued of thoſe vvhiche they had, and Shoemakers, VVeuers, Tinckers, Cowherdes, Broome men, Ruſſians for felonies burned in the handes to bee putte in their places? Then vvas no holſome doctrine taught, novv is there nothyngelles taughte but poiſoned and vnholſome. Then vvere there no holie daies kepte, nor hymnes vſed in the night. Novv are they accompted to bee ſuperſtition.
            
               Nowell.
               M. Dorman would induce the reader to thinke, that Neceſſe eſt aut adorare imaginem. &c. Et mox vnigenit' blaſphematur, Spiritus ſanct' ignomi
                        •
                     ia afficitur, &c. VVhiche wordes alſo do declare the leudnes of M. Dormans tranſlation of Baſiles former place, as though the biſhop, & not Chriſte, had been blaſphemed. As is before declared. wée are like to the Arrians in wicked opinions, and in perſecutiō of the true churche of Chriſt: but who ſo wil read that. 70. epiſtle of Baſill, ſhall finde it otherwiſe. We neither worſhip our ſelues, nor inforce any other

to worſhip the Image that Baſil treateth of in that 70 epiſtle: wee are no Idolaters, nor teache falſe doctrine: we haue not many goddes, leſſe, and greater: we abate nothyng (as did the Arrians) but moſte to our power ſet foorth the glorie and deitie of Chriſt. Let the Papiſtes ſee that theſe poinctes touche not thēſelues rather. We doo not ſequeſter the holie ghoſt from the glorious Trinitie, as did thoſe Arrians in ſaincte Baſils tyme: whoſe miſchief, and their owne miſerie, he in this epiſtle doeth deplore and bewaile. Wherefore his ſaiynges in that Epiſtle apperte
                     •
                  ne nethyng to vs, who are nothyng guiltie of thoſe crimes and hereſies: but they are brought in by dreaming M. Dorman without any cauſe, and biſide all purpoſe, ſauyng onely that in readyng Hoſius 
                     Lib. 2. aduerſus Brentium. Flo. 92. b.
                   he founde this place alledged, & thought good to folowe him therein, and to tranſlate it into his booke. But now touchyng our verie caſe: why did not theſe biſhops of the Eaſte write their humble petition, for helpe in their miſeries, ſeuerallie to the biſhoppe of Rome, as heade of all the churche: but doo write to all the biſhops of Fraunce and Italie indifferently, without any mention of the biſhop of Rome at al? So farre of is it, that thei made any ſpeciall mention of hym, as the chief or heade ouer all the churche: yea placyng alſo the biſhops of Fraunce, before the Italian biſhoppes, 
                     The inſcriptiō of Baſil his. 70 epiſtle. Pie
                           •
                        tiſfimis reuera, ac chariſtimis fratr
                           •
                        bus, & in miniſterio cō
                        ſortibus vnanimis, ꝑ Galliā & Italiam epiſcopis, Baſilius Caeſariae Cappadociae epiſcopus.
                   (though M. Dorman doo craftilie diſſemble the ſame) and callyng them altogether brethren, and felowes in the miniſterie, whiche thei would neuer haue dooen, had thei had this opinion of his ſupremacie, that maiſter Dorman, and other Papiſtes doo now defende and mainteine. But in the ſaied. 70. epiſtle the ſaied Eaſt Biſhops, whiche doo not once ſpeake of the Pope, doo praie the Frenche and Italian biſhops, to make hūble ſute to the Emperour, that he by his authoritie would

repreſſe their enemies the Arriās, and releue their miſeries: whiche maketh rather for the Emperour his ſupremacie in the churche, then for the biſhops of Rome. Now where M. Dorman ſpeaketh of perſecution, as he did a little before of our moſte cruell practiſe, I referre it to the iudgement of all the worlde, whether our aduerſaries or wee bee more cruell perſecutours: and whether haue ſuffered more perſecution, thei, or wee: and whether thei or we doo come more nere to that example of perſecution, by S. Baſill in this. 70. epiſtle deſcribed, I praie thee good reader iudge indifferently. Firſt S. Baſill ſheweth that the perſecutiō was moſte 
                     Baſil. epiſto. 70. Perſequutio, & perſecutionū horrendiſsima apprehendit nos, & afflictiones quas impoſsibile eſt auribꝰ ſuſcipere, propterea ꝙ nullus ſermo reperiatur qui declaret. &c.
                   horrible, cruell, and bloudie, ſuche as was impoſſible to be expreſſed with woordes: and that Maleficus quidem nullus. &c. thieues, murtherers, and other offenders were more reaſonablie, and mercifullie dealte with, then godlie men were in that perſecution: that thei were apprehended Quidā neque nouerunt accuſatores &c ſed in tempeſta nocte violenter rapti ī exilium fugati ſunt. &c. in the night, and neither knowyng their accuſers, nor cōuicted of any crime, were baniſhed, or put to death. And that there was continuall Gemitus fiunt populorū &c.mournyng, weepyng, and ſighyng euery where: that becauſe the Quia Chriſtianorum nomen perſequē
                     tibus incumbit. &c. perſecutours had the name of Chriſtians, thei would not ſuffer ſuche as thei put to cruell death, to haue the names of martyres,  and that Father Latimer, Reuerēde Crāmer, god
                     
                        ••
                      learned Rid
                        ••
                     y, burned in 
                        ••••
                     diche.neither Nō canicies apud iudices iniquitatis venerabilis eſt. &c. age, and a hoare white heade, neither godlines, and a life vertuouſlie ledde had any  reuerence with the perſecutours. He ſheweth that the perſecutors were riche & wealthie, but thei No
                        •
                      ob tenu
                     
                        •
                     ate contēpti 
                        •
                     ertatem di
                     
                        ••
                     endi non ha
                     
                        ••
                     mus. &c. who were perſecuted were poore menne, and for their pouertie  contemned, not hauyng libertie to ſpeake. He calleth this horrible perſecution 
                     
                        ••
                      Flagellorū 
                     
                        ••
                     mmae tradi. 
                        ••
                     d Timoth.fire by a figure, but the perſecution that wee ſuffer is by fire in deede, by the whiche our aduerſaries trie vs, and ſifte vs into aſhes: ſo that ſaincte Paules prophecie of many, who in the laſte daies ſhould be tried by fire, is in deede, and without

figure accōpliſhed in vs. Conſider I praie you, good readers, theſe circumſtances of moſte extreame crueltie in thoſe perſecutours, whom S. Baſill ſpeaketh of, and iudge whether we, or our aduerſaries doo the like: and withall conſider how reaſonablie M. Dorman reſembleth vs to the ſaied perſecutours, and themſelues to them that were ſo perſecuted. Now where he goeth aboute to burthen vs with enuie of Churches, either pulled doune, or altered to other vſe, and of their altars deſtroied (muche like as the rebelles did burthen Henrie the eight, in the. 28. yere of his raigne) we make this anſwere: Truthe it is, that the foundations of Abbeis and Chauntries, Pro redemptione animarum fundatorum 
                  The true cauſes of the ruin of Abbeis. 
                  ſuorum & progenitorum ipſorum. &c. For the redemption of the ſoules of their foundours, and their progenitours ſoules. &c. (as in the ſaied foundations appereth more at large) were ſo vnſure and weake, or rather wicked, that thei could no longer beare ſuche huge ſuperſtructions and buildynges, as were laied vpon them. For the Idolatrie, ſuperſticion, hypocriſic, and wickedneſſe of the Monkes, Nunnes, and Prieſtes themſelues were growen ſo greate, and ſo heauie now, that no foundacions, though ſure and good, were hable any longer to beare and abide them. Let the horrible hiſtorie of their darke, dreadfull, and moſte diuelliſhe dooynges, notified to kyng Henrie the eight, and after to the Parliament houſe, by the reporte of the viſitours, retournyng from their viſitacion of Abbaies, and the Monkes & Nunnes themſelues, in their owne confeſſions ſubſcribed with their owne handes, bee a proofe thereof: whiche beyng regeſtered in a blacke booke, might more iuſtlie bee called doumes daie, then any recorde this daie remainyng in Englande, reuealyng ſuche matter, as thei had thought ſhould haue remained

hidde vnto the greate daie of reuelation of all ſecreates, if euer thei looked for it. Now truly the monſtrous Monachorum monſtra monaſteria euerterunt. liues of Monkes, Friers, and Nunnes haue deſtroied their Monaſteries and Churches, and not wée. Concernyng their foundations ſo contrarie to the merites of Chriſt our ſauiour, that is come to paſſe of thē, that our ſauiour hymſelf foreſhewed. Omnis plantatatio. 
                  
                     Math. 15. b. 13. 
                  &c. Euery plantacion not planted by my heauē
                  ly father, ſhalbe plucked vp by the rootes. Touchyng their impietie towardes God, and wickedneſſe of life: that is fulfilled, that was foreſhewed by the Prophetes, Eſaie, and Ieremie vpon Babilon and Hieruſalem: 
                     Eſaie. 14. d. 19. &. 34. d. 13. Hier. 9. d. 11. & 10 d 21. &. 50. 
                        
                           •
                        . 40. &. 51. d. 37. and conſequently, vpon all wicked cities and places, where Gods lawe ſhall likewiſe bée tranſgreſſed: where like Idolatrie, like fornication, bodily and ghoſtlie ſhalbée committed: where ſhalbée founde like fooliſheneſſe, ignoraunce, and blindneſſe of the Paſtours, heades and rulers, that is to ſaie: that their buſldynges ſhalbée made heapes of ſtones: that brambles & briers ſhall growe, where their pleaſaunte lodgynges were: that Oules, night ſcritches, and Dragons ſhall make their neaſtes, and houle and ſeritche, where the voyce of bankettyng and ioye was wonte to bee heard: and that their houſes ſhall neuer bee builded againe. And that when menne ſhall paſſe by, and ſaie, why hath the Lorde thus dooen to this greate Citie, to theſe goodlie Abbeies, Nunries, and Fratries? Anſwere ſhalbee made, for that thei haue forſaken the couenaunt of the Lorde their God, and haue worſhipped ſtraunge Goddes, and haue ſerued theim. Theſe, M. Dorman, be the true cauſes of ſuche horrible deſtructions and deſolacions, as haue in our time come vpon Monaſteries, and other houſes & churches. Well it maie be, that the Goſpel of Chriſt (whiche M. Dorman calleth hereſie) was

occaſion of their ruine, 
                     Eſai. 
                     
                        •
                     . c. 14. Luc. 2. 
                        •
                     . 34. Roma. 9. g. 32. 33. 1. Pet. 2. b. 6. 7. as Chriſt is the ruine of all infidels, or that the co
                     •
                  etouſneſſe of men, ſeekyng their owne gaine, maie be iudged of many, the cauſe therof. But the very true cauſes in déede, of this their ſubuerſion, were their wicked foundations laied by their firſt founders, and the ſuperſtructions of Idolatrie, ſuperſtition, hypocriſie, and abominable life, whiche they, falſely named religious men and Prieſtes, heaped ſo hugely vpon the ſaied foundations. Had their foundations béen good and ſure, had their workes been honeſt and godlie, thei ſhould by the light of the Goſpel haue gotten praiſe, and honour: and their woorkes had not to their ſhame been diſcouered by the light, and by the 1. Cor. 3. c. 13. heate of the triyng fire, vtterly conſumed. But beyng as thei were, thei loued darkeneſſe, thei hated and fled 
                     loan. 3 c. 19. 20 the light, leaſte their woorkes ſhould bee ſeen: and becauſe thei could no longer hide ſo huge wickedneſſe in ſo cleare lighte, whiche diſcouereth euen ſmall blemiſhes: it came to paſſe that God by his officers, ſtirred thereto through their counterfeite holineſſe, & ſo double wickedneſſe, reueiled by the ſaied light, executyng his iuſtice by the fire of his dreadfull and terrible indignation, cōſumed all together: ſo that the houſes were deſtroied, and thei diſperſed. Touchyng the name of altares, whiche M. Dorman ſo gladlie catcheth holde of here in ſainct Baſil (as he did before in S. Cyprian) where we call it the Lordes table, we haue for vs good 
                     Lib. 3. epiſt. 9. authoritie. Firſt that Chriſt inſtituted the Sacrament at a table, and not at an altar, is moſte manifeſt: except M. Dorman would haue vs thinke, that men had altares in ſteede of tables, in their priuate houſes in thoſe daies: but our ſauiour expreſſelie ſaiyng, that the handes of hym, who ſhould betraie him, were vpon the table, 
                     Luc. 22. c. 21. taketh awaie all doubtyng. And S. Paule alſo 1. Cor. 10. c. 21.
                  
calleth it Menſam dominicā, the Lorde his table. Sure I am that M. Dorman and all the Papiſtes with hym can not ſaie ſo muche out of the ſcriptures of the newe Teſtamente, for their altares, as I haue alledged for the Lordes table: thei maie therefore go and ioyne thē
                  ſelues to the Iewes, as in multitude of Iewiſhe ceremonies, ſo in altares alſo: as it ſeemeth in déede, thei would bothe become themſelues, and make vs too Iewes, rather then chriſtiās. If S. Baſill, and ſome other old writers cal it an altar, that is no proper, but a figuratiue name, for that as in the old lawe their brent offeringes and ſacrifices were offered vpon the altare, ſo are our ſacrifices of praier, and thankes geuing &c. offred vp to God at the Lordes table, as it were at an altar. But ſuche kind of figuratiue ſpeache cā be no iuſt cauſe to ſet vp altares, rather then tables: vnleſſe thei thinke that their croſſes alſo ſhould bée turned into altares, for that like phraſe is vſed of them, where it is ſaied, Chriſte offered by hymſelf vpon the altar of the croſſe. Now th'olde doctors doe call it the Lordes table, 
                     Chryſ. Hom. 18. in. 2. Cor. Auguſ. Tract. 26. in loan. & multi multis locis.
                   vſuallie, truelie, without figure, and agreablie to the ſcriptures. Concernyng the ſpirituall worſhip or ſeruice of God, or ſacrifice, if you will (ſeyng it is alſo mē
                  tioned in S. Baſill) due to be doen at the Lordes table, whiche, as afore is noted, he calleth an altare, it is not lackyng in our Churches at the Lordes table: that is to ſaie, true repentaunce of harte, whiche is, as the Prophete calleth it, a ſeruice and a ſacrifice pleaſaunte 
                     Pſal. 51. b. 19. vnto God, the offeryng vp of our praiers and praiſes vnto God: whiche ſeruice and ſacrifice of praiſe, as the Pſalme witneſſeth, doeth honour God: and ſpecialie, 
                     Pſal. 50. c. 14. d. 23. that ſacrifice of thankes geuing, moſte peculiar to this altare or Lordes table, and to that holie Sacramente, hauing thereof a peculiar name, beyng called with the

Greekes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to ſaie, thankes geuyng, for the gratefull remembraunce of that one Sacrifice offered by our ſauiour once for all: whiche ſacrifice of thankes 
                     Hebre. 10. geuyng wée ioynctly with other preſent doo offer vp to Chriſte our ſauiour in the memoriall by hym lefte, and by faithe in our hertes doo communicate his precious bodie and bloude, a ſacrifice by hymſelf offered for vs. Neither are our oblations, or offerynges to the poore lackyng, when we come to this altare, which S. Paule 
                     philipp. 4. d. 18 alſo calleth a ſacrifice acceptable, & pleaſaunte to God: whereas you Papiſtes haue no ſuche thyng, but onely the bare woorde Offertorium, without any offeryng for the poore: ſauyng that you did not forget to receiue the offerynges for your ſelues at the vſuall offering daies, and when any Dirige, or Monethes mynde did fall. Thus you ſe, maiſter Dorman, that we haue euen that ſame ſpirituall worſhip, ſeruice, and ſacrifice too (if you ſo will) due to be done at this altare, that is to wit, the Lordes Table, whiche S. Bafill ſpeaketh of here: and any other altare or ſeruice he meaneth not, nor knewe none. And were you not altogether to groſſe, S. Baſil ſo oīte ſpeakyng of ſpirituall worſhipping, and ſpirituall ſeruice, might ſomewhat reforme your carnall and ſenſuall vnderſtandyng. You ſee wee doo not ſticke to Spiritualis cultus, ſpirituales gratiae. graunt you not onely a ſpirituall worſhip and ſeruice, but a ſacrifice too, whiche yet hath no neede of your altares, framed to your ſelues vpon this falſe phantaſie, that the bodie and bloud of Chriſte are there offered by the Prieſtes for the quicke and deade, with the abuſe of that diſtinction of the bloudie, and vnbloudie offeryng of Chriſtes bodie, applied to the ſame: whiche is altogether a falſe fable, and a vaine dreame moſte mete for M. Dorman. The ſcriptures doo thus teache vs, that Chriſt our ſauiour once for all offered vp his body and 
                     Hebr. 10. c. 10. n. 14.
                  
bloud vpon the altar of the croſſe, the one and onely ſacrifice 
                     Phil. 5. a. 2. Hebr. 10. c. 10. 12. 14. of ſwéete ſauour, to his father: by the whiche one oblatiō of the bodie of Chriſt, a ſacrifice for our ſinnes, once for euer offered, and no more to bee offered by any man, we be ſanctified and made perfite. Wherfore the popiſhe Prieſtes whiche doo repeate often the ſacrifice of Chriſtes death, as thei doo teache, thereby, as muche as in thē lieth, doo take awaie the efficacie and vertue of the Sacrifice of Chriſtes death, makyng it like to the ſacrifices of the old lawe: the imperfection of which ſacrifices, S. Paule doeth proue by the often repetitiō of the ſame. For the continuance wherof their prieſtes alſo needed ſucceſſion: but Chriſte is a Prieſt for euer, without ſucceſſion, and his ſacrifice perpetuall, without repetition; as the Apoſtle plainly teacheth. Our 
                     Hebr. 10. c. 
                     
                        •
                     . ſeruice and ſacrifice now, is the often and thankful remembraunce of that onely ſacrifice, in the receiuyng of the holie Sacrament at the Lordes table, accordyng to his owne inſtitution: Hoc facite in memoriam mei: doo this in remembraunce of mée: with ſpirituall feadyng by faithe alſo vpon that his moſte precious bodie and bloud, ſo by him for vs offered. Touching the pullyng 4. Reg. 18. c. 22 4. Reg. 23. 2. Para. 14. a. 3. 2. Para. 17. b. 6. 2. Para. 31. a. 1. 2. Para. 34. a. 4 doune of your altares, I anſwere: thei are iuſtlie deſtroied, as were thoſe wicked altares by Aſa, Ioſaphat, Ezechias, Ioſias godlie kinges of Iuda deſtroied. For as abominable Idolatrie was committed on, and before your altares, as euer was vpō and before thoſe. If you require proufes hereof, you ſhall haue them in their due places of the Maſſe, and of Idolatrie to Images. In the meane ſeaſon, if you thinke it enough, onelie to call vs heretikes, and to affirme that wee pollute ſuche Churches, as yet remaine, with ſchiſmaticall ſeruice, and diueliſhe doctrine: and that we doo accompt hymnes in the night, and holie daies to be ſuperſtitiō:
                  
If you M. Dormā, thinke it enough onely to ſaie thus, to proue nothyng, to raile muche: ſeyng all is not Goſpell, that Dauus or Syrus dooe ſpeake in plaiyng their partes, lette it ſerue me at this preſente alſo, to ſaie the contrary: that wee teache no doctrine, but ſuche, as is agreable to God his woorde, and therefore be no 
                     •
                  eretikes: that wée haue, and keepe our Sabboth daies, and holie daies too, aſwell as euer did the Papiſtes: and doo ſing as good and godlie himnes in the daie, as euer did thei your Nightyngal
                     •
                  es, in the darke, and better too. And when wee haue bothe thus ſaied, to leaus the iudgemente of bothe our ſaiynges to the diſcreate reader for this tyme, rather then continuallie, at euery occaſion by you catched, to make a confuſion of diuers matters, which it ſeemeth, you haue purpoſely ſought. And thus farre to that, whiche M. Dorman hath alledged out of S. Baſill, as againſte vs. And I doo muche maruell that he did not rehear
                     •
                  e theſe woordes of ſainct Baſill in the ſame place alſo. Vnum eſt crimen. &c. to ſaie: There is one faulte whiche is now vehementlie condemned and puniſhed: to witte, the diligente obſeruation of the tradicions of the fathers. Theſe are ſainct Baſilles woordes in effecte, whiche omitted by maiſter Dorman, doo ſignifie that either he redde not the place hymſelf, or was more then halfe a ſleape when he did reade it, els would he neuer haue let it ſo eſcape hym. But wee anſwere to ſuche as haue alledged it. The traditions of ſuche fathers as wer S. Baſilles fathers, and liued in the primitiue Churche, wée eſteme as wee ought to doo. The traditions of our later ſtepfathers, vnborne long after S. Baſilles death, who be the children of that ſtepdame the Popiſhe Synagoge, wée cō
                  temne and condemne, for that thei haue preferred their ſaide traditions, before the lawe of God, and the inſtitution

of our ſauiour Chriſte. And thus muche for our agréement with S. Baſill. Now whē M. Dorman beſide S. Baſill, & beſides the booke too, as thei ſaie, affirmeth, that learned mē are depriued of their liuinges, & Shomakers, weauers, Tinkers, Ruffians, Felons, &c. put in their places, it is but a flooriſh of his Rhetorike: he is not able to name any one ſuche in a learned Papiſtes roome, or any of ſuche diſhoneſtie, as ruffians, or felons in our miniſterie: though it be not vnknowē, that there hath been great plentie of popiſhe prieſtes, bothe felōs, and traitours too. But if M. Dorman will make a reaſonable cōpariſon, he muſt compare the learned of our ſide, with the learned of their ſorte: or their vnlearned ſir Ihons, with our poore miniſters. And I doubte not, though our Biſhoppes bee not ſo well learned in Canon Lawe, in matters of contention aboute worldlie controuerſies, in bearyng of temporall office, and authoritie, and in comelie courtlie behauiour, and worldly pompe, as are their Biſhoppes: yet in all kindes of learnyng, maners and qualities, by S. Paule in the 1. Timo. 3. 2. Tit. 1. c. 7▪
                   office of a Biſhoppe required, there ſhall bée founde as many learned biſhoppes, and as able, and willyng to doo the dueties of good and godlie biſhoppes [per ſe, nō per alium] emongeſt vs euen at this daie, as euer were emongeſte the Papiſtes, or in Englande, fith the firſte Biſhoppe was created in it. And I truſt likewiſe, that our Cleargie, nexte vnder our biſhoppes, ſhall not bée founde any whit inferiour in learnyng, nor honeſtie of life, to theirs. Therfore M. Dorman, whē it pleaſed you to ſaie, that Cowheardes, and Broume men, are placed in learned mennes roumes, you doo but fable, as you are wonte to doo. And that wée lacke a greate many of learned men to furniſhe all eccleſiaſticall offices, wée maie thanke you Papiſtes, who haue moūe crnellie

conſumed ſo many of them to aſhes, and therby driuen vs to ſupplie ſmall cures with ſome honeſte artificers, exerciſed in the ſcriptures: whom, neither ſainct Peter the Fiſher, nor ſaincte Paule the Tente maker (who 
                     Ioan. 21. a. 3. Act. 18. a. 3. bothe vſed their artes after their calling to the Apoſtleſhip) would ſo deſpiſe, as doo you M. Dorman. And I doo muche meruaile of your iudgement, who doo place Peter the Fiſher in the higheſte roume aboue all Biſhoppes, and can not ſuffer other honeſt artificers, ſufficiently exerciſed in the Scriptures, to haue any place at all in the inferiour miniſterie. Whiche honeſt poore men, if thei haue ſucceded in the places, not of learned men, as you doo vntrulie ſaie, but in the ſteede of your Popiſhe ſir Ihons lacke latin, & all good learnyng, and honeſtie too: who tooke the chaunge of our Churche Seruice, from Latine into Engliſhe ſo greuouſlie, for none other cauſe, but for that thei could reade no Engliſhe, a greate many of them, whē thei were put to it (ſuche greate clerkes thei were) and were otherwiſe, by triall founde, in all qualities farre more meete to be Tinkers, Cobblers, Cowheardes, yea Swineheardes, and Bearewardes too, then miniſters of Chriſtes Churche: no good and godlie man can therefore iuſtlie bee offended with ſuche chaunge, though M. Dorman ſtorme neuer ſo muche thereat.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 3.
            Now as we felte none of all theſe miſeries beſides a thouſande moe, ſo long as wee keapt ourſelues within the vnitie of one head: ſo is euery manne able to beare me witneſſe, that as ſoone as the diuell the authour of all hereſies had once obteined, and brought about the baniſhemente in our countrey of that one biſhoppe, with the whiche [as you haue heard out of S. Cyprian before] he vſeth alwaies to begin, all theſe ruſshed in apon

vs, as the dore that ſhould haue kepte them out, beyng ſet wide open.
            
               Nowell.
               M. Dorman faieth, you haue heard out of ſaincte Cyprian, that with the baniſhing of that one biſhop, (meanyng the biſhoppe of Rome) the diuell beginneth, & bringeth in all miſeries afterwarde: but you haue ſéen it plainlie declared, that in al thoſe places, alledged by M. Dorman out of S. Cyprian, there is not one worde written or meant of the biſhoppe of Rome, but of Rogatian, and of S. Cyprian hymſelf, beyng bothe Biſhoppes of Afrike. And where he ſaith, that all miſeries haue ruſshed in vpon vs, with the baniſhyng of that one Biſhoppe, and heade, and onely ſaith ſo, I doo ſaie the contrary is moſte true: and will alſo in place of this treatie cōuenient, not onely ſaie, but proue, that where the Pope hath had the greateſte authoritie, there hath he brought in with hym, as well all miſeries, miſchieues, and deſtructions vpon the common wealthe: as alſo all ſuperſtitions, hypocriſtes, errours, and Idolatries into the Churche. And for this preſent tyme, it ſhall be ſufficient to admoniſhe the reader, that in all reſpectes wée bee now in farre better caſe without the Pope, in more quietneſſe, peace, ſecuritie, plentie of thynges, &c. then wee were of late vnder the Pope: and that therefore, M. Dorman doeth moſte euidētly and falſly fable, when he ſaieth, that a thouſande and more miſeries haue ruſhed into this realme, with the refuſall of that one biſhoppe and heade.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 3.
            And as this is confeſſed by the moſte auncient fathers that haue written ſence Chriſtes tyme, that by this meanes we firſte reuolt from the churche, by contemnyng, The vvaie to retourne to the vnitie of the church
                     •
                  . and not acknowledgyng the heade: ſo muſte

our retourne thither againe bee by the contrary, that is by reuerencyng hym, by acknowledgyng hym, by humble ſubmiſsion of our ſelf to hym.
            
               Nowell.
               It is none otherwiſe confeſſed by other moſte auncient fathers, then you haue alreadie heard it confeſſed by S. Cyprian, and Baſill, whom he hath without all ſhame alledged for that purpoſe, whereas thei ſpeake not one woorde of that matter, neither acknowledge any ſuche heade. And as thei remained in the Churche of Chriſte, neuer acknowledgyng the biſhop of Rome, as heade of the Churche: ſo doo wee, likewiſe re
                     •
                  ectyng his falſly vſurped ſupremacie, nothyng doubt, but wée remaine in the Churche of Chriſte, whoſe ſworne enemie we doo knowe that falſe vſurper to bée, and therefore none of Chriſtes Churche: ſo farre of is it, that he can be the heade of the ſame.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 3.
            So did thoſe that after their fall with Nouatus, S. Cyprian receiued into the Churche againe, apon their ſubmiſsion teſtified in theſe woordes. Nos-Cornelium Epiſcopum 
               Epiſtola ad Cornelium papā. lib. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                
               ſanctiſsimum Catholicae Eccleſiae, erectum à Deo omnipotente, & Chriſto D. noſtro ſcimus. Nos errorem noſtrum confitemur. Circumuenti ſumus perfidiae loquacitate factioſa amentes: videbamur quaſi quandam communicationem cum homine ſchiſmatico habuiſſe: Syncera tamē mens noſtra in eccleſia ſemper fuit. Nec ignoramus vnum Deumeſſe, & vnum Chriſtum eſſe dominum, quem confeſsi ſumus, vnum Spiritum S. Vnum Epiſcopum in Eccleſia catholica eſſe debere. VVe [ſaie thei] acknowledge Cornelius This Cornelius was Biſhop of Rome. to bee erected by God almightie, and Chriſte our Lorde, to be the holy biſhop of the catholike churche. VVe confeſſe our errour: we haue been circumuented ronnyng madde by the factious babblyng of treacherie:

wee ſeemed to haue communicated as it were, with that ſchiſmaticall manne Nouatus: yet was our ſincere One God, One Chriſt One holie ghoſte. One biſhop mynde alwaies in the Churche. Nor wee are not ignoraunte, that there is one onelie God, and one Chriſte our lorde, and that in the catholike churche there muſt be one holie ghoſt, and one biſhoppe.
            
               Nowell.
               
                  Maximus, Vrbanus, and Sidonius (whom M. Dorman 
                     Nicephorus lib. 6. cap. 3. meaneth) neither reuolted from the Churche, by contemnyng, and not acknowledgyng this heade, he ſpeaketh of: nor retourned to the Churche againe, by acknowledgyng of any ſuche heade. For in thoſe daies Cornelius, biſhoppe of Rome, was not acknowledged to bee heade of the Churche, by any man liuyng: ſuche ambition, and falſe vſurpation of the biſhop of Rome, to bée heade of the Churche, beyng vnknowen to Cornelius, then biſhoppe of Rome, and to all other biſhoppes of Chriſtendome alſo. But to make the truthe in deede knowen to the reader how theſe menne reuolted from the Churche, and how thei retourned, I ſhall out of ſaincte Cyprian, and hiſtories Eccleſiaſticall, declare 
                     Euſebi. lib. 6. cap. 43. the veritie of the matter. After the death of Fab
                     •
                  anus biſhoppe of Rome, Cornelius was lawfully choſen by 
                     Nicephorus lib. 6. cap. 3. Cyprianus li. 3. epiſto. 13. ad Stephanum li. 4. epiſt. 2. Ad Antonianum.
                   the cleargie and people, to be his ſucceſſour there. Nouatus, who was of that opinion, that ſuche as for feare of tormentes and death, had renounced the Chriſtian ſaithe, though thei repented therefore, were not to bee receiued into the Churche againe, made a greate ſtirre againſt Cornelius, who with ſaincte Cyprian, and all catholike biſhoppes, helde the contrary: that is to ſaie, that the Penitentes ought to be receiued after due diſcipline executed vpon them. But the faction of Nouatus waxyng greater, Nouatus, or (as ſaincte Cyprian ſaieth) Nouatianus, would haue intruded hymſelf, into

the Biſhoprike of Rome, and tooke hymſelf, and was taken of his faction, to bee lawfull ſucceſſour of Fabian, and the true biſhoppe of Rome: and Cornelius to be an vſurper, as one that did communicate with ſuche as had renounced their faith. Wherevpon grew this queſtion and controuerſie, whiche of them two
                     •
                   was a catholike biſhoppe, holdyng the truthe, and truly and lawfully choſen by God: and whiche was the intruder, and not of the Catholike churche, but an heretike. And amongeſt others, Maximus, Vrbanus, and Euſebi. & Niceph. vt ſupra. 
                  Sidonius, prieſtes of Rome, ioigned themſelues to Nouatus, againſt Cornelius, holdyng Nouatus opinion, and takyng hym for their Biſhoppe. And thus thei reuolted by fallyng to hereſie, and refuſyng Cornelius their biſhoppe, and by ioignyng themſelues to Nouatus an vſurper and heretike, and not by deniyng Cornelius, as biſhop of Rome, to be the head of the churche▪ as M. Dorman fableth. But afterward Maximus and his felowes repētyng their deede, did forſake Nouatus 
                     Cyprianus li. 3. epiſt. 11. as an heretike and vſurper, and retourned to Cornelius againe, as their true Biſhoppe, to ioigne in faithe and communion with him, as with a catholike biſhop, or a Biſhoppe of the catholike Churche, whiche is all one. And thei doo acknowledge that he was erected by God into that Biſhoprike of Rome: and ſo conſequently, Nouatus to be a falſe vſurper and heretike, and ſo no biſhoppe of the Catholike churche. Wherefore it is euident, that when M. Dorman ſaieth, that thoſe men retourned againe to the Churche, by this waie, that is to ſaie, by acknowledgyng Cornelius to bee the heade of the vniuerſall churche, he ſaieth moſte vntruly. And hath corrupted, and tranſlated this place falſely, remouyng the woorde ſanctiſsimae from his place, and in ſteede of, Cornelium epiſcopum ſanctiſsimae catholicae

eccleſiae, Cornelius a biſhoppe of the moſte holie catholike Churche, as ſaincte Cyprian doeth write, he hath Cornelium ſanctiſsimum epiſcopum eccleſię catholicę, Cornelius the moſte holie Biſhoppe of the Catholike Churche, to make a better ſhewe for his purpoſe: as though Maximus, Vrbanus, & Sidonius, with others, had acknowledged Cornelius to be erected by God almightie, to bee the moſte holy Biſhoppe of the Catholike and vniuerſall Churche, and ſo to make for his ſupremacie ouer the whole Churche. Whiche is neither written here, nor els where, neither euer was meante by Maximus, or his felowes, nor by ſaincte Cyprian hymſelf. But this is the true ſenſe of thoſe woordes. Nos Cornelium Epiſcopum ſanctiſsimae Catholicae eccleſiae, erectum à deo omnipotente, & Chriſto Domino noſtro ſcimus. &c. Wee acknowledge Cornelius to be a Biſhoppe of the moſte holie Catholike churche, erected by God almightie, and Chriſte our Lorde. &c. as if thei had ſaid more at large, where we before tooke Cornelius to be an vnlawfull vſurper, and to communicate with thoſe that had renounced their faithe, and therefore to be no member of the moſte holy Catholike churche: now we acknowledge hym to be a Catholike Biſhoppe, by God erected, and that we were deceiued before in ioignyng with Nouatus againſte hym. And that this is the true ſenſe of that place, ſaincte Cyprian hymſelf in his epiſtle to Stephanus ſheweth, writyng thus of that ſame matter: Non poteſt à quoquam noſtrum illi communicari, qui epiſcopo Cornelio in Catholica 
                  
                     Lib. 3. epiſt. 13. 
                  eccleſia dei iudicio, & cleri, ac plebis ſuffragio ordinato, profanum altare erigere, & adulteram Cathedram collocare, & ſacrilega contra verum ſacerdotem ſacrificia offerre tentauerit. That is: None of vs cā communicate with hym, who hath attempted to erecte

a profane altare, and an vntrue chaire, againſte biſhop Cornelius, ordeined in the catholike churche by Gods iudgemente, and by the election of the Cleargie and people: and hath attempted to offer ſacrilegious or wicked ſacrifice againſt the true Prieſte. Thus farre ſainct Cyprian. Whereby you maie ſee, that he calleth not Cornelius here the biſhoppe of the Catholike churche, but Biſhoppe Cornelius ordeined in the Catholike churche by God his iudgemente, and the election of the Cleargie and people. And this is all one in ſenſe and meanyng with the other. For Epiſcopus Catholicę eccleſiae, and Epiſcopus in catholica eccleſia, be as muche to ſaie, as Catholicus Epiſcopus, a catholike biſhoppe, and not the Biſhoppe of the Catholike or vniuerſall Churche, as M. Dorman would haue it. For this beyng in controuerſie, whether Cornelius or Nouatus was the true and Catholike Biſhoppe, or Prieſte, and whiche was the vſurper and heretike: here doo Maximus, and Vrbanus with others confeſſe, that Cornelius was the Catholike biſhoppe. Wherefore M. Dorman in tranſlating the ſaied place ſo, that it maie ſeme to make for the Popes ſupremacie, and by the waie remouyng this woorde Sanctiſsimae from the Catholike churche, to attribute it to Cornelius (by like to make a ſhewe that the title of Sanctiſsimus was of olde appertsining to the biſhoppe of Rome) doeth herein like him ſelf. Now, concernyng that whiche foloweth in their confeſſion: VVe bee not ignoraunte, that there is one 
                  S. Cyprian his phraſe of one Biſhop of, or in the church, orīa church. 
                  God, one Chriſte our Lorde, one holie Ghoſt, and that there muſt be one biſhoppe in the Catholike churche. or more truely, in this place, in a Catholike Churche. This M. Dorman did not doubte, but that the ſimple ſorte would take it to bee a moſte plaine proofe, not of Cornelius ſupremacie onely, but ex abundāte, that he

alone was that one Biſhoppe, whiche ought to be onely in the whole Catholike Churche: for ſo it ſemeth by his marginall note, of one God, one Biſhoppe &c. he meaneth. But I truſt, that fewe will allowe M. Dorman, euen of thoſe that be of his own part, if he would ſo wreſt ſainct Cypriā, that as there is one onely God, and none but he: ſo there ſhould bée but one onely Biſhoppe, and no mo but he. Whereas nothing leſſe was meant by them, that made this confeſſion, nor by ſainct Cyprian, who maketh reporte thereof. For firſte, Maximus and his felowes, whiche had before ioigned thē ſelues to Nouatus, who chalenged to bée a true catholike biſhoppe, and biſhoppe of Rome alſo, doo now acknowledge Cornelius to be the true biſhoppe: and becauſe there can be no moe biſhoppes in any one catholike churche but one, therefore now affirmyng Cornelius to be that one Biſhoppe, thei doo reiecte Nouatus as no biſhoppe, but an vſurper: and thereby acknoweledge, that there ought to bee but one biſhoppe in that catholike churche. And ſo nothyng leſſe is meant here, by one biſhoppe, then one head biſhoppe ouer all other biſhoppes: muche leſſe is meant one biſhoppe alone of all the Churche, as there is one onely God ouer all: as it maie ſeme that M. Dorman would gather. For the declaration whereof, it is to be noted, that when ſainct Cypriā ſpeaketh of one biſhop of the catholike churche, he meaneth no one ſpeciall Biſhoppe ouer all, but indifferentlie all, and euery catholike biſhop throughout the vniuerſall churche: for that thei haue euery of them the full poſſeſſiō of one onely biſhoprike. Whiche as it is but one throughout all the worlde, ſo hath euery biſhop the ſame, wholie, and fullie. So that when ſainct Cyprian ſpeaketh of one Biſhoppe onely to rule the Churche, he meaneth the Biſhoppe of that Dioceſſe,

whiche he then entreateth of, who ſo euer, and of what countrey ſo euer he be: as here in this epiſtle, he meaneth Cornelius: and in his epiſtle to Pupianus, by the 
                     Lib. 1. epiſt. 5. ſaid one biſhop, appoincted by God to rule the churche, he meaneth hymſelf beyng biſhop of Carthage. For in bothe places he hath the ſame woordes, of one biſhoppe 
                     Lib. 4. epi 9. appointed to rule the Churche, by the contempte of the whiche Biſhop, hereſies doo ſpryng, or ariſe. This remaineth yet more fully to be declared, as well by Cornelius, as by ſaincte Cyprian hymſelfe in other places. Firſt Cornelius writyng to Fabius Biſhoppe of Antioche (as Euſebius teſtifieth) hath theſe woordes 
                     Hiſtor. eccleſiaſticae libr. 6. cap. 43. concerning this verie matter. Vindex ille euangelij (de Nouato loquitur) ignorauit vnum eſſe debere epiſcopum ī catholica eccleſia, in qua neſcit (quomodo enim ſciret?) preſbyteros eſſe. 46. diaconos 7. hypodiaconos 7. acoluthos. 42. &c. that is to ſaie: this defendour of the Goſpell (he ſpeaketh of Nouatus) was ignoraunt that there ought to be one Biſhop in a Catholike churche, In catholica eccleſia. in ye whiche he knoweth not (for how ſhould he know) that there be. 46. Prieſtes. 7. Deacons, 7. ſubdeacons, 42. inferiour eccleſiaſticall miniſters, or ſeruiters. &c. Thus farre Cornelius. By whiche woordes it is euident that the Catholike churche, whereof Cornelius and Cyprian doo ſpeake, and wherein there muſte bee but one biſhop, is not the vniuerſall churche throughout the worlde, as M. Dorman would haue it (vnleſſe he thinke that 46. Prieſtes, and 7. Deacōs maie ſuffice the vniuerſall Churche for miniſters, as well as one onely biſhoppe is ſufficiente for the heade of the whole Churche, for the one is as reaſonable as the other) but the catholike churche that Cornelius ſpeaketh of here, is the particular churche of Rome: in the which as one biſhop, ſo alſo 7. Deacons might ſuffice. Whiche particular

churche is by Cornelius here, & by S. Cyprian, and other auncient doctors of the churche in their writynges, called Catholike, becauſe it profeſſed & taught the catholike faithe, and to notifie it from ſchiſmaticall or heretical churches. And any other particular church teaching the catholike faithe, may in like maner be called a catholike churche, or ye catholike churche of ſuche a citie, or countrey. Now cōcernyng S. Cyprian, he declareth in many places, that euery Biſhop in his owne dioceſſe hath the full poſſeſſion of ye biſhoprike, whiche is one throughout all the worlde, & therfore is the onely biſhop and head of that his owne Catholike church: as namely in his epiſtle to Antonianus, where he hath theſe woordes. Vna eſt Eccleſia, à Chriſto per totum mundum in multa membra diuiſa: item epiſcopatus vnus, epiſcoporum multorum concordi numeroſitate diffuſus. &c. That is to ſaie: there is one churche, from Chriſt throughout the whole worlde diuided: likewiſe one biſhoprike, ſpread abroade in the agreable multitude of many Biſhops. But S. Cyprian declareth his minde moſte plainly of this one biſhoprike, wholy and equally poſſeſſed of all and euery biſhop, in his booke De ſimplicitate praelatorum, not farre from the beginnyng, writyng thus. Vnum corpus, & vnus ſpiritus, 
                  Cyprianus De ſimplicitate praelatorum. 
                  vna ſpes vocationis veſtrę, vnus dominus, vna fides, vnum Baptiſma, vnus deus. Quam vnitatem firmiter tenere, & vindicare debemus, maximè epiſcopi, qui ī eccleſia praeſidemus, vt epiſcopatum quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ipſum, vnum at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      indiuiſum probemus. Nemo fraternitatem mendacio fallat, nemo fidei veritatē perfida preuaricatione corrumpat. Epiſcopatus vnus eſt, cuius à ſingulis in ſolidum pars tenetur. Eccleſia vna eſt, quae in multitudinē latiùs incremento foecunditatis extenditur: quomodo ſolis multi radij, ſed lumen vnum: & rami arboris multi,

ſed robur vnum, tenaci radice fundatū &c. Whiche is to ſaie: There is one bodie, and one ſpirit, one hope of your vocation, one Lorde, one Faithe, one Baptiſme, one God. The whiche vnitie we muſt firmely hold and mainteine: ſpeciallie wee Biſhoppes, whiche doo gouerne in the Churche, that we maie proue the biſhoprike it ſelf alſo to bee one, and vndeuided. Let no man by liyng deceiue the brotherhodde: let no man corrupte the veritie of faith by falſe preuarication. There is one Biſhoprike, parte whereof euery man hath wholie, or In ſolidum. more plainely, there is one Biſhoprike, whiche euery biſhop hath wholie for his part. There is one churche, whiche is ſpread abroade by increaſe of fruictefulneſſe into a multitude: as there be many beames of the ſūne, but one light: many braunches of the tree, but one bodie of it, ſtaied vpon a ſure roote. &c. Thus farre ſaincte Cyprian, with muche more proceſſe to proue the vnitie of the churche, and the vnitie of one biſhoprike, whiche euery Biſhop wholie hath for his parte: and ſo conſequentlie, all Biſhops to be equall. Wherefore maiſter Dorman hath in vain noted in the margēt of his booke in this place, One God, one Chriſte, one holie Ghoſt, one Biſhoppe: as though the Biſhoppe of Rome were that one Biſhop, and none but he: as there is one onely God, and none but he. Where as that place of ſainct Cyprian (as by conference with this place appeareth) proueth, that though there be one biſhoprike throughout all the worlde, yet are there many biſhops, and that euery one, in his owne Dioceſſe, hath the whole poſſeſſion of that one Biſhoprike: and that therefore there is an equalitie of all Biſhops, and ſo conſequently, no ſuperioritie of any one ouer all, as M. Dorman would haue it. For if euery Biſhop haue in ſolidum, that is to ſaie, fullie, and wholie that one Biſhoprike, or biſhoplie

function and office, as S. Cyprian ſaieth, no one cā haue more, then the whole, and therefore, no one can be aboue all other. Whiche maie appeare more plainlie, by the compariſons of one faithe, and one Baptiſme, whiche ſaincte Cyprian in the ſame place vſeth. For as there is but one faithe, though there be many faithfull perſones: one Baptiſme, though many Baptiſed: ſo there is by ſainct Cyprian his iudgement but one Biſhoprike, yet be there many Biſhops: whiche one Biſhoprike is equallie, and wholie diuided emongeſte all the ſaid Biſhops: as faithe and Baptiſme are equally, and wholie diuided emongeſte the faithfull Baptiſed: and yet remaineth ſtill but one Biſhoprike, as there doeth but one faithe, and one Baptiſme: for that euery biſhoppe hath that one biſhoprike wholie: as euery true faithfull hath the one chriſtian faithe wholie: and In ſolidum. euery one, that is duely Baptiſed, hath that one Baptiſme wholie. And conſequently it foloweth, that as no one man hath any ſuperioritie in Baptiſme, or faithe, aboue other truely faithfull, and Baptiſed: ſo hath no one biſhoppe any ſuperioritie ouer other biſhoppes, for that euery biſhop hath that one biſhoprike wholie, and therfore none hath it more then other, but be all equall In ſolidum. in office and authoritie. This is S. Cyprian his minde of one Biſhopricke, whiche euery biſhop hath wholie, and equallie, and is therfore in his owne Dioceſſe the one onely biſhop in the catholike Churche to gouerne the ſame. Whereby any manne, but of meane vnderſtandyng, maie well perceiue, that this ſaiyng of one biſhoppe, vſed by ſainct Cyprian, maketh nothyng for the biſhoppe of Rome his ſupremacie, but directlie againſte it: makyng all other biſhops equall with hym: as thei, whiche haue in ſolidum, wholie, that one Biſhoprike, as well as he. And therefore when ſainct Cyprian

nameth one biſhop in the catholike church, or of a catholike churche, he meaneth the biſhop of that ſpeciall dioceſſe which he entreateth of, of what countrey ſo euer it be, as here he meaneth Cornelius: and by the like wordes in other places, he meaneth other biſhops, and of other dioceſſes. Whiche is moſte euident by the like wordes, of one Biſhop who gouerneth the church, vſed by the ſame ſaincte Cyprian, in this epiſtle to Pupianus. His woordes be theſe: Epiſcopus, qui vnus e
                        ••
                     , & eccleſiae praeeſt, cōtemnitur. &c. The Biſhop which 
                     Libr. 4. epi. 9. is one, and gouerneth the Churche, is contemned and ſette at nought. &c. Where it is moſte euident, that by that one Biſhop, who gouerneth the Churche, and is contemned, he meaneth himſelf, beyng biſhop of Carthage, and by the ſaied Pupian deſpiſed, as is at large alreadie declared. Whiche place yet M. Dorman alittle before alledged for the ſupremacie of the Biſhop of Rome as leudelie, as he doeth this place here. To conclude, Maximus, and his felowes had a controuerſie with Cornelius, altogether diuers from our cōtrouerſies with the Popes of Rome: and therefore, their exā
                  ple apperteineth nothyng to this caſe of the Popes ſupremacie, then neither mooued, nor knowen. And it is no meruaile, if that Maximus, Vrbanus, and Sidonius beyng prieſtes of Rome, & there hauyng with Nouatus, 
                     Euſebi. lib. 6. cap. 43. beyng hymſelf Prieſt of Rome alſo, made ſo great ſtirre and buſineſſe againſt Cornelius, recōciled themſelues to Cornelius the Romaine biſhop, beyng their own biſhop: whiche apperteineth nothyng at all to vs, who haue nothing to doo with the biſhop of Rome.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 3. Nowell. Ex papa bo
                     ••
                  
                  f
                     •
                  cio Extra. libr. 1. Tit: de Maiorit. & obed. cap. vnam ſanctā.
            
            So did Vrſatius and Valens forſakyng the hereſie of Arius, offer vp their recantation to Iulius then Biſhoppe of Rome. By this meane
                  •
                [good Chriſtian readers]

retourned thei to the Churche, by this muſte you retourne that haue ſtraied, what ſo euer you be, if you will bee ſaued.
            
               Nowell.
               
                  Vrſatius, or Vrſitius, and Valens, in their recantation 
                     Socrates lib. 1. cap. 27. Nicephorus lib. 9. cap. 13. &. 27. make nothyng for the Biſhop of Rome his ſupremacie, but rather againſt it. Thei write to hym, as thei vſe to write to any other biſhoppe: their inſcription is, Ad Iulium Epiſcopum Romanum, to Iulius the Romaine biſhop. Thei vſe theſe woordes: Bonitatis tuae literis in hanc ſententiam traducti. Wée were brought into this minde or iudgemente by the letters of your goodneſſe. Apud humanitatem tuam profitemur. We doo profeſſe vnto your humanitie or gentleneſſe. And, pietas tua, your godlineſſe: and ſuche like, whiche are no woordes of ſupremacie. For that thei call hym once 
                     Tom. 2. Aug. epiſto. 183. Auguſtino epiſcoporū ſum mo: & mox, venerabilis papa &c.
                   
                  beatiſsimum dominum papam, the moſte bleſſed lorde Pope, maketh nothyng for his ſupremacie: vnleſſe it make for ſainct Auguſtine biſhoppe of Hippo in Afrike his ſupremacie alſo, who is not onely called venerabilis papa, honourable Pope, but alſo the higheſt of al biſhops. But M. Dorman hymſelf confeſſeth ſomwhere I trow, this name Papā, pope, to be cōmen in that time to all biſhops, and therefore vnmeete to proue the ſupremacie of any one. But if he thinke the titles added, Moſt bleſſed Lorde, doo make the worde Papam, Pope, to bee ſingular, and for the ſupremacie: thereto I doo anſwere: Firſt, it is euident that this worde dominus, Lorde, or ſir, is vſed not onely to all biſhops, but to all Popiſhe ſir Ihons alſo, who yet haue no ſupremacie at all. And I am contente that this woorde, Beatiſsimus, moſte bleſſed, maie ſerue M. Dorman his purpoſe here, ſo that he will admitte it likewiſe in other places: as in this, emongeſt other. All the Prieſtes and Deacons of

Rome call Cyprian Biſhoppe of Carthage, Beatiſsimum, 
                  
                     Lib. 2. epiſto. Cypriani, epiſtola. 7. in fine
                   
                  & glorioſiſsimum Papam: the moſte bleſſed, and moſte glorious Pope. Loe Maiſter Dorman, here is a double epitheton and title, for your ſingle. Lette the biſhop of Carthage then haue the ſupremacie with the biſhoppe of Rome: or let the biſhoppe of Rome go
                     •
                   without it, with the biſhoppe of Carthage. But if this make for Iulius biſhoppe of Romes ſupremacie, that Vrſatius, and Valens offered vp their recantacion to hym, as M. Dorman taketh it to doo: lette it alſo make for Athanaſius biſhoppe of Alexandria his ſupremacie, to whom in like maner thei offer vp their recantation alſo, as is recorded in the ſame place. The cauſe concernyng 
                     Nicephor. lib. 9. cap. 27. 
                  Vrſatius and Valens ſtandyng thus, M. Dorman abuſeth the readers to muche, to geue them a dor, with a matter nothyng to the purpoſe: ſaiyng, So did Vrſatius and Valens, and ſo to paſſe ouer without further declaration, or as muche, as once noting the place, where the matter might bee founde. Whiche M. Dormanne hath doen of ſet purpoſe and knowledge, that it was nothing to the purpoſe, that thei did, and that him ſelf alledged. And yet herevpon, as vpon good proues and declarations, he concludeth thus. By this meanes retourned thei to the Churche, by this muſte you retourne, that haue ſtraied, if you will bee ſaued. I tooke my Harpe into my hande, and twange ꝙ my ſtryng a.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 3.
            
               Ex Pighii Hierarch. lib. 5. ca. 2 fo 210. Seyng now as I haue declared, the goyng out of the Nowell. Churche is by the contēpt of the head thereof, and the returne home again, by the acknowleging, and reuerē
               cyng of the ſame: 
                  Ex Hoſii cō
                     tra Brentium lib. 3. fol. 134. perſuade your ſelf that it hath not been for nothing, that good men in all ages haue been, and at this tyme are, no leſſe buſied in defence thereof, then heretikes, miſſecreātes, and enemies to our faithe,

are readie with all their power to aſſault the ſame.
            
               Nowell.
               You haue declared nothyng at all, your Doctours The ſumme of all hetherto alledged & ſaied by maiſter Dorman. ſaie nothyng for you, your allegations, and examples are altogether impertinente. Rogatians deacon beyng an African, muſte reconcile hymſelf to his owne biſhop an African: Pupianus ought to reconcile himſelf to ſainct Cyprian biſhop of Carthage. For the firſt places alledged out of ſaincte Cyprian, perteined onely to them twoo, diſobedient to their owne biſhops beyng Africanes. Saincte Baſill ſpeaketh of the Eaſte churche, and biſhops: Nouatus ſweareth men to ſticke to his hereſie, and to take hym, and not Cornelius for their biſhop: Maximus, Vrbanus, and Sidonius Prieſtes of Rome, reconcile themſelues to Cornelius their owne Romaine biſhop, whom thei had vniuſtly forſaken: Vrſatius, and Valens, offer their recantation, and be reconciled to Iulius biſhop of Rome: thei doo in like wiſe to Athanaſius Biſhoppe of Alexandria. For thei tooke Arrius the heretikes parte againſt them bothe, & had greatly vexed them bothe, and therefore were thei reconciled to bothe: as al chriſtians are likewiſe bound to reconcile themſelues, not onely to Biſhoppes, but to all other, whom thei haue offended or wronged. What rime or reaſon is it therefore, for M. Dorman togather hereof the Biſhop of Rome his ſupremacie, as he hath gone about in this his Introduction, whiche he might better haue named a Seductiō, as in ye whiche, he hath proued nothyng, railed muche, lied more, deceiued fielie ſoules, abuſed the wiſe, & better occupied readers. And as there is not one place, hitherto by M. Dorman alledged, apperteinyng to his purpoſe, nor any one ſentence of his voide of liyng: ſo ſhall you in the ſequele of this treatie finde hym no chaun̄gelyng.
            
         
         
            
            Dorman. Fol. 4.
            The conſideration whereof hath cauſed alſo me, in this enterpriſe of myne, to beginne firſt with the fortifiyng of that whereunto our enemie▪ [as the verie foundacion of all true religion, the comforte and ſtaie of the Catholikes, the terrour and vtter vndoyng of all heretikes] doe moſte directe their batterie.
            
               Nowell.
               You haue doon like a wiſe manne, and vſed herein more diſcretion, then did your maiſter D. Hardyng, who hath made this matter of the Popes ſupremacie, but as a common matter, and as the Latines ſaie, vnā ex multis, one of many: Where in deede, as you hau
                     •
                   well conſidered, it is the chief foundation of all Poperie, your Religion, the comforte and ſtaie of all Papiſtes, vſurpyng falſely the name of Catholikes: the terrour and worldlie vndooyng of all thoſe, whom it pleaſeth you to call heretikes, holde thei neuer ſo muche with Chriſt and his Goſpel, agree thei neuer ſo muche with his true, catholike, & aunciēt Apoſtolike churche. For maie you once eſtabliſhe the Popes aucthoritie, not to bee denied: his ſupremacie, not to bee diſobei
                     •
                  d: you haue wonne all, you neede no Scriptures, no interpretation of Doctours, no aſſemble of Counceiles: 
                     Sexto Decret. lib. 1. tit. 2 ca. licet. Roman' pontifex iura oīa in ſcrinio pectoris ſuicē
                        ſetur habere. Vide Platinam in vita papae Pauli ſecundi.
                   all is in the boxe of the Popes booſome: (as the Popes themſelues, Boniface the eight, and Paule the ſecond with others doo bragge) he is all in all: he ſaith it, ego it muſt needes bee beleued: for Fides Petri non deficit, Peters faithe faileth not: as Pighius out of Eckius, 
                     Hoſius lib 2. contra Brentium fol. 83 a. &. 86. a. b.
                   Hoſius out of Pighius, and 
                     D. Hardyng fol. 
                     
                        •
                     5. b.
                   D. Harding out of Hoſius haue alledged: whiche yet apperteineth as muche to the Pope, as doeth a Saddle to a Sowe. Likewiſe, the Pope commaundeth it, ergo it muſt be obeied: For be is the iudge, and finall determiner of all matters, as

M. Dorman hath 
                     M. Dorman fol. 7. a. &. 9. b & 12. a &. 62. b
                   often alledged for the ſame purpoſe, out of Deuteronomium. If it pleaſe the Pope to offer his feete to Emperours & Kinges of the worlde to kiſſe: or if it ſtādeth further with his pleaſure to treade on their neckes, as he ſerued the Emperour Frederike: or if he haue a likyng to their crounes and kyngdomes, as he had to the croune of Englande in kyng Ihon his time: or liſte he to depoſe kynges and Emperours, as he hath depoſed many: yet maie he neither be diſobeied, nor denied in his will and luſte. For as Pighius to that purpoſe hath alledged, Qui ſuperbierit 
                  
                     Pighius Hierarch. lib. 6. ca. 13. fo. 323. d.
                   
                  nolens obedire. &c. He that waxeth proude, and will not obeye the commaundemente of the high Prieſte for the tyme beyng, lette hym dye by the decree of the iudge. And peculiarlie, that he maie ſo tread vpō Emperours and Kynges neckes, that in ſo doyng he doeth but right, appereth by this texte, alledged for that purpoſe by Pope Alexander the thirde: Super aſpidem & Baſiliſcum ambulabis &c. That is to ſaie: Thou ſhalt walke vpon the Adder and Baſiliſke: thou ſhalt tread vpon the Lion and Dragon. And his right to all kyngdomes, & that in aſkyng of them he dooeth but aſke his owne: and that he maie make, and depoſe kynges, and beſtowe kyngdomes at his pleaſure: and that he hath bothe the ſwordes, and the right of bothe the heauenly 
                     Extra. Ioannis 22. tit. 5. cap. 1. Sifratrum. Extra. cōm. lib. 1. de Maiorit. & obediētia. cap. vnan: ſāctam.
                   and earthly Empire, is proued by theſe ſpeciall textes alledged by Pope Boniface the eight and other Popes for that purpoſe: Ecce duo gladij hic. Beholde twoo ſwordes here. Et ecce, conſtitui teſuper gentes, & regna &c. 
                  
                     Ieremi 1. Beholde this daie doo I ſette thee ouer the people and kyngdomes, that thou maieſt roote out, breake of, deſtroie and make waſte, & that thou maieſt builde vp, and plante. And by this texte alledged by 
                     Platin. in vita Gregorii. 7. Pope Gregorie the .vij. Quicquid ligaueris aut ſolueris

in terra &c. What ſoeuer thou doeſt binde or looſe vpon the earth, ſhalbee bounde or looſed in heauen. Of whiche woordes the ſaied Pope maketh this collectiō, that if thei maie binde and looſe in heauen, thei maie muche more in earth take awaie, and geue Empires, Kyngdomes, Principates, and what ſoeuer mortall men els haue, and ſo foorth, as foloweth in Platine, moſte worthie to bee read. And the ſame is proued alſo by this ſpeciall texte, to the like purpoſe alledged by Pope Iulius the thirde: Gens & regnum quod mihi non ſeruierit, peribit. The nation & kyngdome whiche ſhall not ſerue me, ſhall periſhe. Whiche ſentence alſo The inſcription of pope Iulius the third his coigne. for more ſuretie, the ſaid Pope cauſed to be ſtamped in his coigne. Finally whatſoeuer it ſhal pleaſe the Pope to doo, to the burte of mennes bodies, or loſſe of their gooddes and poſſeſſions, yea or to the eternall damnation 
                     D
                           •
                        ſtin. 40. ca. Si Papa. Extra. Ioann. 22 Tit. 4 cap. 2. in ſchol
                           •
                        is.
                   of their ſoules, be thei neuer ſo many, yea bee thei innumerable, yet maie no mortall man blame hym, no man maie bee ſo bolde to ſaie: Domine cur ita facis? Lorde why doe you ſo? Wherefore, notwithſtandyng ſaincte Paules boldeneſſe with Peter the Popes predeceſſour, as he ſaieth, wee are 
                     •
                  ow without all remedie againſt the Pope, what errour ſo euer he doo teach, and what miſchief ſo euer he doo: and wee muſt rather ſuffer our ſelues and infinite thouſandes to b
                     •
                  e damned, then to bee ſo bolde as to alledge any ſcriptures, though moſte manifeſtlie contrary to ſuche the Popes ſaiynges, and doynges: Suche as emongeſt others, are theſe: Principes gentium. &c. That is to ſaie, Princes of nations beare rule ouer them, but it ſhall not bee ſo 
                     Math. 20. d. 25. Marc. 10. f. Lucae. 22. c.
                   emongeſt you, but he that will bee the chief emongeſt you, let hym bee your ſeruaunte: and he that will bee greate emongeſt you, let hym bee your miniſter: euen as the ſoonne of man came not to bee miniſtred vnto,

but to miniſter vnto other. And againe, Nolite vocari Rabbi &c. Vos omnes fratres eſtis. Be not deſirous to 
                     Math. 23. b.
                   be called Rabbi, for one is your maiſter, to wit Chriſt, and ye are all brethren: bee not called maiſters, he that is greateſte emongeſt you, ſhalbee your ſeruaunte: for whoſoeuer exalteth hymſelf, ſhalbe brought lowe, and he that humbleth hymſelf, ſhalbée exalted. Et ne ſitis ceu dominium exercentes in cleros. Bee not as thoſe 1. Petri. 3. who exerciſe dominion ouer the people, or, as Lordes ouer Pariſhes. For ſo is it trāſlated alſo. If we (I ſaie) ſhall alledge theſe, and ſuche like Scriptures againſte ſuche vſurped tyrannie and falſe wreſtyng of the ſcriptures, wee ſhall gaine nothyng thereby, but onely to be accompted here
                     •
                  ikes, for not obeyng the voice of the high Prieſt, who alone can tell the ſenſe and meanyng of the ſcriptures, accordyng to this texte: Legem requirent ex ore ſacerdotis: thei ſhal require the lawe at the mouthe of the high Prieſt: without whoſe interpretation, the ſcripture is but the dumbe and deade letter, a rule of Leade, a noſe of waxe, flexible what waie you 
                     Pighius Hierarch. libr. 3. cap. 3. f
                           •
                        . 103. d
                   liſte bou it. If we further doo bryng the olde Doctours of the Churche, by whoſe interpretations it is declared that theſe ſcriptures doo ſerue directly againſt ſuche vſurped rule and dominion: as ſainct Auguſtine, alledged in the Popes owne Canon lawe, teachyng that, Epiſcopatus operis, non honoris nomē eſt: a Biſhoprike 
                     
                        •
                     . Quaeſt. 1. ca. Qu
                           •
                         epiſcopatum.
                   is a name of woorke, not of honour. And S. Hierome likewiſe alledged in their owne Canons, willyng biſhops to knowe that thei bee Eccleſiaſticall miniſters, 
                     Diſtinct. 95. cap. Eſto.
                   and not Lordes: where he bringeth for hym the foreſaied place of S. Peter. And the ſcholies of that Canon do
                     •
                   note it to be written againſt the pride of Biſhops: and that where thei call their inferiours, children, thei ought to call them brethren. And the ſame place of S.

Peter, S. Bernard likewiſe alledgeth to Pope Eugenius, & willeth hym, as Peters ſucceſſour, to heare Peter, 
                     Epiſtola. 237. ad Eugenium 1. Petri. 5. 2. Cor. 1. yea and Paule alſo, bothe ioinctly warnyng him to auoide the vſyng of dominion and Lordeſhip ouer the Churche. And telleth hym that if he bee ſent by Chriſt, he is ſent to ſerue, & not to be ſerued. And exhorteth him not to be preſumptuouſlie wiſe, but to feare: and warneth hym to beware of bribes, & to weigh the cauſes of the Archbiſhop of Canterburie, & the biſhops of Wincheſter and Yorke, not by money (accordyng to the cuſtome of the courte of Rome) but by equitie. For theſe Prelates at that tyme purſued their controuerſies in the courte of Rome. And the ſame ſaincte Bernard vpon 
                     De conſi
                           •
                        eratione ad Eugenium lib. 2. Lucae. 22. this place afore alledged out of ſaincte Luke, The kynges of the earth haue dominion ouer them. &c. hath theſe woordes. It is plaine: dominion is forbidden vnto Apoſtles. Goe therefore and be ſo bolde, ſaieth ſainct Bernarde to Pope Eugenius, as to vſurpe to thy ſelf either the Apoſtleſhip vſyng dominion: or dominion, 
                     Vſurpare aude aut dominans Apoſtolatum, aut Apoſtolicus dn̄atū. &c. Si vtrunque ſimiliter habere voles, perdes vtrunque. Oſee. 8. beyng Apoſtolike. Doubtleſſe thou art forbidden the one or the other. If thou wilte haue bothe a like, thou ſhalt loſe bothe. And ſo foorth, telling hym plainly, that if he will needes raigne, he ſhalbe of that compainie of whō God ſpeaketh by ye Prophet: Thei haue raigned, but not by me: thei haue been Princes, and I haue not knowen them. And if ſuche ſeueral teſtimonies of doctours maie not ſerus vs, if we for further proufe bring a number of doctours ioinctly agreyng together, & forbiddyng biſhops ſuche tyrannicall dominion ouer the churche of God: as did ſaincte Cyprian in the Councell of Carthage, with the allowance of the whole Councell then, and with the approbation of ſaincte Auguſtine afterwarde, and an other whole Councell alſo: The woordes ſpoken by ſaincte Cyprian in the ſaied

Councell, and by ſo many Biſhops and Doctours allowed, are theſe. Nemo noſtrum epiſcopum ſe epiſcoporum conſtituit, aut tyrannico terrore ad obſequendi 
                  
                     Cyprianus in concil. Carth. in initio. Auguſti. lib. 2. de bapt. contra Donatiſt. ca. 2. 
                  neceſsitatē collegas ſuos adigit, quando habeat omnis epiſcopus pro licentia libeitatis, & poteſtatis ſuae arbitrium proprium, tanquàm iudicari ab alio nō poſſit, cum necipſe poſsit alterum iudicare. That is to ſay: None of vs maketh hymſelf Biſhop ouer Biſhops, or doeth by tyrannicall feare force his felowe Biſhops to the neceſſitie of obeiyng: ſeyng euery Biſhop hath for his libertie & power his free iudgement, as he who can not be iudged of an other, neither can himſelf iudge an other Biſhop. Thus farre ſaincte Cyprian and ſaincte Auguſtine.) Wee ſhall profite, I ſaie, no more by the allegations of Doctours, yea or whole Councelles, thā by the allegation of the Scriptures themſelf, againſte the Popes ſaiynges or doynges, what ſo euer thei bee. Neither the texte of the ſcriptures, nor the interpretation of Doctours, nor iudgementes of Councelles can haue any credite againſte hym. For as Pighius the principall Doctour of the Popes part ſaieth: In concilijs 
                  
                     Hierarch. lib. 6. cap. 1. fol. 275. b.
                   
                  vniuerſalibus vniuerſis haud ferè aliud factum eſt, quàm vt conuenientes ex toto orbe epiſcopi, praeiudicatam iam Apoſtolicae ſedis vnanimi conſenſu amplexarentur & ſequerentur ſententiam, nec in eis definitum aliquid, quod non iam praeiudicatum antè definitumque eſſet à ſede Apoſtolica. That is to ſaie: In all generall Councelles, for the moſte parte, nothyng els is doen, but that Biſhops comyng together out of all partes of the worlde, ſhould embrace and folowe with agreable conſent, the foreiudged and afore determined ſentence of the Apoſtolike ſee: and that nothyng was defined in ſuche generall Councelles, the whiche was not before defined and foreiudged by the Apoſtolike

ſee. Thus farre Pighius: who alſo affirmeth in the ſame place, that the onely iudgement of this one ſee is more ſure, then the iudgement of an vniuerſall Coū
                  cell of the whole worlde. Wherby it maie well be vnderſtāded, what labour and coſte euen by the Papiſtes themſelues is loſte, and how in vaine their Biſhoppes take ſuche paine to come to Councelles out of all partes of Chriſtendome, leauyng their cures vncared for, and vnlooked tos, and that ſometyme a ſorte of yeres together: as of late thei haue doen, in the laſte Tridentine councell, onelie to determine thynges alreadie determined, 
                     The Tridentine Councell beganne anno 1545. & ended anno 1563. in the whiche tyme thei ſate at Trident ſeuen yeres.
                   and that therefore thei ſhould like wiſe men keepe themſelues at h
                     •
                  me, and ſpare ſuche trauell and coſte, and onely herken what is pronounced out of that ſacred mouth of the Pope at Rome, and it to obeye abſolutely. And the ſame Pighius afterward in an other place ſaieth expreſly. Huic 
                  
                     Hierarc. li 6. ca. 13. fo 323 c. The ſame doth M. Dorman teach fo. 62 b. out of pope Innocentius his epiſtle.
                   
                  ſedi authoritas componendi & definiendi exortas i domo eccleſiaſtica vniuerſas queſtiones & controuerſias, ab eodem Chriſto eſt data: tibi verò illius definitionibus & iudicijs abſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vlla diſcuſsione eſt impoſita obſequendi neceſsitas. That is to ſaie: The authoritie of orderyng, definyng and determinyng of all queſtions and controuerſies riſen in the Churche, is geuen by Chriſte to this ſee of Rome: and vpon thee is laied a neceſſitie of obeiyng all definitions and determinations of the ſaied ſee, without any examinyng or diſcuſſing of ye ſame. Theſe be Pighius woordes alſo. No meruaile therefore, if you doo well cōſider the premiſſes, that M. Dorman calleth the Popes ſupremacie, the fundation of al. Naie, it is the fundation, ſuperſtruction, batilmentes, garniſhinges, and all together: it is all, and all in all. For were this one article of the Popes ſupremacie with the appurtenaū
                  ces, as I haue ſaid, once obteined, you neede not to trauell

in writyng any more: you neede not to bryng any proufes out of the ſcriptures, Doctours or Councelles for you, or againſte vs any more: for it were concluded at once, that you be the Catholikes, who doo acknowledge the neceſſitie of obeiyng the voice, the determinations, and definitions of that high Prieſte, without whattes, or whies, without diſcuſſyng or examinyng of them by your ſelues, or with others: and that we bee the heretikes, who doo not obeye his voice, beyng againſt Goddes voice: but are ſo bolde to examine, how his voices doo agree with Gods voice. And therefore are we worthie to dye moſte cruell death, due to ſuche falſe heretiques. Graunte this one propoſition of the Popes ſupremacie with the appurtenaunces, I ſaie, and by and by, all that M. Dorman hath hitherto moſt leudlie alledged, or ſhall alledge hereafter, for the Popes ſupremacie, is to the purpoſe: all lies he hath alreadie made, and ſhall hereafter make for that purpoſe, are truthes. And whatſoeuer we ſaie to the contrarie, what ſcriptures, what Doctours, what Councelles ſo euer we bryng, all is to no purpoſe, nor of any credite: for he alone is iudge, whoſe the cauſe is: he alone, as your greate Doctour Pighius ſaieth, is more to be beleued, then a generall Councell of the whole worlde aſſembled. And therefore hath M. Dorman doen like a wiſe manne, to entreate firſt of the Popes ſupremacie, and in the treatie thereof to ſpende more paper & ynke, more oile and labour, as thei ſaie, yea twiſe as muche, as he hath doen in the other three principall matters, though otherwiſe the greateſt of all other, as touching euen the verie Maſſe it ſelf, whiche as it hath hitherto ſuſteined the Pope, and all his Cleargie: ſo if the Pope doo not now by his ſupremacie and irrefragable authoritie (ſuſteined by maiſter Dorman, like a friende at

néede) ſuſteine the Maſſe againe: it maie come to paſſe, that bathe Pope and Maſſe, will come to nought ſhortly. Now foloweth the diuiſion of M. Dormās treatie.
            
         
         
            
               Dorman. fol. 4.
            In the handlyng whereof I purpoſe God willyng to take this order:
            Firſte, before I come to the principall poincte that lieth in queſtion betwene vs [whiche is of the biſhop 1 of Romes ſupremacie] to proue to you by moſte plain, and euident reaſons, that the Churche of Chriſte here militante in earth muſte of neceſsitie for diuerſe and ſondrie vrgent cauſes, haue one chief heade and ruler vnder Chriſte, to rule and gouerne the ſame.
            Secondarily, that that one heade muſte needes bee a Prieſte. 2
            
            Thirdlie & ſo laſt of al, that of all prieſtes the biſhop of Rome is he, whiche muſt ſupplie that place, and that 3 for ſo (that is head & ruler of the churche) he hath byn, of the auncient coūcels, & olde fathers, within the firſt ſixe hundred yeres after Chriſtes departure, taken.
            
               Nowell.
               And I folowyng your order, M. Dorman, doo affirme, and will proue the contrarie, to all, and euery pointe of your diuiſion: that is to witte.
               Firſte, that it is not profitable, muche leſſe neceſſarie, that the Churche of Chriſte here in earth ſhould 1 haue one chief heade, and ruler vnder Chriſte, to gouerne the ſame: and that for diuers, and ſundrie vrgent and moſte weightie cauſes.
               Secondarilie, that no prieſte can bee any ſuche one 2 heade of the Churche here in earth.
               Thirdly, that of all prieſtes, the biſhop of Rome can not be that heade: for that he is no Biſhop, but rather a 3 temporall vſurper, and tyraunte, contrary to Gods expreſſe

woorde: and that all ſuche places, as are by you, M. Dorman, and others alledged out of the ſcriptures and doctours, for the ſaid biſhop of Rome his ſupremacie, apperteine nothyng at all to that purpoſe.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 4. 
               Nowell. This is Pighi' his aſſertion. Hierarch. li. 5. ca. 14. fo. 262. c.
            
            That Chriſtes Churche here in earth, muſt of neceſsitie haue one chief heade, and gouernoure vnder Chriſte, to rule the ſame.
            
               Nowell.
               M. Dorman doeth well begin with this part firſte, to proue that there muſt of neceſſitie be one chief heade and gouernour of the whole Churche vnder Chriſt: for if there ought not to be ſuche an one heade and gouernour at all, he did well perceiue, that conſequently the biſhop of Rome could not be that head and gouernour. Wherefore it being throughly proued, and manifeſtly declared, that M. Dorman faileth in the proufe of this firſt pointe (as I doubt not but it ſhal bée ſo proued and declared) I truſte that all wiſe men ſhall vnderſtande, that this firſt and principall part, and ſtaie of the whole beyng ouerthrowen, his whole treatie of the biſhop of Rome his ſupremacie ſhall altogether fall to grounde with it, without any further batetrie to ye ſame, or vnderminyng thereof to be made.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 4. 
               Nowell. This is in Pigh
                     •
                  us Hierar. lib. 4 cap. 3. fol. 149. b.
            
            The truthe of this propoſition [good chriſtian readers] is not onely by the whole order, and forme of the eſtate of Gods people in the olde lawe [whiche was alſo the true churche of God] long before the comming of our ſauiour into this worlde, but by the daiely experience alſo, of c
                  •
               uile and politike gouernement, moſt manifeſtly confirmed.
            
               Nowell.
               Of the eſtate of Gods people in the olde lawe, who,

as thei were one ſeuerall people, ſo had thei one highe prieſte: what can you gather further, but that likewiſe in euery Dioceſſe or countrey, it were good to haue one chief prelate, or biſhop to rule in the cleargie? Whiche we denie not, nor euer did deny. But of this matter M. Dorman geueth vs occaſion to ſa
                     •
                  e more hereafter.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 4.
            
               Nowell. Borovved out of D. Harding Fol. 81. & 82. who had it out of Pighi' de Hierarch. lib. 5. cap. 2. fol. 204. For who is there ſo blinde that he ſeeth not, that in the whole frame of this worlde, there is no kyngdome ſo mightie, no realme ſo puiſſant, no citie ſo populous, no toune ſo wealthie: yea on the contrary parte alſo, no village ſo little, no family ſo ſmall, finally no ſo cietie of men, no not of thoſe that haue wrapped them ſelues in league, to robbe and ſpoile, that can any while continue without a heade to gouerne them. If therefore to liue vnder the gouernment of a heade be a matter of ſuche importaunce, as without the whiche neither great nor little, riche nor▪ poore, good nor badde can ſtande: how muche more neceſſarie ſhall wee thinke it in Chriſtes Churche here militant in earth, where the diuell in his members, is cōtinually occupied in raiſing of ſchiſmes, in ſtirryng vp diſcorde, to vexe and moleſt the people of God, to haue this wholeſome prouiſion for the appeaſyng thereof, and the reſtoryng of the ſame beyng troubled to quietneſſe againe?
            
               Nowell.
               This reaſon he had in D. Hardyng his booke, who borowed it of Pighius, whiche beyng taken out of S. Cyprian his epiſtle to one Pupianus, thei haue violē
                  tly wreſted to a wrong ſenſe. For S. Cyprian maketh this reaſon directlie againſte them, for the proufe of his 
                     Cyprian. lib. 4. epiſto. 9. owne authoritie, being biſhop of Carthage, and for the authoritie of euery Biſhop in his owne dioceſſe. Now to the matter. VVho is ſo blinde? ꝙ M. Dorman: now

ſurely I truſte, no man is ſo blinde, but he can ſee that M. Dorman reaſoneth blindlie, and without all reaſon gatheryng thus: that becauſe euery kyngdome hath his ſeueral kyng, euery people, citie, toun, village, houſe, yea euery companie of the eues, & robbers, haue their ſeuerall gouernour, or heade: put to and you will alſo, (as dooeth ſaincte Cyprian, out of whom D. Hardyng and M. Dorman vndiſcreatly tooke the occaſion of this argument) euery hiue of Bees hath his capitain Bee: therefore ſhould it folowe, that all Churches, or the whole churche diſperſed throughout the whole world, muſte haue one heade. You ſhould M. Dorman, if you would haue reaſoned reaſonably, haue taken aſwell ſaincte Cyprian his concluſion, as you haue taken his antecedent, and haue concluded with him, Ergo in like wiſe euery dioceſſe, and euery Churche ought to haue their ſeuerall heade prelate, or biſhop, who is to bee obeyed by all their owne cleargie: and wee would haue graunted the cōſequencie, and conſequent as thei ſaie. For by this meanes ſaincte Cyprian concludeth, that Pupianus did wickedlie in diſobeiyng ſainct Cyprian hymſelf, who was his biſhop. But neither ſaincte Cyprian, nor any other learned man doth vſe theſe examples or ſimilitudes any where, to proue that there ought to be one head or gouernour ouer all churches, or the vniuerſall churche: but hath the cleane contrary, ſaiyng thus. Singulis paſtoribus portio gregis aſcripta 
                  
                     Lib. 1. epiſt. 3. pagin. 10. 
                  eſt, quam regat vnuſquiſque, & gubernet, rationem ſui actus domino redditurus. That is to ſaie: A portion of the Lordes flocke is appointed to euery paſtour by himſelf, the which euery one ought to rule & gouerne, who ſhall geue accompte of his doyng to the Lorde. And ſo foorth, moſte plainlie againſte the ſupremacie of one: and for that due gouernmente of euery biſhop ouer his

owne ture. This is ſaincte Cyprian his reaſon, this is his concluſion, M. Dorman. But if you like your concluſion ſo well, that you will nedes cōclude, that there ought to bee one generall heade of all Churches, you muſt thus begin. As there is one generall gouernour or kyng ouer all the worlde, one generall head ouer all people, all cities, tounes, villages, and houſes: one capitaine thief and robber, ouer all thieues and robbers: one kyng Bee, ouer all hiues of Bees, throughout the whole worlde: ſo muſte there bee one onely heade in earth ouer all Churches throughout the worlde. But as no man is ſo blinde, but he ſeeth the falſehood of this antecedent: ſo is (I truſt) no man ſo blinde, but he ſéeth the abſurditie and inconſequencie of your former concluſion, of one generall heade ouer all Churches, gathered out of an antecedent, and vnlikely ſimilitude of the ſeuerall gouernours that euery kyngdome, countrey, people, citie and toune, and euery companie of menne ſeuerally haue. I merueile he alledged not Homer the Poete, and Ariſtotle the Philoſopher alſo for the Popes ſupremacie, as dooeth his maiſter D. Hardyng, 
                     D. Hardyng fol. 81. b.
                   who hath theſe woordes: It is not good, ſaieth Homere, to haue many rulers, lette one bee ruler. It is true, that Homere ſaieth, it is not good to haue many equal rulers ouer one countrey, or nation: but this maketh nothyng to proue that there ſhould bee one heade ouer all the Churche throughout the worlde: excepte D. Hardyng can proue that Agamemnon was kyng of all the worlde, or at the leaſt, that Homere meant he ſhould ſo bee: but he meante nothyng leſſe, for he ſpeaketh of the gouernemente of the armie of the Greekes onely. And ſo I graunt it is good likewiſe, that one biſhop doo gouerne one dioceſſe: as it was good in Homers iudgemente, that one graunde capitaine ſhould

gouerne the Greeke armie. And thus muche by the waie to D. Hardyng his Poeticall argumente for the Popes ſupremacie. Now ſeyng it pleaſed doctor Hardyng to make mention of Ariſtotle, who miſliketh not Ariſtocratie, that is to ſaie, the gouernyng of the beſte and wiſeſt men, beyng a competente number: and ſeyng further, that many cities haue been and bee farre better gouerned in Democratie, by many rulers choſen of the people, then euer was the whole churche by one Pope: It is preſumptuouſlie doen by M. Dorman, bothe againſt his maiſter doctor Hardyng, and againſt Ariſtotle ſo noble a philoſopher, and to zelouſly, for one Pope, to ſafe thei be all blinde, that can not ſee the neceſſitie of one onely head gouernour euery where. And it maie ſeme to ſome, that ſuche kinde of ſpeache doeth not ſo muche ſpryng out of abſurditie of the matter, as out of the diſpoſition of M. Dormans drouſie head, and dimme ſight. Let vs in Englande bee in that poincte of the beſt iudgement, and in the beſte caſe (as we be in déede) vnder ſo moderate a Monarchie: and yet let them withall, who haue of long tyme been vnder the quiete gouernemente of many reaſonable rulers, neither bee ſtarke blind, neither (though not in ſo happie a ſtate as are we) yet in no vnhappy caſe, as it ſemeth M. Dormā would place them. But let euery nation & citie thinke it ſelf moſte happie in that ſtate of regiment, that God hath placed it in. And concernyng the gouernement of the vniuerſall Churche, ſeyng it ſtandeth of ſo many, or rather innumerable thouſandes of menne and women of al countries, nations, and languages throughout the whole worlde, ſo that it can not poſſiblie be ruled and gouerned by one, neither was it by God appoincted to bee by one gouerned, no more then the whole worlde it ſelf, the ſeuerall kyngdomes, & countries

thereof being appoincted by God to ſeuerall kynges 
                     
                        
                           •
                        ccl. 17. b. 14. and gouernours. Yet if it muſt nedes be gouerned by popes, ſeyng it nedeth many gouernours, I would we had many Popes, were thei good gouernours: but beyng, as thei are, falſe vſurpers and cruell tyrauntes, one Pope is to many by one. Concernyng the auoydyng and quietyng of Schiſmes and troubles in the Churche, we ſaie, that as the ſeuerall kynges of euery kyngdome, the ſeuerall gouernours of euery countrie and citie &c. are able to ouerſee their ſeuerall charges, and to kepe their people in ciuill order and peace: ſo are the ſeuerall Biſhoppes of euery dioceſſe, and the ſeuerall chief prelates of euery prouince able to auoide, or to appeace, if thei riſe, all ſchiſmes and troubles eccleſiaſticall: as ſaincte Cyprian, out of whom this reaſon is borowed, and falſlie wreſted by thē to an other purpoſe, dooeth moſte plainlie teache, ſaiyng thus: Cum ſtatutum ſit omnibus nobis &c. Whereas an order, 
                     Cyprianus lib. 1. epiſt 3. pagi
                           •
                        . 10. ſaieth ſaincte Cyprian, is taken emongeſt vs all, and it is right and reaſonable, that euery mannes cauſe be there heard, where the fault was cōmitted: and wheras euery Biſhoppe hath a part of the flocke aſſigned to hym, whiche he ought to rule and gouerne, and for the whiche he muſte g
                     •
                  ue an accompte vnto the Lorde, it is not conuenient that ſuche as bee vnder their gouernaunce ſhould runne from one Biſhoppe to an other, but there to make anſwere in their cauſes, where thei maie haue accuſers, and witneſſes of their crimes. Excepte ſuche deſperate perſones thinke the authoritie of Biſhoppes in Afrike to bée leſſe, then is the authoritie of other Biſhoppes. Thus farre ſaincte Cyprian: with muche more in the ſame place, expreſly affirmyng that it is right and reaſon that ſeuerall Biſhoppes haue the gouernemente of ſeu
                     •
                  rall dioceſſes, euen for the ſame

cauſe, for the whiche you doo vntruely alledge the neceſſitie of one heade: and declaryng the commoditie of pacifiyng of hereſies, Schiſmes, and diſſentions (for of them he ſpeaketh in that place) and of correctiō of vices by euery ſuche ſeuerall Biſhoppe in his owne charge, moſie directlie againſt D. Hardyng and M. Dormans doctrine of pacifiyng of ſchiſmes by one onelie head of the vniuerſall Churche: affirming all ſuche appellations from a Biſhoppe of one countrey, to a Biſhoppe of an other countrey to be vnlawfull, for that all Biſhoppes of all countries be of like authoritie: and that none but naughtie and deſperate menne, doo thinke the authoritie of ſome biſhoppes, to be inferiour to the authoritie of other. And further, folowyng D. Hardyng, and M. Dormans owne groundes, wee ſaie: that as God is the one heauenlie kyng ouer all the worlde, and yet hath not appoincted any one man to bee his onelie deputie in earth ouer all the Kyngdomes of the worlde: but that the whole worlde is gouerned by his prouidence, as the onelie kyng thereof, and by the miniſterie of many ſeuerall kynges and rulers, whom he hath ſeuerally 
                     Eccl. 17. b. 14▪ 
                     Rom. 13▪ 
                     
                        •
                     . appoincted ouer euery nation, as his deputies, as is expreſlie declared in the ſcripture: ſo in like wiſe is Chriſte the onelie heauenlie heade of his Churche, and neither neadeth, nor hath appoincted any one perſone in earth, to bee his deputie or vicar generall ouer all the churche throughout the worlde: but by his prouidence, and the miniſterie of many Biſhoppes, his ſeuerall vicars in euery dioceſſe, bothe hath, and dooth well gouerne his Churche: and that as it is impoſſible, that there ſhould bee one onelie earthlie kyng ouer all the worlde, (as by the ſtate of the worlde, from the beginnyng hitherto, is moſte manifeſt) and in caſe there were one, yet were it impoſſible for that one to ouerſée

his charge, and to keepe all the worlde in Ciuill order (ſeyng the wiſeſt kinges that be, haue of one particular kyngdome their handfull as thei ſaie) ſo in like maner is it impoſſible, that there ſhould be one generall head in earth ouer the vniuerſall Churche, or all Churches diſperſed throughout all the world, conteinyng ſo many nations, ſo diuerſe languages, and natures of men: or that ſuche an head could ouerſee his charge, & keepe all Churches from Schiſmes and troubles, and pacifie them when thei were riſen. This, as a thyng tried by the ſtate of the worlde at this daie, and euer ſith the firſt beginnyng thereof, I leaue to thy reaſonable conſideration, good reader, to determine betwixte vs.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 5.
            And becauſe good Chriſtian readers, you ſhall wel perceiue, that this is no newe deuiſe, or fantaſie imagined by me: I will here laie before your eyes, the iudgemente of certaine notable menne, whom God gaue to his churche to ſerue for a wall for the ſame, againſt the incurſions of the wicked Phyliſtines his enemies. In whom you ſhall moſte plainlie perceiue, this order in Chriſtes Churche to bee ſo neceſſarie, that the onelie breach and lacke thereof, hath been by thē taken, to be the high waie, & verie path that leadeth to all hereſies.
            
               Nowell.
               M. Dorman maie bee careleſſe, no man taketh the Popes ſupremacie to be his deuiſe and inuention: it is knowen to bee the inuention of the ambitious Popes themſelues, whom the diuell hath ſet a woorke to trouble the quiete ſtate of Chriſtendome, and to bryng all errours into Chriſt his Churche, and to laie the foundation of the kyngdome of Antichriſt.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 5.
            And firſte to beginne with that bleſſed martyre of

God ſainct Cyprian, hath he not concerning thi
                  •
                matter, Nowell. Bor
                     •
                  wed out of D. Hardyng Fol. 76. b. who had it out of Hoſins contra Brent. lib. 5. fol. 234. b. in an epiſtle by hym written to Cornelius then biſhop of Rome, thieſe woordes? Neque enim aliunde obortae 
               
                  
                     •
                  b. 1. epiſt. 3. 
               ſunt haereſes, aut nata ſunt ſchiſmata, quàm ind
                     •
                   quèd ſacerdoti dei non obtemperatur, nec vnus in eccleſia ad tempus ſacerdos, & ad tempus tudex, vice Chriſti cogitatur. That is, neither 
                  
                     •
                  he high way 
                     •
                   hereſies to 
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  ke that 
                     •
                  et is not one 
                     •
                  dge in earth 
                     •
                   the ſteed of 
                     •
                  hriſte. yet truely doo hereſies ariſe, or ſchiſmes growe, of any other cauſe, then thereof, that menne obeye not the Prieſte of God, neither doo thinke, that there is in the Churche in the ſteede and place of Chriſte, one Prieſt, and one iudge for the tyme.
            
               Nowell.
               Either M. Dorman had not with ſufficient diligēce reade and noted that long epiſtle, written by ſainct Cyprian to Cornelius Biſhop of Rome, or els he deepely diſſembleth that, which he there perceiued. For though the epiſtle be written to Cornelius, yet it is for a great parte writtē of Cyprian hymſelf: and many of the ſentences in that epiſtle, yea & this verie ſentence, whiche M. Dorman here alledgeth for Cornelius his ſupremacie, as Biſhop of Rome, by the tenure of the epiſtle appeareth to bee written ſpeciallie of ſaincte Cyprian hymſelf, Biſhop of Carthage in Afrike, rather then of Cornelius, as afterward at large ſhalbe declared. And further it appeareth that this ſentence, and all other ſentences of the authoritie of the Prieſte, or Prieſtes, Biſhoppe, or Biſhoppes (for ſaincte Cyprian in that epiſtle doeth ofte chaunge the number, and ſometyme ſpeaketh as of one, ſometyme as of many, or all Prieſtes and Biſhoppes) doo indifferentlie appertaine, as well to euery, and all Biſhoppes of all cities and dioceſſes, as to either Cornelius, or Cyprian. For that he here ſaith Sacerdoti dei non obtemperatur, The prieſt of God is not obeied, is aſmuche as, Sacerdotibus dei,
                  
the Prieſtes of God are not obeied. As when the ſcripture ſaieth, Regem honora, honoure the Kyng, is as muche, as though it had ſaied, Let ſubiectes of all places, honour their kynges. Touchyng theſe woordes, Neque vnus in eccleſia ad tempus Sacerdos, & ad tempus index vice Chriſti cogitatur: that is to ſaie, Neither is one Prieſte in the Churche for the tyme, and iudge for the tyme in Chriſtes ſteede thought vpon. I haue declared at large before, how that ſaincte Cyprian taketh all Biſhoprikes, to be but one Biſhoprike, as the faithes of all men, are but one faithe. Vnafides, ſaieth ſainct Cyprian, vnum baptiſma, vnus epiſcopus, cuius à ſingulis in ſolidum pars tenetur. There is one faith, Lib. de ſimplicitate praelatorum, non procul ab initio. one Baptiſme, there is one Biſhoprike, the whiche euery Biſhoppe hath wholie for his parte. So that whē he ſpeaketh of one Biſhoppe, one iudge in the churche for the tyme, or of the biſhop whiche is one, and ruleth the Churche abſolutelie, he meaneth euery Biſhop in his owne di
                     •
                  ceſſe without exception: if he ſpeake ſpeciallie, he doeth meane the Biſhop of that citie or dioceſſe wherof he entreateth, whether it be ye biſhop of Rome, Carthage, or any other place. For the moſte manifeſt proufe whereof, note theſe woordes of ſaincte Cyprian to Pupianus, who was ſtubborne againſte the ſaied Cyprian, whereof it hath been before entreated. Vnde enim ſchiſmata &c. Whereof ſaieth ſainct Cyprian 
                     Lib. 4. epiſt. 9. doo hereſies and Schiſmes ſpryng, but of this, that the Biſhoppe whiche is one, and ruleth the Churche, is through the proude & arr
                     •
                  gant preſumption of certain contemned, and ſet at nought: and beyng the man by Goddes approbation allowed and honoured, is of vnwoorthy men iudged. And a little before this place: T
                        •
                      te epiſcopum epiſcopi, & iudicem iudicis ad tempus à deo dati cōſtituis. Thou doeſt make thy ſelf a Biſhop

ouer the Biſhop, and a Iudge ouer the Iudge by God for the tyme appoincted. Thus muche ſaincte Cyprian to Pupianus, who deſpiſed the ſaied Cyprian, ſo appoincted by God to be the Biſhoppe, and Iudge for the tyme, as he there ſaieth. Now in his epiſtle to Cornelius, he ſaieth thus: Neque enim aliunde &c. Neither doo hereſies ariſe, or ſchiſmes grow, of any other cauſe, but hereof: that menne obeie not the Prieſte of God, neither dooe thinke that there is in the Churche, in the ſteede, and place of Chriſte, one Prieſte, one Iudge for the tyme. Compare now theſe twoo places together, and you ſhall finde them all one in effecte: And that S. Cypriā, nor any other could haue vttred in diuers places, one ſenſe more nearelie, vnleſſe he would haue vſed the ſame woordes altogether. But it is moſte manifeſte to all men, that will reade theſe epiſtles, that in the firſt place, by the biſhoppe whiche is one and ruleth the Churche, by the man by Goddes approbation allowed, by the cōtemnyng of whom, hereſies and ſchiſmes doo ſpryng and ariſe, by the Biſhoppe or Prieſte, and by the Iudge for the tyme by God appoincted, S. Cyprian hymſelf beyng Biſhop of Carthage is ment: and by hym, that deſpiſeth the ſaied Biſhop, is Pupian meant, who did deſpiſe the ſaied S. Cyprian. Wherefore either it muſte folowe, that ſaincte Cyprian is the heade of the vniuerſall Churche, ſeyng thoſe woordes, whiche by M. Dormans iudgemente appoincted that head, apperteine to him: orels, as the truthe is in déede, that any Biſhop is called by ſaincte Cyprian, the Biſhoppe whiche is one, and ruleth the Churche, or the iudge for the tyme in the Churche in Chriſtes ſteede or place (for all is one) and that then the ſpeciall biſhop of that place whiche is intreated of, whether it be Rome, Carthage, or any other, is meant: and ſo conſequentlie

euery Biſhop in his owne dioceſſe, is that one Biſhop that ruleth in the churche: and that iudge for the time, in the ſteede of Chriſte. And that in this place, ſaincte Cyprian meaneth no ſupremacie of any one Biſhop, but the equalitie of all Biſhops, it maie bee moſte euident to them, that will read the whole epiſtle, and note how ofte he ſpeaketh of all Prieſtes, and Biſhops. As, Sacerdotibus tantus honor conceditur: ſo great honor is geuen to Prieſtes: and immediatlie before the place by M. Dorman alledged, are theſe woordes: Sacerdotalis authoritas, &, Sacerdotum hoſtes: That is to ſaie, the Prieſtlie authoritie, and, the enemies of Prieſtes. Alſo theſe woordes nexte folowing the ſame place: Sacerdotum collegium: & mox, Sacerdotes. i. diſpenſatores dei: the Colledge or companie of Prieſtes: and, the Prieſtes, that is to ſaie, Gods diſpenſers or ſtewardes. If thei will in readyng the epiſtle note theſe, and many like phraſes, thei ſhall eaſelie perceiue this alſo, whiche M. Dorman alledgeth, to be ſpoken of the authoritie of many, and not of one onelie. And if it bee to tedious to peruſe the whole epiſtle, if the readers will but caſte their eye vpon the ſhorte argument of the epiſtle written by Eraſmus, who was no vnſkilfull, or negligent vewer of the writynges of the olde fathers (and whoſe authoritie M. Dorman vſeth in this booke againſt vs) thei ſhall eaſilie vnderſtande the ſame. Eraſmus his woordes in the argument, or ſumme of this epiſtle, are theſe: Oſtendit praetereà, qualiter ſacerdotalis authoritas, & poteſtas, diuina dignatione firmetur: & inde abortas haereſes, & nata eſſe ſchiſmata, ꝙ dei ſacerdotibus obtemperare noluerint. Saincte Cyprian doeth ſhewe (ſaieth Eraſmus) how the Prieſtlie authoritie and power, is by Gods goodneſſe eſtabliſhed: and that hereſies Diuina dignation
                        •
                     . and ſchiſmes dooe ariſe hereof, that thei will not obey

the Prieſtes of God. Thus farre Eraſmus: who ſpeaketh, as you ſee, of the verie place here by M. Dorman alleged. And if M. Dorman had read and marked but this ſhorte argumente of that epiſtle, thereby might he haue vnderſtāded, that this place by hym alleged for the ſupremacie of one, to witte Cornelius as Biſhop of Rome, perteineth to the authoritie of all the Prieſtes of God, aſwell as to hym. And that ſainct Cyprian Lib. 4. epiſt. 
                        •
                     . meaneth that euery one Biſhop ſhould bee ruler onelie in his owne dioceſſe, and that no one Biſhop or other manne ſhould bee ruler and iudge ouer all other Biſhoppes, appeareth by his woordes, wherewith he blameth Pupianus for that preſumption: Tu te epiſcopum epiſcopi &c. Thou doeſt make thy ſelf a biſhop ouer the Biſhop, and a iudge of the iudge, by God for the tyme appoincted. Theſe are ſainct Cyprians woordes, with whom in this caſe ſainct Auguſtine doeth agree: Augu contra Donatiſtas de baptiſmo. lib. 2. cap. 2. ex epiſtola Cypriani ad Quintum. who (as is before noted) reporteth, and alloweth theſe woordes of ſainct Cyprian. Neque quiſquam noſtrum epiſcopum ſe eſſe epiſcoporum conſtituit. &c. That is to ſaie, none of vs maketh hymſelf Biſhop ouer Biſhoppes, or doeth by tyrannicall feare force his felowe Biſhoppes to the neceſſitie of obeiyng. Seyng euery Biſhop hath of his libertie and power, his owne free iudgemente, as he who can not be iudged of an other, neither can hymſelf iudge an other: lette vs then looke all for the iudgement of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, who alone hath power bothe to place vs in the gouernaunce of the churche, and to iudge of our actes. Thus farre ſaincte Cyprian and faincte Auguſtine: by whoſe iudgemente you ſee, M. Dorman, how the Pope hath vſurped a tyrannie ouer other Biſhops, in takyng vpon hym to be Biſhop ouer all Biſhops, and iudge ouer the Iudges appoincted for the tyme in Chriſtes

ſteede: and that you mainteine the ſaied tyrannie.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 5.
            Hetherto ſaincte Cyprian. By the whiche woordes good Chriſtian readers, it is ſo euident, that there muſt bee one Prieſte in the Churche, whom all other muſte obeie, that the ſame muſte bee taken of vs, for iudge Th'Apologie of the Engliſh church reproued by ſainct
                     •
                   Cyprian, here in earth, in the ſteede of Chriſt: that you ſee I nothyng doubt, greate cauſe to condēne, the groſſe ignoraunce of our late apologie: wherein the authors, contrary to this doctrine of ſaincte Cyprian, moſte impudently pronoūce, that in his Churche, Chriſt our lorde vſeth not, the helpe of any one man alone to gouerne the ſame in his abſence, as he that ſtandeth in neede of no ſuche help, and that if he did, no mortall man could be found, hable alone to doe the ſame: and finally with the ſame S. Cyprian, who died a holie martyr, and is no doubt a ſainct in heauen, to whom the belief of bothe theſe twoo articles ſeemed not onely not impoſsible, but alſo verie neceſſarie, to liue and dye in the obedience of this Prieſt, and vnder ſuche a iudge, then with a ſorte of leude loſels, in whoſe Churche [beyng a certain The definiti
                     ••
                   of the prot
                     •••
                   tantes churc
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                ſecrete ſcattred congregation vnknowen to all the worlde beſide, and to their own felowes too] is nother heade, order, obedience, neither yet certaine rules or groundes where on to ſtaie, to runne hedlong ye wote no more then your guides whither.
            
               Nowell.
               I truſt it is ſufficientlie and moſte euidently declared, that euery Biſhop in his owne dioceſſe, is that one Prieſt, whom all muſt obeie: and that this place apperteineth to any Biſhop of any place, as well as the Biſhoppe of Rome. But whereas M. Dorman would ſo 
                     •
                  aine haue theſe woordes of ſaincte Cyprian, Vnus in eccleſia ad tempus ſacerdos &c. whiche is to ſaie, one

Prieſte and one Iudge in the Churche for the tyme in the ſteede of Chriſt, to proue that there ought to be one heade Biſhop ouer all the Churche: if that, to gratifie M. Dorman, were graūted hym: where vpon he would gather conſequentlie, that Cornelius, as Biſhoppe of Rome, ſhould bee that one heade, as to whom, and of whō this place is written (as M. Dorman thinketh): if it be declared by the verie place it ſelf, that theſe wordes bée ſpoken and meant of ſaincte Cyprian hymſelf, and not of Cornelius: and ſo conſequentlie the ſupremacie of the Churche by their owne reaſon, to bee remoued from Rome, to Carthage in Afrike, where no Chriſtian Churche now is, maie not M. Dorman, D. Hardyng, and Hoſius, who doo al ſo confidentlie allege this place for the Biſhop of Rome his ſupremacie, bee either aſhamed of their greate folie, or els declare their ſhameleſſe impudencie? For declaration whereof, I ſaie, that as this thirde epiſtle of the firſt booke is written to Cornelius, then Biſhop of Rome: ſo is a greate parte of the ſaied epiſtle written of ſaincte Cyprian his owne affaires, and of the iniuries doen to hymſelf, by the heretikes, bothe preſent in Afrike, and of their railinges againſt him in his abſēce, as appeareth by theſe woordes, about a ſide of a leafe in folio, from the beginnyng of the epiſtle. Quae autem ſui elatio, quae comminantium tumens, & inflata, ac vana iactatio, illic abſenti minari, cùm hic me habeāt in poteſtate praeſentem? What a preſumption of themſelues i
                     •
                   this, what a ſwelling and puffed, and vaine braggerie is this, there to manneſſe me beyng abſente, when as thei haue me here preſente in their handes? By theſe woordes of S. Cyprian it appeareth euidentlie, that here he ſpeaketh of hymſelf, beyng deſpiſed, and in his abſence railed vpon by certaine of his owne inferiours: and ſo goeth on

with a longe proceſſe, and with many allegations out of the ſcriptures, and reproueth that damnable vice of a proude and ſlaunderous toungue. Emongeſt other places he allegeth this texte. He that ſaieth thou foole to his brother &c. is guiltie of hell fire: whereof he inferreth, how can thei then eſcape the iudgemēt of God the auēger, who ſpake ſuche thinges not onelie to brethren, but alſo to Prieſtes? And ſo procedyng alledgeth out of the Scriptures againſte thoſe heretikes, whiche had ſo railed on him: as out of Deuteronomium the 17 chapiter, and out of the firſt booke of Kinges, out of the 8. of Mathewe, and the 10. of Luke, the 23. of the Actes, of the obediēce and reuerence due to the high prieſtes, and to the Apoſtles. And all this he writeth ſpeciallie, to confirme his owne autthoritie, beyng ſo vnwoorthilie railed on behinde his backe: as is moſte euidente by the continuaūce of the proceſſe. After whiche foloweth the place by M. Dorman alledged, of the prieſt of God who is not obeied, and of one prieſte, and one iudge in the churche in Chriſtes ſteede, not regarded. Whiche woordes he ſpeaketh of hymſelf ſo abuſed by thoſe heretikes, ſo railyng on hym behinde his backe, as by all that goeth before, from the firſte entrie of ſpeakyng of hymſelf and his owne wronges, and ſtill continuyng the treatie of hymſelf, and his owne matters, and alſo by theſe woordes folowyng, it doeth moſte plainly appere. Caeterum dico, dico enim prouocatus &c. But I ſaie, ſaieth ſainct Cyprian, for I ſaie, beyng prouoked (to witte, by ſuche railers vpon him as he began firſte to ſpeake of) I ſaie, beyng ſorowfull, I ſaie, beyng cō
                  pelled: when a biſhop is placed in the roume of his predeceſſour beyng deade, when he is choſen peaceably, by the voice of all the people: beyng in perſecution defended by Gods helpe, ioigned faithfullie to all his felowe

biſhops, tried and allowed of his people in his biſhoprike foure yeres: ſufferyng ſo many perſecutions, euen at this verie time, in the whiche I doo write to you theſe letters, cried for to be throwen to the Lions: when ſuch a brother is aſſaulted of certaine deſperate and wicked perſones, it appeareth that thei whiche doo ſo aſſaulte him, be the enemies of Chriſte. Thus farre ſaincte Cyprian: whereby it appeareth, that he hath continued, and doeth ſtill continue to write of hymſelf, by the verie woordes, prouocatus dico, I ſaie being prouoked &c. and by the circumſtances of his complaintes to Cornelius, for ſuche vnworthie deſpiſyng of him and railing vpon hym, by ſuche his diſobedient inferiours, and by the circumſtance of the matter & time, where he ſaieth, that he, who was of his people allowed foure yeres in his Biſhoprike, is the broother ſo aſſaulted: beyng the Prieſt of God, is ſo deſpiſed: beyng the iudge in Chriſtes ſteede for the tyme, is not regarded, as he ſaied before. Whereby it is moſte manifeſt, that ſainct Cypriā meaneth himſelf, and not Cornelius, who was biſhop of Rome but thrée yeres, or as Platina and others ſaie, 
                     Nicephorus lib. 6. cap. 33. Platina in vita Cornelii.
                   but twoo yeres. So that theſe woordes of one prieſt & one Iudge in the Churche, for the tyme in ſteede of Chriſte (whiche M. Dorman hath alledged for the ſupremacie of one heade of the vniuerſall Churche) can not poſſiblie be taken as ſpoken of Cornelius Biſhop of Rome, but are directlie ſpoken of S. Cyprian hymſelf Biſhop of Carthage in Afrike (as I doubt not but all learned, and diſcreate men readyng the epiſtie will iudge.) Wherefore it falleth out, by M. Dormans diligence, that Carthage, whiche is in Afrike, and in the poſſeſſion of the Infideles, ſhould bee the ſee of the ſupreme heade of the Churche, and not Rome. Now the truthe in deede is, that as this place is here alledged by

ſainct Cyprian, with a number of ſcriptures there like wiſe rehearſed for the mainteinaunce of his owne authoritie in his Biſhoprike: ſo doo thei likewiſe apperteine to the authoritie of euery other biſhop in his own dioceſſe, who is there th'one prieſt, and the one iudge in the churche in Chriſtes ſtéede for the tyme. And neither theſe, nether any other ſuche places were euer alleged by S. Cyprian, for the ſupremacie of any one Biſhop, ouer al the churche. Let S. Cyprians woordes next before the very place, by M. Dorman alleged, proue this that I haue ſaied. Cum haec tanta, & talia, & multa alia exempla praecedant &c. That is to ſaie, where as theſe ſuche, and ſo greate examples, with many other, do
                     •
                  e goe before, by the whiche the ſacerdotal authoritie and power is by Goddes goodneſſe eſtabliſhed: what maner Di
                        •
                     nadignatione. of men thinke you bee thei, whiche beyng the enemies of Prieſtes, and rebelles againſte the catholike Churche, are feared neither by the threatnynges of the Lorde, forewarnyng: nor with the vengeaunce of the indgement to come. For hereof riſe hereſies and ſchiſmes, that the prieſte of God is not obeied &c. as maiſter Dorman hath alleged out of this place of S. Cyprian. You maie ſee that where S. Cypriā ſaieth now, The prieſt of God, as ſpeaking of one: immediatly before, he ſaid, The prieſtes, as of many: as it is all one to ſaie, Obeie thy ſuperiour: and, Obeie thy ſuperiours. Whiche alſo declareth that the woordes nexte folowyng, of one Prieſte, and one Iudge, in the Churche in Chriſtes ſteede, doo apperteine to all Biſhops: that is, to euery one in his owne dioceſſe, and not, one to be ouer all the churche. Concernyng the Apologie, maiſter Dorman his owne example of ciuile gouernemente, 
                     •
                   little before alledged, plainlie declareth that he dooeth vniuſtlie finde fault with it. For as the Apologie with

vs denieth not, but that euery king in his own realme, euery meaner magiſtrate in his office is, in Goddes ſteede or place, a Iudge for the tyme: ſo doeth it not denie but that euery Biſhop in his dioceſſe is, in Chriſtes ſteede or place, iudge for the time. But as the Apologi
                     •
                   denieth that euery one Kyng is, or can bee in Goddes place, iudge ouer all the worlde to rule it: but euery kyng is in Gods ſteede Iudge in his owne kyngdome or kingdomes, as God doeth appoinct, for he geueth to 
                     Eccle. 17. b. 14 diuers kynges many kyngdomes, but to none, all: ſo doeth it deny, that any one biſhop is, or can be, in Goddes place, iudge in the vniuerſall churche, or in al churches throughout the worlde. Wherefore the Apologie is herein vniuſtlie blamed of you M. Dorman: neither dooeth S. Cyprian (who died an holie martyr, and is no doubt a ſainct in heauen) holde with you againſt the Apologie, but with it againſt you moſt plainly, in this and all other places, whiche you haue vntruelie alleged, and all reaſons, that you haue vnreaſonablie gathered, and violently wreſted againſt it, out of S. Cyprian. And I truſt that of this, & ſuche like vndiſcreate allegations, it will appeare to the wiſe reader, how little cauſe M. Dorman had to triumphe, as though S. Cyprian were of his ſide altogether: and withall, ſo inſolentlie to raile vpon vs, ſaiyng: that it were better with S. Cyprian, to liue and die in the obediēce of this Prieſt, and vnder ſuche a iudge (meanyng the Pope, of whoſe ſupremacie ſainct Cyprian neuer dreamed) then with a ſorte of leude loſels, in whoſe Churche (beyng a certaine ſecrete ſcattered congregation, vnknowen to all the worlde beſide, and to their owne felowes too) is neither head, order, obedience, neither yet certaine rules or groundes wheron to ſtaie, to runne headlong ye 
                        •
                     ote no more then your guides whither. And withall

to note in the margent of his booke, this to be the definition of the proteſtantes churche. To the which outragious railynges, in this and all other places, I ſaie as S. Cyprian in this verie epiſtle ſaieth to ſuche like railers againſte hym. Multa turpia, & probroſa, & ore 
                  
                     Lib. 1. epiſt. 3. non procul ab initio.
                   
                  tuo digna, te proferre. That thou vttereſte many vile, and ſhamefull woordes, mete for thine owne mouthe. And as S. Auguſtine, euen in the place by M. Dormā in the firſt face of his booke alledged, doeth ſaie to Petilian, beeyng a weake reaſoner, but a mightie railer, ſuche as M. Dorman is. Tu es maledicus conuiciator, 
                  
                     Auguſt. contra Perilianū lib. 2. cap. 32. 
                  non veridicus diſputator. Thou art an euill tongued railer, not a true and pithie reaſoner. The firſte parte whereof, M. Dorman hymſelf doeth in this place, and in all the reſte of his booke prooue aboundauntlie: the weakeneſſe of his reaſonyng, partly I haue alreadie, and ſhall hereafter more, and (as I truſte) ſufficientlie declare. Now to the matter: I ſaie, our congregation is not ſo ſcattered, nor ſo ſecreate and vnknowen to the worlde, as M. Dorman dooeth make it: the Pope and his haue bothe more knowledge and feelyng alſo, then likyng thereof. And wee take this obiection as no reproche, beeyng common to our congregation with the primitiue churche of our ſauiour Chriſt, & his holie Apoſtles, ſpeciallie in the time of perſecutiō. We are not headleſſe, as you make vs: we haue Chriſt in heauen, & our Prince in earth vnder hym: wee haue orders bothe ciuile and eccleſiaſticall, and liue (as men maie) thereafter. We doo obeie our naturall Prince, and the magiſtrates, and eccleſiaſticall prelates vnder our Prince with better conſcience, then you doo obeie your foraine head, the Pope of Rome. Wée haue the rules & groundes of Goddes woorde, and therefore we knowe whither to goe, and whervpon to ſtaie: whatſoeuer you M.

Dorman ſaie.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 5.
            But ſainct Cyprian, was he trowe you of this mind Nowell, Borowed of doctour Hardyng fol. 80. b who calleth this a notable ſaiyng. alone? No verilie, for ſaincte Hierom is of the ſame, as by thieſe his woordes it is moſte euident. Eccleſiae ſalus; in ſummi ſacerdotis pendet dignitate, cuiſi non exors, & ab omnibus 
               Contra Luci
                  
                     ••
                  rianos. 
               eminens detur poteſtas, 
                     •
                  ot in Eccleſia efficientur ſchiſmata quot ſacerdotes. The healthe [ſaieth he] and welfare of the Churche, dependeth vpon the eſtimation of the chief Prieſt, who, if he haue not authoritie peareleſſe, and aboue One chief Prieſt to a
                  
                     •
                  oide ſchiſmes all other, ye ſhall haue in the Churche, ſo many ſchiſmes, as there be Prieſtes.
            
               Nowell.
               It is true that S. Hierome is of the ſame minde that S. Cyprian was of: but neither of them bothe were of that minde that D. Hardyng and M. Dorman bee of: that is to witte, that either there ſhould be one head ouer all the churche, or that the Biſhop of Rome ſhould be that head: but that euery biſhop in his own dioceſſe is ſummus ſacerdos, the high prieſt ouer his owne cleargie: and that one biſhop is not ſuperiour to an other. Neither hath ſainct Hierome in the whole dialogue againſt the Luciferians, aſmuche as one woorde that is ſpeciall to the Biſhop of Rome onelie, but common to all biſhops of all places: as the learned, that will reade the dialogue, ſhall eaſilie vnderſtāde: and as Eraſmus in the argumente of the ſaied Dialogue, hath well noted, ſaiyng: Liber eſt in primis lectu dignus, quippe qui multa ſalutaria praecepta complectatur de vita Epiſcoporum. The booke is verie woorthie to be reade (ſaieth Eraſmus) as the whiche doeth conteine many holſome preceptes concernyng the life of Biſhops. Thus farre Eraſmus. For whereas the Luciferians thought that laie menne, which had fallen into hereſie, beyng penitent,

might be receiued into the churche again, but that biſhops ought not to bee receiued againe vpō their penaūce, except thei were vnbiſhopped, S. Hierome proueth that the biſhops alſo vpō conuerſion & penaunce, might be receiued, and remaine ſtill biſhops. And here about is the diſputation in the firſt part of the ſaid dialogue, cōteining the one half of the ſame: in the whiche part alſo is this ſentence by D. Hardyng and M. Dorman alleged, for the authoritie of one Biſhop ouer the whole Churche, whiche is by S. Hierome there moſte plainly ſpoken for the authoritie of euery biſhop in his owne dioceſſe. But it is expediēt that I doo note certain of the places out of the ſaid dialogue, whiche euidently doo proue that which I ſaie of euery biſhops authoritie, & doo reproue ye wreſting of this place by D. Hardyng & M. Dorman, to the authoritie of one biſhop ouer al the churche. Orthodoxus dixit: Neſcis & laicos & clericos 
                  Orthodoxus. 
                  vnū habere chriſtū, nec alium neophytis, aliū Epiſcopis eſſe deū: cur ergo nō recipiat clericos, qui recipit laicos penitētes? That is to ſaie: He of ye right faith ſaid thus: Dooeſt thou not knowe yt aſwel thei of the laitie as thei of the cleargie haue both one Chriſt, & that ſuche as be but nouices in chriſtian religiō haue not one God, and biſhops an other? (but that bothe haue one God): why ſhould not he therefore receiue thē of the cleargie, who doeth receiue ſuche of the laitie as bée penitent? And again, not muche after. Luciferianus: oro te nōne legiſti de epiſcopis dictū: vos eſtis ſal te
                        •
                     rę? &c. which is to ſay The Luciferiā ſaid: I pray thae haſt yu not read yt which is ſpokē of biſhops: you are the ſalt of the earth? but if ye ſalt haue loſt his ſaltneſſe, what cā be ſalted therwith? and ſo foorth at large. Vnto whō Orthodoxus aunſwereth thus, Sit, ita vt vis, Arrianorum Epiſcopus hoſtis Chriſti, ſit ſal infatuatū &c. That is to ſaie, Be it ſo as

thou wouldſt haue it, that an Arriā biſhop is the enemie of Chriſt, bee it ye he is infatuate or vnſauery ſalte &c. Hitherto out of S. Hierome againſt the Luciferiās. Wherby you maie ſée yt he ſpeaketh of many biſhops, or of one heretike biſhop, as of al of ye ſame ſort. Now to come nerer the place, by D. Hardyng and M. Dorman alleged: wheras the Luciferian thinketh the dignitie of a biſhop to be ſo great, that it maie not be reteined by one that hath once been in hereſie, S. Hierome cōſeſſeth in déede that biſhops be in authoritie aboue al prieſtes & deacons in their owne dioceſſe, but that yet thei maie neuertheleſſe after penitēce reteine their biſhoprikes. Theſe be S. Hieromes woordes alitile before the place by M. Dorman alleged. Orthodoxus. Nō equidē abnuo hanc eccleſiarū eſſe cōſuetudinē, vt ad eos qui longè ī minoribus vrbibꝰ per preſbyteros, & diaconos baptizati ſunt, epiſcopus ad inuocationē ſanctiſpūs, manū impoſiturus excurrat &c. That is: I doo not denie this to bée the cuſtome of churches, that ye biſhop doeth come to thoſe that be Baptiſed in leſſer tounes by Prieſtes & deacons, to laie his hand vpon them, with the inuocatiō of the holy ghoſt. And ſhortly after he ſaieth: Quòd ſi hoc loco quaeris, quare in eccleſia baptizatus, niſi ꝑ manus epiſcopi nō accipiat ſpiritū ſanctū, quē oēs aſſerimus ī vero baptiſmate tribui? diſce hāc obſeruationē, ex ea autoritate deſcendere, ꝙ poſt aſcenſum dn̄i ſpūs ſanctꝰ ad apoſtolos deſcēdit. Et multis ī locis idem factitatū reperimus, ad honorē potius ſacerdotij, 
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      legis neceſsitatē. Alioqui ſi ad epiſcopi tātùm imprecationē ſpūs ſanctꝰ defluit: lugēdi ſunt qui in viculis aut in caſtellis, aut ī remotioribus locis per praeſbyteros & diaconos baptizati, antè dormierunt, quàm ab Epiſcopis inuiſerentur. Eccleſiae ſalus in ſummi ſacerdotis dignitate pendet: cui ſi non exors quaedam, & ab omnibus eminens detur poteſtas, tot in eccleſiis effictentur ſchiſmata quot ſacerdotes. That is to ſaie: If you aſke in this place, wherefore he that is Baptiſed in the Churche, doeth not receiue the holie ghoſt, but by the handes of the biſhop,

the whiche holie ghoſt we all doo affirme to bee geuen in true Baptiſme? Learne, this obſeruation to come of that authoritie, that after the aſcenſion of our Lorde, the holie ghoſt came doune vnto the Apoſtles. And we finde that the ſame is dooen in many places, rather for the honour of Prieſthoode, then of the neceſſitie of the lawe. Els if the holie Ghoſte come doune onelie at the praier of the biſhop, thei are to be lamented, who being baptiſed by Prieſtes and deacons, in little tounes and villages, or places further of, doo dye before thei be viſited by the biſhops. The healthe of the church dependeth vpon the eſtimation of the chief Prieſt: who, if he haue not authoritie peareleſſe, and aboue all other, ye 
                  This is maiſter Dormans tranſlation. 
                  ſhall haue in the churche ſo many ſchiſmes, as there be Prieſtes. Thus farre S. Hierome: whoſe woordes I haue repeated at large, and in the laſt place without any intermiſſion haue ioigned the verie woordes, by D. Hardyng and M. Dorman alledged, to S. Hieromes woordes nexte before. Whereby it is moſte euidente that S. Hierome ſpeaketh of euery biſhop in his owne dioceſſe, and of the prieſtes and deacons that bée vnder hym in his ſaid dioceſſe. And that the authoritie which S. Hierome ſaieth the Biſhop hath, is the authoritie of laiyng his handes vpon children, or other lately baptiſed by inferiour miniſters, and curates in villages of the ſaid dioceſſe (whiche authoritie is apperteinyng to all biſhops in their owne dioceſſe) & that biſhops haue that authoritie geuē them aboue other prieſtes or deacons, beyng curates of ſmaller tounes and villages in their dioceſſe, not by the neceſſitie of Gods lawe, but for the honour of their biſhoprike. For if euery prieſt of the dioceſſe ſhould in all poinctes bée of equall authoritie with the biſhop, there would ariſe ſo many Schiſmes by the arrogancie of the prieſtes, as there bée prieſtes.

And for this cauſe hath euery biſhop an authoritie peareleſſe (as M. Dorman dooth tranſlate it) and aboue all other prieſtes in his dioceſſe. For it is euident by the places before alledged, that compariſon is made betwene prieſtes, deacons and cuvates in ſmal tounes and villages, who haue authoritie to baptiſe, beeyng many, and betwene the Biſhop of the dioceſſe, who is one, and the high prieſte in the ſaied dioceſſe, and hath authoritie peareleſſe ouer all other prieſtes and deacōs in the ſame dioceſſe: And that there is no compariſon here made betwene the biſhoppe of Rome, as the high prieſte, or biſhop ouer all other prieſtes and biſhops, as D. Hardyng and M. Dormā without all ſhame would wreſt it: whereas there is not one woorde from the beginnyng of that longe dialogue of S. Hieromes vnto this place by them alleged, nor to the ende of the ſame, either written, or meante of the biſhop of Rome, but of euery Biſhop in his owne dioceſſe. And therefore this whole matter is altogether impertinente to D. Hardyng, and M. Dormans purpoſe, of one onely heade ouer the whole Churche, vnleſſe M. Dorman would frame vs therof this leude argument: Sainct Hierome ſaith that euery biſhop ought to haue authoritie aboue all other prieſtes of his owne dioceſſe, ergo the Biſhop of Rome ought to haue a preeminēce peareleſſe aboue all biſhops of all dioceſſes, and ouer the whole churche throughout the whole worlde. Whiche maie well bee M. Dormās reaſon: but fure I am, that no reaſonable man, beyng awake, will ſo reaſon. To conclude, you ſee it is not without great cauſe, that 
                     Fol. 80. b. VVhere he vntruely ſaieth, that S. Hierō here meaneth the Pope Peters ſucceſſos.
                   D. Hardyng in his booke calleth this place of S. Hierome a notable place, and ſaieth that it maie not be lette paſſe: whiche his maiſters woordes, M. Dorman well noting▪ would not ſuffer it to paſſe, vntill he had by the handelyng

thereof, declared his notable fooliſheneſſe. Wherein as I doo little merueil of M. Dorman, whom, the leude
                     •
                   the writyng is, the better it dooeth become hym: ſo can I not but muche muſe how it ſhould come to paſſe, that doctor Hardyng, or any of any honeſtie and learnyng, ſhould ſo abuſe hymſelf, and the readers, with the allegation of ſuche impertinente places: and with what conſcience, and ſhamefaſtneſſe thei can doo it. Vnleſſe thei thinke that this excuſe maie ſerue in matters of religion alſo: Dolus an virtus, quis in hoſte requirat? which is to ſaie, What matter maketh it whether you vſe fine force (plaine truthe) or guile, with an enemie? And therefore thei deale with vs rather as enemies, then as doeth become themſelues beyng Chriſtians, or as apperteineth to the treatie of religion, woorthie of al truthe & ſinceritie.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 5.
            And againe in an other place, ſpeakyng of the apoſtles Ad Euagr
                     ••
                  . he writeth thus, Quòd vnus poſteà electus eſt qui caeteris praeponeretur, in ſchiſmatis rem
                     •
                  dium factum eſt, ne vnuſquiſque ad ſe tra
                     •
                  ens eccleſiam rumperet. That is, That one was afterwarde choſen to rule the reſte, that was dooen for a remedie againſt ſchiſmes, leaſt while euery man would chalenge to hymſelf the churche, by ſuche halyng and pullyng thei might breake the ſame.
            
               No well.
               S. Hier
                     •
                  me in his epiſtle to Euagrius, ſhe weth that praeſbyter and epiſcopus, a Prieſt and a biſhop, bee all one, by the firſte inſtitution, and by the Lawe of God: whiche he proueth by many teſtimonies of the ſc
                     •
                  ip
                     •
                  ures, and withall he declareth that the Apoſtles themſelues were called praeſbyteri, that is to ſaie, elders or prieſtes. So that all biſhops, whiche be the ſucceſſours of the Apoſtles, bee alſo praeſbyteri, that is to ſaie, prieſtes: whereof it foloweth alſo, that there is an equaliti
                     •
                  
                  
emongeſt all biſhops by Gods lawe, as the equall ſucceſſours Omnes Apoſtolorum ſucceſſores ſun
                        •
                     . of the Apoſtles. And that this is S. Hieromes minde in that place, all learned menne, who haue redde the ſaied epiſtle, doo well knowe. Nowe to that plac
                     •
                   whiche M. Dorman allegeth out of this epiſtle: Quòd autem poſtea vnus electus eſt, qui caeteris praeponeretur, in ſchiſmatis remedium factum eſt: ne vnuſquiſque ad ſe trahens eccleſiam rumperet. That is to ſaie: That one was afterwarde choſen to rule the reſte, that was doen for a remedie againſte ſchiſmes: leaſt while euery man would chalenge to hymſelf the churche, by ſuche halyng and pullyng thei might breake the ſame. Thus farre hath M. Dorman alleged: but S. Hierome proceedeth further to declare the ſame matter, by theſe woordes. Nam & Alexandriae à Marco Euangeliſta, vſque ad Heraclam & Dionyſium epiſcopos, praeſbyteri ſemper vnum ex ſe electum, in excelſiori gradu collocatum, epiſcopum nominabant: quomodo ſi exercitus imperatorem faciat, aut Diaconi eligant de ſe, quem induſtrium nouerint, & archidiaconum vocent. Quid enim facit, excepta ordinatione, epiſcopus, quod praeſbyter non faciat? That is to ſaie: For at Alexandria from Marke the Euangeliſte, vnto Heracla and Dionyſius beyng biſhops there, the prieſtes did euer place one choſen of their companie in the higher roume, and named him, biſhop: as if an armie ſhould make a capitaine: or deacons ſhould chooſe one of their owne companie, whom thei knowe to be actiue and diligent, and call hym Archedeacon. For what doth the biſhop (onely orderyng excepted) that a prieſt maie not doo? Theſe are ſaincte Hieromes woordes. Whereby it appeareth plainlie, that the woordes of ſainct Hierome, One choſen afterward emongeſt them to rule the reſt, for a remedie of ſchiſmes, doo appertaine to euery Biſhop, as

head ruler of the Cleargie of his owne Dioceſſe. For, ſaieth S. Hierome, ſuche an heade ruler was choſen at Alexandria in Aegipte, where S. Marke the Euangeliſt, Heracla and Dionyſius were biſhops, to gouerne the prieſtes and cleargie there. And withall whatſoeuer was doen afterward, was not doen de iure diuino: vpō the grounde of Gods lawe, as you would haue the Popes ſupremacie to ſtande, but of an eccleſiaſtical order and pollicie. For that whiche was doen by Goddes lawe, was not dooen afterwarde, but firſt: this whiche was thus doen afterward, ſaieth ſainct Hierome, was doen rather for the honour of the prieſthood, then for the Hierome contia Luciferianos: ad honorem potius ſacerdotii, quā ad legis neceſſitatem. neceſſitie of the law. For by the lawe of God, which is firſt, the prieſt (as S. Hierome ſaieth) maie doo aſmuche, exceptyng orderyng onelie, as maie the biſhop: but afterwarde for order, one was placed in the higheſt place for the auoidyng of ſchiſmes. And if a prieſte by ſaincte Hieromes minde, maie doo aſmuche as a Biſhoppe, I thinke one biſhop alſo may by Gods lawe, doo aſmuche as an other biſhop. Further ſeyng this one afterwarde choſen to rule the reſte, was choſen aſwell at Alexandria, as at Rome, or elſwhere: and the Biſhop of Alexandria was that rular of the reſte of his Cleargie, as well as was the biſhop of Rome of his owne cleargie: it muſt nedes fall out, that theſe woordes, one choſen afterwarde to rule the reſte, either make for no ſupremacie of any one biſhop ouer all the churche, as apperteinyng to euery Biſhop in his owne dioceſſe: or if M. Dorman will needes inforce a ſupremacie by the ſaied woordes, he ſhalbe inforced to confeſſe the ſaied ſupremacie to be commō to the biſhop of Alexandria (where S. Hierome ſaith this one was choſen to rule the reſt) with the biſhop of Rome: as by the other place laſte before alleged by M. Dorman out of S. Cyprian, the ſaid

ſupremacie ſhould appertaine to the Biſhoppe of Carthage. But bothe Carthage, and Alexandria are nowe in the handes of Infideles, and therefore can there bee no ſupremacie of the church there: and yet aſwel there, as at Rome, where Chriſt is as muche blaſphemed, as he is either at Alexandria, or Carthage. But it is in deede moſte plaine by that epiſtle of S. Hierome, that he doeth not meane that one biſhoppe ſhould be aboue an other, muche leſſe, one heade ouer all other. For he expreſly ſaieth, that all biſhops be equall, and none ſuperiour, nor inferiour to an other by Gods lawe. Neither doeth it hurte our cauſe, in caſe that wée graunt to M. Dorman, that this place doeth appertaine to the Apoſtles: and that one was choſen emongſt the Apoſtles themſelues to haue the chiefe place: that is, to ſpeake firſte, to moderate other, to ſtaie contention, and to remedie ſchiſmes. Naie it maketh with vs directlie, who doo graunt that as emongeſt thoſe .xij. one was ſo choſen to bee ruler: ſo it is good, that in euery competente number of prieſts and cleargie, one be choſen likewiſe to be ruler. And if M. Dorman vpō this graunt, would inferre ſuche a ſupremacie of one ouer the reſt of the Apoſtles, as the Pope claimeth ouer the churche: Saincte Paule reprouyng Peter more ſharplie to his face, then 
                     Gala. 2. c. 11. &c
                   is lawfull now for any biſhop to deale with the Pope, dooeth proue that Peter had no ſuche ſupremacie. For though the Pope by his abominable dooynges dooe 
                     Diſtīct. 40. ca. Si papa. Extra. Ioannis. 22. Tit. 4. cap. 2. in ſcholiis.
                   damne hymſelfe and innumerable other, yet maie no man be ſo bolde as to blame him therefore, but let him goe vncontrouled to the deuill of hel. Neither foloweth it, though one man bee choſen ſo to bee ruler emongeſt xij. therefore maie one alſo bee choſen to bee ruler ouer all the Cleargie of the worlde, of all nations and languages, and to farre of alſo, to be well ruled. No more

dooeth it folowe, for that S. Hierome dooeth ſaie, that one was choſen of the companie of the Prieſtes of euery one Churche or dioceſſe, to rule the reſte (as namelie was dooen at Alexandria) the whiche ruler was called the biſhoppe: therefore ought there to bee one choſen to rule all biſhops of all dioceſſes (namelie at Rome) & the ſaid one ruler to be called Pope, or head of the vntuerſall Churche. For this kinde of collection, vſuall to M. Dorman, I haue by his owne former reaſons and ſimilitudes of ſeuerall gouernours or Princes, neceſſarie to bee ouer euery citie, countrey, or kyngdome, and that none can be ouer the whole worlde, proued to be a vaine and leude collectiō. And I haue alſo by his owne witneſſes, S. Cyprian, and S. Hierome, and by the verie places of them, by him guilefullie wreſted, at large declared the ſame. And I ſhall yet hereafter more plainlie declare that S. Cyprian, and S. Hierome, whom he hath alleged for the ſupremacie of one, that is to wit the Biſhoppe of Rome, are of all other writers moſte cleare againſt him: and that in the verie ſame places by hym for his purpoſe alleged: ſo that it maie bee iuſtlie meruelled, whether M. Dorman were ſo ignoraunte, that he ſhould bring thoſe for his witneſſes, who dooteſtifie moſte againſt hym: or ſo impudente, that he cared not whom he brought, or what he ſaied, ſo he mighte ſeeme to ſaie and bryng ſomethyng, were it neuer ſo farre from, or ſo muche againſt his purpoſe.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 5. &. 6.
            Leo, of whom the whole Councell of Calcedon, as one of the greateſt for nomber: ſo of all men accōpted emongeſte the fower generall for authoritie, reported ſo honourably, that thei did not onely with one voice all, openly profeſſe themſelues to beleue as he did, but called him alſo, by the name of Sanctiſſimus et beatiſsimus,
               
that is moſte holie and bleſſed of all other, ſpeakyng of the miſticall bodie of Chriſtes Churche writeth after this ſort. Haec conn
                     •
                  xio, totius quidem corporis vnanimitatem 
               Nowell. This place D. Hardyng noted out for his ſcholar. fol. 87. a. 
               
                  
                     ••
                  iſtola ad A
                  
                     ••
                  ſtaſium epi
                  
                     ••
                  pſi Theſſal. 
               requirit &c This combination and ioignyng together, [he ſpeaketh of the bodie of Chriſtes Churche] requireth an vnitie of the whole bodie, but eſpecially of the prieſtes, emongeſt whom although there be one dignitie common to them all, yet is there not one generall It is cleane cō
                  trary in all printed bookes that I haue ſeen. To ſaie: Quibus etſi dignitas nō ſit coīs, eſt tamē ordo generalis. That is, emongeſt whō though there be not one dignitie cōmon, yet is there one generall order. order emongeſt them all. For euen emongeſt the bleſſed Apoſtles in that ſimilitude of honor, was there yet a difference of power: and whereas in their election, thei were all like, yet was it geuen to one, to bee aboue all the reſt. Out of whiche forme is taken our difference of Biſhoppes, and by merueilous order and diſpoſition is it prouided, that euery one ſhould not chalenge 
                  
                     ••
                  ſhoppes. to hymſelf euery thyng, but that in euery Prouince, there ſhould bee one, whoſe iudgement emongeſt the reſte of his brethren ſhould bee chief, and of moſte authoritie. 
                  
                     •
                  rchbiſhops. And againe certain appoincted in greater cities whoſe care ſhould be greater, by whom to the only ſeate of Peter, the charge of the vniuerſall Churche Pope. might haue recourſe, that nothyng might at any tyme diſſent from the head.
            
               Nowell.
               The Councell of Calcedon profeſſed that thei beleued as did Leo concerning the moſte bleſſed Trinitie, & condemned Eutyches hereſie: but what is that to the purpoſe? We profeſſe that we doo therein beleue as did Leo: and we doo like wiſe condemne the hereſie of Eutyches. For that the ſaied Councell calleth hym Sanctiſsimum, & beatiſsimum, the moſte holie and bleſſed: what maketh that for his ſupremacie? All the Prieſtes and deacons of Rome doo call S. Cyprian biſhoppe of Carthage, Beatiſsimum & glorioſiſsimum papam, the

moſte bleſſed and moſte glorious Pope, as I haue before noted: and yet I thinke that M. Dorman will not therefore graunt ſainct Cyprian the ſupremacie. But what the Councell of Calcedon graunted to Leo Biſhop of Rome, or is feigned to haue graunted to hym, or what thei graunted equallie with hym to Anatholius biſhop of Conſtantinople, and what Leo did like, or miſlike, allowe, or reiect of the ſaid Councell: I ſhall haue more conueniente place to declare afterwardes, where M. Dorman dooeth more ſpeciallie entreate of the ſaied councell. Now concernyng this epiſtle by M. Dorman alleged, this is firſt moſte euident, that the epiſtles caried about in the names of the firſte auncient Popes, are either forged, or at the leaſte corrupted by their ambitious ſucceſſours of later tyme, to make a ſhewe of the antiquitie of their chalenge of the ſupremacie: and this to bée true is eaſie to perceiue by many circumſtances, as ſhall hereafter at large bee declared. But be it, that theſe be Leos owne woordes, and were this Leo accompted neuer ſo holie, yet I truſt he beyng biſhop of Rome, maie netther bee his owne witneſſe, nor iudge in his owne cauſe of the Popes ſupremacie. The holieſt and the beſte men that bee, are lightly partiall in their owne matters. Wherefore Chriſt our ſauiour, moſte woorthie of all credite, ſaieth: Si teſtimonium perhibeam de meipſo, teſtimonium meum non 
                  
                     Ioan. 5. c. 31. 
                  eſt verum. If I beare witneſſe of my ſelf, my teſtimonie is not true: whiche he ſaieth, for that were his teſtimonie neuer ſo true, as it was euer moſte true, yet beyng of hymſelf, it would not be taken of men as true, as it appeareth by the woordes of the Phariſeis to our ſauiour: Tu de te
                        •
                     pſo teſtimonium perhibes &c. Thou 
                     Ioan. 8. b. 13. (ſay the Phariſeis) beareth witneſſe of thy ſelf, thy witneſſe is not true. If Chriſtes woordes maie not here

take place, let the Pope then cauſe this note to be blotted out of his own canon lawe alſo: Papa iudex eſſe nō
                   
                  
                     Cauſa. 16. Quaeſt. 6. cap. Conſuetudo, in ſcholiis.
                   
                  debet in cauſa propria: The Pope maie not bee iudge in his owne cauſe. For it ſtandeth there in vaine, as it ſeemeth. To the whiche yet it appeareth that Pighius in the fifte booke of his Hierarchie had a reſpece: for he 
                     Lib. 5. cap. 14. fol. 258. b.
                   allegyng a Clementine, that is to ſaie a Popes decree, for his purpoſe, hath theſe woordes. Quum Clementinam audis, nolo imagineris, audire te vnius hominis Romani pontificis in ſua ipſius cauſa ſententiam, ſed cogita te ſententiam audire Viennenſis concilij, in quo ex vniuerſa eccleſia conuenerūt pluſquā. 300 epiſcopi. That is to ſaie, When thou heareſt the name of a Clementine, I would not haue thee to imagine that thou heareſt the iudgemente of one man, to witte, the biſhop of Rome in his own cauſe: but conſider that thou doeſt heare the Sentence of the Councell of Vienne, in the whiche moe then. 300. Biſhops were aſſembled out of the vniuerſall Churche. Thus farre Pighius. Wherby it maie ſeeme that he dooeth not thinke the Popes onely teſtimonie in his owne cauſe to be ſufficient. D. 
                     D Hardyng fol. 76. b.
                   Hardyng, who dooeth folowe Pighius verie muche, ſaieth that he will not allege the teſtimonies of many Popes for the proofe of the ſupremacie, for that wee doo make, though without all cauſe (ſaieth he) exception againſt the popes, as vnlawfull witneſſes in their own cauſe. And therefore he is ſomewhat more ſhamefaſte then M. Dorman, and hath onely noted this epiſtle of Pope Leo: whiche M. Dorman thus largely rehearſeth, and with marginall notes ſo beautifieth, as ſome ſpeciall place to prooue the Popes ſupremacie. As he laith on loade cōtinually, not of popiſhe witneſſes, but Popes thēſelues, witneſſes in their owne falſe claime: 
                     M. Dorman fol. 63. though he can not diſſemble hymſelf in an other place,

but that wee maie make exception vnto them, as not indifferent witneſſes in their owne quarelles. Well, if theſe cauſes of exception to Popes in their own cauſe, whiche I haue alleged, ſhall not ſeeme to D. Harding, and M. Dorman ſufficiente, I truſt yet that all reaſonable indifferent men ſhall iudge them ſufficient. And for more reaſonable cauſe of exceptiō to this Leo here, and all other Popes too, in this matter wee ſaie: that Zozimus or Soſimus biſhop of Rome about a. 24. yeres before this Leo, moued with an ambitious deſire of this ſupremacie, which the biſhops of Rome his ſucceſſours now ſtriue for, as it were, pro aris & focis, for life and death, as one might ſaie, did corrupte and falſifie the decrees of the Nicene Councell, pretendyng that it was decreed in that Councell, that the biſhop of Rome ſhould be the chief iudge, aboue all other biſhops, & that it ſhould be lawful for any mā vnder any other biſhop, to appeale to the Biſhoppe of Rome, as to the higheſt iudge ouer all eccleſiaſticall perſones: and the ſaid Zozimus, as the maner of falſaries is, did counterfeite a decrée to that purpoſe, and put it in writyng, and labored to put it in executiō by mainteinyng one Apiarius, a prieſt of the dioceſſe called Siccēſis in Afrike, againſt his biſhop called Vrbanus: whiche Apiarius beyng by his ſaied biſhop, for his moſte wicked life excommunicate, appealed to the ſaied Zozimus Biſhop of Rome. If ye aſke me how I prooue that I haue ſaied, to witte the ſaied Zozimus Biſhop of Rome to be a corrupter, and falſarie, I anſwere, I prooue it not by twoo onely, but by twoo hundreth and .xvij. good witneſſes, the whole Councell of Afrike, in the whiche ſo many Biſhops were aſſembled, and emongeſt them was ſaincte Auguſtine, the beſte learned of all biſhops, and equall in vertue and godlineſſe with the beſte not onely of his

tyme, but of all ages, with Oroſius, Proſper, and many other biſhops notable in learnyng and vertue. Thei al, as in their epiſtle to Celeſtine one of the ſucceſſours of this Zozimus appeareth, teſtifie that there was no ſuche matter for the Biſhop of Romes ſuperioritie, as was by Pope Zozimus alleged, neither in their vſuall copies of the Nicene Councell, neither in the authenticall examples, whiche were ſent them by Cyrill, Patriarke of Alexandria, and by Atticus, Patriarke of Conſtantinople: whiche authenticalles agreyng with their owne copies, and all other copies euery where, had no ſuche thyng as Zozimus alleged, but had the cleane contrary: for that the ſixt and ſeuēth decrée of the ſaied Nicene Councel make the Patriarkes of Alexā
                  dria, Antiochia, and Hieruſalem, equal with the biſhop of Rome. And the ſaied. 217. Biſhops made a decree in 
                     Conci. Africā. circa tempus Bonifacii. 1. cap. 105. that Africane Councell, that no ſailyng ouer the Sea with controuerſies, nor appellations to the Biſhop of Rome, nor ſendyng of his Legates laterall into their countries, as iudges, ſhould bee vſed: accordyng as by the epiſtle of the ſaid whole councell ſent to Pope Celeſtine Ad Papā Caeleſtinum vrbis Romae epiſcopum. plainly appeareth. In the inſcription of whiche epiſtle, thei doo acknowledge the ſaied Celeſtine none other, but Biſhop of the citie of Rome: for this terme Papa, Pope, was in thoſe daies cōmon to any notable Biſhop, of what place ſo euer he were. For the whiche it pleaſed D. Hardyng to call the Africanes, emongeſt 
                     D. Hardyng fol. 89. b.
                   whom S. Auguſtine, Oroſius, and Proſper, with many other learned & godlie Biſhops were, ſchiſmatikes, as thoſe that ſubmitted not their neckes to the Pope: and folowyng Hoſius his author, he ſaieth, that Afrike 
                     Hoſius contra Brentium lib. 4. fol. 187. continued in this ſchiſme. 100. yeres: to wit, from Boniface the firſte, to Boniface the ſeconde. And M. Dormans 
                     Dorman. fo. 3. b. & fol. 11. b.
                   iudgemente is, that all ſuche are out of the ſtate

of ſaluation, and in damnable caſe, folowyng the iudgement of Pope Boniface, who doeth ſaie, declare, define & pronounce (for the man as in a matter of weight 
                     Extr. cōm. lib. 1. De Maior. & obedientia. cap. vnam Sanctam.
                   laieth on loade of woordes) that of neceſſitie of ſaluation, all men muſt bée ſubiecte to the Biſhop of Rome. But I had rather bée a ſchiſmatike frō that falſe vſurpar, with S. Auguſtine, Oroſius, Proſper, and thoſe 217. godlie and learned fathers, and with the Patriarkes of Alexandria and Cōſtantinople, Cyrill and Atticus, ioignyng with them in the truthe of the Nicene Councell (and ſo beyng, I thanke God, doo little feare any damnation, other then to their fagottes and fire) then to bee with the corrupter and falſarie Zozimus, biſhop of Rome, a counterfeite catholike, and in deede a falſe ſchiſmatike frō Chriſt, and the truthe. Though Hoſius goeth about in vain to defende the cauſe of this corrupter, moſte impudently goyng about to prooue, that neither in Gréece, nor Afrike, nor els where, there was any true copie of the Nicene Coūcell remaining, but onely with the Biſhop of Rome: whiche how credible it is, I leaue to the diſcreate readers iudgement. But of this matter M. Dorman geueth me occaſion to ſpeake more largely hereafter. After this Zozimus, his ſucceſſour Bonifacius the firſt, Celeſtine the firſt, with all others almoſte, folowyng Zozimus ſteppes and ambition, haue with toothe and naile ſtriuen for this ſupremacie: and for that purpoſe did ſticke ſtill to the falſified Nicene Canon, and haue likewiſe falſified other Councelles, in ſundrie places: and haue forged a great many of the epiſtles now abroade in the names of the olde Popes, Clemente, Anacletus, Euariſtus, Teleſphorus, and other their predeceſſours, whome thei make to write almoſte of nothyng els, but of the prerogatiue of Peters chaire, the ſee of Rome: whereas

thoſe godlie olde fathers, euer ſubiecte to perſecutiō and death, neuer thought of any ſuche matters, neither had luſte or leaſure to occupie their heades and pennes about ſuch ambitious matters: as by the true ſtories of thē doeth moſte plainly appeare, and ſhall hereafter at large bee declared. And whereas this Leo refuſed the title of Oecumenicall or vniuerſall Patriarke geuen hym by the ſaid Councell of Chalcedon, and apperteinyng to hym of right, as Pighius ſaieth, though maiſter 
                     Pighius, lib. 5. ca. 10. fo. 239. b M. Dorman fol. 65. a.
                   Dorman doo denie it, there muſte needes bée ſome errour. And it is greate marueile that Leo would ſo ambitiouſly chalenge in his epiſtle the ſame title in effect, whiche he refuſed ſo freely offered vnto hym by the whole Councell. And it maie ſeeme that if the Popes iudgemente bee aboue the Councell, as Pighius doth teache, the Councell did erre, in geuyng hym ſuche a title: and if the Councell in this poincte did well, as Pighius ſaieth, but M. Dorman denieth, either the Pope ſhould haue receiued the ſaid title offered, or not haue claimed the like of thoſe, who would not gladlie graunte it vnto him. Wherefore I truſt no reaſonable man will diſalowe our exceptions to ſuche witneſſes in their owne cauſe. Yet beſides theſe cauſes of moſte iuſte exceptions to this Pope, and all other Popes in their owne cauſe of their falſely vſurped ſupremacie, I will goe otherwiſe to woorke with M. Dorman. I ſaie that Leo here, (bee it theſe bee his woordes, whiche yet is in controuerſie) ſaith vntruely. If M. Dorman aſke howe I prooue it? I would firſte aſke hym whether he hath truely tranſlated this place? And if he haue, howe he can make theſe woordes in this epiſtle, there is one digniti
                     •
                   common to all Biſhoppes, to agree with theſe folowyng: there is difference of power emongſt them, and it is geuen to one to bee aboue all the reſte, whoſe

iudgement is of moſte authorite, and how this manne is not in dignitie differyng from the reſte? And if maiſter Dorman thinke he can well enoughe frame this Iarre: I ſaie further, I will proue the ſaiynges of Leo vntrue, by twoo witneſſes, againſte this one: by indifferente witneſſes, againſt this partiall witneſſe in his owne cauſe: by witneſſes without and aboue all exception, againſte this witneſſe, vnto whom ſo many and ſo iuſte exceptions maie bee taken. I will proue (I ſaie) his own witneſſe of hymſelf falſe, and M. Dorman too, by M. Dormans owne witneſſes, ſainct Cyprian, and ſainct Hierome brought in by hymſelf for the proofe of his parte: and that whiche is more, I will prooue it by the verie ſame places of ſainct Cyprian and ſainct Hierome, whiche are by Doctour Hardyng, and maiſter Dorman here alleged: that is to ſaie, by the thirde epiſtle of the firſte booke of the epiſtles of ſainct Cyprian, and by the epiſtle of ſainct Hierome to Euagrius. And I doubte not, but as of his three witneſſes brought for hym, one is no witneſſe (but ſuche as if one would ſaie aſke my ſelf whether I bee a theefe, or no) ſo the other twoo witneſſes, who bee moſte woorthie credite, ſhall proue my cauſe true, I truſte, and maiſter Dorman a verie liar. Wherein I doo thus proceade. Firſt, I will 
                     Lib▪
                      1. epiſt. 3. pagin. 10. putte the reader in remembraunce yet once againe, of Saincte Cyprians owne woordes before touched, written in the ſame epiſtle by maiſter Dorman alleged, whiche are theſe: Cum ſtatutum ſit omnibus nobis, &c. whiche maie bee thus tranſlated: whereas an order is taken or ſtatute made emongeſte vs all, and it is alſo reaſonable and right, that euery mannes cauſe be there hearde, where the faulte was committed: and whereas a portion of the flocke is aſſigned to euery biſhoppe by himſelf, whiche euery one ought to rule and

gouerne, and muſt geue an accompte of his doynges to the Lorde: theſe whiche bee vnder our gouernaunce ought not therefore to runne about (to witte, from one Biſhoppe to an other) neither to breake the agreable concorde of Biſhoppes by their guilefull temeritie or raſhneſſe, but ought there to make anſwere in their cauſes, where thei maie haue accuſers, & witneſſes of their crimes, excepte it ſeeme to a fewe deſperate, and caſte awaie perſones, that the authoritie of the biſhoppes that bee in Afrike is leſſe, then the authoritie of others, whiche Biſhoppes haue alreadie geuen iudgement of them: their cauſe is alreadie heard, ſentence is alreadie pronounced againſt them: neither dooeth it agree to the graue iudgemente of Biſhoppes, to be blamed of the leuitie of a mouable and inconſtant mynde: whereas our Lorde dooeth ſaie, Let your ſpeache bee, yea, yea: no, no. Thus farre ſaincte Cyprian, M. Dormans owne witneſſe, euen in the ſame epiſtle by hymſelf alleged. And this ſentence of ſaincte Cyprian touchyng the determinyng of controuerſies in the places where thei dooe riſe, and that no appellations ſhalbee made to any biſhop of an other Prouince, yea and that namely not to the Biſhop of Rome, nor that he ſhall ſende any Legates Laterall to heare or determine foraine matters, dooeth the whole Carthaginenſe councell approue and allowe: wherein was ſaincte Auguſtine, Droſius, and Proſper, with. 217. moe learned and godlie Biſhoppes aſſembled, as I haue before noted. The ſame ſainct Cyprian euer agreyng with hym ſelf in this veritie of the equalitie of al biſhops, (which is the ouerthrowe of the ſupremacie of one) dooeth applie many ſuche places of the ſcriptures, as are cuſtomarelie, but moſte falſely alleged now a daies by this authour, and other aduerſaries for the proufe of the popes

ſupremacie ouer all Biſhoppes, to the declaration of the equall authoritie of euery Biſhoppe in his own dioceſſe, as the place of Deuteronomium concernyng 
                     Deuter. 17. the obedience due to the high Prieſte: out of Numerie, of the diſobedience of Chore, Dathan, and Abyron againſt 
                     Numeri. 16. Aaron: out of the Actes of the Apoſtles touching Saincte Paules woordes: I wiſte not that he was the 
                     Act. 23. high Biſhoppe, for it is written, thou ſhalt not ſpeake euill to the prince of thy people. All theſe places, I ſaie, doeth ſaincte Cyprian allege for the authoritie of Rogatian 
                     Cyprianus lib. 3. epiſt. 9. an Africane Biſhop, and againſte the diſobedience of the ſaied Rogatians oeacon againſt his biſhop. And the ſame places dooeth ſainct Cyprian likewiſe againe 
                     Cyprianus lib. 4. epiſt. 9. in an other place allege for his owne authoritie, beeyng Biſhop of Carthage, and againſt the ſtubborneſſe of Pupianus towardes hymſelf. So that ſaincte Cyprian doeth in all places maintaine the equalitie of biſhops, and withal ouerthrowe the ſupremacie of one ouer all, directlie againſte this place by you, as out of Pope Leo, alleged. But in no place is ſainct Cyprian more effectuous and piaine concernyng this matter, then in his booke intituled De ſimplicitate praelatorū: where he hath theſe woordes: Dn̄sapoſtolis oībus poſt reſurrectionem ſuam, parem poteſtatē tribuit. & mox: Hoc erant vtique & caeteri apoſtoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari conſortio praediti, & honoris & poteſtatis. That is to ſaie. The Lorde after his reſurrectiō did geue like orequall power to al his Apoſtles. The other Apoſtles were the veric ſame, that Peter was, beeyng indued with like felowſhip, both of honour and power. Thus farre ſaincte Cyprian: who beyng in ſo many places ſo directlie againſte this vſurped ſupremacie of one, and for the equalitie of all Biſhoppes, it is to be wondered with what face M. Dorman hath been ſo bold and buſie

with S. Cyprian in this his treatie of the popes ſupremacie. Now let vs heare S. Hierome, M. Dorman his ſecond witneſſe: and euen in the ſame epiſtle by M. Dorman alleged alſo. Where Saincte Hierome ſpeakyng of the authoritie of Churches and Biſhops, and makyng thē all equall, and none aboue an other, hath theſe woordes. Nec altera Romanae vrbis eccleſia, altera totius orbis eſtimanda eſt &c. Wée maie not thinke that the Churche of the citie of Rome is one, and the Churche of the whole worlde an other. Bothe Fraūce and Britaine (now called Englāde) Afrike and Perſie lande, the Eaſt countreis, and Indie, and al barbarous nations woorſhip one Chriſte, and obſerue one rule of truth. If you ſeke for authoritie, the worlde is greater Maior eſt orbis authoritas quam vrbis. then the citie (of Rome): whereſoeuer any biſhoppe is, whether he be at Rome, or Eugubium: at Conſtantinople, or at Rhegium: at Alexādria, or Tanis: he is of the ſame merite, of the ſame prieſthoode. The power of riches, or baſeneſſe of pouertie maketh not a biſhope either higher or lower. But thei be al the ſucceſſors of the Apoſtles. But thou wilte ſaie, how dooe thei at Rome a
                     •
                   the teſtimonie of the deacon ordein the prieſt: What dooeſt thou allege to me the cuſtome of one citie: what dooeſt thou chalenge for the lawes of the Churche the vſage of a fewe, whereof preſumptiō hath riſen: Thus farre ſainct Hierome. Vpon the which place Eraſmus in his Scholies noteth that Eugubium, Rhegium, and Tanis were baſe and little tounes, and that ſainct Hierome matcheth in paires and couples a poore & ſimple Frigidum opidulum. little toune, with a noble citie: to ſhe we therby that the dignitie of the Biſhop is not eſtéemed by the greatneſſe of his dioceſſe or citie, but that all biſhops bee equall in office. Now let vs compare theſe twoo, ſainct Cyprian I ſaie, and ſaincte Hierome bearyng witneſſe with the

truthe, with Leo onely bearyng witneſſe to hymſelf. Leo ſaieth, In the holie Apoſtles themſelues there was a differēce of power, and that it was geuen to one to be aboue all the reſte. On the contrary parte S. Cyprian ſaith, The Lorde gaue like and equall authoritie to all his Apoſtles: all the Apoſtles bee indued with like felowſhip, bothe of honour, and power. Thus ſaieth S. Cyprian in his booke intitled De ſimplicitate praelatorum, Of the ſimplicitis of prieſtes: noting them as double faced prelates, that teache, or attempt the cōtrary. Againe Leo ſaieth: Out of this forme is taken our difference of Biſhoppes, that in euery Prouince one bee chief and of moſte authoritie, and the biſhop of greater cities to haue greater care, and conſequētly that he who ſitteth in Peters chaire, ſhould haue charge, & be heade of the vniuerſall Churche. Thus ſaieth Leo: and thus he ſaieth, becauſe he hymſelf would be Lorde and head ouer all the churche. S. Cyprian ſaieth: Euery biſhop hath his ſeuerall portiō of Chriſtes flocke to rule and gouerne, for the which he muſt geue an accōpt vnto the Lorde. And that thoſe, who are vnder the charge of the biſhop of one countrey, maie not appeale to a biſhop of an other: nor the cauſe determined by one Biſhop, maie be called in queſtion before an other: for that the authoritie of one Biſhop is not inferiour to an other: nor the authoritie of the biſhop of Afrike is leſſe, then the authoritie of the biſhops of Italie, or Rome it ſelf (for his woordes haue euidentlie that relation) and that none thinke the authoritie of one biſhop to be leſſe then the authoritie of an other biſhop, but a fewe wicked and deſperate men. Thus you ſee how your owne witneſſes are at ſquare, and there is, yea, and naie betwéene this your Leo, and S. Cypriā in theſe matters. S Hierome, agreing with S. Cyprian, ſaith: All churches

worſhippyng one Chriſt, and obſeruyng one rule of truthe, are equall with the churche of Rome: all biſhoppes bee the ſucceſſours of the Apoſtles, and of one prieſthoode, and of the ſame merite and dignitie. Thus ſaieth S. Hierome. But Leo ſaith contrary: that it was geuen to one to be aboue all the reſt, & that thei, who be appoincted in greater dioceſſes or cities, haue more care and authoritie: and that th' onely ſee of Peter hath charge of the vniuerſall Churche, & is heade therof. Thus ſaith Leo. S. Hierome ſaith: The leſſe dioceſſe or toune, or the poorer eſtate maketh not the biſhop lower, or leſſe in authoritie: the greater prouince, the greater citie, the greater riches make not a Biſhop greater in authoritie. And though Leo doo make neuer ſo muche of Rome, and ſet it aboue the vniuerſall Churche: S. Hierome ſaith, Th'authoritie of the vniuerſall churche is greater, then the authoritie of the churche of Rome, as the worlde is greater, then the citie of Rome. And he ſaith further: What dooeſt thou allege me the vſe of the one citie of Rome for a lawe of the churche, wherof riſeth preſumption of a fewe againſt all men? I thinke ye fire and water are not of more contrary nature, then are S. Cyprian and S. Hierome contrarie to that epiſtle alleged by M. Dorman, as Leo the Popes epiſtle: nor that any witneſſes brought againſte a man by his aduerſarie, euer haue more directlie teſtified againſte him, then theſe twoo witneſſes, S. Cyprian and ſainct Hierome brought in by D. Hardyng and M. Dorman for them, dooe teſtifie againſte them, euen in the verie places by themſelues alleged: beſides their conſonancie with themſelues in al other places, and the conſent of S. Auguſtine and twoo hundreth and moe Biſhops agrecyng with them, againſte this Leo. What ſhould one iudge of theſe mē, bringyng in together three witneſſes,

of the whiche twoo are moſte directlie againſte them, and againſte the thirde alſo, who alone ſeemeth to make with them: & that thirde, as in his owne cauſe, to bee ſuſpected: and further to bee doubted alſo, whether it bee he in deede, or an other vnder his name: and ſuche as he is, the woordes of his teſtimonie either manifeſtlie falſified, or els at the leaſt in diuers copies beyng not onely diuers, but cleane contrarie? as hauyng in one copie, it is ſo, in an other (if M. Dorman ſlepte not) it is not ſo. And yet bothe theſe, impoſſible bothe to bee true, bee one mannes teſtimonie, of one and the ſame matter, and in one and the ſame place alſo. Were theſe menne ſo blinde that thei did not ſee this, or ſo ſhameleſſe that ſeyng, and knowyng, thei durſt yet allege ſuche witneſſes for them? So blind buſſardes thei tooke all menne in the worlde, ſauyng themſelues, to bee. Surelie me thinketh it to bee an harde caſe, and a ſilie ſhameleſſe ſhifte, for menne to bee driuen to allege thoſe authours, and to bring thoſe witneſſes for them, whoſe teſtimonies dooe thus conuicte them, and quite ouerthrowe their cauſe, and withall ſhame them vtterlie. And verie miſerable is the Pope and Poperie, being driuen now at the laſte to the patrocinie of ſuche proctours, who openyng and bewraiyng the weakeneſſe of the groundes and foundations thereof, ſo long tyme heretofore, by ignoraunce of the worlde, iudged ſure, will themſelues bryng all Poperie, beyng alreadie of it ſelf ruinous, to ſpeedie and vtter deſtruction. For the whiche alſo all godlie, and ſuche as loue the truthe haue greate cauſe to geue God greate and hartie thankes, for that (theſe cauſes as deſperate, beyng forſaken of almoſte all learned & graue men) M. Dorman, with ſuche other as he is, haue thus taken them in hande, and that ſuche leude matters haue founde at the Similes habēt labra lactucas.
                  
proctours and patrons moſte méete for them.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 6.
            Hetherto haue you harde good readers, beſide the experience that we haue of ciuile policie, and worldlie gouernemente, the opinions alſo of ſaincte Cyprian, ſainct Hierome, and holie Leo, all three agreing in one, that there muſt nedes be one iudge in Chriſtes church in his ſteede, that the health of the churche dependeth Cyprian. vpon the authoritie of the chief Prieſte, that if his authoritie bee not aboue all the reſte, there will ſo many Hierom. Schiſmes breake in vpon vs as there bee Prieſtes, that for the auoidyng of that miſchiefe, there was one choſen euen amongeſt the Apoſtles, to gouerne the reſte: Leo. Laſt of all, that that vſage in Chriſ
                  •
               es churche to haue one head, is no newe inuention [as ſome men falſlie report] but taken from the example of the Apoſtles thē
               ſelues.
            
               Nowell.
               Hetherto haue you heard, good readers, how of the experience of ciuile policie and worldlie gouernment, wherein euery ſeuerall countrey, citie, and companie, haue their ſeuerall Princes, rulers, and heades, maiſter Dorman would moſte l
                     •
                  udely gather, that al churches diſperſed in all countries, cities, tounes, villages, nations, peoples, and lāguages (impoſſible to be knowē, and more impoſſible to be gouerned, but of Chriſt onely, the onely head of that vniuerſalitie) ſhould haue one onely heade here in earth. You haue hearde alſo, how ignorantlie (if he did not vnderſtand) how ſhameleſly (if he did vnderſtande) he hath alleged S. Cyprian, and S. Hierome for him, beyng, bothe in all other places vniuerſallie, and in the verie ſpeciall places alſo by hym alleged, moſte euidentlie againſte hym, and that moſte falſly vſurped ſupremacie of the pope. You haue

heard how contrary his witneſſes be, twoo againſt one: and that one either not ſo writyng, as is alleged by M. Dorman, but falſified, or forged as ſo writyng, by the Popes commen corrupters and falſaries of al writers, and writynges: or if ſo writyng, yet vnworthie credite euen by his owne lawe, as partiall in his owne cauſe: and otherwiſe to be ſuſpected, for that his teſtimonie is in diuers copies found not onely diuers, but cleane cō
                  trarie: vnleſſe M. Dormā thought he might put in and out, this woorde (non, not) as a little ſillable, and nothyng materiall, at his pleaſure. And further, the ſaied witneſſe (who ſo euer he be) beyng but one, is confuted as you haue hearde, by the veredicte of twoo witneſſes moſte worthie of creadite, brought in with hym, for teſtimonie of the ſame matter. You ſe therfore not onely no neceſſitie, but an impoſſibilitie of ſuch an one onely head, aſwell of the churche diſperſed throughout all the worlde, as of one onely king, or prince of all the worlde it ſelf. You ſée there was no ſuche opinion, muche leſſe knowledge of any ſuche head, emōgeſt the Apoſtles, or in the primitiue churche, but that it is a newe deuiliſhe deuiſe of the late ambitious Biſhoppes of Rome: who when thei were neuer able yet hitherto well to rule the churche of Rome one citie (as by all hiſtories and experience is euidente) would yet of the worlde vſurpe the ſuperioritie, & ſupremacie. And if S. Paule didthinke he was not méete to haue charge of one Churche, who 1. Timot. 3. Si quis autem domui ſuae praeeſſe neſcit, quomodo eccleſiam Dei curabit?
                   could not well gouerne his owne houſe: of what monſtrous ambitiō and preſumption is he trowe you, who, neuer yet able to gouerne one peculiar churche, dooeth claime, and would take vpon him the regiment of all churches throughout the whole worlde? Wheras he is not able, were he thereto required, to tell the onely names of a ſmall parte of the ſaied churches, neither knoweth

in what part of the world, a great many of thē be.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 6.
            I can not heare ſtaie, to examine curiouſſie euery worde in theſe auncient fathers, but leauing that good readers to your diſcreatiō, and not doubtyng but that in theſe graue witneſſes, in a matter of ſuche weight & importaunce, as wherevpon dependeth the healthe of the whole Churche: you will be no leſſe diligente, then you would bee in examinyng the depoſitions of your owne witneſſes, or your aduerſaries in a triall of landes, or other temporall commoditie.
            
               Nowell.
               M. Dorman is in haſte, and lacketh leiſure for the examination of theſe matters: there is ſome plaie belike towardes, and his par
                     •
                  e therein the buſieſte of all other: and therefore you muſt examine theſe witneſſes your ſelues, and that with more diligence, then you would dooe in controuerſies about landes, or worldie matters. Now ſurely M. Dorman, a little examinatiō will ſerue to trie out, that you, and all your felowe collectours and ouerſears of this booke, were either of haſt ſhamefully ouerſéene, or ſo ignoraunte, that you could not ſée, though you had had good leiſure: or moſte impudēt and ſhameleſſe (ſo that you cared nothyng, what or how you did write, ſo it were ſome thyng) or els all three together. And had you doen well, you ſhould all haue beſtowed your leiſure and cunnyng together, in ſome one piththie booke (if any thyng can be piththilie written of ſuche leude and trifelyng matters, as you take in hande to maintaine) rather then by launcyng out ſuche hauocke of bookes (like to this yours, and moſte méete for you) in poſte paſe, as though all ſpeede were in the haſte, onelie to gette for the tyme the commendation of celeritie and readineſſe, either of your fanourers,

altogether blinded with partialitie, or of ſuch vndiſcreate readers, as delite moſte, in moſte trifles: and withall to obteine a perpetuall note and blotte of greate ignoraunce, mixed with more ſhameleſſeneſſe and impudencie, in the opinions of all wiſe and learned men. For it will fall out (M. Dorman) that you alone ſhall bee more able to write, and ſende vs ouer a dooſen ſuche bookes at this is, by the leiſure and facultie that you haue, ſufficiente enough thereto, then D. Hardyng and you, with all your adherentes, ſhall bee able to maintaine one little pa
                     •
                  cell of this your, or his booke, as truelie and ſincerely written. So mucke harder it is, either to write a little well, and truelie, or to defende a little, of muche written lightlie and falſelie: then to write neuer ſo many, and ſo greate bookes, bothe lightly, leudely, and falſely too: ſuche as, I truſt, it ſhall appeare to the worlde, this booke (named woorthily yours) is in deede, M. Dorman.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 6.
            I ſhall procede to the conſideration of the ſeconde reaſon, whiche before I touched, of the people of Iſ
                  •
               ael, if I firſte warne you to conſider but this by the waie Nowell. Borowed out of Hoſius li. 1. contra Brentium, fol. 1. a. 5 6. &c. And out of Pighius de Hierarch. lib. 6. cap 13 fol. 325. d. &c. [that ye maie truſte thoſe aunciente fathers by their woorde the better an other tyme] how many ſchiſmes bee burſte in apon vs in our countrey of Englande, for one common receiued truth in the daies of our fathers [when we remained in the obediēce of one chief prieſt and iudge] whiche ſhake nowe ſo miſerablie the ſame: how quietlie in one loue, in one truth, in one doctrine, in one Churche, in one heade thereof God almightie, and his miniſter vnder hym appoincted ouer the ſame, weliued then, and other in other places dooe now.
            
               Nowell.
               Yet for all the haſte M. Dorman hath, he will by the

waie warne you to credite the aunciente fathers by hym alleged. The ſame dooe wee alſo deſire of the diſcreate readers, that thei will creadit thoſe auncient fathers, who, though alleged by M. Dorman, beyng directlie againſt hym, doo declare that he is woorthy of no creadite at all. And he doeth vniuſtlie charge England ſpecially with ſo many ſchiſmes: where it is well knowen, that there is as muche conſente in true doctrine in the churche of Englande at this tyme, as euer was in any realme at any time. And though there were not a perfecte conſent of all men in all poinctes, what marueile yet were it, if that ſhould happen emongeſte vs, whiche was not altogether lackyng emongeſte the Apoſtles themſelues? Let the contētion betwéene Paule and Peter, and betwéene Paule againe & Barnabas, be a proofe thereof. What woonder if that were emongeſt vs touching ſome poinctes, that was not wanting in the primitiue churche emōgeſt the olde fathers? 
                     Hiſtor. Eccl. Rufini, lib. 1. cap. 2. Let the variaunce emongeſte the biſhops aſſembled at Nicene councell: 
                     Euſeb. de vita Conſtant. li. 3. Socr. li. 1. ca. 8. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 16. let the contention betwene the biſhops of the Eaſte and of the Weſte churche aboute the keepyng of Eaſter daie, a matter not woorthie of ſuche variaunce, bée a witneſſe thereof. 
                     Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 9. & 10. &c
                   Let the ſharpe contētion betwéene S. Chryſoſtome, and Theophilus biſhop of Alexādria, and Epiphanius biſhop of Cyprus, In epiſtolis Hierō. ad Auguſtinum. the bitter ſtrief betwéene S. Hierome and S. Auguguſtine, 
                     Hiero. tom. 2. in Apolegia & al
                           ••
                        s li. contra R
                           •
                        finum.
                   and betwéene the ſaied S. Hierome againe and Rufine, 
                     Euſeb. Hiſ
                           •
                        o. li. 10. ca. 5. &c. & vitae Conſtant lib. 4. and like contentions betweene the beſte men of all ages, teſtifie the ſame. What nedeth muche repetitiō of antiquities? As though it were vnknowen what contentions haue euer been emongeſt the Papiſtes themſelues, as betwene the Canoniſtes and ſchole doctours: betwene Scotus and Thomas: betwene Alliacenſis and Occam: and of late tyme betwene Catetanus

and Pighius: and as though at this preſente tyme all Papiſtes agreed emongeſt themſelues in the principall poinctes of their religion: where thei (as ſhal in place conueniente be declared) dooe exceadingly not onely varie, but repugne one againſte an other. And what bee theſe names, Thomiſtes, Scotiſtes, Nominalles, and Realles, but names of ſchiſmes? What be theſe Benedictines, Ciſtertians, Carmelites, Chartuſians, Dominicans, Franciſcans, with others like an huge number, but names of Popiſhe ſchiſmes & ſectes? Who all forſakyng the religion and name of Chriſte common to all true chriſtians, haue choſen to be called religious, as by a ſpeciall name of a ſeuerall religion, and to bee named after men their fathers on earth, forſakyng 
                     Math. 23. a. 9. the heauenlie father, and continuyng and accompliſhyng the ſchiſme firſte begunne in S. Paules time, after the exāple of thoſe, who ſaid, I am of Paule, 1. Corin. 1. b. 13 I of Cephas, I of Apollo: ſaiyng, I am of Dominike, I of Benedicte, I of Franciſe, who alſo maie directly anſwere S. Paule aſkyng, was Paule or any other, ſauyng onely Chriſte, crucified for you? Yea, maie the Franciſcanes ſaie, S. Franciſe was crucified for vs of his familie, and beholde the woundes in his ſide, handes and feete. If S. Paule aſke againe, is Ieſus Chriſt diuided? Yea, maie a falſe hypocrite one of the ſecte of the Ieſuites ſay: for we haue th'one part of Ieſus, therof called Ieſuites, and haue left the other part Chriſte, to the ſeelie ſoules abroade, to holde them ſelues contē
                  ted therewith, and with the name of chriſtians thereof deriued. Why, is Ieſus one then, and Chriſt an other? Be there twoo Chriſtes then, or one diuided into twoo? One of theſe muſt needes be: els if Ieſus Chriſt be not twoo, but one, (as he is moſte certainly one) and beyng not diuided (as he moſte certainelie is whole) then are

you Ieſuites, were your religion good, nothing els but Chriſtians: then are all Chriſtians Ieſuites alſo: then do
                     •
                   you in vaine bragge of a ſeuerall name of religiō, if your and our religion bee one. But if your religion be hypocriſie, (as it is in déede) then haue you ſtirred vp an horrible ſchiſme, diuiding and cutting the glorious name of Ieſus Chriſt, in the whiche onely is ſaluatiō: yea tearyng Chriſte hymſelf in pieces, infinitely more wickedly and cruelly, then euer did the wicked ſouldiars that crucified Chriſt, who had a remorſe to cut his coate aſonder. And leaſte all theſe ſectes of hypocrites ſhould not bee knowen ſufficiently by onely diuerſitie of names, thei haue by other infinite waies and meanes iraueiled to ſeuer their ſectes aſunder, ſtudiyng for diuiſiō as for the beſte, and fliyng all ſhewe of vnitie as the worſte of all thinges. Wherefore to their diuerſitie of names, thei haue ioigned diuerſitie of faſhions, and diuerſitie of colours in their apparell, diuerſitie of girdles, hoſe, and ſhooes: diuerſitie of ſhauyng, diuerſitie of goyng, beckyng and bowyng, diuerſitie of diete and meates, diuerſitie of readyng, ſyngyng, and tunyng, diuerſitie of Churche ſeruice, and diuerſitie of rules of life. All tymes would faile me, if I ſhould, or could rehearſe all their diuerſities, whiche is the verie propertie of ſchiſmes and ſectes. Theſe be thoſe ſchiſmatikes, and ſectaries, with an infinite multitude whereof, of late Englande was repleaniſhed, of the whiche now, thankes bee to God, the realme is well ridde: ſo that if you mete a thouſande men and wemen one after an other ſeuerally, and aſke of them, of what religion bee you? Thei ſhall all and euery one anſwere you, I am a chriſtian, we bée all chriſtians: there ſhall not one anſwere to you (as was wonte vnder your head) I am of the religion of S. Franciſce, a Franciſcane: an other, I

am a Dominicane: the thirde, I am a Carmelite. Et ſic de ſingulis. One woman ſhal not anſwere you, I am a Brigittine: an other, I am a Clarane: the third, I am a Beguine, whiche are all names of abominable ſectes and ſchiſmes, not onely diuidyng, but deniyng, but forgettyng, but reiectyng the religion and name of Ieſus Chriſt, and chooſyng the names and religion of ſinfull ſynners, and counterfaite hypocrites moſte wicked, and ſo muche the more wicked, for that thei cloked their wickednes vnder names of holineſſe & religion. Theſe ſo diuers ſectes of falſe religion being well abandoned now out of Englande, and the one true religion of our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſte onely here remainyng: I marueill with what face you can charge vs with ſchiſmes and ſectes, which is your own ſpeciall ſore? And where you warne the readers vpon experience of the multitude of ſchiſmes lately riſen, ſithen the forſakyng of that one Popiſhe head, to creadite the auncient fathers as witneſſyng with you againſt vs: you might as iuſtly warne them to creadite the aunciente Phariſeis, rather then Chriſte and his Apoſtles: bothe for that the firſt hereſie, as S. Auguſtine ſaieth, ſprange emongeſt 
                     Auguſt. in Pſal. 54. Prima hereſis in diſcipulis Chriſti facta eſt &c. Ioan. 6. 1. Cori. 1. b. 13. the diſciples of Chriſte, many of them departyng from hym vpon the occaſion of his preachyng, ſeemyng to them to be heard: and alſo for that in the Apoſtles time ſome vſed ſuche ſchiſmaticall ſaiynges, as theſe: Wee holde of Paule: ſome other, wee holde of Cephas: the thirde ſorte, we holde of Apollo: whereas there was no ſuche diſſention emongeſt the high prieſtes and Phariſeis, but greate vnitie and concorde emongeſt them againſte Chriſtes Apoſtles: and againe for that diuers 
                     Irenaeus cōtra haereſes lib. 1. Auguſt. lib. de haereſibus.
                   greater ſchiſmes of the Nicolaites, the Symoniās, the Cerinthians, the Menandrians, the Saturninians, the Carpocratians, the Baſilidians, with an huge number

moe, did riſe with, and ſhortly after the firſte preachyng of the Goſpell, as Darnell ſecreatlie ſowen by the enemie, ſpringeth vp with the good corne ſowen by the huſbandeman: and ſpecially for that great ſchiſme, whiche Chriſte and his Apoſtles made from the highe Prieſtes and their Churche, whiche S. Paule made againſt the Phariſeis, whō, he (beyng brought vp from his childhood emongeſt them) did ſo ſchiſmatically forſake, and cleaue vnto Chriſt their aduerſarie. Wherevpon in ſteede of greate quietneſſe in one doctrine, and traditions of their fathers, of great looue emongeſt all Prieſtes and Phariſeis throughout all Iurie and the whole Iewiſhe churche before, did folowe greate diuiſions, & trubles did ariſe, not onely in Iurie, but ſhortly after ouer al the worlde. Wherof our ſauour Chriſt 
                     Math. 27. Luc. 23. Ioan. 7. Act. 5. 17. 24. &. 28. himſelf was accuſed, as appeareth in the hiſtorie of the Goſpell: and S. Paule with other the Apoſtles, were likewiſe accuſed, as is to be ſeen in the Acttes of the Apoſtles: and in like maner the whole chriſtian religion, was in the primitiue Churche of all enemies bothe derided, as diuided into many ſchiſmes and ſectes (as 
                     Euſeb. hiſt. Eccl. lib. 10. cap. 5. & vitae Conſtan. li. 4. Socrates hiſt. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 6. & lib. 3. cap. 24. & multis locis.
                   doeth by hiſtories eccleſiaſticall appeare) and alſo charged as the cauſe of all miſchieues and troubles, that ouerwhelmed the worlde, as by Origenes cō
                     tra Celſum. Auguſt. de Ciuitate Dei. Ambroſius, & Prudentius contra Symmachum. Origen, ſaincte Auguſtine, S. Ambroſe, Aurelius Prudentius and other Chriſtian writers, anſweryng that falſe ſclaunder, is moſte euidente to bee ſeen. And as iuſtlie might you charge the Apoſtles and their doctrine with thoſe ſchiſmes, ſectes, and troubles, as you dooe charge vs with theſe that haue riſen in our daies. Where it is well knowen to the worlde, that our learned men haue by their writynges more oppugned and repreſſed the ſaid ſectes, then all the Papiſtes haue dooen. In deede wee muſt needes confeſſe a truth: that whiles we al remained

vnder the quiet obedience of your Romiſhe heade, in one doctrine of his traditions, there was a coloured kinde of quietneſſe, concorde, and loue emongeſt all the members of that one heade, the ſubiectes of that one gouernour and ruler, and ſpecially emōgeſt the cleargie of that one churche: who had in poſſeſſiō the riches and rule of the worlde, with not onely quietneſſe, but thankes alſo of thē that were bothe oppreſſed and robbed. So blinded were thei with ignorance, the mother of ſuche deuotiō, brought in by the ſaid Popiſhe cleargie, by hidyng in vnknowen tongues, and withdrawyng of the light of Gods woorde, whiche ſhould haue ſhined, and guided our ſteppes better. But when that Chriſt the authour of that light, as he hymſelf, and by his Apoſtles bewraied the errours of the Iuiſhe traditions by the ſaied light firſt ſpringyng, & withall troubled their vnitie & concorde in the doctrine of ſuche traditions, and their quietneſſe in their Synagoge ſo ſettled before: ſo now the ſame our ſauiour in the tyme by his wiſedome appoincted (who of his goodneſſe would not ſuffer vs ſeelie ſtraiyng ſhéepe to wander in darkeneſſe of ſuche errors, nor of his iuſtice could ſuffer your head the Pope with his adherentes to deceiue his people any longer) by the ſame light of his holy woorde againe ſpringyng & ſhinyng to vs ſittyng in ſuche palpable darkeneſſe, and in the ſhadowe of death, hath diſcloſed, that your head and you, for the mainteinaunce of his and your fathers falſe traditions, haue obſcured, hidden, broken, and forbiddē the lawe of God our heauenlie father: and ſhinyng before vs, hath exhorted vs to folowe and walke in the ſaied light, and hath warned vs to forſake bothe your doctrine, and woorkes of darkeneſſe. By this occaſiō is there riſen a like ſchiſme betweene you and vs, as was betweene S. Paule and

the Phariſeis, with whom he was broughte vp from his childhoode before. By this occaſiō of the light, your greate gaine and riches mainteined by the darkeneſſe of ignoraunce, and deuotion of ſeelie ſoules deceiued, ſufferyng themſelues to bée robbed, is decaied: as was the gaine of Image makers, ſhrine makers, and other 
                     Act. 19. c. 2
                        •
                     . artificers of ſuperſtition in Epheſus, by the preachyng of S. Paule. By this meanes is your quietneſſe troubled, your reſte interrupted, your good cheare marred, your pompe abated, your eſtimation decaied, and the yoke of your tyrannie ſhaken of our neckes. This maketh your Romiſhe head and you crie, as you doo, and barke againſte vs, as heretikes, and ſchiſmatikes, as did the high prieſt, and other Iuiſhe prieſtes and Phariſeis crie out againſte Chriſte and his Apoſtles. This maketh your head and you to perſecute vs moſte cruellie, and to adiudge vs to death, as did your aunciente fathers perſecute and iudge Chriſte, and his Apoſtles. If this bee to make ſchiſmes, wee confeſſe our ſelues ſchiſmatikes from you, who haue firſte made your ſelues ſchiſmatikes from Chriſte, and his Apoſtles. To whō as wée doubt not but wée haue ioigned our ſelues in the truth of his Goſpell, ſo haue you in déede in perſecuting of vs for profeſſyng Chriſtes Goſpell, and the doctrine of his Apoſtles, ioigned your ſelues with the old Synagoge of Satan, and the Iuiſhe Prieſtes and Phariſeis: who for the ſame cauſe perſecuted Chriſte and his Apoſtles to death moſte cruellie. But if that you could with vs embrace the truthe of Chriſtes Goſpell, & walke with vs ioinctly in the light of his woorde, there ſhould bee more true quietneſſe, as well of conſciences, as of bodies, more ſincere loue, more godlie vnitie, peace & ioy, then euer there was wordlie quietneſſe, loue, & ioye in the darkeneſſe of Poperie. Which

becauſe you refuſe to doo, deſpiſyng the peaceable wayes of the Lorde, you are guiltie of all theſe ſchiſmes and troubles, and not we. And ſo finallie for this part of purgation of our ſelues againſte your ſclaunders of ſchiſmes and troubles, as by vs raiſed, dooe we allege the effecte of the ſame Parable of the ſtrong manne ſo 
                     Luc. II. c. 21. &c
                   quiet in his houſe, vntill a ſtronger then he came, and diſturbed him, whiche Chriſt our ſauiour in like ſclaū
                  der rehearſed for defenſe of hymſelf. If the reader ſhall thinke that I haue been to tedious in anſweryng this matter here but touched by M. Dorman, as it were by the waie, I truſte he will beare with me therein, for that M. Dorman as he beganne and flooriſhed the firſt face of his booke, with blotting vs by this ſclaunder of 
                     In fronte libri ex Augu. contra Peulianū, de quo vide b. 3 ſtatim poſt praefacionem.
                   ſchiſmes, ſo hath he hetherto cōtinued in the ſame, and applied all his allegations out of S. Cyprian, Baſill, Hierome, Nicephorus and others, chieflie to that purpoſe: and omitteth not in euery other leafe hereafter, importunately to repeate the ſame: folowyng therein Eckius, Pighius, Hoſius, and generally all the aduerſaries that ſpeake or write againſte vs, who doo moſte vehementlie and continuallie burthen vs with the crimes of ſchiſmes and fectes, and of the diſturbaunce of the quiet ſtate of the churche, and worlde: at their pleaſure termyng vs Heretikes, Schiſmatikes, Huguenotes, Caluiniās, Lutherans, and Zuinglians. Neither are thei contented herewith, but doo alſo play with pictures verie pleaſantlie, as thei thinke, in the whiche thei painte out a multitude of ſuche heretikes or rebelles, as our confederates or alies, whoſe opinions wee doo moſte abhorre, and againſt whom we continuallie bothe preache and write. And all this doo thei, for that thei are not ignoraunte that ſuche, though moſte falſe ſclaunders, beyng yet ſo importunelie and continuallie

laied to our charge, are of muche effecte to offende the mindes of the weake and ſimple, & to ſtirre vp their hatred againſt vs. And therefore thei vſe ſuche conſtant aſſeuerations for argumentes, as in their ſchooles thei are taught to doo, when thei are deſtitute of due proufes, whiche hath alſo cauſed me for the ſimplear ſortes ſake once at large to anſwere, and earneſtlie to repell that falſe vſuall ſclaunder of ſchiſmes & troubles laied vpon vs by thoſe, who are themſelues moſte guiltie thereof. For I truſte that no reaſonable reader will thinke vs to bee ſuche, onelie for that it pleaſeth them maliciouſlie ſo to miſname vs, and onelie to ſaie we be ſuche: ſeyng their tongues and pennes are their owne to vſe as thei liſte, and not in our power. For, as wee haue no religion but onelie Chriſtes, ſo deſire we to be called after the names of none but his, & as we bee, ſo to be named chriſtians: and beyng Chriſtians, we care not to bee called heretikes, of heretiques: or ſchiſmatikes, of ſchiſmatiques: ſuche as in deede our aduerſaries bèe. Thinke thei that if we liſt and had leaſure, as thei haue, wee could not frame an arbor or tree, twiſe as greate as thei haue deuiſed? Would not the Popes with their triple crounes, croſſe keyes, & croſſe ſwoordes, whereof ſundrie were heretikes: the fatte fedde Monkes, and leane faced Friers, the nice Nunnes, the ſeelie ſir Ihons ſoule prieſtes and other, with their diuerſities of ſchiſmaticall names choſen to themſelues, Chriſt and his name beyng forſaken, with the diuerſities of apparell, of coules, colours, meates, Churche ſeruice, rules of life, and infinite moe diuerſities, with the Popes Bulles (whereby ſuche ſectes were either founded or confirmed) diſplaied bannerlike vpon the ſeuerall armes and braunches of the tree, where ſuche ſectes ſhall ſeuerallie ſitte: would not, thinke you,

this geare furniſhe the ſaied tree farre more fullie and truelie too, then is M. Stapletons Staphilus forged plante, in the whiche he hath placed ſuche as are to vs moſte ſtraungers, as nexte of our kinne and bloude: whereas I am ſure, that the Pope can make no exception to any one of this ſhamfull rable, that I ſpeake of, why he ſhould not bee placed in the arbour of Popiſhe ſchiſmatikes? Wherefore I conclude that your crime of ſchiſmes, moſte falſly laied to our charge, may moſte truely, iuſtly, and plentifully bee reuerſed vpon your owne heades.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 7.
            But to procede. For the eſtate of the Iues, God by Nowell. Borowed of Pigh. Hierare. lib. 4. cap. 3. fol. 149. b. c. And Hoſius lib. 2. contra Brentium, fol. 59. a. b. his ſeruaunt Moſes did ſo prouide, to take awaie ſchiſmes that apon the doubtfull wordes of the law might ariſe, that he appoincted thē a place to reſort vnto, and a iudge to flie vnto, in all ſuche ambiguities and doubtes. For ſo is it written in the booke of Deuteronomium. Cap. 17. And ſhall wee not by good reaſon thinck, that he hath prouided as well for his churche? Excepte we will ſaie, that he hath byn leſſe carefull of it, then he was of that. VVhiche muſt neceſſarily folowe, if he prouided for thē one chief iudge, to haue recourſe vnto in harde and doubtfull queſtions, and to vs hauyng no leſſe, yea farre muche more neede then thei: he lefte either at all none, or many to make the matter more doubtfull.
            
               Nowell.
               Concernyng this place of Deuteronomium alleged by M. Dorman, theſe circumſtaunces are to bee noted: Firſt, that the high prieſt muſt be in 
                     Deut. 17. b. 8. Aſcende ad locum, quem elegerit Dn̄s.
                   the place whiche God hath choſen, whiche thei can neuer proue to bee Rome, more then any other biſhops ſee. Secondarilie this prieſte muſt be of the 
                     b. 9. Venieſque ad ſacerdotes. Leuitici generis, & ad iudicem qui fuerit in illo tēpore.
                   Leuiticall ſorte, whiche the Pope dooeth deny hymſelf to be. Thirdlie the place is

doubtful, whether the whole determinatiō doo perteine to one, or to 
                     c. 10. Et facies quod cūque dixerit qui praeſunt loco, &c.
                   many: for it is writen: thou ſhalt come to ye prieſtes of the Leuiticall ſort, and thou ſhalt doo whatſoeuer thei ſaie, and thou ſhalte folowe their ſentence. And againe: He that will not obeie the prieſt, let hym die by the decree of the 
                     c 12. Nolens obedire ſacerdo tis imperio, exdecreto iudicis morietur.
                   Iudge: ſo that the Iudge of the nation ſemeth in this caſe to haue to doo 
                     •
                  oinctlie with the prieſtes. Fourthly it is requiſite that the ſaied prieſtes or prieſt doo teache, or iudge according to the 
                     c. 10. Facies quod cunque dixerint & doeuerint, iuxta legem eius.
                   lawe of God, and not at his owne pleaſure, as the old tranſlation hath in that place: againſte the whiche though 
                     Pigh. Hiera. lib. 4. cap. 3. Fol. 149. b. Hoſius lib 2. contra Brentium. fol. 59. 
                        •
                     . Pighius, and Hoſius dooe quarell, yet it is certaine if the high prieſt doo againſt the lawe of God, bothe dooth 
                     Act. 23. 2. 3. ſaincte Paule threaten vnto hym Gods vengeaunce: and 
                     Act. 4. d. 18. ſaincte Peter alſo and ſaincte Ihon the Apoſtles, called before the high prieſte, and commaunded not to preache any more in the name of Ieſus, for that this laſte condition of commaundyng after Goddes lawe, was here lackyng, did ſaie: An iuſtum ſit in conſpectu dei vos potius audire quam deum, iudicate &c. That is to ſaie: Iudge you whether it bée right in the ſight of God to heare you, rather then God: for wée can not but ſpeake the thynges whiche wee haue ſeen and hearde. Thus anſwered the Apoſtles. And neither did ye high
                     •
                   prieſt hymſelf, nor any of the Scribes or Phariſeis preſent, for that diſobedince, charge thē as guiltie of death. But M. Dorman, as it appereth, doeth thinke that neither Aaron for that he was high Prieſte, and therefore could not erre belike, did not amiſſe in commaundyng the people to deliuer their goldē earynges, and in makyng 
                     Exod 32. the golden Calffe thereof, and in buildyng an altare for it, and wo
                     •
                  rſhippyng it: and that if any of the people had diſobeyed hym, commaundyng them to deliuer their ſaied earynges to the makyng thereof, thei

had offended for ſo diſobeiyng the voice and commaū
                  dement of the high prieſt: Neither that Vrias the high Prieſte in committyng Idolatrie did offende, but was therein as high Prieſt to be folowed. And for the ſame reſpecte peraduenture M. Dorman will preferre Caiphas, for that he was high Prieſte, before Chriſte: and Ananias before ſaincte Paule: and with Hoſius will 
                     Hoſius lib. 2. contra Bren
                        
                           •
                        ium. fol. 54. b
                   holde that the veritie or truthe of iudgement was with Caiphas, and the other wicked iudges, againſt Chriſt: and that Ananias commaundyng Paule to be ſtriken did well, and was not in his commaundemente to bee diſobeied: and that the commaundemente of the highe Prieſt forbiddyng Peter and Ihon to preache Chriſte, was to be obeied: And generallie that all the accuſations, teſtimonies, Iudgementes, and doynges of the high Prieſtes againſte Chriſte and his Apoſtles were true, and right. For thus muſte M. Dorman iudge of theſe thynges: or els make his high Prieſt of neceſſitie ſubiecte to the obedience of Gods lawe, before he dooe make all men of neceſſitie ſubiecte to his commaundement, as an inuiolable lawe. Theſe thynges well conſidered maie eaſely informe the reader, that the Popes tyrannie to ſaie and doe what he liſte, can not be groū
                  ded vpon this place of Deuteronomium: and that if the Pope or any creature dooe commaunde againſt Gods woorde, he maie and ought to be diſobeied therein: And that therefore bothe Pighius and M. Dorman haue in vain alleged this place, for any ſuche ſupremacie as the Pope claimeth. And further whatſoeuer M. Dorman, either out of Deuteronomium, or any other place of ſcripture, dooeth vntruely applie to the proofe of the ſupremacie of one head, to witte, the biſhop of Rome: the ſame dooeth S. Cyprian, M. Dormans owne vſuall witneſſe, euery where allege for the proofe of the ſuperioritie

of euery biſhop in his owne dioceſſe, and for the obedience due vnto hym there. He dooeth neuer applie it, as dooeth M. Dorman, to the ſupremacie of one biſhop ouer all other, but rather againſt ſuche ſupremacie of one. And it agreeth verie well with the eſtate of the Iues, that as thei beyng one nation had one chiefe prieſt, ſo is it good likewiſe that euery chriſtian nation haue their chief prieſte or Biſhop. It agreeth not, that becauſe the Iues one nation had one high prieſt to gouerne thē in doubtes, therefore all nations throughout the worlde ſhould haue one high Prieſt ouer all other. For not onely the vnlikelihoode betweene theſe twoo, but the impoſſibilitie of the later is moſt euident. But now let vs heare S. Cyprian in his epiſtle to Rogatianus. 
                     Lib. 3. epiſt. 9. 
                  Habes [inquit Cyprianus] circa huiuſmodi homines praecepta diuina, cùm Dominus deus in Deuteronomio dicat▪ Et homo quicunque &c. Thou haſt (ſaith ſaincte Cyprian to Rogatianus his felowe biſhoppe in Afrike) concernyng ſuche men (to witte diſobediente, as was his Deacon) the commaundementes of God, whereas the Lorde God in Deuteronomie dooeth ſaie: 
                     Deuter. 17. And what man ſo euer ſhall bee ſo proude, that he will not heare the prieſt or iudge, who ſo euer he be in thoſe daies, that man ſhall die, and all the people ſhall feare, and ſhall doo wickedlie no more. And we maie knowe that this voice of God proceaded with true and greate maieſtie, to honour and to auenge his Prieſtes, by the horible deſtruction of Chore, Dathan, and Abyron, who rebelled againſt Aaron. Thus farre S. Cyprian. Where you maie ſée that bothe this lawe of Deuteronomium, the example of Aaron, the eſtate of the Iuiſhe Churche, and all other places of ſcripture falſely wreſted by D. Hardyng and M. Dorman to the proofe of the ſupremacie of one, to witte, the biſhoppe of Rome,

are by S. Cyprian (who died an holie martyr, and is no doubt a ſainct in heauen) applied to the maintenaunce of euery Biſhops authoritie in his owne dioceſſe, and the obedience there due vnto hym. And note withall that S. Cyprian ſaieth, that this and like places of the ſcriptures, apperteine to the honour of Gods Prteſtes: he ſaieth not, to the honour of one high prieſte, head ouer all other. Naie he confeſſeth in the beginnyng of this epiſtle, that Rogatianus did but of curteſie, & not of duetie referre this matter of his diſobedient deacon by complainte to S. Cyprian (though he were the Metropolitane of Afrike, beyng biſhoppe of Carthage the chiefe citie thereof) and graunteth that Rogatianus by the vigore of his biſhoprike, & authoritie of his Chaire, had power to order the matter hymſelf: and for the vigore of this Rogatianus biſhoprike, and authoritie of his chaire, and conſequently of all other Biſhoprikes, and biſhops chaires, doeth S. Cyprian allege theſe and all other places of ſcripture, falſlie detorted by the Papiſtes to theſe of Rome, and ſainct Peters chaire there, as thei call it. Sainct Cyprian allegeth the ſame place 
                     Lib. 4. epiſt. 9. of Deutero. cap. 17. and all ſuche like, for his owne authoritie, againſt Pupianus deſpiſyng hym beyng Biſhop of Carthage, whom ſaincte Cyprian chargeth to tranſgreſſe this law of God of obeiyng the high prieſt, for that he maketh hymſelf, Epiſcopum epiſcopi, & iudicem iudicis, ad tempus à Deo dati, a biſhop ouer the Biſhop, and a iudge ouer the iudge, appoincted of God for the tyme. Which is the verie propertie of that falſe vſurper of Rome, who maketh hymſelf head biſhop ouer al biſhops, and head iudge ouer all iudges by God in euery their iuriſdictions appoincted to bee obeied of all their owne flocke, and not to be vnder a foraigne vſurper. And as he dooeth by ſaincte Cyprian his iudgemente

tranſgreſſe this Gods lawe in makyng hymſelf iudge of the iudge by God appoincted, ſo doubte I not but the iudgemente of the ſaied lawe, He ſhall dye the death, will light vpon hym for his pride, arrogancie, and tyrannie ouer his brethren, and equalles by Gods lawe. And though ſuche horrible Luciferian pride an
                     •
                   other wickedneſſe vnſpeakeable, as is in the Pope, ſeeme to bee reſerued to Gods euerlaſtyng iudgementes, for that no worldly penaltie can bee ſufficiente for ſuche deſertes, yet dooeth God in our daies, not longe before the commyng of his ſonne to iudgemente, denounce the ſame moſte manifeſtly, and as it were peremptorilie to hym, and his.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 7.
            For I remember a ſaiyng of Cregorius Nazianzenus. Vbi nullum eſt imperium, nullus ordo, vbi multorum, ibi ſeditio, vt & 
               Lib. 3. de Theologia. 
               ſic nullum imperium nullus ordo exiſtat. Vtrumque enim eôdem abſ
                     •
                  rditatis perducit. VVhere is none to rule, there is no order: VVhere many rule, there is ſedition: ſo that after Nowell. Borovved out of Pighius Hierarch. lib. 2 cap. 3. fol. 65. 
                     •
                  
                that maner of gouernemente alſo, there is no gouernement, there is no order. For bothe to haue none to rule, & to haue many, leade vs to like inconueniēce. How ſhal we then ſaie, Diligit dominus Syon ſuper omnia tabernaculae Iacob? Our lorde loueth Syon aboue all the tabernacles of Iacob?
            
               Nowell.
               You maie note that M. Dorman hath a good memorie, who can and dare without the booke rehearſe to vs ſentences out of doctours for his proofes, and publiſhe the ſame to the worlde: and boldely in the ſteede of one God gouernyng all, (for of hym ſpeaketh Nazianzene in that place) to daſhe vs in the teethe with one Pope to gouerne all the churche. I would M. Dorman

had enlarged his memorie ſomewhat to a fewe woordes of Nazianzene goyng next before, and makyng all the matter moſte plaine: whiche M. Dorman therefore of purpoſe to blinde the reader hath omitted, ſuche a ſhreude memorie hath the man. The woordes of Nazianzene confutyng twoo falſe opinions that men had of God, are theſe: Prima opinio nullum Deum, nullum Dei imperium: alia Deos multos, & cuique ſuum imperium ſtatuit &c. Sed vbi nullum eſt imperium, ibi nullus ordo &c. That is to ſaie: The firſte falſe opinion of God is, that there is no God, no gouernaunce of God: the ſeconde, that there are many Goddes, and that euery of them hath his gouernaūce by hymſelf. But where no rule is, there is no order: where many rule, there is ſedition. Theſe are Nazianzene his woordes againſte thoſe that thinke that either there is no God, or many goddes: whiche M. Dorman out of his memorie reporteth as ſpoken againſt thoſe, who would haue no pope, or many Popes. But you ſée it is not good truſtyng to M. Dormans memorie, who dooeth ſo readily without booke allege thynges neither againſt vs, nor with himſelf, but altogether impertinent to the purpoſe. Now if M. Dorman liſt tranſferre the ſentence from God, gouernyng all the worlde, to men vnder hym rulyng in the worlde, and would thereof frame vs this argumente: Nazianzene ſaieth, there is one onely God who gouerneth all: Ergo there muſte bee one onely Pope, or head biſhop to gouerne all the Churche: I deny the argumente: and affirme that it foloweth no more, then that there muſt be one onely Emperour to gouerne al the worlde. And to bragge ſomewhat of memorie too, as M. Dorman dooeth: I remember that M. Dorman 
                     Fol. 4. b.
                   hymſelf hath alleged, that for auoidyng of confuſion in the worlde, euery kyngdome, euery countrey, euery

citie, euery companie of menne muſte haue an head to rule them. Whereof I inferre, that for auoydyng of ſchiſmes, and explication of doubles, euery churche of euery countrey and dioceſſe ought to haue an head, and a iudge to reſorte vnto. And as there is no confuſion in the worlde, nor diſcorde, for that ſundrie partes of the worlde haue ſundrie ciuill gouernours, as is moſte neceſſarie that thei haue, and is in the ſcriptures declared to be ſo by God appoincted: ſo is there no diſorder, that ſeuerall churches haue ſeuerall biſhoppes to their heades, 
                     Eccl. 17. b. 14. but is moſte neceſſarie for all good order ſo to bee. And ſo is that ſentence of Nazianzene generally takē, nothyng againſt the gouernance of ſeuerall biſhops in ſeuerall dioceſſes: no more then it is againſte the ciuill regiment of ſeuerall gouernours, in ſeueral countreis. For as it is apperteinyng to God onely, & to our ſauior Chriſt his ſonne, by their almightie power & wiſedome to gouerne all ye world, & all the church: ſo is it enough, and to muche for any one man well to gouerne a little parcell therof. And ſo to returne to Nazianzene his ſaiyng: VVhere is no rule, there is no order: Truthe it is: but where one Biſhop as one head, is in euery dioceſſe, there is ſome rule: therefore there is ſome order. VVhere many rule, there is ſeditiō: It is true, if many magiſtrates haue equall rule in one cōmon wealth, or if many eccleſiaſticall perſones haue equall authoritie in one ſeuerall Churche, wee confeſſe it is like to their phantaſie, who would haue many equall Goddes to rule the worlde. But one ſeuerall ruler in one ſeuerall dominion, one ſeuerall biſhop in one ſeuerall dioceſſe, dooe reſemble one God rulyng one whole worlde, and one Chriſt ruling one whole churche, ſo well as earthly creatures maie reſemble the heauēlie creatour. But one earthlic man by gouernyng all the whole worlde,

or the whole churche throughout the worlde to reſemble God or Chriſte, is a preſumption vnhearde of, but onelie in the Pope of Rome. Let therefore ſeuerall rulers and Biſhoppes holde themſelues contented with ſeuerall dominions and dioceſſes, accordyng to Gods 
                     Eccleſia. 17. ordinaunce. For it is falſe that ſuche ſeuerall rulers in ſeuerall places doo cauſe ſedition, and it is prooued falſe by the ciuile gouernemente of diuers rulers in diuers coūtreis, for ſo it ſtādeth for the moſte part throughout the worlde at this daie. Wherefore M. Dorman and D. Hardyng maie as well ſaie that the worlde is ſeditiouſly gouerned by diuers princes, as the Churche by ſeuerall Biſhoppes. But as Nazianzene euer dreamed of one Emperour ouer all the worlde to auoide ſeditiō, though he teacheth there is one God: no more did he, though he teache one Chriſte, yet euer dreame of one onely head biſhoppe or Pope, ouer the whole Churche throughout the worlde to auoide ſchiſmes, as dreamyng M. Dorman phantaſieth, and thinketh all men that bee awake, to dreame too, as he dooeth. He ſpeaketh further in his ſleape, and ſa
                     •
                  eth. Howe ſhall wee then ſaie, Our Lorde loueth Syon aboue all the tabernacles of Iacob? What this dooeth meane, or to what purpoſe it is, I knowe not. And I beléeue M. Dorman, when he waketh (if euer he wake) can not tell hymſelf. For Pighius out of whō he borowed it, is a ſleape, 
                     Hierarch. lib. 2. cap. 3. and neuer will wake to tell his dreame.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 7.
            There is no doubt therefore, but that Chriſte hath Nowell. Borowed out of D. Harding fol. 82. 2. & 93 b. And Pighiꝰ  Hierarch: fol. 155. a. 196. d. 235. c. 318 d. & multis loc
                     •
                  s. prouided for his churche, whiche he redemed ſo dearely, as with the expence of his owne moſte precious bloud, a iudge and chiefe ruler, to ende and determine ſo many controuerſies, as he knewe ſhould moleſt and infeſt the ſame. Thei cā not ſaie, that are aduerſaries, &

kicke againſte this truthe, that this whiche I allege, was in the olde lawe, and in a ſhadowe, that theſe daies and this tyme requier other maners. For that argumente hath their Engliſhe apologie ſoluted, and pronounced that ſo to ſaie, were Pluſquam ridiculum, ſeeyng there was then, idem deus, idem ſpiritus, idem Chriſtus, eadem fides, eadem doctrina, eadem ſpes, eadem haeredit as, idē foedus, cadem vis verbi dei. the ſame God, the ſame holy ghoſt, the ſame Chriſt, the ſame faithe, the ſame doctrine, the ſame hope, the ſame heritage, the ſame couenaunte, the ſame ſtrength of Goddes woorde.
            
               Nowell.
               M. Dorman is ſo mightie in reaſonyng, and hath ſo many and ſo good groundes, that he is full of concluſions as you ſée. We graunt Chriſte hath prouided for his churche ſo dearely bought and beloued of hym, as well as he did for the Iues, & better too. For wheras thei had but one chief biſhop for their whole nation, he hath by the miniſterie of his Apoſtles, prouided euery greate citie, euery Dioceſſe of ſuche a one, that thei maie bee the better gouerned, and leſſe pained to traueill farre for the deciſion of their doubtes and controuerſies. Wherefore in theſe poinctes wee make no exception to your olde ſhadowe, nor require no new maners. But as thei and we haue one God, one ſpirite, one Chriſte, one faithe, one doctrine, one inheritaunce, and ſo foorthe, that ſo in like maner there bee one like eccleſiaſticall 
                     •
                  eg
                     •
                  ment, that euery one dioceſſe, countrey or nation haue in like wiſe one biſhop to bee their iudge and determiner of doubtes, as had the nation of the Iewes. But M. Dorman dealeth not truely with the Apologie. The Apologie declareth that the church of God was muche obſcured, and broughte to a ſmall number emongeſte the Iewes: and it ſh
                     •
                  weth tha
                     •
                   it

hath in like wiſe alſo been obſcured, and broughte to a ſmall number emongeſt Chriſtians. The aduerſaries of the Goſpell, who are the corrupters thereof, and would haue no corruption nor decaie of the Churche now noted or knowen, ſaie: although the Churche of God was obſcured, and brought to a little number in the old lawe, and in the ſhadowe, and figure, when nothing was perfite: yet can it not be ſo in the time of the Goſpell, the tyme of grace and perfection, &c. The Apologie replieth: That defence can not ſerue, for there was the ſame God, the ſame ſpirit, the ſame Chriſt &c. then, as is now: and therefore as the Churche decaied then, ſo maie it, and hath it decaied now. M. Dorman handleth the matter as though he could prooue by the Apologie, that becauſe there was the ſame God, the ſame Chriſt, the ſame holy ghoſt &c. in ye Iuiſhe church, as is now: therfore muſt there be one head biſhop ouer all the chriſtian churche diſperſed throughout ye world, as there was one head biſhop ouer all yt Iues. Whiche foloweth no more, then that we muſt haue circumciſion now, for that the Iues had it then. Vnleſſe M. Dorman thinke he may mingle In lente vnguentum, thinges moſte impertinent together: and prooue quidlibet, ex quolibet: all thinges of euery thing, at his pleaſure.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 7.
            But yet this I proteſte, that apon the auctoritie of ther Apologie [whiche with me is in that conceit, that it is with all honeſt and learned men, that is to ſaie, taken as in deede it is, for a fardle of lies:] I am no whitte the bolder to reaſon thus.
            
               Nowell.
               Here is at once a proteſtation, and alſo a confutation of the Apologie. For other confutation or anſwere to it then this, and ſuche like, as you ſhall heare hereafter,

haue thei not hetherto made. Wherefore as iuſtlie might we chalēge all the whole companie of Papiſt
                     •
                  s, beeyng at ſo good leiſure as thei are, that thei haue not hitherto anſwered the Apologie ſo lōg abroade in their handes, as we are blamed of many, for that your bookes lately ſet foorth are not foorthwith anſwered. It is a pleaſure for M. Dorman to ſhoote at rouers, & to range as he liſte in railyng here and there, and to call the Apologie, a fardle of lies. But it is not ſo eaſy for maiſter Dorman, nor D. Hardyng to anſwere it piththilie, to the ſatiſfiyng of the learned readers. Whiche neither thei bothe, nor their whole Romiſhe cleargie ſhal euer be able to anſwere to any purpoſe. But I maie iuſtlie replie to M. Dorman as the truth is, that this his booke is nothing els but a fardell of lies, & ragyng railinges packed together, as I truſte I haue in deede notified to the diſcreate reader for that is paſſed ouer of it hetherto, & doubte not of like ſucceſſe in the reſt. And I thinke that all honeſt and learned men in déede, will ſo muche more like the ſaied Apologie, when thei ſhall vnderſtande that it ſo muche miſtiketh M. Dorman, and other of like honeſtie and learnyng as he is.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 7.
            But becauſe I haue perceiued, that God in that people, in their lawe and prieſthoode, ſhadowed out vnto vs, like a cunning workeman the whole forme and proportion of his churche, as witneſſeth ſaincte Paule. Lex 
               Novvell. Borowed out of Pighiꝰ Hierarch. lib. 2. cap. 3. fo. 65. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪ And out of Hoſius contra Brent. lib. 2. fol. 58. b. 
               vmbram habet futurorū bono
                     ••
                   non ipſam imag inem rerum, The Hebr. 10. lawe conteineth a ſhadowe of the good thynges to come, but expreſſeth not manifeſtly the truth of thinges: therefore I thought I might well reaſon from the ſhadow to the bodie, from the reſemblaunce & image, to the truthe thereto anſwering. Frō the whiche kinde of reaſonyng, ſaincte Paule ſometymes abſteined not,

as when he laboured to proue, that the lawe of the goſpell 1. Corin. 9. would beare, that thei whiche preached the goſpell ſhould liue thereby: he reaſoned after this ſort. Nunquid ſecundum hominem haec dico▪
                Speake I this as a man? That is to ſaie, proue I, this by worldly reaſons? An & lex haec non 
               Deuter. 25. 
               dicit? Saieth not the lawe ſo toe? And ſo goeth he forewarde, and proueth yet by this texte of the olde lawe. Thou ſhalt not mooſell or binde vp the mouth of the labouryng Oxe, as though he ſhould haue ſaied: it was ſo in the ſhadowe, therefore it muſt be ſo in the bodie and in the truth ſignified by that ſhadowe. Thus ye ſe good readers, that I maie ſaie with ſaincte Paule, haue I proued onely by reaſons fetched from the dooynges of men, by examples of all common wealthes and ſocieties well gouerned, that in Chriſtes common weale there muſt be alſo one to rule? Haue I affirmed this becauſe ſainct Cyprian, ſaincte Hierom, bleſſed and holy Leo ſo ſaied? VVho yet were while thei liued here but men, although now ſainctes in heauen. Nunquid non & lex haec dicit? Saieth not the lawe ſo toe?
            
               Nowell.
               You take to muche pain M. Dorman, to prooue yt you may lawfully with S. Paule allege out of th'old teſtament, for the proofe of good cauſes, as he did. We blame you not for that you allege out of th'old teſtament, but for your guilefull, & vntrue application of places of the old teſtament & of the doctors, to ſuche purpoſes as thei apperteine nothyng vnto at all, naie are moſte contrary to the ſame. I would you and all other aduerſaries of the truth would, as you ſaie, with ſainct Paule reaſon from the ſhadowes of the olde lawe, to the truthe therby figured: but you haue dooen otherwiſe. For you dooe not with ſainct Paule, but with Pighius and Hoſius 
                     Pighi. Hierar. lib. 2. cap. 3. vſe this place, not bringing vs by ſhadowes to the

truthe, as did S. Paule, but by your ſhadowes of Ceremonies 
                     Folio. 65. c. Hoſius lib. 2. contra Brentiū. fol. 58. b.
                   you haue darkened the truthe, & brought vs quite awaie from it. You haue by this your reaſon, ſo was it in the ſhadowe, therfore it muſt be ſo in the bodie, & in the truthe ſignified by that ſhadowe, not onely placed your Romiſhe head ouer the whóle Chriſtian Churche, but alſo of Chriſtians you haue made vs Iewes: and your ſelues of miniſters of the Goſpell, haue you made Iewiſhe & Aaronicall Leuites. You haue on Aarons robes, you vſe his geſtures, you haue brought in his incenſe, his cenſers, his altars, his candelles, his candleſtickes, his belles and his banners, his gold and his ſiluer into the ſeruice and Temple of God. Of the whiche then beginning, S. Hierome in his time muche Hiero. ad Demetriadem, & ad Nepotianū. cōplained. And would to God you had doen no woorſe, then thus made vs and your ſelues altogether Iuiſhe, by your ſhadowes imitatyng and counterfaityng the olde lawe: I would ye had not alſo, by bringyng in of Idols, by inuocations of dead menne, by your charmes and witchecraftes, contrary to all Gods lawe, both old and newe, made vs altogether moſte wicked Ethniſhe Idolaters, and withall made a marte, and ſet a ſale all this your religion, thereby to robbe ſéelie Chriſtians, both of their witte and money, yea and of their ſoules health too, whiche is moſte of all: as it is euidente to all the worlde you haue dooen. But now to proceede with M. Dormans reaſon from the ſhadowe to the bodie, from the figure to the truthe, from the Iuiſhe churche, to ours: In the Iuiſhe churche all the people, 
                     Exo. 24. b. 7. Deu. 31. c. 12. 13. menne, wemen, and children had the Scripture in a language that thei did well vnderſtande: the Leuites and prieſtes in the Iuiſhe churche Exod. Leui. Deu. per totū. had wiues and children: 
                     Exod. 20. & infinitis locis.
                   in the Iuiſhe churche there were no Images: ergo it muſt be ſo now in our churche. For God like a cunnyng workeman

in that people, in their lawe and prieſthoode, ſhadowed out vnto vs the whole forme, and proportion of his churche now: it was ſo in the ſhadowe, therefore it muſt be ſo in the bodie, and in the truthe. Theſe bee your owne woordes M. Dorman. To proceede: Maie it be proued by reaſon onely, that thei, who are bounden to obeie Goddes lawe, oughte to vnderſtande and knowe Goddes lawe? Dooeth not the lawe ſaie ſo too? 
                  
                     Deut. 31. c. 12. 13. 
                  Maie it bee proued by reaſon onely, that miniſters of the Churche maie haue wiues? Maie not one reaſon with S. Paule, Vnuſquiſque propter vitandam fornieationem habeat vxorem ſuam. Et, qui ſe non continent, nubant: Nam melius 
                  1. Cori. 7. a. 
                     
                        •
                     . b. 9. 
                  eſt nubere, quàmvri. That is to ſaie: Let euery man for the auoiding of fornication, haue his wife. And, ſuche as cānot conteine, let thē marie: for it is better to marie, then to burne. Dooeth not the lawe ſaie ſo too? Maie it bee proued by reaſon onely, that Images ought not to bee in the temples, and that men whiche haue life and reaſon, ought not to boow and ſcoupe to inſenſible blockes, or ſtones? Dooeth not the lawe forbidde it to? If you will denie my argumentes, and thinke theſe reaſons 
                     Exod. 20. Non facies, non coles.
                   vnreaſonable, as I thinke you will, yet I truſt you doo againſt your own woords, and forme of reaſoning. And good M. Dorman aſ
                     •
                  oile me of this doubt, how this argument of yours holdeth, As it was in the ſhadowe, ſo muſt it be in the body alſo: but al the Iues had one head prieſt, Ergo all chriſtians muſt ſo haue alſo. Why this, I ſaie, ſhould holde, and not the other, I would gladlie learne the reaſon of you, at your leiſure: if there be any other reaſon then this, that you maie take of ſhadowes what you liſte, and leaue and refuſe what you liſt, and as pleaſeth you, without al colour or ſhadow of reaſon or truthe, that ye maie be the children of your Romiſhe father the Pope, with whom (as by Daniel was before 
                     Danie. 11. f. 36.
                  
propheſied of hym, and as in his owne Canon lawe is 
                     Clementin. li. 3. tit. 13. cap. 1. & lib. 5. tit 10. cap. 4. gloſſa in verba (volumus & velle.)
                   recorded) will ſtandeth for reaſon: and ſo dooeth it with you all, in all thynges likewiſe. Now where M. Dorman concludeth thus for his one heade, ſaiyng: Haue I proued onely by reaſon, and by examples of common wealthes that there muſt be one head ouer all Chriſtes churche? Haue I affirmed this becauſe ſainct Cyprian, S. Hierome, bleſſed and holie Leo ſainctes in heauen now, ſo ſaied? Saieth not the lawe ſo too? I anſwere, Noforſooth M. Dorman: you haue neither proued it by reaſon, nor by examples of cōmon wealthes: for bothe all reaſon and all examples bee againſte you, and dooe proue and declare that euery particular kingdome, dominion, citie, and companie haue their ſeuerall gouernours, and not all the worlde one earthlie gouernour. Sainct Cyprian, and S. Hierome ſay not ſo, but cleane contrarie to your ſaiyng: to witte, that euery dioceſſe, euery prouince ought to haue his peculiar biſhop to gouerne it. And as for bleſſed and holie Leo, though he bee by you adourned with a double epitheton (where S. Hierome, and S. Cyprian muſte bee content with a ſingle S.) though you put to the third title too, in woorſhip of the three circles in the Popes Imperiall mitre, yet haue I alleged ſufficient cauſe why he cā not ſerue your tourne. And as for the lawe, it likewiſe ſaieth againſte you: and your owne witneſſe S. Cyprian teſtifieth that it ſpeaketh againſt you, for the equall authoritie of euery biſhop in his owne dioceſſe, and therefore ouerthroweth your ſupremacie of one heade Biſhoppe ouer all. And the leudeneſſe of your collection, that becauſe one nation had one head biſhoppe, therefore muſt all nations haue one head biſhop ouer them, is beſides ſo manifeſt, that it needeth no confutation.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 8.
            
               
But here I knowe our aduerſaries will ſaie that theſe proofes neded not, to proue that chriſtes churche muſt haue a head, and a iudge to order & determine doutfull queſtiōs, whiche happē emōgſt vs, & wherof the world is now ſo full. For that will thei ſay, thei know as well as Cyprian, Hierome, Leo, or any of thē all, although thei wil not admit the ſame iudge or the ſame head that thei doo. But what head thinck you good readers appoinct thei to gouerne Chriſtes Churche here in earthe? what iudge to determine controuerſies? Forſoothe the head of the churche thei ſaie [wherein we finde no faulte but Nowell Borowed of D Hardyng, Folio. 81. b. ſay the ſame our ſelues] is Ieſus Chriſt, and the iudge of all controuerſies ariſyng therin, thei call the ſcriptures. Apolo. Eccleſ. Anglic. fol. 
                     •
                  .
            
            
               Nowell.
               Although you queſtion with the reader, as merueiling at the ſtraungeneſſe of our head, yet are we bound to you that you finde no faulte with vs, that wee ſaie, Chriſte is our head, as in deede he is the onely head of the catholike or vniuerſall churche of all places and ages: and none but he alone neither in heauē nor earth, what ſo euer you ſaie to the contrarie. That you dooe thinke it ſo ſtraunge that wee call the Scriptures the iudge of all controuerſies, we meruaile not, ſeyng you folowe your owne phantaſie in matters of religion directlie againſt the ſcriptures. But what ſoeuer you doo or ſaie, we ſaie and beleue that the woorde of God, and of our ſauiour Chriſt ought to be iudge here betweene vs in our daies. For it ſhall iudge both you and vs too, in the laſte greate daie, accordyng to the ſaiyng of our ſauiour. Qui ſpernit me, & non accipit verba mea, habet 
                  
                     Ioan. 12. g. 48. 
                  qui iudicet eum. Sermo quem locutus ſum, ille iudicabit eum in nouiſsimo die. That is to ſaie: He that deſpiſeth me, and receiueth not my woordes, hath that ſhall iudge hym. The woorde whiche I haue ſpoken,

that ſhall iudge hym in the laſt daie. M. Dormā, auoide the contempt, that you maie eſcape the iudgement.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 8.
            Here ſuffer me a little I beſeche you to ſhake theſe maſkers out of there cloutes, and to make open to the worlde their greate diſsimulation and ſotteltie, whereby vnder the name of Chriſt, & his moſte holy worde, ſo glittryng at the firſte ſhewe in the eyes of the ſimple, yea perhappes of ſome of the wiſer ſorte alſo, that it is to be feared leſte it ſtrike them blinde all together: thei ſeeme to haue purchaſed to them ſelues a double benefite at once: firſt, greate credite by pretendyng and vſyng, naie rather abuſyng, the name of Chriſt and his worde: next greate ſecuritie, bothe for ther owne perſones, and alſo for all ſuche diueliſ he doctrine, as thei or any other heretikes liſte to vtter. VVhileſt on the Nowell. Borowed out of Hoſius contra Brentium. lib. 3. fol. 173. one ſide, thei take themſelues to be out of all checke of man, and maie be controlled of none, as thei ſaie, but of God onely, [who if he let thē alone till that tyme that thei thinck he will, then bid thei vs let them ſhifte for thē ſelues, theie ſhall haue tyme enough, in the meane ſeaſon to preache, and teache without controllmente what thei liſt:] and on the other ſide, whileſt by prouokyng to the ſcriptures as ther iudge, thei thinck themſelues to ſtande apon a ſure grounde: ſeyng thei are alreadie with themſelues at a poinct, to receiue no other interpretation thereof, then ſhall make for ther purpoſe, and thei alſo ſee, that emongeſt ſo many hereſies as haue hetherto troubled the churche of God, there was neuer yet any one ſo horrible and abſurde, that the author thereof hath not by this meanes, in his owne iudgement, been right well, able to ſuſteine & defende.
            
               Nowell.
               Holde not the man for Goddes ſake: he ſeemeth to

phantaſie that he is plaiyng his parte in the ſtage, and wil by priuilege of his office vnuiſour and vncaſe ſome of his plaie felowes to make ſport, and to mooue laughter. But where he calleth Chriſt and the ſcriptures our cloutes: I would he wiſt, we reioyſe of thoſe cloutes as muche, as dooeth M. Dorman, either when he is in a glorious golden Cope, with a paire of glitteryng gilte Cenſers in his handes, perfumyng and withall woorſhippyng a golden God, no boliar, nor wiſer then the golden calfe: or when he is in his robes on the ſcafolde, and plaiyng his part in a Chriſtmas game: and I truſt he ſhall ſooner reueſte himſelf againe in theſe his royall robes, then plucke vs from Chriſte our head, and from the ſcripture our iudge, whiche he calleth our cloutes. Good reader meruaile not that I anſwere this merie manne, thus rufflyng in his maſkes, after this maner, but weighe, I praie thee, his writyng from this place forwardes, where he praieth that he be not holden, and marke what a ſhreude ſhakyng he maketh, ſpeciallie for a whole leafe & more, next after folowyng. Where you ſay, M. Dormā, that we blind the people with glitteryng ſhewes, you dooe obiecte to vs your owne crimes. It is you Papiſtes, who, by your glitteryng, glorious, maſkyng garmentes, and other coſtlie and fine furniture, as copes, veſtimentes, gilted croſſes, candleſtickes, dead mennes, and often, dead beaſtes boones burniſhed ouer with burnyng gold, by your Ceremonies, your minſtrelſie, your belles, banners, and other bables, haue bewitched, and ſtriken not onely the ſimple, but a greate many of the wiſer ſorte alſo, ſtarke blind and deaffe too: that neither thei can ſée any thing of Chriſt their ſauiour, nor heare and vnderſtand ought of his moſte holie woorde. And you haue compelled thē in the ſteed of ſincere and ſpirituall woorſhip of the true

God, with you to put all religion in outward & dumbe 
                     Galat. 4. b. 
                     
                        •
                     . Infirma & egena clemēta. Daniel. 11. f. 36. ceremonies, the ſeelie weake and wretched elementes of this worlde: and not to regarde the God of their fathers, but in ſtéede of him to honour the God Maozim, and to woorſhippe a God, whom their fathers did not knowe, with glitteryng golde, ſiluer, precious ſtone, and other precious thynges, in place of true vnfaigned faithe, and a pure harte. With what ſecuritie we dooe vtter the truth forbidden vs by you, as it was to Chriſtes Apoſtles by the high Prieſtes and Phariſeis your forefathers, all priſons in Englāde repleniſhed of late with our captiue bodies, all markette places and other more viler ſprinkeled with our bloud, ſhed by the crueleſte kinde of death that the Deuill the homicide your greate graundfather could diuiſe, dooeth plentifully teſtifie to the whole worlde. And the moſte part of vs loſyng our liues together with all worldelie hope, by death more dreadfull, then is vſuall either to Felons, murtherers, or to moſte ſauage & noiſome wilde beaſtes, might geue you to vnderſtande, if you would conſider, that it is no newe fangled appetite, or luſte of vtteryng errours, or hope of worldlie gaine, that dooeth moue vs to preache againſt your hereſies and ſuperſtitions: but euen the ſame méere neceſſitie of conſcience, whiche in like caſe inforced the Apoſtles, likewiſe forbidden 
                     Act. 14 d. 18. vpon paine of death, to preache: who made anſwere, that it was more reaſon to obeie God, then mā, 
                     Act. 4. d. 20. Nō poſſumus nō loqui quae vidimus & audiuimus.
                   and that thei could not chooſe but teache thoſe thinges, whiche thei did knowe certainlie to be moſte true. And the ſame anſwere dooe we make to you: for the whiche you will ſuffer vs to haue no ſecuritie in this life.
               Concernyng the ſcripture and the ſenſe thereof, the reader maie in a like caſe cōſider. Whereas there was a controuerſie betwene the Apoſtles and the high prieſtes,

Scribes and Phariſeis, aboute the interpretation of the Scriptures, touchyng the true Meſſias, by the whiche Scriptures the Apoſtles prooued that Chriſte our Sauiour, whom thei had crucified, was he: but the high Prieſtes and Phariſeis by their interpretations attempted the contrarie, and would not haue ſuche a poore and abiect man, as to them and the worlde it ſéemed that Chriſt was, to be their Meſſias. Now had the Apoſtles (as M. Dorman, me thinke, thinketh it reaſon) leauyng the Scriptures in this caſe moſte plaine, referred the matter to the interpretation and determination of the high prieſt & his conſiſtorie: wée might at this daie with the Iewes haue looked yet for a Meſſias to come, and ſhould with them haue lacked, to our vtter damnation, the ſauiour of the worlde Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God, who is at this da
                     •
                  e to them, by reaſon of ſuche their interpretations, the ſtone of ſtumb
                     •
                  yng, 
                     Eſai. 8. c. 14. Rom
                           •
                        . 8. g. 33. 1. Pet. 2. b. 6. 7. 8 1. Cori. 1. d. 30. and the rocke of ruine: but to vs, who doo beleue in him, he is become wiſedome, and righteouſneſſe, and ſanctification, and ſaluation. And as there was then a cōtronerſie betweene the Apoſtles, and the high Prieſtes, whether thei had vniuſtlie or iuſtlie ſlaine that righteous one and innocent Lambe of God, and no reaſon it was that the murtherers themſelues ſhould be iudges, beyng not onelie acceſſaries, but the principall parties to the murther: ſo there being now riſen a controuerſie betwene vs and you, about the true religiō of the ſame our Saniour (whiche how ſhamefullie you haue with your traditiōs corrupted, euen as had your forefathers the Phariſeis before corrupted the law of God, he that hath but halfe an eye maie well ſe
                     •
                  ) you thinke it reaſon yet that you, who are the corrupters, and therefore parties, ſhould bee iudges therein alſo, and ſpeciallie your chief and moſte high Prieſte the Pope, the poodle

and ſinke of all theſe abominations, & therefore moſte guiltie of all other, and conſequently moſte vnmeete to be the Iudge therein. And yet M. Dorman will néedes haue hym the Iudge, and the woorde of God ſo indifferent to all men, and partiall to none, reiected. And why reiected, I pra
                     •
                  e you? Forſoothe for that we maie by the Scriptures defende (as you ſaie) what errour wée liſte: as though that you maie not by the iudgemente of the Pope, and by your own iudgementes vnder the name of the churche, farre more eaſilie, as you haue brought in, ſo alſo mainteine and defende all errours and ſuperſtitions. Is not the Pope more partiall to hymſelf, and you his Papiſtes, then are the Scriptures to vs? Wherefore it were as good reaſon, that Annas and Caiphas ſhould bee Iudges, whether thei themſelues had dooen iuſtlie and righteouſlie, or wickedlie and murderouſlie, in ſleayng Chriſte, as that your Pope, or you, the corrupters of true Religion, ſhould be iudges, whether in ſo dooyng you haue dooen well or no. If it be no reaſon (as the prouerbe goeth) to aſke whether one bee a theefe or no, of his felowe: muche leſſe reaſon is it to aſke the ſame queſtion of hymſelf, ſeyng it is certaine that he will not bewraie hymſelf. But the aduerſaries of the Goſpell deale thus with vs: the Pope and all his eleargie, beeyng guiltie of many hereſies, corruptions of religion, and falſe ſuperſtitions, and thereof accuſed, dooe aſſemble themſelues together in a councell, in the whiche nothyng maie bée moued, 
                     Pighi. Hierar. lib. 6. cap. 1. fol. 275. b.
                   muche leſſe determined, but ſuche as pleaſeth the Pope hymſelf: there is enquirie made of vs (who dooe accuſe them thereof, and offer to prooue it) and there vnhearde, and vnſeene, wee are condemned of our aduerſaries (who will needes bee our Iudges) as falſe accuſers, ſchiſmatikes, and heretikes alſo, for that wee

are againſte them, who are (as thei ſaie) the Churche. You will ſaie, wee might bee heard if wee would, for thei call certain of all Chriſtian realmes to their councelles. How we are called, and how we maie be heard, let Ihon Huſſe, called by the Emperour Sigiſmunde his ſaulfe conducte vnder his greate Imperiall ſeale to the Councell of Conſtance, with Hierome of Prague, (who bothe were, contrary to the faith geuen them by the greateſt Chriſtian prince in the world, condemned and burned to aſhes) bee an eternall witneſſe: Yea let 
                     Cō
                        
                           •
                        i. Conſtantienſis ſeſſ. 19. their owne decree made in the ſaied Councell, whiche was: That no faithe nor promiſe is to bee kepte to any heretike, nor that any manne by any promiſe ſtandeth bound to an heretike (for ſo thei call all thoſe that dare ſpeake againſt them) bee a perpetuall teſtimonie of the ſame. Thei ſaie, wee are heretikes: wee dooe deny it: if our naie maie not defende vs, why ſhould their yea cō
                  demne vs? Thei ſaie, becauſe thei bee the churche: but wee deny the ſame: ſhall here their yea ſecue for thē, as it did before againſt vs: and our naie neither touch thē, nor helpe vs? In ſome countreis if the partie accuſed pleade not guiltie, and ſaie naie to the crime obiected, if he, by diuers tormentes enforced to confeſſe, doo ſtill maintaine his naie, and paſſe through the appoincted tormentes, conſtanly mainteinyng his naie, he is diſcharged and let goe. But it cā not healp vs, accuſed as heretikes, to denie the falſe accuſation, to mainteine our deniall in all tormentes, and moſte cruell deathes, neither to bring good teſtimonie of our innocencie out of Gods woorde: all theſe can helpe vs nothyng againſt their onelie bare ſaiyng, that we bee heretikes, for that is all their proofe. In what caſe are we then? How eaſily maie thei then bothe defende themſelues, & cōdemne vs: and maintaine what thei liſt, be it right or wrong,

truthe or falſhoode: beyng accuſers, witneſſes, examiners, and iudges thēſelues, in the cauſes wherein thei bée parties, and parties accuſed alſo? Wherefore what can we dooe els, but as did Chriſt our ſauiour and his holie Apoſtles, againſt the high Prieſtes, againſt the Phariſeis and Scribes, appeale to God, not abſent, not dumbe, as M. Dorman deuiſeth, and ſaiyng nothyng at all for vs, as he would haue it ſeme: but to God, yea and to our Sauiour Chriſte his ſoonne, ſpeakyng his minde moſte largelie and plainly in the ſcriptures, and beyng no partie, but moſte indifferent iudge betwéene them and vs. For if the controuerſie be about true Religion, and ſcruice of God, what better triall can there be then Goddes woorde? God hymſelf commaundyng 
                     Deut. 5. d. 32▪ 
                     & 12. d. 32. vs, that in his ſeruice we ſhall dooe that whiche he cō
                  maundeth vs, that wee ſhall neither adde thereto, nor take any thyng therefrom. What better Iudge can there be in this worlde betwene vs, then Gods woorde, whiche, as our ſauiour Chriſt ſaieth, ſhall iudge vs in 
                     Ioan. 12. g. 48. the worlde to come? If the controuerſie bee aboute the true churche, what better iudge can there bee then the Scripture, writen by the Prophetes and the Apoſtles, 
                     Epheſ. a▪ 
                     d. 20. ſeyng it is teſtified to vs by the ſpirite of GOD moſte plainelie, that the true churche is builded and ſtaied vpon the foundation of the Prophetes, & of the Apoſtles? And though this dooe not like M. Dorman, and ſuche as he is, yet you ſhall heare that it did not miſ
                     ••
                  ke the old, and holie fathers of the auncient and true churche, that ſuche controuerſies ſhould bee ſo quietted by the ſcriptures. Sainct Auguſtine cōtendyng againſt thoſe, 
                     Augu de pe
                           •
                        
                        catorum meritis li. 1. ca. 22 who doo attribute Gods grace and giftes to the woorthineſſe of mennes merites, cōcludeth thus. Cedamus & conſentiamus autoritati ſcripturae ſancte, quae neſcit falli, nec fallere. That is to ſay: Let vs geue place and aagrée

to th'autoritie of the holy ſcripture, whiche cā not bee deceiued, nor deceiue others. The ſame S. Auguſtine contending with the Donatiſtes, hath theſe woordes. Nos nullam Cypriano facimus iniuriam, cum eius quaſlibet literas à canonica Diuinarum ſcripturarū autoritate 
                  
                     Idem ad Creſconium. lib 2. cap. 31. &, 32. 
                  diſtinguimus: ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſine cauſa tam ſalubri vigilantia Canon eccleſiaſticus conſtitutus eſt, ad quē certi prophetarū, & Apoſtolorū libri pertinēt, quos omnino iudicare nō audemus, & ſecundum quos de caeteris fideliū & infideliū, iudicamus. & mox ca. 32. Ego huius epiſtolę autoritate nō teneor, quia literas Cypriani nō vt canonicas habeo, ſed eius ex canonicis conſidero: & quod ī eis diuinarū ſcripturatū autoritati cōgruit, cum laude eius accipio: quod autē nō congruit, cū pace eius reſpuo. Whiche is to ſaie: We doo Cyprian no wrong, when we make a difference betweene euery letter and writing of his, and the Canonicall autoritie of the holy ſcriptures: Neither without cauſe theccleſiaſticall Canon with ſo holſome care hath béen appoincted, to the whiche the certain & aſſured bookes of the Prophetes & Apoſtles pertaine, the which in no wiſe we preſume to iudge, and according to the which we iudge of all other bookes & writinges, both of the faithfull and of the infidels. And ſtraight waies after in the 32. chapiter: I am not bound to the autoritie of this epiſtle, becauſe I hold not Cyprians letters and writynges for Canonicall: but conſider his writynges by the Canonicall: & what accordeth in them to the auctoritie of the diuine Scriptures, I allowe with his praiſe: and what diſagreeth frō them, by his leaue I refuſe. Theſe are the woordes of S. Auguſtine. You maie ſée here, how S. Auguſtine preferreth the ſcriptures before the doctours, yea before S. Cyprian ſo often by you M. Dorman alleged, who was in deede a bleſſed martyr, & is no doubt, a ſainct in

beauen: and who alſo is moſſe againſt you, euen where he is alleged by you. You ſee, S. Auguſtine will haue ſainct Cyprians writynges, and all other doctours, and mennes ſaiynges and writynges examined and Iudged by the ſcriptures (whiche you yet reiecte as no cō
                  uenient iudges) and that the ſcriptures maie be iudged by no man. Yea S. Cyprian hymſelf agreyng hereto, ſheweth the cauſes why hereſies, ſchiſmes, corruption of the truthe, and breache of vnitie dooe come into the Churche, and why ſo many are deceiued by the deuill, tranſformyng hymſelf into an angell of light, by theſe woordes. Hoc eò fit fratres dilectiſsimi, dum ad veritatis 
                  De ſimplicitate p
                        •
                     aelato
                        •
                     ū
                     ▪
                   
                  originem non reditur, nec caput quaeritur, nec magiſtri coeleſtis doctrina ſeruatur. Quae ſi quis conſideret & examinet, tractatu longo at que argumentis opus nō eſt. That is to ſaie: This cōmeth to paſſe hereof, moſte beloued brethren; for that wée dooe not retourne to the origene 
                     ••
                   beginnyng of the truthe, neither is the head ſought nor the doctrine of the heauenlie maiſtor kepte. The whiche thynges if a man dooe conſider and examine, it ſhall not neede any long treati
                     •
                   orargumentes, Thus farre ſaincte Cyprian: Who calleth Chriſte originem veritatis, caput, vnum 
                  Ibidem Pa
                        •
                     
                     lo infrà. 
                  caput, & originem vnam, & magiſtrum coeleſtem &c. To ſaie: The beginnyng of the truthe, the head, the onelie head, the onely beginnyng, the heauēlie ſchole maiſter, whoſe doctrine if we would obſerue, we ſhould not (ſaith S. Cyprian) neede any longe treatie or argumen
                     •
                  es, But for that this beginnyng of the truthe is not returned vnto, this heade is not ſoughte for, the doctrine of this h
                     •
                  auenlie ſchoolemaiſter is not kepte, he affirmeth it, to bee the cauſe of all hereſies, ſchiſmes, endleſſe contentions illuſions of the deuill, & other miſchieues in the church
                     •
                   in his tyme: as we likewiſe prooue it now to bee in our

tyme. And therefore thei that ſeeke other beginnynges, beſide this onelie beginnyng, other heades, beſides this onelie heade, other doctrines beſides this doctrine of this onelie heauenlie ſchoole maiſter, are the verie authours of the ſaied ſchiſmes, hereſies, endleſſe contentions, and all other miſchieues, whiche trouble the Churche of God. Now lette vs heare S. Auguſtine concernyng the ſcriptures and Councelles, who contendyng with the Artians, allegyng the Ariminenſe 
                  
                     Contra Maximi
                           •
                        um Arrianorum epiſcopum lib. 3. cap. 14. 
                  concilium for them, hath theſe woordes: Sed nunc nec ego Nicenum, nec tu debes Ariminenſe, tanquam pręiudicaturus proferre concilium: nec ego huius autoritate, nec tuillius detineris: ſcripturarum autoritatibus non quorum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      proprijs, ſed vtriſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      communibus teſtibus, res cum re, cauſa cu cauſa, ratio cum ratione cōferatur &c. That is to ſay: But neither I ought to bring foorth the councell of Nice, nor thou the Councell of Ariminum, as one thereby to preiudice the oth
                     •
                  r: neither am I bounde to th'authoritie of the one, nor thou of the other. By the authoritie of the ſcriptures, not peculiar witneſſes vnto either of vs, but common and indifferent to bothe, let matter with matter, cauſe with cauſe, reaſon bee cōpared with reaſon. Thus farre S. Auguſtine. You ſée that your Councelles (by S. Auguſtines iudgemēt) ought not to preiudice vs, beyng at controuerſie with you: you ſe how your councelles are partiall to you, as was the Ariminenſe councell to the Arrians, yea and muche more too: you ſee that S. Auguſtine would not in this caſe vſe the authoritie of the Nicene councell, whiche yet of all other, had and hath the greateſt authoritie: and that therefore the authoritie of the Scriptures partiall to none, but common and indifferent to all, is to bee vſed of all, and aboue all as iudge. Sainct Chryſoſtome cōcernyng the ſame writeth thus:

                  Grauior eſt ſcripturarum ac prophetarū doctrina, quā
                   
                  
                     Chryſoſt. de Lazaro concione. 4. 
                  ſiquid à mortuis reſuſcitati renūcient, quàm ſi angelus è coelo deſcendat: quae illi dicunt, ſerui ſunt, qui loquuntur: quae verò ſcripture loquuntur, loquutus eſt Dominus. Docet ergo nos Dn̄s, vt ſcripturis potiùs credendum exiſtimemus, quàm caeteris omnibus. Whiche is to ſaie: More weightie is the doctrine of the Scripture and the Prophetes, then if ſuche as bee raiſed from the dead dooe reporte any thyng, or if an Angell dooe deſcende from heauen: as for the thinges that thei talke, thei bee but ſeruauntes that ſpeake them: but whatſoeuer the Scripture vttereth, the Lorde hath ſpoken it. The Lorde therefore dooeth teache vs, that wee ſhould thinke, creadite ſhould be rather geuen vnto the ſcriptures, then to all other thynges. Theſe are the woordes of Chryſoſtome in that place. And in an other he ſaith. Nemo vult ad ſcripturas attendere: ſi enim aduerteremus, 
                  
                     Ch
                           •
                        yſoſt. in epiſt. ad Hebr. Homilia. 8. 
                  non ſolum nō incideremus in fallaciam, ſed etiam alios deceptos inde liberaremus & periculo abſtraheremus. That is to ſaie: No man will geue heede vnto the ſcriptures: for if wee did conſider them, wee ſhould not onelie not fall into errour our owne ſelues, but alſo therof deliuer other that are deceiued, and pull them from perill. So muche affirmeth Chryſoſtome. Sainct Hierome alſo agreeth to the ſame, who, ſpeakyng of a 
                     Hieron. in Math. 23. matter conteined in the writynges called Apocrypha, ſaieth: Hoc, quia de ſcripturis non habet autoritatem, eadem facilitate contemnitur, qua probatur. That is Probatur, is proued or approued. to ſaie: This, becauſe it hath not the authoritie of ſcripture for it, is as eaſely contēned, as proued. The ſame ſaincte Hierome, euen in an other place, alleged alſo in 
                     Cauſa. 24. Quaeſt. 1. cap. Nō adferam
                           •
                        .
                   the Popes owne Canonnes, hath theſe woordes: Non adferamus ſtateras doloſas, vbi appendamus quod volumus pro arbitrio noſtro, dicentes, hoc graue eſt, hoc

leue eſt: ſed adferamus diuinam ſtateram de ſcripturis ſacris, tanquam de theſauris dominicis: & in illa quid ſit grauius appendamus. Whiche is to ſaie: Let vs not bryng deceiptfull balances, wherein wee maie weigh whatſoeuer wee luſte at our owne diſcreation, ſaiyng this is heauie, this is light: but lette vs bryng the heauenlie balaunce of the holie Scriptures, as from the treaſure of the Lorde: and therein lette vs weigh, what is of more weight. Thus muche concernyng the ſoueraintie of the Scripture, I thought good to bryng out of the Doctours. Nowe touchyng the expoundyng and ſenſe of the Scriptures, S. Auguſtine hath theſe woordes: 
                     De doctrina Chriſtiana lib. 3. cap. 26. 
                  Vbi apertius ponuntur [in ſcripturis ſacris] ibi diſcendū eſt, quomodo ī locis intelligantur obſcuris &c. Where thynges are more plainlie vttered in the ſcriptures, there muſt we learne how thei are to bee vnderſtanded in darke places. Theſe bee ſaincte Auguſtines woordes, who dooth often in ſundrie places of his woorkes inculcate and repeate the ſame. Saincte Chryſoſtome 
                     Augu. lib. 83. quaeſt. Quaeſt. 53. &c. Chryſoſt. In 2. cap. Geneſ. Homilia. 13. agreeyng with ſaincte Auguſtine concernyng the ſame, hath theſe woordes. Ad ipſum diuinae ſcripturae ſcopum accedamus, quae ſeipſam interpretatur. & mox. Sacra ſcriptura ſeipſam exponit, & auditorem errare non ſinit. Whiche is to ſaie: Let vs come to the leuell and marke of the holie ſcripture, whiche dooeth expounde it ſelf. And by and by after. The ſacred ſcripture expoundeth it ſelf, and ſuffereth not the hearer for to erre. Hitherto Chryſoſtome. Now concernyng the authoritie of the ſcriptures and the Churche, there is a moſte notable and true declaration thereof in the auncient authour printed with Chryſoſtome, and of long tyme taken for hym, who vpon theſe woordes of our ſauiour in the Goſpell of ſainct Mathewe, Qui ſunt in Iudęa fugiant ad montes, That is to ſaie: Thei that be

in Iewrie, let them flie to the mountaines, ſaith thus. In opere imperfecto. 
                  Id eſt, qui ſunt in Chriſtianitate conferant ſe ad ſcripturas. Et quare in hoc tempore omnes Chriſtiani conferre ſe ad ſcripturas debent? Quia in tempore hoc, ex quo obtinuit haereſis illas eccleſias, nulla probatio poteſt eſſe verae Chriſtianitatis, neque refugium poteſt eſſe Chriſtianorum aliud, volentium cognoſcere fidei veritatem, niſi ſcripturae diuinae. Antea enim multis modis oſtendebatur, quae eſſet eccleſia Chriſti, & quae gentilitas: nunc autem nullo modo cognoſcitur volentibus cognoſcere quae ſit vera eccleſia Chriſti, niſi tantummodo per ſcripturas. Quare? Quia omnia hęc quae ſunt propriè Chriſti in veritate, habet & hereſis illa in ſchiſmate. Similiter eccleſias, ſimiliter & ipſas ſcripturas diuinas, ſimiliter epiſcopos, caeteroſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ordines clericorum, ſimiliter baptiſmum, ſimiliter Euchariſtiam, & cętera omnia, deni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ipſum Chriſtū. Volens ergo cognoſcere, quę ſit vera eccleſia Chriſti, vnde cognoſcat ī tāta cōfuſione ſimilitudinis, niſi tantūmodo per ſcripturas? Itē ex moribus ipſis priùs ītelligebatur eccleſia Chriſti, quando cōuerſatio Chriſtianorū, aut omniū, aut multorum erat ſancta, quę apud impios non erat. Nunc autē aut tales, aut peiores facti ſunt Chriſtiani, quales ſūt hęretici, aut gentiles: adhuc autem & maior continētia apud illos inuenitur, quamuis in ſchiſmate ſint, quàm apud Chriſtianos. Qui ergo vult cognoſcere quae ſit vera eccleſia Chriſti, vnde cognoſcat, niſi tantummodo per ſcripturas? Sciens ergo Dominus tantam confuſionem rerum in nouiſsimis diebus eſſe futuram: ideo mandat, vt Chriſtiani, qui ſunt ī Chriſtianitate, volentes firmitatem accipere verae fidei, ad nullam rem fugiant, niſi ad ſcripturas. Alioqui ſi ad alia reſpexerint, ſcandalizabū
                     tur, & peribunt, non intelligentes quae ſit vera eccleſia. That is to ſaie: Let them that bee in Chriſtianitie, flie

to the ſcriptures. And wherfore ought al Chriſtians at this time, to flie to the ſcriptures? Becauſe in this time ſith hereſies poſſeſſed thoſe Churches, there can bee no proofe of true chriſtianitie, neither can there be any other refuge of Chriſtians, deſiryng to knowe the true faithe, but the diuine ſcriptures. For before it was declared by many meanes, whiche was the true churche, and whiche was Gentilitie: but now, thei who would knowe whiche is the true churche, can knowe it by no meanes, but onelie by the ſcriptures. Why ſo? For all theſe thinges, whiche are properly Chriſtes in ye truth, the ſame hath hereſie alſo in ſchiſme. Hereſie hath churches likewiſe, and the diuine Scriptures likewiſe: Biſhops likewiſe, and other orders of clearkes: Baptiſme likewiſe, the ſacramente of thankes geuyng likewiſe, and all other thinges: to conclude, euen Chriſt himſelf. He therefore that would knowe, whiche is the true churche of Chriſt, how can he knowe it in ſo greate cō
                  fuſion of likelihoode, but onely by the ſcriptures? Further, the churche of Chriſt might be knowen before by the maners of it, when the conuerſation either of all, or of the moſte parte of Chriſtians was holie, whiche was not ſo emongeſt the wicked. But now Chriſtians are become either ſuche, or woorſe then be the heretikes or Gentiles: yea there is greater continencie emongeſte them, though thei bee in ſchiſme, then is emongeſt the Chriſtians. He therefore that would knowe whiche is the true Churche of Chriſte, how can he knowe it, but onelie by the ſcriptures? The Lorde therefore knowyng that in the laſt daies there would be ſo greate confuſion of thinges, dooeth commaunde that Chriſtians, whiche be in Chriſtianitie, willyng to haue the ſuertie of true faithe, dooe flie to no other thing but to the ſcriptures. Els if thei haue reſpecte to other thynges, thei

ſhall ſtumble, or faile of the truthe, and periſhe, not vnderſtāding Scandalizabuntur. whiche is the true churche. Thus farre that aunciente author: whoſe ſentence and verie woordes, though for auoidyng of prolixitie alittle intermitted, I haue truely rehearſed. You maie ſee that this auncient writer will not allowe, that you beeyng the one partie ſhould claime to your ſelf the name of Chriſtians, the name of the churche, the names of biſhops, and the names of the cleargie, and ſo to take vpon you as iudges to condemne the other partie: but that bothe you and wee muſt be iudged and tried whether we be in Chriſtianitie, and in the true church, by the ſcriptures. You ſee the names of the churche, of Biſhops and cleargie, whiche are common to heretikes with Chriſtians, can not prooue you to bee catholikes, for that heretikes vſe the ſame names: but that bothe you and wee muſte knowe by the Scriptures, whether wee bee in the true faithe, or no: for that (as he ſaieth) in this confuſion of thinges bothe the true churche, and the true faith muſt bee knowen by the Scriptures onelie, and by no other thyng: and that whoſoeuer goeth aboute otherwiſe to knowe them, ſhall ſtumble and periſhe. Wherein this author dooeth agree with S. Auguſtine, S. Hierome, S. Chryſoſtome, and with all the olde Doctours of the auncient churche. Whereby al men maie well vnderſtande, that it is not our newe opinion (as M. Dorman would haue it ſeme) but the olde true perſwaſion of all the auncient doctors and godly fathers of the primitiue churche, that the Scriptures, as moſte indifferent and certaine, ought to be iudges in controuerſies in religion, rather then Doctours, then Councelles, then your Churche, then dead menne, then angelles, yea that the ſcriptures ſhould bee iudge, and not thei. And that the true ſenſe of ſcriptures, if doubte riſe thereof, maie bee

and muſt be gathered by the conference of the ſcriptures, who doo clearly expounde themſelues. For the declaration whereof the ſaid doctors doo ſo often and largely write, that the reherſall thereof would fil an huge volume: but I did thinke that this much would ſuffice. But you Papiſtes will neuer allowe the Scripture as iudge, nor the ſenſe thereof to be certaine, vntill it come to the expoſition of the Churche: and you will bee that churche, that muſt ſo expounde it, your ſelf: that is, you will graūt no ſenſe to be true, but your own ſenſe. But wee deny that you are the true Churche, that hath this autoritie of determinyng of the ſenſe of the ſcriptures. And if you will ſaie ſtill, your are the churche, & neither will, nor can proue it, but onely by ſo ſaiyng, we be not ſo voide of all ſenſe and vnderſtāding, but that we perceiue you will haue no ſenſe but your owne, and that you will be ſtill, bothe parties and iudges in your own cauſes againſte vs, as the Iuiſhe high Prieſte, Phariſeis, and Scribes would needes be againſt Chriſt and his Apoſtles: who did (by your iudgemēt, as it ſemeth) allege the ſcriptures for themſelues againſte the ſaied high Prieſte, Scribes and Phariſeis in vaine, for that thei being the churche, as you now be, were the iudges of the ſenſe of the ſaied ſcriptures by Chriſt and his Apoſtles alleged. And I am ſure that the high Prieſte, with his Iuiſhe churche, was able to ſaie as muche for the ordinarie ſucceſſion of the high Prieſtes his predeceſſours, euen from Aaron vntil his time, for antiquitie, for conſente, and for vniuerſalitie, againſte Chriſte and his Apoſtles (ſo fewe in compariſon, and, as it ſeemed, latelie ſtarte vp): as you are able to ſaie for your churche, or againſt vs. But yet we doo thinke that the woorde of God, as it was alleged by Chriſte and his Apoſtles againſt the ſaied high prieſt, and his churche, ſo

maie it and ought alſo to be alleged by vs, againſt your high prieſt, and your churche: and that the ſame woords of God whiche ſhal iudge bothe you & vs in the worlde to come, as is ſaied, ought alſo to be iudge betwéen you and vs here in this tranſitorie worlde: for ſo dooeth our ſauiour Chriſt teache, ſo doo S. Chryſoſtome, S. Auguſtine, 
                     Ioan. 12. g. 48. and S. Hierome, with all the auncient doctors of the Churche teache alſo, as hath been partely beſore ſpecified, crie you neuer ſo muche to the contrarie, and make you neuer ſo many exceptions to the ſcriptures, and claime vnto your ſelues, as beyng the churche, the interpretatiō thereof: yet ſuche are both your doctrine, and dooynges, and ſo contrarie to the woorde of God, (whervpon the true churche is builded) that we muſte needes thinke that you are not the true church of God. And whether you ſo bee or no, ſeeyng it is in queſtion, and a greater doubte and controuerſie emongeſt men, I am ſure, then can bee about the ſenſe of any place of the ſcripture, you ſhall neuer bee able to make any exception vnto the Scripture, as no competent iudge in controuerſies, but we ſhall be able tenne tymes more to make exception to your Pope, and his churche, as no indifferent nor meete iudge. Wherefore ceaſe once to bragge of that, as the vndoubted iudge of all doubtes, whiche is it ſelf emongeſt men, of all other doubtes the greateſt doubt: that is, whether you be the true church of God, or no. Whiche is with vs in deede no doubte, nor with any that hath any vnderſtandyng in Goddes woorde, and iudgemente in true religion. For we certainlie knowe by the woorde of God, vpon the whiche as the true churche is builded, ſo is it by the ſame to be knowen, that you bee not the churche of God, for that you ſo ſwarue from the woorde of God. As for vs, that wee are at your handes, though we bryng ſo euidente

ſcriptures for vs, ſo reiected and condemned, wee take it the better, for that wée vnderſtande that our ſauiour Chriſte, and his holie Apoſtles, likewiſe allegyng the ſcriptures, yea and further by their woonderfull woorkes, and moſte godlie life, confirmyng the ſame, were by the high Prieſtes, Phariſeis, and Scribes, reiected, condemned, and ſiaine: an eternall documente, that in this worlde no perſone, nor doctrine can ſatiſfie al men, or ſhall be taken for a iudge of controuerſies aboue all exception and quarellyng: ſeyng that Chriſte hymſelf, ſo teachyng, ſo woorkyng, ſo liuyng, was excepted vnto, as a Daemoniake, or one poſſeſſed with the Deuill, as a friende to ſinners, as a wine drinker: and ſeeyng 
                     Math. 21. d. 42. 1. Pet. 2. b. 6. 7. 8 that heade corner ſtone was, as vnprofitable to the buildyng of Gods churche, and his holie woorde alſo, as falſe doctrine, reiected by the high prieſtes, Scribes, and Phariſeis, who would needes be the iudges of all, themſelues. And wee conceiue good hope, that as our ſauiour himſelf, with his holie Apoſtles, teachyng the truthe, though reiected, and murdered by the ſaid high Prieſtes, Scribes, and Phariſeis, haue wonne vnto them the iudgementes of all godlie men and wemen, againſt ſuche vnrighteous iudges: ſo we likewiſe teachyng the ſame truthe of our Sauiour, reueiled in his holie Goſpell, though of this high prieſt and Romiſhe Caiphas, with his adherentes, Popiſhe Scribes, and Phariſeis, reiected, condemned, and murthered, ſhall againſt ſuche vniuſte iudges, winne vnto vs the iudgement of all godlie menne and wemen: as, to the greate decaie of their falſe ſuperſtition, & ſucceſſe of the truthe, is this daie, thankes bee to God, partlie come to paſſe, in a greate parte of the Chriſtian worlde.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 8.
            But of this I will entreate more largelie hereafter.

In the meane ſeaſon, that theie will haue of Chriſtes Churche here in earth, no other head but Chriſt hymſelfe, therein thei fare me thincketh not muche vnlike, to a certaine felon, of whom I haue No, you read it in eff
                     •
                  cte, in Hoſius, lib. 3. fol. 173. heard, that beyng areigned at the barre for a felonie, when he had pleadid to the indictement not guiltie, and was [after the manner] demaunded how he would bee tried, he would [ſuſpectyng his owne caſe, and knowyng that if he ſatiſfied the lawe in putting hymſelf apon the triall of the coū
               trey, there were no moe waies with hym but one] make thereto no other anſwere, but onely that he would put hymſelf apon God, the righteous Iudge of all▪ who although he ſaid truely that God was the chief iudge of all, as the proteſtantes do, in calling Chriſt the head of the church: yet was ther in his caſe an other iudge here in this world vnder god, by whō he muſt haue byn tried, as there is in theirs an other heade here in the churche to order them and kepe thē vnder, & in whō Chriſt the chiefe head of all, vſeth in all neceſſarie knowledge to giue anſwere. And as the felon knewe well that there was an other iudge beſide god, & appealed not to him, as though before him he ſhould haue byn acquitted, & proued not guiltie: but onely to gaine a longer time of life and libertie: ſo doe [I doute not] our aduerſaries the proteſtantes. And truely to bothe theiſe kinde of men beyng bothe theeues, the one ſorte doyng violence to the bodie, the other to the ſoule, if ſuche pleas mighte be allowed, how ſoeuer thei be coloured with the name of Chriſte, betwene them bothe, thei would freely rob the bodie, and murther the ſoule.
            
               Nowell.
               Now proceadeth he pleaſantlie, and by a parable of a certaine felone, all to ſhaketh vs out of our cloutes, as he praied he might be ſuffered to dooe. In the handlyng

whereof, it maie ſeeme he hath dealte as he was wonte, when ſome of his felowes had forgotten their partes in the plaie, to holde men occupied for the time, by ſuppliyng that defecte with ſome pretie conceites, or tellyng of ſome merie tale, thereby to make the auditours to laugh, and the leſſe to marke the maſed memorie of his mates, and ſo to ſaue the matter from vtter marryng, as muche as in hym might lye. In like wiſe dooeth maiſter Dorman here: for where he hath to proue, that of neceſsitie there muſt be one onely chief heade here in earth, ouer the Churche (whiche is in deede, the firſte and moſte neceſſarie parte of the whole treatie of the Popes ſupremacie, and the verie foundation of all: whiche not proued, or els leudly proued, all the reſte commeth doune vpon their heades: For the whiche ſo greate a matter, little beyng as yet ſaied by M. Dorman, and nothyng in deede, and leſſe remainyng behinde to bee ſaied): the man beyng deſtitute of all carneſt matter, piththie reaſon, and good authoritie, turneth himſelf to his accuſtomed arte, and by a pretie tale of a certaine felone, all to ſhaketh vs (as he before threatned he would dooe) out of our maſking cloutes, as he termeth them: and this he dooeth to ſupplie other defectes thereby, and to make this firſt parte (moſte neceſſarie of all to be piththily proued) by ſuche patchyng of i
                     •
                   vp, at the leaſte, a quarter as bigge as his ſeconde part of this treatie, to witte, that no prince, or lay man maie be the onely head of the whole Churche, for that prieſtes haue more to doo in eccleſiaſtical matters, thā thei haue. Whiche ſo long an impertinente parte, had M. Dorman put vp in his purſe, and paſſed ouer with ſilence, he had ſpared a greate deale of paper, ynke, and labour, and of other mennes tyme alſo a greate deale more: and had hurte his cauſe no more thereby, then if

he had lefte his dagger ſheathe behynde hym, when he came out in haſte to plaie his parte in the pagiaunte. But now to helpe the poore ſurmiſed felone ſomwhat: if he appealyng for the triall of his innocencie to God, can bryng for hym ſo many teſtimonies of Gods owne mouthe, as wee are able for our innocencie to brynge teſtimonies of woordes proceadyng from the mouthe of God, and of our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt, and yet it will not ſerue the ſeelie felowe, nor healpe hym any thyng in his plea of not guiltie: then I thinke there can not bee a fitter lawe, whereby to proceade againſte hym, then the Popes Canons: (whiche you knowe well M. Dorman, for you haue therein ſpente more tyme, then in the ſtudie of the Scriptures) neither can he haue a meeter iudge to condemne hym, then the Pope hymſelf: and an handſomer man, emongeſt all men to bee, I will not ſaie, his hangman, but the foreman of a Popiſhe queſt, to paſſe againſt the ſeelie ſoule, ſhall not any manne I beleue eaſilie finde, nor a fitter then is M. Dorman. And thus I lette this his parable paſſe. For that he by the waie ſaith, that there is in our caſe, beſide the ſcriptures, an other heade to order vs, and kéepe vs vnder, meanyng the Pope: it is true, there is ſuche a one in deede, that hath too longe kepte vs, and all the worlde too vnder, by his falſe hypocriſie, and horrible tyrannie: and he maie alſo bee called an heade of the churche, by the ſame phraſe, as Sardanapalus, Nero, Heliogabalus, and ſuche like monſters were named heades of the cōmon wealthe, whiche thei vtterly ſubuerted: and he is in deede the head, and huſbande too of that cruell ſtepdame the Popiſhe Synagoge, beeyng a moſte horrible murtherer of thoſe, whoſe mother ſhe would be accompted to be. That he ſaieth, Chriſte the thief heade of all, vſeth in all neceſſarie knowledge to

geue anſwere by this head, to witte the Pope: it is M. Dormans poſition, and a falſe fable. The filthie ſpirites that are called Ventriloqui, are more méete to geue anſwere by ſuche a polluted mouth. Now that it pleaſeth M. Dorman to ioigne vs with felons, and to conclude, that wee as well as thei bee theeues: and that, as felons would without controlment robbe the bodie, ſo would we, & doo murther mennes ſoules: he fareth herein with vs, as did an haſtie ſcholde once with an honeſt woman, callyng her whoore at the firſt woorde, for feare leaſte the other ſhould haue happened firſte vpon her name, whiche was the ſame. For it is well knowen to the worlde, that the Papiſtes themſelues be rather theues, and murtherers: who, by their pardons and Maſſes, and other ſuche their pedlar pilfrey, ſet a ſale, haue picked all mennes purſes, and of the temple of God, by ſuche buiyng and ſelling haue made a dēne of theeues: 
                     Math. 21. b. 13 Math. 23. b. 14. Mar. 12. d. 40. and vnder the colour of long praiers, of Diriges, ſoule Maſſes, and Trentalles, haue ſpoiled poore widowes houſes, often tymes takyng awaie by the name of a Mortuarie the onely Cowe, whiche with her Milke ſhould haue fedde the ſorowfull poore widowe, and a ſeelie ſorte of fatherleſſe children. Whiche Papiſtes alſo, as thei haue with all crueltie murthered infinite numbers of Chriſtian mennes bodies, ſo haue thei by their poyſoned doctrine ſlaine infinitelie moe thouſandes of mennes ſoules, then thei haue murdered bodies: and ſo haue plaied all partes, and fulfilled all poinctes of perfecte theeues and murderers too. So that a Popiſhe prieſte might moſte iuſtlie bee termed by a Plautine periphraſis, trifur trifurcifer.
               
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 9.
            But let vs examine this reaſon of theirs wherof thei The comm
                     ••
                   reaſon of th
                     •
                   proteſtan
                     •••
                   place in twoo leaues & more in M. Dormās booke is wholy taken out of Hoſius contra Brent. firſt ex lib. 5. then ex lib. 1. 
               Nowell. All that foloweth frō this againſt the ſupremacie of the Pope. are wont ſo muche to triumphe: Chriſte is head of the

Churche, Ergo the Pope is not, Ergo it can haue no other head. That Chriſt is the head of the Churche wee graūted before, and none of our ſide did euer yet denie it. But as it is moſte manifeſt that Chriſt himſelf is the worker of all his ſacramentes [for he baptizeth, he forgeueth ſinnes, he cōſecrateth his bleſſed body, & bloud he ioigneth together in Matrimonie the man and his wife] & yet, foraſmuche as he ſhould needes depart out of this worlde, and could not alwaies dwell with vs, after a corporall maner, he hath choſen miniſters, to diſpenſe thoſe giftes by: and we ſaie, and no faulte founde therewith, that the prieſte his miniſter baptizeth, that he forgeueth ſinnes, that he conſecrateth his moſt pretious body, and bloud: So after the ſame maner and for the ſame cauſe, that is to ſaie becauſe he could not bee alwaies preſente with vs, in ſuche ſorte as we might ſee hym, and ſpeake with hym face to face, to bee reſolued at his mouth of ſuche doutes, and queſtions as ſhould ariſe amongſt vs: he left vs alſo one, that in his abſence ſhould gouerne, and rule his whole churche. He remaineth neuertheleſſe head thereof, he ruleth, he reigneth, he exerciſeth his power and authoritie in the ſame, but yet by mā his miniſter, whō for that cauſe, moſte aptly the Scholaſticall writers haue termed, caput miniſteriale, that is to ſaie a heade, but yet by the reaſon of his ſeruice How Chriſt is heade of the Churche, and how the pope and miniſterie vnder an other, that is Chriſt: who is onely abſolutely, ſimplie, and without all relation to any other, the head therof. Not, as though he were not able to rule the ſame, without any ſuche help or inſtrument [whiche he could haue dooen alſo in the old law, where his pleaſure was that the people ſhould reſort to the chief prieſt, to be reſolued in all doutes ariſyng apō 
               Deuter. 17. the lawe, and had no more nede of helpe then, then he hath now] but, for that this waie it hath pleaſed hym,

to ſhowe his exceding greate loue towardes mankind, by chooſing out of emongeſt men, ſuche as he wil execute his will by in this worlde, ſuche as he wil vſe as his mouthe, to interprete the ſecretes of his holie pleaſure to vs, and finallie ſuche as ſhould repreſente to vs his owne parſone.
            
               Nowell.
               Now that M. Dorman hath refreſhed his readers with his pleaſaunte paſtyme, folowyng the preceptes of his Rhetorike, he retourneth to earneſt againe, and falleth to examination of this reaſon, Chriſte is head of the Churche: Ergo the Pope is not: Ergo it can haue none other heade. The antecedente he graunteth, confeſſyng 
                     Dorman. fo. 8. a Et antè, h
                           •
                        c libro. fol. 67. that none of their ſorte euer denied it, though a little before he made a greate wonderyng at it, inquiryng by a muſing interrogatorie, what head thinke you good readers appoincte thei to gouerne Chriſtes church? &c. And the argumēt alſo is good, the churche beyng taken as it is there in the Apologie, for the vniuerſall churche, which hath not, nor can poſſiblie haue any one earthly head ouer it, to gouerne it: as hath béen often at large heretofore declared. Maiſter Dormans examples of Chriſtes miniſters of his holie Sacramē
                  tes here in earth, make rather againſt hym, then with hym: for one chief heade hath many vnderminiſters in diuers ſeruices and places vſuallie: but what perteineth that to proue that there muſte bee one 
                     •
                  eade ouer all places, and ſeruices eccleſiaſticall throughout the whole worlde? Whiche is vnpoſſible to bee. Neither can your Scholaſticall diſtinction of caput abſolutum, and miniſteriale, healpe the matter: nor yet Hoſius declaration 
                     Hoſius contra Brēt. li. 1. fo. 38. tendyng to the ſame ende, how Biſhops bee both ſeruauntes and lordes, can in this caſe any thyng further you. For there can not poſſiblie bee one onelie

head miniſter in earth ouer all the churche throughout the whole worlde, more then there can bee one vniuerſall ciuill heade in earth ouer all the worlde it ſelf. But note the intollerable ambition of the Pope, who when he ſaw he could not defēde the name of the Head of the vniuerſall church, rather then he would looſe that onely ſounde of this name, Head of the church, he quali
                     •
                  ieth it with miniſteriale, to ſaie, a ſeruing head of the church: he might as good cheape haue been contente with the ſingle title of a miniſter of ye churche. And ſo he ſemeth ſometyme colourablie in ſhewe to be contente, callyng hymſelf, ſeruum ſeruorum Dei, the ſeruaunt of the ſeruauntes of God. But he plaieth in deede, Rex Regum & dominus dominantium. I knowe M. Dorman dooth ſo qualifie this the Popes ſupremacie, terming him caput miniſteriale, the miniſteriall head, for that Chriſte is the abſolute heade of all. But yet in reſpecte of the whole churche, as beyng vnder the Pope, he will haue hym called caput, the heade. But I would haue hym to make that relation of caput, and theſe woordes Seruus ſeruuorum to agree, and to bee bothe caput, and ſeruus or miniſter reſpectu eiuſdem: the head, and the ſeruaūt in one reſpecte: ſpecially claimyng ſuche a kinde of capitalitie as dooeth the Pope, whiche can not agrée with the humble eccleſiaſticall miniſterie. And I thinke he ſhall finde ſome difficultie, and muche hypocriſie, and more crueltie of ſuche a headie ſeruaunte, and ſeruile head: who if he be head, he is a cruel and frantike head, mangling his owne members, as did Lyrurgus in his furious phrenſie: if he be a ſeruaunt, he plaieth the falſe traitour, murdering his felowe ſeruantes, whoſe part, at the commyng of the Lorde, ſhalbee with hypocrites and homicides. You might therefore as good cheape graunt the Pope ſimplie to bee miniſter eccleſiae, a miniſter

of the churche, and therefore no head, but an inferior to the Churche vniuerſall. But the truthe is in deede, that the Pope is neither heade, nor miniſter of Chriſtes churche, but a ſworne enemie to bothe: which he well declareth by his ragyng furie againſte the true churche, and members of Chriſt our head. M. Dorman harpeth to muche vpon this one ſtryng, out of tune for his purpoſe: I meane the example of the Iewiſhe high prieſte, whiche as it declareth that it were good, that euery ſeueral churche of euery ſeuerall nation had their ſeuerall head Biſhop, ſo dooeth it prooue nothyng that all churches of all nations muſt haue one onely heade in earth, whiche is not poſſible to be. That he ſaith (as dooeth Hoſius) God would by this one earthly head the Pope, ſhewe his exceadyng greate loue towardes mā
                  kinde, is a manifeſt lie: for it is euidente by experience that the Deuill the homicide, the head of helle, hath, by this his principall miniſter the Pope, ſhewed his murderyng malice againſte mankinde, more then euer he did by any Nerons, Domitians, Maximines, or ſuche like bloudie tyrauntes. And as the deuill hath vſed the Pope his miniſters handes to al murders, ſo hath that prince of darkeneſſe and father of lies, by the Popes meanes moſte darkened the light of Chriſtes Goſpell, and hath vſed his polluted mouthe and tongue, thereby to vtter all lies and blaſphemies againſte God, and the truthe of his woorde.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 9.
            Becauſe Chriſt is kyng of all kynges, and lorde of all lordes, becauſe if it ſo pleaſed hym, he could rule al this Apoca. cap. 1
                     •
                  . 
               Novvell. Taken out of Hoſius contra Brent. lib. 5. fol. 239. worlde muche better then it is ruled, without the help of any other [whereof he hath his abſolute power cō
               ſidered no neede] ſhall we therefore ſaie, that there bee not, nor neede to be, any kynges here in earth? VVhen ſainct

S. Paule called the man the head of the woman, denied he therefore Chriſt to bee her head? Kyng Saule when 1. Cor. 11. he was called by the Prophete Samuel caput in tribubus Iſrael, the head of the tribues of Iſrael, was God thinck you excluded that he ſhould not be their head? To vſe 1. Reg. 15. examples more familier, the archbiſhop of Cauntorburie is the heade of the Biſhopricke, and dioceſſe of London [as he is of al the biſhoprickes within his prouince] and yet can not a man infer apon this, that therfore the B. of Lōdō is not the head of that his dioceſſe,
            
               Nowell.
               We dooe not ſticke with you, nor with Hoſius your author about this name, Head, but that it maie be attributed to men, as to the kynges and Iudges of Iſrael, Saule, Dauid, and ſuche like. But I praie you cō
                  ſider by the waie, when the ſcripture ſaieth that Saule was by God made head ouer the tribes of Iſrael (whiche 1. Reg. 15. place Hoſius, and you dooe allege) whether he wer appoincted heade ouer the tribe of Leui alſo, that is, ouer the Cleargie, as well as ouer other tribes: for that is to be conſidered. We knowe that Chriſt is the onely heade ouer all, and that he vſeth kynges to bee ſeuerall heades vnder him vpon earth in their ſeuerall dominions, as ſigiſmunde in Polonia (for Hoſius vſeth that example) but we knowe aſwell againe that God vſeth no one kyng to be the onelie earthlie heade vnder hym ouer all the worlde, whiche yet bothe Hoſius and you ſhould conclude, M. Dorman, if you would bryng in theſe examples, to gather thereby that there oughte to bee one head in earth vnder Chriſte ouer all churches, throughout the whole worlde diſperſed: for ſo ſhould you haue prooued the ſaiyng of the Apologie vntrue, and our argumente faultie. But where the Apologie and we dooe thus reaſon: Chriſte is the onelie head ouer

the vniuerſall churche, Ergo he needeth not any other generall head in earth vnder hym, neither can any mortall man be any ſuche head: You, like a good Logician ſtickyng to the matter, dooe prooue that there bee diuers ſeuerall heades in the Churche vnder Chriſte, whiche wée neuer denied, no more then wée denie that there bée ſeuerall kynges & rulers in earth vnder God: though we denie that there is one onelie kyng or Emperour of all the worlde. But neither by your Logike ſhall you euer prooue, nor by your Rhetorike perſwade to any reaſonable men, by ſuche vnreaſonable reaſonyng, and examples impertinente, that there is, or can be any one head in earth vnder Chriſt, either of all the worlde, or of all the Churche diſperſed thr
                     •
                  ughout the worlde. For to gouerne the whole world, or the whole Churche, is the peculiar and onelie office of God, and Chriſt, and a thyng vnpoſſible to any earthlie manne, who hath muche, and to muche a dooe well to gouerns one little parcell thereof, as I haue ſaied before. And where you mingle kynges & Biſhops together, whoſe offices are diſtincte, and vſe the examples of the Archebiſhop of Canterburie, and the biſhop of Lōdon: what titles ſo euer your biſhoppes, when thei were in thoſe roumes, vſed, or abuſed, I am ſure thei, who bee now in place, take it for their chief honour, to bee, and to bee called alſo Gods miniſters in his churche. And as you ſhall neuer prooue any one head in earth temporall, or ſpirituall, 
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  r all: ſo dooe I affirme, that I ſhall more eaſilie prooue the title of heades of particular churches to appertaine to kynges & princes, who haue by Gods lawe the offices of ruling by dominion appoincted thē, then you ſhalbe able to maintaine, that any ſuche preſumptuous title can appertaine to biſhoppes, who are forbidden dominiō, and haue miniſterie to their office:

as I doubte nothyng but it ſhall hereafter clearlie fall out betwéene you and me, to the ſatiſūyng of all godlie and diſcreate readers, and withall, as I truſte, to the confuſion of all Romiſhe vſurpers of that falſe ſupremacie. Yet denie I not, but that Biſhops maie be and haue been, though improperlie, named heades euen by good writers, as the Scholemaiſter of a prince, in that the prince is his ſcholer, is his heade, ruler, and gouernour, though otherwiſe in deede he be the princes ſubiecte, by hym and his lawes, where he offendeth, to be puniſhed.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 10.
            But Chriſte hath no ſuche neede our aduerſaries crie ſtill, to haue any man to be in his ſteede to ſuccede him in the whole enheritāce. Nam & Chriſtum ſemper adeſſe eccleſiae fuae, & vicario homine qui ex aſſe in integrum ſuccedat non egere, theſe bee their verie woordes in their Apologie.
            
               Nowell.
               It is true, the Apologie and wee all likewiſe ſaie, that neither hath Chriſt neede of any ſuche one onelie 1 head Vicar ouer all his churche, whiche M. Dorman a little before dooeth confeſſe hymſelf: Neither is it Chriſtes 
                     Fol. 9. b.
                   will to haue any ſuche head vicar. For though M. 2 Dorman affirme that he ſo would, yet ſhall he neuer by the holie Scripture, wherein Chriſtes will is declared, be able to prooue it. Thirdlie it is impoſſible for any 3 earthlie man to haue, and to execute any ſuche office of vicar generall vnder Chriſt. And I am ſure that M. Dorman, with the aide of all Papiſtes in Chriſtendome, is nt able to prooue theſe three poinctes, or one of them, vntrue. Whiche yet thei muſt doo, els lieth all Romiſhe ſupremacie in the duſte.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 10.
            
               
Here would I like a friende aduertiſe them, that for Hoſius the Cardinall ſclaūder by the heretikes. their poore honeſties ſake thei harpe not to muche on this ſtryng: leaſt by their ſo dooyng thei come as nere the hereſie of Suenkfeldius, as he whom in their Apologie thei falſelie ſclaunder there with, is farre bothe frō that & all other. For Suenkfeldius, emongeſt other his abhominable hereſies, hath alſo this, in my opiniō the chiefeſt, that we ought to baniſhe vtterly frō emōgeſte vs al ſcripture: and (as Hoſius writeth of him) this hereſie Novvell. Here M. Dorman cōfeſſeth his author. Al this place is taken out of Hoſius contra Brentiū. lib. 1. fol. 21. &c. 
               Lib. de Haereſib. noſtri temporis. of his, to derogate frō the ſcriptures all autoritie, he went alſo about to proue by ſcripture. But how I praie you good readers? By what reaſō thinck you would he haue proued this diueliſhe, & moſte abſurde doctrine? Beleue me, or rather your owne iudgementes, ſeyng & perceiuing moſte plainly that I lye not, by the ſelf ſame reaſons, that our aduerſaries dooe vſe to prooue, that Chriſtes Churche here in earth, can haue vnder hym, no head or chief gouernor to gouerne the ſame. Thou muſt not be parfecte in the ſcriptures, ſaieth this ſtinckyng heretike Swenckfield. But why? Becauſe forſooth we muſt be taught at Gods mouthe, becauſe his worde teacheth truely, the Scripture is not his woorde, but dead letters, and no more accompt to be made of thē, then of other creatures, amongeſte the whiche thei are to bee reconed. VVee muſte looke to bee taught from heauen, not out of bookes. The holie ghoſte vſeth to come from aboue without the helpe of meanes, as hearyng, preachyng, or readyng the ſcriptures. Theiſe bee that wicked heretike his fooliſhe and vnſauery perſuaſions. And what other thing is it, I praie you good readers (iudge indifferentlie) to ſaie as the Huguenotes & heretikes dooe, then to leaue and reſte, apon the ſame groundes for the baniſhyng of the head of Chriſtes Churche, on whiche the Swenckfeldians dooe, for the

aboliſhyng of the ſcripture? For the one ſaith, we muſt haue no ſcripture becauſe God can teache vs without: the other, we muſte haue no heade of Chriſtes churche becauſe he is the head hymſelf, and can rule vs without any other to be his vicair. The one ſaieth the ſcriptures are but dead letters, and no more accompte to be made of them then of other creatures: the other ſaieth that the Pope is but a ſynfull manne as other are, and that therefore there is no more accompte to bee made of hym, then of other ſynfull men. Finallie the Swenckfeldians barre God of all meanes to worke his will by, and ſo doe the proteſtantes, while thei alowe hym not a miniſter to gouerne his churche in external gouernment, but tell hym that he is of age and able to dooe it hymſelf, and that therefore there is no remedie, but he muſte needes come doune and geue anſwere to all our wiſe demaundes in his owne perſone.
            
               Nowell.
               A friendlie man at neede, and a truſtie counſailer: and as good and piththie a reaſoner for the Pope, as truſtie friend to vs: Who hath little regard to his own poore honeſtie, and leſſe to the cauſe whiche he maintaineth, when of blinde malice, harping vpon a wrong ſtryng, woorſe then euer did yet any blinde harper before hym, he would haue vs ſéeme like to Suenkfeldius, from whoſe vile hereſies we be as farre, as the Papiſtes be nere vnto them: whiche ſhall, I truſt, appeare euidentlie, euen by M. Dorman his own harpyng vpō this ſtring. Whiche ſtring yet he confeſſeth here in his marginall note, yt he learned of Harper Hoſius to ſtrike after this ſorte: no doubt but vpon reſpecte of his poore honeſtie, he thought it meete once to confeſſe that he alwaies dooeth, boldlie borowyng of other, and braggyng thereof as of his owne: whiche thyng is moſte vſuall,

as well to his maiſter D. Hardyng, as to al other the aduerſaries now writyng. But to the matter: firſt that wee are moſte contrarie to Swenkefcilde and his hereſies, by the bookes of our men written largely againſte them, is moſte manifeſt: and the ſame ſhall bee made more euident and manifeſt by M. Dorman hymſelf in this place. Suenkfeldius, ſaieth M. Dorman, holdeth this abhominable hereſie, that wee ought to baniſhe vtterly from emongeſte vs all ſcriptures. Wee ſaie, that wee ought aboue all thynges to reteine the holie Scriptures, and that beſides them, there is nothyng but errour and darkeneſſe. Thou muſte not bee perfecte in Scriptures, ſaieth this ſtinckyng heretike Swenckfield. (Theſe be M. Dormans woordes of hym). Wee ſaie: euery Chriſtian ought to bee ſtudious of the holie Scriptures, and to labour to attaine to as greate perfection therein, as mortall menne poſſiblie maie in Gods wiſedome, conteined in the ſame. Suenckfeldius ſaieth, as M. Dorman reporteth, The ſcripture is not Gods woorde, but dead letters, and no more accompte to bee made thereof then of other creatures. We ſaie, the Scriptures are the verie woordes of GOD, the woorde of life: in the whiche, life euerlaſtyng is to bée ſoughte, and founde: and that the Scriptures are the moſte diuine gifte of God, and aboue all other giftes, creatures and thynges, excepte onelie, his onely ſonne incarnate, of whom thei teſtifie, and whoſe bleſſed woorde thei be. Swenkfeild ſaieth, wee muſt looke to bee taughte from heauen, not out of bookes, and that the holy ghoſt vſeth to come from aboue, without the helpe of meanes, as hearyng, preachyng, and readyng the ſcriptures. We ſaie, we maie not looke for vaine reuelations from heauen, but muſt marke what Chriſt
                     •
                   the heauenlie doctor and ſchoolemaiſter ſpeaketh to vs

in his holie woorde, in that diuine booke of his bleſſed teſtamente, as we haue receiued commaundement fró his father, ipſum audite: heare hym: wee ſaie what reuelation ſo euer bee made contrarie, or not agreeyng with Chriſtes bleſſed Goſpell, bee it by an angell from heauen, it is not of the holie ghaſte, but from that angell of darkeneſſe, trāſforming hymſelf into an angell of light: and that therefore we muſt come to knowlege of Gods will, and to our ſaluation, by hearyng, preathyng, or readyng of the Scriptures. Now concludeth M. Dorman, after the rehearſall of theſe Swenkfildes hereſies, ſaiyng thus: theſe bee that wicked heretike his fooliſhe and vnſauerie perſuaſions. We ſaie, and theſe bee our true, and to vs moſte ſweete perſwaſions, not onelie of the profitableneſſe, but alſo the neceſſitie of the Scriptures, that truthe, healthe, light, life, and ſaluation is to bee ſaught, and to bee had in them, and by them, and without them can not be had: and theſe perſwaſions haue wee gathered not of vaine reuelations, but of the verie ſame holie Scriptures themſelues, as of the fountaine of al infallible veritie. Wherefore, M. Dorman, you haue dooen nothyng els, but bewraied your moſte malicious blindeneſſe, in ſaiyng that it is no other thing, that the Huguenotes & heretikes doo: and that vve doo leane & reſte vpon the ſelf ſame reaſons and groundes, as did Suenkfeldius: and vvithall as in a credible matter, to praie the good readers to iudge indifferently herein, to beleue rather their ovvne iudgementes then you, and to tell them that thei ſhall ſee and perceiue moſte plainely that you lye not. Wherevnto we ſaie, we truſt that not onelie indifferente readers, but all other alſo moſte partiall of your ſide, M. Dorman, ſhall ſée, and will iudge that fire is not more contrarie in nature to water, nor lighte to darkeneſſe,

then are we to Suenkfeldius: and our true perſwaſions of the Scriptures, grounded vpon the ſure rocke of the ſame Scriptures, contrarie and repugnaunte to his abominable hereſies, waueryng vpon the vncertaine ſandes of falſe phantaſticall reuelations. And therefore we doubt nothing, but al wiſe indifferent readers will plainly perceiue, that ye lie moſte ſhamefully, and will abhorre and deteſt your malice, an deride and hiſſe out your blindeneſſe, who thought them ſo blinde that thei could iudge no colours: and your partiall readers will bluſhe, I doubte not, at your doultiſhe dooynges, and peraduenture beſhrowe your harte, or rather your fooliſhe heade, that hath handled their parte in ſuche ſlender ſorte. And I for our parte, where you deale with vs thus not vnfriendlie onelie, but moſte falſlie, maliciouſlie, and peſtilenilie alſo, and dooe yet make a preface of a friendlie aduertiſer of vs, dooe ſaie to you, as our ſauiour ſaied to a like friend of his, Amice, ad quid veniſti? For as you (like as did D. Hardyng your maiſter) haue with Iudas forſaken Chriſt the truth (whoſe true doctrine you call Caluins religion) and ioigned againſt In the praeface in the beginnyng. hym with the high Prieſtes, Scribes, and Phariſeis, in hope of worldly gaine: ſo geue you vs as friē
                  dlie aduertiſemente, as Iudas offered Chriſt a friendly kiſſe. Well, now we haue truelie prooued, and clearly declared, that we are not onelie vnlike, but moſte cō
                  trarie to Suenkfeldius, and his vile hereſies, by you rehearſed, let vs yet ſée how M. Dorman would make vs to ſeme like vnto hym. Svvenkfield (ſaith M. Dorman) dooeth ſaie, vve muſt haue no Scripture &c. The Huguenotes and heretikes ſaie, vve muſt haue no Pope of Rome to bee head of Chriſtes vniuerſall churche. Loe ſir, you ſee a greate likeneſſe betweene them. Tarie, you ſhall heare more matter of likelihoode yet. Suenkfeldius

ſaieth, the Scriptures are but deade letters: The heretikes ſaie, the Pope is but a ſinfull man, as other be. Hath he not trowe you, ſhewed a verie greate ſimilitude betwene Suenkfeldius and vs? But yet he concludeth at the laſte bothe earneſtly and effectuouſly as you ſhall heare. Finallie, ſaieth M. Dorman, the Swenkfeldians barre God of all meanes to worke by, and therefore thei dooe reiecte the Scriptures to teache by, for that God is the teacher himſelf: likewiſe dooe the proteſtantes, ſaith M. Dorman, whiles thei alowe him not one heade miniſter to gouerne his vniuerſall Churche in externall gouernement, becauſe that Chriſte gouerneth it hymſelf. Whiche reaſon wée are contented that M. Dorman goe awaie withall, when he hath prooued as clearelie, that it is Gods will to gouerne the whole Churche by ſuche a Romiſhe head: as we can clearelie prooue, that it is his wil to teache vs by the ſcriptures. And further M. Dorman maie bee aſhamed to ſaie, ſo doe the Huguenotes (for ſo it pleaſeth him to terme vs) ſo dooe thei in likewiſe barre Chriſte of all meanes to woorke by, as dooeth Swenkfield. Dooe we ſo M. Dorman? Dooe wee not allowe hym a miniſter to gouerne his Churche, who doo allowe hym, as he hymſelf hath ordeined, in euery Churche one at the leaſte, to preache his holie will, and to miniſter his holie Sacramentes accordyng to his owne holie inſtitution? But M. Dorman is not content that we allowe Chriſt euery where one miniſter, except we alſo allowed him one al where ouer all. But good M. Dorman, it belongeth to one onelie Chriſte, to gouerne his Churche all where: and one onelie man, ſhall haue enough to dooe, and more then he can dooe, to performe the office of a good miniſter of Chriſt, ſome where in one onelie Pariſhe, or dioceſſe. Wherefore as we muche miſlike the vndiſcreate

ambition of ſome worldlie Princes, who when thei cā
                  not well gouerne one kyngdome, doo yet deſire many: ſo dooe wee vtterlie abhorre and condemne to the Deuill the authour hereof, the exceſſiue and vnſatiable ambition of the biſhop of Rome, who neuer being able yet well to gouerne the Churche of the citie of Rome, as is well knowen to the worlde, nor to rule his Colledge of Cardinalles, yet deſireth the gouernment and ſupremacie ouer all churches throughout the worlde: and is named in the booke of his owne 
                     Sext. Decre. lib 5. tit. 9. ca. 5. ī gloſſa. Romanus pontifex totiꝰ o
                           •
                        bis eſt epiſcopus.
                   Canon lawe, the biſhoppe of the whole worlde. Yea, and not content with that ſpirituall Monarchie, chalengeth 
                     Sext. Decre. lib. 3. tit. 16. ca. vnico. in gloſſa. Papa totius orbis obtinet principatum.
                   the dominion of all the worlde it ſelf alſo to apperteine to hym▪ whiche neuer yet did any beſides hym, but the Deuill himſelf: of whom whether the Pope holde it by inheritaunce, as his eldeſt ſoonne and heire: or by ferme, as his tenaunte geuerall: or as his deputie, and Bailiffe errande, I knowe not: but ſure I am, that what right ſo euer he hath therto, and by what tenure ſo euer he holdeth it, he holdeth it of the Deuill, who chalengeth the ſame as chief Lorde, and hath made offer thereof to ſuche as would wholie ſerue hym. But GOD I 
                     Math. 4. am ſure, or our Sauiour Chriſt neuer made any ſuche offer or promiſe to any mortall man: naie, our Sauiour 
                     Math. 20. d. 25. &. 26. Chriſte, as he hymſelf refuſed ſuche offer made to hym: ſo he ſpecially forbiddeth the affectatiō of ſuche worldly dominion to all his Apoſtles: & conſequentlie by them to all the Cleargie. Where as M. Dorman proceadeth ſaiyng, that wee tell Chriſte that he is of age, and able to dooe it hymſelf, and that therefore there is no remedie but he muſte needes come doune, and geue anſwere to all our wiſe demaundes in his owne perſone: I truſte all men doo knowe, that M. Dorman did know, that he lied leudelie whē he did write this. For he knoweth

right well, as ſhortly hereafter hymſelf cōfeſſeth 
                     Dorman fol. 11 b. &. 12. 2. the ſame, that wee thinke it enough that Chriſte hath once come doune to teache vs, and that wee looke for none other anſwere of Chriſte, then he hath alreadie geuen in his holie Goſpell, whiche he preached once for all in his corporall preſence, and confirmed the truthe of the ſame by viſible and corporall miracles: and that therefore he ſpeakyng, and anſweryng vs in his holie woorde, to all demaundes neceſſarie for our ſaluation, needeth not any corporall preſence, his woorde and Goſpell written ſatiſfiyng vs, as well as though wee did ſe hym, and heare hym ſpeake, with our corporall eyes, and eares. And maiſter Dorman, and all the aduerſaries to the truthe maie bee aſhamed to charge vs, as not allowyng Chriſte meanes to woorke his ſpiritual grace by, but vexyng hym, by callyng for his corporall preſence: wheras thei themſelues (as thoſe that thinke he can dooe nothing, excepte he bee corporallie preſent) would turmoile hym euery howre, and minute alſo from place to place, yea and would impriſon hym alſo in narrowe and ſtreight roumes, paſſyng little eaſe in the towre of London manifolde. And ſo thei allowyng hym no meanes to woorke by, but that he muſte needes come doune in his owne perſone, dooe as iuſtlie ioigne in this poincte with Suenkfeldius, as thei falſlie charge vs therewith: whereas wee dooe acknowledge that Chriſte, though corporallie abſente, by his diuine power, is able, and dooeth dailie and howerly woorke his manifolde graces in vs, by ſundrie ordinarie meanes, ſuche as hymſelf hath appoincted and inſtituted: and that by his moſte holie woorde he dooeth teache vs as effectuallie, as though he were corporallie preſente: And by his bleſſed Sacramentes of Baptiſme, and of his ſupper he deriueth (as it were) his graces vnto vs:

by the one regeneratyng and reuiuyng vs in hymſelf, who were before vnhappilie borne, and deade borne in Adam: by the other nouriſhyng & refreſhyng our hungrie and thriſtie ſoules, with the foode of his bleſſed bodie and bloude, as effectuallie, as though he were with vs corporally preſent. This dooeth M. Dorman and the aduerſaries knowe, & therfore when M. Dorman ſaith, that we barre Chriſte of all meanes to woorke by, M. Dorman and all the worlde muſte alſo needes knowe, that M. Dormā lieth bothe ſhamefullie, and wittyngly too. Now that you vnderſtande how M. Dorman hath moſte vntruelie charged vs as allies to Suenkfeldius, who doo moſte abhorre, and are moſte farre from hym, & his vile hereſies, let me ſée whether, as I haue ſhewed a verie great likeneſſe & conformitie to be betwene Suēkfeldius & the Papiſtes, in this laſte poincte of allowyng Chriſt no meane to woorke by, and therefore requiring his corporall preſence: ſo I can prooue the like cōformitie betwéen them & him likewiſe in al other pointes by M. Dorman here ſpecified. Suenkfeldius emōgſt others holdeth this moſt abominable hereſie, That we ought 
                  
                     Dorman, Fol. 10. a.
                   
                  to baniſhe vtterlie from emongeſte vs all Scriptures. Dooe not the Papiſtes themſelues, forbiddyng the Novvell. ſcriptures to be readde of the Laitie, kéepyng the ſcriptures hid in an vnknowen tongue, burnyng the ſcriptures written in knowen language, go as nere to this abominable hereſie of Suenkfeldius, as wee are moſte farre from the ſame? Who dooe iudge and teache, that all men, of all ſortes ought with diligence to reade, or heare the ſcriptures. Thou muſt not be perfecte in the 
                  
                     Dorman. Fol. 10. b.
                   
                  Scriptures, ſaieth this ſtinkyng heretike Suenkfeldius: the ſcripture is not his worde, but dead letters, and no more accompte to be made of them, then of any other creatures, emongeſt the whiche thei are to be rekened.
                  
Thou muſt not bee perfecte in the ſcriptures, ſaie theſe Nowell. falſe Papiſtes to all laie men: it is ignoraunce that is the mother of deuotion: it ſufficeth a laie man to haue fidem implicitam, an implicate faithe, yea ſo implicate, that the moſte parte of ſeelie men vnder Poperie, cā no more explicate what thei beleue, then can a Popiniay: yea and Popiniaye like, bothe rehearſyng that their implicate faithe, and praiyng in a ſtraunge language, thei can no more tell what thei ſaie, then dooth the Popiniay, whiche biddeth her dame good night maiſtres, at midde daie. And the Papiſtes ſpeake of the holy ſcriptures, not onelie as vnreuerentlie, and abominablie, as euer did Swenkfield, but dooe farre paſſe hym in al outrage, calling the Scriptures moſte contumeliouſly, and blaſphemouſ
                     •
                  ie a noſe of waxe: and affirmyng it to be but an vncertaine thyng, and like a rule of Lead appliable to euery wicked ſentence, and to all purpoſes, excepte it haue the Popes direction as a moſte certaine infallible rule. I will rehearſe the verie wordes of that blaſphemous beaſte, and as Popiſhe a ſwine, as euer was Swenkfielde a ſtinkyng heretike: I meane Pighius in his Hierarchie, or defence of the Popes ſupremacie, written in our time, of whom Hoſius hath béen as bold to borowe his reaſons and authorities, as your maiſter doctor Hardyng hath been bolde to borowe of Hoſius, and as you M. Dorman haue been bolde with D. Hardyng hymſelf your maiſter, to whom you owe a greate part of this your booke, ſuche as it is. Pighius woordes are theſe: Sunt ſcripturae [vt non minus verè 
                  
                     Hierarch. li. 
                     
                        •
                     
                     ▪ 
                     ca. 3. fol. 103. d.
                   
                  quàm feſtiuè dixit quidā] velut naſus cereus, qui ſe horſum, illorſum, & in quam volueris partem, trahi, retrahi, fingique facilè permittit, & tanquam plumbea quedam Leſbiae aedificationis regula, quam non ſit difficile accōmodare ad quiduis volueris. Et rurſum. Suprà indicauimus, 
                  
                     Liber. 3. cap. 3▪ 
                     Fol. 211. b.
                  
                  
                  ſcripturas facilè trahi quocun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , & velut plū
                     beam quandam regulam, haud difficulter applicari impiae cuiuis ſententiae &c. Theſe are his verie woordes, whiche in Engliſh are thus muche. The ſcriptures (as one man, no leſſe truely then pleaſantlie ſaied, are like a noſe of Waxe, whiche will ſuffer it ſelf eaſilie to bee drawen, countredrawen, and framed whiche waie ye liſte: and as a certaine rule of leade of the Leſbian building, the which it is not harde to apply wherto ye will. And againe the ſame Pighius in an other place ſaith: We haue ſhewed before, that the ſcriptures maie eaſilie be drawen euery waie, and, like a certaine Leaden rule, maie without difficultie be applied to euery wicked ſentence. Thus farre Pighius, ſpeakyng it twiſe or thriſe, as thei ſaie, as is meete for ſo woorthie a matter. Now compare me the eſtimation and ſaiyng of the Scripture vſed by this Papiſte, with Suenkfeldius his ſpeakyng of it. The ſcripture [ſaith Suenkfeldius] is not Gods worde, but dead letters. Pighius ſaith: the ſcripture is like a noſe of Waxe, like a rule of Leade. Is Swenkfielde, callyng the ſcriptures dead letters, more wicked, then is Pighius blaſphemous, in termyng it a noſe of waxe, and withall ſaiyng, that it is ſo called, as truelie, as pleaſauntlie? Suche a pleaſure hath this piuiſhe Papiſt in deridyng of Gods woorde. Is it more to be abhorred that Swenkfielde ſaieth, the ſcripture is but deade letters, then that Pighius calleth it a rule of Leade? Is there any thyng more dull and deade then is Leade? Is there moreouer any thyng more vncertaine then a long latthe, or rule of Leade, readie to bend and boow euery waie? Swenkfielde ſaieth, the Scripture is but dead letters: Hoſius your great eſtate for learnyng and vertue, beyng verie buſie in the ende of his fourth booke againſte Brentius, in comparyng the Goſpell 
                     Lib. 4. contra 
                           •
                        r
                           ••
                        . fol. 178. a.
                  
                  
written in paper and ynke, with the churche whiche he calleth the liuelie Goſpell (as though the other ſhould bee called the deade Goſpell) goeth as nere to Swenkfield, as .iiij. pence doo to a grote. And where he would faine haue vttered his ſtomacke plainely againſte the ſcripture, whiche hath ſo ſhreudlie vexed the Pope and Papiſtes, and durſt not: yet he ſaieth thus muche. Scriptura 
                  Fol. eodem. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   
                  quomodo profertur à catholicis, eſt verbum dei: quomodo profertur ab haereticis, eſt verbum diaboli. The ſcripture as it is alleged or vttered by the Catholikes (to witte Papiſtes) is the woorde of God: but as it is vttered of heretikes (meaning vs) it is the woorde of the Deuill. Thus would Hoſius, by a leude imitation of ſaincte Hieromes woordes vſed in his vehemencie, perſwade the people to thinke that the Scripture vttered by any, but Papiſtes onelie, is the woorde of the deuill. But the Scripture of it ſelf is euer Gods woorde in deede, though the abuſe thereof bee Deuiliſhe: and therefore Hoſius by hatred of the Scripture, ouerreaching hymſelf, dooeth in deede ſpeake thus of it vntrulie. And as the Scripture is neither noſe of waxe, nor Leaden rule, nor the woorde of the deuill, for that it pleaſeth Pighius, or Hoſius ſo to name it: no more are wee heretikes, for that it pleaſeth them, and other aduerſaries maliciouſlie ſo to terme vs: neither bee thei themſelues by and by Catholikes, becauſe thei falſelie ſo miſname themſelues. It is not their onelie ſaiyng, and proouyng of nothyng, that can make either vs to bee, that we bee not, or them not to bee that, whiche in deede thei are, the verie Synagoge of Satan: whiche is by the light of Goddes woorde made manifeſte, and prooued in ſuche ſorte now in our daies, that a good parte of the Chriſtian worlde perſwaded thereby, hath forſaken their Satanicall ſecte of Papiſtrie, and ioygned

themſelues to the ſincere doctrine of the Goſpell: whereof riſeth all this their deadlie hatred, and blaſphemous miſnamyng of the Scripture. To proceade, Suenkfeldius ſaith, No more accompt is to be made of the ſcripture then of any other creatures, emongſt the whiche thei are to be rekened. What ſaith the hoggiſh Papiſte Pighius? The ſcriptures maie be framed, drawen and redrawen, this waie, that waie, euery waie, and applied to euery wicked ſenſe, or ſentence: and therefore, as it ſeemeth by his iudgemente, the Scriptures are not onely not profitable (as be all Gods creatures, to the whiche Suenkfeldius dooeth compare them) but are hurtfull and deceitfull alſo, appliable to euery wicked ſenſe, like as is a longe lithie Latthe, or rule of Leade, to euery crooked wall: ſuche a rule as hetherto neuer did yet good Carpenter vſe I trowe: and like a noſe of ware, ſuche a creature as was neuer by God made. Wherefore the Papiſtes are not onely in blaſphemous woordes againſt the ſcriptures like to Suenkfeldius, who compareth it to other Goddes creatures: but in ſcoffing againſt the woorde of God in ſuche abominable ſort, and comparyng it to ſuche leude inſtrumentes and madde members, as are leaden rules, and warē noſes, are more horriblie blaſphemous, then euer was Suenkfeldius. And whereas Pighius had a naturall noſe, and other mēbers of his bodie, by the vertue of Gods woorde, and yet in mockage dooeth compare Gods woorde ſo beneficiall to him, to a noſe of waxe, by his ſwiniſhe tongue vttring ſuche blaſphemous woordes, it is greate pitie, that he had not had accordyng to his Pighiſhe name, an hoggiſhe groine in ſteede of his noſe, & a ſwiniſh body accordingly: that he might altogether as he was hoggiſh in minde, ſo likewiſe in outwarde ſhape of bodie alſo, haue anſwered fullie to his

ſwyniſh name. No leſſe contemptuouſly and contumeliouſly alſo ſpeaketh Hoſius of the Scriptures, who anſwearyng Brentius, alleadgyng that kynges alſo 
                     Lib. 2. fol. 66. b.
                   had to doo with gods woorde, and prouyng the ſame by the example of Dauid, and Salomon kynges of Iſrael, who by the motion of gods holy ſpirite, put in writing thoſe godly pſalmes, and heauenly inſtructions, whiche haue béen of all ages and times accompted in the body of the Canonicall ſcriptures, hath theſe woordes.
               
                  Scripſit Dauid pſalmos aliquot, ſi quid Athanaſio credimus, quin
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tantùm. Qui ni ſcriberet? ne nunc quidem regi prohibetur aut principi, quo minus aut rythmos, aut Pſalmos, aut carmina ſcribat, quibus Dei laudes celebret. Scribimus indocti, doctique poëmata 
                  Horatius. 
                  paſsim. Whiche in engliſh is thus much to ſaye: Dauid did write a few Pſalmes, if we geue any creadit to Athanaſius, but fiue onely. Why ſhould he not ſo write? neither is a kyng or prince forbidden at this tyme, but he may write rimes, or Pſalmes, or verſes to prayſe God therby: Learned and vnlearned write poetries euery where. Thus farre Hoſius: who is not content, to the derogation of the authoritie of kynges and the Scriptures ioinctly, to compare Dauid his pſalmes, beyng of vndoubted authoritie, (as writen by the inſpiration of the holy ghoſt, and of the body of the canonicall ſcripture, and approued & alleged by our Sauiour 
                     Luc. 24. Chriſte) with rimes onely written by Princes in our daies: but alſo by a blaſphemous deriſion, to matche them with fabulouſe poeſies, writen by learned, vnlearned, it maketh no matter with him. I am ſure, had any writen or ſayd ſo muche in goddes churche vnder the olde lawe, agaynſt the Prophetes, Pſalmes, or the lawe (for ſo Chriſte doth diuide the holy Scriptures of 
                     Luc. 24. f. 44.
                  
the olde Teſtament) as here hath Hoſius written, he ſhould, according to the iudgement of the lawe, haue, like a wicked blaſphemar, be ſtoned to death. But blaſphemie 
                     Leuit. 24. againſt God and his holy ſcriptures, is with our aduerſaries a ſporte. Dayly and moſt horrible blaſphemies againſt Chriſte are ſuffered in the Iues by the Pope, and they neuertheleſſe remaine the Popes friends, ſpecially in néede of money. Onely a woorde againſt that falſe vſurpar of Rome, and his leude traditions is auenged with ſwoorde, fagot, and fire moſte cruelly, vpon thoſe that doo profeſſe Chriſtes name, and all the articles of the Chriſtian faith. Whiche, emongſt many others, is not the leaſt proofe that ye Pope is Antichriſt: for that he doeth therby declare, that he preferreth him ſelfe, and his owne traditions, before Chriſte & his goſpell: auenging himſelf ſo extremely vpon the cō
                  temners of his ſaid traditiōs, and permitting blaſphemers againſt God, our ſauiour Chriſt, & the holy ſcriptures to remayne not onely vnpunyſhed, but alſo his deare friendes. But lette vs procéede with M. Dormans rehearſall of Suenkfeldius hereſies: The holy ghoſt vſeth to come from aboue, vvithout the help of 
                  
                     Dorman fol. 10. b.
                   
                  meanes, as hearing, preaching, or reading the ſcriptures. VVe muſt looke to be taught from heauen, not out of bookes, ſaith Suenkfeldins. Doo not you Papiſtes ſay the ſame? haue not you geuē ouer preaching of gods woord your ſelues, & barred the people from reading, & hearing of it, by your crueltie, & cloſe keping of it in a language vnknowen to the people, and burnyng the bookes of the ſcripture tranſiated for the peoples vnderſtanding? Are not you the right heyres of thoſe Phariſeis, whom 
                     Luc. 11. g. 52 our ſauiour ſpeaketh of, that haue taken away this key

of knowledge of goddes woorde, and neither will enter in your ſelfe, nor ſuffer other that would, to entre? And thus laying aſide preaching your ſelues, and burnyng other that doo preache, and barryng the people of God from reading and hearyng of his woorde, you doe ſaye euen as did Suenkfeldius, that the holy ghoſte vſeth to come from aboue into your Popiſhe churche, without all helpe of meanes, as hearyng, preaching, or readyng of the Scriptures, whiche you will by no meanes ſuffer ſo to be vſed in the churche, as it may be vnderſtanded. Are not you thoſe, who, contrarie to goddes commaundement, that the booke of the lawe ſhould not departe 
                     Deut. 6. b. 6. &c.
                   out of the handes, and from the eyes of his ſeruauntes, haue either ſuche bookes as fewe can vnderſtande, either burne ſuch bookes of gods law as all may vnderſtand: for that you will not haue them to learne of goddes booke, but onely of ſuche traditions, as are reuealed to your churche from heauen, as you ſay? Thus you ſée good readers, I truſte, euidently, howe that M. Dorman hath moſte vniuſtly charged vs, and that we are as farre from Suenfeldius vile hereſies, as the Papiſtes in all poinctes by M. Dorman rehearſed, agree and ioyne moſte iuſtly with theim: as I haue declared by the very woordes of Pighius, D. Hardinges chiefe author, and by Hoſius, M. Dorman his peereles pearle for learnyng and vertue, as he ſayeth. Whiche Hoſius gaue occaſion to M. Dorman to make mention of Suenfeldius in this place: as partly before, and more plainely nowe hereafter doth appeare.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 11.
            And thus vvhileſt moſte ſhamefully to the great diſhonor of the vvhole realme (vnder vvhoſe name as it

vver that fardel of lies, their apologie vvas ſent abroade) thei haue not ben aſhamed, to charge vvith this hereſie of Suenkfeldius, one of the greateſt eſtates, both for lerning and vertue that at this daie Chriſtendom hath: vve may ſe that thei haue not only ſhovved thē ſelues to be very vvicked, and ſhameles men, (the truthe to their vtter and perpetuall infamie and ſhame, had thei any, plainly to the contrary, in the vvorcks of him, vvhome thei ſo ſclaundred, bearing vvitneſſe againſt them) but are alſo runne into the ſame groundes vvhereon Svvenkfilde builded his hereſie, their ovvne ſelues.
            
               Novvell.
               I truſt that who ſo euer ſhall reade that conformitie betwene the papiſtes and Suenkfeldius, and both their hereſies before declared, and ſpecially by the woordes of Pighius, and Hoſius him ſelfe, ſhall vnderſtande that Hoſius was not without cauſe charged with ſome affinitie to Suenkfeldius his hereſie, and with contempt & blaſpemie againſt God and his holy ſcripture, wherewith Hoſius writings doo abounde, and beare witneſſe moſt plenteouſly thereof: and that therefore it is no ſhame at all to the author of the apologie, to beare witneſſe of the truthe: the whiche apologie yet once again M. Dorman with one woorde, after his manner, confuteth, calling it a fardel of lies. But euery woorde that M. Dorman ſpeaketh, is not goſpell. Although he haue here in this his booke packed vs vp ſuche ſtore of lies, that he might more iuſtly haue intitled it a Lighter laden with lyes, than a fardell of lies, yet ſhall he, and all his fellowes finde it more eaſie for them, to ſende vs ouer a Hulke or twayne full fraughted with ſuche lies, as this and other their bookes ſwarme withall, than to

anſwere that litle apologie to any purpoſe, terme he it neuer ſo contemptuouſly. Concerning Hoſius, ſo great an eſtate of Chriſtendome, I wiſt not of it before. Sure I am that in Polonia his countrey he is of the meaner ſort of biſhoppes there: and what ſhould make him ſo great an eſtate beſides, I know nothing, but his Cardinals hatte: which how much ſo euer M. Dormā eſtemeth, yet the truth is, that originally a Cardinall is but a perſon or vicar of one of the pariſhe churches in Rome, or there about in the countrey. For after that 
                     Hiſtor. Floren tinae lib. 1. fol. 40. b. & 45 b.
                   the Popes had iniuriouſly, and violētly put the people of Rome from the election of the ſayde Popes, beyng but byſhoppes of Rome (which election of right apperteined to them ioinctly with the cleargie) and had geuen full authoritie to the perſons and vicars of the pariſhes in Rome, that they alone ſhould elect the Pope: Pope Paſchall the firſt of that name, to adourne theſe Papall electours with ſome ſolemne title, named theſe ſingle ſoled clerkes, Cardinalles: and Pope Nicolas the ſecond of that name, confirmed the ſame: as is in ye Florentine hiſtorie declared. But yet hitherto were theſe Papall electors footemen, for that they were not 
                     Lib. 
                     
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                   as yet hable to paye for their horſe meate in Rome, where prouander is deare: & becauſe they had chaunged their name, and not mended their liuinges, they went appareiled as yet, like other commen curates, no better than our Cardinalles in Paules cathedrall church, yea many of them farre wourſe. This vncomlineſſe pope Innocentius the fourth of that name wyſely conſideryng, ſayth Platina, Statuitvt Cardinales equo in publicum 
                  
                     Platina in vita Innocentij. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                  vecti, galero rubrovterentur, honeſtandi ordinis cauſa. That is to ſaye: He made a ſtatute or ordre, that the Cardinalles

ſhould ryde on horſebacke when thei came abroade, and ſhould were a redde hatte, for the honeſtie of the ordre. Loo ſir, a merueilous eſtate in the Chriſten world that Hoſius hath attained too, to ride on horſebacke (whiche by like, he might not doo before, by vertue of his Varmienſe biſhoprike in Polonia) and to weare a redde hatte. I thinke the ſeruyng men of Englande of late yeres, vſyng ſcarlet cappes, as broade as hattes, and, when they went abroade any thyng farre, ryding alſo, haue well left that vſage, though not of riding, yet of wearyng redde vpon their heades: els might they haue perhaps runne in daunger of the Popes curſe, by ſuch preſumption, ſo to ride, and to weare redde, as doo his Cardinalles. And leſt ye thinke I doo but ieſte, Pope Paule the ſeconde, about an. 100. yeres agoe, as ſaieth the ſame Platine, Publico decreto mandauit, propoſita poena, ne quiſpiam bireta coccinea (ita appellant capitis tegmen) praeter Cardinales 
                  In vita Pauli ſecundi. 
                  ferret: quibus etiam primo pontificatus ſui anno pannum eiuſdem coloris dono d
                        •
                     dit, quo equos, vel mulas ſternerent, dum equitant. Voluit praeterea in decretum referre, vt galeri Cardinalium ex ſerico coccineo fierent, ſed id quo minus &c. That is to ſaye: Pope Paule the ſeconde, by publique decrée commaunded, and that vpon a payne appoineted, that no man ſhould weare a ſcarlet birret, cappe, or hatte (ſo they call the coueryng of the head) ſauing onely the Cardinals: to whom alſo, the firſte yere of his Papacie, he gaue clothe of the ſame colour, to couer their horſes, or mules withall, whyles they ryde. Yea and further he woulde haue made a decrée, that the hattes of the Cardinalles ſhould be made of ſilke ſ
                     •
                  arlet. But that this was not decreed, thoſe letted, which iudgeyng rightly, ſayde, that the pompe of the churche was to be diminiſhed,

not to bee encreaſed with the hurt of Chriſtian religion. Thus farre Platine. Nowe you ſée the pariſhe prieſtes of Rome, who from Peters time, vntill Paſchalis the firſt (whiche was about eight hundreth yeres) were not able to paye for their horſe bread, mounted nowe vpon Mules, and not only them ſelues, but their Mules alſo ouerſpredde with ſcarlet: that they may be worthy chapleines of that purpled ſtrumpet, that S. Iohn in his reuelation ſpeaketh of, beyng 
                     Apoc. 17. clothed in redde ſcarlet, and dronken with redde wyne, and more dronken with the redde bloude of the ſainetes of God. This is that great eſtate, whiche M. Dorman braggeth that Hoſius is come to, of a Biſhop in his countrey, become a paryſh prieſte in Rome. For that is the office of a Cardinall in déede: as to this daye the very titles of their Cardinallike dignities doo teſtifie. Cardinalis tit. Sanctae Priſcae, as was this Pope Pius the Platina in vitis Pontificum, & Onuphri
                        •
                     . fourth that nowe is, before his Papacie. And Pope Paulus the thirde, and Pope Paulus the fourthe, were before Cardinales Oſtienſes, either of Oſtia a towne not farre from Rome, or of Oſtienſis porta, a gate in Rome, of the pariſh next to the which gate, they wer by like perſons. Pope Marcellus. 2. Cardinalis tit. S. Crucis in Hieruſalem, which is a pariſh church in Rome. Pope Iulius. 3. before Cardinalis Praeneſtînus, of Praeneſte a town neare to Rome. Pope Clemens. 7. Cardinalis tit. S. Laurentij in Damaſo, a pariſh church in Rome. Pope Hadrianus. 6. antè Cardinalis tit. Pāmachij, a pariſh churche in Rome. Pope Leo. 10. antè Cardinalis S. Mariae in Dominico, a pariſh churche in Rome. And our twoo countrey men, Cardinall Poole, & Cardinall Wolſey, the one Cardinalis tit. S. Mariae in Coſmedin, ye other tit. S. Ceciliae, two pariſh churches in Rome.

Pope Pius. 3. antè Cardinalis tit. S. Euſtachij. Pope Innocentius. 8. antè Cardinalis tit. S. Lucinae. Pope Xiſtus. 4. tit. S. Eudoxiae. Pope Paulus. 2. tit. S. Marci, foure pariſhe churches in Rome, with many ſuche like, extant in Platinae and Onuphrius: but I thought it ſufficient to note the Cardinalities, whiche theſe laſt popes poſſeſſed before their papacie. Finally, Hoſius himſelfe is Cardinalis tit. S. Laurentij: of a byſhoppe in his countrey, by a notable promotion, become curate of S. Laurence pariſh. I meruell that M. Dorman doth not bragge of the eaſe, as well as of the honour that Hoſius hath gotten by his Cardinals hatte: that he ſhall not be compelled in his owne proper perſon to méete great eſtates on the way, but by the priuilege, and after the manner and cuſtome of the courte of Rome, may ſende his moyle with a lackie to méete them, ſo that his Cardinals hatte hange vpon the pommell of his ſadle for honours ſake, by the figure Synecdoche, continens pro contento, a Cardinalles hatte for a Cardinalles head: ſuche is the guiſe of the courte of Rome, deridyng princes and great eſtates, yea and all the worlde too. This eaſe with this honourable hatte hath Hoſius atteined: other greate gaine I thinke he hath none. For the greateſt penſion that the Popes holineſſe geueth yearly to his Cardinals, is a 1000. crownes: & that penſiō he geueth to ſuch poore chapleines, as haue not yet two or thrée byſhop rikes, or abbacies to finde them Cardinallyke. Neither geueth he it frèely, but they pay ſwéetly for it to the holy father, who ſelleth sacra ac prophana omnia: iuxta regulam, Omnia venalia Romae: accordynge to the lore of his firſt predeceſſour, whoſe knowen ſentence is, Quid vultis 
                  Iudas Iſcharioth. 
                  mihi dare? Unleſſe Hoſius, for his paynes taken in

writing for the defence of the Papacie, now in daunger of vtter ruine, be more lubberally dealth with, than others hitherto vſually haue béen. Though I haue been longe about this great eſtate (good reader) yet I thinke it neither vnpleaſant, nor vnprofitable to thee to vnderſtande the origine, progreſſe, and fine of this greate eſtate of Cardinalles: who, being originally poore pariſh prieſtes, leauinge their cures, and vſurpinge all worldly dignitie, are become méete chapleines to that falſe vppermoſte vſurper, who beinge in déede the biſhoppe of one onely cite, a litle parcell of the vniuerſall worlde, chalengeth the ſupremacie not onely ouer all the churche of Chriſte, diſperſed throughout the world, 
                     Sext. Decret. lib. 5. tit. 9. ca. 5. in gloſſa. & lib. 3. tit. 16. cap. vnico, in gloſſa.
                   but alſo the dominion ouer all the worlde it ſelfe, and all the kingdomes therein: and therfore hath he made his pelting pariſh pries;tes, princes péeres, nay, their ſuperiours, that he myght haue Chapleines méete for ſo great a Lorde as he is. Nowe concerninge Hoſius his great learninge, it is not without cauſe that M. Dorman dooeth ſo excéedingly auance it. For as M. Dorman hath borowed this his booke of D. Harding, ſo hath D. Harding borowed all this his and your treatie of the Popes ſupremacie of Hoſius: And Hoſius hath borowed it of Pighius Hierarchie, and Pighius hath borowed it of dronken Eckius, the founder of all theſe mattiers in our dayes. And moſt true it is, that there is not one reaſon, nor authoritie almoſt in all that great volume of Hoſius againſt Brentius, conteining fiue ſeuerall bookes, but that he hath had out of Pighius Hierarchie, and Alphonſus de haereſibus, after whiche ſorte any meane man may bee counted learned. This I am hable to prooue as true, as I

haue hithertoo, I truſt, prooued you M. Dorman a lier in all you haue hitherto written, and doubt nothing ſo to procéede with you to thende of your leude lies, laden in this your Lighter of falſe fables. Wherfore Hoſius deſerueth the name of the Compilator, rather than the author of that great booke, wrytten againſt Brentius litle booke, intitled Prolegomena, for that he hath ſtolen all his authorities, and reaſons out of the ſayde Pighius his Hierachie, and Alphonſus de Haereſibus, as all learned reading the ſayde bookes ſhall moſt eaſely and plainly perceiue. Yea and in compilyng them together, it is iudged vpon probable coniectures, by the ſtyle and poeticall phraſes, and verſes vnmeete for Hoſius age and vocation, that as he hath borowed the mater of his bookes, ſo hath he had the helpe of other in penning of the ſame: and yet may he well call the bookes his owne, as bought with his owne money, and large rewardes beſtowed vpon his ſtyle wrightes.
               Concerninge his great vertue, though I know not his life, yet I iudge it a woorthie mattier for M. Dorman his commendation, and him ſelfe woorthie of the court of Rome. But I can ſaye litle herein: onely this can I ſay, that his neighbours dwelling néerer him, than I 
                     Iacob' A
                           •
                        
                        dreae cōtra Hoſiū. fol. 155. & multis locis.
                   dooe, a good ſorte of hundreth miles, doo in printed bookes obiect to him, that his Cardinalles hatte, I would ſay, head, will be nowe and then ouerladen with Poloniſhe pottes: I knowe not trulie, or otherwiſe, but as his neighbours doo ſay.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 11.
            For gods ſake good Chriſtian readers, for your ovvne ſoules ſake, and the loue that you beare therto, geue eare to no ſuche ſedicious voices, hovve euer they be cloked

vvith the name of Chriſt, vvhiche the diuell then dooth moſt inculcat, vvhen he vvould driue vs ſoneſt frō him.
            
               Novvell.
               I truſt that all good Chriſtian readers, for that loue that they beare to God, who is the truthe, will geue no eare to ſuche falſe fables, as M. Dorman and other aduerſaries of the truthe doo publiſhe in ſuche leude liynge bookes as this is: and that vpon reſpect
                     •
                   of the health of their ſoules, they will flie farre from the blouddie Butcher of Rome: who, vſinge the cloke of Chriſtes name onely, denieth him in déede: and placing in his place his piuiſhe pardons, and other popiſhe pelfrie, deſtroyeth as well Chriſtian mens ſoules by his poyſoned doctrine, as he dooeth murder their bodies by the moſt cruell kinde of death, that the Diuell his father and he can deuiſe. And by the way note, that to ſpeake truely of a foraigne falſe Poloniſh Papiſte, is with M. Dorman accōpted ſedition: as though, becauſe he is a Cardinall, he were therefore our laufull magiſtrate: whiche, wiſt I, were true, I would geue more reuerence to our Cardinalles in Paules churche, then I hitherto haue done. And ſure I am, they deſerue for their Cardinalſhippe, as muche honour, as dooeth Hoſius, yea and more too, were falſe opiniō baniſhed, & thinges truely, as they are in déede, weighed, and eſtéemed. For they yet according to their origine, miniſter the ſacraments, & viſite the ſicke, as is the propre office of Curates to doo: wherunto Chriſtian princes, once at the laſt I truſt awaking, will bring theſe perſonate, & viſered Romaine pariſhe prieſtes, from their vſurped worldly pompe and dominion: and that the ſaid Princes will reduce the Pope himſelfe likewyſe, from his

phantaſied ſupremacie ouer the vniuerſall churche, to his peculiar cure of the churche of Rome. And thus I lette this Hoſius, one of the greateſt eſtates, both for learnyng and vertue, that this daye Chriſtendome hath (for ſo M. Dorman ſaieth) for this time alone, with his Cardinals ſcarlet hatte, and his moile trapped according for his eſtate.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 11.
            VVhat other thing did their forefathers Chore, Dathan, 
               Numer. 1
                     •
                  . and Abyron, in rebelling againſt Moſes, and Aaron the miniſters of almightie God? VVhat other perſvvaſion vſed they to the people? vvhat other reaſon broughte they to allure from their obedience to rebellion, from quiet reſt, to ſeditious vvandering vvithout a head, the flocke of God: then the very ſame, that theſe miſerable men of our time dooe? Their apologie ſaieth, that there The proteſtantes reaſō as Chore Dathā, and Abyrō did. Numer. 16. nedeth here in the churche no head to gouerne it, becauſe Chriſte is alvvayes vvith it. And did not thoſe vvicked men in their rebellion againſt Moſes and Aaron vſe the ſame reaſon, vvhen they tolde theim to their face. Sufficiat vobis, quia omnis multitudo ſanctorum eſt, & in ipſis eſt dominus? Let it ſuffice you, that all the multitude is holy, and they haue God preſent vvith them, Cur eleuamini ſuper populum domini? And vvhy then take you vpon your ſelues the rule ouer the people of our lorde? As vvho vvould ſaye, hauyng no neede of any other ruler, God being vvith them. But as almyghty God vvas then emongeſt his people and vſed yet neuertheleſſe the miniſtery of men: ſo is Chriſte (no doubt) our ſauiour novve preſent alvvayes vvith his churche, and chiefe head and gouernour therof, and yet gouerneth he the ſame by man. And as Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, be gone before, ſvvalovved aliue by hell, there to taſte of

thoſe revvardes vvhiche for ſuche rebellious vvretches are prepared: ſo muſt our Chore and his companions follovve their trace, onleſſe by their repentaunce they mollifie, and aſſvvage the iuſt vvrath of God.
            
               Novvell.
               This hiſtorie is by many aduerſaries alleaged againſt vs, as vnlawfully rebellyng againſt the Pope: ſpecially by Cardinall Poole againſt kinge Henry the 
                     Cardinalis Polus lib. 
                     
                        •
                     . de eccle. Romanae primatu. fol. 19. &. 20. eight. Concernyng the matter it ſelfe, ſéeyng Chore, Dathan and Abiron, were ſo horribly puniſhed for rebellion againſt Moſes and Aaron, and certein it is, that of theſe twoo, Aaron was the hyghe prieſte, and that yet Moſes was his ſuperiour, it foloweth therefore, that Moiſes, to ſaye, the prince of the people, is aboue the biſhop, or highe prieſt (whiche you can not abide) or els to auoyde that mattier, you muſt ſaye (as you ſome where dooe) that Moiſes was prieſt alſo: whiche, if it be true, inforceth that there were two highe prieſtes at once ouer the people of God, and ſo is your aſſertion of the ſupremacie of one onely high prieſt ouer the whole churche, quite ouerthrowen. For you ſay, M. Dorman, That you haue perceiued, that God in that people in 
                  
                     Dorman, fol. 7. b
                           •
                        .
                   
                  their lavve, and prieſthood, ſhadovved out vnto vs, like a cunning vvorkeman, the vvhole forme and proportion of his churche. Wherfore, M. Dorman, I praye you marre not gods proportion, and forme of his churche: but as you will néedes haue an Aaron, or high prieſt in the ſaide churche, ſo let vs alſo haue a Moiſes to be his ſuperior in the ſame. For which way ſoeuer you turne 
                     Exod. 15. a. b. 1. Pe
                           •
                        ri 
                     
                        •
                     . you, ſure I am, that by the ſcriptures, the title of prieſthoode may as well apperteine to a chriſtian Prince, as it did to Moiſes: ſo that there is no let, nor lacke therin,

but that a chriſtian Prince may as wel be ſuperiour to the highe prieſt, or biſhop, as was Moiſes to Aaron. To procéede: Chore, Dathan, and Abyron, rebelled againſt Moiſes and Aaron, who were ſpecially by God appointed to be their gouernours, and his miniſters: but what apperteineth that to vs, who doo obey our natural Prince, appoincted by God to be our gouernour, & all as well ciuil magiſtrates, as eccleſiaſtical miniſters of god vnder our Prince? And therfore dooe we, as we muſt néedes, renoūce the authoritie of yt foraigne vſurper of Rome, ſworne enemy to our prince, and coūtrey: who is not our gouernour, nor the lawfull miniſter of almighty God, but a foraigne falſe vſurper, and the Diuels bailie generall, chalenging ſuche a ſuperioritie, as none can holde by any tenure, but from the Diuell him ſelfe. It is you Papiſtes that are the ſucceſſours of the rebelles, Chore, Dathan, and Abyron: who leauing the obedience due to your own natural Princes, for the ſeruing of a foraigne falſe vſurper of Rome, doo rebeli not onely againſt Moiſes, that is to ſaie, your gouernour by God appointed, but againſt God himſelfe alſo. You rebell 
                     Rom. 13. againſt God, and his ſeruaunt Moiſes alwaies: you ſet vp and mainteine Idolles, and Idolatrie, contrary to the manifeſt woorde of God geuen by his miniſter Moiſes. You doo charge the Apologie vniuſtly: For it ſaieth 
                     Exod. 10. truely, that Chriſte néedeth no ſuche one onely head ouer all his churche, as the Pope would ſéeme to be: neither can there be any ſuche, but Chriſte him ſelfe onely, as hath at large bene before declared. But when M. Dorman ſo ſpeaketh, as though we would haue no gouernours at all in Chriſtes churche (for that we refuſe that one vſurpar) he dooeth deale deceiptfully with the

ſimple, and impudently with vs. For we acknowledge, that as Moyſes and Aaron were gods miniſters, by him appointed to gouerne his peculiar people Iſrael: ſo hath God likewyſe appoincted to euery ſeuerall countrey 
                     Eccle. 17. their Moyſes and Aaron, their owne Princes, and paſtoures or biſhops, whiche ought likewyſe to be obeied, as Moiſes and Aarō were to be obeied of the Iſraelites. And that thoſe who doo diſobeye them, doo ſinne by rebellion, as did Chore, Dathan, and Abiron. This appeareth to be true by S. Cyprian, who dooeth alleage 
                     Lib. 4 epiſt. 9. & lib. 3. epiſt. 9. this example of the rebellion of Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, againſt ſuche as be ſtubborne and diſobedient to their owne ſeuerall biſhoppes, as was one Pupianus to himſelfe: and as was the African Deacon againſt Rogatian his African byſhop. In the whiche epiſtle alſo S. Cyprian alleageth manie other places of the ſcripture (falſely applied nowe adayes to the proufe of the Popes ſupremacie) for the authoritie of euery biſhop in his owne dioceſſe. But this place of Douteronomium is neither by S. Cyprian, nor any other but onely Papiſtes, alleaged for proufe that the byſhop of Rome is to be obeied by any, ſauynge onely Romaines, or Italians his inferiours. Concerninge the reaſon made by Chore, Dathan, & Abiron, that the people ought not to obey their gouernours, becauſe thei be al holy, & that therfore the magiſtrates ought not to lifte them ſelues aboue the Lordes people, it is not our reaſon, as M. Dormā ſaith: it is the reaſon of the popiſh ſwarmes of their counterfeite hypocrites, falſely called religious: yea & of the whole popiſh clergie, who haue procured of their father of Rome, immunities from all obedience to their naturall Princes appointed by God

ouer them, as was Moiſes ouer the Iſraelites. It is therfore, Chanon Chore, Dathan Dane Monke, and Abbot Abiron, with their complices of falſe Friers, and Multitudo fanctorum. other hypocrites, that were ſo holy ſhauelinges, that they might not for any crime, were it neuer ſo hainous, bee tried by the lawes of their countrey, nor aunſwere before their naturall prince. They cried, as did Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, they were the holy people of the great lorde of Rome, and that no temporall Populꝰ domini Papae. lorde might lifte vp him ſelfe aboue them. And thus they ſhewed themſelues to be the very children of their forefathers Chore, Dathan, & Abirō, as truely, as M. Dorman dooth falſely obiect it to vs. Now whereas M. Dorman alleageth the apologie, as thus reaſoning, that the churche hath no neede of any other ruler, becauſe Chriſt is vvith it: Truthe it is, if M. Dorman dooe meane one onely head of the vniuerſall churche. For Chriſt néedeth no ſuch generall gouernour, ſeyng he is both preſent himſelfe continually by his ſpirite, as he promiſed, & alſo for that he hath in euery peculiar countrey & church, his Moiſes & Aaron, that is to faie, his ſeuerall deputies in his ſtéede euery where here in earth: for that no one mortall man can poſſibly ſuffice to the gouernaunce of the whole worlde or churche, whiche woordes followyng in the Apologie, M. Dorman of 
                     Apolo. Anglican b. 1. pag. 2. Sapientiae. 8. a. 1. &c.
                   his accuſtomed ſinceritie omitteth vtterly. For it is the eſpeciall woorke of Gods omnipotent wyſedome, as firſt to haue created the whole worlde, and inſtituted the whole churche, ſo vniuerſally to gouerne the fame, reachynge mightily from ende to ende ouer all, and ſwéetely diſpoſing or gouerning all thinges: where as ſéely man ouercharged with the goueruaunce of a

little percell, is euer founde guiltie, when it ſhalbe ſaid vnto hym, Redde rationem villicationis tuae: Rēder an accompt of thy Stewardſhip. At the laſ
                     •
                  e he concludeth 
                     Luke. 16, a. 2. with a terrible denuntiation, as it were thunderyng in a kinderkinne, and lightnyng out of a brighte Baſen moſte terribly, that we muſt folowe Chore and his fellowes ſwallowed quicke by hell, as rebellious wretches againſte the Popes Monarchie, vnleſſe we repent. But wee feare no neceſſitie of ſuche horrible damnation, vpon M. Dormans Muſte. For as wee are moſte farre from rebellyng againſte our naturall ſoueraigne, and other Goddes miniſters appoincted to gouerne vs, and therefore no partakers of Chore, and his fellowes rebellion, ſo truſt we in God to be moſte farre from their moſte horrible deſtruction. And wee geue warnyng to M. Dorman, with his maiſter doctour Harding, and all ſuche as thei bee, who for maintenaunce of a forraine Pharao, againſt their conſcience (as is to be feared) doo diſobeie their owne naturall prince, and that vpon the pretence of holineſſe and ſpiritualitie, and are therein moſte like to Chore, Dathan, and Abyron (rebellyng againſte their owne ſpeciall gouernours by God appoincted, as thei did) that thei make ſpeede by vnfeined repentaunce to mollifie Gods moſte iuſte wrathe, that thei folowe not Chore, Dathan, and Abyron, in horrible damnation, as thei haue folowed them in damnable rebellion.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. II.
            But yet let vs good readers, that nothyng maie remaine, that might in any wiſe ſeeme to blemiſ he this truthe, goe one ſteppe farder. For as yet will our aduerſaries I know wel ſaie, that I neuer came where it grew. For our caſe, ſaie thei, is farre otherwiſe, then you take it: ſeyng that we vtterlie denie not, that Chriſte woorketh

by meanes, but onely ſwarue from you, in that we take thoſe inſtrumentes and meanes, to be other then you doe. For the ſcripture, wee ſaie, whiche Chriſt hath lefte to vs, is the true meane, whereby in all doutes and controuerſies, we maie ſufficiently content and ſatiſfie our ſelues. This is that Iudge, whiche can not deceiue, this is that toucheſtone that can not lye. Thus ſaie our aduerſaries, with whom in that that thei appeale to the ſcriptures no man is offended, yea we praiſe thē therefore, The ſcripture not able to determine al the controu
                     ••
                  ſie
                     •
                   that ma
                     •
                  e 
                     •••
                  
                  apon the m
                     ••
                  
                  nyng of the letter. and doe the like our ſelues. But in that that thei holde the Scripture to bee of it ſelf alone, to ende and determine all controuerſies, riſyng apon the doutefull meanyng of the letter, able and ſufficiente: therein wee vtterly diſſent from them, and as wee thinke, not without greate cauſe.
            
               Nowell.
               Concernyng the diſcuſſyng of doubtes and controuerſies by the Scriptures, it hath been before ſufficientlie 
                     Fol. 69. &c.
                   intreated of. But M. Dorman abuſeth all men to muche: for as wee dooe ſaie that the Scripture beeyng the woorde of GOD, is a lanterne to our feete, a 
                     Pſal. 118. light to our ſteppes, a touche ſtone of triall, the loadeſtarre in the darke nights, the waie to walke in to life euerlaſting &c. ſo dooe we acknowledge, that we muſte haue biſhoppes, and paſtours well learned in the ſame Scripture, or woorde of God, to expounde the ſame vnto vs, to rebuke our vices by the ſame, to exhorte vs to all vertues by the ſame, and finally, by the ſame, as a ſalue for all ſores, to cure all our diſeaſes, as becommeth ſuche heauenlie Phiſitions, & by the ſame woords of God, as the foode of our ſoules, like our Spirituall paſtours, to feede vs vnto life euerlaſtyng. And ſoe wee refuſe no lawfull healpes with the ſcriptures, for the determining of doubtes and controuerſies, and the

atteinyng of other benefites (though wee refuſe one vnlawfull vſurpar) but dooe agree moſte directly with Gods ordinaunce expreſſed in Deuter. 17. in reſortyng to our owne biſhoppes, and paſtours, as did the Iſraelites to theirs, in all doubtes, or other neceſſarie caſes.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 12.
            For omittyng here, that almightie God commaunded Nowell. Borovved out of Pighiꝰ Hierarch. lib. 4. cap. 3. fol. 149. & Hoſius lib. 2. contra Bren. Fol. 59. in the olde lawe as before you haue heard, that his people the Iewes, in doutefull queſtions ariſyng apon the law, ſhould reſorte to the prieſtes, and to hym that was the chiefe iudge for the tyme, to be reſolued therein: and bad them not, for the trial thereof whiche ſenſe Deuteron. 17. were moſte true, to laie and conferre one texte with an other [whiche without doubte had he knowen it to be the beſte and ſureſt, as it is the readieſt and eaſieſt waie he would not haue let to haue dooen:] experience alſo hath taught vs the contrarie thereof.
            
               Nowell.
               It is true M. Dorman, we haue heard this your onelie 
                     Deuteron. 17. Dorman. f. 4▪ 
                     touched folio 7. proſecuted at large, fol. 9. b. & foli. 12. 
                        
                           •
                        .
                   place of Scripture (whiche yet is moſte impertinent to your purpoſe) before: yea and that foure tymes, in fiue leaues ſpace too: whiche argueth your miſerable diſtres, who in this ſo neceſſarie a parte of your treatie of the Popes ſupremacie, and the foundation of all, hauyng but one onelie place of the Scripture, whiche in your opinion made a ſhowe for you (though the ſame in deede is not onelie impertinente to your cauſe, but directlie againſt it alſo, as hath been before at large declared) 
                     Fol. 59. &c.
                   are driuen to your arte, by oft repeatyng of that one, to make a ſhowe to the ſimple readers as of many places. And here bilike M. Dorman remembryng the prouerbe, Crambe bis, (muche more ter, quater & ampliùs) that to muche of one thyng is nought, ſpeciallie, if it bee vnſauerie, mollifieth the matter by a pretie figure,

ſaiyng, that he will omitte it, and yet dooeth largelie proſecute the ſame, and will néedes ſtil wreſt this place to, the proofe of one onelie heade Prieſte ouer all churches of all nations, and languages, whereto it ſerueth no more, then dooeth Butter to ſtoppe an Ouen. For how can all natiōs reſort to one onely man? How can all nations vnderſtande one man, had he moe languages then euer had Mithrydates? How can one mā, neuer yet able to ſuffice to the regiment of one chuche, bee able to ſuſtaine the charge of all Churches? How can he that is not faithfull ouer a little, be founde woorthie 
                     Luke. 19. c. 17. to haue the whole worlde committed vnto hym: ſeeyng the diligente and faithfull ſeruaunte was made ruler ouer tenne cities onelie? Salomon indued with 2. Para. 1. b. 10. all wiſedome, ſaied of one nation beeyng vnder hym: Quis poteſt hunc populum tuum digne, qui tam grandis eſt, iudicare? That is to ſaie, Who can be able well to iudge & gouerne this thy people, whiche is ſo great? But who is ſo bolde as blinde Baiarde the Pope, who thinketh hymſelf of abilitie to iudge, & gouerne al people? Showyng hymſelf moſte vnlike vnto vnto Salomon, who hauyng but one nation to gouerne, aſked wiſedome of God, as moſte neceſſarie thereto, rather then riches: The Pope hauyng one Churche of Rome to gouerne, and lackyng wiſedome thereto (as by the diſſolute diſorder, and deteſtable enormities of that Churche aboue all other, appeareth) would yet haue the regimente of all Churches: not well to gouerne all (whiche is impoſſible) but to ſcrape to hymſelf theriches of them all, as the experience of his practiſe hath well prooued. But as the Pope herein is moſte vnlike to wiſe and humble Salomon, ſo is he moſte like to ſubtill and proude Satan, aſcendyng with him in preſumption, and deſiryng to bee like in the gouernaunce 
                     E
                           ••
                        ie. 14. c. 13. 14. &c.
                  
                  
of the whole Churche, and worlde, with the higheſte God, whoſe onelie and proper office this vniuerſall regimente of all is, vnpoſſible to any manne, though the Pope neuer ſo muche, with his graundfather Sathan, 
                     Luke. 4. a. 6. Eſa. 14. d. 15. &c
                   dooe claime all to be his owne: and therefore with hym troubleth all countreis, kyngdomes, and nations: but accordyng to his preſumption with Sathan, ſhall his ruine with hym bee. Saincte Cyprian, and after hym 
                     Cyprian. lib. 1. epiſt. 3. Africā. Concil. circa tempus Bonifacii. 1. ca. 251. ſainct Auguſtine, with. 217. Biſhoppes moe in the Africane councell, ſeeyng the inconuenience of foraigne farre Iudges, and gouernours, and the commoditie of ſeuerall iudges and gouernours in ſeuerall countries, and Cities, decreed, that no manne of their Countrey, ſhould ſaile ouer the ſea, to goe to Rome, or other places, there to be reſolued of their doubtes, but that euery ſeuerall biſhoppe ſhould haue the people of their ſeuerall Biſhoprikes, or Dioceſſes, obedient vnto them ſelues, and all controuerſies emongeſt them ariſyng, to be determined at home. And Sainct Cyprian and other aunciente doctours allege this place of Deuteron. conſtantlie for the ſeuerall gouernemente of euery biſhoppe in his owne dioceſſe: but none of the old doctors euer alleged it for the vniuerſall regiment of one ouer all Biſhops, and in all dioceſſes: as hath been at large 
                     Fol. 60. in priore editione.
                   before declared. Wherefore the appliyng of this place to that vſe and purpoſe, beyng a newe deuiſe and inuē
                  tion of the Popes proctours in theſe latter daies, as it lacketh all antiquitie, ſo is it voide of all authoritie. But ſeyng M. Dorman hath ſo oftē alleged this place, for that he had none other, and I in euery place haue ſaied ſomewhat to the ſame: For auoidyng of tediouſneſſe, I will omitte to rehearſe at large thynges before ſaied, and will remitte thee (good reader) to the. 59. leaf of this booke before: where this place is bothe al
                     •
                  eged

by maiſter Dorman, and conſequentlie anſwered at full, and as I truſte, to the ſatiſfiyng of all reaſonable readers. Onelie this will I here againe rehearſe (ſeeyng M. Dorman calleth vs from the Scriptures to the Pope, and would abuſe this place thereto) that the Iewiſhe 
                     Deut. 17. b. 10. Facies quod cun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         dixerint & do
                           •
                        uerint te iuxta legem eius.
                   high Prieſt hymſelf, by the verie woordes of the ſame place, is bounde to teache, and Iudge accordyng to the woorde of God, and not at his will, and pleaſure. 
                     Pighius Hie
                        
                           •
                        arch li. 4. ca. 3. fol. 149. b. Hoſius contra Brenti. fol. 59. Pighius I knowe, and Hoſius alſo, dooe here finde faulte with the olde tranſlation, for that it maketh againſte their purpoſe. But all other Papiſtes will allowe none, but the olde tranſlation onelie: whiche M. Stapleton alſo earneſtlie in his late Engliſhed booke, dooeth conſtant
                     •
                  ie affirme anclie to be allowed: which might ſuffice Pighius & Hoſius I trowe. But though nothing can ſuffice thē, yet to the ſatiſfaction of the good reader, I doo truſt, that it cā not be denied, but that the high Prieſte (as well as all others) ſtandeth bounde by other places of the Scriptures, to the obedtence and folowyng of Gods lawes, in all his teachynges and iudgementes: accordyng as is by God commaunded to all menne, without exception, by theſe woordes. Non declinabitis neque ad dexteram, neque ad ſiniſtram, ab ijs 
                  
                     Deuter. 4. 2. 2. Deute. 5. d. 32. Deut. 12. d. 32. 
                  quae praecepit Dominus Deus vobis. Et non addetis ad verbum quod vobis loquor, non auferetis ab eo. That is to ſaie, Ye ſhall not decline from the thyng, whiche the Lorde your God hath commaunded you, neither to the right hande, nor the left. Thou ſhalt adde nothyng thereto, nor take any thing therefro. I truſt (I ſaie) that Pighius, and Hoſius, with M. Dorman, and ſuche others, will confeſſe that theſe ſentences, and ſuche other like, dooe binde as well the high prieſt, as all other mē, that he maie not dooe what he liſte, but accordyng as Gods woordes dooe leade: els if he ſitte iudgeyng accordyng

to the lawe, & cōmaunde thinges to be dooen againſt the lawe (as is vſual to the Pope to doo) I beleue S. Paules curſe wil light vpon him: Percutiet te deus 
                  
                     Act. 23. a. 3. 
                  paries dealbate: God will ſmite thée thou ouerwhited 
                     Act. 4. d. 18. wall: & that we with S. Peter, & S. Ihon maie boldlie ſay to him, & his: whether it be right in the ſight of God to heare you, rather then god, iudge ye. So yt conſequē
                  tly, we be at libertie to diſobete the cōmaundement of that high prieſt, that ſhall geue in cōmaundement any thing contrary to Gods woorde, & commaundement: to the obedience whereof, as well the high prieſte, as any other, dooeth ſlande bounden. Now emongeſte other profitable ſtudies of the ſeriptures, what can bee more profitable, yea neceſſarie, then by conſerryng the textes and places of the ſcriptures together, therby to gather the true ſenſe of euery place? Which, though it ſa miſliketh M. Dorman, yet hath it beſte liked all the olde writers, and doctours of the Churche hetherto. Sainct Auguſtine emongeſt others, whom I had rather like, and folowe, then. 500. Hardynges, and Dormans, ſhewyng his likyng of that cōſerryng of places of ſcripture together, hath theſe wordes: Vbi autem apertius ponuntur, ibi diſcendum eſt quomodo in locis intelligantur 
                  
                     De doctrina Chriſtiana. li. 3. cap. 26. 
                  obſcuris &c. That is to ſaie: Where thynges are more plainlie vttered in the ſcriptures, there muſte wee learne how thei are to bee vnderſtanded in darke places. For that can not be better vnderſtanded, which is ſaied of God in one place: Take thine armour and ſhielde, and riſe to healpe me: then of that other place, where it is read: Lorde thou haſt crouned vs, as it wer with a ſhielde of thy good will, or fauour. Thus farre ſaincte Auguſtine: who in the .xxvij. and .xxviij. chapiter of the ſame booke, proſecuteth that moſte proſitable way of collation of textes of ſcripture at large. And

the ſame ſainct Auguſtine in an other place, hath theſe 
                     Libr. 83. Queſtion. quaeſt. 53 woordes. Quibuſdam ſcripturarum locis apertius aliquid exponitur, quod diligens, & pius lector etiam in alijs locis in quibus minus aperitur, intelligat &c. that is to ſaie: In ſome places of the Scriptures a thyng is more plainelie expounded, the whiche a diligente and godlie reader maie alſo vnderſtande in other places, in the whiche it is not ſo plainly opened. For our God, to the healthe of our ſoules, hath by the holie ghoſte ſo ordeined the diuine bookes, that he would not onelie feede vs with plaine textes of ſcriputures, but alſo exerciſe vs with darke places of them. Thus muche in that place Sainct Auguſtine: who calleth ſuche as ſo compare the ſcriptures together, godlie, and diligente readers, whatſoeuer maiſter Dorman ſaieth of them, and he ſaieth that ſuche dooynges are healthfull to our ſoules, though M. Dorman thinke, or ſaie otherwiſe: and therefore by Saincte Auguſtines iudgemente it foloweth, that M. Dorman with others, perſwaded as he is, are no godlie, nor diligente readers of the Scriptures, neither dooe regard the healthe of their ſoules: and therefore no marueile that thei applie the Scriptures, ſo frowardlie, and wreſte them ſo violentlie, and falſelie, as thei dooe, whereof this booke is an euident exā
                  ple. Saincte Chryſoſtome alſo (as before was noted) agreeyng 
                     In. 2. ca. Gene. Homili. 13. Sacra ſcriptura ſeipſam exponit, & auditorem errare nō
                        ſinit.
                   with ſaincte Auguſtine, ſaieth: that the holie ſcripture expoundeth it ſelf, and ſuffereth not the hearer to erre. Wherefore we can not but with ſainct Auguſtine, and ſaincte Chryſoſtome, and other aunciente and godlie doctours, and fathers, muche like, and praiſe this moſte profitable and holſome conference of diuers textes of the ſcriptures. And no doubt but the Iewiſhe prieſt, appoincted to reſolue other men of their doubtes, 
                     Deuter. 17. did hymſelf vſe the ſaied conferēce of ſcriptures, as did

thoſe moſte godlie and learned prieſtes, ſaincte Auguſtine, and ſaincte Chryſoſtome bothe vſe it themſelues, and alſo counſaile other ſo to dooe: as beeyng the beſte waie, to them knowen, whereby to attaine to the true vnderſtādyng of the ſcriptures. But M. Dorman hath a greate deſire to bryng vs from the Scriptures, to the iudgemente of his high prieſte the Pope, and therefore this conference of the Scriptures together, is ſo farre out of conceipte with hym, that he vntruely chargeth vs, for that wee like it verie muche, as though wee did therefore miſlike all inſtructids of gods miniſters. But though we dooe not receiue the Popes inſtructions (for that he is neither Gods, nor our eccleſiaſticall miniſter) yet it is well knowen to the worlde, that we ſeeke inſtructions, and explications of doubtes, of Goddes miniſters and preachers of his woorde continually, wheras the Papiſtes vſe it more rarelie: and, vntill of late thei were by vs a little ſtirred vp, thei vſed it nothyng at all: ſo that it ſeemed by their leauyng of preachyng, and kepyng of Gods woorde vnknowen in a ſtraunge language, thei would neither haue the doubtfull queſtions of Gods lawe explicate, by conferryng of textes of the ſcripture together, nor by the voice of the prieſt, nor miniſter neither: but would haue had Gods holie woorde wholie vnknowen to all the worlde, and all menne to liue, not onely without explication of doubtfull places of the ſcripture, but without knowledge of any place of the ſcripture at all: and in ſteede of Gods woorde, to haue pampered vp Gods people with their poiſoned pappe of Poperie. But, ſaieth M. Dorman, God did not commaunde any ſuche conference of ſcriptures, but onelie to reſorte to the high Prieſte: yet I truſt M. Dormā is not ignorant, what it meaneth that God, and our ſauiour Chriſt dooe ſo earneſtlie exhorte 
                     Deuter. 4. Per totum &
                  
                  
all men to the diligent readyng and ſtudie of the ſcriptures, 
                     multis locis. Pſal. 1. a. 2. 3. & 118. a. 2. & multis locis. Ioan. 5. f. 39. Act. 17. c. 11. and dooe condemne the ignoraunce or wante of knowledge thereof. And where he ſaieth, God hath not commaunded ſuche conference of the ſcriptures (which yet in effecte he hath commaunded) it is happie that he can not ſhewe where God hath forbidden it, which if he could, he would not haue failed to haue dooen. But ſeyng M. Dorman ſetteth ſo muche by Gods commaundementes, and would ſo faine haue vs leaue the conference of ſcriptures, as not commaunded by God (as he thinketh) I would he ſhould aduertiſe the Papiſtes his felowes, that thei would once leaue their Idolatrie to Images, with other their ſuperſtitions, ſo ofte, and expreſſedlie by God forbidden, as to all godlie menne, is well knowen.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 12.
            For emongeſt ſo many as at all times haue diſquieted Nowell. Trāſlated out of Ho
                     •
                  ius contra Brentium li. 5. fol. 237. b. the Churche, what one heretike are thei able to recon ouerthrowen by the ſcriptures? VVas Arrius vā
               quiſhed by them? Naie, if you brought to cōuince him this text, Pater & egovnum ſumus, my father & I are one: he would tell you againe that the ſame Chriſte that ſo ſaied, ſaied alſo pater meus maior me eſt, my father is greater then I. VVhat had you then wonne at his handes, that would tell you, that one place of Scripture muſte expound an other, and that therefore your place muſt bee expounded by his? And if you would wade farder with hym, he would interprete your place [as he did with the catholikes] to be vnderſtande of v
                  •
               itie in will and not in ſubſtaunce, and bryng you ſcripture toe, although wreſted from the true ſenſe, that ſhould ſeeme well to prooue his diſtinction. As when our Sauiour praied vnto his father in this ſorte, pater ſancte, ſerua eos 
               Iohan. 
                     ••
                  
                  ▪
                
               in nomine tuo, quos dediſti mihi, vt ſint vnū ſicut et nos, kepe thē
               
ô holie father in thy name whom thou haſte geuen to me, that thei maie be one, as we twoo are one.
            
               Nowell.
               Firſt to M. Dormans demaunde (whiche is the pith of all that he ſaieth in a leafe and more next folowyng) I anſwere, the Arrians, Anabaptiſtes, and all heretikes, without exception, were vanquiſhed and ouerthrowen by the Scriptures: and that if thei were not vāquiſhed by the ſcriptures, thei were not vanquiſhed at all. For what though thei ſaied thei were not vanquiſhed, were thei therefore not vanquiſhed, becauſe thei would not cōfeſſe it? Did the Iuiſhe high prieſtes, Scribes, and Phariſeis confeſſe themſelues vanquiſhed by Chriſte and his Apoſtles? Were thei therefore not vanquiſhed, for that thei would not graunte it? I would aſke againe of M. Dorman, what one heretike of ſo many can he recken ouerthrowen, but by the ſcriptures? But whereas M. Dorman hath been continually harpyng vpon this ſtryng, againſt the ſcriptures, labouryng to bryng vs from them to the Pope, and his churche, as he ſtill holdeth on ſo to dooe: leaſte I ſhould at euery occaſion by him offered, with tediouſneſſe repeate the ſame thynges againe, I remitte the reader to the. 68. leafe of this booke before, where, and in the proceſſe 
                     Folio. 68. b. 69. &. 70. &c.
                   folowyng, it is at large declared, that if we doubt whether we be Chriſtians, or no, we muſt be reſolued by the ſcriptures: if wee doubte whether we bee in the true faithe, or no, we muſte reſorte to the Scriptures: if wee doubte, whiche is the true Churche, and whether we bee in the ſame, or no, we muſte bee certified by the ſcriptures: and that ſuche as ſeeke other meanes to bee reſolued of theſe, and ſuche like doubtes, otherwiſe thā by the ſcriptures, ſhal be deceiued and periſhe. Where alſo is declared that neither the Pope, nor Popiſhe

Churche can be conuenient and competent iudges in controuerſies now riſen, for that thei are both parties, and parties accuſed therein: no more then the Iewiſhe high prieſt, with his churche of Scribes and Phariſeis were conuenient and competent iudges in the controuerſies betweene them and Chriſtes Apoſtles, for that the ſaied high Prieſte, Scribes, and Phariſeis were parties, yea and parties accuſed, and guiltie too, of the death of Chriſt, about whom was all the controuerſie betwene them, and therefore were thei moſte vnméete to bee iudges thereof. Touchyng the conference of the ſcriptures together, I did ſo late before at large intreate thereof, that I néede not now to repete the ſame again. And thus muche to M. Dormans queſtion. Now if M. Dorman haue brought in this example of the Arrians to bryng vs in ſuſpition with the ſimple people as fauouryng the Arrians, all learned and godlie can cléer
                     •
                   vs, who dooe knowe how muche wee dooe abhorre the Arrians hereſies, and how earneſtlie in our ſermons & writynges wee dooe oppugne them: yea, Hoſius your 
                     Hoſius contra Brentiū, lib. 1. foli. 24. & lib. 5. fol. 249. chief champion ſhall anſwere for vs, who dooeth muche praiſe our writynges and dooynges too, againſte the Arrians.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 13.
            In the expoſition and right vnderſtandyng of theſe Nowell. Trāſlated out of Hoſius cō
                  tra Brentium lib. 3. fol 170. b fewe woordes, Hoc eſt corpus meum, this is my bodie: how happeneth it that the Caluiniſtes and the Lutheranes agree not, by conferryng one place of the Scripture with an other, if that bee ſo readie a waie? Dooeth not Caluine, with all his, teache vs, that the ſenſe and true interpretation of theſe woordes, muſte needes be atteined by the conference of one place of Scripture with an other? And to that ende dooe thei not fondlie allege ſaincte Paule callyng Chriſte a rocke, yea Chriſte 1. Cor. 10.
               
callyng hymſelf a vine, when he was in deede, neither the one nor the other, but by a ſimilitude? As though 
                  
                     •
                  ohan. 15. becauſe th'Apoſtle, or Chriſt hymſelf vſeth a figure in one place, wee muſte thinke that in all other he neuer ſpake otherwiſe. By whiche abominable doctrine what letteth, if a manne would bee ſo wicked, to affirme that Chriſte the ſonne of God, and ſeconde perſone in Trinitie, were not the true and naturall ſonne of God, but by adoptiō onely: and for that wicked hereſie to bryng this texte, Dedit eis poteſtatem filios dei fieri, he gaue them Iohan. 1. power to be made the ſonnes of God. VVhiche wordes wee knowe beyng ſpoken by vs menne, muſte bee vnderſtande by grace and adoption: and frowardlie to mainteine, that all the places whiche any good manne can bryng for the defence of the contrarie, ſhould bee drawen to this texte alleged by them, and expounded and vnderſtanded thereby.
            
               Nowell.
               This is M. Dormans vſage, when he can ſaie nothyng of the preſente caſe, to intermingle foraine matters, thereby to auert the readers minde from his principall cauſe remainyng vnprooued ſtill. But how ſoeuer Caluin and Luther agree in the expoſition of theſe fewe woordes, Hoc eſt corpus meum, This is my bodie: thei agree bothe in this, that the Papiſtes expound them falſely. For, to vſe the places by M. Dorman noted out of Hoſius, he, nor all Papiſtes with hym, ſhall neuer be able to ſhowe cauſe, why theſe woordes, Ego ſum vitis vera, I am the true vine, dooe not prooue as well a tranſubſtantiation, as, Hoc eſt corpus meum, This is my bodie. Is not this as plainlie ſpoken, and as piththilie, I am a true or a verie vine, as, This is my bodie? Naie, if Chriſte had ſaied likewiſe, this is my true and verie bodie, as he ſaied, I am a true or verie

dine: what a rule had we then had? Chriſte ſaieth, Ego ſum panis: I am breade: and yet no tranſubſtantiation of his bodie into breade. Why ſhould theſe woordes, Hoc eſt corpus meum, This is my bodie, more tranſubſtantiate bread into his bodie? This is fondlie alleged, ſaieth M. Dorman. If wee ſaie likewiſe, that all that he hath here ſaid of the controuerſie of the Sacramente, out of place, leauyng his purpoſed matter vnproued, is verie fonde: what hath he then wonne? that I maie vſe his owne phraſe.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 13.
            The Anabaptiſtes who denie the Baptiſme of infantes, Nowell Trāſlated out of Hoſius lib. 3 contra Brentium, Fol. 170. b leane thei not thinke you to this grounde of yours? Yea truelie, and good reaſon it is that beyng all heretikes as you are, although in ſome poinctes diſſentyng, yet all ioignyng and agreeing in one cancred hatred againſte the Churche, you ſhould all vſe the ſame rules & principles. For that I maie here paſſe ouer that reaſon of the Anabaptiſtes, which belongeth to an other place, that therefore infantes muſt not bee Baptized becauſe it is not expreſſed in Scripture [a principle alſo of your religion] but deliuered vnto vs by tradition: ſaie thei not alſo, that thei haue the ſcripture plaine for them againſte vs? VVhere it hath, Qui crediderit & baptizatus fuerit, ſaluus erit, He that beleueth and is baptized Mar
                     •
                  . 16▪
                ſhalbee ſaued: and againe in an other place, vna fides, vnum baptiſma, one faithe, one baptiſme. By whiche places ſaie thei it appeareth, that faithe muſt go before, and baptiſme folowe after. And when the Catholikes to repreſſe, and vtterlie ouerthrowe this brutiſhe and beaſtlie opinion anſwere: that for infantes thus baptized the faithe of the churche is ſufficient, and accounted for theirs: crie thei not as you doe, that in this controuerſie one place of ſcripture muſte expounde an other?

And that therefore, where as the ſcripture requireth in him that is baptized faithe, that thei muſt haue it of their owne, accordyng to the Apoſtles ſaiyng, fides ex auditu, faithe commeth by hearyng, whiche infantes can not haue, and according to the ſaiyng of the Roma. 10. Prophete, Iuſtus ex fide ſua victurus eſt, the iuſte manne ſhall liue by his owne faithe. Abacuc. 2.
            
            
               Nowell.
               Firſt to M. Dormans falſe ſclaunder we anſwere, we bee no heretikes: no Arrians: no Anabaptiſtes: we teache of Chriſtes diuinitie, and of Baptiſme, and all other thynges, accordyng to Gods woorde. Where he ſaieth, the Catholikes doo repreſſe and ouerthrowe the brutiſhe opinions of the Anabaptiſtes, we aunſwere: that it is moſte certaine, & well knowen to the worlde, that our menne haue ſaied, and written more againſte them, then euer did the Papiſtes, Wherefore wee bee therein, as in all other thynges in deede, the Catholikes, and not thei.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 13.
            I am ſorie that in anſweryng to this fonde reaſon, I haue been compelled to make any mention of ſuche horrible hereſies as theſe are, whiche I had muche rather, were with their firſte authours buried in helle, from whence thei came, where neither thei, nor their name mighte euer hereafter offende the conſcience of any good Chriſtian manne. But as I haue neceſſarilie laied before your eyes theiſe, that by a parte you maie iudge of the whole: ſo haue I willinglie ſtaied my ſelfe from rehearſyng whole ſwarmes of ſuche opinions, as beyng of all menne taken for confeſſed hereſies, onelie depende vpon this one falſe grounde, that wee neede here in earth no other iudge, to decide and determine doubtes ariſyng vpon the ſcripture, then the ſcripture

it ſelf: whiche beyng [thei ſaie] laied and conferred together one texte with an other, will not faile to bryng vs to the right vnderſtandyng thereof.
            
               Nowell.
               What other neceſſitie, I praie you, put the man to this ſorowe he ſpeaketh of, or compelled hym to ſuche mention, but onelie the defecte of proofes, for his purpoſed matter of the neceſſitie of one heade ouer all the churche: whiche lacke he is driuen to ſupplie with ſuch digreſſions of the Swenkfeldians, Arrians, and Anabaptiſtes, altogether impertinente to his purpoſe, and with declaimyng againſt the ſcriptures and woorde of God. Whiche diſtreſſe alſo droue him deſtitute of matter, ſo often to repeate that one ſéelie ſimilitude and euell likelihood betwene the Iuiſhe high Prieſt, and the Pope. And yet M. Dorman thus digreſſyng and ſwaruyng hymſelf, is not aſhamed to ſpeake to the Biſhop of Sarum, after this ſorte: I moſte hartelie praie you, 
                  
                     Dorman, Fol. 110. a.
                   
                  keepe you without ſtraiyng from the matter, or allegyng of prooues impertinente, as cloſe as you can &c. This is M. Dormans requeſte, whereof hymſelf hath geuen an example, as you here maie ſee. Now if al heretikes and hereſies were, as M. Dorman wiſheth, buried in hell, then ſhould the Pope with all his Papiſtes be buried together with them, and we might liue ſtill, and with quietneſſe praiſe Gods holie name, & preache his bleſſed woorde, whiche maiſter Dorman dooeth ſet ſo light by. To the reſte we ſaie, that as for reſoluyng of doubtes wee dooe with ſaincte Auguſtine, as is before reherſed, thinke the conference of ſcriptures to bée moſte neceſſarie: ſo dooe we not refuſe any other helpe of learned biſhops, as our guides and directours by the ſame Scriptures, to all truthe. But ſuche a one onelie ſupreme heade, or Iudge ouer all the Churche, as M.

Dorman would haue to bee conſulted of all men of all countries and languages, vpon all doubtes ariſyng, neither dooe we acknowlege, neither is it poſſible any ſuche to be. And we ſaie, that ſuche as haue chalenged or pretended ſo to be, are moſte preſumptuous, & moſte falſe vſurpers. Now where M. Dorman would proue the conference of Scriptures a vaine or euill thing, bicauſe the Arrians, and Anabaptiſtes vſed it: and vs to be heretikes, as thei be, becauſe we vſe the ſame groū
                  des, to witte, cōferring of ſcriptures together: he might aſwell reiecte all allegyng of ſcripture, becauſe the deuill 
                     Math. 4. vſed it: and conclude, that we bee of the deuill, becauſe we vſe the ſame grounde that he dooeth, that is to ſaie, the allegyng of Scriptures. Yea, and he maie by the ſame reaſon finde faulte with Chriſte our ſauiour, and his holie Apoſtles, who dooe ſo muche vſe the ſaied allegyng of ſcriptures. And M. Dorman in ſo dooyng ſhould bee as reaſonable, as he is in callyng vs heretikes, and blamyng vs vſyng the conference of ſcriptures, for that heretikes haue vſed the like. And what if Arrians, Anabaptiſtes, or other heretikes will not bee ſatiſfied with conference of places, and textes of ſcripture? Is it not well that all true Chriſtians be ſatiſfied thereby? Dooe not thei allege Doctours, and Councelles for them, aſwell as ſcriptures? As though M. Dorman could deuiſe vs a waie, that ſhould ſatiſfie all heretikes, without all contradiction or exception on their parte: whiche ſhall neuer in this worlde be brought to paſſe. For our Sauiour Chriſte hymſelf, the ſoonne of God, neither by the authoritie of his diuine perſone, nor by the truthe of his heauenlie doctrine, nor by the confirmation of the ſame by his wonderfull miracles, neither by his example of moſte vertuous life, neither by al theſe together did ſatiſfie al men: but that many,

yea (thoſe who of reaſon leaſte ſhould) the 
                     Math. 9. d. 34. & 11. c. 19. & 12 b. 24. & 27. d. 63. Ioan. 7. b. 12. & 9. f. 34. & 18. d. 29. Prieſtes, Scribes, and Phariſeis made exception to his perſone, and life, and were not ſatiſfied by his doctrine. It M. Dorman therefore dooe miſlike the Scriptures, or the conference of textes, for that all men will not be thereby ſatiſfied, ſure I am, that he ſhall neuer bee ſatiſfied in this worlde, as one that might by that reaſon, miſlike alſo of our ſauiour Chriſt hymſelf, as no-ſufficient iudge. And thinketh he that Popes of Rome, menne of ſuche life, ſuche partialitie, ſuche ignorance, ſuche vntruthe, ſuche falſehoode, ſuche briberie, Simoniakes, poiſone
                     ••
                  , murtherers, ſhall ſatiſfie all menne, in all their iudgementes, of all cauſes, and controuerſies, yea in their own verie cauſes, wherein thei be parties, and that without all exception? The deuill thei ſhall, and that maie I ſaie truely. Wherefore I dooe cōclude, though our ſauiour Chriſt were to the high Prieſtes, Scribes, Phariſeis, and other wicked, a ſtone to ſtūble at, and a rocke of ruine, & his Goſpell either an offence, 
                     Eſa
                           •
                        . 8. c. 14. Rom. 9. g. 32. 1. Pet. 2. b. 7. 8. 
                        •
                     . Cor. 1. d. 23. or a mockage (ſo farre of was it that he did ſatiſfie thē): yet is he and his holie woord (whiche is the vertue & the wiſedome of God) the true iudge in all controuerſies & doubtes of religion, whatſoeuer the high prieſte, or his adherentes the Scribes, and Phariſeis dooe faie to the contrary: or be M. Dorman neuer ſo angrie therewith.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 13.
            If your hartes good readers bee moued vvith theſe hereſies in the readyng, as truelie God I take to vvitneſſe myne vvas in the vvrityng, abhorre thoſe that teache them, ſhonne and auoide ſuche principles and groundes, as haue been the foundation not of theſe onelie, but of all that novve reigne in the vvorlde, and maie bee of any other hereafter, that any deſperate heretike liſteth to inuente. Sticke to thoſe by vvhiche all

heretikes haue been and theſe ſhalbe, to ther vtter cō
               fuſion vanquiſhed. Shrinke not raſhelie from that fundation, vvhereon your elders and forefathers faſtenyng thēſelues, haue paſſed ouer ſo many hundred yeres, in the true confeſsion of one God, one faithe, one truthe, to them that hauyng yet ſcarſe fourtie on their backes, haue notvvithſtandyng emongeſt them [creapyng all out of the filthie neaſt of one Martin Luther] ſo many faithes and yet no faith, ſo many truthes, and yet no truthe, neuer a one agreyng vvith the other, as there be madde frantike heades emongeſt them. Geue no eare to that ſubtill generatiō vvalkyng in the darck like blinde Battes, vvithout a head, vvithout a Iudge, and all to the ende their iuggeling might not be eſpied.
            
               Nowell.
               O pitifull harted manne, but yet farre better Oratour, then tender harted, who, when he drawyng towardes an ende of this his firſt parte, that is to witte, That the vvhole churche muſt needes haue one onelie heade: and thinkyng, that he ought to haue ſome matter of weighte to mooue affections vpon, and findyng none in his purpoſed matter, bringeth in the rehearſall of the Arrians, and Anabaptiſtes hereſies (whiche it is knowen to the worlde that we dooe moſte abhorre) and vpon them, as it were vpon our hereſies, dooeth this Rhetorician ruſſhe into theſe vehemente affections, whiche he mooueth here, but as I thinke, ſtirreth no wiſe manne, excepte it be to laugh at his fooliſheneſſe. Where he ſpeaketh of deſperate heretikes, ſainct Cyprian 
                     Cyprianus l
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                      
                     epiſt. 3. Pa
                           •
                        cis deſperatis & perditis, minor eſſe videtur authoritas epiſcoporum in Africa conſtit
                           •
                        torū. &c.
                   ſo calleth all ſuche as thinke one Biſhoppe inferiour to an other (as dooeth maiſter Dorman, and ſuche other Papiſtes) as hath been before declared. Maiſter Dorman adourneth the Popes chaire, or ſee of Rome, with many glorious titles, but nameth it not as yet,

neither a greate while after, partly for that a periphraſis, or circumſcription was here more meete, for amplifications ſake: and partelie, for that when he had reiected the ſcriptures, he thought it not good by and by to ſaie, that all heretikes (whiche by no meanes can be vanquiſhed by the ſcriptures) muſte bee vanquiſhed by the ſee of Rome, or Peters chaire, or Popes theron ſittyng: but to auoide all ſhewe of abſurditie he compaſſeth the matter, and at the laſte ſtealeth vnto the ſee of Rome, vnder S. Hieromes name. That he exhorteth you to ſticke to thoſe by whom all heretikes haue been and theſe ſhalbe, to their vtter confuſion vanquiſhed, (meaning the Popes of Rome, as is afterward euidēt) I aunſwere, If force, fire, and fagoties faile them not, (for other meanes to vanquiſhe haue not the Popes, nor knowe thei any) thei will no doubte, vſe their cruell furie againſte vs, as thei haue dooen: (and yet haue thei, as I thinke, neither gotten any greate gaine, nor made any greate conqueſte) but if Gods woorde maie bee heard, I doubte not but the Popes chaire of peſtilence ſhalbe ſhortly ouerthrowen, and he with all Papiſtes vanquiſhed, to their vtter confuſion. Where he calleth the Popes chaire (for it he meaneth, as after he dooeth declare) the foundation whereon our elders & forefathers ſta
                        •
                     ed them ſelues many hundreth yeres, in the confeſsion of one faithe and truthe &c. the contrarie is moſte true: that the Pope hath (as muche as in him hath lien) ſubuerted the faithe, and truth of Chriſt, and deſtroyed Chriſtian menne, and Chriſtendome moſte horribly, ſith his falſe forged ſupremacie in theſe our latter daies hath gotten creadite. Our faithe and doctrine haue as many yeres on their backes, as haue the ſcriptures whereon thei are grounded, as hath the Primitiue Churche, and olde aunciente Doctours,

wherewith in all neceſſarie p
                     •
                  inctes of religion thei agrée throughly. It is the Pope, and his ſupremacie, and other Poperie, that is builded vpon a late and ſandie foundation, and therefore ſhortlie to bée ſubuerted, and 
                     •
                  ooted vp. Concernyng diuerſities of faithes, diſagréeynges, and Schiſmes, whiche M. Dorman ſo often repeateth, he dooeth nothyng els, but caſte their owne dounge at our heades, laiyng the peculiar and proper faultes of the Papiſtes to our charges, accordyng as I haue at large before declared, and as I truſte ſullie ſatiſfied 
                     Fol. 55. &c.
                   the diſcreate reader therein. That whiche maiſter Dorman ſpeaketh of franlike heades, hath alluſion to his maiſters caſe, when he forſooke the truthe, and reuolted to Poperie▪ The worlde knoweth wee bee not ſubtile, but are ſore encombred with the craftie generatiō of Papiſtes. The woorde of God is the true light, wherein wee endeuoure our ſelues to our power to walke. Your vnwritten verities are more meeter for blinde Battes to flitter in. Wee haue our heade and Iudge in heauen, one Chriſte onelie, and in earth one prince, and other miniſters, bothe eccleſiaſticall and ciuill, to gouerne and Iudge vs accordyng to his holie woorde. To iuggle, and to coniure too, bée your owne Popiſhe properties: we haue nothing to doo with thē. And thus I haue anſwered M. Dormans aſſeueratiōs in this place, by ſhorte poinctes, which maie ſuffice, ſeyng he onely ſaith his pleaſure, & proueth nothing at al.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 14.
            Tell them that you haue ſeen them thriue ſo euell apon that preſumption of theirs, ſo many hereſies, ſo many ſchiſmes and leude opinions, broughte in thereby, that you are at a poincte with your ſelues to leaue them, and take that waie that Saincte Hierome in the like caſe hath doen before you: who although his knowledge

in the tongues were ſuche, as by the reporte of moſte men, it paſſed any others in his tyme: yet would not he take vpon hym, in the diſcuſsyng of doutes, to S. Herome in doutes referred himſelf to Peters Seate. leane to that rule of theirs, to la
                  •
               e and conferre together one texte with an other, but referryng hymſelf to the ſee of Rome he alwaies proteſted, that by that ſeate and faithe praiſed by the Apoſtles owne mouth would he be counceled and ruled. Beatitudini tuae id eſt cathedrae Petri communione conſocior, To your holines [ſaieth he writyng Borowed out of Hoſius lib. 2. Folio. 76. b. 
               Tom. 2. epiſt. ad Damaſum. to Damaſus then the Biſhoppe of Rome] that is to ſaie to Peters chaire am I ioigned in communion: and he addeth a cauſe whie, Super illam Petram aedificatam 
               The churche builded on Peters chaire. 
               eccleſiam ſcio, I knowe that on that rocke [Peters chaire] the Churche is builded.
            
               Nowell.
               The Pope and Papiſtes haue thriuen ſo well vpon their ſtriuyng againſte the truthe of Goddes woorde, that I truſt all the worlde ſhortly will be at a poinct to leaue them. Saincte Hierome ſaieth no where that he would not compare the ſcriptures together for the diſcuſſyng of doubtes (as M. Dorman would beare vs in hande) and S. Auguſtine ſaieth, he would dooe it, and exhorteth other to dooe the ſame. S. Hieromes woordes to Damaſus Biſhop of Rome make nothyng againſte vs, nor with M. Dorman. For what meruaile is it, if Eraſmus. Hieronymus in Italiae regione natus: Romae baptizatꝰ: Romae educatus: preſbyter Romanus. that ſainct Hierome, borne in a coaſte of Italie, Chriſtened at Rome, brought vp at Rome, and made prieſt at Rome, would in the faith of the bleſſed Trinitie, rather ioigne himſelf in communion with Damaſus Biſhop of Rome, a learned and godlie man, then with Vitalis, and Meletius (whom M. Dorman calleth Miletus) and Paulinus, who were Antiochian biſhops, and therefore ſtraungers to him, and alſo not cleare from the Arrian hereſie? What argument can M. Dorman frame hereof?

Hierome a Prieſte of Rome &c. ioigned hymſelf in communion to his owne biſhoppe Damaſus, Ergo we Engliſhemen muſie ioigne our ſelues likewiſe to the biſhoppe of Rome that now is, beyng bothe a forainer and an enemie. Againe, Hierome ioigned in communion with Damaſus a godlie biſhoppe of Rome, Ergo we muſt ſubmit our ſelues to a falſe vſurper, and enemie of God, and all godlineſſe. Naie, it foloweth rather thus: As ſaincte Hierome refuſed to ioigne hymſelf to Vitalis biſhoppe of Antiochia, and an Arrian, bothe becauſe he was a ſtraunger, and alſo an heretike, and ioigned hymſelf to Damaſus his owne Biſhoppe, and a godlie Biſhop: ſo ought wée to refuſe the Pope, beyng bothe a foraine vſurper, and a falſe heretike, & to ioigne againſte hym, with our owne godlie biſhops at home. But (will M. Dorman ſaie) ſaincte Hierome addeth a cauſe (whiche is the pith of the matter) ſaiyng thus: Super illam petram, &c. I knowe that vpon that rocke [Peters chaire] the Churche is builded: whiche is the cauſe why S. Hierome ioigned with Damaſus, will he ſaie. But he maie be aſhamed, had he any ſhame at al, thus ſhamefully by a falſe parentheſis to intermingle theſe woordes [Peters chaire] in this ſentence of S. Hierome, and ſo to falſifie it, as though S. Hierome had ſaied, or ment in this place, that the Popes chaire is the rocke, whereon the Churche is builded. And now maie ye ſee to what ende all M. Dormans long former drifte commeth, to witte, to bryng vs from the ſcriptures to Peters chaire, that is, the Popes conſiſtorie, there to bee iudged, whiche now at the laſte, after ſo long ſuſpenſiō and delaie, vnder S. Hieromes name, but moſte falſly, he hath vttered. For the more plain declaration wherof, I will report here ſainct Hieromes woordes a little more largely, then M. Dorman hath dooen: whiche are

theſe, Faceſſat inuidia, Romani culminis recedat ambitio, cū ſucceſſore piſcatoris & diſcipulo crucis loquor. Ego nullum primum, niſi Chriſtum ſequens, Beatitudinis tuae, id eſt, Cathedrae Petri communione conſocior: ſuper illam Petram aedificatam Eccleſiam ſcio. Quicunque extra hanc domum agnum comederit, prophanus eſt. Si quis in Arca Nohae non fuerit, peribit regnante diluuio. That is to ſaie, Let enuie auoide, let the ambition of the height of Rome departe, I ſpeake to the ſucceſſour of the fiſher, and a diſciple of the croſſe. I folowyng no chief or head, but Chriſt, am ioigned in communion to your holines, to ſaie, Peters chaire: vpon that rocke, I knowe the Churche to bee builded: whoſoeuer eateth the Lambe without this houſe, he is prophane or vnholie. If one be not in the arke of Nohe, he ſhall periſhe when the floud is aloft. Thus farre S. Hierome. Now if a manne would aſke of M. Dorman why he left out thoſe twoo lines, wherein S. Hierome admoniſheth Damaſus, as the ſucceſſour of the poore fiſher Peter, to laie aſide all ambitiō, whiche the greatneſſe of the citie of Rome might mooue hym too, and withall affirmeth that he will folowe no chief head but Chriſte (whiche woordes are ioigned, and by a participle dependyng to that, whiche M. Dorman alleged) whatſoeuer he ſhall anſwere thereto, I knowe the true anſwere: M. Dorman did of falſehood, and corruption of the meanyng of ſainct Hierome, thus detrunke and mangle his ſentence: for he did ſée that S. Hierome admoniſhing Damaſus of humilitie, and withall profeſſyng hymſelf to folowe no chief or head but Chriſt, not exceptyng Damaſus caſe, but rather affirmyng hym not to be Primum, the chief, maketh clearely with vs, who in this controuerſie of the Popes vſurped ſupremacie ſaie the ſame: We folow no head but Chriſt: we

ioigne in communion with none, but ſuche as folowe hym &c. Furthermore he did ſee that the woordes of S. Hierome folowyng (vpō this rocke I know the church to bee builded) might and ought to bee referred vnto Chriſte, mentioned by S. Hierome ſo nere before, and by Peter cōfeſſed to be that rocke, wheron the churche is builded: and therefore M. Dorman left out of ſaincte Hieromes ſentence the mētion of Chriſt, that he might moſt falſly and blaſphemouſly referre the rocke to Peters chaire, as though Peters rotten chaire, or ruinous Rome were the rocke, whereon the churche of our ſauior Chriſt is builded. And to make the purpoſed wickedneſſe of theſe aduerſaries of the verie rocke Chriſte and his truthe (who care not what thei allege for the maintenaunce of their deſperate cauſe of the Popes ſupremacie, though thēſelues dooe knowe it ſerueth nothing for their purpoſe at all) more manifeſte to all the worlde, I lette the reader vnderſtande, that Eraſmus in his ſcholies or annotations vpon this epiſtle (whiche M. Dorman were he not aſleape muſte needes ſee) did warne him that he ſhould not after this ſorte ſo falſifie S. Hierome in this place. For though he cōfeſſe that S. Hierome might ſeeme by this place to thinke, that all churches ought to be vnder the Romaine ſee, or at the leaſte not ſtraungers from it, yet when he noteth vpon theſe woordes: I knowe the churche is builded vpō that rocke, he ſaieth. Super illam Petrā &c. Non ſuper Romam, vt arbitror: nam fieri poteſt vt Roma quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      degeneret: ſed ſuper eam fidem quam Petrus profeſſus eſt, & quam hactenus Romana ſeruauit eccleſia, qua non alia minus laborauit haereſibus. That is to ſaie, Vpon this rocke, not vpon Rome I trow: for it maie come to paſſe, that Rome alſo goe out of kinde: but vpon the faith, whiche Peter profeſſed, and the whiche hither to

the Romain churche hath kept, then the whiche church no other hath been leſſe infected with hereſies. Thus farre Eraſmus, cleane contrary to M. Dorman and all Papiſtes, who would haue the Romaine ſee, to bee the rocke wheron Chriſtes churche is builded, and that the ſaid ſee can not poſſibly erre. Yea and further the ſame Eraſmus in the beginnyng of his argument vpon his treatie againſte the Luciferians, whiche is nexte to his 
                     Tom. 2. contra Luciferianos.
                   twoo epiſtles to Damaſus, hath theſe woordes. Nulla haereſis grauius afflixit totius orbis eccleſias, quàm Arrianorum: adeò vt Romanum quoque pontificem, & ipſos inuoluerit imperatores. That is to ſay: No hereſie hath more greuouſlie afflicted the Churches of all the worlde, then the Arrians: in ſo muche that it hath wrapped in the Biſhop of Rome, and the Emperours themſelues. Thus farre Eraſmus. It pleaſeth M. Dorman ſometyme to allege Eraſmus againſt vs, whoſe authoritie if it bee good, doune goeth the Pope, and all Poperie: for if the biſhoppes of Rome haue been infected with hereſie, their Chaire is not that vnmoueable rocke, as M. Dorman would haue it. Now if M. Dorman did not ſee theſe notes of Eraſmus vpon the place by hym alleged out of S. Hierome, I praiſe his diligence, he maie of Dorman bee called Dormitantius, as ſainct Hierome (whom he falſely allegeth) called Vigilantius, and more iuſtlie bothe by nature and ſounde of name maie M. Dormā be ſo called, then euer was Vigilantius by ſainct Hierome. But if M. Dorman did ſee Eraſmus note, and diſſembled it, as he did ſee theſe S. Hieromes woordes (I folowyng no heade but Chriſte) nexte and moſte neceſſarilie ioigned to the ſentence by hym alleged, and yet of purpoſe cutte them of by the necke, then is M. Dormans candor, and ſinceritie, vſuall to hym throughout all his booke, moſte woorthie

of plentifull Popiſhe praiſe. But if Eraſmus iudgemente, and authoritie be nothyng woorthe, but onelie when he ſeemeth to ſpeake againſte vs, then I will yet in Chriſtes quarell, that he is the Rocke, & not Peters rotten chaire, bring foorth one witneſſe, not onely greater then Eraſmus, but alſo equall with S. Hierome, and aboue all Papiſtes in creadite and authoritie. S. Auguſtine in his. 13. Sermon vpon the Goſpell of Mathewe, 
                     Tom. 10. col. 58. b.
                   hath theſe woordes. Quia tu dixiſti mihi [inquit Chriſtus Petro] Tu es Chriſtus filius Dei viui, & ego tibi, tu es Petrus (Simon quippe antè vocabatur) hoc autem nomen, vt Petrus appellaretur, ei à domino impoſitum eſt, & hoc, vt ea figura ſignificaret Eccleſiam. Quia enim Chriſtus Petra: Petrus populus chriſtianus. Petra enim principale nomen eſt, ideo Petrus à Petra, non Petra à Petro: quomodo non à chriſtiano Chriſtꝰ, ſed à Chriſto chriſtianus vocatur. Tu es ergoūquit Petrus, & ſuper hanc Petram quam confeſſus es, ſuper hāc Petram quā cognouiſti dicens: tu es Chrſtus filius dei viui, aedificabo eccleſiam meam, id eſt, ſuper meipſum filium dei viui aedificabo eccleſiam meam. Super me aedificabo te, non me ſuper te. Nā volentes homines ędificari ſuper homines, dicebant: ego quidem ſum Pauli, ego autem Apollo, ego verò Cephae, ipſe eſt Petrus: Et alij qui nolebant aedificari ſuper Petrum, ſed ſuper Petram, ego autem ſum Chriſti. Apoſtolus autem Paulus vbi cognouit ſe eligi, & Chriſtum cōtemni: diuiſus eſt, inquit, Chriſtus? Nunquid Paulus pro vobis crucifixus eſt: aut in nomine Pauli baptizati eſtis? Quomodo nō in Pauli, ſic nec in Petri, ſed ī nomine Chriſti: vt Petrus edificaretur ſuper Petrā, & non Petra ſupra Petrū. &c. That is to ſaie, Becauſe thou haſte ſaied to me (ſaieth Chriſte to Peter) Thou art Chriſte the ſonne of the liuyng God: I dooe alſo ſaie to thee, thou art Peter: (for

before he was called Simon) but this name, that he ſhould be called Peter, was geuen him of the Lorde: to th'ende, that by that figure he might ſignifie ye churche. For becauſe Chriſte is Petra, the Rocke: Petrus is the Chriſtian people. For, Petra is the principal name: and therefore Petrus cometh of Petra, and not Petra of Petrus: as Chriſtus, Chriſte, is not named à Chriſtiano, of a Chriſtian, but Chriſtianus, a Chriſtian, is named of Chriſtus, Chriſt. Therefore ſaith Chriſt, Thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke which thou haſt confeſſed, vpō this rocke whiche thou haſt knowen, ſaiyng, Thou art Chriſte the ſonne of the liuyng God, I will builde my churche: that is, vpon my ſelf, beyng the ſonne of the liuyng God will I builde my churche. I will builde thée vpon me, not me vpon thee. For men ye would be builded vpō men, did ſaie: I am of Paule, I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, that is of Peter. And other who would not bee builded vpon Petrum, Peter, but vpon Petram, the rocke, did ſaie: I am of Chriſte. And the Apoſtle Paule whē he did knowe that he was choſen or preferred, and Chriſt deſpiſed by ſome men, ſaied: is Chriſte diuided? Was Paule crucified for you? Or were you Baptized in the name of Paule? And as not in Paules name, no more were ye baptized in the name of Peter, but in the name of Chriſt, that Peter might be builded vpon the rocke, not the rocke vpon Peter, and ſo foorthe. Thus farre S. Auguſtine. And the ſame interpretation, and 
                     Retract. lib. 1. cap. 21. defence, that Chriſt is the rocke, and not Peter, doeth ſainct Auguſtine againe in his Retractations repete, and maintaine. Wherefore you ſee, maiſter Dorman, by ſaincte Auguſtine, that Chriſte is that rocke whereon the Churche is builded, and not Peter, nor Peters chaire, vnleſſe you take Peters confeſſion made before be came at Rome, to be his Chaire, and then ye make

with S. Auguſtine and vs, againſt the Pope: for Rome was not his chaire, before he was biſhop there. You ſee that Peter is here the figure of the whole Churche, in makyng his confeſſiō, not of the churche of Rome onely: you ſee that as Chriſte is the rocke, ſo repreſenteth Peter the chriſtian people, and not the people of Rome onely, muche leſſe the Pope onely: you ſee that Petrus, to ſaie, the Churche, is builded vpon Petra, Chriſt: and not Petra, Chriſte, builded vpon Petrus, Peter: you ſee that ſuche as will haue Peter beyng a man, to be their rocke to builde vpon, bee ſectaries and heretikes, diuidyng them ſelues from Chriſte, deſpiſyng hym, and chooſyng men: and that thei onely be true Chriſtians, whiche wil not builde vpon Peter, nor vpon any other man, but vpon the rocke onely, whiche is Chriſt hymſelf: you ſee, thei that builde vpon Peter maie ſaie, I holde of Cephas, whiche is Peter: but thei that builde vpon the rocke maie ſaie, I holde, or I am of Chriſte. Wherefore I conclude, that all that builde vpon the Pope, or his chaire, as it were vpon the rocke, as thei bée called, ſo bee thei in deede Papiſtes, not Chriſtians: as were all thoſe falſe orders of hypocrites, who forſakyng to builde vpon the rocke Chriſt, and buildyng vpon men woorſe then Peter, Paule, or Apollo, a thouſande tymes, forſooke to ſaie, Ego ſum Chriſti, I am of Chriſt, I am a Chriſtian: and ſaied, Ego Franciſcanus, ego Dominicanus &c. I am of Franciſce, I am of Dominike, a Franciſcane, a Dominicane, a Bernardine, yea an Auguſtinian, cōtrary to this doctrine of S. Auguſtine: whiche argueth, that thoſe hypocrites were neuer of his inſtitution, as thei falſely feigned thē ſelues to be. And as S. Auguſtine witneſſeth with Eraſmus, that Chriſte is Petra, and not Peter, nor Rome Athanafius &. Hiero. de Liberio Papa. Peters chaire, or ſee, ſo hath Eraſmus felowe witneſſes

enough of the auncient doctours of the churche, yea 
                     Cōcil. Sextum Conſt. & Baſil. de Honorio, Iohanne. 23. Engenio. 4. Papis.
                   and generall Councelles too, that Popes were heretikes, and therefore their chaire was not the rocke, but waueryng and vncertaine ſande, the buildyng whereon did runne to the ruine of hereſie. Nowe you maie ſee, good readers, the cauſe why M. Dorman hath thus alleged vnto you ſainct Hieromes ſentence headleſſe, leauyng out the mention of Chriſt, whom onely S. Hierome acknowledgeth for the head, that the wordes of the rocke nexte folowyng, might ſeme to be ſpoken of Peters rotten chaire, or of ruinous Rome, and not of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte, who liueth and reigneth for euer. With like fraude did M. Dormā leaue alſo that, whiche nexte foloweth in S. Hierome, of the houſe, without the whiche, he that eateth the Paſcall lambe, is a prophane, or vnholie man: and the arke of Noe, without the whiche all that bee, periſhe by the floudde. For though that place might ſeeme to make for M. Dormans purpoſe, concernyng the ſupremacie of the biſhop of Rome (as Eraſmus hath noted) yet he knowyng, or ſome manne warnyng hym, that it is in deede nothyng to his purpoſe, for that the houſe, without the whiche the Paſcall lambe maie not bee eaten, the Arke, without the whiche no man can bée ſaued frō the floude, by all olde doctours is interpreted to bee the one vniuerſall churche of Chriſt, and by none to be the churche of Rome: and therefore like a wiſe man, orels a falſe Fore, hath he let that folowyng alone alſo, as he cutte of Hieron. Ego nullum primū niſi Chriſtum ſequens. Chriſte the head goyng and ioigned nexte before, and ſo he hath tolde you a tale bothe without head and taile, thereby to proue the Pope, who is Antichriſte, to be the head of Chriſtes churche.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 14.
            Saie vnto them (as, ſaincte Hierome, ſaied vnto the Ibidem.

heretikes, Vitalis, and Miletus) becauſe thei are aduerſaries to this ſeate that you knowe them not, that thei ſcatter & are ſchiſmatikes altogether out of the churche, that gather not with Peters ſucceſſour.
            
               Nowell.
               By your leaue ſir you ſaie vntruelie, that ſaincte Hierome ſaieth he knoweth not Vitalis and Meletius, (whom you call Miletus) becauſe thei were aduerſaries to the ſeate of Rome, but becauſe thei were aduerſaries to the true doctrine of the moſte bleſſed Trinitie, which Damaſus did defende. Saincte Hieromes woordes are theſe. Non noui Vitalem, Meletium reſpuo, ignoro Paulinum. Quicun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tecum non colligit, ſpargit: hoc eſt, qui Chriſti non eſt, eſt Antichriſti. That is to ſaie, I knowe not Vitalis, I refuſe Meletius, Paulinus I knowe not. Whoſoeuer dooeth not gather with thee, he ſcattereth: that is, he that is not of Chriſte, is of Antichriſte. Thus farre ſainct Hierome. I praie you maiſter Dorman, what is in theſe woordes, but thei maie as well bee ſpoken to ſaincte Auguſtine biſhoppe of Hippo in Afrike, or to ſaincte Ambroſe Biſhoppe of Milane, or to any other godlie Biſhoppe, holdyng the truthe of the bleſſed Trinitie, againſte Vitalis, Meletius, and Paulinuus, teachyng erronious doctrine, and vſyng vnfitte termes thereof. Here is neither mention made of this ſeate or that, or the aduerſaries thereto, as cauſes why ſainct Hierome ſhould not knowe theſe menne: but becauſe thei taught falſe doctrine, and Damaſus taught true, and therefore gathered not with hym, but ſcattered, and were not of Chriſte, but of Antichriſte, Hiero. Trium hypoſtaſeon nouellū nomē à me homine Romano exigitur. therefore did ſaincte Hierome not knowe thē: he beeyng a Romaine, would not acknowledge their errours, cloked vnder a ſtraunge and newe inuented Greeke ternie. But beeyng a Romaine prieſte, he well

knewe Damaſus the Romaine Biſhoppe, and ſo conſequentlie his owne biſhoppe (as euery man is bounde to knowe his owne godlie Biſhop) he knewe his true doctrine, and plaine Latine termes, whereby he vttered the plaine truthe plainelie: and therefore ſo knowyng hym, and his doctrine, he ioigned with hym in communion, not for the ſeates ſake, or for that he was Peters ſucceſſour therein, but for the truthes ſake, whiche he (beeyng Peters ſucceſſour in truthe of doctrine, more then in ſeate, or Chaire) did profeſſe. Againe, the cauſe why ſaincte Hierome did not knowe, but reiected, Vitalis, Meletius, and Paulinus, was not for that thei did not ſubmitte them ſelues to Damaſus as to the ſupreme head of the Churche, or for that cauſe tooke them to bee enemies, as maiſter Dorman would haue it ſeeme (for there was no ſuche matter then in queſtion) but becauſe thei did not agree with Damaſus in the truthe, but taughte falſelie of the greateſte poinctes of our religion, and would haue wrapped the ſame in obſcure and ſtrange termes, therby to deceiue the more, therefore did ſainct Hierome not knowe thē. This is the true ſenſe of this place, good readers, as al learned, that wil reade it, ſhall eaſily perceiue. Wherfore maiſter Dorman thus corruptyng and falſifiyng Saincte Hierome, by takyng awaie from hym, and addyng to hym, what he liſte, and drawyng the woordes of ſainct Hierome concernyng the doctrine of the moſte bleſſed Trinitie, to the Popes vſurped ſupremacie, minglyng vs in lente vnguentum, to witte, matters moſte impertinente, together, might moſte iuſtlie bee blamed in this place therefore, ſauyng that he dooeth ſo in all places. Finallie I would haue thee (good reader) to note, that as S. Hierome would not knowe Vitalis and Meletius, for that thei were forainers, and not his

owne biſhops: for that they taught falſe doctrine, and therefore were not of Chriſt, but of Antichriſt: and for that they were of a ſtraunge language: ſo haue we the ſame cauſes altogether, not to knowe, but to refuſe the biſhop of Rome, and moe too: as this ſpecially, that he, being a forainer, would vſurpe ſuche a ſupreame authoritie, or rather cruell tyranny ouer vs, with whom of right he hath nothing to doo.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 14. Novvell. Tranſlated out of Hoſius contra Brentium. lib. 2. fo. 77.
            
            Tell them boldely vvith S. Auſten that yovv vvill In quaeſt. veteris & noui teſtamēt. q. 110. The heretikes churche a dead trōke or a liue monſtre. ovve neither ſute nor ſeruice to their chaire of peſtilēce, nor be a member of that body, that either lacketh a head and is a dead tronke, or hath many, and is a liue monſtre.
            
               Novvell.
               Be bolde and bluſhe not, M. Dormā, as boldly to belie S. Auguſtine, as ye ſtreight before haue dealt with S. Hierome. For neither be the woords you doo reherſe, S. Auguſtines: neither are the greateſt part of them to be found in the place by you noted: nor ye woordes which be in that place whiche you haue noted (whoſe ſo euer they bee) make ought for your purpoſe, or againſt vs. You ſhould haue done more ſimply, had you alleaged a proufe for your headles trunke, or liue monſtre, out of 
                     Hierach. lib. 3. cap. 4. fol. 111. a. &. li. 5. cap. 14. fo. 261. c. Hoſius lib. 2. fol. 77. Extrauag. commun. lib. 1. tit. de Maiorit. & obedientia ca. Vnam ſanctam.
                   Pighius, Hoſius, & Pope Boniface his Extrauagants: there ſhall you in déede finde for your purpoſe: for much adoo is made there, to ſaue the Popiſhe churche, as hauing two heades, one in heauen, an other in earth (as they ſay) from being a liue monſtre. Eraſmus being no ſimple iudge of the true and counterfeite writinges of the olde doctours, in his preface before the booke De quaeſtionibus veteris & noui teſtamēti, intitled vntruly to S. Auguſtine, doth by diuerſitie of S. Auguſtines phraſe, and

the phraſe of that book, probably, and by very barbarous and falſe Latine vſuall in that booke, vnaccuſtomed to S. Auguſtine, certainly, and by ſundry doctrines in that booke, moſt contrary to S. Auguſtines doctrine in his bookes, vndoubtedly prooue, that it is not S. Auguſtines worke: ſo that it were to muche impudencie for any man, but onely Hoſius and M. Dorman, to alleage it for S. Auguſtines. The woordes of that authour (who ſo euer he was) a little more largely rehearſed by Hoſius, than by you, M. Dorman, leaſte it myght appeare, you had followed him to neere, are theſe: Eorum qui extra eccleſiam, vel contra eccleſiam ſedes ſuas inſtituerunt, Cathedram peſtilentiae dicimus. Qui enim inconceſſa praeſumit &c. We ſaye that the chaire of them whiche haue made them ſees without, or againſt the churche, is the chaire of Peſtilence. He that preſumeth vpon vnlawfull thinges, is guiltie: howe muche more if he alſo corrupte the tradition of him, whoſe ſeate he vſurpeth?
               For they trouble the order begunne of Peter the Apoſtle, and kept to this tyme by the continuance of Biſhoppes ſucceedyng, chalenginge to themſelues ordre without origine, that is to ſaye, profeſſinge a bodye without an head. Wherefore it is agreable, their ſeate alſo to appeere to be the chayre of Peſtilence. Thus farre that incerteine author, alleged by Hoſius, and 
                     Lib. 2. cōtra Brentium, fol. 77. nowe by M. Dorman, for S. Auguſtine. Firſt if you woulde haue this place to make for you againſt vs, you muſt proue your ſelues to be the true churche of Chriſte, which you ſhall neuer be hable to dooe, being in deede the Synagoge of Antichriſte. Further it appeareth by theſe woordes, vvhoſe ſeate he vſurpeth, meaninge Peters ſeate, that this was writen in later

times againſt ſome Antipope, wrongfully choſen, and intruding himſelfe into the Biſhoprike of Rome. For it hath been no noueltie for theſe .iii. or .iiii. hundreth yeres, to haue .ii. or .iii. Popes at once: one choſen at Rome by ſome Cardinalles, an other at Auinion by other ſome Cardinalles, the thirde in a thirde place, appointed by the Emperour: and one to keepe his Papal ſee at Rome, an other at Auinion in Fraunce, the third at Rauenna in Italie, or ſome where els. And ſo ſome writer in fauour of him, by like, that was choſen, and kept reſidence at Rome, hath written this againſt ſome other, that vſurped Peters ſeate: and ſo they beynge many at one time, troubled the order of the ſucceſſion of one, after an other, begunne at Peter, and ſo continued, till ſuch diſcorde came in by thoſe, who ſettinge vp an other chaire, and ſo not ſitting in Peters chaire, ſate (as he ſaieth) in the chaire of peſtilence. Howſoeuer it be, the mater can not be applied to vs, who doo not vſurpe Peters chaire. Further, what woord is there here to proue ye chayre of Rome to be the head of ye vniuerſall church, but rather to be the head of that peculiar church of Rome onely, where Peters ſucceſſours haue cōtinued? Such kinde of head gouernour, as we doo not denie euery biſhop to be in his own dioceſſe, & ſo yet ſubiect to his prince, as ye biſhop of Rome ought to be to ye Emperour his lord. To proceede, we hauing Chriſt to be our head, our church is no dead trunke, as lacking an head: and hauing him our head onely, & other his miniſters, our gouernours vnder him, our churche is no liue monſter as hauing many heades: no more than our cōmon wealth hauing God the only head in heauen, our prince his ſeruant, our head gouernour in earth, is therefore

a liue monſtre: or the whole worlde hauing God to his head, is therefore a dead truncke, becauſe it hath no one onely earthly head, nor can haue any ſuch: no more can the vniuerſall churche, throughout the whole worlde haue any ſuche one earthly head. Wherefore, as M. Dormā would gather our church to be a dead truncke, for that we will not graunt one onely head in earth ouer all the churche, though we graunt Chriſte to be the onely head therof, as in déede he is: ſo let him gather in like wiſe, that the whole world is a dead trūcke, for that it hath no one onely head in earth, though it haue God for his head in heauen: and ſo he may cōclude, that god, and Chriſt the authours of life, be no heades, or no ſuch heades as can ſaue the bodies, whereof they be heades, from being dead trunckes, except the ſaide bodies haue a falſe vſurper from Rome, to be their head beſides, and to geue them life. And had M. Dorman had ſo muche leaſure from his diuinitie matters, as to haue looked better vpon his notes of the Canon lawe, his peculiar ſtudie, he would haue bene better aduiſed, than to haue called vs Acephalos, headles, and therfore dead trunckes, 
                     Extrauag. Iohan. 22. tit. 7. de Re ligioſis domibus, cap. Sancta Romana: Acephali ſūt, qui nul li praelato ſubſunt.
                   who doo obey our owne Prelates, ſeing Acephali (as is there noted) are thoſe who be ſubiect to no Prelate. And vpon the other part againe, let M. Dorman conclude as wel againſt all kingdomes, & cōmon wealthes in Chriſtendome, that they be liue monſters, as hauing many heades (for that they haue God in heauen to their head, and their ſeuerall Princes in earth to their heades, and gouernours) as he for like cauſe concludeth, our particular churches to be liue monſters. And I doubt not, but M. Dorman ſo reaſoninge, ſhall playnely appéere, though not to all men that haue heades, yet to all that

haue reaſon in their heades, to reaſon more like a trūke than a man: who, though he haue an head vpon his ſhoulders, yet dooth he by ſuch monſtrous, and vnreaſonable reaſoning, ſhowe himſelfe to haue but ſmall wit, and leſſe learning in his head. Al this adoo hath M. Dorman made now by the ſpace of more than thrée leaues, to deface the ſcripture, as no fitte iudge in cōtrouerſies: & to perſwade vs that the Pope, like an other Pythagoras, by his onely bare woorde, may and ought to ſatiſfie all mē, heretikes, & others, & that it ſhalbe ſufficiēt for him onely to ſay, without reaſon, or ſcripture why he ſo ſayeth: ſauing this reaſon onely, Papae eſt pro ratione 
                  
                     Clemēt. li. 3. tit. 13. de Cenſibus & Exact. cap. Cum ſit. & lib. 5. de ver borum ſig. tit. 10. ca. 1. Si Summꝰ.
                   
                  voluntas: With the Pope will ſtandeth for reaſon, as is mentioned in the booke of his owne Canon lawe. To this ende all his examples of the Suenkfeldians, Arrians, Anabaptiſtes, matters moſte impertinent to his propoſed mater, doo tende. This is the concluſion of all, that you ſhrinking frō the ſcripture, ſhould not ſhrinke from the Romaine chaire, but ſtick to the Popes theron ſitting, by vvhom all haeretikes haue been, and theſe ſhall be, to their vtter confuſion vanquiſhed. For vvhat one haeretike are they hable to recon ouerthrovven by the ſcripture? VVas Arrius, vvere the Anabaptiſtes ouerthrovven by the ſcriptures, nay, that vvere they not. Theſe be M. Dormans owne woordes. But for that I am not ſo certaine of the certaintie of the Popes iudgement, 
                     Fol. 13. as M. Dorman is, I will be ſo bolde after his example, to demaunde of him certaine ſhorte queſtions touching the Pope as iudge, as he hath made of the ſcripture as no iudge.
               What if there be twoo or three Popes at once, as often hath been: for Dnuphrius reckeneth. 26. ſchiſmes in

in the church of Rome, of which ſome one hath dured about. 40. yeres together (in euery of the whiche ſchiſmes were at the leaſte twoo Popes at once) when there be I ſaye two or moe Popes at once, one curſing an other, one breakyng and diſanulling the decrees made by an other, one perſecuting and killynge an other: is it not to be doubted whiche of them ſhall be this certaine iudge in controuerſies? And whether in this caſe the popiſhe churche be not in daunger to be a liue monſter, as hauing many heades? And on the contrarie part, what if we haue neuer a Pope at all, (for ſo hath it happened many times, for one or twoo yeres together): as after Pope Gregorie the. 7. the ſée of Rome was vacant one yere: after Coeleſtine the. 4. one yere and. 8. monethes: After Clement the. 4. twoo yeres. 9. monethes: after Nicolas the. 4. twoo yeres and thrée monethes: After Clement the. 5. twoo yeres, thrée monethes: And after Iohn the. 23. it was vacant twoo yeres and fiue monethes) ſhal al our doubtes lie for that time vndiſcuſſed for lacke of a iudge: and your popiſh church ſo long lie as a dead truncke, for lacke of an head? Or els whether ſhall Peters chayre (though emptie) bee both iudge & head too, good enough for ye popiſhe church, and ſuche a bodie as it is. What if the Pope ſitte not at Rome in Italie, which is Peters ſée and chayre, but at Auinion in Fraunce, as Popes did for the ſpace of. 
                     a Clemente 5. ad Gregorium 11. Platina in vitis ipſorū.
                   70. yeres together? may we not doubte of the certaintie of the iudge, not ſittyng in the chayre, whereof he hath all his certaintie? or els dooeth he carie his chayre about into all countreis, for yt the 
                     Sext. Decretal. li. 5 tit. 9. de poenis. ca. Foelicis fol. 144 col. 3. litera k.
                   whole world is his dioceſſe, as in his Canon lawe is mentioned? What if the Pope doo erre, as all the Canoniſtes, Gratian,

Gerſon, Caietane, and many others thinke he may? What if he bee an heretike, (as De Papa Liberio. Athanaſius, S. Hierome, De Anaſtaſio. Gratian, In pręfatione in Hier. contra Luciferianos. Eraſmus, the generall Coū
                  celles, the de Honorio Papa. ſixt, the Councell of 
                     de Iohanne 23. Conſtance, and 
                     de Eugenio 4 & de multis alij
                           •
                         alij. Platina i
                           ••
                         vita Iohan. 8. Baſill teſtifie that diuers Popes haue been) muſt he yet néedes be iudge, and his iudgement certaine alſo? What if his election be vncertaine, or vnlaufull, he enteryng in by force, ambition, ſymonie, periurie, (as Platina teſtifieth many of them haue entered, and in whiche caſe, not onely Gerſon, Gratian, Caietane, and all the Canoniſtes, but alſo Pope Nicolas the ſeconde hymſelfe doo affirme, that he is to be depoſed, as no lawfull 
                     Diſtinct. 69 cap. Si quis.
                   Pope, and not Apoſtolicus, but Apoſtaticus, not Apoſtolike, but an Apoſtata) muſt he yet be the moſte certaine and onely iudge? What if we haue a ſhée Pope, ſuche as was Pope Iohane, otherwiſe Iohn the eight, muſt the iudgementes and woorde of our woman Pope be certayne: and the iudgementes and woorde of God vncertaine? What if the Popes ſucceſſours dooe diſanull their predeceſſours Popes decrees, and make decrées moſt contrary to them: pull them out of their graues whan they be dead, and diſgrade them: is here no So did Pope Steph
                        •
                     nus the ſixte ſerue Pope Formoſus. Platina in vita Formoſi. incertaintie which Popes, and Papall decrees are to be folowed, whiche to be reiected? Nowe if the matter be the Popes owne caſe, as is this of his ſupremacie, he muſt be both partie and iudge too, whiche his own Canon lawe forbiddeth. Theſe doubtes, with a great manie moe (whereof you ſhall alſo ſhortely heare more at large, god wylling) haue I (good M. Dorman) about the Pope, as the onely certaine iudge in all controuerſies, and I deſire to be reſolued at your handes, who are ſo certaine of the certaintie of his Papall iudgements,

that you are author to vs to flie from the ſcriptures as vncertaine, to them as moſte certaine, and infallible. For ſéeynge the ſpirite of God doth ſo oft call the ſcriptures 
                     Deut. 4. a, 1. b. 8. & 6. a. 1. d. 20. & 7. b. 11. 12. & infinitis locis.
                   
                  Iudicia, iudgementes, yea, 
                     •
                   
                  Iudicia iuſticiae Dei, the iudgementes of the iuſtice of God, and viam veritatis, the way of truthe, for the certaintie of their iudgement (as I take it) vntill you haue reſolued me of theſe doubtes, and many other, about the Pope your Romaine iudge, and his conſiſtorie, you ſhall hardly perſwade me, and 
                     Pſal. 18. c. 19 &. 118. a. 7. 13. 30. & a. 75. &. c. 105. &. d. 150. & 159. & d. 163 &. 174. (as I thinke) many moe, to beleue that the ſcripture, that is to ſaye, the woorde of God, ſhould be vncertain: and the Popes, that is to ſay, mans, and ſometime womans woorde, to be moſt certain. And beſides this text Deus verax, omnis autem homo mendax, I thinke you ſhall not finde many moe for your purpoſe. 
                     Rom. 3. a. 4 god is true: but euery man is a lyar.
                  
               
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 14
            Aſke of them vvith vvhat face they coulde ſo many yeres together, call king Henry the eight ſupreame head of the churche of England immediatly vnder God, and novv our gracious ſoueraigne lady his daughter, ſupreme gouernour in all eccleſiaſtical thinges and cauſes ouer the ſame (vvhiche hovv ſo euer they pleaſe themſelues vvith fine fetches and coloured deuiſes, is vvith the other title in effect al one) if this reaſon of theirs vvere good: Chriſt is head of the churche, therefore there is no other head therof vnder him? And hovve vvas king Henry then? If they ſaye that their meaning is, that no man can, becauſe Chriſt is head of the vniuerſall churche, be vnder him head of the vvhole, but may vvell be of ſome particuler churche, as king Henry vvas, and the Quenes maieſtie novve is: Then demaunde of them vvhat reaſon they haue to leade them to ſay, that a particuler membre of the churche (as the churche of Englande can bee no

more maie haue an other head beſide Chriſte, and the whole bodie maie not? and whye one member maie haue twoo heades, more then one bodie?
            
               Nowell.
               Now after his long digreſſions, and declamations againſt the Suenkfeldians, againſt the Arrians, and Anabaptiſtes, and againſt the conferēce of ſcriptures, the manne remembryng hymſelf, retourneth ſodainlie to his matter by a queſtion. And in deede he taketh on with his Herotemata, and other rollyng Rhetoricall figures exceadynglie, now that he draweth towarde a concluſion. Flie thoſe, ſticke to thoſe, (ſaieth M. Dorman) Shrinke not from thoſe: Tell thoſe you are at a poincte with them: Saie to them, as ſaincte Hierome ſaied: Tell them bouldlie, with ſainct Auguſtine: Aſke of them with what face, then demaunde of them againe, with what reaſon: with many other Rhetoricall floures, wherewith he hath geuen a faire flooriſhe to his finall concluſion: Magno conatu magnas nugas agens, as thei ſaie, makyng greate adooe aboute greate trifles, as I doubte not but all wiſe menne will iudge. Aſke of them (ſaieth maiſter Dorman) with what face thei could call Kyng Henrie the eight ſo many yeres ſupreame heade of the Churche of Englande? &c. As though the man had ſo proued the contrarie, that none durſte ſhewe his face to gaineſaie hym, whereas all he hath ſaied is not woorthe one ruſhe. Aſke of them [ꝙ he] with what face. Naie aſke of your forſworne fathers the old Papiſtes (for ſome of them are yet liuyng who gaue hym that title firſte] with what face thei did geue it hym, did ſweare it to hym, and ſo long tyme cō
                  tinued ſo callyng hym: if thei did not ſo thinke, as thei ſaied, and had ſworne, but diſſembled deepelie, aſke of them with what face thei plaied ſo falſe diſſemblyng

hypocrites (to ſaie but ſoberlie) with ſo noble a prince, their ſoueraigne Lorde? Aſke of them what maner of ſubiectes thei were all that while, feignyng in face, in countenaunce, in woorde, and writyng alſo, yea and takyng a ſolemne othe to be with their prince therein, and beyng in harte, and déede, on the Pope, his ſworne enemie, his ſide? Whiche paſſeth hauyng of twoo faces vnder one hoode. But if thei thought in deede, as thei pretended in woordes, then aſke of thē with what face thei did chaunge their copie, & forſweare the ſame, and themſelues with all ſo eaſilie afterwarde: yea and compelled al other to be forſworne with them for companie? If it will pleaſe you to reſorte to the recordes of the .xxij. and .xxiiij. yeres of king Henry the eight, there ſhall you finde who thei were, that firſt offered this title to the ſaied kyng: there ſhall you finde that all Abbottes, and other religious, all the Biſhops, Deanes, Archedeacons, and Cleargie of bothe the houſes of the Conuocation, then liuyng, gaue hym that title. Emō
                  geſt whom if you finde one proteſtante, I can for hym finde one ſcore of papiſtes (to ſpeake with the leaſt) and peraduenture one hundreth too. And thoſe proteſtantes, who gaue hym that title, dealed ſimplie and plainly with their Prince, as becomed true ſubiectes, as the ſequele declared. But there ſhall you finde an huge number of Papiſtes, who by their writyng, not onelie ſaiyng: by their othe, not woorde onely, reiected all that falſe vſurped ſupremacie of the Pope (whiche you and thei, as many of them as yet bee liuyng, without all face, or with a ſhameleſſe face, dooe now maintaine) there ſhall you finde who gaue to Kyng Henrie the ſupremacie ouer the cleargie, as well as the laitie, within his owne dominions: there ſhall you finde who thei were that ſo falſely diſſembled, and that ſo many yeres

together with their ſoueraigne lorde. There ſhall you finde who thei were that chaunged their copie and turned with the wind, as the wethercocke: there ſhall you finde, who thei were, that ſo falſely ſware, reſware, trieſware, forſware themſelues, and not content therewith, did ſo cruelly by all moſte terrible tormentes and dreadfull deathes, compell others to periurie with thē. S
                     •
                  ing therefore thus ſtandeth the caſe, with what face ſoeuer M. Dorman moueth ſuche demaundes, and vexeth vs with ſuche leude queſtions, to bee enquired otherwhere, ſurelie he dooeth it without all forehead, or ſhamefaſtneſſe. Now to the matter: by what right wée geue the Quéenes maieſtie the title of the ſupreme gouernour in Eccleſiaſticall matters, as well as temporall, and with what face we ſo call her, is to be anſwered in the ſecond parte of M. Dormans diuiſion (where he affirmeth that prieſtes onely, and not princes ought to haue the gouernemēt of the churche) wherin I doubt nothyng to aduouche, and that ſhortly, the princes due authoritie in the churche of God within their own dominions, with better face, authoritie, reaſon, and conſcience, then you haue dooen, or ſhalbée able to dooe in the mainteinaunce of the Popes foraine falſe vſurped ſupremacie. Where M. Dorman requireth a reaſon, why a particuler church maie haue one head gouernor vnder Chriſt in earth, and the whole church maie not: why one member maie, and the whole bodie maie not haue any head: I truſte the reaſon is not to ſeeke in the good readers memorie, ſeyng it hath been ſo ofte declared before. Yet will I anſwere M. Dormā his queſtion by an other queſtiō. Why maie one kingdom haue one head in earth vnder God (as daily experiēce teacheth) & the whole worlde can not haue one onely head in earth vnder God: (that Monarchie being reſerued to himſelf

alone) and why in this caſe the member maie haue an earthly heade beſides God, and the whole bodie maie not? If M. Dorman ſaie, the queſtions bee not like, I aſke with what face he can ſo ſaie: ſeing that in the beginnyng of this his treatie, he brought the example of 
                     Folio. 4. b.
                   ciuill gouernemente, in the whiche euery kyngdome hath his Kyng, euery countrey, citie, and companie, haue their ſeuerall gouernours &c. to prooue that the churche ought likewiſe to haue one head? But I wotte what maiſter Dorman and other Papiſtes would ſaie to my queſtion, if the tymes ſerued them. Thei would quickelie aunſwere, that the whole worlde hath, and ought to haue one onely head in earth vnder God, and therefore the Churche in like wiſe oughte to haue one onely head in earth vnder Chriſte. And if thei were demaunded, who is, or ſhould be that head? If the tyme, I ſaie, were for it, thei would plainelie ſaie, the Pope 
                     Sex. Decr. li. 3. tit. 16. cap. periculoſo. folio 115. col. 4. litera. k. Papa totiꝰ orbis tenet principatū. & Sert. Decret. lib. 5. tit. 9. de poenis, cap. Foelicis. Romanus pō
                        tifex totius ocbis eſt epiſ.
                   is Lorde and Monarche of the whole worlde, and head of the whole Churche too: For ſo it is recorded in the booke of his Canon lawe, and that he hath as muche righte to all the Kyngdomes of the worlde, as onelie Monarche, as he hath to the whole Churche diſperſed throughout all the worlde, as the onelie head: and in ſo ſaiyng, maiſter Dorman might ſaie more truely, then he is ware of: For he hath like righte to bothe, that is, none at all to any of bothe. But in all his behauiour, riches, pompe, power, Caſtelles, ſouldiours, armour, gunnes, and other artillarie of warre, he ſhewith hym ſelf more like a worldlie prince, then in any one poincte like a godlie biſhop, or a biſhop at all, whereof he hath no token, nor ſigne at all. Wherefore he mighte with better reaſon, plead for his Monarchie of the worlde, as partlie in poſſeſſion thereof, then for his biſhoprike of the world, beyng cleane out of al poſſeſſiō of any biſhoprike,

and without all ſhowe of any biſhop. And as when the tyme ſerued hym, in Kyng Ihons daies, he made as greate title to the croune, as to the Churche of Math. Parifienſis in vita Iohān. Regis verſus finem. Englande: and named the prince his vaſſall, aſwell as the Prieſtes his ſubiectes: ſo hath this Foxe chaunged his heare, but not his maners. And I praie God that he, beeyng in deede but a falſe Romiſhe Foxe, neuer haue oportunitie nor power, ſo to plaie the Lyon, or Beare rather, againe in our countrey.
            
         
         
            Dorman. Fol. 14.
            Finallie, if at that tyme thei flattered the kyng, and gaue hym that whiche neither thei coulde geue, nor he receiue, and abuſed his good nature to the deſtruction of ſo many notable men, as for the onely refuſall to ſaie as thei ſaied, by moſte exquiſite & painfull tormentes, loſt their liues: ſaie vnto them, that thei yet at length acknowledge their faulte, and admoniſhe that good Ladie our maiſtres that ſhe conſente not to vſe that title, whiche becauſe it belongeth to Chriſte, ſhe maie not haue, or if thei thinke and wil ſtande in it that ſhe maie without offence, that thei doe yet at the leaſt confeſſe, that reaſon of theirs to be verie weake and of no ſtrength: Chriſt is head of the churche therefore it maie haue none other. Excepte thei will perhaps ſaie, that he is heade of all other Churches, and hath onelie left oures headleſſe, ſo that becauſe he is not head therof, wee are out of the feare of fallyng into that inconuenience of hauyng many, and maie therefore chooſe ſome one emongeſt our ſelues whom we liſte.
            
               Nowell.
               Who thei were that flattered kyng Henrie, and abuſed his good nature, I haue touched before: who as thei moſte deceipfullie diſſembled with hym, ſo did thei after moſte cruelly by all exquiſite and painfull tormē
                  tes

put to death ſuch as did not ſlatter their prince, but dealed ſincerely with him, and would not therfore geue his enemie, a foraign falſe vſurper, the title due to their ſaid prince. And in bothe theſe poinctes, the falſe flattering of their ſoueraigne, & abuſyng of his good nature, and in murthering moſte cruelly their felow ſubiectes, thei did ſhewe the naughtineſſe of their owne nature. The Queenes maieſtie vſeth no title, but ſuche as of good right ſhe maie vſe, as ſhall in place conuenient be d
                     •
                  ely proued. The reaſon of th'Apologie, Chriſt is the onely head of the vniuerſall churche, therefore there is, nor can bee no one earthly head ouer it, is not weake, but as good as is this reaſon: God is the onely head ouer the whole worlde, therefore there is, nor can bee no one onely earthly head ouer it: which, as I thinke, is no weake, but a good, and ſtrong reaſon, and well confirmed by perpetuall experience. And againe this reaſon, Though Chriſt be the onely head ouer ye whole church, yet maie he haue, and hath his miniſters vnder hym, head gouernours of ſeuerall churches: is as good, as is this: Though God be head ouer all the world, yet hath he ſeuerall kinges, & head gouernours vnder him in euery countrey: whiche I thinke, bothe reaſon & experience will allowe, as bothe reaſonable & true. But that one man ſhould haue the gouernaunce of al, will trouble M. Dormans braine to make it ſeeme reaſonable (but onely to ſuche as is himſef) as the Pope attēpting to put it in experience, hath by his ambition, crueltie & auarice, troubled, oppreſſed and robbed all the worlde: whiche M. Dorman, & ſuche as he is, doo maintaine, as reaſonably and well doen: Non quia honeſtū, aut probabile, ſed quia vtile, not for that it is honeſt, reaſonable or probable, but bicauſe it is profitable to Popiſhe prelates, partakers of ſuche polling & ſpoile of the worlde.
            
         
         
            
            Dorman. Fol. 15. 
                  •••
               
            
            Thus I truſt good readers you ſee ſufficientlie proued, that Chriſtes pleaſure is for the repreſſyng of hereſies, & calmyng of tempeſtuous ſchiſmes, that there be one head of his churche here in earth, ſuppliyng his corporall abſence for the tyme: his honor in the meane ſeaſon nothyng thereby the more diminiſhed, then it is in other thynges wherein he alſo vſeth the miniſterie and ſeruice of menne.
            
               Nowell.
               Thus I truſte (good readers) you ſee the inſufficiencie, or more truelie, the leudeneſſe of M. Dormans proufes, of the neceſſitie of one onelie heade ouer Chriſtes whole churche here in earth: you ſée where he ſaith, that he hath ſufficientlie proued it to be Chriſtes pleaſure, that there ſhould be ſuch an one head, that he hath not, nor could not (for if he could, he would) allege out of the newe teſtamente (where Chriſtes will and pleaſure is written, and declared moſte largelie and manifeſtlie) as muche as one woorde ſounding to that purpoſe: ſo farre of is it, that it is, as he ſaieth, ſufficientlie proued. You ſee that Schiſmes and controuerſies by 
                     Supra. ſo. 33. b. &. 49. b. &c. ſaincte Cyprians iudgemente, and Suprà, folio 48. &. 50. ſaincte Auguſtines alſo, with. 217. Biſhoppes moe aſſembled in the African Councell with hym, and by good reaſon, and experience alſo, maie bee beſte quieted and decided in the countries where thei ariſe, by the magiſtrates and Biſhops of the ſame countreis. You ſee that it becommeth man, vnable well to gouerne a verie little thing, Suprà, folio. 96. &. 97. to humble hymſelf, and to yelde vp the honour & glorie of gouernyng the whole worlde and Churche to God, and to our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſte, who alone are able to ſuffice to ſuche a charge. For experiēce teacheth, that thoſe menne are the woorſte of all gouernours, whiche

deſire to haue moſt. Alſo you ſée, that in this treatie hitherto, as M. Dorman hath not one woorde out of the newe Teſtamente, ſo hath he alleged but onelie twoo textes out of the olde Teſtamente, one out of Deuteronomium, cap. 17. whiche is, as a ſpeciall place often 
                     D. foli. 4. 7. 9. &. 12. D. fol. 11. alleged, and repeated: an other out of Numeri. 16. whiche bothe make directlie againſte hym: the one prouyng that euery nation, countrey, dioceſſe, or churche ought to haue their ſeuerall head Biſhoppe, as had the nation of the Iewes: and you haue ſeene that ſaincte Cyprian ſo taketh it: The other ſhewyng that Chriſtian 
                     Suprà, fol. 60. &. 61. Suprà, fol. 95. &c.
                   princes are ſuperiours to Biſhoppes or high Prieſtes (as was Moſes to Aaron) or els if Moſes were, as thei ſaie, a prieſte alſo, that there were twoo high prieſtes in the Iewiſhe churche at once, and ſo conſequently ought to bée in our churches: whereby M. Dormans aſſertion of one head ouer the whole churche is quite ouerthrowen. And withal you ſee how the Papiſtes thē ſelues, diſobedient to their owne ſoueraigne appoincted 
                     Suprà, folio. 95. &c.
                   by God to bee their gouernour, are the ſucceſſours of Chore, Dathan, and Abyron, rebellyng againſte Moſes and Aaron their gouernours by God appoincted. Wherefore you maie well vnderſtande, that were it either profitable or neceſſarie, were it Goddes, and Chriſtes pleaſure (as maiſter Dorman ſaieth it is) to haue ſuche an one head in earth ouer his churche, God would haue certified vs of a thyng ſo profitable and neceſſarie for vs, and ſo pleaſaunt to hym, in his ſcriptures (where he hath declared his pleaſure) more plainlie and expreſſelie, then by twoo olde ſhadowes of the Iewiſhe Churche: whiche alſo bee ſuche, that thei dooe teache vs cleane contrarie to that, whiche M. Dorman ſaith is ſo neceſſarie for vs, and Chriſtes pleaſure alſo. You ſe how blindly he goeth about to proue that there

ought to be one onely head ouer all the churche, bringeth in for proufe therof the regiment of ſeuerall countreis, kingdomes, cities, &c. by ſeuerall princes, ſeueral magiſtrates and heades, whiche maketh moſte directly with vs, that ſeueral churches ſhould in like wiſe haue their ſeueral heades. And yet he thus dealing auanteth himſelfe, aſkinge, who is ſo blinde that he can not ſée, that he reaſoneth effectuouſly? Like blinde bayard laiyng 
                     D fol. 4. &. ſuprà, fo. 31 b. &c.
                   himſelfe in the mire, and there walowing, neieth yet for wantōneſſe, as though he were galoping in the gréene, and flinging in the plaine. You ſee how often S. Cyprian is by him alleaged for the Pope of Rome his 
                     D. fo. 1. 3. & 5. & ſuprà. fol. 1. 2. 20. &. 35. &c.
                   ſupremacie, in thoſe places where he ſpeaketh of Rogatian, and of himſelfe, beyng both biſhops of other countreis and places, & of the equalitie of al biſhops, whiche is directly againſt the ſupremacie of one ouer all. You ſée in likewiſe how he alleageth S. Baſil, bewailing the 
                     D. fo. 1. & 2. & ſuprà, fo. 3. &. 13. ſtate of the biſhops of the Gréeke and eaſt churche, and the decay of their authoritie, and of their ſées, as though he had ſpoken of the Pope of Rome, and his eſtimation nowe decayed, and his ſee ſo ſore ruined: and howe he hath either very ignorantly, or moſte malitiouſly by falſe tranſlation corrupted S. Baſil. You ſée how vntruly he would make Nouatus his othe exacted for the 
                     D. fo. 2. & ſuprà fo. 7. &c.
                   maintenaunce of his hereſie, to ſéeme the ſame that is our othe of obedience to our prince, and renouncing of the Popes foraine vſurped tyrannie: And howe he 
                     D. fol. 3 & ſuprà, fo. 25 would make Vrſitius and Valens, to ſéeme to acknowledge the Popes ſupremacie: onely for that, they, after long diſſention reconciled them ſelues to Iulius biſhop of Rome: as they did in likewiſe to Athanaſius biſhop of Alexandria in Egypt, who by the like reaſon, ſhould be

the head of the whole churche, as well as Iulius. 
                     Dor. fo. 5. b & fol. 14. a. & ſuprà fo. 41. 42. &c. &. 43. b. &c 107. &c. Hieron. cō
                        tra Luciferianos. Suprà, fol. 41. &c. Hieron. ad Euagrium. Suprà, fol. 43. &. 51.
               
               You ſée howe he hath alleaged S. Hierome ſpeaking of the authoritie that euery biſhop hath ouer the prieſtes and clergie of his owne dioceſſe, as though he had ſpoken of the ſupremacie of the biſhop of Rome ouer all byſhops, and the whole thurche throughout the world. Yea and thus hath he not been aſhamed to alleage out of ſuche treaties of S. Hierome, as either haue not as muche as one woorde ſpoken, nor meant of the biſhop of Rome (though the ſaide treaties be very longe) either if any mention be made of him, other Biſhoppes are expreſſely made equall in authoritie with hym, and therefore his ſupremacie ouer other Biſhoppes cleane ouerthrowen.
               You ſée Pope 
                     Dor. fol. 5. b. &. 6. a. & Suprà, fol. 46. &. 47. Leo his witneſſe in his owne cauſe can not helpe hym, ſpecially the witneſſe being corrupted, and the copies of his teſtimonie not onely diuers, but cleane contrarie one to an other: whiche taketh awaye all creadite from them all. And were they, as they are ſurmiſed, Pope Leo his woordes, yet they are, as you haue ſéene, 
                     Suprà, fol. 49. 50. 51. 52 by S. Cyprian, and S. Hicrome euen in the ſame places by M. Dorman alleaged, clearely and f
                     •
                  lly confuted.
               You ſée howe ſhamefully he alleageth 
                     Dor. fol. 7. a. & Suprà, fol. 62. Nazianzene his ſayinges of one God, as though they had beene ſpoken of one Pope, of whome Nazianzene neuer dreamed. You ſee the woordes of an vncertaine and vnwoorthie authour boldely without bluſhyng alleaged for S. Auguſtines woordes, whiche woordes yet, were they S. Auguſtines, make nothing againſt vs.
               And vniuerſally, you ſée his 
                     Suprà, fo. 3 a. &. 9. b. & 19. b, &. 62▪ 
                     &. 107. &. 111 & multis l
                           •
                        cis.
                   falſhoode in tranſlating, or fraude in corruptinge, manglinge, or addynge to

ſuch authors, as he doth alleage. Neither is his deceite and guile comparable to his impudencie and vnſhamefaſtneſſe, beinge not abaſhed to alleage thoſe authours for him, who aboue all others moſte make agaynſte him. As namely S. Cyprian, and S. Hierome, beynge 
                     Suprà, fol. 49. 50. 51. &c.
                   both moſt plaine and earneſt for the equalitie of all byſhops, and ſo directly againſt the ſupremacie of one ouer all. And thus you ſée good Readers, that ſuch an one head of the whole churche in earth to be, neither appeareth to be Gods, and our ſauiour Chriſtes will or pleaſure, by any thinge hitherto by M. Dorman alleaged out of the ſcriptures: neither to be the wil of any godly auncient doctour, by any thing hitherto brought by M. Dorman out of their writinges: neither appéereth it by any good or probable reaſon by him made, to be profitable, muche leſſe neceſſarie to Chriſtes church, that any ſuch head ſhould be. Nay the cleane contrary, to witte, that it is not Gods, nor our ſauiour Chriſtes pleaſure, that it was not the will of the godly auncient doctours, that it is neither neceſſarie nor profitable to Chriſtes churche, to haue any ſuche one head in earth, appéereth euidently by the Scriptures, doctours, and reaſons, yea and by the ſame ſcriptures, doctours & reaſons which are by M. Dormā for his purpoſe alleaged. And theſe, good reader, be thoſe moſt plaine and euident Thra
                        •
                     o: Mu nus noſtrū ornato verbis, quod poteris. &c. reaſons, theſe be thoſe vrgent cauſes, whiche M. Dorman 
                     Dor. fo. 4. 
                        •
                     
                   promyſed in the beginninge of this treatie, he woulde alleage for the neceſſitie of one head ouer the whole churche. Neyther ſéemeth it that M. Dormā him ſelfe was ignorant of this infirmitie & weakenes of his ſclender proufes: and therfore hath he (to call away the

readers mynde from this conſideration (intermingled many matters impertinent, as 
                     Dor. fol. 2. &. 3. ſuprà. fo. 7. 13. &c.
                   complaintes, and lamentations for the great perſecutions that they, innocent lābes, God wot, doo ſuffer: as trifling tales of 
                     Dor. fol. 8. & 9. ſuprà fo. 77. &c.
                   ſurmiſed felons: as the defence of Cardinal 
                     Dor. fol. 10. 11. Supra, fol. 82. 90. &c.
                   Hoſius, one of the greateſt eſtates for learning and vertue (as ſaith M Dorman) that this day Chriſtendome hath: as long treaties of the 
                     D. fol 10. Suprà. 82. 83. &c.
                   Suenkfeldianss, 
                     Dor. fol. 12. Suprà. 101. 102. &c.
                   Arrians, 
                     Dor. fol. 13. Suprà. 103. Anabaptiſtes: as 
                     Dor. fol. 8. 10. 12. 13. ſuprà fol. 
                     
                        ••
                     . &c.
                   declamations againſt the ſcripture, and conference of tertes of the ſcripture together, whiche he is very oft in hande with, declaringe a ſpeciall offence and ſtomake againſt the ſame. Al which matters, moſt impertinent to his matter of one head (borowed of his Maiſter D. Harding, Pighius, Hoſius, with others as is in their places noted) he hath amplified at large, and gaylie garniſhed with the ornamentes of his raylinge rethorike. Whiche ſtuffe were it altogether had to the dunge hyll, as it ought, al his booke almoſt were cleane ſwept out of the doores, & litle or nothing ſhould be left therof, and yet nothing taken away from it, that did belong of right vnto it. Séeyng therefore this firſt, and moſt principall poinct, of one head of the churche, the very foundation of al is not proued by M. Dorman, or ſo leudly proued, that it faileth, and falleth of it ſelfe, all the Popes ſupremacie commeth downe vpon their heades. For if they can not proue (as they neuer ſhalbe hable) that there ought to be one chiefe head of Chriſtes whole church here in earth, thei can not poſſibly proue, that the Pope ſhould be that one head. Wherefore I doo aduiſe M. Dorman, and all the packe of Papiſtes to recoyle from this their Theſis of one head of the churche, to the Hypotheſis of the Pope head of the churche: and to

proue firſt that the Pope of Rome ought of right to be the onely chiefe head, and then after to induce thereof, that there muſt of neceſſitie be one chiefe head. For if they take not this waye, I dooe geue them plaine warning, they ſhall neuer thriue.
               And further ſéeing this part of M. Dormans booke, both for that it is the firſt, and the chiefe parte alſo, requireth good, and ſubſtanciall proufes, not onely for it ſelfe ſake, but alſo that the readers vpon the good likynge hereof, might haue the better hope and expectation of all the reſt of his booke (according as M. Dorman hath, no doubt, out of the preceptes of Rethorike obſerued) and is yet not withſtanding thus ſclenderly, vntruely, falſely, fondlye, and dreamingly handled by M. Dorman, it geueth the Readers to vnderſtande, what they ſhall fynde in the reſidue of his booke: in the whiche, as it were in the rerewarde, he hath placed bag and baggage, with ſuche pages, drudges, and ſlaues to attende vpon the ſame, as are more ready to runne awaye, than to abide any brunte of battayle. The which I haue not as yet aſſayled, for that I dooe ſée the Byſhop of Sariſburie his bande bent vpon them, whoſe handes if any of that cowardly companie eſcape, as eyther not eſpied, or not regarded of him, I dooe promiſe thée (good reader) that I, God willinge, will ſhortely haue them in chaſe, vntill I haue lefte of all M. Dormans bragging, but moſt cowardly armie of leude Popiſhe reaſons, and allegations, not as muche as one ſouldiour vntaken, or put to ſhamefull flight.
            
         
         
            Dorman. fol. 15.
            It folovveth novve that I ſhovve to you vvho is and of right ought to be that head: if firſt I dooe you to vnderſtand,

that it muſt neceſſarily be a prieſt, and that ſo by iuſt cōſequence neither laye man, vvomā nor child, can be capable of that office.
            
               Novvell.
               M. Dorman by like hath readde, or heard of Ariſtotle, that he geueth counſaile, that if one chaunce to fall Ariſtot. in Topicis. into a matter very barren to reaſon vppon, he ſhoulde by ſome ſleight, ſcape out to ſome other more plentifull matter. And therefore finding his matter of the neceſſitie of one head of the churche (whiche yet is moſt neceſſarie, though it be impoſſible, for the Papiſtes to proue, or els to loſe all) ſo bare & barren of all proufes, as well out of the ſcriptures, as doctours, and good reaſons, he maketh a ſcape into a larger campe, and taketh in hande to proue that no lay lay man, vvoman, nor childe, can be 
                  It is M. Dormans 
                        •
                     erme. 
                  capable of this office (that he ſpeaketh of) to witte, to be the only ſupreme head ouer Chriſts vniuerſal church: and that will he proue you both roundly, & plentifully, by makyng declaration that princes, be they men, vvemen, or children, may not miniſter the Sacramentes, as 
                  
                     Dor. fol. 18. 
                        •
                     . &c.
                   
                  prieſtes may: may not preach, as prieſtes may: may not excommunicate, and abſolue, binde, and looſe, as prieſts may: can not haue ſo great knovvledge in the ſcriptures, as prieſtes may. For in prouing of theſe thinges, which no man doth denie, & which being graunted dooe make nothing to his purpoſe, or againſt vs, he is as plentiful, as he was before ſpare & barren in prouing ye neceſſitie of one head of ye church in earth, which we doo all denie, and whiche not proued, the Papiſtes haue loſt all. And as he had very much adoo to patche vp a fewe leaues by alleaging of two poore places out of the ſcriptures, and thrée or foure trifling teſtimonies of the olde doctoures

(which I ſo terme, for that they make nothinge to his purpoſe, but cleane againſt him) & with impertinēt pelfrie to ſupply ye reſt: ſo in ye ſecond part, to witte, that no prince, mā, vvomā, nor child, can be ſupreme head of Chriſts church in earth, for that they cā not miniſter the Sacramēts, may not preache, can not binde, & looſe, &c. he doothe laye on lode out of the ſcriptures, Doctors, reaſons, and plaieth▪ Rex, reueling, and ruffling roially: ſo that he hath much enlarged his booke with this part. For this acceſſarie, and ſuborned treatie, and counterfeite controuerſie, without any aduerſarie for the moſt part of it (as it were a ſixt finger vpon one hande, longer and bigger then all his felowes) is alone larger, thā 
                  Digitus agnatus. are bothe his firſte and thirde moſte neceſſary partes (or rather the whole ſumme) of all Poperie, that is to ſaye: that Chriſtes churche here in earth muſt of neceſſitie haue one chiefe head: And, that the biſhop of Rome is that heade of Chriſtes churche: In whiche twoo partes ſo neceſſarie, that without them all partes of Poperie muſt of neceſſitie playnely periſhe, the man is contente to bee ſobre, and of a competente length, more for lacke of ſtore or ſtuffe, than for want of wil, you may be ſure. But when he commeth to his Schiomachia, and ſkirmiſhing with his owne ſhadowe, Lord howe he playeth the man in that vnblouddy battayle, and triumpheth not before the victorie, as they ſaye, but of a conqueſt made, without duſte rayſinge, or bloude ſheadinge, without enemie ſlayne, hurte, or put to flighte, yea no enemie at all ſéen, hearde of, or knowen. For M. Dorman can not be ignorant, that wée in all our Sermons and writinges of ſuche mattiers, dooe make a moſte cleare and euident difference

between the functions and offices of princes, ciuill magiſtrates, and Prieſtes Eccleſiaſticall miniſters: And neither did we euer teache that Princes ought, neither did they euer deſire, to execute the offices Eccleſiaſticall of miniſtring the Sacramentes, preachinge, excommunicatinge, abſoluinge, and ſuche like. Wherfore you doo lewdly, and impudently abuſe your ſelf M. Dorman, and al others too, ſo largely to confute that which no man holdeth: and ſo buſily to proue that, which no man denieth. For whan all this is graunted you, what haue you obteined: or what haue we loſt? Is it not well and plainely declared by the examples of kyng Dauid, Salomon, Ioſaphat, Ezechias, and Ieſias, that princes haue authoritie in gouerning of the Cleargie, & churche matters, though they may not execute all eccleſiaſticall functions and offices? What though our moſt gracious ſoueraigne Ladie, beynge a woman, haue not ſo great ſkill in feates of warre, as haue hir capitaines: haue not ſo good knowledge in the lawes of hir realme, as hir Iuſtices, and other learmed men in the lawes haue: (though ſhe haue in all good learning, and in the ſcriptures too more knowledge, then had any of your Popes this ſeuen hundreth yeres I beleue, and therefore no lette in that poin
                     •
                  te, but ſhe may be head of the whole churche as well, and rather then the Pope) what if ſhée ſit not in publique iudgement, nor determine controuerſies, as dooe hir Iuſtices: or be not general of an armie, as are the nobles, hir ſubiectes? What, I ſaye, if ſhée can no
                     •
                   execute all ciuill offices in hir owne perſon? Would you therfore M. Dorman, take from hir, hir ciuill principalitie ouer hir ſubiectes, that ſhe ſhall not be their Prince, and head vnder God? Surely you

may with as good reaſon dooe it, as you woulde take away hir ſuperioritie ouer hir clergie from hir, for that ſhe can not, may not, nor will not execute eccleſiaſticall functions. Though the quéenes maieſtie haue not that vnderſtanding of all the affaires of hir realme, that experience in all thinges, that actiuitie in executing thē, that hath the whole body of hir moſt honorable Councell, yet doothe the whole body of hir Councell, though moſt honorable, humblie acknowledge hir to be their head: onely proude Prieſtes, becauſe ſome thinges are incident to their office, whiche the Prince may not, nor liſte not to dooe, refuſe their ſoueraigne to be their ſupreame gouernour. Let the biſhoppes be the Queenes Maieſties moſt godly Councell in matters of religion, (and I pray God they may ſo be) as is the other moſte honorable Councell in ciuill matters: but let that godly Councel, as well as that moſt honorable Councel, be vnder the godly and moſte highe honorable Prince, as ſuperiour to them both. To commande thinges as well eccleſiaſticall, as ciuill to be done, to ſée them done, to commende, and rewarde all well dooers of them, to correct and puniſhe all euill dooers of them, or negligent in their office, is the part of an head, or ſupreame gouernour: to doo thinges commaunded, is the office of inferiour membres, and obedient ſubiectes.
               But M. Dorman would proue, that the head is not the head, becauſe it can not, nor liſte not dooe all offices of all the principall membres of the bodie: and ſéeketh for an head emongeſt the membres, becauſe they can dooe ſome thinges, that the head can not. For this is in déede the very effecte of that his ſeconde long treatie next folowyng, a matter moſte méete for M. Dormans dreaming

head: in the which treatie his chiefe paines is t
                     •
                   prooue that Prieſtes, and not Princes, ought by theyr office to preache, to miniſter the Sacramentes, to excō
                  municate, to abſolue, to reſolue men 
                     •
                  n doubtes, and ſcruples of conſcience, and ſuche li
                     •
                  e. (whiche no man euer denied) yea and he thinket
                     •
                   that in ſo dooinge he hath ſpunne a fayre thréede. Thus muche hath M. Dorman, by his tranſition annexed to thend of this his treatie of one head, occaſioned me to admoniſhe the readers of that matter: whiche as it may ſuffice for an anſweare to the whole treatie folowing, with all diſcreate readers: ſo ſhall I yet, for the ſatiſfiyng of the meaner ſort, particularly anſweare, as muche as ſhalbe left vntouched by the biſhop of Sariſburie (for the ſame matters, as being before handled by D. Harding, are incidēt to the biſhops anſweare of his booke) ſpecially, if there he any thyng ſounding againſt the Princes ſupreame gouernment ouer perſons, and in cauſes, as well eccleſiaſticall as ciuill, or temporall.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   