
      
         
            
            
            The Fountaine and VVelspring
of all Variance, Sedition, and
deadlie Hate. Wherein is declared at large, the opinion of the famous
Diuine Hiperius, and the consent of the
Doctors from S. Peter the Apostle his time, and
the Primitiue Church in order to this age: expresly
set downe, that Rome in Italie is signified
and noted by the name of Babylon, mentioned in
the 14. 17. and 18. Chapters of the Reuelation
of S. Iohn.
            
               Chap. 17.
verse
               5 And in her forehe
                     •
                  d was a name written,
a mysterie, great Babylon the mother of
whoredome and abhomination of the
earth.
               6 And I saw the woman dronken with the
blood of the Saintes, and with the blood
of the Martyrs of Iesus.
            
            LONDON.
❧ Printed by Roger Ward, dwelling vpon
Lambard hil, neere vnto olde Fishstreet.
1589.
         
         
            
            
            ¶TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND
noble Earls, the Earls of Huntington and Warwicke,
Grace, Peace, & felicitie in the Lord Iesus.
            
               RIght Honorable, the warres, rumors
of warres, breach of brotherly loue,
manifolde troubles and dissention
growing euerie where through Europe,
which is the part of the worlde
professing Christ, argue the dissolution
of all things premonished by
our Lord not to bee farre hence distant.
It behooueth therfore all good
Christians considering the time, to be circumspect to watch
and pray accordingly as vve are commanded by our Sauiour
in these words. Vigilate & Orate: againe, Estote prudentes, sicut
Serpentes. Be ye wise as Serpents, And we are deeplie to
consider, from whence this venome and poyson floweth,
which drunk and sucked in, by the space of many years passed,
hath transformed, and as it were charmed the braines
and sences of many men, that according to the words of the
Prophet, seeing they see not, hearing they heare not, and vnderstāding
they vnderstand not in matter concerning principally
the saluation of their soules. The remedie of which
mortall maladie consisteth in this, to knowe and search out
the cause, and that knowen, to remooue the same, and
then to apply medicine for curing of it. In all which pointes,
(Right Honorable) I shew briefly in this small treatise, following
the doctrine of S. Peter the Apostle, and the best learned
and most approoued Authours opinions consenting &
deliuered from age to age, which open the sinfull man, and
misterie of iniquity, the onely cause of troubles, and not yet
well perceiued, neither vnderstanded of the greater sort.
Committing these my labours to your Honors tuition and

protection, whose zeale to true and sincere Religion, attentiue
eare giuen alwaies to the Preaching of Gods worde, and
laudable life concurring as sure testimonie, well knowen to
the world, makes me bolde to dedicate vnto your LL. this
Pamphlet, hoping that the booke beeing your own (as it is)
and therefore the more to be desired to be read, and to come
into many mens hands, whome all in generall, for your singular
vertues, do reuerence, honour and loue, may profite, doo
good, and perchance, conuert not a few from their obstinate
opinion in cleauing to the woorishe Babilonicall Church,
wherein rather of selfe-wil, than of any grounded reason they
dwell and persist. And on the contrarie side, confirme and establish
the others, whose hearts alreadie conducted by the
holy spirite, see the light of Gods truth, and ensue it▪ And
herein, withall humblenes, I make manifest my conscience,
according to the small talent which vnto me is lent, & hope
that my dutie, obedience, and good vvill to her Maiestie,
Lords of her Counsell, and my Countrey, may in the sequel
sufficiently appeare, Praying God to send both your Lordships
long life with encrease of honour.
            
               Your Lordships most humble,
Christoph. O.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Fountaine and VVelspring
of all Variance, Sedition, and deadlie hate,
throughout Christiandome.
            
               MEdicines be applied to the bodie,
sicke and diseased, but exhortations
are vsed to giue courage and
more stomacke to the forwarde
stout, and industrious, that the
spark of vertue alreadie ingenerated
in them, may grow to a bigger
flame and substance with increase,
or els to stir vp, raise, and
plucke forward the mind of man when it languisheth.
            I therefore of the lowest sort of all among the learned,
purposing to vtter my conscience, and knowledge by way
of exhortation (my most bounden dutie first towardes the
Quéenes Maiestie, and ne
                  •
               t to the people of my natiue
soile and Country of England déeply considered, and moouing
me thereto) doo earnestly pray and instantly require
al true English men of euery degrée as they tender y• safty
of their soules and bodies, to giue attentiue eare, and wel
to marke the whole discourse of this my purposed treatise
the rather because it is of waight & of most great importance,
touching the weale publique in this litle Isle of
England, and preseruation of our most royall and gratious
Quéene Elizabeth, and next of vs all English ingenerall,
our countrie, wherein we are bred and borne,
our wifes, children, kinsfoolkes, and posteritie, whereof
we should haue a most cheefe and especiall care, & regard,
especially and aboue all of religion, which concerneth our
soules to liue here, and euer in the world to come.
            
               In al which by God his grace I intend to vse perspicuity,
to be as briefe as the vrgent occasiō of so necessary a cause
shal suffer me: yet pretermitting many things, which otherwise
should haue bene touched, to auoid tediousnes
and prolixitie in matter now apparant already, and many
yéeres alredy past made manifest vnto y• whole world.
Cōsider O noble Eugland that thou hast enimes that hate
thée deadly, that go about as much as in them is to work
thy destruction, Consider how the professors of the word
of God els wher in Europe, far hence, and those that dwell
next almost vnto vs be manaced, vexed, and persecuted, &
with all rigor and crueltie from time to time afflicted, euen
to death: the malice whereof procéedeth of causes of
long time afore growen, hereafter specified, and fore warned
in holie Scriptures. Ponder déeply and call to minde
with your selues, Nos incidimus in tempora periculosa.
We are fallen into the perillous time.
               
               The latter daies of the world. 
               Nos sumus in quos fines
Seculorum deuenerūt. We be those vpon whom the ends of the
world be come.
                The tokens thereof be plaine and manifest,
told afore by our Sauiour and Lord Iesus Christ, which
be these, Nation shall rise against nation, and Realme against
Realme, then shall they put you to trouble, and shall kil you, and
yee shall be hated of all Nations for my names sake. And then
shall many be offended, and shal betray one another. &c. So the
time is certaine that the day of iudgment is at hand. But
of the day and hower (saith Christ) knoweth no man, no
not the Angels of heauen, but my father onely. The Apostle
S. Paule in his 2 Chap. of his Epistle of the Thessalomans,
               
                  
                     ••
                  hessalo. teaching when the day of Christ shall be at hande,
thus saieth. Let no man deceiue you by any meanes. For the
Lord shall not come, except their come a departing first, and
that the sinfull man be opened, the sonne of perdition, which is
an aduersary and is exalted aboue all that is called God, or that
is worshipped so that he doth sit in the Temple of God,
               
                  
                     •••
                  ichrist. 
               boasting
himselfe to be God. Remember yee not that when I was yet
with you I told you these things. And now you know what withholdeth,
euen that he might be vttered & reuealed at his time.

For the mistery of iniquitie doth alreahy work. &c. Againe in
the 10 Chap. of S. Mathew, these be Christ his words. The
brother shal deliuer vp the brother to death, and the father the
sonne, and the children shall arise against theic fathers and mothers,
and shal put them to death, And ye shal be hated of all for
my names sake. But he that endureth to the end shall be saued.
            
            Now considering that these be the latter daies, & that the
end of the world is hard at hand, by these tokens manifest
and dayly to be séene euery where in Christendom before
our eies, let vs diligentlie search of whence this variance
and deadly discorde sowen and sprong vp through all Europe
is deriued,Variance and deadlie discord throughout Christ
                     •
                  ndome.
out as it were of a welspring or fountaine.
For euery malady proceedeth of his cause: take away the
cause and imediatly ensueth the curing of the sore or disdase.
What hath bene and is the originall cause that the
knot and band of brotherly loue is broken in the partes of
the world professing Christ, that the rage cruel, and beastly
fearcenesse taketh place, bearing sway, that the Peace
which was in one house, is put to flight: that enuy, hatred
and ma
                  ••
               ce créepeth in, that War and the sword threatneth
destruction euery where,The Pope the cause of variance euen to the Innocentes:
That Sathan is let loose abroad to increase the malice of
men, and to kindle the fier brand of all wickednesse. Uerily
the originaull causes of all these troubles at this present
broiling, and afore this time many yeares past, hath
bene, and is the holie Father (as they call him) the Pope,
the Bishop of Rome, whom Saint Paule as ye haue heard
now before, couertlie describeth to be Antechrist, the Son
of perdition, which is exalted aboue all that is called
God. I beséech you gentle Readers bée yee indifferent
Iudges, euen as the trueth of God his word shall leade
you, & as the interpretation vpon holie Scripture, made
and set downe by the ancient & approoued Doctors of the
Church, euen from the Apostles time, til 1000 yeares past
shal direct you: when the Pope rideth from his castle to S
Peters Church in Rome, and is caried (sitting in a Chaire)

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
aloft by men,The Pope exalteth himself aboue all that is called God. vpholding the same vpon their shoulders.
And the Sacramentall bread is set in a Pyx on a Nag or
white horse backe, led by a Priest in a white Surplice, going
afore him, his gard enuironing the holie Father, and
crying with aloud voice to the people gazing on to sée the
sight, in this Italian word, Abasso, Abasso, which is to say
Bow and bend downe your selues, or knéele downe, not
so much to the Pix as to the Pope. Is not here the Bishop
of Rome exalted aboue all that is called God, and aboue
the God in the box? For the Popes doctrine teacheth
men to cal the Sacramētal bread God, when they term it
their Maker, & when the make it a Sacrifice propiciatory
for the quick and the dead, in their Masses, when they reiterate
day by day on the Altar that oblatation once offered
vpon the crosse once for all, for filthy lucre and gaine, as
in trentals of Masses, &c. Doth not the Pope boast himselfe
aboue all that is called God,The pride of y• Pope. when hee sitteth in S.
Peters Church enthronished thrée or foure yardes higher
then the Altar or Sacramental bread reserued in the Pix,
blessing and crossing them that lie prostrate before him:
when he vnder his Buls writtē or printed in shéeps skins,
& sent to those that dwell 1000 or 1500 miles from him,
being at Rome, forgiueth (vpon mony taken) horrible murders,Pardons for murder.
incest parracide, and such like crimes, the heartes of
the parties not considered, whether they be trulie and
vnfainedlie penetent or no. When the Pope most arrogantly
peruerteth the wordes spoken in the Psalme 90.
only of Christ. Super Aspidem & Basiliscum ambulabis, &
conculcabis Leonem & Draconem. Thou shalt goe vpon the
venemous beast and Adder, the yoong Lion and Dragon shalt
treade vnder thy feete:
                and applieth them with a Sathanicall
pride vnto himself, and to those that from time to time

                  •
               it in his Chaire, which is horrible basphemie. But here
I will vse a litle digression from the man to the certaine
place of his habitation,The Pope knowen to bee An
                     •
                  echrist by his habitation and place. that the Beast may the better bee
knowen by his den and accustomed haunt, where he fatteth
and franketh himselfe. For more and better prooffe

of the sequele of this matter, and so to settle their consciences
in the truth, which hitherto haue but blinded: Hear (I
desire you in the Lord Iesus) certaine authorities from
the Primitiue Church to this age, consenting and agréeing
together, that Babylon specified in the Reuelation of
S. Iohn, doth 
                  ••
               te and signifie vnto vs the Cittie of Rome
in Italie.
            
            First it is vsuall in holie Scripture to set downe some
word by some Trope to signifie a thing turned away from
that which it properlie betokeneth. And it is vsed in writing,
when an argument commeth in handeling, out of
which may grow either vehement suspition or feare of an
imminent danger. In this sort S. Paule. 2. Tim. 4. sayeth
himselfe to haue bene deliuered out of the mouth of a Lion:
meaning by naming the Lyon, the cruel Prince Nero.
That in this place the sence is, Nero to be taken for the
Lion: The ancient Doctours of the Church, as Hierome
vpon the life of Paule, Chrisostomus, Theophilactus, Aquinas
                     •
                  
Lyranus, Interpreters vpon holie Scriptures, doe agree &
consent. By like Trope our Lord Christ in the 13 of Luke,
calleth the King Herode, by the name of a For. Ignatius an
holie writer in the Primititiue Church, vsing this maner
of spéech, saith that he he himself was compassed about with
ten Leopards, which Ignatius afterwarde interpreteth to
be ten cruel souldiors to bring him capti
                  •
               e to Rome. Thus
as S. Paule couertlie by the name of a Lion would haue
to be vnderstanded Nero. Our Lord Iesus by the name
of For meaneth Herod. And Ignatius by the Leopardes
tearmeth Souldiors. So the authour of the Reuelation
would haue Rome to bee knowen by the vo
                  •
               able of Babylon.
            
            With this also agreeth S. Peter,
               1 Pet. 5. who in the end of the
fifth chap. of his former epistle writing from Rome, saieth
thus. The Congregation which is at Babylon saluteth you.
Here note that vpon this place of Peter, as well the olde
and ancient Interpreters, as the newe doe agrée that the
word Babilon is set downe for Rome, as testifieth P
                     •
                  pias

Hierapolites in Eusebius, vpon the Ecclesiasticall Historie. 2
booke 15. Chapter, Hierome vppon the life of Marke the Euangelist,
Papias. Eus. bi
                     •
                  . 
               Nicolaius Lyra, an approoued writer, by the Romishe
Church, and many other, which heere to rehearse, it
were to long. And so much the more this hath a resemblance
of truth, that the Apostles had reueiled vnto them
many and sundry things concerning the latter times: of
the falling of the Romaine Empire: of the reueiling of
the acurssed sonne Antichrist: of the abhomination, standing
in the holy place. All which, the Apostles set out as it
were shadowed somewhat darkly, as it is left vnto vs in
writing, and may be séene in the 24. of Mathew, 2. Thessalonians.
In which two places, there is spoken of these matters,
as it were by points, and prickes, rather than by
any oopen speach.
            Againe, the same Papias taught afterward in Alexandria,
and had bene the scholler of S. Iohn the Apostle, whervpon
we should be perswaded that he must néeds heare the
same interpretation of his maister, concerning Rome to be
named by Babylon, and that the same interpretation was
as well in the Churches of Asia, where S. Iohn preached
as in Europa, where S. Peter taught.
            And least peraduenture any might doubt, that no good
and iust testimony may be brought out of the ancient and
approoued writers of the Primitiue Church, succeeding
next to the Apostles age, you shal hear the opinion of those
which were next to the Apostles.
            
               Tertullian
               Tertullian. did write in the yeare 170. after Christ. He in
his worke against the Iewes hath this written. Babylon
in the writing of Iohn, bereth the figure of the city of Rome,
in that it is great, proud in force, and a beater downe of the
saints. Who will now doubt, but that the said Tertullian
heard this at the Apostles mouthes.
            Also Origines
               Origines. liued in the yeare 200. And he wrote in Alexandria
many bookes, and the 12 Homily vppon Ezechiell
the Prophet, he thus expoundeth that there is Babilon: where
is confusion of maners, by vices & mischieuous doing, continually

growing. And therfore it is no maruell if the holy
writers, pondring what was y• state of the Romains Empire,
which was the head of the world, especially the city of
Rome haue defined Rome to be Babilon in their bookes.
            Now hear an euident manifestation of this: where Hierome
wrote about the yeare of our Lord 380.Hi
                     •
                  ronimus. teaching the
Churches, both in Asia and Europa, in his commentary vppon
Esay 47 chap. hee witnesseth, y• many beside him in his
time and age, did interpret the daughter of Babilon, which
should be made humble, not to be Babylon in Caldea, but to
be the city of Rome in Italie, which is called specially by the
name of Babilon in the Reuelation of S. Iohn, and in the Epistle
of S. Peter, & all threatnings which be spoken by the
Prophet against Babilon to be referred to the distruction of
the city of Rome. Likewise the said Hierom, in a certaine Epistle
to Assella, complaining of the corrupt maners of the
city of Rome, calleth Rome by the name of Babilon. Againe,
the said Hierom, in the end of his 2▪
                booke against Iouinian▪
               
turning his oration to the city of Rome, I speake vnto thée
(saith he) which hath blotted out the blasphemy written in
thy forhead, by the confessing of Christ. O mighty city, lady
of the world, interpret thy name, Rome is by the Gréekes a
name of strength, by the Hebrues a name of highnes, kéep
that that thou art called. Let vertu make thée high, let not
voluptuousnes make thée low. Thou maist eschue by repentance
the curse which our sauior hath threatned in the
Reuelation. Thou hast the example of the Niniuites. Beware
the name of Iouinian, which is deriued of an Idoll.
            S. Avgustine liuing in the time of S. Hierom, but yet a
litle yonger,S. Augustine. accounted the chief among the latin Deuines,
and hauing respect to al that was spoken of Rome, by those
that had written afore in y• Church, declareth many things
to be like in Rome and Babilon: for in his booke De ciuitate
Dei, the fifth Booke, and second Chapter, he calleth Babilon
the first Rome. In his 18 book, and 22. chap. he compareth
Rome with the city of the wicked whi
                  ••
               h Cain builded. The
one saith he was builded of c
                     •
                  in which 
                  ••
               ue his brother abel.
               
The other was builded by Romulus which killed his brother
Rhemus.
            
            Againe Orosius a Spanish writer liuing in the time of
S. Augustine, sheweth that Rome and Babilon were alone,
and especiciallie beside all other wickednesse in opressing
the Saintes of God. Lib. 2. cap. 3. and again. lib. 7. cap. 2.
            But perchance some to this afore may make obiection,
alledging, that at that time when these ancient writers did
write, Rome was gouerned by most cruell Emperours,
which persecuted horibly all good Christians, inflicting
vpon them all torments and most sharpe death. But now
Rome is no more gouerned by Emperours that be wicked,
and thirst the blood of the godly, but Rome is vnder the
iurisdiction of the holie Pope, and for that cause to be reuerenced
and honored of all. Therefore if any man should
now say in these our daies that Babylon mentioned in the
Apocalips might betoken Rome, no sufficient cause or
ground of matter were to confirme or corroborate his assertion
to be found. But the answere to confute this is
ready of great force and validitie, and not to be conuinced.
            Albeit wicked Emperors euen from the Apostles time
and long after,Nero and others persecuted the Christians: The Popes doe the same. by some hundred yeares held Rome for the
chiefe seat imperiall, and put manie to sundrie kindes of
torment and death for confessing Christ: yet S. Hierom,
who liued about 380 after Christ, and after S. Augustin
and Orosius whose ages were during the raignes of Iouinian,
Valentinian, Gratian, and Theodosius Emperours, who
not onely fauoured, but greatly aduanced Christian religion,
did in their bookes taxe & sharply reprehend Rome,
by the name of Babylon, then gouerued rather by Popes
and Bishops, as it is knowen, than by temperall princes.
            And here is further to be noted, that these Christan Emrours
aforesaid ruled and made their abode in Constantinople,
and the Popes administred all at Rome, by litle and litle
mal engin, deceit, sinister practise with hypocrisie,
counterfeit humblenes now and then by force enterminled,

encroched not to bee onely equall, but chalenged to
haue superioritie, not vpon the Cleargie onely, but ouer
Emperors and kings, to make lawes at their lust & pleasure,
to wage war, make battel, yea, to tread down vnder
their féet the whole world, if they might bring it to passe.
            All hitherto said and written doth the testimony of the
Church of Leodia in the low countries confirme, set down.
about the year of our Lord 1100 against Pascalis the second
of that name, then Pope.The testimony of the Church of Leodia against Rome. That is as followeth hitherto
(saith he) I haue but interpreted that S. Peter wold
by the name of Babylon note Rome, because at that time
Rome was spotted with all kind of Idolatrie, sin, and filthines.
And now my sorrow doth interpret vnto me that
S. Peter terming with a spirit of prophesie, the congregation
gathered together in Babylon, did foresée the confusion
of dissention, by y• which the Church is at this day tornin
sunder: for although the Church be in Babylon of the world,
yet it ought to be gathered by brotherly vnanimity. And
a litle after Esay saith, Babylon my welbeloued is turned to me
into a miracle: but I say Rome my beloued is turned to me
into a miracle, yea what is so marue
                  •
               lous, yea what is so
miserable. Dauid saw the Angel of the Lord standing with
a drawn sword ouer Ierusalem: we, the daughters of the
Romish Church behold, we sée the Bishop there, which is
or should be the Angell of God, ready with a drawn sword
ouer the Church. Dauid praied that y• people might not be
killed: our Angel reching to the Earl of Flanders the sword,
praieth that we may be slaine: wher many mo things touching
the crueltie of Babylon be adiected in their place,
whosoeuer listest to search and read the history at large.
            About the yeare of our Lord 1200, S. Barnard the
Monke liued in great estimation with Kings and Princes,S. Barnard.
euen with the Kinges of this Land: For he was a
man of great fame, both for his godly life and learning.
            This S. Barnard in his bookes written to Pope Eugenius,
doth rehearse and carpe so many and such crimes, both
of the Bishops, and Citizens of Rome, how many and such

as none of the old prophets is read to haue obiected to the
Babilonians, which to 
                  〈◊〉
                tediousnes here I omit to rehearse,
who so is 
                  〈◊〉
                to seée his words, the books be extant
at this time though written 400 year past & more.
            Likewise Petrus Iohannes Pyranensis about 1330 did openly
in schole teach, that as the Pope was Antichrist: So
no other Church but the Romish to be vnderstood by the
name of the whore of Babylon.
            
            Also Wickliefe of England, and Iohn Hus, and Hierome of
Bohemia, taught & affirmed the same doctrine of the Pope,
and of Rome: the first of these thrée, his bones burned 18
yéeres after he had bene dead: the other two brent aliue,
yet consenting in opinion to all the godly Fathers and
Doctors in these points that be aboue rehearsed. Now it
hath bene sufficiently spoken with the approoued testimoof
euery age euen from the Apostles time, and the opinion
and sentence of the best learned cited thereto touching the
place, that Rome is signified by Babilon. Now let vs return
againe to the ruler of this Babylon and his tragicall actions
who putteth on him the vizard of piety and is altogether
vnder his Maske impiety it selfe.
            This impudent and shameles man of Rome, yea rather
beast he may be called, which doth the iniuries afore rehersed
to our Lord Christ: what presumeth not he to aduenture
vpon, daily among his inferiors for equals hee will
haue none, and both Emperor and King professing Christ,
within Europe, he hath made subiect vnto him, and ready at

                  •
               all to do his will and command
                  •
               ment. He maketh War
himselfe: he prouoketh one prince with fire & sword to assault
another: he sheddeth innocent blood, in persecuting
those that dare or wil open their mouth against him. Hée
maintaineth Subiects so rebell against their Soueraigne
Lords & kings: he is the firebrand to set an outrage of burning
in al parts of Christendome: he is a deadlie poison
which hath infected y• church of God with notorious dregs
            Did not the Pope stir & prouoke Sigismond the Emperor
and the noble Princes of Germany with force of armes to

inuade the realm of Bohemia? Upon what ground or occation?
Truly because Iohn Hus and Ierome of Prage, had by
preaching of the word of God, began to reueale the son of
perdition in the same country of Bohemia. The Pope therfore
féeling himselfe touched to the quicke, endeuoured as
much as in him did lie to destroy, and extirpate all the Bohemians,
First Hus & Ierom were cruelly burned, and yet
the desire of the people to the knowledge of true religion
thereby not quenched, but inflamed and kindled the more.
What ensued of this, with huge power and most puissant

                  〈◊〉
                the Bohemians were inuaded two yeares together.
And both the times with wonderful courage & prowes of
the Bohemians, the assault makers were repulsed, and put
back to shameful flight by the miraculous power & mighty
hand of God, who fought for them, & did set thē at rest
& peace, in despite of the Bishop of Rome, his Cardinals &
cleargie.
            I omit here for breuities cause, to inferre manie examples,
how the Popes frō age to age moouing war, haue
procured by their Legates and messengers, one Prince to
wage battel on his next brother and Prince adioining,
and when the Armies were readie to encounter and
méete, then would he colourably as though no fault were
in hym, Friers and other messengers were despatched betweene,
perswading peace and reconcilement. The
Chronicles in euerie Realme can sufficientlie testifie the
same. And therfore I remit those that be desirous to know
further herein to the said Chronicles.
            This I say and affirme boldlie, that it was the Pope
that did animate and set on Robert Earle of Flanders against
Henry the fourth Empero
                  •
               r.
            It was he the Pope that maintained the warres with
ten thousand Italians and gaue money to pay them wages
on the behalfe of the Emperor Charles the fift against
the Duke of Saxony and the noble Pée
                  •
               es of Germany, because
the said Pope would haue had the light of the Gospell
darkened, which at that time had sprong vppe from

the first preaching of Luther, séeking to bring ignorance
in place againe, though it wer with the shedding of Christian
blood, and vtter vndooing and spoile of many both
men, women, and children.
            It is he the Pope, that to his great ignominy and shame
for euer, cherished a ranke Traitor named Stukeley a man
of euill life and conuersation,Stukley trator maintained by the Pope. and mainteyned him against
his Soueraigne Ladie and Quéene, with money,
men, Shippes, and munition to enter Ireland, God confoundeth
the deuises and purposes of the wicked, and maketh
them frustrate, contrary to their expectation. What
followed? Stukeley when he had sailed from Italie to the
Bay of Portugale, and there hearing that the King Sebastian
was going ouer into Barbary with all royall preparation
of warre, offered his seruice to the said King not for
any zeale or good will but vpon a subtill pretence, that
Warres there ended, hee woulde borrowe a summe of
money of the King, the better afterwards to goe through
with his enterprises in Ireland. In the battell in Barbarie,
the King of Portugall, the blacke King with others, and
this Stukley also was slaine. This you may sée that God
sent a curst Cow short hornes, and Ireland was deliuered
and England also from a most cruell enemie and Traytor,
though he died a fairer death then he should haue done, or
had deserued, yet such was the malice of the Pope, this
enterprise began by Stukley, was afterward prosecuted
by the sayd Antechrist of Rome, who first sent Buls full
all impiety, as it were with a bayt to allure the wilde
Irish to rebellion, and armed shippes and Souldiors to
infringe the publike peace there,The popes men vanquished by the L. Gray in Ireand. who not long after their
arriuall, had their welcome, so that of faure or fiue hundred,
not past twentie escaped aliue. The English vnder
the conduct of the Lord Gray, Lord Deputie of Ireland,
atchieuing the victorie vpon the Pope, his Italians and
Spaniardes, the fourth day after they came to the place
where these Strangers had entrenched themselues in good
order of war.
            
               He remarke well gentle Reader, the great goodnes and
mercy of God towards our most gratious Quéene Elizabeth,
and her realme of England and Ireland. Note the wisedome,
forwardnes, and diligence, of the Noble man, chief
                  •
               
Captaine, and General of her highnes Armie. How he spared
not to catch hold of oportunitie, in the colde and deepe
of the winter: according to the saying: Principijs obsta, & arripienda
est occatio. For if they, with the badge of the crosse
Keies of their brests, might haue bene suffered to harbour
the winter time there, this small sparke would haue growen
to a bigger flame, and not so easilie haue beene quenched.
But the Lords of England, be so hot with their souldiers
vnder them, that let the enemies make triall when
they will, let them trust to it, they shalbe fought withal, if
they attempt to come on land, before the swimming growen
of the Sea-sicknes bee quite out of their heads.
            The Pope can and will,Church plate taken out of the Vestries by the Pope to make war. raise warre to spill Christian
bloud, take out of the Uestries Church plate, (for not any
must controlle him) exact tasks vpon his Cleargie, to cause
his Cardinals and Bishops to giue contribution to bestow
the same where it pleaseth him to murther innocents, to
force wiues and widowes, to deflower virgins. For these
be the fruits of warre, the benefits that be reaped vpon insolent
victories.
            Now take in few woordes,The wicked liues of the Popes. of what godly conuersa
                  •
               ion
and life, Popes haue bene of late time, that either the Catholiques
may be ashamed of such spirituall and holy Fathers,
or els, in time to forsake them, and to begin to abhor
and detest them, and their most wicked and abhominable
actions, and to learne to bee of better vnderstanding than
they haue bene, For the successor is commonly worsse and
more had than his predecessour.
            Séeke and sée the writer Raphaell Volaterranus,
               Raphael Volaterranus. Xistus the 4. whether
I make true report of them or no. Search in other faithfull
Historiographers, what Xistus the 4. was in his Sée
of Rome. A man not caring (so hee might haue his will)
whether it were right or wrong, raising warre for euerie

trifling matter, selling benefices and offices for mony, rouling
himselfe middle among harlots.
            What was Innocentius the eight,Innocentius the eight. a man both couetous,
and factious giuen, to set out the Sword and pike, boasting
aboue measure of his aduoultries, and bastard Children,
and occupied continuallie in aduauncing and promooting
them to high dignities.
            What was Alexander?
               Alexander the sixt. the sixt, a man of lust and carnal
desire, that it is to be wondred at, and for shame almost not
to be named, which thing very cunningly did he paint out,
which wrote these two verses of his Daughter.
            
               Hoc tumulo Dormit Lucretia nomi
                     ••
                  e, sed re
               Thais, Alexandrifilia, Sponsa, nurus,
            
            
               In this graue sleepes Lucretia, so men her cal'd by name,
               Yet Thais she by maners might, and eke be clipt for fame.
               Daughter she was to Alexander the Pope, and sometime wife,
               And married was to bastard his, marke here the fathers life.
            
            This Alexander created of his bastard sonnes, not without
great ignominy to true Nobilitie, Earles, Dukes, and
marquesses and did beare the charge of the Armie, of the
which, is sonne was generall.
            Of this sort and facultie was Iulius the second, and likewise
also like to these,I
                     •
                  lius the second. was Leo the tenth.
            And to these is annexed,Clement the seuenth. 
               Clement the 7. a subuerter and
destroyer both of Rome, and of his natiue soile, the city of
Florentia.
            
            And after these, succéedeth Paulus tertius,
               Paulus tertius for his auarice,
wicked liuing, incest, tyrany, and other horrible crimes
so odious, that men indewed with any sparke of honesty
and godlines abhorre to remember them, the Heauens,
the Earth, and the Seas wil flie away from the hearing of
them.
            Heere, (the place moouing me thereto) let such as bee addicted
to the Church of Rome, beware in season, that they be

no longer seduced, and take héed and learne to knowe the
bad from the good, by that token which our Lorde Christ
himselfe gaue, saying: Ex fructibus eorurn cognoscetis eos.
Ye shall know them by their fruits.
                These Popes afore rehearsed,These Popes, not men, but monsters of men.
were not men, but monsters of men, and to read
their liues trulie penned and set down, and déepely to consider
of it, were sufficient to drawe away any man from
that selfe-will, loue, and confidence, they haue put in that
whoorish and Babilonicall Church of Rome. Homines sunt,
ergo errare & labi possūt
                saith he. But these be men & monsters
of men, as I haue already said, and their errors be so
grosse and palpable, that children and boyes sée them, and
are able to confute them, their maners & actions so wicked
and vicious, that euery good Christian must condemne
them.
            I am bere further to vse a few wordes to the Papistes,Catholiqu
                     •
                  s.
who call and terme themselues Catholiques, by a word as
it should seeme, that many of them doo not well vnderstand
or if they doo, they haue no great reason to vse it. For Catholique
a Gréeke word, signifieth vniuersall in English,
and Ecclesia Catholica in our Cr
                  ••
               de or Articles of our beliefe,
hath Sanctam set afore that is the Catholique Church
of God dispearsed wheresoeuer it bee vppon the fa
                  •
               e of the
Earth, not tied to any one certaine or terminate place, but
vniuersall, where the Congregation, small or bigge is dispersed
throughout the world, professing truly Christ and
his holy Gospell. We beléeue one holy vniuersall Church
to be.
            How holy the Romish Church is, let indifferent men
iudge, where such good liuers as the Pope
                  •
                aboue mencioned
be the chiefe a
                  ••
               ors in the plaie. So the word Catholike
maketh quite against the papists, who would haue the true
church at Rome, & depending vpō the same Romish church,
as tied to one certaine place, where many of the Bishops
of the same church haue bin, & at this day be as wicked and
cruell as were in times past. Phalaris Dionysius, Nero, or
Diocletian. Nam vitiato capite viti
                        •
                     ntur & mēbra corporis.
               
               
The head being corrupt,Exhortation to the Papists, to recurne to the true Church. néedes must the members of the
body be infected with corruptiō. I therfore pray you which
be not yet come out of the mistie clouds of Papisme, in the
bloud and bowels of our Lorde Iesus Christ, deceiue not
your selues. Look wel about you in time. Pin not your faith
vppon another mans sléeue. No man can make attonement
for his brothers soule. It is the bloud of Iesus Christ the son
of God, that clenseth vs from all sin, as witnesseth S Iohn,
in the first Chapter of his Epistle: Againe, he the same Apostle
saith in the same Chapter. If we acknowledge our sins,
he (that is Christ) is faithfull aend Iust to forgiue vs our sinnes,
and to cleanse vs from all vnrighteousnes. And our Lord himselfe
giueth vs this lesson: Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis,
& onerati estis, & ego reficiam vos. Come vnto me all yee
that Labour and are heauie laden and I will refresh you.
                It is he
our Lord Christ that hath borne our sinnes, and paied the
ransome for them vpon the Crosse. Now brethren, wil you
trust in the Popes Pardons, who hath no more authority,
than any brother Bishop or Minister hath to forgiue sins,
and to pronounce absolution to them that be hartely penitent,
by authoritie giuen to the Apostles generally,Equal auctority giuen to all the Apostles to forgiue sins and so
to their successours, and all Ministers that come not in by
the window, but by the doore. For as for the wordes spoken by
Christ to Peter alone of binding and loos
                  ••
               ng, it is
answered. If all the Apostles had the same authoritie by
Christes his worde, as it may appeare in Mathew 18. and
Iohn 10. Than Peter being but one, had it not alone. But if
if it were spoken to him alone, in Mathew, yet it doth not restraine
the generall grant, made to others in the places cited
before.
            
               Quorum remiseritis peccata &c. Whose sinnes yee shal forgiue,
they shalbe forgiuen, & quorum retinueritis, retenta sunt:
For those words are spoken in the plurall number, whereby
all Priests claime true interest in absoluing. For will
you hear what the Priests vtter after auricular confession
hard at any mans hand, and iudge your selfe. Dominus Iesus
qui est summus Pontifex, absoluat te ab omnibus peccatis

tuis &c. & ego auctoritare mhi commissa, absoluo te in nomine
patris, & filij, & Spiritus sancti Amen: (which is to say)
Our Lord Iesus, which is the highest Bishop absolue thee from all
thy sinnes, and I by the auctority committed vnto me absolue thee
in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, Amen.
Where is sinnes reserued in the Canons to the Pope onelie to
forgiue? Why practiseth hee to send abroad his pardons
in parchment, with leaden seales for money? where
is his warrant in holy Scripture? wherevpon our Sauiuiour
Christ saith in the fiftéenth of S. Mathew. In vanum
colunt me homines docentes doctrinas & mandata hominum.
               
In vaine doe they serue me, teaching the doctrines
& precepts of men. Here I must put you in remembrance
of a fond fellow, who hath set out a book: intituled, Hierarchia,
               Hierarchia, a Gréeke word, a glorious title, a shewe or promise by
the word, of a great matter, where in the end and effect, it
prooueth nothing.
            It is a rehearsall by name of the popes, from Peter, which
was the first Bishop of Rome, (if it so be true) and how one
succéeded an other, from time to time, and this was by Election
in diuers sorts, one whi
                  •
               e by the voice or suffragies
of the people, as though Democratia were in vre, sometime
by the consent of the better sort in degrée, as when the
Deane and Chapter elected, and that doth adumbrate Aristocratia.
And lastly and principally, when the chiefe gouernour
maketh his choice of any person, where is the rule
of Monarchia.
            
            But succession by election is one thing, and the right of
inheritance another. We daily sée, that a good father hath
sometime an vngratious sonne, that godly parents haue
a child descended from them afterward to be euill disposed.
I haue found a man according to my hartliking saith God
of Dauid the king. And yet his son Salomon succéeding him,
fell to women and Idolatry, insomuch that God being angry,
rent his kingdome after his daies into two parts, viz.
Rehoboam reigned ouer 2 tribes, & Ieroboam ouer 10. If this
be where state of inheritance claimeth his right, that for sin

God put teth downe one, and setteth vp another, and oftentimes
changeth the inheritance from one line of kindred in
to another,Succession by i
                     •
                  heritanc, & Succession by Election. of what force is succession that commeth by Election
which is grounded upon humaine pollicie. The Electors
naming and appointing to office whome they will,
mooued thereto somtime by méed and corruption of mony,
sometimes by fauour and friendship, procured, somtimes,
by hatred and enuie, the better ma
                  •
               r
                  •
               iected, and the worse
chosen. It is not denied, but that many lerned, vertuous, &
of laudable life, haue bene Bishops and Pastors professing
Christ in Rome. But t
                  •
               ey with their whole flocke, as they
might be caught for the most part, suffered Martirdome, vnder
the persecuting Emperors of the same city, as Nero,
Diocletian, & others. A body of the best complection, which
is sanguine by continuance of time, and disorder of diet in
meats, drinks, and other féeding draweth vnto it grosse humors,
and so 
                  •
               alleth into diseases, that the alteration wil be
such, that ye shall not know it to be the same. So the See
of Rome, both during the time of the Primitiue Church,
and long after retained a beautie of knowledge and holynes,
but by litle and litle, it fell away and was defaced, as
rust créepeth vpon yron and other metals by contin
                  •
               ance,
especiallie, when they be not rubbed, scraped, and dried, S.
Paule spake these words in this time, Etiam mysterium iniquitatis
operatur, and now the mistery of 
                        •
                     iquitie doth worke.
               
And againe, as is aforesaid by the said Paule, what withholdeth
euen that the sonne of perdition might bee reuealed
at his time. Most true it is where Christ saith, Ego sum vobiscum
vs
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   and consumationem Seculi, I am with you euen to
the end of the world,
                that the holy ghost hath bin, is and will
be with his Church to to the end, and wil neuer leaue it destitute.
As when the Heresie of the Arrians oue
                  •••
               owed the
worlde, the holy Spirite of God stirred vp Athanasius, to
defend his truth, which Athanasius albeit,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the 
                     〈◊〉
                   is, there is the Church. he was forced to
flie & hide himselfe oftimes in dens & ca
                  •
               es, for the space of
diuers years, yet the Church of God was with him in hys
dens and caues. For where the truth is, there is the church

Idolatry, worshipping of Images, masses, dirriges, and
Heauen to be sold for mony, murdring of saints, stewes in
whole stréets of Curtesans, blessings for méed, cursings for
enuy, are to be found in Rome, yea, and Antichrist himselfe
who exalteth himselfe aboue all that is called God, therfore
there is not the true Church. What monsters haue bene
admitted to the Papacie after one thousand and od yeares
after Christ, it hath bene somewhat afore touched, & may
séeme to such as haue not read Histories almost incredible?
What execrable practise was this to enter and possesse
the Popes chaire by Magicke and Art forbidden both by
Gods law and mans, to giue himselfe to the deuill: to gette
worldly dignitie and promotion, to infame himselfe for euer,
to purchase a momentary and transitory pelfe: to win
wealth & glory on the earth, to léese eternal ioy and heauen.
Upon this monster last rehersed, & popes afore mencioned,
iudge of this said Hierarchia, of this holy principality or gouernment
of the Church, which the author of the book wold
onely apply to the see of Rome, as to the chiefe of the same,
where good & bad popes are associated together in the rehersall,
as though Gods church, were not from the beginning
guided & conducted in all truth by the holy ghost, before the
Papacy took place, or as if gods spirit could not blow wher
it listed, not in one circuit of ground only, but in the church
whersoeuer dispersed euen where gods word is truly preched,
& the sacraments rightly administred, whether it bee
in the east of the world, the west, south, or north part of the
same. This fellow doth not only sanctifie the impurest monsters
of the world, but also restraineth and tieth the grace
of God & his spirit to the Popes girdle. Succession in the
See of Rome, is of no more force to prooue principalie in
the Church, then that the Bishopric
                  •
               es of Cullen in Germany,
of Toledo in Spaine, may prooue the line by discent
by Regester Bookes many hundreth yeares. O mad and
fantasticall heads of such as of selfe wil beléeue him, to wit,
the Pope and Rome his See to haue of right the superioritie
of the Church.
            
               
               Hierusalem and mount Sion had these wordes spoken of
her that follow.Hierusalem fo
                     •
                  s
                     •
                  ken, much more Rome. 
               Psalme 132. For the Lord hath chosen Sion
too be an habitation to himselfe. This shalbe my rest for euer.
Here will I dwell, for I haue delight therein. Yet Hierusalem 40. yeares after that Christ hath suffered, was sacked
(to pretermit in silence, what was doone afore to it by
the Assirians & their king) The Temple with the city wals
and houses was taken, rased, wasted, and consumed, that
one stone was not left vppon another by Titus and Vespacian.
            
            For what shal we now think of Rome? whe
                  •
                was there
any promise made to it, which Rome by trope is painted
out, and spoken in the 14. and 17. Chap. of the Reuelation of
S. Iohn, to be Babylon that gret whoore,Harlots or curtesans in Rome. where whole stréets
of Curtesans liue without checke, sauing that at the beeginning
of Lent, they come to auricular confession, & take
ashes, receiue the Sacrament, and pay their taxes to the
Pope and his officers. After Easter, they returne to theyr
old life againe, and so continue all the yeare. See what filthy
lucre may cause. For these women pay swéetly: what
heads of the Church are these? who would trust or haue anie
confidence in them. I pray and desire all men, as they
loue their soules and saluation, to looke into the holy Scriptures,
to study and read them diligently, and to conferre the
Bishop of Rome his doings and doctrine with gods Booke,
and they shall quicklie espie and confesse, that the Pope is
the selfe same son of perdition spoken of by S.To read scripture, bringeth k
                     ••
                  wledge, vnderstanding. 
               Paul to the
Thessalonians as is afo
                  •
               esaide, and so spéedly forsake him.
What is the let, what is the stop and bar that these Catholiques
(as they call them selues) draw backe and come not
forward.
            Their Maister the Pope would not haue them once open
or looke into the holy Bible, translated into the vulgar
tongue, And they will not read it, nor any other booke that
may bring knowledge of the truth, they loue to dwell in ignorance.
God grant of his infinit mercy, that they maie amend
and waxe wise in time Amen.
            
               It may séeme to some that I haue bene somewhat too
long in this discourse of Rome, and of the Pope, & I pray
thē of patience, seeing the matter is so far forth not impertinent,
that it touched and concerneth not a few but all:
not one region or countrey, but all the partes of Christiandome:
not the saftie of mans bodie only, but the health
of the soule: not temporall, but eternall life. And no inuectiue
can be sufficient on him, til his name and tyrannical
seate be raised vp from the bottome, and his memoriall
quite extinct, his pride thrust downe together with Lucifers
in Hell. His doctrine abolished, as these few Latine
verses following doo partlie declare.
            Papa sibi metuens frontem fore cornibus orbam
            Lurida bacchatur trux aconita vomens.
            Et cupit extinctos diro molimine Reges,
            Mergit at hunc Stygijs CERBERVS ater aquis.
            Non prius, in latis spatiosi finibus orbis
            Di
                  •
               sidij & coedis languida praxis erit,
            Cum socijs, quàm Papa suis plorare iubetur,
            Eius & extinctum nomen ab orbe perit,
            Totius Europae magni consurgite Reges,
            Arma (inquam) celerivos capitote manu,
            Totius Europae communem pellite pestem,
            Icta armis vestris Bestia tetra cadat:
            Sic gens Christicolum tranquilla pace fruetur,
            feruescet verae religionis amor.
            Which verses may be thus englished, not following
word for worde, but the sence truely taken out.
            The Pope fearing least his strong force
            might him alone forsake,
            Doth fret and cast his poison ranke,
            new shiftes of helpe to make.
            And first doth seeke with treacherie,
            Th' annointed of God to kill.
            
               Without their let or any stop,
            His purpose to fulfil:
            Both braule, and strife shall neuer cease,
            Nor edge of sword wax dul,
            Till Pope and all his partakers
            Be rapped on the scull.
            Ye mightie Kinges of Europe all
            Vse force, expell away
            The common plague of Christendome:
            Vse force, vse force I say.
            If beast once fall that fenced was▪
            
            Time past that hornes had ten:
            Debate shall slake and peace ensue,
            God grant it so, Amen.
            
            For it is the Pope that is the 
                  •
               eade and C
                  •
               le
                  •
               taine of
the Confederates in Europe at this day,The Pope the head of the holy league that practiseth to trouble & molest England. who the last
yeare, viz. 1588, endeuoured to bvxe and spoile this noble
realme of England, to molest & trouble our most gratious
soueraigne Lady & Quéene▪ but in vaine (thanked be
God, they were fr
                  •
               strate of their purpose) & if they might
haue had any good successe, they determined afterward to

                  •
               lea and root out all the professors of true religion in Christendome.
            This was the resolute determination, purpose and inintent
of this Antichrist, Chieftain, and his confederates
the Spaniardes with their societie.The Spaniard his preparatiō for war against England many yeares. To prosecute the same
with effect, diuers yeares past preparation hath bene
made, of money, armor, weapon, ships, ordinance, victuals
and all other necessarie furnitur
                  •
                for mortall warre to inuade
England: But God, euen the God of Abraham, Isaac
and Iacob: God, the God of Elizabeth Quéene of England,
whom she dayly and hourly honoureth and serueth, hath
confounded their deuises, broken their cros-bowes of stéel,
shortened their armes, weakened their bodies which they
bragged to be so strong, made faint their heartes and courages
in Iulie, last past, 1588: and in August following

and September, that the Deb
                     •
                  ra of England may say; God
hath bin on our side. God fought for her, God ouerthrew her
enemies.
            Thus it is apparant, our deadly enemies is the Pope,
that aduersary (as S. Paule tearmeth him) that is exalted
aboue al that is called God, maintaining the war made
vpon England this la
                  ••
                yeare,The Popes pr
                     •
                  mise to saue the soules of them that perish. with 
                  〈◊〉
               , and men▪ abetting
and encouraging al the rest with promises, to giue
them the blesse of heauen, if they perished in the war, and
died in the fight.
            O Sathā, transfigured into an Angel of light. O false i
                  •
               gler!
O crafty Apostle, yea rather Aposta
                  •
               a. O bloody murderer,
that vnder pre
                  •
               ence of holines, would séeme to sit at
home in thy chaire, and y
                  •
               t ar
                  •
                the grea
                  •
               est slaughter man
in the front of the battaile. O fierce brother of Cain that
killest the innocent Abels. S
                  •
               rcease to animate & mainteine
the Spaniards thy partakers in war: Learne by
the euent of their late enterprise, to sit stil to study on gods
booke and to leaue the 
                  •
               an
                  •
               ling of war to temporal princes.
But religion is the chiefe occasion and ground of the debate
& breath of peace, beside other  quarels. The deciding
of true religion & false, and iudgement thereof consisteth
onely as they say in the Pope, and therefore pronounceth
vs English, heretiques. And where he cannot consume
vs with fagot and fire, because he hath not our Lady and
Quéene at commandement to be his executioner, as hee
hath Princes in other regions  
                  〈◊〉
                thral to his tyranny.
            This blessed man of Rome maketh vs a pray to the
Spaniards or any other that will assaile vs. Where, note
that the Pope gaue the crowne and kingdome of England
to the king of Hispaine.
            
            O impudent monster of men. O thou that hidest the
commandementes of God in the Latin, from the lay,The Pope a murderer. simple
and vnlearned people, and wittingly and wilfullie
breakest them thy selfe, which knowest them, and vnderstandest
them.
            
               It is written in the 10 and last commandement. Thou
shalt not cou
                     •
                  t thy neighbours house, nor any thing that is his.
These bee the wordes among others in the commandement:
If to couet be sinne and breach of the precept: what
horrible offence to God is it, impudently to take and
giue away that which is anothers, as though the whole
earth were the Popes to bestowe and destribute at his
pleasure.Not found in scripture that the Apostles di
                     •
                   assigne Princes, c
                     •
                  ownes. But y• Popes do it. Where is it read, that Christ or his Apostles
or any other Bishoppe of the Primitue Church or
prelate of any other place since, but this of Rome, did giue
or assigne Princes crownes, or kingdomes: the same Bishop
of Rome, at the first being a beggar, and liued but of
almes and deuotion of the well disposed, who at the first
went on foote as others doe. And after that Constantines
donations had enriched the Sée of Rome, began to ride on
horsebacke,Constantines donations puffed vp th
                     •
                   Se
                     •
                   of Rome with pride. and now through pride is so puffed vp that he
is caried vpon mens shoulders in a chaire. A kinde of most
arrogant insolencie: for pompe, that no Prince in any age
for glorie hath vsed the like, but the Pope.
            Religion (as I said before) is laid to the charge of vs
English. Touching Religion, we answere, that we are
in the true, and the Pope and his adherents in the false.
The iudgment whereof appertaineth not to him being an
aduersary of Christ, a persecutor of poore innocentes and
professors of true Religion, a Tyrant, a blood-sucker. But
the t
                  •
               uchstone must be the holy Sceiptures, as our Sauiour
Christ hath 
                  〈◊〉
                and taught in these wordes. Scrutamini scripturas.
Search the Scriptures. And againe thus,
Erra
                     •
                  is, nescientes scripturas, Ye erre out of the way not knowing
the Scriptures,
                which shew and declare who goe right,
and who goe wrong. And we answere with the word
                  •
                of
S. Paule in the 24 Chapt. of the Actes of the Apostles. But
this we boldly confesse with S. Paule the Apostle vnto the
whole world, that after the way which the Pope and his
Cleargie call heresie, so worship we the God of Abraham,
beléeuing all things which are written in the Lawe
and Prophets. &c. This is the Pope of whom the Prophet

               Daniel speaketh of in y• 7 Chap. of his Prophesie that
shall destroy the Saintes of the most highest: and in the
8 Chapter, Hee shall slea the strong and holy people. In laying
heresie to thy charge (O England) which is no heresie,
but the true worshipping of God, then it is God cause
that thou art blamed for, that thou art manaced, 
                  •
               ated,
enuied, and sufferest. Keioice therefore and be glad, that
thou may be counted worthy to suffer these reproches for
Christes sake. The Spaniards, the Popes owne chéefe
Darlinges,The Spaniard tooke in hand the execution of the Popes malice, 1588. afore all other people in Europe, did take in
hand this last yeare viz. 1588 the execution of the Popes
malice and War, adding thereto quarels of their owne:
But as the Spaniard liketh his last aduenture made vpon
England, so let him and his partakers come againe,
We English put in God alone our trust, they shall go wée
ping away, if any go away or escape.The cruel
                     •••
                   of the Sp
                     •••
                  
                  ards.
For I trust it neither
is, neither will be forgotten, the manacing of the
Spaniards this last Sommer, their whippes, their scourges,
their Yrons that they brought in their ships to mark
the youthes of each Sex of the conquered nation to make
their bond-slaues: for so they vaunted, and according to
the Prouerbe, Antè victoriam canebant triumphum, that
is, They assured themselues of victory before thoy did strike astrcke
for it. And if euer they come againe, they shall bée
recompensed seuen folde in their bosom and shall bee vsed
as Perillus was, according to the Prouerbe, Be whipped
with their owne whippes, and marked with their owne Yrons.
For they be a people disdainfull, cruell and proud in heart
aboue measure, euen frō the lowest degrée of men in their
common weale. Will you heare for a proofe thereof, what
I haue seene.
            A poore Spaniard Fisherman, which onely gaineth his
liuing by going to Sea to catch Sardines, a kind of Pilchard,
sillie wretch in his olde ragges, scant woorth taking
vp if they were found vpon the donghill, after he hath
caught some fish, and returneth with his small Skiffe, or
boat home, his poore wife waiteth at the shore side for him.

The man leapeth out vpon the shore, leauing his fish to b
                  •
               
solde by his wife, and his boat also to be made cleane by
her, and going home to his house, putteth off his sea apparell,
claddeth him selfe with his best doublet and hose, and
couered with his Spanish cape or cloke, with his Rapier
and Dagger by his side, walketh and 
                  •
               etteth in the place
of the towne whereto marchantes, and the wealthiest of
the Towne resort to buy and sell. As the Spaniard is
proud, so is he crue
                  •
               l excéedinglie: and where hee can or
may ouercome, his tyrannie is intollerable: what infinite
slaughters haue the Spaniardes made in the West Indians
in America, as well of women and children, as of
men, silly soules of that Country.
            It is beside my purpose, here to rehearse: whosoeuer
is desirous t
                  •
                knowe the trueth thereof, let them reade
whole bookes written of the same matter both in French
Latine, and other tongues. And to know the same by reading
it, will make any Christians heart to bléede. Ouer
and beside, the crueltie of their Cleargie in matters
of Religion repugnant to Papistrie, Superstition, and
idolatrie. Woe, woe, yea thrée times woe to them
that shall fall into their handes. It is comparable with
all the inuentions of punishment and forture of all Tyrantes
read of in all histories before this time, if it 
                  〈◊〉
               
not passe or surmount them. Consider what the Strapado
               The Strapado.
is: a Diabolicall inuention, which is to let downe into the
threate a fine péece of linnen, wrapped round and 
                  •
               ast together,

                  •
               i
                  •
               d to a smal string, and to pul it vp and down, that
a man would choose ra
                  •
               her seuen times to die, if it were
so possible, then to suffer this paine once. Againe the martirdome
of Gardiner, an Englishman borne in Bristoll, and
suffering at Lisbona in Portugall, was it not equall with
Phalaris Bul? First his right hand was chopped off, and
after his left hand. After this he was hanged vpon an high
gibbit, and fire so made vnder him, that it could burne but
his féete & shanks, then that done a space of time betwéene
his knées and thighes: after that his bellie, and intralles

were consumed with fire, so that all this while his breast,
hart, and head, wherin the pincipal seat of life is, were vntouched:
last, by Gods mercie the rope wherwithal he was
tied vnder the arme pits sodenly, brake, and so the whole
man fell into the fire sooner then they expected or wished.
To hear this torture wil it not make christiā eares to glow
and any heart to quake. I will leade the Reader with no
more examples, for they be so many of this sort, that will
and may make vp whole bookes. Now let vs come to the
Religion of the Spaniard. Pilgrimage is vsed & frequented
euen at this day freshly to S. Iames in Galitia, & through
all Spaine accompted an holy & meritorious thing to saluation.
If any man die of any wealth there in that countrey,
the Friers of the four orders so flock about and the priests
that it is estéemed but a small funerall, the charges wherof
doth not amount to 200 Markes, which is deuided among
Friers and Priestes for the most part, for saying of
Masses, Diriges, and funeral Obsequies, making the people
beléeue, that they with their oblations and praiers can
saue their soules. Of whence commeth this, the Cleargie
so perswade the people there, they wil deliuer any mans
soule from hell, and send it vp to heauen, applying their
merites thereto, and with their Sacrifices of Masse auailable
both for the quicke and the deade. I haue seéene a
yoong Priest in Spaine (for there be many Priestes there
belonging to one Chuch, which liue onely by these means
following) coming to the Church in the morring, and hauing
mumbled to himselfe Mattyns (as they call it) hath
(stāding at the Altar) put on his Albe, looking round about
him, and expecting who woulde lay downe and offer their
deuotion vpon the Altar: I
                  •
                there were so many that the
summe offered or giuen did amount to ten or eleuen Royals
of plate, he would put on his Palle or Cope, say Masse
that morning, otherwise he would put off his linnen Albe
and will the people to come againe the next day.
            Behold be not Masses wel sold? be not Priests wel maintained?
What doth the Priest all the day afterwardes?

He 
                  •
               etteth vp and downe not after the maner that sad and
sage Priests vse, but like a Courtier in a cloake without
a cape down to the ground. O noble England, O England
thou maist by this treatise behold as it were in a glasse,England beware. thy
aduersaries, the Pope, his Cardinalles, Cleargie, and the
Spaniardes, the former sort to raigne ouer the soules of
Christians, with great tyranny to maintaine their pomp,
wealth and glory, the other and latter ready to prosecute
the Popes commandents, & to raise vp a new monarchie
& Empire to ouertop al other in estate his equals. To the
which better to be accōplished, they haue practised as ye old
Prouerb is, That where a Fox skin cannot reach they haue
sowed to a Lions skin. And as they haue done already the
yéere past, so they wil perchance again vse force & violence
although they haue had a faire warning already, to leaue
& surcesse by their harmes sustained: Howsoeuer it may
fal out,England▪ call vnto the Lord & trust in him. arme your selues (O valiant Britaines & English
men) first aboue all with Spirituall defences, as the kingly
Prophet teacheth Ad Dominum cum tribularer clamaui
& exaudiuit me, when I was in trouble I called vpon the Lord,
and he heard me euen to the granting of my petition.
                Againe
God himselfe scholeth vs in this sort, Inuoca me in di
                     •
                   tribulationis
& ego exaudiam vos. Cal vpon me in the day of
trouble and I wil heare you.
               
               England be sory & lament for thy sinnes past. Let vs be sorie for our offences
past: let vs be sorie and most sory for the sinnes we haue
comitted, from the bottom of our hartes with ful purpose
of amendement of life hereafter to be led by Gods grace &
assistance of his holie spirit. Let vs sing in hart & say with
tongue, The Lord is my light and saluation, whom then
shal I feare? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
then shal I be afraid: Though an host of men were layed
against me, yet shal not my heart faint. If warre rise vp against
me, yet will I put my trust in the Lord. Againe the
Prophet thus saieth.England cease not to pray continual
                     •
                  y. The Lord is on my side, I will not
feare what man may doe vnto me. The Lord taketh my
part with them that helpe me, therefore shall I sée my desire
vpon mine enemies.
            
               Be ye therefore full of courage:Our en
                     •
                  mies hate vs fo
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  eligion.
O ye English hearts.
Our enemies hate vs for religion. Their principall quarrell
is religion, our religion is constant, and agréeable with
the word of God: there religion is repugnant to it. Yea let
the holy Bible bee an vpright iudge betwéene vs. They
brag to assaile vs: we are to defend our selues boldly, manfully,
couragiously: What dasterlie heart beareth that
man that will not strike, rather then be stricken: who wil
not kill, rather then be killed:The heathen mans l
                     •••
                  on, 
                     •
                  o fight for our countri
                     •
                  
                the Heathen mans lesson is
Pugna pro patria, pro Principe, pro aris & pro focis, Fight for
thy Countrey, for thy Prince, for religion, for thy house, wife, and
children:
                Gods law commandeth vs so to doo. For as they
which saile in a ship by all meanes and force, they can possiblie
endeuour to saue and preserue the ship. If the ship
perish and sincke, or be cast away, the passengers and mariners
all be lost and die. So euerie man indewed but onlie
with the gift of reason, besides that, he is by duty bound
thereto, and so commanded by God,Bound by gods law to defend our Prince and Countrey. will and must with all
his might of body, spending of his substance, studie, and i
                  •
               
               dustrie
of witte and soule, protect, defend, and saue his natiue
soile, land, & place where he hath his originall of birth,

                  •
               ostering, feeding and bringing vp, abod, and dweling link,
of kindred, societie of friends and countrimen, euen to the
losse of life and liues, if one man might haue an hundreth
liues.
            If the land wherein thou dwellest fall into captiuitie,
then thou that escapest aliue shalt be in worse case than he
that is dead. A continuall torment, pinching, tearing of a
man liuing, is worse then any sharpe death. The senses by
death are taken: the anguish on the other liuing in torment
in the day time is euill, and in the night worse. It fretteth
and suffereth still and continually as is the fable of Prometheus
his liuer, which as it wasteth by féeding the gréedis
vultures mawes. So it is renued, and encreasing againe,
ministreth matter euery day of n
                  •
               w and fresh torment and
punishment.
            This one chiefe and principall comfort (but there bee

many mo besides) may make glad all true Subiects to call
to remembrance, how our Quéenes most excellent Maiestie,
Comfo
                     •
                  t of the Q
                     •
                  eenes 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and her most wi
                     •
                  e c
                     •
                  uns
                     •
                  ll. Quéene Elizabeth together with her Graces prudent
Counsellers, haue prouided such plenty from the beginning
of her Raigne of principall Armour, Artillarie, Munition,
a
                  •
               d all other necessary furniture of warre, as neuer
was in England at any time before, and thanked be god
therefore,England furnished with Armour and Artillery, as it was neuer in any princes daies 
                     〈◊〉
                   this time. the English throughout the Realme so appointed
and fenced with Corselets, and weaponed in all sortes,
with such readines at one houres call, so forward in theyr
musters, that the children and yonglinges leape and spring
for ioy at the sight of the same, & imitate men in their order
of warlike array. A greater comfort is, that our gratious
Lady and Quéen, hauing reigned ouer vs now thirtie
one years,The commen
                  
                     •
                  ation of the Q
                     •
                  eene Elibeth. with al clemency & administration of Iustice,
hath conserued this noble Island of England in long 
                  〈◊〉
               
with increase of great wealth in euery sort, and her highnes
gouernement is such, that it farre excéedeth the rule
of any whatsoeuer Princesse, either in Affrica, Asia, or
Europa, from the beginning of the world to this day, except
Debora that beloued of God among the Iudges of Israell.
            
            Read the Cronicles and Histories in g
                  •
               nerall written
in Greeke,H
                     •
                  r vertues & worthy qualities. Latine, or any other tongues and it may be séene
that her Maiestie is without comparison. Elizabeth of England,
her gifts of the mind be so rare, so excelling▪ so surpassing,
(that is) her most fine and royal peircing wit in al her
Princely spéeches and communications,H
                     •
                  r knowledg in the Greeke Latine, and other t
                     •
                  ngues. fre
                  ••
               ent and mo
                  ••
               
apparant, her learning and knowledge in the Gréeke, Latine,
Italian, French, and Spanish tongues well knowen
to all Ambassadours and others, who haue conference in
causes with her Grace farre aboue the capacitie in the Feminine
Sex, oner and beside the gifts of the body, and other
that they make this Queene of the West, noble through
the whole world.
            Note also, how oft by the mercie and great prouidence
of God, and carefull watch of her most noble Councellers,

her Maiesties person hath beene deliungred from perill and
daunger of Treason, and lately from the deuelish pra
                  ••
               
               ses
of Pary,
               He
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   wonde
                     •
                  ful 
                     ••
                  
                  liuerāce from trea
                     •
                  on at 
                     ••
                  me. first alias Vphary called after that of Babington
and his fellowes, a thing miraculous in the sight of all
good Subiectes, in the which, the wonderfull mercy, and
loue of our God; hath bene shewed to her grace and Realme
of England.
            
            Looke and read ouer the Chronicles of all nations, for
the long raigne of women Princes,The long raigne of a man princes. and ye shall find non
to haue raigned so long, but Debora and one more, (wee
English trust in GOD shee shall double her yeares of her
raigne with like felicitte and victorie, as her Maiestie hath
already inioyed) which one thing is a sure token of the fauour
of God towardes the Realme and vs the inhabiters
of the land.Salomon. For as it is written in the Prouerbes of Salomon.
            
            Short raignes of Kings and Princes,Short raignes of prince what it b
                     •
                  tokeneth. and oft changing
of the regall seat signifieth that God is displeased with that
Country or land. And contrary the long raigne of a prince,
betokeneth Gods great blessing. God grant Quéene Elizabeth
long to raigne, Amen.
            Ouer and besides this,The long ra
                     •
                  gne of a Prince. the care, study, and diligence by
her highnes Lords 
                  •
               f the priuie Counsel, hath beene and is
such, for to continue good gouernement, and to preserue in
vnitie, peace and loue, both England and her Subiects, that
it must néeds breed a comfort and ioy in all true Englishe
people.
            Further,The Quee
                     •
                  s care and 
                     ••
                  udy to stop and represse the rage and 
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  ie practised in France an in y• Low-countries. howe déepely hath her Grace lamented the rage
and furie now many yeares practised and put in execution
both in France, and in the Low-Countries.
            
            How hath her highnes ende
                  •
               oured with all Godly zeal
first to stoppe and represse the great cruelties there exercised.
            Secondly, to make mediation for vniting perfect amitie
and peace betweene the one side 
                  〈◊〉
                the other heerein,
and in this poi
                  ••
               
               ▪ the 
                  〈◊〉
                Noble and valiaunt Robert
Earle of Leicester, who from hence lately deceased, meriteth

his commendation of eternall fame and glory, who of
his own frée will and zeal to true religion, leauing at home
his deare Lady and wife, his lands and possessions in maner
and sort neglected, his ease and pleasures altogether abandoned,
hath in two seuerall voyages, very fortunate, in
the yeares 1586. and 1587. aduentured and hasazarded his
person, spent and consumed his goods, money, and plate,
euen to the great endebting of himselfe. The first time he
went ouer, in the deepe and middest of the winter, in a dark
and stormy night taking shipping at Harwich, Sir Henry
Palmer knight Captaine, and M. Gray, Maister of the
ship, and landed the next day at Flushing, & so passed by Zealand
into Holland. And this is to bee remembred, that during
his ab
                  •
               ad in Zealand and Holland, for the more force
of his martiall affaires, hee was accompanied with the
Earle of Essex, the noble and valiant

                  Lord Willoughbie.
                  The Lord burrowes.
                  The Lord Wentforth.
                  Lord Rich.
                  The Lord North.
                  Sir Thomas Cicil son & heire
to the Lord Burghley, Lord
high Treasurer of England
                  Sir Phillip Sidney.
                  Sir Thomas Gorge.
                  Sir Thomas Sturley, knight.
                  Sir William Pellam, knight,
                  Sirr Thomas Perot, knight.
                  Sir William Druery, knight.
                  Sir Phillip Butler, knight.
                  Sir William Goodier, knight.
                  Sir William Read, knight.
                  Sir Iohn Connaway, knight.
                  Sir Iohn winckefield, knight.
                  Sir Robert Sidney, knight.
                  Sir Cholmely, knight.
               
            
            And many other worthy Knightes and Gentlemen of
England, furnished with great Horse, Geldings, and Armour,
that it was a most worthy sight to bee séene. What
care, study and watch being there in the Low-Countries:
as a most wise and politike Captaine and Generall, did hee
vse in the night? what industrie, labour and paines, did hee
take in the day, both in the house, in consultations necessarie,
and abroad in the fieldes, present in person at skirmishes

and sieges of sorts and strong townes. What occasion
rei benè gerendae, as the latine phrase is did this Earl omit,
either to aduance the honour of his Country, either to preferre
the weale publique there? what good example of religion
and good life, did not this valiant Gentleman, and noble
Lord giue, hauing two godly and famous learned men
adorned with degrées of the Schoole of the Vniuersitie, M.
D. Tomson, and M. D. Holland, euery day preaching Gods
word, and saying diuine seruice? what Hospitality and open
house as we terme it? what princely Court did this
Earle kéepe, for bread meat, wine and béere, and all other
delicate chéere, so amplie, so plentifully, so aboundantly,
that the best sort in the Countrey, had him in admiration,
the second and meanest, praied, wished, and desired that he
might continually dwell among them. How did he tender
the poore, redresse wrongs, restraine and bridle the enemie
from iniurying those vnder his charge, win many strong
townes, castles, and forts, and as it were wall Holland, and
that part of Zeland, that the enemy might not approch but
with great danger and difficulty. And at the two yeares
end came away from thence with great honor, loosing in
fight very few, especially of fame and name, but that noble
hardie and most worthie knight,Sir Phillip Sidney. sir Phillip Sidney, who béeing
hurt in a very hot and bloudy skirmish, with a musket
shot a farre of, afterward returning to Arnam, died of his
wound: whose fame & glory, no age at any time shall weare
away.Carolus 
                     •
                  eobussextus king of Scots lamented his vnripe death. The noble king Carolus Iacobus Sextus king of Scotland,
and diuers others of the Nobility of the same country,
beside infinite numbers of euery degrée in England, mooued
with his vertues, valour and prowes, made Latine verses
most learnedly lamenting his vnripe death happening in
the flower of his age. Truly, yea most truly, there was nothing
els sought, either by the puissant Quéene Elizabeth
& the Lords of her Counsell, either by the said noble earle,
but to preserue true and pure religion, that it might not be
troden vnder the foot, and to stop effusion of bloud, which otherwise
would haue bene much. And that ought to be the

care and studie of euerie Christian king and Quéene, to
stoppe and inhibit outrage of spilling of Christians bloud.
            Finally, the gouernement of the said Noble Earle of
Leycester, in his abode beyond the seas, hath bene such, that
the wise and well disposed euery where, grauely consindering
vpon the same, giue to it condigne praise to the great
benefites of the Countrey where he hath bene, and to no
small strengthening of vs Englishe at home, in such sort,
that the Low-Countreis reaped thereby the benefite of quietnes
and rest, from the molesting of the enemie, which
otherwise would haue assailed them most sharpelie to their
vtter confusion and vndoing.
            This also haue wee English to ioy and to comfort our
selues with all,The Lord Charles Howard Lord Admirall of England. and to deliuer the same for an euerlasting
memoriall to our posteritie, that the last yeare it pleased
God of his infinite mercie and goodnes, to giue victorie by
Sea, to the right noble and valian
                  •
                Lord, the Lord Charles
Howard, Lord high Admiral of England, vpon and ouer the
Spanish Armado or fléet, so huge, so strong, so great, so furnished
with double Canons, and Canons, and Culuerins,
and all other sort of geat ordinaunce and small, as musket
shot, calyuer and others so fraught with Captaines, souldiers,
and marriners to the number of 28000 so garnished
with armor & all maner of weapons, so laden and stuffed
fully with euerie kind of victuall, to serue for long
time, all which did so farre passe, surmount▪ and excéed, that
it was Vique ad mundi miraculum, Euen to the wonder of this
age,
                that the Spaniardes vpon the confidence they had in
the same, their owne strength, were so puffed vp with pride
that they had denoured all England in their hearts, whilest
they were yet in Spaine, and before they came any thing
néere our coast.
            Neither is this here to be vntouched, how the said Lord
Charles Howard, Lord Admiral, with the nauie of England,
went to the Seas in the moneth of December,His going to Sea in the deepe of winter. 1587. beeing the deepe of winter, to expect the enemies comming, and so
continued till August following.
            
               What watch, what labour, what paines, especially in
winter. What stormes and foule weather this noble man
and his company did sustaine and abide, and indure out,
during these nine monethes. It cannot be vnknowen to al
those which haue experimented voyages by Seas.
            And in the Comming & approching of the Spanish Armado,
to the west part of Cornewall, which was about the 19
of Julie, 1588. How ready, desirous, & glad, the said Lorde
Howard was to méet and encounter with the Spaniard,
it doth by this appeare:His victory ouer the Spaniards. that the said Lord Admiral, accompanied
but with fiftie saile, not exspecting the rest of the
Queenes Nauie, or any further aide so come, did begin and
enter fight with the Spaniards, and so continued pressing
and chacing the Duke of Medina Sidonia high Generall of
the enemies companie, and his hundreth and thirtie two
saile, from Sonday till Saterday following, by the space
of seuen daies, night and day, forbearing sléepe and bodilie
rest which nature of man doth exact and require. Al which
time, my Lord Thomas Howard, my Lord Shiefield, Sir Edward
Hobby knight, of yeares but young, yet for the gifts of
the mind, wit, learning, knowledge, boldnes and courage
equall to the best Captaines, and many other Gentlem
                  •
               n
in this our English Nauie of good and ancient houses, for
the loue, zeale, and dutie they did beare to the Quéenes Maiestie,
their Countrey, and my Lord Admirall, did voluntarilie,
not without their great charges, as it were not onlie
offer, but intrude them selues into the seruice of the sea,
in this warre to winne honour and same, and most couragiouslie,
and with lyons hearts, did assault, pursue, and
terrifie the Armado, that where their purpose and pretence
was to inuade and land in Englande, they durst not once
drawe néere to any shore, but kept their course still in the
chanell and déepe streame, alwaies flying and seeking by
night if it might bee, in the darke to leese the sight of our
ships.
            On saterday night when ye enemies came to an anker afore
Calis,
               The firing of the Spanish Ships. th'english anchored hard by thē y• they could haue

no rest, expecting still when our men should boord them.
            And it was deuised by the Lord Charls Howard the next
night following by sira
                  •
               ageme well known, and therefore
not needful at large to be here rehearsed, to fire all the Spanish
ships, which in part was done and had taken further
effect, but the enemie for saking the rode, leauing Ankers &
cables behind them for hast, set vppe saile and fled. And the
next morning being Monday, my Lord Admirals number
being augmented aboue the Spanish with my Lord Henrie
Seimers fléet of warlike shippes, a feesh fight began: the
Spaniard flying afore to the north towards Scotland, and
the English, folowing the chace with most sharpe & bloudy
fight.
            In all which Battaile of nine daies together continuing,
both great wisedome and manhood was vsed by the
said Lord Charles Howard, by the Lords and Knights in hys
company, Mariners and souldiours, and marueilous force
was bent against the enemy. For one of the ships of the
Quéenes on Monday, the last day of the fight, shot in eight
houres fiue hundreth and 32. great pellets out of her great
ordinaunce hard vnder the sides of the Spanish Armado.
            
            What number may we thinke all the rest of the great
shippes did discharge that day. They of this great fléete of
the enemies, beside the great slaughter of their men, made
and caused by our forces, were constrained to cast ouerboord,
their fine Iennets and horses, and waxed glad when
night with darkenesse drewe on, setting indirect courses
that the Englishe might with more dificultie espie, finde,
or follow them in the morning ensuing.
            There were from the beginning till this time taken
Prisoners, and Spanishe shippes soo
                  •
               cke and spoyled by
the English forces, and brasen péeces and Artillery taken,
as the true number of them apeareth in books already printed,
by the meanes aforesaid, the pursuit was omitted, and
the spaniardes sought their way furthest about by the craggie
rocks and Sea shore of Scotland, to the west of Ireland.
               
Where God with windes and soule weather so tossed the
remain of the Armado, that 17 of the greatest ships there,
wracked, & were drowned with y• losse of some thowsands
of their men, beside artillerie, ordinance, and other lading
that perished in the water. Thus they that came to kil vs,
were killed, taken, or drowned, except those that escaped
by flieng and running away: and God fought for England
with his mightie hand and stretched out arme, when the
force of the English had ceased to pursue. Let any reasonable
man or others that haue any experience be Iudge.
            This proud and haughtie nation and people that came
to conquer England, to kil man, woman, and child, to make
the countrie wast, to take the land into their owne possession,
if they had not bene sore afraide, and self also the Yron
pellets and blowes of our English ordinance and the forces
of the Lord Charles Howard and his most famous band
of Mariners and souldiers to the losse of liues of their
men and great spoile of their ships, would haue returned
home the same way they came; but they durst not, but
sought Spaine the farthest way about.
            The fame of this victorie, howsoeuer the Spaniardes
may or will colour it, is spread ouer all Europe, Asia, and
part of Africa, insomuch that the heathē haue our renowmed
Quéen in admiration for her vertues, princely qualities,
royall hart and courage, and principally for this victorie
atchieued vpon the Spaniarde. O most high, O
most mighty, O most mercifull God, how good and gratious
diddest thou shew thy self to our Quéene Elizabeth, to
her dominions and territories, to her subiects and people:
How godly, how prudently, how thankfully did her Maiestie
at the last comming home and returne of the L. Admirall
from the Seas, attribute and ascribe this victorie gotten
by fight vpon the Sea, only to God, giuing him all the
praise, honor, and glorie for the same, speaking in open audience
of her Nobilitie, Ladies, and gentlemen in Court,
these words, which one of late hath p
                  •
               uned in a book written
in latine verse of her Highnesse. The verses follow.
            
               Carole, laudo tuas virtutes, laudo viriles
            Inuictos
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tuos animos, comitum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tuorum
            Quod loquor ex animo loquor, O attendite, quaeso
            Non vis vlla hominū, non tu (praeclare Dynasta)
            Non comites, socij
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tui, non Anglica classis.
            Est Deus aeternus, Deus est, qui solus & vnus
            Effecit, totam vt victrix celebrata per orbem
            Ore ferar populi, domi & vt secura quiescam▪
            
            Illi tota rei benè gestae gloria detur,
            Illi totus honor, sit ei sui gloria soli.
            And her Grace did not onely in spéech, but also in action
apparant to the whole world shewit, when her Highnesse
accompanied with the Bishops of the Realme, and
Nobilitie came through the stréetes to the temple of S.
Paule within the citie of London,
               The Queenes going to Paul
                     •
                   Chu
                     •
                  ch t
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   thanks vnto God. & knéeling humbly within
the west doore of the same Church, gaue with heart, mind,
and lowlines of body, thanks to God for his mercies & benefites
bestowed vpon her and her people, and after heard
a sermon at Paules crosse, tending to the same end. As
this was done and said before, like a most Christian Lady
and Quéene, so it is worthy of remembrance, that contrarie
to the custome of man and womans nature, prouoked,
irritated and stirred vp before to wrath & displeasure,
vpon outrage & mali
                  •
               e, practised by any enemie, her Grace
with a most charitable and pitifull heart cherished and
gaue almes,The Queenes clemencie & wonde
                     •
                  full 
                     〈◊〉
                  , euen to the enemy. meate and drinke to the Spaniards, captiues
and taken prisoners, forbidding that any iniurie or violence
should be proffered vnto them, according to the counsell
of S. Paule. Vince bono malum. Ouercome the euill with
doing good. Here I admonish and exhort all true English,
of euerie degrée, to print in memorie at the benefites afore
rehearsed, receiued by the mercie of God, and daily and
ha
                  •
               rely to be thankfull for the same, and to learne with
the Prophet to say & sing Misericordias Domini in aeternū
cantabo. My song shal be alwaies of the louing kindnes & mercies
of the lord, with my mouth wil I euer be shewing of thy truth
from one generation to another▪
                Again in the 146 Psal. Praise

the Lord O my soule, while I liue will I praise the Lord, yea, as
long as I haue any being, I wil sing praises vnto my God▪
                Let vs
follow the example of Mardocheus the 9 chap.England be continually mindfull of y• great benefites receiued at Gods hand. of Hest. who
inioyned the Iewes the 14 day of the moneth of Adar, and
the 15 day of the same, euery yeare, according to the daies
wherein the Iewes rested from their enemies and the
moneth which was turned to them from sorrowe to ioy,
and from mourning into a day of myrth to kéepe them the
dayes of feasting and ioy, and to send presents euery man
to his neighbour, & giftes to the poore: wherfore was this
done and enioined them? Because Haman the Iewes Aduersarie
had imagined against the Iewes to destroy them
& had cast Pur, that is a lot to consume & destroy them.
            Let vs follow Iehoshophat, who, when the childrē of Moab,
& the children of Ammon came against him to battaile,
did séeke the Lord▪ & proclaimed a fast throughout all Iuda
So did the Londiners (God be praised for it) & the English,
fearing God throughout all the Realme, and continued in
praier from morning vnto night. I wish and exhort them
in the Lord to kéep a memoriall thereof, & oftentimes to
pray, and often to fast, many times to giue thankes for the
manifold blessings of God poured vpon vs in preseruing
(as he hath done) the Quéens Maiesties person from treason
and imminent danger and peril, in sending her Grace
a long and gratious raigne, that it may please him to send
her victorie ouer her enemies (as he hath done) if any here
after shal arise.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                So shal it come to passe, that as Iehoshaphat
the king and the Iewes, without any stroke stroken on
their parts, had their enemies ouerthrowen at gods hand
& they gathered the spoile 3 daies, & the 4 day they assembled
thēselues in the vally Berracah & there blessed ye lord,
then euery man returned with Iehoshophat to go again to
Ierusalem with ioy. And they came to Ierusalem with viols
& with harps, & with tr
                  •
               mpets, euen vnto the lords house,
& the feare of god was vpon al the kingdomes of the earth,
when they had heard that the lord had fought against the
the enemies of Israel, and so the Kingdome of Iehoshophat
               
was quiet, and God gaue him rest on euery side, likewise
in the 14. Chap. of Exodus in the end of the same, it is thus
written. But the children of Israell walked vpon the drie land
through the middest of the sea. And it followeth in the 15.
Chap. Then sang Moses and the children of Israell this song
vnto the Lord in this maner, I will sing vnto the Lord, for hee
hath triumped gloriously, the horse and him that rode on him
with all the rest, hath be ouerthrowen in the sea. The Lord is
my strength and praise, he is become my saluation, he is my God
he is my fathers God, and I wil exalt him. The Lord is a man
of war, his name is Iehouah, &c. Let vs thus pray, & praise
God with y• Israelites for the ouerthrow of our enemis in
the Sea: and he wil continue our good and merciful God.
Let vs continue to go to the temple with Iehosophat, and
there with the harmonie of our cleane soules and bodies,
giue there the Sacrifice of thanksgiuing. Let vs sing
th
                  •
                21 Psalme. Domine propter robur immisum gaudet
Regina, & quia tu author illi fuisti victoriae, exultat seriò. O
Lord the Queene re
                     •
                  oiceth for the strength that thou hast sent
vpon her, and because thou hast bene the principall giuer of victory
to her, she reioiseth earnestly. Let her Maiesty spiritually
reioise as she doth: Let vs her Subiectes take bolde
heartes, and be full of courage, if at any time forraine enemie
should make attempt. The Lord will not forsake
them that put their trust in him.
            God grant her Highnesse a long life, a long and most
prosperous raigne. God of his mercie, continue his blessings
vpon this Realme of England. Amen.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   