
      
         
            
            
            OBSERVATIONS TO BE FOLLOWED, FOR THE making of fit roomes, to keepe Silk-wormes in: As alſo, FOR THE BEST MANNER OF planting of Mulbery trees, to feed them. PVBLISHED BY AVTHORITY for the benefit of the Noble Plantation in VIRGINIA.
            
               AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston. 1620.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ADVICE FOR MAKING OF CONVENIent roomes to lodge Silk-wormes in, and for the moſt commodious planting of Mulbery trees, to haue the beſt leafe to feed them.
            
            
               BEcauſe that theſe two things, Firſt, the making of lodgings for the Silk-wormes: Secondly, the abundant planting of the beſt Mulbery trees in a requiſite diſtance one from another, whereby to haue the beſt leafe to feed the Wormes, require ſome good time for the due preparation of them: Therefore that no time be loſt for ſo great and ſo gainfull a buſineſſe, (the profits whereof will be moſt certaine, and that with ſmall charge, after that theſe two prouiſions are once for all well accommodated) we ſend you theſe neceſſary inſtructions aforehand, till you receiue a booke which ſhortly ſhall be purpoſely printed for you and ſtore ſent, to teach all there, the exact vſage and ordering of Silk-wormes, the

skill whereof may ſoone bee learned, and preſently put in practice.
            
               The lodgings of the Silk wormesOf theſe two preparations then, which require ſome length of time to fit them, the firſt is, that you muſt make the lodgings and rooms for the Silk-wormes, ſo commodiouſly and conueniently for them, as they may eaſily doe their worke, to yeeld you abundance of ſilke: which is but a vaine hope, if you lodge them in a place vnproper, and contrary to their nature. The Chambers for to lodge and bring vp the Silk-wormes in, muſt bee made ſpacious, lightſome, pleaſant, neate, and wholeſome, farre from ill ſents, damps, fogs, and humidities: warme in cold, and cold in hot weather: they muſt not be lodged in the loweſt roome neere the ground, nor yet in the vppermoſt roome neere the tiles, becauſe of the diſtempers of theſe two contrary ſituations: the loweſt roome may be too moyſt, and the vppermoſt too windy, too hot, or too cold for them, according to the ſeaſons. Neuertheleſſe, the lower roome is the better of the two, and may bee borne withall, if the floore be dry and boorded, and that vpon it you erect one onely ſingle Stage for the Wormes, three or foure foot high from the floore, for the auoyding of cold dampes and moyſtures, and ſo as there bee too, one roome aboue it cloſe boorded, to the end the Silk-wormes may be ſtill placed farre off from the tiles, which being neere them, are alwayes hurtfull

to them, becauſe that the winde and the cold pierceth thorow them, and the heat of the Sunne is there alſo inſupportable, when it lights vpon the roofe in his full force.Thatched leafes naught Thatched roofes are alſo naught for them, becauſe they harbour Mice and Rats in them, which are great deuourers of the Wormes.
            The moſt proper and commodious roomes for the Silk-wormes then,Middle roomes beſt. are middle chambers, which muſt be ſpared for thē two months only in the Spring: or elſe if your houſe-roome be too ſtraight, you muſt build new lodgings expreſly for them, in which they will ſoone quit the coſt, and that durably after; but otherwiſe to expect profits of them in bad roomes, will not be worth your labour.
            You muſt caſt the proportion for their roomes after this manner:The proportion of the roomes. The Silk-wormes comming of ten ounces of ſeed, to be kept and fed well at eaſe for the beſt profit, muſt haue a middle chamber of forty two foot in length, eighteene foot in bredth, and twelue foot in heighth; and for more or leſſe Wormes you keepe, ground your ſelfe thereafter, vpon this proportion.
            The houſes wherein you keepe them,Situation of the houſes for them. would be ſituated in a good, cleere, dry ayre, for moyſture is a great enemy vnto them: the chambers wherein you feed them, muſt haue caſement windowes to open and ſhut on both ſides the roome, being oppoſite one againſt

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
being blacke, is greater, and better to taſte, than that of the white, which is luſhious; beſides all this, the blacke is of farre ſlower growth than the white Mulbery tree.
            
               Three ſorts of white Mulbery trees.Of the white Mulbery tree there are manifeſtly knowne three kinds, which neuertheleſſe are onely diſtinguiſhed by the diuers colours of the fruit, which are white, blacke, and red, and ſeuerally brought forth by ſeuerall trees: all which three ſorts, notwithſtanding the difference of the colour of the fruit, beare but one name of the white Mulbery tree. Theſe three ſorts reſemble all one another, both in leaues which they bring forth, all of a meane greatneſſe, and a ſmooth feeling, the wood of all being yellow within, and the difference onely to be knowne by the fruit, as aforeſaid.
            
               The white Mulbery tree better than the blacke.The blacke Mulbery tree leafe makes groſſe and courſe ſilke; but the white Mulbery tree leafe makes fine, & high-prized, (for according to the fineneſſe of the leafe, will the fineneſſe and goodneſſe of the ſilke be:) Therefore alwayes where it is in your power to make the beſt choyce, ſtore your ſelfe with the white Mulbery tree; which as it is farre better than the blacke, ſo alſo it ſpringeth faſter, growing more in two yeeres, than the blacke in ſixe.
            
               The white Mulbery tree, bearing the blacke berry, beſt of all.Yet among the three ſorts of white Mulbery trees, there is choyce alſo to be made; for by the ſearching of ſome it hath been found, that the leaues comming of that white Mulbery

tree which beares the blacke berries, are 
                  〈◊〉
                than any of the other white Mulbery trees, bearing either the white, or the red berry. Wherefore if it bee poſſible, furniſh your ground onely of this kinde, that the food of the Silk-worme, and ſo withall, your ſilke may be the more exquiſite.
            Next to this, is the white Mulbery tree, bearing the white berry, which ſome (according as there are diuers fancies) holds to be the better: neuertheleſſe the former is generally held the beſt.
            Aboue all,A Rule. keepe no tree in your Mulbery yard, which beares leaues very much indented; for it is neither of ſo great ſubſtance, nor yeelds ſo much food as that which hath leſſe nickes: but yet this tree will be made good by grafting vpon it.
            Hauing choſen your beſt plant of the white Mulbery tree bearing blacke berries,Soyle of the Mulbery, for good leafe. the next choiſe to be made, is of fitte ground to plant them in. Secondly, to haue wholeſome and profitable foode for your Wormes, you muſt plant them in ſuch a ſoile as is beſt fitting for your Vine, namely, not in too fat a ground, nor yet in too barren and leane, but in a middling ſoile: rather in a drie than a moiſt, in a light than a heauy, in a grauelly than a clay. For the quantity of the leaues, true it is, the farre and rich ground is the beſt, but not for the quality; for the leaner ground breed the leafe, of the

moſt profitable and perfect nouriſhment: the Mulbery tree hauing that in common with the Vine, which brings the beſt Wine in the like ſoile to this; ſo then the lighter ground brings forth the more exquiſite, delicate, and ſauoury leafe for the foode of the Silke-worme, and the fat ground a more ranke, groſſe, flaſh, and vnſauory leafe, which being an vnwholeſome kind, ſeldome fadges well with the Worme or neuer, vnleſſe it be helped by an excellent good ſeaſon: whereas the leafe of the leaner and midling ſoyle, neuer fayles the effecting of your deſired purpoſe. The leafe of the Mulbery will be then well qualified as is fitting, if you plant them in an indifferent ſoyle, ſomewhat dry, far from ſprings of water, and from bogges, and from watry and foggy places;What ſoyle beſt. prouided alſo, that they be expoſed to the Sunne, and kept as much as may be from the annoyance of the North and Eaſt Windes: for with the Vine too, the Mulbery hates a cold, ſhady, and watry ſituation. And though the Vine and the Mulbery bring forth more in a fat ſtrong ground then in a leaner, yet ſo it is, that the little of the fruite of the leaner ground being delicate, is more eſteemed and of better price, than the abundance of that out of the fatter ſoyle, which is coorſe and groſſe.
            The third thing, is to ſhew the beſt time and order to plant and remooue the Mulbery tree, and at what age the leafe is good. Conſidering

there be ſuch ſtore of growne Mulbery trees, ſmall and great in Virginia to be taken vp, nothing ſhall be ſaid now of planting the ſuckers or branches, nor yet of ſowing the Mulbery ſeede (which though it be the ſloweſt, yet it is held a ſure and a good way) but we will onely aduiſe you to take choyce of ſuch well-growne Mulberies, as may ſooneſt bring profit by their forward flouriſhing. Experience teaches,The leafe of the old Mulbery, the beſt. that the leaues of the olde Mulbery trees are farre more healthfull for the Worme, and more profitable than thoſe of the young ones, in caſe they be ſtill vigorous and not falne into extreme decay through age: the Mulbery tree, as in many things, being in this alſo like to the Vine, which brings better wine olde than young. And as the Vine begins to beare good Wine after the ſeuen or eyght firſt yeeres of his planting, ſo likewiſe the Mulbery tree in the ſame age, brings forth ſo good leafage, wherof you may be ſure to reape certaine profit.
            The time and manner of remoouing of the Mulbery tree, is much after the faſhion of others: you may remooue and plant the Mulbery in September, October, Nouember, December, February, March, or Aprill, and in Ianuary too if it be not froſty weather.When to remoue the Mulbery tree. Take them vp in faire weather, being neither froſty nor hotte, with ſuch care and curiouſneſſe that you may haue all the rootes whole and intire, without any being broken or bruiſed if it bee poſſible:

which to doe, you muſt neither ſpare coſt, nor paines, nor muſt you want patience, which is neceſſary for this action, for feare leſt through rude haſtineſſe and careleſneſſe, your trees ill taken vp, prooue loſt charge and labour. Before you take them vp, head them, cutting off all their branches, leauing ſome forked armes of them onely with ſnags, of ſuch length as is fitting for new growth, as vſually is done in remouing of other trees.How to remoue Mulbery trees, and to prepare the ground for t
                     •
                  em. To doe well, three moneths at leaſt before you remoue them, you muſt make holes in the earth ready digged for them, where you minde to ſet them. The longer the holes are digged before you ſet them, be it a whole yeere, ſo much the better; for the more the earth is ſeaſoned and prepared by the weather, the eaſier the trees take rooting, and draw the better nouriſhment from the earth. But if neceſſity conſtraine you to dig the holes at the ſame inſtant that you are to plant them, then muſt you burne ſome ſmall wood, buſhes, or ſtraw in the holes, that the fire may ſupply the want of the Sunne and the froſt, for the fit preparing of the earth: if otherwiſe, you muſt not fill vp the holes with that earth which was taken out of thē, but with other ſeaſoned earth, pared and taken onely from the very top of the ground, which is better ſeaſoned by the Sunne than that raw earth which lyeth deeper. The holes muſt bee made very large and wide for them, for to containe the roots at full eaſe; you

may be ſure you cannot make them too big. The rootes muſt be ſet as deepe in the ground, as they were then when they were taken vp; ſo ſhall you plant them after their naturall manner, which is beſt, neither too deepe, not too ſhallow. There muſt be left halfe a foot of ſmall looſe earth in the bottome of the hole, to ſet the roots vpon; which earth, if it bee not well prepared before by the weather, muſt bee taken from the top of the ground, and by this means, they will the eaſier and ſooner take root downward. The roots muſt be ſet downe eaſily, and put into the earth as neere as may bee, to the ſame ſite and naturall poſture that they were when they were growing, taking heed that in placing them, you make not the roots to preſſe and croſſe one vpon another: wherefore ſee that you couer the roots well, and handſomly, putting betweene them all ſoft and fine earth, preſſing it downe, and couering them by little and little patiently with the hand, and not treading them with the feet, or vſing rammers, and beaters, as ſome doe, which ſpoyleth them, but filling them vp rather, and kneading the earth about them gently with the hand, as is ſaid; beginning firſt from the loweſt roots, and ſo going on to the middlemoſt, and then at laſt to the higheſt, till the ground be leuelled. So ſhall all the roots be couered, without any hollowneſſe being left betweene them; for this cloſeneſſe keepes the roots from taking wind,

and from water ſtanding about them, which rots them. If in the negligent taking vp, part of the roots be vnbarked, bruiſed, or broken, that part muſt be cut off before you plant it, and you muſt put earth cloſe about that place which is thus hurt, that water and ayre come not betweene it and the earth, to rot it.
            
               For Mulbery trees to ſpread and grow bigger.To haue your Mulbery trees grow big, and faire ſpred, you muſt ſhred off ſome two inches of the tops of all the branches round about, and eſpecially to cut the maſter bough of the ſtocke, in lopping the top of the tree, ſo as in the whole height of the growth, the tree bee not aboue ſixe, or ſeuen foot high from the ground: for keeping your trees alwayes at that height by ſhredding them, they will ſpread the more: for the ſubſtance going backe, will be imployed in nouriſhing of the ſtocke; whereas if you let the branches grow at will, there will be much ranke and vnprofitable wood.
            
               In what ſpace to plant the Mulbery tree.The fourth poynt requiſite for the goodneſſe of the Mulbery leafe, is, the regard to be had in the planting of them in fit diſtance and ſpace one from another, whereby the Sunne may come euery way freely to them, to giue you a well-concocted and wholſome fine leafe for your Silkworms. The more ſpace of ground the Mulbery tree hath freely by himſelfe, and the more frankly the ayre and Sunne comes to it, the greater it growes, and brings the better leaues. Therefore if you will make, as it were,

whole Forreſts and Woods of the Mulbery trees, you muſt plant them in a ſtraight line, and comely figure of a quincunx, euery tree being diſtant one from another euery way, at leaſt foure and twenty or thirty foot. Or otherwiſe, hauing ſuch ſtore of Mulbery trees as you haue ſomewhere in Virginia, you may take vp all trees betweene them, that hinder this diſtance from thirty foot, to thirty foot, that the Sunne may come throughly to them.
            But if you will plant them in rankes in the hedges, and out-borders of your plough-lands, or other grounds, then may you plant them neerer together, yet alwayes without preſſing them too neere one another; for that is euer to the hurt of the tree, and the loſſe of the owner. But conſidering that the onely outskirts of arable lands, vineyards, and other parts of your demeane lands, though indifferently large, are not ſufficient to containe Mulbery trees in ſo great a number, as is fitting to feed the Wormes in abundance; and for that on the other ſide, the leaues of the trees which are in the thickets and woods, are not ſo good and wholſome for them, as thoſe that are ſet in due ſpace in the out-borders, becauſe the other neither haue Sun, nor winde at will: a meane betweene theſe two extremes is found, conueniently to plant the Mulbery trees for the profit of good leafage, and yet without much hindering the tillage and vſe of good land. And

this is to plant the trees amidſt your grounds by line and leuell in double rowes, one ſingle rowe being euen diſtant from the other ſixteene foot, and ſo likewiſe euery tree to be ſet in the ſame diſtance from one another; which being thus planted, the two rowes on each ſide make one faire alley.The beſt way to plant Mulbery trees in good order: like to the firſt of More field walkes. And you muſt diſpoſe theſe allies on this manner; namely, both along, and acroſſe the field, the one alley thwarting and intercroſſing the other, leauing on the outſides on them great empty ſquares of ground, euery ſquare containing an acre, or more, as a man pleaſeth, for to ſow corne there, which may bee reaped, without being trod downe by the gatherers of the leaues; for when they gather the leaues, they ſhall tread only on the allies, or neere them; which allies taking vp but ſmall roome, there will be but little loſſe of ground, either for your come, or for other vſes. You muſt alſo plant the trees in theſe allies in ſuch ſort, that they be not ſet iuſt right ouer one againſt another, leſt they be peſtered together, but ſet a tree of one row, ſtill againſt the empty ſpace of the other row: ſo ſhall they haue roome and aire enough to grow luſtily and freſhly, hauing thus the benefit of the Sun, which will alwayes come moſt freely vpon them, eſpecially vpon the open ſides of the great ſquares. In which ſquares you may, if you will, conueniently ſow corne, ſpecially O
                  •
               es, and field Peaſe, or ſuch like; which though they be

trodden downe in the gathering of the leaues, yet can they haue no great hurt, by reaſon that the blades of theſe graines will bee then backwards, and they will riſe againe, though they be beaten down to the ground; ſo wil not Wheat, Rye, nor Barly, which for that reaſon would not be ſowne in your Mulbery-yard, but vpon neceſſity.
            There is another commodity comes alſo of ploughing your Mulbery grounds: for the Mulbery tree proſpers much better in the looſe ploughed or digged ground, then in the hard cloddy medowes and paſtures, ſo as you take heed leſt in ploughing or digging about them, you hurt not the rootes. In the ſame ſquares you may alſo plant Vines, where they will profit, as being not much hindered by the ſhade of the trees; or you may, if you had rather, haue medowes or paſtures in them, after the trees haue had foure or fiue yeeres rooting, ſo as you dig the earth looſe about the roots, and ſometimes dung them. In this ſort, without hindering your demeanes better, than any other way, neere to your houſe (for ſo is moſt fitting) may you plant your Mulbery yards with great profit, both for the goodnes of the leaf, & for the pleaſure and beauty which will be in the walkes, in which alſo if you pleaſe, you may ſow, or ſet ſomewhat, that may bee for vſe and profit, and quit the coſt of labouring the ground.
            
               Now you muſt not content your ſelfe in planting a few; for the Mulbery trees being the maine foundation of this reuenue, that muſt be the chiefeſt thing whereat you muſt aime, for to plant ſo great a quantity of them, and ſo ſoone, that in a ſhort time you may reape the ſweetneſſe of this rich profit to your contentment.
            Thoſe that are perfectly experienced in this buſineſſe, aduiſe a man by all meanes to haue as great abundance of Mulbery trees as is poſſible, and for one that is a good husband to reape good profit, they preſcribe the quantity of two or three thouſand trees;One man ſhould haue two or three thouſand Mulbery trees in hi
                     •
                   yard for good profit. for with a leſſe number a man that will bee a maſter of this worke, ought not to enterpriſe this buſineſſe; for here is no queſtion of good profit which muſt grow out of a ſufficient number of trees.
            Therefore it is neceſſary to imploy this worke heere in a great volume, or elſe the play will hardly be worth the candle. It is onely for women wantonly to keepe a few Silk-wormes, with a few Mulbery trees, more for pleaſure, than for profit. So then, if you minde to be very rich indeed in this commodity, you muſt not ſtay at that number of trees aboue-named, but alwayes ſtill augment your Mulbery yard, adding thereto certaine hundreds of trees yeerly, both for feeding plenty of Wormes, and alſo for the ſuccour of the trees, whereof

you ſhall doe well to let ſome part of them euery yeere reſt vnleaued; as Lands that bee fallow, to haue them in better hart. Now the profit riſing by the leaues, is thus eſtimated:A thouſand waight of leaues feed an ounce of ſeed. A thouſand waight of Mulbery leaues, is ſufficient to feed an ounce of ſeed in Silk-wormes: and an ounce of ſeed, if the race in goodnes, the conuenience of the lodging, the perfectneſſe of the leafe, and the ſeaſonable time for the worke of the Silkwormes, and the carefull diligence of the Gouernour, all agree together, (for there muſt be a conſort of all theſe) then (I ſay) an ounce of good ſeed, makes eaſily fiue or ſixe pound of ſilke, which what it is worth euery one knowes. And this thouſand waight of leaues, ſome twenty, or fiue & twenty trees of a meane ſize, will alwayes bring forth. Yea a much leſſe number of trees ſufficeth for ſo much waight, if they bee old and great. As there are ſome Mulbery trees in ſome places neere Auignion, ſo large and ſo abundant in branches,One great tree ſometimes bear in thouſand waight of leaues that one tree will furniſh leaues ſufficient to feed an ounce of ſeed. The coſt and charge of the buſineſſe yeerly, is thus rated in France, a fourth of the totall defrayes it all, and ſo there remaines three parts of cleere reuenue to the owner.
            Beſides this profit of ſilke to be made of the Mulbery tree, which is of infinite commodity alone; it is alſo good for many other ſingular vſes. By tryall made, it hath been found, that

the barke of the white Mulbery tree makes good linnen cloth,Other profits of the Mulbery tree and Cordage. The wood alſo is good to make hoopes for tubs and barrels, and it is fit for all Ioyners worke, and for any vſe that is yeelding and pliant: it is alſo good about ſhips and botes: the boughs ſhred off, are excellent for Conies: the berries are much deſired of poultry, and is good feed for them; and the leaues, all that fall of themſelues to the ground in the end of Summer, being laid by in ſome place, and taken thence day by day, as you need, and giuen boyled to ſwine, keepe them in good ſtate, and begin to put them into fleſh. Theſe, and diuers other commodities come of this excellent tree; which aboue all others therefore, you muſt preſerue and multiply ſtill in Virginia.
            
            To this aboueſaid ſhall be added and taught the way how to make Silk-wormes, which is reported by ſome, the experiment whereof is ſo much the more neceſſary to bee tryed, becauſe there is great danger in carrying of the Silk-wormes ſeed, ſo long a iourney by Sea to Virginia.
               The Sea by contrary qualities corrupts the Silk-worme ſeed. For the Sea is much contrary to the nature of the Silk-worme ſeed, and eaſily corrupts it, by reaſon of the moyſture, and cold rawneſſe, eſpecially carried in winter time; and therefore it is very hard to ſend it by Sea in his perfection. Now then, beſides the gathering together of the naturall Silk-wormes, ſaid to bee in Virginia, (which out of all queſtion

muſt needs bee the beſt, both for worke, and for to haue good race of ſeed from them) you ſhall doe well to try this experiment commended by ſome Authors.
            In the Spring time,How to make Silk-worme
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                ſhut vp a young Calfe in a little darke and dry ſtable, and there feed it onely with Mulbery leaues ſome twenty dayes, meane while let it not drinke at all, nor eate any other thing; at the end of this time, kill it by ſtrangling, and put it whole into a tub, to rot there, and couer it all ouer with Mulbery leaues: out of the corruption of this carcaſe, come forth abundance of Silk-wormes, which you may take vp with the Mulbery leaues, they faſtening themſelues vnto them; theſe fed and handled according to art and common faſhion, in their due time bring forth both ſilke and ſeed, as others. Some, to leſſen this charge, take onely the leg of a ſucking Calfe, and cut out of it as much fleſh as weighes ſeuen or eight pounds, and putting it in ſome woodden veſſell with Mulbery leaues about it, leauing it to rot, take the wormes comming out of the fleſh, from the Mulbery leaues to which they cleaue, and ſo vſe them in like manner as others. Conſidering, that Bees are made but of the rottenneſſe of a young Bull or Heifer, and according to the Scripture of the Lion, and that wee ſee daily many creatures come of putrifaction: this is no improbable thing, and therefore is worth

the triall, to ſaue the labour and danger of ſending Silk-worme ſeed by Sea, which to doe well, would be changed euery foure yeeres, as you vſe to doe your graine that you ſowe.
            Other things concerning the ordering of Silk-wormes, you ſhall know by another booke which is to be printed. Meane while, with all ſpeed make theſe timely and neceſſary prouiſions aforeſaid, for the ground-worke of the buſines, as to plant ſtore of the beſt Mulbery trees, in a good aire, in proper ſoyle, & fit diſtance, & dig ſtore of holes in the ground betimes for the preparing of the earth, the better to plant the trees in: prouide alſo faire and fit middle lodgings for the Silk-wormes: for this delicate creature, which clothes Princes, and payes his charges ſo bountifully, cannot indure to bee lodged in baſe and beggerly roomes, but in thoſe that be large, ſweet, neat, wel ayred, and lightſome. It is a thing well knowne, that a few Silk-wormes, fed at large, and eaſe, make farre more ſilke than a greater number, pent in narrow and ill-ſauoured roomes. No ill ſmels muſt come neere them, they muſt be kept ſweet, and oft perfumed; therefore hauing ſuch ſtore of ſweet woods in Virginia as you haue there, you ſhall doe well to make their roomes and tables of thoſe woods: ſweet ſents being a thing moſt agreeable to them. Bee carefull to doe things curiouſly and thorowly well for them at the firſt, for your more plentifull and

certaine gaine after: conſidering the charge to you is all one: and a thing once wel done, they ſay, is twice done, which will thereby alſo bring you twice double profit, with long continuance.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A valuation of the Commodities growing and to be had in Virginia: rated as they are there worth.
            IRon ten pounds the Tunne.
            Silke Coddes, two ſhillings ſixepence the pound.
            Raw Silke, thirteene ſhillings foure pence the pound.
            Silke graſſe to bee vſed for Cordage, ſixepence the pound: but we hope it will ſerue for many better vſes, and ſo yeeld a farre greater rate, whereof there can neuer bee too much planted.
            Hempe, from ten ſhillings, to two and twenty ſhillings the hundred.
            Flaxe, from twenty ſhillings to thirty ſhillings the hundred.
            Cordage, from twenty ſhillings, to foure and twenty ſhillings the hundred.
            Cotton wooll, eyght pence the pound.
            Hard Pitch, ſixe ſhillings the hundred.
            Tarre, fiue ſhillings the hundred.
            Turpentine, twelue ſhillings the hundred.
            Rozen, fiue ſhillings the hundred.
            
               Madder Crop, forty ſhillings the hundred, courſe Madder, fiue and twenty ſhillings the hundred.
            Woad, from twelue ſhillings, to twenty the hundred.
            Annis-ſeeds, forty ſhillings the hundred.
            Powder Sugar, Panels, Muſcauadoes and Whites, fiue and twenty ſhillings, forty, and three pounds the hundred.
            Sturgeon, and Cauiare, as it is in goodneſſe.
            Salt, thirty ſhillings the weigh.
            Maſticke, three ſhillings the pound.
            Salſa Perilla wild, fiue pounds the hundred.
            Salſa Perilla domeſtick, ten pounds the hundred.
            Red earth Allenagra, three ſhillings the hundred.
            Red Allum, called Carthagena Allum, ten ſhillings the hundred.
            Roach Allum, called Romiſh Allum, ten ſhillings the hundred.
            Berry graine, two ſhillings ſixe pence the pound: the powder of graine, nine ſhillings the pound: it groweth on trees like Holly berries.
            Maſts for Shipping, from ten ſhillings, to three pounds a piece.
            Pot-aſhes, from twelue ſhillings the hundred, to foureteene.
            Sope-aſhes, from ſixe ſhillings, to eyght ſhillings the hundred.
            
               Clapboord watered, thirty ſhillings the hundred.
            Pipe ſtaues, foure pounds the thouſand.
            Rape-ſeede oyle, ten pounds the tunne, the cakes of it feede Kine fat in the winter.
            Oyle of Walnuts, twelue pounds the tunne.
            Lin-ſeede oyle, ten pounds the tunne.
            Saffron, twenty ſhillings the pound.
            Honey, two ſhillings the gallon.
            Waxe, foure pounds the hundred.
            Shomack, ſeuen ſhillings the hundred, whereof great plenty in Virginia, and good quantity will be vented in England.
            
            Fuſtick young, eyght ſhillings the hundred.
            Fuſtick old, ſixe ſhillings the hundred, according to the ſample.
            Sweete Gums, Roots, Woods, Berries for dies and Drugs, ſend of all ſorts as much as you can, euery ſort by it ſelfe, there being great quantities of thoſe things in Virginia, which after proofe made, may be heere valued to their worth. And particularly, we haue great hope of the Pocoone roote, that it will proue better than Madder.
            Sables, from eyght ſhillings the paire, to twenty ſhilling a paire.
            Otters skins, from three ſhillings, to fiue ſhillings a piece.
            Luzernes, from two ſhillings, to ten a piece.
            Martins the beſt, foure ſhillings a piece.
            Wild Cats, eyghteene pence a piece.
            
               Foxe skins, ſixe pence a piece.
            Muske Rats skins, two ſhillings a doozen: the cods of them will ſerue for good perfumes.
            Beuer skins that are full growne, in ſeaſon, are worth ſeuen ſhillings a piece.
            Beuer skins, not in ſeaſon, to allow two skins for one, and of the leſſer, three for one.
            Old Beuer skins in Mantles, gloues or caps, the more worne, the better, ſo they bee full of furre, the pound waight is ſixe ſhillings.
            The new Beuer skins, are not to be bought by the pound, becauſe they are thicke and heauy leather, and not ſo good for vſe as the old.
            Pearles of all ſorts that you can finde: Ambergreece as much as you can get: Criſtall rocke: Send as much as you can, and any ſort of Minerall ſtones, or earth that weighs very heauy.
            Preſerue the Walnut trees to make oyle of, and cut them not downe: ſo alſo preſerue your Mulberry and Cheſnut trees very carefully.
            In the moneth of Iune, bore holes in diuers ſorts of Trees, whereby you ſhall ſee what gums they yeeld, and let them be well dried in the Sunne euery day, and ſend them home in very dry Caske.
            
         
      
   