
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The Boke of meaſuryng of Lande as well of Woodland as Plowland, & paſture in the feelde: & to compt the true nombre of Acres of the ſame. Newly corrected, & compiled by Sir Richarde de Beneſe.
            
            ¶ Impynted at London, by Thomas Colwell.
            
         
         
            
            The Contentes of this booke.
            IT ſheweth the māer of deuiding of one acre or mo, of woodland frō many other acres, liyng ī one peece togither Alſo it ſheweth the diuerſytie prices of al the partes of an acre of wodlande, after ye rate & diuerſitie of the pryce of the ſame, from the price of .iii s .iiii. d. for an acre to the price of .vi li. xiii. s. iiii. d. Alſo it ſheweth the maner of meſurynge of timbre or ſtone, by the fote ſquare, in timbre meaſure of what quantitie ſoeuer the timber or ſtone be, frō one ynch in ſquare to xxxvi. ynches ſquare. Alſo it ſheweth ye māer of meaſurynge ſawene bordes, tables, or panes of glaſſe by the foote ſquare, what bredth ſoeuer the bordes, tables, orpanes of Glaſſe be, from one ynche breadthe, to xxxvi. ynches in breadth.
            It ſheweth alſo the maner of meaſuring of a Chambre flore or of a Pauement, to knowe howe manye Foote of Boorde or ſtone wyll borde or paue it, of what lēgth and breadthe ſo euer the floore or Pauement be, to. iv. foote in lengthe, and. xl. foote in breadth.
            Finis.
         
         
            
            The Preface of Thomas Paynell. Chanon of Marton to the gentell Reader.
            
               IT is moſt cōmonlie ſene, that euery mā doth moſt cōmende ye thing that he is beſt experte & ſene in. And therfore ſome ther are ye exfoll diuin letters, ſome the law, & ſom Philoſophy, with ſuche other lyberall ſciences, in the which they are learned and exercyſed.
            Other ther are ye do not onely extoll thē, but after they haue ſo done, they diſpute whither of them are moſte laudable, and moſt worthy to be preferred aboue other Ther are lykewyſe ye after longe diſputacion do not onelye aſſygne euery ſience his peculier laude & praiſe, but all ſo ye diſcuſſe whether that of ſuch noble ſciences are moſt for thy cōmon weale ſuppoſyng (and wyll) that thinge to be moſte excellent, that is for euerye mannes profyte, and that common vtylytye and proſyte

dothe none other wiſe ercede priuat gayn & profyt than gold all other metals.
            Theſe men (after my ſentence) gre in a very good opinion, for the diuine Plato ſaith: that man is not borne onelye to profyte him ſelfe, or any ſynguler perſon, but to profite the cōmon welth alſo The which doth then proſper & floryſhe, when gouerners and rulers doe tenderlye and intierlye abiectynge all ſynguler affection, looke and take hede vnto it.
            My diligēce and ſtudy is (ſaith Scipio Africanus) not onelye to beware howe rome be now in my time ruled: but how I may inuent faſhions & meanes, that it may increaſe, & be well gouerned hereafter. O what an excellent worde and ſaynge was that.
            What other thynge but onely ye welth publyke moued M. Curius to ſaye thus to the Samnites, offerynge hym great ſumes of moneye, I deſyre none of your gold (quoth hee) but I deſyre that ye and your riches may be vnder the dominien of the Romaynes. O. was not that an excellent aunſwere.
            And that O. M
                  ••
               i
                  •
               s conſpired to murther Porcenna enemy to the Romanes

without any hope or ſauegard of hys life was it for the cōmon welth of Rome.
            And did not the onelye wealth publike in force M. Regulus to perſwade the Senatours of Rome that they ſhoulde not reſtore the yonge galauntes of Cartago to prolonge his lyfe withall. They are luſty (quoth he,) and in theyr floures, and apt to do vs muche ſorowe, and ſo her re turned agayne to Cartago well aſſured that hee ſhuld neuer eſcape theyr handes alyue. O what ſynguler affection and loue had this man to the cōmon wele, yt preferred it aboue hys owne lyfe of all thynge the moſt eſtemed, and beſte beloued. Are not ſuche men worthy to be gouerners and rulres of cyties and of the common weale.
            As longe as Rome & Cartago, with other lyke cytyes, had ſuche regentes & gouerners, they proſpe red and had abundaunce of all thinge. But after that ſynguler affection, ſynguler cōmodytie and profyte, ambycion, Idlenes & voluptuous pleaſure toke theyr enter, then all that (wyſdome, diligence, ſtudye & great labour had augmented) decaied. Then theſe moſte excellent and ryche Cyties

fell in ruyne, and were eaſely ſubdued. The which thyng doth declare and open theyr great laude, by whoſe gubernacion, rule and pollicie, they came to ſuche hyghe renowne & fame. By this it doth now appeare & folow yt ſuch politike Rulers are worthy of much laud & great cō
               mēdacion. But what cōmendadion laud, & praiſe ſhall we eſteme and iudge them worthy of, ye ingeniouflie haue inuented & cloquently diſcribed, how and by what ſubtile and politike faſſhions, ſuch places ſhuld be gouerned & aſcended to high honoure. And againe how Gouerners of a cōmon wealth ſhulde vſe them ſelues in theyr offices. And not withſtandinge there be that do eleuate & extoll the doer & the inuenter of thinngs aboue the writer, yet after my minde, the inuenter, wryter, or expoſiter of other mēnes writynges are worthye of no lytle prayſe, what reaſon ſhuld defende him, yt would ſaye, that the executer of the Lawe (by whoſe ayde all cōmon weales are ordayned and ruled) to be of more excellency then Moyſes, the fyrſte of all lawyers.

Shuld any Phyloſopher prefer hym ſelfe aboue Pytagoras the fyrſt Phyloſopher, or any Aſtronomer aboue ye chyldren of Seth, the very inuēters & foundaciō ther of, or any Muſician aboue Tuball, Lameths ſon, ye fyrſt yt euer gaue any ſtudy to Muſycke, or any Phyſyciā aboue Apollo or any Arithmeticiā, aboue 
                  •
               aminus, Pytagoras, Pallas, or Algus (of whō Arythmetike is called Agrym, (the inuenter of nombres. Or any Geometrician aboue Cain, the which taught the Hebrici ans the maner and crafte of weightes & meaſures? Is it not (tr
                  •
               w ye) more to inuent and fynde, than to adde vnto that, that is found al redy. And as Agrym was found for ye courſe of marchandyſe & the accomptes therof, ſo was Geometry vpon the excurſions and ouerflowing of the floud Nilus whoſe inſidaciōs and ſurges were ſuche that they confounded and ſo troubled the lymytes and bondes of the land of Egypt, that they knew not theyr owne Lande from other mēnes. Of this toke Geometrye hys Oryginall begynnyng the which includeth the meaſuryng

both of lande & water, the vſe of weyghtes and knowledge of the vniuerſall ordre of the bodyes aboue, the diſtaunce and greatnes of ſtarres, mocyons, and reflections.
            Carpenters and Maſons, withe ſuche other Artyficers doe vſe Geometrye, by the which all maner of ingynes and craftye ordynaunces of warre, and other apperteynynge vnto theyr arte doe depend as hangynge roofes, and Galaryes, walles, ſhyppes, Gallayes, Brydges, Milles Cartes, and wheeles, with the whyche, thynges of great weyght, are verye eaſ
                  •
               lye drawen and hoyſed vp.
            Alſo what ſoeuer goeth by weyghte, water or wynde, or by cordes, as Clockes, the whych goeth by weygtes, and Organes, the whiche ſoundeth by the vehemence and force of the wynde, dothe longe vnto thys noble Scyence. The artificiall crafte alſo of warre, of caſtynge of Belles, and Bomberdes, or Gonnes with ſuche other Artylery, whither they be of tymbre or metall doe for the moſte parte depende of Geometrye.
            And did not the noble Archytas make 
                  •
                Doue of woode, to lyfte her ſelfe vpp,

and to flye by Geometrie.
            Did not Archimenides, make an Inſtrument of Braſſe, wherin men myght eaſely perceyue the mocyons of the Planettes, withe other thynges compryſed in the materyall Speare, & howe to meaſure the altitude and height of all ſuche thinges as man maye ſee and not come vnto? And thoſe thynges alſo that lye playne, deepe, rounde, cornerwiſe, in lengthe, or in breadthe be longethe vnto Geometrye, the whiche conteyneth. iii. dyuers kyndes of meaſuringe.
            The fyrſt is named Altemetria to me aſure a quantytie after his lenghte only.
            The ſeconde is named Planimetrya, that is, to meaſure a quantitye after hys length and breadth.
            The thyrde is called Tercometria, that is to meaſure a quantytie after hys length, breadth, and deepeneſſe.
            In this Scence, are certayne quantyties, called famouſe quantities, as a Fynger, a Palme, a Foote a Cubite, a Pace, a Perche, a ſtake & a 
                  •
               yſe, withe ſuch other, moch neceſſarie to be knowen
            It were very 
                  •
               edyous to expound all the Termes, Partes, Properties, and

Vtylities of Geometrye. For notwythſtandynge that God may, and can doe althyng without nōbre, meaſure, weyght or any poynte of Geometrye, yet when hee gaue the fyrmament the Planettes, and ſtarres, theyr mocions, the earthe, fourme and faſſhion, the Sea, withe other riuers, theyr bankes, hee dyd it by nombre, weyght, and meaſure.
            Wherfore I may well extoll this moſt noble Science conteinynge theſe three, withe the knowledge of manye other lyberall and manuall artes, ryght neceſary for the cōmon weale of man, Conſiderig thē this lyberall Science called Geometry to be in euery thig much conuenient for the vſe & cōmon profite of all men. A Frende and a louer of myne, a Chanon of Marton, named Syr Rycharde Beneſe, not willing to hyde the treaſure, that god hath enryched hym withall. But euermore myndinge & labouringe (as the fore ſayd Romaynes dyd) to encreaſe the common wealth, hauinge alſo this ſaienge of the Phyloſopher in memory. The more profytable a thinge is, the more it ſhulde

be common, hee hath, (I ſaye) compyled this ingenyous and profytable Booke, for the common profite, and vſe of euery man
            Wherin is ſufficiently & breiflie centeyned the perfecte fourme & rule of meaſuryng of woodlande, hilles & mountaynes? wherſoeuer, how ſoeuer or in what fourme or quantitie ſoeuer they lye.
            Alſo of deuidinge of one acre of woodlande or mo from many other acres.
            And of meaſuring of Timbre, ſquare or rounde? Boordes, Tables, & Panes of Glaſſe, by the foote ſquare.
            He hath furthermore ſo expreſt theſe intricate and harde poyntes of Geometrye by fygures, rules, & ſuch open examples, that euery man, applyenge hys mynde therunto, maye wythout anye great labour attayne vnto the perfecte knowledge therof. Vale.
            ¶ Thus endeth the Preface.
         
         
            
            
               
            
            ¶ Here foloweth the Booke to meaſure all Landes.
            
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ¶ The maner of meaſurynge of Lande, and co
                     ••
                  ptynge the nombre of acres of the ſame.
               
                  BY cauſe in meaſuringe of Lande, meny men ſomtyme the ſellers, ſel more meaſure than ryght, ſomtyme the byets by leſſe meaſure thā right be greately deceiued, by ye m
                     •
                  aters therof, the which be not experte and connynge, both in true meaſurynge of Lande, and alſo in true compting and ſummyage the numbre of actes of the ſame. Therfore in this lytle booke, ye ſhall reede certayne rules much neceſſary for ye perfecte knowledge bothe of true meaſurynge of Lande, and alſo of true comptynge and ſumynge the numbre of actes of the ſame.
               
                  
                  ¶ Of dyuers quantytyes of meaſures, and of dyuers names of the ſame.
                  BVt fyrſte for the playner and redyer knowledge of theſe rules folowynge, ye ſhall dylygently note, that there be dyuers quantityes dyuerſly named in meaſuryng of lande that is to ſaye: an ynche, a foote, a perche, a dayworke, & quarter of an acre (moſte cōmonly called a roode,) an halfe acre, and an acre.
               
               
                  ¶ To make a true ynche.
                  THe lengthe of an ynche after ſome mennes opynion, is made by the length of thre barly cornes, ye which rule is not at all tymes true. for ye length of a barly corne of ſome tillage is lōger, & ſome ſhorter, after the fatnes and leaneſſe of the lande, where it was ſowen vpō. Therfore ī makynge of an ynche after this rule It ſhulde be ſomtymes longer, and

ſomtymes ſhorter after the lengthe and ſhortnes of the barly cornes: the which ſhulde make great difference in meaſuring. Therfore ye ſhal take the length of anie ynche more truely vpon an artificers rule made of two foote in lēgth, after the ſtanderde of London, the whiche rule doth conteyne. xxiiii. ynches in lengthe.
               
               
                  ¶ To make a true foote in length and in ſq
                        •
                     re.
                  A foote conteineth xii. ynches in lengthe, a foote ſquare in meaſurynge of lande, or any other thing by the length and breadth onely, cō teineth in it. c. xliiii. ynches di. A fote ſquare conteineth in it. lxxii. inches. A quarter of a foote ſquare conteyneth in it. xxxvi. ynches. But in meaſurynge of tymbre or ſtone, or any other thynge by the length, breadth, and depth, a foote ſquare tōteineth in it. xvii. ¶. and. xxviii ynches.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Of two maner of perches, the woodlande perche, and the fylde lande perche.
                  Bycauſe Woodlande, and fyldeland be not meaſured with perches of lyke and equal lengthe. therfore ye ſhall vnderſtande, that lande in the felde is meaſured moſt cōmonly with a perch or a pole of xvi. foote & dī, in length. But in ſome places the land perch is l
                        •
                     nger and in ſome places ſhorter, after ye cuſtome there vſed. The woodland perche is commonly. xviii. foote in length. But in ſome places it is longer, after the cuſtome ther vſed. The woodland perche of. xviii. foote in length ſquare cō teineth in it. iii. ¶. xxiiii. foote, half of this perche ſquare contayneth in it. ¶. xlii. foote, a quarter of this perche ſquare contayneth in it. lxxxi. foote.
               
               
                  ¶ Of an acre both of woodlande & felde lande.
                  
                     
AN acre both of woodlande, and alſo of fylde lande, is alwayes. xl. perches in length, and iiii. perches in bredth, although an acre of wood lande be more in quātitie, than is an acre of feldelande. Becauſe the perch of woodlande is longer, than is the perche of fyldelande, as it is afore expreſſed, An acre can not lightly be reduced & broughte into a true ſquare, excepte ye ſhulde adde to ſome parte aboue the true quantytie of an acre, or els take awaye ſome parte from the true quantytie of an acre. Neuertheleſſe, after myne accomptyng (as nyghe as I can ſearche the true the, in this behalfe (an acre of woodland ſquare is on euery ſyde. xii. perches & di. ii. fote. viii. ynches, and a quarter of an ynche. An acre conteyneth in it ¶. lx perches. An halfe acre cōteīeth in it. 
                        •
                     xxx. perches. The quarter of an acre (otherwiſe called a rood) contey

neth in it. xl. dayworkes. A daiworke cōteyneth in it. iiii. perches. For lykewyſe as a Marke of money conteyneth in it. ¶. lx. pence, ſo doth an acre cōteyne in it. ¶. lx. perches. And lykewiſe as a Marke of money doth conteyne in it. lx. grotes, ſo doth an acre conteyne in it. xl. dayeworkes. And as a grote doth conteyne in it foure pence, ſo doth a dayworke conteyne in it. iiii. perches.
               
               
                  ¶ Of two maner of Inſtrumentes to meaſure lande withall.
                  MEters of Lande, for the moſte parte do vſe to mete land with a pole made of wood, conteynyng in it the length onely of one perch. The whiche is a verye true and a perfyte way of metynge. But it is moche laborious & not ſpedefull to mete therwith a great quantytie of Lande in ſhorte tyme. And alſo it is very tedyous

to marke truely a great nombre of perches in metyng of them one after another. Therfore ſome men do vſe (and beſt) for ye more expedytion and ſpede, to mete with a corde or a lyne conteynynge in it. v. perches in length, which lyne foure times layde in length, doth make. xx. perches.
                  ¶ This maner of metynge wt a lyne hath ben vſed long tyme before. For the Prophet Zachary ſayth in the. ii chaptēr. that when he lyfted vp his eyes, he ſawe a mā bering a metynge lyne in his hand. And when the prophet aſked the queſtion of hym, why ther he went, this mā anſwered the prophet, that he went to mete Ieruſalē, to know how much the length and bredth of it was. But by cauſe a corde or a lyne by drawynge it vpon the grounde wyl ſometyme ſhrynke, and waxe ſhorter, yf it take wet, and ſōtyme ſtretche lōger by long dryeng

therfore it ſhal be neceſſarie, to ſere it in hote waxe ane roſyn, that it maie kepe at all tymes his true length.
               
               
                  ¶ Howe ye ſhall 
                        •
                     ewe a pece of lande, & marke the faſſhyon ther of to meaſure it.
                  WHan ye ſhall meaſure a pece of any maner of lande, ye ſhal go about the boundes of it ones or twiſe and conſydre well by vewynge of it, whether ye may meſure it in one parcell hole togither, or els in two or many parcelles. For ſome maner lande, lyeth in ſuche dyuers faſſhions, that it muſte nedes be meſured in dyuers parcelles, eche one by them ſelfe.
                  Therfore whē it may be meſured in one parcel togither, then ſhal ye loke wyſely, whych way ye may caſt it in to. iiii. ſydes, & then ye muſt meaſure euery ſyde by it ſelf. And marke dylygently in writyng or els ſcore vpon a ſquare ſlycke the nōbre of perches of

euery one of the ſame ſydes by them ſelfe, and then ſume them togyther, as ye ſhall ſe hereafter. But whan a pece of lande muſte be deuyded into dyuers parcelles, and muſte be meat ted eche one by them ſelfe, then ye ſhall conſydre well in how many parcelles, and in what maner faſſhions they muſt be beſt deuyded into, that ye maye meaſure euerye one of them after theyr dyuers faſſhion. For dyuers faſſhions of lande be dyuerſlye meaſured, as ye ſhall playnely perceyue by dyuers fygures folowynge.
               
               
                  ¶ Of dyuerſytie of lynes and angles.
                  BY cauſe all maner of fygures be made of lynes and angles, therfore it ſhal be expedient fyrſt to know the diuerſity of them. For they make great dyfferences in the makynge of meaſures. Therfore ye ſhall dylygently note that there bee three maner

of lynes, & thre maner of angles. Of lynes, one is a ſtrayght lyne hangynge, the ſeconde is a ſtrayght line ouerthwart, the thyrde and laſt is a croked line hāgig, or els ouerthwart Of angles, one is a plaine angle, like to one of the angles of a. iiii. ſquare, the ſecond is a flat angle, like to one of the angles of. v. or. vi. ſquare or mo The thyrde and laſte is a ſharpe angle, lyke to one of the angels of a tryangle or. iii. ſquare. The which lines and angles bee theſe that hereafter folowe.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                  
                  ¶Hereafter folowe dyuers fygures, of dyuers faſſhions of land, and firſt of a pece of land equally ſquare in all the. iiii. ſides, with. iiii. playne āgles.
                  ¶ Yf a pece of lande  be euuallye ſquare in all his. iiii. ſydes hauynge. iiii. playne angles, lyke this preſēt fygure, and perches vpon euery ſyde of equall nombre as in this example. The vpper ſyde is. xx. perches in length, the nether ſide is. xx. perches, the ryghte ſyde is. xx. perches, the lyfte ſyde is alſo. xx. perches, thē ye muſt take. xx. perches for the lengthe, and. xx. perches for the bredth, becauſe all ye ſydes be equall

in length. The whiche. xx. in length and. xx. in bredth multiplyed the one by the other, doeth make two acres and dī. in the whole ſūme, as ye ſhall ſe by diuers rules of ſūminge of meaſures folowynge hereafter.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande equall in bredth at both the endes and equall in length on both ſydes.
                  ¶ Yf a pece  of lande be equalle in breadth at both endes and equal ī length on both ſydes with. iiii. plain angles, lyke to this preſente fygure, As in this example, the vpper ſide is xx. perches in length, the nether ſide is. xx. perches in lēgth, the right end is. x. perches in breath, and the lyfte ende is. x. perches in bredth, then ye

muſt take. xx. perches for the length, and. x. perches for the bredth of thys lande, the whiche. xx. multyplyed by. x. make one acre, & one roode. Lyke wyſe in all other maner of formes & faſſhions of Lande, whither they be in thre ſydes equallye trianguled, or els partely tryanguled, or els diuerſlye in maner of an Harpe trianguled or els in. iiii. ſydes partelie ſquare, or els in all. iiii. ſydes dyuerſlye ſquare, or els in. v. or. vi. or mo ſydes equallie ſquare, or els rounde, or els pertelye rounde, lyke to a faſhion of a 
                        •
                     owe, or els in two ſydes partelye rounde, lyke to the faſſhion of an egge, or els it be mountyng vp in the mydle, lyke to a mountayne or an hyll, or els deſcendynge downewarde, lyke to a valey, as hereafter ſhall appeare by dyuers examples of diuers figures, yet that maner of lande, muſte nedes by ſome maner of reaſon be brought to

one rertayne length, & one certayne breadth, or els it can not be ſūmed to the true nombre of acres, and other odde quātities as hereafter ſhall appeare. But ſome men that be ygnoraunt, and not expert in this maner of meſurynge & co
                        ••
                     tynge, they wyll mete a pece of lande roūde aboute of what forme or faſſhion ſo euer it be, and wyll caſte the whole nombre of perches of all the ſydes togyther.
                  And then they will deuide that whole nombre of perches, into. iiii. equall partes, of the whiche they wyll take one parte, for the length, and one other of thē for the breadth. But in this maner of comptynge, they bee greatly deceiued, as it ſhal be proued by this laſte example before, where the ryght and the lefte endes, euerye one be. x. perches in bredth, ye higher and the lower ſides be euery one. xx.

perches in the lēgth. Theſe. iiii. ſides layde all togyther, doo make. ix. perches in the whole ſūme. Then if ye deuyde this whole nombre in to. iiii. equall partes, euerye parte is. xv. perches in length. Therfore if ye take. xv. perches for the length, and. xv. al ſo for the bredth of that pece of land after this maner of comptinge, they do make in the whole ſūme one acte, one roode. vi. dayeworkes, and one perch. But this ſūme is falſe, for it is more thē the true content of it, as doth appere by the length, & bredth, (as they do ſtand) in this foreſaid figure. For. xx. perches in length, and x. perches in bredth, do make but an acre, & on eroode. Another example the higher ſyde is. xl. perches ī lēgth the lower ſyde is. xxx. perches, the right ſide is. xx. and the lyfte ſyde is. x. perches. All theſe nombres of perches layde togyther, doo make an.

C. perchers. Deuide them into foure equall partes, and euerye parte maketh. xxv. perches. Thē take. xxv. perches for the length, and. xxv. for the bredth, and this length & bredth of perches doth make in ye whole ſūme (after this comptynge (.iii. acres. iii. roodes. vi. daie workes, and one perche. The whiche ſūme is falſe, as ye ſhall proue by caſtynge of euerye two cōtrarye ſydes togyther. The which deuyded into two halfes doth make xxxv. perches for the length, and. xv. for the bredth. For theſe nombres of perches in lēgth & breadth do make but. iii. acres, one roode, one dayworke and one perche. Therfore ye ſhall not vſe that maner of comptynge by caſtynge the whole nombre of all the ſydes into. iiii. equall partes, and by takynge one parte of them for the length, & one other for the breadth bycauſe it is falſe. But ye ſhall caſte

euery two contrary ſydes togyther, and then take the halfe parte of two of them for the length, and the halfe of other two of them for the breadth of the lande: as ye ſhal ſe plaīely here after in the fygure dyuerſly ſquare.
                  Or els in ſuch maner fygures dyuerſlye ſquare, ye ſhall vſe another waie better, as in the ſame place doeth playnely folowe.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande tryanguled in all thre ſydes equally.
                  BVt whan ye can  not caſt a pece of lande into. iiii. ſydes, bycauſe it is trianguled hauing all thre ſydes of equall length, like to this preſent figure, thē ye ſhal meſure from on of the angeles to the mydle of the contrarye ſyde as doth appere by the lyne through ye mydle of ye ſame figure. And take the nōbre

of perches of yt meaſure for the lēgth And thē take half the nombre of perches of a whole ſyde, for the bredth as in this exāple. The thre ſydes euery one is. xx. perches, the mydle lyne from the mydle of the lower ſyde to the hygher angle, is. xvii. perches & di. Then take the nombre of perches of ye midle line for the lēgth, the whiche is. xvii. perches & di. Afterwarde take halfe the nombre of perches of the longer ſyde, the whiche is. x. for the bredth. Then multyply. xvii. and dī. by. x. & it maketh. C. lxxv. perches, the whiche maketh one acre. iii. dayworkes, and. iii. perches.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande partly tryanguled.
                  ANd whē a pece of land is partly tryanguled, hauynge the. ii. ſydes of lyke length, & the head ſhorter in bredth lyke to this preſent fygure. Thē ye ſhall meaſure from the

foote to the midle of ye 
                      head, as doth appere by ye midle lyne ithys ſame figure. And take the nūbre of perches of that meſure for the length. And thē take halfe ye numbre of perches of ye head for the bredth, as in this example. The hygher ſyde is. xvi. perches ye right & the lift ſydes euery on is. xxx. perches, and the lyne in the myddeſt from the foote to the midle of ye head is. xxix. perches. Thē take the halfe nombre of perches of the hed, the which is. viii. for the bredth and the nombre of perches from the foote to the myddeſt of the hed The which is. xxix. for ye length, and then multiply. xxix. by. viii. and it maketh one acre, one rood, and. viii. day workes.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Of an other pece of lande partely tryanguled.
                  AND  yf a pece of lā de be partely tryā
                     guled hauyng ye one ſyde lōger, & the. ii. other ſides ſhorter of lyke lengthes, lyke to this preſent figure, then ye ſhal meaſure frō the mydle of the longer ſyde to the flat angle on the cōtrary ſyde, as doth appere by ye midle lyne in ye ſame fygure. And take the nombre of perches of yt meaſure for the length, and than take halfe ye nombre of perches of the longer ſide for the bredth as in this example. The longer ſyde is. xl. perches in length, and the two other ſhorter ſydes euerye one is. xxx perches in length, and the diſtaunce betwene the mydde of the lōger ſyde

and the flat angle, is. xx perches in length. Thē take the nombre of perches betwene the myddes of the longer ſyde, and the flat angle, the whiche is, xx. for the lēght, and the halfe nombre of perches of the longer ſyde the whiche is alſo. xx. for the bredth. Then multiplye. xx. by. xx. and it maketh two acres and a halfe.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande diuerſlye tryanguled, in maner of the halfe parte of a quadraunte.
                  Alſo  whā a pece of land is dyuerſlye tryanguled, in maner of the halfe parte of a quadraunte hauyng one plaine angle, and the other two ſharp angles, lyke to this preſent fygure.

Thē ye ſhall meaſure from the playne angle on the lyfte ſyde, to the ſharpe angle on the right ſide, & take the nōbre of perches of yt meaſure for the lēgth, afterward ye ſhall meſure frō the plain angle to ye ſharpe angle on ye left ſide, & take ye halfe part of ye meaſure for the bredth, as in this example. The higher ſide betwene the ii. ſharpe angles, is, rxv. perches, the lower ſyde frō the playne angle to ye ſharpe angle on the ryght ſide, is, xx. perches, & the hed on the lefte ſide is xv. perches. Thē take the nombre of perches for the hed on ye left ſide, the which is. vii. & dī. for ye bredth. Then multiply. xx. by. vii. & dī. & it maketh. iii. rodes. vii. daiworkes &. ii. perches
               
               
                  ¶ Of another pece of lande dynerſly tryanguled lyke to the faſſhion of an harpe.
                  
                     
And  whē a pece of lande is dyuetſlye tryangled in maner of an harpe, hauynge one flat angle, & the other two ſharpe angles like to this preſent figure, thē ye ſhal meaſure from ye ſharpe angle on the lyfte ſyde to the ſharpe angle on the ryght ſyde, & take the nombre of perthes of that meaſure for ye length afterwarde, ye ſhall meaſure from the flat angle on the hygher ſyde with a ſtrayght hanging lyne to the nether ſyde makynge there a playne angle, as doth appere by ye mindle line in ye ſame fygute, and take the halfe part of the meaſure of the hangyng lyne for the bredth, as in this example,
                  The ryght ſyde, from the flat angle aboue, to ye ſharpe angle on ye ryght ſide is, xx. perches, the lefte ſide from

the flat angle aboue to the ſharpe angle beneth is xviii. perches, ye lower ſyde betwene the two ſharpe angles is. xxviii. perches, and the hanginge lyne betwene the flat angle aboue, & the nether ſide is. viii. perches. Thē take ye nōbre of perches of the lower ſide, the which is, xviii. for the length and the halfe nōbre of perches of the hangynge lyne, the whiche is. iiii. for the bredth. Thē multyply. xxviii. by. iiii. and it maketh dī. an acre, and. vii dayeworkes.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande in all. iiii. ſydes equally ſquare with two flat angles, and. ii. ſharpe angles.
                  YFa pece of  land be in all. iiii. ſydes equallye ſquare, with two halfe angles aboue & beneth, & two ſharpe

on the right & left ſides, like to this preſent fygure. Thē ye ſhall meaſure from the ſharpe angle on the ryght ſyde, to the ſharpe angle of the lyfte ſyde, and take the nombre of perches of that meaſure, for the length. After warde ye ſhall meaſure from the flat angle aboue to the flat angle beneth and take the halfe parte of that meaſure for ye bredth, as in this example The dyſtaunce betwene the. ii. ſharpe angles is. xvi. perches, and the dyſtannce betwene ye. ii. flat angles is. xii. perches. Then take. xvi. for the length, & the halfe parte of the other meaſure, the whyche is. vi. for the bredth. Afterwarde multyply. xvi. by. vi. and it cōmeth to halfe an acre, &. iiii. day workes.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande in. iiii. ſydes partly ſquare.
                  
                     
AND when  a pece of lande is partlye ſquare with two playne āgles on the lyft ſide, and one flat & one other ſharpe angle, on ye right ſyde, lyke to this preſent fygure, the whiche is of lyke bredth betwene the flat angle aboue and the contrary ſide of ye ſame fygure beneth, as is the bredth betwene the two playne angles on the lyft ſyde of the ſame fygure. Then in the exāple of this figure, ye ſhall take the nombre of perches, yt be betwene the two playne angles on the lyfte ſyde for the breadth, the which is. x. and afterward ye ſhal lay the vpper and the nether ſydes togyther, the which make. xxx. perches in ye whole nombre. Of the whych take the half nombre of perches the whiche is. xv. for the lengthe, and then multiply.

xv. perches, by the nombre of. x. and that nombre ſo multiplyed maketh. iii. ro
                        •
                     des. vi. dayeworkes and two perches.
               
               
                  ¶ Of another pece of lande in the. iiii. ſydes partelye ſquare.
                  ¶ Alſo whan  a pece of lande is partelye ſquare, like to this preſente figure with. ii flat angles on the higher ſyde, &. ii. ſharpe angles on the lenger ſyde, hauynge lyke dyſtaunce from both the flat angles about, to the contrary ſyde beneth▪ thē ye ſhall take the nombre of perches betwene the hygher & the lower ſides for ye bredth, as doth appere by the lines ī the ſame. After warde ye ſhall laye the hygher & the lower ſydes togyther, & take of. the

nombre of perches, of theſe. ii. ſydes for the length as in this example. The dyſtaunce betwene the flat angles at both endes, and the contrary ſyde of the fygure is. xv. perches, therfore take. xv▪ for the bredth. Thē lay the higher ſyde, the which is. xx. perches, and the nether ſide, the which is. xxx. perches in one ſume bothe togyther▪ and theſe bothe ſydes make in the whole ſume. l. perches. Of the whych take the one halfe, the which is▪ xxv. for the length, and. xv. for the bredth, the whych length multyplyed by the bredth, maketh in the whole ſume two acres, one roode. iii. dayworkes, and. iii. perches.
               
               
                  ¶ Of another pece of lande in the. iiii. ſydes partely ſquare.
                  
                     
¶ And when  a pece of land is ī. iiii. ſydes partly ſquare Lyke to thys preſent fygure, hauynge. ii. flat angles on ye ryght ſyde, and. ii. ſharpe angles on the lyfte ſyde, hauynge lyke dyſtaunce from both the flat ongles to the ryght ſyde, to the lyne an the lyfte ſyde, then ye ſhall take the nombre of perches betwene ye lynes on the ryght and lyfte ſydes of the fygure for ye length, as doth apeer by the mydle lyne in the ſame fygure. Afterwarde ye ſhall lay both ye right and the lyfte ſydes together, in one nombre of perches, and then deuyd out halfe the nombre of perches, of thoſe. ii. ſides for ye bredth, as in this example. The diſtaunce betwene the ryght and the lyfte ſyde is. xx. perches in lengthe, therfore take. xx. perches

for the length. Thē lay ye ryght ſide, the which is. x. perches, and the lyfte ſyde, the whiche is. xvi. perches in one ſume, both togither and theſe both ſydes make in the whole ſume. xxvi. perches, of the whiche take the one halfe, the whiche is. xiii. for the bredth, and. xx. for the length. Then multyplye. xx by. xiii. and it maketh in the whole ſume one acre & di, and v. daye workes.
               
               
                  ¶ Of another pece of lande in the. iiii. ſydes partely ſquare.
                  ALſo whā 
                      a pece of lande is in. iiii ſydes partelye ſquare, wt one flat angle & on ſharpe angle on the right ſide, & one ſharpe angle, & on flat angle one the lyfte ſyde, lyke to this preſent fygure

hauynge lyke diſtaūce at both endes from the flat angles, the lynes on ye contrarye ſydes, than ye ſhall take the nōbre of perches betwene eyther of the flat angles, and ye lyne on the contrarye ſyde for the breadthe, as it appeareth by the two lynes in it.
                  Afterwarde ye ſhall laye both ye hier and the lower ſydes togyther in one nombre of perches. And then deuide out halfe the nōbre of perches of that two ſydes, as for the length in thys examples. The dyſtaunce frō eyther of the flat angles, to the lyne on the contrarye ſyde is. x. perches the whiche is the ſhorter ſyde. Therfore take. x. perches for the breadth.
                  Then laye the vpper ſide, the which is. xx. perches, and the nether ſide ye which is alſo. xx. perches in one ſume both togyther. And theſe both ſydes make in the whole ſume. xl. perches. Of the which ſume, take the one halfe,

the whiche is. xx. perches for the length &. x. for the bredth. Then multyply. xx. by. x. & it maketh in ye whole ſume one acre, and one roode.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande in all. iiii. ſydes dyuerſly ſquare.
                  BVt when  a pece of lande is in all iiii. ſydes dyuerſly ſquare, with one flat angle, and one playne angle on the ryght ſyde, & one ſharpe angle, and one plain angle on the lyfte ſide, lyke to this preſent fygure, hauynge lyke diſtaunce betwene the flat angle on the ryght ſide to the line on the left ſide, as is betwene the two plaine angles on the netherſide Then ye ſhal take the nombre of perches betwene ye flat angle on ye right ſyde, and ye lyne on the lefte ſide this figure for the length, as doth appere

by the lyne in it. Afterwarde ye ſhall laye both the ryght and the lyfte ſydes to gyther in one nombre of perches, and than deuyde out halfe the nombre of perches of that two ſides for the bredth as in this example.
                  The diſtaūce from the flat angle on the ryght ſyde, to the lyne on the left ſyde is. xx. perches, the whiche is the longer ſide, therfore take the nombre of perches of that meaſure, the whiche is. xx. for the length. Afterward laye the ryght ſyde, the whiche is. x. perches, and the lifte ſide, the which is. xvi. perches ī one ſume both togyther and theſe both ſydes make in ye whole ſume. xxvi. perches, of the whiche take the one halfe, the whiche is xiii. for the bredth &. xx. for the length
                  Then multyply. xx. by. xiii. and it maketh in the whole ſume one acre. ii. roodes, and v. dayeworkes.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Of an other pece of lande in all. iiii. ſydes dyuerſly ſquare.
                  Alſo when  the. iiii. ſydes of a pece of lande euerie one of thē be of dyuers nōbre of perches, with one flat and one ſharpe angle on the ryghte ſyde, and alſo one flat & another ſharpe angle on the lyfe ſyde, lyke to this preſent fygure, kepinge no like diſtaunce betwene any of the contrarye ſydes, as in this example, & higher ſyde is. xx. perches in length, ye, lower ſyde is. xxiiii. perches, the ryght ſyde is. xiiii. perches, and the lyfte ſyde is. viii. perches in length. Then ſome men wolde laye both the contrarye ſydes eche two togyther, and take the one halfe of euery two, the more for the lengthe, and the leſſe for ye bredth, as in thys

example. Lay ye hygher & the lower ſides togither, and they make in the whole ſume. xliiii. perches. Than deuide out the half of this nombre, the whiche is. xxii. for the length. Afterwarde laye the right & the left ſydes togyther, and they make. xxii. perches in the whole ſume. And deuide out alſo the halfe parte of the nombre, the whiche is. xi. for the bredth. Then take the more nombre of theſe two the which is. xxii. for the length and the leſſe nombre the which is. xi for the bredth Then multiplye. xxii. by. xi. and it maketh one acre and di. &. ii. perches. But this maner of meaſurynge of ſuche a pece of lande pleaſeth me not, for it maketh more land than is conteyned in this maner of fygure. Therfore ye ſhall deuide ſuch a pece of Lande from the two contrarye angles, into two partes, lyke to the deuiſion, as doeth appeare by

the lyne in the ſame fygure.
                  ¶ And take  the nō
                     bre of perches of ye line for ye length. And thenne ye ſhall meaſure from the two other angles to the mydle lyne with playne angles, and laye the two halues of theſe two lynes togyther for the bredth, as ī this example. The dyſtaunce betwene ye two ſharpe angles of thys ſayde fygure is. xxx. perches in lengthe, and the lyne from the flat angle on the ryght ſyde, to the mydle lyne playne anguled is. viii. perches, and ye lyne from the flat angle on the lefte ſyde to the ſaide lenger lyne playne anguled is. vi. perches. Thē take the nombre of perches of the mydle lyne, the which is. xxx. perches for the length and the halfe part of the other two

lynes, the whyche is vii. perches for the bredth. Then multyplye. xxx. by. vii. and it maketh one acre, one rood ii. daye workes, two perches. Wherby ye may perceyue well that in ſuch a pece of land that is diuerſly ſquare in all. iiii. ſydes without any playne angle, or in any other like, ye ſhall neuer lay both the two contrary ſydes togyther, and take the halfes of thē, one for the length, and the other for the breadth, for that maner of ſumming of any pece of lande is not true but in ſome maner of ſquare lande, & ſpecially where ther is any playne angle, ye ſhall laye one, but not both of the two contrary ſydes togyther, and take the halfe nombre of them ſomtyme for the breadth, and ſomty me for the lengthe, as the faſſhyon & quantytie of the lande ſhall requyre, the whythe ye haue ſeene in dyuers ſquare figures before, in this maner

of figures diuerſly. iiii. ſquare is to be noted great dyuerſytie of quantities of meaſures. For the flatter that the flat angles, and the ſharper that the ſharpe angles be, the leſſe quantytie muſt nedes be in ſuch maner figures. And on the contrarye wyſe, the ſharper that the flat angles be, and the flatter that the ſharpe angles be the more quantytie muſt nedes be in the ſame figures. For althoughe the. iiii. ſydes do alwayes con
                        ••
                     ing and kepe euery one theyr lēgthes, yet the more or leſſe diſtaunce that is betwene ye contrarye angles, the more or leſſe meaſure doeth it cauſe to bee within the ſame fygure. Therfore ye maye not caſte the contrarye ſydes by the halfes, as moſt cōmon meters do vſe But ye ſhall deuyde ſuche maner fygures into two feldes in maner of tryāgles, as is before expreſſed. And meaſure thē as doth appere by the

lynes in theyr foreſaide figure. This is a ſpecyall rule, & well to be noted
               
               
                  ¶ Of dyuers other ſquare perches of lande in all. iiii. ſides dyuerſly ſquare.
                  
                     
                  
                  ALſo whē there is any other pece of lande in all. iiii. ſydes dyuerſly ſquare with ſharp flat angles lyke to any of theſe preſent fygures, or any other lyke, then ye ſhall neuer take the halues of any of both the cō
                     trarye ſides of them for theyr length or bredth, bicauſe ye can not meaſure

truely any of them in one pece wholy togyther. But ye muſte deuide euery one of thē into two partyes in ſuche maner of deuiſion as doth appeare by the lynes within the ſame. And then meaſure euerye parcell therof after hys faſſhyon, as ye haue ſene playnely before in the fygures of tryangles.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande in many ſydes diuerſly ſquare.
                  
                     
                  
                  AND when a pece of lande is in many ſydes, dyuerſlye ſquare

like to any of theſe preſent figures or any other lyke, then ye ſhall deuyd it into many partes by ſuche lyke deuiſions as doth apeare by the lines in the ſame figure, bycauſe none of thē maye be metted in one pece all togyther. And then ye ſhal meaſure euery parcell therof by it ſelfe, after the maner of tryangles of that faſſhion, equallye, partely, or els diuerſly trianguled, as ye haue ſene in dyuers figures before.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande in dyuers ſydes ſquare, and in ſome ſydes indented.
                  YF a pece of lande  be in dyuers ſydes ſquare, and ſome of them be indented, lyke to this preſent fygure then ye ſhall deuyde oute one ſquare parte of it, the which ye may do moſt conueniently

lyke to ſuch maner of deuyſyon, ſo as it dothe appere in the mydle lyne wt in the ſame fygure. And then meaſure that one pece by it ſelfe, and caſt the length and the bredth of it, as ye dyd of other ſuch ſquare peces before Afterwarde ye ſhal meaſure the thre ſtraight ſides of the other pece euery one by them ſelfe, and thēye ſhal dylygently vewe the fourth ſyde mounted, and ye ſhall leaue as moche by eſtymacion withoute the meaſure of that ſyde, as doth lacke within, and then alſo meaſure that ſeconde pece, as ye did ſuch other like peces before Or els make foure ſydes of this ſeconde pece (as large as ye maye) as doth appeare by the lyne in this preſent fygure.
                  And then meaſure yt 
                      pece by it ſelf, in ſuch māer, as it is before expreſſed afterward

ye ſhall meaſure the other parte indented by perches, halfe perches, & quarter perches. And thē ſume it by pence, halfe pence and farthynges.
               
               
                  ¶ Of other fygures to be deuyded partly into tryangles and partly into other faſſhyons.
                  Alſo whā 
                      ther is any other pece of lande lyke to any of theſe preſent figures, then ye ſhall deuyde euery one of thē in ſo many partes as ye ſhal conſydre neceſſary, by ſuch maner of deuyſyon, as doth appeare by the lynes in the ſame fygure, and afterward caſt euery parcell of theſe deuyſyons by them ſelfes, into the lēgth and in bredth, as ye haue done

other lyke peces ſquare or tryāguled in the examples before wryten, and then ſume euery one of thē, by theyr lengthes and breadthes, as ye haue done before other ſquare peces, or triangled.
               
               
                  Of a pece of lande lyenge in dyuers faſſhions.
                  
                  SOmetyme if a pece of lande doth lye dyuers faſſhions as dothe theſe preſent fygures, & as do many other, the whiche ye can not mete in one pece whole togyther by it ſelfe.
                  Therfore then ye muſt vewe it dylygently and deuyde it in ſo many partes as ye ſhall perceyue neceſſarye, lyke to theſe deuyſions made wythe

lines in theſe ſaid figures. And afterwarde ye muſt mete them euery one by them ſelfe in ſquares or triangles after ſuche maner of faſſhions, as they be of, and then caſte them euery one by them ſelfe in lengthes & bredthes, & lykewyſe ſume the length & bredth of euery one of them, as ye do of other peces, that ye doe meaſure, wholly togyther. For it were to ſedyous, ye impoſſyble, to put partyculer examples for all faſſhyons of lande, the which be infinyte, and euer newly founde.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of woodlande growynge hauynge many ſydes dyuerſly anguled.
                  
                  
                     
¶When there is a pece ofwoodland growing, like in faſſhion to this firſt fygure, hauinge many ſides diuerſly anguled, the which ye can not vewe euery waye from ſyde to ſyde, for the ſtandyng of the woode, then ye ſhall enlarge that maner pece of wodland into. iiii. ſquare ſydes, in lyke maner, as doth appere by the lynes of theſe ronde fygure. And then meaſure all that whole ſquare togyther in one felde, & compteit all togyther in one ſume, and afterward ye ſhall meſure euery parcell ſo enlarged with lynes by them ſelfe. And then caſte all the ſame parcelles into one ſume togyther, and take awaye all them from the fyrſt whole ſume, and that quantytie yt remayneth of the fyrſt whole meaſure (the ſaid parcelles enlarged with lines, taken awaie) ſhall be the true quantytie of this maner pece of woodlande, as in this example.
                  
                     
The whole figure enlarged into. iiii. ſquare conteyneth in it. lxxx. acres of the whole ſume, the parcelles enlarged with lynes, layde in one ſume to gither cōteyne. xxvi. acres. Thē take away. xxvi. from. lxxx. and ther doth remayne but. liiii. acres, the whiche ſume of. liiii. ſo remaynynge is the cō
                     tēt of this figure. Note wel this rule for it is verye profitable and often times neceſſarye for the meaſuryng of woodlande growynge.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of land in. v. ſydes equally ſquare, wt. v. flat angles.
                  
                     
                  
                  ¶ And when a pece of lande is in. v. ſydes equallye ſquare with. v. flat

angles lyke to this preſente fygures then ye ſhall meaſure all the. v. ſydes togyther, and take the halfe parte of that meſure for the lēgth. Afterwarde ye ſhall meaſure from the mydle poynt wfthin the ſame fygure to one mydle place betwene two angles of one ſyde of the circuite, take the nombre of perches of that meaſure for ye bredth, as it his example. Euery one to the. v. ſydes is. x. perches i length, the whiche. v. ſydes layde all togyther make. l. perches in the whole nō
                     bre. Then take halfe this nombre of perches ye which is. xxv. for ye length and the diſtaunce betwene ye midle poynte and the midle place betwene two angles of on ſide is. vii. perches Then take the halfe nombre of all ye v. ſydes, the whiche is. xxv. perches for ye length, and the nomber of perches betwene ye midle point and the midle place betwene two angles, ye
                     
which is. vii. for ye bredth. Then multiply. xxv. by. vii. & it maketh one acte iii. day workes, and. iii. perches.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande in. vi. ſydes equally ſquare, with. vi. flat angles.
                  
                     
                  
                  ALſo when a pece of land is in. vi. ſydes equallye ſquare with. vi. flat angles, lyke to this preſent fygure. Then ye ſhall meaſure lykewyſe all the. vi. ſides togither, & take the halfe parte of that meaſure for ye length. Afterwarde ye ſhall meaſure from the mydle poynt within the ſame fygure to ye mydle place betwene 
                        •
                     woangles of one ſyde of the cyrcuyt

and take the nombre of perches of that meaſure for the breadth as in this example. Euerye one of the. vi. ſydes is. xii. perches in length, ye whiche. vi. ſydes layde altogether make lxxii. perches in the whole ſume, thē take halfe this nombre of perches ye whiche is. xxxvi. for the length. And the diſtaūte betwene ye midle poynt and the midle place betwene two angles, of one ſyde is. x. perches and dī Thē take the halfe nombre of al the. vi. ſyde, the whiche is. xxxvi. perches for the length, and the nombre of perches betwene the midle poynte, and the midle place betwene two angles the whiche is. x. perches and dī. for the bredth. Then multiply. xxxvi. by x. and a halfe, and it maketh two acres one roods. iiii. daye worke. and two perches.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande in. vii. viii. ix. or. x. ſydes equally ſquare.
                  
                     
                     
                  
                  AND alſo when a pece of land is in vii. viii. ix. or x. ſydes equallye ſquare lyke to any of theſe preſent fygures. Thē in lyke maner as ye dyd.  in theſe two fygures laſte before, ye ſhal take ye half nōbre of perches of al the whole ſydes for the length, & the nombre of perches of the dyſtaunce

betwene the midle point with in the ſame figures, and the midle place be.  twene two angles of one ſide for the breadth, as ye haue ſene expreſſed in the two fyrſte figures of fiue, and. vi.  ſquare, & as it doth appeare plainely by examples of the ſame. iiii. preſent fygures.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande, all rounde without any ſquare ſyde.
                  
                     
                  
                  BVt when a pece of land is roūde without any ſquare ſyde lyke to this pleſent figure. Then (leuyng all other untrue reaſons and opynions of meters of lande in this behalfe ye ſhal meaſure roūd about al ye whole cyrcuyte of this fygure, and take the one halfe of the nombre of perches of that meaſure for the lengthe. Afterwarde ye ſhall meaſure frō the midle poynt within the figure, to the vtter ſyde of the cyrcuyte, and take the nō
                     bre of perches of that meaſure for ye bredth, as in this exāple. The whole

cyrcuyte rounde aboute is. xiiiii. perches, of the which take the one halfe the whiche is. xxii. perches for the lēgth, and the diſtaūce betwene the mydle poynt and the vtterſide of the cyrcuyt is. vii. perches. Then take ye half nombre of perches of the whole cyccuyte, the whiche is. xxii. for thee length, and the nōbre of perches betwene the mydle poynte, and the vtter ſyde of the cyrcuyte, the which is. vii. for the bredth. Then multyply. xxii. by. vii. and it maketh. iii. roodes. viii. dayworkes and two perches.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande halfe rounde, lyke to the faſſhion of a bowle.
                  
                  ANd whē a pece of lande is half rounde, lyke to the faſſhion of

a bowle as is this preſent fygure.
                  Thē ye ſhall meaſure the whole half cyrcute, and take the halfe parte of that meaſure for the lengthe. Afterwarde ye ſhall meaſure frō the midle of the halfe cyrcuyte aboue, and take the nombre of perches of that meaſure for ye bredth, as in this example. The halfe cyrcuite is. xxii. perches in length, of the whiche take the halfe nombre of perches, the whiche is. xi. for the length, and the dyſtaunce betwene the mydle of the nether lyue, and the mydle of the half cyrcuyte is vii. Then take the halfe nombre of perches of the half cyrcuyte, the whiche is. xi. for the length, and the nombre of perches betwene the mydle of the nether lyne and the mydle of the halfe cyrcuyte, the whiche is. vii. for the bredth. Then multiplie. xi. by. vi. and it maketh one roode. ix. dayworkes, and one perche.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande more than halfe rounde
                  ANd whē 
                      a pece of lande is more than half roū
                     de like to this preſent figure the whiche is in the circumference, or cyrcuyte about. xxv, perches, the nether ſyde is. vt. perches, the dyameter or ouerthwart lyne is. x. perches, & the hanginge lyne is. ix. perches. Thē ye ſhall deuyde it into two feldes, as it appereth by the deuiſions of ye lines within ye ſame fygure. After that for meſuryng of the hygher parte in the lyne deuyſion, ye ſhall multiplye the halfe nōbre of perches of the diameter or ouerthwart line, the which be. v. by ye half nombre of perches of the

cyrcute of the fygure, the whiche be. xii. and di. and they will come to. lxii. perches and di. Afterwarde for the meaſurynge of the triangle in the deuyſyon, ye ſhal take againe the halfe of the ouertwarte line. the which be v. from the. ix. the whiche the hangynge lyne doth conteyne, and then ther dothe remayn but. ii. the which iiii. ye ſhall multyplye by. iii. the whiche is the halfe nombre of the nether lyne, and it cōmeth to. xii. the which xii. ye ſhall ioyne with the foreſaide. lxii. and di. and theſe. ii. ſumes layde both togyther make. lxxvii. perches and di. the which nombre of perches maketh one roode. ix. dayworkes, & one perche and di. Note well thys rule, for it is verye ſubtyl, and muche profytable.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande leſſe than the halfe parte of a whole rounde.
                  
                     
BVt when a  pece of lande is leſſe than is the half part of a wholeroūd like to this preſent figure, thā ye ſhal adde to it ye reſidue of the whole cyrcuyte, as doth appere by this ſecond fygure, and note well the nombre  of perches of the cyrcūference, ye whiche is. xliiii. perches & alſo of the diameter, ye whiche is. xiiii. & thē ye ſhall mete al the ſame whole fygure in on meaſure togither, takīg the halfe of the cyrcūference, the whiche is. xxii. for the lēgth and the halfof the diameter, the which is. vii. for the breadth, then multiplye. xxii. by. vii. and it maketh. C. liiii. perches.

After that ye ſhall deuyde the ſame whole fygure in to two partes, lyke to theſe two deuiſions made within theſe lynes in this thyrde fygure, of the which the  latter deuyſyon is the fygure leſſe thā halfe rounde. And then ye ſhall meaſure the fyrſt deuyſion of this figure as ye dyd the fygure laſt before, that is more than halfe rounde. And that quantitie yt lacketh of ye whole rounde beſyde the meaſure of ye fyrſt deuyſion ſhall be the quantyty of the latter deuyſyon, the which is the fygure leſſe than halfe rounde, as in this example. The cyrcumference of the fyrſt deuyſion is. xxx. perches, & the diameter is. xiiii. perches, then

the half of that circumference, ye whiche is. xv. multyplyed by the halfe of the dyameter, the whiche is. vii. maketh. C. v. perches. After that ye ſhal take agayne the halfe of the dyameter (the whiche is. vii.) from the. x. dī. and a quarter, the which the hāgīg lyne of the fyrſt deuyſion doethe conteyne, and then there doeth remayn but thre dī. and a quarter, the which iii. dī. and a quarter, ye ſhall multyply by. vi. the which is the half nombre of perches of ye nether lyne of the fyrſte deuiſion, & it maketh. xxii. perches and dī ye ſhall ioyne this with the foreſaid. C. v. perches. And theſe two ſumes layd both togither make C. xxvii. perches and dī. And this is the ſume of the fyrſte deuyſyon the whiche lacketh of the content of the whole roūde. xxvi. perches & dī. And ſume this ſo lackyng ſhalbe thy meaſure of the letter deuyſion, the whiche

is the figure leſſe thā halfe round Note well this Rule, for it is verye ſubtyle.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande leſſe than halfe rounde on both ſydes
                  And whē 
                      a pece of Lande is leſſe thē half roūd on both ſydes lyke to the faſhion of an egge, as is this preſēt figure. Thē ye ſhall deuide it into two partes by ſuche lyke deuyſions as doth appere by the lyne ouertwarte in the mydle of the ſame fygure. And than ye ſhall meaſure one of the ſame two partes lykewyſe, as ye dyd meaſure before the fygure leſſe than half rounde. Afterwarde ioyne the ſume of yt ſyde to the other ſyde, and then theſe. ii. ſum mes layde bothe togyther, make the

whole contente of this fygure, as in this example. The ouerthwarte line in the mydle is. xii. perches, and the hanginge lyne of one ſyde is thre perches and a quarter, then the cyrcūfe rence of the whole roūde added ther to (as it is before proued) ſhalbe. xliiii perches, and the dyameter. xiiii. the which whole rounde meted all togyther cōtaineth. C. liiii. perches of the whiche the hygher parte added to ye fygure leſſe then halfe rounde is. C. xxvii, perches and dī. And the ſume lackynge of the whole nombre before ſayd, the which. xxvi and dī. is the cō
                     tente of the nether parte, the which. xxvi. and dī. doubled for both the ſydes of this fygure makethe. liii. perches. And this is the true content of this preſent fygure.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of lande, that is playne on both ſydes, and halfe rounde at both endes.
                  
                     
ANd whē 
                      a pece of land is plain on both ſides and halfe roū
                     de at bothe endes lyke to this preſēt fygure, then ye ſhal deuide it into thre partes by ſuch lyke deuyſiō, as doth appere by the lines within ye ſame fygure. And then ye ſhal meaſure ye midle ſquare part by it ſelfe, & afterward ye ſhall meaſure one of the halfe roundes of one ende, and ioyne it in one ſume wt the other halfe rounde of the other ende, & then ioyne all theſe thre partes in one ſume togyther. And that whole ſume ſheweth the content of this māer figure, as in this example The dyameter of one halfe rounde in this figure is. xliii. and the cyrcumference of the ſame is. xxii. then multyply the halfe of the cyrcumference,

the which is. xi. by the half of the diameter, the whiche is. vii. and it maketh. lxxvii. Then ioyne that. lxxvii. to the other half roūde of the other ſyde, and it maketh. C. liiii. After yt ye ſhall multyplye. xiiii. the which is the length of the ſquare parte in the mydle of the figure by. vii, the which is the bredth of the ſame parte, and it maketh in the whole ſume. CC. lii. the whiche is the whole contente of this fygure.
               
               
                  ¶ To meaſure a mountayne or an hyll, hauynge the two aſcences, on both ſydes from the foote to the top of equall dyſtaunce and meaſure.
                  
                     
WHen  a pece of Land is not playne but is moūting in the mydle, lyke to thes preſent fygure of a mountayne, hauyng the. ii. ſydes from the foote to the toppe of equall diſtaunce, and meaſure. Then ye ſhal mete diligently the nombre of perches of the cyrcuyt, and compaſſe of the tope of the hyll, and alſo of the foote and of the aſcence or goyng vp from the foote to the top. Afterward ye ſhall laye togyther the nombre of perches of the cyrcuyte of the foote and of the toppe of the hyll, and take the halfe parte of both theſe meaſures for the bredth. Alſo take ye whole nombre of perches of the aſcence frō the foote to the top of the hyll for the

lengthe as in this example. The crycuyte of the toppe of the hyll is. lxxx. perches, and the cyrcute of the roote of the hylis. CC. xl. perches, the whiche two ſummes make. CCC. xx. perches, and the aſcence from the foote of the hyll to the top is. CC. perches. Then take the halfe nombre of perches of the cyrcuites of the foote and toppe of the hyll, the which is. C. lx. for the bredth, & the whole nombre of perches of the aſcence the whiche is. CC. for the lengthe. Then multyply. CC. by. C. lx. and it maketh. xxxii M. perches, and this ſume maketh. CC. acres.
               
               
                  ¶ Of an hyll or a mountayne hauynge the heade, the mydle, & the foote of dyuers cyrcuytes of meaſures.
                  
                     
And  whē the circuy tes of the top of the moūtaine of ye midle and of the foote do diffre much, one frō another in theyr meaſure, lyke to this preſent fygure. Thēye ſhall lay the thre nōbres of the top, the midle, and the foote in one ſume togyther. And take the thyrde parte of yt ſume for the bredth. Afterwarde ye ſhall meete the aſcence or goynge vp from the foot to the toppe of the hyll, and take the whole nombre of petches of that meaſure for the lengthe. As in this exāple. The cyrcute of the foote is. cc. perches, the cyrcuite of ye midle is. c. percges, & the cyrcuyte of ye topp is. xxx. perches, the which thre ſummes layde all togyther maketh. ccc. &

xxx. perches. And ye aſcence from the foote to the top of the hylis C. lx. perches. Thē take ye thyrde part of the ſayd ſume of. CCC. xxx. the which is C. x. for the breadth. And the whole ſume of the aſcēce, the which i. C. lx. for the length, then multyplye. C. li. by. C. x. and it maketh. xvii. M vi. C. perches, and this ſumme of perches maketh. C. l. acres.
               
               
                  ¶ Of an hyll or a mountayne that is not of equall meaſure in the aſcences, netber in the cyrcuytes.
                  But whē 
                      an hyll, or a mowntayne is not of equal meaſure aſcē
                     ces, neither in ye nether i the cyrcuites, lyke to this preſent fygure. Thē
                     
ye ſhall laye the meaſures of the cyrcuytes of the toppe and foote of the hyll togyther, and take the half part of theſe two crycuytes for the bredth Afterwarde ye ſhall laye the meaſures of the longer, and the ſhorter aſcences both togither, & take the half parte of that meaſure, for the length as in this example. The cyrcuyte of the top of the mountayne is. xx. perches and the cyrcuyte of the foote is CCC. perches, ye which two ſūmes laide both togither maketh. CCC. & xx. perches, and the halfe parte of it is. C. lx. Alſo ye lenger aſ
                        ••
                     nce is. CC perches, and the ſhorter is. C. xx. the which ii. ſūmes laide both togyther make. CCC. &. xx. perches, & the half parte of it maketh. C. lx. Then take. C. lx. for ye length, &. C. lx. alſo for the bredth, and afterwarde multyply on of the ſame two ſūmes by the other, and it maketh. xxv. M. vi. C. perches

the whyche ſume of perches maketh C. and. lx. acres.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the meſuryng of a pece of land lyeng i a valley, incloſed roūd about with a mountayne or an hyll.
                  
                     
                  
                  ANd whē ther is a pece of land lieng in a valley, incloſed roūd about with a mountayne or an hyll lyke to this preſente fygure, then ye ſhall vſe contrary wyſe of meaſurig of ſuche maner of lande, as ye dyd of meaſurynge of hylles & mountaines For in meetynge of an hyll, ye meaſured the aſcence and goynge vp frō the foote to the toppe. But in meetyng

of a valley ye ſhall meaſure the deſcene and goynge downe from the toppe of the hyll to the depth of the valley. And wher ye meaſure the cyrcute & compaſſe of the toppe of an hyll, ſo contrarye wyſe ye ſhall meaſure the cyrcuite and compaſſe of the depth of the valley. And where ye meaſured the cyrcuite and compaſſe of the foote of ye hil, ſo contrary wiſe ye ſhall meaſure rounde aboute the cyrcuyte and compaſſe of the heyght of the valley. And then ye ſhall laie ye cyrcuite of the height, and the depth of the valley in one ſame togyther, and take ye halfe part of that whole ſume for the breadth. Afterwarde ye ſhall take the nōbre of perches of deſcence and goynge down from the heyght of the hill to the depth of the valley for the length of the meaſure. And then ſume it by multiplyēg the lengthe by the breadthe, as in this

example. The circuite of the depth of the valley is. lxxx. perches, ye cyrcuyt of the heyghte of the valley is. CC. perches. And the deſcence from the heyght of the hyll to the depth of the valley is. CC. perches. Thē take the nōbre of perches of the deſcence, the whych is. CC. for the length, & halfe the nōbre of perches of the circuites of the which is. C. lx. for the bretdth. Then multiplye. CC. by. C. lx. and it maketh. CC. acres.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a valley, yt is nether of equall meaſure in the deſcences nether in the Cyrcuytes.
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
BVt whē a valley is not of equall meaſure nether in the deſcēces, nether in the cyrcuytes, lyke to this peſent fygure, then ye ſhall laye the cyrcuytes of the height and depth of the valey togither and take the half parte of theſe two cyrcuytes for the bredth. Afterwarde ye ſhall laye the meaſures of the lenger, and ſhorter deſences bothe togither, and take ye halfe parte of thoſe meaſures for the length, as in this exāple. The circuit of the depth of the valley is. xx. perches, and the cyrcuyte of the heygth of the valley is. ccc. perches the whyche two ſumes layde both togyther make. ccc. xx. perches▪ & ye half part of it is. c. lx. perches. Alſo the lenger deſcence is. cc. perches, and the ſhorter is. c. xx. the whiche two ſumes layde both togyther, make in ye whole ſum ccc. xx. perches, and the ha
                        •
                     e parte of it is. c. lx. Thē take. c. lx. for the length

&. c. lx. alſo for ye bredth, & afterward multyply. c. lx. by. c. lx. and it maketh. xxv. M. and. vi. C. perches, ye which ſume of perches maketh. c. lx. acres.
               
               
                  ¶ Of one māner waye to compte & ſome the nomre of acres conteyued within any meaſure.
                  WHen ye ſhall compte and ſumme the nombre of acres conteyned wtin any meaſue of land, thē ye ſhall laye ſo many times the nombre of perches in the length, as be in the nōbre of petches in the bredth, or els contrarye, as many tymes the nombre of perches in the bredth, as be in the lēgth. But ye muſt turne the perches into pence. For lyke nombre of perches wil make an acre, as of pens wyll make a marke, the which doth ſygnyfy an acre in this maner comptynge, as in this exāple. The length

of the meaſure is. xl. perches, and the bredth of it is. xx. perches. Thē cōpt xl. times. xx. pence, or els. xx. times. xl. pence, the whiche maketh. v. Marke and ſo lykewiſe. xx. times. xl. perches maketh. v. acres. Another example. lx. perches in the lēgth, and. l, in the bredth. Thē ye ſhall compt. l. tymes, lx. pence, the whiche is in the whole ſume. xii, li. x, s, the whiche ſume maketh, xviii, acres, and, iii▪ roode, Another exāple. xlv, perches in the lēgth and. xxv, perches in the bredth, Thē ye ſhal compte, xxv, tymes, xiv, pence the whiche is in the whole ſume, iiii, li, xiii, s, ix, penc, the whiche ſume maketh. vii. acres, one dayworke, & one perche. But whē ye haue halfe a perche or a quarter of a perch in any ſyde of ye meaſure, ye ſhall not compt them with ye perches, but after that ye haue caſt the ſumme of perches in the length & bredth in maner beforeſaide.

Then, ye ſhal compte the halfe perches by them ſelfe, and the quarter perches by them ſelfe, and ſume them in the contrarie ſyde, as in the example. The pece of lande is. xl. perches and di. in length, &. xxx. perches in bredth. Then bycauſe the half perches do ſtand in the length, therfore ye muſte compte them in the bredth and ſume them (as in this laſte example.) xxx. halfe perches, after the nōbre of the bredth▪ and not. xl. halfe perches after the nōbre of the lēgth, the which. xxx. half perches do make iii. dayeworkes, and. iii. perches.
                  Lykewyſe if ye haue half perches, or quarter perches, or els halfe perches & quarter perches both in ye length, and alſo in ye bredthe of the meaſure Then ye muſte alwayes ſumme euerye one of them by them ſelfe in the length, that ſtande in that bredth.
                  And ſumme them in the bredth, that

ſtande in the length. Therfore in all other lyke maner of comptynge the ſumme of acres by money, ye ſhall vnderſtande alwaies, that a marke of money doth ſygnyfy an acre, a royall doth ſygnyfye thre quarters of an acre, or thre roode, a noble doth ſygnyfye an halfe acre, a crowne doth ſygnyfye one roode and. v. dayeworkes. xl. d. doth ſygnyfye a quarter of an acre, or a roode. xii. d. doth ſygnify. iii. dayeworkes, a grote doth ſygnyfy a dayewoke, a penye doth ſygnyfye a perche, an halfe penye doth ſygnyfye an half perche, and a farthyng doth ſygnyfye a quarter of a perche.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the turnynge of poundes into markes or acres.
                  BY cauſe in coumptyng of money it is not muche vſed to compte anye ſummes in markes, but moſt cō
                     monlye in poundes. Thefore becauſe

Markes do ſygnyfye acres in comptynge the meaſures of lande, & poundes be not lyghtly turned into Markes by them that bee not experte in reakenynge, and caſtyng of a compt. Therfore in theſe ſumes folowynge ye ſhall ſe pence turned into perches grotes turned into daye workes. xl. d into a roode, a noble in to dī. acre, a Royall into. iii. roodes: a marke into an acre, & poundes turned into Markes, the which there be named acres And this rule doth extende frō. i. d. to. xl. d. and from. xl. d. to. xx. s. & from xx. s. to an. C. li. and frō an hundred pounde, to a. M. pounde.
               
               
                  ¶ This Rule folowynge, is verye playne, and eaſye to be vnderſtanded: if it be well marked.
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Pence.
                           Dayeworkes And perches.
                        
                        
                           i. d.
                           i. perche.
                        
                        
                           ii. d.
                           ii. perches
                        
                        
                           iii. d.
                           iii. perches
                        
                        
                           iiii. d.
                           i. dayworke
                        
                        
                           v. d.
                           i. dayworke and. i. perche
                        
                        
                           vi. d.
                           i. dayworke and. ii. perches
                        
                        
                           vii. d.
                           i. dayworke and. iii. perches
                        
                        
                           viii. d.
                           ii. dayworkes
                        
                        
                           ix. d.
                           ii dayworkes and. i. perche
                        
                        
                           x. d.
                           ii. dayworkes and, ii, perches
                        
                        
                           xi. d.
                           ii. dayworkes and. iii. perches
                        
                        
                           xii. d.
                           iii. dayworkes
                        
                        
                           xiii. d.
                           iii. dayworkes and. i. perche
                        
                        
                           xiiii. d.
                           iii. dayworkes and, ii. perches
                        
                        
                           xv. d.
                           iii, dayworkes, &, iii. perches
                        
                        
                           xvi. d.
                           iiii. dayworkes
                        
                        
                           xvii. d.
                           iiii. dayworkes and. i. perche
                        
                        
                           xviii. d.
                           iiii. dayworkes and. ii, perches
                        
                        
                           xix. d.
                           iiii. dayworkes &. iiii. perches
                        
                        
                           xx. d.
                           v. dayworkes
                        
                        
                           xxi. d.
                           v. dayworkes and. i. perche
                        
                        
                           xxii. d.
                           v. dayworkes and. ii. perches
                        
                        
                           xxiii. d.
                           v. dayworkes and, iii. perches
                        
                        
                           ii. s.
                           vi. dayworkes
                        
                        
                        
                           ii. s i. d
                           vi. dayworkes and. i, perche
                        
                        
                           ii s. ii. d.
                           vi. dayworkes &. ii. perches
                        
                        
                           ii. s. iii. d.
                           vi. dayworkes, &, iii. perches
                        
                        
                           ii. s. iiii d.
                           vii. dayworkes
                        
                        
                           ii. s. v. d.
                           vii. dayworkes and, i. perche
                        
                        
                           ii. s. vi. d.
                           vii. dayworkes &. ii. perches
                        
                        
                           ii. s. vii. d.
                           vii, dayworkes &, iii. perches
                        
                        
                           ii. s. viii, d.
                           viii, dayworkes.
                        
                        
                           ii. s. ix. d.
                           viii, dayworkes and, i, perche
                        
                        
                           ii. s, x. d.
                           viii. dayworkes &. ii, derches
                        
                        
                           ii. s, xi. d.
                           viii, dayworkes &, iii, perches
                        
                        
                           iii, s
                           ix, dayworkes
                        
                        
                           iii, s. i. d,
                           ix. dayworkes and, i, perche
                        
                        
                           iii. s. ii, d,
                           ix, dayworkes &, ii. perches
                        
                        
                           iii. s. ii. d.
                           ix dayworkey and. iii. perches
                        
                        
                           xl, d,
                           A quart. of an acre, or a rood
                        
                        
                           v, s.
                           i, roode and. v, dayworkes
                        
                        
                           vi. s, viii,
                           halfe an acre
                        
                        
                           x, s,
                           iii. roodes or. iii, quarters of an acre
                        
                        
                           xiii. s. iiii. d
                           i. acre
                        
                        
                           xvi, s, viii, d
                           i, acre and one roode
                        
                        
                           xx, s,
                           i, acre and dī.
                        
                        
                           xxx, s,
                           ii, acres, and one roode
                        
                        
                           xl, s,
                           iii, acres
                        
                        
                           l, s,
                           iii. acres and, iii. roode
                        
                        
                           iii. li,
                           iiii. acres and dī,
                        
                        
                           iiii. li.
                           vi. acres
                        
                        
                           v, li.
                           vii, acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           vi, li,
                           ix, acres
                        
                        
                           vii, li,
                           x, acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           viii, li
                           xii, acres
                        
                        
                           ix, li
                           xiii, acres, and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           x. li.
                           xv. acres
                        
                        
                           xi. li.
                           xvi. acres and dī.
                        
                        
                           xii. li.
                           xviii. acres
                        
                        
                           xiii, li.
                           xix. acres and dī.
                        
                        
                           xiiii. li.
                           xxi. acres.
                        
                        
                           xv. li.
                           xxii acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           xvi. li.
                           xxiiii. acres.
                        
                        
                           xvii. li.
                           xxv. acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           xviii. li,
                           xxvii. acres
                        
                        
                           xix, li,
                           xxviii. acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           xx. li.
                           xxx. acres
                        
                        
                           xxi. li.
                           xxxi acres and d.
                        
                        
                           xxii, li.
                           xxxiii, acres
                        
                        
                           xxiii. li.
                           xxxiiii. acres and d.
                        
                        
                           xxxiiii, li.
                           xxxvi. acres
                        
                        
                           xxv, li.
                           xxxvii. acres and dī.
                        
                        
                           xxvill,
                           xxxix. acres
                        
                        
                           xxvii. li.
                           xl. acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           xxviii, li
                           xlv. acres
                        
                        
                           xxix. li
                           xlvi, acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           xxx. li.
                           xlviii, acres
                        
                        
                           xxxi. li.
                           xlix, acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           xxxii, li
                           li, acres
                        
                        
                           xxxiii, li,
                           lii, acrers and d.
                        
                        
                        
                           xxxiiii. li.
                           liiii. acres
                        
                        
                           xxxv. li.
                           lv. acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           xxxvi. li.
                           lvii. acres
                        
                        
                           xxxvii. li.
                           lviii. acres and dī,
                        
                        
                           xxxviii. li.
                           lx. acres
                        
                        
                           xxxix. li.
                           lxi. acres and dī.
                        
                        
                           xl. li.
                           lxiii. acres
                        
                        
                           xli. li.
                           lxiiii. acres and dī.
                        
                        
                           xlii. li.
                           lxvi. acres
                        
                        
                           xliii. li.
                           lxvii. acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           xliiii. li.
                           lxix. acres
                        
                        
                           xlv. li.
                           lxx. acres and dī.
                        
                        
                           xlvi. li.
                           lxxii. acres.
                        
                        
                           xlvii. li.
                           lxxiii acres and dī.
                        
                        
                           xlviii. li.
                           lxxv. acres.
                        
                        
                           xlix. li.
                           lxxvi. acres and dī.
                        
                        
                           l. li.
                           lxxviii. acres
                        
                        
                           li. li.
                           lxxix. acres and dī.
                        
                        
                           lii. li.
                           lxxx. acres
                        
                        
                           liii. li.
                           lxxxi. acres, and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           liiii. li.
                           lxxxii. acres
                        
                        
                           lv. li.
                           lxxxiii. acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           lvi. li.
                           lxxxiiii. acres
                        
                        
                           lvii. li.
                           lxxxv, acres and dī.
                        
                        
                           lviii. li.
                           lxxxvii, acres
                        
                        
                           lix, li,
                           lxxxviii, acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           lx, li,
                           lxxxx, acres
                        
                        
                           lxi, li,
                           lxxxxi. acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           lxii. li,
                           lxxxxiii. acres
                        
                        
                           lxiii. li.
                           lxxxxiiii, acres and d.
                        
                        
                           lxiiii, li.
                           lxxxxvi. acres.
                        
                        
                           lxv. li.
                           lxxxxvii, acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           lxvi. li,
                           lxxxxix, acres
                        
                        
                           lxvii. li.
                           C. acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           lxviii. li.
                           C. ii. acres
                        
                        
                           lxix. li,
                           C, iii. acres and dī.
                        
                        
                           lxx. li.
                           C, v acres
                        
                        
                           lxxi, li.
                           C. vi. acres and d.
                        
                        
                           lxxii▪ li.
                           C. viii. acres
                        
                        
                           lxxiii. li.
                           C. ix. acres and d.
                        
                        
                           lxxiii. li,
                           C, xi, acres
                        
                        
                           lxxv, li,
                           C, xii, acres and d.
                        
                        
                           lxxvi, li,
                           C, xiiii, acres
                        
                        
                           lxxvii, li,
                           C, xv, acres and d.
                        
                        
                           lxxviii, li,
                           C, xvii, acres
                        
                        
                           lxxix. li,
                           C, xviii, acres and d.
                        
                        
                           lxxx, li,
                           C, xx, acres
                        
                        
                           lxxxi. li,
                           C, xxi, acres and d.
                        
                        
                           lxxxii. li,
                           C, xxiii, acres
                        
                        
                           lxxxiii. li,
                           C. xxiiii, acres and d.
                        
                        
                           lxxxiii, li
                           C, xxvi, acres
                        
                        
                           lxxxv. li,
                           C, xxvii, acres and d.
                        
                        
                           lxxxvi, li.
                           C, xxix, acers
                        
                        
                           lxxxvii. li.
                           C. xxx, acres and d.
                        
                        
                           lxxxviii, li,
                           C, xxxii, acres
                        
                        
                           lxxxix,
                           C, xxxiii, and d.
                        
                        
                        
                           lxxxx, li,
                           C, xxxv, acres
                        
                        
                           lxxxxi. li.
                           C. xxxvi. acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           lxxxxii, li,
                           C. xxxviii acres
                        
                        
                           lxxxxiii. li.
                           C. xxxix. acers and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           lxxxxiiii. li.
                           C, xli. acres
                        
                        
                           lxxxxv, li.
                           C. xlii. acres and dī
                           
                        
                        
                           lxxxxvi. li.
                           C. llxiiii. acres
                        
                        
                           lxxxxvii. li.
                           C. xlv, acres and d,
                        
                        
                           lxxxxviii. li.
                           C, xlvii. acres
                        
                        
                           lxxxxix, li
                           C, xlviii, acres and d,
                        
                        
                           C, li,
                           C, l, acres,
                        
                        
                           CC, li,
                           CCC, acres
                        
                        
                           CCC, li,
                           iiii, C, l, acres
                        
                        
                           CCCC, li,
                           v. C, acres
                        
                        
                           v. C, li,
                           vii, C, l, acres
                        
                        
                           vi, C, li,
                           ix▪ C, l, acres
                        
                        
                           vii, C, li,
                           M, l, acres
                        
                        
                           viii. C, li,
                           M, CC, acrers
                        
                        
                           ix. C. li,
                           M. CCC, l▪ acres
                        
                        
                           M. li,
                           M. CCCCC. acres.
                        
                     
                  
                  ¶ Thus endeth this waye of turnynge of poundes into Markes or Acres.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Of another waye of ſūmynge of meaſures in to acars.
                  BEcauſe this Rule of ſummynge of acars beforeſayde is very harde and tedyous to them, that bee not experte and redy in caſtynge of a compte, and manye tymes they be deceyued in true ſummynge of meaſures after this waye. Therfore ye ſhall haue hereafter a Rule folowynge more playner, and redy to all men, for the true knowledge of this thynge. Therfore when ye haue caſte out the lengthe and bredthe of your lande, by ſuche wayes and reaſon as ye haue ſeene before in dyuers faſſhyon of fygures, by dyuers examples. Then ye ſhall ſeeke out the nombre of perpches of the lengthe of your lande in the hygher margent, and the nombre of perches of the bredthe of your lande, in the ſyde of the margent. And then ye ſhall ſeke out benethe vppon the ſame ſyde, that place, the whyche dothe auſwere dyrectlye to bothe of theſe nombres, of the lengthe and of the breadthe togyther.
                  And theare ye ſhall fynde the nombre of acres, roodes, dayeworkes, and perches

conteined within the lengthe and bredth of the ſame meaſure.
                  ¶ Explicit.
               
               
                  ¶ To knowe the reaſon of this rule folowynge.
                  BVt fyrſte for the perfect knowledge of this Rule folowynge, ye ſhall vnderſtande, that the nombres ſet aboue in the hygher margent, do ſygnifie the nombre of perches in the lengthe of the meaſure. And the nombres ſet in the ſyde margent, do ſignyfye the nombre of perches in the breadth of the meaſure. The fyrſte nombre ſet to euerye ſquare place beneth vpon the ſydes, do betoken the nombre of acres. The fygure of. 1. ſet aboue, in the lifte of the ſaide places, dothe betoken a roode, or a quarter of dī. acre. The fygure of. 2. ſet there ſignyfieth an acre. The fygure of. 3. ſet ther ſignyfieth three quarters of an acre. The fyrſte fygure ſet in the lēger parte of euery place, betokeneth the nombre of day workes, and the fygure that foloweth next after that, be tokenethe the nombre of perches. Alſo ye ſhall note, yt this rule doth extende from the

nombre of one perche, to the nombre of. vi. ſcore perches in length. And from the nōbre of one perche to the nōber of an. C. perches in breadthe, and no further. This rule ſhoulde bee written altogither vpon one ſyde of a table that ye might ſee all togither, the whole length and breadth of al theſe nombres before ſaide. But bycauſe this maner of table, ſhulde be very large & tedeous to beare aboute. Therfore it is deuyded in this litell Boke, in to the. x. partes as it doth playnelie appeare hereafter.
                  
                     1. ¶ The fyrſt parte is from i perche to. vi ſcore perches, in length, and from one to. x. in bredth.
                     2. ¶ The ſeconde parte is from. xi. to. vi. ſcore in length, and from. xi to. xx. in bredth.
                     3. ¶ The thirde part is from. xxi. to. vi. ſcore in length, and from xxi. to. xxx. in bredth.
                     4. ¶ The fourth parte is from. xxxi. to. v. ſcore in length, & from. xxxi. to. xl. in bredth.
                     5. ¶ The. v. parte is from. xli. to. vi. ſcore in length, and from. xli. to. l. in bredth.
                     
                        
6. ¶ The. vi. parte is from, li. to. vi. ſcore in length, and from. li. to. lx. in bredth.
                     7. ¶ The. vii. parte is from. lxi. in to ſixe ſcore in lēgth, and from thre ſcore and one, to thre ſcore and ten in breadth.
                     8. ¶ The. viii. parte is from. lxx. to. vi. ſcore in length, and from. lxxi. to. lxxx. in bredth.
                     9. ¶ The. ix. parte is from. lxxxi. to. vi. ſcore in length and from. lxxxi. to. lxxxx. in bredth.
                     10. ¶ The. x. parte is from. lxxxxi. to vi. ſcore in length. & from. lxxxxi. to an. C. in bredth.
                  
               
               ¶ Here endeth the meaſurynge of Landes. And hereafter foloweth the meaſurynge of Tymber.
            
            
               
               ¶ To meaſure Tymber or Stone, in length, breadth and depthe by the foote ſquare.
               
                  
               
               
                  IN meaſurynge Tymber. Stone, or anye other lyke thyng in length, bredth, & depth, by the foote ſquare ye muſt diligētly mark, whither it be equaly. iiii. ſquare, or partly. iiii. ſquare, or els in. iii. ſides equally, or partely ſquare, or els in. v. vi. vii. or more ſides ſquare. Or els all rounde, with out any ſquare ſyde. And if a pece of timber be equally in. iiii. ſydes ſquare lyke to this preſente fygure, then ye maye take in dyfferently one of them

to the breadthe of the true ſquare of that maner pece of tymber. And thē ſet forth the length therto for a foote ſquare, as doth apere by the meſure that foloweth after that ſquare in the fygure of Tymber meaſure, as in this example. The. iiii. ſquare ſydes be euerye one. xii. ynches brode, then ye muſt laye out to that breadth. xii. ynches in lengthe, the whiche dothe make one foote ſquare in tymber me aſure, as dothe appere in the fygure of tymber, meaſure folowig. Another example. The ſquare ſydes, be euery one. x. ynches brode, thē laye out. vii. ynches. qr. ynch therto in length for one foote ſquare, as doth appere in the ſame rule folowynge, and ſo lyke wyſe of all other peces of Tymber equallye. iiii. ſquare.
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of tymber in. iiii. ſydes partely ſquare.
                  
                     
                     
                  
                  BVt bycauſe al peces of Tymber, be not in all. iiii. ſydes equallye ſquare, lyke to this foreſayde fygure, but ſome be in. iiii. ſydes partely ſquare, lyke to this preſent fygure. Therfore in ſuche peces of tymber ye ſhall laye one broder & one narrower ſide in one whole ſume togither, and deuyde them equally into two partes, and then take one of them for the breadth of the ſquare of ſuche maner tymber, as many artificers do commonlye vſe, the which be greatly deceyued therby, bycauſe by ſuche deuy ſiō, they make ye ſquare therof much more then the trueth, and by reaſon of the more ſquare, they ſette forthe the leſſe lengthe thereto, for a foote

ſquare in Tymber meaſure, But ye ſhall take the ſquare of ſuch a pece of Tymber, as is ſet forthe in the table of ſquares folowinge, accordinge to one of his broder & narrower ſydes of what dyuers quantityes ſo euer they be. And thē ye ſhal meaſure the lengthe therto, for a foote ſquare in Tymber meaſure, as it is plaīely ſet forth in the figure of Timber meſure next after that rule folowynge, as in this example. The pece of tymber is on one ſide. xii. ynches brode, and on the other ſyde. xvi. ynches brode, thē take. xiii. ynches di. ynch quarter ynche, quarter quarter ynch of. quarter quarter ynche, for the ſquare of theſe two bredthes, as doth appere in the fygure of ſquares folowynge. After warde ye ſhall laye to this ſquare. x. ynches, quarter ynches in length for one foote ſquare in tymbre meaſure as doth appere in the fygure of tymber

meaſure folowige. But bycauſe ye ſquares doe not alwayes tyſe to any ynches, but ſōtymes to odde partes of any ynche, 
                        •
                     s in this exāple before ſayde. Therfore the odde quantytes after your dyſereſcyon conſidered, ye ſhall adde to, or take away, ſum part more or leſſe in ſettyng forth the foot ſquare in Tymber meaſure, beſyde the quātyties expreſſed in the figure of tymber meaſure here. For it were very hard, yet impoſiyble to ſet forth true quantities of tymber mea
                        •
                     ſure, to all odde quantyties of ſquares.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of tymber in. iii. ſydes equally ſquare.
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
AND when a pece of Tymber is in. iii. ſydes equally ſquare, lyke to this preſent fygure, then ye ſhall take ye diſtaunce betwene one of the angles to the mydie of the contrary ſyde for the ſquare, and the halfe of one whole ſyde for another ſquare. Thenne ſerche oute in the fygure of tymber, as it is ſet forth there accordynge to the broder and narrower ſydes therof, as i this example. The dyſtaunce betwene the one angle to the contrarie ſyde is. x. ynches, & the half one whole ſide is. vi. ynches, thē take. vii. ynches di. ynche, quarter yn che, for the ſquare of this lēgth, and bredth, as doth appere in the figure afterwarde ye ſhal lay to this. ii. fore xi. ynches, quarter ynche, in lengthe, for one foote ſquare in Tymber meaſure, as doth appere in the fygure of tymber meaſure. Alwayes conſydered the od quantytes of the ſquare

aboue the. vii. ynches.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of Tymber in. iii. ſydes partely, or dyuerſly ſquare wt one plaine Angle.
                  
                     
                  
                  ALſo whē a pece of tymber is in iii. ſydes partelye or dyuerſlye ſquare with one playn angle, lyke to this preſente fygure. Then ye ſhall meaſure from the playn angle to the ſharpe angle on the one ſyde for one ſquare, and meaſure from the plaine angle, to the ſharpe angle on ye other ſyde, and take halfe of that meaſure for the other ſquare. Then take the ſquare of that pece of tymber, as it is ſet foorth in the Fygure accordynge

to the one border, and one narrower ſydes therof, as in this example, the one ſyde from the playn angle to the ſharpe angle is. xii. ynches in bredth And the other ſyde from the playne angle to ye other ſharp angle is. viii. ynches in bredth. Then take. xii. for the bredth of one ſyde of the tymber and halfe of the other ſide of. viii. the whiche is. iiii. for the bredth of another ſide. Then take. vi. ynches halfe ynche, quarter ynche. di. qr. ynche. qr quarter ynch, di. quarter ynche, for the ſquare of this lēgth & bredth, as doth appere in the figure, afterward ye ſhall laye to this ſquare ſum part leſſe than the. iiii. foote in length, for one foote ſquare in tymber meaſure as doth appeare in the fygure of tymber meſure in cōſideration of ye odde quantyties aboue the. vi. ynches in the ſquare aforeſayde.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of tymber in. v. ſydes equally ſquare.
                  
                     
                     
                  
                  IF a pece of tymber be in. v. ſydes equally ſquare like to this preſēt fygure, then ye ſhall meaſure all the ſquare ſydes of it rounde aboute and take halfe the nombre of ynches of that meaſure for one ſquare ſyde. And thē ye ſhall meaſure the diſtaū
                     ce from the mydie of the ende of the tymber, to the mydle of one ſquare ſyde betwene the two angles, as it appeareth by the lyne in the ſame fygure. And take the meaſure of ye dyſtaūce for another ſquare ſyde, as in this exāple, in this figure of. v. ſquare euery ſyde is. x. ynches, the which. v. tymes multiplied maketh. l. then take halfe. l. the whiche is. xxv. for one

ſquare & ye diſtaūce betwene ye midle paynt to the midle of one ſquare ſide the whiche is. vii. for another ſquare ſyde. Thā take. xiii. ynches dī. quar. ynch, quarter qr. ynch. di. quarter qr ynche, for the ſquare of this length, and bredth. Afterwarde ye ſhall laie to this ſquare, ſome parte leſſe than x. ynches, quarter ynche, in lēgth for one foote ſquare in tymber meaſure, as doth appere in the fygure of tymber meaſure, by reaſon of ye odde quā tyties aboue the. xiii. ynches to the ſquare aforeſayde. This laſte rule ye ſhall folowe generally in meaſuryng of all other peces of tymber in. vi. vii. viii. or more ſydes equally ſquare.
               
               
                  ¶ Of a pece of rounde tymber without any ſquare ſides.
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
ANd whē a pece of tymber is all roūde without any ſquare ſide lyke to this preſent fygure, then artyficers moſte cōmonely doe gyrde it roūde about with a lyne, & deuyde ye meaſure of that gyrdynge into. iiii. equall partes, and thē they take one of them for the ſquare of ſuch a roūd pece of tymber. But they be greatlye deceyued by ſuche maner of meaſuring, for they make the ſquare therof muche leſſe than the trueth, and by ſettyng forth the more length therto for a foote ſquare in tymber meaſure much more 
                        〈◊〉
                      her for a foote ſquare in ſuche rounde peces, than is ryght. Therfore whē ye haue gyrded it roū
                     de about with a lyne, ye ſhall deuide the length therof into. ii. equall parties, and take one parte of them for one ſquare ſyde of ſuche a roūde pece of tymber. Afterward ye ſhal deuide agayne the ſame whole lengthe in

to. iii. parties, and take halfe one of them for another ſquare ſyde of this pece of timber. Thē take. viii. ynches dī. ynch dī. quarter ynche di. qr. quarter ynche, for the true ſquare of this lēgth and bredth as doth appere in the fygure. Afterwarde ye ſhall laye to this ſquare ſome parte leſſe than two foote. iii. ynches in lēgth for one foote ſquare in tymber meaſure, as doth appeare in the figure of tymber meaſure nexte after that folowynge, wythe allowance of ſome parte leſſe for the odde quātities aboue the. viii ynches of the ſquare afore ſayde.
               
            
            ¶ Explicit.
            
         
      
   