
      
         
            
            
            A LEARNED AND 
                  ƲERY ELOQVENT Treatie, writen in Latin by the famouſe man Hieronymus Oſorius Biſhop of Sylua in Portugal, wherein he confuteth a certayne Aunſwere made by M. Walter Haddon againſt the Epiſtle of the ſaid Biſhoppe vnto the Queenes Maieſtie.
            Tranſlated into Engliſh by Iohn Fen ſtudent of Diuinitie in the Vniuerſitie of Louen.
            LOVANII, Apud Ioannem Foulerum, Anno 1568.
            Cum Gratia & Priuilegio.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE CATHOlike Reader.
            
               I Was moued (gentle Reader) to tranſlate this Booke into our mother tongue, for diuers and ſundrie cauſes. Firſt the fame of the authour prouoked me thereunto, who is, not in my priuate opinion, but in the eſtimation of alſuch as know gim, a vertuous Prieſte and godly Biſhoppe, in the iudgement of the world, for grauitie, wiſedome, eloquence and profound knowledge in al kinde of learning in theſe our daies a ſingular, yea an odde man. Then I thought it expedient, to impart the benefit therof vnto my vnlearned countrey men,

bicauſe as it was writen generally for the commoditie of al the Churche of Chriſt, ſo it was eſpecially meant and as it were dedicated to the Churche and cōmon weal of Englād, vnto the which, as it may appeere both by the epiſtle which he wrot before vnto the Queenes Maieſtie, as alſo by this Booke, he bare ſiugular good will. Moreouer I iudged, that mylabour in tranſlating it ſhuld be the more profitably emploied, bicauſe there are in it many goodly exhortations to ſtirre a mā vp to the loue and feare of God, many holeſome leſſons, by the whiche a Chriſtian man may direct and order his life, many points of Catholike doctrine (whiche are in theſe dayes called in controuerſie by our Aduerſaries) ſo plainly ſet out, that the vnlearned

maie take great profit therof, ſo lernedly diſputed, that ſuch as are wel exerciſed in Diuinitie, may find wherwith to increaſe their knowlege. To be ſhort, the thing that moſt moued me to take theſe paines, was, bicauſe it conteineth a briefe confutation of manie erroneous opinions, of much heretical and peſtilēt doctrine, compriſed in a litle booke, ſet out theſe late yeares in the name of M. Haddon: wherin was pretended an anſwere to the Epistle of Oſorius, (which I ſpake of before) but in effecte was nothing els, but a numbre of ſtout aſſertions faintly prooued, be ſprinkled here and there with bitter tauntes, vnſauerie gyrdes, and other the like ſcomme or froth of vndigeſted affections. Theſe were the things

that cawſed me to ſpare ſome time from my ſtudy to trāſlate this booke into Engliſhe for the commoditie of ſuche as vnderſtande not the Latine tongue: wherof if thou ſhalt receiue any profit (as thou maiſt very much, if thou reade it with diligence and good iudgement) thanke God of it, and with mindful hart acknowledge his great mercy and goodnes towards vs, in that it hath pleaſed him in this perilous time, not only to ſend vs at home in our owne countrie moſt vertuous, godlie, and learned men, to be vnto vs a perfecte rule both of good life and true beleefe: but alſo to moue the heart of this graue Father and reuerēt Biſhop (whoſe learned writinges haue deſeruedly obteined ſo great authoritie thoroughout al the

Church of Chriſt) to pitie the lamentable state of our moſt miſerably decaied Church, and to laie his helping hand to the repairing of it, employing thervnto the rare gyftes and graces of God, with the which (as thou ſhalt perceiue by reading this booke) he is moſt beawtifully adourned and decked. And thus I bid the heartily farewell, commending my ſelfe to thy deuout praiers, and thee to Almightie God, whome thou ſhalt moſt humbly beſech, that it maie pleaſe him, either of his mercie to turne the heartes of ſuch as are maliciouſly bent against the true faith of Christe, or els of his iuſtice to turne the wicked deuiſes and diueliſh practiſes of Achitophel and all his confederacie to the glorie

of his holie name, and aduaunceme
                  •
                of the Catholike Churche.
            
               From Louen, the fyrst of Nouember. Anno Domini. 1568.
                  
               
               John Fen.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST BOOKE.
            
            
               I Thinke it a great grace and benefite of God M. Haddon, that your booke, which ye ſette out againſt me a fewe yeres paſt, with much a doe at the length, this laſt daie came vnto my handes. Such care hath God put into the hart of Henrie the Cardinal, who is a moſt godly Prince and wiſe gouernour, to vſe al poſsible diligēce, that no ſuch bookes, as may diſteine the purenes of godly Religion, be brought in emongeſt vs. Had it not benne, that Emanuel Almada Biſſhoppe of Angra, a man excellently wel furniſhed with al good qualities and vertues, to me moſte intiere, both for the ſtreight friendſhippe, as alſo for the long acqueintaunce betwene

vs begone and continued euen from our Aunceſtours, had accompaigned the moſt vertuous Ladie Marie Princeſſe of Parma, into the low Coū
               tries of Flaūders, I had not as yet heard any thing either of the booke, or of the Writer. But he, after his arriual into thoſe parties, chauncing vppon the booke, thought he could no leſſe doe of friendſhippe, but take vpon him my cauſe, and confute your reprocheful wordes. Howbeit in the worke, which he wrote with ſingular diligence, he tooke vppon him the defence, not ſo muche of me, as of Religion, of pietie, of godlineſſe.
            After his returne into his countrie (whiche was much later then we hoped) it was rumored foorthwith, that an Engliſh man, whoſe name was vnknowen, had writen againſt Hieronymus Oſorius, and that the Biſhoppe of Angra had earneſtly taken vpon him the defence of Oſorius, and this much

was ſignified vnto me by my friendes letters. At the ſame time, I was painfully occupied in viſiting my Dioceſe, the which notwithſtanding, I was not ſo letted, but that I found a time to ſalute my frind, and welcome him home by my letters, in the which I required of him, that he woulde ſend me your booke together with his defence. He anſwered me to euery point of my letters, as humanitie, courteſie and frindſhip required. But as touching your booke, he ſaid he was moued in conſcience not to ſend it, vntil he had obteined licence of the Cardinal. whereby ye may perceiue, how heinouſe and wicked offence it is emongeſt vs, to reade the bookes of ſuch men, as haue with many errours infected Religion.
            This wiſe man, albeit he had had very exact and perfect tryal of my Religion by long experience, and ſaw that I was placed in the roome and dignitie of a Biſhop, and therefore might of mine

owne authoritie ſearch and trie out what ſoeuer wilines or craft laie hiddē vnder the couert of your writings: yet durſt he in no wiſe make me partaker of your booke, before he vnderſtoode our Cardinalles pleaſure. You wil here peraduenture ſcorne and laugh at his ouermuch ſuperſtition. But I ſhal neuer thinke any diligēce that is employed to put away the contagion of ſuch a deadlie or mortal peſtilence, to be ouermuch. After many moneths at the length when he vnderſtoode the Cardinals pleaſure, he ſent me your booke willing me withal to ſpare ſome time from mine owne moſt earneſt affaires, to anſwere you, and ſo did the reſt of my friendes alſo counſel me to doe. And although it might ſeme a diſcourteſie not to regarde the requeſt of my friendes, yet I would not haue yelded vnto them▪ if in this your woorke my eſtimation only had ben touched, and not the puritie of the Catholike Religion

violated. I was alſo moued thervnto ſo muche the more, bicauſe I thought it a point of Chriſtian charitie to trie, whether you might be brought through my diligence, to laie downe ſomewhat of your engraffed lightnes. For doubtleſſe I may wel gather of theſe your writinges, that in the writing thereof, ye ſtoode very much in your owne conceite, yea and that in ſome places as it were rauiſhed with good liking of your ſelfe, ye ſtoode ſtil looking earneſtly about you euen for the fauourable applauſe of your frinds. But how much your cōceit hath deceiued you, it ſhal foorth with appeere.
            Firſt of al wheras ve ſay that I am a great framer of wordes and ſentences: whether ye meane truely, or whether ye diſsēble, I can not tel, but the praiſe that you geue me, I doe not acknowledge. If there be in me any cōmendable grace of ſpeache, truly it is bicauſe I haue beſtowed my time and ſtudie,

not ſo much in words, as to atteine the knowledge of the higheſt pointes of learning. Beſides that, this qualitie of ſpeach, how ſimple ſo euer it be in me (if it be any thing at al) I haue vſed, not to the damnable forging of falſe Religiō, but with earneſt and zealous good heart, to the ſetting foorth of true godlines.
            In the very beginning of your booke ye laie to my charge a great crime of raſhnes and preſumption: for thus you ſaie. You tooke muche vpon you, that being a priuate man, ſeparated from vs by land and ſea, and vnacquainted with our affaires, durſt ſo boldly ſpeake vnto the Quenes Maieſtie. Now Sir, I beſeche you, let me learne this one thing of you. What meane you by this worde priuate? Is it a worde of reproche only? Or may it not be applied alſo to good, vertuous, and noble men? Are there not emongeſt you many noble men that beare no office, neither ſerue

in any place of the common weale? Saie you ſo Sir? Are al thoſe that ſerue not in the Office of Requeſtes to be thruſt out by you from the preſence and ſpeach of Kinges? For ſo you laie the name of a priuate man to me, as though ye eſtemed it to be a woord of villanie and diſhonour: as though you would ſaie, that my father were ſome vplandiſh man, and I brought vp in baſenes, of ſo ſmal accompte, that I was neuer woorthie to looke any King in the face, and therefore had committed a fault woorthie of greuouſe puniſhment, that durſt in my letters to name Queene Elizabeth, (whome I alwaies name for honours ſake dewe vnto her Princely Maieſtie). But admitte I were not (as I am in deede) of a verie auncient gentlemans howſe: yet it was not the part of a man brought vp in liberal ſciences, to eſteme any kind of men, or any kind of honour more then the ornamentes

of vertue. For al cogniſaunces or Armes either of nobilitie, or of honour, although they be faire and goodlie in ſhewe, yet when true vertue is away, being falſe, vaine, and void of al ſound fruict, are deſpiſed and holden as worthy of no account with euerie wiſe mā. So that, if ye meane to ſpeake to my rebuke, charge me with ſome crime or grieuous offence, laie not vnto me the name of a priuate man. For before I had the office of a Biſhoppe, I was, both for fauour, authoritie, and worſhippe, preferred before a great number of your calling. If the name of a priuate man did ſignifie dulnes or lumpiſhnes of witte, if it did importe any heinouſe crime or diſhoneſtie of life: then ſurely, he that ſhoulde obiect that name to me, ſhould reprochfully ſpeake of me, and contrary to my deſertes. But for ſo much as we ſee oftentimes, that, emongeſt Princes thoſe mē are in the higheſt places of honor,

which are of al honour moſt vnworthy, and contrariwiſe thoſe voide of al honour, whiche could moſt faith fully and honorably ſerue their Princes: it cōmeth to paſſe, that the name of a priuate man ſignifieth not the vnworthines of the perſons, but the vnluckines of the Princes. For they are ſo beſette and holdē with the ſeruice of lewd felowes that thei can not vſe the vertue of good men. Now wheras you ſay, that it is nothing decent, that I being a ſtraunger ſeperated from you by lande and ſea, ſhoulde write a letter to your Queene: I beſeke you Sir, teache me: were letters deuiſed to aduertiſe mē of thinges behoueſul, in their abſence, or in their preſence? Doubtleſſe in their abſence. Whie then do ye blame me, that bearing very harty good wil vnto your Queene, I admoniſhed her being abſent and ſeperated from me by land and ſea, of thinges apperteining vnto the eſtabliſhmente of her eſtate?

If I had benne preſent, I wolde haue humblie beſought her, not by letters, but by worde of mowth in preſence, that, if ſhe minded to ſaue her life and mainteine her honour, ſhe ſhould eſchew the companie and familiaritie of infamous perſonnes.
            You obiecte alſo vnto me, that I am not ſkilled in your affaires. As though I talked not of ſuch matters as are moſt perfectly knowen of al men.
            Laſt of al you increaſe the vnworthines of my fact with the name of a Princelie Maieſtie: as though your Quene did excel rather in richeſſe and puiſſaunce, then in gentlenes and humanitie, and as though I were ſuche a man as could not by my letters aduertiſe the greateſt Prince in the Chriſtian worlde of things of greateſt importaunce. Acknowledge nowe, I pray you, your moſt vnaduiſed raſhnes in this your talke, for thus muche you ſeme to ſaie. Whereas you haue neuer

had the practiſe of the Law, neuer borne in any common weale office (I meane ſuch office as apperteine to mē of Law) neuer offered ſupplications to any Prince: Who hath made you ſo arrogant and preſumptuous, as to take vpon you to ſpeake vnto the Queenes Maieſtie, a thing graunted to me al only, and to ſuche as I am, and that for great good cauſe? If you perceiue not M. Haddon, howe fonde and childiſh this your talke is, I muſt nedes deeme that you are beſtraught of your ſenſes. But if it greaueth you to ſee, that the Quene geueth eare to ſome other man that is not of your qualitie, I can not blame you. For whie, certaine it is, that you can not long enioy this your felicitie, if many wiſe and vertuous mē ſhal vnto her good wil and authoritie ioyne their ſeruice and induſtrie. For the counterfeicted attendaunce of feined vertue, in the preſence of true vertue vaniſheth awaie. Wherfore, I

geue you counſel to exclude al honeſt men (of whom, as I vnderſtand, there is no ſmal number in England) from the familiaritie of the Prince, expel them, thruſt them out, by proclamatiōs force them to flee out of the Realme. As for me, that am ſo farre of, there is no cauſe whie ye ſhould be greatly careful, for ſo much as it can not be ſuſpected, that I ſhoulde take awaie from you your gaines, after which as you ſhew your ſelfe, you gape ſo greedilie. But by your pacience Sir, me thinketh ye are of nature very baſe and abiecte, that for ſo meane a promotion take ſo great ſtomake and courage. If ye can not beare ſo meane a condition, but that you muſt needes in reſpecte of your office, laie vnto me the name of a priuate man, what would you doe, if you were called to ſome higher degree of worſhippe?
            You ſaie, that I do goe about to appaire the eſtimation of lawes, wheras

in deede I doe thinke, that the good eſtate of a common weale ſtandeth and is mainteined by lawes, and am hartily ſorie, that through theſe peſtilēt ſectes al good lawes cuſtomes and ordinaunces are fallen to ruine and decaie.
            You ſaie that I appeache all the whole Realme of England, I can not tel, of what, hateful newfanglednes: the whiche is alſo falſe. For I haue heard of credible perſonnes, that the greateſt part of that Iland doe continue in the Olde Religion.
            Now wheras you require of me to beare with you, bicauſe you haue talked ſomewhat freelie with me, as being an Engliſh mā, foſtred and brought vp of the Queenes Maieſtie, and of the affaires of England not ignorant: I commend your loue towardes your countrie, I commend your loyaltie towards your Prince, I cōmend your knowlege of things gotten by long experience, I cōmend alſo your freedom in ſpeache.

But beware you doe not (ſo muche as in you lieth) ouerthrow your Countrie, beware you bring not the Quene into daunger of her eſtate and life, and when you are pricked and yearked foorth with the goades of your owne madnes, beware you cloke not your erroneous beleefe and licentious life vnder the honeſt name of libertie. Ye promiſe aſſuredly that you meane to doe it, for no debate or diſſenſion of minde, whereas there can not be deuiſed any greater diſſenſion then this, you taking vpon you to mainteine, and I contrariwiſe to inuey againſt the moſt wicked and heinouſe malefactours of the worlde.
            And where you ſaie, that your purpoſe is to pul out of mens heartes certaine falſe opinions that they haue cō
               ceiued of the ſtate of England: if you can ſo doe, you ſhal doe me a verie friendly pleaſure. But this one thing I meruaile much at, that you ſay, that my

writings might happē to cauſe this falſe rumor and infamie, that is now bruted of England. What ſay you Sir? Are you only ignoraunt, how long time it is ſence England was firſte charged with this infamouſe report? How was it poſsible, when the holie men Iohn Fiſher Biſhop of Rocheſter, and S. Thomas More were openly put to death for their conſtancie in their faith and Religion: when the good Religiouſe Fathers the Carthuſians were with moſt cruel tormentes ſlaine and murdred: when the houſes of Religion, in the whiche was appointed a manſion or dwelling place of perpetual chaſtitie, were laid wide open, and turned to prophane vſes: when many other momentes of holines were vtterly ouerthrowen and defaced: how was it poſſible, I ſaie, that England ſhoulde be without a very exceding greate infamie? But without cauſe, ſaie you. Be it ſo (if it pleaſe you) for I wil not

as yet diſpute for either part. Yet this muche I ſaie, that euen at that time there was a great brand of diſhoneſtie burnt into the eſtimation of Engliſh men. But you forſooth, that ſhoulde haue defended al thoſe thinges with maine pollicie and counſel, were not yet come to beare the ſwaie, and therfore the matter being deſtitute of ſuch a ſpokeſman as you are, that opinion that was by the conſtant reporte and brute of al men diuulged, tooke place in al the Realmes of Chriſtendome. How is it then true, that I ſhould cauſ
                  •
                this infamie (which is ſo olde) by my writinges ſet out but the laſt daie?
            You commend my kinde of writing, the which is more then I requir
                  •
                of you. For that I vſe in matters we knowen, words not neceſſarie (as yo
                  •
                thinke) you reproue me. But your reproch I am nothing offended withal for my deſire is to talke of thinges mo
                  •
                clere and plaine, and what were to b
                  •
               
               
put into my Oration, and what to be put out, I thinke it dependeth of my iudgement, and not of yours, whiche peraduenture knowe not, what my meaning is.
            You ſaie that, whereas I pretended in the beginning to doe ſome other thing, I fel at the length to taunting and defacing of Religion. That is trew in deede, if moſt vile and ſeditions hereſie may be called Religion. You ſay that it is to no purpoſe for me to goe about to diſcharge manie Ingliſh men of the enuie of the facte, for that, (as you ſaie) their caſe and cauſe is al one. And to proue that, you declare the manner of England to be ſuch, that no law bindeth the people there, vnleſſe it be firſt decreed by the whole communaltie, receiued of the nobilitie, approued by the Clergie, and laſt of al authoriſed by the King, and therfore can not ſtand, that a lawe being made by the ful conſent and agreemēt

of al, ſome men ſhould ſuſteine blame, and ſome others ſhould be altogether void thereof. The law I like wel: But that it is not kept, I thīke itmuch to be miſliked. If the geuing of voices were free, and not wreſted and gotten out frō men by threatning and puniſhmēt, I would like your ſaing wel. But here to paſſe ouer with ſilence the lightnes and inconſtancie of the multitude, which may verie eaſilie be brought to any incōuenience either with the hatred of ſeueritie, either with the ſhew of gentlenes: and withal to leaue that point vntouched, howe it is a thing impoſsible for euerie particular man to geaue his voice, but of force they muſt geue ouer their authoritie of geuing voices vnto a few: I would you would teach me this one thing, (for I confeſſe plainely, that I am a ſtraunger, and nothing expert in matters of your cōmō weale) what horrible fact had the biſhop of Rocheſter cōmitted,

that neither the grauitie of his perſon, neither the dignitie of a Biſhop could ſaue him from death? Went he about anie treaſon againſt his coūtrey? Had he conſpired the death of the Prince? Had he entred into talke with foraine ennemies to betraie his owne common weale? Nothing leſſe. But bicauſe he moſt conſtantlie refuſed to yeeld his conſent vnto a wicked ſtatute, the holie and innocent man was ſo puniſhed, as though he had ben the moſt deteſtable traitour in the worlde. What had Thomas More committed, a verie good man, and excellentlie well learned? Had he forged the Kinges letters patentes▪ Had he embeſeled the Kinges treaſure? Had he kylled or greuouſly inuried any of the Kinges ſubiectes? No ſuche matter. But onelie bicauſe 
                  •
               e woulde not claw and flatter the 
                  •
               ing, but rather woulde ſpeake his 
                  •
               inde freelie: they chopped of his

head before al the people, as though he had ben a fellon or traitour. But now what ſaie you to the Carthuſiās, moſt vertuouſe, godly, and religious Fathers, men in pleading at the barre vnacqueinted, in the cōmon affaires and practiſes of the world vnſkilful? Why were thei ſo cruellie handled? Why were they truſſed and hanged vppon gibbets? Whie were they diſmēbred and quartered in peaces? Whie were they finally burned and cōſumed with fier? dowbtleſſe bicauſe they would not with their voice allow and make good a thing, that vnto them ſeemed wicked, heinouſe, and vnworthie to be named. What ſhal I ſay of the holie biſhops, whom you haue lodē with yrōs fetters and chaines, whom you haue ſhut vp in darke and cloſe priſons, whom you haue robbed both of goods and honour? Haue you any thing elles to laie to their charge, but that they would not geue their aſfent to your

ſtatutes, which ſemed to them vniuſt? And therfore it is no wonder, if other men being with ſuch cruel and horrible puniſhments put in extreme feare be not ouer bold to declare their mind freelie in open place. For where the geuing of voices is not free, but forced of men by feare and terrour, there reigneth, not the coūſel of the whole, but the luſt and outrage of a few. You doe not therefore ſufficiently proue, that thoſe lawes were made and allowed by the cōmon agreement and conſent of al ſtates. For it is manifeſt, that they were violently forced, and that who ſo euer did gaineſaie them, was extremely puniſhed.
            As touching my humble ſuite vnto the Queene, wherein I beſought her Maieſtie, that, if I were able by good argumēt to proue, that theſe authours or brochers of newe fanglednes did moſt daungerouſly and perniciouſly erre, it might pleaſe her to eſteme and

hold their doctrine as vngodly and deteſtable: you ſay, that it is a falſe accuſation without ſtrength of argument: that it procedeth of ſtomake, and not of loue towardes the trewth: that it is grounded vpon a ſlaunder, and not vpō reaſon: that it is a reproch, and not a diſputation laied vpō the ground worke of religion▪ You require of me the verie ſame thing, as I required of your Quene: that is to wit, that if you were able to ſhew, that I had without good cauſe found fault with the gouernement of your common weale, I ſhould repent me of myne offence.
            Firſt of al, I take Chriſt Ieſus to witnes (who only knoweth the ſecrettes of my hart) that I wrote thoſe my letters neither for hatred, neither for diſpleaſure, neither for reproche (as you ſay) but for earneſt good zeale and loue I beare to the trewth and to the welfare of the whole realme. For what haue Ingliſh men hurt me more

then other men? What wrong or diſpleaſure haue thei done me? Trulie neuer a whit. But contrarie wiſe I haue ben informed by the letters both of Antonius Auguſtinus Biſhop of Ilerda, a man for his excellēt vertues and ſingular knowledge in the liberal ſciences, wel deſeruing the dignitie of a biſhop together with immortal fame (who was ſometime ſent from the biſhop of Rome legat vnto Quene Marie) as alſo by the letters of Iohn Metellus a Burgonion, a man, whom for his courteous and ſwete conuerſation ioyned with rare giftes of learning I loue verie intierly: that manie great learned men in England did geaue m
                  •
                a verie honourable report. Wherefore there was good cauſe, whie I ſhould rather loue Engliſh men, then malice or reuile them. Neither did I euer thinke to reprooue your common weale, but the corrupt lewdnes of a fewe, which diſquieteth the whole realme.

And whereas you charge me with curioſitie for medling in a ſtraunge common weale: I thinke it is no ſtraunge common weale, but myne owne. For I did not reaſon of the lawes of your Realme and ciuile ordinaunces, but of Chriſtiā religion, for the which I am not afraid to looſe my life. And therefore ſhal I neuer thinke any thing to be impertinent to me, whereby I may mainteine and ſet foorth the honour of this common weale. Conſider now, M. Haddon, how iuſt your requeſt is. This is your demaund. If you can conuince and manifeſtly prooue, not that I am in any errour (for that were tolerable) but that I wrote my epiſtle for hatred, euil wil, and reproch: you require of me to confeſſe my fault and to ſaie that I was ouer raſh, when I tooke vpon me to control your matters, whiche I knew not. Can you on the other ſide prooue, whereas I meāt louingly, frindly, and religiouſly,

that it was done ſlaunderouſly, enuiouſly and vntruly? But leſt you ſhould ſay, I deale to ſtraightly with you, this much I promiſe you faithfully. If you be able to proue, not that I wrote for any euil intent (for that is impoſsible) but that the rearing vp of this your newly framed religion is without all fault and blameleſſe, I wil repēt me of my doyng. I am not ignorant, how daungerous a matter it is, to promiſe thus much to a man of law. But bicauſe I haue a good affiaunce, that you ſhal not be able to circumuent me with any malicious and crafty fetch of the law, and my deſire is to diſcharge honeſt men of ſlaunderous reportes: I promiſe you thus much of myne honeſtie: if you be able to proue, that thoſe felowes be honeſt, godlie, and religious men, whiche I take to be lewde and wicked verlettes, I will neuer ſpeake one word againſt you.
            You take it in ſnuffe M. Haddon,

that I deale ſo boiſteouſly with your new maiſters, ſaing that I doo oftentimes thunder out againſt them moſt horrible and fyerie reproches, yea ſo much, that mans hart can not deuiſe any thing more deteſtable. Wherin I perceiue that you can not well diſcerne, what an argument, and what a reproch is. For I contended not with reprochful woordes, but with argumentes, ſuch as you can not yet anſwere. Than you ſaie. Where are theſe monſters of Religion? What are thei? How long haue they continued? Where are thoſe miſſhapen felowes to be found? If you thinke to ſhift the manifold argumētes which I haue vſed, with ſuch a glittering ſhew of wordes, you are much deceiued. For I loke for reaſons, and not for a vaine noiſe of wordes. But that, that you bring in vpō this, is a very toy and mockerie. Your woords be theſe. Declare the thinges, name the perſones, note the times, adde the circū
                  ſtances,

that we may haue ſome certaintie, wherin to ſtād with you, as alſo to withſtand you. I thinke, M. Haddon, it was longe, ere you were ſet to the Rhetorike ſchole, and that ye were not verie apte to learne it. You would be counted a Rhetorician, and yet you know not that Rhetorique is a prudencie or diſcretion in ſpeaking: ſo that what ſo euer is againſt diſcretion, is not conuenient in this arte, whiche you went about to learne at an incōuenient time. There is a rule of the law, vſual in iūdgemētes, which is this. Whē the queſtiō is, not of the law, but of the facte, the offence being ſecrete, we muſt vſe al argumētes and coniectures poſsible, to bring the truth of the facte to light. For it muſt be cōſidered, of what conuerſation, of what life, of what audacitie the partie arreined was: it muſt be weyed, what feare, what deſire, what enuie, what hatred might moue him to committe the facte: it muſt be

declared, what oportunitie he had, what time, what occaſion, what pollicie to cōceale, what hope to eſcape, what ſuſpiciō went before, what came after, with all other circumſtances, which maie before the iudges increaſe the ſuſpiciō of the fact. Now ſir when your maiſter (which as it ſemeth, was but meanelie ſeene in theſe matters) had taught you this rule: you thought it wolde ſerue in al cauſes, not only in iudgemente, but els where: and therfore you require of me ſuch circumſtances as the cauſe did nothing require. For my meaning was not to accuſe any man, but to aduertiſe th
                  •
                Quene, that ſhe ſhould not ſuffer her ſelfe to be brought to any inconuenience. If you or any ſuch as you are were to be arreined, what? ſhould we, in a matter openlie knowen and not denied, but defended to be lawfully done, vſe ſuch argumentes, coniectures and circumſtances as you require?

Not ſo. But it were ſufficient to declare, that your doinges were heinouſe and vngodlie. And he that ſhould otherwiſe doe, might worthely be laught to ſcorne as a trifling and a fooliſh babler. Why then Sir? If you neither vnderſtande what is decent, neither conſider what the cauſe requireth, neither perceiue the difference of thinges: is it meete, that I ſhoulde be punniſhed for your ignorance? I thinke not ſo. But whereas my meaning was, not to arreine any man, but only to admoniſhe your Prince, that ſhe would put awaie from her ſelfe and her realme the peril that hangeth ouer them: could I doo any leſſe, but ſet the greatnes of the daunger before her eyes? And bicauſe the greateſt daunger in the wordle is, to take a falſe religion for a true: I ſhewed certaine markes, by the whiche a man might diſcerne falſe and diueliſh hereſie, from true and godly religion. Thoſe

markes, if they be falſe, reproue them: if they be not manifeſt, conuince me of ignorance: if they offend not you, hold your peace: if vnwares I touched you at the quicke, ſhew your greefe.
            Monſters of Religion I know there are verie manie, if they be not yet come into England, I am glad for your countreis ſake: and I confeſſe I was in an errour, when I thought that your Iland had ben peſtered with diuers and ſundrie kindes of ſuch monſters. But your bare denyal is no ſufficient Conſutation. You muſt vſe manifeſt proofes: you muſt declare by good reaſon, that I was in an errour, and then I will ſaie, that you are an eloquent felow. But if you can not doo this, but only prate and talke: I am not bounde to beleeue you. A litle after ye ſaie thus. You crie out againſt religiō, you fight againſt the ſetters foorth of religion, in theſe two pointes you vſe much bitter talke, and yet in neither of

them both do you tel vs either what it is, or where it is. Sir either you haue not read my letters, or if you haue, the meaning of them, whiche is verie plaine, you vnderſtande not (ſuche is peraduēture the dulnes of your witte). Could any man ſet foorth more plainly with wordes, the infamous doinges of men, the great owtrage, and cruell impietie of their procedinges? Anon after, ye take a peece as it maie appere out of ſome other mās oration, and ſet it in for your owne, in a place nothing to the purpoſe. theſe be your wordes. This your accuſation is verie pitiful, the which if I anſwere but with one woord, ther is no remedie, you muſt needes hold your peace. It is euen ſo, ſir, you haue made a great ſpeake. The thinges that you haue done, the deuiſes and practiſes that you haue wrought, al was don in darkenes and huggermugger. Ther are no witneſſes, ther remaineth no footeſteps to tracke you ou
                  •
               , no ſignes

and tokens by the which a man might come to the knowledge of your doinges. Then you ſaie thus. You crie, yea with gaping mowth, and that verie lamentably: that this newly deuiſed Religiō is to be ſhunned, abandoned, and abhorred, that the begynners of it were miſchieuous perſons, murderers, cutthrotes, poiſoners, ouerthrowers of cōmon weales, ennemies of mankind. Surely this talke that you aſcribe vnto me, is yours, and not myne, how be it I am not angry with you for the deuiſing of it. For ſuch heinouſe offenſes would be ſhakē vp with much ſharper wordes then theſe be. But ſir how anſwere you theſe thinges? Full ſtowtly I warrant you, they can not be denied. Yet thus you ſaie. I conſtantly affirme, that ther is no ſuch thing: I beleeue not you, I require to be inſtructed. What ſaie you? What proue you? Oh what an eloquent felow is this, that cā ſo eaſily with one clauſe or ſentence, and that verie ſhort, ſhut

vp the whole matter? How manfully you ſtand to your defence? How warily you kepe out your ennemie? In good ſooth I can not but muſe at your, folie, to ſee, vpon how ſmal occaſion (when you haue ſaid nothing at all) you fal to crying out, as though you had vttered ſome excellent matter. I ſaid in that my epiſtle, that the Virgins or Nunnes conſecrated vnto God, were defiled with incoſtuous wedlocke: I ſaid that the images of Saincts, and of the Croſſe, yea and of Chriſt him ſelfe crucified, were pulled out of their places, and broken in peaces. I ſaid, that the olde Religion was ouerthrowne, and a new ſet vp in the place of it. Other thinges I let paſſe, reſeruing them to their conuenient places. What ſaieth M. Haddon to al this? Al theſe thinges confuteth he, like an Oratour, with one word: and driueth me to the wall, that I can goe no farder. I beleue you not, ſaieth he, I

require to be inſtructed. What ſaie you? What proue you? Whie then what ſhall I doo? Whether ſhall I goe? M Haddon an Ingliſh man, a man verie expert in the affaires of his countrey, 
                  •
               aieth pla
                  •
               inly, that thinges that are commonly reported to haue ben done in England, were neuer done. If it be ſo, I muſt bring witneſſes. And principally I will 
                  •
               ite you to geaue witneſſe. If you will confeſſe ſo muche as I require of you, you ſhal ridde me of great trouble. If you denie it, then will I call other witneſſes to teſtifie for me, if nede ſhall ſo require. Afterward yo bring in theſe wordes. You crie out as lowd as you can, heaping together all the villanous woordes in the worlde, whiche, it ſeemeth, you haue ſorted out, and ſet a ſide for the nonce, to deface this your counterfaict religion, and to ſticke and kill certaine perſonnes, which no man knoweth but your ſelfe.
               
I praie you, M. Haddon, ſobre your ſelfe a litle, but euen ſo longe, as you maie peruſe, againe this your talke. You ſhall ſee your ſelfe, that you were ſtarke madde, when you wrote theſe thinges. For you vtter ſuche matter, as neither I, nor you your ſelfe doo vnderſtand.
            You ſaie, that I doo deface my counterfaicte religion with woordes of villanie. I omitte the name of counterfaicte Religion, as though I had ben the authour or begynner of any newe Religion at all. But how ſhould I my ſelfe deface myne owne Religion, which I doo mainteine and with dew praiſe ſet out? This would I faine learne of you.
            Then for the perſonnes, which you ſaie I ſticke, I wold gladly vnderſtand what they are. As for Luther with his adherētes and folowers I take them for moſt wicked and infamous perſones,

and ſuch in dede I doo a litle pricke in my writinges. Theſe are the perſons, which you ſaie no man knoweth but I. And you for ſooth, know them not: and yet you commend them highly, which is a point of meruelouſe great ouerſight in you to commend ſuch as you know not. But you, will neither ſaie ſo, neither can you wel tell, what you wolde ſaie. Doubtleſſe it were better, to be dōme, then to vtter ſuch matter, as no man neither ſad nor mad can vnderſtand.
            You accuſe me that I haue defamed your moſt noble Iland, being thervnto brought by pelting rumours of maliciouſe perſones. Whie then, ſir, you graunt, that I haue deuiſed nothing, but what I haue ſpoken, I was moued to ſpeake by common report. Moreouer I haue alreadie declared, that I ſpake not againſt the whole Iland, as you ſaie, but only againſt the brochers of your new fangled Religion.
            
               
Now whereas I ſaid, that hereſie and ſectes are popular, which is verie daungerous and noiſome to Princes, that minde to rule like kinges, (wherin you M. Haddon, find great fault with me) if I prooue it not by good reaſon, I am content, you ſhal take me, yea and proclaime me as a ſlaunderer. But of this we wil talke hereafter.
            The miſchieuouſe practiſe of poiſon, wherwith it is reported that certaine Princes haue ben killed, you pourge with two examples taken out of your auncient Cronicles. For you ſaie, that the Emperour Henrie the fourth was made awaie by the treaſon of a monke, that gaue him the bleſſed Sacrament infected with poiſon. You ſaie alſo that Iohn king of Englād was by the like man and maner poiſoned. I know that both theſe tales are proued to be ſlaunderous lyes by good and approued writers. But to my matter, whether it were ſo or not, it ſkilleth

litle. Neither did I euer ſaie, that before Martin Luther there was no man that could I kill in poiſon, or that beſides him ther was neuer ill monke or frier in the wordle. But thus much I ſaid, that when ſuch offences are committed in common weales, by men not ſo well trained in godlie life: it were expedient, that they were refourmed, by the puritie of this your moſt vnſpotted diſcipline, by the wholſome vertue of your goſpell, by the goodlie redreſſe that your Doctours haue brought to the wordle. The whiche being nothing ſo, but all together to the contrarie, (for it is manifeſte that within theſe thirtie yeares laſt paſt manie moe conſpiracies haue ben wrought againſt Princes, then in many hundred yeares before) I maie boldly ſaie, that the operation of this your medicine is not ſo effectuall, as you take it to be. Soone after ye ſaie thus. But to reherſe

theſe thinges particularly vnto you, is not nedeful, whiche being neerer vnto ſuch miſchiefes then I am maie the better learne out of your neighbours bookes: how often the cuppos of poiſon haue walked emongeſt the Princes and rulers of the Churche of Rome▪ and how and by whome the ſedes of diſcorde and warres haue ſuffered thorough all the common weales of the Chriſtian Dominion. You are a wonderful fellow M. Haddon. This obſcure and intricate maner of ſpeaking liketh you meruelouſly well. I praie you what woulde you ſaie, when you ſaie that I am neerer vnto ſuch miſchiefes? Meane you that I am neerer, as acceſſarie to ſuch faultes? If you ſaie ſo (as your wordes ſeeme to importe), you are not well acqueinted with my manners. If you ſaie, I am of that countrei, wher poiſon is oftentimes geuen to Princes in meates and drinkes, that is falſe alſo. For there is no coūtrey in the worlde,

where the name of a king is more reuerenced then here. If you ſaie that I am neerer vnto Rome, where ſuch thinges are ſometimes vſed, ſurely you haue not wel learned the ſituations and diſtances of countreis. For we are much farder from the citie of Rome then you are. Whereas you ſaie, that the ſeedes of warres haue ſuffered, what your meaning is, I aſſure you I can not tel. Except peraduenture the printer miſtooke, and for this woorde Diſperſa, put in vnwares perpeſſa.
            
            As towching the heades or prelates of the Churche, whiche were made awaie with poiſon: I graunt that ſuch wicked actes haue ſometimes ben cō
               mitted. For it chaunceth often, that, where a man wolde leaſt looke for it, there reigneth moſt the heinouſe vices of coueteouſnes and ambition: out of the which two fountaines ſpringeth al euils to the deſtruction of mankind. Yet this I warne you, that it is muche

looked for, that the redreſſe of al theſe euils ſhould procede from your Euangelike diſcipline, which pretendeth in outward ſhew to make an end of al enormities.
            But ſir, what is it, that you beare your ſelfe ſo hohly, ſo godly, ſo religiouſly, yeelding vnto God thankes with ſo kind and mindful hart, for the benefite of this your Goſpel. Thus you ſaie. I humbly hold vp my handes vnto the immortal God, thanking him hartily, that it hath pleaſed him, by the riſing of the ſonne of his Goſpel openly 
                     •
                  mongest vs, to driue awaie the moſt depe darkenes of the times past: through the lack of whoſe knowledge, and through the affiaunce of ſuperstition, we walowed before without care in the ſinke of vice, beleeuing that by the lead of Bulles, and by the mumbling of praiers not vnderſtoode, was purged, what ſo euer ſinne might be committed in this life. What more godlie praier could be deuiſed

than this? You thanke God, that you are deliuered frō moſt perilous darkenes, yea and that through the light and ſhining of the goſpel, which was writen and ſet out, not by Matthew, Iohn or any other holy Euangeliſt, but by Luther, Melanchton, Zwinglius, and ſuche other worſhipful ſquiers lately dropte out from heauen. And ſo being deliuered through the benefit of this proſperous and luckie goſpel from the ſtincking dich of al filthines, in the which you wallowed before (as you confeſſe your ſelfe) hauing affiaunce in ſuperſtitiō: you are now no more ſubiecte vnto the brandes of fleſhly luſt: you are no more troubled with ambition: you are not occupied in the troubleſome cares of coueteouſnes: you are not puffed vp with pride and vaine glorie: you truſt no more to fraude, deceit, and lying. For it is like, that hauīg receiued the brightnes of heauenly light, ye diſpiſed foorth with al worldly thinges, and were inflamed with the

deſire of heauenlie life, yea and (that more is) of the diuine nature it ſelfe. Who cā deny, if this be ſo, but that ſo wonderful an alteration of life doth moſt manifeſtly declare the verie preſence of Chriſt him ſelfe? But I would faine learne this of you, whether you alone in al England, doe enioye theſe ſo great benefites, or whether thei be common to al ſuche, as haue receiued the brightnes of your new goſpel. If you alone haue the fruitiō of this light with ſo great fruict of the heauēl
                  •
                vertue: the glittering of this newe goſpel hath brought no great commoditie to your coūtrei. for it ſhould haue furdered, not any one particular mā, but the whole cōmon weale. Oh ſay you, euerie one. for as the ſonne riſing driueth awaie the darkenes from the eyes of al men: euen ſo the brightnes of this goſpel putteth awaie the myſte that was caſt ouer all mens heartes. Al thinges are now laid open, al thinges

are come to light. Ther are no faultes in the worlde, no wicked offences, no heinouſe crimes, no, none at al. Ther is great good cauſe, if this tale be true, whie we ſhould forſake our owne countrei, and come to dwel in Englād, that we might be partakers of this your felicitie with you. For what could a man deſire more of God, then alwaies to behold ſuche a countrei, where, for the greater part, neither coueteouſnes, norſenſualitie, nor hatred, nor pride, nor contention, nor raſhnes, nor any other ſpot of vncleane life may take place. But, Sir, I praie you: What was the let, whie you vſed no iuſtice or godlines, before this new ſonne beames ſhone vpon you? Horrible ſuperſtition, you ſaie. for we beleeued, that through the vertue of a peece of lead, and the mumbling of a few praiers, whiche we vnderſtoode not, al our offences were forgeauen vs, what ſoeuer we had done in this

worlde. What ſaie you? is it to be thought you were al ſo mad, that you wolde thinke a ſinne conceiued in the hart to be forgeauen through the vertue of a peece of lead, or by the pronouncing of praiers, the mind being otherwiſe occupied? What a great dulnes of witte was that? what a ſtraunge folie? who had put that errour into your hartes? Were there no men emongeſt you learned in the holie ſcriptures, to teach you, that al the hope of ſaluation conſiſteth in the grace and mercie of Chriſt? Trulie I hold vp my handes moſt humbly vnto the immortal God (as you pretend to doe) yeelding him moſt hartie thākes, that it was my chaunce to be borne and brought vp in Spaigne, where no man (if he be a Chriſtian) was euer ſo fooliſh as to thinke, that there is any other waie to pourge ſynne, but only by the grace and goodnes of Chriſt. The which to atteine, the neceſſarie

and onely meane is according to the doctrine of Chriſt him ſelfe, to deteſt and forſake vice, to confeſſe our ſinnes cōmitted with baſhfulnes and ſorow, to withdraw our ſelues frō ſenſualitie to cōtinencie, frō vice to honeſtie, frō malice to charitie, to enter into a new trade of life, and to exerciſe our ſelues in holy workes. Now ſir, of you truſted ſo much to lead, that ye thought it of force to blot out ſinne: you were not wel in your wit. If you ſaie that al England was in the like blindnes, you bring a great ſlaunder of madnes vpon your countrie, that hath brought you vp and placed you in ſo great worſhip. No, ſay you, I ſaie not ſo. But I meane by the name of lead, in the whiche we ſaw the name and image of the biſhop of Rome engraued, the authoritie and iuriſdiction of the Pope him ſel
                  •
               e, the which manie hundred yeres agoe, was holden and eſteemed as a thing verie holie, of our Fathers and

afterward of vs. This authoritie, which we ſometime reuerenced, being now inſtructed by the moſt cleere doctrine of this goſpel, I doe neglecte, deſpiſe, contemne, and thinke it to be eſteemed as a thing of naught of all wiſe men. Whie then, M. Haddon, what needed you the name of lead to ſignifie this authoritie? Did you it, to make it more odiouſe? Or rather thought you by ieſting at the woord to gette the greater applauſe of your compagnions? For I knowe, that pleaſaunt ſporters, as you be, are muche delighted with ieſting, and like to contend not ſo much with argumentes and ſentences, as with ſco
                  •
               fing, and (as it ſeemeth to me) with an vnſauerie kind of pratling. In ſuche like ſcoffes and tauntes Martine Luther your youthlie Patriarke and olde wanton was a great doer. And I dowbt not but ſome of your clawebackes, when he came to this

place, tooke vp a great laughter, and bound it with an oth, that it was meruelous pleaſauntly ſpoken, and excellently wel handled. For al thinges are ſo farre out of courſe and dew order, that it is a verie eaſie matter for a ſawcie reprochful ſcoffer, to get the name of a merie felowe and pleaſaunt compagnion.
            But as concerning this matter, although the Biſhop of Angra hath diſputed verie learnedly of the authoritie of the Biſhop of Rome: yet wil I reaſon with you (as with a ſeculare man and ciuilian) of the ſaid matter in few wordes. Firſt of al let this be a The Monarchie of the Church.grounde worke or foundation. The Church of Chriſt is one and not manie. Then let this be agreed vppon. It is not ynough for a Prince, whiche maketh lawes to eſtabliſh a common weale, to ſet them out, except he alſo appoint gouernours and inferiour magiſtrates. Let this alſo be the third

ground. (for ſo much as you like wel myne opinion as touching the order of a Monarchie) that it is moſt expedient for a common Weale well appointed with cuſtomes and lawes, to be vnder the rule of one Prince. For many doe teare and diſmembre a cōmon weale, but one by ſupreme authoritie vniteth and as it were with glew, ioineth together the heartes of the people. It was therfore moſt agreable to the beſt maner of gouernement, when the Prince of al Princes (vnder whoſe euerlaſting Empire are ſubiected both heauen and earth) intended to ſet vp a heauenlie cōmon weale in earth: that he ſhould firſt make Lawes, and then creat Princes and Magiſtrates, which might according to the preſcribed order of Lawes and equitie, rule this common weale. Suche were the Apoſtles and the reſt of the Diſciples of Chriſte. Laſt of al, leſt the band of this ſocietie might be diſſolued, and the peace of

the Citie diſtourbed: he appointed a Monarchie, and gaue the ſupreme gouernement thereof vnto Peter. Are not theſe thinges commonly knowen of all men? Ymagine you to obſcure and darken thinges moſt clearely ſpoken? Truſt you ſo muche to your malice, that you thinke your ſelfe able to wreſt the wordes of the Goſpell from the true meaning, to ſerue the filthie appetite and luſt of you and your companions? I pray you what can be ſpoken more plainely and cleerelie then Mat. 16. c.thoſe woordes? Thou arte Peter, ſaith Chriſt, and vpon this rocke I wil build my Churche. And what ſo euer thou ſhalt bind vpō the earth, it ſhalbe boūd Luc. 22. d.in heauen. And againe. I haue prayed for thee, that thy faith faile not, and thou being turned, confirme thy brethren. And many other places of like effect, which do manifeſtly proue, that Peter had a Prerogatiue aboue the reſt of the Apoſtles. But you wil ſaie for al

this, that theſe teſtimonies of the holy ſcriptures, which we haue alleged, are expoūded farre otherwiſe of the new Apoſtles. I wil ſet againſt the authoritie of your Apoſtles, the authoritie of S. Ambroſe, Auguſtine, Hierome, Baſile and all other holie men, that haue with their writings geuen light to the Church of Chriſt. But now your Doctours wil anſwere, that although it be true that the ſupreme authoritie was graunted to Peter, yet foloweth it not, that it was geuen to his ſucceſſours alſo. Why then I aſke you an other queſtion. Did Chriſte ſet vp a Church to continue but for one mans life? Or els minded he to eſtabliſh it for euer? If he appointed, that his Church ſhould ſtande ſo little time, he didde not ſo great a thing, as was to be looked for of his infinite bountie and wiſedome: for ſo muche as he beſtowed ſo much labour and diligence, yea and ſhedde ſo muche bloud about a cōmon weale,

whoſe cōtinuance was limited within the bounds of ſo ſhort time. If he minded that his church ſhould cōtinue for euer: then doubtleſſe he ſet it in ſuch order, as ſhould in al chaunges and alterations of times be mainteined and kept. If it be then euident (as it is moſt euident and plaine) that Peter had a Superioritie ouer the reſt of the Apoſtles: it muſt needes folowe, that the ſame preeminence or principalitie, of right apperteineth to al ſuche as haue ſucceded in Peters roome and charge. Or els, in the Church of Chriſt, which is one, it might ſeeme there was ordeined not the order of the heauēly Monarchie, but the gouernement of manie. And then what knot or band of concord were there in the Churche? By whoſe authoritie ſhoulde the tempeſtes riſen in it be aſſwaged? By whome ſhould ſeditious opinions and ſects be rooted out? By whom ſhould pride and ſtubbornes be reſtreined and

kept vnder: if there had ben no man appointed in the Church from the beginning, by whoſe authoritie all men ſhould be kept in order? No we for ſo much as the church of Chriſt is ſimple and one: and one it can not be, vnleſſe there be in it one only Prince: furthermore being euidente and plaine, that Chriſt ordeined one onely ruler in his Church, whom al men ſhould acknowledge and obeie: finally being out of al doubt, that this preeminence apperteineth to the Succeſſours of Peter, and that none of al the aūcient Fathers endewed with the ſpirit and grace of God euer doubted, but that the biſhops of Rome were the ſucceſſours of Peter (as bothe their writinges, and the common agreement of the vniuerſall Church declareth): with what ſprite were your newe Apoſtles moued to bring in this new Goſpelliſh doctrine, to diſtourbe the order appointed by Chriſte, to breake the bande of vnitie

and concord, to ſhake the very Rocke and ſtaie of the Churche. But leſt ſome man ſhuld thinke, that theſe thinges were wrought of them without any cauſe in the world, I wil briefly declare, what their deuiſe, or rather what the fetch of Satā was in this enterpriſe. It was vnpoſsible that euer the peſtilēt ſects ſhould gather any ſtrēgth, except the authoritie of the Biſhop of Rome had ben firſt weakned. For how could the miſchieuous weede haue growen any long time, whereas it was a very eaſy matter with the authoritie of the Biſhop of Rome▪ forthwith to cut it doune, ſo ſoone as it appeared aboue the groūd. Take vs (ſaith the ſpouſe of Caut, 2. d.Chriſt) the litle foxes, that deſtroy the Vineyardes. This requeſt of the ſpouſe who ſhalbe able to fulfil, if noman haue authoritie to ſuppreſſe the malice and lewdnes of heretikes, before it waxe great? For it is manifeſt that by the foxes are vnderſtode heretikes. And therfore

S. Paul in his ſecond epiſtle to the 2. Theſſal. 2. b.
               Theſſaloniās ſaith, that Antichriſt ſhal not come before: he great reuoltīg or departure frō the catholike Church of Chriſt. It is therefor neceſſari for theſe yong Antichriſts, which (as S. Iohnſaieth) do in figure and ſignificatiō repreſent the great Antichriſte to come, before they can bring their purpo
                  •
               ed miſchief to paſſe, not only to depart them ſelues frō the Church, and from the ſupreme ruler of it, but alſo to ſolicite and procure to the like departure all ſuch as they mind to carie away, and make their diſciples: and this is the cauſe that al heretikes, whoſe chiefe endeuour and principal intent is to ouerthrowe the catholike Church, do firſt of al aſſaile this fortreſſe, do here plant their ordinaunce, doo here make their battery, do here vndermine to ouerrhrow the forte. For they ſee, that if this fortreſſe were once ouerthrowen and wonne, they may frely ſow the ſeades

of al naughtines, and to the ruine and decaie of manie, flee vppe and downe through the worlde, whether ſo euer thei liſt, without any cōtrol or checke. And to paſſe ouer the olde Heretikes, this was the cauſe whie Huſ
                  •
               e endeuoured to ouerthrow the authority of the Biſhop of Rome This was alſo the meaning of Hierome of Prage, when he went about to weaken the authority of the ſaid biſhop This was the way, by the which FrierLuther thought vtterly to deſtroy the Catholike church. This was the traine, by the whiche in Englād a gap was vnaduiſedly opened to al ſuche errours, as ſence that time haue followed. Nowe the railes and barres being after this manner broken downe, and the gates laid wide open, it was a very caſie matter for al vile and deſperate felowes to ruſh in, to mangle and teare in peeoes the vnitie of the Churche, to bring in ſo many wicked errours, ſuche horrible ſectes, ſuche a

rable of peſtilent opinions, one directly againſt an other▪ The Zwinglians fight againſt the Lutherās. The Anabaptiſts kepe continual warre with the Zwinglians. What ſhould I here reherſe the heretikes called heauenly Prophetes, the Interimniſts, and ſuch other names of ſectaries? What ſhould I ſaie of the hatred, malice brawling, and diſcorde within them ſelues? What ſhoulde I ſpeake of their variety and incōſtancy in opiniōs? Yea and ſuch as are of one ſect, are not al, nor alwaies of one opinion. Many points of their Doctrine they correct, they alter and chaunge, the
                  •
                turne in and out, they blot out the old, they make newe, nowe they pull downe, and now they ſet vp, they can not wel agree neither with other men, nor yet with them ſelues. What ſaye you to this Sir? Are not theſe thinges true? Can you ſaie, that al ſuch as are ſprōg of Martine Luther, are throughly agreed? that there is emōgeſt them

no debate, no diſcorde, no diuerſitie of opinions, but contrarily moſte perfect agreement in matters of faith and religion? O M. Haddon how muche better had it benne to reuerence that peece of lead, whiche you ſo muche ſcorne at▪ then to open a way to ſo many, yea and thoſe ſo peſtilent errours? But let vs returne to your Oration. Theſe are your wordes.
            
               But the authority of the holy Scriptures hath thundred in our eares, and hath made vs ſo affraid, that caſting awaie the deuiſes of men, we runne onely to the free mercie of God. What is this? Do you ſo requite Luther, to whome you are bound for this ſingular benefite? For it was he that draue all feare out of your hartes. What terrour is this that you ſpeake of? What feare? What carefulneſſe of minde? Suche is the faith, that Luther deuiſed, as being once well planted in your hearte, no feare in the worlde ſhall euer be able

to ſhake the quietnes and ſecuritie of your conſcience. And, me thinketh, that it is not to be borne, that you ſaie, you doe deſpiſe the deuiſes of men. For you are not ſo farre forewarde in the waie of heauenly life, but that you make good accompte of ſome men. For the diuiſes of Luther, Zwinglius, Bucer, Caluin, and ſuch other as were the founders of this your new cōmon weal, you haue learned them, you haue greedily ſnatched them vppe, yea you haue with heart and minde embraced them, ſtriuinge within your ſelues, who ſhoulde be foremoſte in them, finallie you haue decreed to frame the order of your life after their direction. Whereby we gather, you looke not ſo ſteddilie to heauenwarde, but that ſometimes you looke downe vppon menne. And well donne too ſurelie. For righte and reaſon requireth, that you ſhoulde alwaies haue bothe in your eyes and heartes

ſuche men as they were, ſo chaſte, ſo holie, and ſo religious. But yeat this muche I tel you by the waie, your minde was not ſo feruently inflamed with the loue of heauenly thinges, but that you did highly eſteeme ſome men withal. Admitte that Frier Luther had ben a holie man (euen as holie as you liſt to make him) that Melanchon had ben void of al earthlie affection: that Zuinglius for the meruelouſe reporte of ſincere and chaſte life had ben admitted to be one of Gods owne priuie coūſel: that Bucer had excelled al men in cleane, honeſt, and chaſt conuerſation: that Caluine had paſſed in vertue and holines Bernarde, Anſelme, Auguſtine, Ierome, Baſile, and al other holy men, that haue lead an angelike life here vpon the earth: yea adde vnto theſe (if it pleaſe you) euen your owne Martyr, whoſe rare vertue you commend ſo highly: Admitte I ſaie, that theſe men had ben moſt excellently

furniſhed with al the higheſt vertues, yea and moſt chaſte withal: yet were they men, and it is not impoſsible, but that they might haue ben in ſome errours. And yet doo you eſteeme their lawes, decrees, and ordinances, as a diſcipline of moſte high wiſedome, and as a moſt holie rule of mans life. With what face then ſaie you, that you deſpiſed, and reiected the deuiſes of men, whereas you doo aſcribe vnto thoſe menne that I haue here named, almoſte a diuine perfection? But now let vs conſider the ende of your oration. Soone after you bring in this clauſe. Hauing in like manner regarde vnto the ſaying of the Prophete, where he commaundeth vs, that wee ſhould confourme the innocencie of our life vnto holineſſe and iuſtice. In this place I merueiled excedingly, not at you, M. Haddon (for it is not credible, that ſo graue a man as you be, ſhould lie ſo impudently) but at the

ſlaūderous report of men, which with feined tales, and forged cōplaintes (abuſing vs being ſtraungers, and ignorāt (as you ſay) of your affaires haue made vs beleeue that you conforme you ſelues, not vnto holines of life by the law of God, but vnto licentious lewdnes through vnbridled luſte and bolde preſumption. And the doctrine of that mad felowe Martine Luther made it ſeeme the more probable, the whiche cōdemning wickedly al good workes, and burning at a ſermō the Canōs and holie ordinaunces of the Church, and teaching for a ſownd doctrin this preſumptuous affiaunce, vnto the which alone he aſcribeth ſaluation, calling it raſhly and impudently by the name of faithe, and putting quitte out of mens hartes al feare of lawes bothe of God and man, ſetteth out ſenſualitie in her ful ſtrength and force, geaueth fleſhlie luſt free ſcope and libertie, pretendeth hoope of impunitie, boldeneth men to

al ſynne and wickednes. Wherefore I thought it impoſsible, that a man obſeruing his preceptes, ſhould withal geue his mind to iuſtice, vertue and religiō, or take great care how to keepe him ſelfe chaſt and honeſt. For it is the part of a wiſe man, when he ſeeth the cauſe to doubte nothing of the euent. And it is commonly ſeene, that naughtie begynninges haue the like ending. What ſhould I then do? Seing iuſt cauſe of infamie, hearing it moſt commonly, yea and ſadly reported, that you are in farre worſe caſe, then you pretende to be: weying withal the conſtant fame, which is, that ſuch as folowe this new religion, are not only ſubiect to fleſhly and vncleane liuing, but alſo much increaſed in al wicked and heinouſe vices: ſhould I not beleeue it? Should I ſtande againſt moſte credible perſonnes reporting it? Should I without any groūd, without witneſſes, vainely contend, ſeing the cōmon agreement

of al men confirming this opinion? I could not doe it. Wherfore if that be falſe, whiche was conſtantly and not without inward ſorow of al good men reported, you muſt pardon me, and lay the fault vnto the lightnes and impudēcie of certaine men bearing you no good wil, whiche were the deuiſers of this falſe report. But if it be true that is reported, then are you a very madde man, if you thinke by lying and facing to waſh out the ſpot of true infamie.
            Here you muſe againe what I meāt to aduertiſe your Queene, to beware of ſuche as are infected with theſe hereſies. And here I tel you againe, that, when I come to that place, I wil doo my endeuour ſo to handle it, that you ſhal no more muſe at it.
            You declare vnto me the felicitie of your Quene, that ſhe aboundeth in riches, that ſhe liueth in proſperitie, that ſhe feareth no treaſon, neither of her owne ſubiectes, neither of forenners.

I am right glad of it, and I pray God graunt her alwaies a good, proſperous and flouriſhing reigne. Yet is it the part of a wiſe Prince, in calme weather to thinke of a ſtorme, and to conſider long time before, not when the mariners them ſelues begynne to tremble and quake▪ howe to ſaue her ſelfe: and ſeing with what tempeſtes the maieſtie of other Princes hath ben ruffled in diuers and ſundrie realmes, to miſtruſt, that her maieſtie alſo maie experience the like fortune. Of the tempeſt in Fraunce, the which you ſay is aſſwaged, I ſaie nothing elles, but that you beare witneſſe againſt your owne ſelfe. For, I praie you Sir, who ſtirred vp that tempeſt? Who armed the Frenche m
                  •
               n againſt the King of The rebellion in Fraunce.Fraunce? What diſcipline or inſtruction had they, whiche contrary to their oth taken in the face of the worlde, conttarie to they▪ allegiaunce towards their Prince, finallie contrarie

to the maieſtie and reuerence of kingly name, ſet them ſelues in armour againſt the Kings owne perſon, not only traiterouſly and villanouſly to diſpatch the King out of his life, but alſo to aboliſh the name of a King vtterly out of the common weale? And you ſay, the tempeſt is aſſwaged. As though I had ſaid that, what ſo euer ſuch traitors had moſt wickedly and rebelliuſly deuiſed, muſt nedes haue a proſperous ſucceſſe. No, no. Their wicked attempt was repreſſed by policie and force, and eſpecially by the great grace and benefite of God: it is nothing long of thē, that (like rebelles) made warre againſt their prince. For to haue brought their purpoſe to a miſchieuous ende, there lacked not in them any good wil, but ſtrength and power.
            My diſcourſe of the contempte of wordly thinges and deſire of heauenly things you miſlike not: but you ar mad angry with me, bicauſe I cal ſuch men

enemies of Religion, as you ſaie were the ſeruaūtes of God, and ſent frō heauen for the ſaluation of the world▪ and it greaueth you, that I ſhould laugh at their vaine and foliſh attēpts. Tel me I pray you Sir, what take thoſe felowes vpō them, which were ſent, as you ſay from heauē? Doubtles, to deliuer Chriſtian men from errour, throughly to purge the Churche, to reſtore the doctrine and rule of the Apoſtles life, to ſet the truth at libertie, whiche was, as you ſay, oppreſſed with coueteouſnes and ambitiō, to pul dreames and ſuperſtitiō out of mēs harts. I ſaid this was a great vaūt. But Sir, this kingdō of God which they tooke vpō thē to maintein▪ this glorie of God, for the which they haue entred into ſo gret a cōflict, doth it cōſiſt in words ōly, or in the workīg of vertue? Surely if we beleue S. Paul, it ſtādeth in the ſtrēgth and cōſtant working of vertue: wherfor if they mind to proue themſelues honeſt mē, let them

reſtore the old modeſtie, humilitie, patience, meekenes, obediēce, chaſtitie, puritie, innnocentie, the chaſtiſing of the bodie, the continual warre bothe againſt the tyrannie of the fleſh, as alſo againſt al other vices: let them reſtore that earneſt loue and ſeruent charitie, that continual meditation of heauenly thinges, that godly exerciſe of praier vnto God both day and night for the proſperous eſtate and ſaluation of al men: Let them take vp the croſſe on their ſhoulders, and crucifie al vncleanes of ſynnes: let them forſake al pleaſures of the world: let them pul vp by the roote the very ſtringes of carnalitie▪ finally let them mortifie al the vnbridled paſsions of their willes: that nothinge liue in them, but the power and wil of Chriſte, and then wil we beleeue, that they haue fulfilled their promiſe, and quitte them ſelues like true men of their worde. But if they haue done no ſuche thing, but rather

by their examples of life and doctrine haue brought to paſſe, that men liue more frely in al kind of vice, that they are the readier to commit ſacrilege, that they are the bolder to venter vpō any vile, and heinouſe offence, that they are the fierſer and creweller (yea more deſperat then any mans hart can thinke) to doe villanie and violence to their Princes, for whoſe ſafetie they ought to hazard their owne liues: if they forgetting Religion bend them ſelues wholly againſt religion: is it not plaine, that they are not onely to be ſcorned and laughed at, but alſo to be abhorred, and deteſted as the moſt horrible and crewel peſtilence of a common weale?
            
               Wel wel, ſaie you, I perceiue at the length, what this your new ſect is, againſt the which you haue ſo ſharply whetted your eloquence. Oh what a pleaſure youhaue to ſpeake doubtfully and obſcurely? What ſaie you M. Haddon?

Say you that you do at lēgth vnderſtād, what my new ſecte is? Say you that I do maintein any newfangled ſect? that I do allow their wicked actes, which I accurſe and deteſt? That I am fallen frō the faith and Religion of the holy Catholike Church? And then how ſtand theſe thīgs together, that I ſhould whet my eloquēce againſt that ſecte, which (as you ſai) I folow my ſelf? Moreouer, by what argumēt cā you proue it? You haue peraduēture heard ſaie, that I was a voluptuous mā, geuen to pleaſure and vncleanes of life, deſirous of nouelties, haſtie and headlong to make ſedition, debate and diſcord emōgeſt men. And therfore you thinke peraduenture▪ that I am entāgled with the like deteſtable vices, as your Maiſters are. But cōſider, I pray you, how theſe thinges, that folow, may ſtād together with this your moſt impudēt ſuſpition. At the length, ſay you, I ſee the aduerſaries, whom you would haue to be cut of from the Quenes

maieſtie, and driuen out as the corrupters of the whole realme. Whie then, if you ſee, that I am earneſtly bent againſt all ſuch as are the brochers of new fangled ſectes: if you ſay plainly, that I would, they ſhould be driuen farre frō the preſence and familiaritie of the Queene, that they ſhould be bāniſhed out of the boundes of England: doubtles, neyther do theſe innouations like mee, neither do I allow their wicked doinges. But how do you defend them your ſelfe? I am, ſay you, of a cōtrary opinion. Theſe profeſſours of the Goſpel are the ſeruantes of God, ſent vs from heauen, to awake our ſleapines in theſe daungerous times of the worlde growing now to olde age, and to ſtirre vp our ſlownes. Theſe are wōderful matters that you ſay, if ſlepines may be awaked, or ſlownes ſtirred vp. So may feare beare it ſelfe hardily, and the pleaſure of the bodie reſtreine vice and vncleanes of life, and mad raſhnes wel and wiſely gouern a cōmon weal▪
               
Then it foloweth. They were ſent from heauē to cōfute error, to reproue impiety: and therefore they are to be ſought out of the Quenes Maieſty, and to be much made of in al the cōmon weale. When ye ſpake theſe wordes, you thought to reproue me of lightnes, for beleuing otherwiſe, of preſumption, for writing vnto the Quene. You ſay furthermore, that it is not neceſſarie to diſcuſſe particularlie euerie point of my accuſation, but only to gather them, as it were into certaine heades, and ſo briefely to runne them ouer. Then you add theſe words. I wil, if I can, put backe the very hornes of your accuſation. I woulde faine ſee with what manhood and ſtrength you wil beginne the matter. It foloweth. Firſt of al, you ſaie we muſt conſider the perſones, bicauſe they promiſe nobly, and we muſt weie, whether they be of habilitie to performe it, whether they haue ſo muche vertue and holineſſe as they pretend. This would I faine ſee. But for

ſo much as, this holineſſe, which you ſpeake of, muſt be declared in workes, not craked of in woordes (for ſo doth Chriſte teache vs to diſcerne the true 
                  Math. 7. 
                     •
                  .prophetes from the falſe by the iru
                  •
               cte of workes, not by the bragge or vaunt of wordes) I looke you ſhoulde ſhe we me the miracles that theſe holie men haue wrought: the which being declared, you ſhall be the better able to put backe the hornes of my diſputation. For of the woordes I am nothing affraid, the whiche in apparence are merueilous goodly and gate. And this, I warrant you, is the firſt lewde point in al Heretiques, to cloke their wilie trappes with moſt holie wordes. For The vvi
                     •
                   lines of heretikesby what other meanes might they allure the mindes of the ſimple people, but only by a feined ſhew of holineſſe and innocencie? For vertue naturally inuiteth and draweth al men vnto her. The whiche thing theſe ſubtile and craftie fellowes knowing wel inough,

they do on the habit of vertue, the ſoner therby to creepe into the boſomes and hearts of vnlearned folkes. For as the fowlers deceiue the birdes: either with ſome bait, or els with inſtrumēts reſembling the voice and tune of the birds: euē ſo do your doctors by ſetting out the gaſe of coūter feit holines, they bring vnto their ſnares the ſimple people, where vnwares and ſuſpecting no deceit, thei are takē. For open diſhoneſty could do litle harme, (being of her ſelf very foul and deformed to behold) except ſhe did beare the coūtenāce or face of honeſty and innocēcy. But feel pray you, what pollicy theſe plauſible and good felowes haue foūd out to ſtir vp the cōmon people. We were al ſory to ſee the maners of mē corrupted, the ſtreightnes of old diſciplin relēted, the Prieſts wallowing in vnclean life, and abuſing their dignity immoderatly to gaine and luker. Nowe, as it happened ſometimes in the Citie of Rome,

the furious Tribunes of the peple, whē the like occaſiō was offred thē, to ſtirr vp the cōmons againſt the nobility, did not let it paſſe, but the enuy which was already to much kendled, thei made to burn, putting vnderneth, the fierbrāds of their trobleſom ād ſeditious oratiōs: in like maner theſe moſt holy perſons, whom you cōmend ſo highly, whē thei ſaw into how great hatred the church men were come: thei thought to vſe al meanes poſsible in the world to bring them into farder hatred and diſpleſure. And ſo, what by finding fault with thē, and what by putting the peple in hope of a better world, they ſhewed themſelues as ringleaders in this ſeditiō and fallīg frō the church. And the better to bring their purpoſe to paſſe, they vſed many goodly and holy words, bearing men in hād, that thei wold expreſſe the holy life, not of the Sainctes that came neere after the Apoſtles rule (for of thē they made none accompte) but of the

Apoſtles them ſelues. And ſo they had alwaies in their mowthes, Chriſtian pietie, the puritie of the Goſpell, the holines of moſt chaſt Religion, a heauenlie diſcipline, the which to diſteine with any deuiſes or ſuperſtitions (as they terme it) of man, they tooke it to be a moſt heinouſe offence. After that they brought all men into great hope and expectation, that the very perfection of the Primitiue Churche ſhould by their diligence be reſtored, and that the wonderful gifts of the holy Ghoſt▪ which now were thought to be ſtarke deade, ſhoulde be reuiued 
                  〈◊〉
               . This goodly beginning how plauſible it was to the worlde, euery man may iudge. But naughtines can neuer ſtay long in one degree: but when it hath once begonne to ſlide, it ruſſheth forewarde, and falleth downe headlong. To gette therefore the greater fauour emongeſt the people, what ſo euer ſeemed to them any thing rough or

vnpleaſant, they tooke it quite awaie. To confeſſe their ſinnes, was very trobleſome: to puniſh their bodie with faſting, was painful: to be tyed with the bande of Excommunication, was a vexation of minde: to be ſhaken with the threatninges of Gods iudgement, was bitter. They did therfore moſt earneſtly endeuour themſelues, to take al ſuch cares out of mens hartes. Wherfore it is no wonder, if the ſimple people, being partlie offended with the miſliuing of the Church men (whiche all the worlde talked of) and partlie brought into great hope of a golden worlde and moſt pleaſant libertie, did willingly applie them ſelues to the fantaſie of thoſe men, by whom thei ſurely truſted to be deliuered▪ from al euils, and to haue the fruition of all felicitie and pleaſure. But when the fury of the cōmon people was nowe armed with this coūterfeit ſhew of Religion (good Chriſt) how gariſhly theſe your holie

men ranne to the ſpoile of the Churches? What greate ſlaughters of men they made? What a great alteratiō of thinges folowed by and by, with the decaie of al▪ Godlines? And yet you M
                  •
                Haddon make them equal with Ath
                  •
               
               naſius, Baſile, Ambroſe, Ierome, and Auguſtine. If they are to be tried by their workes, as Chriſt teacheth, who are rruly ſent from God, and on the other ſide, who are pricked foreward of the diuel to do miſchiefe: if I can ſee no holie works that your prophetes haue done: if you your ſelfe can not declare any excellēt vertues in them: if you can bring no holie woorkes for proufe of their heauenlie vertue: what cometh into your minde, to compare men for chaſtitie of life moſt cleane, for godly religion moſt holie, for authoritie of ſentences moſte graue, with them, whom all the worlde knoweth to be, for filthines of life infamous, for their vngodlie attēptes Churchrobbers, for

their vndiſcret lawes and ordināces, frā tik ād mad mē. But it is worth while to cōſider how you proue it: thus you ſai. Neither ſhew you any thīg, why thei may not be equal with the auncient Fathers. Yes ſurely, I wil ſhew ſomething, and ſhew withal, how ſhameleſſe you are, which compare vnbridled fleſhlineſſe, with cleaneſſe of life, impietie with godlynes, raiging madnes with godly wiſedome. Then you ſaie.
            
               But I wil bring you away from theſe odious compariſons, for this is no place to reaſon theſe matters. Yes M. Haddon, I wil be ſo bold as to reaſon with you. If this be true, that in geuīg of coūſel the manners and behauiour of the geuer, is to be weied, and that nothing induceth vs more to credit the coūſel geuē, then the tried honeſty of the perſon: I ſay plaīly, that it is a queſtiō worthy to be aſked, of what maners and cōuerſatiō thei are, that giue vs coūſel to folow their opinion. You ſay afterward. I wil

vphold that our Doctours doe agree with the reuerende Fathers, that they take the verie ſame way that they did, that they teach in effecte the ſelfe ſame religion. I would you were able to defende, that the auncient fathers and your doctours were wel agreed. Then it foloweth. The whiche if it be true, it booteth not to make compariſon betwen ſuch as are alone. If it be not ſo, tel vs wherein they diſagree. You ſay wel, if it be ſo. But before I begynne to declare, how muche the auncient Fathers diſſented from your new maiſters, I wil tarie a litle to ſee howe you can proue this goodlie agreement. S. Auguſtine, ſaie you, cōplatneth in his time, that flouddes of ceremonies ouerflowed the Churche, in ſo muche that the Chriſtians were almoſt in worſe caſe, then euer were the Iewes. You neuer read that in S. Auguſtine▪ that the Ceremonies, whiche we now vſe, are like to the Iewiſh ceremonies, and therfore to be reiected:

but your maiſters haue brought you like an ignorant felowe to beleeue it. S. Hierome, ſaie you, wiſsheth that the holie ſcriptures, which your Churche hideth frō al men, might be learned without the booke, euen of children and women. S. Ierome writing to Paulinus, diſputeth to the contrarie, where he complaineth of the raſhnes and boldhardines of men, which tooke vppon them without any good witte or vertue to handle the Scriptures with to much libertie: and of the vndiſcrete chatting of fooliſh women, which taking vppon them to expounde Scriptures, defined manie thinges verie vnaduiſedly. It foloweth. Baſile imploied his vacant time in the moſt godlie exerciſe of reading and teaching diuinitie. It was wel don truly. for Baſil was none of them that take vpon them arrogantly to teache doctrine that they neuer learned. Then you adde theſe wordes.
            
               If Monkes had leued according to

the rules of Baſile, no man woulde euer haue touched them with ſo much as his finger. As though your quarel had ben againſt men, and not againſt chaſtitie it ſelfe. But admit that their manners were looſe, their behauiour diſſolute, their life wanton. What then? was there none emōgeſt them al, that kept their chaſtitie? There were without doubt. And that the loue of cleane, and chaſt life was not vtterly decaied em ngeſt monkes, the end of the holie fathers the Carthuſians declared full wel, who, if thei would haue yeelded their cōſent to the wicked decrees, neded neuer to haue ſuffered other puniſhmēt but only to be married. It was not therefore the miſliking of filthie pleaſure, that ſtirred you to ſuch barbarous crueltie, but the hatred of chaſtitie and virginitie. And I know wel, that not only thei were chaſt and perfect men, but alſo many other that are now banniſhed emong vs: the which

wherſoeuer they ſet their foote, they leaue behind them moſt manifeſt footſteppes of baſhfulnes and honeſty. But admit that the greater part of them had ben drowned in vice: was it therefore good reaſon by and by, to ouerthrow the whol order? How much had it ben more for your honeſty, to haue don as the moſt puiſſaunt King Fernandus did ſometime in Spaigne and Elizabeth his wife, a Princeſſe cōſecrated to euerlaſting fame? as the moſt honorable king and renoumed Prince Emanuel: as Iohn the third his ſonne, a King for his religion and godlines worthy of moſt high cōmendation: as Charles the fifth an emperour born to immortal glorie: as Euricus the Cardinal ſonne of king Emanuel, in whom ſhineth a wōderful light of al vertue and holines: finally as all other moſte religious Princes did: who ſeing the manners of monkes to tende towardes a niceneſſe, ſent for certaine perfecte religious menne, by

whoſe diligence their vnbridled affection and licentiouſnes was tied vp, their looſe manners by ſtreighter diſcipline reſtreined, and their ſleapie mindes ſtyrred vp to the moſt feruent loue of godlines. And ſo there are now emongeſt vs moſt holie and religious Monkes, whiche folow Baſile, Benet, and Bernarde, and Dominique, and Frauncis, in the puritie of moſt chaſte religion, in moſt earneſt and zealous loue of God, in moſt notable examples of al vertue. Whie then would you rather cut of that, that might haue ben healed? Bicauſe, as I ſaid a litle before, it was not anie diſpleaſure toward filthie luſt or life, but the hatred of perpetual chaſtitie, that ſtvrred you to Heretiks enemies to chaſtitie.deface and vtte
                  •
               lie to ouerthrow the name of Mounkes. For (as S. Hierome 
                  •
               aith) all Heretiques haue a naturall hatred and grudge againſt chaſtitie. Wherefore there is no doubt, but that, if your Mounkes had liued

according to the rules of S. Baſile: the greater their perfection had ben, the more diſpleaſure and hatred you wold haue born them. Afterward you bring in theſe wordes.
            
               We reuerence the Crede of Athanaſius as it ought to be, neither is there any controuerſie betwene them and vs. What great diſcorde there is betwene your menne and Athanaſius, I haue partely declared in that my letter, whiche you ſo muche reuile. Neither ſkilleth it muche, whether you be agreed in ſome pointes yea or no. For I neuer ſaide, that your Championsdiſſented from the opinion of the holie Fathers in al matters. But to what end tendeth al this talke? what would you prooue? For ſooth, that Luther, Bucer, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, Caluine and other the Miniſters of this your goſpel, are in vertue, holines, chaſtitie, and religion, nothing inferiour to S. Auguſtine, Hierome,

Baſile, and Athanaſius and other holie Fathers, whoſe writinges ſeeme to ſend forth the verie ſwete ſauour of the holie ghoſt. But how do you proue it? S Auguſtine you ſay, cōplaineth, that whole flouddes of ceremonies ouerflowed the Church: S. Ierome thought it expedient, that women and children ſhould learne the ſcriptures without the booke: If Monkes liued according to the rule of S. Baſile, no man woulde once laie his ſinger on them: and we reuerēce the Crede of Athanaſius. What then? Can you proue by theſe propoſitions, that Luther and Bucer, and the reſt of your Worthies are to be compared with S. Auguſtine, Ierome, Baſile, Athanaſius in vertue, cōſtancie, chaſtitie, cleanes of life, religion and wiſedom? A goodlie pregnāt wit of a yong Logician: he ſhaketh out his argumentes ſo fearſly, that he maketh them fitte to cōclude, what ſo euer him li
                  •
               teth to prooue. Let this fourme of reaſoning be once

receiued, and what thing is ther in the worlde ſo muche contrarie to al reaſon, that maie not eaſily be prooued▪ As if we ſhould ſaie for example: Mahumete ſaieth, that God created the worlde. S. Baſile holdeth the ſame. Baſile therefore and Mahumete are moſte like in godlie life. Arius confeſſed, that Chriſt ſhed his bloud for the redemption of mankinde. Athanaſius affirmeth the ſame. Ergo, Arius ſhined in vertuouſe conuerſation no leſſe then Athanaſius. Luther diſputeth that all good thinges are to be referred to the grace of Chriſte: the verie ſame doth S▪ Auguſtine declare moſt wiſely. It followeth therefore, that Luther hath deſerued no leſſe commendation of holines, then S. Auguſtine. See you not, vnderſtande you not, conſider you not, howe childiſhly you haue concluded, howe weakelie you haue defended your newe Maiſters?

Are you wont in ſkirmiſh ſo to put backe the hornes of your ennemies? This was the principall and chiefeſt point of al, in the whiche you ſhould haue ſhewed al the force and ſtrength of your witte, to haue brought al the world in admiration of you.
            You ſaie afterward that I doe taunt and reuile the ſoule of Luther. As though the minde of Luther did not yet liue in al ſuche as folowe his doctrine. You cal the ſame Luther the man of God. I knowe not what you are M. Haddon. But if it were lawful to eſteeme by coniecture, what maner of man you are, I ſee no cauſe why I ſhould greatly commend either your witte, or your life▪ for he that geaueth the teſtimonie of diuine vertue or heauenlie cōuerſation to a moſt filthie and infamous perſonne, we may worthely ſuſpecte, that he is him ſelfe ſubiecte vnto the like vices. Your woordes are theſe. This man of God, whome you

reprochefully call a mad man, in open aſſemble before Charles the fifte, gaue a ſobre and ſownd account of his faith. That is falſe. You might better ſaie, that in the preſence of the Emperour him ſelfe, he moſt impudently betraied his owne madnes. And, that he was not puniſhed for ſo doing, it was, bicauſe he had receiued before hand the Emperours ſafe conduicte for his indemnitie, in caſe he ſpake anie thing not agreable to holie religion. You ſaie. This madde man ſtoode faſt and in ſafetie thirtie yeares, in ſpite of all the politike and wiſe patrones of your Church, were they neuer ſo madly bent to make him out of the waie. In theſe wordes you doe not defende Luther, but you reioiſe and triūph at the ruine of the Church. I knowe that the outrage of Luther hath ben fortified and mainteined by the aide of Princes, and by the furie of the common people: and I confeſſe that it hath ſo come to paſſe for our

ſynnes. For as God in the old time to puniſh the ſynnes of his people, ſtyrred vp ennemies againſt them, minding by puniſhment and plagues to bring them backe to honeſt ciuilitie and godlie religiō: euen ſo in ou
                  •
                time hath he ſuffred Luther, and permitted his madnes to be bolſtered and borne out by the helpe of manie men, meaning by plagues of his wiſedome appointed, to cal vs home againe to the feruēt loue and folowing of true godlines. But wheras you ſaie, that Luther ſtoode faſt and in ſafetie: ſurely you know not wherin ſafetie ſtandeth, if you be of that mind, that it is rather a miſerie to be pouniſhed for ſynne, then to liue in ſynne. Furthermore the patrones of the Church (as it liketh you to call them) perced him thorough with their writinges, and ſet out his name to all the poſteritie, diſhoneſted with the fowle ſpottes of his moſt heinouſe and filthie life. As

for the thirtie yeares, in the which you boaſt he ſtoode ſo faſte, you neede bragge no more. For the name of Mahumete, which hath cōtinnued aboue nine hundred yeares, remaineth yet in verie greate honour and eſtimation emongeſt ſuche men, as doe followe that wicked and deteſtable ſecte. But Eraſmus, ſaie you, geaueth vnto this madde man a ſingular good teſtimonie of innocencie by theſe wordes. The doctrine of Luther manie men miſlike, but his life they doe with one voice allow. I doe not ſo much eſteme Eraſmus, that I thinke my ſelfe bounde to ſet my hand to his teſtimoniall in all matters. And yet I know, that Eraſmus wrote againſt Luther, (how beit not ſo earneſtly as the cauſe required). For he feared the furious and reprochfull talke of the felow.
            You accuſe me for ſaing, that Luther was Popular, and withall you demaunde of me, what I meane by

the worde Popular. I wil do ſoo much for you, that you maie vnderſtād, how fitly the worde maie be applied to Luther. Popular vvhat it is.They were ſometimes called Popular, which ſought the common profitte of the people, and endeuoured them ſelues by ſtrength and diligence to reſcue the impotent and poore men, when wrong was offered them by ſuch as were of greater force and power. This name therfore was in thoſe daies much eſtemed and highly commended Now whereas it is the propertie of flatterie to counterfaicte vertue, and vnder the pretenſed coulour of honeſtie and gentlenes priuily to creepe into the hartes of the ſimple people: the craftie and malitiouſe felowes, whoſe only bent was to attein to honour, perceiuing that ſuche as were Popular, were in greateſt eſtimation emongeſt the people, and by common agreement promoted to the higheſt romes of honour: endeuoured

them ſelues to ſeeme Popular. And theſe men conſidered verie curiouſly, not what was in dede good and profitable for the people, but what they liked and longed moſt after as profitable vnto them. And as it fareth now a Clavv
                     •
                   backes of the court.daies with manie ſeruitours in court that hunte after the fauour of Kinges, they ſpie out diligently, not what ſtā
               deth moſt with the kinges profite and honour, but what they moſt couet, what they loue, and what they would faineſt bring to paſſe, ſeruing only their vnlawfull pleaſure and vnruled affection: euen ſo emongeſt free peoples did thoſe men, whome we cal popular, the Grecians called them 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is to witte, leaders of the people: they applied them ſelues, not to the profitte, but to the pleaſure of the people. For the profitte of the people conſiſteth in a good and diſcrete moderation of thinges: but through inordinate greedines of the

thing that they luſt after, and through the name of libertie, it is brought to naught. The common people enuied ſuch as were men of power. Theſe Populares made lawes, by the whiche they were either depriued of their goods, or banniſhed out of their coū
               trie, or put to death. The people could not awaie with ſeueritie of lawes. The lawes therfore, that ſeemed any thing ſtreight, in reſtreining the vnbridled affections of the people, the Populares tooke quite awaie. The people hated vertue, bicauſe they ſawe, it ſtoode directely againſt their vntamed outrages: the Populares with their decrees and ordinaunces diſpatched all vertue out of their common weales, and ſo by the meanes of theſe Populares, the people might without cōtrol or check doe what them liſted. But to cōclude, ſuch as came to honor by this meanes, ſerued the filthie luſt, the vicious deſire, the vncleane affectiō, and the furiouſe

rage of the baſe people: and did ſo beare them ſelues in euerie office, that it might ful wel appere, that they were no free men, but the verie bondſlaues of the vndiſcret and mad peple. And the better to bring this matter to paſſe they marked verie diligētly, not only what the people longed for, but alſo whome they enuied at for wealth and richeſſe: and ſo brought al men of power and richeſſe to be enuied, ſtyrred vp the moſt earneſt hatred of the commons againſt their Princes, ſet fire vnto the hote rage of the multitude, therwith to cōſume and waſt al ſuch as were in high authoritie and honour in their cōmon weales. But how did they profit the peple? Ful wel I warrāt you. For euen thoſe thinges, that the peple moſt thirſtily gaped after, were vtterli ouerthowē. For wheras the nature of the peple is ſuch, that thei cā not beare to much welth and proſperity: hauing once atteined the libertie: whiche

they ſo much wiſhed for, they fal together by the eares within themſelues, they rage and ruffle, they toſſe and turmoile, and in the end they wrecke their angre and malice euen vpō them, that were the procurers of this libertie. And ſo, (whereas nothing can longe continew, where diſcord and madnes reigneth) it cometh to paſſe, that they leeſe not onely the libertie and impunitie by the diligence and flatterie of theſe Populars procured, but alſo their honeſt and lawfull libertie, whiche they might otherwiſe haue kepte long time. Theſe are they, that are wont to be called Populars.
            Now it remaineth, that we declare, whether frier Luther were Popular after this manner. Is there anie doubt in the wordle of the matter? What other thing, I praie you, intended Luther, but only to flatter the people? Al ſuch thinges as the people hated and lothed, did he not take them quite

awaie? The authoritie of the Biſhop of Rome, did he not vtterly deface it? The holie Canons, did he not abrogate and diſannull them? Did he not ſtirre vp hatred and enuie againſt the Princes of the Church? did he not quench in mens hartes al feare of lawes both of God and man? did he not make a faith, which aſſured men of ſaluation, were they neuer ſo wicked, yea and obſtinately bent to cōtinew in naughtines? did he not ſhew to al the wordle a great hope of licentiouſnes? did he not with his doctrine make thoſe men diſobedient and rebellious, which he him ſelfe had begoten, foſtred and brought vp? Is it not wel knowē, that ſuch as had geuen them ſelues wholly to his doctrine, prooued ſo deſperate and headlong, that he him ſelfe could not rule them? But how worthely you defend him M. Haddon? If he be popular, ſay you, that regardeth the health of the people, there is no man more popular

then he: but if you meane, by popular, ſuch a one as ſtirreth the people to ciuile diſcord, read his booke, in the which he inueieth againſt the tumultes of the cōmon people in Germanie, and ſlaunder him no more. Oh what a wiſe mā is this? How wittily he quiteth the Prince of his religiō? I cal him Popular, whoſe ſcholers by hearing his doctrine become ſeditious. You anſwere me, that Luther cō
               plained of the tumultes in Germanie, whiche his ſcholers and folowers ſtirred vp. And you are ſo blockiſhe, that you perceue not that you ſpeke for me againſt your ſelfe. Luther, ſay you, ſpeketh earneſtly againſt the tumultes in Germanie. Why then he cōfeſſeth, that the ſelfe ſame religiō, which he had taken vpō him to gouerne, which he had inſtructed with diuine ordinaunces, which he had brought backe: to the old puritie of the gofpel, is ſtirring and ſeditious. Then did Luther brīg meruelous goodly frutes to his coūtre
                  •
                me
                  •
               
               ▪ for he

made them not modeſt, but reprochful: not gentle, but impatiēt: not quiet, but ſeditious: yea ſo much, that he him ſelfe was forced to ſet out bookes, and to reprehēd their deſperat madnes. O what a holeſome goſpeliſ
                  ••
                doctrine was this? what a wonderful light caſt this diuine mā into the wordle? what a ſoueraigne ſalue laied he to the wounded cōſciences? Is this, to pourge the Church throughly of vices? to reſtore againe the olde puritie of the goſpel? to proppe vp the doctrine of the Apoſtles▪ begynning to fal? to cauſe by his doctrine ſuch men, as were of nature quiet, to become ſo prowd and inſolēt, ſuch brawlers and quarellers, that their captaine, yea their owne deere father could not hold them backe? For how manie thowſand men were ſlaine by ciuile warres in Switzerland ſtyrred Hereſſe cauſe of ciuile vvarre
                     •
                   ād bloud
                     •
                   ſhead.vppe by Zwinglius and Oecolampadius? What a companie of huſband men in Sueuia folowing their captaine

Muncer were cut of by the nobilitie? What place was there in al Germanie free from this contagious and peſtilēt diſcorde? The begynners and ringleaders thereof what were they, out of what fountaine ſprang they? Doubtleſſe out of the rage, madnes, and preſumption, of Luther, out of the ſhop wher the moſt infamous Lutheraniſme was wrought and cōtriued. But ſome of the forenamed perſonnes fel out afterward with Luther. Yea and no meruaile. For it was impoſsible, that ſuch naughtie felowes being al agreed in miſchiefe, ſhould long agree within them ſelues: where euerie one of them ſought to be the Captaine. What did Luther him ſelfe? did he not make ſeditious ſermons? did he not ſtirre vp the commōs againſt their Princes? did he not vſe verie reprochful and villanous talke againſt moſt honorable perſonages? did he not moſt ſpitefully reuile th'Emperour him ſelfe, Hērie king

of England, George Duke of Saxonie, and manie other noble Princes? Is it not wel knowē, that al his ſermons tē
               ded to the ſtirring vp of diſcord and ſedition? What is then more plaine and euident then that the ſecte of Luther is altogether Populare, ſeditious and troubleſome? And how daungerous it is to Princes, it nedeth no declaration. For what ſo euer is, after this ſort, populare, is, (as I declared in my letters) verie much contrarie, not only to the good eſtate of the common weale, but alſo to the maieſtie of Princes. If you be not of ſuch conuenient witte, that you are able to foreſee by the cauſes going before, what euent is like to folow: you wil neuer fully vnderſtād it, though I ſhould declare it with infinit examples. Is it vnknowen, thinke you Hereſie ouer▪ throvve of Kings and king domes.that through the naughtines and outrage of Luther, Ludouicus King of hūgarie was flaine in the fielde with a great multitude of Chriſtian men? For

whē Solimanus Emperour of the Turks brought againſt the King a great huge armie, ād great daūger was bēt againſt al Germany: yet the cities of Germani, being partly entāgled with ciuile wars within themſelues (the which Luthers ſect had cauſed) ād partly imbrued with the doctrine of Luther (who mainteined in diſputatiō, that it was not lauful to withſtād the force of the Turkes) either could not, or would not aide Ludouicus. If therfore this victorie of the Turkes hath brought ſuch great diſhonour to the name of Chriſtians: if by it ther is laied open a gap into Chriſtendom, to the vtter decaie and ruine of Auſtria and to the great daunger of all Germanie: if the noble kingdome of Hungarie (for the greater part of it) be brought vnder the rule and gouernement of a moſt barbarous and crewell ennemie: for al this we maie thāke the naughtines and owtrage of Martine Luther. But peraduenture you neuer heard of this geare, and therfore you

wil bide by it, that your new goſpel is no hinderāce to Princes. What? cā you beignorant of that alſo, how Edward your owne king was in his childhood moſt traiterouſly made away with poiſon? know not you▪ by whom Charles the Emperour a moſt worthie Prince was both betraid and aſſaulted? heard you neuer ſaie, with how crewel treaſon quene Marie a womā moſt excellētly furniſhed with princelie vertues, was firſt aſſaulted with poiſon and afterward beſieged of her own ſubiects▪ Is it poſsible that you ſhould know no thīg of the cōſpiracy, in the which was contriued by a cōpanie of moſt filthie traitors the murder both of the quene and of Cardinall Poole a moſt noble, godlie, and wiſemā? what nede I to reherſe vnto you the rebelliō of the frēch mē, the diſloialty, the cruelty, the waſt ād ſpoile of churches and holy thinges in Frāce? what ſhould I ſay of the king of Scotlād, who was by moſt cruel vil lanie murdered and ſlaine? Now they

that haue ſtirred vp ſuch great broi
                  •
               es and tumultes, they that haue committed ſuch barbarous and horrible actes, frō whens haue they their originall or begynning? Is it not euident to the wordle, that the verie fountaine and ſpring of al theſe miſchiefes was in Luther? And yet it liketh you to cal him the man of God, one ſent from heauen for the ſaluation of mankind. Tel me, I praie you, what vertues appeared in him ſo great, that you ſhould conceiue ſuch opinion of him as you doe? what continencie of life? what grauitie of māners? What ſeueritie? what gentlenes? what contempte of wordlie thinges? what contemplation of heauenly thinges? what time ſpent in cōtinnual praiers? what daies and nightes paſſed ouer in weeping and teares for the health of the people? What faſting? what gronīg and ſighing? Finally what deedes of moſt feruēt charitie hath cō
               mended this man vnto you ſo much,

that you dare ſaie of him, that he maie wel be compared for his excellencie in vertue and godlines, with Baſile, and Athanaſius, and al other holie men?
            Firſt of all, he was, as his owne paiges do confeſſe, of nature crewel, in his talke rough, wrathful, haughtie and prowde, yea ſo muche, that he eſteemed not Melanchton to be a man. Then his vowe ſolempnely made vnto Chriſt he brake it, and like a moſt filthie ribaude coupled him ſelfe with a woman, whiche had in like manner vowed perpetual chaſtitie vnto Chriſt in a monaſterie of Vrgines: and by this example ſhewed him ſelfe to be a captaine and ringleader to al ſuche, as would doe the like. To be ſhort, he was infamous for many other moſt heinouſe vices and deteſtable crimes. But leaſt his commendable qualities might ſeeme to be vtterly defaced with the blemiſh of manie vices: I cō
               feſſe, he could with a goodlie ſhew of

humanity ſomtimes hide his rough and boiſteous mad nature, and ſo ſet forth hīſelf to the ſimple people. For he was a pleaſant cōpagniō, and at a bāket a iolie prater in al kind of myrth verie fine, if reprochful taūting may be called ciuil finenes. He pleaſured much in ſcoffing and taūting, in reuiling the Princes and gouerners of the Church, in mockīg and ſcornīg of honeſt plain folkes, Prou. 3. d.ſuch as were true Chriſtiā mē
               ▪ But our lord, ſaith Salomō, abhorreth ſcorners, and cōmunicateth the ſecretes of his coūſel with the ſimple. Wherby it may be gathered that Luther was not repleniſhed with the light of heauē. And yet you thīk hī worthy to be cōpared with the moſt holy fathers. Of felow ſhip tel me, which of al the aunciēt fathers diſteined himſelfe with ribaudrie and inceſt? Which of them brought the cō
               mō people in hope of licētious liuing? Which of them ſtirred vp with his ſermons ſedition and hurly burly in diuers

and ſundrie places? which of them taught mē to put the hope of their ſaluatiō in faith, that is to ſay, in a only raſh and foliſh preſumptiō? Which of them tied vp the wil of mā, which god wold haue to be free, with I cā not tel what bādes of deſtenie? which of them durſt euer affirme, that God was the author or chief cauſe of al ſinne? which of thē euer held that al good works wrought and done of holy mē by the grace and inſtinct of the holy ghoſt were vnclean and ſpotted with ſinne? which of them euer toke away the true iuſtice, which by the grace and goodnes of Chriſt i
                  •
                aſcribed vnto faithful mē, and cōſiſteth in clean life, innocēt cōuerſation, and exerciſe of holy workes: and in ſteede of it ſubſtituted a newly deuiſed iuſtice ſuch as was neuer heard of before? For whē Luther denied, that ſyn was quite blotted out in holy mē by the grace of Chriſt, he affirmed, that ther was none other iuſtice, but onely the ſingular

iuſtice of Chriſte, applied to euerie particular man by faith, were he neuer ſo ſynnefull and wicked: the whiche being but one in all men, it was impoſsible, that there ſhoulde be anie difference in the worlde betwene the iuſtice of anie common man, and the iuſtice of Paule or Peter, yea or of the moſt holie Virgine mother of God. And you demaund of me what thoſe monſters of religion are. Al theſe thinges, whiche I haue here moſt briefely compriſed, I ſaie, are the moſt horrible monſters of religion: and the father of them is not villanous, but villanie it ſelfe: not frantike and madde, but verie frantikenes and madnes it ſelfe. What ſhew of baſhfulnes, honeſtie or modeſtie could you ſee in this man being the ouerthrower of all honeſtie, continencie, and modeſtie? What glimſe of vertue could he ſo daſel your eyes withal, that you woulde ſuffer your ſelfe. to be ſo daungerouſly deceiued

in him? And yet wil you continewe in your errour as you haue begonne. And yet wil you acquite ſuche a peſtilēt ſecte as blameleſſe and without faulte? And yet will you liken the good holie Fathers to Luther a moſte vile and infamous caitiue.
            But you triumph excedingly, that he ſtoode ſo ſtiffe thirtie yeares together, and was neuer puniſhed for his naughtines and owtrage. Can you imagin anie greater puniſhment in the worlde, then the remembrance of a ſynneful and filthie life? The remorſe of his heinouſe offences made him terribly afraied. The feendes of hell tormenters of damned ſowles vexed his mind. The ennemie the diuel ſhooke him vp, and would not ſuffer him once to breath or reſt him ſelfe. Truth it is, he woulde banket and make good cheere with his freendes, and therewith ſomewhat relent his intenſif
                  •
                cares. But neither chambering, nor bā
               ketting

is of that force, that it is able to raiſe vp a mans hart weied downe with the peiſe of ſynne. But what Luthers death.kind of death died this noble holie Father? Being at ſupper with his frinds ouer night he quaffed ſomewhat freely, and the nexte morning was founde dead.
            You ſaie afterward, that there were brought into England by the goodnes of God a golden couple of olde men, Martin Bucere, and Peter Martyr, whoſe vertues you cōmend aboue the ſkies. Of them I haue nothing elles to ſay, but that I thinke them to be verie lewde and naughtie felowes, if for nothing els, yet for this cauſe onely, that you ſo highly commend them. for he that commendeth Luther, it is not poſſible, that he ſhould cōmend any thing that is godly, honeſt, or holy.
            Whereas you put me in mind that I ſhould ſomewhat temper my ſtyle, and not cal ſuch men arrogāt and prowde,

as you eſteeme for gentle and modeſt, ſignifying withal after a ſort the daunger that by them might enſewe towardes me: I woulde ye would aduiſedly conſider, howe illfauouredly your woordes hang together. For if they be verie gentle (as you ſaie they are) then although I ſhall reuile them, they will neuer be moued▪withall, but wil meruelouſly well keepe their pacience and conſtancie. But if they wil fearcely ſette vppon me with villanous and reprochfull language: then are they not ſo gentle, as you make them to be. I knowe verie wel, that vnder the couert of a ſheepes ſkynne 
                  Mat. 7. 6(as Chriſte ſaieth) lieth hidden the r
                  •
               ugh and crewell nature of wolues. It is alſo by experience well tried, that there is nothing in the worlde more ſhameleſſe, then theſe fellowes are. For when anie reaſon is brought againſt them, thei endeuour thē ſelues to anſwer
                  •
                it, not by reaſon, but by

multiplying of woordes. And therefore, when they are pr
                  •
               ſſed with argumentes, then beginne they to chafe and ſweat, to feare and fainte, to raile and raue, and in the ende fall to plaine ſcolding, vntil thei haue founde for their impudent aſſertion ſome ſhameles ſhifte. But beleeue me I feare no mans ſlaunderous tongue. For I haue committed myne honeſtie and eſtimation to the keeping of Ieſus Chriſt, and therefore no man ſhal euer be able to thruſt me out of my place by the violence of his tongue. And as for your reprochful woordes, they moue me no more then the rauing of one that were frantike or out of his witte. Were it not that the loue of godlines had moued me, had I euer written ſo much as one letter againſt you? No, not one. I tooke vpon me this charge of writing, not minding thereby to mainteine my
                  ••
                owne good fame or 
                  •
               ſtimation, but to 
                  •
               onfute

your wicked and vngodlie talke. Wherefore be bolde and ſpare not, to taunt me at your pleaſure, to perce my good name with fowl words, to tourmoile it with villanie, to rente and teare it with al diſhoneſtie: and I geue good leaue and licence not onely to you, but alſo to all your Bucers and Martyrs, moſt gentle and ſofte creatures (as you cal them) to bende them ſelues as fiercely againſt me as thei can deuiſe. Wherefore there is no cauſe why you ſhuld goe about to make me affraied of them: for ſo muche as, vnto their tauntes, for the which I care not, I wil neuer anſwere: and their reaſons are very peuiſh, and alreadi cōfuted by the bookes of many learned men: and I my ſelf am at this point, that I fear nothing in the worlde but only Chriſte.
            As touching their perſons, if there be any ſenſe of humanitie in you, you ſee how il you haue defended thē. You ſay aferwarde, that it is nothing true, that

you ſhuld ſtand to the holy Scriptures only: for ſo muche as you do receiue many ſentences of the holy Fathers withal. What a doubling and incōſtancie is this? Now you reiect many thinges, for this reaſon only, bicauſe they are (as you ſay) the deuiſes of men▪ and by and by, you receiue what you liſt, and ſay, that you haue not reiected al the traditions of menne. You are ſo doubteful, ſo diuers, and ſo ſlipperie, that you can not wel tel your ſelues, what you thinke, and what you mind to ſtand to. And yet when you ſpake thoſe wordes, you commended them that acknowledge nothing elles but the holy Scriptures, and refuſe al holy traditions and ordinaunces. Theſe are your wordes. Truely if it were ſo, then folowed they the example of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, then folowed they the cuſtome of the Apoſtles, and of the auncient Fathers in the primitiue Church. How many things you laie out at a venture?

It is like forſooth that Chriſt the mind and wiſedome of God the Father, by whoſe power and diſpēſation the law it ſelfe was made, by whom the Prophetes declared thinges to come, of whom al holie men of old time receiued their light, was content to abyde that lawe him ſelfe, that he would not be ſo hardie, as to ſpeake one woorde, which he founde not regiſtred in the holy Scriptures. I beſech you Sir, wher read he in the Scriptures, that a man Vnvvritē truthes.for being angry only, although he vttered not one reprochful word, ſhuld incur the dāger of Gods iudgemēt? wher found he it written, that a man for caſting his eye alitle aſide wātonly, ſhuld Mat. 5. dbe accounted as an adulterer? By what wordes in the Law was a man forbidden to geue a bil of diuorſe to his wife? In what place was it euer writen, that a man minding the perfect obſeruatiō of the Lawe, ſhould ſell all his goodes, and beſtowe the money made thereof

to the vſe of the poore, reſeruing to him ſelfe nothing? Haue you euer read, either in the law, or in the Pſalmes, or in the Prophets, that the way to ſaluatiō is a narrowe waie, or that you ought, when a man hath ſtriken one cheeke, to holde him vppe the other, or that you ought to pray vnto God for their life, that ſpeake il of you, and woorke your deſtruction? But nowe to come to other pointes, of the birth and proceding of God: of the regeneration of men in heauenlie life, the whiche Nicodemus 10. 3. a
               a man exactlie ſeene in the doctrine of the lawe vnderſtood not: of the time, in the whiche God would 10. 4. c.
               be woorſhipped neither at Hieruſalem, nor in the mountaine of Samaria: of the bread of heauen, whiche is the foode and ſuſtenaunce of our life: of al theſe thinges what woorde haue you expreſſely written in any place of the olde Teſtamente? But when Chriſt ſpake theſe wordes, there was

no Goſpell yet written, neyther did any writen monumente confirme the ſayinges of Chriſt, but looke what he ordeined by woordes, was afterward put in writing, to the ende that men ſhould not forgette it. I doe here let paſſe many thinges (minding not to proſecute al that might be ſaied, for ſo muche as I haue alreadie ſpoken ſufficientlie) to the intent you might vnderſtand howe vnaduiſedly you haue ſaied, that our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt did alſo obſerue ſuch a rule in his doinges. What ſhall I ſaie of the Apoſtles? Where had S. Paule read, that ſuch as Galat. 5. akepte the circumciſion of the Lawe, were to be ſeparated from the communion of Chriſte? In whiche of all the holie Writers found he, that it is vnſeemely for a woman to worſhippe God bare headed, or for a man to couer 1. Cor. 11. 
                     •
                  
               his head, when he praieth to God? What ſhoulde I rehearſe vnto you; howe he commendeth ſuche men as

were mindful of his Doctrine, deliuered vnto them either by writing, or by worde? What ſhould I ſpeake of that, Act. 15. e.that the Apoſtles ſay in their Councel? It hath ſeemed good to the holy Ghoſt and vs? They ſaie not. It is writen in the holie Scripture: but, It hath ſeemed good to the holie Ghoſt and vs. Nowe as touching the holie Fathers, which peraduenture you neuer read, how durſt you affirme of them, that they neuer brought in any thing for the gouernement of the Churche, but what thei had found writen in the holie Scriptures? How many things reherſeth S. Baſile, and diſputeth that thei were deliuered from the Apoſtles vnto the Churche, onely by woorde of mouth? How many ſuch things are recited of Cyprian, Chryſoſtom, Auguſtine, and the reſt of the holie Fathers? How much do they reuerence al ſuch holy ordinaunces, as were decreed in general Coūcels? I do here omitte an

infinite nūber ofteſtimonies, which do plainly cōuince this madnes of you, or rather of your Maiſters, for ſo much as not onely the greateſt learned men of our age, but alſo the moſt holy Fathers of other ages, haue in theſe points very learnedly diſputed againſt your opinion. For in times paſt, al heretikes in a manner held this opinion, that nothing ought to be receiued, vnleſſe it were written in the holie Scriptures, minding withal to wreſt and corrupt the holie Scriptures with their owne interpretation. But the holie Fathers moſt earneſtly defended the contrary, alleaging Argumentes and Examples brought euen from the Apoſtles time, and by the decrees of Coūcels directed they al their doinges. Wherfore ſuche thinges as you report of Chriſt, of his Diſciples, and of the holie Fathers, are al moſt euidently falſe. You ſay, it is not true, that your Doctours ſhould take any thing vppon them, aboue the

cōmon ſort of men. Can you ymagine any greater arrogancie in the worlde, thē to preſume to reforme the church, being ſomewhat impaired, with newe Iawes and ſtatutes, whiche neither Athanaſius, nor Baſile, nor Cyprian, nor any other of the holi Fathers euer thought vpon: and to ſet ſuch wordes, and countenance vpon the doctrine of their new Goſpell as though they had done althinges by ordre and appointment of Chriſt him ſelfe?
            You ſay that I am not able to ſhew any fault or diſhoneſtie in the worlde in their life. That is true, if we muſt needes ſtand to your opinion: For ſo much as emongeſt you neither filthie pleaſure of the bodie, nor rebellion, nor any other diſordre or outrage are accompted as faults.
            You find faulte with me, for that I ceaſe not to trifle daungerouſly, and to hinder the eſtimation of moſt graue perſonages, by whoſe diligence your

Churche hath ben ſet in a maruelous goodly ordre. You could ſay no leſſe, for ſuch as you doe commend (being your ſelfe both for vertue and authoritie a very graue ſire) muſt needes be verie graue men. Then you ſaie.
            
               You laie to our charge that the companies of virgins and monkes, which were ſometimes incloſed in Monaſteries to keepe the Diuine ſeruice of God, and to mainteine the chaſtitie oſ their bodies, were by our men let out to the vncleane pleaſure of the fleſh, and al other licentious liuing: that their howſes were laied wide open for gaine, that lawes were made, that no religion ſhoulde hinder the pleaſure of the bodie. What you meane by their gaine, I vnderſtand not. For I neuer ſuſpected, that they did for their gaine cōmit any vile or filthy acte. But you doe in this as you doe commōly. You can not wel tel, neither what you do ſay, nor what you would ſay. Then how impudently is that ſpoken

that foloweth? O
                     •
                  t vpon this ouer malepart and licentiouſe deſire, whiche you haue to peruert all thinges. We confeſſe, yea and with all our heartes confeſſe, that, through the moste holie aduertiſement of our menne, thoſe downgeous of all wickednes are fallen downe, into the whiche the tender young maidens, and the ſeelie boyes were violently thruſt in, to their ſo great hinderaunce in good manners, as I can not for baſhfulneſſe well declare. Oh what a ſhamefaſte and may denlie fellow is this? What is that, I praie you, that you woulde not for ſhamefaſtnes expreſſe? Nothing in the wordle. for immediatly after you bring in theſe woordes. Thoſe ſame ſhoppes of lewdnes had litle other thing in them, but only a certaine phariſaical continuance of praiers in an vnknowen tongue. Their other more ſecrete exerciſes might wel be likened to the old reuelles of Bacchus in Rome. Tel me I praie you (moſt preſumptuous

and impudent railer) could you hane vttered any more ſpiteful reproche againſt the poore monaſteries of holi virgins, if your goodly maidenlines and modeſtie had not ſtaied you? Compare you the greene arbour of Chriſt, the houſe of chaſtitie, the repreſentation of heauēly life, with the moſt horrible and filthy reuels of Bachus, whiche were ſometime moſte ſharply pouniſhed by the lawes of the Romaines? And yet you ſay forſooth, that your may denlie modeſtie wil not ſuffer you to expreſſe their ſecrete vices. Pleaſure you ſo much in your ſtinking eloquence? Like you ſo wel to taunt and reuile chaſtitie, to ioyne the defence of your moſt barbarus and vile acte, with the reproche of Chriſt? As though the worlde knewe not, that you ouerthrow thoſe holy Monaſteries, not for any diſpleaſure you beare to naughtines and vice, but for the hatred you beare towardes chaſtitie.

And of like the greadie deſire you had of the goods and poſseſsions, with the which the Nonnes and Monkes were mainteined, holpe the matter well foreward. If you had had no face at al, no ſhame, no baſhfulnes in the world, how could you with more vile and filthie language haue diſhoneſted ſo holie a trade of life? The exerciſe of Religious and chaſt life you cal the downgeon of wickednes▪ that is to ſay, a ſincke of al vice, a cannel of filthines, a ſtanding poole of vnclean pleaſures. Could any thing be more impudently ſpoken? And yet you content not your ſelfe with al this ſtincking ſturre of wordes, but you ſay moreouer, that the tender young maidens, and the ſeelie boies were violently thruſt into the ſaid Monaſteries, to their greate hinderance in good manners. What meane you by this? What would you ſay? What geaue you the worlde to vnderſtande? Is there any vice ſo heinouſe,

that it may not be wel compriſed in this your ſhameleſſe talke? After this there foloweth the moſte beaſtlie word of all the reſt, where you cal the holie diſcipline of cleane life and continencie, a ſhoppe of naughtines. As for the Phariſaical continuance of praier, which is but a tricke proceding of Luthers railing ſprit, I wil let it paſſe. But wherto tēdeth the compariſon, which you make with the moſt vncleane and deteſtable rebels of Bacchus? Is mans heart able to deuiſe any thing ſo abhominable, that you may not wel cōprehende it within the compaſſe of this your moſte baſe and vile language? Why then what is that, which you can not expreſſe for baſhfulnes? Doutleſſe nothing: wherof it foloweth, that you are vtterly void of al ſhame, baſh fulnes and honeſtie. For I can not tel how it cometh to paſſe, that the more a man vſeth the companie and familiaritie of ſuch men as you commende, the more

ſhameleſſe is his behauiour. But to the intent you may the better ſee, howe heinouſe and wicked an offence you haue cōmitted againſt your owne ſelf: I think it good to declare the original The originall and inſtitutiō of mōkes.of the name and inſtitutiō of Monkes.
            There are two kind of men within the folde of Chriſtes church. The one is of them, which liuing a cōmon life, cōtent them ſelues with the commendable exerciſe of meane vertue and godlines. The other is of ſuch, as endeuour them ſelfe to excell in the folowing of heauenly life and diſcipline. Now for ſo much as the ende, whiche euery Chriſtian man ought to ſet before his eyes, is the likenes of the perfection and iuſtice of God, the which they atteine muche ſooner, which are prōpter and redier to behold the beautie of the wil of God: the which beautie no man can wel cōceiue in his hart, ſo long as he is as it were tied downe with the bandes of ſtreight frindſhip and familiaritie of the bodie: it came to

paſſe, that ſuche as had an earnſt and feruent deſire to ioyne them ſelues vnto God, called away their mindes (as much as was poſsible) from the familiar acqueintance of the body, to the intent they mighte the better faſten the eyes of their hearts in the cleerenes of God. Theſe are they, which (as our Lord ſaith) haue ghelded them ſelues for the loue and earneſt deſire of the kingdome of heauen. For the pleaſure of the bodie weyeth downe the heart euen to the earth, and with her importunitie carieth away the minde from the contēplation of the brightnes of God. The which thing is ſo true, H
                     •
                  b. 13. a.that, although Mariage be honorable, and the bed vndefiled, and he that defraudeth his wiſe of the right of Mariage, committeth no ſmall ſinne, yet it is ſometimes neceſſarie for ſuche as do minde to receiue this cleereneſſe of God within them ſelues to abſteine from their owne wiues.
            
               
               Exod. 19. c For this cauſe Moyſes, before he receiued the law, gaue commaundemēt to al men, to abſteine from the companie of their wiues, vntil God had geuē out the law. For this conſideration S. Paule alſo, when he forbiddeth the husbandes to forſake the companie of 1. Cor. 7. a
               their wiues, addeth this clauſe. except it be for a time to geaue your ſelues whollie to praier. In the which place the holie Apoſtle teacheth plainely that the verie lawful and holy companie of man and wife, doth hinder the mind, that it can not ſo freely and ſpedily pearce the heauēs, and there talke familiarly with God. And therefore ſaieth he in the ſame Epiſtle, he that ioineth his virginitie in marriage, doth wel: and he that ioyneth not, doth better. The reaſon, whiche the Apoſtle geueth, why it were better for a maide to contine we vnmarried, is this. Bicauſe that, ſuch as are entangled with the cares of marriage, are oftentimes

caried a waie from the remembrāce of heauenly thinges. But ſuch as are free from mariage, are troubled with none other care, but how to pleaſe God. And, the ſingle woman, ſaith S. Paule, thinketh vpon the thinges that apperteine vnto God: how ſhe may be holly in bodie and in ſoule. And a few lines after, he ſetteth before our eyes, the goodli fruit of this moſt holy freedom, which is, a libertie to praie vnto God at all times without any impediment or lette. That this ſo great a gifte, and benefitte ought to be aſcribed, not to the merite of man, but to the mercie of God, our Lorde him ſelfe declareth, ſaying. Euerie man receiueth Mat. 19. bnot this word, but they only to whom it is geauen. Whereby it is manifeſt, that, ſuche as doe ſo conquere the tyranny of fleſhly pleaſure, that they are able to continue their lyfe in chaſtitie, they dooe it by a ſingular benefitte of God, and for that cauſe are moſt worthie

of honoure and reuerence.
            But you wil ſaie peraduenture, that I ſpend muche talke in thinges too wel knowen, and not neceſſarie. They are, I graunte you, thinges verie well knowen, and thoroughly debated in the writinges of holie menne. But that they are nothing neceſſarie, then maie you geue iudgement, when you ſhall perfectly vnderſtande, that they are impertinēt to thoſe matters, which I haue taken vpon me to treate of.
            Whereas therefore in the Primitiue Churche, the greateſt parte of men that became Chriſtians, liued vprightly and godly, but yet ſo, that they differred little from the common lyfe of men: there was no ſmal number which were inflamed with moſt erneſt deſire of the greater dignitie and higher perfection. Nowe theſe (being there vnto moued by the ſpirit and grace of God) fearing leſt the luſte of the bodie, and care thereof, might be ſome hinderāce

vnto them, and hoping withal that thei ſhuld more manfully vanquiſh the ſenſuality of the fleſh, abſteined thē ſelues frō mariage: to thentent that although their bodies walked vp and downe in the earth, yet their minds ād thoughts might be cōuerſant with God in heauē. The which thing that they might the more cōmodiouſly bring to paſſe, they ſeparated themſelues frō the company and cōuerſation of men, and with one accord pitched in one place: that ther might be made of al their mindes, one ſure and perfecte agreemente of heart and will. And the order that was taken in the beginninge at Hieruſalem, that no man ſhoulde haue any poſſeſſion ſeuerall to him, (whiche coulde not be long kept of all, for the greate multitude of men) was of theſe men reſtored and putte in vre againe. Their lyfe was nothing elles, but onlie a perpetual warre againſt the bodily pleaſures and ſinne; with an earneſt

and continual meditation of heauenlie thinges. Their bodie therefore they ſubdued with faſting, watching and labour: but their mindes they ſtirred vp to behold the bewtie and brightnes of God by prayers and ſpiritual ſonges, hymnes and meditation of godly matters. Hereof proceded that moſt feruent flame of loue: hereof came that earneſt deſire to folow godlines and vertue: hereof aroſe the ioyning of mans wil with the wil of God: hereof ſprang a certaine cleere and bright ſonneſhine in the ſowle of man: finally hereof iſſued that knot or coniunction with God, then the whiche mannes hart is able to y magin no thing ſtreighter or faſter.
            Theſe men were at the firſt called in greeke Monkes, that is to ſay, ſolitarie liuers: not ſo much bicauſe they haunted deſert places, as bicauſe they forſoke and deſpiſed al wordly things, and were knitte with a moſt ſtreight

band of loue vnto God al only, according to the ſaying of Dauid. It is good Pſal. 72. dfor me to cleaue vnto God. And S. Paul ſaith in like manner. He that cle▪ 
               1. Cor. 6. d
               ueth vnto God, is one ſpirit with God, Theſe monkes therfor, which I fpeak
                  •
                of, that they might the better att
                  •
               in
                  •
                vnto a ſtate, in the whiche no man might diſquiet or pul them away from this coniunction of the ſpirite of God: tooke ſuch ordre of life, as I haue here declared. S. Diony ſius of Areopagus whom I eſteeme, after the Apoſtles, as prince of al Diuines, doth not only expound the name of a Monke after this ſort, but declareth alſo▪ what ceremonie the Biſhops vſed at the profeſsing of monkes. This name of a monke hath ben ſometimes in great reuerence and eſtimation: and howſes were builded for them to dwell in, the whiche, as Philo writeth, were at the firſt called Monaſteries. There were alſo many virgins inflamed with the loue of God,

the which ſubdewing the ſenſual pleaſure of the bodie, taming the affections of the mind, deſpiſing the richeſſe of the world: gaue themſelues wholly to the ſeruice of Chriſt: and the better to bring their purpoſe to good effecte, thei came together in one place, where they liued alwayes in the contemplation of God. S. Baſile a very holie and great learned man, after many yeares drewe out a rule in writing for Monkes, to the ende they ſhould no more alter and chaunge their diſcipline, but be well ſetled and bound alwaies to one vniforme faſſhion of religion. His Epiſtles are yet extante, in the whiche he doth moſte grauelie confute the ſlaunderouſe talke of certaine lewde felowes, the which miſliked his doinges herein. For the worlde was neuer, nor is nowe, nor neuer ſhall be without ſome feedmen and ſeruitors of Satans retinew, which endeuoure them ſelues to vndoe the

Decrees and ordinaunces of holy men. This life of Monkes how highly doth Chryſoſtome comme
                  •
               d it? With how greate woordes doth Auguſtine bring men in admiration of it? How often, how grauely, how eloquently doth S. Hierome ſet out the excellencie of it? Who did not only cōmend it in words, but alſo folowed him ſelf that trade of life, and liued and died in the company of Monks. And ſo did Gregorie of Nazianzen, the moſt worthy piller of Diuinitie, the goodly paterne of vertue and eloquence. What ſhould I here reherſe al other men, that haue excelled in learning and holines? Was ther euer any vertuouſe and perfect man in the world, which gaue not exceding great commendation to the rule and life of Monks? Truth it is, that the erneſt loue of this perfect religion hath ben ſlaked and quenched (as it happeneth) diuers times: but there neuer lacked holie men to ſtir it vp and kendle it againe.

from thence came that wōderful good Father Benet, from thence came Bernard and Brunus, and after them Francis and Dominike, the whiche did not only ſet an order in the life of Monks, but alſo with moſt earneſt and feruent deſire, laboured to reforme the church of Prieſtes which was very ſlacke and negligent. How many Martyrs came from thence? How many Writers? How many excellent men in al kinde of vertues? For if there was any thing in the Church in their time, that tended either to example of excellent vertue, or to a rule of high wiſedome, al that may we thanke the Monkes of: or (to ſpeake better) thanke Chriſt him ſelfe, which ſtirred the hartes and mindes of Monkes to follow ſuch a goodly diſcipline of vertue and wiſedome.
            But, to abridge this our diſcourſe, being now made plaine, that there were euen in the Primitiue Churche, two kind of Chriſtians: the one which contēting

them ſelues with meane doings, liued a cōmon life without crime: the other, which tending to heauen warde with greater feruēcie, withdrew their minds from the familiariti of the body, and them ſelues from al reſort of men, and cōſecrated their whole life, to the ſeruice and loue of Chriſt: being alſo euidently proued, that this life of perfection farre paſſeth the other cōmon life: ſurely it is veri manifeſt, how great honour and reuerence men ought to haue borne to thoſe houſes of Virgins and Monkes. For they were in this kinde of life, which is more noble and excellent, yea and commeth farre neerer to the nature and likeneſſe of Angelles, as it were common Scholes or working howſes of heauenlie vertue, and cleane lif
                  •
               . This is that, that induced manie Chriſtian Princes moſt vertuous and godly men, to build Monaſteries, and to endew them with poſſeſsions, by the whiche the Virgins

and monkes might liue and ſerue God continuallie. When this was donne, thoſe princes were for victories moſt renowmed, for chiualrie and feates of armes moſt honorable, and their countreis excellently wel gouerned. But nowe we ſee in many places where men do baſely ſwarue from the godlines of their auncetours, that it cometh farre otherwiſe to paſſe. For with increaſing of rentes and reuenewes cō
               tendeth nedines: with the multitude of men, diſhoneſty: with pride, the weaknes of the whole cōmon weale: finally with the ſhew of holines impudently faced and borne out, ſacrilege.
            But you wil ſaye, that this kinde of monks are al decaied and worne away. Not emong vs, I aſſure you. For ſence the Kinges of Spaigne haue bent them ſelues earneſtly towards the reformation of religion: there is found ſo great religion and godlines in diuers Monaſteries, that manie younge men of

the nobility brought vp in great welth, ſtanding in good hope of muche worſhip and honour in the cōmon weale, being inflamed with the loue of ſuche wōderful vertue as they ſee with their eyes, doe forſake richeſſe, deſpiſe honour, reiecte pleaſures, litle regard the teares of their parents, and flie for ſuccour into ſome holy cōpanie of monks, as it were from the ſtormy tempeſt of filthie vice, into the quiet hauen of cleane life. In like maner many virgins of excellent bewtie and comely behauiour, being ſewed vnto for marriage of diuerſe yong men of the Nobilitie, haue forſaken al the allurements of this life, that they might in the company of holie virgins much more pleaſantly ſolace them ſelues in the ſpirituall and ſweet familiarity of Chriſt.
            But you will ſaye peraduenture, that theſe exaumples of greate vertue, are verie fewe in compariſon of them, that are thruſt into Monaſteries

againſt their wil and repining at it. And no meruaile. For why, in euerie kind, looke what is excellente, is alſo rare. Then whereas you talke of violence vſed in putting the Virgins into Monaſteries, it was neuer permitted by any Lawe, nor yet allowed of wiſe men, and the holie Councell of Trent hath from hence foorth vtterlie forbidde it, and therfore it is now no more vſed.
            But what fruicte and commoditie haue theſe Virgins by this kind of life? Doubtleſſe ſuch as can not in wordes be expreſſed. For manie of them are ſo inflamed in ſpirit, that they are ſomtimes taken quite awaie from their bodies, and lifted vp into heauen, where in the contemplation of the goodnes of God they reioyſe excedingly, and beholding the bewtie and brightnes of God (ſo much as they may) are aſtoniſhed, yea ſo much that ſomtimes thei are beſides them ſelues. I haue good acquaintāce my ſelfe with a Monke, a

ſimple and plaine man, the whiche, ſo often as mentiō is made of the loue of God, his ſenſes failing him, he falleth vpon the grownd, and yet in the meane time, his memorie is freſh, and is in cō
               templation of heauenlie and godlie thinges. It were an infinite matter, if I wold reherſe, how manie holie men I haue ſeene in thoſe companies which you laugh to ſcorne, and howe manie virgins I haue talked withal, which are wonderful for religion and holines.
            If theſe thinges be true (as they are moſt true) why haue you taken away this ſo excellēt an example of religiō? Whie haue you defaced ſo wonderful a rule of chaſtitie and cleane life, in the which is conteined that, that is in the religiō of Chriſt the higheſt perfectiō, and (as I ſaid before) moſt of all to be eſteemed? whie haue you violētly and furiouſly ruſhed into thoſe holy howſes to aboliſh vtterly out of the worlde the very remēbrance of perpetual chaſtity?

Oh, ſay you, they liued not after the rule of S. Baſil. I graūt you, for emō
               geſt vs alſo ſomtime, the Nūnes forgetting their duety, waxed ſomwhat wanton, and ſome Monkes alſo liued very diſordredly: howbeit the moſt holy order and diſciplin was not for that cauſe vtterly taken away and ouerthrowen. Neither are the members of the body, which may be healed, ſo ſone as they fal into any diſeaſe, forth with to be cut of. What? Thinke you it wel done, for a ſmal blemiſh or eyeſore to grubbe vp the whole order by the root? Were it not better, wene you to bring the mē
               bers, that are diſeaſed, to their naturall ſtrēgth again? If you had vſed the ſame medicine, as our Prīces did: why might not the cōmendable vertues of chaſtity and holines haue floriſhed emōgſt you, as thei do with vs? But it was neuer no part of your thought. Neither did reaſon moue you to doe well, but hatred and couetouſnes pricked you forward to miſchiefe.
            
               
Nowe as touching the Phariſaicall continuance of praiers (for ſo it liketh you to terme the continual exerciſe in the Diuine ſeruice of God) this much I anſwere. If the defence of Religion do confiſt in vnreaſonable and reprochful woordes, then are you to to muche to good for vs. For you haue had in that honeſt faculty, an excellent ſcholemaſter called Luther, from whom proceded al theſe termes, Phariſee, hypocrit, Papiſt, and ſuch other (which I do let paſſe as wordes not meet to be ſpoken of any honeſt and baſhfull man) with the which he reuiled holy men. And yet you to mainteine one miſchiefe by an other, to defende Sacrilege with a heape of ſlaunders and falſe witneſſe, you ſaie, that the diſorder of Monkes in their Celles, and of Nunnes in their Cloiſters was ſo great, that they might well be compared with the reuelles of Bacchus. Howe then haue you left ſuch heinous offences vnpuniſhed?

Wherefore did you not ſuppreſſe ſuch fowle and horrible vices with moſte extreme and ſharpe puniſhmentes? Wherefore did you not procede with al ſeueritie and rigor againſt ſuch deteſtable conueticles (for ſo you ful vnreuerently cal them) wherfore did you not make them exāples to the worlde, leſt the libertie of vnbridled and filthy pleaſure might ouerflow your coūtrei to the vtter▪ vndoing of your common weale? Are you ſo rechleſſe and negligent in the gouernemēt of your realm, that you thought it meete to appoint no puniſhmēt at al for that moſt deteſtable ſhop (as you cal it) of filthie vice? Wil you in that Iland, in the which a Queene (whome the king loued verie well for her beawtie, witte, and courtelie behauiour) for the onelie ſuſpicion of a great deale lighter offence then this is, was by the ſentence of the iudges, at the commaundement of the King him ſelfe her houſbande,

openlie in the face of the world, by the hand of a hangman executed and beheaded: wil you, I ſaie, in that Iland ſuffer ſuch heinouſe offences, as are not to be named, to eſcape vnpuniſhed, yea ād that in a kind of men, which are not only contemptible and abiecte, but alſo odious and hateful? It is not like.
            Moreouer, this feate of pulling downe monaſteries beganne not emō
               geſt you, but you had it from other menne. For Carolſtadius and Luther and other the head Sectaries attempted this goodlie enterpriſe firſte of al: ſo that you maie not robbe them of the honour thereof, and take it to your ſelfe. It was not therefore the hatred of vncleane pleaſure, but the example of theſe noble perſonages ſet out as a rule in this your new diſcipline and Religion, that ſtirred your mindes to the ouerthrowe of perpetual chaſtitie. Beſides this, the greauous

diſpleaſure you had conceiued againſt the Biſhoppe of Rome for entermedling and geauing ſentence againſt you: the caſting of your eyes vpon the goods and poſſeſsions, with the whiche the Mounkes liued: the flatterie of certaine naughtie and deſperate fellowes: the fonde pleaſure and appetite to make alterations and chaunges, helped the matter wel forwarde. In olde tyme emongeſt the Romaines (whiche were men vtterly void of the light and knowledge of God) the Virgins of Veſta were had in ſuch eſtimation, that euerie man did geaue them the waie, the place, and ſeate, with verie great reuerence. And you haue diſteined the Virgins of Chriſte with a notorious and perpetuall infamie. Thoſe Virgins, bicauſe they mainteined the fier of Veſta, the citezins did not onely honour and attende vpon religiouſly, but alſo reuerenced their iudgementes: and

you haue not ſuffered the holie virgins of Chriſte to keepe their virginitie ſolemly vowed, to maintaine the euerlaſting fier of heauenlie loue in their heartes enkendled. It was lawful for thoſe Virgins to marrie after thirtie yeares, and yet of their owne accord they did abſteine from marriage: you haue maried the virgins of Chriſt, to whome it was in al ages vnlawful, to filthie ribaudes. Thoſe virgins, if they were at anie tyme by intiſement deflowred, they were buried aliue and ſo ended their life with a horrible kinde of death: and you haue taken them, whiche were diſhoneſted (as you ſaie) with moſto vile brothelrie, and haue for puniſhment of ſo great a vice pleaſauntly rewarded them with ſporting and daliaunce. And yet you ſay.
            
               Wherefore God hath ſtirred the harts of our men, that theſe ſo great bāds or cō
                  panies, which laie lurking in blind ſtīking

corners, were through their godlie exhortations called foorth, from idlenes to labour, from vice to vertue, from wicked brothelrie to moſt honeſt marriage. You ſay, God hath ſtirred the heartes of our men. I would faine learne of you, what God that was. for there are manie, as S▪ Paule ſaith, that are called Goddes. For to ſome men the bellie is a God: to ſome other monie is a God: yea and to ſome riot and ruffling and hawtines is a God. I would therefore faine knowe, what God that was, that put it into the heartes of your menne, to aboliſhe and rake vp in the earth the loue of moſt holie and perpetuall chaſtitie. Was it Bacchus, or Cupide, or Mercurie? For of Chriſt the ſonne of God, who is verie muche delyted in perpetuall chaſtitie and cleane life, I am right wel aſſured, that he neuer moued you to any ſuch heinouſe acte.
            The idlenes, which you ſpeake of,

was not a fruteles ſitting ſtil, void of al holie workes, but it was a continuall exerciſe in the contemplation of godlie thinges.
            As touching the moſt filthie brothelrie (as you cal it) you are in one ſentence conuinced both of a lie, and of impudencie withall. For, if there had benne anie ſuche offence committed of them, you woulde not haue ſuffered it vnpouniſhed. And then howe impudent and ſhameleſſe you be, the forging of ſo filthie a crime doth plainelie declare. It is not therefore true that you ſaie, that your doinges ſtande well with the profitte of the common weale. But contrariewiſe you haue bv violence and authoritie drawen out thoſe bandes or companies (as you cal them) from holie quietnes to a buſines defiled with wicked ſacrilege: from the exerciſe of godlines, to the libertie of vice: from the diſcipline of perpetuall

continencie to the bondage of moſte vncleane voluptuouſneſſe. Howe be it by this, I doe not excuſe your Religiouſe menne. For it had ben muche better for them to ſuffer intolerable paines, yea and to let their lyues in tormentes, then to forſake their Faith, whiche they haue openly profeſſed to Chriſte. For if they had withſtood your warninges and counſell, your threates and authoritie with good courage and conſtante heartes, dowbteleſſe they had died an honourable death for the glorie of Chriſte. For you are wont to punniſh extremelie th
                  •
                chaſte and cleane lyfe: but filthie and vile brothelrie, as you confeſſe your ſelfe, you are wonte mercifullie to pardonne. The Carthuſians▪, moſte chaſte and holie Fathers, you put to death: but thoſe moſt wicked bandes and companies, as you terme them, you called foorth to be

married, and to liue in pleaſure. Wherefore there is no dowbt, but that, if your Mounkes had liued after S. Baſiles rule, they had benne diſpatched emongeſt you euerie one. And yet you glorie that by this your ſo goodlie an acte you are reſtored againe to libertie. As thoughe you vnderſtoode, what thinge true libertie were. But of that we ſhall ſee hereafter. Nowe before I enter into that diſcourſe, I wilbe ſo bolde as to demaunde of you one queſtion.
            This libertie of the goſpell, whiche you haue alwaies in your mowth, doth it take place in all thinges, ſo, that it maie be lawfull for euerie man at al tymes to do what him liſteth? Or els is it limited by ſome certaine rule of lawe and reaſon? As for example in Matrimonie. Shall it be laweful for the huſband to put awaye his wife for euerie cauſe that hym lyſteth

to alleage? No without doubte. For the euerlaſting law of the Goſpell will not beare it. I
                  •
                then the band of Matrimonie beinge once knitte by the mutuall conſent of man and wife▪ can not be diſſolued: by what meanes, I praie you, may that bande, with the which Virgins are willingly conſecrated vnto Chriſte with ſol
                  •
               mne ceremonies, and faithful promiſe, be broken by the preſumption of menne, without great 1. Tim. 3. b
               and heinouſe offence? S. Paule commaunded Timothee to auoide yonge widowes. For when they haue liued rioteouſlie, ſaieth he, to the reproche of Chriſte, they will marrie. What then? Is it not lawefull for widowes to marrie? Doubtleſſe it is lawfull.
            For the ſame S. Paule ſaieth. If her 1. Cor. 7. g
               husbande be a ſleape, ſhee is free from the lawe of her husbande. Shee may marrie to whome ſhee will, onely in our Lorde.
            If then it be lawful for Widowes to

marrie without ſinne, what is the matter that S. Paule findeth faulte with theſe widowes, bicauſe they would marrie? for he addeth, that they haue their dā
               natiō. Whie ſo I praie you? what haue 1. Tim. 5. b.
               th
                  •
               y donne? what offence haue they cōmitted? Bicauſe they haue, ſaith he, broken their firſt faith. what faith I beſeke you? Expound the meaning of S. Paule, if you can. What manner of promiſe was this, whiche the Widowes haue broken with none other offence, but bicauſe they would haue married. Is it the promiſe, which they made to their houſbandes, that they would neuer ſpot the bed of wedlocke with adulterie? No. For of that promiſe they were quite diſcharged by the death of their houſbandes. Whie then it foloweth, that this promiſe was not made to anie man, but to the ſonne of God, that they ſhoulde keepe th
                  •
                chaſtitie both of bodie and mind perpetually to his glorie. The whiche promiſe when

they had decreed to breake, they did a greuous reproche, not to men, but to Chriſt him ſelfe. And therfore it ſeemed to the Apoſtle, that they had deſerued, (as being condemned for the offence of a moſt wicked adultery) not to be receiued into the cōpany of chaſt widowes, but rather to be forebidden to enter into the church. And that you maie the more meruaile at it, note, that S. Paule ſaied not, that thoſe widowes after the firſt mariage had married to other mē cōtrarie to their promiſe made, but onely that they would haue married: wherby it is geauen vs to vnderſtand, that this religious promiſe is moſt wickedly and heinouſly broken by the onlie will and deſire to be married againe. It was therfore lawful for widowes to marrie, before they had promiſed and cōſecrated their chaſtitie vnto Chriſte, but after the time that the promiſe was paſt, it was no more lawful. Now then ſir: Think you that the offence of the Virgins is anie

thing leſſe, which haue not only a deſire to marrie, but doe marrie in deede to the great reproch of Chriſt? Doubtleſſe it is farre greater: by ſo much as, it is a more wicked offence for an vndefiled virgin to plaie the harlot to the diſhonour of Chriſte, then not to kepe the chaſtitie of a bodie, whiche is not vntowched. How long then laſteth this libertie? So long as it is in our free choiſe, to take what way we wil. But when we haue once either yoked our ſelues in matrimonie, or els offered vp our bodies by vow to ſerue God in religiō: as it is not laeful to break the promiſe of matrimony, ſo is it not lauful to violate the ſacramēt of perpetual chaſtitie. And who ſo euer preſumeth to doe it, cōmitteth a moſt wicked crime, that deſerueth the iudgemēt and vengeance of God. He that hath cōſtantly 1. Cor. 7. g.
               determined in his heart, ſaith S. Paule, hauing no cōſtreint, but hauing power ouer his owne wil, and hath aduiſedly

determined in his hart to kepe his virgin, doth wel. He laieth no neceſſitie at al vpon vs: but by his authoritie approueth the wil of that man, which weying and conſidering the matter wel, and taking withall the will of the virgin (for otherwiſe it maie not be) dedicateth the ſaid virgin vnto Chriſte, which he kepeth vnder his rule and power. But after the virgin hath once bound her ſelfe with the vowe of perpetual chaſtitie, S Paule ſaieth not, that ſhe is at her choiſe to marrie if ſhe wil. For if he ſhould ſo ſaie, he ſhould ſpeke verie muche againſt him ſelfe. But al theſe thinges are verie eaſily confuted in the opinion of ſuch as are addicted to Luther. For it is not lawful, ſay thei, for any man to bind him ſelfe by vowe to that religion, which he is not able to kepe. And to reſiſt the tyrannie of fleſhlie luſt, they ſaie, is graunted to no man. This is the talke of a mā not only incōtinent and diſſolute, but alſo wickedly

bent againſt God. For he diſtruſteth the goodnes and power of God, and meaſureth the ſtrength of vertue and continencie, not by the almightines and power of God, but by his own weakenes and filthie appetit. And this is the propertie of al naughty felowes, by their owne beaſtly life to iudge the conuerſation of other men. Nero was fully perſwaded, that al men were as euil as him ſelfe, but that their vnbridled luſt was reſtrained by the lacke of thinges, that it could not breake out at al times into deedes. And this opinion cauſeth, that when vicious men heare tel of anie man or woman that is verie continent, they doe not only not beleeue it, but they wil deuiſe oftētimes ſome infamous crime to burden him withal. I graunt you thus muche, that neither Luther, nor Bucer, nor Zwinglius, nor Occolampadius, nor Caluin, nor your Martyr him ſelfe was able to ſuſteine the aſſault of the fleſh. For the

heauenly gifte of perpetual chaſtitie, is iuſtly denied to al ſuche, as haue moſt wickedly diuided them ſelues from the church. But vnto ſuch as are within the boundes of holy Churche, and are deſirous to be ioyned with moſt feruent loue to Chriſt the chiefe and principal worker of honeſtie and holines, for ſo much as they are fenſed on euerie ſide with the ſtrong bulwarke of God, it is very eaſie to put fleſhlie pleaſure to flight, to pul vp the verie ſtrings and rootes of al vncleane vice. Otherwiſe S. Paule had neuer geanen counſel to virgins to continew in the 1. Cor. 7. b
               ſtate of virginitie: he had neuer ſaid, that they were farre happieſt of al other, that folowed the cleanes of his life: he had neuer condēned widowes, only for that they had a wil, to be married 1. Tim. 5. b 
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 7. g
               contrary to their promiſe: he had neuer preferred the ſtate of Virgins before widowhod: no our Lord him ſelfe had neuer approued that kind of

geldinges, whiche haue gelded them Math. 1
                        •
                     . b.ſelues for the kingdom of heauen. And yet wil you here lament (like a Popular felowe, a reſtorer of libertie) the wretched bōdage of thoſe virgins that deſire to ſerue Chriſt more painfully and more chaſtly, then you doe. You are altogether ignorāt, what libertie is, which doe condemne the moſt excellent kind of liberty, calling it bondage. For if it be true libertie to doe, what fleſhlie luſt cōmaundeth, what naughtines forceth, what wrathfulnes moueth, what hatred perſwadeth, what the mad rage of a wilful and headlong mind driueth a man to deuiſe and doe: then I graunt you, that they are bondmen, which haue crucified their affections, and haue faſtened them ſelues with ſuch ſtreight bandes vnto Chriſt, that they can not be toſſed to and fro with the ſwaie ofpeſtilēt and filthy luſtes. But if libertie be a power of that True libertie▪
               part of the minde, which hath the rule

and gouernment, and tendeth to come to that end, to the which both the excellēcie of natural inclination, and alſo the likenes of God in the mind calleth it: I would learne of you, whome you thinke to be more free: that woman, that being, as it were, pulled in ſunder with a thowſand diuers buſines, ſerueth alwaies with great care her husband, her children, and her familie: or her, that being diſcharged of al theſe troubles, caſteth her ſelfe downe at the feete of Chriſt, and hath no more but one onely care, how ſhe may at al times ſingularly wel pleaſe Chriſt her heauenly ſpouſe. That woman, whome the force of pleaſure being by law permitted, yea and of dewtie required, conſtreineth oftentimes to forget heauenly thinges▪ or her, whome no force of pleaſure is able (ſo long as ſhe is bound vnto Chriſte) to hinder from the cōtemplation of God. Finally, that woman, who is thorough

the loue of her huſband drawen two waies, or her, which hath ſet her whol loue vpon the beawtie of Chriſt. Who can denie, but that liberty is then geuē to the mind in dede, when reaſon beareth rule in all the ſtate of the minde? Whervpō it foloweth, that where reaſon keepeth downe the fleſhlie luſtes moſt, ther is the mind freeſt. Wherfore it muſt needes be, that the frutefull libertie whiche you haue vnſeaſonably brought foorth for holie Virgins and Monkes, againſt all right and reaſon, againſt the holie order of Chriſtian religion, is no libertie at al, but a deteſtable and pitiful bondage. We haue ben ſomewhat long in the confirmatiō of this part, bicauſe I ſawe, that vpon this l
                  •
               wd point was laied the verie foundatiō and growndworke of al Luthers moſt peſtilent doctrine. For this holi
                  •
                chaplain of Venus (I meane not Venus of Cyprus nor Paphos, nor Ericine, but Venus the Regēt of hel) when he had

moſt filthylie ſpotted him ſelfe with leacherie and ribawdrie, he thought that not vnough, but vſed violent perſwaſions with ſo manie as were of his re
                  ••
               new, to doe the like. And as we reade in Euripedes, that Venus tooke great diſpleſure, bicauſe ſhe was deſpiſ
                  •
               d of Hippolitus, and therfore deuiſed craftily, to ſende certaine monſtruous ſeacalues out of the ſea, to gallowe his chariot horſes by the whiche traine Hippolitus was for the onlie loue of chaſtitie, torne al in peeces and cruelly ſlaine: euen ſo hath this helliſh Venus pricked foreward Luther and Carolſtadius, and the reſte of theſe horrible monſters, not againſt anie one chaſte man, but againſt chaſtitie it ſelfe, meaning by them vtte
                  •
               l
                  •
                to aboliſh out of the worlde that heauenly example of chaſtitie, of honeſtie, and of virginitie.
            Moreouer ther was a b
                  •
               tter hatred cōceiued againſt the Biſhop of Rome, whoſe ſtate Luther ymagined might

by this goodlie pollicie be verie much weakened.
            Laſt of al Luther, according to the diuels phyſick (who vſeth to cure one euel diſeaſe with an other woorſe) deuiſed to heale the infamie of incontinencie with impietie and miſbeleefe: to thintent that, when he had perſwaded al ſuch as folowed him, that it was not only lawful and honeſt, but alſo that very dewtie and godlines, 
                  •
               ea and neceſsitie it ſelfe required, that al Nunnes and Mōkes ſhould be maried, there ſhould no man be able to blame him for his incontinent and vicious liuing. The verie ſame trade and waie haue you takē, folowing the ſteppes of your maiſter, to aboliſh al good affection towardes perpetual chaſtitie: and now, that, that was verie vngodly and heinouſly done, you defende it to be done, for godlie and iuſt cauſes. To ſlide and fall procedeth of the weakenes of man, and to continewe in anie

vice il begonne, is an argument of an vnbridled mind and vnrulie affection: But to reioiſe and glorie in wickednes, and to geue the name of honeſtie and godlines to moſt filthie vices, is ſo preſumptuous and horrible offence, that it cā not by wordes be expreſſed. And yet bicauſe I did in my letters but only lament this ſo great a ruine and decaie of religiō, you laie out againſt me with open mowth. And yet you make outcries, and in ſo doing you woulde be taken for an erneſt and vehemēt man. And yet you wold beare men in hād, that the thinges that you haue done for hatred, malice and raſhnes, were done charitably, prouidently, and aduiſedly. You ſaie.
            
               Out vpon this ouer malepart and licē
                  tiouſe deſire, which you haue to peruert all thinges. I ſaie on the other ſide. Out vpō your barbarous and crewel boldnes. Out vpon your intolerable impudēcie. Out vpō your moſt wicked and

deuiliſh practiſes, deuiſed and wronght by the labour, ſtudie, and diligence of Satan. What rage hath ſo driuen you, what madnes hath ſo ſtirred you, that you durſt ſet vpon ſo wicked an enterpriſe? For you haue made open warres againſt honeſtie and chaſtitie: you haue furiouſly brokē into the holy Monaſteries: you haue ouerthrowen baſhfulnes, honeſtie, and continencie: you haue chaſed awaie that moſt excellent loue of perpetual virginitie: you haue geuen the goods of religions perſonnes to whome you liſted: and now, when you triumph at the fall of chaſtitie and Religion, you ſo vaun
                  •
                your ſelues in it, as though you had by this noble victorie, gotten euerlaſting fame and honour.
            
               Image
                     •
                  . Now foloweth the diſputation of the pulling downe of Images, whiche you like verie well, and are offended with me, bicauſe I ſhould ſaie, that when the images are takē awaie, there

is nothing left, wherby the mind might be ſtirred vppe to thinke vpon godlie thinges. The which I neuer ſpake. For there are manie other thinges, whiche you haue ouerthrowen together with the ymages, that moue our mindes more vehemently then they doe. But this much I ſaied: For ſo much as Images are verie good and effectuall to bring al men, eſpecially▪ the vnlearned, to the remembraunce of the wonderful vertue, which ſhone ſometimes in the holy Saintes and it were expediēt that the benefit of Chriſt ſhould be repreſented vnto vs by al ſignes, in al places: it was wickedly done of them; that pulled downe Croſſes and Images. For we doe neither praie, nor offer, nor ſacrifice vnto them: but we are by them put in remembraunce of thoſe thinges that are of dew to be worſhipped. It is, ſaie you, againſt the expreſſe commaund
                     •
                  ment of God. I would your doctours would inſtructe you better in Diuinitie,

that you might no more babble out ſuch childi
                  •
               h toyes. Tell me, I praie you, haue you neuer read, that there were in the tabernacle of God, Images of Cherubines ſet before the Arke of promiſe? The vele, whiche 
                  
                     •
                  xod. 25. b.diuided the inner part from the reſte of the tabernacle, was is not wrought betwene, with manie Images of Cherubines? Numer. 2
                        •
                     . b.Was there not made the Image of a Serpent in braſſe by the commaundement of God in the wildernes, vpon the whiche, ſuche as were bitten of ſerpentes, looked, and were healed? What Images then hath God forbidden to be made? Thoſe Images without dowbte, by the whiche men blinded with ſynne went abowte to expreſſe a thinge, that can neither be deuiſed, nor painted, nor engrauen, nor expreſſed wyth woordes, nor conceiued with the heare, that is, the infinite Maieſtie of God. Beſides this, there was greate

daunger, leſt the people being now acqueinted with the manners of the Aegiptians, being alſo abowt to goe into a land, which was infected with the ſelfe ſame errours, might through familiaritie and neighbourhood of theſe vngodlie nations, fall into the like errour, and offer vp ſacrifice vnto goddes made of ſtockes and ſtones: or at the leaſt make the ymages of ſome naughty and vile men, and ſet them vp in the place of God. The feare of this daunger cauſed manie thinges to be taken quite awaie, which had ben otherwiſe lawfull and tolerated. The ymage of the braſen ſerpent was diligently kept, as a goodlie monument of the benefite of God, and ſingular ſacrament of the ſaluation to come. But after manie yeares, when the people were come to ſuch madnes, that they thought there had benne ſome diuinitie in the ymage, and therfore offered ſacrifice vnto it: it was by the

holie King Ezechias broken and made 4. Reg. 18. a.
               into powder. Shew you now, that we doe goe about to expreſſe the nature of God by ſignes, or that we thinke that ther is anie godhead in dome images, and then may you wel conuince vs of blindneſſe and folie. So long as you doe not this, there is no cauſe, whie you ſhould feare the dotage of idolatrie (as you terme it) or laie blindneſſe to our charge with ſuch
                  •
                monſtruous wordes. For we doe that, that is by right and reaſon ordeined, by the holie Churche approoued, by ſentence of holy Fathers determined. The goſpell, ſay you, commaundeth vs to abſteine from Images. That is true. But what muſt we vnderſtand to be ordeined by this commaundement? For ſooth this, that no man ſhould offer vp ſacrifice to Images, or for anie pretenſe of religion, make as though he did follow the errour, that was in other men. For the faithful men were

not then commaunded to ouerthrow and breake their Images, but to forſake the deteſtable Sacrifices. Moreouer, what Images were thoſe? Of Iuppiter, Apollo, Minerua, Mars, and Mercurie, and other the like Goddes, which were thought of old time to be verie true goddes in deede. But we doe neither offer vp ſacrifice vnto idols, neither doe we thinke the Images of vncleane and vicious men to be worthie of any reuerence in the world. You ſay afterward.
            
               But this feare being taken awaie, yet muſt the doctrine of Chriſt haue ful authoritie 
                     •
                  mongeſt Chriſtian men: in the which it is plainlie ſaid, that God is a ſpirite, and that the true order of praying to God is, to worſhip him in ſpirite and 
                     •
                  rewth. Of like we know not that, M. Haddon, and therefore doe we make God like a man both in bodie and mā
               ners. Would God, you had learned, what it is to worſhip God in ſpirite,

and then had you neuer fallē into ſuch vngodly opinions. You ſay, that the true ordre of praying nedeth not theſe helpes of outward thinges. Although you and ſuch as you are, hauing nowe waded ſo farre in the exerciſe of ſpiritual life, neede not theſe outwarde helpes, but may without them preſſe euen to the throne of God: yet ſhould you remembre, that there are manie, that are not yet come to ſo high a degree of heauenlie perfection as you be, and therfore haue neede to be holpen by all meanes poſsible. Not ſo, ſaie you, but raither while our owtwarde man is to muche occupied in theſe ſhadowes of holie thinges, the feruencie of the minde waxeth colde within. Not ſo, M. Haddon, but rather while the minde waxeth colde within, it is, by theſe outwarde repreſentations of holie thinges, to be ſtirred vp, to remembre thoſe thinges that were forgotten. for, as Dionyſius

teacheth vs, ſo long as we are incloſed within the frame of this bodie, and can not altogether withdrawe our minde from the acqueintance of the bodie, we are to be ſtirred vp nowe and then by bodilie Images to the remembrance of the inuiſible God. This not withſtanding you goe fore warde, and ſaie.
            
               Let vs put examples. The old Church of the Apostles and Martyrs had none of all theſe monumentes, and yet was their ſpirite moste earneſtly inflamed with the loue of God. In the wane of 
                     •
                  ure Religion pictures crope in by litle and litle, and ſo appalled in the heartes of men that former boyling heat of Religion. Not ſo ſir, but then were Images and pictures neceſſarie, to ſtirre vp againe by almeanes the feruencie of religion, which was, as you ſay, appalled. For ſo long as the Image of the Croſſe was printed and engrauē in the hearts of all men, this multitude of Images

was not ſo neceſſari
                  •
               . But you doe much like, as if a man ſhould ſay, that the remedies of diſeaſes were the cauſes of diſeaſes. for the picture did not cauſe men to forgette holie thinges: but rather it was wiſely deuiſed, that men might not forgette them. If the vſe of Images quenched, as you ſaie, that feruēcie of ſpirit, with the which men were inflamed in the olde tyme: then muſt it needes folow, that, when Images were firſt ouerthrowē of you, you were by and by verie hote in ſpirite. Tel me therefore, if it pleaſe you: When you firſt brake downe the Images, tables and other monumentes of Saintes: when you defaced them, mā
               gled them, and daſſhed them in a thouſand peeces: when you burned the relikes of the moſt holie Martyr S. Thomas: was there foorth with enkendled in you ſo great a heat as you ſpeake of? were you by and by wholly inflamed with fier from heauen? I beleeue there

fell from aboue, not onely fierie tongues, but alſo fierie heartes and bowelles, the heate and flames whereof wrought with you ſo extremely, that you are not able by any meanes to abide this ſtraūge force of loue, which burneth within you. Neither do you now liue vpon the earth, but in hearte and mind you are in heauen. For euen as vpon the ouerthrow of the authoritie of the biſhop of Rome, ther aroſe out of hand a new ſonne emōgeſt you: ſo muſt it nedes folow, that vpon the pulling downe of Images, vppon the breaking of the monumentes of Chriſt crucified, vpon the digging vp of the graue of the holy Martyr, and burning of his bones: you cōceiued foorth with ſuch a fier of heauenly loue in your bowelles, that there is nothing in the world to be ſeene in your heartes, but only that ſame hoat and ſierie loue of God. If it be ſo, I commend the vehemencie of your ſpirite, I allowe your

doing, I thinke, this worthie acte of yours deſerueth immortall fame and honour. for what ſo euer quencheth the feruencie of the ſpirite, what ſo euer doth any thing breake or weaken the force of loue, it would be put back with the whole bent of the hart. Neither ought we to beare anie thing in the world, that might cauſe a dulnes or ſlakenes in the minde. But if it be nothing ſo, if, after the breaking downe and defacing of the goodlie monumentes of vertue, you were not inflamed by and by with fier from heauen: then it is moſt euident, that the Images and reliques of holie men buried vnder the grownde, did nothing hinder you from that feruent loue of God. Whie then, what (the diuell) madnes came into your heads, that you ſhould be ſo earneſtly bent to make a waſte and ſpoile of thinges, whereof you could take no commoditie in the worlde?
            
               
At the length, you ſpeake verie earneſtly (as you doe often) againſt the diuinitie of the ſchoole doctours, wherin I can not much blame you: for you haue good cauſe to be offended with them, whoſe whole drifte both of mindes and diſputation is altogether againſt you. For they haue receiued a pure and true Doctrine from holie men: you haue taken a pudlie and ſtinking doctrine of moſt wicked perſons. They are bound to the verie auncient Religion, that was deliuered from the Apoſtles: you falling from the auncient religion, are wickedly flitted to this new fangled ſecte. They, for the moſt part of them, doe worſhip Chriſt with honeſt conuerſation and vpright cōſcience: but you haue done and ſpoken manie thinges verie impudentlie and raſhly, to the reproche and diſhonour of Chriſt. Nowe whereas you impute the cauſe of Images to them, you ſhew your ſelfe to be not only very

ſhameleſſe, but alſo very witleſſe. 
                  •
               or you doe not accompt emongeſt the ſchoole Doctours Cyrillus or Athanaſius, or Ierome, or Ambroſe, or Auguſtine. Whome then? Dowbtleſſe ſuch as folowed Petrus Lombardus, and beganne manie yeares after his tyme to expound openly in ſchooles his Sentences (as they cal them) gathered out of the bookes of the holie Fathers, and brought into one volume. Petrus Lō
               bardus flouriſhed about the yeare of our Lord. 1141. And the ſecond Councel of Nice was kept in the yeare. 781. Neither was it firſte decreed in that coūcel, that Images ſhuld be ſet vp, but that they ſhould not be pulled down. And the herefie of ſuch as would haue them to be ouerthrowen, was there condemned by the ful agreement of al the fathers. Of the which errour, as it appeared by the teſtimonials brought into the Councel, the firſte brochers were certaine Manichees and Marcioniſtes.

It was there declared at that time, by the authoritie of Baſile, Gregorie of Niſſa, Cyril, Ierom, Auguſtin, and by the cuſtome receiued in the Church euen from the Apoſtles time: that the Images of Chriſt, of his moſt bleſſed Mother, and of other holie men had ben ſet vp, vpon a great good conſideration, to call the mindes of men continually to remēbre the goodnes of God. In the ſelfe ſame Councel alſo, was read an oratiō of Athanaſius, of a miracle, whiche was wrought at Berith a citie of Syria, when certaine Iewes pearced the Image of Chriſte with a ſpeare. For out of the wound flowed out bloud, whervpō the Iewes were turned vnto Chriſte. And although in the Apoſtles time, ſuche ſignes were nothing neceſſarie, and as then it was not lawful through the tyrannie of Princes to builde Churches, and to bewtifie them with comely ornaments: yet doe the auncient monumentes

declare, that euen at that time The Image of the Croſſe. 
                     •
                  
               there was ſome vſe of Images. As for the Images of the Croſſe, there is no doubt, for ſo much as the moſt aunciēt monumentes both of Aethiopia and India make mention of them.
            In that part of India, which is within the riuers Indus and Ganges towardes the eaſt, there is a towne called Mailapur, and belongeth to the great kingdō of Narſingua, where the bodie of S. Thomas was buried. Ther, not many yeares ago, was digged out by the prouidēce of God a great Croſſe made of ſtone: whoſe top and both ſides, an arke hewen out of the ſame ſtone couered: wherein were engrauen letters of verie great antiquitie, whiche no man could reade but ſuch as were lerned in the aunciēt letters of the Bracmans. The meaning of the letters, as it was afterwardes founde, was a ſtorie of the death of S. Thomas: whiche declared, howe a holie man named

Thomas, in the time of King Sangam ruler of thoſe landes, was ſent of the ſonne of God to viſite thoſe countreis, and to bring the people vnto the knowledge of God: and how the ennemies of religion crucified him vpon the ſame Croſſe▪ And the Croſſe euen at this daie is ſmeared with ſpottes of bloud.
            Euſebius alſo writeth, that, in a citie called Philips Ceſarea, there was a braſen Image of Chriſt ſet vpō a foote, of a good heith, and before it an other Image of a woman▪ the whiche being ſometime ſicke of a bloudie fluxe, was cured by the benefit of our Lord. This Image was made in manner of a woman ſuppliaunt and holding vppe her handes vnto the Image of Chriſt. He declareth furthermore, that neere vnto the 
                  •
               oote of the ſaid Image there was wont to growe a certaine kind of herbe, the which when it was growē ſo high, that it touched the hemme of

the garment of Chriſt, it conceiued a great vertue, and was verie ſoueraigne againſt diuers and ſundrie diſeaſes. The ſelfe ſame Euſebius reporteth, that he him ſelfe had ſeene the Images of the Apoſtles excellently wel painted, the which manner he cōmendeth highly.
            It is alſo writen that Conſtantine the Emperour ſawe in a viſion Peter and Paule, whoſe Images when he beheld afterwarde, being ſhewed vnto him by Sylueſter the Pope, reſembling in al pointes that, that he had ſeene, he was excedingly aſtoined.
            What ſaie you M. Haddon? Are you not aſhamed of your ignorance? It is euident, that there were Images ſet vp in places of common reſort, euē in the times of holie men (which you graunt to be happie tymes) eſpecially after it was lawful to buyld great and ſumptuous Churches: it is euidēt, that they were miſliked and reſiſted of verie olde heretikes, and worthely mainteined

by moſt excellent men both for holines and learning: finally it is euidēt that the ſecond Councel of Nice accurſed and excōmunicated al ſuche as dyd condemne the Images of holie men, and the monumētes of Chriſt: and wil you vnaduiſedly aſcribe the cauſe, and original of them vnto the ſchooledoctours, which beganne to diſpute of diuinitie in ſchooles manie yeares, yea many hundred yeares after that tyme? what dulnes is this? what negligence? what ignorance of antiquitie? But to let paſſe your ignorance in ſtories, what maie be ſaid of your vndiſcreete boldnes in theſe your doinges? For whereas Images are ſo effectuall in bringing vs to the remembrance of thinges, that euē thei that reade bokes continually, that ſerue God with great feruencie, that may be brought to remembre heauenly thinges by many other monumentes, yet are they cheerfully preuoked to the loue of godlines,

by looking vpon the outward ſignes of heauēly thinges, and Images of holie men: what came into your heades, to pul away frō the vnlearued people, which haue not ſo many ſtaies to lean vnto, theſe healpes and ſuccour of memorie, theſe monumentes of perfecte religion? For (to paſſe ouer with ſilēce al other monumentes) where ſhal you find one emongeſt an hundred, that is not moued by looking vpō the Image of Chriſt nailed on the Croſſe? that is not inwardly ſtirred to deuotiō by the remembrance of ſo great goodnes and mercie of God? that is not ſometime wholly molten and reſolued into teares? Wherefore then will you take awaie from the vnlearned and weake, this goodlie healpe, with the whiche, the learned them ſelues, yea and ſuche as are well hardened in the exerciſe of godlineſſe, are oftentimes moued? Eſpecially, for ſo much as you are neuer the feruenter in faith and

charitie, after this your ſo honorable an enterpriſe, for the which you take ſo much vpon you.
            But how wittily you conclude all this queſtion with a twoforked argument, ſaying, that our pictures, if the ſpirite be preſent, neede not: if it be abſent, they boote not. Not ſo ſir, but if the ſpirite be preſent, they doe no hurt, if it be abſent, thei maie do much good. For what ſo euer reneweth in vs the remembrance of the goodnes and mercie of God, profitteth vs not a litle, and prepareth the waie verie wel to atteine to the grace of the ſpirite it ſelfe.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND BOOKE.
            
            
               IN good faith I am aſhamed to vſe ſo many wordes in the confutation of that your booke, for the which you ſtoode ſo muche in your owne conceite. But for ſo much as you haue hudled vp together ſo manie thinges in it, whiche I muſt nedes laie abrode ech thing by it ſelfe, I could not compriſe ſo manie and ſo diuers pointes of vngodlines and hereſie in fewe wordes.
            But to come vnto other matters, you meruaile, that I ſhould lament in thoſe my letters, that all holie thinges, ceremonies, godlie cuſtumes, ſolemne feaſtes, and Sacramentes of Religion were vtterly decaied. You ſaie therefore. What doe I heare? Is it like that

there ſhould liue anie kind of profeſſours of Diuinitie in the Chriſtian worlde, the which would vtterly aboliſh holy things, ceremonies, and all Sacramentes of the Churche? By theſe your wordes, M. Haddon, a man maie coniecture, that it were ſuch a horrible acte to doe it, that the verie remembrance of it maketh you to tremble and quake. For you thinke it a thing impoſsible, that anie man (which is called by the name of a Chriſtian) ſhoulde be ſo wicked and barbarous, ſo farre from true faith and religion, ſo ſpitefully bent againſt al godlines, that he would goe abowt to diſhoneſt, to depraue, to corrupte and deface the ſolemne cuſtumes of the Churche, the religious vſage of holie thinges, the inuiolable reuerence of ceremonies. Looke what you graūt vs we take it, and we thinke you to be worthie of no meane commendation, bicauſe you thinke that their offence is not meane, which do deſpiſe

auncient ceremonies. Otherwiſe you would not haue aſked with a certaine admiration, whether there were anie kind of profeſſours of Diuinitie in the Chriſtian worlde, that would commit an offence ſo wicked and barbarous. And although you vſed craft, wheras you ſaied, that the ceremonies were not al ouerthrowen) as though it were no fault to take awaie ſome, and to retaine ſome): yet I doubt not, but when it ſhal appeere euidētly, that the verie principal ſacramentes haue ben quite ouerthrowē by ſuch as beare the name of Chriſtian men, it ſhal ſeeme euen to you a very horrible offence. You meruel (and not without cauſe) at the gretnes of their heinouſe act. But I meruail excedingly, not at the wicked acte of a ſort of deſperat felowes, but at the foly of a graue and wiſe mā. What ſay you? Are you only ignorāt in al Chriſtendō, what hath ben done? Are you only a ſtraūger and vnacqueinted in matters

ſo notoriouſly well knowen? Heard you neuer ſaie, how Luther a paſsing holie man (as you thinke) hath geauen a prowd ſaie to plucke awaie al the ſacramentes of the church? Neither can it be ſaied, that he keepeth the ſacramētes, the which wickedly and lewdly appaireth the vertue and ſtrength of them. If you neuer vnderſtoode this, what ſaie you to that? heard you neuer tel, that Carolſtadius, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, and laſt of all your owne Martyr (to paſſe ouer a great nombre of others) did rent and teare the bleſſed Sacrament of the aulter with moſt vile and reprochful wordes? It is like you neuer heard of it. For how had it ben poſsible, that M. Haddon a chaſt and vpright man, a mā moſt zealouſly bent towardes religion, (if he had vnderſtoode, that Peter Martyr had ben diſteined with ſo fowle a crime) could haue fownd in his heart, I ſaie not to commend him, but only

               
haue anie ſtrength or power towardes ſaluation: it is not poſsible, that anie thing ſhoulde healpe towardes ſaluation, whiche is void of the grace and mercie of Chriſt. But Luther denieth, that the grace of Chriſt is procured by them. Wherupō it foloweth, that ther is conteined in them no ſownd fruicte of iuſtification, but onlie bare Images and tokens. And therfore it is to no purpoſe for you to keepe them, if you beleeue Luther. But bicauſe it were tedious to make a diſcourſe vpon all the reſt of the Sacramētes I wil ſpeake only of two, which are of gret weight and importaunce towardes ſaluation. The one is the confeſsion of ſynnes, wherin is conteined the ſacrament of penaunce: (it maie pleaſe your fine and piked eloquence to beare with theſe termes of plaine ſchoolemen) the other is the Sacrament of the Aulter.
            
               Confeſſion. And to ſpeake ſomewhat firſt of Confeſsion, I ſaie and affirme, that there is no remedie appointed in the

Church ſo effectuall to put awaie the diſeaſes of the ſowle, and to recouer the health thereof by the grace of Chriſt, as confeſsion is. The whiche we prooue by reaſon, and trie alſo by daile experience. I ſaie nothing here, how in the time of the old lawe, in the ſacrifices which were oftentimes offered vp for the purgation of ſynnes, there was a certaine confeſsion of vnclene Num. 5. alife made vnto the Prieſtes. Neither do I think it needefull to rehearſe in this place, how erneſtly ſuch ascame to the baptiſme of Iohn, did firſt confeſſe Math. 3. btheir ſinnes. Neither wil I declare as now what is writen in the Actes of the Apoſtles as towching cōfeſsion of Act. 19. d.ſynnes, which was made vnto the diſciples of Chriſte by ſuche as became Chriſtians. That commaundemēt alſo of S. Iames concerning confeſsion I Iacob. 5. dwil paſſe ouer with ſilence. Neither wil I here alleage thoſe place in the which Chriſt hath moſt vndowbtedly

committed the rule and iuriſdictiō of ſowles vnto the Prieſtes, the whiche, as you know verie well by the ſtudie of the law, can not be executed, without The profit of cō
                  feſsion.the examination of the cauſe. This one thing wil I ſaie, that the profitte of this wholeſome cōfeſsion is ſo great, that anie wiſe man maie eaſily coniecture, without anie teſtimonials, that it was ordeined by the prouident wil and bowntiful mercie of the holie Ghoſte. For firſt of al, how muche the knowledge of euerie mans owne ſelfe auaileth to ſaluation, it can not wel be expreſſed with wordes. For euen as ſelfe ignorāce blindeth the mind with errours, and maketh it prowd and inſolent: ſo doth the remembrance of the wekenes and miſerie of man bring men to the learning of wiſedome. Furthermore, for ſo much as no man can atteine the grace of God, except he doe firſte lowly abbaſe and plucke downe his minde: there is nothing to

be regarded with greater care, ſtudie, and diligence of ſuch as deſire to get the grace of Chriſt, then a moſt feruent loue and earneſt deſire to come vnto this vertue of humilitie, in the Humilitiewhich reſteth the verie foundatiō of Chriſtian pietie. And this humilitie is cauſed in vs by ſetting before our eyes the deformitie of our ſynnes, by ſhame which riſeth in vs by beholding the ilfauourednes of then, by dew conſideratiō of the daunger, into the which we ranne headlong. But al theſe things are conteined in the confeſsion of our wickednes and ſynnes. For confeſsion conteineth in it ſelfe a diſcrete examinatiō and acknowleging of our ſelues, a learning of humilitie and modeſtie, a baſhful rehearſal of the ſynne committed, a feare of the daunger hanging ouer our heades. By this confeſsion, ſuch as lie downe, are ſtirred vp: ſuche as be faint, are cheered foreward: ſuch as be prowd, are pulled downe: ſuch as

be vnlearned, are inſtructed wyth wholeſome leſſons. And this is well knowen, that when the time draweth nere in the which confeſsion is to be made, men are more modeſt and cōtinent then at other times. And the harder it is to bring manie men vnto it, the better it is ſeene, that it was orderned by the prouidence of God. For whereas there is naturally in al men a certaine loue of honeſtie, and a careful deſire to conceale diſhoneſtie, no man could be brought to open the deformitie of his ſinnes vnto Prieſtes, vnleſſe he were driuen therevnto by order, diſpoſition, power and wil of the holie Ghoſt. Moreouer what ſtronger bridle can be deuiſed to aſſwage and repreſſe the haughtineſſe of men of power, to reſtreigne and moderate their raſh and wilfull preſumpteouſnes? For we ſee the higheſt Princes, when they haue caſte them ſelues downe at the feete of the Prieſtes, to

be ſore afraied of their rebukes, to be reſtreigned by their lawes, to be inſtructed by their aduertiſementes, to be reclaimed by their commaundemētes frō vnlawfull luſt and libertie to good order and ciuilitie. This Sacramēt cauſeth The effectes of cōfeſsion.baſhfulnes, it draweth out teares, yt endeth aduouteries, yt reſtoreth money embeſeled, it quencheth hatred, yt maketh peace, yt quieteth rage, it ſetteth in comelie order the whole conuerſation of the inwarde man. But now, if a man not contenting him ſelfe to be confeſſed once in the yeare, wil oftentimes confeſſe all the vncleanes of his minde, wil examine his conſcience diligently, to the end that he maie cōfeſſe with the greter fruict, wil keepe an earneſt battaile againſt ſynne: he ſhal ſee a dailie amē
               demēt in him ſelf, with a more cleane, chaſt and vpright conuerſation. I take Ieſus Chriſt my Lord and my God to witneſſe, that by the often coming

to this moſt wholeſome confeſsion I haue riſen and eſcaped from a meruelous nombre of ſinnes. In ſo much that, if I haue at anie time repreſſed the pleſure of the fleſh, if I haue deſpiſed vncleane luſtes, if I haue ben earneſtly bent towardes the loue of chaſt life, if I haue ben enkēdled with anie ſparcle of the loue of God: I maie thanke this Sacrament of it, by the whiche the holie Ghoſt hath imparted vnto me a great deale of his mercie and goodnes. Neither haue I only receiued this ſo great commoditie of confeſsion, but whome ſo euer I do ſee geauen to this moſt holie exerciſe, (of the whiche there is a meruelouſe numbre emongeſt vs) I perceiue that they are deliuered from al worldlie pleaſures, that they flouriſh in all vertues, and that they become better and better dailie, to the gréat wonder of manie men.
            And this is that, that moueth me to vſe moſte earneſt perſwaſions with my

ſubiectes, to induce them to reſort oftentimes to confeſsion: wherof I receiue no ſmal profitte. For manie of them haue nowe withdrawen them ſelues from the companie of vnchaſt women, manie haue remoued them ſelues from exactinge of vſurie, manie haue recōciled them ſelues vnto ſuch, as they did beare mortal hatred vnto. And I know, that emongeſt vs, many worthie Biſhops both for learning and vertue doth the like. Neither are we ſuch as can contēt our ſelues with the confeſsion of ſynnes only, but we require alſo the fruictes of penance, the whiche we are wont to call ſatisfactions, Satisfaction.how ſo euer it pleſe your maiſters to ſcorne and ſcoffe at that word. But beleeue me, we are nothing troubled with the laughter of vngodlie mē. We herken to S. Iohn, which commaūded ſuch as had alreadie confeſſed their ſynnes to doe the worthy fruictes of Math. 3. 
                  
                     •
                  
               penāce. We willingly receiue the ſelfe

ſame wordes pronownced and repeted by that moſt high maiſter of iuſtice, the redeemer of mankind. For while we obei the commaundemētes of Chriſte, we ſo litle eſteeme the tauntes and ſcoffes of lewd felowes, that we are not only not moued with their reprochful talke, but alſo we reioiſe excedingly in it.
            Now then, ſeing that this ſacramēt is of ſo great importaunce to ſaluatiō, ſeing that we ſee ſo great fruicte to be gathered out of it, if we doe feruently deſire the ſaluation of al men: can you blame me, if I ſorow and lament, that this great gate of ſaluatiō is cloſed vp to manie Chriſtians through the lewdnes and miſbelefe of a few men? I talk not with you now, for ſo much as you kepe, as you ſaie your ſelfe, the ſacramentes of the Churche. But if ſome man of an other diſpoſition ſhal be ſo crewell and vngodlie, that he wil attempte

to damme vp this waie to ſaluation, caſting before it piles or heapes of earth, wil you ſuffer it? Will you, ſeeing ſuch a deteſtable offence, ſo refraine your ſelfe, that you wil not crie out vpon it? Blame not me then, if I doe, as you your ſelfe wil doe, if it be true, that you ſaie, that you doe keepe and obſerue diligently the ſacramētes of the church. But if you ſpeake otherwiſe then truth, I will not much meruaile at it, for your doctours are excellent framers, not only of impietie, but alſo of vanitie.
            But you will ſaye peraduenture, that muche euyll and myſchiefe ariſeth by the occaſion of this confeſſion. If it be ſo, it is not muche to be merueiled at. For there is nothing in the worlde ſoo holye, the whiche men agreed in wickedneſſe maie not abuſe to naughtines and miſchiefe. But it foloweth not by and by, that for the defaulte of a fewe lewde

perſonnes, thinges ordeined of God for the ſaluation of men ſhould be vtterly caſt awaie. For ſo, ther had ben no good thing left this daie in the worlde. For al thinges, that are by nature wholeſome, are vnto corrupt and vicious men hurtful and peſtilent. And to let paſſe all other thinges, howe manie men are wont to abuſe the verie mercie of God, when he differreth to puniſh them for ſynne, to the increaſe of their damnation? And yet is not God for all that remoued from his good will and purpoſe to deale mercifully with vs.
            But ſome will ſaie: we confeſſe vnto God only. Yea, but God, for ſo much as he can not be perfectely ſeene of vs, hath appointed his Deputies vpon the earth, to exerciſe his authoritie and iuriſdiction, to threaten and feare, to geaue gentle admonitions, to incourage, to raiſe vppe, to geaue ſentence: in ſo muche that, who ſo

ſo euer doth deſpiſe them, are to be taken (and that for great good cauſe) as though they did deſpiſe God him ſelf, and refuſe his order and commaundemēt. Furthermore it were dāgerous to leaue euerie man to his owne wil in this caſe. For howe manie ſhall you find, that ſhalbe able to ſearch out and conſider their owne ſynnes? that wil confeſſe them with ſuch ſhamefaſtnes and contrition of heart, as Dauid ſaith is a moſte acceptable Sacrifice vnto God? that wil geaue ſentence lawfully vpon them ſelues, for that they are in their owne cauſes verie parciall iudges? It remaineth therefore, that he, that lyueth not vnder the obedience of the Church, and wil not abide the iudgement of a Prieſte: neither would he at anie tyme be confeſſed of his ſynnes vnto God, as he ought to be▪ Dowbtleſſe Baſile the great ſawe ful wel, what profitte ariſeth by this confeſsion, when in his Ethikes he aſcribed

vnto it the very beginning and foundation of iuſtice. So thought Origen, when he willed vs that we ſhuld not delaie it from daie to daie: but ſo ſoone as we were fallen, we ſhould foorthwith haue recourſe vnto the Prieſt. Such was the iudgement of all holie men, the which exhort vs ſo often to this godly exerciſe. Neither did the biſhop of Rome firſt ordeine this Sacrament: but being before ordeined and commonly receiued, he decreed verie prouidently, that it ſhould be put in vre at the leaſt once in the yeare, leſt it might be neglected to the great decaie of godlines.
            But to cōclude this matter, I would faine learne of you, howe you thinke Eſai. 1
                        •
                     . b.that place of Eſaie to be vnderſtanded, where he ſaieth, that it ſhall come to paſſe after the birth of Chriſte, that a wained child ſhal thruſt his hand into the Cockatriſe hole, and pul him out. If you wil folow the Iewes, you ſhall

vnderſtand it thus: that euen as the Poetes reporte, that Hercules being yet in his cradle caught twoo great ſnakes that were ſent vnto him by Iuno, and daſht them together: ſo ſhal euery ſucking babe take venemous ſerpentes in his handes out of their holes and kil them. But if you wil expound the place like a Chriſtian man, by the children you muſte vnderſtande thoſe menne, to whome Chriſte hath geauen power to treade vppon ſerpentes and ſcorpions, that is to ſaie, vppon the beaſtlines of ſynnes, vpon the crafte and creweltie of Diuelles, that lie lurking in the ſecrete couerte of ſowles. And although they be ſimple as children, yet are they endewed with ſuche great power and ſtrength, that they can eaſilie pull owt thoſe vipers out of the moſte priuie corners and innermoſt creekes of mennes heartes and kill them, that they may not infecte and poiſon ſuch,

as haue ioyned them ſelues to Chriſt by earneſt and true faith. Nowe this thing as it maie be done of the Prieſtes of Chriſt manie waies, ſo there can no waie be deuiſed by anie wiſe man more commodious then that, whiche is by the wholeſome confeſsion of ſynnes. for in confeſsion the Prieſtes doe thruſt their handes into the innermoſt partes of mens heartes, that they may draw out the ſerpentes of ſynne, and daſſh them againſt a ſtone, and kil them.
            
               The Sacrament of the Aulter. But now let vs come to that wonderful Sacrament of the Aulter. But before I enter into this matter, it liketh me to ſet here a goodlie ſaying of Simias written of Plato in his booke intituled Pho
                  •
               do. Plato bringeth in Simias reaſoning thus with Socrates. Me thinketh, Socrates, as I iudge you think alſo, that it is impoſsible, or ſurely exceding hard, for a man, ſo long as he is in this life, to vnderſtand the truthe

cl
                  •
               rely and perfectely. The which although it be true, yet me thinketh it were the parte of a weake and faint hearted man, not to diſcuſſe and examine by reaſoning on both ſides, what ſo euer is wont to be diſputed in theſe darke matters, vntil at the length, the matter being diligently weyed and conſidered, we may be able either to lerne the truth of other, or els to find it our ſelues. If we can not atteine vnto this, yet at the leſt wiſe, we muſt haue great regard, emongeſt the reaſons of diuers men to take ſome one that ſeemeth better and ſurer: with the which as it were with a boate we maie gouerne our life in theſe waues with ſome daunger, vntil we may either find an other ſhip of more aſſurance and leſſe daunger, or els be inſtructed by the wordes and aduiſe of God him ſelfe, how to directe our courſe without anie errour. Thus much ſaid he. But to what purpoſe, ſay you, haue

you alleaged this place out of Plato? That you may vnderſtand, that men of excellent wits did euen in thoſe daies perceiue, how litle we ought to truſt to mās reaſon, and how earneſtly we ought to praie, that our life might be gouerned, not by the ſtaie of our owne wit, but by the rule of the woorde of God. So we doe, ſay you. Would God ye did. But it is not ſo. But rather when it is leſt cōuenient, you wil weakē reaſon and take it awaie quite, and runne like mad mē into darkenes: againe whē reaſon is to be bridled by the faith of Chriſt, you yeald ſo much to reaſon, that what ſo euer reaſon is not able to atteyne, you will foorth with geaue it ouer. Now for ſomuch as reaſon is driuen into a narrowe and ſtreight roome, and the boundes of Chriſtian faith are paſsing great and endles: it is a token not onely of a naughtie and wicked man, but alſo of a blunt and dul wit, to directe his life, not by faith,

but by reaſon. For what man a liue is able to trie out perfectly the cauſes of the leſt thinges in the worlde? to deſcribe exactely the firſt ſpring, the increaſe, the varietie, the beawtie, the fruict, the profitte and vſe of trees and plātes? to expreſſe in wordes the ordre and waie, by the which eche thing in his kinde is holdē together and made to cōtinue? what man in the world is able to atteine by wit, to ſearch out the ſecret force and cauſe, how a liuing thīg is made, nouriſhed and knit together with bones and ſinewes? by what cū
               ning or ſubtilty the vaines are ſpread through the whole body, how the arteries are ſo wonderfully wouen one within an other, and how they do cō
               uey the ſpirite of life to al the partes of the body, being ſo meruelouſly accorded the one to ſerueth' other▪ ād ſo finely cōpacted together within thēſelues. Then to come to the nouriſhment, increaſe, mouīg, goīg, diuerſity, ād multitude

of liuing thinges, and the naturall knowledge and pollicie that ech thing hath to keepe and defend it ſelfe: what man was euer able to find out by vndoubted reaſons the very ground and perfecte knowledge of theſe thinges? Great learned men haue diſputed verie much as touching the mind of mā: of the nature, diſpoſition, wit, reaſon, inuention, memorie, and other powers of it: but of al this diſputation we receiue none other commoditie but this, that we may wel perceiue by their long ſtudie and diligent ſearch, howe great darkenes and ignoraunce there is in mans reaſon. For we ſee in them a goodlie endeuour of mind to conſider the nature of mans mind: but of the perfecte knowledge of the thing, which thev ſeeke for, we are neuer the neere. Wherevpon it is gathered, that no man is able to know him ſelfe perfectly.
            And yet there are ſome men ſo hard

that, if a thing be tolde them, which is wont to grow or to be done in farre Countries, they wil not beleue it: as though the thinges whiche they ſee with their eyes, and yet are ignorant of the cauſes, were leſſe to be wō
               dred at, then thoſe thinges, which are reported to be done in other places. But now to omit to ſpeake of the firmnes of the earth, the paſsing great widnes of the ſea, the nature of the ayer that enuironeth vs, the burning of the ſkie, the due proportion and agreemēt of theſe bodies, the chaunge and alteration of one nature into an other as it were by courſe and order of Lawe: What ſhall we ſaie of the brightneſſe, bewtie, hugenes, and compaſſe of the heauen? You, if ye leane vnto reaſon onely, what woulde you haue done in this caſe? Ymagine you had ben borne and bred in the darke countries of Cimeria (as the Poetes feine) and ſome man had tolde you, that there were a

huge greate frame conteining within his compaſſe al the whole world, meruelouſlie decked and garniſhed with many fiers, of ſuch hugenes that al the landes and ſeas in compariſon of it, are but as a pinnes point, of ſuch ſwiftnes in mouinge, that within the ſpace of fower and twentie howers it turneth the whole bodie round about, of ſuch force and violence, that ſeuen other huge bodies of the ſame nature, which are conteined within his compaſſe, hauinge a contrarye courſe, it beareth them al backe with his onely mouing, if a manne ſhoulde tell you this tale, would you beleeue him? No truly, if you truſt onely to reaſon and ſenſes.
            For ſo would you perſwade your ſelues, that the thinges, the cauſes wherof vou are not able to conceiue, were impoſsible, (before you ſee them with your eyes).
            What if he ſhoulde tell you of the ſonne ſhine, a thing both healthful and

comfortable to al liuing creatures, and of the goodly order, which the ſonne keepeth in goinge by litle and litle towards the North, and again how he returneth by the ſame way to the ſouth, caſting his bright beames vpō al things in the world? What if he ſhould report how the moone with her increaſe and decreaſe diuideth the times of the yere and how ſhe geueth ripenes to al thīgs which the land and ſea bringeth forth? What if he ſhould declare, how diuerſlie the heauenly bodies aboue are moued and tourned, and how notwithſtanding they are all reduced to a moſt perfecte harmonie and agreemente? Would you beleeue it? No truely, if you can be perſwaded in nothing, except it may either be proued by reaſon, or perceiued by ſenſe.
            It is ſurely a token of a baſe mind to eſteme the knowlege of things, by the narrow and ſtreight meaſure of mans vnderſtanding, and not according to

the almighty power of him that made them. And out of this dulnes or weaknes of nature procedeth al ſuch opinions, as are contrary to holy Religion. For all heretikes, either they eſteeme the almightie power of God by their owne weakenes, or els they meaſure the infinite mercie of God by their own naughtines. As though thei were able to make any reſemblance in the world of the power of God, or vnderſtand how great the goodnes is of that moſte bountifull Father, whiche doth with ſpecial regard, as it were, walke vp and downe throughout al his creatures, and prouidētly mainteineth eche thing in his kinde and nature. And to paſſe ouer all other thinges, me thinketh, that in that laſt geuing of ſhape and fourme to euery liuing thing, I ſee a miracle, which ſheweth plainly the power and cūning of that moſt excellent workeman, in whoſe handes the liuing creature was made and faſhioned.

Neither dothe the multitude of liuing thinges miniſh the eſtimation of Gods worke, but rather augment and increaſe it. For the benefites of almightie God, the more they are in number, and the better they are knowen, the better is the greatnes of his power and mercy ſene, although the reaſon of his workes be not vnderſtood. What ſhal I here ſpeake of thoſe thinges, that are for the excellency of their nature farre aboue the ſenſe and vnderſtanding of man? Who wil beleue that there is an infinite multitude of heauenly ſpirites, whiche being of vnderſtanding moſte cleere, of holines moſt pure, of vertue and power very excellent, of comelines and bewty moſt like vnto God, are alwaies occupied in the Seruice of God? euermore ſinging and praiſing his Maieſtie, continually burning with the flame of the loue of God? What? Can you conceiue by reaſon, how the only ſonne of God, the veri expreſſe Image

of the Father, the brightnes of ouerlaſting light, being equal with the Father in nature, power, kingdome, and maieſtie: toke vpon him the ſhape of man, ſuffered in his mortal bodie labour, miſery, puniſhment for vs, redemed with his bloud our ſoules which were fouly ſpotted in ſinne? If theſe thinges are to be weyed by mans reaſon onely, they are nothing like to be true: but if we will conſider them according to the faith, which we haue of the bowntiful goodnes of God, there is nothing more credible. For paſsing great benefits are to be required and loked for of paſsing great bountie. He that ſpared not (ſaith Rom. 8. f.S. Paul) his owne ſonne, but gaue him vp for vs al: How gaue he not vnto vs al things with him? Wherfore to ſuch as beleue vprightly, I thinke ther is nothing els nedeful to be conſidered, but how the thing, that they are willed to beleue, ſtandeth with the bountie of God: the which doing, it is not poſſible

that any man ſhould doubt of any myſterie of our ſaluation.
            Theſe thinges being thus determined, I will now talke, not with you, M. Haddon, of whome, as you ſaie, the Sacramentes of the Churche are kepte: butte I will take ſoome one of them to talke withall, that rayleth with blaſphemouſe mouth againſt the bleſſed Sacramente of the Aulter.
            And bicauſe I wil ſeeke no further, let it be your golden Martyr, whom you commend ſo highlie. Ymagine therefore, that I talke with him after this ſorte.
            O moſte vile and naughtie felowe, what came into thy minde to go about to deface, to violate, and to depraue that moſte holy Myſterie, the monumente of the loue of God towardes vs, the comforte of our banniſhment, the ſtaie of the frailtie of manne, the bankette of heauen, ordeyned for vs in that laſt Supper by the handes of

Our Lord him ſelfe? Was there none in ſo many hundred yeres but thou and thy Maiſters, that durſt attempt ſo heinouſe, vile, and barbarouſe an acte? Was there none that vnderſtoode the ſenſe of the holie Scripture, the meaning of the Goſpell, the order of the bleſſed Sacramentes, but you? Were ſo many holy Martyrs, ſo many Religious perſons, ſo many great wiſe men (in whome ſhone the beames of the brightnes of God) ignorant in matters of ſo great importance? It is like forſooth, that the light of the holie Ghoſt ſhewed it ſelfe firſt vnto ſuche ſaucie, deſperate, raſh and preſumptuous varlettes, as you are, and ſuffered ſo many thouſandes of holie and vertuous men to lye in darkenes and ignorance. Tel me, I pray thee, what great thing had Chriſt done for vs, if at what time he determined to leaue to his Diſciples a ſpeciall pleadge of his loue towardes thē, he had left them nothing els, but a

bare remembrance of his death in the conſecration of that bread? It had ben a ſigne only, meet to be nūbred em
                  •
               
               geſt thoſe that you defaced and ouerthrew, and nothing worthie to be celebrated with ſo great reuerēce of that moſte holie and euerlaſting Prieſte. Moreouer I wold faine learne of thee, whether it be a wicked offence to call to remembrance the death of Chriſte, ſo long as a man is in ſinne? No truly, but cōtrariwiſe we can deuiſe no better medicine, then that is, to driue awai ſinne, and to recouer our health by the grace of Chriſt. What moued S. Paul then, if there be nothing elles in this ſacrament, but only a bare remembrāce of that death that Chriſt ſuffred vpon the Croſſe, to threaten ſo grieuous and horrible paines to ſuche, as woulde receiue this heauēly bread vnworthily? 1. Cor. 1
                     •
                  . 4.Who ſo euer ſhall eate, ſaieth he, the bread, and drinke the cup of our Lord vnworthylie, ſhal be giltie. What? Is

it ſuch a greiuous offence, when I am ſicke, to thinke vpon the medicine, with the which only I may be healed? What other thing did I, when I receiued that bread, (if there be nothing els in it, but a remēbrance of thoſe woūds, by the which only my wounds may be healed) but cal to remēbraunce the only remedy of life? Wilt thou blame me, when I am ſicke, bicauſe I ſeeke the remedie of my diſeaſe, and humblie call for ſuccour? Thou canſt not do it. And yet▪ if I receiue that, bread vnworthily, that is to ſay, as thou expoundeſt it, if I remember being in ſynne, that Chriſt ſuffered death and crewel tormentes for me: S. Paule maketh me terribly afraid, by charging me with a crime. But with what a crime I pray thee? Some light or cōmon crime peraduēture, the which offendeth not verie much. No, ſuch a crime as is of al other moſt heinouſe 1. Co. 
                  
                     •
                  1. f.
               and wicked. He ſhalbe giltle, ſaieth he, of the bodie and bloude of our

Lorde, that is to ſay, he ſhalbe gyltie of no leſſe crime, then if he had crucified Chriſt. For what cauſe? Bicauſe as the wicked ſouldiers, pricked forewarde with vnbeleefe, put to death the Lord and maker of al thinges: ſo do they, that preſume to touch with vncleane mindes that moſte excellent cleanes, ſeeme to bring vpon them ſelues the ſelfe ſame plague for the likenes of their heinouſe offence. For bothe of them do alike deſpiſe Chriſte, and vnreuerently abuſe his holines and maieſty. For otherwiſe what harme were it to ſynful men to receiue that bread? None at al. The Apoſtle therfore, bicauſe he ſawe, how grieuouſe a faulte it was, to touch the bodie of our Lord with an vncleane ſoule, denoūced the puniſhment, to fray al men from doing ſuch a pr
                  •
               ſumptuous acte. And therefore he ſaith anon after: Let a manne firſt trie him ſelfe, and ſo eate of that 1. Co. 11. g.
               breade, and drinke of that cuppe.
            
               
               Mat. 26. e Mar. 14. c Luc. 22. b. 
                     •
                  . Co. 11. c. And, what can be more plaine then the wordes of our Lord? This is, ſaith he, my bodie: and doe this in remembrance of me. How then? Wilt thou preſume to take the wordes of Chriſt, being nothing doubtful, but plaine and euident, and expoūd them maliciuſly? Wilt thou ſet the meaning of S. Paul at naught, which expoūdeth the myſte rie exceeding plainly and wel? Wilt thou preferre this thy vnſetled fantaſie and mad gare, before the moſt ſincere meaning of the Apoſtle of God? If he be giltie of the bodie and bloud of our Lord, which receiueth this bread vnworthelie: He that ſlaundereth and depraueth it, he that reuileth and (ſo muche as in him lyeth) rendeth it in peeces, he that treadeth vnder his foot
                  •
                the bodie and bloude of Chriſte, he that goeth about to take away and vtterlie to aboliſhe the vertue of that ſo wonderfull a Sacramente: howe ſhall he be punniſhed according to his

wicked and horrible facte?
            What is it ſo? If thou vnderſtande not, by what meanes the moſte holie bodie of Chriſt is in this Sacramēt, not placed or limited according to the meaſure and proportion of the greatneſſe thereof, but preſente in the eyes of a faithfull heart through the almightie power of the woorde of God: if thou ſee not that merueilouſe chaunge of earthly breade into the nature of heauenlie bread: if thou perceiue not, by what meanes the moſt excellent Maieſtie of Chriſt, which filleth al things, multiplieth the giftes of his whole bodie, that he may therewirh feede and refreſh the faithfull ſoules, and glewe them all together with charitie within them ſelues, and tye them faſt to him ſelfe with the band of euerlaſting loue: is it therfore reaſon, that thou ſhouldſt ſlaunder and depraue this ſo wonderful a benefite of God? What thing doeſt thou vnderſtande? What thing

doeſt thou conceiue by diſcourſe and reaſon? What thing is there in all the worlde, whiche thy minde is able to perceue exactly, and to know perfectlie? Why then doeſt thou not order thy life, by cleere faithe, and not by troubled reaſon? Tel mee, I pray thee, doeſt thou miſtruſt Gods power or mercie, or elles doth the greatneſſe of the benefite trouble thee? Neyther can the power of God be hindred by any let or ſtaie, neyther can his mercy be limited with any bowndes: and the greatnes of the benefite is a very good proofe of the truth thereof. For why, there is nothing more agreeable to the greate bountifulneſſe of God, then the greatnes of the thing, which he geaueth.
            Then I aſke thee an other queſtion: What is the cauſe, thinkeſt thou, why I doe beleue, that the bodie and bloud of Chriſte is after a wonderfull manner conteined in this Sacrament, and

thou beleeueſt it not? It is not ſurely, bicauſe I will ſuffer my ſelfe to be abuſed for lacke of witte. For thou doeſt not paſſe mee either in witte, or learning. But this is the cauſe. Thou truſteſt thy ſenſes, and I directe al my doinges according to the faith of holie Churche. Thou doeſt caſte of the yoke, and ſpurne againſt it: but I doe of myne owne accorde put my heade into the moſte ſweete yoke of Chriſt. Thou doeſt refuſe his benefites, but I doe praie vnto him to encreaſe my faieth.
            Moreouer, we ſee this by daily experience. The more a man yeldeth to vice and vncleanes of life: the feinter is his beleefe as touching this dreadfull Myſterie. Wherevppon it is concluded, that he, that geaueth him ſelfe wholie ouer to the pleaſure of the bodie, and therefore falleth from the vnitie of the Churche, wil beleue nothing at all of it. But on the other

ſide we ſee, that the chaſter and cleaner life any mā leadeth, the more ſure and conſtant is his belefe in this point: in ſo much that he perſuadeth him ſelf, that he beholdeth in this Sacrament, euen Chriſt him ſelfe nailed vpon the Croſſe.
            Surely this agreement of the mind and wil of man, is a thing to be woondered at. The mind ſeeketh the thing that is true: the wil deſireth the thing that is good: and the wel gouerned wil foloweth the iudgement of the truly directed mind. It foloweth therefore that they only ſee the truth perfectly, which are wel ordered in their life and conuerſation: for vicious and naughty men are cōmonly tourned away from the truth, bicauſe they haue their mind diſordered with vnruly deſires.
            Now therefore conſider to whom it is better to geaue eare. To thoſe holy men, the which being of mind moſt pure, of life moſt chaſt, in holie Scriptures

moſt excellently wel learned, haue from the time of the primitiue Church folowed this faith: or elles to theſe madbraines and frantik felowes, to theſe filthie licentiouſe ribawdes, to the newe vpſtart doctours, which haue moſt wickedly and heinouſly violated this faith? This Sacramente the holie Fathers, whiche were taught of the Apoſtles, called Synaxim, that it to ſay, a bringing together, bicauſe it Synaxis.linked the mindes of men together wi in themſelues, and brought them to be ioyned al in Chriſt. In like māner they Euchariſtia.called it Euchariſtiam, that is, a thankeſgeuing: bicauſe there is no benefite of God in this life, for the whiche we are bound to yeald vnto his Maieſtie greater praiſe and hartier thankes. For The effectes of the Sacramēt of the Aulter.it ſupporteth the ſtate of the ſowle, it eſtabliſheth the powers of the minde, it clereth the vnderſtāding, it ſtrēgthneth faith, it ſtirreth vppe hope, it enkendleth charitie, it inflameth hartes,

it filleth the godlie and deuout mindes with meruelouſe great ſweetenes and comfort. With this heauenlie foode, S. Cyprian (ſo often as any tempeſt or perſecution was towarde) thought it good to fortifie them, that were appointed to ſuffer tormentes for the name of Chriſte. And therefore dyd he the ſooner admit into the Churche againe, ſuch as were yet penitentes, that is to witte, menne ſeparated from the Church for a tyme, to do penance for ſome offence committed: to the intent that, being ſtrengthned by this cōmunion of the body of Chriſt, they might ſtand valiātly to the end againſt al the power of Satan. For the holy mā was of this mind, that the foode of this heauēly bread gaue ſuch ſtrēgth ād courage, as could not be brokē or weakened by any force of our enemie the deuil. What ſhould I here rehearſe other holy Martyrs without nūbre, al holie writers, the faith and agreemēt of the

vniuerſal Church continued euen frō the Apoſtles time to our daies? And yet wilt thou keepe open war, againſt the ordinaunce of Chriſte, againſt the doctrine of S. Paule, againſt the ineſtimable greatneſſe of the fruictes in this myſterie cōteined, againſt the experiēce of ſuch wōderful profit and ſweetnes, againſt the pure and ſincere faith of the Catholik Church? And yet wilt thou reprochfully reuile the body and bloud of Chriſt, and depraue like a mad mā the moſt excellent and higheſt benifit, that euer the goodnes of God beſtowed vpon man? And yet wilt thou reioyſe in thy wickednes, and poiſon many other men with the contagion of this thy moſt peſtilent hereſie?
            Theſe thinges, M. Haddon, thinke them not ſpoken to you, but to your Martyr. And now let him ſtand a ſide, and I wil thus reaſon with you. Could you, M. Haddon, knowing, as you doe verie wel, not only the vertue of

this wonderful Sacrament, whiche is of al other the greateſt, but alſo the ſtrength and operation of al other Sacramentes: being withall of that opinion, that to deſpiſe the Sacramentes, is a moſte heinouſe treſpaſſe: when you vnderſtoode, that there was a man in the worlde ſo lewde and wicked, that he woulde goe aboute to take awaie and aboliſh this moſt worthie pleadge of the loue of God, this moſt ſure ſtaie of all Chriſtian Religion, conteming in it all the graces and benefittes of God: could you, I ſaie, ſpeake familiarly vnto him? could you ſalute him gentelly? could you ſhewe him anie token of loue? Haue 2. Ioā. 1. c.
               you neuer reade in S. Iohn, that he that ſaieth, good morrowe, to wicked menne, is become partaker of their wickedneſſe? But you haue not onely ſpoken familiarly to this Martyr, but alſo commended him aboue the ſkies: and you haue ſaied, that

that ſame golden couple of olde men, were brought into your Iland by the prouidence of God, to ſhine ouer you (which had alreadie the goodly brightneſſe of the newe ſonne riſen emongeſt you) with a muche cleeter light.
            Are you ſo ſottiſh, M Haddon, that you vnderſtande not, howe muche you haue diſteined your eſtimation by that countenaunce and ſhewe of gentleneſſe towardes him? For what can be more infamous, then to be familiare with a frātike and naughtie felowe? But if you like his Doctrine alſo, then is it plaine, that you keepe not the Sacramentes at al: for ſo much as you haue vppon an vnſetled pange, without al order, wiſedome, or diſcretion, taken awaie the greateſt Sacrament, and that, that is of al other moſt wonderfull. Whie then ſay you, that you wonder, if there be any kind of profeſſours in diuinitie in the worlde,

that deſpiſeth and ſetteth at naught the Sacramentes? But let vs now conſider the deſcription of your Church, the which you ſet before our eyes to behold, that we may vnderſtand by it, that you haue had none other maiſter in Religion, but only the holy Ghoſt. You ſay thus.
            
               Firſt of all, bicauſe faith is by hearing, we ſende downe into all partes of our realme teachers of the holie Scriptures, to inſtructe the people in all pointes of godlines, and to infourme them in the true woorſhipping of God. Out of what fountaine ſprang theſe Doctours? If they came out of the ſchoole of Luther, Bucer or Caluin: they can teach the people no godlines, being them ſelues open enemies to all godlineſſe. It were therefore muche more tolerable, to haue no doctours at all, then to be infected with the moſt corrupt Doctrine of wicked menne. If they ſprang out of any other heade, then

is it manifeſt, that there is not emongeſt you any one and ſimple Doctrine, but diuerſe opinions fondly iarring within them ſelues. It followeth.
            
               Then haue we a common order of praier out of the holie Scriptures, confirmed by the authoritie of a Parlament, (for ſo doe they terme the conſent of the estates of our Realme) from the which we ſuffer no man to depart. By what order, lawe, or authoritie is this done: that a Councel, or as you cal it, a Parlament, ſhould ſo impudently vſurpe the office of the Catholike Churche, to make orders for praiers, preſcribe how religion ought to be vſed, and not ſuffer any man to depart from the order which it hath decreed? For in holie thinges it is not lawfull for theſe menne to geaue lawes, but to take lawes. For otherwiſe they ſhall diſturbe the common weale, if they wil not content them ſelues with their

owne vocation, but will thruſt them ſelues into other mens doinges: and they ſhal marre Religion, if they will in matters apperteyninge to them onely, that ſuſteine the perſonne of the Churche, take vppon them to meddle, and tranſpoſe the dignitie of Prieſtes to them ſelues. You ſay afterwarde.
            Prouiding both in the one and in the other, ſo muche as we coulde, that the commaundement of the holie ghost be obeied, the whiche, willeth that ſuch as ſpeake in the Churche, ſhould vſe the word of God: and that there ſhould be one common and agreable Doctrine emongeſt them all. You doe verie wel vndowbtedly. But wherehence riſeth this ſo great debate and hourlie bourly for Religion in your Churches? Wherefore are the confeſsions and Credes ſo often chopped and chaunged in places, where Luther hath had a great name?
            
            
               
               And we prouide, ſaie you, that the Sacramentes be miniſtred verie neere vnto the preſcribed order of the holy ſcriptures, and according to the example of the old Church, in the whiche our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt firſt ordeined them himſelfe with his Apoſtles. O valiant men, worthie to be commended aboue the heauens. O glorious attempte. O liuelie courage of luſtie blouddes, the which thought yt not ynoughe to approche neere vnto the holines of the olde Church, but they would preſſe euen at the verie hard heales of them. It followeth.
            
               All theſe thinges are ſet out in our owne mother tongue, bicauſe it is a great madnes for a man to babble out before God, he can not tell what: and it is directely againſte the most wholeſome doctrine of S. Paule, and all the auncient examples of the Apoſtolike Churches. It is not you only, that teache ſuch as Praier in the vulgar tongue.vnderſtand not the Latine, to praie in

their owne tongue. For we alſo doe not ſuffer ſuch, as are ignorant in the Latine ſpeach, to ſerue God, but only in their own mother tongue: and there are manie bookes of praiers and holy ſcriptures writen, not by Parlament, as you call it, but by holie Prieſtes: the whiche (being firſte examined by the prelates of the church) are ſent abroad euerie where, and by them are children, women, and ſimple folkestrained in the knowledge of their dewtie towardes God. And the thinges that are thus written, they are not taken out of euerie mans fantaſie, but out of the holie Scriptures, and out of the writinges and examples of holie men. So that there lacketh not omongeſt vs anie diſcipline of manners, nor example of vertue, nor good bringing vp in true religion, to al ſuch, as coulde not imploie them ſelues to the ſtudie of learning. We haue alſo manie ſermōs, by the whiche men are ſtirred vp to

the loue of godlines and religion. But Diſcreti
                     •
                   in preaching.in preaching we vſe much diſcretion and warines, that none of thoſe queſtions be opened emongeſt women and ignorant folkes, which are not verie neceſſarie vnto ſaluation, and yet maie quickely intangle their mindes with verie troubleſome dowbtes and ſcruples. For as S. Gregorie of Nazianzene ſaieth verie wiſely: it is not conuenient to reaſon and diſpute of God, neither to al men, neither in the preſence of all men, neither at all times, neither of all matters, neither without good diſcretiō. For there is required to Thinges requiſite in a preacher.the doing of this thinge a meru
                  •
               lous cleanes of ſowl and body, a veri calme and wel ſetled mind, good time, cōuenient oportunitie, earneſt zeale, much fearfulnes and exceding great moderarion. For ther is no man ſo ſimple, that he can not vnderſtand the difficultie of euery queſtion: but there are few ſo witty, that they cārid thē ſelues out of

the briers, when they are once fallen in. And this is the cauſe, whie manie men are confounded in queſtions, but few eſcape out of their ſnares. Moreouer ſuch is the arrogancie and pride of certaine ignorāt felowes, that they become intolerable, if they can atteine neuer ſo litle knowledge in any thing, which they knew not before, ſpecially if it be in expownding the holy ſcriptures. For they wil iudge ſo preſumpteouſly of the higheſt pointes of Diuinitie (the which they vnderſtand not) as though they were called to be of Gods priuie counſaile: the which raſhnes hath bred manie wicked and troubleſome errours, and cauſed much diſſenſion. But the end of the law, ſaieth S. Paul, is not the vaunting of learning, 
                  
                     •
                  . Tim. 1. b
               but charity from a pure hart, and good conſcience, and faith vnfained. He therfore that can bring to paſſe, that al men maie be, linked the one to the other in charitie, fourniſhed with vertues,

eſtabliſhed in true faith: although he beate not into the heads of the vnlearned people a hundred queſtions towching predeſtination, yet ſhal he ſhew him to be a very good preacher. Not neceſſarie t
                     •
                   haue the ſcripture
                     •
                   in the vulgar tongue.Therfore for ſo much as this ought to be our only intent, how to plant charitie, innocencie, and faith in the hartes of men: and that maie very well be taught without this tranſlation of the holy ſcriptures: what neded it, to take the thinges that were cōteined in the latine tongue without perill, and to tranſlate them into the Engliſh tongue with great daunger? Mary ſir, ſay you, it is againſt the moſt wholeſome doctrine of S. Paul How ſo I praie you? If you marke well the meaning of S. Paul, you ſhal ſee, that his wordes are nothing contrarie to our pourpoſe.
            But firſt of all it is to be knowen, that in S. Paules time al Chriſtian men in a manner were endewed with ſuch vertues and qualities, as fewe men in

our daies can atteine vnto by ſtudie and faith. Then it is alſo to be conſidered, that there were in thoſe daies diuers giftes and graces of the holy ghoſt geauen vnto ſuch men, as were inflamed with the loue of Chriſte. Howbeit, although they were taught and ſchooled of the holy Ghoſt, yea and wel inſtructed to be humble and modeſt: yet were they in no ſmall daūger of pride. The which is not to be wondered at, for ſo muche as S. Paul him ſelfe the maiſter of heauēlie wiſedom, the perfecte example of humilitie and modeſtie affirmeth, that the pricke of 
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 12. b.
               the fleſhe was a thing neceſſarie for him, leſt the knowledge of the ſecrets of God might puffe vp his mind. Now as manie were puffed vp with thoſe gyftes, ſo were ſuch, as had the gyfte of tongues, ſomewhat more inſolent then other men: and they would praiſe God in diuers tongues, whiche other men vnderſtoode not, without any interpretour.

There was alſo an other great inconuenience, which was, that he, that ſpake with vnknowē tonges, would not tarie till an other man had made an end of ſpeaking, but at one time a great many together woulde praiſe God in ſtraunge tongues. And theſe three diſcōmodities were cauſed in their aſſembles, for lacke of diſcretiō in thoſe good men. The firſt was the arrogant ſetting out of the gyftes of God: the ſecōd was the diſquieting of ſuch as would teach: the third was the breaking of order, which of all thinges becometh the Church of Chriſte beſt.
            But S. Paule very wiſely remoueth al theſe thinges. For to place humility, he putteth al men in mind of that moſt wretched ſtate in the which they had liued before, when through the mociō of the ennemie the diuell they went ſuppliantly afterydols: that they might the more eaſily gather by that, that 1. Cor. 1
                     •
                   
                  a.
               thoſe gyftes ought to be referred,

not to their deſertes, but to the infinite mercie of God.
            He teacheth them alſo, that other mē were not to be diſpiſed, the which, although they had not receiued thoſe gyftes, yet were they not vtterly void of the gyftes of God: for ſo much as no man can confeſſe our Lord Ieſus from his heart but by the benefite of the 1. Cor. 12. a.
               holie Ghoſt.
            After that he declareth how that the gyfte, which euerie man hath receiued, he hath receiued it, not for him ſelfe only, but for all other: and that it ought therfore to be imploied to the profit of the vniuerſal Church.
            Then he ſheweth how emongeſt al the gyftes of God, charitie hath the higheſt roome and dignitie, that they might thereby vnderſtand, that it ſkilleth not much, how manie tongues a man knew, or ells how great miracles he was able to worke, but with how great zeale and diligence he furthered

the Churche.
            Laſt of al making a compariſon betwene the gyfte of tongues and prophecie, he deſpiſeth not tongues, but perferreth prophecying far before the tongues. And theſe are the places, by the which the Apoſtle brought the mē of that time frō a certaine kind of lightnes, to the loue of grauity ād modeſty.
            But that diſorder of talking together 1. Cor. 14. f.
               and hindering one an other in ſuche ſort, that the profitte of teaching was thereby loſt, S. Paule tooke it a waie, when he ſaied. But if any man ſpeake with tongue, let it be done by two, or at the moſt by three, and let one expounde. For you maie prophecie by one and one, and you maie ſpeake by one and one. And leſt anie man might ſaie, that he was violently moued by the ſpirite, in ſuch ſorte, that he could not refraine him ſelfe from ſpeaking: the Apoſtle ſaith, that the ſpirit of prophetes is ſubiecte vnto the Proph
                  •
               tes.

Wherin he teacheth them, that it laie in them, whiche were moued by the holy Ghoſt, to moderate the gyfte of the holy Ghoſt.
            Finally he ſetteth an order, (of the whiche he had ſaied much before) by 1. Cor. 14. f.
               theſe wordes Endeuour your ſelues to prophecie, and forbid no man to ſpeke with tongues. But let al things be done honeſtly and orderly. The Apoſtle forbiddeth not to vſe ſtraunge tongues: but yet he preferreth before tongues the gyfte of prophecie, that is to ſaie, the declaration of the wil of God, and the edifying of the Church: and he cō
               maūdeth, that al thinges be done with verie good order.
            Now there are two pointes to be cōſidered in this place: the one is, that, emongeſt many things, which maie be done at one time at our pleaſure indifferently, looke what thinges maie be omitted without offence, are to be omitted, when any daunger that maie

thervpon enſewe, and the time ſo requireth. And therfore, although in S. Pauls time al myſteries might be communicated to al men: it foloweth not, that they ſhold, in our daies (when ther is no like capacity in al mē to cōceiue them) be cōmitted to al men indifferētly without any reſpecte of perſonnes.
            The other point is, that the meaning of S. Paul in al that diſputation was, to keepe downe pride, to ſet vp charitie, and to cōmaund, that order ſhould be kept. He therfore that geueth occaſiō of pride, that ſlaketh loue and charity, that diſtourbeth good order, although he ſeeme to folowe the wordes of S. Paule, yet goeth he directely againſt the meaning of S. Paul.
            Theſe thinges being thus determined, I wil aſke you a queſtion: what came into your braines, to be ſo deſirous to take al the volumes of the holy Scripture, and without anie neceſsity, ye with no ſmal dāger of the vnlerned

people, to cōmit them to euerie iackeſtraw to expounde? did you it, to reſtreyne the pride of ſuch as are baſe? No: you haue rather puffed vp their hartes incredibly, cauſing them to cō
               ceiue a falſe opinion of wiſedome in them ſelues. Was it done to cauſe a more feruent charitie emongeſt them? No: you haue rather forced the weake mindes to fall out within them ſelues, through your diuers, yea and contrary expoſitions of the law of God. Was it done to ſet all thinges in good order? No: you haue rather ouerthrowen all good and aunciēt order. For now euery man is a prophete, euerie man is a ſhepeheard, euery mā is a doctour, euerie man will prate in euerie place very vnſemely of matters of diuinitie, euery mā wil babble what him liſteth of the higheſt Myſteries, the loweſt pointe whereof is farre aboue his capacitie. This is by like your prouidence, wherby you haue taken quite awaie that ſilence

which was vſed of olde time in the churches: that baſhfulnes, whiche became honeſt matroues meruelouſly wel: that modeſty, which kept the ſimple people verie wel in their dewtie. And ſo it is come to paſſe, that wheras you pretend to folow the wordes of S. Paul, you bend your ſelues erneſtly againſt his meaning.
            What lacked there, I praie you, in the olde time, that was neceſſarie to keepe honeſt heartes in a ſobre diſcicipline? Were there not lerned Prieſts, the which were able to chooſe out of the holie myſteries ſo muche as was needful to ſaluation, and ſo muche as they might declare vnto the ignorant people without da
                  •
               nger? Were there none to ſupplie the place of the vnlerned man, and to anſwere Amen? Was the ſownd and wordes of the Latine tongue ſo ſtraunge, that no man vnderſtoode it in all your Churches? Needed there the authoritie of the

Apoſtle to breake vp that diſordered confuſion of many tongues together, when there was heard, in the commō praiers of the churches, but one kind of ſpeach only, and that by long cuſtome verie well knowen and commonly vſed?
            If the vſe of one common tongue ioyneth the mindes of men in one, then was there nothing more agreable to the rule of Chriſt, then that the ſeruice of God ſhould be openly ſaied in one only tongue, the which was in all churches of the weſt part of the world learned in ſcholes, and practiſed in the dailie affaires: and nothing leſſe conuenient, then that the ſeruice is now ſaied in ſo manie tongues as there are nations, emongeſt whome men without learning, without witte, without religion take vpon them the office of expounding the holie Scriptures. Wherfore neither was our ſimplicity ſo vnprofitable, as you wiſe men

thought it was: neither is your prouident warines ſo wholeſome, as your maiſters imagined it would haue ben. For out of it are riſen errours, and diſorders, and a falſe opiuiō of wiſedome (whiche is the greateſt madnes in the worlde) with manie other diſcommodities.
            Then you goe forewarde in the declaration of the doctrine of your Church, ſaying. We vſe at the laying on of handes, the celebration of mariage, the churching of women after child bearing, the viſiting of the ſicke, and the burying of the dead, ſolemne and publike ſeruice ſet out according to the truth of the ghoſpell. Al the reſt you comprehend verie briefely in one ſentence, perſwading your ſelfe, that it is ſufficiently declared, that you are not deſtitute, neither of Sacramentes, neither of anie other thinges apperteyning to religion.
            You confeſſe plainely after that, that you haue ſhaken of from you,

the yoke of the high Biſhop or Pope: bicauſe it was heauier, then that either you or your fathers could beare it. Your fathers and auncetours I know, did beare it verie well and with great commēdation: but you
                  •
                graunt, were not able to beare it. For how had it ben lawful for you, to breake violently into the monaſteries, to diſanull the rules of monkes, to deflower the holy and chaſt Virgins, to deface like vngodlie and furious men al orders of religion, to laie your greedy and violent handes vpon the Churche goods appointed to holie vſes, to pul 
                  •
               owne all monumentes of vertue and godlines, to ouerthrow the auncient Churche, and to botch vp an other at your pleſure: if this yoke had not ben firſt taken of from your neckes? You bring in a litle after.
            
               Neither doe we acknowledge anie Biſſhop, but onlie our Lord Ieſus Chriſte, to whom the holy ſcriptures appoint this peculiar

honour. O worthie ſaying, full of wonderful godlines, and conteyning in it a moſt euidēt proufe of heauenlie life. What ſhal we doe to theſe mē, which are ſo holie, ſo vtterly void of al care of this preſent life, that for the deſire and loue of the preſence of Chriſt him ſelfe, they can not abide to ſee any Vicare of Chriſt vpō the earth. But lette vs ſee a litle. This name of Chriſt, doth it import the dignitie and office of a biſhop only, or elles doth it comprehende alſo the authoritie and maieſtie of a King? Surely it can not be denied, that by the worde and meaning of Chriſt, in this name of Chriſt is conteined the power both of a biſhop and of a King. Whie then doe you acknowledge any other king, beſide our Lord Ieſus Chriſt? Whie are you not ſo free and earneſt, to ſhake of this yoke that remaineth? Whie ſuffer you this freedome of your goſpell to be hindered through the power and authoritie

of a King? Whie doe you not (as it hath ben already attempted in other places, whiche are infected with the ſelfe ſame religiō) bend your ſelues earneſtly to make away the maieſtie of a King? for as you acknwolege one only high biſhop, ſo is it neceſſarie to obei one only King. If you thinke it mete to haue an other king in th' earth, as Vicare of that high and almightie king: what is the c
                  •
               uſe, whie you wold not haue an other biſhop as Vicare of that moſt high and holy biſhoppe? But you wil ſay. We haue biſhops, but we wil haue no high biſhop: Whie then, it is not the name of a biſhop, but of a high biſhoppe, that offendeth you. Wherefore thinke you then, that the authoritie of a Kinges power (whiche dowbtles is the higheſt) is to be borne in England? Are there not magiſtrates emongeſt you? Is there not a publike counſel? Haue you not Princes and Lordes? Then take awaie the controuerſie

of the name, and ther are in England a great many, (as there are alſo emōgeſt vs) the which haue the authority of kinges, although thei be not called by the name of Kinges. Ymagin
                  •
                therfore, that they were certaine litle kinges. What needed it then, being ſo many kinges emongeſt you, that there ſhuld be any one high or ſupreme king, to reſtraine by his authority the other inferiour kings? For if you thinke that this word (high) mai not be born in the dignitie of a biſhop: why do you not in like māner deteſt the name of highnes in the Maieſtie of a king? No, ſay you, it was very wiſely prouided, that al the magiſtrats and Princes in Englād ſhuld haue one ſupreme Prince, whom they ſhuld al reuerēce, and by whoſe power ād autority they ſhuld be al reſtrained: for otherwiſe, it cannot be choſen, but that there would be ſtirred vp muche trouble and diſcord, to the great peril of the whole realme. I thinke you ſay

truly. And therefore I affirme in like manner, that in the Churche, whiche ought to be alwaies one, it is neceſſarie, that there be one ſupreme power of a high biſhop, whoſe authoritie all other Biſhops ſhould reuerence. For otherwiſe it muſt needes be, that there ariſe much debate and manie peſtilent ſectes, to the great ruine and decaie of the Churche, and that the Church be brought therby into verie great daunger. For if within the ſpace of fourtie yeares, ſence a great peece of Germanie, and afterwardes England fel from the Biſhop of Rome, ſo many ſ
                  •
               
               ditions haue riſen emongeſt the Princes of your Religion, that they cā not poſsibly agree, neither with other mē, neither yet within them ſelues: what ende, thinke you, wil enſew, in caſe al Chriſtendome (the which God forbid) being thereunto procured and moued by your diligence and vnreaſonable meanes, ſhould rebel with the like outrage

and madnes? It remaineth therefore, that, as in England there is one ſupreme power, whiche comprehend
                  •
               th al other Princes vnderneth it: ſo there be alſo in the Churche one ſupreme authoritie, the whiche al other inferiour powers muſt willingly and diligently obeie. For otherwiſe it is not poſsible, that the crewel tempeſtes riſen in the Churche ſhould euer be ſlaked, or the flames of diſcord quenched, or the ciuile warres ended. Now, for ſo much as Chriſt is the authour of peace: Whoſoeuer wil ſaie, that they wil haue but one only biſhop which is our Lord Ieſus Chriſte, and by the religious pretēce of this worde, wil open a gap to ſo manie opinions, and to ſo much peſtilent diſſenſiō: thei are lyers. No, they doe rather fight againſt Chriſt, and worſhippe Satan the authour of debate and diſcorde. But contrarie wiſe, ſuch as honour and reuerence the biſhoppe of Rome as the

Vicare of Chriſt, for that reſpect only, bicauſe he is the lieutenant of Chriſt in the earth: they doe in deede acknowledge only Chriſt to be the high Prieſt.
            And yet you ſaie, that, by this your rebellion and contempte, you doe not cut and māgle the coate of Chriſt, but only geue a touch at the Biſhop of Romes cloke. And by and by after you bring in theſe wordes. Neither doe we laie open the waie, as you ſaie, to ſedition, but we doe dāme vp the path, the▪ which goeth downe, through his lic
                     •
                  ntious lead, to the great decaie of good manners. Of this lead, and of your notable reproch I haue ſpokē before, with as much modeſtie, as the matter would ſuffer me. But of this your baſe, vile, and ſhameleſſe boldnes, when you ſay, that you haue not rent and torne the coate of Chriſt, but rather, that you haue, by this your moſt wicked rebellion, made a goodlie prouiſion, that good manners

ſhould not decaie, I can not wel tel what to ſay to you. Dare you, ſeing euerie where, as you doe, that there are ſo many diuiſions of peſtilēt ſectes, with ſo much debate and diſcord: that there is no certaine faith emōgeſt you, no agreemēt in Religiō: that your confeſsiōs are changed almoſt euerie day, your beleefes and Creedes corrected: that the olde places of doctrine are diſanulled, and new ſet vp: that manifold ſectes ariſeth daily, and the old Church is diuided in many parts: how dare you, I ſay, report, that this your falling from the Church hath not māgled the coate of Chriſte? When you ſee with your eyes, that pride, arrogancie, diſobedience, ſtubbernes, ſaucie talke, ſlaunderous report, fleſhlie pleaſure, naughtines, diſhoneſty, tumult and ſedition goeth vp and downe freely and vncō
               trolled, whereſouer your maiſters put their foote: with what face dare you ſay, that you haue after this rebellion

ſet the manners of men in good and ſeemelie ordre? The thing it ſelfe ſpeaketh, dailie examples declare, neither doe the open aſsiſes, no neither ſecret parlars hold their peace.
            But let vs now ſee, howe worſhipfully you confute that my diſcourſe as touching the Monarchie of the holie Church. You ſay. In the beſt time of the Church, there was one God and one faith. That is true. But now neither is there one God, nor one faith emongeſt the miniſters of your goſpel. For one offereth vp diuine honour to pleaſure, an other to madnes: ſome to the bealie, and ſome to railing. Luther hath one faith, Bucer an other, Zwinglius hath one, and Caluin an other. And yet you ſay.
            
               Peter had his Prouince, Paule had his, and Iames his, and other had other Prouinces. And yet did not this ſeparation of their perſons diſioine the vnitie of their ſaith. What conclude you then? maie

it be gathered by theſe things, that you ſaye, that Peter, when he was reſident in one Prouince, had no preeminence ouer the reſt of the Apoſtles? That is not wel cōcluded of theſe things, that you haue ſpoken. For now euery Biſſhoppe hath his Prouince, and the Biſſhop of Rome hath his. And yet are we all ſubiect vnto him by the lawe of God. It foloweth.
            
               In proceſſe of time, many of the Biſhops of Rome, were Martyrs, and were ſacrificed vnto God by prophane and vngodlie Princes: but Crownes had they none, vnleſſe it were the Crownes of Martyrdome. This extraordinarie ſoueraintie of Popedome, they knew not. Yes M. Haddon, it is wel knowen, that the moſt bleſſed Princes and ſoueraignes of the Church of Rome them ſelues, to witte, Clement, and Euariſtus, and Lucius, and Marcellus, and Pius, the which atteyned the Croune of Martyrdome with very great glory, whom neither ambition,

nor any other vnlauful deſire moued to ſeke for that ſupreme honoure: do beare witnes againſt you. For their writinges declare plainely, that their iudgement was, that the ſoueraintie of the vniuerſal Churche, was euer in the Church of Rome. What ſhould I here reherſe Ireneus, Auguſtine, and al other holy Fathers? What ſhoulde I here vnfolde the memorie of al the antiquitie? Of the new writers reade, if it pleaſe you, Eckius, the B. of Rocheſter, Cocleus, Pighius, and ſuch other moſt excellēt men both for vertue and learning, and you ſhall ſee, how ignorant you are in this mater of the ſupremacie. They diſpute and contend, not with reprochful wordes, not with lies not with impudēcy: but with teſtimonies of the holie Scriptures, but with the authorities of the holy Fathers, but with examples of the vnſpotted antiquitie: and they preſſe their aduerſaries, and proue them to be not onely

wicked felowes, but alſo very mad and frantike mē. But how is it poſsible, that you ſhould vnderſtand theſe thinges? What time could you ſpend in the ſtudie of Diuinitie, being a mā alwaies cō
               uerſant in the law court, and hindered with many affaires? And ſo, me thinketh, that you are not ſo muche to be blamed, as your maiſters, the whiche haue nouſeled you in ſo mani errours. How be it you are alſo to be blamed for two points. The firſt is lightnes, for that you haue ſo lightly geuen credite to naughty mē. The other is impudēcy, for that you haue ſo raſhly auouched thinges, that you neuer read. Tel me, I pray you, where haue you read, that Gregorie did abandone this ſupreame dignitie of the B. of Rome? And yet you put it in your oratiō affirming it ful ſtoutly, and are neuer a whit aſhamed of your lying. At the length you conclude thus. Wherfore if the beſt ſtate of the church, was without this Monarchy:

may alſo lack it ful wel: yea we ought to lacke it, not only bicauſe it is expreſſely forbidden by the Goſpel, but alſo bicauſe it ſtandeth wel with reaſon. What a raſhnes and impudencie is this in you, to conclude an Argument after this ſorte without al reaſon? You muſt bring in your concluſion vpon thinges, that are true, knowen, and agreed vppon, not vppon thinges that are falſe and not graunted. If you be ignorant in this, you are a very dolt: if you know it, and yet will goe about to conclude your argument vpon falſe propoſitiōs, without any proufe going before: you are to be taken as a very ſhameleſſe ſophiſter. For emongeſt the guyles and ſubtilties, which the babling ſophiſters are wonte to vſe, this is accounted for one of the firſt, to goe aboute to conclude what them liſteth, vppon thinges, that are not true, neither graunted, neither agreed vppon. If the beſt ſtate of the Church, ſaie you, was without this Monarchie,

we may alſo lacke it full well. What, if the beſt ſtate of the Churche was neuer without this Monarchie, may you then lacke it? I thinke not. If it be then proued by writinges and records, yea and by the ful agreement of al the holy Fathers, that the beſt ſtate of the Church was neuer without this Monarchie: if you are able, neither to cōfute the authorities, neither to make any good proufe for your ſelfe, neither to bring any ſure ground of antiquitie, but only in bare wordes to ſaie, what ye liſt: doe you not ſee, that all you
                  •
                talke is fainte and weake, and that it is pitifully ſhaken and battred of it ſelfe without gonneſhotte? And yet, as though you had already contriued the whol matter according to your hearts deſire; you ſay moreouer: Yea we ought to l
                     •
                  okd it. How proue you, that it is of du
                  •
               tie? What fruict can you ſhew of this your wicked rebellion? What light haue you ſhewed to the worlde

by this your outrage and madneſſe ſo wonderfull, that you may wel ſay, that you haue diſcharged your duetie and office commendably.
            Nowe, whereas you ſay, that the Goſpel forbiddeth it expreſly, you declare the verie true cauſe of all your doinges. For it ſeemeth, that you are minded to doe that onely, that the Goſpell of Chriſte forbiddeth you to doe. How be it you woulde not ſaie ſo, but rather that you do by the warrant of the Goſpel refuſe the authority of the B. of Rome. Suche is your eloquence, that you are not able marlie times, to vtter your owne meaning. But by what teſtimonie of the Goſpel, by what authority haue you proued it? Bring foorth the place, preſſe vs with the wordes, cōuince vs with the commaundement, ſhew where the Goſpel hath forbidden, not darkely, but by expreſſe and plaine words, that we ſhuld not acknowledge any one man as the high Vicare of Chriſt in the earth.
            
               
You ſaie moreouer, that it ſtandeth with reaſon: whereas you neuer ſhewed before, how reaſon and this your lewdnes may ſtande together. And yet, as though you had moſte plainely and inuincibly proued the matter: you do not only cōclude veri much beſides the purpoſe, but alſo vaūt your ſelf beyond al modeſtie. Some il hap come to that felow your Schoolemaiſter, that brought you vp ſo il. It is like, he toke vpon him to make you eloquent: and he made you not only a babe, but alſo an vntoward and a 
                  〈…〉
                Wherfore I would geue you 
                  〈◊〉
                to take an action againſt him, to make him repaie his waiges, that he tooke of you. For you beſtowed your time very il with him, the which might haue ben better ſpent in drawing out writes and proceſſes in the Law. But let vs ſee, what reaſon you bring. You ſaie. Neither can the head ſo far frō the mē
                  bers diſagree cōueniently. What are you

               
                  Conueniē
                     ter diſ
                        •
                     idere. are M. Haddons vvords in Latine. yet to learne to ſpeake Latine? What meane you by this? What is to diſagree conuenientlie? For the thing that is in it ſelfe conuenient, is nothing diſagreeable. Whereas you ſaie therfore, that a thing doth diſagree conueniently, you ſpeake not pure and cleane Latine, but you vſe a monſtruouſe kinde of Latine ſpeache. For this cauſe I am not aſhamed to confeſſe ſo often, that I doe not vnderſtand, what you ſaie. I ſuſpect, you would ſaie in this place, that it is not poſsible, that the heade ſhould 
                  〈◊〉
                be ioyned vnto the members being ſo farre a ſunder. If you ſay ſo, you are much deceiued, if you beleue that the cōiunction of the church conſiſteth in the nighnes of places, and not in the conſent of faith, and agreement in one Religion. But if you doe compriſe vnder this diſordered kinde of ſpeach, ſome other more ſecret myſterie: When you haue exponnded your ſelf, then peraduenture I wil anſwere

you. You ſay afterward. Eſpecially for ſomuch as this Monarchie or only ſoueraintie, for the which you laboure ſo much, we haue it at hand at home with vs in Englande, ſo that we neede not to ſeeke it abroad. It is not my part to rehearſe al your woordes after you, like a childe. But I will aſke you this one thing, what only power or ſouerainty is that? We haue, ſay you, the abſolute authoritie of a Kinges Maieſtie, wherein is conteined fully and wholly the Princelie eſtate of our common weale. What, would you alſo, that the ſupreme authoritie of the Church ſhould be ſubiect vnto this Kingly Maieſtie, as you ſaie? For no man euer ſaid, that your common weale ought to be gouerned by the authoritie of the Biſhop of Rome, in matters cōcerning the ſtate of your ciuile affaires: but only, that the Churche of Englande can not refuſe by any means without great offence the authority of the Biſhop of

Rome. For this doe we contend and, as you ſaie, labour ſo earneſtly. This is that, which you ſaie is nothing neceſſarie: for ſo much as the Kinges Maieſtie hath an abſolute authoritie emongeſt you, and therefore you neede not ſeeke any other abroad. You ſay therfore expreſſely, that your Quene doth rightfully take vpon her the gouernement of Englande in ſpiritual matters. And the more hardelie to preſſe me therewithal, you reaſon with me after this forte. But ſurely this ſeemeth vnto you, a thing not to be borne. And in this place you are ſo chauſed, that you laie Sacrilege vnto Princes charges, bicauſe thei wil rule the lawes of the Church▪ and vnreuerently handle holy thinges. Anon after, you counſell me like a ſage and graue man, that I ſhoulde tempre my choler, ſaying vnto mee. O Maiſter Ierome be not ouer much diſquieted. Such great choler and wrath is not ſeemely in a Philoſopher. In this place, M. Waulter,

if you dally, you dally very ſtalely. If you ſpeake in earneſt, it is nothing true that you ſaie. Neither was it angre (whiche is a ſodaine rage ſtirred through the opinion conceiued of diſhoneſtie) that could haue moued me to write thoſe my letters, for ſo muche as I was neuer prouoked to diſpleaſure with ſo much as one rough worde of any Engliſh man: but it was the loue of moſt holy Religion, and the good wil I beare towards the Quene, that moued me to ſend thoſe letters, and to aduertiſe her to eſchew the danger that hanged ouer her and her Realme. Neither is there any token of anger to be ſeene in my talke, excepte you will cal a iuſt and lamentable complaint of the ſtate of our moſte vnhappie time, angre. But that that foloweth, howe pretily it was ſpoken? Take breath a little. As thoughe you had with this your wonderfull force of talke ſo diſquieted me, that I coulde not take my breath.

Then that other ſaying of yours, what a pleaſante grace it hath: Come to your ſelfe againe. This is a foule rebuke. For it ſeemeth to M. Haddon a wiſe man, whoſe iudgement was alwaies ſimple, pure, and vncorrupted, that I am out of my wittes. Or els he would neuer warne me, to come to my ſelfe againe. You ſaie afterwardes. You ſhall ſee all ſhal be wel. That do I loke for in ded
                  •
               : how be it I am ſore afraid, left you being an eloquence man and wonderfull in perſwading▪ may force me to beleue thinges, that are not proued vnto me. Yet I looke for your reaſon, by the which you wil proue, that it is lawfull for your Quene to meddle in Eccleſiaſtical matters, and to lai
                  •
                ſuche lawes vpon Churches, as her liſteth. What ſaie you Sir? The Kinges Maiestie, ſaie you, maiſtereth al perſones in England. What els? So doth the French King the French men, and the Scottiſh King the Scottes. I commend your briefenes

in reaſoning. For you conclude al in one worde, as often as you liſt, and that meruelouſe wittily. But yet you take ſuch thinges, as are neither true, neither of force to conclude thoſe thinges, that you would proue. For firſt of all, the gouernement of a King is not violent, neither tyrannical: and ſuche as he hath taken vppon him to mainteine▪ like a louing Father, he doth not maiſter them like ſeruaūts: neither doth he imploye his regimente to his owne commoditie, but to the ſafety of his ſubiectes. It is therefore falſe, that he doth maiſter them, except he wold rather be accounted a tyranne, then a King. Moreouer, admit it were true, yet doth it not folow, that he doth gouerne them in al matters. That therefore, that you ſhould haue proued, you lai
                  •
                for a ground, as though it were alredy proued and graūted: the which is one of the greteſt faults, that mai be in a diſputer. Laſt of al, neither doth the

french King gouerne the french men in ſpiritual matters, neither the Scotiſh Kinge the Scottes: and if he doe (the which is nothīg true) then doth he not his owne office, but vſurpeth an other mans. Yet you ſay. But the Quene putteth not her hand vnto holie thinges. Why ſo, I pray you, M, Haddon? Is it bicauſe ſhe thinketh it not lawful? Or els bicauſe ſhe wil not? If ſhe thinke, that it is not lawfull, then doth ſhee ſpeake directely againſt you. If ſhe be occupied with other affairs, and therfore committeth holie thinges to men of the baſeſt ſort, ſhee doth otherwiſe then her eſtate requireth. For ſhe thinketh, that there is ſome other thing to be preferred before holie things. You ſay. The ciuile affaires are cōmitted to the ciuile magiſtrates, the Church matters to the Biſhops. What Biſhops meane you? Are they thoſe Biſhops, that you haue violētly thruſt out of their Biſhopriks, and caſt into the iayles? or els are they

ſuche as you haue caught vppe in the ſtreates, and frō the alebēches, and haue placed thē in the roome of thoſe moſt holibiſhops? O what an honorable preſence of Biſhops is that, for all ſubiects to reuerence, and al il men to be afraid of? But I would faine learne of you, what goodly gloſſe of vertue was that, that moued you to place thoſe baſe felowes in this roome and dignitie? Was it their meruelouſe and chaſt life, which you can not abide? Was it the knowledge of holie Scriptures, the which thei had learned in tauernes, or in ſcholes, where perhappes they had ben Maiſters? Was it their wonderful eloquence, where with thei were able to withdrawe the cōmon people from licentious liuing to continency, which they them ſelues abhorre? For it is to be thought, that they that depriued thoſe godlie and learned Biſhoppes of al their dignities, would not haue done ſuch wrong vnto the vertuous men:

vnleſſe they had meant to ſet other in their places, that did very farre excede them in all godlines, learning and eloquence.
            But I wold demaūd one thing of you: if they be ſo holi, ſo lerned, and ſo eloquēt, wherfore did you not cōmit vnto them aboue all other this care and charge to write againſt me? Wherfore would you betray to the worlde your owne ignoaāce and babiſhn
                  •
               ſſe? Was there ſuche a ſcarcity of learned Biſſhops, that you muſt needes take vpon you a charge that was none of yours, no nor ſeemely for you to medle in? For, to mainteine Religion, apperteineth to a Biſhop, not to a man, that is to urmoiled in the ſuites and queſtions of the ciuile Law. If they did not excel in ſuch vertues and qualities as are to be required in Biſhops, what a frowarde malice was that to thruſt out the good Biſhops, and to put ſuch baſe felowes in their roomes and dignities?

You politike wiſe man, doe you not ſee that that common weale is neere to vtter ruine and decaie, wherin ſuch honours as are dewe to honeſtie and vertue are geauen to baſe varlettes? But be it, that they had ben promoted to this honour for their excellent qualities (for I can not wel geſſe the truth of the matter: and it maie be that thei were, before thei came to that dignitie, put to ſchoole to Bucere or els to your Martyr:) but ſir, I demaunde of you, by what right or iuſtice was it done? Howbeit as touching iuſtice you haue already ſatisfied me, when you affirmed, that within the cōpaſſe of the Queenes Maieſties authoritie is conteined, what ſo euer concerneth God or man. But yet I pray you tell me, with what ceremonie, with what ſolemnitie, with what Religion was it done? Who laied handes on them? who cōſecrated them? I would know what holines and puritie you vſed in

the doing of it. For it is like, that ſuch fine and deintie felowes as you are, were offended with our ceremonies, (the which peraduēture might ſeeme vnto you very ſtale and old) and therefore you deuiſed other much trimmer then oures, the whyche you haue brought not neere, but, as you terme it, exceding neere to the very paterne of the goſpel.
            You ſay afterward, that the Church matters are ordered by the biſhops: but when there i
                     •
                   ought to be decreed, the diuines do determine it. It is euident, that you cal thē diuines, who were brought vp vnder Bucer or Caluin. Why then haue you diminiſhed the right of biſſhops? for it perteineth to the biſhops to determine: the diuines haue no more to doe, but only to aſsiſt the biſhoppes with their aduiſe. But you in geauing ouer the right of the biſhops to the diuines, declare, that your biſhops are no diuines. Your biſhops therfore are (as

the common report is) not only poore ſcrapers and baſe felowes, but alſo vtterly ignorant in the holie Scriptures. And menne ſay, that the principall cauſe whie they are choſen, is, that they muſte content them ſelues with ſome ſcantling of their reuenewes, and leaue the reſt to be rifled of you vnder pretence of the Queenes eſcheker. If this be not true, you muſte not blame me, a man (as you ſay your ſelfe) vnacqueinted in the affaires of Englād: but the falſe report of your il willers. Yet, this I warne you, that you and ſuch as you are, doe ſuſteine the great dint of this infamie. For when you chooſe ſuche Biſhops, you make menne ſuſpecte, that you are greedie and coueteous.
            You conclude at the length, that both the adminiſtratiō of the biſhops, and decrees of the diuines are authoriſed by the confirmation of the Quenes Maieſtie. Whie then, if there

ſhalbe anie thing done by the biſhops, or els determined by the diuines, that is not for the Queenes profitte, that ſhal not be ratified.
            Here you ſpeake darkely, I can not tel what, of the Kinges of Iſrael, as though the Prieſtes in olde time had done al thinges, that concerned religion, after the preſcribed ordre of kinges: the which is falſe. You ſay afterward. Then the goſpel ſucceding and diuiding theſe powers, in the firſt place it ſetteth the authoritie of Kinges, and vnder it other powers by the authoritie of Peter and Paule, whoſe names you abuſe to ſet vp the kingdom of the ſea of Rome. 
               Flatterie.O what a plague and deſtruction of common weales, what a whirle wind and tempeſt to your moſt flouriſhing Ilād, what an vtter ruine and decaie of al kingdomes and peoples is this, that is compriſed vnder the naughtines, audacitie, crueltie, and coueteouſnes of flatterers? What wild beaſt can anie

man deuiſe in the worlde more horrible and crewel, then it is? For what ſo euer the pleaſure of Kinges ſtandeth vnto, be it neuer ſo wicked, heinouſe and vngodly, be it not only hurtful to the common weale, but alſo cō
               trarie to al good and godly ordre: it is made forthwith by thoſe clawbackes, whome thei cal to their counſel, to be dewtiful, iuſt, commēdable, religious, moſt wholeſome to the cōmon weale, and moſt acceptable to God. The which thing is wel knowen to haue chaunced vnto king Henry, who was vntil that time both for his vertue, wit, and deedes a moſte noble and renowmed Prince. For when as the king had cōceiued an earneſt loue, and alſo an earneſt diſpleaſure, and was deſirous both to ſatisfie his loue, and alſo to reuēge the diſpleaſure taken of the Pope (who forbad the new mariage) he was brought, by the perſuaſion and authoritie of a certaine wicked man, to beleeue,

that he was ſuprem head of al the Churches that are within the realme of England. This thing was the vndoing of the biſhop of Rocheſter, and More, and of other holie mē, that abid extreme puniſhments: if a moſt honorable death conſtantly ſuffred for the glory of Chriſt and eſtabliſhing of religion may be called an vndoing. From hence as out of a flou
                  •
               dgate iſſued ſo many peſtilent opiniōs, ſuch a broile of ſectes and hereſies, ſuche outrages of lewd felowes into the ſtate of the Church of Englād, to the great decay of the auncient cuſtome.
            But what was the place, the which that moſt vile corrupter would abuſe to proue it? Submit your ſelues, ſaith S. 1. Pet. 
                  
                     •
                  . c.
               Peter, to euery wordly wight for gods ſake, whether it be to the King, as to the more excellēt perſonage, or els to the rulers, as ſent frō God, for the puniſhment of malefactours, and cōmendation of good men▪ what other thing

doth S. Peter in theſe words but only cut of al occaſion of diſordre and outrage? for he would not, that, by the pretenſed name of the libertie of the goſpel, the cōmon weale ſhould be diſordered, or the ſociety of men by ciuil policie gathered together be diſſolued. And therfore doth he bind al Chriſtiā men to the lawes and ordinaunces of menne, ſo that they be not againſt the lawe of God. He commaundeth ſeruantes to obey their maiſters, be they neuer ſo crewel: womē to obey their huſbandes: huſbandes to honour their wiues: children to obei their parentes▪ parentes to loue their children, and to prouide for their bringing vppe and mayntenaunce. Finally the holie Apoſtle commaundeth, that ordre both in commaunding and obeying be kept (whether it be publike or priuat) without any grudging or pretending of exceſsiue libertie. The which ordre was to be kept of Chriſtian men with ſo

much the more diligence, as it was cō
               uenient, that their vertue ſhould ſhine more then the vertue of other menne. Ro. 13. a.The ſelfe ſame thing doth S. Paule, when he warneth vs to ſubmitte our ſelues to the magiſtrates, and to obey the lawful cōmaundementes of Princes. He teacheth maiſters and ſeruantes, parents and childrē, houſbands and wiues the very ſame leſſons.
            I demaund now of you, what goodly pregnant wit is this of yours, or rather of them that brought you into ſo great an errour: that they would picke ſuch a meaning, as you ſpeake of, out of theſe words of S. Peter? Did this word, More excellent, moue you to doe▪ it? Surely that were a manifeſt token of a verie great folie, and extreme madnes. For ſo do we ſaie in common ſp
                  •
               ach; that that man doth excell in nobilitie, or is More excellent, whiche is in deede verie noble, although he be not of all other moſte noble. So

doe we ſaie alſo, that a man excelleth, or is More excellent then other, in vertue, or learning or authoritie, the which paſſeth other in theſe qualities, although he paſſe not al the worlde in them. The ſelfe ſame ſignification and meaning hath the Greeke word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and ſuch is the vſe of it. Moreouer when we ſaie, that an
                  ••
                man excelleth in ſome one thing, we doe not by and by in ſo ſaying yeald, that he doth excel in al thinges: but in that thing only, whereof we ſpake. If mention were made of the ciuile law, and we would ſaie, that M. Waulter Haddon did excel in the knowledge of the ciuile law▪ we did not in ſo ſaying geaue him authoritie to expounde the holie Scriptures, wherein he is altogether ignorant.
            I woulde now demaunde of you, what matter was S. Peter about, when he ſaid that the king was the more excellent perſonage? Was he about the

gouernment of Churches, or thinges apperteining to religiō? No doubtles, but abowte ciuile gouernement, the which he would not haue to be diſordered by anie ſedition.
            What goeth S. Paul about, when he commaundeth vs to ſubmit our ſelues to all powers? The ſelfe ſame thing, Rom. 13. a.that S. Peter doth. And to confirme that, he ſheweth that all power is ordeined and appointed by God. And to teache vs, that this is our bownden dewtie by the law of God, he ſaieth: Geaue therfore to al men their dewe. Tribute, to whome you owne tribute: cuſtume, to whom you owe cuſtume: feare, to whome feare is dewe: and honour, to whom honour apperteineth. It liketh not the Apoſtles to haue anie ſedition or broile in the cōmon weale; or anie thing that maie diſtourbe the peace and good order. And therfore, although Princes were at that time verie ill affected towardes the moſte

holie ordinaūces of Chriſt: yet in matters apperteining to the ciuile gouernment, they cōmaund al Chriſtian men, not only to obey their Princes, but alſo to make their hūble praiers vnto God 1. Tim. 2. a
               for their good eſtate. S. Peter therfore gaue not vnto the king, in calling him more excellent, the ſupreme authoritie in the Church: (neither did anie man euer dreame of▪ that beſides you) but he graunted vnto him the ſupreme power in the ciuile gouernment.
            Tel me, I praie you, who helde the kingdome at that time, when S. Peter wrote theſe thinges? either it was Caius, or Claudius, or Nero. For Tiberius (which was alſo a naughtie and vniuſt man, as we maie coniecture) was dead before. Is this your iudgement then M. Haddon, that Peter and Paul did commaunde, that the Preſident of the Churche ſhoulde doe nothing, but by order of Caius, or Claudius, or Nero: that he ſhould reteine ſuch Prieſtes

onlie, as they wuld haue and put away the reſt, if it liked the emperour: that he ſhould, if there chaunced any difficultie or hard queſtion in the Church, referre it to Ceſar: or that (to be ſhort) he ſhould miniſter all the ceremonies and ſacramentes of our religion according to Nero his pleaſure? If theſe thinges be voied of al wit and reaſon, then is that your opinion, whervpon theſe thinges doe neceſſaliy folowe, ſuche, that if you would ſtudie for it, you can not deuiſe anie thing more fooliſh and vnreaſonable.
            But you will ſaie, that this ſentence of S. Peter perteineth not to ſuche Princes as are enemies to the faith of Chriſt, but only to Chriſtian Princes. If you ſaie ſo, then are you of this mind, that S. Peter gaue this cōmaundement to the Chriſtians, that, ſo long as ſuch men reigned, as were not well affected towardes the name of Chriſt, they ſhoulde not acknowledge their

authority, they ſhould not regard their officers and magiſtrates, they ſhoulde deſpiſe their lawes, they ſhoulde like rebelles diſorder the peace and tranquillitie of the common weale. The which it were a verie great madnes to ſpeake. For then to what pourpoſe ſhould S. Peter bring in this ſentence 1. Pet. 2. c.
               afterward. That you maie, ſaieth he, by well doing▪ put the ignorance of fooliſh men to ſilēce. Doutleſſe, if they had not obeied vngodlie Princes, no man would haue ben put to ſilence by them: but euerie man would haue ſet vpon them, (and that for their deſert) as vpon peace breakers and enemies to al good order.
            If then neither the ſignification of the word requireth it, neither wil reaſon beare it, neither the comely diuiſion of the orders eccleſiaſticall and temporal by anie meanes in the world ſuffer it, that kinges ſhould beare anie ſwaie in the Church: what a ſtraunge

kind of flatterie was this in you, to yeld vnto kinges a full power and ſupreme authoritie in Churches? But what a ſhameles part is that in you, to affirme by the authoritie of S. Peter and Paul, that the authoritie of kinges is aboue al other authorities? I graunt you, that kinges are by the authoritie of S. Peter ſet ouer al rulers and gouerners in the ciuile gouernemēt: but not ouer things apperteining to religiō, not ouer the holi ordināces of the church, not ouer the ſacramentes and ſeruice made to appeaſe the wrath of God.
            And whereas you ſaie, that we doe abuſe th' authority of S. Peter and Paul to ſet vp the kingdome of the ſea of Rome, it is falſe. For we leane to the wordes of Chriſt, when we defend the authoritie of the biſhop of Rome: and who ſo euer doth violently wreſt the moſt plaine woordes of Chriſte, we iudge him to be a preſumptuous felow, we take him for an vnreaſonable,

naughtie and wicked perſone. But before I procede vnto other matters, I thinke it expedient briefely to ſignifie theſe thinges vnto you.
            
               Laie men plagued of God for taking vpō them the office of Prieſts. Num. 16. a
                Dathan and Abiron, for vſing violence towardes the Prieſtes of God, were with a terrible noiſe and ſodeine earthquake deuowred with all the cō
               panie of their wicked complices. Core in like manner with the reſt of his conſpiracie, for taking vpō them impudētly and wickedly the office of Prieſtes, 2. Re. 6▪ 
                  a.
               were cōſumed with ſodeine fier. Oza, by cauſe he preſumed a litle to ſtaie vp with his hād the Ark of promiſe being like to fall, was ſodeinly ſtryken dead. Ozias the king, by cauſe he wold haue 
                  2. Paral▪
                      26. d.
                  
                  Daniel. 5▪
                      g.
                vſurped the office of a Prieſt, was diſſigured with the lepry. Balſeſar the king of Babilō, bicauſe he tooke the veſſels that were appointed to holie vſes, and did vſe them to riot ād bāket in, loſt in one night his kingdome, his riches, and his life. But you, neither doe you feare

the euerlaſting goulfe of hell, neither doe you tremble at the thunder and fier of Gods wrath, neither are you afraied of any puniſhment dewe vnto your raſh preſumpteouſnes, neither do you regard the leprie of perpetual infamie, neither doe you take anie care, leſt ye be robbed and ſpoiled of the riches of the euerlaſting kingdome together with the loſſe of your wordlie dignitie, and temporal life.
            But all theſe thinges not withſtanding, you leaue not to raile at the Popes dignitie. What (a miſchiefe) hatred is this towardes the Pope, ſo crewell and ſo bitter, that you repete one thing ſo often? You ſay thus. But you contend not only for the Popes ſc
                     •
                  ptre, but alſo for his holy ordinaunces and Decrees▪ (as you eſteeme them) by the decaie whereof you thinke that all feare is vaniſhed awaie out of mens heartes. This is true. For being once agreed that the authoritie of the Pope is good and godly: it

foloweth, that we muſt obey his ordinaunces and lawes. For as Kinges, to whome God hath cōmitted the ciuile gouernement in the common weale, not contenting them ſelues with the holie ſcriptures, ſuche as concerne the ſtate of the cōmon weale (for ſo much as al things that maie happen in diuers kindes of cōmon weales, could not be compriſed in them) haue made other ſtatutes and lawes, the which all men are bownd to obey by the law of God: ſo the Biſhops of Rome, to whome is committed the rule and gouernement of the vniuerſal Church (although you ſwel and burſt at it) doe make decrees, not only by word, but alſo in writing, as the times require: the which all we, that beare the name of Chriſtian men, are bownd to obſerue and keepe.
            As for the feare, the whiche, I ſaied, was taken quite awaie by you, I doe impute it, not only to the decaie of the Canon lawe, but muche

more to the neclecting and deſpiſing of the lawe of God. For I ſaie, that thrugh the decrees of Luther the fear of Goddes iudgement and euerlaſting damnation is vtterly quenched. I haue heard, ſaie you, that verie manie men haue ben by the Canons excedingly enritched: but I haue not heard, that manie haue ben instructed in the feare of God. What M. Haddon? Such as folow the ſtudie of the ciuile lawe, are they al inſtructed in the feare of God? No truly. And yet you woulde not haue the whole ciuile lawe to be burned for that. For the ordinaunces of Princes are not to be diſanulled for the malice and crafte of the interpretours: but the lewdnes of ſuch as turne all lawes to their owne gaine and aduantage were moſt ſeuerely to be reſtreined. And yet you ſaie, that you doe obſerue the decrees of Popes, bicauſe they are not a litle profitable. The whiche thing

truly I meruaile muche at, for two cawſes. Firſt, bicauſe in this pointe you diſſent from the moſt holie father Luther, who, as you ſaie, was ſent from heauen. For he burned all the Popes decrees in ſuche ſorte, that he left not one of them. Then, bicauſe all your trade ſo dependeth of heauen, that you eſteeme all wordlie thinges no better woorth, but to be caſt awaie.
            Whereas you ſaie, that I doe accuſe your Doctours, bicauſe they haue cawſed a certaine vnreſtreined libertie in ſuche as they teache: I graunt I am yet of that opinion, and howe true it is, I will declare hereafter.
            You complaine afterward, that I mocke thoſe your holie men. Your woordes are theſe. I woulde haue you to remembre, what your great Maiſter of eloquēce wrote ſometime verie wiſely: that it is an vngodlie coſtume to daly

against the Gods, whether it be done in earneſt or in ſport. You are to ſuperſtitious, M. Haddon, and I ſee now, that Luther is a holie God with you, and that you praie, that Bucer wil be mercifull vnto you, and that you thinke, that you muſt appeaſe with ſacrifice the maieſtie of your Martyr alſo. For theſe men do you eſteeme as Goddes: and therefore I looke when you will erecte aulters vnto them. For els, what other Goddes did I euer ieſt at? Then by like theſe are the Goddes, of whoſe diſpleaſure you warne me to beware. But whereas you ſaie, that I do vſe ieſting wordes againſte Chriſte, in that point you folow your maiſters, which are in the myſterie of lying very handſome crafteſmen.
            You chalenge me to diſpute, a thing ful vnſeemelie for your perſone. For you vnderſtād not the ſcriptures, no, Luther him ſelfe could not, (being, as he was, altogether blinded in vice and

wickednes) diſcerne, what great light was in them. And this is the cauſe why he is caried to and fro, ſo diuerſly, ſo dowbtfully, and ſo vncertanly, that to this daie no man in the world is able to ſaie for certaine: this was his opinion. For at one time he affirmeth, that all ſtandeth in only faith: and he bringeth me in ſuch a faith, as, if it be once receued, al good works are put to flight. At an other time being ouercome by the very force of truth it ſelfe, and aduertiſed by his frindes to auoid the enuie of men, he ſeeketh out the good works againe. I would you wold read ouer my bookes of Iuſtification: and I iudge, you ſhould not neede to be to ſeeke in anie point, concerning this matter, which you now ſpeake of.
            
               We beleeue, ſaie you, the goſpel. You do wel. But the deuils beleeue alſo and quake for feare. But what ſaieth the goſpel? That there is no dāger, ſaie you, of damnation to them, that are graſſed in Rom, 8. a.
                  
Chriſt: that liue not according to the fleſh but according to the ſpirit. For I wil not goe farre from the verie woordes of the holie ſcriptures, leſt I maie ſeeme in ſome point to deale not vprightly. That ſeemeth in deede, M. Haddon, to be the propertie of a perfect lawier, to mainteine the writen word of the law, and to goe ſometimes directely againſt the meaning of the lawe. But, I praie you, what words are thoſe, the which you Ro. 3. dmight in no wiſe leaue out? S. Paul, ſay you, after a long and earneſt diſputation concludeth, that he thought, that we are iuſtified by faith without the woorkes of the law. What S. Paul hath concluded, I know very wel: but what you wold conclude, I doe not yet perfectely vnderſtand. We muſt needes yeld, ſaie you: we are not able to diſcredite the goſpell. But yet we muſt take that withal out of the ſelfe ſame S. Paul: faith that worketh 
               Galat. 5. a
               by charitie. If we doe keepe theſe thinges ioyned together: you maie not ſeparate

them, and ſo reaſon againſte an errour, whiche hath none other author beſides your owne ſelfe. By theſe your wordes I doe coniecture, M. Haddon, that your opiniō is, wheras S. Paul ſaieth, that no man is iuſtified by workes, and againe, that we muſt kepe that faith that worketh by charity: (although theſe things maie ſeeme to diſagree the one with the other) yet that we maie not in anie wiſe depart from the verie wordes of the goſpel. And how ſo euer the ioyning together of theſe thinges maie ſeeme to be a hard matter: yet for ſo much as S. Paul is the authour of it, it were a preſumpteous acte to go about to ſeparate what S. Paul hath ioyned.
            But I am of a cōtrary opiniō, that this only argumēt is ſufficient to proue, that S. Paul neuer ſpake theſe thīgs, bicauſe they hāg not together. For what thing ſtandeth better together and is more agreable, then the reaſoning and doctrine of S. Paul? And nothing is leſſe

agreable then this: that iuſtice is not geauen without that faith, that woorketh by charitie: and, that no man can Onlie faith iuſtifieth not.be iuſtified by works. Not the hearers of the law, ſaieth S. Paul, but the doers Rom. 2. b.of the law, they ſhal be iuſtified. They therfore that doe the thing, that is cō
               maunded in the law, by the authoritie of S. Paul are iuſt before God. If that be true, what is more cōtrary to the meaning of S. Paul, then to ſaie, that no mā is made iuſt by workes? You therfore knit thoſe things together, that cānot be ioyned. But I would ſtand in it, and proue by this reaſon only, if I had none other, that S. Paul wold neuer ſpeak it.
            Whereas you ſaie, that I doe fight or contend againſt an errour, it ſoundeth to my commendacion. For what goodlier thing can I doe, them to plucke vp peſtilent opinions by the roote?
            But when you bring in vpō this, that of the ſelfe ſame errour, which I contēd againſt, ther is none other authour

biſides myne owne ſelfe, we had nede of Oedipus to expound it. You haue a meruelous liking in darke ſayinges. Heard you it euer reported, that I ſhould ſay, that the workes of holie menne were defiled and ſpotted with ſynne, and that for this cauſe no man could atteine iuſtice by holy workes? This is the errour whiche I doe ſtand againſt. But you wil not once ſay ſo, and yet you are ſo babiſh, that you can not vtter, what you thinke. But the fambling of your tongue we wil lette paſſe, and conſider howe fowly you are ouerſeene in weightie matters.
            You ſaie, that woorkes are not auaileable to iuſtification, and yet, you ſay, that workes are not to be deſpiſed, for ſo much as we haue both theſe opinions grounded vpon the authoritie of S. Paul. The principal deuiſours and Archbuylders of your newe goſpell, whome you worſhippe as Goddes, of whome you learned theſe myſteries,

went further then ſo, and ſaid plainly, Luthers moſt dā
                  nable doctrine touching Workes.that al the workes, the which holy mē doe, are not only vnprofitable, but alſo vncleane and ſpotted through the contagion of originall ſynne. For they doe not beleeue, that originall or engraffed ſynne, the whiche we tooke from the ſpring, is quite blotted out in the baptiſme of life: but that it groweth ſtill, and caſteth out ſuch a deale of vncleane vice, that all the doinges of holy men, although thei be done by the mocion and inſtincte of the holie Ghoſt, yea and referred to the glorie of Chriſt, yet they are deadlie ſynnes, and deſerue of iuſtice the puniſhment of euerlaſting damnation, without the great goodnes and mercie of Chriſt. If it be but litle ciuilitie, as you ſaie, (and as yt pleaſeth your great lawier to write alſo) to iudge of a lawe, vnleſſe it be thoroughly weighed and conſidered: reade diligently the bookes of Luther, Melanchthon, Caluine, and

other your learned men, and you ſhall ſee, that this was their opinion, or rather that the whole ſomme of the doctrine, whiche they profeſſed, ſtoode vpon this opinion, that they condemned al workes as wicked and ſynfull.
            You ſee here an extreme deſperation of atteining vnto iuſtice. For if no man can be iuſt, but he only that keepeth the law, as S. Paule ſaith: if not he 
                  Rom. 2. b. Mat. 7. 6.that ſaith Lord, Lord, ſhal enter into the kingdome of heauen, as our Lord him ſelfe declareth plainely, but he that doth the wil of the Father: if iuſtice, as the Prophetes witneſſe, is a ſhunning of all vices, and an earneſt deſire to folowe vertue and honeſtie: if iuſtice cōſiſteth in cleanes of life, in innocencio, in good and ſeemelie ordre of the mind, in holy conuerſation, in newnes of heauenly life, and in the cōtinual exerciſe of charity: and we be able, neither to keepe the commaundementes of God, neither to forſake

vice, neither to folowe honeſtie, neither to doe the woorkes of charitie, if it be ſo, that, (wil we, nil we) we muſt needes beare the yoke of ſynne: by what meanes in the worlde ſhall we be able to aſſure our ſelues of the ſtate of iuſtice, through the grace and mercie of Chriſte, if Chriſte hath not yet broken the force of ſynne in vs by the merite of his bloude, as your maiſters ſay? You ſee here, after what ſort that man, that was (as you ſay) ſent from heauen, hath cut of by his deuiſes all hope of atteining vnto iuſtice. But ſee on the other ſide, how wittily he hath deuiſed a remedie, and how al the reſt haue folowed him.
            He ſaieth, that no man hath anie particular iuſtice through the grace of Chriſt, but that the iuſtice of Chriſte him ſelfe is applied to all beleeuers by faith, in ſuch ſorte, that the iuſtice of Chriſt is no leſſe accōpted and eſteemed in euerie faithfull man (be he neuer

ſo wicked) then if it were that mās owne iuſtice, that ſtaieth vppon faith onely. He ſayth therefore, that it cometh to paſſe through this faith, by the which euerie Chriſtian man aſſureth him ſelfe that he is in the fauour of God, that the iuſtice of Chriſt is imputed to be the iuſtice of that man, that beleeueth. You haue here the law of Luther, ſo muche as concerneth this preſent place, thoroughly ſcanned, ſo that you can not iuſtly complaine of any wrong done vnto Luther.
            Nowe conſider you on the other ſide, what a meruelouſe eaſie waie he hath deuiſed to atteyne vnto iuſtice. For to whome ſhal it not be a very eaſie matter (if he wil beleeue Luther) to ſay thus with him ſelfe? This geare goeth gaily wel with me. I am in high fauour with God for my faithes ſake. It is ſo, that the iuſtice of Chriſt is become mine owne iuſtice. I am therefore as iuſte as Paule, as Peter, yea 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
the moſte bleſſed mother of God her ſelfe: for ſo much as no man hath the cō
               mendation of any particulare iuſtice through the grace of Chriſt: but there is one only iuſtice applied indifferētly to al ſuch as keepe the faith: the which bicauſe it can not be higher or lower, greater or leſſer, it foloweth, that I am ſo iuſte my ſelfe (although there remaine ſynne in me) as he that is moſt iuſt.
            You ſee now, how by the diligence of this excellent felow, all feare is put to flight, preſumption ſet on tip toe, boldhardineſſe confirmed in her full ſtrēgth and force. For ſo much as therfore a man can not be earneſtly prouoked to doe any vertuouſe acte, being either in extreme deſpaire or elles in extreme preſumption: and Luther hath in parte cutte of all hope of iuſtice, and in parte hath brought his diſciples into a moſte preſumpteous affiaunce of atteyning vnto it, by deuiſing

an other iuſtice that was neuer hearde of before: is it not euident, although to eſchewe enuie he ſpake ſometymes manie thinges concerning the woorkes of iuſtice, that he quenched all loue and deſire of well doing? For, I praye you, by what meanes wil you encourage a faint man to doe anie honeſt thing, if he haue learned before of ſome graue perſon, that ſuch as endeuour them ſelues to doe anie vertuouſe acte, doe but looſe their labour?
            Agayne, howe will you driue the feare of euerlaſting damnation into them, that are altogether careleſſe, and preſume ſo muche of their owne iuſtice, that they beleeue, that no man doth paſſe them in any excellencie of iuſtice? Wherefore no man in the worlde wil euer bend him ſelfe to doe holie woorkes (if he hearken to the Doctrine of Luther) for ſo much as it is impoſsible, that any man,

being either in extreme deſpaire of honeſtie, or elles in extreme preſumption of ſaluation, ſhould earneſtly endeuour him ſelfe to folow godlines.
            But, you wil ſay, that it may be, that Luther did exhorte his countrey men to good workes in his Bookes and ſermons. I know that wel. So did Epicure him ſelfe, when he had with Decrees taken away al vertue, yet woulde he diſpute now and then of vertue very notably. I conſider not, what the light felowe ſaith ſometime, either through the inclination of nature, or elles for feare of enuie: but I ſee, what is moſt agreeable to his decrees and doctrine. This is moſt vndowbtedly true that, when thinges are either vtterly deſpaired, or certainely aſſured, there is no man, that wil take any great paines in folowing of vertue. Therefore, for ſo much as Luther hath ſhewed him ſelfe to be the authour both of this extreme deſperation, as alſo of that, extreme

preſumptiō: who doth not ſee, that, by him, al good and godly works hath ben quite ouerthrowen? Wherfore this was in him a great fault, a cruel deede, a ſhameleſſe acte, a wicked crime, an intolerable villanie: but yet was that other muche more heynouſe and deteſtable, that he woulde wreſt the godlie and wiſe ſaying of S. Paule after his owne pleaſure, and abuſe the teſtimonie of the holy Apoſtle to confirme his ſhameles opiniō and doctrine.
            But let vs now ſee, howe you will make Luther the defacer of all vertue, labour, diligence, and induſtrie: to agree with S. Paule, the high Schoolemaiſter of al holines, religion and vertue? S. Paule, ſay you, ſaith, that there is nothing auailable to ſaluation, beſides faith that worketh by charitie. The ſelfe ſame Paul ſaith, that no man is iuſtified by woorkes. It is therefore euidēt, ſay you, that theſe two points are ioyned together.
            
               
But I ſay on the other ſide, that, for ſo much as theſe things do diſagree excedingly the one frō the other, it is impoſsible, that euer S. Paul ſhould ioyne them together. But that it may be fene how il your maiſters vnderſtād S. Paul: it is to be cōſidered, what his meaning was, what he went about, what intention and purpoſe he had, as in al his Epiſtles, ſo eſpecially in this, whiche he wrot to the Romains, out of the which you haue taken theſe teſtimonies corruptly vnderſtood.
            
               A ſound and catholike doctrine touching vvorkes. What was then the purpoſe of S. Paul in this Epiſtle? Doubtleſſe this, to withdraw men from all affiaunce in worldly things to the faith of Chriſt.
            He teacheth therfore, that there was no ſure ſtaie of ſaluation, neither in nature, neither in the ordinaunces of the olde Law. For it was neither nature, neither the law, that toke away iniquity, and brought in iuſtice, in the which only ſtādeth our ſaluation and honour.

For only iuſtice procureth the fauour of God towards mankind.
            And firſt that nature of it ſelf holp
                  •
                nothing towardes iuſtice, he proueth by this argument: bicauſe all menne, which ſtaied vpō nature ōly, although they were endewed with excellente witte, yet they were ſpotted with iniquitie; with vncleane luſtes, malice, couerouſnes, diſhoneſtie of life, crueltie, and with other vices vnſemely to be named. As though he ſhoulde ſaie thus. If the excellencie of nature, if the ſharpeneſſe of witte, if the force of the mind and reaſon had holp
                  ••
                any thing towards iuſtice: then had the Gentils, which excelled in nature, in wie, and in reaſon, ben well appointed and furniſhed for al helpes and ſtates of iuſtice. But the brightnes of iuſtice ſhone not emongeſt them: (for they were full of iniquity and vices without number) wherefore the excellencie of nature holpe them nothing to liue iuſtly.
            
               
Then turning him ſelf to the Iewes, he vrgeth the ſelfe ſame argument, but more earneſtly and with greater force. For he had entered into a moſt erneſt cōflict with the Iews, as touching the ceremonies of the old Law: the which the Iewes, thought neceſſarie to kepe ſtil, beleuing that the ſoules were purged by them. Againſt whom S. Paule diſputeth, declaring that al the ordinā
               ces of the Law, which were but only ſhadowes of Iuſtice, vaniſhed away at the coming of the true and perfect iuſtice: and that ſuche as referred the cauſe of iuſtice vnto thoſe ſhadowes, appaired the honour of Chriſte. For they diſtruſted the power and merite of Chriſt. And therefore writing vnto Gala. 5. a.the Galathians, he ſaith. If you be circu
                  •
               cided, Chriſte ſhal doe you no good. In like manner writing to the Hebrews, he ſaieth, that the Law
                  •
                
               Hebr. 7. c.broughte nothinge to perfection, but that it ſtirred vp men with ſhadowes

only and Images to the hope of the ſaluation to come. And thoſe ceremonies and ſacrifices ordeined by the law, the which in this place and in the epiſtle to the Galathians, he termeth the woorkes of the Lawe, writing to the Hebrewes, he calleth them the iuſtices of the fleſh. S. Paul therefore ſpeaketh 
                  Hebr. 9. 6.of this part of the Lawe, whiche cōſiſteth in ſhadowes of iuſtice, which conteineth the cleanſing of the bodie, and reacheth not vnto the ſoule, whē he ſaith, that no man is iuſtified by the woorkes of the Lawe. This was the meaning of S. Paule, and the concluſion of that ſo long and earneſt diſputation, which you ſpeake of. As though he would ſaie thus. If Circumciſion, if the ſprinkeling of aſſhes, if the offering vppe of brute beaſtes, if the other cleanſinges of the Law did make men iuſt, it ſhould folow, that al the Iewes which obſerued and kept orderly the holie ceremonies of the Lawe, atteſned

vnto iuſtice. But it is euident, that al ſuch lewes as leaned and truſted vnto the lawe only, were naughty men, vncleane liuers, backbiters, murderers, and wicked perſones. Wherefore they receiued not the fruit of iuſtice by the law. And ſo it remaineth, that no man is iuſtified by the workes of the lawe.
            If you haue any wit at al, this reaſon concluding ſo aptely maie teach you, what workes S. Paule meant, when he ſaied, that no man is iuſtified by the works of the law. For otherwiſe what could any man haue ſaid more vnaptly, woorſe hanging together, and leſſe to the purpoſe? If S. Paule had ſaid, that the Iewes had excelled in cleane liuīg, in godlines and innocētie, and yet that ſuch vertuos dedes had helped nothīg towardes iuſtice: if he had vpon theſe thinges concluded, that they were not iuſtified by the workes of the law: you might well haue geſſed, that by the works of the law, he had vnderſtoode

the deedes of vertue and godlines. But S. Paul neuer ſpake any ſuch word. No, he declareth plainly by the teſtimonie of the law it ſelfe, that ſuch as beſtowed much diligēce and labour about the ordināces of the law, wer very naugh ty and wicked men: whereupon he cō
               cludeth, Works of the lavve do not iuſtifie.that the works of the law did not iuſtifie. What then? Think you that S. Paul doth cōclude his argumēt vpon things that are not proued and agreed vpon, as you do? If you preſume to ſay ſo, then ſhal you falſly charge the wiſedome of the holy man with the crime of raſhnes and folie. The whiche thing how far it is from S. Paul, is wel knowen to al ſuche as ſtudie his writinges with a pure intētion. For what can be deuiſed more witty and better applied, fuller of wiſedome and more earneſtly endited, then the reaſoninge and ſtyle of S. Paule? His Arguments are al ſo wellinked within them ſelues the one dependeth of an other

ſo aptly, they are knit together ſo finely, the ſeconde cometh in vppon the firſt, the laſt anſwereth vnto the middelmoſt ſo neceſſarily, he chaineth all the whole diſcourſe in one, with ſuch an excellent order and cunning, that it is not poſsible to finde any one pointe in al his talke, that agreeth not wonderfully wel with his meaning expreſſed in any other place before. It is therfore gathered by the reaſon it ſelf of S. Paule, (which concludeth verie aptly) what workes of the Law thoſe are, by the which, he ſaieth, no man is made iuſt. They are thoſe workes, the which S. Paule plucketh at euermore in his diſputatiō, againſt the which he contendeth moſte earneſtly, from the afſiance of the which he endeuoureth to withdraw the Iewes: for the cauſe of the which he was cruelly aſſaulted of the Iewes, and oftentimes put in great peril of his life.
            Now if you deſire to know, wherfore

theſe ſacrifices of the Lawe, are called the woorkes of the lawe: howe thoſe workes alſo, which are done by the ſtrength of reaſon only, (vnto the which men leane and truſt to muche, and therefore require againſt al reaſon a reward for them, not accordinge to grace, but of duetie) are to be accounted emongeſt the workes of the Law: how the workes of godlines, charitie, humanitie and vertue are to be referred vnto the power and holineſſe of faith: in how great blindenes thei are, the whiche not vnderſtandinge theſe places of S. Paule, and wreſting them from their true meaning, abuſe them to proue, that the workes of holy men are not only vnprofitable, but alſo wic ked: I haue declared theſe thinges plainely ynough in my bookes writen of iuſtice, which are now abroad: and therefore I thinke it not nedefull to repete them againe in this place. I doe not therefore pul in ſunder ſuch things

as are ioyned together by reaſon: but the things, that are diſagreable and cō
               trary the one to the other, I can no
                  •
                
               
                  •
               
               bide to ſee them hudled vp together without reaſon. For, ſeing that S. Paule doth moſt earneſtly exhorte vs to the loue of vertue, innocēcy and charitie: ſaying, that euery mā ſhalbe rewarded according to his workes: ſeing that he affirmeth, that al ſuch as are ioyned vn to Chriſt, are waſhed and clenſed of al vncleanes of ſyn, and are become holy: yea and that they are for cleannes of life and brightnes of vertue comparable to the ſterres: what thing in the world could haue bē ſpokē more cōtrary to this ſaying, ſo oftē and ſo cōſtantly repeted, then to affirme, that ſuche, as the Apoſtle reporteth to be cleane, holy, cleere, moſt excellētly beutified with the brightnes of heauēly vertues, are ſpotted with ſinnes, and that their workes are not only nothing auailable towards the heap and perfection of iuſtice, but alſo that thei are vnclene, ſinful,

and diſteined with the contagious infection of our corrupted nature?
            
               Rom. 8. a. But let vs cōfider the place of S. Paul it ſelfe, which you alleage. S. Paule, ſay you, warāteth, that there is no danger of dānation in ſuch as are ēgraffed in Chriſt. But we take that withal, that foloweth in the ſame place: ſuch as liue not accordīg to the fleſh, but according to the ſpirit. You doe wel to take in that withal. But let vs ſee▪ what are they, that walke, as S. Paul ſaith, accordīg to the fleſh? Doutleſſe thei are thoſe, which are, as S. Paul Gal. 5. c.writing to the Galathians ſaith, corrupted and defiled with auoutrie, with the filthie pleaſure of the bodie, with vncleanes of life, with curſed ſuperſtition, with hatred, with making debate and ſtrife betweene men, with ſtirring vppe troubles and diſcorde, with peſtilente ſectes, with enuie, murder and creweltie, with drunkenes, and glottonie, with theſe and other the like vices, of the which ſaieth the

Apoſtle, I tel you now, as I haue alſo told you before, that who ſoeuer doth ſuch thinges, ſhal neuer poſſeſſe the inheritaunce of God. He excepteth no man, he ſaied not, vnleſſe they haue faith: for it is like that this light of the new Goſpell had not yet ſhined in his eyes. And what they are, that liue according to the Spirit, the Apoſtle declarerh, ſaying, that they are ſuche, is enioye the moſt ſweete and pleſaune fruit of the Spirite. Nowe the fruit of the ſpirit, as he ſaith, is charity, gladnes, peace, conſtancie in vertue, gentlenes, bowntifulnes, faith (not meaning that ſlacke faith, but ſuch a faith, as is ioyned with obedience) mekenes, continencie, and other the like commendable vertues, againſt the whiche no man can procede by law. And yet a manne might doe it, in caſe they were ſpotted and defiled with any ſinne. S. Paule therfore doth in no wiſe promiſe the inheritance of the euerlaſting

kingdom to them that leane to the only faith of Luther: but to ſuches as doe good workes, and direct all the doings of their life to the glorie of Chriſt.
            Here wil you crie out againe, and proteſt the faith of Gods and men, that this is a notable ſlaunder, and not to be borne: and that you did not put ſuche affiaunce in onely Faith, but that you determined withal, that good workes were alſo neceſſarie vnto ſaluation. I will not as now diſpute, howe farre from al reaſon it is, to put any hope or affiaunce of ſaluation in a thing, that is vncleane and wicked. And therfore, if al workes, as Luther ſaith, are defiled with ſinne: then are thei not to be wrought diligētly, but to be neglected and deſpiſed. But omitting this matter, we wil conſider, how theſe works, be they neuer ſo euil, yet muſt thei nedes be had of you: (for this pointe haue I ſearched out with much diligēce.) Bicauſe, ſay they, they folow faith of neceſsitie:

not for that, that workes doe make the way vnto ſaluation, (for as of them ſelues they came not into iudgement) but bicauſe there is in them a certaine fruit of Faith. For as a tree of it ſelf bringeth forth fruit by the ſtregth of nature, ſo dothe faith of neceſsitie bring forth workes. Theſe two points of doctrine do your maiſters teach: butboth the one and the other is falſe.
            For firſt of al, the works themſelues do deſerue either ſaluatiō or dānation: and the workes ſhalbe weied by them ſelues in the balāce of Gods iudgemēt. Pſal. 61. d.Otherwiſe Dauid woulde neuer haue ſaid, that God wil 
                  •
               ēder vnto euery mā 
               Ro. 2. b.according to his workes: S Paul would neuer haue ſaid, that God wil rewarde euery man according to the qualitie of his worke good or il: he would neuer haue ſtaied men with that threat, that 2. Cor. 5. b
               we muſt all ſtand before the iudgemēt ſeat of Chriſt▪ to make account euery Ro. 14. d.man, of what ſo euer good or euill he

hath cmōitted in this life: and that euery mans own works ſhalbe moſt exactly tryed: to make ſhort (for ſo much as the teſtimonies, that may be alleaged, are infinite) the moſt holy iudge himſelfe would neuer haue ſaid, that ſuch as haue done well, ſhal goe into life euerlaſting, Mat. 25. dand ſuch as haue done euil, into euerlaſting fier.
            Then that other point is alſo falſe, that good workes do neceſſarilie ariſe out of Luthers faith. I graunt you, that good workes do folowe my faith, but not yours, M. Haddon, if you beleeue Ro. 10. c.Luther. How ſo ſay you? Bicauſe faith cometh by hearſay, ād hearſay cometh by the worde of Chriſt. For ſo much The faith of the chu
                     •
                  
                  che is fru
                     •
                  
                  ful.therfore as my faith, that is to ſay, the faith of the holy Churche is grounded vpon the wordes of Chriſt, and Chriſt him ſelf ſaith, that al ſuch as do not repente, ſhall be condemned: that ſaith and credit, which I geue to the words of Chriſt, cauſeth me to do penaunce.

               Io▪ 
                  15. b. Againe when our Lorde ſaieth: 
                  〈◊〉
                ſhalbe my friendes, if you will do th
                  •
                thinges, that I commaunde you to doe if I beleeue the wordes of Chriſte, and deſire earneſtly to be receiued into his frindſhip: I wil endeuour my ſelfe to the vttermoſt of my power, to do ſuch thinges as are by him commaunded. And whereas Chriſt telleth vs before, that not he that calleth him Lorde, 
                  Mat. 7. 6.ſhal come to haue the poſſeſsion of the kingdome of heauen, but he that ordereth al his workes according to the wil of the euerlaſting Father: If my faith be not faint, if it be liuelie and ſtrong and inflamed with the deſire of that kingdome: I am ſtirred vp by this faith to directe al my doinges according to the wil of God. See you not now, after what ſort this faith conteineth holy workes within her wombe, which are engendred of the fruictefulnes of her.?
            Now let vs ſee the faith of Luther,

whether it be able to bring foorth any Luthers faith fruitles.fruicte, that is quicke. No without doubt. Firſt of all, bicauſe al workes as he ſaieth, ſeeme they neuer ſo holy, are diſteined with ſynne. And no man maketh any account or eſtimation of a thing that is vncleane and ſpotted with ſynne. Moreouer bicauſe (as he mainteineth) the force and ſtrength of inordinate luſt is ſo great, that he thinketh it impoſsible to withſtand it by any meanes in the world. Seing then it is impoſsible for any man to endeuour him ſelfe to doe any good workes, vnleſſe he doe firſte deſtroie the kingdome of ſynne: and the kingdome of ſynne can not poſsibly be deſtroied, if it be true that Luther ſaith: it remaineth, that no man can poſsibly do any holy workes. For who is ſo mad, that he wil beſtowe his labour in any thing in vaine and without fruicte? Laſt of al bicauſe Luther hath determined ſuch a kind of iuſtice, as needeth not

the healpe of any doing or worke. For if I perſuade my ſelfe, that the iuſtice of Chriſt is applied vnto me by faith, no leſſe then if it were mine own iuſtice: and that I haue atteined vnto that moſte high and perfecte iuſtice of Chriſt, although I lyue and continue in ſyn: with what deſire, care, or hoofulnes ſhould I be pricked forewarde to doe any good worke? Forſomuche therefore as Luther both deſpiſeth holy works, and cutteth of al hope of honeſtie and holineſſe: and by this faith, which he hath deuiſed, taketh away al feare of puniſhment: is it not euident, that he is the ouerthrower of holy workes, the deſtroier of honeſtie and godlines? although he pretēded ſometime to ſtirre vppe his diſciples to the loue of vertue? Wherefore it is manifeſtly ſeene, that this man of God, whō you cōmend aboue the heauens, what with bringing good workes into contempt, and what with cauſing men to

deſpaire of honeſtie, and by teaching a vaine affiaunce in his newly deuiſed iuſtice, hath quite taken away al deſire of doing and working.
            Let vs now come to your other cō
               plaīt, in the which you ſay, that I make no end of babling, while I lament the vnſenſiblenes of Luther, which tyed vp the wil of man with neceſsitie of deſtenie. Truly, ſay you, I am not wonte to be moued with angre, and yet now I can hold my ſelfe no longer. It is my great fault, M. Haddon, that I haue by this my babling as you terme it, cauſed you (being ſo gentle and ſoft by nature as you are) to rage like a mad man. Wel let vs then heare the talke of this felow which is iuſtly prouoked to plaie the bedlome. What ſaie you ſir?
            
               This ſlaunder, ſay you, is not only blockiſh and ignorant, but alſo blaſphemou
                     •
                  : and ſuche, as the verie ſtoones them ſelues, whiche you ſpeake of, if they could ſpeake, would not tourne it againſt

our men. I know, M. Haddon, that that place of Rhetorik is wel applied to this vehement kind of ſpeach, whiche you now vſe. And therfore I looke, when you wil bring in thoſe ſtones, and make them to ſpeake. You ſay afterwarde.
            
               But haue you an eye vnto the Scriptures a litle while, and repent you. Truly I haue a diligent eye vnto them: but I haue not as yet gone to ſchoole with doctour Walter. Now therefore I am attētiue, if I may, by your good inſtructions come to a cleerer vnderſtāding of the ſecrets of God. I wuld ye would vtter vnto vs this wonderful ſtuffe of your high wiſedome. Well: what ſay you then?
            
               Predeſtination. 
               God the Father hath choſen vs in Chriſte, before the foundations of the world were laied, to the ende that we ſhould be holie and vnreproueable before him. How knowe you, M. Walter, I pray you, that you are one of the choſen? Againe which be they, that are holy

and vnreprooueable before God? Doubteles they are ſuch, as are void of al ſynne. But by Luthers doctrine, you can not be without ſinne. For he ſaith, that ſin is not al put out, but that a certaine ſteime of vice breaketh out of it, as it were out of a burning fornace, the which deuoureth and conſumeth all thinges round about it: whereupon it foloweth, that no man is vnreprooueable. But if you peraduenture will ſay, that you ſpeake not of your ſelfe, but of al mankinde: if no man in the worlde be deliuered from al ſynne (as Luther teacheth) then doth it followe, that no man can be vnreproueable.
            
               You heare, ſay you, the election or choiſe of God out of the goſpell, the which you ſo muche deteſt in your talke: and you heare the tyme alſo. Doe I deteſt the election of God? With what face dare you ſaie ſo? In what place? in what woordes? before whome? who

is your witneſſe? who was made priuie? in which of all my writinges can you conuince me to haue ſpoken any ſuch word? Haue you ſuch a pleaſure, to babble out, what ſo euer cometh vpon your tongues end?
            
               Neither is this neceſsitie of Gods electiō
                ſay you, an occaſion whie we ſhould yeald our ſelues wholly to felowe the pleaſures of the bodie and vncleane vices (as it pleaſeth you full vngodly to ſport) but that we ſhould be holie and vnreproueable before God through charitie: as it is declared by the expreſſe woordes of the goſpell. Although I vnderſtande you not verie wel, yet I thinke you make with me. For I ſaie the verie ſame thing, that we are not compelled by any neceſsitie to doe euil: for ſo much as God hath geauen vs (as it is manifeſtly prooued by many places of the Free Wil.Scripture) a free choiſe of life and death. Wherefore we are free, and not tied with any fatal neceſsitie.
            
               
But here again forgetting what you ſaid before, you alleage certaine places out of S. Paule, by the which as I imagine, you intende to take from vs our freedome of will.
            
               Phil. 2. b. 
               It is God, ſaie you, that woorketh in vs both to will and to doe. S. Paul in theſe woordes hath tyed vppe our wil, and reſtreined our power. Neither did S. Paul euer thinke it, neither did your maiſters vnderſtande the meaninge of S. Paule. Muche leſſe is it to be thought that you, being farre inferior to them, ſhould be able to atteine to the Apoſtles meaning in this matter. We graūt this to be true, that our thoughtes and works (ſuch as are wel begon and ended) ought to be referred vnto god, by whoſe power thei are don. For except God had called me backe, when I rāno into all miſchiefe: excepte he had aduertiſed me by the inſtincte of his ſpirit, that I ſhuld not caſt my ſelfe headlōg into euerlaſting thraldome: except

he had with his wholeſome grace and ſure aide ſo ſtrengthened me, that I might be able to doe the godly worke which he commaunded me to doe: I could neither haue done, neither yet haue thought any good thing: but what ſo euer ſtudie or diligence I had emploied either in deuiſing, or els in doing any good worke, it had benne all in vaine. Yet this much we ſay, that we may, not yeald our aſſent to the inſpiration of God, that we may, not regard his liberalitie, that we maie, refuſe his gentle offer, yea and leeſe, thorough ſynne and wi
                  •
               kedneſſe, the Apo
                     •
                  . 3. d.grace, that is alreadie goten. I, ſaith our Lorde, doe ſtand at the doore and knocke. He ſaith not, I doe breake open the doores, or I doe pul them out of the hinges, or I doe breake in by violence: but only, I doe knocke▪ that is to ſay, I doe warne: I doe declare the peril that may enſewe: I do ſhew the hope of ſaluation: I doe promiſe

healpe: and I doe allure men vnto me by benefites. Yet you ſaie.
            
               What then? Is there no difference betwene vs and a ſtone? He muſt needes be more vnſenſible then a ſtone, that wold gather after that ſort. As though I had gathered this, M. Waulter, out of the ſobre meaning of S. Paul, and not out of the dronken dreming of Luther: as it ſhal appeere hereafter.
            
               The ſelfe ſame S. Paul, ſaie you, calleth vs the coadiutours of God, and commaundeth vs to woorke our ſaluation in feare and trembling. See you not then, by the verie woordes of S. Paul, that the freedome of will is buylded vpon his authoritie, the whiche Luther goeth about to ouerthrowe? For wherefore ſhoulde he haue ſaied, that we are the coadiutours of God, if a man coulde doe nothing towardes the woorke, that God woorketh in vs? Wherfore ſhould he haue warned vs to woorke our ſaluation, if it were

not in our power to doe it? But you, euen as in that ioyning of faith that woorketh by charitie, and of woorkes that are vnprofitable, laboured in vaine to glew together by the teſtimonie of S. Paul ſuch things, as can not poſsibly be ioyned: in like manner you would bring to paſſe, by this your ſingular wit, the which we ſimple idiotes can not reache vnto, that freedome and bondage ſhould be knit together with a moſt faſt knot of frindſhip, and that by the ſayings and meaning of S. Paul. And therfore at one time you alleage certaine places of S. Paul, that maketh for freedome: at an other time you bring other teſtimonies, the which, as you thinke, confirmeth bondage. But I might proue by this argument alone, that you could neuer ſo muche as ſuſpecte, what great wiſedome was in S. Paul: (as in whoſe heart reſted the ſpirite of Chriſt) bicauſe you labour to prooue, that he ſpake ſuch thinges, as

are verie contrarie.
            And yet you ſaie, that I doe abhorre the Goſpel. In deede I do abhorre Luthers Goſpell: and when I name Luther, I meane Melanchthon alſo, and Bucer and Caluine, and the reſte of your Baſſaes. For although they be diuers channels of waters, yet came thei al out of one fountaine. But whereas you abuſe the teſtimonies of S. Paul to auowch your vngodlines, me thinketh it is a thing not to be borne. You ſaie afterward.
            
               You ſhall know by three wordes of S. Paul. What ſhall I know? I am able to 
               Philip. 4. c
               doe al thinges in Chriſte, whiche ſtrengtheneth me. And S. Auguſtine compriſed the ſelfe ſame ſentence in other wordes verie finely: God, ſaieth he, crowneth his owne woorkes in vs. Verie well. But to what purpoſe bring you theſe thinges? Be we of them, thinke you, that take parte with Pelagius? Did we euer ſaie, that we coulde doe

anie good and commendable woorke by our owne ſtrength and diligence? No truly. And yet you in this place, as though you had wonne the field, begynne to vaunt your ſelfe without all modeſtie, and ſaie.
            
               What is it? See you not how the prouidence of God is fortified by the authoritie of the holy ſcriptures? And yet you vnderſtande, that it is not the mother of ſynne, but the nourſe of all vertue. O M. Haddon, what agew fitte is this that holdeth you? What damned ſprites are theſe that vexe you? What plagues of ſynne are theſe that folow you vp and downe? Where haue you heard or read, that I doe denie the prouidence of God, or that I doe affirme, that out of it there ſhoulde ariſe anie euil in the worlde? Is this no furie? Is this no madnes? Is this no impudencie? You coulde neuer gather anie ſuche thing out of my writinges: vnleſſe you thinke perhaps, that the prouidence of

God can not ſtand by anie meanes, except the freedome of mans will be taken quite awaie. If you thinke ſo, you are worſe then mad. If you thinke not ſo, and yet wil charge me falſely withall: you are paſt al ſhame. And yet you ſaie.
            
               But let vs goe vnto the fountaines them ſelues, out of the which although there flowe moſt ſweete honey, yet hath your moſt corrupted mind ſucked out of them verie peſtilent poiſon▪
                O M. Waulter, how much it eaſeth your ſtomake, to vomite out this railing poiſon, with the whiche you are glotted? S. Paul writing to the Galathians ſaied: would Gala. 5. b.God they might be cut of that trouble you. In like manner doe I praie vnto Chriſt my God, the authour and geauer of vncorrupted and vpright life: that all ſuch as come to hādle the holy ſcriptures, with an vncleane minde, with fowle eyes, with an vngodlie intent, maie at the length repent them

ſelues: or els, if they wil not, that they maie be put to moſt ſharp puniſhment and horrible death, raither then to bring ſo much miſchiefe into the common weale of the Church.
            In this place, (good Chriſt) what a ſtirre you keepe? how wonderfully you laie about you? how you vaunt your ſelfe in wordes like a conquerour? You doe, in your owne conceit, not only beate backe the hornes, as you ſaied before, but alſo ouerthrow and diſcomfite a whole armie. You bring diuers places of S. Paule, which are nothing neceſſarie, to prooue that there is a prouidence. After that you laie out againſt me with open mowth, as though I ſhould cōclude that by the prouidence of God, if there were any, a man were bereft of his ſenſes. The which is in deede a verie ſhameles lie. For you neuer read anie ſuch word in my oratiō. Neither doth it folow, that a man ſhould be like a blocke, of gods

prouidence, but of Luthers madnes, by the which, cōtrarie to gods prouidēce, he taketh awaie the freedome of the will. But you peraduēture thinke, that the lewdnes of Luther is ſo ioyned with this prouidence, that who ſo euer ſpeketh erneſtly againſt Luthers madnes, he muſt needes appaire Gods prouidence. But I am of a contrarie mind, that who ſo euer foloweth the lewdnes of Luther, doth ſo much as in him lieth, ouerthrow the prouidēce of God.
            But what meaneth this? Wherfore declare you not in plaine words, what you wold haue? wherfore vſe you ſuch darke parables? wherfore forſake you the name of Babilonical bondage, and take vp violētli the name of prouidēce? Luther ſaied, that free wil was either a thing of a title only, or els a title without a thing. He ſaith, that mā doth ſuffer, and not doe: that he is drawen, and doth not deliberat: that he is onli an inſtrumēt, the which God turneth, as him

liſteth: that God driueth him foreward and pulleth him backeward as his pleſure is: and that he vſeth him as a ſawe or a hatchet: and that man hath no power or ſtrength in the worlde to doe either good or euyl. But he correcteth him ſelfe afterward in this manner. I did il, ſaith he, to ſaie that free wil before grace is a thing of a title only: I ought rather to haue ſaied ſimply, that free wil is a feined deuiſe in thinges, or els a title without a thing. For ſo much as it is in no mās power once to thinke anie good or euil (as it is in the article of Wicleffe condemned at Conſtāce) but all thinges doe come to paſſe of a mere and abſolute neceſsitie. He amplifieth theſe things afterwardes with manie wordes, and ſtreineth him ſelfe verie ſore, to prooue that the mind is alwaies tied, the wil bownd, the power to doe taken awaie, yea in ſuche ſort, that we can not poſsibly not only doe, but alſo not ſo much as thinke

vpon anie thing good or bad. Theſe thinges taught Melanchthon alſo, and ſo did Caluine with great copie of woordes, and other, whome I here omit. To be ſhort, the ſomme of this doctrine was, that ther is no difference betwene vs and anie other woorking toole. Theſe are the thinges, whiche your Doctours teach openly.
            But I faie, (and al good men, al holy men, all men endewed with godlines and vertue auowch my ſaying to be true) that to teach this your doctrine is a heinouſe offence, a deſperat boldnes, a deteſtable owtrage, a courſed acte. For graunt me this doctrine to be true, and I ſaie, that lawes are taken quite awaie, counſells put to ſilence, honeſt craftes ouerthrowen, learning defaced, ciuile gouernement diſordered, the determination of right and wrong confounded. I ſaie moreouer (for it foloweth of neceſsitie) that man is bereft of his ſenſes, ſpoiled of coūſel,

depriued of reſon, and brought to that paſſe, that there is no difference betwene him and a ſtone caſt out of the hand. I ſaie alſo, that the warninges of the lawe of God, the commaundementes, counſells, exhortations, and thre
                  •
               tninges, the rewardes aſsigned vnto vertue, and the puniſhmentes appointed for ſinne and wickednes, were to no purpoſe enregeſtred in the holie ſcriptures for the perpetuall remembraunce of them. All theſe inconueniences folow vpō the doctrine of Luther neceſſarily. There foloweth alſo an other incōuenience, the which, (to conceiue it only in heart) is the moſt horrible blaſphemie, that euer could be ſpoken or ymagined, that God the moſt holy and vpright iudge, in whom no iniquitie can poſsibly reſt, doth vniuſli puniſh that offence, of the which him ſelfe was (as Luther ſaieth) a perſwader, a forcible mouer, yea the doer. For euē as, when a murder is cōmitted, not the ſweard, but he that committed

the murder with the ſwerd is arained: ſo, right and reaſon would, that not I, which was forced to doe a miſchiefe by a certaine fatal violence, the which I could not withſtand, but he that vſed ſuche forcible meanes towardes me, ſhuld beare the blame of it. I ſaie therfore, that this point, out of the whiche foloweth ſo many and ſuche horrible mōſters, is ſo heinouſe and wicked, that if al the reſt were gathered together, in cōpariſon of this, they might ſeeme to be very light. For it doth both ouerthrow quite the ſocietie and good order emongeſt men: and it doth falſly charge that our moſt holie Lord and bowntiful father with the crime of vniuſtice and creweltie. This therfore do I ſaie, iudge, define, determine, taught by infinite teſtimonies of the holy ſcripture, moued therūto bi the monumēts of al holy mē that euer wrote either of old time or in our daies, inſtructed by many diſputatiōs of the moſt excellēt

philoſophers, endewed alſo with vpright reaſon, the whiche was wont to be called the lawe of nature and God: that this abſolute or fatale neceſsitie, with the which Luther tied vp all the doinges and thoughtes of men, without exception, can neither ſtand, nor enter into the mind of anie reaſonable man: and that, who ſo euer deuiſed it firſt, was of al men, that euer liued vpon the earth, moſt vile and wicked.
            This is that, which I ſaied. This I would haue you to confute, and to declare, either that Luther neuer ſpake it, or els if he did, to prooue that he did it vpon good cōſideration. The which thing of like you doe not (peraduēture for feare of enuie) and therefore you ſhifte your ſelfe into a diſputation of Gods election, and you goe about to prooue by the teſtimonie of S. Paul, that there is a prouidence: as though I had diſputed againſt the prouidence of God, and not againſt the madnes of

Luther. Can anie man in the worlde deuiſe a more fond or fooliſh order of diſputation and cōfutation, then this is?
            You are ouer bold and raſh to abuſe the epiſtle of S. Paul to the Romaines, being, as you are, altogether ignorant in it. And yet, as though you had with this your leadden ſweard killed God haue mercie on his ſowle, when you had brought in that example out of S. Paul of the children that were yet vnborne, you ranne vpon me like a mad man. This is the language, that you vſed.
            
               What ſaie you good ſir? Behold the election once againe, and that according to the pourpoſe of God. Behold the time of the election which was, before the children were borne. What ſhall we then ſaie? that there is anie vniuſtice in God? S. Paul deteſteth that ſaying, but Ierome Oſorius dowbteth not to auowch it. O M. Haddon, what madnes is this that vexeth you? What ſaie you? What

thinke you? What a ſhameleſſe luſt of lying is this? When ſaied I ſo? in what wordes? Shew the place: reprooue me by witneſſes: conuince me by good proofe. Before you doe this why rage you? Whie take you on like a mad man? Thinke you, that Luther, that mad felowe and filthie varlet, and the heauenlie doctrine of S. Paul are ſo neere ioyned together, that who ſo euer is againſt Luther, muſt needes be againſt the moſt holie ordinaunces of S. Paul alſo? Oh (ſaie you) it is the voice 
               Rom. 9. c.
               of God to Moyſes. I will haue mercie on whome ſo euer I haue mercie, and I will haue compaſsion, on whom ſo euer I haue compaſsion. S. Paul bringeth in vpon this: that it is not in him that will, neither in him that runneth, but in God that taketh mercie. After this you recite the example of Pharao, but you ſhew not plainely, to what ende you alleage it. And then, as though you

had alreadie declared by the teſtimonie of S. Paule, that the freedome of mans wil was taken awaie, you conclude after this ſort.
            
               What ſaieth Ierome Oſorius? For ſooth he ſaieth: if manes reaſon be tied vppe, if freedome of deliberation be taken awaie, if the will be ſettered with euerlaſting bandes: that it muſt needes folowe, that man is altogether bereft of his iudgement and ſenſes, that there is no difference betwene him and a ſtone, yea that God is made to be the authour of euill.
            
            
               And that it ſtandeth not with reaſon, that we ſhould be pouniſhed, for that offence, whiche we committed, not with our will. That is true, M. Haddon, neither haue you confuted my argumentes, neither haue you brought anie teſtimonie of S. Paule, the which might cauſe me to chaunge my minde. And yet as though you had determined the matter all at

pleaſure, you rowſe your ſelfe, and entring into a more earneſt vaine of ſpeach, you bring thoſe woordes, that folowe, out of the innermoſt corner of your cunning. You ſaie thus.
            
               Doe I make anie thing of my ſelfe? doe I alter or chaunge anie thing? do you not acknowledge your owne wordes, whiche are partly falſe, and partly wicked? Theſe things while you declaimed them like a fine Rethorician, and vaunted your ſelfe ſomewhat inſolently with a certaine luſtie kind of talke: you make that ſame gliſtering gloſſe of wordes to ſhine a great deale the brighter by putting in (as your manner is) a taunt or reproch. Your wordes are theſe.
            
               Of like you are that prowd reaſoner, whoſe haughtines S. Paul rebuketh very ſharply. Will you being an earthen veſſel, made of dyrt and claie, demaund of the potter, to what vſe he hath ſo made you? Theſe and the like tauntes you caſte out againſt me, and you warne

me withall, that I doe not ouerthrow, thorough this my intolerable pride, ſuch as leane vppon the prouidence of God. Theſe are the thinges, which you vtter in exceeding great choler.
            O goodly golden veſſel, made by the excellent woorkemanſhip of Bucer, I pray you diſdaine not the poore earthen veſſels: for it is in them, to become golden veſſels. In a great houſe, ſaith S. Paule, there are veſſels, not only of gold and ſiluer, but alſo of wood 2. Tim. 2. c
               and earth. And ſome are made for honour, and ſome for reproch. If any man therefore will pourge him ſelfe from theſe, he ſhalbe a veſſel for honour, made holy and meete for our Lord, and prepared to all good worke. You ſee how S. Paule declareth, that it is a very eaſie matter for vs, if we wil, to be chaunged out of woodden and earthen veſſels, into veſſels of gold and ſiluer. And by what meanes this

thing may be brought to paſſe, he declareth plainly, when he ſaieth: If he wil pourge him ſelfe from theſe. From whom? From them doubtleſſe, which as he ſaid a litle before, had ouerthrowen the faith of certaine men. But that you may vnderſtande, howe ill your maiſters haue expounded thoſe teſtimonies of S. Paule, whiche you haue hudled vppe together, I thinke it neceſſarie to ſet out at large the meaning of S. Paule. The which thing, that it may the better be done, it is to be conſidered, to what ende S. Paule brought al thoſe argumentes.
            
               A learned expoſitiō of S. Pauls Wordes. When he had therefore deſcribed in moſte ample manner the bleſfull ſtate of thoſe menne, the whiche deſpiſing the pride of mans nature, and forſaking the ordinaunces of the law, whiche was now diſanulled, betooke them ſelues wholly to the ſeruice of Chriſt: yea and ſo gaue them ſelues thereunto, that they walked, not according

to the fleſhe, but according to the ſpirite: that is to ſaie: they put away all filthineſſe of vncleane life and naughtineſſe, they cutte of the verie ſtringes of carnalitie, and followed the woorkes of vertue, godlineſſe, and iuſtice with an earneſt deſire: when he recorded after this ſort in his mind the graces and gyftes, with the which the mindes of thoſe menne were adourned and bewtified, that were receiued into the protection of Chriſt, and ordered by the guydaunce of the holy ghoſt: he reioyſed incredibly. But the greater this ioye was, the more grieuouſly did he ſorow at the remēbraunce of the moſt bitter chaūce and fal of his owne countrie menne, whiche had for their crewel treacherie and horrible blindnes of heart loſt ſuch great richeſſe. But for ſo much as many men tooke occaſion by this fall of the Iewes, to appaire the eſtimatiō of Gods truth and faithfulnes: ſaying,

that it could not ſtand with the conſtancie of Gods truth, that that nation, which was foſtered in great expectation of libertie and felicitie, whiche was called by Gods owne promiſes to the hope of the heauenly and euerlaſting kingdome, ſhoule be tourned out of al good thinges, and left in moſt horrible darkeneſſe: and that it might be gathered by this, that either the light was not yet brought into the worlde by Chriſt, or that God was not ſure of his promiſe: for ſo much therefore as certaine raſh and vndiſcrete felowes vſing theſe argumentes went abowte therby moſt vnworthely and ſlaunderouſly to diſteine the glorie of God: S. Paule diſputeth earneſtly for the glory of God, and proueth by very good and grounded reaſons, that God was ſure of his worde, and that he had perfourmed al ſuche thinges, as were promiſed, abundantly. And ſo much doth he ſignifie, when he ſaith. Not, that

the worde of God is fallen. Nowe the Rom. 9. b▪
               prouſe of this defence he taketh out of ſower places.
            The firſt place is the deſcription of a true Iſraelite, to th' intent that, when it was vnderſtoode, that the Gentiles gathered together vnto Chriſte were nombred in the ſtocke of Iſrael, it might appeare, that God had in their ſaluation and honour excedingly well fulfilled his promiſes.
            The ſecond place was that, in the which he declared, that maine, euen of them that came of the very ſtocke of Iſrael, were ſaued. For in that great ſhipwracke, certaine remnantes eſcaped through faith, out of that moſt crewell tempeſt and waues of infidelitie.
            In the third place he teacheth, that ther was no ſtay in god, but that al the Iewes might haue come to ſaluation. For God had his treaſures and richeſſe alwaies in readines to beſtowe them,

and allured them with often calling vpon them to repaire towardes him, and to receiue the fruicte of his bountifulnes: but they being through the aſſiaūce of their law brought into a pride, and through pride into verie madnes, with harts vnkind and obſtinately bent to liue in ſynne, refuſed the liberalitie and gentle calling of God.
            
               Rom. 11. c. Laſt of all he foretelleth, that the time ſhal come, when the ful multitude of the gētiles are come in, that al Iſrael ſhalbe ſaued. And with theſe argumentes, (whiche he handleth at large) the Apoſtle declareth very plainely, howe faſt and ſure God hath alwaies continued in his faithful promiſe. Of the which we wil touch thoſe pointes onely, that apperteine to this preſent diſputation.
            Firſt therfore he ioyneth the deſcription of a true Iſraelite with the declaration of equitie and iuſtice: and declareth, that the nobilitie of a true Iſraelit

conſiſteth, not in the communitie of bloud, but in the propagation of faith: and that he is the true ſonne of Abrahā, that is borne according to the promiſe of God, the whiche faith beholdeth: and not he that is borne according to the fleſh, in the which earthie men do glorie. Not they, ſaith S. Paule, Rom. 9. c▪
               that are the ſonnes of the fleſh, but thei Gen. 18. b.that are the ſonnes of promiſe, are coū
               ted in the ſeede. And this is a word of promiſe: I wil come about this tyme, and Sara ſhal haue a ſonne.
            But leſt it might be ſaid, that Iſaac was therfore preferred before Iſmael, bicauſe he was begotten of a free mother, he bringeth in like manner an other example of twoo twinnes. For Iacob and Eſau were begotten and borne both of one father, of one Mother, and in one hower: and yet was Iacob placed in the inheritaunce of his Father, out of the whiche Eſau was caſte by the prouidence

               
                  〈…〉
                of God. If you will reſpect 
                  〈…〉
                of their birth, it 
                  〈…〉
                Eſau ſhould haue benn
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                bicauſe he came firſt into the 
                  •
               orlde. If you conſider the merites of woorkes, it was determined in Gods ſecret counſel, before thei were borne, and before they had done anie thing good or euyl, that Iacob ſhould haue the preeminence. S. Paule ſetting this ſimilitude before our eyes, confirmeth, that this nobilitie of Iſrael is to be aſcribed, neither to any ſtocke of man, neither to auncetrie, neither to any merite going before: but to the grace of God, the whiche according to election goeth before al merites of vertue and godlineſſe. For Iacob repreſented ſuch, as ſtay them ſelues vppon faith, and looke for the grace and mercie of God: but Eſau reſembled them, the which haue no reſpect vnto the grace of God, but are puffed 
                  〈◊〉
                with an affiaunce, whiche they 
                  •
               aue

               
                  〈…〉
                woorkes.
            
               
                  〈…〉
                leſſon therefore we gather out 
                  
                     •
                  ſounde and Cath
                     •
                   like concluſion.
               
                  〈…〉
                place of S. Paule: that it is not 
                  〈…〉
                ſtocke on Petegree of manne, nor woorke▪ nor the Lawe, that maketh 
                  •
               ru
                  •
                Iſraelites, but the election, calling, and grace of God.
            But let vs ſee. This ſo notable a mercie of God, which is beſtowed vppon vs without any deſert or merit of ours, is it geauen without any choiſe? No t
                  •
               uly. For then were there chaunce and vnaduiſednes in the iudgement of God, the whiche no man can once thinke without great offence. S. Paule therefore to put awaye that dam
                  •
               able opinion, ſaith. To the end that the det
                  •
               rmination Rom. 9. c.of God might ſtand according to election: it was ſaied not by 
                  •
               orkes, but by the caller, that the elder ſhould ſerue the yonger.
            
               Election. 
               
                  〈…〉
                woorde Election, 
                  〈…〉
                oddes or difference 
                  〈…〉
                with 
                  〈…〉
               
               
that there was ſomewhat in the thing choſen, which was not in the thing refuſed. For the purpoſe of God is a preuented iudgement, in the which God according to election and foreknowledge of thinges, which he ſeeth ſhall come to paſſe, ſome he apointeth mercifully vnto glorie, and other he adiudgeth to euerlaſting damnatiō. Neither is the wiſedome of God, which comprehēdeth in his endleſſe knowlege al things, that hath ben, that are nowe, or ſhalbe hereafter, cōpelled to looke for the euent of things, when he wil geue iudgement.
            What was that then, whiche God choſe before? was it any worke, or merite that was woorthy of the grace of God? No truely. For, if it were ſo, grace were no grace. It is certaine, that through the mere mercy of God al only, we were diliuered frō the darkenes of ſyn, and ſet in the poſſeſsion of iuſtice. For he was nothing in our debt.

But rather for the hatred towards the law of God engraffed in the nature of the body (which was after ſynne made ſubiect vnto the tyrannie of inordinate luſt) we were al moſt worthy of euerlaſting puniſhment.
            Moreouer although that moſt high and euerlaſting bountie woulde, as S. Paul ſaith, that al men ſhould be ſaued: 1. Tim. 2. a
               yet the order of iuſtice wil not beare, that ſuch as vnkindly refuſe the benefites of God, and continue in that wickednes to the end, ſhuld receiue them. They therfore are moſt iuſtly excluded from the benefites of God, whiche are at defiance with the boūty of God, and will not in any wiſe be receiued into his fauour. Now wheras God knew before the beginnings of the worlde, that it ſhould come thus to paſſe, of his mercie he choſe them, which he ſawe woulde not at the ende ſtubbornelie refuſe his ſo greate benefites. And thus it cometh to paſſe, that ſome

are by his iuſt iudgemente refuſed, and other are by his great mercie called to enioy
                  •
                his euerlaſting riches.
            But you wil ſaie peraduenture: what Sir? Saie you that any merite of man goeth before the grace of God? No forſooth. For the very yelding of my minde, by the which I geue my aſſent vnto the warninges and inſpirations of God, and do not refuſe his benefites, is to be referred to the grace and mercie of him, that called me, and bowed my mind: and in the receiuing of my ſaluation and dignitie there is no merite of mine. For if I be a poore needie man, and oppreſſed with extreme neceſsity, what merite is mine, if I be ſuſteined, and enriched by the liberalitie of ſome bountiful Prince, which ought me nothing? What doth the Phyſition owe me▪ the which of his own accord hath healed my wounds, bicauſe I haue ſuffered my ſelfe to be healed of him? Againe what is he in my debt, whiche

ſeeing me beſet on euerie ſyde with theeues, deliuered me from preſent death? Nothing at al. So therfore it cometh to paſſe, that ſuch as be receiued into the fauour and grace of God, are ſaued by mercy: and ſuch as be excluded from the grace of God, are repelled by his moſt iuſt iudgement. Rom. 9. c.
            
            It foloweth in the text of S. Paule. What ſhall we then ſaie? Is there any vnrighteouſnes in God? God forbid. For he ſaith vnto Moyſes. I wil haue mercie on whom I haue mercie: and I wil haue compaſsion on whom I haue compaſsion. S. Paule geueth a reaſon, wherfore no man can poſsibly laie any vniuſtice to God. For the defence of Gods iuſtice ſtandeth altogether in his mercie. For that often repetition of Gods mercie ſignifieth his great conſtācie in geauing mercie. And the mercy of God quiteth his iuſtice of al ſlaū
               den. As though oure Lorde him ſelfe ſhould ſaie: I am by nature ſo merciful,

that I pleaſure in no thing more, then in pardoning of ſyns, and in keeping a moſt cōſtant and euerlaſting mercie to mainteine them, whome I haue receiued into my protection. It may therefore be ſene very wel, when I do punniſh ſyn▪ that ſuch as are cōdemned, do periſh through their owne default. For if thei would come to good order, thei might obtein the like mercy and be ſaued. But forſomuch as of their own accord, thei eſtemed more darkenes then light, bondage then freedom▪ pouertie then riches, death then life: it was iuſt, that they ſhoulde be throwen downe headlōg into bitter paine and torment. And ſo by this place which S. Paul allegeth after a heuēli ſort, of the aſſured nes of Gods mercie, we ſee his iuſtice vtterly diſcharged of al ſlander. Wherfore in the calamity of the Iews no mā could finde any lacke of truth in God, but he might well blame the vnfaithfulnes and wicked ſtubbornes of them, that would not be ſaued by the mercie

of God Then to cōfirme this ſaying, ād to teach vs that al hope of ſaluatiō is to be referred to the merci of God, which is ſo freely offred to al mē: he ſaith. It is Rom. 9. c.not therfore in hi that willeth, neither in him that rūneth, but in God that taketh mercy. Wil importeth a deſire: rūning ſignifieth an earneſt endeuour to honeſtie: the which both are comprehēded in the benefit of God. For it is he the which with often calling vpō me cauſeth me to wil: it is he alſo, the which geueth a cheerefulnes vnto my wil. Howbeit, neither my deſire, neyther my cherfulnes, ſhal haue ani good ſucceſſe, vnleſſe he of his mercie ſhall bring both my wil and my earneſt endeuour to perfection. For our ſtrength is appaired, our hopes vaniſh al to nothing, ſo often as the mercie of God for our vnkindnes of heart, departeth from vs. When I therefore doe any good woorke, it is to be aſcribed neither to mans will as being naturallie

inclined to honeſty, neither to my earneſt endeuour: but only to the mercy of God. But that it might appeare yet more plainely, that the Iewes fell not through the vniuſtice of God, as vngodlie men reported, but through their owne vnfaithfulneſſe and wilfull ſinne, he reherſeth the like example of naughtines and lacke of beleefe. For God vſed the like meanes in callinge Pharao to honeſtie, and fraying him from vnbeleefe. But he of a pride and ſtubbornes, which was in him, would abuſe the mercie of God, to his farre greater puniſhmente and damnation. Vppon this, S. Paule bringeth in theſe Exod. 9. d.wordes. For the Scripture ſaith vnto Pharao: for this haue I ſtirred thee vp, that I maie ſhewe my power in thee, and that my name may be declared in al the earth. In the which place, two thinges are to be noted.
            The firſt is, that Pharao was not driuen to ſuche outrage by any violence

o
                  •
                force of Gods behalfe, as S. Paule declareth him ſelf unon after. The other point is, that the wickednes of Pharao was therfore tolerated a great while of God, the moſt wiſe and bountiful Lord of al things, (which out of euil thinges draweth euermore ſome good, and bringeth thinges diſordered into good order) that by ſhewing one example of 
                  ••
               ueritie, he might kepe a great many men in wel doing. And this may appeare much better, if we will trie the wordes at the Hebrew fountaine, for this ſentence might very well be tranſlated after this ſorte. For this cauſe haue I ſuffred thee to ſtand, that I may ſh
                  •
               we my power to theo, and that my name may be honoured in al the earth. He ſayeth not, I haue taken away thy wittes from thee, and I haue cauſed thee to be madde, that thou ſhouldeſt continually rebell againſt mee: but, I haue ſuffred thee a greate while, and haue differred thy due punniſhmente,

that I mighte reſerue it to the greater ſetting out of my glorie, and the ſaluation of many men.
            He called Pharao both to faith and alſo to honeſtie. But for ſo much as Pharao regarded not the goodneſſe of God, but ranne on like a wild colt vpon an vnbridled affection: it ſtode verie wel, not onely with Goddes iuſtice, but alſo with his mercie, that many menne ſhould by the moſt iuſt example of Pharao be put in feare, and ſo brought to good ordre. For as the gouernours of common weales doe vſe to out of with conſtant ſeueritie, ſuch as they can not redreſſe by lighter puniſhmentes, to the ende that they may by the terrour of that puniſhment keepe the reſt of the citizins in ordre: euen ſo doth that moſt high gouernour ſhew ſometimes an exāple of ſeueritie vpon them, that wil not be refourmed, but wil vpō ſinne wickedly cōmitted heape a ſhameleſſe defence:

that he maie by the deathe of thoſe lewd perſons benefite the whole, and that he may, in puniſhing the wicked, ſhew many points of his high mercie.
            What is the cauſe then, that we ſee that word ſo often repeted: And God hardened the heart of Pharao. To hardē is, to g
                  •
               ue vnto wicked men, which do abuſe good thīgs vnto malice, ſome matter with the which they may encreace their ſyn and ſtubbornes. Knoweſt thou not, ſaith S. Paule, that the goodnes of God mooueth the to penāce? But thou, according to thy hardnes and vnrepentaunt hart, doeſt treaſure vp to thy ſelf diſpleaſure. In like maner therefore God cauſed not that hardnes in Pharao: but Pharao refuſed the mercie of God, and of a certaine hardnes and frowardnes, that was rooted in him, abuſed the clemēcy of God vnto greater ſyn, and ſo encreaſed the heape of Gods wrathe towardes him euery day more and more.
            
               
Now marke how wonderfully the Apoſtle linketh together his argumēts▪ Firſt of al he declareth, that to be a true Iſraelite cometh not of mans nature, but of the grace of God. Then he confirmeth the iuſtice of God, by the greatnes of his grace, which is offred freely to al men, that wil vſe it. For by that mercie it is euidently ſeene, that ſuch as periſhed, periſhed through theyr owne default: and this doth he declare more plainly by the example of Pharao, the whiche refuſed the mercie of God, and was willingly forlorne: that it might be gathered by this, that the Iewes fell in like manner through their owne wilful blindnes, bicauſe their hearte was to obſtinatly bent and har
               
                  •
               lened in wickednes: and that their dā
               nation is not to be imputed vnto God, which called them to ſaluation▪ but vnto their owne naughtines and ſtubbornes, whiche refuſed the goodnes of God. Vpon this the Apoſtle bringeth

in theſe wordes. Wherefore he taketh Rom. 9. 
                  
                     •
                  .mercie on whome he wil, and hardeneth whom he wil. The which is not ſo to be taken, as though the thing that God willeth, he willeth it without great good reaſon. For the wil of his euerlaſting wiſedome can not be ſundered from vnderſtanding, reaſon, and aduiſement. And his will is to rewarde the faith of the choſen, not as of dewtie, but according to grace. His wil is alſo to withdraw his helpe and aide, from ſuch, as refuſe it, ād to ſuffer them to be of a corrupt iudgement. Hereuppon S. Paule ſayeth: Then you wil ſay Ibidem.vnto me: Wherefore doth he yet complaine? For who ſhal withſtand his wil? In theſe wordes S. Paule bringeth in the perſon of a preſumpteous man, the which iudged raſhly of the counſel of God, and vnderſtandeth this ſentence of the ſcripture naughtily: and he maketh him to ſpeake very vngodly, that he may the better ſtop the mowth of

vngodlines it ſelfe. If this be true, ſaith euery wicked perſon, that God taketh mercy on whom he wil, and whō him liſteth, he refuſeth him, and hardneth his hart, and no man can reſiſt his wil: then he that ſynneth, ſinneth of neceſsity. If he do ſyn of neceſsity, wherfore doth God ſo often cōplaine of the hardenes and crueltie of wicked men?
            This ſynful and preſumpteous talke S. Paule cōfuteth two waies. Firſt of al, he ſheweth, that it is a preſumpteous act, to iudge of the iugemēt of god. For euen for this cauſe only, that a thing is don bi god, although we vnderſtād not the reaſon of it, yet muſt we aſſuredly thinke, that it was done, not without great reaſon. Then he declareth the counſel of God, by the which he hardneth, that is to ſaie, beareth long time with the wicked, and at the length leaueth them deſtitute of his aide and healpe, that he may ſuffer them to periſh Rom. 9. d.to the profite of manier. O man, ſaieth the Apoſtle, who art thou, that

reaſoneſt with God? Doth the thing, which is fourmed, ſaie vnto him that fourmed it, why haſt thou made me ſo? May not the potter make of one lump of claie one veſſel to honour, and an other to diſhonour? In which place you may cōſidre by the name of a pot, that it is not a worke which is determined without reaſon, but ſuch a thinge, as is done by workemāſhip. Wherin he geueth you to vnderſtand this much. If the potter, as a potter, doth what ſo euer he doth, by art: much more doth God al things, by art, reſon, and coūſel. S. Paul therfore ſpeaketh after this ſort. O man wilt thou not loke circūſpectly about thee? wilt thou not acknowlege the frailtie of thy nature? wilt thou not cōſidre the wiſdom and power of god? Wilt thou not dreade his Maieſtie? If there were any ſenſe in earthen veſſels: ſurely ſuche veſſels were not to be borne withall, as woulde diſpute with the potter, whiche made them,

of the workemanſhip wherwith they were made. Much leſſe is the preſumpteouſnes of a ſeelie man to be borne▪ the which improueth the iudgemente of that moſt excellent gouernour, and in an endleſſe and incomprehenſible wiſedom findeth lacke of cunning and ſkill. Art thou at that point in deede? The thing, the cauſe and reaſon wherof thou art not able to atteine vnto by wit, wilt thou by and by ſtand vnto it, that it is void of al reaſon? The potter maketh by arte one veſſel for honour, an other for diſhonour: and loke what is made by arte, no man may wel finde fault withal. And wilt thou ſaie, that the thing, which is made of that moſt high and perfecte wiſedome, (in the which neither raſhneſſe, neither vniuſtice may reſt) is made vndiſcretely and vniuſtly? By theſe wordes S. Paul intend
                  •
               th only to put vs to vnderſtād, that it is a very grieuouſe offence, to trie the iudgements of God by the balance

of mans reaſon, and to doubt of his iuſtice. He doth therefore onely keepe downe vnreaſonable preſumpteouſnes, and fraieth raſh and prowde 'menne, by denouncing vnto them the iudgement of god.
            After that he declareth, what is to be holden as touching this queſtion. Theſe are his words. If ſo be, that God Rom. 9. 
                  
                     •
                  .willing to ſhew his wtath, and to make his power knowen, hath ſuffered the veſſels of wrath with much patience, which were ſhaped to deſtructiō, that he might ſhew the ritches of his glory towardes the veſſels of mercie, the which he hath prepared to glorie. It is an vnperfecte ſpeach, the whiche manner of ſpeaking S. Paule vſeth oftē tymes. There lacketh either this, or ſome other thing like to this. And yet wilt thou reprooue the wiſe and iuſt counſel of god?
            Now in theſe wordes, firſt of al it is to be noted, that God framed not the

veſſels of wrath. Truth it is, that God made nature vnto the veſſels, but not ſynne, not vngodlines, not the reſt of vices, which deſerueth to be puniſhed moſt ſharply by the ſeueritie of Gods iudgement, (whiche the holie Scripture calleth wrath). For it cometh to paſſe by the wil of euery wicked man, that he is made the veſſel of wrath, which would not be made the veſſel of mercie. The whiche thing S. Paule meanīg to ſet forth more plainly, ſaith: He ſuffered. And being not ſatisfied with that word he ſaith moreouer: He ſuffred in much patience the veſſels of wrath. What is this? What griefe is that ſo great? What torment is that ſo crewel, that, to the bearing of it, God neded patiēce, yea and that no mea
                  ••
               , but exceding great patience? Doubtles it is that, which is (if God were ſubiect to any griefe) of al griefes, that may be deuiſed, the greateſt: to wit, it is vicious liuing, wickednes, and an obſtinate

wil to cōtinue in ſynne. For there is nothing els, that diſagreeth with his vertue, goodnes, and wiſedome: there is nothing els, that is directely againſt his moſt holy ordinaunces and lawes: to be ſhorte, there is nothing elles, that God doth moſte extremely hate and dereſt. So that, it is no wonder, if a verie great patience were (to ſpeake of God as of a man) needefull, to beare ſuch a bitter torment. God therefore cauſed not this hardneſſe of heart in Pharao, but he ſuffred with a certaine great patience the wilfull ſtubbornes of that moſt wicked man, whiche grieued his heart. The which thing to expreſſe the beter, S. Paule ſaith: Veſſels made to deſtruction. He ſaith not: The veſſels which God him ſelfe hath made to deſtruction: as he ſaieth a litle after of the veſſels of mercie, the whiche God him ſelfe hath prepared to glorie: that you may vnderſtande, that Godlie menne are

appointed vnto glorie by the wil and mercie of God, and that wicked men are thruſt out violētly into euerlaſting tormentes, through euerie mans owne Eſai. 50. dwilful ſynne: as Eſaie ſaith. Goe into the fier, whiche you haue kendled for your owne ſelues. But to what ende, I praie you, did that moſt high Lord ſuffer ſo long time and with ſuche great patience the veſſels of reproch? To ſhewe, ſaith the Apoſtle, his wrath: that is to ſay, to ſhewe the ſeueritie of his moſt holie iudgement, and the power of his maieſtie. Againe, I aſke you: to what pourpoſe was it, to deſire Rom. 9. c.to declare that vnto menne? To ſhewe, ſaieth he, the ritches of his glorie towardes the veſſels of mercie, the which he hath prepared to glorie. For he doth al thinges for the choſens ſake.
            Now it remaineth, that we doe cō
               ſider, what fruict doe the choſen take by ſetting the iudgemente of god, before

their eyes? Very great without doubt. For firſt of al, while the choſen ſee the wicked puniſhed according to their deſertes, it putteth a certaine feare of Gods iuſtice into their hartes, whiche cauſeth them to abſteine from euil doinges. For the foundation of Prou. 1. a.true wiſedō
               
                  ••
                is laied vpon the feare of God. Moreouer the vertue of the good being aſſaulted both by the priuy awaites, as alſo by the forcible attēptes of wicked perſonnes ſhineth a great deale the brighter. For vertue maketh a great ſhew of her ſelfe, when it is neither corrupted by the example of vicious menne, neither tourned away from the exerciſe of godlines through naughtie counſell, neither drawen from the loue of moſt holie Religion by threatninges or tormentes. Againe when they conſider by the fal of the wicked, out of howe great thraldome they are delyuered by the mercie of God, they embrace their parent and

redeemer with a much more feruent deſire and earneſt loue. Laſt of al the very holines it ſelfe of the euerlaſting lawe, and the ordre of Gods iuſtice being ſet before the eyes and ſight of good menne, bringeth them to a cleerer vnderſtanding of God, and cauſeth the mercy of God vſed towardes holy men to be the better knowen: and ſo increaſeth their ioye. To the intēt therfore that the good might take ſo great and ſo manifold fruicts by the dānation of the wicked: god would not vſe any ſuch violence towardes the wicked, that they ſhould cōmit ſinne as being driuen vnto it of neceſsitie: but he ſuffred moſte patiently their wilful frowardnes and ſtubborne obſtinacy, that he might in the end tourne altogether to the glory of his choſen.
            If you haue not vtterly loſt al ſenſe of a ſobre man, you may ſee plainely, that free wil is not by the ſaying of S. Paule taken away, but rather verie

ſurely eſtabliſhed. Theſe thinges the Apoſtle proſecuteth afterwarde more at large, and declareth at the length, howe the Iewes fell from God thorough their pride, arrogancie, vnfaithfulneſſe, and obſtinacie. For they were ſo puffed vp with a vaine affiaunce of a ſhadowed iuſtice, which ſtoode vpon the woorkes of the lawe, that they deſpiſed very ſtubbornly and wickedlye the true iuſtice, whiche conſiſteth in cleannes of life, in holineſſe, in charitie, in peace, in ioye, and in other the like fourniture of heauenly vertues whiche by the holie ghoſt are planted in the mindes of godly men.
            Now for ſo much as this is the ſaying and meaning of S. Paul, what rage was that, that came into that mad mās brain, the which wēt about by the autority of S. Paul to perſuade ſuch an opinion, as both ouerthrew good order emongeſt men, and falſly charged God

with vniuſtice? For what right is it, that wicked men ſhould be puniſhed for a wicked acte, whiche they cōmitted, not willingly, but being violently driuen vnto it by an euerlaſting and external power.
            
               Luther ſay you, ſet out a Booke, in the whiche he ſpake earnestly against the hurly burlies in Germanie. What if ſome one of them, whom he rebuked, ſhould haue ſaid vnto him euē then: ô Luther, why doſt thou blame vs innocēt men? whie keepeſt thou ſuch a ſtirre? whie plaieſt thou the madde man? we haue learned of the, that it is not in vs to do any thing good or euil: in ſo much that we are not free, ſo much as to thinke ſuch thinges, as we would. For God worketh al things in vs, as you ſay: and we are only certaine working tooles, the which god thruſteth out with his hand, whether ſo euer him liſteth, and wrēcheth vs foreward and backeward at his pleaſure. Theſe tourmoiles therfore

ādſeditiō, for the which you blame vs, God al only, as you teach, hath ſtirred vppe. For ſo much as therfore, that moſt mighty Lord, whoſe power can not be hindered by any ſtrēgth of man, is the mouer, the deuiſer, yea the doer of this ſtirre, whie blame you vs for it? Whie reuile you vs? Whie labour you vainly to withdraw vs from this ſedition? If anie man, I ſaie, of that multitude, whiche Luther tooke vp with ſuche ſharpe woordes, had ſaied thus much vnto him: I praie you, what anſwere woulde he haue made? With what honeſt ſhifte woulde he bothe maintaine his doctrine, and defend the iuſtice of God?
            But to let Luther paſſe: what ſaie you ſir Luthers aduocate, which ſaie, that he was ſent from God: how maie you (if you approoue his doctrine and rules) puniſh male factours? If there be no freedome, if mans will be tied, if al power be taken awaie, if the verie

thoughtes be fettered, if al things, both greateſt, and leaſt, and middlemoſt, be bownd with an euerlaſt neceſsitie, if God be the authour and doer of all things both good an euyl: vndowbtedly thoſe ſeelie wretches, which you (as I take it) commaunde to be had awaie to execution, haue done nothing. By what right doe you puniſh the innocent men? What reaſon haue you to put gyltleſſe perſones to death? who made this lawe, that the doers of fellony ſhould be acquited, and the tooles or inſtrumentes of fellons cōdemned? with what kind of ſpeach, are you able (if you minde to maintaine this doctrine) to rid that moſt high Iudge of the infamie of vniuſtice. Is this no villanie? Is this no madnes? Is this no preſumpteous part of a raſh and an vnbridled mind? And yet wheras Luther doth at one time both diſtourbe the order of mans life, and lay vnto gods charg, (like a moſt ſhameles varlet) the crime

of vniuſtice: he is not afraied to ſaie, that he ſtandeth in defence of Gods glorie, whiche he goeth about to deface and ouerthrow.
            You ſaie, that I doe condemne the firſt fownders of this doctrine, as no leſſe wicked and vngodlie, then if they Protag. and Diag. thought there vvas no God.were like vnto Protagoras or Diagoras. I am not ſo blunt, that I woulde ſaie ſo. I thinke them not onlie comparable with Diagoras in wickednes, but alſo incōparably worſe then euer he was. For I take it to be more tolerable, to thinke that there is no God, then to thinke that God is a malefactour and vniuſt.
            Now as towching prouidence (that I maie once cōclude this matter) I ſaie no more but this. If the prouidence of ProuidēceGod be a counſell determined by the foreknowledge of thinges, if the word of election, if the purpoſe of God, that is to ſaie, the preuēted iudgement and euerlaſting decree do import a reaſon

and meaning: then doth he confeſſe the prouidence of God, which bele
                  •
               
               ueth, that there was nothing apointed and ordeined of God from before the begynning of the worlde without verie great counſell, iuſtice and reaſon. And contrarie wiſe, thei that ſaie, that God hath ſorted out of the common lumpe of mankind ſuch as he woulde directe vnto euerlaſting glorie, and Proteſtāts denie Gods prouidence.ſuch as he would apoint vnto euerlaſting dānation, vpō none other reaſon or cōſideration, but bicauſe him liſted ſo to doe: how ſo euer they maintaine the prouidence of God in word, they denie it in deede. For he that taketh awaie the meaning and reaſon, taketh awaie prouidence.
            But will you ſee, how like a babler you proſecut the reſt of your matters? Your woordes are theſe. At the length when you haue ſcholded your fill, you begynne to conclude ſomewhat, making a totall ſomme of all ſuche thinges, as you

complaine haue ben ouerthrowen by our men: and you aſke what thing hath ſucceded in their roome. O M. Haddon I haue iuſt cauſe to complaine. For I ſee none other thing ſet vp in the ſteede of them, but only that woorſhipfull acte of yours, in the which you glorie ſo muche, and therfore you repete it verie often. For the ſuperſtitious ydle
                     •
                  es of lurking hypocrites, ſaie you, we haue ſet vp the neceſſarie buſines of Chriſtian profeſsion: for wandering pleaſures, moſt honourable marriage: for the dreames of mens inuentions, the holie Scriptures of God the Father, and of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt. The waſt and hauoke of holie thinges I ſee: but what you haue reſtored in their roome I ſee nothing, as I told you before, except it be, for moſt godlie quietnes, moſt wicked ſtirring: for the loue of chaſt life, filthie and inceſteouſe ribaudrie: for the puritie of moſt holie doctrine, moſt peſtilent errours of deſperate felowes.
            
               
               Would God, ſaie you, ye had here broken of your moſt reprochful epiſtle: Of like you are not aſhamed of your tauntes, which you haue gathered together without anie cawſe in the world. I aſſure you, I am wearie of the reherſal of them. To what purpoſe is it, to repeate ſo often, without argumēt, without comely grace, without any likely hod of truth, thoſe your ſo ſhameles and vnreaſonable errours, in the eares of the Quenes maieſtie, yea in the eares of al Chriſt endume? How ſtā
               deth this geare together, M. Haddon? Saied you not before, that I was an excellent framer of wordes and ſentences? Confeſſed you not, that you liked wel my kind of vtteraunce? Haue you not called me often times in this your booke Cicero his ſcholer? Wherfore then ſaie you now, that my epiſtle was written without anie argument (as for the comelie and pleaſaunt grace I wil ſaie nothing?) By like, when you commended mine eloquence, you ſpake

not in earneſt and as you thought. You dalied with me, Sir pleaſaunce, you dalied: and the ladie Venus, in the honour of whome you haue prophaned and vnhalowed the tēples of chaſtitie, hath beſprinkled you with her comelie and pleaſaunt graces. Howbeit I thinke this very much to be miſliked in this your pleaſauntnes, that it can not be well perceiued, when you ſpeake in earneſt, and when you ſport. But peraduenture you thinke it a cō
               mendation of a ſharpe witte, to ſpeake darkly, and therefore you vſe it in diſputation alſo. But howe often you caſte me in the teeth with the name of Cicero? As though I ſhoulde be aſhamed of hym, or els thought my ſelfe hable to expreſſe in my writinges anie parte of his witte, vehemencie, and copie: as though I had ſtudied Cicero only, and had not ſpent verie muche time in other▪ the higheſt pointes of learning. But you like

a foxie lawier and wilie proctour, haue made a verie good prouiſo, that no man maie wel laie the name of Cicero to your charge. For you ſpeake nothing in cleane ſpeach, nothing plainly, nothing diſtinctely, nothing orderly, nothing grauely, nothing eloquently. What ſo euer liketh you, you put it in: and then you prooue it, not by argument and reaſon, but by railing and ſhameles talke. At the length as though you had wonne the field, you pricke me with the briſtles of your reprocheful tongue, you preſſe me with a numbre of apiſh queſtions▪ you triumph like a noddie before the victorie. Whervpon you ſaie thus?
            
               What ſaie you good ſir? And then? S. Paul deteſteth it: Ierome Oſorius is not afraied to auouch it. As though I affirmed that thing, whiche you there denied, or els meaned to diſpute with S. Paul, and not with Luther. And again. What ſaieth, Ierome Oſorius? And again.

               Doe I make anie thing? Doe I chaunge anie thing? And with theſe woordes for ſooth, you would haue ſeemed to be a vehement ſpeaker 
                  〈◊〉
                this of the, M. Haddon, if you can (bicauſe your 
                  〈◊〉
                lucke was to chaunce vpon ſuch a maiſter, which brought you vp ſo fooliſhly and ſo ignorātly) that theſe queſtions are then both gra
                  •
               e and vehement in deede, when the aduerſarie i
                  •
                cōuinced by ſome firme and ſure argument. For otherwiſe they are verie 
                  •
               oliſh and to be laughed at: for ſo much is they haue no vehemēcie or ſtrength in the worlde, but only a declaration of a certaine pitifull pang or heat of the ſtomake. So God healpe me, as I could not ſometime (although your talke ſeemed vnto me verie much to be pitied) hold my ſelfe frō laughing. And ſo I am fully diſcharged of my promiſe, whiche I made you, that, in caſe you could driue me either by grownded reaſons, or els by true exāples to geaue

my aſſent vnto you, I would not refuſe it. For neither haue you brought anie argument, neither alleaged any example, that was to the pourpoſe: and y
                  •
               t, as though you had borne your ſelf like a pretie man, you rage and reuel in wordes, and keepe a meru
                  •
               lous pitifull and frantique ſtirre. I can not deuiſe, what wicked ſprite it ſhould be, that put you in mind to take this charge of writing vpon you. Yet I meane not, but that you maie doe, as you thinke good: neither wil I limite you in ſuche ſorte, that you maie not in writing ſhew your ſelfe to be as fooliſh, as you liſt. And to put you in good comfort, take this of my worde, that no man, which is of anie iudgement, wil find fault with you, for being to much a Ciceronian.
         
         
            
            THE THIRD BOOKE.
            
            
               IT foloweth now, that we make anſwere vnto your other complaint, in the whiche you ſeme to take that part of myne epiſtle very grieuouſly, wherin I reckened vp the impudencie, the robberies, poyſoninges, conſpiracies and other deteſtable vices, ſo manie, that my maiſter Cicero, as you faie, neuer heaped vp moe againſt Verres, with the whiche I ſhoulde ſaie, that England was atteinted. Wherin you ſhew verie plainly, that you read thoſe my letters with litle heede. For it was neuer my meaning, to condemne all Englande of ſuche vices. For I knowe, there are in that Iland verie manie godlie and religious men,

which neuer fel from the holy church, but would gladly yeald their liues for the glorie of Chriſt, if neede ſo required. Yea manie haue alreadie by their moſt honourable death ſet out their faith excedingly: manie haue abiden impriſonement, reprochful woordes, with diuers other incōmodities: manie being loth to ſee ſuche a decaie of religion, wander from place to place of their owne accord like baniſhed men and outcaſtes, and haue liefer to keepe a continual combat with miſerie and needines, then to beholde with their eies ſo heauy a ſight. The which thing verie manie other men would do alſo, if you would ſuffer them. Moreouer and this I heare that ther are certaine places within that Ilād, vnto the which the infectiō of this morreine is not yet come: and it is reported that there are manie noble men alſo, which are vntowched. A frind of myne, an honeſt and credible perſon, which hath ſome

doinges in England, tolde me this for certaine, that there are moe in the realme, that continue in their faith ſtil, then there are of ſuch as haue forſaken it: howbeit they dare not profeſſe it openly, for feare of them, that are in authoritie. For it is lawful for them, ſo long as they are not required to profeſſe their faith openly, to keepe it to them ſelues, vntill ſuch time, as, they muſt either maintaine their religiō by ſuffring death, (if they be put vnto it) or els reſerue them ſelues to a better worlde, to the ende that all good men decaie not at once. And as for them, whoſe heartes are not blinded with pride, which are caried awaie, not ſo much of malice and naughtines, as of ſimplicity of mind (of the which there are verie manie) maie verie eaſily be brought home againe. Wherefore I ſaied not, that al the Iland was geuen to ſuche vices, neither haue I laied downe al hope of the recouerie of the

whole: no, I truſt to ſee within theſe few daies ſuch an alteration of things, that the verie remembrance of this moſt peſtilent plague ſhalbe vtterlie aboliſhed.
            Furthermore I meant not in thoſe my letters (as I tolde you before) to make anie enditement or accuſation, but to aduertiſe your Prince, that ſhe ſhould not ſuffer her ſelf to be infected with the peſtilent ſectes of deſperate felowes: the which thing that I might doe it the better, I declared certaine tokēs, by the which true religiō might be diſcerned from falſe religiō, and true Prophetes frō falſe Prophetes. In the doing wherof if I lacked diſcretion, we ſhal ſee anon. Thus much haue I ſpokē concerning my letters, the which you ſaie were writen without good argument, and without anie comely grace. Wherin I find a great lacke of grauitie in you: for it is not the part of a graue mā, to be moued with a talke, which is

void of all good argumēt. And yet you (as a man maie wel cōiecture by your writinges) after you had read my letters, fell into ſuch a pelting chafe, ſuch a rage and madnes, that you betraied your griefe by reprochfull and railing talke: yea you went ſo farre in it, that you were not aſhamed to bewraie to the worlde the verie ſtammering and ſtuttering of your tongue.
            You confeſſe alſo, that my letters were caried vp and down throughout al Chriſtendome, the whiche ſhoulde not haue ben done, if they had ben written without anie good grownd.
            But let vs ſee, how you, which ſaie that I had no argument to ſtaie vpon, will anſwere that myne argument, by the whiche I prooued, that the puritie of the Goſpel was not reſtored by your maiſters, for ſo much as emongeſt the diſciples of your Goſpel there raigneth a numbre of moſt deteſtable vices. Tuſhe, ſaie you, it is all falſe,

that you report of the diſhoneſtie of the men of our ſide. Such is your impudēcy, M. Haddon, that you will denie the thing, which is knowen and commōly bruted, yea which is ſealed and cōfirmed by the teſtimoniall of the whole worlde. Doe you not cōfeſſe the broiles and tumultes of Germany? See you not with your eyes, how volupteouſnes flieth to and fro auancing her ſelfe? how licentious liuing getteth vp and down vncōtrolled? how the churches of religious men are prophaned with bloudſhead? how al places of deuotiō are rifled and robbed how treaſon and wilie practiſes are wrought againſte Princes by your ſectaries? how al places, where ſo euer your maiſters ſet vp ſchoole, are diſtourbed with hurly burlies? How then dare you ſaie, that that thing was neuer done, which you not only heare of other men, but alſo ſee it done daily with your owne eyes?
            
               
Admit, ſay you, that this were true: yet could it neuer com of this cauſe which you gather. I would faine learne of you, how it ſhould not come of this cauſe. There was alwaies, ſay you, darnel ſomen emongeſt the good corne. There was alwaies ſeedes of diuerſe kindes, of the which ſome were choked in the thornes, and ſome were dried vp by the heate of the ſonne. The falſe Prophettes did alwaies bende them ſelues against the true Prophets: our Lord Ieſus Chriſt fownde Caiphaſſes; the Apoſtles found Nerons: the Martyrs, that folowed them, founde Decies. But to omit theſe thinges as ouer ſtale, I wil bring you home to your owne doores. In your Churche is there not ſynne committed openly? Do not men offend in the ſight of the worlde? You deny it not. Wel then, throwe away your argument, the whiche either it is of no force, or els, if it be, it is againſt your owne ſelfe firſte, and againſt your Churche.
            
               
By this talke you thinke, that you haue tourned the eadge of our dagger. But you ſee not, howe manie faultes there are in it. Firſte of all I deny not, that it was euer ſo (as I ſaid plainely in my letters) that there were manie vices in euerie common weale, and that the ſeades of naughtines were ſowen emongeſt the good corne. But I required (and that inſtātly) to vnderſtand, how theſe menne of god had diſcharged their duetie, which tooke vpon them to purge the corne, and to plucke vppe al ſuch weedes are were noiſome to the corne. The which thing when I ſaw they performed not, yea, when I ſaw that through their diligence vice came vp a great deale ranker then it did before, I gathered by that, that their doctrine was nothing wholeſome. That the true Prophetes ſuſteined the enmitie of falſe Prophetes, Chriſte of Caiphas, the Apoſtles of Nerons, the Martyrs

of Decies, I graunt you: but that maketh much more for the confirmation of myne argument. For vertue was euer enuied of the wicked, hateſull to viciouſe, aſſaulted by the vnfaithful. Vertue euer aſſaulted, and yet preuaileth.And yet was it alwaies of ſuche puyſſaunce, that it preuailed againſt al crafte and policie, againſt all ſubtile practiſes and priuie awaites, againſt the force of wickedneſſe and vice, and brought to the world a goodly and wholeſome ordre. For they that gaue eare to the Prophetes, that folowed Chriſt, that kept the faith of the Apoſtles, that reuerenced the cō
               ſtancie of the Martyrs, were not preſumpteouſe, wicked, diſordered, and vicious: but they were wiſe, modeſt, gētle, courteous, decked and beutified with diuerſe and ſundry vertues. For the vertue of holy mē, the more it was aſſaulted, the greater and goodlier increaſe it yealded of godlie fruict. But your doctours whiche were ſent, as

you ſay, from heauen into the worlde, hauing the aide of great Princes, being garded by the common people, yealded no fruicte of honeſtie, chaſtitie, or meekeneſſe to ſuch as folowed them.
            I ſpeake not of your aduerſaries, by whom you wil complanie peraduenture, that your brethren haue benne wrongfully withſtoode, euen as the Martyrs were ſome tyme by the Decies: but I ſpeake euen of them, that loue Luther, Bucer, Zwinglius, and your Martyr, that praiſe and reuer
                  •
               ce them, yea that eſteeme them as gods: I ſay, that they them ſelues, whiche procured to haue theſe wiſe men to be their ſchoolemaiſters, prooued neuer a whit the better: whereby it is concluded, that their doctrine was nothing wholeſome, euen to ſuche as did not only not diſalowe it, but alſo eſteemed it very highly.
            Now whereas you demaund of me of our Church (for ſo you ſpeke) whether

it be voide of al ſynne: I haue alreadie lamented the ſynful life of our men very oft. There raigneth, I graūt you euen at this day emongeſt vs both coueteouſnes and ambition in manie: neither is volupteouſnes grubbed vp by the rootes.
            Why then, ſay you, the argument, which I vſed, may eaſily be tourned againſt our own ſelues. How ſo I pray you? If there ſhould ariſe ſome great prophet emōgſt vs, which would take ſo great a charge vpon him, as to purge and fine the goſpel to reſtore the aunciēt diſcipline, to proppe vp the Churche, which tendeth to ruine, with heauenly doctrine, to bring his diſciples to liue like Apoſtles: if we ſhould folow hi and yet that notwithſtāding liue in vice as we did before, then were this a good argument, both againſt our prophete, as alſo againſt our owne ſelues. But the brightneſſe of this ſo cleere light hath not yet ſhined vppon vs:

wherefore it is no wonder, if we continue ſtil in our accuſtomed ſynnes. But to you, whome the ſprite hath repleniſhed with a certaine new light, which might very eaſily haue ben inſtructed in heauenly thinges, by ſuche men, as were ſent frō heauen for your ſaluation, whiche are by the goodnes of God already deliuered from ſuperſtition and hypocriſie which deſpiſe al wordly thinges, and wil ſuffer nothing to be mingled with the puritie of your Doctrine, vnleſſe it be drawen out of heauen: to you, I ſay, it were nothing ſeemely to haue any daungerouſe diſeaſe or cracke of vncleane vice. For, if you haue: your doctours, whome you commende aboue the ſkies, you ſhame them for euer, and their Doctrine you declare by your doinges to be not only vnprofitable, but alſo hurtfull and peſtilent. But for ſo much as you deſire to vnderſtande the ſtate of our Churche, I will declare it vnto

to you, ſo briefly as is poſsible.
            
               The ſtate and belefe of the Catholike Churche. Firſte of all, we doe moſte conſtantly hold and mainteyne the Goſpol, not of Luther, Melanchthon, Caroloſtadius, Zwinglius, Caluine or Bucer, but of Matthew, Marke, Luke and Iohn: and we keepe one faith, not this newly deuiſed faith, whiche is ioyned with a raſh and vayne preſumption: but that faith, which was taught by the Apoſtles, and is not corrupted through the naughtines of outragious and mad men.
            In lyke manner we are incloſed within one Churche, whiche was ſownded by Chriſt, inſtructed by the Apoſtles, fortified by the aide of the Martyrs, ſette out by the Doctrine of holie menne, defended and kepte alwaies inuincible by the power of the holy Ghoſte in ſpite of the maliciouſe and violent attemptes of all Hore
                  •
               iques: and without this Churche, we beleeue aſſuredly
                  •
               , that there

is no hope of ſaluation.
            This Church we acknwolege to be ſo linked in one meaning, in one ſpirite, in the agreeable confeſsion of one faith, yea to be faſt glewed together with ſuch agreemēt in religiō, that no man can poſsibly by deuiſing new opinions (ſuch as may concerne the principal points of religion) rend and teare it into a numbre of ſectes iarring and ſquaring the one with the other without al reaſon and ordre.
            And bicauſe we know by the goſpel, by the teſtimonie of Martyrs, by the faithful and agreable report of holie menne, by reaſon and common experience of thinges, that it is not poſsible, that the Churche ſhould be one, excepte it haue one ſupreme Gouernour the Vicar of Chriſte▪ whiche may by his inu
                  •
               olable authoritie ioyne together thinges ſeparated, knitte vppo thinges looſe
                  •
               , and keepe all me
                  •
               ne in one faith and

vnifourme order: we do moſt willinglie obeie the Biſhop of Rome, which as Chriſtes deputy exerciſeth this ſo great office in the earth, and what ſo euer is cōmaunded vs by him, we do it without any refuſal. And the very experience of thinges maketh vs to do it the more willinglie, bicauſe we ſee, that, where ſo euer this authoritie is taken awaye, there breaketh out by and by many peſtilent and troubleſome ſects. That this power is builded not vppon any decree of man, but vpon the ordinaunce of Chriſte him ſelfe, it is moſte euidently proued, not only by the authoritie of the holie Scripture, but alſo by the teſtimonie of all the antiquitie, (wherein we are not ignorant).
            We refuſe not the authoritie of any lawfull power. For we beleeue, as S. Rom. 13. aPaul teacheth vs, that al lawful power is ondeined by God: ſo that, who ſo euer reſiſteth a lawfull power, is to be taken as though he didde reſiſt
                  •
               
               
not men, but God him ſelfe. For this cauſe we beleue, that not only the decrees of Popes, but alſo the ordinances of Kings (ſuch as are not cōtrary to the law of God) are moſt diligently to be obſerued and kept. Emongeſt the ordinances of mē this choiſe we make. Al ſuch as cauſe a ſlackenes in the keping of the law of God, we reiect, as the deuiſes of men: but al ſuch as prouoke vs to be more earneſt in the obſeruation thereof, we iudge to haue ben ordeined, not without the inſtinct of the holy Mar. 9. f.Ghoſt. For Chriſt ſaied: He that is not againſt you, is for you. For this cauſe, we thinke that the rules of Baſile the great, of Benet, Bernard, Brunus, Frauncis, Dominike, and other the like ſingular good and holie men, ſuche as tende to the perfection of a Chriſtian lyfe, are not to be ſette at naughte. For they are all written to this ende, that ſuche as binde them ſelues vnto them, may the more willingly

keepe the chaſtitie of body, and cleanes of heart▪ the which two things are conteined in the counſelles of the Goſpell) and may with a great deale more freedome and cheerelineſſe ſing and prayſe God daie and night, and ſo with the more facilitie folow the lyfe of Angels here in earth.
            If we ſee any decaie in their manners through looſenes or negligence, we thinke it expedient to prouide out of hand, that it may be ſtreightly boūd vp by the rigour of the olde diſcipline, and not to ouerthrow the place, where men may liue ſo godly and ſo wonderfull a life. And bicauſe we can not be weaned from the acqueintaunce of the bodie ſo much as it were to be wiſſhed we coulde: bicauſe we vnderſtande, that the beginning of mans miſerie procedeth of negligence and forgetfulnes, what ſo euer thing mai bring vs to remember the bowntifulnes and mercy of God, we vſe it very diligētly.
            
               
Therfore euen as we make the ſigne Croſſes.of the Croſſe vpon our forehead (the which manner S. Baſile referreth to a tradition of the Apoſtles) ſo doe we ſet vp Croſſes not onely in Churches, but alſo in our howſes and highwaies, to the end, that the remembraunce of ſo great a benefite ſhould neuer depart out of our minde. For if God, when he deliuered the peple of Iſrael by the diligence of Moyſes out of the weake dominion of Pharao, gaue order vnto them, that they ſhoulde alwaies haue, before their eyes, in their handes, and in ſuch places of their howſes as were in ſight, ſome monument of that benefit: how much more diligently ought we to doe it, which are redeemed, not by the meane of Moyſes, but hy the benefite of that moſt bountifull Lord, which was offred vp for vs, from euerlaſting darkenes and damnation, into euerlaſting light, libertie, and glorie?
            For the ſame cauſe were the Images

of holy men ſet vp of olde time (as Images o
                     •
                   Saintes.it is declared before) that men beholding them, ſhould be moued the oftener to bend their mindes to thinke vppon thoſe men, whiche walked more feruently in the ſteppes of Chriſt, and to diſpoſe them ſelues the ſoner to folow their godlines and vertue. For in holie men, we doe not ſo much reuerence the men them ſelues, as the maieſtie of Chriſte, whiche dwelleth in their heartes. For they are the ſonnes of God, the brothers of Chriſte, the heires of the euerlaſting and heauenlie kingdome: the whiche ſtate all ſuche haue atteined by the benefit of Chriſt, as haue ſo nailed their ſenſes vpon the Croſſe, that there liueth none other thing in them, but only the ſpirit, will, and pleaſure of Chriſt: as S. Paule ſaid: Gal. 2. d.I liue, now not I, but Chriſt liueth in me. And ſo we honour in holy men a moſt excellent gift of God, a verie expreſſe Image of God, yea (after a maner

of ſpech) certain Gods, in the brightnes of whome we extol and praiſe for euermore the moſte high and euerlaſting benefite of God.
            
               The Catho like faith. Now the faith, in the which we liue, is ſuch, that it doth neither miniſh our hope in attempting any good woorke, neither wipe away quite all feare or doubt of ſaluation: but it bringeth the wel diſpoſed mindes in hope of godlines and vertue, and it driueth withall now and then a certaine feare into all ſuch, as think vpon the rigour of Gods iudgementes. For Chriſte, which by his bloud hath drowned ſynne (as it is writen) into the deapth, and hath furniſhed all ſuche, as are come vnto him with a liuely and true faith, with the giftes of holines, puritie and iuſtice, hath appointed euerlaſting damnation to them, that refuſe to obeie his commaundemente. For he was made the Heb. 5. c.cauſe of euerlaſtinge ſaluation, not to euerie man, that boaſteth of faith, but

to ſuche as obeie him (as Sainct Paul
                  •
                ſaieth).
            
               Workes. Wherefore we beleeue, that the woorkes of holie menne are not diſteyned with anie vncleanes of ſynne (for that were a derogation and diſhonour to Chriſte, for ſo muche as they are donne by his grace and power) and we knowe for certaine, that ſuche as thinke not, that the lyfe of manne is to be ſpente in doing holie woorkes, (if they continue in that lewde opinion) ſhalbe tormēted in hel for euermore.
            We confeſſe, that men being deſtitute of the aide and grace of Chriſte, can neither doe, nor endeuour, no nor thinke any thing, that is auaileable to euerlaſting ſaluation: and therfore we beleeue, that all hope of ſaluation, all the meane to atteine vnto true honour, all the ſtaie of lyfe euerlaſting reſteth in the mercie of God. And Free vvill.yet we beleeue this aſſuredlie, that it

lieth in vs, either to refuſe, or els to accept thankefully this benefite, when it is offered vnto vs. And as we doe not deface, neither the ſignes of the holie Croſſe, neither the Images of Chriſte, neither the monumentes of holy men: ſo do we thinke, that the reuerent ordre Ceremonies.of al ceremonies, and the religious vſage of holie Sacramentes (I meane not any newefourmed ordre, deuiſed and trimmed by the witte of fine M. Haddon, but that moſt old and auncient vſage, whiche was approoued by the ful agreement of the holy Fathers, as it may eaſily appeare by their writinges) is moſte reuerently and inuiolably to be obſerued and kept.
            
               Penance. When we fall, we thinke it expedient foorth with to haue recourſe to the Churche, and to the iudgement of the Confeſsiō.Prieſt. There is made a due examination of the ſinne, and it is ſeene howe great the deformitie of it was: whervpon the mind, which is now aſhamed

of ſuch vncleanes, doth the more earneſtlie hate and deteſt the offence cō
               mitted, and a
                  •
                keth pardon humbly, and is abſolued by the ſentēce of the Prieſt, whiche repreſenteth the perſonne of Chriſt: but yet ſo, that he muſt diſcretly ſubmit him ſelfe to ſuch order as the Mat. 10. d.Prieſt will inioyne him. He that heareth Luc. 10. c.you ſaith our Sauiour Chriſt, heareth Io. 13. c.me, and he that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me.
            
               Our Lords Supper. After this we come with feare and trembling, and with a good affiance of the mercie of God, vnto that moſt holy and dreadful Sacrament of the body and bloud of Chriſt, in the which banket we are ſo refreſhed and ſtrengthened, that we doe withſtand the tyrannie of bodily luſtes with a greater force and courage. And bicauſe it were a daungerouſe matter to leaue all this to the wil and diſcretiō of euery man (for there are many ſicke men, which will not be healed: and the life of the common

ſorte is not ſo well gouerned by will, as by lawe and diſcipline) it hath ben ordeined vpon great conſiderations, that all Chriſtian men ſhould be conſtreined to laie this ſo ſoueraigne a ſalue to their wounds at the leaſt once euerie yeare. There are many, which come vnto this Sacramente oftentimes: but yet ſo, that they examine them ſelues before diligently, as Sainct Paule teacheth, and endeuoure them ſelues to waſſh out all the ſpottes of ſynne by the merite of Chriſt, which they may moſt eaſilie obteine, if they will confeſſe and forſake their foremer lyfe. It is a wonder to ſee, what a multitude of menne is fedde enerie Sonnedaie and Holie daie in the yeare, with this Diuine and heauenly foode, and howe by the helpe of it they are ſtirred more earneſtlie to ſeeke after heauenly richeſſe. For we ſee in them, that are oftentimes refreſhed with the moſte holy bodie of Chriſte, that the

darkenes of ſinne is driuen away, the light of heauen riſeth, vertue and godlineſſe are planted in them, the moſte goodlie fruictes of iuſtice are powred vpon them abundantly.
            
               The office of biſhops Biſhops, ſuch as are able to preach, (the which hath ben litle regarded of ſome to the greate hinderaunce of the Church) do preach oftētimes. Such as are not able to diſcharge it themſelues, appoint certain religious and wiſe perſons, men wel learned, not in the rules of Bucer or your Martyr, but in the holy ſcripture, and in the bokes of the holy Fathers, to inſtruct the people with chaſt, pure, and religious doctrine. And as we ſee it come to paſſe, eſpecially in ſuch as are bleare eyed, that, if they be either put into an extreme dark place, or els loke ouer ſteddily vpō the ſonne beames, thei leeſe their ſight: euen ſo, if mē either be altogether turned away frō the light of God, or els wil looke to intentiuely vppon it, before the blearednes

of their minde be healed, they are ſtriken ſtone blinde. Wherefore it is very wiſely and warily prouided of vs, that we neither ſuffer the common people to lacke the light of Gods word any time, neither do we daſel their eies ſo muche with the brightneſſe thereof (which they are not able to abide) that they may be therewithall miſerablie blinded. We bring therfore none other thing in our ſermons, but that, which we iudge effectual to bring men to the loue of godlines and folowing of charitie, to the hatred of ſinne and forſaking of vncleanes of lyfe. And for this cauſe doe we ſet before their eyes oftentimes, the crowne of euerlaſtinge glorie, and the paine of the euerlaſting torment. But the daungerous queſtions of darke and ſecret matters we do for good conſideration leaue vntowched in ſuch ſermons as are made vnto the people. The authoritie of Biſhops is great: in ſo much that, it is not very

hard for them to reſtreine the vnbrideled luſt of diſordered perſons, and to remoue them, that be obſtinate in ſin, from the Communion of the Church. Neither are ſuch menne choſen to be Biſhops, as may be either for baſeneſſe deſpiſed, or for foliſhnes ſet at naught, or for notoriouſe vices reprehended, and ſo do much hurt by their example.
            
               The times of the yere The times of the yeare are ſo conſecrated and diuided with ordinarie and ſolemne ceremonies, that at all tymes there is ſomewhat done in the Church, which may renew in vs the remembrance of Gods graces and benefites.
            
               Aduent. And, to beginne at the Moneth of Decembre, we are then ſtyrred vp to remembre that time, in the which the holy Fathers of the olde time loked for the coming of the Sonne of God into the earth, and beſought him with continuall prayers to haſten it, and had a moſt earneſt deſire to ſee it: that we

might the better vnderſtande, howe muche we are bound and endebted to God, which hath graunted vs the ioyfull fruition of that moſte excellent fruit, which the old Fathers, very holy men, and of God intierly beloued, ſo griedily luſted and longed after.
            
               Chriſtmas When the daie of Chriſtes birth is come, we keepe watches, and ſinge hymnes and Pſalmes by note: our organs alſo and others inſtruments ſound euery where to the honour and praiſe of God: euery thing doth then ſtirre vs vp to beholde the Sonne of almightie God, the moſt excellēt Lord and maker of al the world, lying naked and crying in a mangier in the weake fourme of a ſucking babe. We heare then with the eares of our heartes the voices of Angels bringers of that glad tydinges: and we endeuour by faith to doe our homage with the ſheape
                  •
               erdes vnto the King that is borne vnto vs: and fixing our ſelues in the contēplation of him,

wee receiue the fruicte of incredible ioye.
            
               Nevvyeres daie. The firſt day of Ianuarie, the Churche putteth vs in minde, to beholde the wound, which our Sauiour receiued that daie, and the Myſterie of circumciſion, and the moſte dreadefull name of Iheſus, which is the pleadge of our ſaluation, and the leſſon, which was then geuen vs, of that moſt perfect obedience: and ſo by the ſtrength and ſignification of this moſte holie name, we labour muche more cheerefully to atteine to the ſaluation, which is promiſed vs.
            
               Tvvelſe daie. What ſhould I here ſaie of the moſt bright ſtarre, which appeared to the Gentiles in the furthermoſt partes of the Eaſt?
            
               C
                     •
                  delmas How might I expreſſe the incredible ioy and pleaſure of the holie man Simeon, when he bare the child in his armes? What ſhould I here rehearſe the exceeding gladneſſe and cumfort,

the which Anna the widowe conceiued, or els the godli prophecies which ſhee pronounced, when ſhee beholde the Child? All theſe thinges hath the Churche ſet before our eyes with ſolemne pompe, and proceſsion, and candels burning, to the intent, they ſhould ſincke the deeper into our heartes.
            Now when the time of faſting draweth Lent.nero, we behold how Chriſt was baptiſed by Iohn in the floud Iordane: we here the voice of the Father: we conſider the faſt, wherwith the ſonne of God puniſhed his owne bodie: we record the tentations and wilie practiſes of Satan againſt him: we endeuour our ſelues, as muche as we can, to ſet out the victorie of Chriſt: we call to minde the homage of Angels, which brought him meate and ſerued him. By this exāple of Chriſt we are taught, that we ought to kepe ftil that puritie and cleanes, whiche we receiued in the holie fount of Baptiſme: that we

ſhould receiue the voice of the father commaunding vs to obeye him, with heart and minde: that we ſhould ſubdewe the body with faſting, and encounter with our old enemie the dinel: to the end that▪ at the length, the battaile being fought, and the victorie by the mightie protection of God atchieued, we might be refreſhed with heauenly foode and comforted by the miniſterie of Angels. The holy Weeke.
            
            When the time approcheth, in the which we mind to celebrate the ſupper of our Lord▪ to do ſo holy a worke with the greater deuotion, we prepare our ſelues much more diligently then at other tymes: and we doe it with gladnes and feare together. Then doe we conſecrate the holy Oiles, by the which are fignified diuers gyftes and graces of the holy Ghoſt, according as S. Denyſe and other holy Father write: and we miniſter the body of our Lord to al ſuch as are readie to

receyue it: and we waſh the feete of poore men, not only with water, but alſo with many teares ſometimes: and by this example we cauſe ſuche, as looke on, to powre out teares abondantly. But when we behold attentiuely Chriſt hanging on the Croſſe: when we conſider, how he was ſcorned, reuiled, tormented and put to death: when we pray for the ſaluation of all menns: when we come barefooted to worſhip Chriſt in his Image: when we bring in God him ſelfe complaining of our miſliuing: when we craue pardon for our ſynnes in moſte humble and lowly wiſe: what man, thinke you, is then in the Churche, which is not foorth with ſtirred vp to forſake ſynne, and to folow a better ordre of life?
            But when Eaſter day is come, we vſe ſuche honour and pompe, we ſing Eaſter.ſuche Hymnes and Pſalmes, to aduaunce the victorie and triumph of

Chriſt raiſed from death, to ſet out the ſacke and ſpoile of his enemies, to magnifie his euerlaſting kingdome and empire, that we may ſeeme for verie ioye and gladneſſe to be beſides our ſelues.
            
               Aſcenſion His aſcenſion alſo we recorde in ſuch ſort, that we thinke it our part, to bend our ſelues, as much as we can, to clymme vp together with Chriſt into thoſe goodlie dwelling places of heauen.
            
               Witſontide. What may be ſaide of that ineſtimable benefit, wherin the holy ghoſt enkendled the Diſciples of Chriſte with the loue of God, and enflamed them with fyerie tongues, to the end that they ſhould go throughout al the world, and wrap vp that heauenly fyer in the bowells of faithfull men? With howe great ioye and gladneſſe is that feaſt alſo obſerued and kept in all the Church? The feaſts of Saincts
            
            Moreouer whē we keepe the memorie

of holy men, in whoſe heartes the maieſtie of Chriſt dwelled, with dew reuerence: (for it is not lawful to ſeparate them from the companie of Chriſt, whom he him ſelfe taketh vnto him as felowes and comparteners of al his goods) we are ſtirred vp to a hope of a certaine diuinitie, when we caſt with our ſelues, how they, that are of the ſelfe ſamè nature that we be of, for the likeneſſe which they had with God in vertue, haue moſt happily atteyned the ſtate euen of Goddes.
            
               The feaſts of our Ladie. And as we doe moſt highly prayſe the holines of other (as it becometh vs to do) ſo do we eſpecially honour, reuerence, and worſhip that ſingular paterne of cleanes, virginitie, and godlines, that heauēly and meruelous tēple of the holy ghoſte, that moſt holy and immortal tabernacle of the euerlaſting promiſe, out of the which riſeth the ſonne of iuſtice, to put away with the brightnes of his beames the darkenes

of the whole worlde: and wee doe with right good affiaunce cal for the helpe of the ſayd moſt bleſſed Virgin in our diſtreſſe and neceſsitie, and wee finde, that her prayers doe vs muche good often tymes before her Sonne.
            The ſeruice of the Church is ſo ordered, that, the yeare tourning about, there is no benefite of God, the remē
               braunce whereof the holy Churche wil ſuffer to be forgotten. And the Churche doth repreſent the memorie of al theſe benefites in ſuch ſorte, that it ſeemeth, that they are not ſo much declared in words, as expreſſed in doinges. For as the excellent Poete ſaith:

                  The thinges we heare, do not ſo ſoone prouoke the mind to riſe,
                  As doe the thinges, that vewed are, with true and faithful eyes.
               
            
            Al theſe thinges, which I haue here declared, with manie other of lyke

ſorte, whiche I haue omitted (for I thinke it not neceſſarie, to rehearſe particularly euery point) are not (I graunt you) matters of perfection. They are certayne introductions and neceſſarie helpes for vs, whiche haue ſome what to doe as yeat with this mortall condicion, as we feele by experience. For ſo often as theſe ordinaunces of the Churche are litle Regarded, the minde waxeth dul, diligence fainteth, the loue of religion ſlaketh, and ſo by litle there creapeth into our heartes a certayne forgetfulnes of vertue and godlineſſe. Agayne, when we bende our mindes earneſtly to ſette vppe agayne thoſe godlie ordres, we feele, that the loue of religion and godlineſſe is ſtirred and enkendled in vs. And no meruaile. For why, the brightneſſe of that light, which hath ſo wonderfully lightened your mindes, is not yet riſen vnto vs: neither are we ſo weaned from the

acqueintaunce of the body, that we may be without all theſe outward ſignes of heauenly thinges any tyme without greate daunger. This is the ordre of the Churche, which is holy, ſimple, and one: this is the rule and Diſcipline, by the whiche all wee, whiche haue not yet atteyned vnto the higheſt degree of wiſedome, are inſtructed.
            Now I haue declared theſe thinges, it remayneth, that I tourne my talke vnto thoſe your heauenly felowes, and men of God, the which being not contented with this beaten and common diſcipline, haue taught their diſciples a newe trade and doctrine which is more wonderful then this. Geue me leaue therefore to talke with them after this ſort.
            It is a great matter (right woonderfull Sirs) and a harde enterpriſe, whiche you haue taken in hande: a thinge of ſo greate importaunce

in deede, as none of al thoſe holy Fathers, whoſe vertue and witte we eſteeme very much did euer attempt the lyke in all their life: to cure an old forgrowen diſeaſe with a new kind of medicine. When you ſawe that the old diſcipline was fallen, that manners were decaied▪ that vnlauful luſt rāged vp and downe without reſtraint, that the Church tended to ruine: you did, (as it became holy men ſent from heauen) take it verie heauily. Wherein I can not blame you. For it was a matter worthie of many teares and much bitter weeping. But you reſted not ſo: bicauſe it were a token of a feint heart and weake ſtomake, to pitie the fal and ruine, and not to procure any other remedie for ſuche a miſchiefe, but onely a fewe teares. You did not therefore, as we are woont to doe, ſorowe and lament ſo great a miſhap, and powre out teares vnto God for it: but you thought it good to prouide

by your labour, ſtudie, and wakefull diligence, that the Church ſhould not be quite ouerthrowen. And who can denie, but that this is a token of an honourable hart and a valiaunt cowrage. But let vs ſee, after what ſort you haue perfourmed this ſo great, ſo weightie, and ſo worthie an enterpriſe.
            I muſt therfore repete a ſentence, whiche I vſed in my letters, for the whiche M. Haddon, a man brought vp in your rules and doctrine, quarelled with me verie ſharply. What: haue you thought it expedient to heale the woundes, which the Chriſtian cōmon weale hath taken, by ſuch meanes, as the moſt holy Fathers vſed of old time in propping vp the Churche, when it was like to decaie? No, ſaie you: for they were the deuiſes of men: and ſo great a miſchiefe coulde not be remedied by mans healpe, but only by the ſtaie and mightie power of God. And therfore you determined to forſake all

wordlie healpes, and to ſticke only to the word of God. Verie wel. For that is it in deede, which healeth the mind, fortifieth the ſtrength, geaueth light to the ſoule, and bringeth it to euerlaſting glorie. Wherfore I long to ſee ſome worke of this your word of god (wherin you glorie ſo much) which maie be ſo notable and ſo vndoutedly wrought by God, that it mai appere to the world by it, that you did not without good cauſe ſet all other remedies at naught, and lay all the hope of your ſaluation vpō the only ſtaie of this your goſpel. But for ſo much as the kingdom of god that is to ſaie, the goſpel and power of the word of God cōſiſteth, not in the vaunt of woordes, but in a meruelous vertue: and this vertue ſtandeth, not in vndiſcret and ſawcy talke, not in filthy and licentious liuing, not in bitter hatred and flamboldnes, but in modeſtie, cōtinencie, and charitie, in the workes of iuſtice, and loue of godlines: my deſire

is to ſurueie narrowely this your wōderful gentlenes; courteſie, ſoftnes, patience, continencie, charitie, holines of life, and other the like vertues, which maie witneſſe, that the Church hath ben preſerued by you. But this can not be, ſaie you, before all ſuche thinges, as hinder this our great and godlie pourpoſe, be taken quite away. For it is the office and dewtie of the worde of God, to pul downe the olde howſe, before the fowndacions of the new howſe be laied. I take this alſo to be verie well and wiſely ſpoken. For euen as a medicine pourgeth oholer or other noiſome humours, which do moleſt the body, before it doth repaire nature being feeble and brought low: ſo was it expedient for you, to expell pride, coueteouſnes, leacherie, and other diſſeaſes of the ſowle, before the Churche coulde receiue the comfortable nouriſhment of vertue and godlines. This deuiſe of yours I

like verie well. But now I deſire to know, how theſe hurtfull and peſtilēt humours haue ben pourged by you. Oh, ſaie you, ther was nothing in the world ſo much againſt godlines, as ſuperſtition: wherfore our principal care was, to take awaie al ſuperſtition. You are not to be blamed for that: for in deede there is nothing ſo muche contrarie to true vertue, as is falſe and counterfeicte vertue. Wel now, I will not demaund of you, howe you haue taken awaie ſuperſtition: for that is verie euident. You haue defaced the authoritie of the Biſhop of Rome: you haue ouerthrowen the howſes of Monkes and Nunnes: you haue laied hand on ſuch goods, as were apointed to holie vſes: you haue rifled churches: you haue beſtowed the goods of them vpon whome you liſted: you haue miniſhed the reuerence of the auncient ceremonies: you haue defiled the religious vſage of Sacramentes: you haue

throwen downe Images, monumētes, Croſſes, and aulters: you haue condē
               ned the deuout teares and good works of holie men as naught and vngodlie: you haue diſanulled the holie decrees, lawes, and ordinances of the Church: you haue cut of all hope of true vertue and honeſtie, by a certaine tyrannical eſtate or inuincible kingdome of ſynne, which you haue ful clerkely by your doctrine ſet vp. Neither were you cōtented with this waſt and ſpoile of thinges, but you haue alſo taken quite away the freedome of mans wil: and contrarie to nature and reaſon, cō
               trarie to the equity and iuſtice of gods lawe, you haue tied vp all the doinges and thoughtes of men, good and bad, wholeſome and vnwholeſome with a certaine fatall neceſsitie. Theſe are the thinges (with manie other of like ſort) whiche, I ſee, are by you, as the lettes and ſtaies of wholeſome doctrine, pulled downe, defaced, deſtroied,

mangled and minced in peeces.
            I doe not now bewaile the decaie and waſt of holie thinges. For if the health of the church could not otherwiſe be recouered, if the Goſpel could not otherwiſe be brought to his olde brightnes and dignitie, I could eaſily beare this loſſe, and it woulde not grieue me to ſee thoſe thinges, that ſtande whole, the whiche you haue not yet deſtroied, to be vtterly raſed withall.
            Wherfore if you haue left anie thing vntowched, ſette vppon it alſo, if it like you, ſhake it, pull it, hourle it downe vpon the grownde, ſo that you reſtore vs that auncient feruencie of godlines, that loue of iuſtice and equitie, that ampleneſſe of charitie, that contempte of wordlie thinges, that earneſt deſire of heauenlie life, with the whiche the Churche was inflamed of old time in the Apoſtles daies. This is the puritie of the Goſpel,

this is the excellent worke of the worde of God, in this ſtandeth the whole perfourmaunce of your promiſe. You can not diſcharge your dewtie and bande with anie meane vertue. For when I ſee the ſacke and ſpoile, whiche you haue made, to be ſo great, howe might I thinke it to ſtande with right or reaſon, that you ſhoulde recompence it with anie meane commoditie? Wherfore I will aske you once againe, although M. Haddon be offended withall, I will earneſtly demaunde, yea I will moſt inſtantly require of you, what thing is reſtored by you in the ſteede of all thoſe thinges, whiche you haue pulled downe? I will repete the ſelfe ſame woordes, that I vſed in thoſe my letters, whiche M. Haddon ſo muche reuiled.
            What is ouerthrowen I ſee, but what is ſet vp, I ſee not: what is grubbed vp by the roote I perceiue, but

what is planted I perceiue not. Tell me, I praie you, what it is, to repaire the doctrine of the Goſpell when it tendeth to decaie? What it is, to bring al thinges verie neere, as M. Haddon your diſciple ſaieth, to the rules of Chriſtian godlines vnto the moſt holie doctrine of the Apoſtles? what it is, to driue awaie with a newe light and brightnes the darkenes of errours, and miſt of ſynne, in the which men liued? I think it be, to bring to paſſe, that men maie haue no wil to looke down vnto the earth, that they may be deſirous to looke vp to heauenward, to become modeſte and humble, to be inflamed with the loue of holines and chaſtitie, to be decked and beawtified with the cōmendable vertues of meekenes, patience, grauitie, and conſtancie, to be verie obedient to the Rulers of the Churche, to yeald verie great honour and loue to the gouernours in the cō
               mon weale, to emploie their whole

life, deuiſes and practiſes to a common profitte, to be zelouſly bent to wardes godlines and Religion, finally to make and prepare the way to heauē by godly vertues.
            I demaund of you therefore, whether there be anie one man amongeſt al thoſe, that ſo much eſteeme and reuerence you, yea that ſette you vp as Goddes, endewed with ſuch a ſeruent loue of heauenly thinges, with ſuche chaſtitie and cleannes of life, that he wil not ſuffer him ſelfe to be diſteined with any ſpot of diſhoneſtie: with ſuch patience and gentlenes, that, although he be prouoked with railing and diſpiteful language, he wil not only not offende in worde, ſuche as wronged him, but alſo wiſh them al good things and proſperitie: with ſuche louingnes and charitie, that he wil beſtowe all his ſubſtance to the common profitte; with ſuche grauitie and conſtancie, that he wyll neuer be diſordered:

witn ſuche a burning loue of euerlaſting life and glorie, that he wil forſake all the light and vaine pleaſures of the worlde, that he will pitch downe his Croſſe, and daſh againſt it all his vnlawfull luſtes: that he wil thinke vpon Chriſt only, and ſit downe at his feete: that he wil loue God erneſtly, and be, as it were, violently caried vp to heauen in mind and thought. With al theſe vertues did the Churche ſometimes flouriſh: with theſe fier brādes of godlie loue were men of olde time inflamed: from this moſt ſeruent loue of godlines coulde they not poſsibly be brought by anie terrour or tormentes. And this tooke you vppon you, to pourge the goſpell thoroughly, to put to flight ſuperſtition vtterly, and to enkendle againe the light of the aunciēt Church, which was put out.
            Be therfore as good as your word, perfourme your promiſe, diſcharge your debt, into the whiche you are incurred.

Reſtore that puritie of mind, reſtore that chaſtitie of bodie, reſtore that feruencie of godlines, reſtore that continencie, and gentlenes, that peace and concord, that band of charitie and frindſhip, bringe your countreimen againe to that ſtate, from the whiche we are al fallen: that you maie by ſuch a wonderful alteration of thinges, and heauenlie example of vertue put vs to ſilence, to whome this newfanglednes is both ſuſpected and hateful. As for vs, it is no meruaile, if we haue not as yet atteined this great and high perfectiō in vertue. For you haue not yet ſet out this goodlie light to vs. I aske this queſtion therfore of ſuch only, as take your part, how holily, how vprightly, how religiouſly they liue. For reaſon would, as I ſaied before, that we ſhould looke for no meane matters at your handes. For you haue taken vpon you a charge of ſo great honour, magnificencie, and profite to the

worlde, as poſsibly there can not be deuiſed a greater. Wherefore vnleſſe your adherentes and diſciples doe ſo much excell in vertue and honeſtie al other men, that are vertuous and godlie, (and yet be not of your ſchoole) that they maie dymme the light of their vertue, and put them out of conceite: you haue not fulfilled your promiſe. For if the ſelfe ſame degree of honeſtie might haue ben kept and mainteined by vs, without the loſſe and ruine of thoſe thinges, vpon the whiche you haue laied your violent and griedie handes: if the vertue of your brethren doe not verie much paſſe the vertue of our men: ſhal it not appeare to the worlde, that you wiſe men haue taken a great deale of paines in defacing of thoſe thinges, which you haue ouerthrowen, to no pourpoſe or profite? Shall it not be ſeene, that thoſe thinges were not the lettes or ſtaies vnto you, for the which

coulde not exerciſe iuſtice and godlines?
            What if your Diſciples are not only neuer the better by defacing thoſe thinges, but rather much more diſodered and outragious, muche more wicked and vicious? What, if licentious liuing be now leſſe puniſhed, if miſchieuous hardines be now greater, if more debate and greater broyles haue bene ſtirred vp, ſence you haue ſet your ſelues to be teachers of men? What, if moe robberies and ſhamefuller actes are now cōmitted emongeſt you in euery parte of the realme (if it be true, that is reported)? What, if there be wrought more traiterous practiſes againſt the maieſtie of Princes, euen by ſuch as haue geauen them ſelues fully and wholly to your doctrine?
            But I wil let your maiſters goe, and will vrge you, M. Haddō, once againe? What can you alleage? What example can you bringe of that auncient

vertue? How can you mainteine and defend this newfanglednes? And yet you will auowch, that your Churche differeth nothing at al from the order and diſcipline of the Apoſtles. You ſaie manie things in deede: but no mā, which is in his right wit, will euer beleeue you. It is not ynough to a
                  •
               firme, what ſo euer you liſt, in wordes. I loke for the examples of this heauenly vertue, and not for vaine woordes. If you ſee vnlawful luſt ſet at libertie, diſorder flinging vppe and downe without checke, the highe waies beſet with theeues and murderers, tumultes ſtirred vp, cōſpiracies wrought, and daungerous practiſes deuiſed againſt common weales euerie where: if all theſe miſchiefes be not only not taken away after the time that the doctrin of theſe felowes, whom you ſo highly commend, tooke place, but rather muche more increaſed: with what face dare you ſaie, that this your newe doctrine

differreth nothing from the doctrine of the Apoſtles?
            You ſaie, that I require a perfection which can not be had in this life. It is like ynough ſir, that I doe ſpeake of light offences, ſuch as continent and honeſt men may fal into euery houre, and not of moſt vile, filthie, and infamous crimes, ſuch as haue cawſed all holie things to be waſted, ſpoiled, and cōſumed with fyer, without any fruict of godlines and Religion, the whiche thinges theſe felowes promiſed to reſtore.
            You require of me, that our church as you cal it, and yours maie be ſet together and compared, that it maie appeare at the length, whether of them both is more eſtabliſhed by the authoritie and doctrine of the Apoſtles. Your requeſt is not reaſonable. For I ſaie not, that there is no ſpot of vncleanes at all emongeſt vs. But I ſaie and affirme, that it is verie ill done of

you, that thoſe ſpottes are not taken awaie emongeſt you by the diligence of your Apoſtles. We haue promiſed nothing, we haue not pleadged our faith and truth, that all thinges ſhould be brought againe to the olde perfection by our diligence: no man can call vs into the court, and charge vs, that we haue not ſtoode to our promiſe. But theſe men, who, as you ſaie, were ſent from heauen, haue takē this much vpon them: to reſtore the puritie of the Goſpell, to bring againe charitie, holines, cōtinencie, with that moſt earneſt longyng after the euerlaſting glorie, to bring al other ſuch vertues, as ar cōteined in the word ofgod, to light, which were before buried in darkenes, and to ſet vp once againe a heauenly cōmon weale vpō the earth.
            But that you maie ſee, what courteſie and fauour I wil ſhew you in this conflicte, I will not require of you to examine and trie your manners by

the ſtreight diſcipline of the Apoſtles, and by that exacte rule of moſt holie and perfect religion: but to compare the ſtate of this your Church with the grauitie, vertue, religion, and worſhipful behauiour of your auncetours: the which thing if I can intreat you to do, you ſhall vnderſtand that there is ſo great oddes betwene your goſpelliſhe doctrine, and the honorable religion of olde England, as can not be expreſſed in wordes. Why then ſir, what a thing is this? If you were neuer able, after the tyme that you gaue your ſelues to theſe newe and vngodly opinions, to reach to any part of the honour of your auncetours: by what meanes, I praye you, ſhall you be able to atteyne to that auncient perfection of the Churche, whiche flouriſhed in the Apoſtles dayes to the great wonder of the world? Are you ſo voide of all witte and reaſon, that you thinke it ynough to ſay, that your

Churche differreth nothing from the Apoſtles doctrine, as though mē were bound by and by to beleeue you? No ſir, that muſt be ſhewed and prooued, not by braggyng and light behauiour, not by boaſting and reprochfull wordes, but by wonderful examples of iuſtice, innocencie, chaſtitie, cleanes, religion, and charitie, by a moſt holy life, a moſt vertuouſe conuerſation, and a moſt feruent loue of godlineſſe. Yea, M. Haddon, I tell you once againe, that it is not ſufficient for them, that haue promiſed to bring the looſe manners of our tyme to that moſt floriſhing ſtate of the primitiue Church, to be meanly vertuous: they muſt excell, they muſt be wonderfull. The whiche thing bicauſe they do it not, but rather, wherſoeuer they put their foote, they leaue the grownde embrewed with muche naughtineſſe and vice: it is very euident and plaine, that they could not perfourme ſo much, as

they had promiſed. For they haue brought into the common weale, for the cleannes of the Goſpell, fowle vices: for peace and loue, debate: for modeſtie, pride: for religion, wickednes: for liberty, bondage: for good ordre, licentious liuing: for pleaſaunt calmenes, a moſt crewel ſtorme. And yet you like a godly man lay before me the iudgement of God, to make me afraied: in the whiche you ſay, that I poore wretch (for ſo it pleaſeth you to terme me) ſhal yeald an accōpt of this ſo heinouſe and wicked offence before the iudgement ſeat of Chriſt, bicauſe I haue preſumed to rebuke thoſe holie, continent and religious perſons.
            In deede there is good cauſe, why I ſhould feare. For M. Haddon a wiſe man, and ſuch a one as hath familiar cōference with God at al tymes, wold neuer haue ſaid it, vnleſſe it had bē declared vnto him before, by ſome heauenly reuelation. Reaſon would therfore,

that I ſhould tremble and quake for feare of that iudgement, the which you your ſelfe feare neuer a deale, and yet you threaten me very ſeuerely withal.
            You ſay, that I doe not only laugh at your Goſpell, and deface your Doctours, (whiche are very heauenlie menne) but alſo violently wreſt Hieremie. The which thing how falſe it is, I wil declare hereafter.
            You ſay afterwarde, that all that teſtimonie of Hieremie concerning falſe Prophetes perteyneth vnto vs. Howe ſo ſir? Hearde you euer ſay, that there was any newe Prophete emongeſt vs, that went about to tourne vs away from the auncient Religion? That warranted vs of peace and ioylitie, as though he had had commiſsion from Chriſte ſo to doe? That taught the people, that ſynne ſhould eſcape vnpuniſhed? You retourne once agayne to ſpeake your pleaſure by the

holy Church, the ordre wherof I haue alreadie declared: in the whiche although there be ſome diſeaſes, yet they are ſuche as may be cured. For we refuſe not the medicine, the which without the Church can not be found els where.
            After that you commend your own Church highly. The publike fermons, ſay you, you commit to certaine ſeely friers: and they declaime after their owne faſſhion, in other matters they are dome. As touching preaching, I haue ſaid already, that this charge is in no wiſe to be neglected of the Biſhoppes: neither doth the holy Churche beare with ſuch negligence: but rather exhorteth and chargeth al Biſhops moſt ſtreightly, to folow the office of preaching and teaching with all diligence. And it is no reaſon, that the negligēce of a fewe men ſhould be imputed to the whole Church, the which is ſo careful to take good and wholeſome ordre

with euery particular man, that he ſhould doe his dewtie. Moreouer, there are, as I ſayd before, many Biſſhops emongeſt vs, the which preach oftentymes, and ſtirre vppe their ſubiectes to the loue of godlines. But admitte it were alwaies ſo, that the ſermons were made by Monkes: doubtleſſe it is more tolerable, that godly and religious perſones ſhould be appointed by the Biſhops to doe that office, then that baſe fellowes, and ſuche as are poiſoned with moſt peſtilent and erroneous doctrine, ſhould be made rulers ouer Churches.
            Whereas you ſay, that at our ſermons the audiēce is brought a ſleepe, I graūt it muſt needes happen ſo ſometimes, when he, that preacheth, can not be ſo eloquent and fine, as you are. What then? Bicauſe ſome man nappeth a litle ſometime, therefore ſhall not the reſt awake them ſelues, and geaue diligent eare to the ſermon?

ſhall no preacher be able to moue and exhort his hearers to ſerue God with greater loue and feruency?
            
               In the miniſtring of Sacramentes, ſay you, the Priestes only are doers, the reſt are but lookers on. Of lyke you are not pleaſed with that. You haue no liking in modeſt and ſeemely ordre. You would peraduenture, that there ſhould be made a diſordre and confuſion of offices, and that al men ſhould take vppon them the office of prieſthood. But we thinke, that that comely ordre was ordeyned by God, that Prieſtes only ſhould miniſter the Sacraments, and that the reſt ſhould take the profit of them with ſilence, and not medle them ſelues with the diuine ſeruice.
            As concerning the vnknowen tongue, in the which the ſeruice is ſaide, I 
                  ••
               ue ſpokē ſufficiently already: wherfore, bicauſe I wil not repete one thing often tymes, I referre you to thoſe

thinges, that are ſaid before.
            
               Let vs now enter, ſay you, into the maſſes, in the which you would haue the very marow of religion to be powred out. That is very true. For they conteine in them a moſt ſeruent lifting vppe of the heart vnto God, moſte holy and deuout prayers, the monumentes and remembraunces of Chriſte, whiche repreſent vnto vs his life, his paſsion, his death, and merites, the ordre and woorking of our ſaluation, and the appeaſing of the diſpleaſure of God. And (that I may ſay nothing elles) in them is offered vppe the moſte holie bodie of Chriſt, the ſelfe ſame Sacrifice, that taketh away the vncleane ſpottes of ſynnes, that yealdeth vppe thankes to our moſt mighty Lord and bountiful parent, that enkendleth godly mindes, and inflameth deuout hearts with the loue of euerlaſting life and glorie.
            You ſay moreouer, that no mā entermedleth

with the Goſpell emongeſt vs. You ſay wel in that. For we can not abide, that euery man ſhould be a Reader, euery man a Doctour, euerie man a Prophet. But we thinke it expedient to prouide, that al thinges may be done honeſtly and orderly.
            Where you ſaie, that all exhortations out of the Goſpell are whiſſhed omongeſt vs: that is falſe. For we haue continuall preaching, and there is expounded, what ſo euer cōcerneth ſalualtion, (not vnlearnedly, nor yet vnſauerly, as you imagine:) and the hearers keepe ſilence after a very modeſt and comely ſorte.
            You come, ſaie you, to the Lordes Table once per aduenture euery yeare, and that more for a ſolemne ceremonie, then for a contrite heart. This geſſe of yours is very vaine alſo. Truthe it is, that al men are bownde by lawe and order to come vnto our Lordes Table once in the yeare: but ſuch as doe it but once

in the yere, are not wont to be cōmended. And emongeſt vs there are of ſuch as feaſte them ſelues at this heauenlie banket very often, an exceding great number. Whereas you ſay, that it is done for a ſolemne ceremonie onlie, and not for a contrite heart, you doe but geſſe as your manner it. And for ſo muche as your geſſe prooueth falſe, it ſeemeth, that you may woorthilie be numbred emongeſt the falſe Prophetes. When you ſaie, that in this ſupper the ſupper of our Lorde is not remembred of vs, you ſpeake with out the booke, euen as you didde before. Howe be it, as touching the Supper of our Lorde, I can not wel tell, what to ſaie to you. For as yet I am not perfectlie infourmed, whether you folowe the wicked opinion of your Martyr, or no. If you doe folowe him, with what reuerence or trembling can you come to the Sacrament of the Aulter, ſeeing that you beleue,

that there is none other thing in it, but onely a naked and bare remembrance of the death, which Chriſt ſuffred vppon the Croſſe for vs? If you folow him not, wherefore do you not abhorre and deteſt the naughtie and wicked felowe?
            You find fault with vs alſo, bicauſe we haue no publike or open confeſſion of our ſynnes emongeſt vs. I woulde faine learne of you, how that ſynne, which is committed ſecretely, is to be confeſſed in the face of the worlde.
            
               I haue, ſaie you, declared your vſage. You blamed me, bicauſe being vnacquainted with the affaires of England, I declared ſuche thinges, as are notoriouſelie knowen and caried by letters, by talke, by moſte conſtante reporte of all menne, into all Countreis and Coaſtes, euen to the furthermoſt partes of the world, to the great griefe of all ſuch as heare them: and

yet you ſpeake raſhly of our matters, whiche you haue neither ſeene, nor vnderſtoode, (and therefore you vſe this word, peraduenture) and as though you knew very exactly, al thoſe thinges, which you haue ſpoken, you ſaie boldlie, that you haue declared oure vſage, and that very plainely.
            After that you tourne againe to the commendation of your Church. You ſpeake much of your continuall preaching, of the deſpiſing of mans traditions, of your Pſalmes, and Hymnes, and Lawdes, with the which you honour the Lord. Anon after you ſaie thus. Then foloweth the holy table of the Lord, which is occupied euery holie daie. The miniſter of God calleth vp all ſuch as haue prepared them ſelues to that ſo heauenly a banket. Do you call that a heauenlie bāket, the which your Martyr, whom you ſet out with heauēly praiſes, went about to bereafe of al heauenlineſſe? Furthermore you tel vs not, how ſober

they are, when they come to this ſupper, how wel they are clad with their mariage garment, with what examination with what feruencie and wakeful diligence they prepare them ſelues vnto it. And of your Miniſter you ſaie neuer a worde, by what meanes, with what ceremouie, after what ordre of Religion, by whome he came to that dignitie.
            You talke muche of the puritie of your ſermons, whereas in deede there can not poſsibly be any puritie in ſuch a corrupt and peſtilent doctrine.
            Laſt of al you declare not, what 
                  •
               ite this your religion bringeth. For you ſhew vs not your wonderful cha
               
                  •…
               itie, your puritie and holines of life, your meruelous woorkes of godlines and charitie. And yet you ſaie thus.
            
               I might in this place make an oppoſition 
                     •
                   cōpariſon, leſt I lacked wordes, wherewith I might, if I would, trimme it and 
                     •
                  t it out. I would be glad to ſee you

doe it, M. Haddon. Howe greate a praiſe had that bene vnto you, if you had laied together diuers examples of hothe ſydes, and ſhewed, howe this churche whiche you ſet foorth ſo ſolemly, is moſt like vnto that auncient and primitiue Church, which was dedicated by the bloud of Chriſt, and inſtructed in the doctrine of th' Apoſtles, in vpright and heauenly conuerſation, in innocentie, vertue, conſtancie lowlineſſe, pacience, chaſtitie, in modeſt and ſeemelie behauiour. If you had don this, you had diſpatched the whol matter. Wherfore did you not brauelie ſet out that oppoſition or compariſon, which you ſpeak of? Wherfore did you not ſet out to the world the worthie actes and holie woorkes of your maiſters? Wherfore did you not cler
                  •
                that point, in the which conſiſted the very groūd and pith of the whol matter? I aſſure you, you had had the daie of vs, if you had declared, how much

theſe newe Prophettes dooe paſſe in heauenlie vertues, and had ſhewed withall that there is no difference betweene them and the olde Diſciples of Chriſt. What, could a man of ſuch a wonderfull witte and ſingular eloquence, as you are of, lacke wordes, in the defence of ſo true and ſo honeſt a cauſe as this is?
            But that concluſion of yours liketh me meruelouſly wel. You ſaie thus. A man may ſee more ſorowing and ſighinge in one holye Supper of the Lorde, which our men doe reſorte vnto, then in ſixe hundred of your ſolemne Maſſes. Firſt of al if you thinke, that al Sacramentes are to be miniſtred with teares and ſighes, you are fowly ouerſeene. For there is a time of ſorow, and a time of gladnes, as Salomon ſaith. Then it cometh to paſſe oftētimes that we may think of heauēly things more earneſtly ād more attētiueli without ſorow then with ſorow. Laſt of all I would faine

learne of you, what theſe your ſighes doe meane. Doe thei ſignifie a deſire and longing after the olde Religion againe? Or els ſerue they for a cloke to couer your new diſguiſed Religion? Or els is there no ſuche matter at all? For Eraſmus and certaine other learned men, haue geuen this marke vnto your Religion, that none of you al wil once ſigh, no not vppon ſuch daies as are to be kept with teares and ſorow. And Luther him ſelfe, the foreman of all this rable, he neuer wept nor ſorowed, at the remembrance of the bitter paines and tormentes, whiche Chriſt ſuffered for vs vppon the Croſſe. For he was a man fortified with incredible hardnes, and a deadly enemie to weeping and teares.
            As for the diuerſe expoſitions of our Doctors, which you ſpeake of, thei are altogether impertinent to our matter. For there is no diſagreeing omongeſt vs in ſuche matters as concerne the

grownde of our faith and Religion. But to what end tend al theſe thinges, M. Waulter, to what purpoſe do you bring them? Be it, that theſe your ſolemnities be kept of you with ſo great pompe and ceremony, as you wil your ſelues: yet can I not ſee hitherto, that you haue by theſe your ſolemne ſacramentes newly deuiſed by the goodlie witte of you and your companions, by this Religion ſet vp with ſuch diligēce and prouident carefulnes, by theſe dailie ſermons, by this ſighing and ſorowing, brought the Churche to ſuche a ſtate, as your Maiſters promiſed you to doe. Wherefore you muſt pardon me, if I require one thing of you many times, if I be to importunate in aſking it. Reſtore, I ſaie once againe, reſtore vnto vs the puritie of the Goſpell, lai
                  •
                abroad thoſe goodly wares of heauenly vertues, ſet out to the world the notable leſſons of this worthy Religion, that, when we ſee by your wonderful

workes and honourable dedes, that the mightie power of the holy Ghoſte is within you, we may be aſtoniſhed ſeing your miracles, and confeſſe, that thoſe Prophetes, whiche taught you, were ſent from God.
            Marke diligently, I pray you, what our Lorde hath ſaied as concerning a Deut. 18. d.falſe Prophete. The Prophete, ſaith God, the whiche being ſeduced with pride, ſhall preſume to ſpeake in my name, the thinge which I commaunded him not to ſpeake, or elles ſhall ſpeake in the name of other Goddes, ſhall be put to death. If ſo be, that thou ſhalt thinke in thy hearte, howe may I vnderſtande the woorde which A mark to diſcerne a falſe Prophete by.our Lorde hath ſpoken? Thou ſhalt
                  •
                haue this token. The thing, which that Prophet foretolde in the name of our Lorde, if it come not ſo to paſſe, our Lord ſpake it not: but the Prophet deuiſed it of a pride of his own heart, and therfore thou ſhalt not feare him.
            
               
What thinge can be more euident and plaine, then this ſigne? What more prouidently ſpoken for our ſaluation? Being now warned and inſtructed by God, I geue no eare to wordes, but I tourne mine eye to workes: I loke to ſee, howe faithfully theſe Ptophetes haue fulfilled their promiſe. It remaineth therefore, that wee conſider, what Luther, Melanchthon, Bucere, Caluine and the reſt of your Champions haue promiſed and taken vppon them, what hope they haue brought their adherentes into by their goodlie wordes. Doubtleſſe thei cauſed men to conceiue this hope, that thei would bringe the doctrine of the Goſpell to the olde perfection, that they woulde ſet Religion vp againe, as it was at the firſt, that they woulde ſtai
                  •
                vppe the Church, which tended to decaie.
            Now this puritie of the Goſpel, this holineſſe of Religion, this ſure ſtaie of the Churche, by what power and

ſtrength is it mainteined? By fayth, gentlenes, chaſtitie, peace, concord, lowlineſſe, obedience, charitie, godlines, and the great loue of God. But they haue brought into the world, for faith and religion, Church robbing: for gentlenes, crueltie: for chaſtity, looſe liuing: for peace, whourlibourlie: for concord, ciuile diſcord: for lowlines, pride: for obedience, contempte of lawfull autho
                  •
               itie: for charitie, bitter hatred towardes all good menne: for godlines, wicked impietie: for godlie loue, the vtter decaie of all ſuch holie thinges as ſtirred vs vp to the loue of God. They are therefore ſo muche ſhorte of the perfourmaunce of thoſe thinges, which they haue in large and ample manner promiſed, that they haue rather by their laboure and diligence ſo woorſhipfullye employed, lefte all thinges, whiche they tooke vppon them to refourme and bringe to the olde perfection, in much worſe

caſe, yea muche more depraued and diſordered, then euer they were before. Wherefore theſe men were not ſente from God. And ſo it is concluded by the Lawe of God him ſelfe, that they deſerue no ſuch commendations, as you geaue them, but rather euerlaſting damnation.
            I demaunde of you once againe.
            The vertue and puritie of the Goſpell, doth it conſiſt in good woorkes thinke you, or elles in woordes? Doubtleſſe if we beleeue our Lorde him ſelfe, we muſt ſaie, that it ſtandeth rather in woorkes, then in a goodlie ſhewe of woordes. For ſo muche therefore as theſe your Maiſters haue confirmed this new Goſpel, not by good workes, not by woorking of miracles, not by continencie of lyfe, not by vprighte cōuerſation, not by feruencie of mind, not by burninge deſire, and longinge after heauenlie things, but by boaſting and bragging woordes: is it not manifeſt,

that they are not partakers of the kingdome of heauen? Is it not cleere, that they were not ſent from God? Is it not verie euident, that they were falſe Prophetes?
            But let vs retourne vnto Ieremie. And firſt of all, where you ſaie, that I would, for a certaine pride, which is in me intolerable, be eſteemed as one of Gods priuie counſel, I would faine learne of you, whereof you gather that. Heard you euer ſaie, that I preached anie newe Goſpell? that I profeſſed anie newe doctrine, the which in the olde time was neuer heard of? that I withdrew the people from the olde faith and auncient order with goodlie promiſes? that I mainteined anie opinion deuiſed by myne owne ſelfe ſo conſtantly, as though it had proceeded from God him ſelfe? No truly. What reaſon moueth you then to ſaie, that I take this ſo great a name vpon me, whereas in deede you ſee no

token of ſuch intolerable pride in me? You ſaie afterward.
            
               You molest Ieremie againe, and will not ſuffer the reuerende Prophete to take his breath. If I haue moleſted the holie Prophete, I haue committed no ſmall offence againſt my ſelfe. But let vs ſee, how you will prooue it. You procede thus. You alleage theſe woordes of the Prophete. If they had ſtoode in my cownſell, and had openly declared my woordes vnto the people, truly they had tourned them from their euyll waie, and from their naughtie deuiſes. The wordes of the Prophete are verie cleere. I can not tell therfore how you goe about by your woordes to make them darke. It foloweth.
            
               Let vs take our beginning out of Ieremie, whiche was a worthie Prophete. You can ſaie none other. If you could M. Haddon, I doubt you would doe it. You goe forewarde.
            
               
               Did he fraie al the Iewes from vice? Did he bend them al to vertue? Marke wel the whole ordre and proceſſe of his prophecie, conſidre the watling that he maketh, which is in deede very lamentable. Hitherto you reaſon, not againſt me, but againſt the moſt godlie Prophete, to prooue him a vaine man: for you make him to ſpeake contrarieties. He had ſaied before, that the word of God was of ſuch force, that it brought men from vice to vertue. He lamenteth afterward, that, although he were ſtirred vp by the might and power of the word of God, yet he could not poſsibly bring the people from their wickednes. Wherefore he ſpeaketh contrarieties, and diſagreeth exceedingly with him ſelfe. As you did therefore in S. Paule, euen ſo doe you now. You improue not my ſaying, but you make the man of God to ſpeake contrarie to him ſelfe. But I ſaie on the other ſide: that it may moſt eaſily be prooued by

this reaſon onely, that you could not vnderſtand the meaning of the Prophete, bicauſe you thinke, that he diſſenteth from him ſelfe. For it is not poſſible, that there ſhould be any diſagreement in the worde of God, of the which Ieremie was a miniſter. And yet you, to impugne more openly the meaning of the Prophete, you earneſtly alleage the example of S. Peter, yea and of Chriſte him ſelfe, by whoſe preaching, ſay you, not al ſuche, as heard them, were fraied from their ſynne, vice, and wickednes.
            And at the length you goe ſo farre, that you affirme, that whereas one man yealdeth to the warning of God, an other doth not, it is not in the free wil of euerie man, but that it was ſo ordeined before the beginning of the worlde: and ſo you confirme againe that fatal violence or neceſsitie. And whereas you heare the complaint of our Lord him ſelfe, whiche is very lamentable,

wherein he bewaileth the infidelitie of the Iewes, which would not be receiued vnder his winges, being thereunto very mercifully moued: yet do you impute their damnation, not to the wickednes of the naughtie men, but vnto God as the author therof. The which impiety of yours is already ſufficiently confuted, (ſo much as the place required.) But neither you neither your maiſters doe vnderſtand the Prophets: and therefore they imagine, that the Prophets ſhould ſpeake contrarieties.
            Thinke you, that God by Ieremie gaue that token to diſcerne a true Prophete from a falſe: that al ſuch, as were preſent at the ſermons of a true Prophete, ſhould foorthwith be withdrawen from wickedneſſe, the which thing the falſe Prophetes could not doe? If you imagine, that the Prophete ſpake ſo, you are much deceiued. For our Lord him ſelfe, by whoſe

ſpirite all the holy Prophets were enkendled and ſtirred foreward, ſpeaking vnto thoſe men, that were obſtinately bent in ſynne, that ſhutte their eyes, and ſtopped their eares willfully, that the light of heauen might not ſhine vppon them, or the Worde of God moue their heartes, made them not to forſake their wickedneſſe. And therefore he complayneth of the Capharnaites, and ſuche other as withſtoode his Doctrine verie obſtinately.
            What is that then, that Hieremie ſaid? Dowbtles this. That ſuch as beleeued the Prophetes, ſuche as hadde them in good eſtimation, ſuche as tooke their ſayinges to be the verie anſweres of God, (if thoſe Prophetes were ſent from God) there is no doubt, but that they were eaſily brought from vnbeleefe to faith, and from vice to an honeſt ordre of life. The whiche thing when it folowed not,

it was a moſte ſure argument, that they were not ſent from God. For example.
            Phaſur the Prieſt was in high reputation. Ier. 20. a.He bent him ſelfe earneſtly againſt Hieremie. Hananias deſired to be called and eſteemed as a Prophete. He was in lyke manner an enemie to Hieremie. Hieremie in thoſe daies threatned the people, that ther hāged a great plague ouer them: but the other ſignified vnto the people with manie circumſtances of words, that al ſhould be wel. Many men folowed them, but very fewe folowed Hieremie. Nowe ſir, when there was ſuch a great diſſenſion betwene theſe twoo factions, by what token might a man diſcerne, whether of them was ſent from God? By the vertues and vices of ſuche as folowed either part. Therfore if it had ben diligētly marked at that time, that ſuch as folowed Phaſur and Ananias, or other the lyke falfe and deceitfull

Prophetes, prooued neuer the better, but rather walowed ſtil moſt filthily in the ſelfe ſame vice, as they did before: might it not haue ben eaſily perceiued, that thoſe Prophetes, vnto whom they had addicted them ſelues, were not ſent from God? And contrarie wiſe if it had ben noted, that thoſe fewe which folowed Ieremie, which reſorted vnto him, which gaue diligent eare vnto his doctrine, did forſake ſinne, embrace godlines, and feare the iudgementes of God: they might haue iudged very well, that he was ſent from God, and that the thinge which he ſpake came not from him ſelfe, but that he vttered ſuche thinges onelye, as he hadde learned of God.
            Wheras therfore ther were at that 
                  •
               yme many men, whieh tooke vppon them the name of Prophetes, and ſaid: thus ſaith our Lorde: when in deede they had neuer heard the voice of our

Lord: and clawed the common people and brought them in hope of a merie worlde, and ſaid peace, peace, whē no peace, that is to ſay, no great quietnes, and abundaunce of thinges, but an extreme calamitie hanged ouer the ſtate of the Iewes, and the common people, whoſe eyes were wholly bent vppon them, who eſteemed them as menne of God, were nothing the better for them, but continued ſtill in as muche wickednes, as they did before: doubtleſſe it was euident, that thoſe menne were falſe Prophets and craftie crowders, and that they did poiſon ſuche, as they tooke vpō them to inſtruct, with peſtilent errours.
            The lyke might be ſaid of the tyme of Chriſte and his Apoſtles. There were Prieſtes, and Phariſees, and Saducees, and Herodians, all contrarie to the Doctrine of Chriſte. Suche, as folowed Chriſte, and applied them ſelues with al diligence to learne his

doctrine, withſtood ſynne, and were inflamed with the deſire of godlineſſe and vertue: but ſuche as folowed the Prieſtes of that time, and the Phariſees, were diſteined with many foule vices. By this token therfore it might be perceiued, that Chriſt wrought by the holy ghoſt, and ſpake the worde of God: and that the Prieſtes and Phariſees tooke a pride vpon their owne conceite which proceded of an vnſetled and vndiſcrete mind.
            We may ſay the like of the Apoſtles, who had much a do with falſe Prieſtes and Philoſophers, whiche were frowardly bent againſt the truth. For ſuch as herkened vnto the Apoſtles, were beautifully fourniſhed with the ornamēts of true vertue: but ſuch as went vnto the contrary part, were clogged with moſt hei
                  •
               ouſes vices. Any man therefore, that was in his right wittes, might well perceiue by the reſtimonie of Hieremie, that the Apoſtles

were ſent from God: and that their aduerſaries were moued and ſtirred forward by the enemie the diuel.
            That this is the meaning of the Prophete, al men, which are not obſtinatly ſet in their owne mad and frantike opinion, may ſee very plainely. For otherwiſe the wiſedom of God, which ſpake in the holy Prophete, ſhould ſpeake againſt it ſelfe: the which thing if a man ſhould but once conceiue it in his heart, it were a moſt
                  •
                wicked ſynne, and horrible offence. Wee may nowe applie it vnto theſe newe Prophetes.
            There was a certayne woorſhipfull Prophete, whom you thinke vndowbtedly to haue ben ſent from heauen. Many men went after him, and commended him highly, and garded him both with their bodies and armes, and fourniſhed him with their gooddes. I will therefore demaund not of al, but of ſuch onely, as did not onely loue

Luther as a bowntifull and helping man, but alſo eſteemed and reuerenced him as a Prophet ſent from heauē, and receiued his doctrine moſt willingly both with eares and heartes: whether they were foorthwith chaū
               ged in hert, and whether they became any thing the better for it. No, they were rather made by the hearīg of him much more preſumpteous and proud, much more incontin
                  •
               nt and ſeditious, much more diſpiteful and outragious, yea ſo farre foorth, that Luther him ſelf, which had ſchooled them, was not able to kepe them in order. That therfore might haue ben a full proofe, that Luther ſtoode neuer in the counſell of God. For if he had ſtoode in the counſell of our Lord, and had declared the verie wordes of God vnto ſuch as folowed him and were named after him, dowbtles there ſhould haue ben ſeene ſome wonderfull alteration of life in them.
            
               
The like maie be ſaied of Melanchthon, Zwinglius, Bucer, and Caluine, and other the like Prophets. For theſe men were none ſuch, as might by good example of their cōtinent and honeſt conuerſation aſſwage the heate of incōtinency in thoſe that folowed them: but rather out of their ſchooles proceded verie often vicious and incōtinent men: yea and not only incōtinent, but alſo violēt churchrobbers, deſtroiers of good lawes, wily practiſers of treaſon againſt princes, felowes miſchieuouſly bent to deface al places of holines and deuotion by manſlaughter, bloudſhead and fier. Wherfore the teachers of this doctrine were not ſent from God: for if they had ben ſent from God, doubtles they had tourned thoſe men, that honoured them as goddes, from their wicked life.
            Moreouer, for ſo much as there is no diſagreement in the ſpirite of God, if they had ben ſent from God, there

muſt needes haue ben a moſt perfecte cōſent and agreement emōgeſt them. But the world knoweth, that there is a moſt bitter diſſenſion emongeſt them: wherfore it foloweth neceſſarily, that they were not moued by the inſtincte and inſpiration of the holie ghoſt, but driuen with burning fyer brandes of the findes of hell, and that they applied them ſelues, not to inſtruct men, but to ouerthrow them.
            You ſaie, that there is a meruelous goodlie agreement emongeſt you. I ſpeake not of you as nowe. For it maie be, that you maie by feare of pouniſhmente ſtaie for a lytle time the furie of raging felowes, (the whiche remedie, when the minde is not well ſettled, can not endure longe.) But of others, ſee you not, howe great diſſenſion there is emongeſt them, that ſprange of Luther? See you not, howe they fall out about woordes? How they alter and

chaunge their opinions? Howe confuſely, doubtfully, and intricately they ſpeake? With what fond reaſons they labour in vaine to prooue that thing, which they are bent to mainteine: in ſo muche that they can neither agree with other men, neither yet within them ſelues? They choppe and chaūge their Creedes, they affirme now one thing and now an other, they are eſtabliſhed in no one opinion. They can neuer agree within them ſelues, to whome they maie referre the determination of dowbtes.
            You referre the matter to your parlament (as you terme it): or els to your babling Bucerans, as the Biſhoppe of Angra not vnſittely termeth them. Diuers men referre the deciſion of queſtions in religion to diuers Confeſſions of the faith, which are wont now and then to be altered and chaunged. Thinke you, M▪ Haddon, if, as I doe now reaſon with you in writing, ſo I

mighte be preſente wyth you, and preſſe you with wordes, and wind you to and fro by the force of argumentes, that you were able to ſtande to your tackelinges? No without dowbt. But you woulde deuiſe a hundred diuers ſhiftes of deſcant to face out the matter, and ſeeke out all the ſtarting holes and blind corners in the world: in ſuch ſort, that it might eaſily appeare, that neither your tongue, neither yet your wit were in perfecte good plight. Howbeit one poore ſhifte you would finde, (which is a ſingular good helpe to you in all your diſtreſſes) that is, to brawle, chide, ſchold and reuile. You ſaie afterward.
            
               That you maie acknowledge the authoritie of this Churche, if you dowbt of it, I referre you to the Apologie. I know you haue writen an Apologie, wherwith you labour to ſet out your Churche meruelouſly. If you haue written it more wittyly and finely, then this

booke, which you ſet out againſt me, ſurely you haue done me great wrōg. For you made light of me, and therefore did not voucheſafe to put out the vttermoſt ſtrength of your eloquence, when you encountered with me. If you vſe the like ſtile and the like argumentes, that is to ſaie, if you contend with the like arrogancie and reprochful language: I haue not ſo much time to ſpare, that I wil deſire to take it once in my handes. For you define nothing, you ſpeake▪nothing ſincerelie, you conclude nothing by good argument. You ſaie at the length.
            
               Confute it if you can. But you can not. That was verie arrogantly ſpoken. Who hath made you ſo loftie and high ſprited? Your eloquence? Or elles the loue of the truthe? If you truſte to your eloquence, you are a very babe. If you beare your ſelfe vppon the truth, you imagine manie

thinges to be true, that are not.
            You ſaie, that one hath barked againſte your Apologie. I haue not reade it, and yet I knowe, that your Apologie, whiche, you ſaie, can not poſsiblie be confuted, is alreadie excellentlie well confuted, by a manne of muche grauitie, godlines, and learninge. which thing you denie.
            But this leſſon haue you learned of your maiſters: who beinge openlye conuinced, fall a crying, being ſette a gogge, kepe a raging ſtirre: and when they are able to ſaie nothing to the grownde of the matter, they heape together manie woordes without order and beſides the pourpoſe, and yet they vaunte them ſelues emongeſt their adherentes beyond all meaſure and modeſtie. But I regard not your brauerie and Iuſtines, I eſteeme not your haughtie and prowde vauntes: I weye the truthe, reaſon and argumentes. And ſuche is the noblenes of

this your Ilād, the glorie and renoum
                  •
                of your kingdome ſo bright, that neither can anie vice lie hidden in it, neither yet anie vertue vnknowen.
            Wherfore you labour but in vaine to conceale that thing, whiche is euerie where cōſtantly reported. What you ſay touching the immortality of ſoules, I wote not. I neuer ſaied, that your maiſters denied the immortalitie of ſowles. Howbeit I am not ignorant, by what degrees or ſteppes men are wont to clymme vp vnto the higheſt point of that moſt deteſtable opinion.
            Whereas you ſaie, that there hath ben manie men emongeſt you, which haue confirmed the truth of the goſpel by baniſhment, nakednes, hungre, yea by ſheading their bloud and yealding their liues: I graunt it. For ſo did the Biſhop of Rocheſter, ſo did Moore, ſo did the holy Carthuſians (to paſſe ouer a numbre of others) theſe men died a moſt honourable death for the glorie

of Chriſt. So doe your holy Biſhops, whō you haue defeated of their goods depriued of their dignities, and caſt into priſons. So do we ſee many others, Biſhops, Prieſts and Monks, very godlie and Religiouſe perſons, driuen out of England and Ireland, liuing like baniſhed men and outcaſtes: the which, if they had not ben able to eſcape out of your clammes, had peraduenture ben put to a moſt orewel death, by the miniſters of this your Goſpel.
            If you meane any other of your men, heare what S. Cyprian ſaith: that, ſuch as being without the bowndes of the Church, doe ſuffer death for the glory of Chriſte, they doe not receiue the Croune of Martyrdome, but beare the puniſhment for their vnbeleefe. If thei therefore, that breake vp the incloſure of the Church, and ſeperate them ſelues from it, although they yeld their bloude and liues for the Religion of Chriſt, which the Church holdeth, are

not to be accounted as Martyrs, but as naughty packes and Church robbers: what is to be thought of ſuch, as being without the Church, are not aſhamed to ſpil their bloud and liues in the main tenance of rebellion and vngodlines?
            I am nowe come to that place, whiche is by you, (who are a man naturally abhorring the ſleightie occupation of flatterie and lying) verie clerkely handled. Your woordes are theſe.
            
               You confeſſe that you haue gone further in the matter, then you had thought to doe. Truth it is, that you haue gon a great deale further, then it became you to doe: eſpeciallie in the moſt learned and prudēt eares of the Quenes Maieſtie, whoſe ſharpe witte and iudgement you woulde haue ben afraid of, if you had wel weighed with your ſelfe, how much pitthineſſe there is in her. O right excellent Syr Waulter, you appeare nowe in your owne likenes. Tel me, I pray you, doe

you not ſee, that exceſsiue prayſing
                  •
                doth not aduaunce the dignity of Princes, but rather vtterlie peruerte their minde and iudgement oftentimes? Do you not know, that the moſt fine and ſharp wit, loueth truth, and abhorreth excedingly all lying and flatterie? For what other thing is it to praiſe Princes exceſsiuely, but to ſet them out to the world as mocking ſtocks? Truly if your Quene be ſo witty, as I may wel think ſhee is, not by your talke, but by the reporte of other men, ſhe will tourne you out of her courte and companie as an open and detected flatterer, and wil not ſuffer her ſelfe to be moſt impudently mocked of you.
            If you ſet out her wit, if you commende her knowledge in the Latine 
                  •
               nd Greeke tongue, if you praiſe her courtlie grace and comlines of ſpeach, i
                  •
                is well donne. But when you make her no meane Diuine, when you aduaunce her witte ſo muche,

as though I ought to be terriblie afraid of it, you aſſault her Maieſtie by verie wilie and craftie meanes. Is this your loialtie? Is this the part of a kind hert, mindefull of the benefites beſtowed vppon you? Is this well done, that a moſt noble Quene, a Princeſſe endued with moſt excellent wit and ſingular qualities, ſhould be gibed and ſcorned of you, M. Haddon, who haue, as you ſaie your ſelfe, ben foſtred and brought vp by her Maieſty? Did you ſo little eſteeme her iudgemente, that you thought her meete to make your laughing ſtocke? To pull her downe from the ſetled ſtaye of her minde by your clawing and flatterie? To deceiue her for your gaine and lukers ſake?
            If, when you ſette for this bootie, you had made your entrie more couertlye, your fowle flatterie needed not to haue benne repelled with ſo greate inforcemente. For a manne

mighte haue thoughte, that you had miſdowbted the ſharpeneſſe of the Queenes witte, and therfore hadde deuiſed to vndermine ſecretelie, that you might the better haue ſcaled the forte, whiche you haue deſired to take.
            But now, wheras you mock ſo opēly, aſcribīg vnto her maieſty, ſuch cōmen dable qualities, as can not poſsibly ſtād, neither with her age, neither with her nature, as being a woman, neither with her tender and delicate bodie, neither yet with her eſtate, (which is otherwiſe employed to weightie and carefull affaires): is it not manifeſte, that you make lighte of her witte? Doe you ſo recōpence the benefits which you haue receiued of her bowntifulneſſe? If ſhee be ſo wiſe as you make her to be, if ſhee haue ſo many excellente vertues, as I deſire her Maieſtie to be alwayes decked and bewtified withall: the moderate praiſes,

whiche I geaue her, ſhee wil accepte with good hearte; but that immoderate flatterie of yours ſhee will refuſe and reiecte: neyther will ſhee ſuffer her ſelfe to be mocked of ſuche preſumptuouſe felowes to the greate abatemente of her eſtimation and honour.
            As towchinge the quietneſſe of thinges, whiche you talke of at large, I ſaie this muche. It is the parte of a madde man, yea of one, that is ignoraunte of the common frailtie of man, to truſt to much in proſperitie, and not to caſt long time before by cauſes paſſed, ſuch aduerſities, as peraduentur
                  •
                hange ouer his heade. Moreouer, there canne be no quietnoſſe, where the faithe of the holie Churche is ſhut out. For the minde is troubled, yea and oftentimes ſhaken quite out of the hengies, by the remorſe of ſynne, the which the moſt preſumptuous and bolde felowes in the worlde are not

able to ſuppreſſe, (although many are able to diſſemble it).
            As for the compariſon of your Church with the Primitiue Churche, which you ſaie may be confirmed by the Hiſtories, I ſaie that, either you haue not read the Hiſtories, or els you are paſt all ſhame. You ſhoulde haue brought ſome example or teſtimonie out of the Hiſtories, with the whiche you might ouercharge vs. But you can neuer doe it, forſomuch as all the antiquitie maketh againſt you.
            Whereas you ſaie, that your nobilitie is verie well agreed, would God it were ſo: but it is otherwiſe reported commonlye. I paſſe ouer manie thinges of purpoſe, partly bicauſe they are nothing to the purpoſe, and partly becauſe they are alreadie confuted before. But wheras you ſaie theſe words: Ah be not diſquieted gentle Syr: I acknowledge your pleaſaunt manner of ſpeach. As for your heauenly kindred,

of the whiche you ſaie, you are verie deſirouſe: you doe well in it. But I woulde you had ſome other menne of this ſtocke and kinred, more ſkilful interpretours of the law of God. Then how wittilie was that ſpoken of you?
            
               Wherefore ſaie you, that menne haue benne caried awaie by vs from that most aunciente and holie Religion, whiche was grownded vppon the bloude of Ieſus Chriſte, and hathe continewed alwayes one euen vntill our daies, and that they haue benne trained in an other Religion, which is moſte curſed and deteſtable?
            
            Then you adde, Doe you beleeue theſe thinges, as you haue ſpoken them? No trnely doe you not. Theſe thinges were very merrily ſpoken of you, M. Haddon. Doubtleſſe your pleaſant gyrdes procede of ameruelous wit: eſpecially when yon thinke your ſelf to be cocke ſure. For then, as though your diſcourſe had eſcaped the rockes, you pleaſure very much to ſport and dalie.
            
               
But whereas you ſaie, that I doe not beleeue thoſe thinges whiche I haue ſaied, you are fowly deceiued. For I doe bothe beleeue and confeſſe them, neither ſhal the outrage and vnbrideled wilfulneſſe of a ſort of raſcall varlets euer bring me from the cōſtant confeſsion of my faith. What argumentes of yours thinke you, to be of ſuch force, that thei might cauſe a mā, which is in his right wittes, not to beleue that, that is confirmed by the teſtimonie of holie Scriptures, by authoritie of the holie Fathers, by the recordes of al the antiquitie? You ſaie, afterward.
            
               For in the olde and beſte time of the Church, neither was their any Popedom, neither leaden redemption for ſynne, neither the marte of Purgatorie, neither woorſshippinge of Images, neither runninge vppe and downe to viſite Sainctes, neither offering in the Maſſes for the liue and for the dead, with other like.

Theſe ſhamefull pointes, whiche dooe diſshonest Relligion, at what times they crope in, and by whome they were deuiſed, you are not ignoraunie. But you diſſemble it, to ſerue the eares of your companie.
            
            Belke out M. Haddon, ſtreine your ſelfe, as muche as you can, ridde your ſtomake of this ſurfeicte, of moſt barbarouſe furie and rage: caſt vppe your poiſon, ſpewe out your venime: and then ſhall you openly triumph emongeſt your compagnions with this peeuiſh and vaine talke. When you haue ſaid nothing, prooued nothing, alleaged no true teſtimonie of the antiquiquitie: when you haue broughte nothing elles but railinge for argument, madneſſe for reaſon, impudencie for true exaumples: you keepe ſuch a raginge ſtirre, as though you hadde alreadi
                  •
                wonne the fielde with greate honour.
            But we on the other ſide are wont

to declare, by authoritie of the holie Scriptures, by teſtimonies of the holy Fathers, by fetching the Monumentes and Recordes of al the Antiquitie, finally by reaſon, by vſe, by experience, by a number of examples, that thys kinde of gouernement hath allwaies bene in the Churche: and that, who ſo euer goeth about to appaire it, is a breaker of peace, an ouerthrower of Religion, a woorker of ſedition, a puller downe of the Churche, whiche is one, and a fettor vp of diuers and ſundrie churches, diuerſly ſundered and diuided within them ſelues, a bringer in of infinite moſt filthie vices, and trowbleſome errours.
            As for the mart of Purgatorie, which you ſpeake of, we anſwere you, that there is no ſuch thing. If at any time in ſo many hundred yeares ther hath ben any bying and ſelling of holie thinges vſed, the holie Churche alloweth it not, but baniſheth it out of the bounds

of the Chriſtian common weale, as a moſt peſtilent and pernicious abuſe.
            Likewiſe of Images, we ſay, that al we, that liue in the holy catholik faith, are able to prooue both by reaſons, argumentes, and examples, that euen frō the primitiue church, (eſpecially after it might be done for tyrannes) there hath ben Images ſet vp in churches, to the euerlaſting remembraunce of vertue, to moue men to godlines and religion, to the glorie and honour of Chriſte, the whiche is ſeene in the wonderfull vertue of holie men. We ſaie moreouer that the errour of thoſe men, that threw downe Images, was condemned by manie authorities of the holy Fathers, by diuers decrees of generall councels: the whiche thing your maiſters, be they neuer ſo ſhameles, can not denie, vnleſſe they wil firſt burne al the writinges of holie fathers, al hiſtories and records, all the decrees of general Councels.
            
               
What ſhoulde I here reaſon of the reuerence and honour, which was of old time geauen vnto ſainctes? Could you neuer ſpare a litle time from the fine woorkes of Accurſius, to beſtow in the reading of Gregorie Nazianzene, Baſile the Greate, Hierome and Ambroſe? If you coulde doe it, you ſhoulde ſee it in their bookes, howe many times godlie perſonnes came together in the olde time, what reſortes and aſſemblies there were made, what eloquent Orations were pronounced in the commendation of Sainctes, how greate multitude of the common people preſſed thither to heare them. But nowe, if I woulde ſhewe you, with what feruente zeale and deuotion verie many men were wont to continue all night at the Tombes of Martyrs, it were a hard matter to expreſſe it.
            None of al the holy Biſhops in thoſe daies, did once put backe the common people from hearing the cōmendation

of Martyrs: no man diſſwaded them from that moſte earneſt deuotion towardes the Saintes: no, they did rather exhort al ſuch as were preſent, to viſit their Monumentes, to praiſe and honour them, to obſerue and keepe ſuch woorſhippe, as was dew vnto them. For they ſawe in thoſe aſſemblies, when the name of Martyrs was ſette out with heauenlie prayſes, that not the nature of the bodie, but the grace of God, and the almightie power of Chriſte him ſelfe was dewlie honoured in them. For if the Chriſtian menne in thoſe daies kept the ſignes of the holie Croſſe, and the Images of Sainctes, whiche were of deuotion ſette vppe in Churches, with ſuch reuerence: if they were oftentimes put in minde by thoſe ſignes to plucke vppe their heartes, and to remember the vertue whiche thoſe domme Images did repreſente: was it not muche more conuenient, that the liuely Images

of Chriſte ſhoulde be honoured with greater feruencie, and that all ſuche as ſerued God truely and heartilie, (to doe this honour the better) ſhould viſite the Tombes of Martyrs, and Churches builded in the honoure of them? And is it not euidently ſene, that the Sainctes are by the operation of the holy Ghoſt ſhapen to the likenes of God and that they beare a very true and expreſſe Image of Chriſt?
            
               Purgatory proued by Luther. As touching your paſtime that you make with Purgatorie (for you muſt needes haue a ſnatche at euery thing) can there be broughte any grauer teſtimonie againſt you, then that, which the manne, that was ſent (as you ſaie) from heauen, hath geuen openlie? Who is that ſaye you? It is that Luther, whome you honoure and reuerence, whome you make a God, whome you affirme to haue ben borne for youre ſaluation. Hee ſayed more then once or twiſe, and abidde

by it, that there was a Purgatorie, and that he did not weene, thinke, or beleue it, but certainely knowe it to be ſo. For proufe whereof, he conſtantlie alleaged that place of S. Mathew, Matt. 12. c.where Chriſte ſaid, that the ſynne of ſuche, as did wilfully reſiſt the teſtimonie of the holie Ghoſte, ſhoulde neuer be forgeauen, neither in this worlde, neither yet in the worlde to come: by the which wordes it is ſignified, that ſome hope of forgeuenes is mercifully ſhewed by God vnto many men euen in the worlde to come.
            
               
                  
                     •
                  . Macab. 
                     
                        •
                     2. g. He alleged alſo that place out of the Machabees, where Iudas made oblations for the ſynnes of ſuch as were departed. With theſe and other the like argumēts and allegatiōs he was earneſt to proue that there was a Purgatorie.
            How then? If Luther ſaied there was a Purgatorie, and you will warrant it, that Luther was ſent from God: and, if he were ſent from God, ſo long

as he was in that embaſſage, he coulde not lie: it is manifeſtly prooued by his authoritie, (the whiche you maie not gainſaie) that there is a purgatorie. If there be no purgatorie, Luther lied. If Luther lied, he was not ſent from God, but from him, that is the father of lying. Chooſe therefore whether you like better. For either the authoritie of Luther ſhal cōfirme, that there is a purgatorie, or els the feined tale of purgatorie, (as you terme it) ſhall conuince Luther of vanitie and madnes.
            But he afterward denied purgatorie. That is no wonder. For not only he, but all his ofſpring ſaie nowe one thing, and now an other: they correct and alter manie thinges, neither can they ſtaie them ſelues in anie one degree, but rather when they haue once begonne an errour, they heape and increaſe it with a numbre of other errours.
            But I would faine learne of you M.

Haddon: whether of theſe two opinions, whiche are mainteined both by Luther, think you to be the truer? The later, ſaie you. Well then the former he receiued not of God. Then was he not as yet ſent from God. But after he had diſteined him ſelfe with inceſtuous wedlocke, after he had allured his contrei men to rebellion, after he had defied chaſtitie and all holines, after he had ſtirred vp ſuch broile and ſedition in the common weale, that he coulde not appeace it him ſelfe afterward, when he had railed againſt the ſtate of the church with moſt reprochfull and ſhamefull language, when he had vttered moſt horrible and diueliſh blaſphemie, when he had waſted, ſpoiled, and burned all holie thinges, when he had committed all theſe outrages and villanies: then was he thought a meete man to be taken into gods pricuie counſell, and a perſone woorthie, to whome God, beſides all other ſecretes,

ſhoulde mercifully reuele that myſterie alſo of the deuiſing of purgatorie. Then did this great wiſe man vnderſtand at the length, that S. Auguſtine, which held that we ſhould praie vnto God in our Sacrifices for the dead: that S. Cyprian, which laied this moſt grieuous puniſhment vpon ſuch, as appointed Prieſtes in their teſtamēt to be tutours or gouernours to their children, that there ſhould no ſacrifice be offred vp for them in the churches: that S. Chryſoſtome, whiche referred this ordinaunce to the tradition of the Apoſtles: that S. Deniſe (to paſſe ouer a numbre of others) which wrote very diligently of the care, that is to be had for the departed in the faith, and of praiers, that are to be made vnto God for their deliueraunce: Luther, I ſaie, vnderſtood, from heauen that al theſe men had ben in great errour and folie.
            Trulie the capitaine of this your faction had a great commoditie of his

naughtines and folie, if, after the reiſing of ſuch broiles and troubles in the worlde, he was deliuered by the benefite of God from that errour, in the which thoſe holie Fathers, moſt Godlie and wiſe men, excellently wel learned in the Scriptures, linked vnto Chriſte with a moſt ſtreight band of heauenlie loue were quite drowned.
            If no man can thus perſwade him ſelfe, vnleſſe he be peeuiſh, frantike and ſtarke mad, void not only of al godlie religion, but alſo of common ſenſe: who doth not ſee that this opinion of Luther is wicked ād deteſtable, taught and ſet out by none other, then by the enemie the diuell.
            But this, ſaie you, is not witten in the ſcripture. What then? The thing, which the Apoſtles taught by word of mowth, which their ſchollers deliuered to the poſteritie, whiche hath ben moſt conſtantly holden and beleeued from the primitiue Churche till our

times, whiche hath ben approued by the beleefe and full agreement of the whole Church for ſo manie hnndred yeares, ſhall Luther a ſeditious mad ſelowe, after ſo manie ages gariſhly auowch it to be a feined matter? Shall men, whiche take vpon them to be both Godlie and religious, folow him as a God of heauen, that attempteth moſt deſperatly to aſſault heauen? For he maketh warre againſt heauē, which taketh vp armour againſt the faith of the Church.
            
               No, no, ſaie you, you would not thinke, what manner of man he was. For he, I tel you, woulde allowe nothing, vnleſſe he fownde it written in the holie ſcriptures. Well ſir, I will not nowe handle that matter, whiche is by the holy Fathers diſcuſſed long a goe: howe the goſpell conſiſteth not only in thinges written, but alſo in cuſtomes and ordinaunces receiued without any writing, deliuered vnto the Churche by

worde of mowth and order of the Apoſtles: how much the ſure and groū
               ded 1. Tim. 3. c.authoritie of the Church, which is the piller and ſtaie of truth, is to be eſteemed: of howe great value and importaunce the agreement of all holy men in one minde without anie varietie ought to be: all theſe thinges I will nowe omit, and aſke you one queſtion, how Luther, when he ſaied there was a purgatorie, to prooue it, alleaged the teſtimonies of the holie ſcripture, if there were no teſtimonie in the ſcripture, that proued that there was a purgatorie?
            Then againe when he ſaied, that there was no Purgatorie, by what teſtimonie of the Scripture thought he, that Purgatorie might be vtterly diſprooued? Brought he anie one place, by the whiche he might conuince that there is no Purgatorie? Dowbtleſſe not one. Such therefore was his preſumption, that, what ſo

euer came into his head, that woulde he conſtantly affirme: and againe, the ſelfe ſame thing, if it miſliked him, would he vtterly denie.
            And yet his diſciples for ſooth find no fault at all, neither with his inconſtancie, neither yet with his lewd faſſhions: but what ſo euer the drowſie blowbol draueled out ouer his pottes, that toke they vp ſo griedily, as though it had ben good goſpell.
            
               Purgatorie. But leſt you ſhould ſaie, that it can not be ſhewed by the teſtimonie of the ſcripture, that there is a purgatory, although it be not neceſſarie, yet, beſides thoſe places, whiche are wont to be alleaged for the proofe thereof, I thinke it good to bring a fewe: of the whiche that is one of S. Marke: where our Lorde, when he had ſaied, that hel (into the which al ſuch ſhalbe throwen downe, as eſteeme more their bodilie pleaſure, then their dewtie towardes God) ſhoulde haue this

propertie, that the worme of them, that ſhall be tombled down headlong into it, ſhould neuer die, and their fyer neuer be quenched: he brought in Marc. 9▪
                   gfoorthwith theſe wordes: for euerie man ſhalbe ſeaſoned in fyer, and euery ſacrifice ſhalbe ſeaſoned in ſalt. In this place there are two thinges to be noted. One is, that there is a worme, that is to ſaie, a vexation or torment of cō
               ſcience gnawing and moleſting the minde, the whiche ſhal haue an ende: and that there is a torment of fyer alſo, the whiche in like manner ſhall haue and end in ſome men. For otherwiſe our Lorde woulde neuer haue Eſaie. 66. abrought that place out of Eſaie: their worme dieth not, and their fyer is not quenched. By the whiche place we are taught, that there is one torment euerlaſting, and an other that laſteth but for a time. For ſo muche therefore as this worme and fyer is a torment or vexation of minde, and of

tormentes there is one, whiche is appointed by the iudgement of God to laſt but a time, and the other to continew for euermore: is it not euidently prooued, that there is a purgatorie? (for ſo is the place of puniſhment called, in the whiche by the ſentence of God the ſowles are purged within a certaine time of ſuche ſpottes of venial offences, as they had gathered in this life.)
            An other thing worthy to be noted is this, that no ſynne ſhal eſcape vnpuniſhed. For euen as in the old lawe it was not lawful to offre vp any Sacrifice without ſalt, ſo is it not lawful for our ſoules to approch vnto the throne of Gods maieſtie, vnleſſe their vncleanes be before clenſed by ſalt and fyer, that is to ſay, by the rigour of Goddes iudgement, and by dewe puniſhment: that, when al the ſpottes of vncleane affection be put out and quite conſumed, the faithful ſowles may come to

haue ſuch a puritie and cleerenes, that thei may be able to receiue the brightnes of God in them ſelues, and be likened and confourmed to the glory of God. For although by the mercy of God ſynne is taken quite away in ſuch as ſtay them ſelues vppon a liuelie ſaith, yet are they for the moſt parte ſo bounde with ſome knot of the law, that they muſt needes ſatisfie the iuſtice of God. For almightie God is mercifull, but ſo
                  •
               , that he is not vnmindfull of his iuſtice: he is alſo iuſt, but in ſuche ſorte, that in the miniſtring of his ſeuere iudgement he ſheweth manie pointes of great mercie.
            Moreouer this puritie or cleannes, which is gotten by the grace and benefite of Chriſt, hath certaine degrees, ſo, that he that is cleane, may be yet cleaner, and come vnto a cleerer knowledge of the nature of God. And the encreaſe of this cleannes conſiſteth

in ſalt and fyer, that is to ſay, in ſuch pouniſhment, as is appointed to pourge the remnantes of ſynne: that the Sacrifice may be purer and holier and more acceptable to God. Wherefore it is neceſſarie, that the Sacrifice, whiche is to be offered vppe vnto God with ſuche rites and orders, as are appointed by Chriſte our high Prieſt, be firſt cleanſed, yea and perfectely well pourged, by laying on ſome pouniſhment vppon ſynne, either in this lyfe, or elles in the lyfe to come. For euen as God, when he pardoned Dauid, quited him not of all 2. Reg. 12. d.
               puniſhment, (for he loſt afterward his ſonne, and was chaſed out of his kingdome by the heynouſe treaſon of his ſonne Abſolon, and his howſe was diſhonoured in the face of the world) in lyke ſorte, although God forgeaueth ſynnes, yet, that notwithſtandinge, hee wyll require ſome penaunce, that there maye be made a

ſatisfaction or amendes for the offence committed. The which ſatisfaction reſteth not in the weight or eſtimation of it ſelfe, but in the infinite merite of Chriſt. For otherwiſe there ſhould be no end of puniſhment, for ſo muche as the offence was endles: in ſo much as the maieſtie of God was offended, (which is endles.)
            Vnto this penaunce, which is to be abiden of al ſuch, as haue not thorughly pourged the vncleannes of their 1. Pet. 4. d
               ſinnes in this life by dew labours, looked S. Peter, when he ſaid, that the iuſt ſhould hardly be ſaued, wherefore the wicked were ſarre from that, that they could aſſure them ſelues of ſaluation. That there is a moſt certaine hope of ſaluation offered vnto the iuſt, he denieth not: but that it is geuen, vnleſſe they take great paines and trauaile before, that he denieth vtterly.
            S. Peter againe in the ſelfe ſame epiſtle, to teach vs, that the entraunce

vnto ſaluation is not ſhut vppe to the 1. Pet. 3. d
               dead, ſaith, that Chriſte preached the goſpell to thoſe ſowles, that were in cuſtodie or ward. He ſaith not, that Chriſt going downe to hel declared that ioyfull and glad tydinges to the holy Fathers onely, but alſo to menne which were committed to ward, that is to ſay, to men which were ſhut vp in priſon for offences committed. And left it might be thought, that thoſe mē, whome Chriſt at that time inſtructed with a more cleere and exacte knowledge, had ben before vtterly voide of 
                  •
               aith, he added: Such as had been ſome Ibide
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               time vnbeleeuing. And againe leſt ſome man might ſuſpect, that that ſentence had ben ſpoken by them, the which, although they had ſometyme cōmitted ſome offences, yet had ſpent the greateſt part of their life in faith and religion, he ſaith: that the goſpel, that is to ſay, the tidings of euerlaſting ſaluation was brought to them, which

in the daies of Noe made light of the counſel and aduertiſement of the holy man: the whiche notwithſtanding, (before thei were cōſumed in the flud) were better aduiſed, and gat pardon of their ſynnes and offences: but yet ſo, that for their long offence, they ſuffred in hell a long penaunce. Out of the which place it is gathered by the autoritie of S. Peter, that ſuch, as repent them ſelues in lyke māner of their vncleane and ſynful liuing in the ende of their life, and depart out of this bodie with a burning faith, ſhal after the ſame faſſhion be kepte in priſon, vntil they haue ſuffred ſuche puniſhment as God hath appointed, and vntil being more cleerely inſtructed in the thinges apperteyning to God, (in the whiche inſtruction and receiuing of the light ſtā
               deth, as S. Denyſe ſaith, the ſomme of the purgation) they may be caried vp into thoſe ioyfull dwelling places of heauen.
            
               
S. Paule alſo writing to the Corinthians, ſaith. What ſhal they do, which 1. Cor. 15. d.
               are baptized for the dead, if the dead riſe not at all? Wherefore are they baptized for them? To be baptized in in this place, is to offer vppe him ſelfe as a ſatisfactorie or pourging Sacrifice to waſſhe and clenſe the ſpottes of ſowles. Wherevpon our Lorde him Luc. 22. 
                  
                     •
                  
               ſelfe ſhewed, that he was very ſore pained with the earneſt deſire that he had of baptiſme, that is to ſay, of that moſt wholeſome waſſhing, wherein he ſhould offer vp him ſelfe a Sacrifice vpon the Aulter of the Croſſe for Mat. 2
                        •
                     . 
                  
                     •
                  
               the ſynnes of mankind. And of the two brethren, whiche ſought to haue the higheſt roome with him in his kingdom, he demaūdeth, whether they be 
                  •
               eady to beare him cōpanie in the ſame baptiſme. To be baptized therefore for the dead is nothing els, but to honour God with ſome pourging Sacrifice or offering for the ſaluation of the dead,

and to offer vp with good heart euen the Sacrifice of our body for their ſaluation.
            The which thing S. Paule did, as it appeereth, not only for the dead, but 1. Cor. 15. d.
               alſo for the liuing. For immediatly after he ſaith thus. Wherefore doe we alſo put our ſelues in ieoperdie euerie day? I doe die dayly for your glorie, which I haue in our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. By the whiche place it may be gathered, that S. Paule, ſo o
                  •
               ten as he aduentured his life for the ſtate of the holy Church, ſo often did he adminiſter the Sacrament and Sacrifice of this baptiſme: the whiche thing he did then 2. Tim. 4. 
                     •
                  .moſt worthely, when he died a moſte honorable death for the glory of Chriſt and ſaluation of al men. For he ſayde, that he was to be offered vp as a Sacrifice, at that tyme eſpecially, when death, by the which he ſhould be deliuered out of the priſon of his bodie, approched neere. By the which place

it is euidently prooued, that many other alſo haue offred vp moſt holy Sacrifices for the dead, that is to ſay, for the ſaluation of the deade. The which thing if it were alwayes done in vaine, then might it be concluded, that ſuch, 
                  •
               s are deade, ſhould neuer returne againe to liue.
            But now, for ſo much as it was not done in vaine, (for otherwiſe S. Paule would neuer haue borne withal) it foloweth neceſſarily, that prayers made for the ſaluation of the dead are not ſuperfluous, and that the ſowles of ſuch, as are departed this lyfe, are holpen by the prayers, vowes, and Sacrifices of the lyuing. The whiche ſowles ſo departed, for ſo much as thei 
                  •
               re neither buried in euerlaſting darkneſſe (for then could they not get out by any mans prayers) neither yet placed in heauen (for there ſhould they not neede any mans prayers) it followeth, that they be in ſome other

place, which we are wont to call purgatorie.
            Many other thinges might be ſpoken to this purpoſe. Many things haue ben verie well alleaged of diuers godly and holy men to confirme this matter: but if there had ben no ſuch thing, yet the faith of the holie Churche, which hath alwaies continewed vndefiled euen from the Apoſtles tyme till our daies, might haue ſuffiſed vs abundantly. But you, when you ſee moſt euident teſtimonies, when you are not able to ſhift our argumentes, when you are conuinced by the autoritie of the holy Fathers, when you may ſee the agreement of the whole Churche, yet wil you of an vncredible ſtubborneſſe continewe in the wicked opinion, which you haue once taken.
            What ſhal I here ſay of prayers and vowes made in Sacrifice for the liue

and the dead? Is there any tyme, in the which it is not lawful for Chriſtiā men to vſe charitie, the perfection of whoſe Religion reſteth in charitie? Can there be deuiſed any greater deede of charitie then that, wherein we praie vnto God moſt ſeruently for the ſaluation of our brethern? Is there any tyme more meete and conueniēt to doe this holy woorke, then that is, when we goe about to appeace the maieſtie of God, not with the Sacrifice of brute beaſtes, but with the bodie and bloude of Chriſte? Is there any thing more agreable to the ordre of our Religion, which doe beleeue, that ſuche as departe out of this mortall bodie with true faith, doe not die, but lyue, then to ioyne them with ſuche, as remayne in this lyfe: and to praye vnto Chriſte, whiche was offered vppe for vs, both for the lyuing, as alſo for them, that are departed out of this life?
            
               
Cal you this godlie point of Religion, this holy worke of moſt feruent charitie, this wholeſome Sacrifice offered vppe not onely for vs, but alſo for our brethern, vnto whome wee are knit with an euerlaſting bande of loue, call you this, I ſay, the diſhoneſtie of Religion? Is this no outrage? Is this no madneſſe? Is this no impudencie?
            To refuſe lawefull authoritie, to breake the aunciēt ordre of the Churche, to deflowre holy virgins, to robbe good matrones of their chaſtitie, to cancell the verie remembraunce of of vertue, Religiō, and iuſtice, to quēch the loue of honeſtie and gentlenes, to prophane and robbe Churches, to take holy men, and ſome to murder, ſome to ſpoile and put to all the villanie in the worlde, ſome others to banniſhe out of their countrey, to awrecke the malice your beare towardes godlines vpon the relikes of Sainctes, to

vaunt your ſelues like helhoundes in the waſte and ſacke of holy thinges, ſhal this be accompted as honeſt and gloriouſe, ſhall this be eſteemed as a matter worthie of immortal commendation and praiſe? And to be bound to obeie authoritie grounded vppon the commaundement and ordinaunce of Chriſt, to conſerue the band of peace and concord, to honour and reuerence the iuſtice and mercie of God ioyned together in one, to cal to remembrāce the goodly monumentes of holines, to offer vp that moſt holy and noble Sacrifice (the vertue whereof we cā neither expreſſe with woordes, neither yet conceyue in heart) for the liuing and the dead, and for the good eſtate of the whole Chriſtian cōmon weale: ſhal this be ſuch a diſhoneſtie as may not be borne? And yet you are not afraied to cal al theſe thinges the diſhonour of Religion, and to ſay, that I am not ignorant, by whome theſe

thinges are cropen in, but that I diſſemble it to ſerue the eares of my compagnions.
            Of lyke, Sir, all theſe thinges, whiche you miſlike, and call the diſhoneſtie of Religion, were deuiſed and brought in, by brothels and bawdes, or elles by ſuche felowes, as ſerue the bellie, luſte, or vnſtedfaſtneſſe of the people for their commodities ſake, and not by the ſpirite of Chriſte, and by moſt continent and holy menne, in whome was the ſpirite of Chriſte. But you are neuer able to prooue that you ſay. For both reaſon and the teſtimonie of all antiquitie, as alſo the authoritie of holy Fathers doe vrge and preſſe you, yea and conuince you of impudencie: but wee haue putte backe the violent puſſhe of this your vngodlyneſſe and malice, with argumentes moſt ſure, with teſtimonies moſt graue, with examples moſt true.
            
               
Whereas you ſay, that I ſpeake otherwyſe then I thinke, to ſerue the eares of my compagnions, I ſee well, you are wel acqueinted with my behauiour. I am lyke to be ſuche a man, as would ſpend my tyme with all diligence to learne to flatter, and to write, not what I thinke, but what I imagine may be beſt liked of my compagnions. I beſech Chriſte the iudge of the liuing and of the dead, if I write not, in matters concerning Religion, thoſe thinges which I thinke, whiche I iudge to be true, whiche I beleeue aſſuredly, that he ſuffer me not to enter into that moſt gloriouſe and euerlaſting Citie of heauen, and that he let me not to haue the ioyfull fruition of his owne light and brightnes for euermore.
            For what is the Popedome els, but a miniſtration of an authoritie, which is lawefull and ordeyned by God? What is our beleefe of Purgatorie,

but a declaration of Gods iuſtice and mercie together? What is the honou
                  •
                geuen vnto Sainctes, but a reuerent conſideration of the worke of God, in the which appeereth the almighty power and bountifulnes of God muche more, then in the making of heauen, yea or in al the works of nature. What are the praiers made in our Sacrifice for the liuing and the dead, but a work of moſte perfecte holineſſe, of moſte excellent Religion, of moſte ſeruent charitie?
            Theſe be diſhoneſt points, which you haue takē a way. There is good cauſe, why you ſhould glorie in it, and haue your name recorded with honor to al the poſterity. for you haue brought in, for obeying of holy and lawful authoritie, rebellion: for the feare of purgatorie, a raſh a
                  •
               fiaunce of licentiouſneſſe vnpouniſhed: for dewe woorſhipping of Sainctes, the contempte of holineſſe and iuſtice: for the religious obſeruation

of the moſt holie ſacrifice, and charitable behauiour of men, a deſpiſing of religion and forgetting of charitie: yea moreouer and this, you haue brought in a ſcornfull laughter exceding al modeſtie, together with a ſawcie talke paſsing all ciuilitie. Are theſe thinges comelie, M. Haddon? Are theſe thinges honourable? Are theſe thinges to be commended? Are theſe thinges to mabe a ſhewe of?
            But you ſaie, that the Biſhoppes of Rome keepe warres, that in Rome is kept a market of purgatorie, that holie thinges are there ſet out to ſale, that manie men are to muche incombred with ſuperſtition in the woorſhipping of Sainctes, that Prieſtes liue not very continently, and that they abuſe their ſacrifices now and then to their luker and gaine.
            Firſt of all as towching warres you muſt thinke, that we can not of reaſon and equitie condemne all warres. For

they are ſome times begonne for the defence of Religion, and maintenance of a iuſt cauſe.
            As for the buying and ſelling of holie thinges, if in ſo manie hundred yeares ſome ſuche matter haue ben vſed, it is no wonder. For (as you ſaie your ſelfe) it can not be choſen, but that ſometimes in the good corne there will growe ſome weedes. And if anie ſuch abuſe haue ben, it is now taken quite awaie.
            If ſuperſtition trouble mens mindes now and then, it is verie eaſily taken awaie by the labour and diligence of Biſhops. The vicious and vncleane life of Prieſtes is verie ſeuerely puniſhed. And there are at this time emongeſt vs a great manie moe of them, that liue verie continently, then of ſuch, as will diſteine them ſelues with vicious and vncleane liuing.
            Laſt of all, to paſſe ouer all other, the vertuous, godlie, and religiouſe

example of this moſt holie Pope Pius the fifth, (whome neither ambition, neither coueteouſnes, neither the fauour of the people, neither yet the raſhnes of men, but the holie Ghoſte hath placed in this roome of highe honour and dignitie) bringeth to paſſe, that all thinges waxe better and better euerie daie, and that verie manie are ſtirred to the loue of true godlines.
            But admitte there were no ſuche matter at this time, as I talke of: admit that al went to naught, and that there were no man to refourme the church where it is decaied: ſhould it be well done by and by to euerthrow all ſuch thinges, as haue ben wiſely ordeined, ſo ſoone as men doe abuſe them to naughtines? No truly: but rather to prouide, as neere as we maie, that holy thinges maie no more be abuſed. For otherwiſe all would decaie, and there wold folow a meruelous diſorder and

confuſion of thinges in the Churche.
            If you, as you haue for the miſbehauiour of a fewe monkes (as you ſaie) taken quite awaie the whole order, and for the lewdnes of certain Priſtes ouerthrowen the dignitie of Prieſthood, and authoritie of Biſhopps: ſo you woulde procede, (for it ſtandeth with as good reaſon as the other doth) and for the default of a Magiſtrate, or Prince, or King, which hath not done his dewtie, take awaie the orderly gouernment of the common weale, together with the Kinglie honour and authoritie: the worlde ſhoulde come againe to that confuſion, which (as the Poetes report) was, before that nature was diſpoſed and ſet in comelie order. For what thing is ſo holie, the whiche men maie not abuſe ſometimes to doe much harme and miſchiefe? For, that we maie goe no further, wedlocke it ſelfe, (which you preferre before perpetuall virginitie) is it alwaies kept in

ſuch chaſte, godly, and religious order, as it ought to be? Doe the houſbādes neuer looke beſides their wiues? Doe the wiues neuer beguyle their houſbandes? Are there no aduowtries cō
               mitted nowe and then emong? Yeas queſtionles are there: and manie fowle and ſhameful actes are done of maried men oftentimes, with great raſhnes and impudencie. Shall we therfore, for the lewd demeanour of ſome maried perſones, breake the band of man and wife, and take awaie the holie ſtate of lawfull wedlocke? No truly. For then woulde men and women runne vnto it without order, and there woulde be no differēce betwene them and brute beaſtes. Wherfore although all our doinges were voide of al good order, honeſtie, and religion: yet are not ſuch thinges, as haue ben for a moſt godlie pourpoſe deuiſed and ordeined, forthwith to be diſannulled, but rather order woulde be taken, that thinges,

which are amiſſe, might be amended. Neither are ſuche thinges, as maie be cured, to be cut of: neither yet, if the feſtered and corrupt partes of the body muſt needes be pared of, is it neceſſarie for that to deſtroie the whole bodie, whiche maie be recouered: neither is the ſtate of a common weale to be altered, ſo ſoone as anie diſorder happeneth in it, but rather reaſon woulde, that al ſuch matters, as are decaied, ſhould be brought again to that comelie order, in the whiche they were at the begynning.
            Ariſtotel telleth, that there was a certaine man called Hippodamus of Mileſium, which wrote of a common weale. Emongeſt other matters he reciteth a lawe of his, by the which he decreed, that a great rewarde ſhoulde be geauen out of the common treaſure to him, that coulde deuiſe anie lawe profitable for the commō weale. This decree Ariſtotel miſliketh. For he

thinketh, that there woulde be an end in making of lawes, bicauſe the often Often chaunging of lavves daungerous.chaunging of them is wont by litle and litle to bring them into contempt: and the lawes being once deſpiſed, the good eſtate of a common weale can not long continewe. Wherefore that excellent learned man counſelleth al ſuch, as make lawes, to foreſee, that there be not more euyll in the often altering of the lawes, then there is in that diſorder, which they goe about to refourme by the new lawe. For he thinketh it more ſafetie to keepe indifferēt good lawes, then to make others not muche better. Wherein he hath good reaſon. For whie, that conſtant and perpetuall reuerence towardes the lawes cauſeth a certaine feare and baſhfulnes, and linketh men together within them ſelues with a ſure and inuiolable band of equitie. But this fond appetite that men haue to alter and chaūge the law (without fom weighty

cawſe) engendreth a preſumpteouſe boldnes, and maketh a waie by ſubtile and wilie meanes to take the lawe quite awaie, and to bring in tyrannie. And although there came none other inconuenience of it, yet at the leaſt it diſordereth the common weale.
            Nowe this, whiche is to be feared about the innouation of lawes, is to be determined about religion ſo muche the more conſtantly, the greater the perill is to offend in religion, then in anie other thing. This thing cōſidered the fownders of common weales of olde time, puniſhed ſuch, as brought in anie new tricke of religion out of other places, with death or baniſhmēt, and decreed, that the rites or faſhions of the countrey ſhoulde be moſt conſtantly reteined. Wherin, although they had ſhaped them ſelues a religion after a very bad ſort, and liued in great errours, yet was this their ordinaunce not altogether voide of good reaſon

and conſideration. For if it were poſsible, that ſome one religion might be more commendable then ſome other, he, that ſhould take awaie an old religion, whiche were not vngodly, to ſet 
                  •
               p an other religion, that were but a litle better, ſhould do a ſhrewd tourne to the common weale.
            Whie ſo, ſaie you? Bicauſe he ſhould bring in a cuſtome to alter Religion, and, by conſequent, to bring Religion into contempt. And ſo it might come to paſſe, that diuers and ſundrie religions coming in one after an other, being either deuiſed by craftie wittes, or els taken out of other countreis, might moue great debate about the eſtabliſhing of religiō: and while euery religiō ſhould diſprooue one an other, the matter might by litle and litle ſo fall out at the length, that all religion hould come to naught.
            The which thing being true, (that we maie retourne to our diſputation

againe) how is this to be taken, that a religion, which, is moſt true, holy, and auncient, approoued and confirmed by the teſtimony of God, by the bloud of Chriſte, by the faith of holie men, ſhoulde be diſcredited by reaſon of a new goſpel deuiſed bi the wit of a ſort of filthy varlets? Is it not a conſequent (as we now ſee it fal out euery where) that there ariſe a nomber of religions of diuerſſe 
                  •
               ortes, all vngodlye and naught, yea and iarring within them ſelues? That they ariſe one againſt an other? That euerie one of them diſprooue the folie of others? That neuer a one of them being able to mainteine it ſelfe by grownded reaſon, and ſtrōg argument, they come all at the length to be deſpiſed and ſet at naught?
            By theſe ſteppes or degrees are mē come to that point at the length, that manie a one raiſeth vp the damned ſprites of Arius, Sabellius, and other moſt deteſtable heretikes from holl▪
               
and reneweth their errours, whiche were before buried: ſome others thinke, that there is no Religion true it all, and perſwade them ſelues, that the worlde is not gouerned by God. This fruicte haue the brochers of your newly deuiſed and freſh tapped goſpel brought into common weales, that 
                  •
               uerie man maie profeſſe him ſelfe▪ to 
                  •
               e a ſetter vp of a newe Religion, and 
                  •
               ake vp the ſweard againſt all other, 
                  •
               hat are deuiſers of the like peſtilent 
                  •
               ectes: whereby it is like at the length, 
                  •
               hat al order of Religiō maie be taken quite awaie. O what bountifull and 
                  •
               rofitable felowes are theſe, whiche 
                  •
               aue ſo woorthely prepared a waie to 
                  •
               l miſchiefe and vngodlines?
            And yet you aſked me, what came 
                  •
               to my head, to affirme, that theſe 
                  •
               ectes are daungerous and hurtful vnto Princes. Tel me ſir, I praie you, ſuch as 
                  •
               aue preſumed to doe ſo great villa
               
                  •
               i
                  •
               , as to ouerthrowe the wonderful

example of chaſt and cleane life, to deface al monumentes of religiō and holines, to burne the holie Canōs or rules of the Church openly at a ſermon, to raſe the ſtate of the church with their weapons (where they might be ſuffred to doe it) to bring the people to hate the lawe, and ſo to plaie outragious and mad partes, to deſpiſe all lawfull authoritie, to ſet God and al godlie order at naught, to fil the Churches and chapples of religious men with bloud, to egge and allure the ſimple people through the hope of to much libertie to take vp armour: think you not, that theſe felowes (when ſo euer they ſhal finde occaſion) will tourne the ſelfe ſame furie and rage vp
                  •
               n the Princes them ſelues? Is it not wel knowen (as it is ſa
                  •
               ed before) what they haue wrought and practiſed againſt the emperour in Germanie, againſt the eſtate and life of King Henrie in Fraunce, againſt Edward, whome they made

awaie with poiſon, and afterwarde againſt Quene Marie in England? Is it not knowen, how traiterouſly and furiouſly they bent them ſelues againſt the maieſtie of theſe Princes? What ſhal I here ſaie of the King of Scotlād, whome the worlde knoweth to haue ben moſt crewelly murdered? What? Haue they not wrought the like treaſon againſt many other Princes alſo?
            I leaue out a number of examples of this barbarous villanie, whiche I could here recite. And, although there were none ſuche, yet woulde I not dowbt to ſaie ſo much, as I haue ſaied. For it is not the part of a wiſe man▪ when he ſeeth the cawſe, to dowbt of the euent, whiche foloweth neceſſarily of the cawſe. For when I ſee the common people void of feare, vnrulie and fearce through a pretenſed name of libertie, outragiouſely following their owne vnbridled wil and pleſure, haughtely flingyng vp and down, bearing

them ſelues vppon a falſe opinion of Religion: maie I dowbte, but that they are moſt ſpitefully bent againſt al authorititie, wherby they thinke, that their libertie, (which they ſo griedely long after) maie be hindered?
            Theſe are the thinges, M. Haddon, theſe are the thinges, that doe diſhoneſt Religion, and not thoſe matters, which you ſpeake of. For what is more comely and honeſt, then to obey ſuch authoritie, as is ordeined by God? To dread and feare the iudgemēt of God? Reuerently to conſider the mercie of God, in them, whome he firſt trieth by dewe puniſhment, and ſo admitteth them into life euerlaſting? To call to mind the monumentes of iuſtice, godlines and holines? To yeld vp humble praiers vnto God in the moſt holie ſacrifices, for the good eſtate of the liuing, and for the ſaluation of the dead? But in the meane time, while you dowbte not to ſaie▪ that theſe moſt

godlie orders are the thinges, that doe diſhoneſt religiō, you marke not how great the diſhoneſtie of your religiō is.
            For, that I maie ſaie nothing 
                  •
               ls, can there be anie greater diſhoneſtie of religion, then that all Sacramentes and ceremonies, al decrees and ordinaunces of the Churche, al prieſthood and holie orders ſhoulde be vnder the rule and gouernement of a woman? I meane not hereby to diſgrace your Queene, whome I deſire to ſee ſo beawtified and fourniſhed with moſt excellent vertues, that her name maie remaine as a thing of holie remembraunce vnto all the poſteritie. Neither doe I ſo muche blame her, as you, whiche haue by your flatterie brought her to this inconuenience, that ſhe taketh her ſelfe to be gouerneſſe of the Churche. Tel me ſir, if it like you, where haue you readde, that euer anie Prince tooke vpon him the office or charge of the high Biſhoppe?

No rather, all ſuche Princes as loued godlines and iuſtice, whoſe name is for their noble actes ſet out to the poſteritie for euer, did reuerence the iudgemēt of Prieſtes, refuſed not to be obedient vnto Biſhoppes, and thought like verie wiſe men, that it would tourne to their euerlaſting commendation, if they were gouerned by them. So did your great Cōſtantine, the moſt woorthie ornamēt and beawty of your Ilād: ſo did our Theodoſius, ſo did Lewis King of Fraunce, ſo did a number of others, which with moſt noble victories enlarged their Empiere verie farre: when they had ſubdewed al countreis with armour, they did ſo obey the decrees and ordinaunces of Biſhops, that they ſeemed to glorie not ſo much in their Empire, as in that obediēce. But you haue brought al holie thinges not only vnder a king, which (as I ſhewed before) were to be eſteemed as a moſt heinous offēce, but alſo vnder a quene,

againſt all right and reaſon, againſt the inuiolable reuerence of moſt pure religion, againſt the ordinaunces of almightie God: you haue taken awaye the moſt holy dignity of the high biſſhoprike from the lawful biſhops, and haue tranſpoſed it to be adminiſtred by a woman. The which, I ſay, was a moſt wicked deede, a moſt barbarouſe acte, a moſt deteſtable and curſed offence. Whereby it may be gathered, that mans heart can imagine no miſchiefe ſo horrible and diuelliſh, that theſe flatterers wil not take vpō them to practiſe it, with deſperate boldneſſe and impudencie.
            Here do I paſſe ouer many thinges, and vnto the railing words, which you heape together againſt me, I anſwere you nothing, for in deede I regard them not. Neither is it my meaning to confute your railing wordes, but to take vppon me the defence of moſte holy Religion, for the which it were

a goodly matter for me to die. Al other thinges therefore I let paſſe, that I may come to that place, in the which you drawe bloud of your owne body, yea and geaue your ſelfe a deadly wound with your owne handes. Your wordes are theſe.
            
               What then? This holy doctrine of the goſpel, in the which we haue continued more then thirtye yeares together (the moſt troubleſome ſpace of ſix yeares excepted) in the which the Queenes maieſtie hath paſſed ouer all her life, in the which ſhe hath founde God ſo mercifull vnto ber, in the which the ſtates of the realm are fully agreed, in the which many noble ſtatutes and lawes haue enſewed: this true and ſincere worſhipping of almighty God, which is ſo diligently enuironed and fortified on euery ſide by the Quenes maieſty, ſhal the voice of a ſeely felow of Portugal breake it downe? What a deale of matter you heape vp together, M. Haddō, how vnaduiſedly you

ſpeake (that I may not ſay, how raſhly and madly). for firſt of al, this, whiche you cal the holy doctrine of the goſpel, is the doctrine of Luther, Zwinglius, Bucer, Caluin, and other the like brainſicke felowes, which haue, not only by their moſt peſtilent decrees and ordinaunces, but alſo by the example of their filthy and vicious liuing, quite ouerthrowen al chaſtitie, holines, modeſtie, meekeneſſe, and obedience: which haue broken and caſt away true faith, and in ſteede of it haue ſet vppe a raſhe and preſumpteouſe boldneſſe: whiche haue taken awaie libertie (although in their talke they pretende otherwyſe) and for that haue rewarded their adherentes with a licence to lyue in naughtineſſe vncontrolled▪ whiche haue taken awaie the gyft of iuſtice (which is the greateſt and largeſt grace that man maie receyue of God) and for true iuſtice haue brought in a fevned and counterfeyte iuſtice
                  •
               
               
which, of a mad and vngodly minde, haue not ben aſhamed to impute the cauſe of al ſynne and wickedneſſe to God that moſt perfecte goodnes, from whome no euil can proceede: which, (whereas they tooke vppon them to ſcoure or purge the goſpel throughly, and to repaire the Churche agayne, which tendeth to ruine) haue not only not perfourmed ſo muche, as they prowdly and raſhly promiſed to doe, but haue moreouer beraied the Churche (the vncleanes whereof religious menne could not beare before) with much filthineſſe of vice and naughtines, and haue brought it to be rent and riuen in peaces.
            What ſhould we thinke to be the cauſe, wherefore, when any man infected with the contagion of this doctrine is taken emongeſt vs (whiche is counted here a very ſtraunge matter) although he ſet neuer ſo ſad or graue countenaunce vpon it to make a colour

and ſhewe of holineſſe, yet will the concealed trickes of a diſordered and carnal mind ſhewe them ſelues, and manie fowle vices, whiche were before hidden vnder the couert of hypocriſie, wil foorth with appeere. For the more a man geueth him ſelfe to this doctrine, the more is he contrarie to baſhfulnes and continencie.
            I omit to ſpeake of your earneſt talke, wherein you ſay, that this newe broched Church, which is diſteined with innumerable vices, may be compared with the Churche of the Apoſtles, which was moſt flouriſhing with heauenly gyftes, with religion and holineſſe.
            As for that compariſon of myne, wherein I ſhewed, what great difference there was betwene the twoo Churches, I would not haue you vainly and without any fruicte to find fault withal. For as yet you haue not confuted it, neither ſhal you euer be able

to doe it. And who ſo euer ſhall attempt to do it, ſhall doe nothing elles, but only ſet out to the world his owne madnes and impudencie together, and cauſe al men to laugh at his folie, and abhorre his malice.
            That I may therfore omit that fooliſh and ſhameleſſe talke of yours, I would you would compare this your Church, but onely with the Churche of your auncetours: the which thing if you doe, you ſhall finde, that there is brought in for the religious conuerſation of your forefathers, a preſumptuouſe boldnes: for their grauitie and conſtancie, a light and vnſetled hariſhneſſe: for their continencie, ſenſualitie: for their manhood niceneſſe. And will you call this the holy Doctrine of the goſpel, which hath ouerthrowen and defaced ſo many holie thinges, and in ſteede of them hath brought in ſuch a deale of naughtines and diſordre?
            
               
               The firſte founding of the proteſtantes Churche. Call to remembraunce I pray you the firſt founding of this your Churche. For you maie not wel diſſemble ſuche thinges, as are commonly talked of all menne, and in writing commended to the euerlaſting remembraunce of all the poſteritie. Wantonneſſe and loue were the firſt ſetters vppe of it: the breache of lawe and ordre, and a hatred towardes the Pope for geauing ſentence agaynſt the offender enlarged it: the flatterie of lewde felowes with the healp of lying walled it: inordinate deſire and coueteouſneſſe fenſed it: the puniſhinge of holie and innocent perſonnes halowed it: the putting of al menne in feare confirmed it: finallye the Doctrine of ſuche menne, as were ſent into thoſe coaſtes not from Godde, but from Satan, infected it with moſte peſtilent and ſeditious er
               
                  •
               ours. Dare you call this a religious, 
                  •
               odly, and holy doctrine, whoſe beginning,

proceding, increaſe, and ende you ſee (vnleſſe you be in extreme and miſerable blindneſſe) to haue ben ſet vppon, folowed, and finiſhed with naughtineſſe, incontinencie, hatred, coueteouſnes, creweltie, outrage and madnes?
            Then, what a fopperie is that, to ſay, that you haue continewed in this doctrine, more then thirtie yeares together? O reuerēt horeheaded goſpel. O auncient heauenly doctrine. O old vnſpotted religion. But you thinke, that you being a wittie and wilie interpretour of the law forſooth, neede not recke much for the antiquitie of your doctrine. For you ſeeme to plead preſcription, and therefore you content your ſelfe with the ſpace of thirtie yeares, within the which tyme you thinke, that the ordre of your religiō may be lawfully poſſeſſed. Howbeit if you take awaye from thyrtie yeares the ſpace of ſix yeares, whiche

you call a troubleſome time) it is euident, that this your holy Goſpel is not yet fully thirtie yeares olde.
            But admitte that the thirtie yeares were fully expired, if this title of preſcription be good, then may the Arabians much better mainteine their ſect, then you can yours. For you defende your hereſy by the preſcriptiō of thirty yeres: but they wil vphold the wicked ſuperſtitiō of Mahumet by the poſſeſsion of more then nine hundred yeares.
            You ſaie moreouer, that the Quenes Maieſtie (for ſuch a pleaſure haue you 
                  •
               o flatter, that you neuer call her the Queene, as though in the name of a Quene, there were litle dignitie, or 
                  •
               ls 
                  •
               er Maieſtie ſhould decaie by and by, 
                  •
               f you ſhould cal her Quene). You ſai
                  •
                
               
                  •
               herfore, that the Quenes Maieſty hath 
                  •
               aſſed ouer al her life in this doctrine. That this is true, I haue none other warrant but your word. But if it b
                  •
                ſo▪ 
               
                  •
               he fault is not ſo much in her, her
                  •••
                in h
                  ••
               
               
teachers, who had the bringing vp of her, when ſhee was of age tender and weake, and therefore the more meete to be abuſed by ſuch ſubtile and craftie felowes.
            Laſt of all, it is not as yet euidently ſeene, ſo long as ſhee is not free from your tyrannie, which vnder her name, as men ſaie, doe poſſeſſe the kingdom, what waie ſhe woulde take in al theſe matters. Of thys I am righte well aſſured, that her ſingular wit is not by nature ſo obſtinately bente to mainteine an opinion once conceiued, or ſo muche geauen to naughtie and falſe doctrine, that it is not very flexible to yealde vnto good reaſon, and verie willing to forſake falſe doctrine, and to folowe that which is true and incorrupted. Wherefore I doubte not, if ſhe be ſo wittie, as you ſay ſhee is, but that ſhee will (ſo ſoone as euer ſhee may doe it for your importunitie) turne from this your wicked doctrine,

to the honeſt, godly, and profitable doctrine of the Church.
            And wheras you adde theſe words: In the which ſhee hath found God ſo merciful vnto her: Me thinketh, you vnderſtand not in what thing the teſtimonie or proufe of Gods mercy ſtandeth▪ For it ſtandeth not ſo much in the glory of the people, or in the proſperouſe ſucceſſe of worldli matters, as in the peace 
                  •
               d quietnes of cōſciēce, in a mind beutifully decked with the giftes and graces of God, in faith and vpright cōuer
               
                  •
               atiō, in true and vncorrupted doctrine, 
                  •
               n that ſtate of life, which is abundantly 
                  ••
               rniſhed with heauenly vertues. Fur
               
                  •
               hermore, if ſhee haue had God very 
                  •
               erciful vnto her, and haue not tryed 
                  •
               r fealt as yet his iudgement, ſhe ought 
                  •
               o be ſo muche the more carefull, that 
                  •
               e do not offend him, and that ſhe doe 
                  •
               ot abuſe his mercy and clemencie to 
                  •
               e contempt of his moſt pure and holy 
                  •
               eligion. And to make ſo much of fiue

yeares proſperitie, it argueth a'
                  ••
               erueilouſe great raſhnes in you. When Solon warned Creſus, that he ſhoulde not truſt to much to proſperouſe fortune: he taught him, that the proſperitie not of fiue yeares, but of manie yeares, is to be feared: and he ſhewed withal, that no man is to be accounted happie, ſo long as he liueth. This Creſus being afterward ouercome by Cyrus and ſet vppon a pile of wood to be burned, called with a lowd voice vpō Solon, by whome he had ben warned before of the cōdition of mans frailtie, and of the ſodaine alteration of worldlie felicitie. Cyrus hearing the name of Solon, demaūded of Creſus what that Solon had ben. To whome Creſus anſwered that he had ben the wiſeſt man in al Greece, of whom he had learned this leſſon, that it is the greateſt madnes in the worlde to be lifted vppe to much with proſperitie. Cyrus foorthwith, cauſed Creſus to be taken doune

from the pile, and vſed him very honourably, and him ſelfe in all his proſperitie held a goodly meane.
            Theſe and the like examples are ſo wel knowen, and daily experience geueth vs ſuch occaſiō to know the vncertaintie of this our condition, that there can not be any greater token of madnes or folie, then to waxe proude, when the worlde ſerueth vs at will. For who ſo euer is puffed vp with the proſperouſe ſucceſſe of things, neither doth he vnderſtand, how ſodainlie all the wealth of the worlde vaniſheth awaie, and from howe high a grieſe or ſtep many of the greateſt Princes haue ſallen, to the great wonder of al men: neither doth he conſider, what a violent kinde of ſeueritie that ſupreame Iudge vſeth, whē he mindeth to ſhake as it were with a whirle winde, and throw down the eſtate of ſuch as truſt to much to them ſelues. Who is able to ſaie, that al things ſhal proſper with

him, euen vntil his dying daie? Who is able to aſſure him ſelfe of one daie, yea of one hower voide of all calamitie or miſhappe? For as darkenes enſeweth vppon lighte, as the tempeſt is wonte to come vppon the watermen and mariners vnwares: euen ſo doth heauy chaunces oftetimes marre the flouriſhing ſtate of fortunate men, and ouerwhelme them in the waues of al aduerſity, and driue them againſt the rockes of euerlaſting thraldome and miſerie. And the more careleſſe men are, the more grieuouſly are they pained, when any ſuche calamitie falleth vpon them.
            Wherefore it is the parte af a wiſe man, to conſider long time before all ſuche miſchaunces, as maie happen euery daie and hower, yea euerie minute of an hower: but it is a token of a fooliſh and madde felowe, in proſperitie to forget the weakeneſſe of manne: eſpeciallie whereas we ſee

oftentimes, that almightie God nowe and then ſuffereth ſuche, as he is moſt offended withall, to haue the longer enioying of their apparente felicitie, that he maie of a ſodaine ſtrike them, that will not repente, and geue them the deeper wounde. And therefore our Lorde warneth vs, that we be 
                  Gen. 7. 
                     •
                  .not like vnto them, which in the daies of Noe liued a recheleſſe life, and ſo cō
               tinued euē vnto the time, in the which they were oppreſſed ſodainly with the floud, which they could not poſsiblie auoid. He teacheth vs alſo by the ſodaine 
                  Gen. 19. 
                     •
                  .fiering of thoſe Cities, that his iudgement catcheth improuidēt men, as it were with ſecrete grynnes or ſnares, in ſuch ſort, that they can not eſcape from euerlaſting pouniſhment and tormentes.
            If theſe thinges be true, what a madnes was that in you, for fiue yeres proſperitie, to vaunt your ſelfe ſo arrogantly and vainely? To triumph

ſo inſolently? to build ſo great an argument of Gods fauour towardes you vpon ſo ſlender a ground? See you not howe manie nations there are in the worlde vtterly voide of the faith of Chriſte, whoſe eſtate is a great deale more flouriſhing then yours is? If this argument were any thing woorth, ſee how eaſily the Turkes ſhall be able to auouche their peſtilent ſecte, wherein they are drowned. You mainteine your cauſe with fiue yeares felicitie: but they wil proue their Religion to be true by their great victories, and by the very proſperouſe ſucceſſe, which they haue had in all their affaires for the ſpace of many yeares.
            Laſt of al, are you wel aſcerteined, what alteration one day, or rather one hower, may bring vnto your ſtate? Wherefore are you then ſo bragge? Wherefore do you vaunt your ſelfe ſo farre beyonde all modeſtie, as though you were free and paſt al daunger, yea

as though you were altogether exempted from the bondes of the condition of man in ſuche ſorte, that you coulde not poſsibly be ouertaken with any ſodaine miſhap?
            As for the agreement of your councel in bringing the auncient Religion to be ſet at naught and forgotten, (if it be ſo as you ſaie) and in makinge the Quenes Maieſtie Superintendent in al ſpiritual matters, I haue already declared, that neither of them both coulde be donne without incurringe the grieuouſe diſpleaſure of God. If you think, that you ſhall eſcape vnpuniſhed, bicauſe it is delaied, take hede, if you repēt not, while you haue time, leſt you doe increaſe through this your preſumption, the plague, that hangeth ouer you.
            As for the hope, which I conceiued (as you ſaie) of your Quene, and therfore wrote thoſe my letters vnto her, it repenteth me not, as yet of my doinges.

If I haue donne any good, it will appeare at the lengthe. If I haue donne none, yet the ſignification of my good heart towardes her, can not be but wel taken of her, if ſhee wil continue in her accuſtomed courteſie and gentlenes.
            You ſaie, I ſhall not bring her to be of myne opinion, no, althoughe I ſhould write ſixe hundred millions of Philippicall Orations. I would faine knowe, how you are able to auouche that. Thinke you, that ſhe is of nature ſo barbarous and ſauage, that although I doe detecte the craftie dealinge and priuie practiſes of naughtie felowes, and prooue them vnto her by Argumentes inuincible, by reaſons more cleere then the ſonneſhine at noonetide, if I ſet before her eyes the filthines and lewdnes of this counterfeict religion, which they haue moſt wickedlie and heinouſly deuiſed, if I declare vnto her in plaine words, how childiſh your

reaſons are, wherwith you goe abou
                  ••
                to mainteine their cauſe, and how il fauoredly thei hang together: think you, I ſai, that ſhe wil, notwithſtāding althis rather imbrace your moſt deteſtable opinion to her certaine and vtter vndoing, then cal to mind againe the true Religion, which hath ben forgottē for a time through the default and naughtines of ſuch as ſhould haue put her in remembrance of it, to her moſt aſſured ſaluation and glory euerlaſting? If reaſon ſhal ouercome he
                  •
                if the authoritie of holie Fathers ſhall cauſe her to yealde, if the Lawe of God ſhall put it into her heart, that ſhee wil deſire to forſake and deteſt this your ſecte: yet haue you ſo good affiaunce in your owne force, and ſo little eſtimation of the ſharpeneſſe of her witte and iudgemente, that you dare warrant, that vnleſſe you geaue her leaue, ſhee ſhall neuer retourne (doe what ſhee can) vnto that godly order of Religion,

whiche her moſte noble Progenitours obſerued and kepte very honourably, to their great profit and immortal glorie? Shall you Syr, haue her at your commaundement and becke: ſhal you take order with her: ſhal you preſcribe her what ſhee ſhal beleue, in ſuch ſort, that for feare of falling into your diſpleaſure, ſhe ſhal not regard her owne life and dignitie: but ſhal rather ſuffer her ſelfe to be carried awaie into euerlaſting tormentes and damnation, then to gainſaie your opinion, be it neuer ſo vngodlie, heinouſe, and wicked, yea and mainteined with neuer ſo fond and peeuiſh kinde of talke?
            But be it. Admitte ſhe be ſo much an vnderling vnto you, that ſhee dare not for her life once diſſente from you in any thing. What if ſhee ſhalbe moued by the inſtinct of the holy Ghoſt? What if Chriſt him ſelfe ſhal ſtirre her heart to conſider and enioye his graciouſe giftes? What if God wil ſet vp

ſuch a light before her heart, that ſhee may ſee how certaine wicked perſons woorke priuie treaſon againſt herlyfe and perſone? And, that I may ſay nothing els, what if ſhe ſhall receiue but onely ſuch a ſmal quantitie of the light of God, that ſhee may ſee, that Luther with his diſciples and folowers, were neuer moued by the holy Ghoſte, but pricked foreward by the fendes of hel, and that they came not to inſtructe men with wholſome doctrine, but to infecte them with moſte peſtilente errours? What? Wil you this notwithſtandinge, holde her backe, will you ſhackle her in ſuch ſorte, that ſhe ſhall not poſsibly geue eare to the holy warninges and counſels of God? To continue in a wicked opinion being once conuinced as erroneouſe, is the parte of a dul and blunt wit: to be afraid of the vniuſt diſpleaſure of her own ſubiects, is a token of a baſe and cowardlie heart: but to refuſe the gift of Gods

mercy, to reiect his gratious aid, when it is offred, is an argumtē of an vngodli ād naughty mid. So ſhal it com to paſſe, that you, while you deſire to put the worlde to vnderſtand what a perilous felowe you are, ſhal falſely charge that Princeſſe, whome you reporte to be moſte excellentlie fourniſhed with all vertues, paſsingly well adourned with many ſingular qualities, with dulnes of wit, with feintnes of heart, and with the crime of impietie.
            Truely M. Haddon ſhe is very much beholdinge vnto you for your goodly ſeruice, if you haue by your diligence, ſo beſette her on euery ſide, that, although ſhe ſee her ſelf tombled doune headlong into euerlaſting death and damnatiō, yet ſhe may not be ſo hardy in her hert (if you ſaie nay to it) as once to which or ſtep aſide, to auoide the daunger, that hangeth ouer her, leſt in ſo doing, ſhee might trouble your patience (more grieuouſlie perhappes

then a man would thinke). And yet am I moued to refreine to write vnto her, 
                  •
               ny more of the ſame matter for verie iuſt and good cauſes. For I think I haue very wel diſcharged my duety, both in my letters which I ſent vnto her, as alſo in this anſwer, which I write againſt your booke, if it happe to come to her hands. Either therfore the things that I haue already written ſhall haue ſufficiente force and ſtrength to make her heart to yelde, or els I ſhal not be able to doe it, although I write againe. And in deede, I haue not ſo much vacante time, that I may ſpend it without any fruict or profite.
            Let vs now come to your good coūſel, wherin you aduertiſe me, that I ſhould not once hādle the holi ſcriptures. you cōmend my wit, and my eloquēce you do not miſlike. But you ſay, that I am to be reckoned emongeſt the Oratours and Philoſophers, and not emongeſt the Diuines, My bokes of nobility

(for it is like you neuer read any othe
                  •
                bookes of myne) you ſale you like very wel. I am right glad, that my wr
                  •
               
               tinges are commended by a manne ſo finely learned, and ſo trymly nourtered: and your friendly counſell I take it in good worth. And therfore it liketh me to ſpeake vnto you (Syr newe Diuine) Damaſip
                  
                     •
                  us had no 
                     •
                  hing of a 
                     〈…〉
                   but 
                     •…
                  ely a 
                     •
                  ard: The 
                     ••
                  ber 
                     •…
                  erfore 
                     ••
                  ing 
                     〈…〉
                  rd, 
                     〈◊〉
                   avvai 
                     •
                   Philophie.with the ſelfe ſame verſes, as Horatius feineth him ſelfe to haue vſed to Damaſippus a new Stoike.
            
               Syr Waulter for your counſel true, a barber maie you haue:
               Sent from the Gods and Goddeſſe eke, your worthie heard to ſhaue.
            
            But howe came you to be ſo well acquainted with me? Who tolde you, that I haue not beſtowed a great deale more ſtudie in Diuinitie then in Cicero, Demoſthenes, Ariſtotle and Plato. You cōmend my wit. what then? think you that the ſtudy of Diuinitie is mete for dul heads onely and drawlatohes▪ You like my eloquēce: 
                  〈◊〉
                you therefore

that the holy Scriptures would be handled of rudeſbies only and homly felowes? Wheras you geue authoritie to women, to tinkers and tapſters, to the rifferaffe of al occupations, to iangle and prate at rouers in Scripture matters: wil you forbid me, being not only a biſhoppe and Prieſte, and long tyme exerciſed in the holy Scriptures with ſome profitte, but alſo a man (as you report your ſelfe) both wittie and eloquent, to followe this moſt godlie trade of learning? Then by what equitie, by what power, by what autoritie doe you this? ſhal it be lawful for you being a man of lawe, to geaue ouer the ſtatutes made for walles, lights, and eues gutters: to deſpiſe and caſt a ſide your obligations, bargaines, and couenantes: to lay away the drawing of writes and ſuites in lawe: and to take vppon you in Diuinitie as bold as blind baiard▪ and to me, to whom it a
                  •
               
               perteyneth by office to inſtructe the

Church committed vnto me in the holy Scriptures, wil you not geue leaue, to beſtome much tyme and diligence in the ſtudie of them? You are iniurious two waies. For you doe both violently intrude your ſelfe into other mens poſſeſsions, and wrōgfully thruſt me out of myne owne by your vniuſt iniunctions.
            Now thoſe threates of yours, howe weighty and graue are they? What a great terrour doe they put into me? You ſay thus. If ſo be that you mind to vaunt your ſelfe to certaine men, and ſo to aſſault vs any more, I warne you now before, that you come with farre better furniture, then you haue done at this tyme.
            You tel me moreouer, that, in caſe you be dead before, yet there ſhal not lacke ſuch, as ſhal breake the dint of my ſtroke, Whereby I ſee, that you could neuer ſo much as geſſe, what my meaning is. I knowe, that there are in that

Iland many excellēt men both, for wit, learning, and godlines, which wil neuer moleſt me, for ſo much as they agree with me in religion meruelouſly wel: (although you thinke it a matter not to be borne.) Then if any man doe write againſt me, in caſe he wil cōtend with reaſon, argumētes and examples, I wil not refuſe to diſpute with him. But if he fal to railing and reprochfull wordes, I can not poſsibly be perſuaded to make him anſwere. For neither am I moued with any reproch, neither can I looke, that that victorie ſhould tourne me to honeſtie, where the maner of fight is ſo vnhoneſt. If I ſhal ſee, that there is any hope to win you and ſuche as you are to God, I will not doubt to trie both by letters and prayers, what good I am able to do. Otherwiſe I wil not ſuffer my tyme, wherof I haue litle to ſpare, to be ſo
                  •
               l beſtowed. Tit. 3. c.For ſo doth S Paule teach vs, that after one or two warnings wee

ſhould ſhonne the companie of ſuche menne as are obſtinatly bent in erroneouſe and wicked opinions, for ſo much as they are condemned by their owne iudgement. Wherefore I geaue you leaue, to bende your ſelfe moſte fiercely againſt me with taūtes and reproches. Rore as much as you liſt, crie out as lowd as you can. For neither is it conuenient for my perſon, neither yet comely for the office I beare, to be moued with railing wordes, or elles to make anſwere to euerie ſlaunder. I neuer reuiled you, whome I knewe not.
            As for my epiſtle, which you rend and teare with ſpitefull languague, it hath not one reprochful word in it, vnleſſe perhaps you wil cal the moſt iuſt bewailing and moſt true declaration of errours and wicked vices a reproche. And yet like a wilde bore thruſt thorough with a venemous dart, you rāne vpō me, as though you had ben wood.

But I was not only nothing diſquieted with your reprochfull words, but alſo moued to laugh at your fond talke. I take my God to witneſſe, that, if the loue, which I beare to true Religion and godlines, had not earneſtly moued me, I had neuer put pen to the paper to write againſt your booke. But if you knew, how much I pity your caſe, and what a hartie deſire I haue of your ſaluation, (for I would with all my hart, as the dewty of a Chriſtian man requireth, yeald my ſelfe to die for the ſaluation of you and your countrei men) you would ſurely be at one with me. For I was not moued by anie euyl wil I beare you, but it was verie charitie, that prouoked me inſtantly to write. I praie Chriſt our moſt bowntifull and almightie Lord, I humbly beſech him, by his precious bloud ſhead for the ſaluation of al men, by his woundes and moſt bitter paſsion, by his death, by the which he ouercame death, by his victorie

whiche he atchieued ouer the kingdome of Satan, to deliuer that kingdom, in the which hath ben ſometime a dwelling place of vertue, religion, grauitie and iuſtice, and is now diſordered thorough the lewdnes of deſperate felowes, from errours and hereſie: to make the brightnes of his light to ſhine ouer them: to bring them againe to the faith and vnitie of moſt true Religiō: to carie them backe vnto the fold of the catholike Churche: to gouerne and mainteine them by the aſſiſtance of his holy ſpirite: that al we, which are now ſundered in opinions, maie at length agree in the vnitie of faith, and loue of true Religion, and ſo come to that euerlaſting glorie, to the great reioyſing of al the holie companie in heauen.
         
         
            
            Liber iſte lectus est & approbatus à viris ſacrae Theologiae et Anglicani idiomatis peritiſsimis, quibus tutò credendum eſſe exiſtimo: maximè cùm tantùm tranſlatus ſit ex Latino legitimè approbato.
            
               Cunerus Petri, Paſtor Sancti 
               Petri Louaniſ. 3. ſeptemb. Anno. 1568.
               
            
            
            
         
      
   