
      
         
            
            
            NEWES SENT to the Ladie Princesse of Orenge.
            Translated out of French into English by I. E.
            
               VBIQVE FLORET
            
            LONDON Printed by Iohn Wolfe. 1589.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            NEWES SENT TO THE LAdie Princesse of Orenge.
            
               MOnsieur de Diguiers, and Monsieur de la Valette, haue concluded a league betweene themselues in December last, and haue beene since oftentimes together, and haue entered Valentia, Romans, Tulet, and diuerse other places in Daulphiné.
            This league concluded, the Lorde de Diguiers marched his armie into the fielde, and with his cannons laid siege to, and battered the fortresse of Auxonne, situate on the riuer of Rosne, right ouer agaynst Mont-de-limart and tooke the same by assault, the fifth of Ianuarie. The Captaine of the sayd fort was slaine, and all his men who were within the fort with him. By these surprises the forces of the Lorde of Esambaud, Gouernour for those of the reformed religion, in Viuares, followed and marched after the forces of the Lord de Diguiers, which before was not possible for him to doe.
            From thence the Lorde of Diguiers went to lay siege to the holde of Coullonselles in the the Countie of Grignan, which hold he tooke by assault. The gouernour of the holde he hanged, and put all his men to the edge of the sword, one onely saued vpon condition, that he should pay all the expenses that the whole armie had beene at in the same place.
            Departing from thence, he toke his way straight to the Countie of Veyascin: he was no sooner there, but the holdes of Bannyes, of Transsy, le Bouschel, Racherinchez, and Rocheguardes yeelded, before the

canon euer played vpon them.
            Going on further, hee went to besiege Camaret, a place very well fortified in the said countie distant some two miles from Orenge, the which yeelded, neuer staying till the assault was made, vpon condition that the sould
                  •
               ours and inhabitants thereof should haue their liues graunted.
            From thence hee came to Vacqueyras, which was yeelded vp also to him by composition. After that hee went to the hold of Aubignan, which likewise yeelded seeing the cannon. The whole campe soiourned there tenne dayes to refresh the souldiours. Thither came the deputies of the Countrie to demaund a truce, but could doe no good in the matter.
            The Lord de Diguiers departing from thence went to besiege another hold, called Cayranne, which was taken by assault. The gouernour thereof being an Italian was hanged, and all his men were put to the sword or hanged euery one. And by and by from euerie place of the Countrie came the gouernors, and brought vnto him their keyes, that is to say, from Raestel, S. Romans, Ville di
                  •
               u, Boisson, Mirabel, le P
                  •
               ymerat, and S. Romanet, & my Lord went to besiege Molans, a place verie well fortified, where are also Castels th
                  •
               t are very strong. The cannō plaied 300. times against their wals, and yet stil they held out, defending the assault. The deputies of the said countie were present at the same time, when the said place was takē by assault, 250. men being slaine in the combat. The Lord of the said place had his life saued paying 1000. French crowns for rā
               some: yet his house & al the town was sacked besides.
            The Lord of Diguiers straitely commaunded by the Lord Alphonsus, Collonell and commander generall

for the King in Daulpiné, to draw neere to Grenoble, whether hee was looked for to come, to conclude a truce for the said Prouince, lodged his armie in the townes of the said county, that he had taken in, & went to Nyons, where the Deputies of the sayd County did intreate with him to accord a truce for 25000. French crownes to be paide at one paiment, and 2000. Franks of contribution to be paid euerie moneth to the Lord of Blacons, for the entertaining of the garrison of Orenge. And that all the holdes that the Lord of the said Countie had taken in, should be yeelded vp, sacked, & the wals beaten downe to the ground. All was fullie agreed vpon, but the battering of the wals downe to the ground, the which the said deputies sayd they had not in charge to accord. By this meanes peace for a moneth was concluded, at the end whereof the said Lord came to this Citie, either to prosecute his victorie, or else fully to conclude a truce for altogeth
                  •
               r.
            The said Lord de Diguieres departed from Nions to come to Bogencie, which is a fortresse that he caused to be made some two miles from Grenoble, where the assignation was giuen to meete the eighth of March, to conclude the truce for Daulphiné, about the entreating whereof hee staide three weekes, at the last sell to agreement, they signed and confirmed it with greate solemnytie in the suburbes of Grenoble.
            It was agreed of in the sayd truce, that those of the league that entered the Countrie, and were reuolted to the King, shoulde paie vnto Monsieur de Diguieres 18000. French crownes, for the entertayning of his companyes, and the one halfe of all tolles, that was gessed to amount to fiftie crownes a daie.
            
               Moreouer, they agreed to paie him 8000. French crownes, for the entertaining of certaine Ministers & other workes of pietie in the said Prouince. The fortresse of Bogencie & diuerse other holds that the Leaguers held, being beatē down to the groūd. The Prince dome of Orenge beeing cōprised within the said truce. This truce was proclaimed in the said town vpon Easter day, & the publishing of the truce of the said coū
               tie was prorogued, vntill the time that it was agreed vppon. For the Prouince of Languedoc the assemblie was holden at Nysmes and Lunel, to conclude the said truce, and there is good hope they wil confirme it for foure yeres.
            Monsieur de Mont-morencie hath bin reestablished, & confirmed by the King in his gouernment of Languedoc, and hath published his authoritie in the sayde Countrie: yet those of the reformed religion woulde not permit the saide proclamation to bee made in anie places that they holde, without absolute commandement from the King of Nauarre. The King permitteth him to remoue the Parliament of Tholouse to Carcassone, for that those of Tholouse are Leaguers. It is reported that the Citizens of Narbone haue shut their gates against Monsieur de Ioyeuse, and haue sent for Monsieur de Mont-morencie to come, and they will receiue him, seeing that it hath pleased the King to reestablish him in his gouernment. As for the Citie of the Holy Ghost, the Lord Colonnel Alphonsus is looked for euerie day to thrust out the companies de Cor
                  •
               es which are within it, and to yeeld it vp into the handes of my Lord de Mont-morencie.
            As for the Countrie of Prouence, the Lord of Vins holdeth for the Court of Parliament, and so for those

of the League. The Lord de la Valette, who holdeth for the King, is verie strong, and hath the greatest part of the said Countrie and of the fortresses there. Hee caused an assemblie of the states to bee holden lately, where it was agreed, that they shoulde take armes, and warre against the said court of Parliament, & the Lord de Vins: and for that purpose they deliuered 10000. French crownes to the Lord de la Valette.
            The Lord de Mont-brun confederate to the sayde Lorde de la Valette hath of late surprised two verie strong fortes in the said Countrie. Monsieur de Diguieres so soone as he shall haue confirmed the truce in this Countrie, shall bring downe the whole campe into Prouence.
            My Ladie de Mont-morencie in the beginning of this moneth passed ouer the territories of this Citie to go to the Court, and Monsieur des Diguieres brought her two miles onward of her waie.
            Of late we had here the Declaration in print that the towne of Lions hath made, how it reserueth and holdeth it selfe towards and against all, vnder the name & authoritie of the King.
            My Lady the Princesse of Lorraine came downe this way vpon the riuer of Rosne, accompanied with fiftie Barges, and kept her Easter at Auignon, from whence she is departed this present daie to embarke her selfe at Marseille with foure galleies, which stay there waiting for her, to conduct her to the Duke of Florence with whom she shall now bee married. Monsieur de Mont-morency staied for her 15. daies at Beauquaire, but was forced to depart before her cōming without seing her, for that he was sent for away to Narbona, whither he is gone frō Orenge in al hast. This 24. of March. 1589.
            
               
                  These newes came to London
                  
                     the 20. of May. 1589.
               
            
         
      
   