
      
         
            
            
            AN EPISTLE
of the Reuerend father in God
HIERONYMVS OSORIVS BISHOP
of Arcoburge in Portugale, to the most
excellent Princesse ELIZABETH
by the grace of God Quene of
England, Fraunce, and
Ireland. &c.
            Translated oute of Latten in to Englishe
by Richard Shacklock M. of
Arte and student of the Ciuill
Lawes in Louaine.
            Imprinted at Antwerp by Aegidius Diest,
Anno M.D.LXV.
         
         
            
            THE TRANSLATOVR.
            
               
                  SEYLAN an Ile of florishing fame
               VVith pretious pearles was wont to excell,
               But now it hath lost that notable name,
               And Portugale for pearles beareth the bell.
               All spirituall goldsmythes can wytnes this well,
               That this pearle sent from Portugale grounde,
               Surmoūteth al pearles which in Seylan are foūde.
            
            
               This pearle of greate price Osorius hath sent
               To a pearlesse Princesse our excellent Quene
               
                  ELIZABETH of England most Royall regent,
               God graūt her grace take it as the giuer did mene.
               Th̄e pretious pearles plentie shall in England be sene,
               If counterfett pearles being sett a parte,
               This Catholyke pearle take place in her harte.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               FOR so muche as it is the dutie
of euerye Christian man,
not only in hart to pray with
the Prophet Dauid, saying:
Deale mercifully O lord in thy good pleasure
with Syan, that the walles of Hierusalem
(that is of the churche) maye bee
builded vp agayne, but also to put to hys
helping hand so muche as he is able to the
repayring of it, I thought it to appertaine
to me, which am (I trust) a membre of
Christ hys Catholyke churche, to doo as
muche as in me lyeth, that the broken and
battred walles of it may be reedified. And
where as it passed my strengthe, to bryng
any principall beames, any corner stones,
by wrytyng newe workes of myne owne
inuention, rather then I would be an ydle
loker on, I thought it my part to be an inferior
laborer, to bryng morter, to carry
sand, and as it were beare baskettes, by
translatyng some worthy worke of some
other wryter. And although I dyd well

knowe, that there were many workes in
Latten, which beyng translated in to Englysshe,
myght helpe to rayse vp the ruynous
walles of Christ hys churche in England,
yet among so many, this one semed
to me to conteine moste spedy remedie and
reparation: whiche as it was of the first
author dedicated to a most excellent Princesse,
so of me the second translator (for
one before me hath trāslated it into Frenche)
is named not without a cause, A PRECIOVS
PEARLE FOR A PRINCE. If any
man meruaile, what moued me to trāslate
this Epistle,3. causes of this translation. I do hym to vnderstand, that
three causes styrred and prouoked me.
 The first is, that I myght moue all godly
Englishe hartes, to morne and lament, that
thei in England should be so blynded with
the smoke of ignorance, that they them selues
coulde not see the greate flames of heresies,
which dayly burne theire sowles, but
were fayne to be warned of them which be
 in farre countries. The second is, to gyue

God thankes, that allthough the eyes of
them which dwel in England, can not perceaue
those furiouse fyars, for so muche
as they dwell in the mystie vales of heresies,
yet that it hath pleased hym, to make
greate learned men, which dwell on the
hygh hylles of the Catholyke fayth, a farre
of to discrye the flames which dayly consume
England, and not onlye to discrye
them, but also to send holy water of moste
godly councell to quenche them.
            The third cause is, to styrr vp all deuoute 
Catholykes not learned in the Latten tongue,
to pray to God for the Quenes Maiestie,
that as she hath good councelloures
abroade in farr countryes, so she may haue
good councelloures at home in her courte,
which with Osorius may be osores of all
false doctryne and heresie: which with Osorius
maye persuade her to come oute of
the cockring bote of scismaticall noysomnes,
in to the stedfast arcke of Noy, that is
of holsome and catholyke vnitie: which

with Osorius may instruct her to gyue no
eare to theis deceptfull shypmen,A mete metaphor for suche maryners. whiche
clymyng vp in to theire pulpyttes, as in to
the topp of the mastes, crie to them which
be beneathe, that thei see the port and saffe
hauen of God his worde, when in deede
thei be in the mayne sea of their owne wauering
phātasies: which beare her in hand
that they sayle with a fore wynde of the
holy ghoste, when in deede they ryde with
a sydewinde of dyuellishe suggestion: which
make her beleue, that she hath with her the
warme southe wynde of charitie, and concorde,
when in deed thei leade her with the
colde Northewynde of dissention and discorde:
which persuade her that thei goe
Eastewarde, where the bryght Sonne of
true doctrine doth ryse and appeare, when
to say the truthe, thei goe VVestwarde,
where the cleare beames of veritie doth
vanishe and shrynck oute of syght. Oh that
so noble a Princesse should be so abused by
them which crie against abuses. But to my

purpose. These be the three causes, which
hartned me to translate this epistle, notwithstandyng
I knew I should displease
some, for God is to be pleased rather then
men: notwithstandyng I was not ignorant
that our base tounge coulde not atteine to
the maiestie of Osorius his Laten, for I
regarde not so much the fynes of wordes,
as the diuynenes of the matter: notwithstanding
this epistle of Osorius is after a
sorte answered à quodā osore veritatis,
who shall be nameles, for all the world can
wytness that the answer osoris illius is no
more to be compared to the epistle of Osorius,
then the light of a lampe to the light
of a lynck, then the light of a lynck to the
light of the Sonne. Allthough being compared
with other of his owne sect, I confess
hym to be as he is taken a man of handsome
eloquence. But compare hym to the glistryng
starres, which are this daye in the
catholike church, and namely to Osorius,
against whome he setteth hymselfe, he is

but a candle vnder a bushell, as he shall
well perceaue at Osorius next answer, if
so be Osorius thinck hym worthie to be
answered. But to leaue all comparisons, for
that thei be odious, I wishe to that answerer
not the eloquence of Osorius, which I
know he wold abuse in setting out the false
Churche, but the grace and spirit of Osorius,
to be one of the true church. Then I
doubt not, but he will wishe when he made
that answer, he had don some other thing,
but I will say no more, for I almost had
don his name to be vnderstanded against
my will. Only, gentle Reader, I desire the,
diligentlye to reade this epistle, in reading
it to learne, in learning to lyue according
as it doth councell. For I assure the
this is a pretiouse pearle, which held against
the Sonne of good vnderstandyng,
casteth oute suche a glystring light, that
Princes thereby may learne to rule, subiectes
may learne to obey, wauerers in religion
may be stayed, wanderers may be

brought in to the right way. If thou profite,
gyue God the cheife prayse: and if
thou thinck me worthie no thanke for that
I haue but declared and sette out in English
an other mans his doing in Latten, I
am well cōtent. Yet remembre that many
tymes we see those men, which haue iewelles
in keeping, which be none of theire
owne, to receaue greate thankes at
theire handes, to whome they
do shewe them.
            Fare well,
from Antwerp. xiiij. of March.
               
               R. S.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A PEARLE FOR
A PRYNCE.
            
               I WAS, I assure you (moste
noble Princesse) here to
fore sufficientlie prouoked
to the loue of youre Maiestie
and highnes, when I herd say howe
muche you dyd preuaile in witte, how
greately you had profited in Greke and
Latten, and howe you did ioyne youre
Princely dignity with liberalle learning
and knowledge: But after that certaine
men brought me worde, that you willingly
did reade my workes,Hys booke intituled De vera nobilitate. my former
good will was so muche increased towarde
you, as in wordes I am not able
to vtter. Whether thei tolde me that
vnfaynedly, or that they ment to curry
fauor with me, I am not able to say, but
this I am assured of, that I toke greate
pleasure at theire sayinges, and bethought
my selffe howe in writing I
might wytnesse my moste louing and

moste lowly hart toward you. For I
mistruste not, but with the same fauoure
with which you reade my workes
(if it be true, that you be not a littell
delighted in reading them) you
will interteine these my letters.
            Specially, seing those other my workes
doe concerne the common profit
of all men, but these my letters intend
cheifely the mayntenaunce of youre
estate, and the auauncement of youre
Royall Maiestie. The whiche thing,
thoughe I shall not be able to cōpasse,
yet my good will is not to be displeasantly
taken of you. For why? mightie
Princes are wont not so much to haue
an eye to the worth of the thing which
is presented to them, as to weygh the
hart and the good meaning of the presenter.
For seing the suerest defence
and furnyture of Princelye renome,
dothe stay vppon the frendeshipp and
trustines of men, howe can that be mistaken

of them, which thei perceaue to
procede of a hartie loue and speciall
fidelitie? and that here I may make an
entraunce to my writing, I am wont
many tymes to merueil with my self at
the prouidence of God in appointing
kinges,The merueilous prouidēce of God in kyngly regiment. that to a multitude of people al
most innumerable, made of so sondry
natures, greatly disagreing one with an
other, he hathe gyuen suche a mynde,
that it will haue an eye cheifely to one,
that it will be kept in awe at the commaundment
of one, that it will suffer
it self as it were to be tyed short with
the lawes and procedinges of one. In
so muche that whereas men often tymes
aboute other thinges, with deadlye
hatred do warr among them selues,
and outeragiously disagree, yet in this
one pointe (for the moste parte) with
greate consent of myndes, they cleaue
and holde together. And as I greatly
wunder at this, so I accompt those kinges,

which at the appointment of that
highe and euerlasting king, do execute
so worthie and paynefull an office,The preeminence of kynges aboue other persones. to
be men farr surmounting in all kinde
of vertue, and all together indued with
godly perfection. For there is nothing
greater or more honorable, nothing so
hard and paynefull to attchyue, as to
brydell the affections of men, to cutt a
way filthie desires, to mainteine innocentie,
with rewardes to encorage vertue,
with punishment to discorage syn,
and fynallie in establishing peace and
quietnes, to make the hole common
wealthe to florishe and abounde with
all commodities. Seing no man is able
to performe those thinges, but he
which is indued with heauenly grace,
surely they which worthily behaue thē
selues in theire kingly vocation, are to
be accompted in the number of the
heauenly citezins, and worthie to be
reuerensed as certeine godes among

men. If so be notable men, when they
gyue them selues wholy to preserue the
cōmon wealthe, and do vprightly, wisely
and discretly rule their kingdome,A woman wysely ruling is more to be merueiled at then a man.
be muche merueiled at, surely when a
woman shall do the like, she shall gyue
men greater occasion to merueile. For
what is more to be wondred at, then
to beholde in a woman a manly constantie,
in a virgin an horehedded prudence,
in greate aboūdance of richesse,
greate praise of temperaunce and modesty?
What can soner astonish a man,
then to see the tendre and deintie nature
of a woman to be trimmed and
decked with so many vertues, that she
is able to vpholde the burden of the
whole realme, and to be haue her selfe
in that office with greate commendation,
which is scantly brought to passe
withe the aduise, prouesse, fidelity and
autority of many excellēt men? Wherfore
(as it is to be hoped) if you will

so ordre the cōmon wealthe, that you
will not swarue frō the vertue of youre
auncetoures, who only embraced godlynes,
you shal so farre go beyond them
in greatnes of renome, as it is a greater
matter for a young woman to rule
a Realme wyselie and stoutelye, then
for men whiche are strengthned with
rype yeares and experience. If there
were euer any woman of excellēt vertue,
which with a noble corage hathe
bent her selfe to the care of the common
wealthe, and by that carefulnes
and gouernement,A wyder wyndowe of winnyng immortal fame opened to oure Quene of Englande then to any Prince here to fore. hathe wonne great
cōmendation, youre Kingdome hathe
happened to you in suche a tyme, and
you haue gottē suche a matter to worke
on, that if you will constantly take
in hand those affaires, which well become
that princelie disposition which
glistreth in you, with the brightnes of
youre noble prayse and worthie doinges,
you shall ouershadowe and darckē
               
the greate actes of moste mighty princesses.
And that we may boldly warrāt
the whole Christian cōmon wealth,
thus muche of your grace,Causes of good hope in oure noble Quene. many causes
do moue vs. For you are indued
with a singular wytte. You are learned
in the preceptes of moste noble sciences:
you are praysed aboue all others
for gentlenes and mekenes, which well
beseme youre comelye bewtie: and as
for those prayses which are due to constancie,
you well think, that you ought
not to denye them, or put them from
you. Therefore if you will not neglect
and forget youre selfe, you shall set a
good stay in the common weale, you
shall bring all those mischeifes, which
disquiet it,Greate danger in vnskilful ruling the ship of the Englishe common weale. to an end: and you shall purchase
youre selfe euerlasting commendation.
But on the other syde, if in suche
stormes and hurly burlies, you shall
go any thing a wrye, and shall vnskillfully

rule the stearne of youre charge▪
it is an hundred to one (which God
forbid) but that the shyp of this youre
common wealthe, dashing against hidden
and secret rockes, shal be all to broken:
and the passingers which be committed
to youre charge, shall vtterlye
perishe and be cast awaye. Therefore
seing you be in that taking, that either
you must wyn greate honour with the
safety of your whole realme, or become
a laughing stock with the ouerthrowe
of your common wealthe, I thinke
that no riches nor treasures ought to
be so deare vnto you,No riches to be prefered before faithfull coūcell that you sholde
prefer them before faithfull councell,
which intendeth the staying and assuring
of your kyngdome. But perchaūce
you will saye to me,An obiection. doe you thinke
me so ill bestead of frendes and councelloures,
that you neede nowe to tell
me what I sholde doe? or haue you so

muche vacant tyme from the affaires of
Portugale▪ that you can intend to take
care for the matters of England? I
thinke verily,The aunswer. there be in England many
wyse men, greately to be commended
for theyr vertue and godlynes, to
whome if you will gyue eare, you shall
prouide verye well for youre self and
youre realme, and trimlye mayntayne
youre princelye porte and estate.A goodly similitude. But
like as thei which be muche gyuen to
gather goodes, allthoughe they haue
greate riches layed vp in store at home,
yet for all that do not refuse golde
and siluer, which is brought vnto them
from other places, and loke howe rycher
they wax, so muche the more they
couet to haue theire good heaped and
encreased: euen so wyse Kinges, whose
treasure ought rather to consist in the
prudent aduise & faythfulnes of good
men, then in the aboundaunce of money,

although they haue store of councell.
Yet if those riches, which they esteme
aboue all other, by any meanes be
augmented, they ought not to sett it
light, or despise it. Nether neade they
to care, whether he which coūcelleth
them, be a countrie man borne, or a
straunger, but of what intent he taketh
suche an office vpon hym. Beside this,
councells gyuen of forenners, many tymes
are least to be suspected. For many
treasons are wrought against Princes
of theire howseholde seruauntes,Inimici hominis domestici eiꝰ. Matth. 10.
many craftie fetches are attempted in
the court for loue of lucre, many thinges
are couered with the cloke of dissimulation,
partly to curry fauoure, and
partly for feare of falling in to daungerouse
displeasure: so that there be very
fewe, whiche dare frelye speake their
mynde to Princes: last of al, I adde this,
that I think no Christian Prince a forrener

or a straunger, but I professe my
selfe to be beholding to all, but cheifelye
to you, whome afore all other for
the hope which I haue conceaued of
your gentlenes, I haue sett before myne
eyes only to be worshipped and reuerensed.
            But that I may come to that, which
I haue taken in hande, two thinges specially
are to be cōsidered of all Kinges,2. thinges of Kynges to be considered.
first the worthines of the office which
thei beare, and secōdly the weightynes
and paynefulnes in fullfilling that office.
As for the worthynes of it, it is so
greate,The worthines of kingly office. as greater can not be imagined
in this lyfe. For all Kynges for theyr
owne parte, are the Vicares of God his
authority, for it is as it were the office
and roume of a God, that one man
among all the rest, sholde so farr excell,
that all with one agrement of mynde,
sholde yelde them selues to be ledd and

defended of hym, and that they sholde
beleue, that the strongest bulwarkes of
theyr life, welfare, and worshyp, doe
rest in his wysdome, manhode; and honestie.
Now, as touching the difficultie
of theyr office,The difficulte of Kyngly office. it is vnspeakable. For
if it be an hard matter to rule al affections,
to brydle vnhonest desires, to
subdue the vnruly motiōs of the mynd,
and to keepe the whole state of the
mynde in suche a frame, that nothing
arise, which with any boysterouse blast
may shake or disquiet it, then what ado
is it for one not only to wayne hym
selffe from his owne wyll, but also to
tame and qualifie the affections of the
whole people, after suche a sorte, that
no oute rage or vprore burst oute of
theyr vnruly myndes, which may set the
whole cōmon wealthe oute of ordre?
            Therefore he which is charged with
such an office, as requireth first that he

sholde kepe hym selfe in ordre, (for it☜
can not be, that he sholde assuage other
mens lustes, which can not tempre his
owne,) and secondly, that with reason
he sholde alay the trobles of the whole
common wealthe, that as muche as in
hym lyeth, he sholde make all his subiectes
sober and discrete, and that he
sholde warde them with the defence of
all vertues, I saye, suche a man is to be
aided and socored with the helpe, not
only of man, but also of God, to the intent,
that the thing which he hath lustyly
purposed, he may luckyly performe.
But that I may first intreate of man
his helpe (which neuerthelesse is conteined
in the ayde and assistaunce of
God) I think,How necessary good men be for Kynges. that all the riches & possessions
of Kinges, which with greate
indeuoure are to bee sought after,
ought to staye vpon the wysdome and
honestie of good men. For no Prince

is able by any meanes, either in warr to
get the victory, or in peace to mayntaine
his honoure, either in his affaires
to behaue hymself politikely, or in
his leasure continewe quietlye, which
is not as it were walled with the company
of good men. For howe shall he
be able with his owne eyes to see to all
thinges, which Kinges ought to looke
to? Or howe with his owne eares can
he heare the complaintes of all clientes?
Or with his owne mynde and cō
               sideration,
studie for so many thinges,
as be requisite to preserue the cōmon
weale?
            Therefore many are to be called to
take parte in the ordring of the kyngdome,what mā
                  ner of men kynges sholde call to theire councell. whiche be men bewtified with
the iewells of kyngly qualities, that is
to say, iustice, temperance, manhode,
sagenes, stedfastnes, liberality, and wysdome,
in which one vertue, all thinges

which are prayse worthie be conteyned.
Yea these men must be of suche
wysdome,wise men. that thei be able to trye oute
all thinges narrowly, and by former
causes long before to prouide, for thinges
which may ensue afterwarde.
            Theire trustines muste be suche,Trustie men. that
no bribes, or aduauntage, may leade
them a syde from doing their duty, and
maintayning the truthe. They ought
to be of so valyaunt a corage,Stoute mē. that nothing
may dismay them frō sayng that
playnely, whiche may be healthfull to
the cōmon weale.A trim similitude. For like as sick men
often tymes lothe and abhorre holsom
medicyns, if thei be bitter and vntothesome,
and long after those thinges
which be enemies to theire healthe,
euen so nowe and then Princes being
sore sick and diseased in theire sowles,
refuse the phisick of true councell, and
are delighted with counterfet fynes of

lying, and deceaueable lickersomnes of
flatterie. So it cometh to passe, that
all be it in the beginning they take a
pleasure, yet in the end, they bye theyr
rashnes, and folly, with hartbreake and
sorowfulnes: and as nothyng is more
godly then truthe, so nothing is more
healthfull for the common weale. For
what other differēce is there betwene
wyse men and fooles,Difference betwene wyse men and fooles. but that wyse
men with ernest trauaile, purchase to
them selues thinges which are good
in dede: but foles being beguyled with
false appearaunces, hunt after thinges
which haue a shewe of goodnes, and in
dede be very vaine trifles, and mockeries:
and so at length whilst they couet
false worship, and seke after deceiptfully
pleasures, they be branded with
the marck of fowle shame, and be tormented
contynually with the worme
of theire wicked conscience. Therefor

all the trade of a blessed life consisteth
in truthe, and all wretchednes standeth
vpon lying and dissimulation. For
which cōsyderation, all Princes which
doo wishe the safetie of theyr cōmon
weale, and desire to cōtinewe and vpholde
theyr honour, ought all wayes
to pretend this, bothe in worde and
worcke to wytnesse this, that nothing
is more deare vnto thē, then the bright
beames of veritie. So they shall set all
good men free from feare, and holde
shameles flaterers noses to the grynstone.
The which thing that they may
more easely compasse,what Kynd of mē Princes sholde banishe frō them. it is neadefull
that they enriche and highely aduaūce
good and true meaning men, but as
for nawghtiepackes, coyners of lyes,
and forgers of flearing tales, thei ought
to abandon them farre from theyr acquaynetaunce,
and to think them vnworthie
of any prefermēt. For all flatterers

be sworne enemies to the truth,
back frendes to all good men, verie
poison of Princes, and not only deadly
foes to the whole c̄munaltie, but also
malishiously mynded against God hym
selffe. For he which wrastleth against
the truth, wrastleth against the mightie
ruler of all thinges, who is the only and
euerlasting veritie. Therefore these
naughtie and pestilent persones, are
to be put out of all cōceipt, to be kept
a loofe from climing to honoure, to be
excluded from all companie and familiaritie,
yea to be banished as farre as
there is any land, lest the infectyon of
theire myschefe, sholde spreade it selffe
to the vtter vndoing of Kinges, and
waste the whole cōmon wealthe, with
a remedilesse consumption. But on the
other syde, thei which euer speake the
truthe, neuer double or dissemble, but
esteme true vertue more then worldly

ryches▪ and drawe the lyne of theire
whole lyfe, by the square of wysdome
and honestie, they I say, if they kepe
thē selues secrete, be to be pulled oute
of theire prime closettes, will they nill
they, drawe they back neuer so muche,
they are to be brought acquaynted
with kinges, and to haue whole heapes
of ryches bestowed vpon them. For
those ryches of Kynges,Fidelitie the suerest treasure howse of Princes. be in better
assuraūce, which be laied vp in the fidelitie
of good men, then those which
be horded and couched vp in theire
cofers. For beyng layd vp in the treasure
howse, thei breede the cancker of
enuye, but being sette a broade to the
vse of good men, they make the Kyng
to be well spoken of, and fortifie his
estate, with the faithful hartes of good
men. Beside this, riches closed and chested
vp, may ether be caried away of
theues, or be lasht oute and made hauock

of, through the falshode of the
kepers. But the remembraunce of a
good turne, is rooted for euer in thākfull
myndes, & can not be plucked out
by any mans pilfrie. More ouer, it is
to be consydered, that they which by
no false or sowle fetches; but by true
vertue and fayre conditions, cam to be
familiar with their Kinges, doe thinck
that of duetie they ought to bestowe
those riches which they receaued of
theyr Kynges▪ to the profit of them by
whome they enioye them. But they,
whiche by hypocrisy,The properte of hypocriticall honor hunters. haue obteyned
great wealthe of Kinges, for so muche
as they gape al for gaines, as sone as
they spy, where more aduauntage is to
be gottē, they forsake theyr kinges, yea
they betray them, and some tyme byd
them battayle. Whereby we may gather,
howe mad all Princes be, which
not regarding good men, bestowe

riches and promotions vpon wicked
persones, and put all theyr honoure in
the credit of them, whome couetousnes
will not suffer to be trusty & faithfull.
But they which be of suche wysedome,
that displacyng naughtie men,
doo call good menne vnto them, and
make them partakers of theyr coūcels
and charge, doe prouide very well for
theyr honoure and safetie. For it can
not be, that the Safegarde of Prynces
shoulde be betrayed of them, who
holde fidelitie more deare, then all the
wealthe of the world: nether can theyr
honour be stayned with anie spotte of
reproche, when it shall appeare, that
they be fastned in the frendshippe and
familiaritie of vnculpable men. For as
nothing bringeth more shame to Kinges,
then the companie and familiaritye
of rakehells, so the frendshippe
of good men, doth greatly increase

theire glory and renome.
            For we so iudge of them,lyke loueth lyke. as they be,
with whome they be moste familiar &
cōuersant. Whereby we may cōclude,
that those Kynges be not to be counted
riche and puissant, which possesse
greate pyles of golde and syluer,what Kinges are to be counted riche. pretiouse
stones gloriously glystring, great
store of yuorie, many mynes of metall,
and be Lordes ouer manye landes:
but those rather, which be assisted with
a numbre of men excelling in honestie
and trustines, which be lincked in league,
and frendshippe of all good men,
so farre as shall become their Princely
person and Royall maiestie. For all
those thinges afore sayde, be seldome
obteined withoute vertue,Vertue with oute riches is sufficient. but thei be
neuer reteined withoute the succoure
of vertue. But turne vertue naked oute
of all the robes of riches, yet she will
holde her owne, and make her bright

beames, be sene a great waye of. Beside
this,Riches with oute vertue be impotent. if riches haue not the ayde of vertue,
they can help nothing, but rather
stirr vp and kyndle the cole of couetousnes
in the hartes of many, to worke
treason agaynst them, whome they see
pufft vp with plentie of possessions.
            But vertue alone, many tymes without
reskue of ryches, preserueth the Prince
hys estate, and doth auoyde the daunger,
which hangeth ouer the common
wealthe. But this may suffice, which we
haue spoken, as concerning the healpe
of man: now it followeth in ordre, that
we sholde intreate of the ayde and assistaunce
of God.
            Therefore, if the honestie and faithfullnes
of good men be of suche force,
that withoute theyr healpe, no Kyngdome
or common weale can long endure,
then I praye you, what shall we
think of the healpe of God? For God

is he by whose Deitie, councell, wyll,
kingdomes doo begyn,God is first to be sought for. be enlarged, &
mayntayned: by whose wisdome they
be kept in ordre, by whose helpe they
be vpholden, and finally, by whose displeasure
they decay, ouerwhelme, and
vtterly come to naught. Therefore a
Prince, which will acquite hym selfe
well in his office, and comlyly handle
the rule committed to his charge, before
all thinges must kepe religion purely
and vndefyledly, and in his daylye
prayers desire God to prosper hym, accompting
al the happy successe in rulyng
the realme, to stay vpon the seruice
and pleasing of God. For first, if
wisdome be so necessarie for Kinges,
that without it, they can not haue so
muche as a pece of a common wealthe,
but they shall leaue all thinges topp feturuy,
and seing wisdome borroweth
her light of none other, then of that

passing and vnspeakeable clearenes of
the wysdome and spirit of God, by the
which all thinges are led in the right
way, and lightned, vpon what thinges
sholde kinges more bestowe their studie,
then in ernest bendyng themselues
to religion, & purely praying for God
his healpe and assistaunce? which thing
if they doo,The effect which Kinges haue by seruing of God. suche clearenes of Godly
wisdome, suche a brightnes of wonderfull
vertue shall shoote oute of their
myndes, that they shall not onlye discerne
what is right, honest, and profitable,
and knowe to trye what difference
is betwene counterfet and currant,
but looke what so euer they perceaue
to be right, that same they shall
stedfastlye put in practyse. For the
mercy and goodnes of God, worketh
bothe these thynges in vs. For first it
sheweth a moste cleare light to mā his
mynde, and armeth hym with inuincible

valiantnes, so that by meanes of the
one, he neuer trippes or treades a wrye,
& by reason of the other, is not abashed
of the daunger or troble, that the executing
of his office bringeth with it.
            For there is nothing so hard to come
by, nothing so coūtregarded with ingynes,
which he shall not easely batter
and beate downe, which is indued with
Godly vertue. He must therefore speadily
asuage all the brutishe mocyons of
the mynde,what a Prince shold do which seketh for god his help he must wayne hymselfe of
his owne wyll, he must scrape oute all
the blottes and blemishes of vices, and
so lighten all the state of his mynde
with the brightnes of honestie, that a
meruaillouse amiablenes, bewtie, and
liuely image of God his holye spyrit,
may clearely appeare in it. For it can
not be, but he whiche in this lyfe so
muche as is in man hys powre▪ with
cleare eyes doth behold God, & dayly

doth vewe that pearlesse fayrenes and
bewtie, sholde be raueshed with the loue
of it, and force hym selfe ernestly to
be lyke vnto it: specially, seing he can
not attaine to resemble and be like vnto
it so muche by his owne labour and
trauaile, as by the goodnes and graciousnes
of God. And loe, oute of this
likelyhood of mens myndes,The effect of the likely hood of mās mynd with god with the
spirit of God, there springeth an euerlasting
band of amitye, which causeth
God so to cleaue to mans sowle, that
he will vouchsafe a gyltles and deuoutly
disposed mynde, plentifull to partake
of his Godly treasures. Therefore
suche a mynde, he enformeth with coū
               cell,
he wardeth with vertue, he compasseth
with conforte, and in all hasard
doth defend it with his godly presence.
Therefore they which be kyndled with
the loue of true vertue,Vertue is ful of good hope. being hartned
with this hope, though all the worlde

be togeather by the eares, thoughe the
grounde open with earthe quakes, yet
they be not dismayed, but then most of
all they trust God wyll succoure them:
and when in mans iudgement all hope
is past, they stand styffly in this belefe,
that God will saue them harmeles.
            Whereby we maye gather, that for so
muche as mans nature is so feble, and
that there ys no holde to be had in
these transitorie and glyding goodes
of the worlde, and that all oure lyfe
stādeth in the gunshot of daūgers, couragiousnes
of mynd, and confidence
of vnprenable strengthe to be founde
in them only, which cōsyder that they
haue God on theyr syde. Therefore
seing no man can take vpon hym the
office of a Kyng, without wonderfull
wysdome, without a speciall token of
worthynes, without the stay of an vnconquerable
stoutenes, and none of all

these laudable vertues, grow oute of
the grounde, but descend downe from
heauen by God hys inspyration, it is
playne that Kinges ought to employ
all theyr care and office, to be of an
holy and blameles religion. For they
and none other, are to be reckned wyse,
dyscrete, and stronge, which are
knyt with the knot of right religion to
God, who is the author, and cheifetayne
of all wysdome, honestie, and valiantnes.
            But what shall we now say of iustice?
can any man ministre it, onles he cast
all his mynde vpō the rule of the euerlasting
lawe, and cōceaue in his mynde,
the wel spring of righteousnes, and diligently
marcke the ordre and semelynes,
with the which that cheife ruler
setteth all thinges in frame? and last of
all, onlesse he gyue hym selfe wholy to
the studie of God his lawe? surely it is

impossible. For God only is the pythe,
wisdome, and rule of the lawe: he is the
beginning and rote of vpright dealing,
and father of all iustice. By whose grace,
all holsome and profitable lawes be
enacted, by whose procurement they
be kept and preserued. Hereby it followeth,
that they only glystre with the
brightnes of iustice, which fix theyr
eye vpon that hyghe and euerlasting
light. Verily oute of this agrement of
mynde, by the which men resemble the
iustice of God, and stretch all the stringes
of theyr studie to profit the cōmon
wealthe, the loue and hartie good wyll
of men dothe growe, oute of this doth
issue the commendation of myldenes
and curtesie, oute of this (to be short)
doth procede all the swetenes of most
true pleasure and delight. For no bodyly
pleasure is in any poynt to be cō
               pared
with the pleasure which cometh

of vnfayned honestie. For the pleasure
of the bodye many tymes in a madnes
is desired,The difference betwene the pleasure of the body & the mynde and in twinkling of an eye
vanisheth away, and afterward seareth
the mynde with sadnes, and leaueth a
print of shame behynde it. But that
pleasure which true vertue doth breed,
is chosen oute wisely, and is inioyed
cōtinually, not able to be defyled with
any lewde affection, or defaced with
any villany, because it is farre from all
infectiue filthines, and ioyned with excellent
honestie and comlynes, by reason
of which, it cometh to passe, that
theyr lyfe, which be lincked in loue
with God, is not only adorned with
Godly vertue, indued with greate ryches,
and put in sure hope of euerlasting
glorie, but also is replenished with
stedfast and vnspeakeable ioy and cō
               forte,
so that they may lawfully crie
with that most fayntely Kyng, how

greate is the plenty of thy swete comforte,
o Lorde, which thou haste layed
vp for them which loue the? Therefor
the loue and carefulnes of religiō, doth
conteyne all these benefytes, with the
which the laboures susteyned in vertuouse
practise, are made more tolerable
and easie, and requited with a certeyne
exceding swetenes, and without
the which, the Kyngdome can not be
wel ordred. More ouer what a notable
thing is that? that all the subiectes, except
suche which through myschefe are
growne to a monstrouse madnes and
crueltye,Subiectes do loue & wyllingly obey religious Princes. will greatly loue those Kinges,
and vse muche fidelitie towarde
them, if they se them deuoutely to embrace
religion? For it must neades be,
that the picture of diuine fayrenes set
before mennes eyes, sholde make them
greately inamored, and cause euery bodye
to be much delighted with it: and

there is no mā which wyll let this sinck
in his mynde, that he which feareth
God and casteth all to please hym, will
once forsake his fayth or shrinck from
his seruice. Therefore partely because
they perceaue hym learned in the preceptes
and conncels of God, and to be
ernestly bent to care for the common
wealth, partly because thei mistrust not
his goodnes, and stand not in dought
that he wil forget publike profit, whilst
he licketh his owne fyngers, they willingly
obey hym, & in no wyse grudge
to bee vnder hym. Nowe then, if no
Realme, no Citie, yea no house can be
vpholden without it be ruled, and the
manner of ruling well, standeth in pure
and perfect religiō, surely nothing may
be inuented more profitable or holsome
then religiō, to kepe a multitude
of men in awe, and good ordre. For
what can more strengthen a ruler, then

that all men may know and perceaue,
that all his delight and studie is, to profit
the cōmon weale? for so it cometh
to passe, that the common wealth hath
him in admiratiō, loueth him, and with
hartie good wil dothe yeld to his procedinges.
Otherwise they wil not long
leade in his lyne, but as much as lyeth
in them, they will striue to cut or snap
it a sundre: for no regiment can long
continew, which is rather established
with feare of punishment, then with
loue of vertue. If so be that agreement
doth preserue and encrease the cōmon
weale, but drawing diuerse wayes, doth
teare it and minsse it all to māmockes,
and the right religion of the Prince
doth as it were glue his subiectes together
with this cōcorde, (for all with
one consent do shewe obeisaunce to a
religiouse Prince, and be redie at his
cōmaundement) then without peraduenture,

all the saffegarde and suretie
of the common wealthe doth beare it
selfe vpon religion. Moreouer, that is
not to be lightly weyghed, that vntrue
subiectes will not be so bold to worke
treason against theyr Prince, on whose
syde they thincke God to be. Neither
doe his enemyes ventre so sone to bid
hym battell, whom they see to be wayted
on with the trayne and garde of
God his healpe. For if they go aboute
to worke wyles, or offre warre, they do
it fayntly and fearefully, so that naughtye
subiectes being taken with the mā
               ner,
may suffer for their offence, or for
feare be reclamed from theyr naughtienes,
& enemies also may easily leaue
of to moue warre and disquietnes.
            For they willingly seke to be at one
with them whose strengthe in warre
they feare, whose fidelitye in peace
they loue, and whome they know to be

suche, that they neade not mystrust,
leaste they shoulde breake the truce,
which they haue well agreed vpon.
            Laste of all, seing euery common wealthe
dothe frame it self to the Princes
fashiōs, if the Prince be a worthy worshipper
of godlynes and religion, the
whole cōmon wealthe muste neades
lay fast holde vpon the same religion.

                  The effect of true religion. And religion trulye dothe restrayne
naughtye desyres, it dothe kepe wantones
vnder, it abateth pryde, it staieth
rashenes and folishe hardynes, it maketh
men discrete, and obedient, bothe
to the lawes, and also to them which
execute the lawes. For there is nothing
of more powre then the feare of
God, to pull back out ragiouse desyres,
to cutt the combt of bragging and
lightnes. For when we call to mynde,
howe muche we be bounde to oure
highe and most holy father for his benefites

bestowed vpon vs, and what
paynes be ordeined for them which defyle
the bewtie of their sowle with syn
and vncleanes, and when we conceaue
in oure vnderstandyng, that there be
no lurkyng holes whiche can hyndre
the sight of God, seing those thinges,
whiche Iye hyd vnder the yearth: yea
euen very hell it selfe, which is wrapped
with continuall darcknes, appeare
brightly in his sight, I saye, when we
weygh all these thinges with oure selues
we breake & disapointe our owne
will, partly least we sholde offend hys
eyes with fylthines, or shewe owre selues
vnthākfull towarde hym (then the
which nothing is more greuouse) partely
leaste we sholde shame oure selues,
and worke owre euerlasting wo,
throughe owre owne abhominatyon:
and so being reskewed by the healpe of
God, we beare away the victorie vanquishing

and putting to flyght all kynd
of wickednes, for they whiche stand
in awe of God his iudgementes, and
feare to displease hym, be neuer forsaken
of him, or left to shyft for them selues.
Therefor being assured of his cō
               forte,
they easely kepe of the assaulte
of concupiscens, from scaling and inuading
the mayne towre of reason. So
then, it is an easie matter, to lyue ordrely,
to doo as a man ought to doo,
and to practyse all thinges which vertue
dothe prescribe, when dyuellyshe
desyres be quenched and subdued.
            For who can auoide vncleanes, but he
whiche with vndesyled eyes beholdeth
that hyghe and euerlastyng honestie,
trymnes and neatenes, which is in the
bewtie of God? who shall be blameles
in ministring iustice, but he which
dothe marke the fashion, ordre, and
comlynes with the which that mighty

Lorde ruleth all thinges, fytly placeth
all thinges, and in their seuerall offices
appoynteth all thinges? who wyll not
sticke to put his lyfe in daunger, who
in battaile will fyght stoutely & manfully
for the mayntenaunce of iustice,
and in the common quarrell, but he
which trusteth that God wyll be euer
at his elbowe? and though he be slayne
in the felde, yet trusteth that God hath
not cast hym of, but rather beleueth for
this short and fading lyfe, to be rewarded
with an euerlasting lyfe, in which
he shall enioy all felicitie in the company
of the blessed sayntes? Therefore
if religion in tyme of peace, doth make
men discrete and sobre, and merueillously
agreing together in louable vnitie,
willing and redy to obey the lawes,
and Princes procedinges, and in tyme
of warre doth harten them aboue the
common strength of men, and so rauisheth

them with the loue of euerlastyng
lyfe, that they wyll spend theyr
blood and lyfe in theyr coūtryes cause,
to the intent they may wyn heauen: is
it not playne, that a King which hath
an ernest desyre to doo his dutie to the
vttermost, ought to set all hys care and
studie in the well disposyng of religiō?
For so he shall most royally abounde
with the riches and ornamētes of vertues,
and shall flow on euery syde with
exceding glory which shall neuer decay,
and in all doughtfull aduentures
shall be strenghtned with the ayde of
God, and shall receaue greate cōforte
of the remembraunce of so many good
dedes: neither shall he alone be in an
happye case, but he shall make all the
cōmon wealth cōmitted to his charge,
partaker of hys happie and blessed lyfe:
The charge of Kynges. in the which all the dutie and office of
a Kyng doth consist. For what other

charge hath a Kyng assygned hym ouer
the cōmon wealthe, then that he shold
make the cōmon weale florishe, and be
in a blessed state? which no other wyse
is brought to passe, but by a speciall deuotion
to vertue and religion.
            But loke how muche the more religion
surmoūteth all other vertues, (for
they all be borne of her, caryed in her
armes, and dandled in her lap) so much
the more it is to be feared,Heresye is an hypocrite. least vice
take vpō it the name of vertue and religion,
and vnder the pretence of holynes,
may ouerthrowe and vndermynde
all Godlynes. For as nothing is more
cōtrary to vertue then hypocrisye, so it
euidently doth bewray it selfe, in fayned
and counterfeyte religiō. For horrible
wickednes, cloking it selfe deceiptfully
with the name of vertue, myndeth nothing
ells, but the rasyng of religion,
and scrapyng of the remembraunce of

God oute of mennes myndes. Here
most noble Quene,Notable and holsome coū
                  cel to our noble Quene. I desyre you to cō
               syder
the matter wysely: for seing you
be clogged with so many cares, that
by no meanes you be able by youre
owne wytte to auoide suche snares, and
so peryllous pytfals, whiche be layed
for you, & all Christendome, and seing
all the swey of your Kyngdome standeth
vpon this one poynt, that you
shold inbrace religion purely, that you
sholde be assysted with the healpe of
God, and that you shold kepe the realme
assigned to you, in good estate and
prosperitye, nothing ought to be better
welcome to you, specially in suche
disagremēt of religion, then to be aduertised
of matters of so greate importaunce,
by a man which wysheth your
grace verye well, which is farre from
hope of all fylthie lucre, whiche also
knoweth what belongeth to true religion.

I dare be bold to say thus muche
vnto youre grace, that if I had mistrusted
your wysdome and gentlenes, I
wolde not haue bestowed laboure in
writing these letters. For it had ben a
poynte of great madnes, to take that
in hand, which I haue vtterly dispaired
of. But when youre wytte, learning,
gentlenes, and good nature,The spoile of religiō in Englād is not to be imputed to oure graciouse Quene did bryng
me in greate hope of youre honorable
Maiestie, and when I vnderstode that
the spoyle of religion, which is cōmitted
in your realme, is not to be imputed
to you, but to many men which
being verbes actiue I knowe not of
what mad moode, go about to pul insondre
the fences and inclosures of all
lawe and religiō, and that it is no God
a mercye to them, but long of your
graciouse goodnes, that any sparcke
of Christian religion doth remayne, I
dought not but you will be well pleased

to here me speake. Wherefore in
moste hartie manner,3. Wyse and godly requestes to our royall Quene. I desyre you first
that you will take these my enterpryses
in good parte, (the which you shall do,
if you will looke in to my heart oute
of which proceadeth all that I doo:)
secondly that before you haue readen
all which I purpose to comprehend in
this epistle, you will not gyue youre
verdict either to the prayse or disprayse
of them: last of all, I request you by the
faythe which you owe to Christ, that
if by the craftye councel of others, you
haue conceiued any wrong opinion, if
ryght reason shall confound it, if euident
truthe shall bewray it, if godlynes
shall boult it oute, that you will not refuse
the good grace of God, but willyngly
gyue credit to those reasons
which you shall see to be more agreable
to Christian religion. For it is the
poynt not only of a prowde and arrogant

stomake, but also the token of a
dull and blockyshe wytte, (which faultes
be very farre frō you) to be so addicted
to certayne chosen and singular
opinions, beaton in to the heade by
dayly crying and callyng on of wicked
persones, that it can not be remoued
from that opinion which it hath once
taken in hand to defend. which thyng
as in euery trade of lyfe, is beyond all
God hys forbode, so in wrong religion
which is taken of a heade, is most perylous
and daungerous. For the more
trymme, excellent, and profytable any
thing is in his right kynde, so the more
vyle, beggarly, and hurtfull it is, when
it is coūterfeit.Mark the manifolde miseries caused by the false preachers of oure tyme, The which I wold God
we had not tryed in these troblesome
dayes. For after that by the naughtye
persuasyon, and bedlem boldnes of
some, men forsooke that religiō which
frō the Apostles tyme, euen to our age

hath continued inuincible, and many
being inuegled with paynted woordes,
haue strayed from that way which the
disciples of Christ dyd fyrst open, and
many holy men in whome the holy
ghost dwelled, dyd afterward enlarge,
that they might walcke in that pathe,
which with a shew of licētiousnes and
pleasure, dyd drawe folish and vnaduised
men vnto it, I saye, after that this
newe deuised religion was spredd abroade
by meanes of many seditiouse
sermons, and erronyouse bookes, we
haue sene shamefastnes sodenly to be
shaken of, honestie to be chassed oute
of the countrie, man his lawe and God
hys lawe to be troden vnder fote, holy
thynges to be prophaned, godlynes to
be iested at, boldnes euery where to
scape skotfree, vnshamefastnes to be
mayntayned, many opinions contrary
one to the other, to bee scattered abroade,
the vnity of Christ to be torne

with sutes of dyuerse sectes, and in euery
place where these mad men haue
come, the fyre of horrible discorde to
haue ben blowne vp. Out of this roote
haue spronge deadly displeasures, often
vprores, perylouse dagger drawinges:
hereof many blody battayles haue ben
fought, many slaughters done, many
spoyles cōmitted, many mennes possessions
destroyed with fyre and sworde.
And now, I pray, you who is so blynde
which doth not see what crueltye appeareth
in many of them, which haue
ben the authors of these opinyōs, with
what disdaynefull arrogancye they do
iette vp and downe, with what malypertnes
and cursed speaking they rayle
vpon good men? Adde now here vnto,
the breache of lawes, the contempt of
rule, the hatred of Kyngly authoritie,
the vnmercyfull treasons which these
men moste dyuelyshly deuyse agaynst

Princes. Recken here also, theyr secrette
whysperynges, when they cast
theyr heades together how to destroy
and vndoo theyr Kynges, and whilst
most shamefully they worke theyr wo,
for whose wealth and good estate, they
ought to serue and call vpon God. For
who hath so littell wytte, that can not
perceaue, that this sect is alltogether
for the peoples to the, & to feade theyr
humoure, and that it is more fyt to styr
vp & increase, then to asuage and diminish
theyr folly and madnes? But all
these people pleasers, for so muche as
they be men of no wysdome or discretīo,
but be led with an inordinate desire
of liberty, they loue not law, they defye
iusticers, they wyshe in theyr hartes
that kinges were at the dyuel, that they
without cōptrolmēt might liue as they
lyst. For they couet to be set free from
lawe and ordre, that they may be bond

slaues to theyr owne wyl and naughtie
affectīos, is there any m̄a can deny this?
haue not we had the proofe of it by many
exāples? doth not euery mā see that
they shoote all at this marke, that Princes
being dispatched oute of the way,
there might none be left which shold
once say, black is theyr eye? Therefore
some Kinges they haue poysoned, some
they haue attempted to kyll with the
sworde, and haue cast many myschenouse
fetches, how to pull them oute
of theyr seate. But peraduenture some
man wyll say,An heretis cal obiection. this hath not chaunsed
for any grudge which those good men
haue borne toward Kynges, but only
for the diuersytye and variance of religion.
And that it were not to be feared
that the mad and mysheuouse multitude
myght worke them any displeasure,
if Princes wold agree with them
aboute ordring and appointyng of religion

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
He which will say thys, of necessytie
he must graunt,A Catholyke answer. that it is the
intent and meaning of this newe deuised
religion, by hooke or by crooke to
seke the death of those Prynces, which
will not forsake the religion in which
they haue ben vertuously and wysely
brought vp, to come to the lure of the
mad people. Againe, he doth not wysely
weygh, how that the end of this
sect, is ouermuche libertye, which can
be kept in no ordre, then the which,
nothing can be more contrary to the
offyce and regiment of Kynges. For a
Kyng his offyce is, to cutte vp vice with
the knyfe of punishment, but the vnbrydled
people doo desyre to be delyuered
from the feare of all punishmēt.
A Kyng is the executor,The office of a Kyng & the will of the people be contrary. keper, and
maintayner of the lawes, but the people
as muche as it is able, with rashnes
doth rent and al to teare them. A kyng

studieth for peace and quietnes, but the
people all together vnruly, doth seke
troble and disturbaunce. Laste of all, a
king doth not think, that all thinges
are to be bestowed of euery man a lyke,
but as euery man is more worthie
then an other, so he rewardeth hym after
the rate of his desert. But the people,
wolde not haue one better then an
other, and desyreth to haue heauen and
yearth mingled togeather. So that as in
no sauce it can abyde anie superiours,
so moost cheifely it hateth kinges to
the deathe. For it can not away with
any excellencie of more worthynes.
and it stryueth all to this end, either to
destroy Kinges vtterly, or els to bryng
them in to a trappe of trobles. This I
graunte doth not appeare at the fyrst,
but as sone as a company of madde
rakehels groweth to any strengthe or
powre, then theyr boldnes being encoraged

with long sufferaunce, and wincking
at, bursteth oute to the vndoing
& ouerthrowing of the Kynge his Maiestie.
Therefore seing this is the nature
of the ignorant people,The nature of the ignorant people. so sone as
they haue gotten people pleasyng captaines,
which with theyr railing sermones
may puff them vp as it were with
wyndy blastes, and rayse mightie waues
of foly and madnes, surely Princes doo
vnwisely which doo not nyp wyckednes
in the hed, so sone as it doth begyn,
but cherishe it with theyr sofftnes, and
strengthen it with theyr bearing. For
they do not perceaue that they make a
rod for them selues, when they suffre
that to spryng and increase, which at
the last being growne to a hed, wil pul
them oute of theyr throne, and so when
it is to late, they shall se that they haue
bred theyr owne bane, which they shall
not be able to remedy when they wold.

Wherefore then they shall drynke of
the whyp for theyr madnes, as all other
Princes doo, which take vpon then to
further and mayntayne with publike
authoritie, the folish fansye of the cō
               mon
people. But peraduenture they
wyll deny that this is a people pleasyng
sect. Then what is a people pleasyng
sect if this be not? doth it not euery
where styrre vp sedityon?A profe that this new learning is a people pleasing sect. doth it not
breake the bandes of all iustice and
lawes? doth it not resist rule and kingly
regimēt? doth it not put all men in hope
of to muche lewde libertie? For where
is rule moste dispysed? where are the
Princes had in most derisyon of the c̄omon
people? surely in those places
where this pestilent learning doth gett
the vpper hand. Therefore if this mad
enterprise takē myscheuousely in hand
of these people pleasers, and vnaduysedly
wynked at of Princes, shall grow

to a rypenes, which way so euer it taketh,
it wyll quyte ouerturne all the defence
and strengthe of kyngly estate.
            Beleue me (o Quene,) this sect which
for oure synnes hath ouer run many
partes of Christēdome, is the vndoing
of common wealthes, the marring of
good māners, the spoyling of kyngdomes,
and the destruction of all kyngly
honoure. But you will say, that you sett
not so muche by your reigne, that for
the loue of it, you wold lese the ryches
of the euerlasting kyngdome, and that
you wold willingly abyde any aduenture,
that you might entre in to heauē.
I will not meruaile if you will say this.
For it is the poynte of a noble mynd,
to despyse the fletyng pleasures of this
short lyfe, & to be greatly in loue with
immortalitye. For what goodnes is in
thys lyfe? what part of it is quyt of
daunger? what is it which is not hemd

in on euery syde with sorowfullnes?
as for laughinges, feastinges, mynstrelsye,
sportinges, dalyaunces, many grefes
do follow them, and al delightes are
ended often tymes with pitifull & lamentable
mysfortunes. And put the
case, that all thinges chaunce as we
wolde haue them, yet we must abyde
the sharp shoure of death, which neuer
is farre frō vs, but alway is at our back,
and dayly pyncheth somethyng from
oure lyfe. For it is a folly to thynke
death then to drawe neare when it maketh
an end of oure lyfe, and not to fele
the force of it, when dayly it doth crop
and by littell and littell wasteth oure
lyfe. For euerye day, deathe dothe incroche
vpon vs, and what so euer parte
of oure age passeth away, it is deuoured
by the crueltie of deathe. Therfore
seing oure lyfe dothe so swyftly ebbe
away, and in so lyttell cōtinuaunce of

tyme, is subiect to so many grefes and
miseries, & all greate possessions glyde
away in a minute of an howre, what
is a greater poynte of wysdome, then
to sett at naught all the tryfles of this
lyfe, and to gyue oure mynde to seke
after heauenly and euerlasting thinges?
Wherefore if this be your mynde, that
thoughe you sholde hazarde all youre
riches, you wolde not weygh it a straw,
so that by such meanes you might prepare
youre selfe away to heauen, I can
neuer worthilye prayse the noble disposition
of your princely hart. Wherfor
I gyue you councell, that if the rayfers
of this newe religion, can fynde out
anye meanes, howe you maye come a
nearer way to heauen, although great
losse of goods shold follow you by their
doctrine, you notwithstanding sholde
make muche of them, and thynk them
worthy of all preferment. For small

thinges are not to be compared with
greate, worldly thinges with heauenly,
transitorie thinges with euerlasting.
            Nowe then, what doe they bring with
them of suche force to get heauē, that
auncyent religion is to be forsakē, that
the profit and highe estate of the kyngdome
is to be lyttell estemed? Peraduenture
some man wyll say:An hereticall excusation. O yes, they
bryng with them a great furtheraunce
to heauen, and wonderfully to be com
mended. For these men be not inuentors
of nouelties as fond men do dreame,
but rather they laboure to restore
all thinges which were decayed, to the
perfection of theyre auncient and first
institution: for it muche greueth them
that the purenes of Christian religion,
which Christ and his disciples dyd leaue
behynde, is choked with many superstitions,
and corrupted with many
abuses: therfore they haue found out a

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
notable way, how they may put down
all superstition, and scoure oute all the
blottes of Christian righteousnes, that
so at the length, Christian religion may
recouer the light and purenes which it
had lost.A catholike consyderatiō cō
                  tayning an excellent quyppe. Surely this is a worthy act, and
deseruing immortall prayse. For what
can be inūted either better, for the profitablenes,
or more excellent, for the
worthynes, then in suche an infection
and decay of good manners, in suche a
spoyle and ouerthrow of all good thinges,
for one to step furth inspyred with
such vertue, that he can set a new glasse
vpon olde manners, that he can heale
thynges which are wounded, that he
can repayre thinges fallen in to ruine,
that he can clense religion frō all fylth,
and make all holye thinges perfect?
            Wherefore it is no meruayle, if many
which were hartily in loue with godlynes,
dyd take the decay of true religion

heauely, and being intysed with
suche goodly promises, dyd willingly
follow whither those men dyd lead thē.
But before they had lept so farre, they
shold haue looked, of what abylitye
these promysers had ben.what shold haue ben cōsydered ere credit had bē gyuē to these fayre promisers. For as merchaunt
men do measure euery man his
fydelitye according to hys riches, for
they neuer credit hym whome they
think vnable to stand to his promyse,
so in suche greate vauntes, regarde was
to be had, not only with what woordes
they dyd warrant, but rather muchemore
it was to be weighed with discretion,
whether they were able to performe
and accōplyshe that which they
had spoken. Therefore it was requisyte,
that he which shold take vpon hym so
great & notable an enterpryse, shold be
a man of a meruaylouse vpryghteousnes,
sagenes, sobrietye, manly corage,
stedfastnes, rauished with the loue of

heauenly thynges, furnished and replenished
with greate gyftes of the holy
ghoste. More ouer thys is to be marked,
for so muche as in tyme past, there
haue ben many most holye and wyse
men, excelling in all kynde of godlynes
and neuer any of them could fynde in
hys hart, to further thys good intent of
youres after suche sorte as these men
haue fyrst inuēted, that it standeth with
reason that these men which do take
vpon them to fullfyll your desyre, after
suche a newe and vnknowen fashyon,
shold so farre passe those excellēt worthies
in vertue, as thys maystrye which
they haue taken in hand, is more to be
praysed then all the thynges whiche
those holy men dyd in theyr lyfe tyme.
But I pray you, is there any of these
men, more holy, more sobre, more
stronge to godward, then Athanasius,
Basyll, Ambrose, Ierome, Augustyne, or

other fathers of most excelēt wysdome
and religion? no doughtles▪ what then?
could such a greate matter be brought
to passe with meane and common vertue?
it is not to be beleued. But let vs
relent thus muche to them, and let vs
graunt that it might be, that God in
oure dayes wold reuele to them which
were of meane behauyoure,Note. that kynde
of doctrine inuēted to redresse and reforme
religiō, which was hyd from the
holy fathers. Yet at the least, they must
graunte, that he whome the wysdome
of God wold set ouer suche an offyce,
ought to be a man of indifferent vertue
and godlines. For God is not wont
to commit honorable offyces of holynes
and honestie, to naughtie and wicked
persons, & they can beare no sway
among wyse men whose lyues are defamed
with dishonestie. Therefore although
to the discharging of so weightie

an offyce, I did require not without
a cause excellēt vertue and authoritie,
yet for all that, because it might seme
vnreasonable among suche dreggishe
doctoures, to looke for the examples
of vertue and honestie which was vsed
in olde tyme, I will now content my
selfe with meane vertue and authoritie.
Tell me therefore, who was he so
discrete, so perfect of lyffe, and māners,
that it was lyke that God dyd put hym
in trust with this offyce? who was the
beginner and founder of this learning?
Luther the fyrst founder of this fond doctrine.
who was the hedd carpenter of thys
goodlye buylding? forsothe Luther.
what māner a fellow was this Luther?
surely that I may speake the best of
hym, he was a man neither sobre, neither
discrete, but hedlong, rashe, mischeuous,Luthers lewde scollers.
seditious, and of all other the
greatest people pleasure, and what mā
               ner
of men were they which afterward

sprange oute of hys scole as oute of a
well? vndoughtedly, bold, standing in
their owne cōceite, puft vp with pryde,
and (that I may say no wurse by them)
men not so indued with vertue, that
we being moued with their authoritie,
shold forsake the rules of the religiō in
which we were brought vp. Therefor
how can it synk in to a wyse man his
hed, that oure most holy Lorde,A questiō insoluble and able to choke all heretykes. which
allwayes hath imbraced symple, lowly,
and humble men, and hath lyghtned
with hys brightnes the myndes of such
as take nothing vpon them, now contrary
to his accustomed manner, shold
ouer hyp symple and humble men, and
shew them this new and straūge light,
which haue no sparke of shamefastnes
or modestie? Now I say, how cometh
it to passe, that these fellowes who as
it appeareth by many tokens, be gyuen
to worldly delightes, haue only most

wittily spyed out that which was vnknowē
to so holy fathers, kyndled with
the loue of purenes, and as it were set
on fyre with the desyre of godly knowledge?
But now I reason not of what
authoritie they be. For it cometh to
passe through the offēces of many, that
men can not perceaue that they which
are not to be reuerensed for any notable
vertue,Syn is the cause that men can not see the folly of false teachers. be not able to performe that
which they do pretend. Let vs therefor
graunt, if it please them, that it may be
by some meanes, that they which be
not to be praysed for any excellēt vertue,
and go not beyond others in the
loue of Godlynes, may take in hande
and accomplysh that which men most
famouse for theyr vertue and Godlynes
were not able to bryng to passe.
            Therefor after what sort haue they obteyned
that?An excuse commonly vsed of all heretikes. Because (say they) those
men whome you meane, although they

dyd follow the spirite of God, and were
ernestly bent towarde the woorde of
God, yet they did leane to much to mā
               nes
authority: but we thinck it vnsemely
for vs to stick to the authority of mē,
to be bound to the traditiōs of men, to
weygh what is right & honest according
to the reason and consyderatiō of men.
we haue one only author and maister,
namely God, and we make our accōpt,
that oure lyfe is to be drawen after the
rule of hys worde, and not after mēnes
decrees, and ordynaunces.A trymironia against heritikes. O these be
m̄e worthy to be wondred at, and with
cap and knee to be worshipped. For
they so speake as they now hadd not
one iote of man hys nature in them,
and as though they were not made of
fleshe and bone as other men be. For
they forsothe, haue mortifyed all theyr
sences with fayth, they haue parted the
soule frō the body, neither do they only

defy man hys nature, but also they dispyse
all the authorities of holy men.
For beynge losed from the lynkes of
nawghtie desyres, they be flowen vp in
to heauen, that they may behold none
other thynge but God, and that they
may make none other of theyr coūcell
but the holy ghost. If it be so, I take
them in dede to be men of God, for as
S. Paule wytnesseth, they be the children
of God,A strong profe that the heretikes of oure time be not men of god as they wold seme. whiche bee led with the
spyrit of God, and they which bee the
children of God, questyonles bee furnyshed
with godlye vertues. But now
Syr, yf theyr shamfull doynges, do disproue
theyr shameles sayinges, shall
we beleue them, so often as they make
theyr vaunt that they followe only the
worde of God? for yf in all theyr doinges
they doe according to God hys
worde, then they follow not couetousnes,
hatred, wrathe, ambityon, but they

be all together made perfect with vertues
which spryng out of the worde of
God. If they be not indued with suche
heauenly vertues, then doe they lye in
saying, that they only and all to gether
do frame them selues to the worde of
God, for wyckednesses and the worde
of God can not dwell together. Therfore
eyther they dyrect not theyr lyffe
after the worde of God, eyther they do
not commit any abhominable or shamefull
syn, for if they syn shamefully,
and abhominably, vndoughtedly they
be not squared to the worde of God.
But they commyt many hyduouse offences
and synnes, as al the worlde can
wytnesse, therfore it is false to say that
they be gouerned with God hys word,
and the inspiration of the holyghoste.
            But let vs leaue this darke kynde of
disputyng, and demaūde of them some
token of this worde of God, whiche

they all wayes be chatting on. Therefore
you shal giue me leaue (o Quene)
that I maye searche and ransake all
this matter so farr, tyll it appeare howe
trymly these men do handle the Ghospell.A chalēge chokyng al heritikes.
Nowe then, I wolde willinglye
heare of thē, whether these many yeares
they haue wrought any notable feate,
which may inforce vs to confesse that
they grownde onlye vppon the worde
of God. Well sayde, (wyll they saye)
but you knowe that it is the office of
God his worde,A common clok which heritikes vse. (as it is written in Ieremye)
before it buylde newe, to pull
downe the olde buyldynges, before it
grafte frutefull trees, to pluck vp by the
rootes, those which be barren and vnprofytable.
I knowe it well: therefore
I looke and stand as it were in a mase,
to beholde what you pull downe, and
what you roote vp with this your good
ly attempt, that at the length I may see

Christ his howse raysed vp, and his gardeyne
bewtifully set, with the heauenly
graftes of all manner of vertues. Go to
nowe, bestyrre you a pase, plye the matter
tyll you sweate, that you may be able
to fynyshe a worke of suche excellencie.
Do as muche as in you lyeth, to
ouerthrowe the walles of Satan, to pull
downe pryde, to refrayne angre & cursed
speaking, to picke oute all the brystles
of vncleane and fylthye desyres, to
plucke vp by the rootes all occasyon
of stryffe and debate, that so at the laste
you may laye the foundations of Christian
humilitye and lowlynes, and that
you may plant sobrietie of lyfe, & chastitie,
ioyned with moste pure religyō,
& that you may set the graftes of Christian
loue and charitie. You gyue good
councell say they: but before this, there
is an other thyng that we wyll destroy
and pull downe. In the name of God.

what thing is that so heynouse and detestable,
that you wyll fyrst endeuoure
youre selfe, to dispatche that oute of
the way, before you vtterly ouerthrow
these so pestilent poysons of mākynd?
O saye they, it is a greuouse thynge,
an vntolerable thing,The fyrst spoyle of heretykes. a secret myschefe,
and for the abhominablenes of it, to be
quyte rased out of all remembraunce.
For we wyll rushe in to those howses,
in which holye virgins being inclosed,
day and night do syng hymnes to the
glory of God, and praye to Christ for
the good estate of Kynges and Prynces,
and for the sauegarde of the whole
communaltie. We wyl pull downe the
fences of shamfastnes, we wyll breake
open the inclosures of chastitie, and we
wyll no longer suffer wel fauoured virgyns
to be barred of theire solace and
pleasures, to lack the comfort and ayde
of theire children, and to spend theire

younge yeares in sorrowfull solytarynes,
and miserable vnfrutefullnes. In
faithe, I allowe this youre charitie and
louing kyndnes. What wyl you do more?The secōd spoyle of heritikes.
Then we will make a law for Monkes,
or solitary lyuers, whose howses we
wyll pull downe lykewyse, or let them
oute to hyer, it skilleth not to what lay
men, and charge them vnder payne of
deathe, that here after, none presume
for religious sake, to wrastle cōtynually
against his lecherouse lustes. For why?
It is an heynouse offence, and in no
sauce to be borne withall. What do I
heare? Doest thou reclame men to the
streightnes of religion,Note a god ly defence of ppetuall chastitie. which was in
the primitiue churche, which so busily
doest destroye that thing whiche was
muche to be merueyled at in the primitiue
churche, and which contayned
the image of heauenlye purenes? For
what is more meruailouse, thē subduing

the lustes, which withdrawe the mynde
from contemplation of heauenly thinges,
to thincke wholy on the fayrenes
of God, & to be rauished with the loue
of his diuinitie? It is an hard matter,
say you. Yea if you please, let it be of all
other most hard, so that we vnderstand,
that the harder it is, the more it auaunceth
the glory of God, which hathe so
strengthened oure feble nature, that
for loue of purenes, it is able to resyst
that tickling pleasure, with which naturally
we be intangled, and being wonne
with the swetenes of heauenly delight,
can forsake and lothe all bodyly pleasure.
Therfore if any man rauished with
the loue of godly lyfe, and to the intent
he may gyue hym selfe to the consyderation
of heauenly thynges, shall kepe
hym self from the moste troblesome
cares of marryage▪ if any virgyn inflamed
with the loue of euerlasting glory

and honestie, with an ernest good will,
shall take that vppon her which is seldome
sene and hard to performe, and
shall of her owne accorde, inclose her
selffe in a religyouse howse, that so being
voyde of all other cares, she may be
coupled to Christ with a more streight
and holy band of professyon, and by
the spyrit of Christ, to whom she hath
offered her selffe, shall constantlye refrayne
all vncleane and vnchaste desyres,
is there any man so farr from honesty,
so muche an enimye to the glory
of God, that he wyll detest it as a
greuouse and abhominable offence?
Surely suche a man is to be suspected.
For euen so (as Athanasius and other
holy men do,
                  A iuste cause to suspect the new teachers of oure tyme. make mentyon) dyd the
heretikes of olde tyme. With the lyke
hatred, they did persecute chastitie: with
suche rage, they dyd disquyet the monasteries
of religyouse virgyns. And as

muche as lay in them, wolde not suffer
that ther shold be any, which according
to the councell of Christ, for the loue
and desyre of the heauenly kyngdome,
might forsake all carnall pleasure, and
by contynuall worshipping of God,
might in holynes bothe of bodye and
sowle, here in yearthe, followe and resemble
the conuersation of the sayntes
which be in heauē. But now, I wyll stay
my selffe. For it is not reason that I
sholde bewayle that which is taken away,
before I see what is set vp in the
place of that which is pulled downe.
For as yet there may be hope, that the
worthynes of the thing which shall be
brought in, may make amendes for the
thing which is put oute. Now then,The third spoyle of heritikes. go
on. What hathe this worde which you
bragg on so muche ouerthrowen, besyde
all this which we haue spoken of?
Forsothe all the pictures of Sayntes, all

the signes of Christ his crosse, all paynted
tables in the which any thing was
set oute, which might put vs in mynde
of the mercy of God, or of any notable
vertue. Neither hereafter wyll we in
any wyse suffer the image of oure Sauyour
Christ, or symilitude of his holy
Sayntes, to be set in any open or secret
places. And this doing, certainlye causeth
me to suspect, that these men mynd
no lesse, but by lyttell and lyttell to pull
all remembraunces of Christ oute of
our myndes. For seing nothing is more
conuenient to quicken oure memorye
then sygnes and images,A true defence of images. and seing this
is oure especyall dutie, allway to think
on God, & to remembre his benefytes
cōtinually, and for so muche as in thys
lyfe we haue so many lettes, which make
oure myndes to stray from so godly
and necessary cogitations, I pray you
then, what offence is it to haue those

remembraunces euer before oure eyes,
which may often styrr vs vp to remember
the mercye and kyndenes of God,
and make our myndes more sharpe towarde
the loue of Godlynes? But we
may fynde faulte with this folly of theires,
when we shall perceaue that they
bryng no better salue with them to remedy
the weakenes of man, which may
more depelye prynt the benefytes of
Christe in the hartes of the vnlearned
people,The fourth spoyle of heretykes. thē this beholding (as they say)
of dome images. Is there any thing els
that your fyngers itche at, tyll you haue
it downe? Yea mary is there. We wyll
make hauock of churche goodes, of cerimonies,
and of all the sacramentes▪
Loe also, thys is a thyng, which sholde
make a man quake for feare. wylt thou
(o heritike) abolyshe the holye ordynaunces
which Christ hath ordeined?
which his Apostles haue appoynted to

be obserued? which holy churche hath
allowed? which do rote in our myndes
the remembraunce of Christ,A Godly defence of the cerimonies and sacramentes. by oft repeting
his benefytes, with the which we
haue fastened our selues vnto hym as it
were with a true loue knott, by meanes
of the which we be clensed from syn,
we be hartned with heauenlye foode,
and be defended with the ayde of vnuincible
vertue? For what other thing
wolde the Turcke and other infydells
doo? Oh it is a miserable, a greuouse,
a lamentable case, and not to be borne
withall of a Chrystyan man, to be bereued
of such holy comfortes, through
which he remembreth that often tymes
he hath receaued the benefytes of God
his grace, and that which is more odyouse,
to be bereued of suche Christian
comfortes, by the councell, study, procurement,
and endeuoure of Christian
men. Tushe you do but tryfle (say they)

which do thinke that our holynes and
ryghteousnes doth consist in these cerymonies,An heriticall obiection. whereas in deed, it all to gether
resteth in the grace and mercy of
Christ. As who sholde say, we knewe
not that: as who sholde saye, we haue
readen nothing, we haue hard nothing,
no heauenlye bryghtnes at anye tyme
hath shyned vpon vs, or that this is the
fyrst tyme, that anye suche thing was
tolde vs. Beleue me,A catholike confession cōcernyng oure iustificatiō
                we neuer doughted
that all the cause of oure iustificatyon,
was to be imputed to the mercy
of God, and the most holye merites of
Christ. Notwithstanding we defend
this, that we can not withoute greate
trespasse leaue those thinges vndone,
which the same author of our saluation
hathe ordeined, as meanes to make vs
more fyt to be partakers of his diuine
benefytes, and to strengthē our weaknes
with all ayde and assistaunce.
            
               
Moreouer we affirme, that so oft as we
duly ministre the holy sacramentes, we
do sensiblye perceaue, that those holye
mysteries were assigned and appoynted
of him, by the which, he wold often put
vs in mynde of hys greate goodnes, by
the which, he might in a māner lay before
oure eyes, the paynes which he
fuffred for vs. By the which, he might
more ernestly styr vp oure faith, and to
be short, by the which, he might more
plentyfully styll in to oure hartes the
dewe of hys grace. we truly which do
receaue greate comforte of those thinges,
which the more we be occupied
in executyng of them, the more we fele
Godly deuotion to encrease in vs, do
worthily bewayle suche thynges to be
taken away of you, onlesse you, as of
duty you ought, do restore better thinges
in theyr place. Is there any thyng
els, in pulling downe of the which, you

may brag of your dyligence? Yea certeynely
very many. For where so euer
we come,The fyft spoyle of heretykes. we stretche all the strynges
of oure wyt to thys end, that we may
deface the autoritie of the Prestes and
Bishops, that we may delyuer the people
from thraldome of the Pope, and
that we may disanull all there lawes and
ordinaūces, that there may be nothing
to let a Christyan man of hys libertie.
And I pray you, what other thyng is
this, but to rypp Chryst hys cote, to
breake the ordre which he hathe made,
to disquyet the peace of hys churche,4. notable argumētes for the supremacye.
to cast innumerable bones of debate,
to set men to gether by the eares? For
 as there is one faythe, one religion, one
churche, so is it nedefull that it be ruled
and gouerned chefely by the authoritie
of one. Otherwyse, there shall ryse
 manyfolde yea infinyte religyons one
contrary to the other, and cōtrary churches

shall be mayntayned, whiche may
not be nombred. For euery man wyll
inuēt a churche, according to his owne
fantasye. Then the which thyng, what
can be imagined more confuse & oute
of ordre, more contrary to the lawes
and commaundementes of Chryste?
More ouer lay to thys that when Prestes
be dryuen oute and thrust from 
their roumes, whē the autoritie of the
Pope is despysed, and trodden vnder
foote, then temporall Prynces, agaynst
all God hys forbode, take vpon them
to rule matters of religyon, to medle
with holy thinges, and by suche sacriledge
do heape vpon them God hys
heauye displeasure. Againe, who do the 
not see, whē the religyouse rules which
be conteined in the Popes constitutions,
be taken away, that all feare is put
to flyght, and licentiouse liuyng dothe
raigne withoute comptrollement? As

who sholde say (say they) we shote at
any other marcke,Mark this bragg of hereticall teachers cōcerning securitie. then to pull all feare
oute of mens myndes? For we be the
patrones of perfect libertie, and it is so
farr of, that we wyl suffer those which
be our disciples, to stand in awe of any
thyng, that we will quyte set them free
from fearing of God. For the which
thing veryly our scollers are muche beholdyng
to vs, for it was to sore an hart
breake day and night to feare God, and
by that meanes, to pyne away with cō
               sumyng
carefullnes. Therfore we haue
cōmaunded all those which beleue in
Christ, to set cocke on hoope, & crye
care away. For we beare them in hand,
that fayth is of suche force, that laying
once hand of it, thoughe he be neuer
so mischeuouse a lym of the dyuell, yet
he may warrāt hymselfe the fauoure of
Christ, and blysse euerlasting. So that
there is nothing which sholde make a

man a fearde,Note well this learned confutation of securitie, with a strōg profe that Christian men ought to stand in feare, contrary to the Protestāts cōmon preachinges. if he be harnessed with
this faythe. What is this which sowndeth
in myne eares? Wylt thou take
awaye the feare of God? Wylt thou
shake of that awe which the iudgemētes
of God beate in to the hartes of men?
I pray the, whoeuer was suche a people
parasite, so seruiceable to please the
madnes of the common sorte, that he
durst be so bolde as to encorage men
from fearing of God? In deede, suche
people pyke thankes, haue often tymes
reiected the rule of Princes, haue disanulled
lawes which abridged & restreyned
the people of their wanton wyshes,
with promisyng them to lyue as they
lyst, they wōne the greatest sorte vnto
them, that thei might make a way vnto
their tyrannicall and vsurped autoritie:
but that they sholde not feare the iudgement
of God, none of them all dyd
once open his mouthe, or made anye

proffer to perswade the people. For
they dyd knowe well inoughe, that the
man which dyd not feare God, wolde
not abyde to be vnder the rule and obedience
of any man. For take away the
feare of God, how coulde you knowe
a man frō a beaste? or that I may touche
the truthe nearer the quyck, what
beaste is so outeragyouse and hornemad,
which is to be compared in madnes
to suche a man, which hathe no
feare of God before hys eyes?
            But nowe mark,Oure protestantes wursse thē the ethnikes cōcerning this opinion of securite. howe greate oddes
is betwene these Bible bablers, & those
men which being all together wyde of
true worshipping of God, in olde time
dyd ordeyne common wealthes? they,
forsomuche as they dyd wysely consydre,
that with oute the feare of God,
the people coulde not be kept in lawfull
subiection, dyd institute false and
feyned religions: these men from true

religion, haue fylched all feare, which
myght kepe men with in the listes and
bowndes of their dutie. Those other,
which perhappes beleued not that God
had any regard to worldly affaires, yet
they dyd beate the feare of God in to
the hartes of the rude people: but oure
men, which crake that they came oute
of God his bosome, and knowe all hys
secretes, doo plye the box busyly, that
they may seale Christian men a Quitāce
from al feare of God▪ and so make
them lyke blynde bayardes boldely to
leape in to the myar of al mischefe.
            nowe for all this, I do not yet reason
how well they behaue them selues, but
I declare what cause they do gyue men
to thynk yll of them. For they seme to
haue thys dryft in theyr heades, that
they may stopp all the hyghe wayes of
healthe and saluation, that they which
be shackled with any syn, may haue no

saffe passage or entraunce. For if they
haue shaken of all feare, which of them
wyll syghe for his synnes? who wyll
bewayle his offences committed? who
wyll hartily hate & abhorr his nawghtynes?
who from the bothome of his
harte, wyll long after honestie and holynes?
who falling groueling at Christ
his fete, with teares wyll aske forgyuenes
for his mysdoynges? who wyll go
aboute to take oute the stayninges of
his synnes with allmesse dedes,An hereticall obiection. & other
workes of mercye? What (say they)
doest thou put the holynes of our iustifycation
in weping and wayling, in
sobbyng and syghing at the remembraunce
of oure synnes? Yea surelye.
And that I sholde so doo,A catholike answer. I am not led
with any lyght autoritie, but with the
determination of holy scripture. And
that you be not of that iudgement also,
I doo not a lyttel meruail. O (say they)

wepyng is a wytnesse of the weakenes
of faythe:An hereticall reply. and as for mennes workes,
thoughe they be done with neuer so
godly a zeale, yet as a man wolde say,
they be so rotten at the rote, and so depelye
stayned with sokynge fylthynes,
that they can neuer be scoured or made
cleane. We therfore consyderyng these
thinges wysely, by no meanes doo acknowledge
oure saluation to stand in
wepyng, or in dedes of charitye,A catholike solution. but in
fayth onlye. These sayinges make me
more to merueile thē I dyd before. For
this faythe, which by meanes of Christ
his merites, maketh vs to haue accesse
vnto God, dothe followe the lawe of
God, dothe cleaue to his wordes, and
dothe not say nay to the commaundyment
of our master Christ. Therefore
for so muche as the lawe of God willeth
vs to wepe, so oft as we slyp in to
any syn, & seing that all the Prophetes

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
with lowde voyces do crye vnto vs, that
we sholde clense oure spotted sowle
with sorrowing and sobbyng, with workyng
and performyng mercyfull dedes
of charitie,O Osorius if you were fellowe of Trinitie colledge in Cābridge, you shold lese your fellowship as I knowe who dyd, for saing so in a disputation. seing the sone of God hym
selfe dothe say playnelye, that all they
which refuse to do penaunce, shall vtterlye
peryshe, and forwarneth vs, that
they which wyll do good workes, shall
entre in to euerlastyng lyfe, but they
which worke wyckednesse, shall be tormented
with euerlastyng fyar, I conclude,
that the office and dutie of fayth
is, to mourne, to lament, to conceiue
an ernest hatred agaynst the accoustemed
synnes, with a burnyng desyre to
returne from the byway of wickednes,
to the hyghe way of honest and charitable
conuersation. Which all thynges
truly faythe doth worthylye performe,
so oft as it is quick and lyuely, and not
faynting or ouercharged with the burden

of bodylye and carnall desyres.
Not that she chalengeth any thing to
her selfe, but because she knoweth by
godlye inspiration, that they onlye deserue
the greate mercye of God, which
repent them of their former fylthynes,
& with ernest affection do rendre them
selues vp to the following of God his
lawe. Therefore that fayth, by persuasyon
of the which, any man warranteth
hym selfe euerlastyng blysse, setting a
parte sorrowfullnes for his synnes past,
leauyng of to doo good workes, and
hath the loue of charitye cleane quenched
in hym, I say that fayth, is not worthy
the name of fayth, but rather to be
called folyshe hardynes, hedlong hastynes,
and prowde presumptuousenes.
Moreouer, all men may see that the
profyte of holsome repentaunce, is taken
away, that the ardent loue of charitie
is made key cold, when men take

thys for a sure staff to leane on, that
theyr synnes be not forgyuen, for theyr
mourning, for theyr Godly sorrowing,
for any holy workyng,Luthers opinion. but rather that
in so doing, they heape new synnes vpō
theyr olde. For they take it to be a syn
to lament for theyr syn, and they hold
that no good worke can be done with
out syn. Therfor this is a doctrine worthy
to be wondered at, which hath so
malypertly taken in hand to set furthe
suche incredible thynges, and yet wold
haue men to gyue them credit. Is there
yet any thyng ells, so much to be merueiled
at? so muche quoth you? Yea
which wyl cast you in to suche a mase,
as the head of Medusa sene at vnwares
could not more quickly turne men in
to a flynt stone.The sixth spoyle cō
                  mitted of the heretikes. I pray you, what is
that? forsothe they bynd mānes reason
as it were to a poste, they spoyle hym
of lyberty to take councell, they wrap

hys wyll in fatall fetters, they bereaue
man all together of iudgement, and all
perceaueraūce, and they strype hym so
cleane of all free wyll, that there is no
difference betwene hym and a stone.
            For of all those thynges, which men
cast in theyr mynde, take in hand and
put in practyse, whether they be aught
or naught, they make God the causer
of them, they impute it to fatall necessytie,
and say that it was predestyned
that they shold so do before they were
borne. Which saying if it be true, then
is there no councell to be taken in affaires
of thys lyffe, then there is no iudgement,
no prayse to do well,Note here a goodlye reprofe of fatall necessitie taught of oure Protestantes. no shame
to syn, no vse of iustice, then with oute
a cause, any rewarde is apoynted for
honestie, and it is agaynst reason, that
theyr shold be ordeyned any punishmēt
for syn. For what reason is it, that I for
the syn which I dyd not of myne owne

accorde (for I was cōstreyned of necessytye
to do it) shold suffer euerlastyng
paynes? or what ryght is there, that I
shold be rewarded with euerlasting ioy
for that fayth which I kept only enforced
and spurred forward of God, with
oute any will or dyligens of my parte?
And that which is horrible, and to be
detested, if we will leane to these ioly
fellowes autoritie, all the cause of iniquitie
is to be layde to God hys charge.
For so they reason, that he without any
choyse or respect, only because it pleased
hym so, before all worldes, hath
appoynted who sholde be hys, whome
he wolde crowne with euerlastyng glorie,
and who shold be cast awayes, which
he wolde torment with euerlastyng punyshment.
In the which theyre assertion,
I fynde fault bothe with theyr
constancie, and also their wysdome.
            With theyre constancie, because whereas

they make theyre vaunt,This doctrine of fatal necessitie maketh against the protestantes them selues. that they
be the autors of libertye, they all together
take awaye libertye. Except they
wyll graunt that at the fyrst, they dyd
teach men lycentiouse lyuing, and not
libertie, and that afterwarde, they dyd
deny them libertye, but not to lyue licentiously:
I allowe not their wysdome,
because they troble them selues very
greately, and neade not. For if before
all worldes, God hath enacted, that we
shold receaue that doctryne which they
teache, to what purpose is it, euerye
where to beate it in to mens heades
with so many bookes, preachinges, disputinges,
perylls, and greate trauayles?
Except they will also say, that they be
compelled with the selfesame necessitie
to laboure, to watche, to haue conflyctes
with many men, and that to no
end, and withoute any profyte. There
be many other thynges whiche disgraceth

thys worde of God, vnder whose
banner these doughtie and polytyke
souldyoures, do crake that they fyght.
For it were an endles worke, and nothynge
necessary, if I sholde recken
all, seing that whiche I haue sayde, is
inowghe for oure purpose.
            Nowe you see (o Quene,) of what
force this Ghospell is, to throwe down
and ouerturne those thinges, which we
sely sowles dyd not onlye thinck to be
nothyng hurtfull, but also to be so necessary
proppes of religion, that in such
decay of al good thinges in these dayes,
godlynes dyd seme to staye vppon the
maintenaunce of them.Here England can witnesse whether Osorius doth lye. It hath broken
downe the howses of holye virgins, it
hath put out that wonderfull example
of continuall chastitye, it hath defaced
and broken the sygnes which dyd often
renewe the memory of God his good
gyftes bestowed vpon vs, it hath quyte

dispatched oute of the way holy ornamentes,
cerymonies, the sacramentes,
with the which many mortall men were
greatlye styrred vp to the loue of immortalytie.
They haue also remoued
out of the way for stumblyng, all modestye
and obedyence, by the which all
Christian men dyd stand in awe of the
cheife ruler of the church: it hath made
all the lawes of the church of none effect:
it hathe wyped away the feare of
God: it hath chased away saddnes conceiued
for syn: it hath grated oute the
grefe which the gyltie conscyence dyd
smyte in to mennes myndes for theyr
offences: it hath made men slacke to
doo good workes: fynallye whereas it
dyd allure all men to lybertie, it hathe
taken away libertye. What remayneth
nowe? Forsothe that we may see, what
these conyng craftes men with theyr diligence
haue restored in the place of

those thinges, which they haue taken
away. For suche men of God, and mynisters
of his holy worde, because they
haue abolysshed those thinges, which
dyd some good, displeased as they say,
for that they had a smacke of superstition,
of necessitye must restore muche
better and more holye thinges, if they
wyll stand to theyre promysse.
            For we seeing what that word of God
which they preache, hath pulled down,
and rooted vp, is it not requisyte, that
we shold behold what it hath buylded
& planted in steade of it? Now what is
it that they haue repayred & renewed?
what is it that they haue sowne? what
profyte is there which the world doth
fele by them? surely none at all. I see
what is toppled ouer, but I see not
what is sett vp agayne. I see what is rased,
but I see no good thing as yet raysed.
But (will they say) do you thynk,

that it is but a smal matter, to restrayne
the wanton manners of men, with the
strayght disciplyne of the primityue
church, and to restore Christian religion
with greate trauayle, to that perfection
from the which now of late for
the most parte it is flyded? Surely I
take that to be no small matter, but a
thyng of suche excellency, that if you
performe it, I will beleue verily, you be
men of God, and angels flowne down
from heauen. Therefore let vs see this.A question to put the protestātes to silence.
haue you taken in hand to embr̄ace
mekenes and humilitye with an ernest
and feruēt affection? haue you cast far
from you the bytter gall of deadly hatred,
of rayling and cursed speakyng?
haue you crucifyed your fleshly desyres,
that they being quenched, you may
more easylye lyft vp youre mynde to
thyncke of heauenly thynges? haue you
shewed any meruaylouse token of vertue

and godlynes, by the which we may
perceaue the auncyent bryghtnes of the
Ghospell, and the paterne of that most
pure holynes and charitye, vsed in olde
tyme? no, I assure you. But the more
any man doth apply hym selfe to thys
doctryne,Howe the disciples of this doctrine profytt. the wurser he waxeth, the
more he flowteth those which be playn
and ryght dealyng men, the more he is
set on fyre with hatred agaynst common
peace and quyetnesse, and is puffed
vp with most fantastycall vanityes.
For he taketh that wysdome vpon hym
which neuer man could yet obteyne.
And so standyng in hys owne cōceite,
what so euer toy taketh hym in the
heade, that he so ernestly doth defend,
as if he shold alleadge any worde comyng
oute of God hys owne mouth,
with so headlong boldnes he disquyeteth
all thynges, as in dede he sholde
seme to couet nothyng more, then to

see an hochepoche made of all the
world. Therefore which way so euer
they crepe in to mennes bosomes, that
they may vtter theyr Ghospel vnto the
vnlearned people, they are so farr from
mendyng mennes manners, that they
make all thynges in wurse case then
they found thē. For they banish shamfastnes,
and let carnalitie raunge lose
abroade, and takyng away the feare of
God, without punishment they gyue
men leaue to lyue so wyckedly as they
lyst. So it cometh to passe, that wylfullnes
doth more vehemently burst oute,
that lecherouse lyfe dothe more sone
consume mennes ryches, that boldnes
doth more bragg, and goeth aboute
more heynouse enterpryses. For what
shall I speake, how daungerouse trauaylyng
it is by the hyghe wayes for
feare of robbing? what shall I recken
the disagreinges and furyouse fallynges

oute which raygne euery where? what
shall I sett oute the conspiracyes, treasons,
and murders entreprysed agaynst
Princes? But you will say, these euells
were allway in all common wealthes.
no man sayth nay to that. But I wold
haue those myschefes redressed with
thys youre so holsome and profytable
doctryne. The which thing, because it
doth not bryng to passe, but rather the
more it encreaseth, the greater offences
are committed, and more vnshamefastly
attempted euen of those which
desyre to be called the discyples of
such masters: it is a strōg argumēt that
they were not styrred vp to preache
by the secrete workyng and inspiration
of the holy ghoste.A notable cōparyson betwene the aūcient teachers, and oure new startvp Ghospellers. But consider
what difference is betwene the olde
professors of the Ghospell and these
which beare men in hand that thei followe
theyr foote steppes. They receiued

of God the doctrine, with the
which they gaue lyght to the worlde:
these men leaning to theyr owne wit
and inuention, toke vpon them to be
doctors and teachers. They, brydled the
ryotouse manners of men with seuere
punishement, gyuing also a meruailouse
example of innocēcie and chastitye:
these men with theyr naughtie
example and lycentiouse doctrine, do
set mennes tethe more on edge to all
kynde of vnhappynes. They, exhorted
men to humility, to lowlynes, mekenes
and pacyence: these men for the most
part doo teache theyr scollers, pryde,
crueltie, scolding and cursed speaking.
They, dyd aswage the oute ragyouse
desyres of men with puttyng them in
mynde to feare God, and councelled
them, which had fallen into any syn, to
weping, fasting, & praying: these men
inioyning no penaunce or penaltie to

them which are lodē with syn, do hartē
& encorage thēto all vnshamefastnes.
They, by all meanes possible, dyd withdrawe
men from bodyly pleasures, that
they myght the more be inflamed with
the loue of heauēly thinges: these men
do surrender their scollers fast bounde
to bodyly delyghtes, to the intent they
may wayte, and gyue attendaūce vpon
their lecherouse lustes: fynallye, they,
seing they were all of one mynde, for
so muche as they were the discyples of
one master, that is to say, of the holy
ghoste, so that one coulde not iarr frō
an other, dyd knyt men to gether with
the sure bond of peace, and dyd fasten
the good willes of all mē, with the glue
of mutuall loue and frendeshyp: But
these men, for so muche as euery one
of them according to hys owne fyckle
fansye, dothe blab oute & tell for truth
what so euer he dothe dreame of, and

by meanes of that are dispersed in to
diuerse and innumerable sectes, they
breake peace, they rayse vpp debates,
and procure bloody battailes. In olde
tyme none of those, whiche I haue spoken
of, did minystre poysons, none wyllyngly
did shake the sworde against his
country men, none did take councell
to destroy theire Princes, none did behaue
hym selfe wantonlye or vndiscretelye
vpon his ale benche. And whereas
they did excell in all the prayses of
moste noble vertues, yet this vertue was
to be merueiled at in them, that they
wolde pray to God for the healthe and
wealthe of suche as did them greate
wronge: being rayled on, they did not
gyue fowle language agayne: when iniury
was done vnto thē, so sone as they
were able, they did a good turne to thē
which harmed them: being cast in to
mysery▪ they wyshed no euell to those,

which against lawe and conscience dyd
vnmercyfully handle them: seruauntes
dyd serue theyr masters with greate
trustines: souldyours in battayle for the
saffegarde of the common wealth, dyd
fyght manfullye, and in tyme of peace
they did not refuse the cōmaundiment
of theyr Princes, so farr as they commaunded
nothing contrary to the lawe
of God: but rather obeyed all rulers, as
the ministres of God, allthough theyr
lyfe disagreed from Christian religion.
Therfore they so behaued themselues,
that nether in peace, nether in warr, nether
when they were at leasure, nether
when they were occupyed, nether in
pryuate busynes, or in cōmon affayres,
they myght commyt any thyng which
myght set the common weale oute of
ordre, or gyue men occasyon to be offended
through their synfull and wycked
example. I let passe to speake of

the fastynges, heare clothes, watchynges,
with the which they dyd coole the
heate of theyr burnyng desyres, and
constreyned the body to be obedyent
to the fowle. I wyll saye nothing of
the ryches, whiche they dyd bestowe
on the releuyng of the poore. What
neade I make mentyon of theyr daylye
prayers? What sholde I make reporte
of that ernest zeale, with the
which theyr hole mynde was set so fast
vpon God, that althoughe bodyly they
dwelled here vpon yearth, yet spiritually
they were caryed vp in to heauen?
Who can expresse those teares, which
they did pore out longyng for the heauenlye
kyngdome? Who can vtter in
wordes those syghes, which they did often
drawe, from the bothome of theyr
harte, for that they were all togeather
rauyshed with the loue of God? I say

nothing of them which with an inuincyble
corage for the honour of Christ
did suffer hangyng, burnyng, rackyng,
and other newe fownde tormentes.
            Also I ouerpasse them which to the intent
that they might better allway gyue
attendaunce vpon Christ, & haue more
leasure to study heauenlye thinges, did
withdrawe them selues from mennes
company, and led theyre lyfe in solytarye
and desert places among wylde
beastes, in such sharpnes, nedynes, and
pynyng dyet, that they made all men
astonished to see them, or here of them,
whereas notwithstandyng they being
comforted with the ioy of heauenlye
thinges, did easylye endure watchyng,
hungre, and nakednes. I speake of the
common godlynes of those Christians
whiche lyued next after the Apostles
tyme, in whome the most ernest loue
of vertue, honestye, charitye, and modestye

did florishe. Let these godlye
Ghospellers restore these thinges,How oure Ghospellers might get them credit. let
them reclayme men to these manners,
let them leade vs back to these rules,
for the moste parte left of these manye
yeares, & let them bryng to passe both
that they them selues and all their followers
abstayne from vices, & followe
those godly vertues in which holy men
of olde tyme did greatelye excell, and
then men may beleue that they be authors
of the Ghospell. But if they be
not able to performe any of these thinges,
but rather they put out all shamefastynes
& religion, and that they entre
no soner in to any place, but strayghtway
contempt of lawes buddeth oute,
wantones, wylfullnes, madnes, crueltie,
and other myschefes do corrupt good
manners, and rayse vprores and hurlyburlyes
among men, haue they suche
brasen faces, that they dare once open

their mouthe, and speake of the Ghospell?The Ghospell preached in England at thys day is a wylye Ghospell.
O wyly and deceitfull Ghospell.
For outewardly it pretendeth oure felicitye,
and priuilye it worketh oure
destructiō. It putteth vs in hope of lybertye,
and in dede layeth vpon vs the
yoke of moste miserable bondage. It
allureth vs with the coloure of present
pleasure, and afterwarde freteth vs with
many cares and greate heuynes. It promiseth
that it will shewe the ryght way
to heauen, and in the end it tumbleth
men which hope for help of it, hedlong
in to hell. For what other way is there
in to heauen, but that which is opened
with good workes, and with excellent
innocencye of lyfe? Therfore, he which
vnder the name of Godlynes, dothe
stryue against the exercise of Godlynes,
and dedes of charitye, dothe not leade
vs to euerlastyng lyfe, but bloweth the
coles of the vnquencheable fyar, intendyng

to make vs roste meate for the dyuell.
Marke I pray you,Note here by what note you may know the true Ghospell from the false. with what wordes
by the Prophete Ieremy God teacheth
vs to try, which is the true Ghospell,
and which is the false: Gyue no
eare (sayth he) to the Prophetes, which
prophecy vnto you pleasaunt thinges,
and in dede do deceaue you. For they
tell you but the dreames of their owne
head, and not of the worde of God.
            For thus they speake to suche as do dishonoure
me. peace shall come vnto
you. and to them which walcke after
the wyckednes of their owne harte, no
harme or peryll dothe hang ouer your
heades. What shall we say now? Could
the māner of these men be more playnely
set forth? coulde theyre vnshamefastnes
be better discouered? For they
quite them frō of all feare, which be defyled
with fowle synnes, and they warrant
all them which be at dagger drawing

with Godlynes, that all thinges
shall chaunce well and luckyly vnto thē.
He sayeth moreouer by the Prophete:
which of them was euer of coūcell with
God, & hath sene or hard hym speake?
It is certayne, that these wordes doo
marke oute the Prophetes of oure tyme,
which do tyckle mennes eares with
suche pleasaunte and delectable sayinges.
For none of them hath lyued so
perfectly, that by any meanes we may
thynk that God hath made hym pryuye
of hys councel. For which of them
hath so refrayned hys luste, that no syn
dyd burst oute of it, to make men offended?
which of them was euer of
thys mynde, that he thought God hys
wrathe to be appeased with fastyng,
with continuall praying, and dedes of
charitie? which of them to the intent he
might turne away the destructiō hangyng
ouer hys deare frendes, hath

with many teares bowed God to take
mercye? Fynally, which of them dyd euer
burne so with charitye that for the
lyffe of other he wold offre hym selfe
to death? and could fynde in hys hart
to suffre in hys owne body the punishment
due for the offences of hys whole
countrye? For it is requisyte, that they
to whome we sholde beleue that God
hath opened all hys secretes,what manner of men God maketh his secretaryes. shold be
men of no meane perfection, shold be
men not fellow lyke with the common
sorte, but that they should be men surmounting,
and farre passing all others,
and for many cōsyderations to be merueyled
at. For neyther the Prophetes,
neither the Apostles, neither other
most holy men, whome God dyd make
partakers of hys councells, haue come
to that degree of most hyghe perfectiō,
with leading theyr lyfe in suche pleasure,
as these deyntie tothed and sugre

sop gentlemen be delyghted with all,
but rather in meruailouse and excellent
holynes of manners, in incredible sharpenes
of lyfe, in many laboures, watchynges
prayers, wepynges, in suche
egre desyre of heauenly thinges, in such
feruēt charitye, that they desyred to be
kylled, and to be tormented with most
greouuse paynes, so that other might
be saued. Of the which vertues, where
as these men haue not one sparckle,
but lyue so, that it may appeare by many
tokens, that they take delyght in
those pleasures which the cōmon sorte
of men do couet,A lykelyhode that our protestauntes be not men chosen of God to fynde oute the truthe not knowne before. and that they be gyuen
to those entysemētes, and prouocations,
which naturall appetyte doth
greatelye desyre, yet they so talke, as
thoughe God had made them of hys
coūcell, and as though not one worde
scaped them, which they hard not and
learned of God hym selfe. Therefore

God in the place aforesayd, doth worthily
curse such shameles chyldren, and
doth threatē them greuous destructiō.
And within a littell whyle after, he gyueth
vs a notable marke,An other special note to know false prophetes frōtrue. how we shall
knowe the false prophetes from the
true, saying thus: if they had ben of my
councell, and had vttered my wordes
vnto the people, surely they shold haue
turned them from thyer synfull wayes,
and from theyr naughtye cogitations.
Therefore as it appeareth by this verdict,
whiche God gyueth, where true
prophetes take in hand to teache & instruct
the people, many sodenly chaūge
their myndes, and wax euery day better
and better, and for the desyr of immortall
glory, do forsake bodyly pleasures,
do set naught by the delyghtes of this
lyfe, and with a certayne cherefullnes
do applye them selues to the studye of
God his lawe. on the other syde where

so euer false prophetes treade, by and
by you shall see greater lycence to syn,
lesse shame to do amisse, more abhominable
oute ragyng in all kynde of
fylthynes: so that you may easyly perceaue,
as the same Prophet in the same
place in the person of God at large
doth intreate, that theyr intent is to
bury the studye of God hys lawe, and
hys most holy relygion, in the graue of
euerlastyng forgetfulnes. And truly this
place of Ierymy is not heare alleadged
of me without a cause, for by it we perceaue
how we may knowe false and
forged doctrine, from holsom true and
vncounterfeyted doctrine. For if, synce
this newe learning was brought in to
Englād, there was also brought in with
it, shamefastnes, honestie, and vpright
lyuyng, if graue manners, constancie,
strayght lyfe, laudable comelynes, and
vertuouse behauyoure, were brought

to lyght, if fydelytie towarde Princes, if
agreement and loueable vnitye, was
more assuredlye planted in subiectes
hartes one towarde an other, if men
be made more redye to practyse mercyfull
& charitable workes, if the churches
be occupied with better or more
holy relygion, if the remembraunce of
Christ which dyed for vs vpon the crosse,
be more depelye printed in mennes
myndes, so that manye for the loue of
Christ his crosse, do laye a crosse vpon
their owne neckes, to the end that they
may stay the rage of those lustes which
warre continuallye with the holynes
of Christ, fynallye if a newe lyght be
spronge oute, if a newe bewtie of godly
vertues neuer sene before doth glystre
in mennes eyes, then they whiche
haue followed theyr whystle, seme not
worthye so muche to be blamed.
But if so be by meanes of this religion,

none of all these thynges be brought
to passe,what merchandise this scismaticall ship hath brought in to Englād. but rather by occasyon of it,
rashenes, vnshamefastnes, vncleanclines
of lyfe, doth more boldely flye rounde
aboute, if vntolerable pryde, and arrogancye
be much more establyshed then
it was before, if seditions, contentions,
and fallinges oute, be more easyly styrred
vp, if traytours be more ventrouse
to lay violent handes vpon theyr Kynges,
and to laye wayte how to murdre
theyr Princes, if neither shame, neither
feare, neither awe of God hys displeasure,
can holde them from doynge of
mischefe, which haue yelded them selues
vp to this newe doctrine, if all this
synck or dunge hyll of myschefes, or at
leaste, an increase and newe heape of
euelles, be brought in with this learning,
withoute doubte it is not establyshed
by the worde of God as they
prate in theyr pulpytes, but by the craft

and subtylitye of our cruell enemy the
deuyll. For the worde of God, commaundeth
shamefastnes and purenes of
lyfe. But this learnyng, suffreth the lustes
to run at ryot, & that which is next
dore to it, prouoketh hedlong to all
kynde of wyckednes. The worde of
God,A cōparison betwene the true worde of God and the protestantes worde. do the abate all arrogancye, and
especially trayneth men vp in modestie:
but this puffeth vp mennes hartes with
pryde, and teacheth them to despyse all
antiquitye, auncyent religion, and holynes
of old tyme. The worde of God,
dothe make peace, and lyncketh mennes
myndes in loue, makyng them parteners
of all good thinges: but thys
learnyng, do the breake peace, and teareth
the bodye of Christ hys churche,
with inwardly consumyng & wastyng
sedition. For how can they be autors
bothe of discorde and concorde, which
nether agree with them selues, nether

with other,The incō
                  stancy of heretykes. which wander oute of the
waye as well as they? which disagree
with themselues moste inconstantlye?
which to day hold one opiniō, to morrow
an other, cleane cōtrary one to the
other, & cā not rest long in one mynd?
Therefore seyng it is the propretye of
Christ (as he hym selfe doth wytnesse)
to gather in to one place those which
stray a broade,The difference betwene Christ his doctrine & the dyuelles. to ioyne those which be
of diuerse myndes, in an vniforme cō
               sent,
mutuall beneuolence, and charytye,
and that it is the dynells dutye, to
scatter and pull a sundre, those which
agree wel to gether, and to breake the
band of all faythfull and frendely felloweshyp,
and seyng the doctryne of
these goodly Ghospellers, dothe rayse
vpprores, dothe breake peace, dothe
spreade one sect in to innumerable sectes,
and causeth one sect to be at defyaunce
with the other, is it not playne

that theyr religion is not drawen by
Christ hys rule, but all to gether is inuented
according to the craftie deuyse
of subtyl Sathan? For what greater argument
can we haue,A greate argument of false doctrine. then their deadlye
hatredes▪ theire contentions, theire
scamblyng by the eares, theire tauntynges
and rybauldry raylinges? Christ
doth not cause these euelles, but Antichrist▪
For he is not the author of
dissention, but of peace. Nowe laste
of all, this is not to be passed ouer with
sylence, at what marke these sundrye
fectes & licentiouse pratinges do shore.
Mary, they haue this fetche, that they
may quyte take away all the knowledge
of God. For seing that no religion among
them is so surely grounded,At what mark heritykes chefely shote. but
it may easyly be ouerthrowen with the
argumentes of other sectaries, for so
muche as moste men be caryed aboure
with euery winde, and be diuersely tossed

with doubtfull and wandryng opinions,
and can stay themselues vppon
no certeine iudgement, when at the
lengthe many perceaue the fondnes &
vanitye of theyr opinions, which they
once cōceiued, it cometh to passe that
they make but a ieste of all religion,
ether that they think, there is no God,
or ells, that he hath no regarde what
men doo here vpon earthe: then the
which thing what cā be sayd or thought
more beastelye, that they whiche once
had bequethed and offred them selues
vp to Christ, and were taught to know
God, euen by the verye sone of God,
after they had gone oute of the onlye
true and ryght way, sholde so far leape
ouer the lynes of all godlynes, that they
shold not only hate the crosse of Christ,
and in steade of God worshyp theyre
owne lustes and wyckednes, but also
beleue that the Lorde and Creator of
all thinges, whose powre and ryght iudgementes,

euen the dyuelles in hell and
damned sowles do feare, ether not to
be at all, or ells not to rule and gouerne
the whole worlde? But you will peradnenture
aske, who is so beastely & past
all grace, that can cōceaue in hys mynd
so straunge and abhominable blasphemie?
Surely, if you will marke well, you
shall fynde,Secres be the steppes to atheisme▪ that is, of denying that there is any god. that there hath bene many
whiche clymyng vp by these sectes, as
by certeine steppes and degrees, haue
at laste ascended to the top of thys vnspeakable
abhomination. For as in other
artes, no man can sodenly attayne
to that perfection, for the which he
myndeth to take paynes, but necessaryly
he must begyn with his principles, and
so ordrelye go one by lyttle and lyttle,
and at laste growe to a rypenes, so in
learning of naughtines, there be certeine
begynninges, (and not Christ
crosse) but Christ curse rewes, which

if they be suffred to crepe forwarde,
they wyll induce men as farr as is possyble,
to the full knowledge of that
vnspeakable myschefe. But who they
bee,Our heritykes be gyltie of atheisme. whiche be gyltie of this greueous
syn, they them selues do wytnesse wel
inoughe by theyr workes. For if they
thought, that God dyd forsee and regarde
all thinges, and sharpely punyshe
synnes vpon yearth, they wolde neuer
haue wrought suche wylye wayes,
to seduce the people: But alas, they are
so farre gone in madnes, and tumbled
hedlong in to all folly, that so often as
it taketh them in the head, with wicked
wordes, they scoffe and mocke those
thinges, whiche be wryten of God hys
iudgemētes, as thoughe they were but
Caunterbury tales and grym vysardes
only deuysed to fray younge chyldren.
But I haue bene longer then I purposed.
Yet for so muche as myne intent

was to shewe you myne aduyse, howe
to prouyde for those helpes, with the
whiche you beyng assysted, you maye
more stronglye establyshe youre kyngdom,
& that I myght declare vnto you
that the cheifest stay, and furnyture of
your Realme, consysted in the aduaū
               cement
and mayntenaūce of religion,
and that I myghte proue, that there is
no presenter poyson to the common
weale, then coūrerfeyted religion and
hypocrytycall holynes, I thought nothyng
to be more agreable to my purpose,
then to shewe certayne euydent
tokens, howe you myght discouer the
secrete deceptes, which lurcke vnder
the happ harlottes cloke of forged religion.
For if you haue in remembraū
               ce
those frutes of religion,A recapitulation of the frutes of true religion and falfe. whiche before
I haue rehersed, you shall easyly
perceaue, whiche is false religion. For
if true religion doe beare downe arrogancye,

ouercome angre, brydle fylthye
defyres, restrayne intemperaunce,
scrape oute the spottes of the mynde,
preserue shamefastnes and modestye;
brede the feare of God, make subiectes
faythfull to theyr Princes, establyshe
peace, fasten mennes myndes in
amyty, and inflame them with the desyre
of heauen, then certaynely that religion
which causeth pryde, prouoketh
angre, letteth the lustes lose, defyleth
the sowle with syn, taketh away shame
fastnes, remoueth the feare of God,
worketh treason agaynst Kynges, trobleth
cōmon peace, bloweth the cole
of hatred, thrusteth oure myndes down
to the earthe warde, and drowneth
them in the seas of worldly trobles, is
no true religion, but false, pestilent,
and damnable. Furthermore, I haue
proued, that thys sect, (if so be, we may
call it one sect, which is not only doubtfull,

slyppery, but also diuerse, manyfolde,
and contaynyng in it innumerable
other sectes) is all to gether popular,
and for the peoples pleasure. For
alluryng the people with a ioly shewe
of to muche libertye, it armeth them
against Offycers, against their Kynges
autoritie and regiment, and hardneth
the hartes of the multitude with a false
persuasyon of religion. And if it dyd
onlye procure destruction of Kynges,
so that it brought no daunger and damnation
to the sowle, and by all meanes
dyd not ouerthrowe the law of God, it
were somethyng to be borne with all.
But this is greatly to be lamented, that
it putteth oute the loue of vertue, the
bryghtnes of honesty, the lyght of most
true religion and deuotion, defyleth all
commendable comlynes with vnpure
lyuyng, and vtterly stoppeth vs for entryng
in in to euerlastyng glory. Therefore

what is it that may now deceaue
vs? Is it the autoritie of these teachers?
But I haue playnely declared,The autority of the protestantes should not moue vs to credyte them. how farr
the professors of thys learnyng be from
true vertue, grauitye, and constancie of
lyffe, and the perfection of moste pure
religion. What then? Is it the lose lybertye
of the people? But there is no
more sworne enymye to Princes,the liberty of the people sholde disuade vs to beleue these new teachers. then
that is: besyde that, it dothe vndoo the
people whiche whiche couet it, and spoyleth
them of al lyberty. For all thinges trulye,
be preserued with kepyng a meane,
and are destroyed with superfluitye &
excesse. For as a Kyng, which not contentyng
hymselfe with his lawfull kyngdome,
desyreth to be lorde ouer all the
worlde, and dothe not only thinke to
rule the roste in worldlye matters, but
also casteth to haue thinges pertaynyng
to God, obedyent at hys becke & commaundyment,
can not long enioy hys

leyngdome, for so much as he shall both
turne away from hym mēnes hartes, by
reason of doing them manye iniuryes,
and also shall get God hys moste heauy
displeasure, euen so the people, which
is not cōtented with the liberty which
the law gyueth them, and for that cause
breaketh all good ordre, moueth sedicyon,
and waxeth woode, of necessyty
at longthe, loseth that libertye whiche
it might haue styll enioyed, with many
other commodities and benefytes.
            Therfore what now? Shall we follow
this lore, because it leadeth vs to euerlastyng
lyfe? But I haue playnely proued,
that by meanes of this religiō,The protestantes promising vs euerlasting lyfe ought not to wyn vs. men
be intysed to wantones, tovnshamefastnes,
to vnlawfull lustes, that troblesome
tumultes and dissentions be styrred vp,
that many naughtye entrepryses be taken
in hand, that inumerable myschefes
be forged, and last of all, that the remembraunce

of godlynes is quyte blotted
oute. The which thinges truly, do
not conducte vs to heauen, but pytch
vs hedlong in to the place of cōtinuall
mysery and wretchednes. In the which
thing trulye it appeareth, howe faythfully
these Euangelicall teachers haue
performed theyre promisse. For thys
they professed, thys they proclaymed,The protestantes promise not performed.
thys they promysed to bryng fullye to
passe, that they wolde call back corrupted
manners to the strayght rule of the
Ghospell, and that they wolde restore
that perfectiō & purenes of lyfe which
was in the primityue churche.
            Nowe you vnderstand, o Quene▪
how well they haue kept touche. For
they haue not onlye left the Christian
cōmon weale vnhealed, but also wheresoeuer
they cam, they haue bestowed
their trauayle to this end, (that if there
were any healthe in it) to take it away,

and to infect all the membres of Christ
his church with most vncurable diseases
and maladyes. Therefore, how coulde
any man farther ouer shote hym selfe,A greate oure shote in them which were seduced by these new doctoures.
then to be persuaded by these mennes
autority, to go from the most auncient
and holy religion, which was halowed
with Christ his bloode, sealed with the
tormētes of martyres, aduaunced with
the diuine workes of godly wryghters,
standing allway inuincible against the
wycked attemptes of heritikes, and assaultes
of cruell tyrauntes, hathe remayned
in the same state euen vnto
these oure dayes, to imbrace a religion
which is to be suspected for the newenes,
which is defamed with the wycked
lyuyng of the autors and teachers of it,
which is lamentable for the destruction
of all holy thinges, which is detestable
for the horrible end which is shooteth
at? The which religion truly, as it can

be taken in hand of no man,The greatest plague for herisie, shall lyght vpon kynges. withoute
miserable destruction, so kynges which
suffre them selues to be abused and corrupted
with it, shall be more greuousely
plaged for it. For they do not only put
theyr imperiall maiestie, the saffegarde
of the common wealthe, their lyfe and
theire honowre in greate hazarde, but
that which is muche more myserable,
and harmefull, they shall prouoke the
greuouse displeasure of God towarde
them, & shall suffre much more paynefull
punyshement worlde without end.
For the mo which following their euell
example fall in to the lyke damnation,
whome they ought to haue healed and
preserued, the more greuouse and painefull
shall their tormentes be in hell
fyre.A notable and terrible amplification of S. Paules wordes. It is an horrible thyng, sayth saint
Paule, to fall in to the handes of thelyuyng
God. For to whome shall we run
for succoure, if God hym selfe be oure

enymye, in whose mercy all oure might
and trust is? whose healpe we defyre in
all aduersyty, and dystresse? on whome
only we fasten oure eye, lokyng to be
rescued, whē we be assaulted on euery
syde? vnder whose buckler shall we
stand to anoyde his blowe? in what dē
               nes
or darcke dungeons shall we hyde
oure heades, that we may not beholde
his angry and displeased countenaūce?
with the leaste: blaste of hys breathe
the whole yearth is shaken, the hylles
smoke beyng swyndged with the fyre
of his terrible lyghtnynge, the heauen
with greate thundre clappes sendyng
oute flying flames, ouershadowing the
yearthe with darcknes, shewing many
other fearefull and terrible syghtes, discomforteth,
amaseth, and astonisheth
mortall men.
            Therfore seeing he hath thus stronglely
weaponed nature to smyte feare

in to vs, and to fray men from doing of
naughtynes, what shall we thynke, he
will doo, when he hym selfe shall come
with all the hostes of heauen, and shall
appeare in the clowdes, gyrded with
iuste seueritye and indignacyon, comyng
to take veng eaunce of the enymyes
of hys moste holy religion? when
with hys iudgement he shall treade vnder
foote all pryde, and worldly pompe,
when he shall thruste oute of hys
presence those, whiche haue bene obstynate
synners, to be tormented with
fyre, and moste cruell punyshementes,
which neuer shall cease. He fayth the
Scripture is the God of Goddes, the
Lorde of Lordes, strong, myghtye,
and terryble, whose iudgement nether
with fauoure can be bowed, nether
with rewardes or brybes be corrupted.
Shall we not therefore feare hys iudgementes?
shall we not quake at hys loke?

shall we not for awe of hym shake
of all syn and inyquitye? More ouer,
what if long before we be warned of
hym with many sygnes,Many signes shewed vs to repēt of the myseries
which for wicked lyfe and heynouse
offences▪ hange ouer all oure heades?
shall we yet for all that not regarde
God hys warnyng tokēs, and as a man
wold say hys watche wordes? notwithstandyng
these, shall we wallowe styll in
oure myary manners? Truly, God gyueth
(as Dauid recordeth) many sygnes,
the whiche also we see to happen
in oure dayes, beeing admonished with
the whiche, we may by chaungyng our
eonuersation, auoyde the shot of hys
bowe, which he hath bent agaynst the
enimyes of hys religiō, and by true and
syncere worshyppyng of hym, turne asyde
hys deadely arrowes. The which
hys so greate mercye, if we shall with
more boldenes and vnshamefastnes,

abuse in contynuyng in oure naughtynes,
we shall as S. Paule sayth, heape vp
the ryches of God his angre, and bring
carte lodes of syn to encrease our euerlastyng
punyshemētes. Swete Iesu forbyd
thys pytyfull destructiō from hys
Chrystyan flocke,A Godly prayer. and comforte hys
church so greuousely disquyeted with
controuersies, and at laste ioyne them
with it in vnity of mynd, which be caryed
from it with contrary opinions:
and I besech hym, that he will not suffre
suche an occasyon of reioysyng, to
the mortall enymyes of hys name, with
the losse and castyng away of so many
sowles. For my parte truly, I thynk it
my dutye, all way to pray for the saffegard
of all Christendome, which only
consisteth in the imbracyng of one religion,
in mutuall loue and agreement,
in the felloweshyp and partaking of all
God hys graces and holye blessynges.

and whereas I am very sorye for other
countryes, which haue deuyded them
selues from the church, yet I am so trobled
in mynde for the daunger which
hangeth ouer this Realme of Englād,Alas that England shold be in such a case, that forenners sholde so pytye it.
that I can not in wordes vtter the care
and thought, which I take in the behalfe
of it. For I take it very heauyly,
yea it nyppeth me at the harte, that so
floryshyng a countrye, furnyshed & replenyshed
with all thynges, more ouer
(if that make any thing to the purpose)
knit very fast to this oure kyngdome of
Spayne, both in nyghe kynred and also
confederacie of long continuaunce,
whiche hathe gyuen so many profes of
godlynes, and in olde tyme hathe not
shewed more notable feates of armes
in battayle, then it hathe set forthe examples
of religion and holynes, worthy
to be followed of the posterity, in these
dayes seduced with the deceptes and
subtyll suggestions of desperate doctours

is in diuerse poyntes fallen in to
folyshe and so dyuellyshe opinions.
            But in so greate vexation of mynde, a
certayne hope doth refreshe me, which
I haue conceaued of your syngular wyt
and especiall graciousnes. For it is the
poynte of a notable wyt, to take hede
before hand of eueles which may ensue,There is cause of good cē
                  forte in oure souereigne Quene.
to forsake the wrong opinion, whē
the falsehode is discouered, wyllyngly
to receaue the truthe, when it is once
knowen and tryed oute, and to thynk
no honowre to consist in styff standyng
in wrong opinions, but to beleue that
it is moste honorable, easyly to bend &
yelde to holsome coūcell. Also it is the
dutye of excellent graciousnes, to haue
a care for the hole countrye, & if neade
requyre, with ventryng the lyffe, to delyuer
it from all pernitiouse erroures.
All the healthe of youre countrye standeth
in youre handes. If you wyll take
vppon you to reuenge religions quarrell,

if you wyll ioyne your selfe to the
consent of the Catholyke churche, if
you wyll mayntayne and cherishe auncient
manners and good ordres, & banyshyng
naughtye men oute of youre
courte,How oure gratiouse Quene may make an happy England. and councell, shall intertayne
good and godly men to assist you, no
doubt by the healpe and furtheraunce
of Christ, but you shall set your cōmon
wealthe in a good ordre, and restore
healthe, wealthe, and happy lyfe to all
your subiectes. But if you wyll haue no
regarde to vnderset those thinges which
fall downe & go to decay, I am a fearde☜
to tell you what wyll become of you,
and all youres. Also I wolde wyshe you
to recorde this with your selfe, that he
whiche preferreth hys owne honowre,
before the honowre of Christ, and refuseth
to employ all his endeuoure,Marck this and prayse God for suche holsome councell. to
aduaunce Christ his glory, for feare of
indaungeryng hym selfe, dothe often
fall in to that myserye, which he intended

to scape, by wynckyng at wycked
men, whiche robb and spoyle Christ of
hys honowre and glorye. For it is the
ryght iudgemēt of God, that he which
maketh more accompt of hys owne
glorye then of the glory of Christ, shold
end hys lyfe in greate shame and dishonowre.
Contrarywyse, he which in
respect of Christ hys glorye, setteth
naught by hys owne ryches and estimation,
attayneth to greate weathe adourned
with all worshipfull preferment
and promotion. For suche a man getteth
allmightye God to be hys patrone
and defendour, who neuer yet did forsake
his seruauntes, so that he maketh
hys ryches & hys honowre in more assuraunce,
thē if he were garded or wayted
on with a mightye & strong armye.
Therefor if you haue an ernest zeale to
defend and preserue youre kyngdome,
if you desyre to inioy immortall glory,
hercken not so much what men tyckle

you in the eare to be expedyent to
strengthen and assure you, as what the
lawe of God, the cause and consideration
of hys moste holy relygyon dothe
requyre of you. Cal to remembraunce
with what a goodlye wyt, God hathe
indued you, consydre with what learnyng
and knowledge you be decked,
in what roume you be placed, what an
office and charge you haue taken vpon
you, and you shall vnderstand that all
those gracyouse gyftes,God hath bestowed so many gyftes of grace vpō our excellēt Quene, to set oute his glory. which you haue
receaued of God, you ought to vse
and bestowe to the settyng forthe of
hys glorye. For he which hathe blessed
you with suche benefytes, if you wyll
wholy yelde vp your selfe to hym, wyll
assyste you with his grace, and wyl euer
be redy at youre ellbowe to helpe you.
For allthoughe you alone,Our mightye Princes, able a lone to reforme England. sholde take
in hand suche a greate entrepryse, to
reclayme England to the aūcient fayth,
what were not you able to bryng to

passe, hauyng God before you, at your
☞ backe, and on eche syde of you? Add
here vnto, that there be in thys youre
realme, mo which fauoure the Catholyke
religiō, and which be redy to suffre
extreme punyshement, in the holy
quarell of it, then there be which inclyne
to these newe foūde learnynges,
and late vp starte opynions. Therefore
there is no doubt, but what so euer you
wolde haue done in this behalffe, you
shall haue bothe God and man redy to
further you. Weygh allso with youre
selffe howe muche it shall redounde to
youre honoure, that thys youre realme
set oute of ordre & for the moste parte
torne a sundre by the meanes of a fewe
myscheuous persones, sholde by youre
dylygence, returne to the auncyent
bewtye,what an honorable thing it we re to oure puyssant Quene to rearesse religion in England. and recouer the ornamentes of
godly conuersation, with the which in
olde tyme it was trymly set forthe and
decked. For all good men wyll speake

and wryght good of you, youre actes
shall be cronycled and regestred vp for
euer, they which be not yet borne shall
talke of you, and no age shall seace to
syng songes in prayse and commendation
of you. For what victoryes are to
be compared with so notable a dede?
            what is able to purchase greater prayse
and renowne? what more notable monumentes
can be left to make youre
name allway to be remembred? for it is
not prayse worthie to kyll many thowsandes
of men, but to put wyckednes
to flyght, vtterly to race oute and deface
syn, that is to be praysed, that is to
be exalted: not to worke men myschefe
and destruction, but to saue and delyuer
them, is the hyghe way to immortall
glorye: not to ouerthrowe with
force of armes many Cyties of forenenymyes,
but to preserue the natyue
countrye for beeing ouerflowne with
feaes of syn, or ouerrun with the runnyng

campe of vngodlynes, dothe wyn
the golden spurres of glorye and renowne.
For all other victories though
they be in God his appoyntement, yet
they be gotten with the dent of the
sworde and helpe of man: but this of
all other moste notable, is obteyned
with godly and spirituall weapons: &
those other victoryes are not gotten
withoute bloodeshed, and a certayne
lycēce or warrant to syn, but thys which
I speake of, is gotten with the destroyinge
of syn, and the sauyng of men:
wherefore of necessytye this passeth in
worthynes all other, which be wonne
with worldely weapons, shrightyng of
souldyoures, & force of men, so farr as
heauenly thynges excell thynges vpon
earthe. Which thynge truly shall cause
men so much more to meruayle, as it is
an harder matter for the Princes of darkenes,
& euerlastyng enymyes of mankynde,
to be vancquyshed of one woman,

then one man to be conquered
of an other. Therfore so notable prayse,
shall not only allway be freshe in mennes
memories, but also it shall be set
forthe and magnifyed of the blessed
sayntes in heauen. Wherefore (o most
noble Quene) euen for the bledyng
woūdes of our Redemer Iesu Christ,A most vehement & Godly exhortation to our redoubted Quene.
for hys bloode shed for vs vpon the
crosse, for his death & bytter passyon,
by hys most gloryous victory, with the
which he tryumphed vpon death, destroying
it and puttyng it to death, for
that contynuall fyar, which he hath inclosed
in the centre of theyearth, and
with the which he hath stirred the hartes
of his seruaūtes to the loue of vertue
and hatred of syn, for that moste
ryghtwyse iudgement with the which
he shall take vengeaunce of syn, and recompence
with euerlasting rewardes,
those which haue helde a sound faythe
and vndefyled religion, fynally for the

loue of all holy thinges in the worlde,
I pray and beseche you, seeing you haue
so many helpes and furtheraunces to
immortall glorye, that no let or hyndraunce
may be found in you. Fasten
youre eyes vpon Christ mangled with
woundes for youre sake, throwe your
selfe flat before hys fete, imbrace hys
crosse in your armes, and banyshe out
of your countrye, thys hatred agaynst
hys crosse,Enimies of the crosse to be banished. whiche thys newe fangled
fraternitye doth openly mayntayne.
            Follow the foote steppes of holy men,
and persuade your selfe that to be the
ryght way, which Godly men indued
with excellent vertue continencie, and
purenenes,what forerūners our most cleare Princes shold followe and eschewe. being hyghly in the fauour
of God, inspyred and taught with the
holy ghoste, haue troden before you:
not that which men blynded with selfe
loue, leanyng only to theyr owne wyt,
hedlong in folysh hardines, ouer whelmed
with wyckednes, and dyuyded frō
               
the vnitie of Catholyke churche doo
persuade you to followe. The which
thyng if you wyll doo, you shall vpholde
and encrease the ryches of your
Realme, and that which is much more
worthe, you shall with greate glory ascend
in to the Kyngdome of heauen.
IESVS CHRIST the fountayne of all
goodnes, the Lorde of all myght, long
preserue youre grace in healthe, with
increase of all honoure and Princelye
aduancement.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Ex testimonio doctissimi cuiusdam viri
Anglicè periti, credimus praedictam epistolam
& esse catholicam, & bene versam.
            Ita esse testor Cornelius Iansenius
            S. Theologiae Louanij professor.
         
         
            
            To M. Doctor Haddon.
            VAlens the Emperour, as Nazianzenas
dothe wytnesse, beyng poysoned with
Arrius heresie, after he had wrytten
with his owne hand many wordes cōcerning
the banishment of saynt Basill, yet coulde not
fynishe those wrytynges, for so muche as the
pen dyd thre tymes refuse to yelde yncke. Not
withstandynge, he beyng obstinae in his proposed
malyce, dyd not leaue of to wryte that
wycked Decree, and to subscribe vnto it when
it was wryten, tyll a greate cramp or palsye
dyd come in to his hād, which dyd smyte such
a feare and terroure in to hys hart, that with
his owne hand he dyd teare that, which he had
once put in wrytyng. O terrible, o fearefull
example. For the loue of God remember this
history M. Doctor Haddon. And whereas it
dyd not feare you to wryte agaynst Osorius
at the fyrst, because peraduenture either you
knewe it not, or ells dyd forget it, nowe seyng
you do knowe it, and haue it freshe in memorye,
despyse it not. But let it be a warnyng to
you, whether you be moued of youre owne
heade, or pricked forward with the suggestion
of other, whether you be in your priuate parler,
or publyke parlament howse, that you say
nothing, write nothing, subscribe to nothyng,
pertayning to the defacyng of the truthe, lest

suche a cramp take you in the hand, when you
sholde wryte, suche a palsye come in to youre
tonge when you sholde speake, that you be a
spectacle to all them which see you or heare
you. Entre in to an humble confession of your
owne imperfectiō, that although in humanity
you can do very commendably, yet when you
come to declame in diuinitye, agaynst the veritie,
you can no more bestirre your selfe, then
young Dauid coulde in Saules heauie helmet,
and boysterouse armoure,1. Re. 17. with the which he
was neuer accustomed. VVherfor I pray you,
vse that, of which you haue some skyll, refuse
that, whereof you be all together ignorant. If
you wyll not ceasse, I assure you, you shall
styrre vp so many aduersaries agaynst you,
that whereas you be M. of the Requestes, and
for that cause, ought allway to be at leasure
to heare petitions, when sueters come to you,
you shall be fayne to make them answer: I
pray you, troble me not, I must go answer Osorius
of Portugall, I must answer Hosius in
Polonia, suche a man in such a countrie. &c.
And if you wyll not make them suche an answer,
yet your brayne shall be busyed with so
many bookes and letters, from so many places
of youre betters, that your mynde shall not

be vpon youre charge. So that either you shal
be put oute of youre office for negligence, or
elles sent from the Court to Cambridge for
pitye, that you may haue more leasure to answer
youre aduersaries. VVhiche chaunge I
thinck you wolde not willyngly chose: wherfore
I pray you, followe my former councell.
Stay your selfe, recompence your troblesome
eloquence, with charitable and quiet sylence.
But if you thinke, that I haue done you iniury
by trāslatyng O forius, you may easily reuenge
me by translating youre answer, if you thynk
it to be truer. VVhether you do translate it or
no, because you be M. of the requestes, I pray
you, graunt me thys request: Increase not I
pray you your olde fault with a new offence,
make no new resistaūce against the auncyent
veritie. And that you may be the more a feard
hereafter to abuse youre hand in writyng agaynst
Osorius, or any other Catholyke, turn
the boke named Symbola heroica, heroicall
deuyses, where in among many pictures, you
shall fynde a shaking hand, with a pen leapyng
oute of it, & this posye wryten ouer it.
Vlterius ne tende odiis. Let this be in paynted
tables euer before youre eyes, let this be
your heroicall deuyse, and I trust it shal feare

you from the lyke vyce. VVhich, I pray God,
you neuer cōmit agayn, whose grace I wyshe
you, that you may worthily repent for that
which you haue done all redy. Amen.
            Fare you well.
From Antwerp the .27. of Marche.
         
         
            Faultes escaped in
some Copyes.
            
               
                  
                     mans hys
arroganyce
wyll what malypertnes
                     Reade
                     man hys.
arrogancye.
with what
malypert.
                  
               
            
         
      
   