
      
         
            
            Sir Thomas Ouerburie
            HIS WIFE,
            With
NEW ELEGIES
vpon his (now knowne)
vntimely death.
            
            Whereunto are annexed, new Newes
and Characters, written by him selfe
and other learned
Gentlemen.
            
            Editio Septima.
            LONDON,
            Printed by Edward Griffin for Laurence L'isle,
and are to bee sold at his shop at the
Tigers head in Pauls Churchyard.
1611.
            
            
               
               To the Reader.
               THE generall acceptance
of this matchlesse
Poem the Wife,
(written by SIR Thomas Ouerbury)
is sufficiently approued
by many, the worth whereof
if any other, out of malice, shall
neglect to commend, hee may well
(if it proceed, from nice Criticisme)
be excluded as a Churlish Retainer
to the MVSES: if from direct plaine
dealing, he shall be degraded for insufficiencie.
For had such a Poem
                  
beene extant among the ancient Romanes,
although they wanted our
easie conseruations of wit by printing,
they would haue cōmitted it to
brasie lest iniurions time might depriue
it of due eternitie; If to cōuerse
with a Creature so amiable as is here
described, be thought difficult; let
the contemplation thereof be held
admirable. To which are added
many Elegies of his vntimely death,
and Characters and Newes written by
himselfe and others his friends.
Howsoeuer, they are now exposed,
not only to the Iudicious, but to all
that cary the least scruple of mother
wit about them.
               
                  Licet toto nunc Helicone frui—Mar.
               Lau: L'isle.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Elegies of seuerall Authors,
on the vntimely death of SIR
Thomas Ouerburie poysoned
in the Tower.
            
               Vpon the vntimely death of
Sir Thomas Ouerburie.
               T'would ease our Sorrowes, t'would release our Teares,
               Could we but heare those high celestiall Spheares,
               Once tune their Motions to a dolefull straine
               In sympathie of what we Mortalls plaine.
               Or see their faire Intelligences change
               Or face or habit, when blacke Deeds, so strange,
               As might force pittie from the heart of Hell
               Are hatch'd by Monsters, which among vs dwell,
               The Starres me thinks, like Men inclin'd to sleepe,
               Should through their chrystall casements scarcely peepe,
               Or at least view vs but with halfe an eye,
               For feare their chaster Influence might descry
               Some murdering hand, oaded in guiltlesse bloud,
               Blending vile iuices to destroy the good.
               The Sunne should wed his Beames to endles Night,
               And in dull darknesse canopie his Light,
               When from the ranke stewes of adulterous Brests,
               Where euery base vnhallowed Proiect rests,
               
                  Is belcht, as in defiance of his shine,
               A steame, might make euen Death it selfe to pine.
               But these things happen still; but ne're more cleare,
               Nor with more lustre did these Lampes appeare:
               
                  Mercurie capers with a winged heele,
               As if he did no touch of sorrow feele,
               And yet he sees a true Mercurian killd,
               Whose birth his Mansion with much honour filld.
               But let me not mistake those Powers aboue,
               Nor taxe iniuriously those Courts of Ioue;
               Surely, they ioy to see these Acts reueald,
               Which in blinde silence haue bin long conceald;
               And Virtue now triumphant; whil'st we mourne
               To thinke that ere shee was foule Uices scorne:
               Or that poore Ouer-buries bloud was made
               A sacrifice to Malice and darke shade.
               
                  Weston thy Hand that Couvre-feu Bell did sway,
               Which did his life to endles sleepe conuay.
               But rest thou where thou art; Ile seeke no glorie
               By the relation of so sad a storie.
               If any more were priuie to the Deed,
               And for the Crime must be adiudg'd to bleed,
               To Heauen I pray, with heau'd-vp Hands and Eyes,
               That as their Bodies fall, their Soules may rise.
               And as those equally turne to one Dust,
               So these alike may shine among the Iust.
               And there make vp one glorious constellation,
               Who suffred here in such a differing fashion.
               D. T.
            
            
               
               To the Memorie of that generally
bewailed Gentleman, Sr. Thomas
Ouerburie.
               
                  BVt that w'are bound in Christian pietie
                  To wish Gods will be done; and Destinie
                  (In all that happs to Men, or Good, or Ill)
                  Suffer'd, or sent, by that implored Will;
                  Me thinks, t'obserue how Vertue drawes faint Breath,
                  Subiect to slanders, Hate, and violent Death,
                  Wise men kept low, others aduanc'd to State,
                  Right check't by wrong, and Ill men fortunate;
                  These mou'd Effects, from an vnmoued Cause,
                  Might shake the firmest Faith; Heauens fixed Lawes
                  Might casuall seeme, and each irregular Sence
                  Spurne at iust Order, blame Gods Prouidence.
               
               
                  But what is Man, t'expostulate th' Intents
                  Of his high Will, or iudge of strange Euents?
                  The rising Sunne to mortall sight reueales
                  This Earthly Globe; but yet the Starrs conceales;
                  So may the Sence discouer Naturall Things;
                  Diuine, aboue the reach of Humane wings.
               
               
                  Then not the Fate, but Fates bad Instrument
                  Doe I accuse, in each sad Accident:
                  Good men must fall, Rapes, Incests, Murders come;
                  But woe and curses follow them by whom:
                  God Authors all mens Actions, not their sin,
                  For that proceeds from deu'lish Formes within.
               
               
                  
                  Thou then that sufferd'st by those Formes so vile,
                  From whom those wicked Instruments did file
                  Thy drossie part, to make thy Fame shine cleare,
                  And Shrine thy Soule in Heauens all glorious Sphere;
                  Who being good, naught les to thee befel,
                  Though it appear'd disguis'd in shape of Hell;
                  Vanish thy Blood and Nerues; true Life alone
                  In Vertue liues, and true Religion,
                  In both which thou art deathles: O behold,
                  (If thou canst looke so low as Earths base Moulde)
                  How dreadfull Iustice (larewith lingring Foot)
                  Now comes like Whirle-winde? how it shakes the Root
                  Of loftie Cedars; makes the stately Brow
                  Bend to the Foot? how all men see that now
                  The Breath of Infamie doth moue their Sayles;
                  Whiles thy deare name by Loues more hartie gales
                  Shall still keep Winge, vntill thy Fames extent
                  Fill eu'rie part of this vast Continent.
                  Then you the Syre of this thus murder'd Sonne;
                  Repine not at his Fate; since he hath wonne
                  More Honor in his Sufferance; and his Death
                  Succeeded by his Vertues endles Breath.
                  For him, and to his Life and Deaths Example,
                  Loue might erect a Statue; Zeale, a Temple:
                  On his true worth the Muses might be slayne
                  To dye his Honors Web in purest Grayne.
               
               C. B.
            
            
               
               Vpon the vntimely Death of
the Author of this ingenious Poem,
Sr. THO: OVERBVRY
Knight, poysoned in
the Towre.
               
               SO many Moones so many times gone round,
               And rose from Hell, & Darknesse, vnder ground,
               And yet till now, this darkned deed of Hell
               
               
                  Not brought to light? ô tardie Heauen! yet tell
               If Murther layes him downe to sleep with Lust
               
               Or no? reueale, as thou art Truth, and Iust,
               
               The Secrets of this vniust secure Act,
               
               And what our feares make vs suspect, compact
               
               
                  With greater deeds of Mischiefe, for alone
               We thinke not This, and doe suspect yet One,
               
               To which compar'd, This, but a falling Starre,
               
               
                  That a bright Firmament of Fire: Thy Care
               
               We see takes meaner things: It times the World
               
               The Signes at random thorough the Zodiack hurld,
               The Stars wild wandrings, & the glib-quick Hinges
               
               Which turne both Poles; and all the violent changes
               
               It ouer-lookes, which trouble th'endlesse course
               Of the high Firmament: by thy blest Force
               
               Doe hoary winter frosts make forrests bare,
               And straight to Groues againe their shades repaire,
               
                  By Thee doth Autums, Lyons-flaming Maine
               
               Ripen the fruits: and the full yeere sustaine
               Her burdned powers: ô being still the same,
               
               
                  Ruling so much, and vnder whom the frame
               Of this vast world weighd, all his Orbes dost guide,
               
                  Why are thy Cares of Men no more applide?
               
               Or if: why seem'st thou sleeping to the Good,
               
               And guarding to the Ill? as if the brood
               
               
                  Of best things still must Chance take in Command
               And not thy Prouidence: and Her blinde Hand
               
               Thy Benefits erroniously disburse,
               Which so let fall, ne're fall but to the worse?
               Whence so, great crimes commit the Greater sort,
               And boldest acts of shame blaze in the Court,
               
               Where Buffones Worship in their rise of State
               
               Those filthy Scarrabs, whom they Serue, and Hate.
               
               
                  Sure things meere backward, there; Honor disgracst,
               And Uertue layd by Fraud, and Poyson, waste:
               The Adult'rer vp like Haman, and so Sainted:
               
               And Femals modesty (as Femals) painted,
               Lost in all reall worth: what shall we say?
               Things so farre out of frame, as if the day
               Were come wherein another Phaeton
               
               Stolne into Phoebus waine, had all misse-won
               
                  A cleane contrary way: ô powerfull God,
               
               
                  Right all amisse, and set the wonted period
               Of Goodnesse in his place againe: This deed
               
               Be Vsher to bring foorth the Maske, and Weed
               
               
                  
                  Where vnder, blacker things lye hid perhap,
               
               
                  And yet haue Hope to make a safe escape.
               
               Of This, make knowen, why such an Instrument
               As Weston, a poore Seruing-man, should rent
               The frame of this sad-good-mans life: did he
               Stand with this Court-bred learned OVERBVRIE,
               In strife for an Ambasdorship? no, no,
               His Orbe held no such light: what did he owe
               The Prophet malice for composing this,
               
               
                  This Cynossura in a neat Poësis,
               How Good, and Great men ought, and All, to chuse
               A chaste, fit, noble Wife, and the abuse
               Of Strumpets friendly shadowing in the same,
               Was this his fault? or doth there lie a flame
               Yet in the embers not vnrak't, for which
               He di'de so falsly? Heauen we doe beseech
               
                  Vnlocke this secret, and bring all to view,
               
                  That Law may purge the bloud, Lust made vntrue.
               
               W. S.
            
            
               
               An Elegie consecrated to the
memorie of the truly worthy and
learned Sir Thomas Ouerburie
KNIGHT.
               
                  HAd not thy wrong, like to a wound ill cur'd
                  Broke forth in death; I had not been assur'd
                  Of griefe enough to finish what write.
                  These lines, as those which doe in cold bloud fight
                  Had come but faintly on; for, euer, he
                  That shrines a name within an Elegie
                  
                  (Vnles some neerer cause doe him inspire)
                  Kindles his bright flame at the Funerall fire.
                  Since passion (after, lessning her extent)
                  Is then more strong, and so more eloquent.
               
               
                  How powerfull is the hand of Murther now!
                  Was't not enough to see his deare life bowe
                  Beneath her hate? but crushing that faire frame,
                  Attempt the like on his vnspotted Fame?
                  O base reuenge! more then inhumane fact!
                  Which (as the Romanes sometime would enact
                  No doome for Patricide, supposing none
                  Could euer so offend) the vpright Throne
                  
                  Of Iustice salues not: leauing that intent
                  Without a Name, without a punishment.
                  
               
               
                  Yet through thy wounded Fame, as thorow these
                  
                     Glasses which multiply the Species,
                  
                  
                     We see thy vertues more; and they become;
                  So many Statues sleeping on thy Tombe.
                  
               
               
                  Wherein, confinement new thou shalt endure,
                  But so; as when to make a Pearle more pure
                  We giue it to a Doue, in whose wombe pent
                  Some time, we haue it forth most orient.
               
               
                  Such is thy luster now, that venomd Spight
                  
                  With her blacke Soule dares not behold thy light,
                  But banning it, a course begins to runne
                  With those that curse the rising of the Sunne.
                  
                  The poyson, that workes vpwards now, shall striue
                  To be thy faire Fames true Preseruatiue.
                  
                  And witch-craft that can maske the vpper Shine
                  
                  With no one clowd shall blinde a raye of thine.
               
               
                  And as the Hebrewes in an obscure pit
                  Their holy fire hid, not extinguish'd it,
                  And after times, that broke their bondage chaine
                  Found it, to fire their sacrifice againe:
                  So lay thy worth somewhile, but being found,
                  The Muses altars plentifully crownd
                  With sweet perfumes, by it new kindled be
                  And offer all to thy deare memorie.
               
               
                  Nor haue we lost thee long: thou art not gone,
                  Nor canst descend into Obliuion.
                  
                  But twice the Sun went round since thy Soule fled,
                  And onely that time men shall tearme thee dead.
                  Heereafter (rais'd to life) thou still shalt haue
                  An Antidote against the silent grave.
               
               W.B. Int. Temp.
            
            
               
               Vpon the vntimely
Death of Sr. Thomas
Ouerbury.
               
               IF for to liue be but a misery,
               If by death good men gaine eternity,
               Twas friendly done in robbing thee of life,
               To celebrate thy nuptials with thy wife;
               So that his will no other aimeintended,
               But by exchange thy life should be amended:
               Yet wert to compasse his insatiate Lust,
               He this last friendship tendred to thy  trust
               Whiles he dishonour'd and defam'd may die,
               
                  Iustice and Fame, shall crowne thy memorie.
               
               B. G. medij Temp.
            
            
               
               In obitum intempestiuum &
lachrimabilem Illustrissimi Equitis aurati
TH: OVERBVRI magnae
spei & expectationis Viri.
               
                  HOw euer windie mischiefe raise vp high,
                  Darke thickning clouds, to poure vpon vs all
                  A tempost of foule rumors, which descry
                  Thy hard mishap and strange distastrous fall,
                  As if thy wounds were bleeding from that hand,
                  Which rather should haue raisd thee vp to stand.
               
               
                  Yet shalt thou here suruiue in pittying fame,
                  In thy sweet Wife, in these most acute lines,
                  In well reputed Characters of name,
                  And vertues tombe, which all thy honor shrines,
                  In spight of enuie, or the proudest hair,
                  That thus hath set opinion at debate.
               
               
                  But for mine owne part, sith it falls out so,
                  That death hath had her will; I now compare
                  It to awanton hand, which at a throw
                  To breake a box of pretious balme did dare:
                  With whose perfume, although it was thus spilld,
                  The house and commers by were better filld.
               
               Cap: Th: Gainsford.
            
            
               
               Encomiasticke Uerses on this excellent
Poem the Wife.
               
                  LOe here the matchles patterne of a Wife,
                  Deciphered in forme of Good and Bad:
                  The Bad commends the Good as Darke doth Light,
                  Or as a loathed Bed a Single life;
                  The Good, with Wisdom and Discretion clad,
                  With Modestie, and faire demeanour dight,
                  Whose Reason doth her Will to Loue inuite.
               
               
                  Reason begot, and Passion bred her loue,
                  Selfe-will She shun'd, Fitnes the Mariage made;
                  Fitnes doth cherish Loue, Selfe-will Debate.
                  Loe thus; and in this Monument of proofe
                  A perfect Wife, a Worke nor Time can fade,
                  Nor loose respect betray to mortall Fate.
                  This, none can equall; Best, but imitate.
               
               R.C.
            
            
               
               On Sir Thomas Ouerburies
Poem the Wife.
               I Am glad yet ere I die, I haue found occasion
               Honest and iust; without the worlds perswasion
               Or flatterie or briberie to commend
               A woman for her goodnesse; and God send
               I may finde many more: I wish them well,
               They are pretty things to play with: when Eue fell
               She tooke a care that all the Wo-men-kinde
               That were to follow her, should be as blinde
               As she was wilfull; and till this good Wife,
               This peece of vertue, that nere tooke her life
               From a fraile mothers labor: Those stand still
               As marginalls to point vs to our ill
               Came to the world, as other creatures doe
               That know no God but will; we learnt to woe,
               And if she were but faire and could but kisse,
               Twentie to one we could not chuse amisse;
               And as we iudge of trees if straight and tall
               That may be found, yet neuer till the fall
               Finde how the raine hath drill'd them; So till now
               We only knew we must loue; but not how.
               But here we haue example, and so rare,
               That if we hold but common sense and care,
               And steere by this card; he that goes awry,
               Ile boldly say at his natiuity,
               
                  That man was seal'd a foole: yet all this good
               Giuen as it is, not cloath'd in flesh and blood
               Some may auerre and strongly twas meere ment
               In way of practise, but not president;
               Either will make vs happy men; for he
               That marrieth any way this my sterie,
               Or any parcell of that benefit,
               Though he take hold of nothing but the wit,
               Hath got himselfe a partner for his life,
               More then a woman, better then a wife.
               I. F.
            
            
               Eiusdem in Eadem.
               AS from a man the first fraile woman came,
               The first that euer made vs know our shame,
               And finde the curse of labor; so againe,
               Goodnesse and vnderstanding found a man
               To take this shame away; and from him sprung
               A peece of excellence without a Tongue
               Because it should not wrong vs; yet the life
               Makes it appeare a woman and a wife.
               And this is she, if euer woman shall
               Doe good heereafter; borne to blesse our fall.
               J. F.
            
            
               
               On Sir Thomas Ouerburies
Poem the Wife.
               WEre euery beauty, euery seuerall grace,
               Which is in Women, in one Womans face,
               Some courtly Gallants might, I think, come to her,
               Which would not wed her, though they seem'd to woe her.
               Setled Affections follow not the Eye;
               Reason and Iudgement, must their course descrie.
               
                  Pigmalions Image made of Marble stone,
               Was lik'd of all; belou'd of him alone.
               But heere's a Dame growen husbandlesse of late,
               Which not a Man but wisheth were his Mate.
               So faire without, so free from spot within,
               That Earth seemes heere to stand exempt from sin,
               
                  Iuno vouchsafe, and Hymen, when I wed,
               I may behold this Widdow in my Bed.
               D. T.
            
            
               
               On the Wife.
               
                  BEauty affords contentment to the Eye,
                  Riches are meanes to cure a weake estate,
                  Honour illustrates what it commeth nie:
                  To marry thus men count it happy Fate.
                  Vertue they think doth in these Emblems shroud
                  But triall shewes they are gulled with a Cloud.
               
               
                  These are but complements; the inward worth,
                  The outward carriage, gesture, wit, and grace,
                  Is that alone which sets a Woman forth:
                  And in this Woman, these haue each a place.
                  Were all wiues such, This age would happy bee,
                  But happier that of our Posteritie.
               
               D. T.
            
            
               
               To the Wife.
               EXpos'd to all, thou wilt lesse worthy seeme
               I feare: Wiues common, all men disesteems;
               Yet somethings haue a differing Fate: some fret,
               We doubt in wares which are in corners set:
               Hid Medalls rust, which being vs'd grow bright;
               The day more friendeth vertue then the night.
               Thou though more commō, then maist seem more good,
               I onely wish thou maist be vnderstood.
               G. R.
            
            
               On the Wife.
               WEl hast thou said, that womē should be such;
               And were they that, had but a third as much
               I would be maried too, but that I know
               Not what shee is, but should be thou dost show:
               So let me praise thy worke, and let my life
               Be single, or thy Widdow be my Wife.
               X. Z.
            
            
               
               On the Wife.
               
                  THis perfect Creature, to the Easterne vse
                  Liu'd, whilst a wife retir'd from common show:
                  Not that her Louer fear'd, the least abuse,
                  But with the wisest, knew it fitter so:
                  Since, falne a widdow, and a zealous one,
                  She would haue sacrifizde her selfe agen,
                  But importun'd to life, is now alone,
                  Lou'd, woo'd, admir'd, by all wise single men,
                  Which, to th'adultrous rest, that dare begin
                  There vs'd temptations, were a mortall sinne.
               
            
            
               
                  TO make a Wife of Wit, or meere Philosophie,
                  And deck her vp with flowres of sweetest poesie,
                  Is no hard taske: but such an one of flesh to find,
                  Would weary all the wits and bodies of mankinde:
                  Since worse must serue the turne, then men must be content
                  To take such as they find, not such as they inuent.
               
               T. B.
            
            
               
               To the cleane contrary wife.
               Look here: & chide those Spirits, which maintain
               Their Empire, with so strong command in you,
               That all good eyes, which do your follies view,
               Pitty, what you for them, must once sustaine:
               O from those Euills, which free Soules disdaine
               To be acquainted with, (and but persue
               Worst Minds) from them (as hatefull, as vntrue,)
               By reading this, for Fames faire sake refraine:
               Who would let feed vpon her birth, the brood
               Of lightnes, Indiscretion, and the shame
               Of fowle Incontinence, when the base blood
               Is carelesse only of an Honourd Name,
               Be all that gentle are, more high improou'd,
               
                  For loose Dames are but flatter'd, neuer Lou'd.
               
               W: Stra:
            
            
               
               To the Wife.
               WEep on kinde Soule; and though thou cōmest in view,
               Put on Woes habit, Melancholies hew.
               A Widdowes beautie makes the louelier show,
               When flouds of sorrow doe her cheekes oreflow.
               The faire Achieuements soft Affection beares
               Are bleeding Hearts, Eyes euer-dropping Teares.
               The Turtle tells thee, Thou shouldst alwaies grone,
               And waile thy Mate with selitarie mone.
               Adde then sweet Soule no bounds to thy Laments,
               Tis fit sad plaints should follow sad euents.
               Yet haue a care his name be not reneal'd:
               Griefe merits most, where it is most conceal'd
            
            
               
               Of the choyce of a Wife.
               
                  IF I were to chuse a Woman,
                  As who knowes but I may marry:
                  I would trust the eye of no man,
                  Nor a tongue that may miscarry:
                  For in way of Loue and Glory
                  Each Tongue best tells his owne story.
               
               
                  First, to make my choyse the bolder,
                  I would haue her childe to such
                  Whose free vertuous liues are older
                  Then Antiquitie can touch:
                  For tis seeldome seene, that Blood
                  Giues a Beautie great and good.
               
               
                  Yet an ancient stocke may bring
                  Branches I confesse of worth,
                  Like rich-mantles shadowing
                  Those descents that brought them forth.
                  Yet such Hills though gilded showe
                  Soonest feele the Age of snowe.
               
               
                  
                  Therefore to preuent such care
                  That repentance soone may bring,
                  Like Marchants I would chuse my ware.
                  
                     Vse-full good, not glittering.
                  He that weds for state or face,
                  Buyes a Horse to lose a Race.
               
               
                  Yet I would haue her faire as any,
                  But her owne not kist away:
                  I would haue her free to many,
                  Looke on all like equall day;
                  But descending to the Sea,
                  Make her set with none but me.
               
               
                  If she be not tall tis better;
                  For that word, A goodly Woman,
                  
                  Prints it selfe in such a letter,
                  That it leaues vnstudied no man:
                  I would haue my Mistresse grow
                  Onely tall, to answere No.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Yet I would not haue her lose
                  So much breeding, as to fling
                  Vnbecomming scorne on those
                  That must worship euery thing.
                  Let her feare loose lookes to scatter,
                  And loose men will feare to flatter.
               
               
                  Children I would haue her beare.
                  More for loue of name then bed:
                  So each childe I haue is heyre
                  To another maydenhead;
                  For she that in the act's afraids.
                  Euery nigh'ts another maide.
               
               
                  Such a one, as when shees woo'd
                  Blushes not for ill thoughts past;
                  But so innocently good,
                  That her dreames are euer chast;
                  For that Maide that thinkes a sin,
                  Has betraide the Fort shee's in.
               
               
                  
                  In my visitation still,
                  I would haue her scatter feares,
                  How this man, and that was ill,
                  After protestations teares:
                  And who vowes a constant life,
                  Crownes a meritorious Wife.
               
               
                  When the Priest first giues our hands,
                  I would haue her thinke but thus;
                  In what high and holy bands
                  Heauen, like twinnes, hath planted vs,
                  That like Aarons rod together,
                  Both may bud, grow greene, and wither.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  THE LIVELY PORTRAICTURE OF SIR THOMAS OVERBURY.
               
            
            
               
               THE METHOD.
               FIrst of Mariage, and the effect thereof, Children.
Then of his contrarie, Lust; then for his choice.
First, his opinion negatiuely, what should not be: the
first causes in it, that is, neither Beautie, Birth, nor
Portion. Then affirmatiuely, what should be, of which
kind there are foure: Goodnesse, Knowledge, Discretion,
and as a second thing, Beautie. The first only
is absolutely good: the other being built vpon the first
doe likewise become so. Then the application of that
woman by loue to himselfe, which makes her a wife.
And lastly, the only condition of a wife, Fitnesse.
               
            
            
               A WIFE.
               
                  EAch Woman is a briefe of Woman-kinde,
                  And doth in little euen as much containe,
                  As, in one Day and Night, all life we finde,
                  Of either, More, is but the fame againe:
                  
                     God fram'd Her so, that to her Husband, She,
                  As Eue, should all the World of Women be.
                  
               
               
                  
                  So fram'd he Both, that neither power he gaue,
                  Vse of themselues, but by exchange, to make:
                  Whence in their Face the Fayre no pleasure haue,
                  But' by reflex of what thence other take.
                  Our Lips in their owne Kisse no pleasure find:
                  Toward their proper Face, our Eyes are blind.
               
               
                  So God in Eue did perfit Man begun;
                  
                  Till then, in vaine much of himselfe he had:
                  In Adam God created onely one,
                  
                  
                     Eue, and the world to come, in Eue he made.
                  We are two halfes: whiles each frō other straies,
                  Both barren are; Ioyn'd both their like can raise
               
               
                  At first both Sexes were in Man combin'de,
                  man, a Shee-man did in his bodie breed;
                  
                     Adam was Eues, Eue Mother of Mankinde,
                  
                     Eue From Liue-flesh, Man did from Dust proceed.
                  
                     One thus made two, Marriage doth revnite,
                  And makes them both but on Hermaphrodite.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Man did but the well-being of his life
                  From Woman take, her Being she from Man,
                  
                  And therefore Eue created was a Wife,
                  And at the end of all, her Sex began:
                  
                     Mariage their obiect is; their Being then,
                  And now Perfection, they receiue from Men.
                  
               
               
                  Marriage, to all, whose ioyes two parties be,
                  And doubled are by being parted so,
                  Wherein the very act is Chastitie,
                  Whereby two Soules into one Bodie goe.
                  Which makes two one while here they liuing be,
                  And after death in their Posteritie.
                  
               
               
                  
                     God to each Man a priuate Woman gaue,
                  That in that Center his desires might stint,
                  That he a comfort like himselfe might haue,
                  And that on her his like he might imprint.
                  
                  
                     Double is Womans vse, part of their end
                  Doth on this Age, part on the next depend.
               
               
                  
                  We fill but part of Time, and cannot dye,
                  Till we the world a fresh supply haue lent,
                  
                     Children are Bodies sole Eternitie;
                  
                     Nature is Gods, Art is Mans instrument.
                  Now all Mans Art but only dead things makes,
                  But herein Man in things of life partakes.
               
               
                  For wandring Lust; I know tis infinite,
                  It still begins, and addes not more to more.
                  The guilt is euerlasting, the delight,
                  
                  
                     This instant doth not feele of that before.
                  The taste of it is only in the Sense,
                  
                  The operation, in the Conscience.
                  
               
               
                  Woman is not Lusts bounds, but Woman-kinde,
                  
                  
                     One is Loues number: who from that doth fall,
                  Hath lost his hold, and no new rest shall finde,
                  
                     Uice hath no meane, but not to be at all;
                  A Wife is that enough, Lust cannot finde,
                  For Lust is still with want, or too much, pinde.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Bate lust the Sin, my share is eu'n with his,
                  For Not to lust, and to Enjoy is one:
                  And more or lesse past, equall Nothing is,
                  I still haue one, Lust one at once, alone:
                  And though the Woman often changed be,
                  Yet Hee's the same without varietie.
               
               
                  
                     Marriage our lust (as 'twere with fuell fire)
                  Doth, with a medicine of the same, allay;
                  And not forbid, but rectifie desire.
                  
                  
                     My selfe I cannot chuse, my wife I may:
                  And in the choyce of Her, it much doth lie,
                  To mend my selfe in my Posteritie.
               
               
                  O rather let me Loue, then be in loue;
                  
                  So let me chuse as Wife and Friend to finde,
                  Let me forget her Sex when I approue,
                  
                  
                     Beasts likenesse lies in shape, but ours in minde.
                  
                  Our Soules no Sexes haue, their Loue is cleane,
                  No Sex, both in the better part are Men.
                  
               
               
                  
                  But Physicke for our lust their Bodies be,
                  But matter fit to shew our Loue vpon.
                  But onely Shells for our posteritie,
                  
                  Their soules were giu'n lest man should be alone:
                  For, but the Soules Interpreters, wordes be,
                  
                  Without which Bodies are no Company.
               
               
                  That goodly frame we see of flesh and blood,
                  Their fashion is, not weight, it is I say
                  But their Laye-part, but well digested food;
                  Tis but twixt Dust, and Dust, Liues middle way:
                  
                  The worth of it is nothing that is seen,
                  
                  But onely that it holds a Soule within.
               
               
                  And all the carnall Beautie of my Wife,
                  Is but skin-deepe, but to two senses knowne;
                  Short euen of Pictures, shorter liu'd then Life,
                  And yet the loue suruiues that's built thereon:
                  For our Imagination is too high,
                  For Bodies when they meete to satisfie.
               
               
                  
                  All Shapes, all Colours are alike in Night,
                  
                  Nor doth our Touch distinguish foule or faire:
                  
                  But mans imagination, and his sight;
                  
                  And those, but the first weeke, by Custome are
                  
                     Both made alike, which diffred at first view;
                  
                  Nor can that difference, Absence much renew.
               
               
                  Nor can that Beautie lying in the Face,
                  
                  But meerely by imagination be
                  Enioy'd by vs in an inferior place.
                  
                  Nor can that Beauty by enioying we
                  
                  Make ours become, so our desire growes tame:
                  We changed are, but it remaines the same.
               
               
                  
                     Birth, lesse then Beauty, shall my Reason blinde,
                  Her Birth goes to my Children, not to me.
                  Rather had I that actiue Gentrie finde,
                  
                     Vertue, then passiue from her Ancestry;
                  Rather in her aliue, one vertue see,
                  Then all the rest dead in her Pedegree.
                  
               
               
                  
                  In the Degrees, high rather be she plac't,
                  Of Nature then of Art and Policie:
                  
                  
                     Gentry is but a relique of Time-past,
                  And Loue doth onely but the present see;
                  Things were first made, then words: she were the same,
                  
                  
                     With, or without, that title, or that name.
               
               
                  As for (the oddes Sexes) Portion;
                  
                  Nor will I shun it, nor my ayme it make;
                  
                     Byrth, Beautie, Wealth, are nothing worth alone,
                  All these I would for good additions take,
                  Not for Good Parts; those two are ill combin'd,
                  Whō any third thing frō 
                     themselues hath ioynd.
               
               
                  Rather then these, the obiect of my Loue,
                  
                  Let it be Good; when these with vertue go,
                  They (in themselues indifferent,) vertues proue,
                  For Good (like fire) turnes all things to be so.
                  
                     Gods Image, in Her Soule, ô let me place
                  My Loue vpon; not Adams in Her Face.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Good, is a fairer attribute then White,
                  
                  Tis the mindes beautie keepes the other sweet:
                  That's not still one, nor mortall with the light,
                  Nor glasse, nor painting can it counterfet,
                  Nor doth it raise desires, which euer tend
                  At once, to their perfection, and their end.
               
               
                  By Good I would haue Holy vnderstood,
                  So God she cannot loue, but also mee,
                  
                  The law requires our words and deedes be good,
                  Religion euen the Thoughts doth sanctifie:
                  And she is more a Maide that rauisht is,
                  Then She which onely doth but wish amisse.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Lust only by Religion is withstood,
                  
                     Lusts obiect is aliue, his strength within,
                  Moralitie resists but in cold bloud,
                  
                  Respect of Credit feareth shame not sinne.
                  
                  But no place darke enough for such offence
                  She finds, that's watcht by her owne Conscience.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Then may I trust her Body with her Minde,
                  
                  And, thereupon secure, neede neuer know
                  The pangs of Iealousie: and Loue doth finde
                  More paineto doubt her false, then know her so:
                  For Patience is of euils that are knowne,
                  The certaine Remedie; but Doubt hath none.
               
               
                  And be that thought once stirr'd, twill neuer dye,
                  Nor will the griefe more milde by custome proue:
                  Nor yet Amendment can it satisfie,
                  The Anguish more or lesse, is as our Loue:
                  
                  This miserie doth Iealousie ensue,
                  That we may proue her false, but cannot True.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Suspicion may the will of Lust restraine.
                  But Good preuents from hauing such a will,
                  
                  A Wife that's Good, doth Chast and more containe,
                  For Chast is but an Abstinence from ill:
                  And in a Wife that's Bad; although the best
                  
                  Of qualities; yet in a Good the least.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To barre the meanes is Care, not Iealousie.
                  
                  Some lawfull things to be auoyded are,
                  When, they occasion of vnlawfull be,
                  Lust ere it hurts, is best descride a farre:
                  Lust is a finne of two; he that is sure
                  Of either part, may be of both secure.
               
               
                  Giue me next Good, an vnderstanding Wife,
                  
                  By Nature wise, not Learned by much Art,
                  Some Knowledge on Her side will all my life
                  More scope of conuersation impart,
                  Besides, Her inborne vertue fortifie,
                  They are most firmly good, that best know Why.
               
               
                  A passiue vnderstanding to conceiue,
                  And Iudgement to discerne, I wish to finde:
                  Beyond that, all as hazardous I leaue,
                  
                     Learning and pregnant wit in Woman-kinde,
                  What it findes malleable maketh fraile,
                  And doth not adde more Ballast, but more Saile.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Domesticke Charge doth best that Sexe befit,
                  Contiguous businesse, so to fixe the Minde,
                  That Leasure space for Fancies not admit:
                  Their Leasure tis corrupteth Woman-kinde,
                  
                  Else being plac'd from many vices free,
                  They had to Heau'n a shorter cut then wee.
               
               
                  
                     Bookes are a part of Mans prerogatiue,
                  In formall Inke they Thoughts and Uoices hold,
                  That we to them our solitude may giue,
                  And make Time-present trauell that of old.
                  
                  Our Life, Fame peeceth longer at the end,
                  And Bookes it farther backward doe extend.
               
               
                  As good, and knowing, let her be Discreet,
                  
                  That to the others weight, doth Fashion bring,
                  
                     Discretion doth consider what is Fit,
                  
                  
                     Goodnesse but what is lawfull, but the Thing
                  
                  Not Circumstances; Learning is and wit,
                  
                  In Men but curious folly without it.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To keepe their Name when 'tis in others hands
                  
                     Discretion askes, their Credit is by farre
                  More fraile then They, on likely-hoods it stands,
                  And hard to be disproou'd, Lust's slanders are.
                  Their Carriage, not their Chastity alone,
                  Must keepe their Name chaste from suspition.
                  
               
               
                  Womens Behauiour is a surer barre
                  Then is their No: That fairely doth denie
                  
                  Without denying, thereby kept they are
                  Safe eu'n from Hope; in part to blame is shee,
                  Which hath without consent bin onely tride;
                  He comes too neere, that comes to be denide.
                  
               
               
                  Now since a Woman we to Marry are,
                  A Soule and Body, not a Soule alone;
                  When one is Good, then be the other Faire,
                  
                  
                     Beauty is Health, and Beauty both in one,
                  Bee shee so faire as change can yeeld no gaine,
                  So faire, as Shee most Women else containe.
               
               
                  So Faire at least let me imagine Her,
                  That thought to me is Truth: Opinion
                  
                  Cannot in matter of opinion erre;
                  With no Eyes shall I see her but mine owne.
                  
                  And as my Fancy Her conceiues to bee.
                  Euen such my Senses both, doe Feele and See.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Face we may the seat of of Beauty call,
                  In it the rellish of the rest doth lie,
                  Nay eu'n a figure of the Minde withall:
                  And of the Face the Life moues in the Eye;
                  
                  No things else being two so like we see,
                  So like, that they two but in number be.
               
               
                  
                     Beauty in decent shape, and Colours lies,
                  
                     Colours the matter are, and shape the Soule;
                  
                  The Soule which from no single part doth rise,
                  But from the iust proportion of the whole,
                  
                  And is a meere spirituall-harmonie,
                  
                  Of euery part vnited in the Eye.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Loue is a kinde of Superstition,
                  
                  Which feares the Idoll which it selfe hath fram'd;
                  
                     Lust a Desire, which rather from his owne
                  
                  
                     Temper, then from the obiect is inflam'd;
                  
                     Beauty is Loues obiect, Women Lust's, to gaine
                  
                     Loue, Loue Desires, Lust onely to obtaine.
                  
               
               
                  No circumstance doth Beauty beautifie,
                  Like gracefull fashion, natiue Comelinesse,
                  
                  Nay eu'n gets pardon for Deformity;
                  
                  
                     Art cannot it beget, but may encrease,
                  When Nature had fixt Beauty perfect made,
                  Something she left for Motion to adde.
               
               
                  
                  But let that Fashion more to Modestie
                  
                  Tend, then Assurance; Modesty doth set
                  The face in hir iust place, from Passions free,
                  Tis both the Mindes, and Bodies Beauty met;
                  But Modesty; no vertue can we see;
                  That is the Faces onely Chastitie.
                  
               
               
                  Where goodnesse failes, twixt ill and ill that stands:
                  Whence tis that women though they weaker be,
                  And their desires more strong, yet on their hands
                  The Chastitie of men doth often lie:
                  
                     Lust would more common be then any one,
                  Could it as other sinnes be done alone.
                  
               
               
                  All these good parts a Perfect woman make,
                  Adde Loue to me, they make a Perfect Wife,
                  
                  Without her Loue Her Beauty should I take,
                  As that of Pictures, dead, That giues it life;
                  Till then Her Beauty like the Sunne doth shine
                  
                     Alike to all; That makes it onely mine.
                  
               
               
                  And of that Loue, let Reason Father be,
                  And Passion Mothor; let it from the one
                  His Being take, the other his Degree;
                  
                  Selfe-loue (which second Loues are built vpon)
                  Will make me (if not Her) her Loue respect;
                  No Man but fauours his owne worths effect.
               
               
                  
                  As Good, and wise, so be she Fit for mee,
                  That is, To will, and Not to will the same,
                  My Wife is my Adopted-selfe, and shee
                  As Mee, so what I loue, to Loue must frame.
                  For when in Mariage both in one concurre,
                  Woman conuerts to Man, not Man to her.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               The Authors Epitaph,
written by himselfe.
               THe Span of my dayes measur'd, heere I rest,
               That is, my body; but my soule, his guest
               Is hence ascended, whither, nestber Time,
               Nor Faith, nor Hope, but onely loue can clime;
               Where being now enlightned, Shee doth know
               The Truth of all men argue of below:
               Onely this dust doth heere in Pawne remaine,
               That when the world dissolues she come againe.
            
         
         
            
            Characters,
OR
Wittie descriptions of the properties
of sundry Persons.
            
               A good Woman.
               A Good Woman is a comfort,
like a man. Shee
lacks of him nothing
but heat. Thence is her
sweetnes of disposition,
which meets his stoutnes
more pleasingly; so wooll meets
yron easier then yron, and turnes resisting

into embracing. Her greatest learning
is religion, and her thoughts are on
her owne Sexe, or on men, without casting
the difference. Dishonestie neuer
comes neerer than her eares, and then
wonder stops it out, and saues vertue the
labour. Shee leaues then eat youth, telling
his lushious tales, and puts back the
Seruingmans putting forward with a
frowne: yet her kindnes is free enough
to be seene; for it hath no guilt about it:
and her mirth is cleare, that you may
looke through it, into vertue, but not beyond.
She hath not behauiour at a certaine,
but makes it to her occasion. Shee
hath so much knowledge as to loue it,
and if she haue it not at home, shee will
fetch it; for this sometimes in a pleasant
discontent she dares chide her Sexe,
though she vse it neuer the worse. She
is much within, and frames outward
things to her minde, not her minde to
them. She weares good clothes, but neuer
better; for she findes no degree beyond
Decencie. Shee hath a content of

her owne, and so seeks not an husband,
but findes him. She is indeed most, but
not much to description, for she is direct
and one, and hath not the varietie of ill.
Now shee is giuen fresh and aliue to a
husband, and shee doth nothing more
then loue him, for she takes him to that
purpose. So his good becomes the businesse
of her actions, and shee doth her
selfe kindnesse vpon him. After his, her
chiefest vertue is a good husband. For
Shee is Hee.
               
            
            
               A very Woman.
               
                  
                     A Very Woman, is a dow-bakt man,
or a Shee ment well towards man,
but fell two bowes short, strength
and vnderstanding. Her vertue is the
hedge, Modestie, that keeps a man from
climing ouer into her faults. Shee simpers
as if she had no teeth, but lips, and
she diuides her eyes and keeps halfe for

her selfe, and giues the other to her near
Youth. Being set downe shee casts her
face into a platforme, which dureth the
meale, & is taken away with the voider.
Her draught reacheth to good manners,
not to thirst, and it is a part of their
mysterie not to professe hunger; but Nature
takes her in priuate and stretcheth
her vpon meat. Shee is Marigeable and
Fourteene at once; and after she doth
not liue but tarrie. Shee reads ouer her
face euery morning, and sometimes blots
out pale, and writes red. She thinks she
is faire, though many times her opinion
goes alone, and she loues her glasse, and
the knight of the Sunne for lying. Shee
is hid away all but her face, and that's
hang'd about with toyes and deuices,
like the signe of a Tauerne, to draw
Strangers. If shee shew more shee preuents
desire, and by too free giuing,
leaues no Gift. Shee may escape from
the Seruing-man, but not from the
Chamber-maide. Shee commits with
her eares for certaine: after that shee

may goe for a Maide, but she hath been
lien with in her vnderstanding. Her Philosophie,
is a seeming neglect of those,
that be too good for her. Shee's a yonger
brother for her portion, but not for
her portion of wit, that comes from her
in a treble, which is still too big for it;
yet hir Vanitie seldom matcheth hir, with
one of her owne degree, for then she wil
beget another creature a begger: and
commonly, if shee marrie better, shee
marries worse. Shee gets much by the
simplicitie of her Sutor, and for a iest,
laughes at him without one. Thus she
dresses a Husband for her selfe, and after
takes him for his patience, and the land
adioyning, yee may see it, in a Seruingmans
fresh Naperie, and his Leg steps
into an vnknowne stocking. I need not
speake of his Garters, the tassell shewes it
selfe. If she loue, she loues not the Man,
but the beast of him. Shee is Salomons
cruel creature, and a mans walking-consumption:
euery caudle shee giues him,
is a purge. Her chiefe commendation

is, shee brings a man to repentance.
               
               
                  Her next part.
                  Her lightnesse gets her to swimme at
top of the table, where her wrie little
finger bewraies caruing; her neighbors
at the latter end know they are welcom,
and for that purpose shee quencheth her
thirst. She trauels to and among, and so
becomes a woman of good entertainment,
for all the follie in the countrie,
comes in cleane Linnen to visit her: she
breakes to them her griefe in Sugar
cakes, and receiues from their mouthes
in exchange, many stories that conclude
to no purpose. Her eldest Sonne is like
her howsoeuer, and that dispraiseth him
best: her vtmost drift is to turne him
Foole, which commonly she obtaines at
the yeeres of discretion, Shee takes a
iourney sometimes to her Neeces house,
but neuer thinks beyond London. Her
Deuotion is good clothes, they carrie her
to Church, expresse their stuffe and fashion,

and are silent, if she be more deuout,
shee lifts vp a certaine number of
eyes, in stead of prayers, and takes the
Sermon, and measures out a nap by it,
iust as long. She sends Religion afore to
Sixtie, where shee neuer ouertakes it, or
driues it before her againe. Her most
necessarie instruments, are a waiting Gentlewoman,
and a Chamber-maide; shee
weares her Gentlewoman still, but most
often leaues the other in her Chamber-window.
She hath a little Kennel in her
lap, and she smells the sweeter for it. The
vtmost reach of her Prouidence, is the fatnesse
of a Capon, and her greatest enuie,
is the next Gentlewomans better gown.
Her most commendable skill, is to make
her Husbands fustian beare her Veluer.
This she doth many times ouer, and then
is deliuered to old Age, and a Chaire,
where euery bodie leaues her.
               
            
            
               
               A Dissembler,
               IS an essence needing a double definition,
for hee is not that hee appeares.
Vnto the eye he is pleasing, vnto the
eare not harsh, but vnto the vnderstanding
intricate, and full of windings: he is
the prima materia, & his intents giue him
forme: he dieth his meanes and his meaning
into two colours, he baites craft
with humilitie, and his countenance is
the picture of the present disposition. He
winnes not by batterie, but vndermining,
and his racke is soothing. Hee
allures, is not allur'd by his affections, for
they are the brokers of his obseruation.
He knowes passion onely by sufferance,
and resisteth by obeying. He makes his
time an accomptant to his memorie,
and of the humors of men weaues a net
for occasion: the Inquisitor must looke
through his iudgment, for to the eye only
he is no
                     •
                   visible.
            
            
               
               A Courtier,
               TO all mens thinking is a man, and
to most men the finest: all things
else are defined by the vnderstanding,
but this by the senses; but his surest
marke is, that hee is to be found onely
about Princes. Hee smells; and putteth
away much of his iudgment about the
scituation of his clothes. He knowes no
man that is not generally knowne. His
wit, like the Marigold, openeth with the
Sunne, and therefore he riseth not before
ten of the clocke. He puts more confidence
in his words than meaning, and
more in his pronuntiation than his
words. Occasion is his Cupid, and he hath
but one receipt of making loue. He followes
nothing but inconstancie, admires
nothing but beautie, honours nothing
but fortune. Loues nothing. The sustenance
of his discourse is Newes, and his
censure like a shot depēds vpō the charging.

He is not, if he be out of Court,
but fish-like breathes destruction, if out
of his owne element. Neither his motion,
or aspect are regular, but he moues
by the vpper Spheres, and is the reflection
of higher substances.
               If you finde him not heere, you shall
in Paules, with a picke-tooth in his Hat,
a cape cloke, and a long stocking.
            
            
               A Golden Asse,
               IS a young thing, whose Father went
to the Diuell; he is followed like a salt
bitch, and limb'd by him that gets vp
first; his disposition is cut, and knaues
rent him like Tenter-hookes: he is as
blinde as his mother, and swallowes flatterers
for friends. He is high in his owne
imagination; but that imagination, as a
stone, that is raised by violence, descends
naturally: when he goes, he lookes who
lookes: if he findes not good store of

vailers, he comes home stiffe and seer,
vntill he be new oyled and watered by
his husbandmen. Wheresoeuer be eates
he hath an officer, to warne men not to
talke out of his element, and his owne is
exceeding sensible, because it is sensuall;
but he cannot exchange a peece of reason,
though he can a peece of gold. He
is naught pluckt, for his feathers are his
beauty, and more then his beautie, they
are his discretion, his countenance, his
All. He is now at an end, for hee hath
had the Wolfe of vaine-glorie, which he
fed, vntill himselfe became the food.
            
            
               A Flatterer,
               
                  IS the shadow of a Foole. Hee is a good
wood-man, for he singleth out none
but the wealthy. His carriage is euer of
the colour of his patient; and for his
sake he will halt or weare a wry necke.
He dispraiseth nothing but pouerty,

and small drinke, and praiseth his grace
of making water. Hee selleth himselfe,
with reckoning his great Friends, and
teacheth the present, how to winne his
praise by reciting the others gifts: hee
is ready for all imploiments, but especially
before Dinner, for his courage and
his stomacke go together. Hee will play
any vpon his countenance, and where
he cannot be admitted for a counseller,
he will serue as a foole. Hee frequents
the court of wards and ordinaries, and
fits these guests of Togae virilis, with
wiues or whoores. He entreth young
men into acquaintance and debt books.
In a word, he is the impression of the
last terme, and will be so, vntill the comming
of a new terme or termer.
            
            
               An ignorant Glorie-hunter,
               IS an insectum animal; for he is the maggot
of opinion, his behauiour is anothing
from himselfe, and is glewed, and

but set on. He entertaines men with repetitions,
and returnes them their owne
words. He is ignorant of nothing, no
not of those things, where ignorance is
the lesser shame. He gets the names of
good wits, and vtters them for his companions.
He confesseth vices that he is
guiltlesse of, if they be in fashion; and
dares not salute a man in old cloths, or
out of fashion. There is not a publicke
assembly without him, and he will take
any paines for an acquaintance there.
In any shew he will be one, though he
be but a whistler, or a torch bearer; and
beares downe strangers with the story
of his actions. He handles nothing that
is not rare, and defends his wardrobe,
diet, and all customes, with entitling
their beginnings from Princes, great
Souldiers and strange Nations. He dares
speake more then he vnderstands, and
aduentures his words without the reliefe
of any seconds. Hee relates battels
and skirmishes, as from an eye witnesse,
when his eies theeuishly beguiled a ballad

of them. In a word, to make sure of
admiration, he will not let himselfe vnderstand
himselfe, but hopes, fame and
opinion will bee the Readers of his
Riddles.
            
            
               A Timist,
               
                  IS a noune adiectiue of the present tense.
He hath no more of a conscience then
Feare, and his religion is not his but the
Princes. Hee reuerenceth a Courtiers
Seruants seruant. Is first his own Slaue,
and then whosoeuer looketh big; when
he giues he curseth, and when hee fells
he worships. He reades the statutes in
his chamber, and weares the Bible in the
streetes: he neuer praiseth any but before
themselues or friends: and mislikes
no great mans actions during his life.
His new yeares gifts are ready at Alhalomas,
and the sute he meant to mediate
before them. He pleaseth the children of

great men, and promiseth to adopt
them; and his curtesie extends it selfe euen
to the stable. Hee straines to talke
wisely, and his modesty would serue a
Bride. He is grauity from the head to
the foote; but not from the head to the
heart; you may finde what place he affecteth,
for he creepes as neere it as may
be, and as passionately courts it; if at
any time his hopes are effected, he swelleth
with them; and they burst out too
good for the vessell. In a word, he danceth
to the tune of fortune, and studies
for nothing but to keepe time.
            
            
               An Amorist,
               IS a certaine blasted or planet-stroken,
and is the dog that leades blinde Cupid;
when he is at the best, his fashion
exceedes the worth of his weight. He is
neuer without verses, and muske confects;
and sighs to the hazard of his buttons;

his eyes are all white, either to
weare the liuery of his Mistris complexion,
or to keepe Cupid from hitting the
blacke. Hee fights with passion, and
looseth much of his blood hy his weapon;
dreames, thence his palenes. His
armes are carefuly vsed, as it their best
vse were nothing but embracements. He
is vntrust, vnbuttoned, and vngartered,
not out of carelesnesse, but care; his farthest
end being but going to bed. Sometimes
he wraps his petition in neatnesse,
but is goeth not alone; for then he makes
some other qualitie moralize his affection,
and his trimnesse is the grace of that
grace. Hir fauour lifts him vp, as the Sun
moisture; when she disfauours, vnable
to hold that happinesse, it falls downe
in teares; his fingers are his Orators, and
hee expresseth much of himselfe vpon
some instrument. He answeres not, or
not to the purpose; and no maruell, for
he is not at home. He scotcheth time
with dancing with his Mistris, taking vp
of her gloue, and wearing her feather;

hee is confinde to her colour, and dares
not passe out of the circuit of her memory.
His imagination is a foole, and it goeth
in a pide-coat of red and white; shortly,
he is translated out of a man into folly;
his imagination is the glasse of lust,
and himselfe the traitour to his owne
discretion.
            
            
               An Affectate Traueller
               IS a speaking fashion; hee hath taken
paynes to be ridiculous; and hath seen
more then he hath perceiued. His attire
speakes French or Italian, and his gate
cryes, Behold me. Hee censures all things
by countenances, and shrugs, and speaks
his owne language with shame and lisping:
he will choake rather then confesse
Beere good drinke: and his pick-tooth is
a maine part of his behauiour. Hee chuseth
rather to be counted a Spie, then not
a Politician: and maintaines his reputation

by naming greatmen familiarly. He
chuseth rather to tell lies, then not wonders,
and talkes with men singly: his discourse
sonnds big, but meanes nothing:
& his Boy is bound to admire him howsoeuer.
He comes still from great Personages,
but goes with meane. He takes
occasion to shew Iewels giuen him in regard
of his vertue, that were bought in
S. Martins: and not long after, hauing
with a Mountebanks method, pronounced
them woorth thousands, enpawneth
them for a few shillings. Vpon festiuall
dayes he goes to Court, and salutes without
resaluting: at night in an Ordinary he
canvasseth the businesse in hand, and
seems as conuersant with all intents and
plots, as if he begot them. His extraordinary
account of men is, first to tell them
the ends of all matters of consequence,
and then to borrow money of them; hee
offereth courtefies, to shew them, rather
then himselfe humble. Hee disdaines all
things aboue his reach, and preferreth
all Countries before his owne. Hee imputeth

his wants and pouerty to the ignorance
of the time, not his owne vnworthinesse:
and concludes his discourse
with halfe a period, or a word, and leaues
the rest to imagination. In a word, his
religion is fashion, and both bodie and
soule are gouerned by fame, hee loues
most voices aboue truth.
            
            
               A Wise man
               IS the truth of the true definition of
man, that is, a reasonable creature.
His disposition alters, alters not. Hee
hides himselfe with the attire of the vulgar;
and in indifferent things is content
to be gouerned by them. He lookes according
to nature, so goes his behauiour.
His minde enioyes a continuall smoothnesse:
so commeth it, that his consideration
is alwaies at home. He endures the
faults of all men silently, except his
friends, and to them he is the mirrour of

their actions; by this meanes his peace
commeth not from fortune, but himselfe.
He is cunning in men, not to surprize but
keepe his owne, and bears off their ill affected
hurnours, no otherwise then if
they were flies. Hee chuseth not friends
by the subsidy-booke, and is not luxurious
after acquaintance. He maintaines
the strength of his body, not by delicacies,
but temperance; and his minde by
giuing it preheminence ouer his bodie.
Hee vnderstands things not by their
forme, but qualities; and his comparisons
intend not to excuse, but to prouoke
him higher. He is not subiect to casualties,
for Fortune hath nothing to do with
the minde, except those drowned in the
body: but he hath diuided his soule, from
the case of his soule, whose weakenesse
hee assists no otherwise then commiseratiuely,
not that it is his, but that it is. He
is thus, and will bee thus: and liues subiect
neither to Time nor his frailties; the
feruant of vertue, and by vertue, the
friend of the highest.
            
            
               
               A Noble Spirit
               HAth surueyed and fortified his disposition,
and conuerts all occurrents
into experience, betweene
which experience and his reason, there
is marriage; the issue are his actions. He
circuits his intents, and seeth the end before
he shoot. Men are the instruments
of his Art, and there is no man without
his vse: occasion incites him, none enticeth
him; and he mooues by affection,
not for affection; he loues glory, scornes
shame, and gouerneth and obeyeth with
one countenance; for it comes from one
consideration. Hee cals not the varietie
of the world chances, for his meditation
hath trauelled ouer them; and his eye
mounted vpon his vnderstanding, seeth
them as things vnderneath. Hee couers
not his body with delicacies, nor excuseth
these delicacies by his body, but teacheth
it, since it is not able to defend its owne

imbecillity, to shew or suffer. Hee licenceth
not his weakenesse, to weare Fate,
but knowing reason to bee no idle gift of
Nature, hee is the Sreeres-man of his
owne destiny. Truth is his Goddesse,
and he takes paines to get her, not to look
like her. He knowes the condition of the
world, that he must act one thing like another,
and then another. To these hee
carries his desires, & not his desires him;
and stickes not fast by the way (for that
contentment is repentance) but knowing
the circle of all courses, of all intents,
of all things, to haue but one center or
period, without all distraction, he hasteth
thither and ends there, as his true and naturall
element. He doth not contemne
Fortune, but not confesse her. Hee is no
Gamester of the world (which only complaine
and praise her) but being onely
sensible of the honesty of actions, contemnes
a particular profit as the excrement
or scum. Vnto the society of men
he is a Sunne, whose cleerenesse directs
their steps in a regular motion: when he

is more particular, hee is the wise mans
friend, the example of the indifferent, the
medicine of the vicious. Thus time goeth
not from him, but with him: and he
feeles age more by the strength of his
soule, than the weakenesse of his body:
thus feeles he no paine, but esteemes all
such things as friends, that desire to file
off his fetters, and help him out of prison.
            
            
               An Olde Man
               IS a thing that hath beene a man in his
dayes. Olde men are to bee knowen
blind-folded: for their talke is as terrible
as their resemblance. They praise
their own times as vehemently, as if they
would sell them. They become wrinckled
with frowning and facing youth;
they admire their old customes, euen to
the eating of red herring, and going wetshod.
They call the thumbe vnder the
girdle, Grauity; and because they can

hardly smell at all, their Posies are vnder
their girdles. They count it an Ornament
of speech, to close the period with a
cough; and it is venerable, they say, to
spend time in wiping their driueled
beards. Their discourse is vnanswerable,
by reason of their obstinacy: their speech
is much, though little to the purpose.
Trueths and lies passe with an equall affirmation,
for their memories seuerall is
wonne into one receptacle, and so they
come out with one sense. They teach
their seruants their duties with as much
scorne and tyranny, as some people teach
their dogs to fetch. Their enuy is one of
their diseases. They put off and on their
clothes, with that certainty, as if they
knew, their heads would not direct them,
and therefore Custome should. They
take a pride in halting and going stiffely,
and therefore their staues are carued and
tipped: they trust their attire with much
of their grauity; and they dare not goe
without a gowne in Summer. Their hats
are brushed to draw mens eyes off from

their faces; but of all, their Pomandars
are worne to most purpose, for their putrified
breath ought not to want either a
smell to defend, or a dog to excuse.
            
            
               A Countrey Gentleman
               IS a thing, out of whose corruption the
generation of a Iustice of peace is produced.
Hee speakes statutes and husbandry
well enough, to make his neighbours
thinke him a wise man; hee is well
skilled in Arithmeticke or rates: and hath
eloquence enough to saue his two pence.
His conuersation amongst his Tenants is
desperate; but amongst his equals full of
doubt. His trauell is seldome farther then
the next market towne, and his inquisition
is about the price of Corne: when
he trauelleth, he will goe ten mile out of
the way to a Couzens house of his to saue
charges; and rewards the Seruants by
taking them by the hand when hee departs.

Nothing vnder a Sub-poena can
draw him to London: and when hee is
there, he stickes fast vpon euery obiect,
casts his eyes away vpon gazing, and becomes
the prey of euery Cut-purse.
When hee comes home, those wonders
serue him for his Holy-day talke. If hee
goe to Court, it is in yellow stockings;
and if it be in Winter, in a slight taffetie
cloake, and pumps and pantofles. He is
chaind, that wooes the vsher for his
comming into the presence, where hee
becoms troublesome with the ill managing
of his Rapier, and the wearing of
his girdle of one fashion, and the hangers
of another; by this time he hath learned
to kisse his hand, and make a Leg both
together, and the names of Lords and
Counsellours; hee hath thus much toward
entertainment and courtesie, but
of the last hee makes more vse; for by
the recitall of my Lord, hee coniures his
poor country-men. But this is not his element,
he must home againe, being like a
Dor, that ends his flight in a dunghill.
            
            
               
               A Fine Gentle-man
               
                  IS the Cynamon tree, whose barke is
more worth then his body. Hee hath
read the Booke of good manners, and
by this time each of his limbs may
read it. He alloweth of no iudge, but the
eye; painting, boulstring, and bombasting
are his Oratours: by these also hee
prooues his industry: for hee hath purchased
legs, haire, beautie, and straightnesse,
more then nature left him. He vnlockes
maiden-heads with his language,
and speakes Euphues, not so gracefully as
heartily. His discourse makes not his behauiour,
but hee buies it at Court, as
Countrey men their cloathes in Birchinlane.
Hee is somewhat like the Salamander,
and liues in the flame of loue, which
paines he expresseth comically: and nothing
grieues him so much, as the want
of a Poet to make an issue in his loue;
yet he sighs sweetly, and speakes lamentably:

for his breath is perfumed, and
his words are winde. He is best in season
at Christmas; for the Boares head and
Reueller come together; his hopes are
laden in his quality: & left Fidlers should
take him vnprouided, hee weares pumps
in his pocket: and lest hee should take
Fidlers vnprouided, he whistles his owne
Galliard. He is a Calender of ten yeeres,
and marriage rusts him. Afterwards he
mainetaines himselfe an implement of
houshold by caruing and vshering. For
all this, he is iudiciall onely in Taylours
and Barbers, but his opinion is euer ready,
and euer idle. If you will know more
of his acts, the Brokers shoppe is the witnesse
of his valour, where lies wounded,
dead, rent, and out of fashion, many a
spruce Sute, ouerthrowen by his fantasticknesse.
            
            
               
               An Elder Brother
               IS a creature borne to the best aduantage
of things without him, that hath
the start at the beginning, but loyters
it away before the ending. Hee lookes
like his Land, as heauily, and durtily, as
stubbornly. He dares doe any thing but
fight; and feares nothing but his fathers
life and minority. The first thing hee
makes known is his estate; and the Loadstone
that drawes him is the vpper end of
the Table. Hee wooeth by a particular,
and his strongest argument is the ioynture.
His obseruation is all about the fashion,
and hee commends Partlets for a
rare deuise. He speakes no language, but
smels of dogs or hawkes; and his ambition
flies Iustice-height. He loues to bee
commended, and hee will goe into the
Kitchin, but heele haue it. He loues glory,
but is so lazie, as hee is content with
flattery. Hee speakes most of the precedency

of age, and protests fortune the
greatest vertue. He summoneth the old
seruants, and tels what strange acts he wil
doe when he raignes. He verily beleeues
house-keepers the best common-wealths
men; and therefore studies baking, brewing,
greasing, and such, as the limmes of
goodnesse. He iudgeth it no small signe
of wisdome to talke much; his tongue
therefore goes continually his errand, but
neuer speeds. If his vnderstanding were
not honester then his will, no man should
keepe good conceit by him; for hee
thinkes it no theft, to fell all he can to opinion.
His pedigree & his fathers sealering,
are the stilts of his crazed disposition.
He had rather keepe company with
the dregs of men, then not to be the best
man. His insinuation is the inuiting of
men to his house; and he thinks it a great
modesty to comprehend his cheere vnder
a peece of Mutton and a Rubet: if he
by this time be not knowen, he will goe
home againe: for he can no more abide
to haue himself concealed, then his land;

yet he is as you see good for nothing, except
to make a stallion to maintaine the race.
            
            
               A Braggadochio Welchman
               IS the Oyster, that the Pearle is in, for a
man may be pickt out of him. He hath
the abilities of the minde in Potentia,
and actu nothing but boldnesse. His clothes
are in fashion before his body; and
he accounts boldnesse the chiefest vertue.
Aboue all men he loues an Herrald,
and speakes pedigrees naturally. He accounts
none well descended, that call
him not Couzen; and preferres Owen Glendower before any of the nine Worthies.
The first note of his familiarity is
the confession of his valour; and so hee
preuents quarrels. He vouchech Welch,
a pure and vnconquered language, and
courts Ladies with the story of their
Chronicle. To conclude, he is precious

in his owne conceit, and vpon S. Dauies
day without comparison.
            
            
               A Pedant
               HE treads in a rule, and one hand
scannes verses, and the other holds
his Scepter. He dares not think a
thought that the nominatiue case gouerns
not the Verbe; and hee neuer had meaning
in his life, for he trauelled onely for
words. His ambition is Criticisme, and
his example Tully. Hee values phrases,
and elects them by the sound, and the
eight parts of speech are his Seruants. To
be briefe, he is a Hetoroclite, for he wants
the plurall number, hauing onely the single
quality of words.
            
            
               
               A Seruing-man
               
                  IS a creature, which though hee bee not
                  drunke, yet is not his owne man. Hee
tels without asking who ownes him,
by the superscription of his Liuery. His
life is, for ease and leisure, much about
Gentleman-like. His wealth enough to
suffice Nature, and sufficient to make
him happy, if he were sure of it; for he
hath little, and wants nothing, hee values
himselfe higher or lower, as his
Master is. Hee hates or loues the Men,
as his Master doth the Master. Hee is
commonly proud of his Masters horses,
or his Christmas; he sleeps when he is
sleepy, is of his religion, only the clock
of his stomack is set to go an houre after
his. He seldome breakes his owne clothes.
He neuer drinkes but double, for
hee must bee pledg'd; nor commonly
without some short sentence nothing to
the purpose: and seldome abstaines till

hee come to a thirst. His discretion is
to be carefull for his Masters credit, &
his sufficiency to marshall dishes at a
Table, and to carue well. His neatnesse
consists much in his haire and outward
linnen. His courting language,
visible bawdy iests; and against his
matter faile, he is alway ready furnished
with a song. His inheritance is
the Chamber-mayd, but often purchaseth
his Masters daughter, by reason of
opportunity, or for want of a better: he
alwaies cuckolds himselfe, and neuer
marries but his owne widdow. His
Master being appeased, hee becomes a
Retainer, and entailes himselfe and
his posterity vpon his heire-males for euer.
            
            
               An Host
               IS the kernell of a Signe: or the Signe
is the shell, & mine Host is the Snaile.

He consists of double-beere and followship,
and his vices are the bawds of his
thirst. Hee enterraines humbly, and
giues his Guests power, as well of himselfe
as house. He answers all mens expections
to his power, saue in the reckoning:
and hath gotten the tricke of
greatnesse, to lay all mislikes vpon his
seruants. His wife is the Cummin-seed
of his Doue-house; and to bee a good
Guest, is a warrant for her liberty. He
traffiques for Guests by mens friends,
friends-friend, and is sensible onely of
his purse. In a word, hee is none of his
owne: for hee neither eats, drinkes, or
thinkes, but at other mens charges and
appoyntments.
            
            
               An Ostler
               
                  IS a thing that scrubbeth vireasonably
                  his horse, reasonably himselfe. He consists
of Trauellers, though he bee none

himselfe. His highest ambition is to
be Host, and the inuention of his signe
is his greatest wit: for the expressing
whereof he sends away the Painters for
want of vnderstanding. Hee hath certaine
charmes for a horse mouth, that
he should not eat his hay: and behinde
your backe, hee will cozen your horse
to his face. His curry-combe is one of
his best parts, for hee expresseth much
by the gingling: and his mane-combe
is a spinners card turn'd out of seruice.
He puffes and blowes ouer your horse,
to the hazard of a double Iugge: and
leaues much of the dressing to the prouerb
of Muli mutuo scabient, One horse
rubs another. Hee comes to him that
cals lowdest, not first; hee takes a broken
head patiently, but the knaue hee
feeles not. His vtmost honesty is good
fellowship, and he speakes Notherne,
what country man soeuer. He hath a
pension of Ale from the next smith and
Sadler for intelligence. He loues to see
you ride, & holds your stirrop in expectation.
            
            
               
               A good Wife
               IS a mans best mooueable, a scien incorporate
with the stocke, bringing
sweetfruit; one that to her husband
is more then a friend, lesse then trouble:
an equall with him in the yoake.
Calamities and troubles shee shares alike,
nothing pleaseth her that doth not
him. Shee is relatiue in all; and hee
without her, but halfe himselfe. She is
his absent hands, eies, eares, and mouth:
his present and absent All. She frames
her nature vnto his howsoeuer: the
Hiacinth followes not the Sunne more
willingly. Stubbornenesse and obstinacy,
are hearbes that grow not in her
garden. She leaues tatling, to the gossips
of the towne, and is more seen then
heard: Her houshold is her charge, her
care to that, makes her seldome non resident.
Her pride is but to be cleanly, &
her thrift not to be prodigal. By her discretion

she hath children, notwantons;
a Husband without her, is a miserie in
mans apparell: none but shee hath an
aged husband, to whom she is both a
staffe and a chaire. To conclude, shee
is both wise and religious, which
makes her all this.
            
            
               A Melancholie man
               IS a straier from the droue: one that
nature made sociable, because shee
made him man, and a crazed disposition
hath altered. Impleasing to all, as
all to him; stragling thoughts are his
content, they make him dreame waking,
there's his pleasure. His imagination
is neuer idle, it keeps his minde
in a continu all motion, as the poise the
clocke: he windes vp his thoughts often,
and as often vnwindes them; Penelopes
webbe thriues faster. Hel'e seldome
be found without the shade of

some groue, in whose bottom a riuer
dwells. He carries a cloud in his face,
neuer faire weather: his outside is framed
to his inside, in that he keepes a
Decorum, both vnseemly. Speake to
him, he heares with his eyes, eares follow
his mind, and that's not at leasure.
Hee thinks businesse, but neuer does
any: he is all contemplation, no actiō.
He hewes and fashions his thoughts,
as if he meant them to some purpose,
but they proue vnprofitable, as a piece
of wrought timber to no vse. His Spirits
and the Sunne are enemies; the
Sunne bright and warme, his humor
blacke and cold: varietie of foolish
apparitions people his head, they suffer
him not to breath, according to the
necessities of nature; which makes him
sup vp a draught of as much aire at
once, as would serue at thrice. Hee
denies nature her due in sleepe, and
ouer-paies her with watchfulnesse:
nothing pleaseth him long, but that
which pleaseth his owne fantasies:

they are the consuming euills, and euill
consumptions, that consume him aliue.
Lastly, he is a man only in shew, but
comes short of the better part; a whole
reasonable soule, which is mans chiefe
preheminence, and sole marke from
creatures sensible.
            
            
               A Sailor
               IS a pitcht peece of reason calkt and
tackled, and onely studied to dispute
with tempests. He is part of his owne
Prouision, for he liues euerpickled. A
fore-winde is the substance of his
Creed; and fresh water the burden of
his prayers. He is naturally ambitious,
for he is euer climing: out of which as
naturally he feares; for hee is euer flying:
time and he are euery where, euer
contending who shall ariue first: hee is
well winded, for he tires the day, and
out-runne darknesse. His life is like a
Hawkes, the best part mewed; and if

he liue till three coates, is a Master. He
sees Gods wonders in the deep: but so
as rather they appeare his play-fellowes,
then stirrers of his zeale: nothing
but hunger and hard rockes can conuert
him, and then but his vpper deck
neither; for his hold neither feares nor
hopes. His sleeps are but repreeuals of
his dangers, and when he awakes, tis
but next stage to dying. His wisdome
is the coldest part about him, for it euer
points to the North: and it lyes lowest,
which makes his valor euerie tide oreflow
it. In a storme tis disputable, whether
the noise be more his, or the Elements,
and which will first leaue scolding;
on which side of the ship he may
be saued best, whether his faith bee
starre-bord faith, or lar-bord: or the
helme at that time not all his hope of
heauen: his keel is the Embleme of his
conscience, till it be split hee neuer repents,
then no farther then the land
allowes him, and his language is a new
confusion: and all his thoughts new

nations: his bodie and his ship are
both one burthen, nor is it known who
stowes most wine, or rowles most, only
the ship is guided, he has no sterne: a
barnacle and hee are bred together
both of one nature, and tis fear'd one
reason: vpon any but a woodden horse
hee cannot ride, and if the winde blow
against him he dare not: hee swarues
vp to his seat as to a saile yarde, and
cannot sit vnlesse he beare a flag staffe:
if euer he be broken to the saddle, tis
but a voyage still, for hee mistakes the
bridle for a bowlin, and is euer turning
his horse taile: he can pray, but tis by
rote, not faith, and when he would hee
dares not, for his brackish beleefe
hath made that ominous. A rocke or a
quick sand plucke him before hee be
ripe, else he is gathered to his friends
at Wapping.
            
            
               
               A Souldier
               IS the husband-man of valour, his
sword is his plough, which honor and
aqua-vitae, two fiery mettald iades, are
euer drawing. A younger brother best
becomes Armes; an elder, the thanks
for them; euery heat makes him a haruest:
and discontents abroad are his
Sowers: he is actiuely his Princes, but
passiuely his angers seruant. Hee is often
a desirer of learning, which once
arriued at, proues his strongest armour:
he is a louer at all points; and a true
defender of the faith of women: more
wealth then makes him seeme a handsome
foe, lightly he couets not, lesse is
below him: he neuer truely wants, but
in much hauing, for then his ease and
letcherie afflict him: the word Peace,
though in prayer, makes him start, and
God he best considers by his power:
hunger and cold ranke in the same file

with him, and hold him to a man: his
honour else, and the desire of doing
things beyond him, would blow him
greater then the sonnes of Anack. His
religion is, commonly, as his cause is
(doubtfull) and that the best devotion
keeps best quarter: he seldom sees gray
haires, some none at all, for where the
sword failes, there the flesh giues fire:
in charitie, he goes beyond the Clergy,
for hee loues his greatest enemie best,
much drinking. He seemes a full Student,
for he is a great desirer of controuersies,
he argues sharply, and carries
his conclusion in his scabbard; in the
first resining of mankind this was the
gold, his actions are his ammell. His
alay (for else you cannot worke him
perfectly) continuall duties, heauie and
wearie marches, lodgings as full of
neede as cold diseases. No time to argue,
but to execute. Line him with
these, and linke him to his squadrons,
and he appeares a most rich chaine for
Princes.
            
            
               
               A Taylor
               IS a creature made vp of shreds, that
were pared off from Adam, when he
was rough cast. The end of his Being
differeth from that of others, and is
not to serue God, but to couer sinne.
Other mens pride is his best Patron,
and their negligence, a maine passage
to his profit. Hee is a thing of more
then ordinary iudgement: For by vertue
of that, he buieth land, buildeth
houses and raiseth the lowe set roofe
of his crosse legged Fortune. His actions
are strong incounters, and for their
notoriousnesse alwaies vpon Record.
It is neither Amadic de Gaule, nor the
Knight of the Sunne, that is able to resist
them. A tenne groates fee setteth
them on foote, and a brace of Officers
bringeth them to execution. He handleth
the Spanish Pike, to the hazard
of many poore Egyptian vermins; and

in shew of his valour, scorneth a greater
Gantlet, then will couer the toppe
of his middle-finger. Of all weapons
he most affecteth the long Bill, and this
he will manage to the great preiudice
of a Customers estate. His spirit notwithstanding
is not so much as to
make you thinke him man; like a true
mongrell, he neither bites nor barkes,
but when your backe is towards him.
His heart is a lumpe of congealed
snow: Prometheus was a sleepe while it
was making. He differeth altogether
from God; for with him the best peeces
are still marked out for damnation,
and without hope of recouery shal
be cast downe into hell. Hee is partly
an Alchimist; for hee extracteth his
owne apparell out of other mens
clothes; and when occasion serueth,
making a Brokers shop his Alembike,
can turne your silkes into gold, and
hauing furnished his necessities, after
a moneth or two, if he be vrg'd vnto it,
reduce them againe to their proper

substance. Hee is in part likewise an
Arithmetician, cunning enough in
Multiplication and addition, but cannot
abide substraction: Summa totalis,
is the Language of his Canaan; & vs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
ad vltimum quadrantem, the period of
all his Charitie. For any skill in Geometrie,
I dare not commend him; For he
could neuer yet finde out the dimensions
of his owne conscience: Notwithstanding
he hath many bottoms, it
seemeth this is alwaies bottomlesse.
He is double yarded, and yet his femall
complaineth of want of measure.
And so, with a Libera nos à malo; I leaue
you promising to amend whatsoeuer
is a misse, at his next setting.
            
            
               A Puritane
               IS a diseas'd peece of Apocripha: binde
him to the Bible, and hee corrupts
the whole text: Ignorance, and fat feed,

are his Founders; his Nurses, Railing,
Rabbies, and round breeches: his life
is but a borrowed blast of winde; For
betweene two religions, as betweene
two doores, he is euer whistling. Truly
whose childe he is, is yet vnknown;
For willingly his faith allowes no Father:
onely thus farre his pedegree is
found, Bragger and he flourisht about
a time first; his fierie zeale keepes him
continuall costiue, which withers him
into his owne translation, and till hee
eate a Schooleman, he is hidebound;
hee euer praies against Non Residents,
but is himselfe the greatest discontinuer,
for hee neuer keepes neere his
text: any thing that the Law allowes,
but Marriage, and March-beere, hee
murmures at; what it disallowes, and
holdes dangerous, makes him a discipline.
Where the gate standes open,
he is euer seeking a stile: and where his
Learning ought to climbe, he creepes
through; giue him aduice, you runne
into Traditions, and vrge a modest

course, he cries out Councels. His greatest
care is, to contemne obedience, his
last care to serue God, handsomely and
clenly; Hee is now become so crosse a
kinde of teaching, that should the
Church enioyne cleane shirts, he were
lowsie: more sense then single praiers
is not his; nor more in those, then still
the same petitions: from which hee
either feares a learned Faith, or doubts
God vnderstands not at first hearing.
Shew him a Ring, he runs backe like a
Beare; and hates square dealing as allied
to caps, a paire of Organs blow
him out o'th Parish, and are the only
glister pipes to coole him. Where the
meate is best, there he confutes most,
for his arguing is but the efficacy of his
eating: good bits hee holds breedes
good positions, and the Pope he best
concludes against, in Plum-broth. He
is often drunk, but not as we are, temporally,
nor can his sleepe then cure
him, for the fumes of his ambition
make his very soule reele, and that

small Beere that should alay him (silence)
keepes him more surfeited, and
makes his heate breake out in priuate
houses: women and Lawyers are his
best Disciples, the one next fruit, longs
for forbidden Doctrine, the other to
maintain forbidden titles, both which
he sowes amongst them. Honest hee
dare not be, for that loues order: yet
if he can be brought to Ceremonie, &
made but master of it, he is conuerted.
            
            
               A Whoore
               IS a hie way to the Diuell, hee that
lookes vpon her with desire, begins
his voiage: he that staies to talke with
her, mends his pace, and who enioies
her is at his iourneis end: Her body is
the tilted Lees of pleasure, dasht ouer
with a little decking to hold colour:
tast her, she's dead, and fals vpon the
pallate; the sins of other women shew

in Landscip, far off and full of shadow;
hers in Statue, neere hand, and bigger
in the life: she prickes betimes, for her
stocke is a white thorne, which cut &
grafted on, she growes a Medler: Her
trade is opposite to any other, for she
sets vp without credit, and too much
custome breakes her; The mony that
she gets is like a traitors, giuen only to
corrupt her, and what she gets, serues
but to pay diseases. She is euer moo'rd
in sinne, and euer mending, and after
thirty, she is the Chirurgians creature;
shame and Repentance are two strangers
to her, and only in an hospitall acquainted:
she liues a Reprobate, like
Caine, still branded, finding no habitation
but her feares, and flies the face
of Iustice like a Fellon. The first yeare
of her trade she is an Eyesse scratches
and cries to draw on more, affection:
the second Soare: the third a Ramage
whoore: the fourth and fifth, she's an
intermewer, preies for her selfe, and
ruffles all she reaches; from thence to

tenne shee beares the name of white
whoore, for then her bloud forsakes
her with salt Rheumes, and now shee
has mewd three coates; Now shee
growes weary and diseas'd together,
fauours her wing, checkes little, but lies
for it, bathes for her health, & scoures
to keepe her coole, yet still she takes in
stones, she fires her selfe else: the next
remoue is Haggard, stil more cunning;
and if my art deceiue mee not, more
crazie. All cares and cures are doubled
now vpon her, and line her perch, or
now she mews her pounces, at all these
yeares shee flies at fooles and kils too:
the next is Bussard Bawde, and there
I leaue her.
            
            
               A very Whoore
               IS a woman. She enquires out all the
great meetings, which are medicines
for her itching. She kisseth open

mouth'd, and spits in the palmes of
her hands to make them moist. Her
eies are like free-booters liuing vpon
the spoile of stragglers; and she baites
her desires with a million of postitute
countenances, and entisements; In the
light she listneth to Parlies: but in the
darke she vnderstands signes best. She
will sell her smocke for Cuffes, and so
her shoes be fine, she cares not though
her stockings want feet. Hers modesty
is curiositie, and her smell is one of her
best ornaments. She passeth not a span
breadth. And to haue done, she is the
Cooke and the meate dressing, her selfe
all day, to bee tasted with the better
appetite at night.
            
            
               A meere Common Lawyer
               IS the best shadow to make a discreet
one shew the fairer. He is a Materia
prima informed by reports, actuated

by Statutes, and hath his Motion by
the fauourable Intelligence of the
Court. His Law is alwaies furnisht
with a Commission to arraigne his
Conscience: but vpon iudgement giuen
he vsually sets it at large. He thinks
no language worth knowing but his
Barragoüin. Onely for that point hee
hath been a long time at warres with
Priscian for a Northerne Prouince. He
imagines that by superexcellencie his
profession only is learning, and that its
a prophanation of the temple to his
Themis dedicated, if any of the liberall
Arts be there admitted to offer strange
incense to Her. For indeed he is all for
money. Seuen or eight yeares squires
him out, some of his Nation lesse standing:
and euer since the Night of his
Call, he forgot much what he was at
dinner. The next morning his man
(in Actu or potentia) enioies his pickadels.
His Landresse is then shrewdly
troubled in fitting him a Ruffe; His
perpetuall badge. His loue letters of

the last yeare of his Gentlemanship are
stuft with Discontinuances, Remitters,
and Vncore prists: but now being enabled
to speake in proper person, hee
talkes of a French hood, insteede of a
Iointure, wages his law, and ioines
issue. Then he begins to sticke his letters
in his ground Chamber window;
that so the superscription may make
his Squire-ship transparent. His Heraldry
giues him place before the Minister,
because the Law was before the
Gospell. Next termne hee walkes his
hoopsleeue gowne to the Hall; there
it proclaimes him. He feedes fat in the
Reading, and till it chances to his turn,
dislikes no house order so much, as
that the month is so contracted to a
fortnight, Mongst his countrey neighbours,
he arrogates asmuch honor for
being Reader of an Inne of Chancery,
as if it had been of his owne house.
For they, poore soules, take Law and
Conscience, Court and Chancery for
all one. He learnd to frame his Cases

from putting Riddles and imitating
Merlins Prophesies, and so set all the
Crosse row together by the eares. Yet
his whole Law is not able to decide
Lucians one olde controuersie twixt
Tau and Sigma. Hee accounts no man
of his Cap and coate idle, but who
trots not the Circuit. Hee affects no
life or qualitie for it selfe, but for gaine;
and that at least, to the stating him in
a Iustice of peaceship, which is the first
quickning soule superadded to the elementary
and inanimate forme of his
new Title. His termes are his wiues
vacations. Yet shee then may vsurpe
diuers Court-daies, and hath her Returnes
in Mensem, for writs of entry;
often shorter. His vacations are her
Termers. But in Assise time (the circuit
being long) he may haue a triall
at home against him by Nisi Prius. No
way to heauen, he thinkes, so wife, as
through West-minster Hall; and his
Clarkes commonly through it visit
both heauen and hell. Yet then he oft

forgets his iourneis end, although he
looke on the Starre-Chamber. Neither
is hee wholie destitute of the Arts.
Grammer he hath, enough to make terminations
of those words which his
authoritie hath endenizon'd. Rhetorike
some; but so little, that its thought a
concealement. Logike enough to wrangle.
Arithmetike enough for the Ordinals
of his yecre-bookes, and numberrolls:
but he goes not to Multiplication;
there's a Statute against it. So much
Geometrie, that hee can aduice in a Perambulatione
facienda; or a Rationalibus
diuisis. In Astronomie and Astrologie he
is so far seene, that by the Dominicall
latter, he knowes the Holy-dayes, and
finds by Calculation that Michaelmas
Terme will be long and dirty. Marry,
he knowes so much in Musique, that he
affects onely the most and cunningest
Discords; rarely a perfect Concord, especially
song, except in fine. His skill in
Perspectiue endeauours much to deceiue
the eye of the Lawe, and giues

many false colours. He is specially practised
in Necromancie, (such a kinde as
is out of the Statute of Primo) by raising
many dead Questions. What sufficiency
he hath in Criticisme, the fowle Copies
of his Speciall Pleas will tell you.
               Many of the same coat, which are
much to bee honoured, partake of diuers
of his indifferent qualities, but so,
that Discretion, Vertue, and sometimes
other good learning, concurring and distinguishing
Ornaments to them, make
them as a foyle, to set their worth on.
            
            
               A Meere Scholler.
               A Meere Sholler is an intelligible Asse:
Or a silly fellow in blacke, that
speakes Sentences more familiarly
then Sense. The Antiquity of his
Vniuersity is his Creed, and the excellency
of his Colledge (though but for
a match at Foot-ball) an Article of his

faith: he speakes Latine better then his
Mother-tongue; and is a stranger in no
part of the World, but his owne Countrey:
he do's vsually tell great stories of
himself to small purpose, for they are cō
                  monly
ridiculous, be they true or false:
his Ambition is, that hee either is, or
shall be a Graduate: but if euer he get
a Fellowship, hee ha's then no fellow.
Inspite of all Logick he dare sweare and
mainetaine it, that a Cuckold and a
Towns-man are Termini Conuertibiles,
though his Mothers husband bee an
Alderman: he was neuer begotten (as
it seemes) without much wrangling;
for his whole life is spent in Pro & Contrae
his tongue goes alwaies before his
wit, like a Gentleman-vsher, but somewhat
faster. That he is a compleat Gallant
in all points, Cap a pea; witnesse his
horsemanship, and the wearing of his
weapons: hee is commonly long-winded,
able to speake more with ease, then
any man can endure to heare with patience.
Vniuersity iests are his vniuersall

discourse, and his newes the demeanor
of the Proctors: his Phrase, the apparell
of his mind, is made vp of diuers shreds
like a Cushion, and when it goes plainest't
hath a Rash outside, and Fustian
linings. The currant of his speech is
clos'd with an Ergô; and what euer be
the question, the trueth is on his side.
Tis a wrong to his reputation to bee ignorant
of any thing; and yet he knowes
not that hee knowes nothing: hee
giues directions for husbandry from
Virgils Georgicks; for Cattell from his
Bucolicks; for Warlike Stratagems, from
his AEneides, or Caesars Commentaries:
hee orders all things by the Booke, is
skilfull in all trades, and thriues in none:
he is led more by his eares then his vnderstanding,
taking the sound of words
for their true sense: and do's therefore
confidently beleeue, that Erra Pater
was the Father of hereticks, Rodolphus
Agricola, a substantiall Farmer; and
will not sticke to auerre, that Systema's
Logicke doth excell Keckermans: his ill

lucke is not so much in being a foole, as
in being put to such paines to expresse it
to the world: for what in others is naturall,
in him (with much adoe) is artificiall:
his pouerty is his happinesse, for
it makes some men beleeue, that hee is
none of fortunes fauorites. That learning
which hee hath, was in Non-age
put in backeward like a Glister, and 'tis
now like Ware mislayd in a Pedlers
packe; a ha's it, but knowes not where
it is. In a word, hee is the Index of a
man, and the Title-page of a Scholler,
or a Puritane in morality, much in profession,
nothing in practise.
            
            
               A Tinker
               IS a mooueable: for hee hath no abiding
place; by his motion he gathers
heat, thence his chollericke nature.
He seemes to bee very deuout, for his
life is a continuall Pilgrimage, and

sometimes in humility goes barefoot,
therein making necessity a vertue. His
house is as ancient as Tubal-Caines, and
so is a runnagate by antiquity: yet hee
prooues himselfe a Gallant, for he carries
all his wealth vpon his backe; or a
Philosopher, for hee beares all his substance
about him. From his Art was
Musicke first inuented, and therefore is
hee alwayes furnisht with a song: to
which his hammer keeping tune,
prooues that he was the first founder of
the Kettle-drumme. Note that where
the best Ale is, there stands his musicke
most vpon crotchets. The companion
of his trauels is some soule sunne-burnt
Queane, that since the terrible Statute
recanted Gypsisme, and is turned Pedleresse.
So marches he all ouer England
with his bag and baggage. His conuersation
is vnreprooueable; for he is euer
mending. He ob
                     •
                  erues truely the Statutes,
and therefore he had rather steale
then begge, in which he is vnremooueably
constant in spight of whips or imprisonment:

and so strong an enemy to
idlenesse, that in mending one hole, he
had rather make three then want work;
and when hee hath done, hee throwes
the Wallet of his faults behinde him.
Hee embraceth naturally ancient customes,
conuersing in open fields, and
lowly Cottages. If hee visit Cities or
Townes, tis but to deale vpon the imperfections
of our weaker vessels. His
tongue is very voluble, which with
Canting prooues him a Linguist. Hee
is entertain'd in euery place, but enters
no further then the doore, to auoid
suspicion. Some would take him to be
a Coward; but beleeue it, hee is a Lad
of mettle, his valour is commonly three
or fower yards long, fastned to a pike in
the end for flying off. Hee is very prouident,
for he will fight but with one at
once, and then also hee had rather submit
then bee counted obstinate. To
conclude, if he scape Tiburne and Banbury,
he dies a begger.
            
            
               
               An Apparatour
               IS a Chick of the Egge Abuse, hatcht
by the warmth of authority: he is a
bird of rapine, and beginnes to prey,
and feather together. He croakes like
a Rauen against the death of rich men,
and so gets a Legacy vnbequeat'd: his
happinesse is in the multitude of children,
for their increase is his wealth;
and to that end, hee himselfe yeerely
addes one. He is a cunning hunter, vncouping
his intelligencing hounds, vnder
hedges, in thickets, and corn-fields,
who follow the chase to City-Suburbs,
where often his game is at couert: his
quiuer hangs by his side, stuft with siluer
arrowes, which hee shoots against
Church-gates, and priuate mens dores,
to the hazard of their purses and credit.
There went but a paire of sheeres,
betweene him and the Pursiuant of
Hell, for they both delight in sin, grow

richer by it, and are by iustice appointed
to punish it: onely the Diuell is
more cunning, for hee pickes a Liuing
out of others gaines. His liuing lieth in
his eyes, which (like spirits) hee sends
through chinckes, and key-holes, to
suruey the places of darkenesse; for
which purpose, he studieth the opticks,
but can discouer no colour but blacke,
for the pure white of chastity dazleth
his eyes. He is a Catholike, for hee is
euery where; and with a Politicke, for
he transformes himselfe into all shapes.
He trauels on foot to auoid idlenesse,
and loues the Church entirely, because
it is the place of his edification. He accounts
not all sinnes mortall; for fornication
with him is a veniall sinne, and
to take bribes a matter of charity: hee
is collector for burnings, and losses ar
Sea, and in casting account, can readily
subtract the lesser from the greater
summe. Thus liues he in a golden age,
till death by a processe, summons him
to appeare.
            
            
               
               An Almanacke-maker
               IS the worst part of an Astronomer:
a creature compact of figures, characters,
and cyphers: out of which
he scores the fortune of a yeere, not so
profitably, as doubtfully. He is tenant
by custome to the Planets, of whom he
holds the 12. Houses by lease parol: to
them he payes yeerely rent, his study,
and time; yet lets them out again (with
all his heart) for 40.s. per annum. His
life is meerely contemplatiue: for his
practise, tis woorth nothing, at least
not worthy of credit; & (if by chance)
he purchase any, hee loseth it againe at
the yeeres end, for time brings truth to
light. Ptolomy and Ticho-Barche are his
Patrons, whose volumes he vnderstands
not, but admires; and the rather because
they are Strangers, and so easier
to bee credited, then controul'd. His
life is vpright, for he is alwaies looking

vpward; yet dares beleeue nothing aboue
Primium mobile, for tis out of the
reach of his Iacobs Staffe. His charity
extends no further then to Mountebanks
and Sow-gelders, to whom hee
bequeathes the seasons of the yeere, to
kill or torture by. The verses in his
Booke haue a worse pace then euer had
Rochester Hackney: for his Prose, 'tis
dappled with Inke-borne tearmes, and
may serue for an Almanacke: but for
his iudging at the vncertainty of weather,
any old Shepheard shall make a
Dunce of him. He would bee thought
the Diuels Intelligencer for stoln goods:
if euer he steale out of that quality, as
a flie turnes to a Maggot, so the corruption
of the cunning-man is the generation
of an Empiricke: his workes flye
soorth in small volumes yet not all, for
many ride post to Chaundlers and Tobacco
shops in Folio. To be briefe, he
fals three degrees short of his promises;
yet is hee the Key to vnlocke Termes,
and Law-dayes, a dumbe Mercury to

point out high-wayes, and a Bayliffe of
all Marts and Faires in England. The
rest of him you shall know next yeere;
for what hee will be then, hee himselfe
knowes not.
            
            
               An Hypocrite
               IS a gilded Pill, compos'd of two vertuous
ingredients, Naturall dishonesty,
and Artificiall dissimulation. Simple
Fruit, Plant or Drug, he is none, but
a deformed mixture, bred betwixt Euill
Nature and false Art, by a monstrous
generation; and may well bee put into
the reckoning of those creatures that
God neuer made. In Church or common-wealth,
(For in both these this Mongrell-weed
will shoote) it is hard to say
whether he be Physicke or a Disease: for
he is both, in diures respects.
               As he is gilt with an out side of Seeming
purity, or as he offreth himselfe to

you to be taken downe in a cup or taste
of Golden zeale and Simplicity, you may
call him physicke. Nay, and neuer let
potion giue Patient good stoole, if being
truely tasted and rellisht, hee be not as
loathsome to the stomacke of any honest
man.
               He is also Physicke, in being as commodious
for vse, as he is odious in taste,
if the Body of the company into which he
is taken, can make true vse of him. For
the malice of his nature makes him so
Informer-like-dangerous, in taking aduantage,
of any thing done or sayde:
yea, euen to the ruine of his makers, if
hee may haue Benefit; that such a creature
in a society makes men as carefull
of their speeches and actions, as the
sight of a known Cut-purse in a throng,
makes them watchfull ouer their purses
and pockets: he is also in this respect
profitable Physicke, that his conuersation
beeing once truely tasted and discouered,
the hatefull foulnesse of it will
make those that are not fully like him,

to purge all such Diseases as are ranke
in him, out of their owne liues; as the
sight of some Citizens on horse-backe,
makes a iudicious man amend his own
faults in horsemanship. If none of these
vses can bee made of him, let him not
long offend the stomacke of your company;
your best way is to spue him out.
That he is a Disease in the body where
hee liueth, were as strange a thing to
doubt, as whether there bee knauery in
Horse-coursers. For, if amongst Sheep,
the rot; amongst Dogs, the mange; amongst
Horses, the glaunders; amongst
Men and Women, the Northerne itch,
and the French Ache bee diseases; an
Hypocrite cannot but be the like in all
States and Societies that breede him.
If he be a Cleargy Hypocrite, then all
manner of vice is for the most part so
proper to him, as hee will grudge any
man the practise of it but himselfe; like
that graue Burgesse, who being desired
to lend his cloathes to represent a part
in a Comedy, answered; No, by his

leaue, he would haue no body play the foole
in his cloathes but himselfe. Hence are
his so austere reprehensions of drinking
healths, lasciuious talke, vsury and vnconscionable
dealing; when as himselfe
hating the profane mixture of malt &
water, will by his good will let nothing
come within him, but the purity of the
Grape, when he can get it of anothers
cost: But this must not bee done neither,
without a preface of seeming
lothnesse, turning vp the eyes, mouing
the head, laying hand on the brest, and
protesting that he would not doe it, but
to strengthen his body, being euen consumed
with dissembled zeale, and tedious
and thankelesse babling to God
and his Auditors, And for the other vices,
doe but venture the making your
selfe priuate with him, or trusting of
him, & if you come off without a sauor
of the aire which his soule is infected
with, you hane great fortune. The fardle
of all this ware that is in him, you
shall commonly see carried vpon the

backe of these two beasts, that liue
within him, Ignorance and imperiousnesse:
and they may well serue to
cary other vices, for of themselues
they are insuppportable. His Ignorance
acquites him of all science, humane
or diuine, and of all Language,
but his mothers; holding nothing pure,
holy, or sincere, but the senselesse collections
of his owne crazed braine, the
zealous fumes of his inflamed spirit, and
the endlesse labors of his eternall tong;
the motions wherof, when matter and
words faile, (as they often doe) inust be
patched vppe, to accomplish his foure
houres in a day at the least, with long
and seruent hummes. Any thing else,
either for language or matter hee cannot
abide, but thus censureth: Latine,
the language of the Beast; Greeke, the
tongue wherin the Heathen Poets wrote
their fictions; Hebrue the speech of the
Iewes, that crucified Christ: Controuersies
doe not edifie, Logique and Phylosophy,
are the subtilties of Sathan, to deceiue

the Simple, Humane stories prefane,
and not sauouring of the Spirit;
In a word, all decent and sensible
forme of Speech and perswasion
(though in his owne tongue) vaine
Ostentation. And all this, is the burthen
of his Ignorance: sauing that sometimes
Idlenesse will put in also, to beare
a part of the baggage.
               His other Beast Imperiousnesse, is yet
more proudly loaden, it carrieth a
burthen, that no cords of Authoritie,
Spirituall, nor Temporall should binde,
if it might haue the full swinge: No
Pilate, no Prince should command him:
Nay, he will command them, and at
his pleasure censure them, if they will
not suffer their eares to bee fettered
with the long chaines of his tedious
collations, their purses to be emptied
with the inundations of his vnsatiable
humor, and their iudgements to bee
blinded with the muffler of his zealous
Ignorance. For this doth he familiarly
insult ouer his Maintainer that breedes

him, his Patrone that feedes him, and
in time ouer all them that will suffer
him to set a foote within their doores,
or put a finger in their purses. All this,
and much more is in him, that abhorring
Degrees and Vniuer sities, as reliques
of Superstition, hath leapt from a Shopbord,
or a Cloke-bag, to a Deske, or
Pulpit, and that like a Sea god in a Pageant,
hath the roten laths of his culpable
life, and palpable ignorance, couered
ouer with the painted cloth of a
pure gown, and a night-cap; and with
a false Trumpet of Fained-zeale, draweth
after him some poore Nymphes and
Madmen, that delight more to resort
to darke Caues and secret places, then
to open and publike assemblies. The
Lay-Hypocrite, is to the other a Champion,
Disciple and Subiect; and will not acknowledge
the Tithe of the Subiection,
to any Miter, no, not to any Scepter,
that he will do to the hooke & crooke
of his zeale-blinde Shepheard. No Iesuites
demand more blinde and absolute

obedience from their vassals; no
Magistrates of the Canting societie,
more flauish subiection from the
members of that trauelling state, then
the Clerke Hypocrites expect from these
lay Pupils. Nay, they must not onely
be obeyed, fedde, and defended, but
admired too: and that their Lay followers
do as sincerely, as a shirtlesse
fellow with a Cudgell vnder his arme
doth a face-wringing Ballet-singer; a
Water-bearer on the floore of a Playhouse,
a wide-mouth'de Poet, that
speakes nothing but bladders & bumbast.
Otherwise, for life and profession,
nature and Art, inward and outword,
they agree in all, like Canters and
Gypsies: they are all zeale, no knowledge;
All puritie, no humanitie; all simplicitie,
no honestie: and if you neuer
trust them they will neuer deceiue
you.
            
            
               
               A Maquerela, in plain English, a Bawd
               IS an old Char-cole, that hath beene
burnt her selfe, and therefore is able
to kindle a whole green Coppice. The
burden of her song is like that of Fryer
Bacons Head; Time is, Time was, and
Time is past: in repeating which, she
makes a wicked brazen face, & weepes
in the Cuppe, to alay the heate of her
Aqua-vitae. Her teeth are falne out;
mary her Nose, and chin, intend very
shortly to be friends, and meete about
it. Her yeeres are sixty and odde: that
she accounts her best time of trading;
for a Bawde is like a Medlar, shee's not
ripe, till the be rotten. Her enuie is
like that of the Diuell; To haue all
faire women like her; and because it is
impossible they should catch it being
so young, she hurries them to it by
diseases. Her Parke is a villanous barren
ground; and all the Deere in it are

Rascall: yet poore Cottagers in the
Countrey (that know her but by
heare say) thinke well of her; for what
she incloses to day, she makes Common
to morrow. Her goods and her selfe
are all remou'd in one sort, onely shee
makes bold to take the vpper hand of
them, and to be Carted before them;
the thought of which, makes her thee
cannot endure a posset, because it puts
her in minde of a Bason. She sits continually
at a rackt Rent; especially, if
her Landlord beare office in the Parish:
for her moueables in the house; (besides
her quicke cattell) they are not
worth an Inuentory, onely her beds are
most commonly in print: shee can easily
turne a sempstresse, into a waiting
gentle woman, but her Warde-robe is
most infectious, for it brings them to
the Falling-sicknesse: she hath only this
one shew of Temperance, that let a Gentleman
send for tenne pottles of wine
in her house, hee shall haue but tenne
quarts; and if he want it that way, let

him pay for't, and take it out in stewde
prunes. The Iustices Clarke standes
many times her very good friend: and
workes her peace with the Iustice of
Quorum. Nothing ioies her so much
as the comming ouer of Strangers, nor
daunts her so much as the approach of
Shroue-tuesday. In fine, not to foule
more paper with so foule a subiect, hee
that hath past vnder her, hath past the
Equinoctiall; He that hath scap't her,
hath scap't worse then the Calenture.
               
            
            
               A Chamber-Maide,
               SHe is her Mistresses she Secretarie,
and keepes the box of her teeth, her
haire, and her painting, very priuate.
Her industrie is vp-stares, and downestaires
like a drawer: and by her drie
hand you may know she is a sore starcher.
If she lie at her Masters beds feete
she is quit of the Greene-sicknesse fore euer;

For shee hath terrible dreames
when she is awake, as if she were troubled
with the night Mare. She hath a
good liking to dwellith Countrey, but
she holds London, the goodliest Forrest
in England, to shelter a great Bellie. She
reades Greenes workes ouer and ouer,
but is so carried away with the Myrrour
of Knighthood, she is many times resolud
to run out of her selfe, and become a
Lady Errant. If she catch a clap, shee
diuides it so equally between the Master
and the Seruingman, as if she had
cut out the getting of it by a Threed:
onely the knaue Sumner makes her
bowle booty, and ouer-reach the Master.
The pedant of the house, though
he promise her Marriage, cannot grow
further inward with her, she hath paide
for her credulitie often, & now growes
wearie. She likes the forme of our
marriage very well, in that a woman is
not tied to answere to any Articles
concerning question of her virginitie:
Her minde, her body, and Clothes,

are parcels loosely tackt together, and
for want of good vtterance, she perpetually
laughes out her meaning. Her
Mistris and shee helpe to make away
Time, to the idlest purpose that can be,
either for loue or money. In briefe,
these Chambermaides are like Lotteries:
you may draw twenty, ere one worth
any thing.
            
            
               A Precisian.
               TO speake no otherwise of this
varnisht Rottennesse then in truth
and verity he is, I must define him to
be a demure Creature, full of orall
Sanctitie, and mentall impietie; a faire
obiect to the eye, but starke nought
for the vnderstanding: or else a violent
thing, much giuen to contradiction.
He will be sure to be in opposition
with the Papist, though it be sometimes
accompanied with an absurdity;

like the Ilanders neere adioyning vnto
China, who salute by putting off their
shooes, because the men of China do it
by their hats. If at any time he fast, it
is vpon Sunday, and he is sure to feast
vpon Friday. He can better afford you
tenne lies, then one oath, and dare
commit any sinne gilded with a pretence
of sanctitie. He will not sticke to
commit fornieation or Adulterie, so it
be done in the feare of God, and for
the propagation of the godly; and can
finde in his hart to lie with any whore,
saue the whore of Babylon. To steale
he holds it lawfull, so it bee from the
wicked and AEgyptians. He had rather
see Antichrist, then a picture in the
Church window: and chuseth sooner
to be halfe hanged, then see a legge at
the name of IESVS, or one stand at
the Creede. He conceiues his praier in
the kitchin, rather then in the Church,
and is of so good discourse, that hee
dares challenge the Almighty, to talke
with him ex tempore. He thinkes euery

Organist is in the state of damnation,
and had rather heare one of Robert
Wisdoms psalmes, then the best Hymne a
Cherubin can sing. He will not breake
winde without an Apologie, or asking
forgiuenesse, nor kisse a Gentlewoman
for feare of lusting after her. He hath
nicknamde all the Prophets and Apostles
with his Sonnes, and begers nothing
but Vertues for Daughters. Finally,
he is so sure of his saluation, that
he will not change places in heauen,
with the Virgin Marie, without boote.
            
            
               An Innes of Court man.
               HE is distinguished from a Scholler
by a paire of silke stockings,
and a Beauer Hat, which makes him
contemne a Scholler as much as a
Scholler doth a Scholemaster. By that
he hath heard one mooting, and seen
two plaies, he thinkes as basely of the

                  Vniuersity, as a young Sophister doth of
the Grammer-schoole. He talkes of the
Vniuersity, with that state, as if he were
her Chancellour; finds fault with alterations,
and the fall of Discipline,
with an It was not so when I was a Student;
although that was within this
halfe yeare. He will talke ends of Latine,
though it be false, with as great
confidence, as euer Cicero could pronounce
an Oration, though his best
authors for't, be Tauerns & Ordinaries.
He is as farre behinde a Courtier in his
fashion, as a scholler is behinde him:
and the best grace in his behauiour, is
to forget his acquaintance.
               
               Hee laughes at euery man whose
Band sits not well, or that hath not a
faire shoo-ty, and he is ashamed to be
seene in any mans company that
weares not his clothes well. His very
essence he placeth in his outside, and
his chiefest prayer is, that his reuenues
may hold out for Taffata cloakes in
the Summer, and veluet in the winter.

For his recreation, hee had rather go
to a Citizens Wife, then a Bawdyhouse,
only to saue charges: and hee
holds Fee-taile to bee absolutely the
best Tenure. To his acquaintance hee
offers two quarts of wine, for one hee
giues. You shall neuer see him melancholie,
but when he wants a newe
Suite, or feares a Seriant: At which
times only, he betakes himselfe to Ploydon.
By that hee hath read Littleton,
he can call Solon, Licurgus, and Iustinian,
fooles, and dares compare his
Law to a Lord Chiefe-iustices.
               
            
            
               A meere Fellow of an House.
               HE is one whose Hopes commonly
exceed his Fortunes, & whose
minde soares aboue his purse. If hee
hath read Tacitus, Guicchardine, or GalloBelgicus,
hee contemnes the late LordTreasurer,
for all the State-policie hee

had; and laughes to think what a foole
he could make of Salomon, if hee were
now aliue. Hee neuer weares new
cloathes, but against a commencement
or a good time, and is commonly a degree
behinde the fashion. Hee hath
sworne to see London once a yeare,
though all his busines be to see a play,
walke a turne in Paules, and obserue
the fashion. He thinkes it a discredit
to bee out of debt, which hee neuer
likely cleeres, without resignation
money. He will not leaue his part hee
hath in the priuiledge ouer yong Gentlemen,
in going bare to him, for the
Empire of Germany; He praies as heartily
for a Sealing, as a Cormorant doth
for a deare yeare: yet commonly hee
spends that reuenue before he receiues
it.
               At meales, he sits in as great state ouer
his Penny-Commons, as euer Vitellius
did at his greatest Banquet: and takes
great delight in comparing his fare to
my Lord Mayors.
               
               
                  If he be a leader of a Faction, hee
thinkes himselfe greater then euer Caesar
was, or the Turke at this day is. And
he had rather loose an Inheritance then
an Office, when hee stands for it.
               If he be to trauell, hee is longer furnishing
himselfe for a siue miles iourney,
then a ship is rigging for a seuen
yeares voyage. Hee is neuer more
troubled, then when he is to maintain
talke with a Gentle-woman: wherein
he commits more absurdities, then a
clowne in eating of an egge.
               Hee thinkes himselfe as fine when
he is in a cleane Band, and a new paire
of shooes, as any Courtier doth, when
he is first in a New-fashion.
               Lastly, hee is one that respects no
man in the Vniuersitie, and is respected
by no man out of it.
            
            
               
               A worthy Commander in
the Warres.
               IS one that accounts learning the
nourishment of military vertue, and
layes that as his first foundation. He
neuer bloudies his sword but in hear of
battell; and had rather saue one of his
owne Souldiers, then kill ten of his enemies.
He accounts it an idle, vaineglorious,
and suspected bounty, to bee
full of good words; his rewarding therfore
of the deseruer arriues so timely,
that his liberality can neuer bee sayd to
be gouty handed. He holds it next his
Creed, that no Coward can be an honest
man, and dare die in't. Hee doth
not think his body yeelds a more spreading
shadowe after a victory then before;
and when he lookes vpon his enemyes
dead body, tis with a kinde of noble
heauinesse, not insultation; hee is
so honourably mercifull to women in

surprisall, that onely, that makes him
an excellent Courtier. He knowes the
hazards of battels, not the pompe of
Ceremonies, are Souldiers best Theaters,
and striues to gain reputation not
by the multitude, but by the greatnes
of his actions. Hee is the first in giuing
the charge, and the last in retiring his
foot. Equall toile he endures with the
Common Souldier, from his example
they all take fire as one Torch lights
many. He vnderstands in warre, there
is no meane to erre twice; the first, and
least fault beeing sufficient to ruine an
Army: faults therefore he pardons none,
they that are presidents of disorder or
mutiny, repaire it by being examples of
his Iustice. Besiege him neuer so strictly,
so long as the aire is not cut from
him, his heart faints not. He hath learned
aswell to make vse of a victory as to
get it, and in pursuing his enemy like a
whirlewinde carries all afore him; being
assured if euer a man will benefit
himselfe vpon his foe, then is the time,

when they haue lost force, wisedome,
courage and reputation. The goodnesse
of his cause is the speciall motiue
to his valour; neuer is hee knowen to
slight the weakest enemy that comes
arm'd against him in the hand of Iustice.
Hasty and ouermuch heat he accounts
the Step-dame to all great actions, that
wil not suffer them to thriue; if he cānot
ouercome his enemy by force, he does it
by Time. If euer hee shake hands with
warre, hee can die more calmely then
most Courtiers, for his continuall dangers
haue beene as it were so many meditations
of death; hee thinkes not out
of his owne calling, when he accounts
life a continuall warfare, and his prayers
then best become him when armed
Cap a pea. He vtters them like the great
Hebrew Generall, on horsebacke. Hee
casts a smiling cōtempt vpon Calumnie,
it meets him as if Glasse should encounter
Adamant. He thinkes warre is neuer
to be giuen ore, but on one of these
three conditions: an assured peace, absolute

                  victory, or an honest death. Lastly,
when peace folds him vp, his filuer
head should leane neere the golden
Scepter, and die in his Princes bosome.
            
            
               A vaine-glorious Coward
in Command,
               IS one that hath bought his place, or
come to it by some Noble-mans letrer,
hee loues a life dead payes, yet
wishes they may rather happen in his
Company by the scuruy, then by a battell.
View him at a muster, and he goes
with such noise, as if his body were the
wheelebarrow that carried his iudgement
rumbling to drill his Souldiers.
No man can worse define betweene
Pride and noble Courtesie: hee that salutes
him not as farre a Pistol carries leuell,
giues him the disgust or affront,
chuse you whether. He traines by the

booke, and reckons so many postures of
the Pike and Musket, as if hee were
counting at Noddy. When hee comes
at first vpon a Camisado, he lookes like
the foure windes in painting, as if hee
would blow away the enemy; but at
the very first onset suffers feare & trembling
to dresse themselues in his face
apparantly. He scorns any man should
take place before him: yet at the entring
of a breach, he hath been so humble
minded, as to let his Lieutenant
lead his Troopes for him. He is so sure
armed for taking hurt, that he seldome
does any: and while hee is putting on
his Armes, he is thinking what summe
hee can make to satisfie his ransome.
He will rail openly against all the great
Commanders of the aduerse party, yet in
his owne conscience allowes them for
better men: such is the nature of his
feare, that contrary 
                     〈◊〉
                   all other filthy
qualities, it make him thinkes better of
another man then himselfe. The first
part of him that is set a running, is his

                  Eye-sight: when that is once struck with
terrour, all the Costiue Physicke in the
world cannot stay him; if euer he doe
any thing beyond his owne heart, tis for
a Knighthood, and he is the first kneeles
for't without bidding.
            
            
               A Pyrate,
               TRuely defined, is a bold Traitour,
for he fortifies a castle against the
King. Giue him Sea-roome in
neuer so small a vessel; and like a witch
in a sieue, you would think he were going
to make merry with the Diuell. Of
all callings his is the most desperate, for
he will not leaue off his theeuing thogh
he be in a narrow prison, and looke euery
day (by tempest or fight) for execution.
He is one plague the Diuell hath
added, to make the Sea more terrible
then a storme; and his heart is so hardned
in that rugged element, that hee

cannot repent, though hee view his
graue (before him) continually open:
he hath so little his own, that the house
he sleepes in is stolne; all the necessities
of life hee filches, but one: hee cannot
steale a sound sleepe, for his troubled
conscience: He is very gentle to those
vnder him, yet his rule is the horriblest
tyranny in the world: for hee giues licence
to all rape, murder, and cruelty
in his owne example: what hee gets, is
small vse to him, onlie liues by it, (somwhat
the longer) to do a little more seruice
to his belly; for hee throwes away
his treasure vpon the shore in riot, as if
he cast it into the Sea. Hee is a cruell
Hawke that flies at all but his own kind:
and as a Whale neuer comes a shore, but
when she is wounded; so hee, very seldome,
but for his necessities. He is the
Marchants booke, that serues onely to
reckon vp his losses; a perpetuall plague
to noble traffique, the Hurican of the
Sea, & the Earth-quake of the Exchange.
Yet for all this giue him but his pardon,

and forgiue him restitution, hee may
liue to know the inside of a Church,
and die on this side Wapping.
            
            
               An ordinarie Fencer
               IS a fellow, that beside shauing of
Cudgels, hath a good insight into
the world, for he hath long been beaten
to it. Flesh and bloud hee is like
other men; but surely Nature meant
him Stock-fish: his and a Dancingschoole
are inseparable adiuncts; and
are bound, though both stinke of sweat
most abominably, neither shall complaine
of annoiance: three large bauins
set vp his trade, wich a bench;
which (in the vacation of the afternoone)
hee vses for his day bed; for a
sirkin to pisse in, hee shall be allowed
that, by those make Allom: when hee
comes on the Stage, at his Prize, hee
makes a leg seuen seuerall waies, and

scrambles for money, as if he had been
borne at the Bathe in Somerset-shire: at
his challenge hee shewes his mettall;
for contrarie to all rules of Physicke, he
dare bleed, though it be in the dogdaies:
hee teaches Diuelish play in's
Schoole, but when he fights himselfe,
he doth it in the feare of a good Christian.
He compounds quarrels among
his Schollers, and when hee hath
brought the busines to a good vpshot,
he makes the reckoning. His wounds
are seldom aboue skin deep; for an inward
bruse, Lambe-stones and sweetbreads
are his only Sperma Ceti, which
he eats at night, next his heart fasting:
strange Schoole-masters they are, that
euery day set a man as farre backward
as he went forward; and throwing him
into a strange posture, teach him to
thresh satisfaction out of iniurie. One
signe of a good nature is, that hee is still
open breasted to his friends, for his
foile, and his doubler, weare not aboue
two buttons: and resolute he is, for he

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
so much scornes to take blowes, that he
neuer weares Cuffes: and he liues better
contented with a little, then other
men; for if he haue two eyes in's head,
he thinks Nature hath ouerdone him.
The Lord Maiors triumph makes him
a man, for that's his best time to flourish.
Lastly, these Fencers are such
things, that care not if all the world
were ignorant of more Letters then only
to read their Patent.
            
            
               A Puny-clarke.
               HE is tane from Grammar-schoole
halfe codled, and can hardly
shake off his dreames of breeching
in a twelue-month. He is a Farmers
sonne, and his Fathers vtmost ambition
is to make him an Atturney. He
doth itch towards a Poet, and greeses
his breeches extreamely with feeding
without a napkin. He studies false dice

to cheat Costermongers, and is most
chargeable to the butler of some Inne
of Chancerie, for pissing in their greene
pots. He eats Ginger bread at a Playhouse;
and is so saucie, that he venters
fairely for a broken pate at the banqueting
house, and hath it. He would neuer
come to haue any wit, but for a
long vacation, for that makes him bethinke
him how he shall shift another
day. He prayes hotly against fasting;
and so he may sup wel on friday nights,
he cares not though his Master be a Puritan.
He practises to make the words
in his Declaration spread, as a Sewer
doth the dishes at a Niggards table;
a Clarke of a swooping Dash, is as commendable
as a Flanders horse of a large
taile. Though you be neuer so much
delaid, you must not call his master
knaue; that makes him goe beyond
himselfe and write a challenge in
Court hand; for it may be his owne
another day. These are some certaine
of his liberall faculties: but in the

Terme time, his Clog is a Buckrom bag.
Lastly, which is great pittie, hee neuer
comes to his full growth, with bearing
on his shoulder the sinfull burden of
his Master at seuerall Courts in Westminster.
               
            
            
               A Foote-man,
               LEt him be neuer so well made, yet
his Legs are not matches, for hee is
still setting the best foot forward. He
will neuer be a staid man, for he has
had a running head of his owne, euer
since his childhood. His mother
(which, out of question, was a light
heel'd wench) knew it, yet let him run
his race, thinking age would reclaime
him from his wilde courses. He is very
long winded; and, without doubt, but
that he hates naturally to serue on horsbacke,
hee had proued an excellent
trumpet. He has one happinesse aboue

all the rest of the Seruingmen, for when
he most ouer-reaches his Master, hee's
best thought of. He liues more by his
owne heat then the warmth of clothes;
and the waiting-woman hath the greatest
fancie to him when hee is in his
close trouses. Gardes he weares none;
which makes him liue more vpright
then any grosse gartered Gentlemanvsher.
Tis impossible to draw his picture
to the life, cause a man must take
it as he's running, only this; Horses are
vsually let bloud on S. Steuens day: on
S. Patrickes he takes rest, and is drencht
for all the yeere after.
            
            
               A noble and retir'd Housekeeper,
               IS one whose bountie is limited by
reason, not astentation: and to make
it last, he deales it discreetly, as wee
sowe the furrow, not by the sacke, but

by the handfull. His word and his meaning
neuer shake hands and part, but
alway goe together. Hee can suruay
good, and loue it, and loues to doe it
himselfe, for it owne sake, not for
thankes. Hee knowes there is no such
miferie as to out-liue good name; not
no such follie as to put it in practise. His
minde is so secure, that thunder rockes
him asleepe, which breakes other mens
flumbers. Nobilitie lightens in his eies;
and in his face and gesture is paintted,
The God of Hospitalitie. His great houfes
beare in their front more durance,
then state; vnlesse this adde the greater
state to them, that they promise to
outlast much of our new phantasticall
building. His heart neuer growes old,
no more then his memorie: whether at
his booke, or on horsebacke, he passeth
his time in such noble exercise, a man
cannot say, any time is lost by him: nor
hath he only yeeres, to approue he hath
liued till hee be old, but vertues. His
thoughts haue a high aime, though

their dwelling be in the Vale of an humble
heart; whence, as by an Engine
(that raises water to fall, that it may
rise the higher) hee is heightned in his
humilitie. The Adamant serues not for
all Seas, but his doth; for he hath, as
it were, put a gird about the whole
world, and sounded all her quick-sands.
He hath this hand ouer Fortune, that
her iniuries, how violent or sudden soeuer,
they do not daunt him; for whether
his time call him to liue or die, he
can do both nobly: if to fall, his descent
is breast to breast with vertue; and
euen then, like the Sunne neere his
Set, hee shewes vnto the
world his clearest
countenance.
               
            
            
               
               An Intruder into fauour
               IS one that builds his reputation on
others infamy: for slaunder is
most commonly his morning praier.
His passions are guided by Pride, and
followed by Iniustice. An inflexible anger
against some poore sutor, he falsly
calles a Couragious constancy, and thinks
the best part of grauitie to consist in a
ruffled forehead. He is the most slauishly
submisse, though enuious to
those are in better place then himselfe;
and knowes the Art of w
                     ••••••
                   well,
that (for shrowding dishonestie vnder
a faire pretext) he seemes to preserue
mud in Chrystall. Like a man of a
kinde nature, he is first good to himselfe;
in the next file, to his French
Tailor, that giues him all his perfection:
for indeed, like an Estridge, or Birde
of Paradise, his feathers are more
worth then his body. If euer hee doe

good deede (which is very seldome)
his owne mouth is the Chronicle of it,
least it should die forgotten. His whole
bodie goes all vpon screwes, and his
face is the vice that moues them. If his
Patron be giuen to musicke, hee opens
his chops, and sings, or with a wrie
necke falles to tuning his instrument:
if that faile hee takes the height of his
Lord with a Hawking pole. Hee followes
the mans fortune, not the man:
seeking thereby to increase his owne.
He pretends, he is most vndeseruedly
enuied, and cries out, remembring the
game, Chesse, that a Pawne before a
King is most plaide on. Debts he owes
none, but shrewd turnes, and those he
paies ere he besued. He is a flattering
Glasse to conceale age, and wrinkles.
He is Mountaines Monkie, that climbing
a tree, and skipping from bough to
bough, giues you backe his face; but
comne once to the top, he holdes his
nose vp into the winde, and shewes
you his taile: yet all this gay glitter

shewes on him, as if the Sunne shone
in a puddle; for he is a small wine that
will not last, and when he is falling, he
goes of himselfe faster then misery can
driue him.
            
            
               A faire and happy Milke-mayd,
               IS a Countrey Wench, that is so far
from making her selfe beautifull by
Art, that one looke of hers is able to
put all face Phisick out of countenance,
She knowes a faire looke is but a dumbe
Orator to commend vertue, therefore
mindes it not. All her excellencies
stand in her so silently, as if they had
stolne vpon her without her knowledge.
The lining of her apparel (which
is her selfe) is far better then outsides
of Tissew: for though she be not arraied
in the spoile of the Silke-worme, she is
deckt in innocence, a far better wearing.
She doth not, with lying long a bed,

spoile both her complexion and Conditions;
nature hath taught her too Immoderate
sleepe is rust to the soule: shee rises
therefore with Chaunticleare, her
Dames Cocke, and at night makes the
Lambe her Courfew. In milking a Cow,
and strayning the Teates through her
fingers, it seemes that so sweet a Milkepresse
makes the Milke the whiter, or
sweeter; for neuer came Almond Gloue
or Aromatique Oyntment on her Palme
to taint it. The golden eares of corne
fall and kisse her feete when she reapes
them, as if they wisht to be bound and
led prisoners by the same hand fell'd
them. Her breath is her owne, which
sents all the yeere long of Iune, like a
new made Hay-cocke. She makes her
hand hard with labour, and her heart
soft with pittie: and when winter euenings
fall early (sitting at her merry
wheele) shee sings a defiance to the
giddy wheele of Fortune. She doth all
things with so sweete a grace, it seemes
ignorance will not suffer her to doe ill,

being her minde is to doe well. Shee
bestowes her yeares wages at next
faire; and in choosing her Garments,
counts no brauery i'th' world like decencie.
The Garden and Bee-hiue are
all her Phisicke and Chyrurgery, and she
liues the longer for't. Shee dare goe
alone, and vnfold sheep i'th' night, &
feares no manner of ill, because shee
meanes none: yet to say truth, shee is
neuer alone, for shee is still accompanied
with old songs, honest thoughts, and
prayers, but short ones; yet they haue
their efficacy, in that they are not
pauled with insuing idle cogitations.
Lastly, her dreames are so chaste, that
she dare tell them: onely a Frydaies
dreame is all her superstition: that shee
conceales for feare of anger. Thus
liues she, and all her care is, shee may
dye in the Spring time, to haue store of
flowers stuck vpon her winding sheet.
            
            
               
               An Arrant Horse-courser
               HAth the tricke to blow vp Horseflesh,
as a Butcher doth Veale,
which shall wash out againe in
twice riding twixt Waltham & London.
The Trade of Spurre-making had decayed
long since, but for this vngodly
tyre-man. He is curst all ouer the foure
ancient High-wayes of England; none
but the blind men that sel switches i'th'
Road are beholding to him. His Stable
is fill'd with so many Diseases, one
would thinke most part about Smithfield
were an Hospitall for Horses, or a
slaughter-house for the common hunt.
Let him furnish you with a Hackney,
'tis as much as if the Kings Warrant
ouer-tooke you within ten miles to stay
your iourney. And though a man cannot
say, he cozens you directly; yet any
Ostler within ten miles, should hee

be brought vpon his Booke-oath, will
affirme hee hath layd a bait for you.
Resolue when you first stretch your
selfe in the stirrops, you are put as it
were vpon some Vsurer, that will neuer
beare with you past his day. He were
good to make one that had the Collick
alight often, and (if example will cause
him) make vrine; let him onely for that
say, Gr'amercy Horse. For his sale of horses,
he hath false couers for all manner
of Diseases, onely comes short of one
thing (which hee despaires not vtterly
to bring to perfection) to make a Horse
goe on a wodden legge and two crutches.
For powding his eares with
Quicksiluer, and giuing him suppositories
of liue Eeles he's expert. All the
while you are a cheapning he fears you
will not bite; but he laughs in his sleeue
when hee hath cozened you in earnest.
French men are his best Chapmen, he
keepes amblers for them on purpose,
and knowes he can deceiue them very
easily. He is so constant to his Trade,

that while he is awake, he tires any man
he talkes with, and when hee's asleepe
he dreams very fearefully of the pauing
of Smithfield, for hee knowes it would
founder his occupation.
            
            
               A Roaring Boy
               HIs life is a meere counterfet Patent:
which neuerthelesse, makes
many a Countrey Iustice tremble.
Don Quixotes water Milles are still
Scotch Bagpipes to him. Hee sendes
Challenges by word of mouth: for hee
protests (as hee is a Gentleman and a
brother of the Sword) hee can neither
write nor read. He hath runne throgh
diuers parcels of Land and great houses,
beside both the Counters. If anie
priuate Quarrell happen among our
great Conrtiers, he proclaimes the businesse,
thats the word, the businesse; as
if all the vnited forces of the Romish-Catholickes
                  
were making vp for Germany.
Hee cheats young Guls that are newly
come to Towne; and when the Keeper
of the Ordinarie blames him for it, hee
answers him in his own Professiō, that
a Woodcocke must bee pluckt ere he be
drest. Hee is a Superuisor to Brothels,
& in them is a more vnlawfull reformer
of vice, then Prentises on Shroue-tuesday.
He loues his Friend, as a Counseller
at Law loues the veluet Breeches
he was first made Barrester in, hee'll be
sure to weare him thread-bare ere hee
forsake him. He sleepes with a Tobacco-pipe
in's mouth; and his first prayer
i'th' morning is, hee may remember
whom he fell our with ouer night. Soldier
hee is none for hee cannot distinguish 'tweene Onion seede and Gunpowdir:
if hee haue worne it in his hollow
tooth for the Tooth-ach, and so come
to the knowledge of it, that's all. The Tenure by which he holds his meanes,
is an estate at Will; and that's borrowing
Land-lords haue but but foure

Quarter-dayes; but he three hundred
and odde. Hee keepes very good Company;
yet is a man of no reckaning: and
when he goes not drunke to bed, hee is
very sick next morning, He commonly
dies like Anacreon, with a Grape in's
throat; or Hercules, with fire in's marrow.
And I haue heard of some (that
haue scap't hanging) begg'd for Anatomies,
onely to deterre men from taking
Tobacco.
               
            
            
               Adrunken Dutch-man resident in
England
               IS but Quarter Master with his Wife.
Hee stinkes of Butter, asif hee were
noynted all ouer for the Itch. Let
him come ouer neuer so leane, and
plant him but one Moneth neere the
Brew-houses in S.Catherines, and hee'll
bee puft vp to your hand like a bloate
Herring, Of all places of pleasure, he

loues a Common Garden, and (with
the Swine of the Parish) had neede be
ringed for rooting. Next to these hee
affects Lotteries naturally; and bequeathes
the best prize in his Will afore-hand;
when his hopes fall, hee's
blanke. They swarme in great Tenements
like flies: sixe House-holds will
liue in a Garret. Hee was wont (onely
to make vs fooles) to buy the Foxe skin
for three pence, and sell the taile for a
shilling. Now his new Trade of brewing
Strong-waters makes a number of
mud men. He loues a Welch-man extreamly
for his Diet and Orthography;
that is, for pluralitie of consonants and
cheese. Like a Horse, hee's onely guided
by the mouth: when hee's drunke,
you may thrust your hand into him
like an Eele skinne, and strip him his inslde
outwards. Hee hoordes vp faire
gold, and pretends 'tis to seethe in his
Wiues broth for a consumption, and
loues the memory of King; Henry the 8.
most especially for his old Soueraigns.

He saies wee are vnwise to lament the
decay of Timber in England: for all
manner of buildings or Fortification
whatsoeuer, hee desires no other thing
in the world, then Barrels and Hoppoles.
To conclude, the onely two
plagues he trembles at, is small Beere,
and the Spanish Inquisition,
            
            
               A Phantastique.
An Improuident young Gallant.
               THere is a confederacy betweene
him and his Clothes, to be made
a puppy: view him well, & you'll
say his Gentry sits as ill vpon him, as if
he had boght it with his pēny. He hath
more places to send money to, then the
Diuell hath to send his Spirits: and to
furnish each Mistresse, would make him
runne beside his wits, if hee had any to
lose. Hee accounts bashfulnesse the

wicked'st thing in the world; and therfore
studies Impudence. If all men were
of his mind, al honesty would be out of
fashion: he withers his Cloathes on the
Stage, as a Sale-man is forc't to do his
sutes in Birchin-lane; & when the Play
is done, if you marke his rising, tis with
a kinde of walking Epilogue betweene
the two candles, to knowe if his Suite
may passe for currant: he studies by the
discretion of his Barber, to frizle like a
Baboone: three such would keep three
the nimblest Barbers i'th' towne, from
euer hauing leasure to weare net-Garters:
for whē they haue to do with him
they haue many Irons i'th'fire. He is trauelled,
but to little purpose; onlie went
ouer for a squirt, and came back againe
yet neure the more mended in his conditions,
cause he carried himselfe along
with him: a Scholler he pretends himselfe,
and faies he hath sweat for it: but
the truth is, he knowes Cornelius, farre
better then Tacitus: his ordinary sports

are Cock-fights; but the most frequent,
horse races, from whence hee comes
home drie foundred. Thus when his
purse hath cast her calfe, he goes down
into the Country, where he is brought
to milk and white cheese like the Switzers.
               
            
            
               A Button-maker of
Amsterdam,
               IS one that is fled ouer from his Conscience;
and left his wife and children
vpon the Parish. For his knowledge,
he is meerely a Horne-booke without a
Christ-crosse afore it, and his zeale consists
much in hanging his Bible in a
Dutch button: hee cozens men in the
purity of his cloathes: and twas his only
ioy when hee was on this side, to bee
in Prison: hee cries out, tis impossible
for any man to be damn'd, that liues in
his Religion, and his equiuocation is

true: so long as a man liues in't, he cannot;
but if he die in't, there's the question.
Of all Feasts in the yeere, hee accounts
S. Georges Feast the prophanest,
because of St. Georges Crosse, yet somtimes
he doth sacrifice to his own belly;
prouided, that heeput off the Wake of
his owne natiuitie, or wedding, till Good
                  Friday. If there bee a great feast in the
Towne, though most of the wicked (as
he cals them) be there, he will bee sure
to be a guest, and to out-eat sixe of the
fattest Burgers: he thinkes, though he
may not pray with a Iew, hee may eat
with a Iew: he winkes when he prayes,
and thinkes he knowes the way so now
to heauen, that he can finde it blindefold.
Latine he accounts, the language
of the Beast with seuen heads; & when
he speakes of his owne Countrie, cries,
he is fled out of Babel. Lastly, his deuotion
is Obstinacy, the onely solace of his
heart, Contradiction, and his maine end
Hypocrisie.
               
            
            
               
               A Distaster of the Time
               IS a Winter Grashopper al the yeer long
that lookes back vpon Haruest, with a
leane paire of cheekes, neuer sets forward
to meete it: his malice suckes vp
the greatest part of his own venome, &
therewith impoisoneth himselfe: and
this sickenesse rises rather of Selfe-opinion,
or ouer-great expectation; so in the
conceit of his owne ouer-worthinesse,
like a Coistrell, he striues to fill himselfe
with winde, and flyes against it. Any
mans aduancement is the most capitall
offence that can bee to his malice: yet
this enuy, like Phalaris Bull, makes that
a torment, first for himselfe, hee prepared
for others: hee is a Day-bed for the
                  Diuell to slumber on; his bloud is of a
yellowish colour: like those that haue
bin bitten by Vipers: & his gaule flowes
as thick in him as oyle, in a poyson'd stomacke.

He infects all societie, as thunder
sowres wine: war or peace, dearth
or plenty, make him equaly discontented.
And where he findes no cause to
taxe the State, hee descends to raile against
the rate of salt butter. His wishes
are whirlewindes; which breath'd forth,
returne into himselfe, and make him a
most giddy & tottering vessell. When
he is awake, and goes abroad, he doth
but walke in his sleepe, for his visitation
is directed to none: his businesse is
nothing. He is often dumbe-madde,
and goes fetter'd in his owne entrailes.
Religion is commonly his pretence of
discontent, though he can be of all religions;
therefore truly of none. Thus
by vnnaturallising himselfe, some
would thinke him a very dangerous
fellow to the State, but he is not greatly
to be fear'd: for this deiection of his,
is onely like a rogue that goes on his
knees and elbowes in the mire, to further
his begging.
            
            
               
               A meere Fellow of a House
               EXamines all mens carriage but his
owne; and is so kinde natured to
himselfe, he findes fault with all mens
but his owne. He weares his apparell
much after the fashion; his meanes
will not suffer him come to nigh: they
afford him Mock-veluet or Satinisco; but
not without the Colledges next leases
acquaintance: his inside is of the selfe
same fashion, not rich: but as it reflects
from the glasse of selfe-liking, there
Croesus is Irus to him. He is a Pedant in
shew, though his title be Tutor; and
his Pupils, in broader phrase, are Scholeboyes.
On these he spends the false gallop
of his tongue; and with senselesse
discourse towes them along, not out of
ignorance. He shewes them the rinde,
conceales the sappe: by this meanes he
keepes them the longer, himselfe the
better. He hath learn't to cough, and

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
spit, and blow his nose at euery period,
to recouer his memorie: and studies
chiefely to set his eyes and beard to a
new forme of learning. His Religion
lyes in waite for the inclination of his
Patron; neither ebbes nor flowes, but
iust standing water, betweene protestant
and Puritane. His dreames are of
pluralitie of Benefices and non-residency;
and when he rises, acts a long
Grace to his looking glasse. Against
hee comes to bee some great mans
Chaplaine, he hath a habite of boldnesse,
though a very Coward. Hee
speakes Swords, Fights, Ergo's: his
pase on foote is a measure; on horsebacke,
a gallop: for his legs are his
owne, though horse and spurres are
borrowed. He hath lesse vse then possession
of Bookes. He is not so proud,
but he will call the meanest Author by
his name; nor so vnskill'd in the Heraldrie
of a Studie, but he knowes each
mans place. So ends that fellowship,
and begins an other.
            
            
               
               A meere Petifogger
               
                  IS one of Sampsons Foxes: He sets men
together by the eares, more shamefully
then Pillories; and in a long Vacation
his sport is to go a Fishing with the
                  Penall Statutes. He cannot erre before
Iudgement, and then you see it, onely
Writs of error are the Tariers that keepe
his Client vndoing somewhat the longer.
He is a Vestrie man in his Parish,
and easily sets his neighbours at variance
with the Vickar, when his wicked
counsell on both sides is like weapons
put into mens hands by a Fencer,
whereby they get blowes, he money.
His honesty and learning bring him
to Vnder-Shrif-Ship; which hauing thrise
runne through, hee do's not feare the
Lieutenant a'th' Shire: nay more, hee
feares not God. Cowardise holds him
a good Common-wealthes-man; his
pen is the plough, and parchment the

Soyle, whence he reapes both Coyne
and Curses. He is an Earthquake, that
willingly will let no ground lie in
quiet. Broken titles make him whole;
to haue halfe in the Countie breake
their Bonds, were the onely libertie of
conscience: He would wish (though
he be a Brownist) no neighbour of his
should pay his tithes duly, if such Sutes
held continuall Plea at Westminster. He
cannot away with the reuerend Seruice
in our Church, because it ends
with The peace of God. He loues blowes
extreamely, and hath his Chyrurgions
bill of all rates, from head to foote, to
incense the fury: he would not giue away
his yeerely beatings for a good
peece of money. He makes his Will in
forme of a Law-case, full of quiddits,
that his Friends after his death (if for
nothing else) yet, for the vexation of
Law, may haue cause to remember
him. And if hee thought the Ghosts
of men did walke againe (as they report
in time of Popery) sure he would

hide some single mony in WestminsterHall,
that his spirit might haunt there.
Only with this, I will pitch him o're
the Barre, and leaue him; That his fingers
itch after a Bribe, euer since his
first practising of Court-hand.
            
            
               An Ingrosser of Corne.
               THere is no Vermine in the Land
like him; hee slanders both Heauen
and Earth with pretended
Dearths, when there's no cause of scarsitie.
His whording in a deare yeere, is
like Erisicthons Bowels, in Ouid: Quodque
vrbibus esse, quod
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      satis poterat populo,
non sufficit vni. He prayes daily
for more inclosures, and knowes no reason
in his Religion, why wee should call
our fore-fathers daies, The time of ignorance,
but onely because they sold
VVheat for twelue pence a bushell. He
wishes that Danske were at the Moloccos;

and had rather be certaine of some
forraine inuasion, then of the setting vp
of the Stilyard. When his Barnes and
Garners are ful(if it be a time of dearth)
he will buy halfe a bushell i'th' Market
to serue his Household: and winnowes
his Corne in the night, lest, as the chaffe
throwne vpon the water, shew'd plenty
in AEgypt; so his (caried by the winde)
should proclaime his abundance. No
painting pleases him so wel, as Pharaohs
dreame of the seauen leane Kine, that
ate vp the fat ones; that hee has in his
Parlour, which he will describe to you
like a motion, and his comment ends
with a smothered prayer for the like
scarsitie. Hee cannot away with Tobacco;
for hee is perswaded (and not
much amisse) that tis a sparer of Breadcorne
which he could finde in's heart
to transport without Licence: but
weighing the penaltie, hee growes
mealy-mouth'd, and dares not. Sweet
smells he cannot abide; wishes that the
pure ayre were generally corrupted:

nay, that the Spring had lost her fragrancie
for euer, or wee our superfluous
sense of Smelling (as he tearmes it) that
his corne might not bee found mustie.
The Poore he accounts the Iustices intelligencers,
and cannot abide them:
he complaines of our negligence of discouering
new parts of the VVorld, only
to rid them from our Clymate. His
Sonne, by a certaine kinde of instinct,
he bindes Prentise to a Taylor, who all
the terme of his Indenture hath a deare
yeere in's bellie, and rauins bread extreamly:
when he comes to be a Freeman
(if it be a Dearth) he marries him
to a Bakers daughter.
            
            
               A Diuellish Usurer
               IS sowed as Cummin or Hemp-seede,
with curses; and he thinks he thriues
the better. Hee is better read in the
Penall Statutes, then the Bible; and his
euill Angell perswades him, hee shall

sooner be saued by them. He can be
no mans friend; for all men hee hath
most interest in, hee vndo's: and a double
dealer hee is certainely; for by his
good will he euer takes the forfeit. He
puts his money to the vnnaturall Act
of generation; and his Scriuener is the
superuisor Bawd to't. Good Deeds he
loues none, but Seal'd and Deliuered;
nor doth he wish any thing to thriue in
the Countrey, but Bee-hiues; for they
make him waxe rich. He hates all but
Law-Latine; yet thinks hee might be
drawne to loue a Scholler, could he reduce
the yeere to a shorter compasse,
that his vse-money might come in the
faster: he seems to be the son of a Iailor,
for all his estate is most heauic & cruell
bonds. He doth not giue, but fell daies
of Payment; and those at the rate of a
mans vndoing: he doth only feare, the
day of Iudgment should fall sooner,
then the payment of some great sum of
money due to him: hee remoues his
lodging when a Subsidie comes; and if

he be found out, and pay it, hee grumbles
Treason; but tis in such a deformed
silence, as VVitches raise their Spirits
in. Grauitie hee pretends in all things,
but in his priuate Whore; for hee will
not in a hundreth pound take one light
sixe-pence; and it seemes hee was at
Tilburie Campe, for you must not tell
him of a Spaniard. He is a man of no
conscience; for (like the lakes-farmer
that swounded with going into Bucklersburie)
hee falls into a cold sweat, if
hee but looke into the Chauncerie:
thinks in his Religion, wee are in the
right for euery thing, if that were abolisht:
hee hides his money, as if hee
thought to finde it againe at last day,
and then begin's old trade with it. His
clothes plead prescription; and whether
they or his bodie are more rotten,
is a question: yet should hee liue to be
hangd in them, this good they would
doe him, The very Hangman would
pittie his case. The Table hee keeps is
able to starue twentie tall men; his servants

haue not their liuing, but their
dying from him, and that's of Hunger.
A spare Dyet he commends in all men,
but himselfe: he comes to Cathedralls
onely for loue of the singing Boyes, because
they looke hungry. He likes our
Religion best, because tis best cheape;
yet would faine allow of Purgatorie,
'cause 'twas of his Trade, and brought
in so much money: his heart goes with
the same snaphance his purse doth, tis
seldome open to any man: friendship
hee accounts but a word without any
signification; nay, he loues all the world
so little, that, and it were possible, hee
would make himselfe his owne Executor:
for certaine, hee is made Administrator
to his own good name, while he
is in perfect memorie, for that dyes
long afore him; but he is so farre from
being at the charge of a Funerall for it,
that hee lets it stinke aboue ground.
In conclusion, for Neighbourhood, you
were better dwell by a contentious
Lawyer. And for his death, tis rather

Surfet, the Pox, or Despaire; for seldom
such as hee dye of Gods making, as honest
men should doe.
            
            
               A Water-Man
               IS one that hath learnt to speake well
of himselfe; for alwaies hee names
himselfe, The first man. If he had betane
himselfe to some richer Trade, hee
could not haue chos'd but done well:
for in this (though it be a meane one)
he is still plying it, and putting himselfe
forward. He is euermore telling strange
newes; most commonly lyes. If he be
a Sculler, aske him if hee be maried,
hee'l equiuocate and sweare hee's a single
man. Little trust is to be giuen to
him, for he thinks that day he does best
when he fetches most men ouer. His
daily labour teaches him the Arte of
dissembling; for like a fellow that rides
to the Pillorie, he goes not that way he

lookes: hee keepes such a bawling at
Westminster, that if the Lawyers were
not acquainted with it, an order would
be tane with him. When he is vpon the
water, he is Fare-companie: when hee
comes ashore, hee mutinies; and contrarie
to all other trades, is most surely
to Gentlemen, when they tender payment.
The Play-houses only keep him
sober; and as it doth many other Gallants,
makes him an afternoones man.
London Bridge is the most terriblest
eye-sore to him that can be. And to
conclude, nothing but a great Presse,
makes him flye from the Riuer;
nor any thing; but a great
Frost, can teach him
any good manners.
            
            
               
               A Reuerend Iudge
               IS one that desires to haue his greatnes,
onely measur'd by his goodnesse:
his care is to appeare such to the people,
as he would haue them be; and to
be himselfe such as hee appeares; for
vertue cannot seeme one thing, and be
another: hee knowes that the hill of
greatnesse yeelds a most delighifull
prospect, but with all that it is most subiect
to lightning, and thunder: and that
the people, as in ancient Tragedies, sit
and censure the actions of those are in
authoritie: he squares his owne therefore,
that they may farre bee aboue
their pittie: he wishes fewer Lawes, so
they were better obseru'd: and for
those are Mulctuarie, he vnderstands
their institution not to be like briers or
springes, to catch euery thing they lay
hold of; but like Sea-marks (on our
dangerous Goodwin) to auoid the shipwracke

of ignorant passengers: hee
hates to wrong any man; neither hope,
nor despaire of preferment can draw
him to such an exigent: he thinks himselfe
then most honorably seated, when
he giues mercie the vpper hand: hee
rather striues to purchase good name
then land; and of all rich stuffes forbidden
by the Statute, loaths to haue
his followers weare their clothes cut
out of bribes and extortions. If his
Prince call him to higher place, there
he deliuers his minde plainly, and freely;
knowing for truth, there is no place
wherein dissembling ought to haue
lesse credit, then in a Princes Councel.
Thus honour keeps peace with him to
the graue, and doth not(as with many)
there forsake him, and goe backe with
the Heralds: but fairely sits ore him,
and broods out of his memorie, many
right excellent Common-wealths
men.
            
            
               
               A vertuous Widdow
               IS the Palme-tree, that thriues not after
the supplanting of her husband.
For her Childrens sake she first marries,
for shee married that shee might
haue children, and for their sakes shee
marries no more. She is like the purest
gold, onely imploide for Princes meddals,
shee neurer receiues but one mans
impression; the large iointure moues
her not, titles of honor cannot sway hir.
To change her name, were (she thinks)
to commit a sinne should make her
asham'd of her husbands calling; shee
thinks she hath traueld all the world in
one man; the rest of her time therfore
she directs to heauen. Her maine superstition
is, shee thinks her husbands
ghost would walke, should she not performe
his VVill: she would doe it, were
there no Prerogatiue Court. She giues
much to pious vses, without any hope

to merit by them: and as one Diamond
fashions another; so is she wrought into
works of Charitie, with the dust or
ashes of her husband. She liues to see
her selfe full of time; being so necessarie
for earth, God calls her not to heauen,
till shee be very aged: and euen
then, though her naturall strength faile
her, she stands like an ancient Piramid;
which the lesse it growes to mans eye,
the neerer it reaches to heauen: this
latter Chastitie of Hers, is more graue
and reuerend, then that ere shee was
married; for in it is neither hope, nor
longing, nor feare, nor iealousie. Shee
ought to be a mirrour for our yongest
Dames, to dresse themselues by, when
she is fullest of wrinkles. No calamitie
can now come neere her, for in suffering
the losse of her husband, shee accounts
all the rest trifles: she hath laid
his dead bodie in the worthiest monument
that can be: Shee hath buried it
in her owne heart. To conclude, she
is a Relique, that without any superstition

in the world; though she will not
be kist, yet may be reuerenc't.
            
            
               An ordinary Widdow
               IS like the Heralds Hearse-cloath; she
serues to many funerals, with a very
little altering the colour. The end of
her Husband begins in teares; and the
end of her teares beginnes in a Husband.
She vses to Cunning women to
know how many Husbands shee shall
haue, and neuer marries without the
consent of sixe midwiues. Her chiefest
pride is in the multitude of her Suitors;
and by them she gaines: for one
serues to draw on another, and with
one at last she shootes out another, as
Boies doe Pellets in Elderne Gunnes.
She commends to them a single life, as
Horsecourses doe their Iades, to put
them away. Her fancy is to one of the
biggest of the Guard, but Knighthood

makes her draw in a weaker Bow. Her
seruants, or kinsfolke, are the Trumperers
that summon any to this combat:
by them she gaines much credit,
but looseth it againe in the old Prouerbe:
Fama est mendax. If she liue to
be thrise married, she seldome failes to
cozen her second Husbands Creditors.
A Church man shee dare not
venture vpon; for she hath heard widdowes
complaine of dilapidations:
nor a Soldier, though he haue Candlerents
in the City, for his estate may be
subiect to fire: very seldome a Lawier,
without he shew his exceeding great
practise, & can make her case the better:
but a Knight with the old rent
may do much, for a great comming
in, is all in all with a Widdow: euer
prouided, that most part of her Plate
and Iewels (before the wedding) lie
concealde with her Scriuener. Thus
like a too ripe Apple, shee falles of her
selfe: but he that hath her, is Lord but
of a filthy purchase, for the title is

crackt. Lastly, while she is a Widdow,
obserue euer, shee is no Morning woman
the euening a good fire and sack
may make her listen to a Husband:
and if euer she be made sure, tis vpon
a full stomacke to bedward.
            
            
               A Quacksaluer
               IS a Mountebanke of a larger bill
then a Taylor; if hee can but come
by names enow of Diseases, to stuffe
it with, tis all the skill hee studies for.
He tooke his first being from a Cunning
woman, and stole this blacke Art from her, while he made her Seacoale
fire. All the diseases euer sin brought
vpon man, doth he pretend to be Curer
of; when the truth is, his maine
cunning, is Corne-cutting. A great
plague makes him; what with railing
against such, as leaue their cures for
feare of infection, and in friendly breaking

Cakebread, with the Fish-wiues
at Funerals, he vtters a most abominable
deale of musty Carduus-water, &
the Conduits crie out, All the learned
Doctors may cast their Caps at him.
He parts stakes with some Apothecary,
in the Suburbes, at whose house he
lies: and though hee be neuer so familiar
with his wife; the Apothecary
dare not (for the richest Horne in his
shop) displease him. All the Mid-wiues
in the towne are his intelligencers; but
nurses and young Marchants Wines
(that would fain conceiue with childe)
these are his Idolaters. Hee is a more
vniust Bone-setter, then a Dice-maker;
hath put out more eyes then the
small Pox; made more deafe then the
Cataracts of Nilus; lamed more then
the Gout; shrunke more sinewes, then
one that makes Bow-stringes; and kild
more idly, then Tobacco. A Magistrate
that had any way so noble a spirit,
as but to loue a good horse well,
would not suffer him to bee a Farrier.

His discourse is vomit; and his ignorance,
the strongest purgation in the
world: to one that would be speedily
cured, he hath more delaies, and doubles,
then a Hare, or a Law suite: hee
seekes to set vs at variance with nature,
and rather then hee shall want diseases
he'le beget them. His especiall practise
(as I said afore) is vpon women; labours
to make their mindes sicke, ere
their bodies feele it, and then there's
worke for the Dog-leach. Hee pretends
the cure of mad-men; and sure
he gets most by them, for no man in
his perfect witte would meddle with
him. Lastly, he is such a Iuggler with
Vrinals, so dangerously vnskilfull, that
if euer the Citie will haue recourse to
him for diseases that neede purgation,
let them imploy him in scouring
Moore-ditch.
               
            
            
               
               A Canting Rogue.
               TIs not vnlikely but hee was begot
by some intelligencer vnder a
hedge; for his minde is wholy giuen
to trauell. He is not troubled with making
of Iointures: he can diuorce himselfe
without the see of a Proctor, nor
feares he the crueltie of ouerseers of his
Will. Hee leaues his children all the
world to Cant in, and all the people
to their fathers. His Language is a
Constant tongue; the Northerne
speech differs from the south, VVelch
from the Cornish: but Canting is generall,
nor euer could be altered by
conquest of the Saxon, Dane, or Norman.
He wil not beg out of his limit though
hee starue; nor breake his oath if hee
sweare by his Salomon, though you
hang him: and hee payes his custome
as truely to his Graund Rogue, astribute
is payd to the great Turke. The

March Sunne breedes agues in others,
but hee adores it like the Indians; for
then beginnes his progresse after a hard
winter. Ostlers cannot endure him, for
he is of the infantry, and serues best on
foote. Hee offends not the Statute against
the excesse of apparell, for hee
will goe naked, and counts it a voluntary
pennance. Forty of them lie in a
Barne together, yet are neuer sued vpon
the statute of Inmates. If hee were
learned, no man could make a better
description of England; for hee hath
traueld it ouer and ouer. Lastly,
hee bragges, that his great
houses are repair'd to his
hands; when Churches
go to ruine:
and those are
prisons.
            
            
               
               A French Cooke
               HE learnt his trade in a Towne of
Garrison neere famish't, where
he practised to make a little goe
farre; some deriue it from more antiquity,
and say Adam (when hee pickt
fallets) was of his occupation. He doth
not feed the belly, but the Palate: and
though his command lie in the kitchin
(which is but an inferiour place) yet
shall you finde him a very saucy companion.
Euer since the warres in Naples,
hee hath so minc't (the ancient
and bountifull allowance) as if his nation
should keep a perpetuall diet. The
Seruingmen call him the last relique of
Popery, that makes men fast against
their Conscience. He can be truly said
to be no mans fellow but his Masters:
for the rest of his seruants are starued
by him. Hee is the prime cause why

Noblemen build their Houses so great,
for the smalnesse of the Kitchin, makes
the house the bigger: and the Lord
calles him his Alchymist that can extract
gold out of hearbs, rootes, mushroomes
or anything: that which hee
dresses wee may rather call a drinking,
then a meale: yet is hee so full of variety,
that he brags, and truely, that hee
giues you but a taste of what hee can
do: he dare not for his life come among
the Butchers; for sure they would quarter
and bake him after the English fashion;
hee's such an enemy to Beefe
and Mutton. To conclude, hee were
onely fit to make a funerall feast, where
men should eat their victuals in mourning.
            
            
               
               A Sexton
               IS an ill willer to humane nature. Of
all Prouerbs, hee cannot endure to
heare that which sayes, Wee ought
to liue by the quicke, not by the dead.
He could willingly all his life time bee
confinde to the Church-yard; at least
within fiue foote on't: for at euery
Church stile, commonly there's an Alehouse;
Where let him bee found neuer
so idle pated, hee is still a graue drunkard.
Hee breakes his fast heartiliest
while he is making a graue, and sayes
the opening of the ground makes him
hungry. Though one would take him
to be a slouen, yet hee loues cleane linnen
extreamely, and for that reason
takes an order that fine holland sheers
bee not made wormes meate. Like a
nation cald the Cusani, he weeps when
any are borne, and laughes when they
die: the reason; hee gets by Burials

not Christnings: he will hold argument
in a Tauerne ouer Sacke, till the
Diall and himselfe bee both at a stadd:
he neuer obserues any time but Sermon
time, and there he sleepes by the hourglasse.
The rope-maker payes him a
pension, and hee paies tribute to the
Physitian; for the Physitian makes work
for the Sexton; as the Rope-maker for
the Hang-man. Lastly, he wishes the
Dogge dayes would last all yeere long:
and a great plague is his yeere of lubile.
            
            
               A Iesuite
               IS a larger Spoone for a Traytour to
feed with the Diuell, then any other
Order: vnclaspse him, and hee's a
gray Wolfe, with a golden Starre in
the fore-head: so superstitiously hee
followes the Pope, that hee forsakes
Christ, in not giuing Caesar his due. His
vowes seeme heauenly; but in medling

with State-businesse, he seems to mixe
heauen and earth together. His best
Elements, are Confession & Pennance:
by the first, he findes out mens inclinations;
and by the latter, heapes wealth
to his Seminary. He sprang from Ignanatius Loiola, a Spanish Souldier; and
though hee were found out long since
the inuention of the Canon, 'tis thoght
he hath not done lesse mischiefe. Hee
is a false Key to open Princes Cabinets,
and pry into their Counsels; and where
the Popes excommunication thunders,
hee holds it no more sinne the decrowning
of Kings, then our Puritanes doe
the suppression of Bishops. His order
is full of all irregularity and disobedience;
ambitious aboue all measure; for
of late dayes, in Portugall and the Indies,
he reiected the name of Iesuit, and
would bee called Disciple. In Rome,
and other countries that giue him freedome,
hee weares a Maske vppon his
heart; in England he shifts it, and puts
it vpon his face. No place in our Climate

hides him so securely as a Ladies
Chamber; the modesty of the Purseuant
hath onely forborne the bed, and
so mist him. There is no Disease in
Christendome, that may so properly
be call'd The Kings Euill. To conclude,
would you know him beyond Sea? In
his Seminary, hee's a Foxe; but in the
Inquisition, a Lyon Rampant.
            
            
               An excellent Actor.
               VVHatsoeuer is commendable
in the graue Orator, is most
exquisitly perfect in him; for
by a full and significant action of body,
he charmes our attention: sit in a full
Theater, and you will thinke you see
so many lines drawen from the circumference
of so many eares, whiles the
Actor is the Center. He doth not striue
to make nature monstrous, she is often
seene in the same Scaene with him, but

neither on Stilts nor Crutches; and for
his voice tis not lower then the prompter,
nor lowder then the Foile and Targer.
By his action hee fortifies morall
precepts with example; for what wee
see him personate, wee thinke truely
done before vs: a man of a deep thoght
might apprehend, the Ghosts of our
ancient Heroes walk't againe, and take
him(at feueral times)for many of them.
He is much affected to painting, and
tis a question whether that make him
an excellent Player, or his playing an
exquisite Painter. Hee addes grace to
the Poets labours: for what in the Poet
is but ditty, in him is both ditty and
musicke. He entertaines vs in the best
leasure of our life, that is betweene
meales, the most vnfit time, either for
study or bodily exercise: the flight of
Hawkes, and chase of wilde beasts, either
of them are delights noble: but
some thinke this sport of men the worthier,
despight all calumny. All men
haue beene of his occupation: and indeed,

what hee doth fainedly, that doe
others essentially: this day one playes
a Monarch, the next a priuate person.
Heere one Acts a Tyrant, on the
morrow an Exile: A Parasite this
man too night, tomorrow a Precisian,
and so of diuers others. I obserue, of
all men liuing, a woorthy Actor in one
kinde is the strongest motiue of affection
on that can be: for when hee dies, wee
cannot be perswaded any man can doe
his parts like him. But to conclude, I
value a worthy Actor by the corruption
on of some few of the quality, as I wold
doe gold in the oare; I should
not minde the drosse,
but the purity of
the mettall.
            
            
               
               A Franklin.
               HIs outside is an ancient Yeoman
of England, though his inside
may giue armes (with the best
Gentleman) and ne're fee the Herald.
There is no truer seruaht in the house
then himselfe. Though he be Master,
he saies not to his seruants, goe to field,
but let vs goe; and with his owne eye,
doth both fatten his flocke, and set forward
all manner of husbandrie. He is
taught by nature to be contented with
a little; his owne fold yeelds him both
food and raiment: hee is pleasd with
any nourishment God sends, whilest
curious gluttonie ransacks, as it were,
Noahs Arke for food, onely to feed the
riot of one meale. He is nere knowne
to goe to Law; vnderstanding, to be
Law-bound among men, is like to bee
hide-bound among his beasts; they
thriue not vnder it: and that such men

sleep as vnquietly, as if their pillowes
were stuft with Lawyers pen-knifes.
When hee builds, no poore Tenants
cottage hinders his prospect, they are
indeed his Almes-houses, though there
be painted on them no such superscription.
Hee neuer fits vplate but when
he hunts the Badger, the vowed foe of
his Lambes: nor vses he any crueltie,
but when he hunts the Hare, nor subtiltie
but when he setteth snares for the
Snite, or pit-falls for the Black-bird;
nor oppression, but when in the month
of Iuly, hee goes to the next riuer, and
sheares his sheep. Hee allowes of honest
pastime, and thinks not the bones
of the dead any thing bruifed, or the
worse for it, though the Countrey Lasses
dance in the Church-yard after
Euen-song. Rocke Monday, and the
Wake in Summer, shrouings, the
wakefull ketches on Christmas Eue,
the Hoky, or Seed-cake, these he yeerly
keeps, yet holds them no reliques of Poperie.
He is not so inquisitiue after

newes deriued from the priuie closet,
when the finding an eiery of Hawkes
in his owne ground, or the foaling of a
Colt come of a good straine, are tydings
more pleasant, more profitable.
He is Lord paramount within himselfe,
though hee hold by neuer so meane a
Tenure; and dies the more contentedly
(though he leaue his heire yong)
in regard he leaues him not liable to a
couetous Guardian. Lastly, to end
him; hee cares not when his end
comes; hee needs not feare his Audit,
for his Quietus is in heauen.
            
            
               A Rimer
               IS a fellow whose face is hatcht all
ouer with impudence, and should he
be hang'd or pilloried tis armed for
it. Hee is a Iuggler with words, yet
practises the Art of most vncleanly

conueyance. He doth boggle very often;
and because himselfe winkes at
it, thinks tis not perceiued: the maine
thing that euer he did, was the tune he
sang to. There is nothing in the earth
so pittifull, no not an Ape-carrier, he is
not worth thinking of, and therefore
I must leaue him as nature
left him, a Dunghil
not well aid together.
            
         
         
            
            The Character of a happy life.
            By Sr. H. W.
            
               HOw happy is he borne or taught,
               That serueth not anothers will;
               Whose Armour is his honest thought,
               And sillie Truth his highest skill.
            
            
               Whose passions not his Masters are,
               Whose soule is still prepar'd for death:
               Vntyed vnto the world with care
               Of Princely loue, or vnlgar breath.
            
            
               Who hath his life from rumors freed.
               Whose conscience is his strong retreit:
               Whose state can neither flatterers feed,
               Nor ruine make accusers great.
            
            
               
               Who enuieth none whom chance doth raise,
               Or vice: who neuer vnderstood,
               How deepest wounds are giuē with praise,
               Not rules of state, but rules of good.
            
            
               Who GOD doth late and early pray,
               More of his grace, then gifts to lend;
               Who entertaines the harmelesse day,
               With a well chosen Booke or Friend.
            
            
               This man is free from seruile bands,
               Of hope to rise, or feare to fall;
               Lord of himselfe, though not of Lands:
               And hauing nothing, he hath All.
            
         
         
            
            Certaine Edicts from
a Parliament in Eutopia;
Written by the Lady
Southwell.
            
               INprimis, Hee that hath no other
worth to commend him then a good
Suite of Apparell, shall not dare to
woe a Lady in his owne behalfe, but
shall be allowed to carry the Hieroglyphike
of his friends affection.
            
               Item, that no fowle fac'd Lady shall
raile on her that is fairer, because she is
fairer; nor seeke by blacke calumniation
to darken her fame, vnlesse shee bee
her corriuall.
            
               Item, that no man may entitle himselfe
by the matchles name of a Friend,
that loues vpon condition, vnlesse hee
be a Schoole-master.
            
               Item, that no Lady, which modestly

keepes her house for want of good clothes
to visit her Gossips shall professe
contempt of the worlds vanity, vnlesse
she see no hope of the tides returning.
            
               Item, that no Bankerupt Knight, that
to set vp shop againe, becomes Parasite
or Buffone to some great Lord, shall euer
after sweare by his honour; but by
his Knight-hood he may.
            
               Item, that no Lady that vseth to paint,
shall finde fault with her painter that
hath not counterfeted her picture faire
enough, vnlesse she will acknowledge
her selfe to be the better counterfetter.
            
               Item, that no man whose vaine loue
hath beene reiected by a vertuous Lady,
shall report that he hath refused and
cast her off, vnlesse he will take the base
lying fellow by the next assailant, so reiected,
without any further quarrell.
            
               Item, that no Lady shall court her looking
glasse, past one houre in a day, vnlesse
she professe to be an Inginer.
            
               Item, that no Quarter waiter shall
feed on cheese three quarters of a yeere

to feast on satten one quarter, without
Galens aduice, and the Apothecaries
bill to be written by a Taylor.
            
               Item, that wench that is ouer-enamored
of her selfe, and thinkes all other so
too, shall bee bound to carry a burden
of Birdlime on her backe, and spinne at
a Barne-doore to catch fooles.
            
               Item, he that sweareth when hee loseth
his mony at dice, shall challenge
his damnation by the way of purchase.
            
               Item, no Lady that silently simpereth
for want of wit shall be call'd modest.
            
               Item, no fellow that begins to argue
with a woman, & wants wit to encounter
her, shall think he hath redeemed his
credit by putting her to silence with
some lasciuious discourse,vnlesse hee
weare white for William, and greene for
Sommer.
            
            
               Item, no woman that remaineth constant
for want of assault shall be called
chaste.
            
               
               Item, he that professeth vertuous loue
to a woman, and giues ground when
his vanity is reiected, shall haue his
bels cut off and flie for a haggard.
            
               Item, she that respecteth the good opinion
of others, before the Beeing of
good in her selfe, shall not refuse the
name of Hypocrite; and she that emploies
all her time in working trappings
for her selfe, the name of spider: and
she that sets the first quest of enquiry amongst
her gossips for new fashions,
shall not refuse a stitcher for her second
husband.
            
               Item, He that hath reported a Lady
to be vertuous, for the which he professeth
to loue her, yet vnder hand commenceth
a base suit, and is disdained;
shall not on this blow which his owne
vice hath giuen him, out of policy raile
suddenly on her, for feare he be noted
for a vicious foole: but to his friend in
priuate he may say that his iudgement
was blinded by her cunning disguise,
& that he finds her wauering in goodnesse,

and in time he shall openly professe
to raile on her; but with such a
modesty forsooth, as if he were loth to
bring his iudgement into question; nor
would he doe it, but that hee preferres
truth euen out of his owne reach.
         
         
            
            NEVVES
FROM ANY WHENCE.
OR,
OLD TRVTH, VNDER A SVPposall of Noueltie.
Occasioned by diuers Essayes, and priuate
passages of Wit, betweene sundrie Gentlemen
vpon that subiect.
            
               Newes from Court.
               IT is thought heere,
that there are as
great miseries beyond
happinesse,
as a this side it, as
being in loue. That
truth is euery
mans by assenting. That time makes
euery thing aged, and yet it selfe was

neuer but a minute old. That, next
sleepe, the greatest deuourer of time
is business: the greatest stretcher of it,
Passion, the truest measure of it, Contemplation.
To be saued, alwaies is the
best plot: and vertue alwaies cleeres
her way as she goes. Vice is euer behind-hand
with it selfe. That Wit and
a woman are two fraile things, and both
the frailer by concurring. That the
meanes of begetting a man, hath more
increast mankinde then the end. That
the madnesse of Loue is to be sicke of
one part, and cured by another. The
madnesse of Iealousie, that it is so diligent,
and yet it hopes to lose his labor.
That all Women for the bodily part,
are but the same meaning put in diuers
words. That the difference in
the sense is their vnderstanding. That
the wisedome of Action is Discretion;
the knowledge of contemplation is
truth: the knowledge of action is men.
That the first considers what should
be, the latter makes vse of what is.

That euery man is weake in his owne
humours. That euery man a little beyond
himselfe is a foole. That affectation
is the more ridiculous part of folly
then ignorance. That the matter
of greatnesse is comparison. That
God made one world of Substances;
Man hath made another of Art and
Opinion. That Money is nothing but
a thing which Art hath turned vp
trumpe. That custome is the soule of
circumstances. That custome hath so
farre preuailed, that Truth is now the
greatest newes.
               Sr. T. Ouer.
            
            
               Answere to the Court Newes.
               THat Happinesse and Miscrie are
Antipodes. That Goodnesse is not
Felicitie, but the rode thither. That
Mans strength is but a vicissitude of
falling and rising. That onely to refraine
ill, is to be ill still. That the plot

of Saluation was laid before the plot
of Paradise. That enioying is the
preparatiue to contemning. That hee
that seekes opinion beyond merite,
goes iust so farre backe. That no man
can obtaine his desires; nor in the
world hath not to his measure. That
to studie, men are more profitable
then bookes. That mens loues are
their afflictions. That Titles of Honor,
are rattles to still ambition. That
to be a King, is Fames Butte, and feares
Quiuer. That the soules of Women
and Louers, are wrapt in the portmanque
of their senses. That imagination
is the end of man. That wit is
the webbe, and wisedome the woofe
of the cloth; so that womens soules
were neuer made vp. That enuie
knowes what it will not confesse. That
Goodnesse is like the Art Prospectiue: one
point Center, begetting infinite rayes.
That Man, Woman, and the Diuell,
are the three degrees of comparison.
That this Newes holds number, but

not weight, by which couple all
things receiue forme.
            
            
               Countrey Newes.
               THat there is most here, for it gathers
in going. That reputation
is measured by the Acre. That Pouertie
is the greatest dishonestie. That
the pittie of, Alasse poore soule, is for the
most part mistaken. That Rost beefe
is the best smel. That a iustice of peace
is the best relique of Idolatrie. That
the Allegorie of Iustice drawn blinde,
is turned the wrong way. That not to
liue to heauenly is accounted great
wrong. That wisedome descends in a
race. That we loue Names better then
persons That to hold in Knights seruice,
is a flipperie seruice. That a Papist
is a new word for a Traitor. That
the dutie of Religion is lent, not
pay'd. That the reward is lost in the
want of humilitie. That the Puritane

persecution is as a clowde that
can hide the glory of the light, but not
the day. That the emulation of the
English and Scots to be the Kings Countrey-men,
thrust the honour on the
Welch. That a Courtier neuer attaynes
his selfe-knowledge, but by report.
That his best Embleme is a
hearne dogge. That many great men
are so proud, that they know not their
owne Fathers. That Loue is the tailworme.
That a woman is the effect
of her owne first fame. That to remember,
to know, and to vnderstand,
are 3. degrees not vnderstood.
That Countrey ambition is no vice, for
there is nothing aboue a man. That
fighting is a Seruing-mans valor: Martyrdome
their Masters. That to liue
long, is to fill vppe the dayes wee liue
That the zeale of some mens Religion
reflects from their Friends. That the
pleasure of vice is indulgence of the
present, for it endures but the acting.
That the proper reward of goodnesse is

from within the externall is policy.
That good and ill is the crosse and pile
in the aime of life. That the Soule is
the lampe of the body, Reason, of the
Soule, Religion of Reason, Faith of
Religion, Christ of Faith. That circumstances
are the Atomies of policy,
Censure the being, Action the life, but
successe the Ornament. That Authority
presseth downe with weight, and
is thought violence: policy trips vp the
heeles, & is called the dexterity. That
this life is a throng in a narrow passage,
hee that is first out, findes case, hee in
the middle worst hemm'd in with troubles,
the hindmost that driues both out
afore him, though not suffering wrong,
hath his part in doing it. That God
requires of our debts, a reckoning, not
payment: That heauen is the easiest
purchase, for wee are the richer for the
disbursing. That liberality should
haue no obiect but the poore, if our
mindes were rich. That the mysterie
of greatnesse, is to keepe the inferiour

ignorant of it. That all this is no
Newes to a better wit. That the City
                  cares not what the Countrey thinkes.
               
               Sr. T. R.
            
            
               Newes from the very Countrey.
               THat it is a Fripery of Courtiers,
Marchants, and others, which
haue beene in fashion, and are very
neere worne out. That Iustices of
Peace haue the felling of vnder-woods,
but the Lords haue the great fals. The
Iesuits are like Apricockes, heeretofore,
heere and there one succour'd in a great
mans house, and cost deere; now you
may haue them for nothing in euery
cottage. That euery great Vice is a
Pike in a Pond, that deuoures vertues,
and lesse vices. That it is wholsomest
getting a stomacke by walking on your
owne ground: and the thriftiest laying

of it at anothers Table. That debtors
are in London close prisoners, and heere
haue the liberty of the house. That
Atheists in affliction, like blinde beggers,
are forced to aske, though they
know not of whom. That there are
(God be thanked) not two such Acres
in all the Countrey, as the Exchange &
Westminster Hall. That onely Christmas
Lords know their ends. That
VVomen are not so tender fruit, but
that they doe as well, and beare as well
vpon Beds, as plashed against walles.
That our Cares are neuer worse emploied,
then when they are wayted on by
Coaches. That Sentences in Authors,
like haires in horse taile, concur
in one root of beauty and strength, but
being pluckt out one by one, serue only
for Springes and Snares. That both
want and abundance, equally aduance
a rectified man from the world, as cotton
and stones are both good casting
for an Hawke. That I am sure there is
none of the forbiddenfruit left, because

we doe not all eat therof. That our
best three pilde mischiefe comes from
beyond the sea, and rides post through
the country, but his errand is to Court.
That next to no wife and children, your
owne are the best pastime, anothers
wife and your children worse, your
wife & anothers children worst. That
Statesmen hunt their fortunes, and are
often at default: Fauorites course her,
and are euer in view. That intemperance
is not so vnwholsome heere; for
none euer saw Sparrow sicke of the
poxe. That heere is no trechery nor
fidelity, but it is because heere are no
secrets. That Court motions are vp
and downe; ours circular: theirs like
squibs cannot stay at the highest, nor returne
to the place which they rose
from, but vanish and weare out in the
way: Ours like Mil-wheels, busie without
changing place; they haue peremptory
fortunes; we vicissitudes.
               I. D.
            
            
               
               Answer to the very Country
Newes.
               IT is a thought, that man is the Cook
of time, and made dresser of his own
fatting. That the fiue Senses are
Cinque-ports for temptation, the trafficke
sinne, the Lieutenant Sathan,
the custome-tribute, soules. That
the Citizens of the high Court grow
rich by simplicitie; but those of London,
by simple craft. That life, death,
and time, do with short cudgells dance
the Matachine. That those which
dwell vnder the Zona Torrida, are troubled
with more damps, then those of
Frigida. That Policie and Superstition
hath of late her masque renr from her face,
and shee is found with a wry
mouth and a stinking breath, and those
that courted her hotly, hate her now in
the same degree, or beyond. That
Nature too much louing her owne,

becomes vnnaturall and foolish. That
the soule in some is like an egge, hatched
by a young Pullet, who often rigging
from her nest, makes hot and cold
beget rottennesse, which her wanton
youth will not beleeue, till the faire
shell being broken, the stinke appeareth
to profit others, but cannot her.
That those are the wise ones, that hold
the superficies of vertue, to support her
contrarie, all-sufficient. That clemencie
within and without is the nurse
of rebellion. That thought of the
future is retyred into the Countrey,
and time present dwells at Court.
That I liuing neere the Church-yard,
where many are buried of the Pest, yet
my infection commeth from Spaine,
and it is feared it will disperse further
into the Kingdom.
               A.S.
            
            
               
               Newes to the Vniuersitie.
               A Meere Scholler is but a liue book,
Action doth expresse knowledge
better then words; so much of
the soule is lost as the bodie cannot vtter.
To teach, should rather be an effect,
then the purpose of learning. Age
decaies nature, perfects Art: therefore
the glory of youth, is strength; of the
gray head, wisdome; yet most condemne
the follies of their owne infancie,
runne after those of the worlds,
and in reuerence of antiquitie will beare
an old error against a new truth.
Logicke is the Heraldrie of Arts, the array
of Iudgment, none it selfe, nor any
Science without it: where it and learning
meete not, must be either a skilful
ignorance, or a wilde knowledge. Vnderstanding
cannot conclude out of
moode and figure. Discretion conteines
Rhetherique; the next way to

learne good words, is to learne sense;
the newest Philosophie, is foundest, the
eldest Diuinitie: Astronomie begins in
Nature, ends in Magicke. There is
no honestie of the bodie without
health, which no man hath had since
Adam. Intemperance that was the first
mother of sicknesse, is now the daughter.
Nothing dyes but qualities. No
kinde in the world can perish without
ruine of the whole. All parts helpe
one another (like States) for particular
interest: So in Arts which are but translations
of nature; there is no sound
position in any one, which, imagine
false, there may not from it be drawne
strong conclusions, to disproue all the
rest. VVhere one truth is granted, it
may be by direct meanes brought to
confirme any other controuerted.
The soule and bodie of the first man,
were made fit to be immortall together,
we cannot liue to the one, but we
must dye to the other. A man and a
Christian are two creatures. Our

perfection in this World is vertue; in
the next knowledge, when wee shall
read the glory of God in his own face.
            
            
               Newes from Sea.
               THat the best pleasure is to haue
no obiect of pleasure, and vniformitie
is a better prospect then varietie.
That putting to Sea, is change of life,
but not of condition; where risings and
falls, Calmes, and crosse-gales are
yours, in order and turne; fore-windes
but by chance. That it is the worst
winde to haue no winde, and that your
smooth fac'd Courtier, deading your
course by a calme, giues greater impediment,
then an open enimies crossegale.
That leuitie is a vettue, for many
are held vp by it. That it's nothing
so intricate and infinite, to rigge a Ship
as a woman, and the more either is
fraught, the apter to leake. That to

pumpe the one, and shreeue the other,
is alike noysome. That small faults
habituated, are as dangerous as little
leakes vnfound; and that to punish
and not preuent, is to labour in the
pumpe, & leaue the leake open. That
it is best striking Sayle before a storme,
and necessariest in it. That a little
time in our life is best, as the shortest
cut to our Hauen is the happiest voyage.
That to him that hath no Hauen,
no winde is friendly; and yet it is
better to haue no Hauen, then some
kinde of one. That expedition is
euery where to bee bribed but at Sea.
That gaine works this miracle, to
make men walke vpon the water; and
that the sound of Commoditie drowns
the noise of a Storme, especially of an
absent one. That I haue once in my
life out-gone night at Sea, but neuer
darknesse; and that I shall neuer wonder
to see a hard world, because I haue
liued to see the Sunne a bankrupt, being
ready to starue for cold in his perpetuall

presence. That a mans companions
are (like ships) to be kept in distance,
for falling foule one of another;
only with my friend I will close. That
the fairest field for a running head is the
Sea, where he may runne himselfe out
of breath, and his humor out of him.
That I could carrie you much further,
and yet leaue more before then behinde,
and all will be but via Nauis,
without print or tracke, for so is morall
instruction to youthes watrish humor.
That though a Ship vnder
Saile be a good sight, yet it is better to
see her moor'd in the Hauen. That
I care not what become of this fraile
Barke of my flesh, so I saue the Passenger.
And here I cast Anchor.
               W. S.
            
            
               
               Forreine Newes of the yeere
1616.
               
                  From France.
                  IT is deliuered from France, that the
choise of friends there is as of their
Wines: those that being new, are
hard and harsh, proue best; the most
pleasing are least lasting. That an enemie
fierce at the first onset, is as a
torrent tumbling downe a Mountaine;
a while it beares all before it: haue but
that whiles patience, you may passe it
dry-foot. That a penetrating iudgement
may enter into a mans minde by
his bodies gate; if this appeare affected,
apish, and vnstable; a wonder if
that be setled.
                  That vaine-glory, new fashions, and
the French disease, are vpon termes of

quitting their Countries Allegeance,
to be made free Denisons of England.
That the wounds of an ancient enmitie
haue their scarres, which cannot be
so well closed to the sight, but they will
lie open to the memorie. That a
Princes pleasurable vices, vshered by
authoritie, and waited on by conniuence,
sooner punish themselues by
the subiects imitation, then they can
be reformed by remonstrance or correction;
so apt are all ill examples to
rebound on them that giue them.
That Kings heare truth oftner for the
tellers, then their owne aduantage.
               
               
                  From Spaine.
                  THat the shortest out to the riches
of the Indies, is by their contempt.
That who is feared of most, feares most.
That it more vexeth the proud, that
men despise them, then that they not

feare them. That greatnes is fruitfull
enough, when other helps faile, to beget
on it selfe destruction. That it is a
grosse flattering of tyred crueltie, to
honest it with the title of clemencie.
That to eat much at other mens cost,
and little at his owne, is the wholesomest
and most nourishing diet, both in
Court and Countrey. That those are
aptest to domineere ouer others, who
by suffering indignities haue learned
to offer them. That ambition like a
sillie Doue flies vp to fall downe, it
mindes not whence it came, but whither
it will. That enen Galley-slaues,
setting light by their captiuitie, finde
freedom in bondage. That to be
slow in militarie businesses, is to be so
courteous, as to giue the way to an
enemie. That Lightning and greatnesse
more feare then hurt.
               
               
                  
                  From Rome.
                  THat the Venereall (called veniall)
sin is to passe in the ranke of Cardinall
vertues; and that those should
be held henceforth his Holinesse beneficiall
friends, that sinne vpon hope of
pardon. That where vice is a Statecommoditie,
he is an offender that often
offends not. That Iewes and
Curtezans there, are as beasts that men
feed, to feed on. That for an Englishman
to abide at Rome, is not so dangerous
as report makes it; since it skills
not where we liue, so we take heed how
we liue. That greatnesse comes not
downe by the way it went vp, there being
often found a small distance betweene
the highest and the lowest Fortunes.
That rackt authoritie is oft
lesse at home then abroad regarded,
while things that seem, are (commonly)
more a far off then at hand feared.
               
               
                  
                  From Venice.
                  THat the most profitable Banke, is
the true vse of a mans selfe, whiles
such as grow mouldy in idlenes, make
their houses their Tombes, and die
before their death. That many dangerous
spirits lie buried in their wants,
which had they means to their minds,
would dare as much as those that with
their better Fortunes ouertop them.
That professed Curtezans, if they bee
any way good, it is because they are
openly badde. That frugalitie is the
richest treasure of an estate, where men
feede for hunger, cloath for cold and
modestie, and spend for Honour,
Charitie, and Safety.
               
               
                  
                  From Germany.
                  THat the infectious vice of Drunken-good-fellowship,
is like to
sticke by that Nation as long as the
multitude of Offenders so benums the
sense of offending, as that a common
blot is held no staine. That discretions
must be taken by weight, not by
tale: who doth otherwise, shall both
proue his own too light, and fall short
of his reckoning. That feare and a nice
fore-cast of euery sleight danger, seldome
giues either faithfull or fruitfull
counsell. That the Empire of Germany,
is not more great then that ouer a
mans selfe.
               
               
                  
                  From the Low Countries.
                  THat one of the sureft grounds of
a mans libertie is, not to giue another
power ouer it. That the most
dangerous plunge whereto to put
thine enemie, is desperation, while
forcing him to set light by his owne
life, thou makest him master of thine.
That neglected danger lights soonest
and heauiest. That they are wisest,
who in the likely-hood of good, prouide
for ill. That since pittie dwells
at the next doore to miserie, he liueth
most at ease that is neighboured with
enuy. That the euill fortune of the
warres, as well as the good, is variable.
               
            
            
               
               Newes from my Lodging.
               THat the best prospect is to looke
inward. That it is quieter sleeping
in a good conscience then a
whole skin. That a soule in a fat body
lies soft, and is loath to rise. That
he must rise betimes who would cosen
the Diuell. That Flatterie is increased,
from a pillow vnder the elbow, to a
bed vnder the whole body. That
Policie is the vnsleeping night of reason.
That hee who sleepes in the cradle
of securitie, sinnes soundly without
starting. That guilt is the Flea of
the conscience. That no man is
throughly awaked, but by affliction.
That a hang'd Chamber in priuate, is
nothing so conuenient as a hang'd
Traitor in publike. That the religion
of Papistrie, is like a curtaine, made
to keepe out the light. That the life

of most Women is walking in their
sleep, and they talke their dreames.
That Chambering is counted a ciuiller
qualitie, then playing at tables in
the Hall, though seruing-men vse both
That the best bedfellow for all times in
the yeare, is a good bed without a fellow.
That he who tumbles in a calm
bed, hath his tempest within. That
he who will rise, must first lie downe
and take humilitie in his way. That
sleepe is deaths picture drawne to life,
or the twi-light of life and death.
That in sleepe wee kindely shake death
by the hand; but when we are awaked,
wee will not know him. That often
sleepings are so many trials to die, that
at last we may do it perfectly. That
few dare write the true newes of their
Chamber: and that I haue none secret
enough to tempt a strangers curiositie,
or a Seruants discouerie.
               God giue you good morrow.
               B. R.
            
            
               
               Newes of my Morning worke.
               THat to be good, the way is to be
most alone, or the best accompanied.
That the way to heauen
is mistaken for the most Melancholywalke.
That the most feare the worlds
opinion, more then Gods displeasure.
That a Court-friend seldome goes
further then the first degree of Charitie.
That the Diuell is the perfectest
Courtier. That innocency was first
cozen to man, now guiltinesse hath
the neerest alliance. That sleepe is
deaths Leger Embassador. That
time can neuer be spent: wee passe by
it and cannot returne. That none
can be sure of more time then an instant.
That sinne makes worke for
repentance or the Diuell. That patience
hath more power then afflictions.
That euery ones memory is diuided
into two parts: the part loosing

all is the Sea, the keeping part is Land.
That honesty in the Court liues in persecution,
like Protestanss in Spaine.
That Predestination and constancy are
alike vncertaine to beiudged of. That
reason makes loue the Seruing-man.
That vertues fauour is better then a
a Kings fauorite. That being sicke begins
a suit to God, being wel possesseth
it. That health is the Coach which
carries to Heauen, sickenesse the posthorse.
That worldly delights to one
in extreame sickenesse, is like a high
candle to a blinde man. That absence
doth sharpen loue, presence strengthens
it, that the one brings fuell, the other
blowes till it burnes cleere: that loue
often breakes friendship, that euer encreaseth
loue. That constancy of women,
and loue in men, is alike rare.
That Arts is truths lugler. That falshood
playes a larger part in the world
then truth. That blinde zeale & lame
knowledge are alike apt to ill. That
fortune is humblest where most contemned.

That no porter but resolution
keepes feare our of mindes. That
the face of goodnesse without a body is
the worst wickednesse. That womens
fortunes aspire but by others powers.
That a man with a female wit is the
worst Hermaphrodite. That a man
not woorthy beeing a friend, wrongs
himselfe by beeing in acquaintence.
That the worst part of ignorance, is making
good and ill seeme alike. That
all this is newes onely to fooles.
               Mris. B.
            
            
               Newes from the lower end
of the Table.
               IT is sayd among the folks here, that
if a man die in his infancy, hee hath
onely broke his fast in this world: If
in his youth, hee hath left vs at dinner.
That it is bed-time with a man at three
score and ten; and hee that liues to a

hundred yeeres, hath walked a mile after
supper. That the humble-minded
man makes the lowest curtsie. That
grace before meat, is our electiō before
we were: grace after meatour saluation
when wee are gone. The soule halts
betweene two opinons, fals betweene
two stooles. That a foole at the vpper
end of the table, is the bread before
the salt. He that hates to bee reprooued,
sits in his owne light. Hunger is
the cheapest sawce, and nature the
cheapest guest. The sensible man and
the silent woman are the best discoursers.
Repentance without amendment,
is but the shifting of a foule trencher.
He that tels a lie to saue his credit,
wipes his mouth with his sleeue to
spare his napkin. The tongue of a icster
is the fiddle that the hearts of the
company dance to. The tongue of a
foole carues a peace of his heart to euery
man that sits next him. A silent
man is a couered messe. The contented
man onely is his owne caruer. He

that hath many friends eates too much
salt with his meat. That wit without
discretion cuts other men meate and
his owne fingers. That the soule of a
chollericke man sits euer by the fire
side. That patience is the lard of the
leane meat of aduersity. The Epicure
puts his money into his belly, and the
Miser his belly into his purse. That the
best company makes the vpper end of
the table, and not the saltseller. The
superfluity of a mans possessions, is the
broken meate that should remaine to
the poore. That the enuious keepes
his knife in his hand, and swallowes his
meat whole. A rich foole among the
wife is a gilt empty bowle amongst the
thirsty. Ignorance is an insensible
hunger. The water of life is the best
wine. He that robs mee of my inuention,
bids himselfe welcome to another
mans table, and I will bid him welcom
when he is gone. The vaine-glorious
man pisseth more then he drinks. That
no man can drinke an health out of the

cup of blessing. To surfet vpon wit, is
more dangerous then to want it. He
that's ouercom of any passiō is dry drūk.
Tis easier to fill the belly of faith, then
the eye of reason. The rich glutton is
better fed then taught. That faith is
the elbow for a heauy soule to lean on,
He that sinnes that he may repent, surfets
that hee may take physicke. Hee
that riseth without thankesgiuing, goes
away and owes for his ordinary. Hee
that beginnes to repent when he is old,
neuer washed his hands till night.
That this life is but one day of three
meales, or one meale of three courses:
childe-hood, youth, & old age. That
to sup well, is to liue well: and that's
the way to sleepe well. That no man
goes to bed till he dies, nor wakes till
he is dead. And therefore
               Good night to you heere,
and good morrow heereafter,
               I. C.
            
            
               
               Newes from the Church.
               IT is thought heere, that the world
was made for man, and not man for
the world, and that therefore they take
a crosse course that lye downe there.
That those that will not rise, their souls
must, and carry their bodies to Iudgement.
That we haue spent one inheritance
already, and are prodigall of
this. That there is no hope beyond
mercy, and that this is that time; the
next is of Iustice. That Christ when
hee went away, left good seede in his
Church; and when hee comes againe,
he shall finde Christians, but not faith.
That the Diuell hath got vpon vs, the
same way that hee did at the first, by
drawing shadowes ouer substances, as
he did the body ouer the soule. That
Protestants weare the name of Christ for
a Charme, as Papists doe the Crosse.
That States vse it, the Clergy liue by

it, the People follow it, more by a
stream, then one by one. That all are
religious rather then some. That euery
one lookes to another, but not to
himselfe. That they go so by throngs
to Heauen, that it is to bee feared they
take the broader waye. That the
Church is in the world, like a Ship in
the Sea; the Elect in the Church, like
Ionas amongst the Mariners. That to
mend this, is to cheate the Diuell, to
turne man the right side outward, and
set the soule foremost againe. That
the soule may be too ranke too, if wee
looke not to it: and so a Puritane often
times meets a Papist in superstition another
way. That to binde from and
to indifferent things, is equall, though
it be thought otherwise. That some,
out of a good meaning haue fallen this
way into a vice. That these faults are
more subtill; and therefore lesse perceiued,
and lesse to be blamed; but as
dangerous as the other, if they take
heed. That the rule is in all things,

the body and the soule must goe together,
but the better before. That wee
haue contended so long about the body
of Religion, that some men thought
it was dead. That so, Atheists are
come into the Church, and that it will
be as hard to cast them out as Diuels.
That those, which haue thus broken
the peace of Ierusalem, are obliged to
satisfaction; and those which first gaue
them cause of amendment. That they
are a good medicine one for another,
and both a good Composition. That
a pure Bishop is the best gouernment, if
the pride on both sides would let them
know it. That all Controuersies for
the most part, leaue the truth in the
middle, and are factious at both
ends. That the Church hath
this good by them, they cleanse the
way for others, but not for themselues.
That sincerity, in the cause of truth, is
more worth then learning. That too
much, and too little knowledge, haue
made the world mad. That we haue a

shorter cut to it, and a surer way then
Drake had ouer the world, if wee could
find it out. That euery man is a briefe
of the whole; & as he is so, he is greater
then a King. That euery King is a
briefe of his Land, and hee hath a Patterne
of the gouernment of it alwayes
abour him. That as the honour that
he giues vnto his Nobles and Counsellours
is a charge; so is that which God
giues him. That as hee requires an
account, so he must giue. That he is
the Image of God in his Kingdome, as
man is in the World. That therefore
the Subiects owe him obedience, as the
Creatures doe Man. That those that
will not obey, are neither good Subiects,
nor good men. That to obey
well, is as great a thing as to gouerne,
and more mens duties. That those
that thinke not so, know not the Christians
part, which is to suffer. That
though States bee naught, if they professe
Religion, they may deliuer many
men safe to Heauen, though they goe

not themselues, and so they are like bad
Ministers. That this is Gods vse of
both, and of the world too, to conuey
his Elect to their place. That the outward
face of the Church hath but the
same vse, and the Elect are the Church
themselues. That they are the Temple
of the holy Ghost, and therefore
ought to plucke downe their Idols, and
set vp God there. That the Idolles of
these times, are Couetousnesse, Pride,
Gluttony, Wantonnesse, Heresies, and
such like admiration and seruing of our
selues. That we must make all time
an occasion of amendment, because
the Diuell makes it an occasion to
tempt. That he is a Spirit, and therefore
is cunninger then we. Thar there
is no way to resist him, but by the Spirit
of God, which is his Master. That
this is the gift of God, which he giueth
to all that are his. That it is encreased
by the word, and held by humility
and prayer. That Faith is the effect
of it, and workes the assurance.
               
                  That thus the vnderstanding and will,
which is the whole soule of man, is
made vp againe, and sanctifies the body.
That so wee are the members of
Christ. That our Head is in Heauen,
as a Pawne, that where he is, we shall
bee. That there is no opinion but
knowledge; for it is the Science of
soules, and God the Teacher.
               I. R.
            
            
               Newes from the Bed.
               THat the bed is the best Rendevou
of mankinde, aud the most necessarie
ornament of a Chamber.
               That Souldiers are good antiquaries
in keeping the old fashion, for the
first bed was the bare ground.
               That a mans pillow is his best Counseller.
               
                  That Adam lay in state, when the
heauen was his canopie.
               That the naked truth is, Adam and
Eue lay without sheets.
               That they were either very innocent,
very ignorant, or very impudent,
they were not ashamed the heauens
should see them lye without a couerlet
               That it is likely Eue studied Astronomie,
which makes the posteritie of her
Sex euer since to lye on their backs.
               That the circumference of the bed,
is nothing so wide as the conuex of the
heauens, yet it contains a whole world.
               That the fiue Senses are the greatest
sleepers.
               That a slothfull man is but a reasonable
Dormouse.
               That the Soule euer wakes to watch
the bodie.
               That a Iealous man sleeps dog-sleep.
               That sleep makes no difference between
a wife man and a foole.
               That for all times sleep is the best
bedfellow.
               
                  That the deuill and mischiefe euer
wake.
               That Loue is a dreame.
               That the preposterous hopes of ambitious
men are like pleasing dreames,
farthest off when awake.
               That the bed payes Venus more custome
then all the world beside.
               That if dreames and wishes had been
all true, there had not been since Poperie,
one Maide to make a Nun of.
               That the secure man sleeps soundly,
and is hardly to be awak't.
               That the charitable man dreames of
building Churches, but starts to thinke
the vngodly Courtier will pull them
down againe.
               That great sleepers were neuer dangerous
in a state.
               That there is a naturall reason, why
popish Priests chuse the bed to confesse
their women vpon, for they hold
it necessarie, that humiliation should
follow shrift.
               That if the bed should speake all it

knowes, it would put many to the blush.
               That it is fit the bed should know
more then paper.
               R. S.
            
            
               Newes from Shipbord.
               THat Repentance without amendment,
is like continuall pumping,
without mending the leake.
               That he that liues without Religion,
sayles without a compasse.
               That the wantonnesse of a peacefull
Common-wealth, is like the playing of
the Porpesse before a storme.
               That the foole is Sea sick in a Calme,
but the Wisemans stomacke endures
all weathers.
               That passions in a foole are Ord'nance
broken loose in a storm, that alter their

propertie of offending others and ruine
himselfe.
               That good Fortunes are a soft quicksand,
aduersitie a rocke; both equally
dangerous.
               That Vertue in pouertie is a ready
rigg'd Ship that lyes wind bound.
               That good fashion in a man is like
the Pilot in a Ship, that doth most with
least force.
               That a Fooles tongue is like the buye
of an Ankor, you shall finde his heart
by it wheresoeuer it lyes.
               Wisdome makes vse of the crosses
of this world, asskilfull Pylots of Rocks
for Sea-marks to saile by.
               H. R.
            
            
               
               Newes from the Chimney corner.
               THat wit is Brushwood, Iudgment
Timber: the one giues the greatest
flame, the other yeelds the
durablest heat, and both meeting
makes the best fire.
               That Bawdes and Atturneyes are
Andyrons that hold vp their Clyents
till they burne each other to Ashes:
they receiue warmth by these; these
by them their destruction.
               That a Wise-rich-man is like the
backe or stocke of the Chimney, and
his wealth the fire, it receiues not for it
owne need, but to reflect the heat to
other good.
               That House-keeping in England is
falne from a great fire in a hot summers
day, to boughes in the Chimney all
winter long.
               
                  That mans reason in matter of faith
is Fire, in the first degree of his ascent
flame, next smoake, and then nothing.
               A young fellow falne in loue with a
Whore, is said to be falne asleepe in
the Chimney corner.
               Hee that leaues his friend for his
wench, forsakes his bed to sit vp and
watch a coale.
               That the couetous rich man onely
freezes before the fire.
               That Choller is an ill guest that pisses
in the Chimney for want of a Chamber-pot.
               That chaste Beautie is like the bellowes,
whose breath is cold, yet makes
others burne.
               That hee that expounds the Scriptures
vpon the warrant of his owne
spirit only, layes the brands together
without tongs, and is sure (at least) to
burne his owne fingers.
               That the Louer keeps a great fire in's
house all the yeere long.
               That deuotion, like fire in frostie

weather, burnes hottest in affliction.
               That such Fryers as flie the world
for the trouble of it, lye in bed all day
in winter to spare firewood.
               That a couetous man is a dog in a
wheele, that toyles to roast meat for
other mens eating.
               The Pagans worshipping the Sunne
are said to hold their hands to the Gloworme
in stead of a coale for heat.
               That a Wisemans heart is like a
broad hearth, that keeps the coales
(his passions) from burning the house.
               That good deeds in this life, are
coales raked vp in embers, to make a
fire next day.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   