
      
         
            
            
            A
TRVE HISTORIE
OF THE MEMORABLE
SIEGE OF
Ostend, and what passed on either
side, from the beginning of the Siege,
vnto the yeelding vp of
the Towne.
            Conteining the Assaults, Alarums, Defences, Inuentions
of warre, Mines, Counter-mines and Retrenchments,
Combats of Galleys, and Sea-fights, with the portrait
of the Towne: And also what passed in the Ile of
Cadsant, and at the siege of Sluice, after the comming
of Count Maurice.
            
            
               Translated out of French into English,
By Edward Grimeston.
            AT LONDON
Printed for Edward Blount.
1604.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Honourable the Earle
of Deuonshire, Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, and one of his Maiesties most
Honourable priuie Councell.
            Charles Mountioie
Anagramma
One: A most Rich Iuel.
            
               YOur good Lordship knowes, that in no times of
Peace, Peace is so fixed, but the varietie to
which all things worldly are subiect, may giue
necessary, and vndelayd occasion to the Theorie
of warres, if not their practise; if neither, yet
the knowledge of both, being by long and renowned
experience so substantially turnd into
the powers of your minde; the vnequall subiect of this resolute and
deadly siege, cannot but adde one welcome forme to your discourse,
and finde some of your emptiest minutes fit to vouchsafe it acceptance.
The bloodlesse and quiet transformation it receiues from my
tributorie labours; wanting so much life of the death and actuall
excitations it naturally presented, I knew must want as much of the
Honor and fire it should confer to the Protection and spirit of a Souldier:
but I know withall, the lost liues of so many resolute and Honorable
Commanders, hauing a little restitution made them in this
willing remembrance, will finde no lesse cherishing and strength of
propagation in your liuing disposition: to whose true Nobilitie and
generally lou'd vertues, I thrice humbly submit these and
whatsoeuer worthier causes of your graue consideration
the vnworthy worke
compriseth.
            
               Your Lordships alwayes to
be commanded,
Edw: Grimeston.
               
            
         
         
            
            The Author to the Reader.
            
               THis latter age hath brought forth memorable
exploits of war: & Flāders (without straiing
from our subiect) to her losse, hath not
seene the least, being vexed with continuall
troubles since the yeere 1566. The sieges of
Harlem, Mastricke, Andwerp, and other
townes, haue beene goodly, according vnto
the Etimology which some giue vnto the word. Bellum, quod
minime bellum, and it seemes that the industry of men instructed
by the inuentions of former ages, and prickt forward by religion,
and other violent causes and coulours, hath added what she
could, and as it were made the vttermost triall of her forces. I
leaue it vnto the reader to make a comparison betwixt this siege
of Ostend, and the rest, but without doubt it exceedes them all in
length of time: the importance therof cannot be told, being the
most memorable occurrant of our age. The opinion I haue that
this small worke (recommended by truth it selfe, and as free from
passion, as voide of affectation) should be pleasing vnto many, is
the cause I haue set it forth, to represent (as in a table) the most remarkeable
things that haue happened on either side at this siege.
Many being interessed in the cause (as they say) will desire to
see it, and spirits prickt forward by curiosity would not loose their
partes. In the yeere 1599. the Flemings being molested with the
continuall courses of them of Ostend, caused certaine forts to be
made about the towne, to bridle them. It is aboue three yeeres
since this fiege begā, which was the fift of Iuly in the yeere 1601.
we may thinke that the importance of the place, hath (during this
time) furnished both the one & the other withal deuises possible,
for the well assayling & defending of the Towne. The discourse
which is briefe, frees me from giuing any censure: and the Law
which I haue prescribed my selfe, opposeth: Some not vnproperly,
call Ostend an Academie and an excellent Schoole, for
Gouernours, Captaines, Souldiers, Ingeneurs, Phisitions, Surgions,
Pilots and Mariners: and they finde it by experience, that euery
one of these persons which hath continued but three moneths

in Ostend, is become excellent in his art and vocation. A
Souldier when he comes forth speakes like a Maister in fortifications,
of Ramperes, Bulworkes, Spurres, Counterscarfes, Rauelins,
Trauerses, Parapets, halfe Moones, Reduites or Blocke houses
and such like, I will alledge one example among many, to
shew the valour of the Souldiers of Ostend: In the yeere 1603.
the Arch-dukes men hauing surprized the Castel of Wastendonck,
the inhabitants resolued to retrench themselues against it, setting
their Garison to worke, who were schollers newly from this Academie,
these good workmen made proofe in three houres what
they could doe, to the great amazement of the Spaniardes, who
said they could not be men, seeing the Canon did not force them
to retire a foote, or els that euery one had a new life in his cofers.
As for Phisitions and Surgians, Mounsieur Moerbeke of Haigh,
is held for a Phoenix, Alexander Courtmans of Andwerp is very famous,
& all such as haue practised in Ostend, haue purchased a prerogatiue
aboue the rest. The like is of all men that haue bin imployed
there, finally this little booke is good for Souldiers, who
shall learne therein many excellent points of their profession, tried
at the cost of other men, and ready to be put in practise: neither
shall it be vnprofitable to any, seeing that we liue in this peruerse
age towards the dissolution of the world threatned of all
sides with wars, like vnto a poore traueller, which sees the Heauen
ouercast threatning a storme in the midst of a plaine Champion.
As for delight: If any one seeke to please his taste, the variety
of the discourse will minister sufficient matter: My intention in
writing these simple remembrances, free from all other affection,
was onely to serue the publike: If my labour may be as friendly
accepted, & be pleasing to all good men, & to those whose iudgements
are not obscured nor transported with passion, neither
that haue coniured against the trueth: I haue attained
to my desire, and thinke my paines
well imployed. Farewell.
            
               A. V.
            
         
         
            
            A description, and the names
of the Forts of the Towne
of Ostend.
            
               1. Sand-hill.
               2. False-bray.
               3. Schottenbruch or the Scottish fort.
               4. Becc-af, here was the Church of the olde Towne, whereof the
steeple onely stands.
               5. The menteur or liar.
               6. The new hauen, the which is not yet finished.
               7. Moises table.
               8. 9. Flamenburch, vpon the West of the new Hauen where they
haue planted a Batterie to shoote against the Arch-dukes men,
when as they go to their battery which is towardes the Saulcisses.
               10. The Bulworke vpon the Northwest with a Blockhouse, vpon
the Hauen, by the which the ships doe now enter.
               11. The North Bulworke, with a battery thereon.
               12. The East gate.
               13. The Rauelin at the East gate.
               14. The Bulworke of Pekell.
               15. A Battery vpon the Bulworke of Pekel, in the which there are
9. demie Culuerins, to shoote at the Arch-dukes approches which
he makes vpon the new Hauen.
               16. Battery vpon the Counter-scarfe before the colke or gulfe.
               17. The Bulworke of Spaine.
               18. A gate with a bridge at the Bulworke of Spaine to go vp into
the Countrie.
               19. A passage through the Counter-scarfe, by the which they go into
the colke or gulfe.
               20. The East Rauelin.
               21. The Spanish halfe Moone, fortified without with a corredor or
gallery.
               22. Becc-af, or the follie of the East.
               23. The halfe Moone of Slimmer.
               24. A Blockehouse abandoned.
               25. A halfe Moone in the high Country.
               26. A Bulworke vpon the South-East.
               
                  
27. A Rauelin vpon the South-East.
               28. A point against the South-square.
               29. A Bulworke vpon the South,
               30. A Rauelin vpon the South.
               31. The South Rauelin hath beene cutt off in this place to stop the
enemies approch there.
               32. A hafe Moone in the ditch of the Counter-scarfe.
               33. Little squares called claptmus at the end of the halfe Moone
vpon the Polder.
               34. The bridge of the South-west Bulworke to goe ouer the Counter-scarfe
into the Polder.
               35. The South-west Bulworke.
               36. The halfe Moone of the Polder.
               37. The South-west Rauelin.
               38. A gate at the South-west of the Towne.
               39. The West Bulworke.
               40. The West Rauelin.
               41. The Porke-espike.
               42. The Helmont.
               43. The West Hauen with the trenches,
               44. A bridge to goe vnto Sand-hill.
               45. The olde Sluice.
               46. A bridge to passe into the olde Towne.
               47. The place where the blue Sluice was.
               48. Many lodgings whether the souldiers retired.
               49. Many Blindes or couerings to receiue the enemies shot which
came from their battery vpon the West.
            
         
         
            
            A description of the Chariot or Pompees bridge, inuented
to giue an assault to the Halfe-Moone of the Spaniards
at Ostend, as it appears in the plot of the towne.
            
               A. The Bridge being let downe.
               B. The Mast against the which the Bridge was raised, being 150.
foote high.
               C. The vpper part of the Bridge, made of great Roapes and Cables
of Musket proofe.
               D. The neather part of the Bridge made likewise of Roapes of
Musket proofe.
               E. A Poste like vnto the beame of a Wagon, to draw the Bridge vp,
and to let it downe.
               F. Foure-score horses to draw this Chariot.
               G. Wheeles eight foote broad, and 14. or 15. high, the which are
exceeding strong, and did cost 300. Ducats a peece.
               H. Heere Musketiers should be placed to shoote at them of the
Towne, and to keepe them from cutting of the Roape.
            
            The Arch-duke after he had done what he could to take Ostend, or
to annoy the besieged, by the inuention of an Italian Ingeneur named
Pompee, he caused a Chariot to be made, or a Bridge called Helwagen
or Loywagen, or Pompees Chariot, by the inuentors name, to
go vnto the assault at the Spanish Halfe-moone, the which was made
and held by them of the towne: the Bridge is 100. paces long & 16.
broad: on the which ten may march in front, it hath foure Wheeles
euery one 8. foote broad, and 14. or 15. high: at the end of the Chariot
there is a tree or mast 150. foote high, by meanes whereof the
bridge is drawne vp and let downe with poollies. Their desseigne was
to fasten Anchors on either side of the Halfe-moone, against the
which 80. horses should draw the bridge, as it is set downe in the Figure.
They of the Towne hauing intelligence thereof, made a high
Palyssadoe with trauerses of masts like vnto Gibets, to receiue the
vpper part of the bridge, being let downe: the besieged seeing this
bridge approach neere vnto the Halfe-moone, they brake one of the
Wheeles with a Canon-shot, so as it was of no effect, which made thē
of the towne call it the Cowards-bridge.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Historie of the siege of Ostend,
from the beginning vnto this
present day.
            
               
                  OStend is a Sea Towne in the countie
of Flanders,
               Description and situation of Ostend.
                one of the most famous
Forts of Christendome, scituated
amongst downes, three miles from
Newport, and foure houres iourney
from Bruges, vpon a riuer called Yperlehe,
the which increased by others,
casts an arme into the Sea by the west Sluce, the which
hath sometimes bin a good Port, but now it is cut of by
the enemy by meanes of a Trenche, and made altogether
vnprofitable by them of Ostend, with two dikes or
causies vpon the side of Polder rampart, to take away
all commoditie and aduantage from the enemie.
            The Towne with the Ramparts about it containe
halfe an houres iourney. Before the siege it was reasonably
well built. For the situation, the inhabitants maintained
themselues with fishing. Before the warres they
were about three thousand, but since the greatest part
are retired to Camuehr in Zeland, so as there remaines
not aboue one hundred and fiftie housholds.
            The port whereof we haue spoken,The Port. stretcheth to

the North Norwest of the towne, the greatest depth is
towards the Norwest drawing to the sea. It flowes and
ebbes euery sixe howers, as in other hauens of Flanders,
and it remaines almost drie at euery ebbe, neither is it
good but at halfe floud, and for vessels which drawe
not much water.
            Besides this Port,A new Gollet. within these few yeares, the Sea
of it selfe hath opened a new gollet or Port, aboue a
hundred foote broade, entring into the land when the
tides are lowest, the depth of two Pikes, and before at
the entrie a good halfe fadam, growing euery day more
deeper, so as it is likely in time to be one of the best ports
of Flanders.
               A new Port. Since the siege they haue made a new Port
or Hauen betwixt these two, whereof shall be spoken
more at large hereafter.
            The fortification of this place began during the
warres of the Lowe-countries,A discourse of the estate of the towne since the warres and fortification therof. in the yeare 1572. It
was first inclosed with gates and Palissadoes against
the incursions of the enemy, and sixe yeares after being
better fortified by the confederate Prouinces, it hath
continued almost alone in all the countie of Flanders
faithfull to her partie, and hath couragiously withstood
all the enemies attempts, and resisted their enterprises.
The Duke of Parma in the yeare 1583. returning with
his victorious troopes from the prise of Dunkerke and
Nieuport, and hauing besieged it, after fiue dayes was
forced to raise his siege.
            Two yeares after, La Motte gouernour of Graueling,
surprised the olde Towne vpon the Sea-shore, being
then onely fortified with a simple rampart and a pallisadoe,
thinking to fortifie it speedily, and so to keepe it,
but he was chased away with great losse, leauing vpon

the place aboue fortie men of commaund, with all his
munition.
            Since it hath beene fortified, and first of all the East-downes,
(the which by reason of their height and neernesse
might much annoy the Towne) haue beene made
somewhat plainer, and the Sea besides her ordinarie
course brought round about the towne when it flowes,
aboue 1200. paces to the South, and at Spring-tides it
runnes a league into the countrie towards the West,
and causeth much broken land there abouts, especially
towards the West Sand-downes, whereas the enemie
must campe, and whereas his onely passage lyes to goe
vnto the Towne.
            The fortification comprehended all the Polder,
               Those of Ostend abandon the Polder.
                (so
they call a medow or field wonne from the sea or riuer)
but finding it vnfit to be fortified, and requiring a
great garde, a part of it was left out. They haue likewise
furnished their ditches with causies and dikes, so
as whereas they were wonte to be drie at euery tide,
they are now full of water.
            The chiefe fortifications haue beene made since the
comming of the Arch-duke Albert in the yeare 1596.
and at the time when Calais and Hulst were taken, and
lastly in the yeare 1600. the ramparts were made higher,
the Bulwarkes inlarged, and all reduced to a fit and
equall proportion. Besides this fortification, those of
the towne haue neede to ramper themselues with dikes
and causeys against the sea, the which they feare more
then the enemy.
            This place imports greatly, that it should greatly
auaile the Arch-duke,Importance of Ostend.
                and that the losse thereof
should much preiudice the confederate Prouinces:

for (omitting to speake of the commodity of the hauen)
the Archduke by meanes thereof is forced to entertaine
warre in his owne countrey, and to haue a little extraordinary
armie continually in pay, to the ruine thereof.
Flanders particularly, (the which in time of peace was
reputed for a third part of the seuenteene Prouinces,) is
as it were abandoned to the souldier, and before the
siege, the greatest part of the champion country to redeeme
themselues from spoile and pillage, haue beene
forced to paie a tribute or contribution to them of Ostende.
            
            The Flemings feeling this thorne in their foote, to
bridle and restraine their ordinarie roades, haue built
many forts there abouts,Forts built about Ostend. and placed guardes vpon the
approches, especially in the yeare 1599. by the aduice
of a corporall fugitiue, who had beene long in garison
in the Towne, and knew all their courses.
            About the Towne from the West to the East, they
recken 17. forts, the farthest of be, Nieudamme, Leffing,
Snaskerk, Altemburg, Plassenthale, Stalhille, Nieuuegen,
Nieu munster, and Blanckenberg, in some of them
country men do dwell; the neerest be, Albertus, Isabella,
Grossendurst, Claire or the stone S. Iohn with his blockhouse,
Colombie with his blockhouse and Bredene, whervnto
hath beene added an eighteenth fort vpon the
East downes: Bredene is the greatest, in the which there
was the last winter a whole regiment in garison. Isabella
is the strongest and neerest vnto the Towne, the which
by meanes of a trench ioynes vnto Grossendurst, & both
of them are commonly guarded by six ensignes: and so
is Claire with her blockhouse. In Albertus there are two
ensignes, and one in Colombie: the entertainement of

which forts in the beginning did cost the states of Flanders
ninty thousand Flemish crownes a month,Expences in garding these forts. & for all
that they could not hinder the descēt of an armie, as experience
hath verified & oftentimes the mutinies of garisons,
haue brought no lesse oppression & ruine to the
Country then the incursions of the enemie.Cause of the siege. Which
hath beene the cause why they haue often made suite to
haue it beseeged straightly, among the rest after the taking
of Calais in the yeare 1596. offering to paie extraordinarily
300000. crownes within three monethes.
The Archduke seemed then to be resolute, and receiued
a good somme of money, but he did nothing but
shew himselfe with his armie before the Towne, and
hauing viewed it he sodainely retired.
            After all this they promised againe vnto the Archduke,
(besides the ordinary contribution of 90000.
crownes a month for the entertainment of the forts,) to
giue him 600000. crownes, that is a 100000. crownes
when hee should bring his armie within view of the
Towne. a 100000. crownes when he had planted his
Canon against it, a 100000. crownes when he had
made a breach, and the other 300000. crownes when
he had taken the Towne, and in trueth they deliuered
this summe and more as shall appeare hereafter. They
preuailed so in the counsel of the States (hauing practised
the Brabançons,) as a resolutiō was taken according
to their desires,Diuersitie of opinions in counsell vpon the siege of Ostend. (although there were great opposition,)
saying there was no reason to hazard an armie at the
siege of a place so much to be feared.
            As for the Archduke he was fully resolued to the
siege, for that (besides the hope he had to carrie the
place) he thought by this meanes to force the confederate

Prouinces, to draw their armie from the siege of
Reynberg, and with this money to pacifie his souldiers,
and amongst the rest those of Isabella fort, which had
beene long time mutined, and had intelligence with
them of Ostend, the which did much trouble the Flemings.
            Then followed the seege, the Arch-duke came to
Altemburg,
               Ostend besieged. and the fift of Iuly 1601. he sent Cont Frederick
de Berge first Marshall of the Campe before Ostend
with foure regiments of foote, who incamped vpon
the East downes, from whence the next day he began
to shoote with foure double Canons.
            Within the Towne there were 21. Ensignes of diuers
regiments, and one of the inhabitants, vnder the
command of La Northe, who prouided for their defence
most of them sending away their wiues & children,
into Zeland.
            
            The 6. day Don Augustine de Mexia Gouernour of
the Castle of Andwerp, came before the Towne with
fiue other regiments, who incamped vpon the West
very neere the Towne, betwixt the forts of Albert &
Isabella. They of the Towne that day and the three following
discharged many a Canon shot at them, and in
the end forced them to retire and to lodge vpon the
West downes, they say there were aboue 400. hurt
men carried to Neuport.
            
            The mutines of Isabella fort were pacified with promises
and faire words, so as they went forth willingly
to receiue their paie at Winoxberge, to the number of
fiue hundred men.
            The 10. and 11. of Iuly, the enemy caused the chiefest
forces of his campe to passe to the West-downes,

leauing vpon the East about a 1000. men vnder the
commond of Monsieur de Guson, who made a new fort
vpon the downes with deepe ditches about it.
            The enemie approched daily vpon the West, and
fortified himselfe, planting twelue peeces of Canon
vpon the plainest of the downes; he made also another
battery vpon the Sea side, wherby they tooke from
them of the Towne that olde Port or Hauen, so as euer
sence they haue vsed the Nieu-port,
               The olde hauen cut off by the enemy. or Chanell which
they had made expresly, whereby all great barkes or
ships with flat bottomes entred,
            Prince Maurice hauing intelligence of the siege of
Ostend, his excellencie sent presently the ninth of Iuly
from the campe Sir Francis Vere Generall of the English
with twelue companies of his owne nation &
                  Graue Maurice sendes to Ostend. 
               Colonell
Vchtenbruch with seuen ensignes of lowe Country
souldiers and some others, to the number of thirty
foure companies, all which ariued happilie and
entered the Towne by the North Port the fifteene of
Iuly.
            The besieged expected daily foure thousand English
men out of England.Succours from England. The 23. of Iuly there ariued
1500. in red Cassackes, the which were presentlye
deuided among the twelue first companies.
            Generall Vere being ariued fortified himselfe presently
in a certaine high place without the Towne, where
the enemy could not annoy him.
            The 13. they made a sally,A Sallie. wherein the Archduke
(according to the aduice which came from Bruges) lost
600. men. Don Augustin de Mexia had a Musket shot
in the hand, and a maister of the campe a Spaniard

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
named Don Ierosme Monroy was slaine there: they of
the Towne lost about thirtie.
            The 18. of Iuly Generall Vere cast vp earth on the
side of the Polder towards the West downes, & the enemie
did the like right against him. Then he fortified
himselfe at Cowe-bridge, the which his Excellencie had
caused to be broken the yeare before: And the 25. he
caused the place to be viewed, and put some Souldiers
into it: at the same instant the Arche-dukes men issued
forth in great numbers out of their approches and trenches,
euery one carrying a Fagot or Bauin vpon his
head, & passed on running at the mercie of the Musket
shot from the Towne, to make a passage through the
marish, and to seaze vpon a high place which lyes betwixt
Cowe-fort & Grossendurst, where in the night they
planted three Canons: and there they lost many men.
            The 26. of Iuly, the Archdukes men played all day
vpon this new fortification, and at night came to the
assault in three sundry places, they forced it and chased
away them of the Towne, the which was easie to doe
being but fortie men.
            The 27.A Sailie. of Iuly they within the Towne made a sallie
and wonne the enemies trenches, whom they chased
euen vnto the Sand-downes: the Canon of the
Towne playing in the meane time to great effect vpon
the Arche-dukes troupes. A Spanish prisoner said that
there were 600. of their men hurt and slaine at this seruice,
and amongst others, Don Diego Idiagues a Spanish
Captaine, sonne vnto the King of Spaines Secretarie,
was slaine.
            The 29. of Iuly the Arch-dukes armie was supplied
with ten Ensignes of new souldiers or Besognes, of

the new troupes that were come from Italie, the same
day the tide ouer-flowed all the enemies approches,
euen vnto the West-downes of sand.
            The same day the enemie sunck a Barke in the which
were 18. men, whereof there were but sixe saued, the
which did so amaze the Marriners, as they were driuen
to great want in Ostend, vntill the comming of Iohn de
Duvenuorde the Admirall, who tooke so good an order
as they might easilie enter by the North-port and the
gollet, and discharge their munition, victuales and marchandize
in the Dikes towards the East-port, so as they
haue aboundance of all things since that time.
            The 31. of Iuly Cont Frederick with a regiment of
Germaines began to make his trenches round about La
pierre S. Iean, going on to this new fortification which
they had wonne, the which they did couer with a new
wing towards the Norwest, and vnited it to their first
workes vpon the West-side of the Towne:The enemies trenches. so as the
enemies trenches are continued from the west-downes
belowe beyond the Fort of La pierre S. Iean. Vpon this
wing the enemy hath built a little corps de garde, against
the which Generall Vere made a retrenchment vpon
the West of his chiefe rampart, from whence the Soldiers
entertained one another with their Musket shot,
but it was razed two dayes after.
            The same day the Polder rampart was put in defence
vpon the North-east towards the Towne, and vpon
the South-west it was raised in manner of a plat-forme
to plant Canon thereon, and sixe double Cannons were
brought from Zeland, whereof foure were planted vpon
Sand-hill, and the other two vpon the West Boulwarke,
whether most of their ordinance was brought,

for that they expected some great attempt of the enemy
there.
            
               Don Catris commanded vpon the West at the Sanddownes,
who desired extremely to doe some exploit about
the Porke epicke along the little Tummel-dike, and
at the first oportunity when the tide should be gone to
cast himselfe by the hauen into the old Towne.
            The 3. of August, the Arch-dukes men made a trench
vnder the fort of S. Claire on the South side.
            The 4. day they aduanced their approches on the
same side within Musket shot of the trenche, which
Generall Vere had made vpon the West side of Polder.
            
            The 6. of August, those that were camped vpon the
West downes, approached fiftie yardes neerer vnto
the Towne.
            The 9. they began to shoote from Cow-fort, whilest
the fortification of Polder was a finishing.
            The same day the Arch-dukes men shotte 2200.2200. canon shot in one day against the Towne.
Canon shot from their batterie of the side of S. Claires
Forte, without making of any reasonable breach, they
onely hurt and slue some poore miserable creatures,
and spoiled some priuate houses, but it did nothing
counteruaile their great expence of Poulder and shot,
neither had they any thing aduanced their principall
desseigne.
            The defences of Sand-hill Bulwarke, Wester
Bulwarke, and Helmont were beaten downe, but they
were so well repaired in three or foure dayes, as in a
whole Moneth the enemie could not much indomage
them.
            The eleuenth of August, a seruant to Sir Horatio
Vere Liuetenant generall of the English was slaine, and

a peece of the Towne-Towre beaten downe.
            The Arch-dukes men stood euery night in armes to
the number of three or foure thousand,The Arch-dukes men stand vpon their guard to receiue them
of the Towne, who they thought would sallie out vpon
them.
            The same day at night came a Fleete of 15.Ships from Zeland. vessels
from Zeland with munition and victuals, the which
were afterwards vnladen in the Towne. The same day
a peece of the Tower of the olde Towne was beaten
downe, and two prisoners were brought into the
Towne, whereof the one was borne at Bruges, and
the other at Namur, who among other things saide
that the mutins of Isabella fort, had beene drawne
forth with good wordes, and were gone to Winoxberge
about 500. men; moreouer they said that the
Archduke had caused all the fugitiues to be put in to
prison, for that some of them had bragged to know the
meanes how to take the towne, but the smale likelihood
there was in their proposition, did shew sufficiently that
it was but to winne themselues credit.
            The 12.Of the Gouernors lodging, beaten downe with the Canon, and not by him abandoned. of August a small Tower of the Gouernours
lodging was beaten quite downe and although it were
pearced through with many a shot, yet did he not abandon
it.
            The same day many of the inhabitants both men
and women returned out of Zeland, who had fled for
feare in the beginning of the siege.
            The 13. of August, arriued 17. or 18. ships, the which
entred into the Towne by the Gollet on the East side
about mid-night, vpon whome the enemy plaied
fiercely with his Canon, and one boy onely was slaine,
this happened because it was moone light, for when the

night or darke they passe safely, without discouerie of
the enemy, whose neerest trenches on that side were a
thousand or eleuen hundred paces of.
            The enemie did also much indamage the ships that
lay within the Towne, behinde the new Church, and
slue a Mariner and some soudiers.
            The Archdukes men which where in guard at Katzen-heubten,
the which is a kinde of Caualier or platforme,
plaied continually with their Muskets into the
Towne, they hurt a Sargent of Captaine Anthonies
company in the leg, and slue the Sargent of Captaine
Kolue.
            
            Those of the Towne tooke two peeces of great Canon,
the which were vpon Wester Boulwarke, and
planted them in the false Braie at the foote of Sandhill,
for that they serued them to no vse whereas they were
before, by reason that the enemy was come so neere
the Towne, and had fortified their approches too well
on that side.
            The same day, three men thinking to flie vnto the enemie,Fugitiues taken.
two of them were taken & put into Yrons; the enemy
shot with foure peeces, from their neerest trench
on the South side, and with others from the East and
West, but their greatest effect was to ruine some houses:
from the first beginning vnto this day, they did not
hurt aboue 18. persons of the Towne and some souldiers,
the which was little in regard of the multitude of
bullets which passed through all partes of the Towne,Bullets of 40. pounde shot into the towne.
whereof the greatest part waied aboue 40. poundes a
peece.
            The 14. of August, there entred by the Gollet 7. or
8. ships laden with munition and victuals: the enemie

ceased not to shoote day and night, breaking all the couerings
of the houses, the which they complained most
of, and sometimes they hurt a Towns-man or a
souldier.
            The same day, about eight of the clocke in the morning
Generall Vere was hurt with a peece of a CanonGenerall vere hurt.
which split, for the which the enemy made great signes
of ioy and triumph, discharging many Canon shot, so
as they hurt six or eight persons, but not one of them
died.
            After dinner a Canonier was slaine vpon Sandhill,
with a Musket shot in the head, the which came from
Keiheubter, this was the seuenth Canonier which had
beene slaine, besides there were fiue souldiers strook
with one Canon shot in the ships, whereof some dyed,
the rest were maimed.
            The same day the Towns-men pearced their Counterscarfe,
to lodge the ships within their ditches, that
they might be more couered.
            The 15. there was great shooting on either side, and
there were 19. or 20. slaine of those which helpt to vnlade
the ships, from morning to morning, day & night
there was nothing hard but the thundering of Canons
and hissing of Muskets on either part.
            The English men made the greene market place within
the Towne hollow, fitting themselues with cabbines
and lodgings in the earth, and they made hollow another
void place vpon the South-west, yet there were still
some of them hurt. Those of the Towne say also that
they did often see them drawe dead men out of
the enemies trenches, the which their Canon had
slaine.
            
               
The 16. of August the Arch-dukes men in the night
made a halfe Moone at their neerest retrenchment towards
the West-downes, and so carried it along the
Sand-downes, vnto their neerest approches, the which
stretch from the Downes vnto the Polder, and there
made a batterie of three Canons, fiftie yardes neerer
then they had yet made any, from whence they began
at the breake of day to shoote against the Bulwarke of
Sand-hill, the which (after they had discharged some
thousands of shot) seemed to be a wall of Yron, and
they might heare the Bullets strike one against another.
They made much sand flie into the ayre, but they
could make no reasonable breache: the Towns-men
prepared to vndermine a little dike which went neere
vnto the enemies trenches vpon the West side of the
Downes.
            The Arch-duke caused many houses of Stone to
be built in the Fort called Albertus by his name, seeing
that the siege in all shew would be long.
            The same day the Sea swelled so high as the approches
and defences comming from the Westdownes,
towards the Towne, yea and those beyond
towards the South, were all couered with water, so as
the Souldiers were forced to recouer the neerest sande
downes: the water was halfe a league about the
Towne from the East to the West downes.The Arch-dukes men forced to retire by the tide. The English-mens
trenches were in like sort full of water, being
forced to saue themselues vpon the highest ground.
The Townes-men likewise expected this, beleeuing
(as it fell out afterward) that it would make the enemie
retire.
            
               
The 17. of August the Arch-dukes men aduanced
their trenches from the West towards the Porke espike
neerer then they had done, so did they vpon the South
towards the trenches of the English, labouring there in
such sort as if they would haue planted all their batteries,
and lodged themselues as neere in a manner as it
was possible.35000. canon shot against the towne. They had about the Towne 50. great
peeces of brasse, and by that day they had discharged
35000. Canon shot, and yet could neuer make breach,
and those places whereas the enemie (the tide being
gone) might passe on drie foote were made stronger
then before the siege.
            The same day one of the enemies souldiers fled
away and came into the Towne, discouering vnto
them the enemies estate, and that they prepared to
shoote balles of wilde fire into the Towne, hauing a
deseigne to assault the West rauelin the which is vnder
Helmont.
            
            That day the enemie shot arrowes with letters into
the English quarter,Letters shot into towne with arrowes. promising ten stiuers a day to such
as would serue him, the which they of the Towne did
interpret, as if they had spent all their inuentions & deuises.
The tide did rise higher that day then before,The tide amazeth the townes men. and
did drowne the plaine countrie a league round about,
and did ouerthrowe 40. or 45. yardes of the East dike,
which extends to the Northe, from the East Port vnto
the olde Towne, the which did more amaze the besieged,
then the Arch-dukes power.
            The eighteene of August the enemie approached
within 20. or 24. yardes of the West rauelin: at night
there arriued a fleete of ten or eleuen saile with

souldiers and all sorts of prouision and victuall, comming
from England, and some from Zeland, whereof
some barkes entred the Towne by night without any
harme.
            The 19. of August the Arch-dukes men planted by
night two peeces of Canon in their neerest trenches,
the which they of the Towne dismounted the night
following, and brake them in peeces with their Canon.
            The same day the enemies campe on the East side
was fortified with three regiments, the which marched
in view of the Towne, with many Wagons and much
baggage: some said these were the troopes which
had beene sent to the releefe of Berke vpon the Rhin,
but without any effect, the Cont of Buckquoy came
with them. This day as the former, the Canon played
furiously on either side, and some inhabitants and souldiers
were hurt within the Towne.
            The enemie had begun to mine, but this inuention
succeeded not, they thought the earth was not fitte
for it.
            They turned a batterie of seauen or eight peeces
against the West rauelin, the which did vsually shoote
against the Sand-hill, finding they had preuailed little:
with an artificiall bullet they fiered the commissarie of
the victuals lodging, the which was couered with
strawe, but it was soone releeued, and the fire quenched.
            In the night some souldiers issued foorth, who passing
along the neerest trenches, slue foure souldiers of
the enemies, and brought away one prisoner, who said
that the enemie laboured in a mine whether no man
went, for that the Colonell Don Catris had made a

cabin from whence he neuer departed; right against
it in the neerest trenches to the Towne, and that they
had an intent to giue the Towne an alarme vpon the
East, and to giue an assault vpon the West part.
            The 20. of August the enemie in the night aduanced
sixe yardes neerer to the halfe Moone, vnto a certaine
dike right against the Porke epike.
            
            Those of the Towne imagined that the Arch-duke
would ioyne all his batteries together vopn his neerest
trenches in the West dikes, without leauing any in the
rest,
            The same day arriued 2000.2000. English come into the Towne. Englishmen well appointed
into the Towne. The besieged shot furiously
day and night vpon the dike, where the enemies were
lodged to driue them away, fearing that they would
mine.
            The 21. day, 50. or 60. souldiers made a Sallie out
of the Towne vpon the enemie, being lodged vpon
this dike, they slue some, but in the end by reason of
the great numbers that came to succour them, they
were forced to retire.
            The same day the enemies discharged all their artillarie,
they of the Towne seeing there-with a great
number of men vpon the Downes, thought that the
Duke was there in person.
            The 23.20. Ensignes of French & other nations. there arriued 50. or 60. saile from Zeland,
and in them 20. Ensignes of French, Walons, Scottish
and Prisons.
            
            The 24. of August they made a Sallie of 700. men,
the which retyred without any great exploite.
            The 25. some souldiers which had beene two nights
in Flanders, returned to the Towne and brought with

them three prisoners, whereof the one was a Cheese-monger
of Bruges, the second of Procter of Dixmude,
and the third a pesant, whom they had taken vppon
the way betwixt Dixmude and Bruges, who saide
there was small store of money in the armie,Prisoners brought into the Towne. and that
the Marchants of Bruges were out of hope to see the
Towne taken, the siege whereof had all ready (in their
opinions) cost as much as all Flanders might bee
worth.
            They said also that the Archduke (to defend himselfe
against the suddaine sallies of them of the towne)The Arch-dukes inuention.
had caused to be laied at the neerest retrenchment, long
plankes full of great nailes the points vpward, to
runne into their feete that should assaile him: And
for that it rained that day there was little shooting on
eyther side, but towardes night the whether growing
cleere they beganne in good earnest, yet the enemie
short no Bullets aboue nine, ten, or twelue pound
waight.
            The 26. of August, foure corporals marching with
a woman which had a childe in her armes, were all
slaine with one shot.
            They of the Towne finding that the enemy approched
to come in the end to an assault, prepared (amongest
other things to receiue them) a great number
of plankes,Inuention for an assault. to euery one of which they did fasten
twelue Muskets, the which by meanes of an instrument
of white Latten with a traine of Poulder should discharge
all at once.
            The 27. of August, the great Barkes or Shipes of
Warre in which there were some Captaines, entred
the Gollet with ful sailes, the enemy shooting hard,

but hee hurt no man.
            The same day they of Ostend did write that hauing
digged and cut a certaine peece of ground neere
vnto the halfe Moone vpon the West part, they had
made a new Gollet or mouth, so as there is a great
Water the which makes a separation betwixt the
Towne and the enemy, & takes from them all meanes
to come to the assault.
            The 28. the Arch-dukes men beganne againe to
shoote into the Towne fiery Bullets and flints in their
great Canon.
            In the night the enemy repaired their trenches and
beganne then at the halfe Moone, which had beene
abandoned, but they lodged not in the Towne at this
time.
            The 29. of August, eight hundreed men of the
troupes of the Lord of Chastillion came into the
Towne.
            The Arch-dukes men raised vp a little plat-forme
on the East side of the downes declining towardes
the South, to plant two or three Canons thereon,
(as a prisoner saide) to shoote at the ships that went
in and out.
            They shoote also furiously at a little sluce which is
in the Counterscarfe, along the Porke-espike, so as
they of the Towne were resolued to stoppe it vp,
but in the end they found the Canon could not hit it
being placed so high.
            The same day entred into the Towne with their
coullors flying, the rest of the souldiers who the 23.
day by reason of a tempest were forced to returne into

               Zeland: there were three prisoners also brought into
the Towne.
            There came an aduise from Callis, that the enemies
began to faint, and yet notwithstanding the Arch-duke
kept the Flemings still in hope, and said that he would
vndermine the Towne, the which is impossible by reason
of the Dike we haue spoken of before.
            This day an English fugitiue was taken againe and
presently hanged. There came also 60. or 70. saile out
of Zeland laden with munition and victuals.
            The 30. day, about 25. of these ships entred by night
into the gollet, and without any danger passed into the
Towne-ditch. There came also another fleete of 16. or
17. saile laden with munition and victuals.
            The enemies had neere vnto their fortifications on
the East part foure great barkes, from whence a canon
shot pierced through one of the Towne Galleis: they
would gladly with those haue taken some ship in the
Fleete, but they durst not venter them.
            The last of August in the night, a Fleete of about
32. saile laden with munition and victuals, entred the
Towne without any losse, except one Barke laden with
Bauins, the which was shot betwixt winde and water.
They may safely harbour two hundred ships in the
new Port, which striking their Mastes, cannot be seene
nor hurt by the enemie.
            One of the enemies campe flying into the Towne,
said that the souldiers were not well paide, and yet the
Arch-duke was resolute to haue the Towne, whatsoeuer
it cost him, and that there were yet about 20000.
men in his armie.
            An English Captaine who was also Sargent Maior,

going the round with Colonell Horatio Vere, was slaine
with a Canon shot.
            As for the forme of the siege and Arch-dukes campe
it was as followeth.The forme of the siege and of the Archdukes campe.
            
            The Arch-duke hath made his trenches on the
West part towardes the Palissadoes of the halfe
Moone, the which the water hath since pierced
through and ouer-flowne.
            There are besides sixe or eight trenches one after another
vpon the west-downes some higher then others,
all well made with Sande and Fagots, and further into
the countrie vpon the side of the West-downes, his
trenches stretch vnto Cow-bridge, the which is aboue
300. yardes, along the which there are diuers Bulwarks
planted with Canon: these trenches are betwixt the
Towne and the trenches of the English, and the two
Fortes called Grossendurst and Isabella. The South end
of his long trenches, ends at the chanell which goes
to Grossendurst and Isabella, and from thence to Bruges,
and so through the countrie.
            At the end of these trenches which go frō the South
about a 100. yardes towards the West, betwixt Grossendurst
and the English trenches, they haue built a
Forte high and thicke, on the which they haue planted
three Canons.
            Vpon the Southe neere the channell and causey of
Ipre, they haue another trenche, the which stretcheth
from this channell to the South South-east, and so returnes
to the East to a large and deepe Marish, which
hath beene made by succession of time, and so goes into
the Sea: There they haue likewise two or three Canons
which play vpon the towne on the South side.
            
               
Vpon the South and South-west of this trench they
haue another trenche of a 150. yardes long; the which
going towards the Fort of La Pierre, alongst the which
there is a lowe ground, that is sometimes full of water,
by the which the boates that bring them victuals
must passe.
            Iust vpon the West they haue brought great stoare
of Sand and bowes, within a stones cast of the ditches
and counterscarfe. Vpon the East they haue fortified
vpon the downes, and haue made a platforme of sand
and Bowes at the foote of the Downes, on the which
they haue placed some peeces, the which they haue
done vpon the shore to annoy the shippes that went in
and out of the gollet or mouth, which peeces were before
vpon the downes.
            The first of September, a Captaine came to Midlebourgh
with fiue prisoners, to present them to his Excellencie:
they said the enemie did not shoote so furiously
as he had done, and that the breach neere the halfe
Moone was fiue yardes wide and deepe enough, without
any annoyance to the Towne: and yet the enemie
had made no meanes to stop it, but had onely gathered
together a great quantitie of Bowes, yet by the opinion
of the besieged, they might easily haue done it, for that
at a lowe water it is not aboue foure foote deepe. They
haue also planted their gabions along their trenches the
which is vpon the Sea-side, and goes right against the
old Port or Hauen: and for feare that they should be
ouerthrowne or carried away with the Sea, they haue
tyed them together with strong Cables and chaines
of Yron to plant a batterie there of Field-peeces to
commaund the North-hauen.
            
               
The 8. of September a Gentleman of Don Catris
traine yeelded himselfe into the Towne, whome his
maister the day before had struck on the head in Albertus-forte,
and left for dead: he saide that Don Catris
(who had the command of the armie) had an intent
to giue an assault to the West-rauelin, the which is
aboue that breache whereof we haue spoken, with manie
engines and Ladders of Yron. It was then our Ladies
birth-day, who would not haue beene pleased with
so bloudie a sacrifice, and the slaughter of so many
men.
            But when we shall consider the preparations which
they of the Towne had made to receiue them, we can
neuer be sufficiently amazed at the enemies blindnesse,
who without any likelyhood of good successe,
hazard the poore Souldiers, and leade them without
pittie to the slaughter, the which may iustly be
called the rage of furious beasts, that runne without
all reason or consideration to their deaths, and
in steede of victorie reape nothing but dishonour.
The vsuall meanes to take a place besieged, hath
beene by Mines, Sappe, or Breache, and when that
could not preuaile, to cut of their victuals and to
famish them, wherein the Spaniards haue yet preuailed
nothing.
            And to the end the reader may more easily conceiue
what the enemy had done to come to the assault,
he must vnderstand that he had approached as neere
vpon the West side as was possible, else he must winne
the halfe Moone, the which is before Sand-hill, but betwixt
him and it is the Port, the which is sometimes
full of water, and sometimes drie, where he must of

force take a counter-scarpe betwixt the halfe Moone
and the Bulwarke, or else at a lowe ebbe to assault this
Bulwarke, as the assault giuen in Ianuarie following
shewed that it was their desseigne: but as it was exceeding
difficult, so could it not succeed well. From the
beginning of the siege vnto this day the enemy hath
still battered this Bulwarke furiously, and there were
so many thousands of bullets in it, as some would haue
vndertaken to haue made it new for the Bullets: and yet
the enemie could not make a breache; the Bulwarke
is a little disfigured, so as a man vnarmed and without
any opposition might mount vp, but a man armed
could not by any meanes, for that it is like vnto a
mount of Sand, and very steepie, from whence they
should fall rather then aduance a foote: besides they
must force seauen Palisadoes, made of great Piles,
which are within the Porte, one a Musket shotte from
another, all which they must breake before they come
to the foote of the Bulwarke, then in the way as they
mount there are certaine mines to blowe vp: and in
passing the Musketiers of the halfe Moone, and of the
counterscarfe would so welcome them, as many of
them would forget to returne vnto their campe: moreouer
there are 13. Canons hidden in the counterscarfe
and other places, charged with chaines and peeces of
Yron to scoure the place: In the meane time the tyde
comes, wherevnto they must yeeld or be vtterly lost,
the which happened in the like sort at the assault of
Ianuary in the yeare 1602. Notwithstanding all these
great difficulties, no aduise of the old Captaines, (who
had considered of it,) could preuaile against the obstinacie
of the States of Flanders; who notwithstanding

al this, haue promised 300000. Flemish crownes monthly
for this siege: & 100000. crownes when the Campe
should be lodged before the Towne, a 100000.
crownes when the canon should be planted in battery,
& 100000. whē a breach should be made, & 300000.
crownes when it were taken. It may be they beleeued
that (trying their fortune,) there might chance some vnexpected
accident, which might cause a successe that
all the Captaines had not dreampt of, but the successe
was contrary to their expectations, for if we consider
the new fortifications of the English, and the breaches
which the Sea makes daylie, ouerflowing and breaking
the little dummell dike, we shall finde the place stronger
then before the siege.
            The forts which the English men haue made vpon
the South, are deuided from the Towne, and as hard to
take as the other.
            The Archduke had great reason to sweare (as his fugitiues
saide) that he would not goe from the table before
they had serued him, for the besieged haue laied a
wager that they will giue it him so hotte as they will
burne his fingers.
            This Gentle man of Don Catris saide, that there
were already about 3000. souldiers slaine before the
Towne, besides Pioners, and aboue two thousand
hurt.
            The 10.The Lord of Castillion slaine. of September, the Lord of Chastillon (being
vpon the high Bulwarke of Sand-hill) with Colonell
Vchtenbruch a Scotish Liuetenant, and other Gentlemen
and men of commaunde, at two of the clocke
after-noone had his head strooke of with a Canon
shotte aboue the teeth, his braines flew against the

left cheeke of Colonell Vehten ruch, and made him to
reele a little, the Scottish Lieutenant was also greeuously
hurt.
            These be ordinarie accidents in warre, neither is the
the besieger any thing more free from them then the
besieged, the greater then the lesse, the strong and valiant,
then the feeble and weake.
            That night 30. ships came into the Towne, and a
greater number were dayly comming, the which staied
at Flesingue for faire weather to waigh Anchor and set
saile.
            The 14. of September also in the night there entred
23. or 24. saile more, laden with victuals and munition,
after the which the enemie shotte furiously, but
by reason of a cloude and miste which did rise, they
could not hitte nor hurte any one, wherevpon they
ceased.
            A fugitiue of the enemies said, that there were manie
sicke men in the Campe, and that the Italians
newly come out of Sauoye dyed by heapes; that the
Canon from the Towne did euery daye kill many
men, that the Souldiers fledde from the armie by
troopes, and that many more would goe, if the horsemen
kept not good guarde abroade, and that it was
to be feared, that if the men of warre were long
held in this constraint, being ill payed, they would
mutine.
            The 15. of September the enemy shot almost all night
fiery Bullets and Flints into the Towne, the which the
besieged returned vnto them againe in the same coine.
            The enemie had then but 16. peeces of Canon before
the Towne,The estate of the besieger. they had sent all the rest to diuers strong

places, except foureteene which they had sent to Nieuport
to be new cast, for that they had beene spoiled and
broken by the Canon of the Towne. They had likewise
sent away part of their troopes, and those which
remained in the armie stood in the water throughout
all their trenches.
            At the same time were surprised sundry letters fromThe Flemings out of hope to take Ostend.
               
men of qualitie of Bruges and other parts of Flanders,
which shewed that they had lost all hope to take Ostend,
and that the Flemings were much afflicted, and yet
notwithstanding the bruite was that the Arch-duke
would by no meanes heate speake of raising the siege,
how long soeuer it did continue, or whatsoeuer it did
cost.
            The night before, the Duke of Holstein or Holsatia,
brother to the King of Denmarke, and the Earle of Hohenlo,
entred the towne with eight or nine saile, wherein
their baggage was and some Poulder: they continued
there two nights and two dayes, and then returned
to Middlebourgh without any annoiance or losse.
            There came oftentimes men of qualitie both fromMany of qualitie goe to see Ostend.
               
               England and France, to see the place and the siege, but
they staied not.
            There went out also 18. or 20. ships without any
harme, but one that was sunke and an anchor broake.
            The Arch-dukes men made a halfe Moone or platforme
in their trenches that are vpon the South at the
foote of the Sand-downes, meaning to plant sixe Canons
thereon to batter the West-rauelin, vnder the
West Bulwarke, where the besieged wrought dayly to
make it higher and stronger.
            The same day as the two former they did not shoote

so much as they were accustomed, the which seemed
very strange vnto the besieged.
            The Noblemen whereof we haue formerly spoken,
went the same day with the Gouernour and Colonels
of Ostend, to see the fortifications of the Towne, and
the enemies trenches which are about it. The enemy
shot 25. or 30. Canon shotte at one vollee, against the
South corner of Sand-hill, and brake a little bridge set
vpon the corner to passe vnto the False-Bray, which
hauing done, they ceased, whereby they might well see
that they meant to giue an assault, and to take away all
that might annoy them.
            There went some out of the Towne with Loapestaues,
which brought in a Spanish Lieutenant prisoner,
who said, that many dyed in their Campe, and that many
fled dayly, and more would flie, if the Horse-men
in guard (which scoured all the passages to the ampe,)
did not hinder them, as hath beene formerly said.
            There was also made a new Hauen at the mouth or
gollet,A new Hauen at Ostend.
                whereby the ships entred with lesse hazard and
were more safe.
            They built many houses in Albertus-fort, and round
about, so as it might well be compared to a little towne,
they thought the Arch-duke would make a Port or
Hauen of the Sluce which is neere, to vse it insteed of
that of Ostend.
            
            The 18. of September there entred about 24. saile
into the Towne, laden with munition, victuals, bowes,
piles, stakes, plankes, and with diuers instruments and
commodities, and they went forth by the gollet without
any hurt or losse.
            The same day they discharged thrice all the Canons,

Muskets and small shotte of the Towne, in honour of
the Queene of Englands birth-day: this thundring put
the enemie in alarme, who presently began to shoote
their fierie Bullets and Flints into the Towne, to the
which the besieged like men of honour and resolution
failed not to replie.
            They of the towne hauing placed some Canons
betwixt the vttermost Piles and the Rampart which
lookes to the enemies Campe, and bends towards the
Sea, were the cause that the Sea swallowed vp and carried
away part of the ground, so as the opening or the
breach of the little Tummel dike grew greater dayly.
            The 19. Generall Vere being cured of his hurt,Generall Vere returned to the Towne. returned
into the Towne.
            Almost all this night the enemie shotte fierie Bullets
and Flints into the Towne, but without any effect.
            About ten or eleuen of the clock, when the tyde
went out, they of the towne (to the number of 200.)
made a sallie vpon the Sands, to fier certaine Gabions,
but beeing too greene or wet, it would not take, where
they lost one Souldier, & brought home ten or twelue
hurt: in the meane time the enemies trenches were
fraught with shot, and their Horsemen were vpon the
Sea-shore, whether the Canon from the Sand-hill shot
furiously, beeing a cleere Moone-light.
            At the breake of day Generall Vere sent forth certaine
aduenturers to the warre, to take some one of the enemies,
who returned about two houres after noone,
bringing with them two Wallons which they had taken
in the armie, who said that the East quarter of the camp
had beene fortified with the regiment of Asincourt,
wherein were 900. men, but they were ill payed.
            
               
The same afternoone, the aduenturers or fributers
brought in a Germane prisoner, who (besides that
which they vnderstoode of the two wallons) said that
the reason why they had fortified the Campe on the
East side, was for that they expected the Arch-duke
there, and that they had prepared a great number of
bridges vpon wheeles, and many great sackes full of
Sand, to stoppe the mouth, or at the least the opening
or hole vpon the West, and that they had tried this
inuention at the Sluces and found it good, and therefore
they had caused a great number of these sackes
to be made throughout all Flanders. And that vpon
the East there was great store of Bowes, great stones
and many tumbrelles, to build a fort according to
the aduice of the Ingeners. And hee saide also that
the Arch-duke had caused a Fourrier or Harbinger,
a volontarie Gentleman, and a Corporall, to be put in
prison,The Arch-dukes rigour. for saying that in their opinions the Towne was
not ready to be taken, and that they were in danger to
be hanged: that the Spaniards were wonderfully incensed
against them of Bruges, as hauing (aboue all other)
pursued the siege of Ostend, saying they were all traitors
to the king of Spaine and to the Arch-duke.
            The 20. of September,The Earle of Northumberland, & the Lord of Kessel, came to Ostend. the Earle of Northumberland
an English man came to Ostend, with the Lord of Kessel,
brother to the Lord of Lockeren, one of whose seruants
had his arme shot off with a Canon.
            The same day the enemies did raise and fortifie their
neerest trenches towards the Polder of the English.
            The 21. of September, there entred 14. ships more into
the Towne with victuals and munition, at whom the
enemie made many a shot but could not hit any.
            
               
The same day the besieged had eight peeces of Canon
sent them out of Zeland, and they sent back some
that were spoiled.
            The 22. a Burges of Scluse came to Flessingue, who
brought newes of the siege of Ostend: saying that the
Arch-duke was resolued not to abandon it vntill he
had taken it, although he were the last, & should loose
himselfe there: and that the Souldiers were very ill payed,
and might happily mutine: and that the countrie six
leagues round about, was spoiled and vndone; and that
the Souldiers were vp to the knees in water in their
trenches, and had made little bankes to sit vpon, and to
keepe their armes drie, and that all the Hospitalles of
Flanders, Brabant, Lisle, and all the neighbour Townes
were full of hurt men, which were in all seauen thousand
at the least.
            The same day there came towards night eight saile
more into the Towne, with munition and victuals, at
whom the Arch-dukes men did not shoote, being not
able to see them by reason of the darknesse.
            The 23. of September it was written from Ostend,
that Colonel Vehtenbruche had beene slaine in the English
quarter with a Musket shot the night before, which
strooke him in the backe and came out at his throate:
and that a little before a French Captaine named Pomerade,
had likewise beene slaine with a Musket in the
head.
            The same day there entred two ships by the mouth
or gollet, laden with all kinde of Munition and victualles,
and two Dromlers laden with bowes: the same
night the enemie brought great store of bowes vpon
the East-side vnder the Fortes, labouring very much

betwixt the Catteyes and Reisern-heubt; they brought
also vpon the South a great number of Wagons laden
with bowes, as if they ment to stay there ten yeares.
            On the other side they of the Towne laboured as
earnestly in the English trenches, vpon the West and
Southside of the Towne,Fortification of the besieged. and ioyned them together
with certaine forts, that is, with the Boulwarke which
is within the Polder without the Towne, and the two
abandoned trenches with the halfe Moone, the which
is before the trenches on the west part, so as these foure
peeces were made all one, without all danger of water
in Winter.
            The English trench vpon the West was made stronger
and thicker, and also more aduanced towardes the
South and North, euen vnto the causie (the which is
about 50. or 60. foote long) where before it was open,
so as the enemy might easily shoote vpon the Polder
Bridge, and did commonly hurt and kill some souldiers.
            The halfe Moone on the West side was ioyned with
Cattey fort, to the West trench with a Ditch and Piles,
and Yron pikes before it, so as this halfe Moone was
exceeding strong.
            Those of the Towne placed two Canons in the casemate,
the which is betwixt the West Boulwarke and
Helmont, to batter the enemies trenches, right against
the Porke-espicke, the enemie did all he could to dismount
and breake them, and in the end they drew
downe a double Canon against the Porke-espike, and
from thence plaied vpon these two peeces, but they
shot so furiously from the Towne, as the enemie was
forced to cease his battery being broken: after that the

enemie brought downe two other peeces, vpon the
waters side, which runnes by the little broken ditche,
with the which they shotte against a Palisadoe which
they of the Towne had made round about the Porke-espike,
to defend the foote of this fortification, least the
force of the water should carry it away: those of the
Towne hauing discouered their desseigne, plaied vpon
this batterie from Sand-hill, and the False-Bray, which
is vnder Helmont, and from the West-port, so as they
were forced to cease.
            About noone, a Frenchman of the enemies armie
came and yeelded himselfe into the Towne, where he
had sometimes serued:
                  Conut Bucquoy made Lieutenant generall to the Arch-duke. He said that Count Boucquoy had
beene made Lieutenant generall in the place of Don
Catris, and that they without made a chaine to carrie
vpon boates from the Old-hauen, thinking therewith
to doe some great exploite being in their power. The
same day a Marriner and a Souldier fled out of the
Towne to the enemie.
            The 24. of September, a Souldier of Lorraine came
from the enemies campe into the Towne, who said
that many Souldiers fled from the campe, and that
they were out of hope to take the Towne, and that
those of the Towne did so annoy them with their Canon,
as the company vnder which he was (being at the
first a hundred and ten men) was reduced to 40. both
by reason of the Towne Canon, as of such as were run
away for want of pay.
            That night three Shippes with a Barke entred the
Towne, being laden with victuals, at whom the enemy
discharged some vollees of Canon shot, and slew in
one of them a woman with a childe.
            
               
They brought out of the English trenches into the
Towne 22. men slaine and hurt by the enemies Canon,
which shott among them that laboured.
            Vpon the West side they discoured great store
of Bowes, Trees, and such like things, which the enemy
caused to be brought in Carts.
            Vpon the West-Bulwarke of the towne they planted
a new batterie with defences about it, to play vpon
the enemies trenches, and vpon their battetie which
was belowe betwixt Reisernheubt and the Cateis.
            
            They also made an other batterie vpon the entrie of
the Hauen in the new Towne, along the bridge by
which they passe, from whence they plaied vpon the
Cateys, to dislodge the enemies shotte which played
vpon the Souldiers, and others that were in the False
Bray, and made great slaughter of them: thus they
dayly changed their counter-batteries, as the enemy altered
his batteries; the enemy did not play so whotly
with his Canon as he had done, but sought onely to
spoile them of the Towne with his Musket shotte.
            The enemy came to view a trenche that was falne,
the which his Excellencie had caused to be made the
yeare before, vpon the South and East side to defend
the ships entring by the gollet and the East-port.
            The 25. of September, a ship laden with plankes
was cast away, yet all the men were saued: there entred
some others into the towne, at whom the enemie shott
but hit no man.
            In the morning the enemie shott some fierie Bullets
and Flint-stones into the Towne, but they ceased
by reason of a great Raine. About ten or eleuen of the
clock did rise a great Northerne winde, the which on

the East-side by the gollet, and on the West by the little
broken dike did driue great aboundance of waters
vp into the Country, so as the enemies trenches were
so full as they were forced to flie from them to their
Platformes and Caualiers, the which they had raised
along their trenches, wherevpon their Canon was
planted: which they of the towne seeing ranne vp to
the Ramparts, crying; Charge, charge: Generall Vere
hauing intelligence thereof, commanded presently
that they should shoote among them, so as many of
the enemies Souldiers were slaine.
            A little Gallie of Zeland striuing to enter by day into
the Towne, had her Maste broken with a Canon
shott, and was in daunger to runne on ground, the
enemy shotte furiouslie at them, and killed a Marriner:
in the end the Galley entred the Towne without
any more harme.
            The water before mentioned, carryed away part
of the enemies trenches right against the Porke-espike,
without doing any harme to the Towne.
            The 26. of September they shotte fiercely on eyther
side.
            That day the enemies trenches were still full of water,
and the breach of the little dike was risen the
night before, and their batterie betwixt the Cateys and
Re
                     •
                  sern-heubt was much indamaged: the countrie was
ouer-flowed a good league about the towne, so as their
forts from the South to the West were all inuironed
with water, that is Colombie, La pierre S. Iean, Isabella
and Grossendurst: besides this the new Fortes at Cowebridge,
and all the trenches from the West vnto Cowebridge,
and so to the South & East, euen vnto the great

marrish and behinde it were couered with water, along
which trēches they had made diuers plat-formes,
whereon they had planted some Canons, whether the
souldiers retyred themselues, and during these great
waters they could not go one vnto another, these ouerflowings
were vsuall vnto them euery new and full
Moone.
            The enemy did also make a new fort at the foote of
the East downes, planting some Canon there to shoote
at the ships, the which must passe towardes the South
before they could enter into the Towne ditches, by
reason of the length of the hauē. They had made two other
batteries before vpon the East, there is one vpō the
North at the foote of the downes, to shoote at the ships
when occasion serues, before they come into the Hauen
or vnder the Towne; the other is vpon the West
at the foote of the West downes: and this new batterie
is 25. or 30. yardes Southward of the downes, as farre
from the Towne as the rest, and all are made to shoote
at the ships when they passe by the South to enter into
the Hauen.
            The same day the enemie plaied from the West vpon
the Towne with 18. Canons, and from the South
with two, and on the East side, from whence with one
only Canon shot they did some hurt.
            The Towne was much indamaged by the tide before
mentioned, in the false Braie of Sand-hill, in the
olde dike of the Sea, which is of the North side of the
olde Towne, and in the dike of the East Sea; but by the
wisedome of the confederate Prouinces, there are alwayes
worke-men within the Towne which haue
charge to repaire all breaches of the Sea, and there is

also good prouision of stuffe fit for that purpose, the
which is very well appointed for the preseruation of
the Towne.
            The 27. of September, the winde was some thing
laid, whereupon the waters did fall a little, and did no
more harme to the Towne: but without, there were
many trenches and fortifications broken: that day the
Canon did not playe on either side but onely Musket
shot.
            All night the 28. of September, the Archdukes men
shot many firie Bullets and Flint stones into the Towne,
and certaine little vesselles full of Nailes and Bullets
chained togeather, with such like things, whereof one
fell behinde the Gouernors lodging, and burst against a
wall, making a noise as if it had beene full of diuels, but
it hurt no man.
            The prisoners said that their men thought to kill a
hundred men at a time with this inuention.
            All the enemies trenches were broken and open, the
water was within and without, and they were forced
by reason of the water to abandon the trench neerest
to the Porke-espike.
            Those of the Towne made a new peece at the North-east
corner of the Bulwarke, to plant two peeces which
were vpon the mouth of the Raye, in the new Towne
to entertaine the enemies Muskitiers which lie in Rayheubten
when it is drie.
            The 29. of September, at night the great Constable of
the Hargubuziers was slaine, and betwixt the day & the
night, there were 40. men slaine and hurt; and for
that the winde held North-east, and North-west sixe-dayes
together so as no ships could get out of the Hauen,

there were three hundred hurt and sicke in the
ships to go into Zeland.
            
            That night the enemie shot furiously into the Towne
with firie Bullets, and in the morning they dismounted
one of the Towne Canons which was vpon Sand-hill,
the which hurt seuen or eight men, whereof Maister
Henry one of the chiefe Canoniers was one. The enemies
trenches were still full of Water, and by reason of
the winde no man went into the Towne, nor out by
Sea.
            The 30. of Septemher, as they set the watch, fire
tooke the Poulder at the rauelin of the Porke-espike,
which spoyled sixe English men and hurt many others.
            The same day, the Smith of the Towne aduancing
too farre (being drunke) was slaine.
            The same day also, came foure English Shippes laden
with victuals, whereof one entred the Towne by
the Gollet, the other three (by reason of the great
Winde,) were forced to passe on and to recouer Zeland,
and so did all the Ships of warre.
            The Arch-duke had drawne much money from
them of Flanders for the siege of Ostend, and had
done all they could to take it, as hath beene shewed:
but in the beginning of October (according to the
opinion of the Counsell of Warre, and the admonitions
of most of the Townes of the low Countries)The Arch-duke resolues to raise the siege.
they had resolued to raise the siege from Ostend,
and to keepe Garisons in the fortes, but whilst
that Winter lasted: the Flemmings aduertised hereof
sent the Bishoppes of Gaunt, Bruges and Ypre
with some other men of qualitie vnto them,

who went to Niewport casting themselues at their
highnesse feete, and shewing them the great miserie
and desolation where-into the Countrey of Flanders
should fall if Ostend were not taken, the which
they laied open vnto them with manie patheticall
reasons, the which mooued their highnesses (contrarie
to their first resolution) to promise by the
faith of Princesses, not to forsake the siege, and
that they would trie all meanes possible to bring
the enterprise to good effect, so as they might be
succored by them of Flanders, the which the deputies
promised to doe to the vttermost of their powers
and to that ende they would giue sixe hundred
thousand Crownes more besides the sixe hundred
thousand Crownes promised the fourth of Iuly, and
vpon the conditions specified in the letters of consent
which were then drawen, and that without any
diminution of the tribute of ninety thousand crownes
monethly, the which they had already paied many
moneths.
            And to satisfie the curious reader I haue added
heerevnto the letters of the fourth of Iuly, contayning
the aboue mentioned conditions.
            
               
                  
                  Most gratious Princesse and Lady.
Most gratious Prince and Lord.
                  THe Clergie and foure members of your Highnesse
countrie and Countie of Flanders, hauing
heard a proposition of halfe a denier of the hundred,
made vnto them in your behalfe in the cittie of
Bruges the 4. of Iuly last past, they together with the
Knights, townes and Castels of the said countrie, with
all the heads and commons, euery one in his quarter,
doe humbly thanke your Highnesses of the good inclination
they shew by effect, to the prosperitie and
freedom of this miserable countrie so worthy of compassion,
by the enterprise they haue now in hand; assuring
themselues that the Almightie God will blesse
it, and will giue it a good ende, to the ease of the poore
commons miserably vexed for these many yeares, and
to the encrease of the name, honour, and glory of your
Highnesse. And although by reason of former impositions,
and the pouerty of the country, they may well
excuse themselues of the demaund made vnto them by
the said proposition: yet to shew the singuler and great
zeale and good will they haue to assist your Highnesses
with this last money, and with all their power and
strength; they haue consented and offer by these presents
to pay 600000. Flemish crownes, the one moitie
before, and the rest after the siege of Ostend, to be imployed
as it is mentioned in the proposition, and with
the conditions, precautions and reseruations specified
in the letters of consent: And first that the demaund
of 600000. crownes, bearing date the 24. of February

last past, shall remaine by meanes of this present consent
voide and of no effect.
                  Item that the managing and distribution of the said
600000. crownes shall remaine with them, as an imposition
of the first demaund vpon euery fire, and shalbe
made by such persons as they shall choose and put
in trust: and more-ouer vpon the saide summe there
shall be deducted all such money as hath beene and is
dayly disbursed for diuers stuffes and workes, and also
for Mariners, Carpenters, Sawers of Plankes and other
workemen, and generally for all such as are imployed
in the like things in the campe, and that according to
the declaration taxed, and the estimation of them of
Flanders.
                  
                  In like sort there shall be a good deduction made
vnto them out of the said summe, of the interests or
rents paide, or to be payed, for money which they haue
borrowed for the aduancement of this businesse and
exploite of warre.
                  Moreouer there shall be abated what they haue disbursed
and furnished weekely, and what they shall
disburse for the contribution and entertainment of the
mutined Souldiers being in garrison in Isabella forte,
with that which depends thereon.
                  The said Estates of Flanders humbly beseech your
Highnesses, that it would please you to accept and take
in good part this their consent, and be well pleased
with them in regarde thereof, without requiring any
further succoures for their exploite, and beleeue that
heerein they haue exceeded, taking vpon them a burthen
exceeding their forces, in giuing the said summe
besides the ordinarie contribution of 90. thousand

Crownes a Moneth. They humbly beseech your
Highnesse to do them so much grace, as presently after
the taking of Ostend, to free the country from souldiers,
except onely such as shall be necessary for the garrisons
on the frontiers, to the end they may haue meanes to
free themselues of the great debts where-with they
stand charged by reason of the exploite.
               
            
            
               
                  Their Highnesses answer.
                  THeir Highnesses hauing a priuate dispatch made
vnto them, conteining the consent of the Cleargie,
and foure members of Flanders, do take their
conclusion in good part vpon the preposition made
vnto them in their Highnesses names, and are well
pleased with the affection they shew, and haue alwaies
shewed vnto their seruice, and doe accept the consent
and offer made by them of the summe of 600000.
Crownes, insteed of the halfe denier of the hundred
which they had demanded, to be paide according to
the conditions conteined in the letters of the said consent;
to which effect their Highnesses doe giue full
power and commandement to euery one whome it
may concerne to conforme themselues and obey: and
will that Letters Pattents be granted vnto them, such
as shall be needfull for to make the leuie. They doe
also graunt and agree, that out of the said summe according
to the supplication of the Cleargie, and
the foure members: the money disbursed by them
shall be deducted, or shall be disbursed for this exploit,

namely in Marriners, Watermen, Carters, Carpenters,
or any other handy-crafts men, and generally all those
that serue the Campe in such like things, or that depend
thereon, according to the declaration and reasonable
taxe and estimation of the Cleargie, and foure
aboue named members, and in like sorte, whatsoeuer
they shall disburse for the contribution of the mutined
Souldiers of Isabella fort, remaining onely vpon their
charge, and what they haue formerly payde vpon this
occasion.
                  They declare also, that they hope this desseigne
shall come to a happy end, before that all this money
be imployed, and that their meaning is not to charge
the countrie any more: yet they expect that as for
their parts they will neuer abandon them, so they will
doe the like in case necessitie requires, and that they
will not leaue this worke vnperfect: they promise also
to discharge the Prouince from all men of warre, but
such as shall be needfull to arme the Frontiers.
                  
                     Giuen at the Campe before Ostend, 
                        the 10. day of
August 1601.
                     
                     Signed Isabella, Albertus,
and vnderneath,
Vasseur.
                     
                  
               
            
            Although this summe of 600000. Crownes was
to be payed at two times: that is; the one halfe ready
downe, and the other after the taking of Ostend, yet
their Highnesses made this demaund presently, which
followeth.
            
               
                  
                  The Arch-dukes.
                  REuerent and worthy Lordes and fathers in God
well beloued and faithfull, well beloued and wise,
hauing vnderstanding that the 300000. crownes
which you haue granted, & were leuied to be imploied
in the necessities of the siege, are almost all spent, as well
in the two stiuers a day which is giuen to euery souldier
for his seruice, as in worke-men, Wagons, Ships, Fagots,
and other like stuffe, and that of necessity we must
continue, we haue thought good (for feare least the
worke begunne, should quaile) to intreate you by these
our letters, to assist vs with the other three hundred
thousand crownes remaining, the which you haue promised
vs after the taking of Ostend: seeing that wee
meane not to imploy it elsewhere, but in the foresaide
affaires, and that you may be assured that our intention
is not to raise the siege nor to depart from hence, before
we haue taken the place by the grace of God, whome
we pray to haue you in his holy keeping, giuen at the
Campe before Ostend, in August. 1601.
                  
                     
                        Signed Isabella, Albertus, and
vnderneath Vasseur.
                  
               
            
            The superscription was. To the reuerend and worthy
Lordes and fathers in God, our welbeloued, faithfull
and wise, the Clergie and foure members of our
Country & County of Flanders, as cōmanding there.
            The Clergy & foure mēbers of Flanders yeeld to this
demand, & for the speedy leauying of this sum they writ
vnto the Townes and Castelles in manner following.
            
               
                  
                  HOnourable and wise, &c. Although the issue of
the desseigne begun against Ostend, growes more
long then wee did thinke or expect, notwithstanding,
not to suffer so commendable an enterprise of their excellencies
to be ruinated, and suddainely to loose all the
aduantage and expence that hath beene made so freely,
it is necessary that your Lordships according vnto that
which we haue granted vpon the serious demaund,
which hath beene made vnto vs by their highnesses,
that you leauie with all speede, and hold ready the other
Moitie of your partes taxed of the some of 600000.
crownes granted by vs, and that you deliuer it into the
handes of our commissaries in your quarter, at the latest
by the fifteene of September next comming as much as
you hold deare and desire to see a good issue of this
enterprise, to our peace and prosperity, and faile not
herein for any excuse or pretext whatsoeuer, &c. At
Bruges the 30. of August, 1601. and vnderneath.
                  
                     Your Lordships good friendes, the
Clergie and foure members of
the Countie of Flanders, vnder
written. F. de Grotte,
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Let vs returne to our siege.
            
            THe first of October, the enemie shotte firie Bullets
and Stones into the Towne, and in the morning
againe more furiously, so as a firie Bullet faling
behinde a Burgesses house, set fire of a barrell of
Poulder, the which burnt all the house, and no man
knowes how that Poulder came there. The weeke before
two Marchants of Poulder, buying Poulder of

the souldiers which they had stolne, and sould it for little
or nothing, were taken and punished, the one who
was a Burgeois was banished the Towne for three
yeares, the other who was a Marriner was fined at 18.
crownes to the poore.
            The breach of the little dike grew still more large
and deepe, by which did passe a great quantity of Water
vp into the Countrie, the which did much hinder
the enemies desseigne.
            The Arch-dukes men laboured earnestly to carrie fagots
from their battery which was neerest to the towne
vnto Alberts fort.
            The 2. of October, there went out of the Towne by
night about 60. sailes, whereof some had attended
eight dayes, and were kept in by ill weather, but
then they went all out without any hurt.
            Those of the Towne made hollow a ditch to cause
the Water of the Gollet to take a right course towards
the enemies trenches, the which came beating against
their Counter-scarfe, which worke was made by 60.
souldiers, euerye of the which did gaine a Doller a
day.
            The Earle of Northumberland went out of the
Towne by night with some others, the Bourge-maister
and officer of the Towne went with him into Zeland,
to recouer stuffe to repaire the workes which were
broken.
            The 3. of October, there entred thirty foure shippes
into Ostend by the Gollet, vpon whom the enemie discharged
aboue seuenty shot, but they onely slue
but one Marriner, and hurt some others, and tore
their sailes. There were three laden with Poulder,

some with Bauins, and other stuffe fit for fortification,
the rest with munition and victualles, and with
three double and eight demie Canons; there remained
yet fiue ships without, towardes the South vnder the
the Sea dike, to stay for more Water at night: right against
these ships there was a little dike broken wherein
they of the Towne laboured all the could to stoppe it,
vpon whome the enemy plaied furiously both from
the East and the South, but the Bullets flue ouer
them.
            About noone the enemy did beat in peeces the
bridge which went betwixt the Polder and the West
trenches of the English, so as they of the Towne were
forced to make a longer, to go from the Polder to the
English quarter.
            Captaine Nicholas Van-den Lier, was by them of the
Towne made generall of the Artillery, in the place of
Vchtenbruch.
            
            The same day there came great store of money into
the Towne for the payment of the souldiers and other
necessities.
            The fourth daye, the fiue Shippes whereof we
haue spoken, were still at the mouth of the Hauen
for want of Water, the enemie shotte continuallye
vppon them but they hurt no man.
            There were also two ships ready to depart from the
Towne, but they could not stirre for the same reason.
            The night before a small English barke was sunke,
the which laie at Anchor in the Gollet on the Southside
of the Towne.
            
               
At the breake of day they made a Sallie of 500.
men out of the Towne on the South-west side vpon
Cow-bridge, where they tooke two halfe Moones from
the enemie, who fled away: they slue thirtie sixe, and
brought away ten prisoners. Of those of the Towne
an English' Captaine had his legge shotte off, and two
French Captaines with some seauen or eight Souldiers
were hurt; but seeing that aboue 2000. of the enemies
came vpon them, they retired themselues in time,
bringing many Cassockes and Spanish Hattes into the
Towne.
            About noone Count Frederick Vanden Berg, set
fire on all his lodgings, and went with his troopes to
Alberts forte, they of the towne thought it was to
fortifie their trenches vpon the West-downes against
their Sallies.
            The Prisoners of whome we spake, which were
Burgonions, sayd, that when his Highnesse came before
Ostend he had 9000. foote, and 1500. horse, and
that since there were 5000. more come vnto him, but
now they were not aboue 8000. and that they were in
great want, and many sicke, and that many fled by reason
of the bad pay, for euery Souldier had but two stiuers
a day and a loafe and a halfe, and sometimes they
receiued not a penny in three weekes.
            The 5. of October there entred 8. ships by the gollet,
whereof two were shotte through and greatly indomaged
by the Canon, for that they stayed too long
at the entrie of the Hauen, yet there was but one man
slaine.
            That night the enemie shotte fierie Bullets and
stones into the Towne, without any great hurt doing,

by day they shot likewise against the English trēches &
the Poulder, where they of the Towne labored, whereof
they hurt some: a Canon shot beat in peeces a planke
which a souldier carried vpon his shoulder, without
hurting him.
            The regiment of Cont Frederick descended to the Sand
downes mid-way betwixt the Towne and Alberts
fort.
            The 6. day, the enemie shot not against the Towne
on the East side, but onely brought certaine stuffe
to make some worke, and about noone they did see
them carrie many Bauins to the next fort or halfe
Moone, into their trenches neere vnto the English
trenches, towardes Cow-bridge: about the same time
the Sargeant-Maiors Liuetenant was slaine vpon the
West Boulwarke.
            The 7. of October, the enemy shot furiously with
their firie bullets and stones into the Towne from morning
vntill night.
            The same night, they discharged al the Canons in the
Towne, with many vollees of small shot, for ioy of the
birth of the French Kings sonne.
            That day towardes night a small English barke was
lost being laden with Beare and victuals, hauing stroake
against the piles right against the olde towne, yet all the
men were saued, and that night there entred two ships
into the Towne laden with victuals.
            The 8. of October, they without raised vp a
newe Plat-forme and batterie on the East-side towardes
the South at the foote of the downes, the
which aduanceth towardes the Hauen, to plant foure
Canons thereon, (as they might discerne by the Canoniers)

to annoy the shippes, they laboured not all
that day on the West part; after dinner they slue
three men within the Towne with one great shot, and
hurt many.
            The 9. of October, they without shot vehemently
into the Towne with their firy Bullets and flints, & hurt
some souldiers in the day and night.
            At night about 25. saile, entred into the Towne by
the Gollet, with munition and victualles, and fiue
Shippes with some Barkes went forth: the enemie shot
aboue sixty Canon shot after them, but could not annoy
them.
            They without brought the batterie or plat-forme
which they had begun vpon the East, three yardes neerer,
but they did not yet shoote from it.
            The 10. day they of the Towne discouered that the
enemie had laboured much in their fort, which is betwixt
the Cateyes and Reisern heubt, and that they had
made it very high and large vnder the Sands, or midway
to the Port, as if they had intended to make a Bulwarke
there.
            There came a great Ship to the South-east of the
port of the Towne, the which had laine there 14. dayes
on ground, and could not stirre for want of water, there
went out three or foure Marriners to helpe to draw it
from thence, but whilst they were busie at their worke
the enemy came and slue one cruelly, giuing him aboue
40. wounds, and setting fire of the shippe, the rest saued
themselues.
            The same day a little English barke came towardes
the Port, but being a great calme two of the enemies
barkes came to him with owers and tooke him, they

of the Towne thought that this had bin done of purpose,
for that the English & the French might trafficke
freely in the enemies Campe.
            Vpon the East the enemy made a great trench on
the East-side of their new battery, and likewise along
the South, stretching out right against that which
goes from the South to the North, at the East of
their fort which is at the downes, as if they meant
to lodge some troupes there: they beganne to worke
there presentlye after the flight of a French Corporall,
who went and presently yeelded himselfe vnto
them.
            The 11. of October there entred sixteene or seuenteene
vessels laden with victuals and all kindes of munition
into the Towne, they without shot furiously at
them on the East part, yet did no other harme but
sunke one laden with Bauins; all the men and Bauins
were saued.
            A Bullet comming from the West part fell into a ship
and stroake off both a boyes legges.
            The enemies did raise vp their halfe Moone, the
which is betwixt the Cateyes and Reisern-heubt, and did
likewise labour hardly at Cow-bridge, where they did
raise a great plat-forme neere vnto the English
trenches, and vpon the West they did not cease to
labour in their trenches.
            They of the Towne shot nine Canon shot in the day
time from the Shippes, but the enemy answered them
not,
            The 12. of October beginning to growe darke, some
of the enemies came vppon the South-side of the
Hauen, to spie and discouer the Townsmens workes,

who hauing discried them, they sent 6. or 8. leapers after
them, who slue one, and brought away three prisoners,
whereof the one was a Sergeant, and all of the
countrie of Henault.
            
            This night there went forth 48. ships, at whome the
enemie made not one shotte, although it were so light
as he might easilie discerne them: there entred no ships
but a small Barke.
            Captaine Grenu sallied forth at night with some of
his men, but for that the enemie did not present himselfe
so soone, he sent back most of his men into the
towne, and remained behinde with 15. or 16. of his
Souldiers, beyond the gollet, to attend what the enemie
would doe, who comming forth vpon him, he
charged them, and slue some at the push of the Pike,
but seeing 150. horse comming on the backe side, he retired
without any losse.
            The Arch-dukes men did not labour so much as
they were accustomed in the trenches which they had
made vpon the East, nor in the Fort betwixt the Cateys
and Reisern-haupt, the which they did raise with Sande
and Fagots, neither were they seene to labour at all
vpon the South or West.
            The same day, two women great with childe sitting
together at a doore, were slaine with one Canon
shotte.
            The 13. of October early in the morning, the enemie
began to shoote his fierie Bullets and stones into
the Towne, but there was no hurt seene or heard of.
            They of the Towne had begunne a Trenche before
the Bridge which is vpon the mouth or gollet,
with a Pallissadoe, and before the trenche they

made a little Palissadoe with Pikes of Yron.
            In the night the enemies raised vp their batterie
which is at the East side of the Sand-downes,
stretching towards the North of them: but they did
not then plant any Canon. They laboured also without
intermission at their batterie betwixt the Cateys
and Reisern haupt, vpon the West-hauen, raising it
very high, and neuer went from it all the day.
            There were moreouer the very same daye, eight
or ten Souldiers slaine and hurt by the enemies Canon.
            The 14.Six or seauen horsemen giue the alarme to the Towne. of October there grewe a great alarme
in the Towne. Generall Vere with the Gouernour
Colonelles and Captaines, ranne to the West trenches
where the alarme was: sixe or seauen of the
enemies men at armes had giuen it, passing at a lowe
water from the West to the East through the olde
Towne and the Gollet, they of the Towne shotte at
them, yet fiue of them escaped.
            This night two ships entred by the East-hauen without
any annoyance.
            The enemies laboured daylye at their Trenches
towards the East, as also vpon the South at Cow-bridge,
and vpon the West at their batterie betwixt Cateys and
Reisern-haupt, there were eight or ten Souldiers hurt
with the enemies Canon.
            The 15. day at night, the enemy shotte many artificiall
Bullets and Flintes into the Towne without
any great harme dooing. The same night there entered
nine shippes laden with munition and victuals
into the Towne, at whome the enemie shotte much
but in vaine.
            
               
The enemie had two Frigats built like Galleys, in
euery one of the which they might place 18. or 20. men,
whom they sent sculking along the coast, to surprise
some ship, but fearing a storme, they strooke their sailes
and retired with their Owers towards the West, passing
along the towne, and neuer forsaking the coast.
            The weeke before they had taken three ships, and
hurt about 30. men in them, whome they cast ouerborde,
bringing them only in, that were sound, one of
the hurt recouered the fleete with swimming.
            The trenches without vpon the West vnto Cowe-bridge,
and those which stretch towards the South and
East, were full of water, so as the enemie was forced
to retire to his Plat-formes: and yet there was no
storme.
            The 16. of October, sixe ships laden with victuals
and munition came into the towne, after whome the
enemie discharged aboue 50. Canon shot, but did them
little or no harme.
            They brought many Cart-loades of Bauins and
other stuffe to the Forte, which is in the East without
the towne, to fortifie it.
            That day the Canon plaide little, but there were six
Souldiers hurt with Musket shott in the towne.
            The 17. the enemies shotte very furiously with their
fierie Bullets and stones into the towne.
            In the night they did cast themselues into the halfe
Moone, which is beyond the gollet before the bridge,
in the which (according to the order which was giuen
by the commanders) there were none but labourers
which did presently abandon it: the enemies being entred,
they were presently welcomed with Canon-shot

from the Bulwarke of the Spaniards, and from Pekel,
the which had beene planted there expressie: as also
by a troope of Musketiers from the Rauelin which is
vpon the counterscarfe right against the Spanish Bulwarke,
so as they left many of their men there▪ there
were but foure of the towne hurt: the Chirurgians of
the towne went thether afterwards, and brought away
Sacks full of mans grease which they had drawne out
of their bodies. There was as great aboundance of
bloud, as if there had beene a great combate fought,
and there was much without the halfe Moone: the
ground was strowed of all sides with armes, legges and
hands: such as went thether first, found much money
vpon the dead men, and garments of good price, with
perfumed Gloues, whereby it seemes that many Spaniards
and men of commaund were slaine there.
They had also brought with them many preparatiues
and deuises to burne the Bridge, and many
Spades, Hammers, Hatchets, Pike-axes, and other
instruments, as it were to make some fortification.
            The enemie carryed his batterie from betwixt the
Cateyes, vnto the Sea side towards the North.
            At night there went forth foureteene shippes, and
not any one came in. A Burguignon prisoner said, that
in this last assault there were not slaine aboue eightie
fiue or eightie sixe vpon the place, amongst the
which there were some men of commaund: hee
sayde moreouer that they would stay it out all Winter,
and that his Highnesse had made prouision of
stuffe to builde lodgings for the Souldiers round about
the towne.
            The 18. there was nothing remarkeable, but that

two French men fled to the enemie.
            The 19. of October, the enemie made high defences
vpon their battery at the East: afternoone they of
the Towne discouered a great troupe of their enemeis
going from Alberts fort to the fort of La Pierre S.
Iean, and vpon the East side many Wagons laden with
Bauins the which they carried to the fort they haue at
the downes.
            The same day, there were 9. or 10. souldiers of the
Towne slaine and hurt.
            The 20.The Arch-dukes men approched neerer by a 130. yardes. day at night, the Arch-dukes men made a
long trench neere vnto the lower end of the Gollet,
120, or 130. yardes vnder their new battery, and approched
neerer vnto the Towne with 32. Gabions in length
and foure in thicknesse: it was for this purpose that the
troupes (we spake of) passed the day before from the
West to the East, to defend them that should labour in
this worke, and that by day they conducted so manie
Wagons laden with Bauins, to imploy them in the
night worke.
            This day the enemy shot from this new batterie, and
to aduance this trench they left their trenches vpon the
South and West part.
            At night there came into the Towne foure ships and
one barke full of men, the enemie shot at them in vaine,
they discouered their Gabions nine thicke.
            A Germane of the enemies Campe came & yeelded
himselfe into the Towne, who said, that there was exceeding
great want in it: that all souldiers which could
finde any meanes to flie forsooke the armie; and that
the enemy would plant nine Canons at his Gabions.
            Afternoone the water being retired they began to labour

againe at their batterie, betwixt the Cateyes and
Reisern-heubt. which they drew down along to the Sea,
to batter the ships on the North-side of the olde towne,
as well on the West side as on the East, wherein they
spent all that night.
            The 22. of October, 44. ships past out of the Towne,
and two entred, one laden with English Beare and the
other of Breda, at whom the enemy shot little.
            The same day before noone the enemie brought manie
cartes laden with bauins to the fort which is at the
downes, and did lengthen the new trench, which is at
the lower end of the Gollet with three Gabions, and
after dinner there past a great troupe of Souldiers from
the West to the East.
            The foresaid fugitiue said that the enemies resolutions
was to make his chiefe attempt vpon the East-side,
and he said moreouer that if he could stoppe the entrie
of the ships, he would be maister of the Towne within
14. dayes.
            They plaied both with Canon and Musket on either
side all that day.
            After dinner they of the Towne discouered aboue a
100. carts which the enemy conducted to the East, to
the fort which is beneath the downes.
            They of the towne labored continually at the Blindes
(the which are workes of earth, of a meane height,
square or in cubit, to couer them which go in the streets,
and to receiue the Bullets) against the enemies batteries
and trenches which are at the Cateys; that day the fire
tooke their lodgings on the East-side.
            The night of the 22. day there was much shooting
on either side, both with Canon and Musket, so as it

hindered the enemies worke, whereas they had lately
planted their Gabions: yet they did not leaue to conduct
many cartes with Bauins towarde their new
battery, from whence they made eight or ten shot that
day, as also some from their batteries which are at the
downes.
            About ten of the clocke at night 25. or 26. ships went
out at the Hauen and the enemy neuer shot at them:
there entred two laden with English Beere and other
victualles, at whome they made two shot, but hurt
them not.
            The 23. of October, the enemy shot all night with his
firie Bullets and stones into the Towne, the which hurt
some souldiers.
            The same night as the former, they of the Towne
shot furiously vpon the Gabions which are neere vnto
the Gollet, and hindred the enemies worke: there went
forth also three or foure Shippes at whom they neuer
shot.
            They without, although they laboured not, yet did
they cause great store of Fagots to be carried to the
East: they were continually busie at their workes which
are betwixt the Cateyes and Resern-heubt, the which
they carried tawardes the North: where (in my opinion)
they did them of the Towne a great pleasure, freeing
the North-east part from the furious waues of the
Sea, the which did much endomage them before the
Porke-espike and Helmont,
            
            The 24. of October they shot firie Bullets and stones
into the enemies Camp.
            A Shippe going out of the Hauen at night did runne
vpon the Sands on the enemies side, the maister and a

little boy saued themselues, two Carpenters were
drowned thinking to recouer the towne by swimming:
there were besides three sicke men, with a woman and
her childe, whom the enemy tooke and then set fire of
the shippe.
            They did nothing but carry Fagots to the East, they
of the Towne did not see them worke, but they found
that their Gabions were seuenteene large and thirty
fiue in length. The continuall shooting of the besieged
did much annoy them in their worke. As for
their batteries of Cateyes and Reisern-heubt, they laboured
continuallye, raising them and fortifying them
daylie.
            The 25. of October, a Captaine of a Shippe went
in a cocke boate round about the Gabions, which are
vpon the Gollet to view them, where he found no man,
nor any one neere, but onely three which had bin slaine
with the Towne Canon.
            That day there went no Shippe in nor out, and
for that it rained much, there was no shooting, and likewise
for the same reason the enemy left labouring,
            The night of the twenty sixt day, was foule
weather and a great tempest, which was the cause
that the Canon plaied not, but in the morning they
saluted one another.
            The Sea (being swelled extraordinarily by reason of
this tempest,) carried away some of their Gabions which
were not yet fully filled nor fastened.
            The Water at the very same time was risen ten or
twelue yardes vp into the trench which is vppon the
Gollet, so as the enemie had no man there, and vpon
the South and South-west a League and a halfe vp

into the countrie, which couered most of the enemies
trenches: and there was no thing to be seene drye but
their Plat-formes, whether they had retyred themselues,
this torment was the cause that no ship went
in nor out. It did somewhat indamage the towne at
the Porke-espike, and the False-Braye, yet not so much
but it was in few houres repaired.
            The 27. at night, according to their commendable
custome, they shott store of fierie Bullets and Flints of
eyther side. There entred an English Barke laden with
Beere.
            The enemie was fortified with a regiment of Italians,
and some Wallons.
            
            The night of the 28. day, foure Barkes went forth,
at whom they did not shoote; but none came in.
            The same night they of the Towne made a Sallie
of 200. Souldiers, and some Marriners, the water being
high, and went vpon the enemies Gabions, many of
the which they brake and cut, with many sacks full of
earth which they found within them, whereof they
brought some into the Towne.
            After noone they might see passe towards the East
quarter, two troopes of Cartes laden with Bauins.
            That day they shott but little on eyther part, and
there was but one man slaine within the towne.
            The 29. there went no vessell in nor out.
            There were a great number of Gabions which they
of the Towne had not broken: The enemie began
to worke behinde them, and did not leaue for all the
Canon of the Towne which played furiously vpon
them.
            They without had made a great worke vpon the

East, which they of the towne thought to be some
new Forte or Batterie, but in the ende they found it
was a Chanell or Conduict to passe from Plassenthale
to the Conduict of Bruges, conteining about halfe
a League, that they might more commodiously furnish
the Forts of the East with munition and victuals,
as well as those of the West, called Saint Pierre
Isabella and Albertus, which receiue their prouisions
by water.
            About ten of the clocke they of the towne made
a Sallie of 60. or 70. men, and some Leapers and Friboters,
charging vpon the enemies Gabions the which
they tooke. There were about 60. men labouring in
them, who fled: presently there came 35. or 36. of the
enemies Horse vpon them, so as hauing viewed well
the gabions, they were forced to retire: one of their
souldiers was slaine, and three or foure hurt with the
Canon. The Canon of the Spanish Bulwarke and of
Pekel (which had beene planted to that end,) played
through the enemies, and ouer-threw some of their
horse-men, one of them was drawne by his horse euen
vnto the towne Trenches, who being searched, there
were found about him eleuen Rose-nobles: an other
was taken & brought neere the Towne, where he was
slaine. there were also many footemen slaine with the
Canon, in the meane time the enemie short from the
West part vpon the Towne, where they did no other
hurt but strooke off a Souldiers arme.
            The 30. of October no vessell went in nor out: the
Towne was much indomaged by the great torment,
who presently sought to repaire what had beene
broken.
            
               
After dinner some Carts laden with Fagots, munition
and victuals, were conducted towards the Forte
which is at the East on the Downes: the enemy made
some shott from the West against the Porke-espike, and
from the East into the towne.
            The same day some traitors were taken within the
towne,Traitors taken in the towne. of whom we will speake in another place.
            The last of October there went no vessell in nor out.
            The enemies laboured still behinde their Gabions,
they of the towne shott vehemently vpon them from
Flammemburg (a high Platforme so called being within
the Towne): they without laboured also vpon the
East at their new chanell, to make it deepe enough, for
that the countrie is high in that place.
            At foure of the clock in the afternoone, a great flote
driuen with the Nor-west winde ouerthrew nine Gabions,
which they without had planted to couer their
labourers from the towne Canon, but for that they
were tyed together with Cables, they remained in the
same place.
            The new battery on the East side vnder the downes,
was all drownd, the tide hauing neuer beene so great
on that side.
            They discouered more Cartes laden with Bauins on
the East part then the day before.
            Vpon the South and South-east, the countrie was
all couered with water aboue a league about, & all the
trenches on the West vnder the Sand-downes, and towards
the South and South-east were full of water,
so as the enemie was forced to flie vp to their highest
plat-formes and caualiers, the which they had to the
number of eight along those trenches, in their retiring

there were many of them stayed by the way by the
Canon from the towne.
            The enemie during this great water shott furiouslie
vpon the Porke-espike to shake it, and to ouerthrow it,
but they preuailed little more then the hurting of some
Souldiers that were vpon it.
            They of the towne ranne by troopes vpon the
Rampars to see if the Sea and the violent winde would
not carry away their Gabions, in the meane time the
enemie shott at them but hurt no man.
            The first of Nouember, the besieged began to repaire
that which the Sea had carried away of the Porke-espike.
            
            They without were not seene to labour in any part,
there were many volees of Musket shott on either side,
but without any notable losse.
            There was a Germaine brought prisoner into the
towne, who was lame of halfe his body, and simple,
they could drawe nothing from him but olde stale
newes, that many of their Souldiers fled, that they
were ill payde, and that there was great pouertie and
many sicke in the campe.
            They of the towne thought that the Block-house
vpon the South should be carried away by the water,
for that the enemie drew foorth much wood out of
their retrenchments.
            The 2. of Nouember there went no shippe in nor
out.
            In the night the Arch-dukes men did lengthen their
Gabions which are vpon the Gollet with 30. others,
at the end which is towards the South: and whereas

the first doe stretch from the South to the North, these
leane something towards the East, to couer their work-men;
the place where they are set is rough and somewhat
high, the which helpes them much, so as the
Towne cannot discouer them in their workes: yet it is
to be supposed they labour, for that the same day (the
which was the first time) they did see horse-men in
guard at the foote of the downes, by the new battery as
if they had feared a Sallie.
            They of the Towne thought that the enemy had other
worke then to charge them, they were farre besides
their compt, for the Sea did euery day make new worke
for them, their trenches vpon the West (which are
right against the Porke-espike) were opened aboue forty
yardes by the last tempest, so as the Gollet or mouth
became daily, greater and larger, and did little harme
vnto the Towne.
            Before noone they shot little, presently after the Generall
Sir Francis Vere came vpon the Spanish Boulwarke
and to that of Pekel, commaunding them to shoote
earnestly at the Gabions, which was the cause they
spent some fifty shot sodainely.
            The 3. of Nouember they of the Towne made a sallie
of a 150. men as well leapers as souldiers, and seuen
horse-men, who surprised the gabions & cut the cordes
and Cables with the which they were tied, and ouerthrew
some at the East end: in the meane time some of
the enemies horse wēt towards the rauelin of the towne
to cut off their way: the horse-men of the towne (wherof
I haue spoken) seeing that, went to meet them with a
150. muskateers of the rauelin which is on the other side
of the Gollet, before the bridge of their enemies side,

who repulsed them: then they of the Towne gaue fire
to the Canon, which slue fiue men with one shot among
thirty or forty which shewed themselues a farre off towrades
the new batterie: there was also a horse-man
and some souldiers slaine vpon the rauelin; during this
incounter the enemies gathered togeather behinde the
new batterie, there went foorth three troupes of horse
against them of the Towne: As for the foote-men they
skirmished with them that first sallied out of the towne:
these three troupes with that which had beene chased
came with a full carrie towardes the rauelin of the
Towne, but being come neere vnto the foote-men,
they were beaten backe by them, and by the Canon
from the Towne, which thundred furiouslye
from the Spanish Boulewarke, and from that of Pekel,
so as they returned as fast as they came: and seeing
that they of the Towne had made hedde against
them they retired behinde their battery, and they
of the Towne did likewise retyre into their rauelin, In
this skirmish there were foure of the Towne slaine
& six hurt, as for the enemies they lost a good number,
they of the Towne recouered sixe or seuen Launces
with banderolles, and among them the Cornet of
Count Aremberges wherein were his armes: the enemy
had gathered togeather another troupe of souldiers
behinde their new battery, which durst not shew themselues
neere, but retyred presently, during which time
they of the Towne sent them many vollees of Canon.
            As for the Gabions they were in verye badde
estate, they did see through some part of them
which were in single ranke, others were ouerthrowne,
and the enemies themselues thinking that they of the

towne were hidden behinde them, shotte through
them, and their Bullets came euen vnto the gollet,
but they of the Towne found no man working
there.
            At noone the enemies transported much wood out
of their Trenches into their Block-houses, and vpon
the West they razed certaine Plat-formes, and carried
away the Bauins to Alberts-fort and to his Block-house,
whether it seemed they would retire themselues,
and it was held for certaine, that a great part
of the Souldiers had beene drawne out of the campe
and sent into Brabant with a good number of the
horse-men.
            They of the towne made an other sallie, but the
enemies did not abandon their forts, shewing themselues
onely a farre of, so euery one keeping his aduantage,
there was nothing done.
            At the same time a great and dangerous treason
was discouered, the which was practised in the
towne.
            An English-man named N. Conisbye,
               Great treason discouered in the towne. hauing serued
the enemie long, and beene Captaine of a companie
of foote in their armie, returned through
France into England, where he preuailed so much
(by meanes of his friends) as hee obtained Letters
of commendation to Sir Francis Vere Generall
of the English forces in Ostend. Hauing these
Letters hee went to Ostend, and presented himselfe
vnto Sir Francis Vere, desiring him to admit him
of his company, at which the Generall could not refuse
him, being a Gentleman. This traitor being thus
crept into Ostend, began to play his part: he receiued

letters and other things weekely from the enemie, and
gaue them intelligence what past within the towne,
and of the meanes to annoy it, making his practises
and proiects according to the instructions he receiued
from them. To send his Letters to the enemie he carried
them into a broken boate, the which in the beginning
of the siege had beene sunke by the enemie,
and was vpon the drye ground betwixt the Towne
and the enemies Campe, making a shewe as if hee
went to vntrusse, knowing well the place where he
should hide them: the enemie came at night to fetch
them with a little Boate, and vpon certaine dayes
brought him an answeare to the same place: and
sometimes money for his entertainement and his
practises, the which he went to fetch in the same manner:
When he was discouered, he had corrupted
foure men, and amongst others a Sargent called
William N. who reuealed it: This Sargent comming
out of prison, where his Captaine had caused him
to bee layde some dayes in Yrons, being all malcontent,
mette by chance with this Conisbye, who
sayde vnto him that hee was very glad to see him
out of prison, and asked him what was the reason
that he had so great and greeuous a punishment:
to whom the Sargeant (rayling vppon his Captaine)
sware earnestly that hee would be reuenged
of the wrong he had receiued, although it should cost
him his life: Conisby thinking to haue found a man fit
for his purpose, said that there was good meanes without
loosing of his life, but contrarywise he should
make his profit and aduance himselfe, wherein he

might helpe him much, and if he would follow his
counsell he should want no money. The Sergeant began
to giue eare vnto his words, and seemed to be well
affected to his desseigne, and to doe what he would
aduise him. Conisbye (after he had made him to sweare
not to reueale any thing that he should say,) discouered
himselfe vnto him, and presently asked him if he
had the resolution, and would set fire of one of the
Magazins of munition, with a certaine inuention of
Poulder, of Leade, & of Match, the which the Sargent
promised to doe, saying that it was very easie, for that
he was often sent to fetch Poulder for the Soldiers;
Conisbye sayd moreouer vnto him, that he had practised
some others, and would haue more, to the number
of twentie, and then would execute his desseigne in
this manner. One of the Magazins being set on fire,
he would worke so as he would haue the guard of a
Sluce which is in one of the Bulwarkes of the towne,
neerest vnto the enemies Trenches, where they
should giue the assault, and take the towne by that
meanes: the Sargent made shew to like well thereof,
demaunding onely of Conisbye a promise of his hand
for the assurance of his recompence, when the worke
should be done: hauing this promise, he goes presently
to the Generall Sir Francis Vere, and discouers vnto
him this practise: Conisbye being apprehended and put
to the Racke, confesseth all, and that he came to Ostend
with that intent, together with the instructions and promises
he had from the enemie: his complices were likewise
imprisoned.
            The 4. of Nouember there were many volees spent
of Musket shott and some of Canon.
            
               
The night before there went foorth fourteene
saile, at whome they neuer shott, and not one came
in.
            The enemie this night raised a mount in the middest
of their Gabions, the which is a long trenche of
about 70. or 80. Gabions of rancke.
            They also set Gabions at the two sides of their new
batterie, which is at the foote of the Downes, and directly
at the East of the trenche of their Gabions, sixe
or seauen on the North-side, and towards the Sand-downes
thirteene or foureteene to serue for blindes
and to couet their men from the Towne Canon,
who shotte very vehemently when as they did see
day.
            About noone an English-man went out of the
trenches and yeelded himselfe to the enemie, it may be
to carrie them newes of the imprisonment of his companions.
            All that day the Canon and Muskets ceased not,
yet was there not any man hurt in the towne.
            The 5. of Nouember they of the towne shotte
some fierie Bullets into the enemies Campe, and all the
night was spent in Musket shot.
            At night there went out one shippe, but none
came in.
            The enemie was busied to deface some plat-formes
and trenches vpon the South and North parts, which
the water had ouerthrowne, carrying the Bauins vnto
the Downes and to their Block-houses.
            About noone a horse-man entred into the Gollet of
the towne, but as he went slowly seeming to be drunk,
three or foure other horse-men followed him, and one

amongst them (who had a great red scarfe about his
neck) ouer-tooke him and gaue him many wounds
with his Courtelas, and ouer-threw him, one of them
tooke his horse, and so they returned to their trenches,
leauing him for dead. Some of the towne hauing
seene this, cast themselues into the gollet to swim
and fetch him, but presently foure or fiue of the enemies
horse came, who tooke him and marched towards
their quarter, but before they could recouer a
place of safetie, they of the towne shott amongst
them and ouer-threw one of them that carryed this
Caualier, the rest fledde, leauing two dead for
one.
            The same day the aduenturers brought a prisoner
into the Towne, whom they had taken betwixt
Bruges and Dixmude, foure leagues from Ostend, who
sayde that the regiment of Count Frederic de Berg,
and some Ensignes of the Counte de Bouquoy, and
Fresin were gone to succour Hertzegenbusch which his
Excellencie had besieged: and that many of the
Arch dukes Souldiers fled dayly, that they were
ill payed, and had many that were sicke among
them.
            They without brought great store of Bauins and
other wood, by the new Chanell of the East-side to
the fort which is at the Downes.
            The 6. of Nouember they shott furiously with
stones into the towne.
            In the morning they might see the Gabions towards
the Northe of the new batterie ouer-throwne,
so as they might see through them, there were onelye
foure standing the which were emptie, and serued

onely to take away the sight that they might not
shoote at their men: more-ouer they did see them
transport great store of wood by the new Chanell
towards the East.
            In the after-noone they did see the enemie labour
very earnestly behinde their Trenches and
Gabions, at whome they of the Towne shotte
some-times: they did also see them transport much
Wood and Bauins to the new Block-house at the
Downes.
            The prisoner of Bruges taken the day before, being
examined, sayde, that at Bruges and throughout
all Flanders they made them beleeue, that in
Ostend they dyed by heapes, of hunger and thirst,
and that many Souldiers forced by extreame necessitie
fled dayly: that there was nothing but mutinies
and seditions in the Towne, and that the
Arch-duke should haue them soone at his pleasure,
and that no man durst deliuer any ill newes
to the preiudice of the Arch-duke for feare of his
life.
            The seauenth of Nouember they without shotte
no fierie Bullets, but onely many Stones into the
Towne.
            They laboured dayly behinde their Gabions vpon
the Gollet, although they of the towne shott often:
they began also a new Corps de garde in their
new batterie, which is East-ward of the Downes
behinde the Gabions and lookes to the bottome of
the Gollet.
            The 8: of Nouember they of the Towne did see the

enemie labour very earnestly behinde the Gabions,
some casting vp sand, others beating in piles, as if they
would raise a Plat-forme to plant Canon thereon.
            The enemies came neere vnto the halfe Moone of
the Towne which is at the end of the bridge on the other
side of the Gollet, but seeing them of the Towne
issue forth to entertaine them with resolution, they returned
after they had discharged some shot.
            After dinner an Ensigne-bearer a Frison was slaine
with a Musket shot being in the Polder.
            They without shot stones into the Towne day and
night.
            The 9. day they shot many stones with their great Canon,
yet they slue no man: in the night they raised their
batterie which is vpon the North betwixt the Cateyes about
three foote, and there made Canoniers to plant
three peeces.
            About 10. of the clocke at night there entered a Barke
laden with Beere with a boate into the Gollet, the enemie
shot furiously at them from their batteries on the
downes and at the foote thereof, & likewise with their
Muskets from their Gabions, which was the first time
they shot from that place, yet the Barke entred happily
without any harme.
            They of the Towne discouered the fleete which was
come from Zeland, who prepared to enter at night,
the which did reioyce them very much, for there were
three weekes that no vessell had entred.
            The enemies according to their custome shot many
stones into the Towne but did little harme.
            The 10. of Nouember there entred 13. Ships by the
Gollet, the enemy shot at them with his Canon, and

with his Muskets from the Gabions, without hitting
of man or Shippe, they onely shotte through some
sailes.
            At night the enemies with their Barkes borded two
ships, the which they tooke and spoyled, and carried away
the men that were in them.
            There were many that laboured in the Gabions vpon
the Gollet.
            There was one ship had passed on two farre and staied
before the Bulwarke of Spaine, the enemy shot all the
day at it, their were 9. or 10. others had entred with it,
but they had cast Anchor behinde the halfe Moone,
which is vpon the Gollet for the defence of the bridge,
and could not be hurt.
            The plat-forme which the enemy had begunne behinde
the Gabions, which are vpon the Gollet, did now
appeare aboue them, and it seemed they would plant
Canon thereon.
            The 11. of Nouember, there were some of both parties
which parled together betwixt the Gollet & them,
but a Canon being discharged from the Towne euery
one retired.
            The Archdukes men laboured continually to finish
the plat-forme behinde their Gabions, by meanes
whereof they thought to stoppe the entrie of the
shippes into the Towne, and held it for certaine
that within fifteene dayes after this worke was perfect,
the Towne was theirs: but they of the Towne
found out a new secret, for the safe entrie and going
foorth of their Shippes, and to make this infinite
charge of the Arch-dukes fruitlesse.
            The shippes which had remained the last night behinde

the halfe Moone, entred this night into the hauē,
& there was no other losse in this goodly fleete of 52. or
53. saile, but onely that which had beene on ground before
the Bulworke of Spaine, was shot through with
the Canon.
            Vpon the East-side, they did see about twēty fiue wagons
laden with bauins and wood, come from the new
chanell to the fort that is at the downes, and some from
Bredene.
            
            That day there was not any man slaine onely three
or foure hurt.
            The 12. of Nouember, they shotte many firie
Bullets and stones of eyther side, with much small
shot.
            That night the Gouernour called the Lorde of
North, accompanied with Captaine Rolle Grenu and
Bronchaulx, dela Digne, two Ministers, & two other men
of the Towne went out with two shippes for their conuoy
to go into Zeland.
            
            They might see vpon the high plat forme which the
enemy had made behinde the Gabions, foure Canoniers
to plant Canon at, to stop the entry and going out
of the ships, for the effecting whereof they wrought all
they could, else they shot little.
            The night of the 13. day they shot not; in the morning
they saluted one another with their Muskets.
            The enemy laboured still at their battery behinde the
Gabions, making it higher and larger, and neglected
their other workes.
            They made a great Corps de garde neere vnto Albert
fort, although that both within it and at the foote

of the downes there were many faire houses.
            About noone they discouered a great fire in Albert
fort, & they said it was fire fallen from Heauen, it burnt
so violently as it could not possibly be quenched: there
was lost for 150000. Florins in Iewels: the Estates
of Flanders to repaire this losse made a present of a
100000. Crownes to the Arch-duke.
            The Shippe which had beene three dayes before
on ground in the Gollet before the Bulworke of
Spaine, entred at night into the Towne Ditch, the enemie
made ten or twelue shot at it but could not hitte
it.
            The enemies whole hope for the taking of the
Towne, was to stoppe the entrie of ships, they thought
to haue effected their desseigne by meanes of their
new plat-forme which they made behinde the Gabions,
but they of the Towne made a new Hauen,The townsmen make a new Hauen. the
which is not much commaunded by the plat-forme,
& by that means the enemies hope vanished to smoake.
The Arch-dukes trenches vpon the west-side were neglected
and fell daily, and the water from the Sea increased
so in the West Gollet, as at this day it is a deepe and
goodly ditch.
            The 14. of Nouember at night the Canons and muskets
shot vehemently on either side: and in the night
there went out 7. or 8. ships, but the enemy neuer shot
at them.
            They without laboured continually at their battery
vpon the Gollet, making strong defences there: and
they of the Towne were busied about their new Hauen.
            After dinner two of their souldiers that were

within the halfe Moone vpon the gollet fled to the
enemie: and presently fiue or sixe horsemen came
from their batterie at the Gabions to receiue them, and
at the same instant they began to shoote at the towne,
and at those that wrought in the halfe Moone, yet they
hurt no man: they might then easily discerne fiue Canoniers
in their batterie.
            The Arch-duke had beene in person at the Campe
vpon the West, where he had changed some quarters
and garrisons; they of the towne shott at the Souldiers
assoone as they appeared vpon the trenches.
            There was more Canon-shot that day then the
foure before, but more from the towne then without,
there were but three hurt in the towne, and not one
slaine.
            The 15. of Nouember being darke they shott a little
on both sides to entertaine the custome, and in the
night the enemy shott great stones.
            That night there went 18. or 20. ships out of the Hauen,
but none entred, the enemie shott much after them
and killed two Marriners and a Boye.
            The enemie laboured continually at their batterie
of Gabions, and at that which is betwixt the Cateyes,
but they did not yet open their Canoniers.
            The enemy shot against the Mill which is vpon the
Bulwarke of Flammenburg, the Bullet strooke of a
French-mans legge, and all the flesh off the other, so
as he was little better then dead. He was scarse retired
from thence, but another Bullet strooke in the same
place, which stayed there and did no harme.
            That day there was not any one but this Frenchman
hurt in the towne, & an other a little hurt in the legge.
            
               
The 26. of Nouember (by reason of the contrarie
winde) no ship went out of the towne, there entred
an English man at whom the enemie made some Canon
shott, but more store of Musket from their batterie
which is vpon the Gollet, yet they hurt no man.
            They without laboured still at their batterie vpon
the gollet, but they did nothing that day in their other
batteries.
            They shot whotly for halfe an houre vpon the towne
of the West side, some thought it was for the comming
of some Noble-men; others that it was by the
intelligence of a fugitiue, who had fled to them the
night before: after dinner they shott also at Flammenbourg
but hurt no man.
            A French-man fled out of the towne vnto the enemie,
who (to escape) thrust himselfe into the gollet vp
to the neck.
            The 17. of Nouember the enemie shott many great
stones into the towne.
            About midnight the enemie sent from the West
part some horse-men into the olde towne and carried
away three prisoners, at the same time from their batterie
of Reisern-haubt they cast some plankes ouer the
Hauen, whereas it is narrowest at a lowe water, on the
which there passed 30. men into the olde towne, from
whence they were presently repulsed with the canon.
            An English-man seeking to flie vnto the enemie,
was presently taken and hanged.
            Also a French Gentleman disobeying his Sargent
and making a great tumult, was committed to prison,
and eight dayes after condemned by the councell of
warre to be shott. But for that he was borne of a good

house, all the French Captaines entreated Generall
Vere to giue him his life, the which he granted, vpon
condition, that he should aske the Sargent forgiuenesse,
the which he would by no meanes doe, notwithstanding
any perswasions: wherevpon they gaue
him eight dayes to resolue with himselfe; which being
past, and he still obstinate, he was brought to the place
of execution and tied to a stake: but when as he did
see the Harguebuziers readie to shoote, he began to
haue horror of death, intreating that he might be vnbound,
promising to performe the sentence, and to
aske the Sargent forgiuenesse, the which he did presently
and was deliuered.
            That day the enemie was not seene to labour in any
place, nor to carry Fagots from the new Chanell of
the East.
            The Plat-forme vpon the Gollet is right against
the Cateye of the Towne, betwixt the Bulwarke of Pekel
and the East-Port, where before there were neither
Rampars nor defences: they of the Towne (to
couer themselues from the enemies Canon) planted
Gabions, so as the enemie could not pierce them, and
if the Bullets flew ouer, then they went into the West
quarter among their owne Souldiers.
            That night came in an English ship with a hundred
Tunne of Beere, the which entred into the towne being
Moone-light, the enemie shott at them from their
batteries.
            The same night the enemie laboured at their batterie
of the North, betwixt the Cateyes, and did raise it
with sand, leauing their Canoniers still shut.
            The 18. the enemies shott stones and flints into the

towne, and the besieged exchanged fierie Bullets
with them.
            At the breake of day they without laboured at their
batterie of Gabions, making it higher and larger, neither
did they shoote nor labour in any other quarter.
            In the afternoone they began to labour in one of
their trenches on the West part, but they of the towne
hauing shott some volees of Canon at them, scattered
them presently.
            At night there went two ships out of the towne for
England, but none came in.
            The same night a Spanish Auncient came and yeelded
himselfe into the towne, (who (as he said) had
slaine a Sargent: he affirmed that there were 3000.
men gone out of the Campe into Brabant, and that
his Highnesse had sent new commissions into Arthois
and Haynault to leauie 3000. men, that the Canon
from the towne did euery day much spoile in the
Campe: and that they were yet 6000. men before
the towne: that is, two regiments of Spaniards, three
of Italians, and one of the Wallons, comprehending
the garrisons of the Fortes: that it was now twentie
dayes since the Souldiers receiued a penny, and before
the Souldiers had receiued but 14. Stiuers in 16.
dayes. He said also that when as the Fort of Albert was
burnt, his Highnesse had lost aboue 60000. Duckets
in Iewels and other things, and that the Flemmings
had made him a goodly present in recompence of this
losse: he said moreouer that the Captaines durst not
eate in the sight of the Souldiers for feare of a mutinie,
This Souldier had a memoriall of the siege of Ostend in
the Castillian toung, out of which was taken that which

followes, the which many serue to the History, and
happily may be pleasing to the reader.
            The Spaniardes are very much discontented, for
that the Arch-duke continues the siege of Ostend, and
aboue all for that he hath cast and dismist so many olde
experimented Captaines and men of command which
did disswade him, and hath put yong men into their
places. That there was a great number of Captaines &
men of commaund dead, and that the regiment of Don
Iean de Brachamonte (which had beene 1500. men
strong) was brought to lesse then 900. The Captaines
say that the Arch-duke is good for nothing but to spoile
souldiers, and to wast the number of good and honorable
men: for that he vnderstands nothing in the arte
of warre, the which doth much greeue the souldiers
that are there: who (among other things) are beaten
with three enemies, hunger, colde, and sickenesse, and
are not paied, that for many dayes they haue receiued
but 25. stiuers, and feare they shall receiue lesse hereafter.
That the Flemmings (and especially they of Bruges)
cannot or will not contribute any more for the entertainement
of the army, and that the bruite was, they
should haue no more munition Bread nor Beere, and
that insteede thereof, for two stiners which they were
accustomed to receiue, they should haue fiue a day: the
which seemed very strange vnto the Spaniardes: They
say also that the comissaries and vndertakers of the amonition
and victuals do make them lesse and falsefie
them dayly, especially the beere of Bruges, who (when
the vessel is halfe out) fill it vp with water, the which
was a signe that the Spaniards had a desire to mutine if
they paid them not money. They saide also that there

were dead at this siege foure Colonels, eight Spanish
Captaines, ten Wallons, and nine Italians, and some
Germanes and Flemmings, with some thousandes of
souldiers, all men of commaund, and workemen, and
that it is a pittifull thing to see how the new Spaniardes
and Italians, died miserably for colde and other discommodities.
            The 19. of Nouember, they shot little; after dinner
they might see plainely how the enemies defaced their
trenches to haue wood to burne: there was no speech
of any hurt in the Towne that day.
            At night their ariued 5. ships, the enemy shot much at
them, as well from the downes as from their battery at
the Gollet, yea with their Muskets from the Gabions,
but did them no harme.
            The 24. of Nouember, the Arch-dukes men shot
more Canon and Musket then they had done in
eight dayes before, the which they returned them from
the Towne in the same money.
            At the breake of day there were two souldiers slaine,
and some others hurt with the Canon, from the West
part.
            From the morning vntill noone they might see a
great number of Wagons passe into the West, betwixt
the forts of Isabella and La piere S. Iean, and likewise to
the East behinde the causie of Bredene: yet the enemie
wrought not in any place.
            They of the Towne were not slothfull in working
at the new port and at the Bulworke of Pekel.
            
            In the night an English Corporall was taken
who had hidde himselfe in the darke, for some ill desseigne.
            
               
Two great barkes went out of the Hauen and none
entred.
            The 25. of Nouember, the enemy neuer ceased from
night to the morning to shoote great stones and firye
Bullets, so as two houses were set on fire, but they were
presently quenched.
            At night Captaine Poelgeest died suddainely beeing
well at noone.
            The Wagons went still to the East and West, yet
the enemy wrought not in any place,
            At night there went 21. ships out of the Towne, at
whom the enemy shot 7. or 8. vollees of Canon, yet he
hit not any, there entred none into the Hauen.
            The 26. at the breake of day there was much shooting
on either side for two houres, and then they
ceased.
            They without ceased not to worke at their batterie
on the Gollet: and they of the Towne omitted no
time to worke at their new Hauen, and at the Bulworke
of Pekel and defences thereof, and at the East-port.
            After dinner they might see many Wagons going
towards the Sand downes in the East, towards night the
Canon plaied on either side a while, & then great store
of Musket shot.
            A little before night the enemy shot furiously with
stones, and soone after ceased, there were two only hurt
that day.
            In the night there went fifteene shippes out of the
Port, at whom the enemy did not shoote, & not any one
came in.
            The 27. of Nouember in the morning, foure ships

entred the Gollet, whereof two were laden with fresh
fish, the enemy shotte at them, but could not hitte
them.
            The enemy wrought this day vppon the West-downes,
and in their batterie vpon the Gollet, yet not so
much as they had done before, neither did they worke
any where els.
            That day Captaine Poelgeest was honourably interred.
            The 28. of Nouember being the day of the feast of S. Elizabeth,
               This was on the 17. of Nouember stilo veteri
(according to the auncient Calender which
they vse in England) Sir Francis Vere Generall of the
English, caused all the Canons of Towne to be shot
off in honour of the Queene of England by their example,
the enemie did as much in honour of the Infanta
Isabella, and there was hard such a noyse and
thundring, as if there had beene a generall alarme both
within and without, which being done they were quiet
all the morning.
            In the meane time the townsmen ceased not to worke
in their new Hauen, and at the Gabions betwixt the
Bulworke of Pekel and the East Port.
            The enemy was not seene to worke in any place,
which made them beleeue that they were troubled to
defend themselues from colde, and to keepe their souldiers
from flying.
            The Counsell of warre of the English caused a thiefe
to be hanged, and his companion to be whipt, whome
they intreated not so rigorously, by reason of his
youth.
            At night they of the Towne shot firie Bullets into
the enemies Campe, who sent them backe againe

many stones, yet was there not any one hurt in the
towne.
            The 29. of Nouember the enemie began early in the
morning to shoote stones into the towne.
            They might see them conduct many Wagons towards
the Fortes which are vpon the Downes at the
East and West, betwixt the Forts of Isabella, Albert,
and La Pierre S. Iean.
            
            There raigned a strange disease in the towne,Sicknesse in the towne. of the
which they that were strooke eyther died or were cured
betwixt the morning and night, there dyed many
thereof, but there was no speech of any that was slaine
or hurt in the towne that day.
            The Arch-duke and the Infanta went for foureteene
dayes to Bruxelles.
            
            That night there went no vessell in nor out.
            The 30. of Nouember at the breake of day the sluggards
were awaked with Canon and Musket shott,
which played furiously on eyther side.
            The enemie made some Canon-short in the day
time, where-with they killed two Souldiers and hurte
some others.
            The enemies Canon giuing some intermission they
lost neither the occasion nor the time, but continued
their workes at their new Hauen, as also at the halfe
Moone which is vpon the gollet neere vnto the batterie
of the enemies Gabions, the which was made so
strong, as it was almost incredible; and though it be
in an open place, and at the mouth of the enemies
Canon, yet could they neuer winne it. They haue giuen
two assaults, and sought to be maisters thereof,
euen in the beginning when it was made, but they

haue beene still repulst with great losse of their men,
and were forced to leaue it.
            That night no shippe went in nor out of the
Towne.
            The first of December at night the enemies played
vehemently with their Muskets into the Towne,
and they discharged their Canon three times in the
honour of S. Andrew patron of the house of Bourgongne.
            
            The enemies Trenches, (the which at euery spring
tide were full of water,) by the which they might haue
gone couered from one plat-forme vnto an other, being
eight in all, were almost all ouer-throwne, so as they
were forced to shew themselues as they passed, and the
Canon from the towne spared them not.
            Vpon the West they might see their Wagons
part from the Forte of Albert, Isabella, and La pierre
S. Iean, and returne with all kinde of victualles from
Bruges, for that they could not bring it by water, the
chanell being frosen.
            In the night the enemies set fire on their thirtie fiue
Gabions which were vpon the Gollet, for they serued
them now to no vse, and they had placed
them there but onely to couer their labourers whilest
they wrought at the plat-forme, the which was a
high worke, and almost perfected, whereon they
might plant seauen or eight Canons.
            The 2. of December, a Souldier of the Towne
fled and went to the enemie: two Marriners were
slaine by the East-port, and a Harguebuzer in the
West.
            The Townes-men shott almost all night into the

enemies campe, who answered them not, the which
made them imagin that they wanted Poulder.
            The same night 14. ships went out of the Port without
any annoyance. There were two English Barkes
laden with Beere which would haue entred, but they
ranne on ground, yet by the helpe of some other ships
they returned in safetie to the fleete,
            The 3. of December at the breake of day, the Muskets
played furiously on either side, after that, the enemie
played with his Canon into the towne, but they
would not be long indebted vnto them.
            Some that had gone out to the warres returned that
day; they had taken two Wallons prisoners, who were
so obstinate and wilfull as they would not marche, so
as the Souldiers were forced to kill one, and to bring
the other into the towne vpon their neckes, after that
they had vsed him in the worst sort they could: for
Generall Vere had commanded them expresly to
bring some one to learne newes of the enemie: but
this man was yet so wilfull, as neither for threats,
faire words, nor any other deuise, they could drawe
any thing from him, but in cursing with iniurious
wordes, he sayd that his Highnesse would not
leaue the Towne before hee had brought it to his
will.
            They could not see the enemie worke in any place;
but the Townes-men ceased not at their new Porte,
the Bulworke of Pekel, and the defences betwixt it
and the East-port: and although the enemie shot little,
yet the Townes-men abated nothing.
            The night before the fourth of December, the
two English shippes (whereof we spake before) entred

into the Towne, it was a bright Moone-light,
and the enemies shott hard at them yet could not
hurt them.
            At the same time when as these ships entred, fire
tooke a house at the East-port, and for that this house
was in the right-vp-street, and a great concourse of
people comming to quench it, the enemie shott continually
at them, and yet there were but three souldiers
and a Boye slaine, and the fier in the ende was
quenched.
            The night was quiet enough,Assault at the English Trenches, and repulsed. without any great
shooting on eyther side, vntill about three of the
clocke, that the enemies came in great numbers to
giue an assault vnto the English trenches, in three diuers
places, during the which (being about an houre)
they shott furiously on either side: the enemies cryed
so lowde in French; Enter, enter, aduance, aduance,
as they heard them easily into the Towne. they were
chearefully receiued and valiantly repulsed three
times, and in the ende were forced to retire. There
were three Souldiers of the Towne slaine, and some
hurt: as for the enemie, we cannot well knowe how
many were slaine, it was so darke: But day being
come, they found so much bloud vpon the place, as
they did iudge a great number to be slaine and hurt,
and they might heare them say in returning one
vnto another: Companions let vs carry away our
Captaine: here is no good to be gotten. Generall
Vere hearing the alarme, ranne to those Trenches
halfe naked, his presence did so incourage the Souldiers,
as they wished that the enemie would returne
againe.
            
               
The enemy in the morning beganne for the first time
to shoote from their batterie which is at the West vpon
the Cateyes, and shot three or foure times through the
Blindes or couerings.
            The leapers brought in a prisoner of the Country of
Luxembourg, who said that he was seruant vnto the
Cont Barlemont.
            
            The night before the 5. day of December, the townsmen
shot many Stones and firie Bullets into the enemies
Campe, who shot not vntill the morning when as
they plaid furiously from the West, and pearced some
houses without any great harme.
            They also made many a shot against the Generalles
house, and beate downe a pane of a wall, and before
it carried away a French Auncients legge, whereof he
died soone after.
            They of the Towne laboured at their defences betwixt
Pekel and the East Port, and at their new Hauen.
            That night there entred two shippes; in the one of
them was the commissarie Doublet who brought fifty
thousand crownes for the workemen, the which are
commonly souldiers who gaine very much.
            Yesterdaies prisoner saide among other things that
the Sunday before, the souldiers had mustred vpon the
East; and insteede of two stiuers which they receiued,
they promised thē 5. but for that they were ill paid the
two, they had lesse hope of the fiue, and that many fled
away dayly and many died, and that within three daies
they had found three souldiers frozen to death in one
lodging.
            The enemie shot vehemently that day from their

new battery betwixt the Cateyes and Reisern-heubt; they
pearced some houses in the top, & shot against Sand-hill
the which seemed to them of the Towne a meere follie,
for if they had spent 10000. Canon shot against this
Bulworke and the rest, they should haue auailed themselues
little or nothing at all.
            The 6. of December it chanced (the tide being low)
two of the enemies souldiers came to the bancke of the
Gollet on the East-side, to whom two souldiers of the
Towne shewed them selues on the other side, all of a
good humour, without any will to hurt one another,
who parled friendly together: the enemies asked them
of the Towne what they thought of the plat-forme
which was vpon the Gollet, and whether they of the
Towne could hereafter receiue in any victualles, with
such like discourses: whereunto the Townsmen answered,
that they little regarded that plat-forme, for that
there was a new Hauen made, to vse when need should
require; and that they looked to receiue daylie store of
victualles and other things necessarie: and besides that,
they had yet store of prouision for a long time of good
Wine and good English Beere, and better cheape then
in the Campe; well said the others, we will go & drinke
with you, looke you vse vs well: hereupon a horseman
of the enemies came, still crying after his companions,
who retyred, saying, we recommend you vnto God vntill
our next meeting.
            In the morning they might perceiue 400. Wagons
going towards the East, but the enemy was not seene to
worke in any place.
            They without, brake and burnt all their Gabions
which were vpon the Gollet, whereas all the plat-forme

appeared plaine, and there might they see some loope
hoales.
            The Townsmen shot all night with firie Bullets
into the Campe, and the enemie likewise into the
Towne, wherewith there was a woman slaine and her
husband hurt.
            The 7. of December both morning, and euening
they shot firie Bullets and stones of eyther side; in the
morning there were some of the towne hurt, & amongst
the rest Sir Horatio Veres Secretary had his legge shot
off.
            They without, shot furiously into the Towne from
their battery which they haue raised at the foote of the
downes, vpon the end of the dike on the East-side, as
neere the Towne as might be, where they had planted
three peeces.
            At night Sir Horatio Veres Secretary (hauing his leg
cut off) died.
            The 8. of December in the morning they of the
Towne beganne to play with two whole Canons and
three demies, against the enemies new worke, the which
they had raised betwixt the Cateyes and Reisern-haubt,
which sport continued aboue two houres. In the meane
time the enemy shot violently into the Towne from
their other batteries of the west, most part wherof lighted
vpon the houses, which the Townsmen little regarded,
being acquainted therewith.
            Besides they might see them without, labour carefully
vpon the downes, to make a new trench of wood to
goe from one battery to another.
            In the night, two Barkes went out and one came in,
with a little shaloup at whome the enemie shot hard,

but could not hit them: this was the first time they
shotte from their batterie which is vppon the Gollet.
            There entred likewise a shaloupe by the North-Hauen,
into the which there came a Canon shotte
from the West, which carryed away a Marriners
arme: They shotte much on eyther side yet few were
hurt.
            The night before the 9. day there were many stones
and firie Bullets shot off either side, according to the
custome: & some Bullets passed through the houses: a
Burgesse found in his celler in the morning three canon
Bullets the which had made a great noise and broken
all there abouts.
            The night before the tenth of December, after
they had staied of eyther side, at midnight they began
to shoote many stones and Musket shot vntill the
morning.
            In the night they of the Towne heard their enemies
labouring vpon their new plat-forme in the East, to
beate in and cut, as if they had driuen in some piles, and
had planted more Canon.
            After noone a Marriner entred by the North Hauen
in a shaloupe, who was come from England, and
had brought a vessell full of goods, the enemy shot
at him but could not reach him: He saide that hee
had hard reported at Sand-witch by Flemmings that
were good and credible men, and did assure it for
certaine, that the fire which had beene lately in Alberts
fort came from heauen, and had taken first in the Arch-dukes
lodging.
            The 11. of December as the day before, the enemies

were busied to deface their olde workes and Ramparts
vpon the South and South-west, to haue Wood to
burne, the Townes-men shott sometimes at them with
their Canon.
            They shott also from their new batterie vpon the
Gollet, into the Towne and vpon the Hauen, to trie
their Canon, without dooing of any great harme, there
were but three hurt that day in the towne, and without
danger of death.
            The night before the 12. of December they began
againe to shoote stones and fierie Bullets, vntill midnight
without any great effect.
            In the night a little Boate went from the towne to
the Fleete, to fetch from the English ship (whereof
hath beene spoken) certaine sheepe and liue hogges,
and returned into the towne, beating the hogges to
make them gront, to spight the enemies, who shott after
them yet could not hit any.
            In the morning the enemie shott into the towne,
and at the Bulworke of Pekel, from their batteries of
Cateyes and the Downes.
            The 13. of December there entred a Barke laden
with fresh fish into the Towne, at whom the enemies
made two shott but could not hurt him.
            Captaine Gisbrecht Kolbe of Bruges, dyed of a burning
feuer, hauing beene sick only two dayes.
            It was such a miste that day, as they could scarse
see from the towne vnto the enemies trenches.
            There was a Canonier slaine, and no man else hurt.
            The 14. of December from the beginning of the
night vnto the morning, they shott fierie Bullets and
stones on either part, with ordinary Bullets through

the houses: the Gouernours house was shott through
at noone day, yet no man was hurt.
            In the night a ship of Vlisingue went out of the Hauen,
at whom the enemy shot not.
            In the after-noone the enemie changed his guardes,
at whom the besieged shott as soone as they might discouer
them.
            The 15. of December (according to the custome of
warre) they shott of both sides, but there was no man
flaine nor hurt within the towne.
            At night three shippes went out of the Hauen, and
were nothing indomaged by the enemie, who shott
at them.
            The 16. in the beginning of the night the enemie
battered in ruine, and shott some fierie Bullets into
the towne.
            In the night the enemies brought before the towne
three great Barkes full of stones and sand, with an intention
(during the darknesse) to sinke them in the
gollet: and so to stoppe the passage of the shippes: but
this deuise succeded not: the Barkes were cast directly
against the olde Towne where they ranne a
ground.
            The morning was so darke as they could not discerne
what the enemie did, but about noone the water
being lowe, the enemies began to playe with their
Muskets and Canon-shott into the towne, yea vpon
the three Barkes that were runne on ground, whether
they of the Towne were gone to see what was
in them: their Horse-men came likewise (hauing
past through the Hauen) and chased them of the
Towne away three times, so as they were forced to

leaue them and to attend more water.
            The 17. of December the enemie shott many stones
into the Towne. The same day, one of the enemies
horse-men being drunke, came to the halfe-Moone of
the towne (which is vpon the gollet;) and intreated
them to lead him to his quarter: they in the halfe-Moone
slue his horse, and (to be short) tooke him
prisoner.
            Vpon the West side, two Italiens (standing Sentinell,)
were taken and brought prisoners into the
towne.
            The three Barkes (whereof we did speake) were
this night beaten in peeces by them of the Towne, and
the greatest part of the wood carried in.
            In the after-noone the besieged shott against their
enemies batterie vpon the Cateyes, and towards the
East vpon the enemie that was come downe vpon
the Sands, the Sea being gone: of whom they slue
some, and the rest fled. There was one man slaine in
the towne, and three hurt.
            The 18. of December in the morning, a ship went
out of the Hauen, at whom the enemy made three
shott but hit it not.
            After noone they of the Towne seeing the enemies
change their guards, shott at them.
            The prisoners that were taken yesterday, said that
their men had no opinion nor courage to take the
towne by assault: and that their onely hope was in
time to stop the comming in and going out of the ships.
            At night there went out two ships, and the enemie
neuer shott at them. The enemie shott fierie Bullets
and stones at the towne vntill midnight.
            
               
The 19. day in the morning being faire, there went
a Barke out of the Hauen, at whom they shott from
the batterie that is vpon the Gollet, but hurt them
not: after noone they shotte no more on eyther
side.
            The 20. day they of the towne shot furiously against
a Block-house, where they did see the enemie working,
and amongst the guards when they changed: the
enemy shotte so little this day and the day before,
as there was no man slaine in the Towne, but some
hurt.
            The 21.An assault giuen, and the enemy repulsed with losse. of December at the breake of day the tide
being spent, the Arch-duke gaue a furious assault to
the olde Towne, with 700. or 800. men, the which
continued well two houres.
            The assailants with a certaine artificiall fire burnt
the Palissadoes, but they within (the alarme being
giuen) played with their Canon and Musket through
the troopes; so as the water rising, the enemies were
forced to retire to their trenches, without getting any
thing, but leauing behinde them many slaine and hurt:
they of the Towne issued forth, and among other
prisoners brought in a Spanyard, a man of commaund,
who being examined by the Generall, said,
that the trueth was, the Arch-duke his Lorde, had
taken occasion to presse the Towne by the weakenesse
of the Garrison, and small number of Souldiers
that were in it; and that of long time they
had receiued no refreshing of Souldiers and victuals,
whereof he had certaine intelligence: that to this end
his Highnesse without loosing any more time, had
gathered together as many Souldiers as possiblie

he could, out of Brabant, Arthois, Hannault and other
places, and had brought to the number of ten thousand
men, being resolued to assault it, in diuers places,
the which he did hope to take by Christmas, & it might
chance before, if occasion were offred. The Generall
hauing fully vnderstoode the confession of this prisoner,
and knowing that it was true, for that a little before
he had receiued the like aduice from diuers places, being
conformable there vnto, and with all that he had
made triall of the weakenesse of his men in this last assault,
and that he had not souldiers sufficient to man all
the places of the Towne, & to defend them; he thought
it fit, (to breake of the enemies desseigne, and to auoid
this danger, and also to gaine some time) to entertaine
him with a vaine hope, and vnder colour of composition,
to spend some dayes in parle, not doubting but to
draw it so out in length, vntill the succors which he expected
were ariued at the least he should haue somtime
to set his men in order; and in the meane time to prepare
al things necessary for the defence of the place: for
this reason he sends Captaine Lewis to the Campe, to
make a motion for a peace, & to demand a truce & cessatiō
of armes, during the conference, & for assurance
therof hostages to be giuen of both sides. Captaine Lewis
(hauing had a good audience of the Arch-duke,A treatie with the Arch-duke to winne time. &
deliuered all that he had in charge, returnes vnto the
towne with his answer, & on his highnes behalfe there
came with him Captaine Rabas Gouernour of Escluse a
Towne in Flanders, and the Sargeant Maior of the Spaniardes,
to remaine in Hostage for assurance of the treaty.
At their first comming there was some disorder among
the souldiers for want of well vnderstanding▪ esspecially

among the Romans or new Gueus (these are
they which yeelded vp S. Andrews fort to Prince Maurice,
in the Ile of Bomel, and turned to his seruice in the
yeare 1600.) which caused an alarme in the Towne,
so as the deputies or Hostages retired to the Campe:
a while after this trouble being pacified, Generall Vere
sent two English Captaines againe vnto the Campe
with whom those men (before mentioned) returned,
to treat on the Archdukes behalfe with them of the
Towne. The Generall propounded vnto them (as they
said) articles very impertinent and without reason, that
is. That he would depart with coulors flying and full
armes, and that the souldiers should carry away their
beggage, victual and Canon, moreouer he demanded
a maruelous great some of mony for the souldiers, and
some dayes of respight, that they might (at their ease)
shippe their goods and Canon, and carry them away.
Ribas made many iournies to know his Highnesse
pleasure, who yeelded to most part of the articles, but
he would by no meanes heare of giuing any money to
the souldiers, and would haue them go away by Land,
offring to giue them a Conuoy to Breszkins, right against
Flussingue, or neere vnto it, to passe at their pleasures
into Zeland,
            
            On the other side they of the Towne would not
go from their first articles, onely they yeelded some
thing in that which concerned the Canon and armes.
And so three dayes weere spent in these parlies.
            During this treaty and cessation of armes, many inhabitants
of Bruges and other places both of the East
and West side, walking along the Sea side, came neere
vnto the Towne, and talked with the Townsmen who

shewed themselues vnarmed vpon the Rampars.
            The 22. of December Generall Vere was all day
busied in disposing of his guard, and in setting a better
order among the Souldiers, to endure a new assault
if the enemie had charged them: the enemie
was also all the day in armes and changing of his
guardes, which was the cause they began to shoote
againe on either side.
            There came from the Fleete into the Hauen 32.
sayle, at whom the enemie shott from foure batteteries,
yea from that which is vpon the Gollet, but the
greatest harme they did, was to shoote through some
of them, yet all the marchandise and euery thing
within them was safe.
            They of the Towne laboured continually in the
new Hauen, without any intermission, no not in the
night.
            The night before the 23. of December, the enemie
shott much vpon the towne, and battered it in ruine.
            The same night there entred two small Barkes into
the towne without any harme.
            After midnight being a lowe water, Generall Vere
went forth in person with two Captaines more with
him into the olde towne, to visit it and to view the scituation,
and went the round, incouraging the Souldiers
and commanding them to keepe good guard.
            In the morning they began to shoote on eyther
side: the enemie shott much at the three ships which
had beene pierced.
            During the treatie their Highnesses shewed themselues
before the Towne within Canon shott: the Infanta
was vpon the neerest Mountaines of Sande,

with twentie Ladyes and Gentlewomen in her traine,
and the Arch-duke with many Gentlemen, and the
guardes of his body, being so neere as one might easily
discerne them, the which was also confirmed
by the Gouernour of Escluse, that their Highnesses
were come thether vnder the assurance of the
truce.
            Herevpon the 25. of December being Christmas
day, a fleete of Shippes of Zeland came before the
Towne, in the which besides all other kindes of prouision,
there were fiue Ensignes of Zelanders which
made 600. men and 300. Marriners, the which entred
into the Towne at diuers times in long boates and
Shaloups by the North entrie or midle hauen at noone
day in view of the enemie, who shott at them from the
foure batteries of East and West without ceasing, and
yet did no other harme but onely hurt three Marriners:
by this meanes the treatie was broken off: and
they sayd vnto the Gouernour of Escluse, that he must
returne to the Campe, for that the cause of this treatie
ceased, by the arriuall of these succours, whereat he
was much amazed, growing in choller for that they
had reteined him there for nothing, and vsing some
iniurious wordes, hee mainteined that there were
no Souldiers arriued, but onely some munition and
victuals, vntill that Captaine Pottey (who came with
the Fleete, and whom he knew well) was brought
before him, and assured him that it was so: About
noone the Gouernour of Escluse was ledde out of
the Towne, and two houres after, one of the English
Captaines returned for him into the Towne, and
hauing sent backe the Satgent-Maior of the Campe a

Spaniard, the other English Captaine returned in like
sort: this done there was great ioy in the Towne for
their happy and vnexpected deliuerie, Generall Vere
sending backe the Sargeant Maior, charged him with
a letter to the Arch-duke of his excuses, as followeth.
            
               
                  WEe haue heretofore held it necessary for certaine
reasons to treate with the deputies which had authority
from your highnes, but whilst we were about to
conclude vpō the conditions & articles, there are ariued
certaine of our ships of war, by whom we haue receiued
part of that which we had neede of, so as wee cannot
with our honour and oath continue the treaty, nor proceede
in it, the which we hope your Highnesse will not
take in ill part, and yet when your power shall reduce vs
to the like estate you will not leaue (as a most generous
Prince) to giue vs a gentle audience.
                  
                     From our Towne of Ostend 
                        the 25.
of December. 1601.
                     
                     Signed. F. Vere.
                  
               
            
            THe 26. of December, after that these spectators
which did attend another issue of the businesse
had beene refused, they began againe the warre more
cruelly then before, the enemy battred in ruine aboue
the plat-forme which is vpon the Gollet, but the besieged
were so acquainted with it that they cared not for
it.
            The same day there entred 48. saile laden with victualles,
munition of warre and other things necessarie,
by the Gollet into the Towne, the enemies Canon hurt

but two ships, the which notwithstanding were saued,
and other of them by the indiscretion of the Pilot ranne
a ground on the enemies side, the which was spoiled
and burned by them.
            All this time they kept strong and good gard.
            It seemed the enemy had a meaning to giue an other
assault vnto the Towne, for this cause there was good
garde kept and the gardes doubled, and all things fitt
to maintaine an assault held in a readinesse, but they attempted
nothing, for that the enemies desseigne had
been broken for this time, by the meanes of this parley,
during the which the succors ariued.
            The 27. of December, the enemy began againe to
shoote stones and firy bullets, and they of the Towne
sent them their exchange presently.
            The same day there came foureteene saile into the
Towne, at whome the enemie made aboue sixtie
Canon shotte, but did them little harme, onely one
barke laden with turffes, ranne a ground vpon the East
port, against the Sea dike, at the which the enemy
shotte vehemently, and beat it almost in peeces, yet
all the turffes were saued: So within fiue or sixe
dayes there entred forty eight shippes into Ostend,
whereof three onely were lost by the ill conduct of the
Pilots. And on Christmas day there entred at the least
400. long boats & shaloupes with souldiers, & the most
of them in the day time, the which the enemy could not
hinder with their foure batteries of the East and West.
            They expected also in the Towne a greater number
of souldiers to fortifie the Garison the which gaue
them more courage and assurance.
            The 28. at night there went two ships out of Ostend, at

whom the enemy shot but he could not reach them.
The same night there entred 200. Marriners into the
Towne to fortifie the Garison.
            The enemy planted 12. or 13. Gabions vnder the
downes, right against the west Port, where before there
had bin a battery of two Canons, the which was partly
mouldred away, & partly beaten down with the towne
Canon. About noone a wagon went from Albert fort to
the Cateyes, they which seemed to be well laden, about
the which there were some horsmen; they of the towne
made two shot at them from Sand-hill, which did beate
the Wagon in peeces and scattered the horsemen.
            The 29. the enemy began againe to shoote with firy
Bullets & stones, the which they had not done in some
dayes past.
            At night there went forth 4. ships, at whom the enemie
made some shot from their battery which is vpon
the Gollet, but did not hurt them: an Italian beeing in
gard was taken by the necke & brought into the towne,
who said that the greatest part of the men of warre were
retyred, and that there remained no more in the Campe
but what was necessary for the ordinary gards the
which was false, as appeared afterwards. A horseman
of the enemies (the water being low,) entred into the
olde Towne, and tooke a Sargeant prisoner, but a Musketier
shot so well after him as he killed his horse betwixt
his legs, & by this meanes freed the Sargeant, the
horsman notwithstanding saued himselfe, and the saddle
was brought into the Towne.
            The enemy planted on two broken batteries at the
West, vpon either a Canon, with the which they shot
against the Porke-espike and Sand-hill, the which they

of the Towne held a meere folly and did not esteeme it.
            The Towne was wonderfully fortified by the great
care and dilligence of Generall Vere, who himselfe in
person stood in garde in the night, whilst the tides were
low the which did much incourage the souldiers.
            The 30. of December, there was little shooting neither
did any vessell enter nor go forth by reason of the
great winde.
            It was so quiet about the Towne, as one would not
haue said it had beene besieged, the enemy had inough
to doe against the colde.
            The 31. of December there was in a maner no shooting
all day or night.
            The besieged hauing intelligence that the enemy
prepared to giue them a new assault, they manned
their chiefe places, as Helmont, Sand-hill and others:
and furnished them with Canon and stones, the which
wrought the effect that shall be spoken of on the 7. of
Ianuary.
            At night two ships went forth without annoyance.
            It was thought the Towne was now forrified with
aboue 1200. men, all which labored aboue eight dayes
in the fortifications, where nothing was forgotten
that might helpe the besieged or annoy the enemy.
            That daye there no speech of any slaine or hurt.
            The first of Ianuary, they sent new yeares guifts with
Musket shot;1602. the enemy made 10. or 12. Canon shot at
the Towne without any harme doing, there was no
man slaine nor hurt that day.
            The Arch-dukes men (knowing they did but thunder
with their Canon through houses already broken,)
grew daylie more colde; that day there went no

ship in nor out, by reason of the great winde: a Barke
which the day before had stucke vpon the Sands neere
vnto the halfe Moone, was drawne into the Hauen
this night.
            The 2. day there was little shooting on either side,
onely in the morning they sent some Canon-shot one
vnto another, but (a great raine falling) they stayed,
so as that day there was no man slaine nor hurt in the
Towne.
            The 3. of Ianuarie, the enemie made two or three
shott into the towne, and so rested all that night, they
shott awhile in the day time but hurt no man.
            Generall Vere had sent some Souldiers into the
countrie to learne some newes; hauing beene sixe
dayes abroad, they returned this day, and brought
newes, that in the countrie they durst not say, but that
the Arch-duke was alreadie maister of the towne, although
his resolution were onely to giue a generall
assault within eight or ten dayes, the which they held
so assured, as they durst not hould the Towne but for
taken.
            The 4. of Ianuarie they discharged many Musket
shott, and about midnight the enemie shott 8. or 10.
Canon-shott, and an houre or two after day, 10. or 11.
more, with one of the which a Smith was hurt in his
house with a peece of a Stone, and some Souldiers.
            All that day nor night no shippe went in nor out:
about noone they of the towne discouered in the enemies
campe some Noble-man mounted vpon a white
Horse, before whom marched fiue or sixe foote-men:
they shott at them, and the enemie into the Towne,
which sport continued two houres and more: there

were three Souldiers slaine in the Towne and some
hurt.
            The 5. of Ianuary, they did shoote continually day
and night on either part, and there were three souldiers
in the Towne slaine.
            The enemies made a new Port at their fort which is
in the East.
            The 6. of Ianuary, they shot much on eyther side
according to their custome, but they of the Towne
more often then the enemy, for that they shewed
themselues but one or two at a time: about foure of the
clocke in the after noone the enemy releeuing his
gardes, they of the Towne shot furiously at them, and
they answered them with the like, there was no man
slaine in the Towne but one or two hurt.
            The same day three ships went forth, at whom the enemy
shot much, they did no other harme but brake
one of their Masts, yet they went away safe.
            The 7. day of Ianuary, the Arch-duke battered all
the day long, (without intermission) the Bulworke of
Sand-hill, Helmont, Porke-espike and other places neere
vnto them, with 18. Canons from two of his batteries,
the one is at the foote of the downes vpon the Cateyes,
and the other on the South-side thereof, all the Bullets
waying 40. or 46. poundes a peece, the Canoniers did
reckon aboue two thousand shotte, besides that which
was shot on the East-side of the Towne: this done about
sixe of the clocke at night the tide being spent he
gaue a generall assault, his numbers were great, his horsmen
driuing them forward behinde, and they came
with great fury vpon the olde Towne,A furious and bloudy assault. the which they
entred by the West Hauen, and by it, (as also along

the shoare) they beganne to giue the scalado to Sandhil,
(hauing first broken and ouerthrowne the Pallissadoes)
and had (to that end) carried many ladders with
them, and light Bridges for an assault, the which they
fastened in diuers places with such furie, as it seemed
the towne would be taken.
            Generall Vere with his Brother Sir Horatio were placed
in that quarter with a troope of chosen Souldiers,
to succour their men in case there were need, who seeing
what past, the Generall crost (with a part of his
troope by the mines) into the False-Braye, casting himselfe
with great cries vpon the Arch-dukes men, whom
he repulst three times, and although they returned alwayes
with fresh Souldiers, yet could they not preuaile
with their Pikes and Muskets against the furie of the
English: notwithstanding the Arch-dukes men did
well, and gaue an assault at one instant in all places: yet
must they needes flie. The aduantage of the besieged
consisted in the preparations which they had made,
beeing long before aduertised of the enemies desseigne.
            Vpon the East-side the assault was likewise giuen,Assault vpon the East
but about two houres too late, for the water began
now to rise, the which did much amaze the Souldiers,
for they did see that if they stayed there any longer
they could not be releeued by their fellowes, which
was the cause that they retired: the greatest slaughter
was made in their retreat, for the Canon (charged with
chaines and small Bullets,) and the Muskets could not
misse so thick a troope.
            The Arch-dukes men gaue an assault also vnto the
Fortes of Helmont, Porke-espike,
               Assault at Helmont and the English trenches. and to all the English

Trenches, which Trenches (according vnto the Generals
order and commaund) being weakely manned,
were easily taken, but soone after finding great resistance
in the towne, at the Polder, South-bulwarke and
their Rauelins: considering that there was no meanes
to come vnto the towne that way, after they had set
fire on the Corps de garde, they abandoned the trenches.
            Generall Vere had caused two double Canons to
be planted that day vpon the flankes of the West port,
with some other peeces that were there before, the
which with others in other places, did scoure along the
Sand-hil and the West Rauelin, and played vpon the
comming and returne of the enemies, and whilest the
assault continued, they charged them with chaines and
nailes, and little sacks full of Musket Bullets, which
made a great slaughter, so as there was a pittifull crie of
hurt men and dying, and the Souldiers fell one vpon an
other pelmel.
            
            The enemie being hotte at the assault, and the water
risen; Generall Vere caused the sluces to be taken
vp, the which did coole the enemies courage: and he
(growing more and more assured) charged them and
put them to flight, recouering all their ladders, bridges
and other instruments which they had brought.
            All about the Sand-hill euen vnto the old Church, &
all about the Porke-espike, in the West Rauelin, and in
the English trenches, all was full of dead bodies: I
speake not of those that were slaine going and comming
by the Canon charged with chaines & small shot,
nor of those that were drowned, some of whose bodies
were carried along the shoare euen vnto Calais.
            
            
               
The spoile was great in mony, apparell, and other
things of price: Searching among the dead, they found
a young Spanish woman neere vnto Sand-hill, in mans
apparrel, the which (as they might gesse by her wounds)
had beene slaine at the assault, she had vnder her apparrell
a chaine of Golde set with precious stones, with other
Iewelles and siluer, during this assault the Arch-duke
was behind the battery of Cateyes, and the Infanta
Isabella at the fort of Isabella.
            
            Those which gaue the assault to the olde Towne
were furnished with two or three dayes victuals, which
they had brought in by sacks, they had also all kindes of
instruments to intrench themselues if the enterprise had
succeeded.
            They of the Towne had dismounted & cast downe
all the great peeces that were in the false bray and at the
Porke-espike, least the enemy should vse them against
themselues: the enemy had already brought sixe Barrelles
of Poulder to the Rauelin of the Porke-espike, to
furnish it & defend it against the Towne, but hauing no
leasure to vse them, they were forced to leaue them to
saue their liues.
            The order which the Arch-duke had giuen, was that
during the chiefe assault on the West side, other troupes
should charge vpon the East, and if this had beene executed
with dexterity, and that all his troupes could haue
ioyned togeather, Generall Vere had had much more
trouble to resist them, and the party had beene doubtfull.
            They were to that end in theer great battailons before
the Towne vpon the Gollet, but the tide which
came in (as we haue saide) did somewhat disappoint

this desseigne; then one of the Towne going out of the
halfe Moone, yeelding himselfe vnto them, diuerted
them, saying that there were but forty souldiers in the
halfe Moone, and offered to conduct them thether,
the which he did and they tooke it easily.The Generals wisedome. Generall Vere
with great iudgement had left it thus ill manned to
draw the enemies thether and by that meanes deuide
them, and make them to loose time, contenting himselfe
to garde the strongest places and most importing,
assuring himselfe that hee should soone recouer the
weaker.
            The Arch-dukes men hauing thus taken the halfe
Moone, and being many therein, they beganne with
Spades, Pike-axes and other instrumentes which
they had brought, to fortifie themselues against the
Towne, but all preuailed not, for they of the Towne
began to shoote at them from the South Bulworke and
from that of Spaine, with their Canon and Musket, with
such fury as they slue very many: and with all seeing
the tide to rise more and more, they beganne to
faint, there vpon Generall Vere sent Captaine Day
with some troupes against them: who fell vpon them
with threates and cries, and chased them out with
great effusion of bloud; the next day they tould 300.
slaine in the halfe Moone, besides them that were drowned
and hurt.
            In this generall assault which continued aboue two
houres,The Arch-duke looseth aboue 2000. men. in all the places aboue mentioned, the Arch-duke
lost aboue 2000. men amongst the which there
were a great number of noble men, and commanders in
war, that is the Cont d' Imber an Italian,Noble men slaine. who offered as
much golde as he did waye for his ransome, and yet he

was slaine by a simple souldier; Don Durango Maister
of the Campe, Don Aluares Suares Knight of the order
of S. Iaques, Simon Anthonie maister of the Campe, the
Sargeant Maior who had beene in hostage at Ostend in
December, 1601. and the liuetenant gouernor of Andwerpe.
            
            There were onely 30. or 40. souldiers of the Towne
slaine, and about a 100. hurt: but of men of command
there were slaine Captaine M. Haeffren, Captaine Nicholas
Vandenlier, and a liuetenant of the new Geulx,
two English Liuetenants, an Auncient, two fouriers of
Captaine Haeffrens, a gentleman of Generall Veres, and
Sir Horatio Vere was hurt in the leg.
            The Arch-duke sent a trumpet the next day to haue
leaue to search among the dead, the which was granted
him for foure houres.
            The names of the noble men and chiefes which commanded
the Arch-dukes men at this assault are Cont
Farnese an Italian with 2000. men of his Nation against
Sand-hill. The Cont Bouquoy with 2000. men
vpon the Gollet against the East Rauelin,The commanders names for the Arch-duke at the assault. but for that
the tide was too high before he began to charge, he retired
and went vpon the halfe Moone, from whence he
was expelled. The Gouernor of Dixmude with 2000.
men against the Porke-espike, who was repulst, another
Captaines with 500. men vpon the west Rauelin, & an
other with 500. men also against the south squares (there
are fortifications made in square, whereof they take the
name) and the Sargeant Maior against the West square
with a 1000 men from whence they were all repulst.
            And for that all kindes of lewde people flie into the
low Countries, from Italie, Spaine, Germanie and al other

forraine Countries, as if cofers ful of crownes attended
them wide open, we will here set downe the copy
of a letter found about one that was slaine, to the end
they may see to what a feast they bring them, and how
they are serued.
            GOod brother, after my humble commendations
done vnto you, I will let you vnderstand that I am
in good health thankes be vnto God, hoping to haue
the like newes of you, moreouer I would not faile to acquaint
you with that which passeth here, first you must
vnderstand that I haue great want and much paine, as
well by reason of the bad weather, as through cold; for
all the Country here abouts is couered with water, and
we are very ill payed, and without hope of any better
hereafter, which is the onely reason why our enemies
holde Ostend so long.
            They are as strong as they were the first day wee
came before it, and we know not what meanes there is
to take it, being impregnable, if God doe not looke on
vs in mercie and pittie, and take compassion of our extreame
miseries, and of the great mortality which is among
the poore souldiers; we are 48. houres in the
Water in garde in the trenches, and neuer stirre, and
are not much better in our quarter; and yet wee must
take all patiently, and besides all this wee doe dayly
yea hourelye expose our bodies to the mercie of
the Canon, Musket, Stones, Grenadoes, and other
small vessels full of wilde-fire, without strawe to lie
on, victualles or any thing else, but what wee buye
for foure times the value, you may thereby gesse
in what case a poore souldier liues, that is naked and
without money at this time, the which is rightlye

to die of hunger and colde; this raignes chiefly among
the Souldiers new come from Italie and Spaine, whom
I haue seene 18. or 20. dying together behind our quarter.
For my part God be thanked I haue neither beene
sicke nor hurt, and I haue a crowne in my purse, the
which makes me to holde my selfe the happiest Souldier
in the armie, for money is dainty heere, and it is
held a strange thing to see a peece of siluer. The God
of all mercie helpe vs; but truely it is a great folly to
beleeue that his Highnesse can take Ostend. From the
Campe this 29. of December 1601.
            The 8. of Ianuary there were great numbers of dead
bodies seene before the olde towne 40. and 50. on a
heape all naked: they were all goodly young men and
black, as Spaniards and Italiens. The Arch-dukes men
had carried away three Boates full. They had a white
marke in their hattes for a token: some prisoners sayd
they had beene forced to this assault by the Arch-duke,
who had beene drawne therevnto by some Captaines,
which desired to finde a meanes to free themselues
from these toyles and miseries, and to seeke to make an
end of the siege of Ostend: the which was also his
Highnesse intention, and indeed it freed a great number
of the miseries of this world. They say they had
made an othe to put all to the sword they should finde
in the towne, both women and children.
            The 9. day there was little shooting on either side.
This day the Captaines and men of commaund of the
towne which had beene slaine at the last assault, were
honourably buried.
            There was no speech of any slaine or hurt in the
towne, some of the enemies which had beene slaine or

drowned at the last assault, were cast vp by the sea into
the old towne, some of them were richly apparelled
and had good bootie.
            The 10. of Ianuary the Muskets played hotely on
either side, as for the Canon they of the towne shott
more then the enemie, and it seemed the enemies were
so amazed with the reception they had had of them
of the towne, as they knew not what to doe, such as escaped,
thought still that death held them by the throat.
            The 11. day there was no great shooting, and that
without any great effect, but piercing of houses: That
day there came certaine ships full of men of warre to
the fleete before Ostend, the which did much reioyce
them of the towne, but as some Captaines and Souldiers
would haue entred into the towne, the enemie
shott at them, and slue some: and about three of the
clock in the afternoone some Ships and Barkes comming
towards the towne, the enemy shott at them, and
strooke a ship betwixt winde and water, and sunke a
Barke which was before the North-hauen, but all the
men were saued, onely two Souldiers were hurt, but
without any danger.
            The night before the 12. day there was great shooting
of Muskets on either side: they of the towne shot
two houres together fierie Bullets and great stones.
then they ceased vntill day, when as they began againe,
the tempest was so great as no ship could come into
the towne, there was no man hurt.
            In the beginning of the night, the tide being gone,
some of the enemies horsemen past by the olde porte
into the olde towne, with an intent to set fire of the
Barkes, with the which they brought the Souldiers

from the ships into the towne, but they of the towne
shott so furiously after them from Helmont and the
West Bulwarke, both with Canon and Musket, as they
forced them to retire with speed.
            All this night was spent in fetching of the Souldiers
from the ships vnto the Towne, the which was done
without the losse or hurt of any man.
            The morning being faire there entred 16. ships by
the gollet into the towne, at whom the enemies shott
much, and did nothing but pierce through a ship, but all
the men and whatsoeuer was in it was saued.
            After dinner the new troopes with their coulours
were set vpon the West port of Helmont, where they
did their deuoire to shoote at the enemies defences:
the enemie shott also at the towne from their batterie
on the West, without killing or hurting of any man.
            In the beginning of the night before the 14. day,
they shott of either side: they of the towne trimmed
vp a great Barke with artificiall fire, to burne
some of their enemies workes, but this deuise succeeded
not.
            In the morning before day, about foure of the clock,
being a full sea, ten shippes entred into the Gollet, but
being forced to stay by reason of foule weather, the
enemy shott furiously at them and sunke three: there
were three slaine, and three hurt, all that was in them
was saued.
            The same day the Seignior of Marquet came into
the towne with foureteene companies of Souldiers,
so as all the Trenches, Spurres, Bulwarkes, and rauelins
of the towne were then manned with new companies.
            
               
In the olde towne neere vnto the olde Church in the
afternoone, there was a Lieutenant and an Ancient
slaine, and a Scottish-man had his leg strooke off.
            The 15. of Ianuary they entertained one another
with Canon and Musket till an houre within night.
            There was great ioy in the towne, as well among
the Souldiers as the Inhabitants for the goodly succours
that were come vnto them.
            There entred yet many Souldiers that night in
Boates, and not one hurt. They of the towne shott
more into the Campe then the enemie did into the
towne, yet there was no man slaine nor hurt.
            The 16. of Ianuary in the beginning of the night
they shott little▪ vpon the morning they of the towne
shott from the West Bulwarke, but they answered
them not.
            All this day was spent in mustering of the Souldiers
in the Towne. There were 81. companies of the
olde garrison, and 31. of the new: and although this
were done with great noise of Drummes and shott of
Muskets, yet the enemie made not aboue three shott
into the towne, which made them of the towne to
thinke they would raise the siege.
            The 17. of Ianuarie, three shippes laden with victualles
and English Beere, entred by the Gollet, at
whom the enemy made many a shott, but could not
touch them. That day there was nothing done, the
enemie onely defaced certaine batteries made vpon
the West and East.
            The 18. day the enemy shott little, yet after dinner with
one Canon shot from the East, they slue 2. Souldiers in
the greene market, & hurt three, and with another shot

from the same place stroake of Captaine Rolles liuetenants
legs, whereof he died presently and hurt two or
three others.
            And for that at the same time the enemies changed
their gardes, they of the Towne plaied with their Canon
and Musket through them, and ouerthrew manie.
            The 19. of Ianuary, there went forth seuen shippes
full of souldiers, at whome the enemy made no shot,
the night was so darke as they coulde not see-them.
            Both before dinner and after, the Canon played a
little more on either side then the day before. They of
the Towne shot against the battery of the Gollet, and
the Sand downes vpon the East, and the enemy from
the same place vpon the Towne, and yet no man was
hurt. But there died daylie sixe or eight of sickenesse.
            The 20. of Ianuary, Generall Vere sent forth some
of his Leapers or aduenturers to take some prisoner of
the enemies Campe, they tooke an Italian, whom the
enemies would haue taken from them but they could
not.
            This night there fell out a great accident at the going
foorth of the shippes. There were three sunke,
whereof two were full of souldiers of the companies
of Captaine Treslon Gistel and Hauttun: the third
was a shippe that brought English Beeere. The Auncient
to Captaine Gistel saued himselfe and lost
his wife: there was also the widow of the deceased
Treasurer or receiuer of the contribution. The C.
Euereuuiin, and a comissarie of the treasurer Doublets.
               
They were about two houres crying for helpe, before
the enemy could goe vnto them, and if any had gone
in time with boates, they might haue retired them from
thence, but seeing that they of the Towne did not succour
them, they sent a Drum through the Water to
the enemies Campe, to require faire warres, else they
would all die with their armes in their handes: the
enemies granted what they demaunded and tooke
them prisoners, and presently the three vessels were
burnt.
            All this night there was little slooting on eyther
side, nor any one slaine nor hurt in the Towne.
            The besieged laboured diligently betwixt the Bulworke
of Pekel and the East Port: In like sort at the
new Hauen: so as the Towne grew daylie stronger,
wherein Generall Vere spared neither paine nor
trauell without feare of any danger, going the round
twice a day and once a night, to see if the Corps
de garde were well furnished, and the Sentinels well
set, especially when the tide was spent.
            The 22. day of Ianuary, they shotte of eyther
side manye firie Bullets and stones, without any
hurt done in the Towne, but that some souldiers
going to fetch away the bordes of some shippes which
had been sunke (ten or twelue dayes before) the enemie
shot at them from the battery of the Gollet and hurt
foure, the which they of the Towne seeing, they shot at
this battery & at that of the East downes from the Bulworke
of Pekel.
            
            That same day Captaine Battemburg (who died of
sickenesse the day before) was honourably buried in
the Towne.
            
               
The 23. day one of the enemies (being very drunke)
came into the Towne, the Generall caused him to be
kept, that no man might speake with him before himselfe.
The Generall also sent a Drumme to the enemy
to know some newes of the prisoners that had beene
taken in the shippes the 20. of this moneth. This fugitiue
said that they had put some of them to death, for
that they were of that company that had yeelded vp S.
Andrews fort
            The besieged shot furiously from the Bulworke of
Pekel, vpon the Gabions which were vppon the Gollet.
            The 24. of Ianuary, the shot of eyther side with firy
Bullets and stones vntill midnight.
            The fugitiue said, that the peeces which were within
the towne vppon Flammemburg, the which are demie
Culuerins, did much harme to the enemies Campe, and
that many souldiers had beene slaine.
            The besieged laboured to fortifie the olde Towne, &
had a 1000. men in worke there.
            The enemy made a new battery on the West
side, betwixt the battery of the Cateyes and the West
downes.
            The enemies changed their gardes in the after noone,
they of the Towne shot at them from the west port and
from Helmont, and many were seene to fall.
            The 25. of Ianuary, they shot furiously of either side,
with firie Bullets and stones.
            From the morning vntill noone al was quiet enough;
but presently after, the tide came with such a fury as all
the Country was couered with water, & the plat-forme
vpon the Gollet was so ouerflowne as they could doe

nothing with their Canon.
            That day an Auncient had his legge shot off with a
Canon which came from the West, and two Liuetenants
of the new Garison died of sickenesse: there was
no man else slaine or hurt.
            The 26. day two French souldiers ranne to the enemie,
they plaied hotly with their Canon and Muskets
against the Towne, who presently repaied it, and it
seemed it was their duties to render carefully such offices
one vnto another.
            The besieged (seeing many goe and come betwixt
Alberts fort, and the forts which are neere vnto the
Towne) shot more vehemently then before.
            They of the Towne shot furiously from Flammemburg
to the west downes, and the enemies from the battery
on the Gollet to Flammemburg.
            
            That day one of the souldiers in garde in the halfe
Moone vpon the Gollet went and yeelded to the enemy.
There was no man slaine nor hurt in the Towne.
            The 27. day the Townsmen shot furiously with their
Canon, Muskets, stones & firy Bullets into the enemies
Campe, so as they were constrained to be all night in
armes vntill the morning that they ceased of all sides.
            They were not seene to labour in any of their fortifications,
although most part of their trenches were
broken.
            The 28. of Ianuary, the besieged finding that the enemie
laboured at the battery which is vpon the Gollet,
they plaied furiously on them from Flammemburg, and
the Bulworke of Pekel,
            
            The same daye one of the souldiers of Captaine
Grenu fled to the enemy, after whome they of the

towne shott in vaine,
            They of the towne hauing discouered some of the
enemies Souldiers gathering of Muscles vpon the
shoare at the end of the Cateyes, they shott at them from
Helmount and slue some.
            This night a small Barke went out of the Gollet
without harme, which was the first since the 20. of the
moneth.
            The 29. in the morning they shott furiouslie of both
sides; yet there was no harme done in the towne: the
rest of the day they were as quiet as the warres had
beene ended.
            The enemy laboured no where, but they of the
towne were still about their new hauen and East-port,
            The 30. the besieged seeing many of the enemies
going and comming betwixt the Cateyes and Albert
fort, they planted against them those Canons which
was vpon the West-port, Helmont and Sand-hil, with
the which they slue many, for the Bulwarke of Sand-hill
commands ouer all the Sea-shore, euen vnto the
fort of Albert.
            
            The 31. of Ianuary they of the towne shott so furiously
from the Bulwarke of Pekel and Spaine, vpon ten
or twelue small vessels which the enemie kept in a little
chanell new made, and were new vnlading them, as
they forced them to leaue their worke: yet the enemy
made not one shott into the towne, but onely with sierie
Bullets and stones against the ships that were within
the gollet, to the which they did no harme.
            At night two ships went out of the Hauen, and one
Shaloup came in, at whom the enemie shott but hurt
them not.
            
               
The 1. of Februarie the enemies changing their
guardes after their accustomed maner vpon the West,
they of the towne shott many volees of Canon and
Musket after them.
            The 2. of February the enemies stopt vp a Blockhouse
neere vnto Cowe-bridge, and did fortifie it,
and did inuiron the Forte of Grossendurst with Palissadoes.
            The Townes-men thinking they would also worke
at the Plat-forme which is vpon the Gollet, shott furiously
at it from the Bulwarke of Pekel: the enemie
sent them many Musket shotte and fierie Bullets,
yet no man was slaine in the towne, and but three
hurt.
            The 3. of February Generall Vere sent an other
Drumme vnto the Campe, for that he whom he had
sent the 22. of Ianuary (to learne newes of the prisoners
taken the 20. day) was not returned: this brings
answer that the first had beene deteined vntill that
the Count Bouquoy had newes from the Court, vpon
the demaund which had beene made vnto him by
Generall Vere, touching the prisoners, the which (as
the Trumpet reported) were 90. and had beene all
sent together to Bruges, and that some sicke and hurt
men had perished in the Sea when as the ships were
burnt; and that the enemies had saued a Maister of a
shippe and his Boye, who were fled to the top of the
Mast, which appeared yet aboue the water: and that
some of the prisoners had beene slaine in colde bloud
and some hanged, for that (by their owne confessions)
they had beene in S. Andrews Fort.
            The 14. of February about mid-night, the enemie

shott some 80. Canon shott against a ship that was
not seruiceable before the East port, for that they did
see some Souldiers in it that brake it in peeces, three of
them had their legges shott off, and some others
hurt.
            The same day a Souldier being in a lodging neere
the West-gate with a pott of Beere in his hand was
slaine.
            In the meane time the besieged shott furiously
from the Bulworke of Pekel at the platforme of the
Gollet.
            Three Souldiers of the towne being fled to the enemie,
came presently forth in view of the towne, threatning
(with spits furnished with roast-meat) as if they
had wanted victuals, the which was false.
            The enemie laboured vpon the South-west neere
vnto the Fort of Grossendurst, at a Rampart which is
in an olde wall, the which they raised vp higher, and
in the middest did builde a Corps de guarde, about
the which they made defences: they of the towne
knew not what they would make, no more then of
Grossendurst, about the which they had made Palissadoes,
for that they had not vsed them in all this
siege.
            The towne was then inuironed with 27. Fortes
and Block-houses, in the fortification whereof they
laboured dayly.
            In the beginning of the night of the fift of Februarie,
they shott of both sides with fierie Bullets and
stones, but in the day time they shott nothing so
much.
            The 6. of February in the night they of the towne

made many Canon-shott against a certaine worke
which the enemie began to raise at the ende of their
batterie on the Cateyes, more aduancing towards the
Sea, to plant Canon thereon, besides those that were
already, to shoote more easily at the ships comming in
and going out of the Hauen.
            The besieged shott also continually at the batterie
on the Gollet, from whence the enemies shott to the
sea dike, which is before the fortifications of the towne.
            That day nor the day before there was no man
slaine in the towne, onely one Souldier that was shott
through, standing Sentinell in the olde towne vpon
the East-rauelin.
            The night before the 7. of February the enemy shot
many Arrowes with Letters into the Towne, by the
which they promised to giue good entertainment to
those that would yeeld vnto them; saying that they
had not sent them which yeelded vnto the Galleys,
and that the report of some of theirs which had fled
into the towne was false.
            They laboured also this night at their worke on the
North of their batterie of Cateyes, and had raised it almost
equall: they wrought also at their Ramper neere
to Grossendurst.
            
            They of the towne wrought also at their new Hauen,
and in the fortifications of the old towne.
            The 8. of February they shott all night on both sides
with fierie Bullets and stones, there was no man slaine
within the towne.
            In the morning a Souldier of the halfe Moone
ranne vnto the enemie.
            Before noone a French Souldier passed the Pikes,

for that he had slaine another souldier trecherously, he
had beene discouered by the meanes of his Hat, which
fell downe in flying awaye after that he had done the
deede.
            The besieged laboured continually at the rampares
of the olde Towne.
            The 9. of February, they shot little of eyther side.
            There were some souldiers imbarked in the Hauen
which had staied there aboue three weekes attending
the winde, to saile into Zeland, whereof there died many
daylie of sickenesse.
            The 10. of February, they shot on both sides with firy
Bullets, stones and Muskets vntill midnight, and after
they ceased.
            The 11. day about two houres after midnight there
went 12. ships out by the Gollet, at whom the enemie
made aboue 60. shot from their battery which is vpon
the Gollet, and onely shot one betwixt winde and water,
the which returned into the Towne without any
more harme: there was no speech of any slaine or hurt
that day in the Towne.
            The 12. of February, there came 15. ships to Ostend,
laden with munition, victuals and souldiers, whereof
two by the Marriners fault ranne on ground neere to
the enemies battery vpon the Gollet, the one was full
of Holland Beere, some 36. or 40. yardes on the North
side from the battery, in a place whereas the Towne
souldiers durst not go for feare of the Canon, the enemy
set fire of it in the morning, but it would not take;
the other was laden with English Beere, as neere the
battery on the South side, or neerer, in a place whereas
they of the Towne could not shoote at them; the souldiers

of the halfe Monne which were 250. yardes of
drew out all the Beere and other things, when as the
enemy durst not shew himselfe to hinder them, for
feare of the Canon of Pekel and the Bulworke of
Spaine, but they of the Towne could not haue the
other shippe: a Marriner had his legge shot off, and a
woman with two others were hurt.
            The enemyes within few dayes had much aduanced
their battery of Cateyes, two yardes towardes
the North, and beganne againe to worke: Generall
Vere caused a demie Culuerin to bee planted against
them, the which this night, (after a lowe Water,)
made twenty shotte to hinder their worke, and for
that this peece was vppon Helmont, the enemyes
made foure shot from the East against it, whereof some
passed ouer Helmont, and went into their owne quarter
which is vpon the Cateyes, wherein they hurt themselues,
as they might see which were in garde at the
Porke-espike and Helmont.
            
            This day fiue souldiers of the Towne went and yeelded
to the enemy, fearing to be punished for mutinies
and disobediences.
            The thirteene of February in the night, the enemies
carried away by peece meale whatsoeuer was in the
shippe that was runne on ground of the North
side of their batterye, not daring then to goe by
day.
            The same night the Leapers and aduenturers
brought a Spanish auncient prisoner into the Towne.
            The 14. the enemie laboured all night at their battery
of Cateyes, and raised vppe the ende which they

had begunne the daye before, almost equall with it,
although they shotte continually at them from the
Towne.
            This night a shippe went foorth of the Hauen
without harme, and yet the enemie shotte much at
them.
            There entred many souldiers in shaloupes from the
shippes of warre into the Towne and no man was
hurt.
            The Spanish Auncient taken prisoner the day before,
saide, that the enemy had small hope to take
Ostend, and that the Arch-duke continued the siege
against the aduice of the Councell of warre, and was
greeued that he did not raise the siege wholy, when
as he went to succour Hertzeghenbusch, the which was
a good pretext, but seeing it was so, that for his owne
reputation and for the honour of the King of Spaine,
it did import him to continue the siege, he would not
now raise it: moreouer hee saide that there were
12000. foote and seuen hundred horse before the
Towne, and that they had promised fiue stiuers in
money and two in bread a daye to euery souldier
but they were ill paide: and that at the last assault,
his highnesse had lost the choice of all his whole armie,
most part of them being Spaniardes which had
serued the King in those Countries and else where, and
that the enemy was about some inuention to stoppe vp
the Hauen.
            As for the fortifications of the towne: there is in the
olde Towne against the Sea, from Sand-hill towardes
the North, foure strong Blocke-houses, vpon euery

one of the which there are two Canons, and farther
into the new Towne they haue made a newe
Rampart, and newe Ditch, and the olde Rampars
(which runne along the Sea) had beene fortified
within.
            At this worke and such like there were a 100. men labouring
from one Sunne to another, one halfe laboured
from the night to the morning and rested the day,
and the other from morning vntil night & then rested,
and they were paied by the Commissaries of the Stats
going from their worke.
            The 15. of February two ships went out of the hauen
at night without any hurt.
            The enemy set that daye 3. sentinels on the East side
more then he was accustomed, so as the halfe Moone
was alwayes inuironed with them.
            The besieged thought it was by reason of the
troupes that were arriued, for there were 15. companies
come into the Towne with Colonell Edmondt: yea
some in barkes in the day time, at whom the enemy shot
and hurt two Marriners.
            The enemy laboured also that day vpon the North
side of the battery of Cateyes, not ceasing for all the
Towne Canon which plaied continually▪ they did
also shoote, but there was no man slaine nor hurt in
the Towne, onelye one Carpenter, who had his
arme stroake off with a Canon vpon the West bulworke.
            The 16. of February they might see the three extraordinary
sentinelles vpon the East, for that the enemy
feared a sallie from the Towne beeing little lesse then
6000. men in it.
            
               
There were (besides this number) some Souldiers
in the ships of warre at Anchor before the towne, the
which could not enter by reason of a tempest: yet
some being more hastie, entred in small Barkes, one
of them through errour by reason of the night, landed
his men of the enemies side, and so returned towards
the shippes, the Souldiers perceiuing that they
were of the enemies side, ranne to the waters side,
where by good hap they found an other Barke which
came to land other Souldiers, of whom they demanded
succour; the Marriner hauing carried away his
men, came to fetch them, but in the meane time the
enemy had discouered them, and pursued them, so as
they were forced to runne vp to the chinne in the water
to saue themselues, and there was not any one of
them lost.
            The 17. of February the enemie began to shoote with
his canon and stones into the towne, & they answered
them with the like, the which continued all night.
            They of the towne shott all the morning from Sand-hill,
Helmont, and the West-gate Bulwarke, at the batterie
of Cateyes, although they could not perceiue that
the enemie had laboured there that night or the night
before.
            The 18. of February in the beginning of the night
they shott furiously on either side, both with Canon
and Musket; and as they changed their guardes, Captaine
Bernards Ancient had his hand wherewith he
held his coulours strooke off with a shott. These Canonades
continued all night, they of the towne slept
not, but gaue them their exchange, and in the morning
they ceased a little.
            
               
There came an Italian flying into the towne, who
(by his saying) had slaine one of his companions at
play. He said among other things, that the Arch-duke
was yet resolued not to depart from the towne vntill he
were maister of it: and that the enemie had resolued to
make a Bridge vpon the West-hauen, to passe into the
olde towne, and on the East-side they would make a
ditche from the Downes vnto the Gollet, and besides
that, they would spoile all the sluces and chanels which
went into the West-gollet: and moreouer he spake
something touching the discontentment of the Souldiers
in the Campe.
            After dinner the enemie shott little into the towne,
and there was no speech of any slaine or hurt.
            The 19. of February, as they were changing of their
guards in the towne, the enemy played furiously at
them both with Canon and Musket, and Captaine
Morgans Ancient with three other Souldiers were
slaine at one shott, and some others hurt: and soone
after there were two other Souldiers slaine, not farre
from Generall Vere, who was vpon Helmont, speaking
with the Colonels Marquet, Lohn, and Edmondt.
            
            This night there entred into the Hauen two ships
laden with men, and three with poulder, at whom the
enemie shott but could not hit them. There was also
some Canon spent on eyther side without any hurt to
the towne.
            The 20. of February the enemies Canon played all
night, and slue Sir Horatio Veres Cooke in his Kitchin.
            The same night there entred 6. ships into the Gollet,
whereof two onely came into the towne, the other
foure by the ignorance and fault of the Marriners ran a

shoare neere vnto the enemies batterie, one was laden
with Turfes, an other with Piles and Plankes, and the
other two with Beere and other commodities: the enemies
did what they could to borde them, but they were
hindered by the continuall shooting from the towne,
which shott at them from Flammembourg and the
Bulwarke of Pekel: most of the men saued themselues
in the halfe Moone, but the women and children
were taken by the enemie. They of the towne
seeing the tide come in, and that the enemie would
take these ships, they ceased not to shoote fierie Bullets
at them, so as they beate them in peeces, the greatest
part of the marchandize was seene floating vpon the
water, the rest burnt with the ships.
            The enemy greeued for the losse of this bootie, shot
from all their batteries vpon the towne, they slue two
Souldiers and hurt some others.
            The enemie going to worke vpon the North side
of their batterie of Catteyes, they of the towne shott at
them to hinder them.
            The besieged were not idle, but laboured to fortifie
the towne against the violence of the Sea, for that the
Marriners said they should within few dayes haue a
great tide.
            The 21. of February there was little shooting on eyther
part. The enemies laboured carefully to raise their
trenches and defences vpon the West, and that night
they did much aduance their batterie of Cateyes.
            
            Two ships more straied out of their course towards
the enemies campe, neere to the downes vpon the East,
but they of the towne thought they had done it expresly
to sell their marchandise the better, seeing the enemies

shaloups board thē without any shew of hatred.
            The enemies sent to the towne the wiues of sixe
Souldiers whom they had taken in the foure former
ships, after they had had their pleasures of them, and
turned them away naked, with other outrages, yea
their little children were black with stripes.
            This day there was little shooting, nor any man hurt
in the towne.
            The 22. of February in the beginning of the night,
they shott furiously for an houre and a halfe one against
an other, the besieged continued all night, euen when
the tide was spent, to hinder their enemies worke. In
the morning they might discouer where the enemies
had laboured vpon the North of their batterie of Catteyes,
and raised it somewhat.
            Moreouer the enemie laboured vpon the West corner
of the West-downes, the which they fortified in
such sort, as if they ment to stay there ten yeares.
            After dinner, a poore woman with childe, the wife
of one of Captaine Weinbergens Souldiers (who was in
guarde in the halfe Moone) being gone forth to gather
vp some boards of the broken ships, was slaine most
barborously by one of the enemies, before she could
be succoured by them of the towne: there was none
else slaine or hurt that day.
            The 23. of February the enemie shott much at the
ships that lay in the towne ditches, discouering them
easily for that the tide was high and the billow great.
            After dinner M. Georges ingenier of the towne, being
busie about the making of some fire-workes, the next
house being by negligēce set on fire, fired his worke, &
slue him with three of his seruants, & hurt many others:

the enemy seeing this, shot both from East & west vpon
the Towne for an houre together, without any harme
doing: the fire was presently quenched by such as are
appointed for the like accidents.
            The 24. of February in the beginning of the night,
the enemy shot firie Bullets and great stones into the
Towne.
            The worke which they had begon vpon the North
side of the battery of Cateyes fell downe for the most
part, as also that which they had made vnder the corner
of the West downes, and that which they had begunne
vpon the West downes was in like sort ouerthrown,
for that they were almost all made of the white
Sand of the downes, and the water had washt it away
at the foote.
            The olde towne was not freed from this nights ruine,
the enemie seeing that the last night the tide had made
many breaches in the Sea dike, neere vnto the East gate,
they began to shoote from their battery of the Gollet to
ouerthrow it quite.
            The Gabions which were vpon the south side of this
battery to the number of 35. were this night carried away
by the sea, for that they were not full, and serued
onely for Blindes and couerings, for the chiefe battery
is vpon the North, and there are 36. Gabions,
            The enemy shot continually vpon the olde Towne
and the Porke-espike, to increase the harme which the
Sea had done them.
            The Water was so high that daye, as the Country
vpon the South and West was a League about ouerflowne,
and all the enemies trenches and Blockhouses
inuironed with water.
            
               
The English square was also in the water, the Countercarfes
vpon the west were pearced, and there came
much water into the Towne both by the East & West.
            There was a breach of ten yardes long in the sea dike
neere the East gate; the Bulworke of Pekel began to fal,
the new Hauen was spoiled and the olde Towne much
indamaged.
            Part of the halfe Moone vpon the Gollet was fallen,
whilst this great tide lasted, the enemy made aboue
1800. Canon shot against the Towne, and especially against
the dike and other places that were endamaged:
yet there were few slaine or hurt.
            They of the Towne answered them in like sort
from all quarters, and it was a terrible thing to see, for
both the Towne and the Campe seemed as if they had
beene all one fire: the alarme was generall, not so
much for the shot, as for the great ruine the Sea made
in diuers partes of the dike, Port, Rampars and defences.
            The 25. day they might see diuers workes vnder
the West downes right against the Porke espike ouerthrowne,
and that which had beene begunne on
the North of the battery of Cateyes to be much defaced:
they without laboured at the West downes.
            They of the Towne shot from the Bulworke of Pekel
into the Campe, & the enemy into the Towne, there
was one souldier slaine vpon Sand hill and two hurt
passing vpon the rampars.
            The 26. of February, they shot on eyther side vntill
midnight, and then ceased a while.
            Before noone the aduenturers of the towne brought in
one of the enemies prisoner, who at the first would not

speake, seeming simple and a foole, but in the end hee
said that two regiments were gone from the Campe into
Brabant.
            There was great ioy in the Towne, the besieged hauing
discouered vpon the West some shippes comming
from Zeland.
            
            The 27. of February, at the changing of the gardes
two souldiers had eyther of them a leg shot off.
            The same night foure ships went out of the Port, of
the which the enemy shot one through, yet by the dexterity
of the Marriners it was drawne forth.
            The Maister of the workes labouring in the Counterscarfe
was shot into the raines of the backe with a Musket,
and two others were hurt.
            The enemie began to repaire the corner of the west
downes, and they drew out great store of goods out of
the boates that were in the new chanell.
            The 28. of February (the water being high) there entred
8. saile into the Hauen wherof the enemy shot two
through, but for that the one got vnto the Rauelin of
the Towne and the other neere to the Sea dike, they
were presently succoured by them of the towne, and all
saued that was within them.
            
               Colonel Dorth entred the towne with a number of souldiers
in shaloupes, and some comissaries & treasurers of
the States, with mony for the souldiers and labourers.
            The Counterscarfe (which had beene broken) was
repaired this night by the diligence of them that commanded
in the Towne: and likewise the olde Towne
(which had beene much indamaged) was repaired and
put in defence; so as the besieged feared not their enemies
on that side.
            
               
After dinner the besieged shot from Flammemburg,
where they had planted two demy culuerins, at certain
souldiers that were vpon the Sands, neere vnto their
boates, at the foote of the downes, who presently fled.
            The enemy shot sometimes towardes the Sea, against
the ships that were in the roade: the ships of warre also
in going and comming shot at the Arch-dukes Campe.
            That day in the after noone foure of the enemies
souldiers came & yeelded themselues into the Towne,
and being pursued neere, the besieged gaue them their
hands: they said, their men had beene on the East side
foure dayes together in battaile, fearing least they of the
Towne (who had receiued in so many souldiers) would
make some sally out vpon them.
            About that time the Spaniardes began to mutine in
the Arch-dukes Campe,The Spaniards mutine for want of paie. and said openly, that they had
brought them vnto the slaughter yea vnto hel, many of
them conspired together to carry away the Arch-duke
and the Infanta (if they could) to Newport, to haue
paiement of that which was owing them, by the meanes
of a generall mutinie: this was discouered and ten or
twelue of the principall, (whereof one was all aparaled
with golde) were strāgled: Some priuat men did write
from Andwerp, that the Arch-duke did fortifie his
Campe more against the secret practises of his owne
men, then against his enemies: and that the Spaniardes
hauing made some new practises, had beene discouered
by some of them, & ten of the chiefe were presently
hanged: they of Andwerp by their letters lamented their
miserable estate,Complaints of them of Antwerp. for that they could hardly recouer any
victualles, and that with great impositions, and yet they
did see no aduancement in their affaires, nor any better

hope to come: as for Ostend, there was lesse hope to
take it then the first day: and the desseigne which had
beene made to stop the gollet, and to hinder the going
in and out of shippes, had failed, spending their time at
three platformes which batter the towne in ruine, to
tire the besieged with their Canon, hauing no likelihood
to force the towne, in the which there were
aboue 6000. men in garrison, and they receiued fresh
men dayly, with munition, victuals, and all other commodities
by the gollet, in despight of the platforme
which is thereon.
            The night before the first of Marche it was a great
mist, the enemie tooke this occasion, fastning a Cable
crosse the Gollet, where the ships should passe, tying
nine pipes vnto it, this was tyed to three Anchors, to
stay the ships all together, and then to sinke them with
the Canon: but the shippes by chance stirred not: this
fogge being past, the besieged discouered the pipes,
and by the meanes of an other darke cloude which
came presently, they sent some Boates to see what it
was, who cut the Cable and brought it into the towne,
and so this inuention was made fruitelesse.
            From the beginning vntill midnight both the Canon
and Musket played much on either side.
            The same night there came fiue Barkes to Ostend laden
with fresh fish, at whom the enemy shott but could
not hit them.
            This day three Souldiers of the towne and a boye
went and yeelded themselues to the enemie, and some
dayes after a French Fourrier, who had mutined.
            After dinner they of the towne brought in a prisoner,Great necessitie in the campe.
who sayd there was great necessitie in the armie,

many sick, and great mortalitie, and that no man durst
presume to speake of raising the siege, nor discourage
his companions, nor report any ill newes touching the
siege, vnder paine of corporall punishment: and that
their Highnesses had resolued not to leaue the towne
before they were maisters thereof, according to the
aduise sent out of Spaine, whatsoeuer it did cost, or
whatsoeuer could chance: and that all the Germaine
Captaines (which had serued their Highnesses) were
gone into Germanie to leauie troopes. and that they
were about some preparations to make the gollet fruitlesse,
and to hinder the entrie of ships.
            They might see the enemie busied still to repaire the
corner of the West-downes, but they could not discerne
them working at the Cateyes, there was no man
slaine nor hurt that day within the towne.
            The night of the 2. of March there was little shooting
on eyther-side vntill midnight, that (the tide being
gone) they of the towne shott vpon the Campe,
to hinder their enemies worke.
            This night a ship went forth, and none came in, yet
many Souldiers came into the towne in Shaloupes,
which entred by the North-hauen. In the afternoone
they might see the enemies drawing forth diuers marchandise
and commodities out of the Boates which
were in the new chanell vpon the East.
            The 3. of March in the beginning of the night
there was little shooting, yet one shott strooke of the
legges of a Lieutenant and an Ancient vpon Flammemburg.
            
            The night being darke and the tide high, there entred
50. saile into the towne, at whom the enemie

made 40. shott and neuer hurt them.
            A little before day there entred eight saile more,
there were yet many in the roade, and others which
passed fetching the winde, to enter at night when it
should be darke, the enemie shott at them, yet could
not hurt them.
            And for that it was a great mist that day, and also
there was a generall muster, there was little shooting
nor any man slaine nor hurt in the towne.
            The 4. of March (the tide being high) there entred
21. saile into the gollet, the enemie shott two through,
whereof the one was laden with Bauins, and entred
into the Hauen, and the other with Turfes, the
which by the error of the Marriners who were blinded
with the smoake of the Canon, ranne on ground
neere vnto the enemies batterie, the men were all saued
and brought into the towne, which done the enemie
set fire on the ship.
            All that day both the Canon and Musket played
hotly on either side: there were foure souldiers strooke
with one shott vpon the Bulwarke of Pekel, whereof
two died presently.
            The night of the 5. of March, two small Barkes
with Generall Veres horses and baggage went forth, at
whom the enemie shott but hurt them not.
            Before the breake of day the enemie shott many firie
Bullets and stones into the towne, and strooke off a
Marriners legge which was in the new-hauen.
            The Sea dike neere to the West gate, hauing beene
broken, the enemy might see from their batterie of the
Gollet, the Souldiers as they went and came in the
towne, and shott at them, yet they hurt few.
            
               
In the after-noone they hurt foure labourers which
wrought in the Sea dike neere vnto the East-port.
            A little before, the Estates had sent an Ingenier into
the towne, who with another (which had continued
there all the siege) laboured diligently in the fortifications
of the towne, the labourers wrought cheerefully,
for that they were well payed.
            The 7. of March they shott fierie Bullets and stones
on eyther side vntill mid-night, and then the Canon
and Musket played. They did easily see the enemy labour
at the Catteyes, but they suffered the corner of the
West-downes to go dayly to ruine.
            And for that at the West Square and at the Polder
(which is without the towne) there was some thing
ruined, they began to labour to fortifie them with trenches,
defences, and ditches of 60. foote, and the counterscarpes
which are about them: the which being finished,
the enemie had no meanes to come neere the
towne on that side, nor by the North-west, for the
towne was exceeding well fortified on that side, and
almost impregnable.
            The tide was so high that day by reason of a strong
Northerly winde and a tempest, as all the enemies Gabions
and Block-houses were inuironed with water.
            About noone a Souldiers wife being neere the East-gate
where the dike was broken, had her head shott off
with a Canon, and a Souldier both his legges.
            Generall Vere departed,Generall Vere leaues Ostend. and Colonel Frederike Van
Dorp commanded in the towne, with the Colonels
Dort Marquet and Edmont.
            
            The night before the 8. of March about midnight the
water being high, there entred 34. saile by the gollet into

the towne, at whom the enemies made but two shot, although
presently after the shot aboue 80. in one of these
was the baggage and prouision of Colonel Dorp.
            
            In the meane time they of the Towne shot from Pekel
Bulworke, and from that of Spaine, against the enemies
battery, which kept them from shooting at the
ships, not seeing them by reason of the great smoake.
            In the afternoone they discouered many boates going
to Alberts fort and there discharged.
            They did also see the enemy inlarge & raise his battery
vpon the Gollet towardes the South, and repaired
their battery at the foote of the East downes vpon the
South side, the which they had let fall this Winter, and
that they made a trench beneath the East downes betwixt
the two Cateyes, to the end they might go frō one
battery to another couered from the Towne Canon.
            There was no man slaine nor hurt in the Towne that
day.
            The 9. of March euery one was set to worke in the
newe Hauen, which had bin indamaged with the tide,
and they hoped to repaire it speedily.
            Within 14. dayes there were 18. or 20. souldiers
which had fled out of the towne vnto the enemy, some
of them were taken againe and one of them was hanged
the daye before: the enemy seeing this lightnesse,
thought it a good meanes to weaken the garison of the
Towne, shooting many letters into it, where by they
promised to giue them good entertainment that should
yeeld vnto them, or else a pasport with some money to
returne into their Countries.
            About two of the clocke in the afternoone, the first
ship went out by the new Hauen, the enemies made

many shott at it, whereof one ouerthrew a Pipe that
stood vpon the hatches. There came also two Frigats
against it, there were two companies of Souldiers in
the ship which shewed themselues too soone, and shott
at the Frigates, and presently there came foure great
Barkes from the towne to succour them, which made
the Frigats retire to their trenches or Forte neere the
Downes.
            This ship went to the Fleet with a Northerly winde,
Colonel Edmont gaue vnto the Pilote two Rose-nobles
to drinke.
            Colonel Lohn parted from Ostend to goe into Zeland.
            
            The 10. of March they shott fierie Bullets and stones
on eyther side.
            After midnight the water being high, there went 33.
saile out of the Hauen,A new Hauen at Ostend. at whom the enemies shott,
but did them no great harme, they went forth by the
new Hauen, and at the same instant the besieged shott
furiously against the battery of the gollet from whence
they shott most at the ships.
            The enemy laboured dayly at this batterie, as also
at those which are aboue, and at the foote of the
downes: they might also see that the night before they
had laboured on the North side of their batterie of
Catteyes.
            
            They laboured also at a new batterie behinde their
gabions vpon a mountaine of sand, the which they
made square with Bauins and Sand, and raised it very
high.
            A little after dinner there came 16. saile into the
towne by the new Hauen, at whom the enemie shott

much but to no end: They shot also from diuers batteries
at the people which shewed themselues openly
in great numbers to see the entrie of these shippes: their
were 9. or 10. strooken with one shot, some slaine, others
hurt. Their were three also slaine vpon the Bulworke
of Pekel, foure at the new hauen, & three in the
olde Towne: It was strange to see the folly of this people,
which put themselues in danger by multitudes,
when any shippe came in by day, without any other
subiect.
            Besides these ships, there entred many souldiers and
boats into the Towne that day.
            The 11. of March, in the night there entred 13. ships
more into the Towne by the Gollet, whereof three
were shot through, yet little or no harme done. One
of them beeing laden with turffes went behinde the
halfe Moone, whether the enemy could not goe: so as
within 10. or 11. dayes there had entred little lesse then
a hundred saile into the Towne, laden with all commodities,
in open day or by moone light by the Gollet,
they might haue entred more safely by the new Hauen
which was now repaired.
            This night there were fiue souldiers strooke on the
East side with one Canon shot, whereof two dyed.
            There were two others slaine in the South square
where they laboured.
            There was also at the greene Market a souldier cut
in two in the midst with a great shot, and another had
both his legs strooke of.
            The 12. of March the enemies shot many stones into
the towne, & canon shot at the west rauelin, aboue two
houres together, to keep thē of the towne frō working.
            
               
That day there went seuen shippes out of Ostende
at whome the enemy shotte but hurt them not: And
for that the North-winde was somewhat loude, the
the trenches and Blocke-houses of the enemies were
full of Water as if it had beene a great tempest.
            This day they shot as of custome, yet there was no
man slaine nor hurt in the Towne.
            The thirteenth of March no shippe went in nor
out.
            The foureteene daye was as quiet as if there had
been no enemy before the Towne, there was one souldier
slaine in the olde Towne, and another had his legs
strooke of.
            About noone the tide being spent, twelue horsemen
of the Towne went out vpon the Sandes neere vnto
the Cateyes, thinking to drawe foorth some of the enemies,
vpon whom the Towne Canon (which was planted
for the nonce) should haue plaied, but no man appeared.
            They might see a great number of vessels in the new
channell on the East-side.
            The 15. of March there parted twenty fiue saile
from Flessingue, laden with souldiers, munition and victualles,
the which arriued all together at Ostend. The
comming in and going of the ships was in a maner like
all the rest of this yeare, as in like sort their ordinary
shooting, the which the reader may imagin by that
which hath bin written and that which followeth: we
will leaue this discourse (the which is happily too long)
because we will not weary him, and will talke of other
accidents which haue past this yeare, to take our first
traine in the yeare, 1603.
            
               
The 5. of Iuly 1602, the Commaunders charged
them of the towne, that at the breake of day they should
celebrate the first day of the siege of Ostend, shooting
of all ther Canon insteede of belles, for they had none,
and euen the women and children were commaunded
to beate vpon kettles, pannes, and other things to make
a great noise, which put all the Campe into alarme, not
knowing what it might be: There was also a Sermon
made to giue thankes vnto God for the miraculous
preseruation of the Towne this yeare, with harty praiers
that it would please to him preserue it so hereafter.
            The Arch-duke hauing certaine intelligence that the
armie of the States vnder the command of Prince Maurice,
               Prince Maurice comes into Brabant.
               
past by Brabant to come to succour Ostend, he caused
his Campe to be fortified against the Towne and
intrenched himselfe without, to attend this armie: these
newes did wonderfully reioyce them of the Towne,
who hoped to be freed by this meanes, but for some
let, or occasion that was offred, his Excellencie past
not into Flanders.
            
            Newes being come vnto the Campe that Prince Maurice
had laied siege to Graue, and the Arch-duke fearing
nothing behinde,Prince Maurice besiegeth Graue. resolued to finde some meanes to
presse Ostend more straightly, and to stop the passage
for the ships, to this end he causeth Saulcisses to be made
(so they call certaine things made of wood, ryed together
very close with hoopes of yron, like vnto a tunne,
but bigger and longer, behinde the which a horseman
might easily couer himselfe, and to roule it they must
haue 50. or 60. men) the which were planted on the
East side of the towne vpon the Gollet, & behinde they

wrought presently, although the towne shott furiously
vpon them.
            The enemie also made very great gabions which
they filled with very great stones, to resist the Sea and
the shott from the towne.
            Whilest these things were doing before Ostend,
Prince Maurice did all he could to take Graue both
by mine and batterie, forcing it to yeeld the 20. of September
1602. and made himselfe be knowne for the
lawfull heire and Lord thereof, in view of the Admirall
of Arragon Lieutenant generall to the Arch-duke, who
incamped neere vnto the towne to succour it, but seeing
his Excellencie very well intrenched, and that he
should preuaile nothing, and that his troopes did leaue
him dayly, in the end he retired without any exploite
doing worthy the remembring.
            The Arch-duke hauing intelligence that P. Maurice
had taken the towne of Graue, was more earnest then
before to stop the passage of the ships; the which notwithstanding
all the inuentions his men could finde
out, haue entred all the time of the siege, and a great
number by the gollet at the Canons mouth, oftentimes
at noone day without feare of any danger.
            Their inuencion of Saulcisses proued also fruitlesse
for this desseine, they tryed yet many other inuentions,
both to fill vp the Gollet, and to annoy the ships in
passing.
            Among other inuentions the enemie filled a great
number of sacks with sand to stop vp the gollet, hauing
tried this deuice in the chanell neere to Alberts fort, but
heere it proued fruitlesse by reason of the violence of
the tide.
            
               
That which most afflicted the besieged this yeare
was the sicknesse that was among them,Sickenesse in Ostend and in the Campe. whereof some
dyed dayly: neither was the enemy free from it.
            The Estates of the confederate Prouinces, considering
that the discommodities the souldiers suffered was
the cause of this sicknesse,Ostend new built. they caused the towne to be
new built, and the streetes were so disposed, as the enemies
Canon could do them little harme, dying at the
first thing it hit, so as of 50. shott not one did hit a man,
and when any such thing chanced, they held it for an
extraordinarie accident, which did not trouble them,
and this made the sicknesse to cease.
            This yeare 8. great Galleys were rigged and made
ready at Seuille in Spaine,
               Galleys of Spaine vnder Spignola.
                their chiefe commander was
Frederike Spignola: that wherein Spignola went was
called S. Lewis, the Captaine thereof was Redon. The
second the Trinitie, the Captaine Pedro de Fergas. The
third the Occasion, the Captaine Auila: the fourth Saint
Philip, the Captaine Don Rodrigo de Neruaiz. The fift
the Morning, the Captaine Pedro Collado Tenorro. The
sixt S. Iuan, the Captaine Hernando de Vergas. The seauenth
Hiacintho, the Captaine Christouall de Mongis:
and the eight La Padilla, the Captaine Iuan de Sossa.
There were 400. men in euery one of these Galleys
besides the slaues, and eight hundred Souldiers
they tooke in as they past at Lisbone. These Galleys
went their course towards England, and were sent
by the King of Spaine with some others which the
Arch-duke had, to scoure along the coast of England,
Holland, and Zeland, to interrupt their trade, and to
annoy them of Ostend by Sea▪ Two of them, the Trinitie
and the Occasion were sunke by Sir Richard Luson
               
Knight, then Admirall in those Seas for the Queene
of England, vpon the coast of Spaine and Portugall,
about the Cape of Sicambre; afterwards these Galleys
tooke their course towards the Lowe-Countries, and
the third of October according to the new computation,
they were first discouered by two of the Statesmen
of warre: the one was called the Tyger, whereof
Iacob Pieterssen-Mol was Captaine: and the other the
Pellican, whereof Timen Luberts was Captaine: these
two Shippes followed and chased these sixe Galleys.
            The same day Robert Mansell Knight, then Admirall
for the Queene of England in the narrow Seas,
lying betwixt Douer and Calais, discouered them also:
and sent presently to Captaine Ionas, Captaine of one
of the Kings ships called the Aduantage, commanding
him to goe presently to Calais, and along all the coast
of Flanders, and to giue and allarme with Canonadoes,
especially to giue aduertisement of the comming
of these Galleys to the States Fleete, which
laye then vppon the coast of Flanders; the which
the Captaine did performe most faithfully and verie
speedily.
            The Admirall did also oftentimes shoote of the
greatest peece of Ordinance in his shippe, to aduertise
and call an other of the Kings shippes called the
answer, whereof Bredgate was Captaine, who ridde
at an Anchor South of the Downes, and he presentlie
set saile.
            Soone after there arriued 4. ships of the Estates of
Holland, of the which the Seignior Opdā
                & Henszbruch
               
was Admirall, lying then sicke at Porthmouth in England,
in whose absence and by his appointment, Iohn
Adrianssen Cant, commanded in quality of vice admirall
the Captaines of the three others were Garbrandt
Iohanss Stahl. Heinric Hartman and Garbrandt Ianssen of
Enchuysen, who (hauing hard this shooting) had put
themselues to Sea towardes France. In the ende they
discouered the galleys, and seeing them to bend their
course towards the coast of England, they turned their
prowes against them, and so did Captaine Bredgate, of
whom we haue spoken, all these together chased them
vntill they came right against Douer where they ouer
tooke them and played furiously vpon them with their
Canon, breaking some of the Chaines whereunto their
slaues were tyed, whereof a good many leaped ouer
board, and some recouered the land; but for that it was
darke, and the Sea was calme neere the shoare, they escaped
for that time. A while after the Moone began to
shine, when as they might discerne the 6. galleys row
before thē aboue the cape of Douer, bending presently
towards the Goeyng (the which is a very dāgerous banke
called by the English Goodwin Sands) & a good gaile of
wind rising, they hoised as much saile as they could wel
beare to chase the galleis; they being come almost right
against Grauelin, there comes happily against them frō
the coast of Flanders, a man of war of the States called
the Mackerell, whereof Gerard Olie was Captaine, who
charged the galley Saint Philip, and slue 60. men,
yet she got of his handes, and hoised her saile to flie,
the viceadmirall seeing this, with his shippe called the
Moone, ranne withall his force betwixt the great mast
and the poupe of Saint Phillip so as he brake an Anchor

and some Yron worke of his shippe, and carried
away with him the hinder part of the galley, and the
helme, and brake their mast, making two Canon shot
at them in the galley being charged with peeces of
olde Yron and small shotte, so as the owers, bankes,
armes and legs flew into the ayre, & presently the galley
began to sinke:The Galley S. Philip sunke. then Iacob Pieterssen Mol strooke
with his shippe against the maine mast and the galley
sunke: yet there were many saued, Captaine Garbrandt
Ianssen of Enchuysen, seeing the Captaine and the principall
of the galley, about some twenty of them in their
boate, seeking to saue themselues hee sent foorth his
boate and caused them to be brought aborde of him,
else they had beene all drowned: then Captaine Garbrand
Ianssen Sahl first of all strooke the galley called
Aurora or the morning, where Pedro Collado was Captaine,
and brake fiue or sixe owers with the hinder
part of it, and beate downe one of their mastes, making
some shot into her but without any great effect,
then the vice-admirall tooke her betwixt the mast and
the poupe, and there with brake halfe and Galion of
his owne shippe, and cut of all the hinder part of her, ouerthrowing
the helme into the Sea which was of sixe
peeces, therupō,The Galley called Aurora sunke. 
               Heinrich Hartman of Rotterdam strook
betwixt the maine-mast and the prowe, and with
that blow the galley sunke; there were about 40. persons
saued: So foure of these galleys were lost, the other
foure were pursued so swiftly as two of them were
broken vpon the coast neere Newport, and another
neere vnto Dunkerke, the eight wherein Spignola was,
saued herselfe with great difficulty in Calais, where the
slaues were freed, and went whether they pleased, and

               Spignola with his gentlemen and others whom he could
saue, went to the Arch-duke to Bruxelles. There were
carried prisoners into Holland, of souldiers, slaues, and
other persons that were taken vp in the Sea about 180.
liberty was giuen to the slaues with apparrell and some
siluer, to goe into their Countries, or whether they
pleased.
            To returne now to our chiefe discourse, the Arch-dukes
men seeing that their battery vpon the gollet succeeded
not as they expected, and that the ships went in
and out thereby; they made a certaine worke, which
they called a float, which was as it were a great and
large plancher of wood, the which might swim vpon
the water, it was armed with defences, and fit to plant
Canon thereon, the which they thought the Water
would holde vp, and not carrie it away nor breake it:
this they brought vnto the Gollet, but the waues of the
Sea brake it, and so this inuention proued fruitlesse as
the rest.
            We haue before spoken of the discontentment of
the Arch-dukes souldiers for their pay, for the which in
the end they mutined and retyred to Hoochstraten, and
had intelligence with Conte Maurice for their preseruation,
making the whole Country, (euen vnto the
gates of Andwerp) to contribute for their liuing and
entertainement, & this caused the Arch-duke to make
a proclamation against them; whereof you shall haue
here a copie with the answer of the said mutiners, to
serue for the history as followeth.
            
               
                  
                  The Arch-dukes.1602.
                  
                  AS we had caused our armie to ioyne with an intent
to succor the towne of Graue,
                     A proclamation & proscription against the mutiners. the which is besieged
by the enemy, & wheras the souldiers that
are within it defend themselues so valiātly & resolutely
as they deserue great praise, being now going to that
end in person, wee haue beene informed that some
souldiers of our saide armie which was neere vnto
the enemies Campe, (vnder colour that they would
mutine, to recouer that which falsly they pretend to be
due vnto them) haue wickedly forsaken and abandoned
their colours, and (after many attempts vpon sundry
places,) haue in the end surprised the Castle of
Hoochstraten, by treacherous and wicked meanes, hauing
giuen many vehement presumptions, that they
holde correspondencie and haue intelligence with our
enemies, and meane to imploy them. A thing which is
prohibited and against all reason and Iustice, & which
neuer any other souldiers haue committed: but contrariwise
such as haue beene in mutinie, when as the
enemy hath besieged any place of ours, or that we had
need of men for any expedition, they came forth of
those places into the which they were retyred to serue
vs willingly and readily.
                  And for that the chiefe actors of this treason and
wickednes be men to whom there is little due, for that
some are new come, and others were of the mutinies
of Diest, Vueert and Karpen, where they had their accumpt
& reckoning, & were paied whatsoeuer was due
vnto them within a short time, being men accustomed

to inuent alterations to seaze vpon the contribution
money, without seruing of vs, hauing induced, deceiued
and forced the rest to commit this treason, whereby
the execution is hindred of succouring their brothers
& companions besieged, & other courses which
we might take against our enemie▪ forcing vs to turne
our armes against them, as against our domesticall enemies,
and more preiudiciall, for that thereby the enemie
is the more fortified. And for that this acte is
strange, odious, foule and of bad consequence, it deserues
to be punished exemplarily. For this cause desiring
to set an order for the benefit of the publike, and
the good of our vassals and subiects, we ordaine and
command all Souldiers and persons of their company
which are in the said castell of Hoochstraten, or shall
ioyne there, or in any other place, vnder coulour of alteration
or mutinie, that within three dayes after the
publication hereof, they returne vnto their Ensignes
and coulours, or present themselues before the gouernour
of Liere or of Herantals, to the end they may send
them presently to their Ensignes, where they may remaine
quietly and peaceably, as if this mutinie had not
chanced; and we giue them our word and faith, that
neither now nor at any time hereafter they shall be punished,
nor reprehended for this fact, although they
were the cheefe motiues, but shall be intreated with
much loue and affection, and will endeuour to giue
them full satisfaction, as to men whom we desire to
gratefie and reward. And in case they shall refuse to
obey, the said three daies being past, as well they which
are now there present, as they that ioyne with them,
we declare them henceforth rebels, traitors and wicked

men, which haue committed high treason In primo
capite. And as such we condemne them to death, their
goods confiscate, the which we doe presently make
forfeit and vnited vnto our treasor: and we giue libertie
to all men of what estate and condition soeuer
they be, freely (and without incurring of any punishment)
to kill the sayd mutiniers or any of them, although
it were sodenly, or in what manner and sort
they can: and whosoeuer shall kill them, there shall
be giuen vnto them for euery one of their heads ten
Crownes: and if it be of any one that hath beene
an ordinary officer a hundred Crownes, and of those
whom they call of their councell, the Sargeant
Maior and Gouernour of the Horse two hundred
Crownes, and for the Electo fiue hundred Crownes:
and if they which shall kill them be any of them, we
pardon them and giue them the said summes. And
we expresly command all Iudges of our Armies, Estates
and Signeories, that they seaze by Inuentarie,
vpon all the goods mooueable or immouable,
which the said mutiners, or any one of them shall haue,
and the apparrell or other things of their wiues and
children, and that he sayd goods be put into the
hands of the depositor of the armie, and be sent
with a true and formall certificate vnto the Superintendent
of the mylitarie Iustice of the armie, to the
ende he may vnite them to our treasor. Wherevnto
we doe presently condemne them, commanding all
persons, that haue money or any other thing of the
said mutiners in their hands, or of their wiues or children,
by exchange, in pawne, in guard, or by what
meanes soeuer, that they doe not deliuer it but make

it knowne vnto vs, to the end it may be seazed on,
as hath beene sayd, vpon paine of confiscation and
losse of all their goods that shall conceale them, and
an arbitrarie punishment. And for the foulenesse of
the fact and bad consequence thereof, for other Princes
to whom the like may chance in their armies,
this being left vnpunished: We therefore require and
beseech the Emperour and King of Spaine, our Lords
and Brothers, and all other Kings, Princes, and
Potentates, into what part or place soeuer the sayd
mutiners shall come, or shall haue any goods, that
they will cause them to be apprehended and taken,
and sent vnto vs, and their goods to be safely kept,
sending vs a certificate in forme aforesayd, being
ready to doe the like in our Countries and Signouries
at your requests, whensoeuer you shall desire it.
And we doe expresly forbid the wiues and children
of the sayd mutiners, to goe into any place where
they may be, or shall be, nor to treate or to conferre
with them eyther by worde or writing, during
the sayd mutinie vppon paine of death. And that
euery one may strippe them and take them without
any punishment, if they goe vnto them, or if
there bee any suspition that they meane to goe to
their sayd Fathers and Husbands. We will also that
within three dayes they depart our Countries, and
that they returne not without our especiall licence,
vpon the like paine. We command also that no man
within our countries or without, that shall be there vnder
colour of marchandise, victualers, or seruants, or
in any other sort whatsoeuer: shall serue, assist, or
giue victuals, munition, or any other thing to the

sayd mutiners, to their seruants, Horses, or to any
one that shall belong vnto them, although it be for
money, vpon paine of death, and other pecuniarie
punishments, according to the will of our Iudges,
and the qualitie of the offence and person, and also
they that finde them may kill them without any offence
In Flagranti. And that out of the Muster bookes
of the Armie, be drawne the names, surnames, markes
and places, where the sayd mutiners were borne, and
those of their fathers. And being necessarie to make
it publikely knowne, let information be made, so as it
may plainely appeare that they are condemned, and
that the sayd mutiners are proclaimed in our court,
and in the places where they were bred or borne, as
well in our countries, as in those of the Emperour, the
Catholike King, and other Princes our friends and
confederates, for banished, infamous, treacherous,
and base men, which haue committed high treason,
In primo casu: And that moreouer the punishments
ordeined against such by lawe, may be executed vpon
them, their children and descendents. By the
which we holde them and declare them from this day
condemned. And to him that shall be the meanes
to dissolue this mutinie, and to deliuer into our
hands the culpable, wee pardon him, and offer to
giue him a very honourable rewarde: and the like to
all those that shall assist him and giue him aide, although
they were of the same mutiners and chiefe authors
and officers therof. And to the end our proclamation
and proscription may be kept and inuiolably obserued,
and may come to the knowledge of all men,
as well generall of the Horse, Commanders of men

at armes, Maister of our artillery, Clonels, Maisters of
the Campe, Gouernours, heads of troupes, Captaines
and officers entertained, souldiers and all other martiall
men, of what quality, condition, preheminence or
nation soeuer they be, as also our other vassalles and
subiects; we commaund that it be publikely proclaimed
& be giuen in an authentike forme to the Licentiat
Iean Frias, of his maiesties counsell superintendent of
martiall causes in these partes, to the end he may cause
it to be obserued, kept and fully executed, and may
giue it to the Auditor generall, and other officers and
persons whom it doth concerne: to the ende that all
Iudges of Townes and villages may giue him notice of
what shall succeed, and he aduertise vs, that we may
prouide and decree what shall be needefull for the due
execution thereof: and that also another formall copy
be giuen vnto Maister Iohn Richardot Knight, president
of our priuie Counsel, & Counsellor of our Counsell
of Estate, that for as much as shall concerne him, he
may cause it to be obserued from point to point, as hath
bin decreed by vs, & cōmandement giuen to the other
ministers and Iustices of our Countries to see it accomplished:
In token whereof we haue caused this present
proclamation to be made, & set our seale vnto it, made
at Diest the 15. of September, 1602.
                  
                     Signed Albert,
and vnderneath.
By the appointment of their
highnesses▪
and signed I. de Mancicidor.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The answer of the Squadron, Electo,
and Counsell of men of Warre retyred
into Hoochstraten.1602.
                  
                  IF proscriptions and threates may stand for payment,
the Squadron, Electo & Counsell of souldiers retired
into Hoochstraten, may soone make ready their quittances
& send them to your highnesses, confessing that
they are well and duly satisfied of all arrerages: but for
that this kinde of payment neither feedes the belly, nor
couers the backe; and that in the meane time they
(which for so many yeares haue hazarded their goods
and liues without pay or reward, & as it were for Gods
sake, to maintaine your highnesses in their estates)
might be in danger (for want of other paiment) to die
of hunger & misery. It is reasonable that the said Squadron,
Electo and Counsell should make knowne vnto
all the world the lies and horrible cruelties wherewith
the said proscription is filled, that the equity of their
cause may be knowne thereby, and that euery one may
iudge if their Highnesses haue reason to thunder thus
out in choller against them, things which should rather
terrifie women and children then men.
                  Choller makes their Highnesses to say (we terme it
choller, for truth can giue no such testimony) that they
had caused their armie to assemble to succor the towne
of Graue, then besieged by the enemy, what meanes
this? was the Towne of Graue besieged at Tilmont or
at Leeubs, was it not besieged aboue a moneth after?
how could their highnesses succor the Towne of Graue
at Tilmont so long before it was besieged? he ads with

the like ground (And going my selfe in person to put
this desseigne in execution) what is hee amongst vs, or
or of all the rest, that did euer see him in the armie,
when as Prince Maurice would come to visite vs, charging
vs vpon our owne dunghill, beeing followed by
them which two yeares before had entertained their
Highnesses so roughly neere vnto Newport. The world
knowes they sometimes busie themselues at Bruxelles
and sometimes at Gand, to giue order to their affaires,
that their persons may bee no more subiect to such
dangers: we confesse notwithstanding that his Highnesse
after the Towne of Graue was lost, came vnto
the Campe, not that there was any neede of his presence;
for hee came but to whett his armes against
his friendes and faithfull subiectes, seeing that he had
found his enemies weapons too sharpe, and his owne
too much blunted in Flanders, to cut the knotes of
so strong a bond; if we say true or no, let them of
Delmonds & Venlo witnes. It is said with the like truth,
that at what time his Highnes prepared to succor the
Towne of Graue, we vnder coulour of a mutinie did
abandon our coulors. The art of Arithmatike or numbring
should not be practised by giddy braines; choller
is an enemy to the memory: but if a good friend seeks
to supply the defect of anothers memory, he merits reward;
If for such a benefit we deserue a recompence,
it is in your Highnesse to acknowledge it, and to speake
the trueth, the memory whereof is fresh yet to all the
world, as well to our friends as enemies: but that the
one is blinded with the darke mists of passion, vntil
their giddie spirits be lightened by the truth: we say
then that we haue imployed our selues for their Highnesses

seruice without regard of the extreame necessitie
and misery whereunto we were brought for want
of money, so long as the Admirall of Arragon, who
was our commander (and not your Highnesse) was
camped before the Towne of Graue, neither did we beginne
to seeke any meanes for our pay, before the armie
was farre retyred from the Towne, and that the
saide Admirall of Arragon had no intent to attempt
any thing, eyther for the reliefe of the Towne, or against
the armie of Prince Maurice. This was apparant
when as the siege of Grobbendoncq Gouernour
of Bolduc, (after that hee had laboured long in
vaine, propounding all the reasons hee could deuise to
induce his Highnesse to seaze vppon the Towne of
Hanestain, and by that meanes cut of the victualles
from Prince Maurice his armie (the onely meanes to
frustrate his desseigne) in the end he retired himselfe
with much discontentment without doing anye
thing. Then wee beganne to imbrace the pursute of
our iust cause. If all they that haue taken this course
shall be helde for traitors and rebelles, there is not any
one that serues their Highnesses which can bee free
from this blame: for who hath euer beene payed
vsing the contrarie course. Their Highnesses name
Dieest, Vueert and Carpen▪
                      places which will yeeld testimony
of their saying, the memory is yet fresh of that
which lately happened there.
                  It is said also that there is little or nothing at all due
vnto vs, & that we do falsely challenge that which we
demand: beeing men that are newly come from Italy
and other places or that a little before had beene fully
satisfied at Diest, Vueert and Carpen, if this bee true

or no, the accoumpts will shew it, and if the summe of
three Millions of Liuers be smal with their Highnesses,
yet is it great for vs. But admit the summe be small as
their Highnesses say, it is then more easie for them to
finde then a greater, and they should not for a small
matter suffer vs to be reduced to this extremitie. As
for treaties and correspondencies which we haue with
the enemies of your Highnesses, we finde it stange
that they should hould it contrarie to reason and all
lawes, seeing that in their proscription, they confesse
that it hath beene to maintaine our selues with them.
For when as we see their Highnesses armes turned
against vs as domesticall enemies, insteed of giuing vs
hearing in our iust complaints: was it not time (being
reasonable men) to doe that which bruite Beasts without
reason doe teach vs, who with all their force and
power oppose themselues against the violence of such
as would oppresse them. Our actions then are not
without ground or reason, but are rather grounded
vpon reason it selfe, and vpon the generall law, necessitie
being not subiect to any law, yea vpon the law of
nature, which hath giuen this instinct to all creatures,
to forget nothing that may serue for their preseruation.
                  It is lamentable thing, that they which for so manie
yeares haue ventured their liues, and powred out
their blouds so willingly for the seruice of their Highnesses,
should be now brought to holde their liues as
it were in see of their enemies, and that contrarywise
they seeke all meanes on their Highnesses part, to
roote them out, depriuing them of their liues, wiues,
children, victuals, and friends, as it appeares more

amply in the said proscription. His Highnesses knowes
well the example of Dauid, who retired to Achis King
of the Philistins, his capitall enemie, when he was forced
to flie before the face of Saul his Lord. It may
please his Highnesse to let the Serenissime Infanta vnderstand
these reasons, and not to thinke it strange if
that we being Souldiers would follow the example of
such a man of war as Dauid. It is said that these courses
were neuer practised by others, wherevnto we will
make no other answer, but that all our companions
know the contrary. How did they of Siche behaue
themselues? who had their deputies continually at the
Haige, entring and comming forth of Breda at their
pleasures, and resting at Langhestrate vnder their
wings which now imbrace our defence, intreating
whole troopes of Prince Maurices as friendes, suffering
them to passe through them without any let. The
examples which their Highnesses propound vnto vs
of such as haue mutined heretofore, and yet haue
abandoned their retreates, and haue offered themselues
at need to their Highnesses seruice, are things
propounded with little consideration: for since that
we retired our selues into this place, their Highnesses
neuer required any thing of vs as they did of the
rest: what reason then haue they to complaine of vs
in this case? But if they had sent vnto these others
a Herauld at Armes, to signifie vnto them such a
proscription as ours, it is to be thought they would
not haue left the places they then held, but vppon
good termes, neither would they haue shewed themselues
so zealous to their Highnesses seruice. It were

also to be desired for their honour and reputation,
that this great zeale and ready obedience of the mutiners
had beene delayed a while, for that being too
rash, it hath beene more preiudiciall then profitable to
their Highnesse, when as (without respect of their
Highnesse worde) they did so villanously breake it in
the behalfe of them of Suaescheuobre neere to Ostend,
the which cost that day the liues of a great number
of our companions: notwithstanding if their Highnesse
finde herein any acte of obedience, as it seemes,
seeing they exalt them so much for that respect, they
are freed from that blame. They will make vs beleeue,
that wee are men accustomed to make mutinies.
We will receiue this reproche in part of paiment
of our debt with the rest; for of late yeares such as
haue carried armes for your seruices, haue receiued
no other paiment: But what bruite is there among
the people? euery man saith openly that your Highnesse
haue brought in this custome, that the Souldiers
being paide in this sort without siluer, the cheere in
court may be the better. And in truth when there is
speech of any exploite of warre, those which holde
places seazed, doe willingly leaue them and come and
offer themselues to your seruice, being full of zeale
and obedience. This cannot be called mutining but
rather wintring: for, for these many yeares all your
men of warre haue learned to winter in this sorte:
Euen as your Highnesse did change your Ecclesistical
estate into a secular, we did much reioyce,
thinking that your Highnesse after that you had
beene Cardinall, Arch-bishop, and cheefe of the

whole Inquisition of Spaine, would not impose
any stricter rule vnto your Souldiers, then that which
your Highnesse might read so often in the Bible,
which is, Content your selues with your paye: But it
seemes (to your great preiudice) that you haue forgotten
it: And there is no man can dreame where
your Highnesse hath found out that Canon, by the
which you will begin the practise of a lawe which
is not yet established: that they must content themselues
without pay.
                  We did alwayes beleeue that the Ecclesiasticall
lawes had beene the strictest, as comming from
God, and regarding mens consciences: but we finde
our selues short of our reckoning. As for the money
of contribution, your Highnesse must knowe what
becomes of it, and it is a ridiculous thing euen for
the peasants to say that we receiue it: The trueth is
that to liue we goe vpon your lands; what should we
else doe? your Highnesses giues vs nothing, and
Souldiers are no Camelions to liue by the ayre: euen
so by lawe the creditor hath an action on the debters
goods: but for all that, your Highnesses ordinarie
contributions are not diminished. Vnder correction,
that Secretarie merites to be dismissed from
your Highnesses seruice, that in your names hath not
beene ashamed to pack vp together so many palpable
lies in so little writing: for that which hath beene so often
practised, should not be held for strange: that which
is grounded vpon good reason and the common
lawe of nature, is neither infamous nor dishonest.
And as for the consequence it cannot be so bad, seeing
that the great seruices done with so great zeale

and obedience by our companions, and the which we
haue not yet refused, are so highly praised by your highnes;
If it were lawfull for vs to say some thing in your
eare, we would thinke to hit the marke, which is, that
some haue aduertised vs from good part, that your
highnesses grow so extraordinarily bitter against vs,
and more then against the rest that haue gone before vs,
somewhat to pacifie the people; seeing that of so manye
woundes which haue beene receiued since some
yeares, they could neuer finde meanes to cure one, the
which is credible, seeing your highnesses make no difficulty
to holde vs for companions with them which
were besieged in the Towne of Graue, and which haue
wonne so much honour, and esteeme for their good
deuoir, which makes vs to holde many things set
downe in your proscription, somewhat tollerable, and
to be inserted onely Pro formo: It is said that we must
returne within three dayes to our coulors, or else your
highnesses doe proclaime vs traitors and rebelles, &c.
Condemned to die and our goods confiscate, &c., To
condemne them to die that haue no will to die, and
that haue meanes not onely to defend themselues, but
also offend them that would assaile them, were very
absurde and your highnesses may well thinke, that we
hope to imploy our armes so well, as the tolleration
which you haue giuen to kill vs in what sort soeuer,
shall not let you nor your substetutes see as few as may
be of our heades, for the which you shall not need to
paie ten, fifty or a hundred Crownes promised by
your prescription, according to the quality of our
persons, to them that shall acquite themselues of this
charge.
                  
                     
As for that which is saide of our goods, mouable &
immoueable; your highnesses know wel what mouable
or immouable goods such poore souldiers halfe dead
with hunger can haue; our mouable goods cannot be
made Mobiles but by our selues, which be our armes, &
we may also call them our immouable goods for them
that would attempt to charge them: daring wel affirme
that euen of his highnes, himselfe they would be found
too heauy and immouable, if he were possest with
this desire: and if there be any other mouable goodes
found among vs, we doe freely make offer of them to
such as will fetch them: and as for money, apparrell,
and other things belonging to our wiues and children,
the registers of your highnesse armie shall neede no
clarke to inroule them: if you haue no other reuenewes
and meanes to feed so many hungry bellies, it is
to bee feared that within few dayes your highnesses
will be brought to haue as little money and cloathes
as we had with our wiues and children, when as necessity
did force vs to assemble in this place to finde
some meanes to feed and cloath our selues: for wee
may saye, that we were then in a manner like vnto
the Indians which goe naked, which nakednesse by
reason of the great colde in these partes is not very
tollerable. Neither your Highnesses nor my Lords
your brothers, the Emperour nor King of Spaine,
shall profit much by our cloathes, nor our goods lying
vnder their iurisdictions: and as for the defence
made vnto our wiues and children to come vnto vs vpon
paine of death, we take it for a great fauour which
your highnesse haue done on vs, not desiring in the
estate wherein wee are to haue our heads much troubled

with our wiues: It were a ridiculous spectacle that
after they had taken awaye our wiues and childrens
cloathes; and they confiscate to your Highnesse, to
condemne them to depart the Countrie within three
dayes; the conduct of this naked troupe would serue
for a recompence to some one of your Court, who by
the shew of so strange a sight, might easily draw some
good summe of money from the people being curious
of nouelties. But doe your Highnesses thinke to famish
vs by the defence which you haue made to bring
vs any victualles? doe you thinke it is possible for your
subiectes to obey you in this respect? seeing it is not in
your power to warrant them against vs? for if you desire
to maintaine the contentes of your proscriptions
causing vs to be slaine by your subiectes, Itsh all bee
easie for vs alwayes to reuenge our selues of this cruelty
by reciprocall actions.
                  It is saide in your proscription that your Highnesse
desires it should be executed against our children and
successors: we doe not thinke that your Highnesse (being
an Arch-bishoppe and reading the Bible) hath euer
found the like, but contrarywise haue often heard (although
they were souldiers) that God doth neuer punish
the children for the fathers offence, vnlesse they
were likewise culpable. And if we had committed all
the offences in the world (the which is not so) by what
diuinity hath your Highnesse learned that you should
proceede so against innocents? Is it for a matter of
consequence? What punishment then will their
Highnesses reserue for themselues and their successors
seeing they are the cause of all this.
                  All Kings and Princes shall haue cause to looke into

your Highnesse carriage, and to learne how they
speede that make warre without money; which is the
synowes thereof.
                  Those which in times past haue woone reputation
by the Warres, haue followed contrarie courses
Cyrus, Alexander, Scipio, Iulius Caesar, and manye others
did neuer impouerish their souldiers, but contrariwise
haue inriched them; they vsed no proscriptions
nor menaces or threates against them, in case of
discontent: but haue sought to pacifie them by mildenesse
and curtesie, and if it were needefull to suffer
with them, they did neuer counterfett: what did
Alexander when in a dray a barren Country, they
brought him a Helmet full of water, hee was better
pleased to cast it on the grounde then to drinke,
seeing that it was no more but for himselfe, and
that his Armie had great need, shewing by this example
that he desired to fare no better then his souldiers.
                  Your Highnesses, haue ten, a hundred, yea fiue
hundred Crownes to buy our heades, but you cannot
finde ten, a hundred, nor fiue hundred farthings
to maintaine our bodies and heartes in your
faithfull seruices; you haue founde the meanes to
exceede manye great Princes, yea the Emperour
Charles the fift of most famous and happy memory,
the Emperour now raigning and the King of Spaine,
in all kindes of state and pompe, and yet yee cannot
finde any meanes to paye your poore souldiers
(the onely foundation of your estate) but by proscriptions
and threates. Alexander the great seeing
the Macedonians (whom hee had greatly inriched)

disobedient, and nothing fauouring his victories,
sought to pacifie them by mildnesse and curtesie, and
it succeeded well. Your Highnesses contrarywise after
you had rashly and miserably thrust headlong the best
part of your most resolute Souldiers and Captaines,
and seeing their affaires brought to a lamentable extremitie,
you sought to ruine them quite, paying them
with proscriptions and threats, and promising recompences
to them that should kill them. Iulius Caesar seeing
on a time a discontentment among his olde Souldiers,
which desired to retire home to their houses, refusing
to goe into Affrike about an expedition, he omitted
nothing that might pacifie them by amiable means,
honouring them with the name of Quirites, that is to
say, Good and olde fellow Cittizens; and by this
meanes he satisfied them. Your Highnesse may learne
hereby how a Prince ought to carry himselfe to his
Souldiers, who by his fault are become miserable.
                  Besides all the points conteined in this goodly proscription,
they will charge vs to be the cause of the desolation
of the countrie of Luxembourg, because we
did not hinder it; it is well knowne that before we
were taken for traitors and rebels, your Highnesse
armes were turned against vs, euery man was allowed
to kill vs, & our heads were set at ten crownes a peece.
                  How can all this accorde well together? It had
beene farre better your Highnesse had imployed your
forces to preserue Luxembourg, and not to suffer so
goodly a Prouince to be so miserably wasted. Seeing
then the foulenesse of your proceedings, and the bad
consequence which other Princes may gather therby,
in comitting the like excesse against their men of warre.
                  
                     
The Squadron Electo and Councell, beseech all
Princes and common weales to make vse of this example,
and to take heede least abusing thus their good
and faithfull souldiars, which are the sinewes of their
estates, they drawe not the like mischiefe vpon them,
which threatens dayly more and more to ruine their
highnesses.
                  The Arch-duke after this proscription of the mutiners,
went to besiege them at Hoochstraten, where he
prest them very hardly, although they were very well
fortified with three ditches and ramparts, where they
made good resistance, and Mounsier de Rosne sonne was
slaine there, yet the mutiners seeing in what case they
were, prouided for their safety, and compounded with
Prince Maurice, who came to succour them, causing
the Arch-dukes men to raise the siege, deliuering by
this meanes the Castle of Hoochstraten into his excellencies
hands, and he put the saide mutiners in garrison
into the towne of Graue. They were full six thousand
men, horse and foote.
                  They of Ostend left not to molest the Arch-dukes
men dayly. And we may say that this siege is a stoppe
for his forces, the which for these three yeares space
haue taken cold before this heape of Sande, the which
hath already cost the Prouince of Flanders neere three
Millions of goulde, besides that which the King of
Spaine, and the Arch-duke, haue imployed for their
parts, and likewise what the estates of the vnited Prouinces
haue contributed, all which is not of lesse value,
the which may well be sayd a wonder of this age.
                  The first of Ianuary. 1603. they sent one an other1603.
new yeeres guifts with Canon and musket shott.
                  
                     
In February the float whereof hath bene spoken,
(which had beene set vpon the Gollet to stoppe the
passage of the shippes) was broken by a tempest and a
strong North northeast winde, and did no more trouble
the shippes going in nor out.
                  From the beginning of the siege vnto the first of
March 1603,250000. bullets shot against Ostend.
                      there were shott against the towne
250000. bullets of iron, euery one waying betwixt 36.
and 50. poundes, and a nomber of Canon spoyled: as
soone as the Canoniers did cease neuer so little, the
Infanta (the Arch-dukes wife) lying at Newport, sent in
post to commande them to shoote continually.
                  The besieged lost no time, for they shott a 100000.The towne spēt a 100000. shot.
Canon shott against the armie, and often sent their canons
into Zeland to be chaunged or new cast.
                  They reckoned of dead men, as well through
necessitie as by the Canon in the Arche-dukes campe
18000.Nomber of the dead on either side. men and of them towne 6000. or
7000. amongst the which there were of eyther
side men of marke chiefe commaunders in warre, and
Captaines.
                  The 12. of March Captaine Granszfelo had his leg
shott off with a Canon being on the west rauelin and
died vppon the place.
                  The 16. day there entred three shippes by the
newe Hauen, the which were shott through with the
Canon.
                  The 17. the enemy planted 6. demie Culuerins and
a whole one vppon a plat-forme called the swallowes
neast.
                  The 20. of March they began to shoot from thence
and among others, hurt 9. men with one shott: they

made 375. shott that day.
                  There entred 17. shippes into the towne by the gollet,
which were much annoyed with the Canon, there
were three men slaine and two shippes sunke.
                  The 24. of March in the night there entred 22. saile
into the Hauen, whereof the one was laden with
horses.
                  The 26. day the enemie planted three peeces at the
Gollet, vpon a new plat-forme.
                  The 29. there entred three barkes in the day time,
whereof the one was laden with Turfes, at whom
the enemie made about 68. shott, and pierced that
with Turfes in eleuen places, the which sunke in the
new hauen.
                  The 30. of March there went 10. saile out of the
Hauen, whereof the enemy tooke foure with their
barkes.
                  The 31. of March they parled together, as well
to redeeme the shippes, as to holde quarter (that
is to say Truce) by land, and not by sea, but their followed
nothing.
                  The 2. of Aprill a corporall of the gouernours companie
was shot, for that he had slaine his sargent in the
night, he was called Hans Huhm, & was a Brabanson.
                  
                  The 4 of Aprill 2. Frenchmen of the Towne being
in gard on the west square, fled vnto the enemies to
the crowes neast: the same day the aduenturers of the
Towne brought in one of the enemies prisoner, who
sayde that they of the Towne laboured continually at
a new platforme, and that euery man which laied the
bauins had two dooble ducates for the day and night,
and that they which brought the bauins & other stuffe

did get as much: and he said moreouer that he had bin
in garde the night before, and that sixe men had beene
strooke with one shot.
                  The 6. of Aprill the besieged made an enterprise to
surprise the enemies sentinels on the East side, and to
cut the Corps de garde in peeces; and as some of their
men were vnder the Plat-forme to heare what was
done, they were discouered, and presently the alarme
giuen throughout all the Campe, the which forced
them to retire.
                  The 7. of Aprill they of the Towne dismounted a
demie Culuerin which was at Luysbos vpon the Gollet.
                  In the night there went forth foure saile, whereof
three were nothing hurt, the fourth being shot betwixt
winde and water, returned, and soone after went to Sea
againe.
                  The 10. of Aprill three men to whom they had promised
a 100. Dollers, brought in a ship which had bene
fired, one of them (who was a Canonier) had a Hargubuze
shot in the arme.
                  The same daye a Culuerin was planted vpon the
Polder.
                  The 13. of Aprill did blowe a violent South-west
winde, so as many olde walles and couerings of houses
were blowne downe, & the Church steeple, vnder the
ruines whereof a man was slaine, and another had his
legges broken; almost all the enemies Gabions vpon
the East were ouerthrowne, and their new worke vpon
the Gollet was likewise much ruined.
                  In the night the enemy gaue an assault to the towne of
al sides,A furious assault with great forces; vpō the East side they pulled
vp aboue a 100. piles at the halfe Moone of the towne,

but they were repulsed and forced to retire: vpon the
West side they gaue an assault to the Porke-espike, and
brought thether two barrelles of Pitch and Rozen,
but in the end they were repulst; Captaine Hanekrots
Lieutenant was slaine, and Captaine Bocke had a Hargubuze
shott through the body, whereof he died three
weekes after.
                  At the same time the enemy gaue an assault to the
Rauelin of the Polder,The Polder taken. from the which they were at
the first repulst, but they returned with such fury as
they tooke it, and the Polder square, West square and
Sout square, and yet there was a demie Culuerin with
some yron peeces vpon the Polder square, which plaied
their partes well. The put them all in a maner to the
sword, and the next day in the morning they slew them
in colde bloud which had remained: they hanged vp
a Canonier and then cast him downe the Trenches
with derision: This assault continued foure houres.
                  The 14. of Aprill, about 9. of the clocke at night
the besieged made a sally vpon the squares, from
whence they were repulst and lost many of their men,
and amongst others Captaine P. Frist, and the Colonel
of the Suisses Lieutenant, an Auncient of the Suisses
& one of the English: so as there were 400. men of the
Towne slaine, & amongst them many men of marke
and vallour. The enemy lost a 1000. men with all hope
to take the towne by assault.
                  The 16. the besieged redeemed the Lieutenant Colonel
of the Suisses body for a 100. Dollers,The number of the slaine. and it was
brought into the Towne.
                  That day and the daye before there, entred 7. companies
of souldiers into the Towne, two of Suisses one

of Denmarke, one of English, two of Sueden, and one
of the low Countries. That day the enemy did fortifie
himselfe on the East side.
                  The 17, of Aprill, 4. Culuerins were brought to Ostend,
three Demies and one Minion.
                  The 18. of Aprill there went a Barke forth whose owers
were broken by the enemy.
                  The 19. the besieged planted a bastard Culuerin vpon
the Bulworke of Pekel, and another vpon the Bulworke
of the Polder, and the third vpon the North-east
Rauelin.
                  The 20. they planted another bastard Culuerin vpon
the west Port.
                  The 21. of Aprill, a messenger came to Ostend with
letters, which did much reioyce the besieged, giuing
them to vnderstand that they should be soone releeued.
                  The 22. of Aprill there was a Culuerin planted vpon
the Polder, to shoote at the swallowes neast.
                  The 23. the besieged shot three peeces at the swalloes
neast, and dismounted three of the enemies Canons.
                  The same day one fled from the enemies Campe into
the Towne, who gaue intelligence that the Arch-dukes
men had resolued to giue an assault to the halfe
moone vpon the East; both by water with barkes, & also
by land▪ they of the towne (to preuēt this enterprise,)
set aboat in garde neere to the halfe Moone, the which
was twise sunke, the garde of the place fell out by lot to
Captaine Seknitt.
                  
                  The 24. of Aprill there entred 32. ships into Ostend by
the new hauen, at whom the enemy shot about 80. Canon
shot, and wounded a Marriner to the death:
                  
                     
The same day the enemies planted eight Canon vpon
their new battery, and made there about eleuen Canoniers.
                  The 27. of Aprill there entred eleuen companies into
Ostend, three of them were of Zeland & the rest Scottish
& English; there were two slaine in one barke, and
a boy had his legs strooke of.
                  The 28. of Aprill there entred a ship at noone day into
the Towne, and at night there went sixe forth: the
same daye there was a proclamation throughout the
towne, at the sound of the drum, no man vpon paine of
death, to fight, quarrell or stricke.
                  The 2. of May they brought two Canons from Zeland
into the towne: and the aduenturers tooke two of
the enemies prisoners.
                  The 3. of May a french man of the enemies Campe
came and yeelded himselfe into the towne, in the night
there entred two Companies of souldiers.
                  The 5. of May two french men of the towne went to
the enemy: at night a barke of the Towne was sunke
and two men slaine in another.
                  The 7. of May there came seuen galleys before Ostend,
who fought with seuen shippes of warre, but they
were beaten and made flie.
                  The 8. of May Lieutenant Gesseler was slaine.
                  The 10. of May there entred 34. saile into Ostend by the
Gollet, at whom the enemy discharged 128. canon shot,
& sunke fiue; one was laden with bullets, another with
a Culuerin, & the rest with munition: they of the towne
seeking to saue the ship that was laden with bullets, had
fiue of their men hurt with one shotte, yet in the ende
they saued it, as also that which had the Culuerin,

being forced to cast the Culuerin into the water, the other
three were presently lost.
                  The 11. and 12, of May, the souldiers which lay in
the Roade, were brought into the Towne, about 30.
companies, so as then there full 80 Ensignes in the
Towne.
                  The 13. of May they parled, and there were two prisoners
exchanged: at night there was brough 120. barrels
of Poulder into the Towne.
                  The 14. of May, three French men of the Towne
fled vnto the enemy.
                  The 15. there went forth 7. saile at noone day by the
new Hauen, two wherof were sunke, one of the which
(the maister being hurt in the arme) went vnto the enemies
side, the other was quite beaten in peeces, but
al within it were saued▪ The same day there were three
marriners of the Towne slaine by their owne men; and
Captaine Blommert died, nine of the enemies swamme
through the Gollet, to spoile certaine vessels.
                  The 16. of May there was a truce made on the East
side, but not vpon the water, and fiue prisoners were
exchanged: they of the Towne had intelligence that
the enemy had some practise to sinke two ships that lay
in the Gollet.
                  The same day, about 60. ships and barkes set saile,
whereof there was but one sunke, in the which there
was the baggage of two captaines Frisons, & their spoile
which was worth much.
                  The 17. of May, there came a company of Frisons
into the Towne, and there was Beere also brought in;
before a barrell of English Beere was worth twenty
foure Liures which is eleuen Germaine Dollers, and

and that of Holland. 20. liures.
                  The 19. day, they might discouer about 30. saile at
Sea, they shot furiously on eyther side: there were two
men slaine in the towne, and one souldier that would
haue fled to the enemy.
                  The 20. of May there went in three shippes by the
gollet, wherof two were sunke.
                  The 21. of May in the night the troupes of Naninck
went forth: and a souldier of Schleumers companie was
hanged, for that he would haue caused the souldiers
to mutine.
                  The 22. of May there entred 20. shippes by the gollet,
whereof three were sunke.
                  The 23. of May eight shippes entred by the new hauen,
whereof two were sunke, one laden with a Culuerin,
(the which was saued) the other a merchant and
he perished.
                  The 24. of May there entred 29, shippes by the new
hauen whereof two were sunke.
                  The 25. defences were made by the sounde of the
dromme, for all marriners or other persons, to make
sale of any marchandise before it had line 24. howers
in the halles for that they made monopolies, which
caused a derth:Good orders in Ostend.
                      It was also forbidden to play at Cards,
Dice or any other thing, vpon paine of imprisonment,
and to fast eight dayes together with bread and water:
likewise for men of command not to be drunke being
vpon their guard, vpon paine to loose his armes and to
be degraded: And there was a promise made of 50.
Crownes to him that could take any one dead or aliue
that would flye vnto the enemie.
                  That night there went 9. shippes out of the towne

without any harme.
                  The 26. of May the besieged receiued 100000.
pounde waight of Poulder, whereof 40000. for the
soldiers, and 60 the Canon; a sargeant came and
yeelded himselfe into the towne, who sayd that the besieged
did much anoy the new battery vpon the gollet,
and had that day slaine a canonier, and stroke of an others
leggs.
                  The 27. of May at the breake of day, being an easterly
winde, a full sea and calme, the generall Don Frederike
spignola (by the Arche-dukes commaundement,
who omitted no opportunity to annoy Ostend) parted
from Escluse with 8. galleis and 4. frigatts well appointed
both with slaues and marriners, and in them were
2500. musketers and small shott; they shewed themselues
at the west of the ditch of Escluse, betwixt the
bankes called Francois Pol, (that is to say) the chiefe or
head, and rowed eastward of this ditch. The ships and
galleys of the States and of Prince Maurice, (being
Admirall generall of the sea) seeing that their meaning
was to charge them, wayed anchour, and hoysed vp
their sailes, taking their course towards the east, although
the tide were cōtrary; & the wind also being so
weake as it would not fill their sailes. Spignolas galleis
hauing the aduantage of wind,Combate at Sea. tide, and sun, vpon the
States fleet; went by the North beyond the Francois
Pol into the Vuielinghe or gulfe, turning their prowe against
the fleet. Being in the Vuielinghe about 5. of the
clocke, the 8. galleis deuided thēselues in two foure &
foure, with some space betwixt them, & came in this
order very furiously with a great cry, & with all their
force against the states army, first 2. galleys set vpon the

shippe of lost de Mohr vice-admirall, called the golden
Lion; don Fredirike Spignola was in one of these galleys,
the which had no banderolle or flag vpon his mast, but
only aboue the Chamber of the captaines lodging;
Mohr the vice-admirall defended himselfe valiantly and
did much indomage his enemies with his great ordinance,
                        Spignola slaine.
so as Spignola himselfe was there mortally woū
                     ded
& died before he could go a shore: foure other galleis
went after the shippe of Captaine Legier Pieterssen
of Groningh called the Segel-hont or flying-dog; one of
them tooke him right vpon the sterne with his spurre
or pointe, and made him retyer; at the same time the
gunner of the dogg set fier to a peece, the which made
such a spoyle of the soldiers in the galley, as it seemed
a Cart had passed from one end to the other: The
Hollandoise or black galley wherein Iacob Michielson was
Captaine, did fight with the other two galleys; this
skirmish hauing continued a while, two of the galleys
which were nere vnto the shipe of Legier Pieterssen, forsooke
him, and went against the galley of Zeland called
the Flight, in the which Cornelius Ianssen of Gorchū
                     
was captaine, who played his part as well as the rest, &
without doubt had wone the honor, if an accident of
fier had not chanced in his galley; The 2. other galleys
did in like sort leaue Legiers shipe, & rowed against the
Hollandoise or blacke galley: One of them was vice-admiral
to Spignola & had a bāderol vpon her mast, these
4. galleis had inough to do with the Hollōdoise, who defended
her selfe so valiētly, as notwithstāding that these
4. had grappeled with her to draw her into Escluse, yet
were they forced to leaue her after along fight. The
galleie of Holland being thus forsaken by them that had

assailed her, went against them that were in fight with
the vice admirall lost de Mohr. An other shippe wherof
Criin Henrihes of Zierc zeè called the Alte-hont or
the old dogge, although he were not charged, yet did
he much harme to Spignolas Galleies; he was among
the rest, & did flanke them shooting furiously vpon the
enemies galleyes, which were in fight with the vize-admirall
and the black galley. There was such a slaughter
on euery side, but especially in Spignolas galleies,
as euen a hart of Flint would haue bin moued to pity:
neyther of them shewed any base cowardise, they were
all so attentiue man to man, with the Canon, Muskets,
halfe pikes, swords, and other armes, to shoote, strike
and anoy an other, without any care to auoide the enemies
blowes, as it was a horrible things to see: in the end
Spignolas men fainted, and fled to Escluse in great disorder,
carrying backe all their gallies, being fauoured
by the neerenes of the retreat. According to the letters
written from diuers parts,The nomber of the dead. there were slaine on the
Arch-dukes side; the Generall Frederik Spignola with
aboue 800. men; and there were some hundreds hurt
on the States side; There were some 36. slaine, and amongst
them Captaine Iacob Michels and his Lieutetenant:
The Vize-admirall Iost de Mohr, and Captaine
Legier Pieterssen with some 60. others which were hurt
in the Vize-admirall and the galley of Zeland, there
were in either of them about 18. Englishmen of the garrison
which is at Flesingue for the King of England,
who serued very well, there were 8. slaine and 15. hurt
which are comprehended in the nomber of the dead
and hurt. In this combat Iost de Mohr the Vize-admirall
commaunded, insteed of the signeur William Van

Halteyn Lieftenant Admirall to the Prince Maurice:
which lieutenant (hearing the Canon shott) parted presently
from Flesingue, with 5. ships of war and one frigat,
to come to the succor of his men, before the ditch
of Escluse, but the combat was ended, & the enemies retired
when he arriued. Beholde what passed then with
the galleys of Spignola, wherein is verefied that which
the royal Prophet Dauid saith in the 16. & 34, Psalmes,
that victories come not from the force and power of
man, but from the grace, succor and assistance of Almighty
God.
                  The 28. May, Monsier du Fort went out of Ostend with
part of the French men at night there went forth two
great ships, whereof the enemies tooke one.
                  The 29. of May two souldiers of the Towne meaning
to flie vnto the enemy, one of them was slaine;
two ships went forth whereof one of them was sunke,
and fell neere vnto the enemies battery: the Pilot saued
himselfe, there were 19. souldiers of Ghistell which
were taken, and as some say were hanged.
                  The 2. of Iune the Leapers or aduenturers of the
Towne brought in four prisoners, and amongst them
one of the enemies aduenturers.
                  In the night a little boat past ouer the dike, to surprise
the enemies Sentinell: the same night the enemy
aduanced neerer vnto the towne vpon the west square.
                  The 3. of Iune they of the Towne made a sally, in
the which Captaine Hanikrot was hurt in the cheeke,
arme and legge.
                  The 4. day at night there entred 20. Marchantes
ships, whereof three were sunke.
                  The same night they of the Towne made a sally vpon

                     Lusbos with a 1000. men, and wonne the Platforme
and the enemies trench turning some of their
owne Canon against them;A salie of 1000. men. they cloyed two, and cut
in peeces the Corps de garde, Canoniers, and other officers
of the artillery, whom they found there: of their
parts they lost the lieutenant to Conte Ernest of Nassau,
the first lieutenant of Hauszman, & the Baron of Sancy
a frenchmā, Grouestein Colonel of the Frisons was hurt in
the legge with many others, and in the end they of the
Towne were forced to retire.
                  They buried their dead men together: the simple
souldiers as well of the Towne as of the enemies were
buried in the downes, & the men of commaundement
in the Towne.
                  The 8. of Iune they brought 100. barrelles of Poulder
into the Towne.
                  The 9. day there went 5. ensignes of French out of
the Towne: three souldiers fled out of the Towne to
the enemy, and in the night there entred 44. ships into
the Towne, whereof two were sunke. About the same
time Lieutenant Bitter died.
                  The 11. of Iune 5. saile went out of the Towne by the
new Hauen, whereof one (in the which were Frenchmen)
was sunke, and some of them lost.
                  The same day the bowels of the Barron of Sancy were
honorably enterred at Ostend, and his body, imbalmed
and sent into France.
                  
                  That night there were two barkes sunke, in the one
were artificiall fire-workes, and in the other victualles
for Captaine Elias.
                  
                  The 12. of Iune at night they of the Towne set fire
on the West square the which burnt all night: the day

following they discouered 8. Canoniers which they
had not seene before.
                  The 13. of Iune there were 13. saile went out of the
Towne; the same daye before noone Auncient Long
died, who had both his legges strooke of with a Canon.
                  The 14. day there entred two companies into Ostend,
the same day the enemy beganne to batter from
the Poulder square, the halfe Moones of the Towne,
that is, the halfe Moone of Sednezden, that of Slimmer,
and the Bec-af or folly of the East, the which is a bowe
shoote into the Country, vnder the halfe Moone of
Slimmer, to the which the night following they gaue
an assault. The Gouernour of Ostend fearing that if
the enemy should become Maister of this place, he
would build a fort, which might greatly preiudice
them of the Towne, for that it would take from
them the meanes to transport their stuffe, and also
the enemye might then cast a bridge vpon the Gollet,
without any let or hindrance, and by that meanes
goe from one Campe vnto another in lesse then
halfe an houre: where as now they must haue aboue
sixe: hee resolued with the Counsell of warre
to prouide for it as well as hee might possibly.
                  The enemyes passing by night at Bec-af vppon
a bridge with Ladders and other instruments, they
were presentlye receaued by ten or twelue Musketiers,
who shotte at them giuing the alarme by that
meanes, and so aranged themselues presently with
their troupes which doe attend the enemy; which entred
almost at the same instant with thē, crying, amassa,

amassa, guadagnato guadagnato: but being furiously
charged by them of the towne they retyred faster then
they entred.
                  If they had charged home to the halfe Moones,
they had beene receiued in the like sort, for they were
very well manned and garded, in the morning they
found many slaine and a peece of the enemies bridge
broken.
                  The 17. of Iune at night there went forth 6. ships,
and some prisoners were exchanged on either side,
                  The 18. there went forth 4. ships.
                  The 19. one ship went forth which receiued 17. Canon
shot.
                  The 21. of Iune there went forth 40. saile whereof
sixe were sunke.
                  The 22. they brought a hundred barrelles of Poulder
into the Towne.
                  The 24. of Iune there entred 4. companies of souldiers
into the Towne, and sixe saile in the day time,
whereof three were sunke and one Marriner slaine.
                  The 25. there entred 5. ships in the day time without
any harme.
                  The 26. of Iune, there entred 12. more in the daye
time, and 9. went forth without any hurt. There entred
a frigate in the which there were twenty foure persons
hurt for that they wonderfully prest in her.
                  The 27. of Iune Colonel Bruges went forth.
                  The 28. day there came fire-workes into the towne.
                  The 5. of Iuly part of the ships entred with al kindes
of fruites and hearbes without any losse, and also with
store of Poulder, and for that it was the day of the besieging
of that place, it was celebrated, and all the Canon

of the Towne shot of: In the night Captaine Adam
van liest was slaine, being without the halfe moone
of the Polder; his bowells were interred in the Towne,
and his body was carried to Dordrecht.
                  
                  The 8. of Iuly two loopehooles at Luisbos were beaten
downe, towards the sea; at night a strong northerly
winde cast a ship vpon the east shore.
                  The 9, of Iuly there went forth three fisher boats.
                  The 11. of Iuly there entred eight sayle by the new
Hauen; the night before there went forth 30. where
of one was sunke, but the barkes did succor it and
brought it into the roade, from whence it sayled towards
Flesingue. The same day Bort Lieutenant to
Geniel was slaine, whose body was caried to Scoonhouen,
and his bowells were buried at Ostend.
                  
                  The 12. of Iuly there went forth two shippes wherof
one was sunke: and in the morning there entred 5.
                  The 13. of Iuly early in the morning, Colonel Dorp
(who had been gouernour) went out of Ostend; and at
the same time the seigneur de la Nort (who had cōmanded
there before) came in his place, with 4. companies
of Zelanders.
                  
                  The 15. of Iuly a soldier of the enemies campe came
and yeelded himselfe into the Towne.
                  The 17. Captaine Calwart was slaine neere vnto the
halfe Monne of Geniet, his body was carried out of the
Towne.
                  The 19. of Iuly there went 20. saile out of the towne
whereof two were sunke, in the one was the baggage of
Captaine Smith, & in the other the companie of Colonel
Dorp in the which 5. soldiers were slaine at one shot,
and many were drowned and miserablie burnt, the fier

hauing taken the Poulder.
                  The 21. there went forth 6. ships with a barke of the
Towne full of souldiers.
                  In the night the besieged shott from the West
Bulwarke to the South-square with a demie Culuerin,
the which was sette on fier and burnt all the couering,
                  The 22. of Iuly at night the besieged likewise set fier
vpon Luysbos, the which consumed all the bauins and
wood therof, & all the loope-holes, there was a great
fier in the midst therof, & the enemy did what he could
to quench it, but it was in vaine.
                  The 23. of Iuly the besieged planted gabions without
the halfe Moone of the Polder, thinking to raise vp an
other halfe Moone, but the ground was to wet: that
night the lieutenant to Captaine Kief named Brus was
honorably interred.
                  The 27. of Iuly there entred 40. ships in the day time
into Ostend, without any more hurt but the losse of 3. or
4. men; some entred by the Gollet, and others by the
new hauen; amongst other things there were 3. culuerins
in them.
                  The 28. of Iuly there entred 24. saile more in the day
time, among the which there was one marchants ship
sunck, the which came against the rauelin of the towne
the frenchmen ranne to it, wherof there were 5. slaine.
                  The 28. and 29. there entred three companies of Prisons,
Hollanders, and Zelanders into the Towne.
                  The 30. of Iuly the enemy shotte from the East
manie fierie Bullets, stones, and other shott into the
Towne: That night Colonell Lohn entred into Ostend
with ten saile.
                  
                     
The 31. of Iuly the besieged cast balles of wild fier
vpon the enemies plat-formes, the which was presently
quenched because it was so calme: there entred
two ships.
                  The 3. and 4. of August there went 29. saile out of
Ostend, and in them ten companies of soldiers,
                  The 5. day there went forth 12. saile more without any
hurt.
                  The 7. of August there entred 28. ships.
                  The 10. of August there entred 5. fisherboats.
                  The 11. of August the besieged were all day and
night in armes, thinking there would be an assault giuen:
the same day they set fier of Luysbos, but it was
presently quenched.
                  The 12. day the enemies mustered and changed
their Campe, they of the Towne thinking it had
beene to some other end stoode in armes: the same
day fiue Frenchmen went to the enemy by the West
side.
                  The 15. of August two Frenchmen more fled to the
enemy vpon the east side: Luysbos was againe set on fier,
but soone-quenched.
                  The 17. day two Frenchmen going to yeeld vnto
the enemy were stayed and slaine.
                  The 19. of August there entred two companies of
soldiers into the Towne.
                  The 20. and 21. there entred 7. companies more, the
same day they of the towne set fier on a plat-forme, at
the which they shot a 150. fiery bullets, it tooke not fier
vntill the 136. shotte and continued 3. daies and 3.
nights. The same day there entred 9. saile.
                  The 24. day there entred fiue saile more in the

day time, in the which was a companie of souldiers,
with Poulder and Matches: in the night the enemy
brought some part of another floate.
                  The same night there went some shippes out of the
Towne, one of them, in the which were 13. sicke persons,
and fiue women, had her helme strooke of: they
of the Towne tooke eight prisoners.
                  The 25. of August, the enemy brought another part
of their float, the which was (by a fugitiues saying) of
80. tuns in length, and fiue fadome thicke.
                  The same day the fiue women were restored, after
they had bin rauished with all indignities.
                  The 26. of August the enemies hung vp all those
sicke men,Cruelty of the enemy. except one, whome they slue with their
swordes, being so weake, as he could not goe vp the
ladder.
                  The last of August the aduenturers returned and
brought in one of the enemies horsemen prisoner.
                  The 2. of September the aduenturers went forth, accompanied
with some Marriners, and tooke an auncient,
a Corporall, and an Ingenier.
                  The same day, and the 3. the besieged shot at that
which remained of the enemies floate, & did in a manner
ruine it quite.
                  The 5. of September there entred 9. ships.
                  The 8. of September the besieged demanded a truce
of the enemy, who required fiue dayes respite to consider
thereof.
                  The 19. of September there went forty saile out of
Ostend, whereof sixe were sunke, and two taken by the
enemy: one of them did runne aboue a League along
the coast, being laden with stuffe of great value; they

did hang vp the Pilot towardes the East: the horseman
taken the last of August suffered for it, and was hanged
in Ostend for the Pilot.
                  The 25. of September they laboured in the new hauen
which was spoiled: There entred 28. saile into the
towne, three of the which were full of Mariners.
                  The 28. in the night there entred fiue saile into the
Towne, whereof three were sunke.
                  The 29. of September there went forth fiue fisher
boats, & Colonel Dorth went forth in a smal barke. That
night they of the Towne were busie in working at the
dike which was broken.
                  The last of September, there were three barkes and
three boates taken going to fetch flagges, there were
two slaine and some taken prisoners.
                  The 3. of October there entred 18. ships by night into
Ostend, and there went forth 31. whereof one was
sunke, after that the men which werein her had bin saued
shee ran against Luysbos, where the enemies burnt
her.
                  The 5. of October there entred 9. ships laden with
ten Canon and some munition.
                  The 7. of October in the night there went foorth
32. saile with little harme: that day the besieged shot vpon
Luysbos and the enemy vpon the Towne, so as there
were many armes and legges shott off on eyther side,
and many men slaine, they might see the Poulder
in the Campe set on fire, which did them much harme.
                  The 8. of October there went forth 11. saile, and 12.
entred.
                  The 10. day there went forth six ships with the messenger
of the Towne, who went into Holland.
                  
                  
                     
The 11. of October, the enemies with one of their
Barkes tooke a ship in the day time which was bent for
Flessingue. They made a Salue, euery one of the Musketiers
three shot, and euery one of the Hargubuziers
two, at the comming of some noble man into the
Campe.
                  The Gouernour caused the new Hauen to be newly
repaired, making it more commodious for the shippes
then before.
                  The sicknesse which had bin great in Ostend began
now to cease, the Towne being furnished with better
Phisitions and Surgions.
                  The Towne was euery day fortified more & more:
About that time there entred 18. Ensignes of souldiers
into the Towne.
                  The 17. of October, in the night there entred 14.
saile into the Towne, one was broken at the entrie of
the Hauen, and a man had his head strooke off with a
Canon.
                  The 19. there went forth 13. saile.
                  The same day there appeared without the Towne
13. great Barkes and 4. ships which came from Escluse;
and it seemed they would cast another floate vpon the
Gollet, they of the Towne prepared to receaue
them.
                  The 20. at night they approched with a new floate,
which they carried backe presently.
                  They brought behinde Luysbos foure ships and some
great Barkes in the which they had placed some slaues
of Escluse.
                  
                  The 21. of October there came in 10. shippes at
noone day, whereof the enemy tooke one laden with

Bauins, and carried it to the West shoare.
                  The 22. in the night there went forth ten ships without
any harme.
                  The 23. of October, the enemy brought another
floate, the which was very great & thicke, which they
carried almost halfe neerer then the first, and more towardes
the East Rauelin. Presently they opened fiue
loope holes, and shotte furiously at the Bulworke of
Pekel, so as they of the Towne were presently forced
to retire their Canon a little, and at that time they
had no other place from whence they might shoote at
this floate, but the Bulworke of Pekel.
                  
                  The twenty sixe of October, the tyde being gone,
the enemies thrust a Canon behind their floate, from
the which they made foure or fiue shotte at the
East Rauelin, and then when the tide came they
presently drew backe their Canon with much toile.
They of the Towne had not yet shotte much at
it.
                  In the night the batteries of the Bulworkes of Spaine,
of Pekel, and of the East Rauelin, were prepared and
made ready.
                  One ende of the floate was vndone, they of the
Towne were in good hope to ruine it in verye few
dayes, it was so lowe as the least waue past ouer
it.
                  This night there arriued two English Barkes laden
with Beere and other prouision.
                  They of the Towne were much troubled to transport
their Canon from one Bulworke vnto another to
shoote at the floate.
                  The dike vpon the South-side was broken againe,

they were much troubled to repaire it, although they
spared no money.
                  The 27. of October they might see their enemies labouring
at their floate with peeces of wood, & beating
in of piles behinde it.
                  The besieged shot at it with Grenadoes, chaines, and
stones, meaning to make fiue Canoniers more to plant
peeces at.
                  They of Ostend had intelligence from diuers places,
that the Marquis Spignola with his Ingener Pompee, had
some practise in hand to depriue them of the Gollet, &
to take them by assault, but hetherto al their subtill deuises
are come to smoake.
                  The 5. of Nouember there entred 11. saile into the
Towne, and the like number went forth without any
harme.
                  The 17. day the enemy brought another float which
held from the end of the first floate vnto the banke of
the Gollet.
                  The 20. of Nouember, a strong winde comming
from the Sea brake this floate of the 17. of Nouember,
already much shaken by the towne Canon, so as there
scarce remained any shew of it.
                  The 25. day they brought yet an other float, which
preuailed no better thē the rest, but was broken partly
with the winde, & partly with their continual shooting
from the Towne, so as when the water did rise, their
pipes and other vessels parted and went one from another:
many beames and other stuffe were cast into the
Towne, so as this inuention serued them to no purpose.
                  The same day the enemy cast wilde fire from Luysbos
                     
to the North east Rauelin, there were 9 souldiers
and Marriners slaine in quenching it, and manye
hurt, in the ende it was quenched without any more
harme.
                  The fleete of Zeland shewed it selfe the third time
before the Towne, hauing still beene put backe with a
contrary winde; in the end hauing a faire winde they
entred, there were in it some companies of Souldiers
Prisons, with munition and victuals.
                  A Turkish slaue came and yeelded himselfe into
the Towne, who said that Spignola had put slaues into
his barke, thinking therewith to annoy Ostend much,
but hetherto he had done nothing.
                  The same day there entred 
                        •
                     . ships without any losse.
                  The 26. & 27. of Nouember the enemy shot some
firy bullets but with out any effect.
                  The 27. the besieged did cast many Grenadoes the
which did much harme in the enemies approches.
                  The 28. day the besieged brought a newe peece vppon
the North-east Rauelin.
                  The 30. of Nouember the enemy fired this Rauelin,
the which was quenched by the Marriners, to whome
was giuen a tun of Beere.
                  The first of December they fired the same place againe,
the which was quenched in the night.
                  They of the Towne did beat downe a corner of Luisbos
with the Canon. That night it did freese hard &
was very windie.
                  The 4. day there entred sixe Fisher-men into the
Towne whereof one was sunke, at night they of the
Towne receiued 200. barrels of Poulder.
                  The 5. of December two Irish men of the enemies

Campe fled into the Towne.
                  The 6. day, three souldiers of the Towne went vnto
the enemy.
                  The same day there blew a strong North-west
winde which carried away a great part of the enemies
floate.
                  The 7. and 8. of December the enemy shotte furiously
vpon the Towne Rauelin, and did great harme
to it.
                  The 9. day Captaine Simon Krynen Rotbol entred the
Towne, the same daye a Barke was sunke in the new
hauen, in the which Captaine Bebery was: within 4. or
5. dayes there had entred 12. companies into Ostend.
                  
                  They of the Towne tooke a prisoner, who was so
confident and resolute, as he would neuer discouer any
thing of the Arch-dukes Campe, neither could they
learne any newes of him.
                  The 10. of December some ships would haue come
into the Towne, whereof six stucke fast, for that they
entred too soone into the hoale, (which is the new
hauen) the rest seeing that, put forth to Sea with great
danger, being a South-east winde: the enemy shot continually
at them, and annoyed them much: the Marriners
say for their excuse, that they were forced to set
saile hauing both weather & winde contrary: at night
the enemy brought another floate.
                  The 11. day they of the Towne shot furiously vpon
this floate. There were 10. men hurt in Captaine Peter
Wilkens Barke.
                  The 12. of December, the enemy brought another
floate.
                  The 13. there entred a ship by day.
                  
                     
The 15. there were two Barkes lost, but all that were
within them were saued, at night there went foorth
some Mariners.
                  The 16. of December, they parled about the redeeming
of prisoners: two came from the South-square to
yeeld themselues into the Towne, who said that the enemy
would giue an assault with a certaine bridge.
                  The 17. of December, it was a great tempest with
a North-weast winde, the which did much harme on
either side.
                  The 18. of December, there entred 41. ships into Ostend,
the which were almost all shotte through with the
Canon, and yet were they all saued, one onely was
sunke: & another (beeing laden with victuals) was abandoned
by the Pilot, and yet entred into the
towne. That day the Gouernour Ghistil arriued at Ostend.
                  
                  The 20. day there was a great tempest with thunder
and raine from the Southwest.
                  The 22. of December there entred 27. saile into
Ostend in the day time, without any losse, one of Amsterdam
was the first, falling to her by lot.
                  The 23. day, the Captaine of the blacke galley arriued
with a 150. mariners, & the Seignier de la North (which
had bin gouernor) went out of the Towne.
                  The 24. of December, all prisoners Mariners and
Marchantes were exchanged one for another, and the
truce continued.
                  The 25. of December, being christmas day, the enemies
brought another float, the which was not great; they of
the towne shot continually at it day and night, with 8.
Canons and could not breake it, being bound very fast

vnto the first: the enemies laboured there without intermission.
                  They also brought a floate vpon the West side, and
placed it whereas it looked vpon the Porke-espike and
the false braie, it was farre better then the other, for that
the Water is not so large in that place as in the Gollet,
but being neerer vnto the Towne, it was more easie
to fire.
                  The 28. of December, there entred fiue companies
of English into Ostend.
                  
                  The 29. day there went forth 24. ships without any
harme: and the same day Captaine Kalb of Vtrike was
slaine.
               
            
            
               
                  The Coppy of a Letter written from
Andwerp the 30. of this moneth, whereby
you may learne many notable
particularities.
                  HEre we haue had great hope of the taking of Ostend,
especially when as they thought the Gollet might
be cut off, and made vnprofitable for the enemies,
but in the ende the Sea hath carried away all the
workes: notwithstanding there is yet some hope to preuaile:
Spignola hath vndertaken it, and doth daily imploy
some about the workes. He hath casziered and
dismissed aboue 600. men, as well commanders, Captaines
and Sargeants, as commissaries and Treasurers,
wherof some had put to accompt to the King, or to the
Country, fiue stiuers for euery Bauin, whereas now
they haue them for halfe a stiuer: hee hath also reformed
the common souldiers.
                  
                     
The Countrie of Flanders doth contribute for the
entertainment of the army 12000. flemish Crownes a
day, comprehending the munition, forrages, and stuffe
for buildings and seruices, all to be deducted out of
their rates by the other Prouinces, for the terme of six
moneths to begin the first of Nouember. They meane
to make fiue forts or plat-formes more before Ostend,
at the which they labour already. all things are ready
to batter the Towne and to giue an assault, with great
forces, the army (which hath lodged at Kempen) doth
now march towards Ostend, the assault shall be giuen
vpon the first occasion that is offred. They haue promised
generally to all soldiers, (the Towne being taken)
to pay them all arrerages, and to giue them foure
moneths pay more then is their due, with leaue & pasport
to retire for such as shall demaund it. They make
many engins at Nieuport, Bruges, Gand, & other places,
and amongst the rest canons of wood, a fadom long,
with great bandes of Yron, the which one man may
carry for a neede; these they shall charge with nayles
with two heads or crooked, and euery peece shal make
but one or two shotte at the most, they expect shortly
to heare of some great exploits, whatsoeuer shal befall,
they haue resolued not to raise the siege nor to abandon
the Towne.
                  Not long since in a sollemne assembly of the Councell
at Warre (whereas all the commaunders Colonels
and chiefe Captaines were present) his Highnesse
(amongst other questions,) demaunded how
long the Prince of Parma had beene before Andwerp,
and being answered him, about eighteene monethes,
he saide it was not then eighteene yeares, and

when we haue beene so long before Ostend, wee shall
take it, yea if we should imploy all that is in the King of
Spaines power. The speech is, that we shall haue 14.
thousand Italians and Spaniardes in the spring, and to
that end they labour continually in the munition houses,
to make dublets, breeches, cassackes and such like
and you would say that the warre doth but now beginne:
You may see hereby, that they spare no cost,
nor feare any danger or discommodity, yea they are
without feare of death, hoping to inioy this spouse in
despight of her.
                  The last of December at night, eleuen souldiers
went forth of the Towne to fire some of the enemies
workes, but the Bauins would not take, so as they
were presently forced to retire with the losse of foure
of them.
                  
                     1604. The first of Ianuary (according to the custome of
warre) they saluted one another with Canon and
musket shott and many were slaine,
                  The 2. of Ianuary 8. shippes went out of Ostend,
whereof one was sunke, the which ran on ground behind
Luysbos.
                  
                  The 3. of Ianuary there went forth 24. saile together
without any losse.
                  The 6. of Ianuary there entred three ships.
                  The same day seauen Loapers or aduenturers
brought a Corporall & two Soldiers into the Towne;
by whom they knewe (according to the letter from
Andwerp of the 30. of December) that within eight
dayes the Campe had beene fortified with 50. enseignes
of foote, and seauen Cornets of horse, and that
they expected the Arche-duke; so as it semes they

haue a desseigne to giue a generall assault, but they
of the towne are strong and furnished with all things
necessary, to defend themselues, and to hold out besides
the succors which are dayly and houerly sent vnto
them.
                  The 9. of Ianuary foure ships went out in the day
time without any losse.
                  The 10. of Ianuary an Italian of the Campe, came
and yeelded himselfe into the Towne, and sayde that
the enemies had resolued to giue an assault to the
halfe Moone that is vpō the Gollet, the first darke night
that should come. And to that effect they had built a
bridge,
                        Pompeies Chariot. which they called Pompees Chariot, by the name
of Spignolas Ingenieur. It is made in maner of a Chariot
with foure wheeles, euery one being 15. foote
high and six broade, behinde comes the Bridge, supported
vppon a highe crosse beame, which is at the
end of the Chariot, the moyty of which Bridge
that goes before, doth rise and fall as they please,
by the meanes of two Cables that past by two
polleys, which are fastened at both endes through
a Crosse, the Beame whereof as a great Maste, a
150 foote long, the which stands vpright before the
chariot, the bridge is 60. paces long, and 16. broad, as
it is plainly to be seene in the plott of the towne of
Ostend. As for the effect of this engine, the vertue of
the garrison, and the good happe of the States hath
turned all into smoke: this fugitiue saith also, that
the enemie should assaile the towne in foure or fiue
places at once.
                  The tempest and foule weather had almost ouerthrowne
the East Rauelin, so as the enemies had

now better meanes to annoye the shippes, going in
and out of the Towne: the besieged looked for
stuffe dayly out of Zeland to repaire it.
                  The enemy brought yet another floate on the
West-side neere to Sand hill, right against the olde
Hauen.
                  They of Ostend did writ into Zeland, that all went
well in the Towne, and that they had no want but
of stuffe to repayer the breaches which the Sea had
made.
                  Here endes the Germanie discourse, I haue recouered
many instructions from diuers places, conteyning
the most memorable things that haue passed since, at
the siege of Ostend, as well without as with in, vnto this
present, the which I haue added hereunto, to acquaint
the reader as well with the intelligences and letters
written from Ostend, as from other places.
                  From the 15. of Ianuary to the 19. of February there
hath entred at diuers times aboue a 150. saile great and
small, with fower Canons, two demyes, and ten companies
of souldiers.
                  The Arch-dukes men make there approches at the
South-west, betwixt the Polder and the olde Hauen or
platforme. They presse vs most vnder the west rauelin;
and wee haue 15. companies in guard in the counterscarfe.
They make battery vppon battery, hoping to
make a breach: for our partes we double and fortifie
our counterscarfe; we peerce six Canoniers vppon the
Polder, and ten others which flanke vppon the approches,
with foure more in another place. The next
night they should plant two small Brasse peeces in the
halfe Moone of the Polder, & two others in the Curtin

of the West-Rauelin, with which peeces they shall
play and indomage the enemies workes; their approches
are exceeding neere, we doe nothing day & night
but shoote Grenadoes, firy bullets, and stones at them;
yet they cease not to labour continually, so as you
would say they are slaues which are at this worke: we
doe not thinke but in the day and the night they loose
aboue three hundred men the place where they presse
vs neerest, is the halfe Moone at the Polder, and the
West Rauelin, we cast Grenadoes vnto them with our
handes hourely. We haue prepared a Barke full of
wilde fire, the which at the first occasion we will thrust
against their approches: The composition of this fire
is such, as the more they shall striue to quench it,
the more vehemently it will burne. God send it good
successe. Our double Rauelin shall be soone finished,
they doe nothing at the new Hauen. The enemie approcheth
neere vpon the gollet, and labors there continually,
but that will auaile them little: we remoue our
canon frō the west part: our halfe Moone of the Spaniards,
is made aboue like vnto a clothiers tainters wheron
they stretch their cloath, to withstand the force of
Pompees chariot: This chariot hath beene once tryed,
but after they had well obserued it, they carried it
backe to the downes.
               
            
            
               
                  The 10. of March from Ostend.
                  THe first of this moneth the winde was very high
at West Northwest, with a furious tempest, so as
out towne hath bin wonderfully indomaged. The tide
hath bin so high as many haue bin forced to leaue their

lodgings and houses. The ancient inhabitants say, that
there hath not beene any so great these fortie yeares.
This tempest hath continued vnto the fift of this moneth;
vpon the East-side, it hath wholy ouer-throwne
our Rauelin with the Curtaine, euen vnto the East
gate, as also the East-Rauelin which is right before
the gate, the enemie shoots there, & doth much harme.
                  The Strod-dicke (that is to say, the Dike made of
Strawe, which alwayes keepes the water vnder the
Souldiers feete) is broken in diuers places. The halfe
Moone of the Spaniards vpon the Gollet is free from
harme.
                  A corner of the counter-scarpe hath beene carried
away by the tide.
                  The enemies Lueschosch or Luysbos, hath also beene
wonderfully ruined, and there is 100. paces fallen
downe to the ground betwixt the two batteries together
with the chiefe batterie at the end of Luysbos
towards the Sea shoare, in such sort as the least part
thereof is standing, and had not that beene which
they had newly made, Luysbos had beene quite carried
away with the Souldiers, and whatsoeuer was
vpon it.
                  The old towne hath had a good share in this wrack,
and if the winde had not somewhat abated the third
day, all the towne had beene in danger, but the Almightie
God by his mercie did prouide for it. A great
part of Sand-hill was ouer-throwne, but the Pork-espike
was not toucht. The counterscarpe hath beene wholy
carried away, so as the water cannot be stayed within
the towne ditches, and when the tide is gone, they go
on drie foote. The workes of the Arch-dukes men vpon

the West-side, and their new approaches betwixt
the old Hauen and the West square, haue beene wholie
ruined, except that which they haue newly made
vnder the halfe Moone of the Polder which stands yet.
                  The 3. day we set fire on their approaches which
they abandoned.
                  The 4. they tooke Becc-af or the follie of the East
from vs, but we made them presently to forsake it.
                  The 5. day the Arch-dukes men made 150. Canon
shott vpon Sand-hil, Helmont, Porke-espike, and the
West-rauelin.
                  The sixt of March our men forsooke Becc-af, which
the enemie seeing, he presenlty seazed on it, but soone
after (fearing that we would blowe them vp) they forsooke
it againe of themselues. They haue also shott vehemently
this day from the Polder-square, South-square,
and West-square, seeing vs to worke at our
Canoniers: we haue shott so furiously from the West-gate,
as they haue beene forced to retire their Canon.
There haue beene spent aboue 300. Canon-shott on
both sides; to morrow or the next day we shall batter
the enemies approaches which are vnder the halfe
Moone of the Polder with 19. Canons, and shall fire
them. Euery night when as the water is lowe we are
continually in armes.
                  The 14. two Suisses of the Arch-dukes Campe came
and yeelded themselues vnto vs, and said that they had
receiued no money in seauen weekes: that there was
great mortalitie in their quarter, and that the Souldiers
had no courage to come to the assault: but we beleeue
them no more then needs must: we are the next night
in guard, and the day following.
                  
                     
God be thanked we are yet strong inough, and haue
no need of any thing.
               
            
            
               
                  From Ostend the 24 of March.
                  THe 15. of this moneth there went forth 36. saile
whereof one was sunke.
                  The 17. there entred 9. saile and 9. peeces of ordinance,
as well whole as demy culuerines.
                  The 18. there entred 42. saile without any harme
or losse.
                  The 21. in the after noone Colonell Ghistel our gouernour
was slaine with a musket shot.
                  The same day, two of our Scottishmen went and
yeelded to the enemy.
                  The 22.The Gouernour of Ostend slaine. they without asked vs if our Gouernour
slept still; hauing opened him, they found the bullet
had peirced through his heart, and had stayed in the
left eare, his bowels were interred here, and his bodie
imbalmed and sent to Vtrecht.
                  
                  The 23. day one of the Arche-dukes souldiers came
and yeelded vnto vs, saying that without doubt within
3. dayes the Arch-duke would giue vs an assault; and
that all the preparatiues were ready.
                  The same day M. Dauid de Orleans Ingeneur and
chiefe maister of the fortifications within the Towne,
and the most renowned in Christendome was hurt,
he gaue order for all thinges, and then passed into
Zeland; but there is good hope of his recouery.
                  The enemies aduance their approches much vpon
the West and Southwest, and are already vnder
the poynte of the halfe Moone of the Polder; but

that is no great aduantage, we are strong in men and
want no resolution, and haue more prouision then we
neede: God be thanked here is no speech of any sicknes;
since the great tide there haue entred aboue a 100.
saile without any losse, withall kindes of commodities
and we expect more dayly.
                  The Colonel Lohn hath beene chosen Gouernour
in the place of Colonel Ghistel.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Letters from the Arch-dukes
Campe.
                  AS for the affaires of the siege of Ostend of our side
they do nothing, and these three monthes they
haue little aduanced: Pompees Chariot hath made a
great shewe, but there is no likelihood that it shall
worke any greater effect then it hath done hetherto.
The Tide of the first of March hath been wonderfull
terrible, for there hath not been the like seene
in the memory of man. It surprised vs in the night, at
a little platforme, and carried away all the Corps de
guard, which were vpon the head of the dike, yea the
little Baraque of the Count Boucquoys,
                     
                        Baraque signifies a lodging. it ouerthrew
three or foure Canons, and forced all the Souldiers
of the guard to clime vp, vnlesse they would be drowned:
it drowned much of our quarter, and carried
away a good part of the watermens: But the hurt
it did vnto the Towne was nothing lesse: The entrie of
the hauen was all broken; the counterscarfe ruined in
many places; Bruges Gate quite layed open, the rampere
broken in manie places in such sort as maine thousands

of Canon shotte coulde not haue done more;
for seauen or eight daies after; they battered the towne
with twenty fiue Canons. and it was propounded to
giue an assault, and concluded so to doe, but the order
was afterwardes changed. They suppe now vpon
the side of Albertus fort. Catrisse Maister of the
Campe, and the Bourgingnous on the Polder side, are
already alodged at the Counterscarfe, they haue but
eight foote of earth to pearce: Catrisse was shotte
through the body with a Musket shotte; and Mounsiuer
de Torres hath beene called to commaund in his
place where now hee is; the saide Catrisse died on
Sunday at night, his Sargeant Maior called Rouuille
was slaine the night before: and the day before
Captaine Liestre, brother in lawe to Catrisse,
was sore hurt.
                  I know not what the euent will be: Captaine L' Enfant
Sargeant Maior of the Liegeos was slaine a little
before: Monsieuer de la Malaise Lieutenant Colonell of
the Liegeois is hurt: Mounsieur de Torres escaped faire
from a Grenado which fell at his feete. The Italians
aduaunced to the Cangrego, and the Spaniards to the
Porke-espike, so as they haue taken good footing,
and hope for a good end, it were happy it might be
soone, for the enemie makes himselfe strong. Mounsieur
de Ghistell Gouernour of the Towne dyed eight
dayes since of a Musket shott: he whom the Souldiers
haue chosen in his place, hath had his legge
shott off within these foure dayes. Beholde the
estate of our affaires at this day. The 2. of Aprill
1604.
                  The Estates of the confederate Prouinces and the

Prince Maurice, seeing that the Arch-duke Albert continued
still his siege before Ostend,
                     The resolution of the Estates and of Prince Maurice.
                      the which he held
straightly begirt by land: And although he preuailed
not in his desseignes, which were to reduce it vnder
his obedience, sparing neither men, money, munition
nor any thing whatsoeuer to that effect: Yet
the Estates of the confederate Prouinces, thought
it fit to prepare an armie to raise the siege from the
saide Towne, or at the least to annoy the Arch-duke
in some other place, whereby he might be constrayned
to turne head, and to with-draw some part of his
forces, and so to cease the dayly alarmes which hee
gaue to them of Ostend, who had beene besieged three
yeares.
                  To effect this desseigne it was resolued by
the saide Estates to staye all shippes and boates fitt
for that purpose both of Holland, Zeland and Friseland,
to the number of foure thousand saile and
more, the which they caused to repaire to Dordrecht,
Goroum, Schoonhouen and other places of Holland:
                     4000. vessels furnish an army.
the Rendeeuous being giuen before the Castell
of Ramekins in Wallcheren, the which is one of the
Ilandes of Zeland. They of Horne, Enchusen, and
Amsterdam did furnish 500. saile, it was an admirable
thing to see the men of warre and Marriners, which
came to Dordretch: for whose seruice the shippes were
rigged & made ready, as well for them, as also to carry
a number of pipes full of fresh water, with Wagons
and horses, sackes to fill with earth, artillery and other
necessary munition, so as it was a goodly thing to beholde
this equipage.
                  The 21. of Aprill Prince Maurice parted from Dordrecht
                     
with 12. or 14. thousand men: amongst the
which there were 20. companies of horsemen, and all
the aboue named shippes of Warre, with the rest
that were in other places: The which being come to
an Anchor before the hoale of Middlebourg, and along
the shoare of Armude, there were found aboue three
thousand and three hundred ships of warre, without
compting all other charges requisite in an armye. At
which place his Excellencie concluded with the Estates,
where they should land in Flanders.
                  
                  The 24. of Aprill the gates of Armude were open
from nine of the clocke at night vntill three in the morning,
where proclamation was made at the sound of
the drum, that al souldiers should imbarke presently vpon
paine of death, euery one in his owne vessell; the
which being done, & the tide being good, al the fleete
passed towardes Flessingue and Ramekins, sailing towardes
Wulpen, the which is at the mouth of the Hauen
of Escluse, & hauing a south-east winde they came
betwixt Wulpen and Cadsandt, into the blacke port or
hoale, where they landed; the places lying commodiously,
but two leagues distant from Flessingue, and one
from Escluse.
                  
                  The 26. of Aprill, they came to the Ile of Cadsandt,
where they landed without any opposition or let: Such
as were in garde at the blacke Port and other places
fled: so as Prince Maurice marched towardes the
fort of Hossede, and hauing taken it, he went towardes
that of Lippinon, causing the Captaine (who commanded
therein) to be summoned to yeeld the place, who
made answer that he would first see the Canon before
he would yeeld, Prince Maurice sent him word, that

if he forced him to make on Canon shot against the
place, he would put all within it to the sword, and yet
he gaue order to bring two canons, the which as soone
as the besieged did see they yeelded. They of the fort
of Estfliet, being likewise sommoned to yeelde, made
no answer but with their Canon, to such as presented
themselues before it, but towardes night, seeing the
Canon planted, they yeelded, leauing their artillery,
munition for warre, and victualles in the fort; those
which came forth were full sixe hundred men, so as
all the Ile of Cadsandt and the said forts were now in
the possession of Prince Maurice: In the meane time
the rest of the armie was busie to discharge the ships in
the said Iland.
                  The Arch-duke (hauing intelligence of Prince Maurice
his descent) sent some troupes from his Campe before
Ostend, who arriued the 25. and 26. day, and intrenched
themselues in a halfe Moone vpon the West
side of the Port of Escluse, to stop Prince Maurice his
passing.
                  The 27. of Aprill, Prince Maurice sent some of his
ships, with some souldiers, (being accompanied with
the blacke Galley) towardes the entry of the hauen of

                        
                           •
                        scluse, to passe his men with shaloupes: But the Arch-dukes
men beeing to the number of a thousand horse
and three thousand foote (according to the report of
some prisoners) which then were incamped at the said
entrie, and had some artillery planted euen with the
water, gaue them such a welcome as they were forced
to retire hauing lost some Marriners, notwithstanding
that his Excellencie had two batteries on this side the
hauen, euery one of six peeces of ordinance.
                  
                     
The 26. of Aprill Prince Maurice did nothing but
assure himselfe of the Ile of Cadsandt and the Arch-dukes
men in their fortifications: his Excellencie caused
some artillery to be brought euen vnder the Castell of
the Port of Escluse, to annoy the Galleys that lay there,
but they drew them higher into the Towne, and then
they shot little on either side.
                  In the meane time they of Ostend beeing aduertised
of the descent of Prince Maurice, reioyced much, hoping
to haue some rest, as indeede they had for a
while; but they omitted not to shoote more couragiously
against the enemy, with their firie bullets especially
against a great Bul-worke the which they called
Loucqen Pot, where the fire tooke, the which the
Arch-dukes men seeing, they drew away their artillery,
and suffered it to burne and ruine.
                  The last of Aprill, sundry ships went in and out of
Ostend by the new Gollet, and yet they shotte not at
them, notwithstanding that the Mariners were faine
to thrust their vesselles in and out by maine force, a
thing which had not beene long vsed in the Country,
so as for the present, they of Ostend are in hope that
the Towne will be hereafter better furnished then it
hath bin, especially for that they hinder them nothing
in their fortifications. Prince Maurice hauing effected
what he desired in the Ile of Cadsandt, beeing loath to
loose any time, he sent to discouer the most comodious
places to enter into the firme land of Flanders; so
as the 30. of Aprill, his Excellencie past the streame
which comes from Escluse towardes Isandicque, and
hauing transported his armie without any incounter,
he presently tooke the fort of Coxi, and the Lieutenant

with ten others prisoners; such as would defend
themselues were slaine choosing rather to stand vpon
their defence. then to saue themselues by flight,
some prisoners that were taken saide, that the enemies
were in a great terrour, and that they of Escluse
did fortifie daylye, setting their Galley slaues to
worke, which doe serue them to no other vse in the
Towne.
                  The Arch duke notwithstanding is constrained to
disperce his forces,The Arch-duke deuides his army into three. according to the resolution of the
Estates▪ and is forced to deuide them into three that
is, one part before Ostend another towardes the Prince
Maurice & the third against the incursions of the mutiners,
the which are 1200. horsemen, accompanied
with a thousand sixe hundred Caualiers of his Excellencies,
and a thousand fiue hundred Musketiers on
horsebacke set vpon Coussins, the which were made
this Winter in Holland.
                  
                  His Excellencie making his preparation to besiege
the fort of Isandicque, changed his resolution, meaning
first to force three other forts which are neere to that
place.
                  The of 1. May, he Camped before Saint Marguerits
fort, where there was spent from noone vntill
midnight, with nine Canons, about some hundred
shotte, the which did so terrefie them, that although
there were at the least two thousand horse and foote,
with the peasants, yet they abandoned the place and
fled by night; and so did they in like sort of the forts of
Saint Catherine and Saint Philip, although in all the said
forts there were three thousand foote & sixteene companies
of horse.
                  
                     
The 3. of May, his Excellencie besieged Isandicque,
where he intrēched himselfe in such sort round about,The siege of Isandicque.
as no man could go in nor out, he brought much ordinance
vnto it, and commaunded certaine shippes of
warre to present themselues by Sea before it, with
some Brigandins and shaloupes to stoppe their passage
forth by Sea: In the meane time the Arch-dukes men
which were vpon the West side of the Hauen of Escluse
(thinking now to haue a good opportunity to recouer
the Ile of Cadsandt,) caused many shaloupes to
come from Bruges, and with some that were at Escluse,
in the which they imbarked 2000. men; but those
which Prince Maurice had left in gard in the said Iland,
suffered some thousand to land, whom they charged
so furiously as they put them in route; most of them
were Italians and Spaniardes, who cried ala barca, alabarca,
labouring to recouer their shaloupes, but as they
prest into them, some of them were ouer-whelmed, &
a great number were drowned, they could not take aboue
16. or 18. aliue, and 8. shaloupes whereof the prisoners
were presented to his Excellencie.
                  
                  In the end Prince Maurice hauing entred into the
maine land,Prince Maurice before Escluse. he set downe before Escluse, sending his
horsemen to scoure the Country almost as farre as
Gaunt & Courtray, who returned with great spoile, so as
they of Flanders are more oppressed then they were euer,
all the burthen of the warre being fallen vpon
them. His Excellencie hath giuen leaue to many ships
to retire themselues, & there comes dayly new troupes
to the armie from diuers nations.
                  The Arch-duke is come to Gaunt to dispose of his
affaires, and hath placed a great Garison in the Towne:

They of Bergues vpzoone write, that the mutiners haue
surprised the Towne of Wauere aboue Bruxelles, and
make their courses into Haynault, spoiling the Country
where they passe, and haue burnt the Suburbes of vilnorde
for that they would not paye the contribution
which they demaunded, the which doth greatly terrifie
the pesants, so as the Towne of Gaunt and Bruges
are full of Country men, who are fled thether with
thier wiues children and cattell.
                  Saterday the eight of May, three souldiers came
out of the fort of Isandicque, and yeelded to his Excellencie;
they saide, that the besieged had neede of
all things and especially of fresh water, and that if the
Canon once plaied, they would not make any great resistance.
                  The ninth of May, Prince Maurice sent to sommon
them by one of his trumpets,
                        Isandicque sommoned by a trumpet was slaine. whom they slue with
a Musket shott; Prince Maurice offended at this outragious
acte, sent a drumme to demaund him that had
committed it, threatning, that if they failed therin, not
to receiue any one of them to mercie; They sent forth
two Captaines to make their excuse, saying that they
knew not who it was had made that shott, finally,
they deliuered an Italian vnto him,Compotion of the fort of Isandieque.
                      & then it was yeelded
vpon these conditions.
                  First that the besieged should depart the fort with
their armes, their matches out, and their drummes not
sounding.
                  That they should leaue the Canon and munition of
warre.
                  That for foure monethes they should not carry any
armes in Flanders against his Excellencie.
                  
                  
                     
That they should furnish them with ships to carry
away their sicke men and hurt with their baggage to
the Hauen of Sas, which ships they should be bound to
send back, & for assurance thereof vntill they were returned,
they should leaue two Captaines in hostage.
                  According to which accord, they departed the 10.
of May at fiue of the clock in the afternoone, being in
all, about 600. men, Italians and Wallons.
                  
                  The eleuenth of May P. Maurice went with 1000.
foote and seauen companies of horse before a ruined
towne called Aerdenburg,
                     
                        Aerdeburg a ruined Towne. betwixt Gaunt and Escluse,
the which is another passage, bordring vpon that coū
                     trie
which the Sea hath gained, in the which there was
a regiment of Germaines, with some troopes of Horse,
which had intrenched themselues to stop the passage,
but they were as faint harted as the rest, and fled out
at the back side into the Marishes, leauing withall a
Castell reasonably strong, into the which there was a
garrison put of 2000. men, which holds Escluse besieged
on that side, so P. Maurice entred the secōd time into
Flanders, finding many enemies, but small resistance.
                  The 16. of May, the whole armie (that onely excepted
which was left for the guard of the Ile of Cassandt)
being parted from Isandique passed at Aerdenburg, taking
the way of Dam,
                     
                        Dam a Towne in Flanders.
                      the which is vpon the riuer that
goes from Bruges to Escluse: vpon the way halfe a
league from Dam, there is a water (which cannot be
easilie waded through, by reason of the mudde) the
which hath a little Bridge and a Sluce, vnto the which
the tide flowes: here the Arch-dukes men had entrenched
themselues, to the number of 4000. horse and
foote, vpon so straight a passage, as but two horsemen

could march in fronte: the fort was reasonably strong,
and sufficient to stay Prince Maurice his armie: yet after
some resistance they abandoned the place, and retired
by Dam on the other side of the riuer; they left
vpon the place 300. men slaine & hurt, and among the
rest there were two Captaines slaine, and three prisoners,
two Italians and one Spaniard, and a Sargent Maior
sore hurt, there were more taken prisoners then
slaine. The same Souldiers being retired (as hath beene
said) by Dam on the other side of the riuer, made a shew
as if they would once againe attend the Prince, and to
that end they lodged themselues in a place of more aduātage
then that which they had abandoned; they had
a great chanell by the which the sea did flow vnto Bruges,
and with all the riuer & dikes which couered them.
                  The 18. of May part of the armie hauing bin all night
in battaile the Lord of Chastillon hauing the point with
a part of his regiment, thinking to charge thē, he found
they had left the place. The same day at night the armie
camped before Escluse.
                  
                  The 23. day S. Georges forte which is vpon the banke
of Escluse yeelded.
                  The 30. day the Arch-dukes mē to the nūber of 4000
foot, & 2000. horse, thinking to put some mē, munition
& victuals into Escluse, were chargd by P. Maurice & put
to route, & their victuall & munition taken: there were
few slaine, & the number is vncertaine, for that the contry
is couered & full of Marishes The galleis being vnprofitable
for thē of Escluse, they drew forth the slaues,
and sent them out with some souldiers, who being incoūtred
by P. Maurice his troops, were dispersed, about
100. of these slaues being chained 2. & 2. together saued
thēselues in his Excellēcies camp, where they had good

entertainment, and some of them came into France.
                  
                  The 5. of Iune on Whitson-eue,Assault at Ostend the 5. of Iune. there was a generall
assault giuen in three sundry places, the most obstinate
that might be: they renued it thrice, and it continued
eight houres, the enemies had made certaine Mines,
which annoyed them more then the townes-men, hauing
blowne them vp too soone; there were 800. men
slaine, and 500. hurt of their part, and among the rest,
the Seignieur of Bossempierre.
                     Bossempierre slaine. There were about 100.
slaine in the towne, and some hurt.
                  The 17. of Iune the enemies gaue an other assault
the which lasted from two of the clock in the afternoone
vntill eight at night,An assault the 17. of Iune. when as the enemie did
winne some of the Rauelins of the Polder, at the
which they lost but 150. men: and they of the towne
some hundred: amongst others there were foure Captaines
slaine: And although the Towne Souldiers behaued
themselues very well, yet the enemies lodged
vpon the Polder rampers very neere the towne, where
they did strongly intrench themselues.
                  There entred at the same time into the towne 17.
companies of Souldiers, with munition and victuals
by the Gollet.
                  The Arch duke seeing that a part of his forces were
drawne away to suppresse the insolent courses of theThe Arch-duke compounds with the mutiners.
mutiners (to the end that he might fortifie himselfe the
more against Prince Maurice, who lay before Escluse)
he sought a meanes to make an agreement with them,
the which he effected, conditionally that he should (as
he had promised) pay them whatsoeuer was due: that
he should remit and discharge them of all such money
as they had leuied: that he should forgiue whatsoeuer

was past: disanull the proscription which he had made
against them; and giue them Ruremonde for their assurance;
giuing to euery footman 10. stiuers a day, and
to euery horsemen 25. vntill they had receiued their full
pay. The said mutiners yeelded vnto his Highnesse the
castels of Hochstraten and Carpen, and to P. Maurice the
Towne of Graue, with the 1600. Caualiers, and 1500.
Musketiers which had ioyned with them, and the said
mutiners were not bound to serue his Highnesse vntill
they had receiued their full paiment.
                  The Reader shall be aduertised that the Arch-duke
doth presse the towne of Ostend very hardly,Conclusion & end of the booke. for that
Prince Maurice is camped before Escluse, so as they daily
make new attempts to take Ostend: and they within
the Towne doe all they can to defend it, hauing
made new retrenchments to that end, whereby we
may coniecture they cannot be yet forced, yet eyther
of them doe what they can to take or to defend the
place: which is the occasion why we end this booke,
for that euery three dayes they giue new assaults, the
which would be but a repetition of the like things we
haue before set downe; and therefore the courteous
Reader shall content himselfe with this, vntill there
shall fall out some other memorable thing, the which
in time we will offer his sight.
               
            
            
               
               A continuance of the sieges of Ostend
and Escluse, with a pourtrait of the new
retrenchments at Ostend.
               WE haue heretofore said that Prince Maurice had
taken the Ile of Cadsandt, and set footing into the
maine land of Flanders, to incampe himselfe before Escluse,
and to beseege it. Before we proceed any further,
we will represent vnto you the scituation of the towne.
Esclufe is a Sea towne lying in the country of Flanders,
which they call Flamigante, three leagues from Bruges
and fiue from Middlebourg, in Zeland: In former times
it hath beene a good and a riche towne, but through
the quarrels and warres it hath had with the Brugeois,
it hath beene made subiect vnto them, and much impouerished
and diminished. It hath a goodly spatious
Hauen, capable of 500. ships; the towne is exceeding
strong both by Arte and Nature, inuironed of all sides
with the Sea, Marishes and drowned land so as in a
maner it is inaccessible. In the beginning of the warres
it held for the confederate Prouinces. The Prince of
Parma besieged it in the yeare 1587. and did batter it
with thirty Canons and eight Culuerins, making a
breach of two hundred and fiftie paces, where his men
gaue seauen assaults, and were valiantly repulsed by
them within the towne, who fought for their liues and
liberties: In the end succours comming within view
of the towne, and being hindred by the valour of the
Prince of Parma, either to enter, or to do any other exploite
importing for their releefe, the besieged after
three moneths siege, yeelded vp the towne the 4. of
August, vpon honourable conditions. Since which

time Escluse hath continued vnder the Spanish gouernment,
who haue so afflicted them with subsidies, garrisons,
and such like vexations, as the greatest part of the
Inhabitants haue abandoned it. The King of Spaine
(by the aduise of Spignola) made choise of this place
for the retreate of his galleys, wherof we haue spoken
before, and euen when as his Excellencie came to incampe
before it, there were some the which being
made vnprofitable by his Excellencies forces, they of
the towne drew forth the slaues, and sent them away
as vnprofitable mouthes, to spare their victuals which
are very scant. These are they we haue seene in France
some moneths since, who saued themselues, when as
their leaders were put to flight by his Excellencies
men. His Excellencies quarter is vpon the North-side
of the towne, whereas there are many Block-houses
and trenches, aswell against the towne as without, to
hinder the succours. The second quarter is Count Williams,
fortified almost like vnto his Excellencies. Count
Ernest quarter is some distance from the rest, vpon the
West of the Towne, fortified with Black-houses, hauing
a bridge vpon Kreck to go to Sterdenburg vpon
the South-west. In the drowned land there are foureteene
ships and some Barkes with Block-houses, wheras
the Seigniour de la Noot commaunds. His Excellencie
hath caused some batteries to be made, but they
haue not yet done any thing. He hopes to haue the
towne by famine, the besieged hauing great want of
victuals, and especially of fresh water. His Excellencie
makes the Inhabitants of Flanders to contribute euen
vnto the Gates of Gaunt, for the entertainement of his
Armie.
               
                  
The Arch-duke in the beginning of Iuly went to
vist the Infanta, and to assure the inhabitants. As for
the siege of Ostend,
                  Ostend. the Arch-dukes armie consists of
eight or nine thousand foote, and fifteene hundred
horse, & euery day there entereth two thousand men
in guard into the trenches▪ the Sea hauing ruined the
fortifications of the towne, and especially their counterscarfe,
by the breach whereof the water hath runne
out of the ditch, so as the Arch-dukes men tooke it,
& haue gotten to the foote of the towne rampere. The
Bourguignons are lodged on the right hand, the Spaniards
on the left, and the Italians in the middest.
               The second of Iune the enemy blew vp a mine at
Polder Bulworke,A mine at Polder Bulworke. the which did little harme to them
of the Towne, but buried many of their owne men being
falty without: the which did coole the heate of the
Arch-dukes men being ready to go to the assault. At
the same time being come to handie blows, they of the
Towne plaied with their Canon and Muskets vpon
them, where there were about fifteene hundred slaine
and hurt, and of the Towne forty.
               The 16. day, the besieged made a sally,A Sallie in the which
they slue fiue or sixe of them which laboured in the
mines, and tooke foure or fiue prisoners, amongst the
which there was one of the chiefe Maisters, and vndertakers,
who saide that the enemy did mine vnder the
the West-gate:
                     Spignola sicke. and that Spignola was extreame sicke,
whom they held for dead.
               The besieged seeing themselues thus prest,Retrenchments of the besieged. had long
before begunne two retrenchments at the Rampere,
(the foote whereof the enemy was lodged) a hundred
and fifty paces one from another; their ditches are forty

foote broade the which they fill with water by the
sluces they haue within the Towne, and which cannot
be taken from them; betwixt these two retrenchmēts
there is a halfe Moone. The first was made defensiue
about mid Iune, and some peeces of Canon planted
theron as also vpon other plat-formes to play vpon the
Arch-dukes great battery; the portrait is set downe in
the beginning of this discourse.
               The 15. day the besieged were in armes all the morning,
thinking that the Arch-dukes men had prepared
to come vnto an assault, but it was a generall reuew
which they made.
               The 16. day the enemy blew vp a mine neere vnto
the West gate, the which wrought small effect, the
besieged laboured to repaire the breach which it had
made, and did counter-mine continually. An Italian
souldier came and yeelded himselfe into the Towne,
who said that there was another mine neere vnto it,
which the enemy would blow vp the next day, & giue
an assault, the which they did, but they were repulsed
with great losse of their men.
               There were diuers other mines and assaults, like in
a maner to the former, in one of them Captaine Hamilton
a Scottishman was slaine; Berendrecht Gouernour
of Ostend was also slaine about the same time. Colonell
vtenhouen who was sent to succeede him, had a Musket
shot through the necke, Captaine Marquet doth
now commaund there, being sent by his Excellencie.
They of the towne had beseeched him to giue them a
Gouernor of the same country, some man of valour &
authority. The besieged haue no want of any cōmodities,
being refreshed daily with al things necessary from

                  Zeland: The Inhabitants of the Towne are so assured,
as many of them haue caused their wiues to returne,
being retired for the amazment of the mines.
               The trenchments being finished,The besieged forsake the olde rampere. the besieged resolued
to bandon the olde rampere to spare their men. It
is a strang thing & worthy of memory that they haue
so long time disputed for a rampere of thirty foote
thicke, so much battered, mined, countermined and
sapt. The Spaniardes presently zeased vpon the olde
rampere.
               The 15. of Iuly Colonell Marquet Gouernor of the
Towne,A Sallie caused a sally to be made about eight or nine
of the clocke at night, to cloy the enemies Canon, of
whom there were many slaine but seeing the whole
armie comming vpon them, they retired.
               The siege beeing planted before Escluse, they of Ostende,
thinking it would be a cause to make the Arch-duke
to presse them more straightly, to diuert his Excellencie
by this meanes from his entriprise, laboured
continually in their new retrenchments, making one
behinde an other, as you maye see in the portraite,
seeking out all inuentions possibly to that end, and to
make the same firme, and to keepe it from falling, they
haue thought it good, besides the Bauins to mingle
hay therewith and to fill sackes
               
                  Spignola, being recouered of his sicknesse, prepared
to batter the retrenchments vpon the end of Iuly.
               The besieged are incoraged by the neernes of his Excellencies
armie, thinking that they fight in vew therof,
to the end that resisting the enemy still, Prince Maurice
might the better effect his desseigne vpon Escluse,
which is to force them to yeeld by famine.
            
            
               
               A discourse of that which happened at Ostend since
the 17. of Iune vnto the end
of the siege.
               AFter the death of Moūsieur de Ghistelles gouernor
of Ostend his successor Colonel Adrian van Lhoon
was likewise shot, then the cōmand of the towne
remained in three of the chiefe Captaines, whereof the
one called Captaine Beerendreght was slaine, & Mounsieur
Vtenhoue (another of them) being hurt retired into
Zeland: about the last of Iune Mounsieur Marquet (a
gentleman of good sufficiencie) was sent for gouernor:
the Marques Spignola hauing now the absolute charge
of the whole campe before Ostend,
                  
                     Spignola generall of the Campe before Ostend.
                   being a man of great
resolution, dilligent, affable & liberall: rich of himselfe,
hauing furnished the king of Spaine with great sums of
mony for the maintenāce of this siege: after that he had
(about the 17. of Iune) taken Helmont, with the west &
South-west Bulworks, Sand-hill standing then in great
danger; the besieged (hauing before hand made new
Bulworks with other fortifications opposite vnto thē,)
did now begin with all speede to make new retrenchments,
in diuers parts of the Towne, so as one part being
lost, they might haue another retreat, & their last
refuge was by the hauens mouth, where they had made
a Blockehouse or reduite inuironed with the Sea, in
this worke they vsed the aduice and skill of an English
Ingeneur called Ralse Dexter an olde seruitour in those
Coutries.
               In the meane time the besiegers cōtinued the approches
& workes towards the Sand-hill & new workes,
by mines & battery frō their plat-formes, giuing diuers

assaults with aduantage, so as the Arch-duke was in
great hope to take Ostend before that Prince Maurice
should be well intrenched before Sluice, being now lodged
in the towne ditch, which was a hard sandy groūd,
subiect to sappe and mine, and this was the generall
opinion of all his councell at warre.
               Prince Maurice Generall of the armie of the vnited
Prouinces,
                     P. Maurice intrenched before Sluice.
                   had time inough to intrench himselfe strōgly
before Sluice, yet not so sodenly, but that there entred
about 1500. men with some small supply of victuals, at
two seuerall times through the marishes. Notwithstanding
soone after the towne was so intrenched about, &
all the marish grounds ioyned together with bridges in
such sort, and in some waters, ships and armed Barkes
brought in all so strongly fortified, & of so great a compasse,
as the works were wonderfull for so short a time.
               Prince Maurice hauing finished and furnished his outward
fortifications with three skonses, he began to
make his entrenchments & battery against the towne,
causing a marueilous long Bridge to be made to giue
an assault ouer the hauen; but hauing intelligence by
some that fled out of the Towne, that their victuals
within grew scant, hauing aboue 3000. souldiers 1500.
galley-slaues, besides the Citizens to feed, he resolued
to famish them, being assured that Ostend would hold
out. Moreouer he knew that a secret way by the which
the Gouernour Serrano did thinke to draw in victuals
by night, was cut off by a fort which his Mariners had
made, and the wayes vnder water made deeper.
               They of Escluse being in great extremitie, made fiers
nightly vpon their steeple, crauing succours;
                     Sluice in extremity. 1604. so as the
Arck-duke (seeing Ostend to hold out) began to finde

his owne fault, in that he had not resisted the entire of P.
Maurice with all his forces: he therfore resolued to succor
Sluice, and yet to keepe Ostend still besieged, giuing order
to aduance the approches towards the new retrenchments,
the which the Marques Spignola was very loth to
do; It is said that he had written into Spaine, that he was
marching to the reliefe of Sluice, with small powre & little
hope, and not without danger of the winning of Ostend,
but he was forced therevnto to satisfie the Arch-dukes
humour and obstinacie.
               The Arch-duke gathered together all the power he
could, and by great promises drew the mutined Souldiers
to do him seruice in this action, who came vnto him
with a gallant troope of horse and foote; he gathered together
also a number of Wagons, and so framed an armie
vnder the command of the said Marques Spignola, not
without great enuy of the Spaniards & others, leauing the
siege of Ostend wel furnished with directiōs & necessaties.
               About the end of Iuly the Marques Spignola marched
with 5000. men towards Sluice,
                  
                     Spignola marcheth to releeue Sluice.
                   he tooke an olde towne
called Middlebourg, and so sought round about to force
through the Princes campe, but all in vaine: at length
when he had tried all quarters with losse on euery side, he
resolued the 17. of August to put his enterprise in execution
on the side of Coxie which is beyond the Ile of Cassandt,
hauing some intelligence that that quarter was but
weakely guarded.
               Prince Maurice being aduertised that the Marques
Spignola had resolued to make some great attempt vpon
the side of Coxie by Cassandt, holding that quarter the easiest
to force, and fittest for his approach to Sluice, if he
might lodge there: seeing that he was retired the 16. day
at night from before his trenches where he had camped,

hee imagined that he was gone to put his enterprise in
execution: he went therefore at night to dispose of all
things, if the enemies should present themselues, which
was to lodge few men in the two first forts, which he had
opinion they would assaile, commanding the Captaines
who had the charge thereof, to make some resistance if
the enemies came vpon them, and to retire into their
trenches as men surprised and amazed, drawing them in
as neere as they could to his artillarie, which discouered
all; he had also lodged 2000. Musketiers neere vnto thē,
the Lord of Chastisllon, with six companies of French, and
Colonel Veer with six of English, commanding that the
artillerie should not play vntill the enemies were come to
handie blowes with them, to the end they might drawe
on the other troopes that came to second them into the
trenches, he lodged his horsemen in such sort as they
might set vpon the enemie behinde during the fight, and
so disorder them, or to charge the bands of Spaniards, Italians,
or Wallons, in their retreat as they pleased. The mutinadoes
to the number of 2000. had the point, who giuing
a furious charge before day, forced the first defences,
and entred the trench, where they made some resistance
in retiring: those which commanded at the Artillerie,
seeing them so neere, with great aduantage, tooke the
oportunitie to discharge their Canon, without attending
those that were to second them, so as his Excellencies
horse could not come in time to charge them.
                     Spignola repulsed at Sluice.
                   The 2000
men which first entred, seeing themselues ill intreated by
the Canon and Musket shott, and part of them slaine and
hurt, they retired in the darke to their other troopes
which fled. There were many men lost in this charge.
It was written to his Maiestie that there were fourescoare
men of command slaine, amongst others the Marques

of Ranty, borne of the houses of Lalain and Croy;
Alfonso Borgias, who commanded the Spanish foot-men;
Maintenon a French-man, the rest were maisters of the
Campe, Captaines, and some voluntarie Gentlemen.
               The next day they of Sluice seeing Spignolas repulse,
and the armie retyred, being no longer able to subsist for
the great want of victuals which did consume them,
they sent forth two Captaines to his Excellencie to
treate of a Capitulation: wherevnto his Excellencie answered,
that there needed but three words, without any
further discourse.
               The first; that if they would depart that day, they
should goe with their Coulours flying, Drummes sounding,
their matches light, Bullet in the mouth, with
their armes and baggage, like men of honour and good
Souldiers.
               If they stayed vntill the next day, they should then
depatt with white wands.
               But if they temporized vntill the third day, he would
not suffer them to carry away any thing but Halters
about their necks, knowing they did it through malice,
being prest by extreame necessitie, being not bound
therevnto in honour, seeing they had no hope of succours,
but would glorie in shewing themselues obstinate.
               The two Captaines being returned into the Towne,
made report of the conditions propounded by Prince
Maurice,
                  
                     Sluice surrendred the 10. of August. but they could not resolue to depart that day,
but the next day they changed their opinions, and departed
with honourable conditions, being about foure thousand
and two hundred men, almost hunger-starued,
for all their bread and victuals were spent: many of the
Galley slaues had not toucht any bread in 10. or 12. daies,

& did feed vpon grasse, greene leaues, leather, old shooes
tenderly sodden, partchment and such like.
               The conquest of this strong scituated towne, very fitt
for many attemps, with 70. peeces or more of great ordinance,
and 10. or 11. Galleys with their furniture, incouraged
the vnited Prouinces to thinke vpon some course for
the reliefe of Ostend, for the effecting wherof they made a
general assēbly of the states at Sluice in the end of August.
               
                  Spignola being returned with his forces to the siege of
Ostend, the Arch-duke placed strong Garisons in Blankenbourg,
Dam, & Bruges, fortifying all places that might stop
Prince Maurice his passage to Ostend.
               
               In the meane time they of Ostende had diuers and
sundrie aduantages against the enemy by sallies and
countermines. The 10. of August they made a sally, chased
the besiegers frō the olde Bulworkes, seazed of their ordinance
& cloied it, but in their retreat (some hauing ventured
too far) 2. or 3. of their captaines & officers were slaine.
Spignola being returned,
                     Spignola returned to Ostend.
                   he prest them more then before,
and finding the Spaniardes to flie from al seruices, for the
enuy they did beare to him & to the Italiās, he resolued to
imploy the Germaines in their steede, and to draw them
vnto it by his bounty: hauing therefore made his approches
to Sand-hil by mines and other deuises, he resolued
to giue an assault with the Germaine regimentes of the
Earles of Foglia & Barlamont, being for the most part all
olde souldiers and of great resolution, who after much
resistance tooke Sand-hill,
                     Sandhil taken by the enemy. and slue all them that had
not retired in time, the which was a great furtherance to
obtaine their intent: for this their good seruice Spignola
bestowed of them out of his owne bounty some forty
thousand gilders to drinke, with great thankes and commendation.
               
                  
In the meane time the assembly of the generall Estates
of the vnited Prouinces of Nether-land,Reasons vppon the continuance of the siege of Ostend.
                   being at Sluice to
resolue what was best for them to do for the reliefe of Ostend,
propounded that this long, bloudy, and chargeable
defence of Ostend, was to haue an entry into the maine
land of Flanders. thereby to force them to their contributions
and to keepe the warre there, that seeing they had
now taken the strong towne of Sluce the Iland of Cassādt,
with many forts and skonces, besides the strong fort of Isandike
and the ruinated walled Towne of Ardenburg,
(which they resolued to fortifie and to builde a new) all
which contained a great peece of ground in the maine of
Flanders, whereby they had good meanes to draw all the
warres into Flanders into the enemies Country, and so
force the Country to contribute, 70. 80. or 90. thousand
gilders monthly, all which being now obtained, they
thought it needlesse to be at any further charge. Moreouer
besides the small likelihood there was to defend it:
there was no hope to take all the forts and skonces round
about it, without the which the towne would be to them
of no moment. And for the great benefit of the hauen to
the enemy, they thought, what with their shipping by sea,
and their strength of horsemē by land in Flanders, & their
dayly courses to incumber and stop the riuers and passages
within the Country, withall they would not dispaire,
that when the forts round about should be eyther broken
or neglected, to recouer the Towne againe, keeping the
dominion of the Sea, which aduantage they pretend aboue
their enemies, and that when as the place should be
repaired by their enemies against the violence of the Sea,
the which now against winter required a great charge of
30. or 40. thousand crownes.
               These & such like considerations being propounded,

the estates resolued to leaue the defence with the best
and most profitable conditions they could:They resolue to yeeld it vp. vnlesse Prince
Maurice with his maine force would attempt to raise the
siege, or else make a shew for the obtaining of more reasonable
conditions; but the fortification of Sluice and of
their other conquests beeing very necessary, to take all
meanes from the Archduke to besiege Sluice againe; did
hinder the same, sauing a little shew made to no effect.
               Wherefore the Sand-hill being taken by force in September
by the Germaines, as we haue said, and the Marques
Spignola making his approches & mines in the olde
Towne about the olde Church, by which it was greatly
feared that with any great tides or Westerne Windes,
the Sea might make some great breach, & be a hindrance
to any good composition, Mounsieur de Marquet the gouernour
with his Councell of warre in Ostend, knowing
the will and pleasure of the Estates of the vnited Prouinces
of Nether land their maisters,
                     Ostend surrendred the 12. of September 1604. hauing shipt all the principall
ordinance and munition, leauing some for a shew,
entred into treaty with the Marques Spignola the 8. of September,
concluded the 10. day: and they departed the 12.
day, after three yeares and ten weekes siege, and that
a continued siege without intermission, with fighting &
shooting of great ordinance daye and night both from
within and without, the like hath not beene seene in any
mans remembrance, nor read in any Histories.
               The number of shot spent of both sides may hereafter
come forth in so me relations and likewise of the dead
in three yeares space.
               It is written that there was found in a Comissaries pocket
who was slaine before Ostend the seuenth of August
diuers writings and remarkeable notes, and amongst
the rest a note of the number of the Arch-dukes Campe

that died without of euery degree. As followeth.
               
                  Maisters of the Campe. 7.
                  Colonels. 15.
                  Sargent Maiors. 29.
                  Captaines. 565.
                  Auncients. 322.
                  Lieutenants. 1116.
                  Sargents. 4911.
                  Corporals. 9166.
                  Lansepesadoes. 600.
                  Souldiers. 54663.
                  Mariners. 611.
                  Women & children. 119.
                  All amount to 72124. persons
               
               Which number is not so great, considering the time of
three yeares, sicknesses, and the colde Winters vpon the
Sea coast in so colde a Climate, fighting against the Elements
the which in former times hath not beene vsed.
There is nothing yet come to light of the number that
died within, but it is thought the number is far lesse, both
for that they were not so many in the Towne, and had
more ease, and were better victualled.
               The conditions of the composition were honorable.The Articles.
To goe forth by land as many as would, with their
Colours flying, Drummes sounding, their Matches
light, and Bullets in their mouthes, with foure peeces
of Ordinance, and Bullets & Poulder for tenne shotte:
and two hundred Wagons to carry away their stuffe,
besides all the Shippes within the Towne that were laden,
and the rest to be laden with their baggage, and
householde stuffe, their wiues and children, leauing
the rest of the amunition behinde, the chiefe whereof
was shipt before, they left about eight peeces some
not mounted, others crackt & broken with two or three
morters, and some 80. bartels of Poulder, the rest was
shipt away or made vnfit to vse.
               
                  
And so there went forth about foure thousand tall Souldiers
by the Stronde towards Blankenbourg, hauing beene
feasted and banketed by their enemies, both within the
towne and without in Spignolas Tents, and had a conuoy
to conduct them, & their ships departed in like sort; they
lodged that night at Blankenbourg and the next day they
came to Prince Maurice his campe before Sluice, where
all the Colonels, Captaines and chiefe men were kindly
entertained and welcomed by his excellencie, and the
Baylife of Ostend was made Baylife of Sluice.
               
               There remained no Inhabitants in Ostend, only one old
man, and a woman or two, but all retired, leauing it as
heapes of earth and sand. The Arch-duke came thether
with the Infanta to see the place, and from thence they
went in pilgrimage to our Lady by Dunkerke, to whom
they did ascribe the victory. All the countrie people there
abouts were commanded to bring in stuffe of wood and
Bauins, to repaier the Towne against the Sea.
               The Arch-dukes Campe is disolued, and the soldiers
are dispersed into the citties & townes of Flanders, which
were forced to receiue them for garrisons, to withstand
the incursions of the garrisons of Sluice and Ardenbourg,
the which his excellency had fortified with many Bulwarkes,
leauing there this winter some 7. or 8000. foote,
and 2000. horse in garrison, hauing built stables for
their horses in Ardenbourg and Isendicke. Monsier
Vander Noot being made Gouernour
of Sluice vnder Cont Hendrik Fredricke
of Nassaw, brother to
Prince Maurice.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            An Explanation of the figure
of the retrenchments of
Ostend.
            
               51, A Halfe Moone before Helmont in the which they of the towne
kept garde a long time.
               52. Helmont cut off from the Towne marked 42. in the whole
carde of the Towne represented in the Historie.
               53. A Bulworke on the West, where a mine played the 16. of Iune,
and the next day an assault was giuen in the whole mapp. 39.
               54. The Gallery or Corredor from Polder Bulworke to the Counter-scarfe.
               55. Here a mine was blowen vp the second of Iune, and an assault
was giuen.
               56. Here they of the Towne had a halfe Moone and kept garde.
where they made a mine.
               57. The Bulworke of the South-west. 35.
               58. The Castall, or stable of Kine, the South Bulworke.
               59. A halfe Moone within the Counter-scarfe where they of the
Towne kept garde.
               60. A halfe Moone taken by the besieged, cutt off and seperated
from the towne.
               61. A Rauelin.
               62. The West Rauelin
               63. The Porke-espike, a part whereof the enemie blew vp ane seazed
on the rest 41.
               64. A Blocke-house before the North gate.
               65. A Bridge,
               66. A Rauelin.
               67. New Helmont.
               68. The new Bulworke of the West.
               69. Sure gardes or vrigandes.
               70. A Plat-forme vpon the market place, whereon they haue made
three batteries marked with the numbers of 71. 72. 73. Afterwardes
it was changed to the new West Bulworke, number 69.
the which is of eight peeces, to play vpon the enemies Catteyes,
and is changed as occasion serues, as you may see in the portrait.
            
         
      
   