
      
         
            
            Ouidius Naſo
HIS REMEDIE
OF LOVE.
Tranſlated and Intituled to the Youth of
England.
            Plautus in Trinummo.
            
               —Mille modis Amor
               Ignorandu'ſt, procul adhibendus eſt, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   abstinendus.
               Nam qui in Amore precipitauit, peius perit, quàm ſi ſaxe ſaliat.
            
            
               VIR EST SIT VULNERE VERITAS
            
            LONDON
Printed by T. C. for Iohn Browne, and are to be ſold
at his ſhop in Fleetſtreet, at the ſigne of
the Bible. 1600.
         
         
            
            
            TO HIS SOMEtimes
Tutor, at all times
deereſt friend, M. I. better reward
for his deſerts. &c.
            
               I Haue liued to be the cauſe of thy wrong;
I may liue to doe thee right; the firſt by
caſualtie, contrary to my deſire, the latter
voluntarily, according to thy deſert.
Accept therefore theſe few lynes,
whatſoeuer they are, and howſoeuer attirde,
yet as true witneſſes of my euerlasting
loue. If they ſeeme vnpolliſht (as I feare) hide
them, for thou gaueſt them their beginning: If poſſeſsing
any thing of worth or pleaſure, (as yet I hope) ioy in it, and
enioy it, for thou wert the firſt moouer of my Muſes circular
conceits, which had neuer beginning but by thee, and
neuer ſhall ende, but in thee: and whatſoeuer they doe, all
ſhall be for thee. Farewell.
            
            
               Times trueſt child.
F. L.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The firſt booke of Ouidius Naſo,
intituled
The Remedie of Loue.
            
               1
               WHen Loue firſt read the title oſ this booke,
               Wars, wars, againſt me now are wag'd (
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   he)
               O dayne thy Poet of a milder looke,
               Condemne him not, that from offence is free.
               VVho euer was Loues vowed Ancient,
               Bearing his cullers with a true intent.
            
            
               2
               Not I Tydides, by whoſe cruel ſpeare
               Thy mother wounded, on Mars foming ſteeds
               Fled into heauen, full of carefull feare,
               Others ſometime, in bitter fancy bleeds.
               
                  But I ſtill burne: If thou the queſtion moue
               What now I do? I anſwere alſo Loue.
               
            
            
               3
               Yea, I haue taught how thou mightſt be obtaind,
               So learning reaſon, how to bridle force:
               Yet not to thee, nor to mine Arts, containd
               In papers, proue I foe without remorce.
               Ne yet my Muſe doth labour to vntwiſt,
               Her old ſpun webbe, that doth of Loue conſiſt.
            
            
               
               4
               He that hath built his fancie to his minde,
               He happie loues, and happie liue he ſtill;
               Still fill thy ſayles with that thrice proſperous wind;
               But if thou be ſubiected to the will
               Of any tyrant, or vnworthy mayd,
               Leaſt that thou periſh, ſearch our Arts for ayd.
            
            
               5
               VVhy, why ſhould any baſely hang and die?
               To giue an inſtance of their deſperate loue:
               Or, why ſhould any with ſuch crueltie,
               By ſelfe-inflicted wounds their ſoules remoue?
               So thou that onely doeſt in peace delight,
               Shalt gayne ſuſpition of a murtherous wight.
            
            
               6
               If then he be, who leaſt he ſcapes the ſnare;
               And leaues to loue, muſt alſo leaue to liue;
               O let him in due time thereof beware,
               O let him leaue to loue, and leaue him giue.
               Thus loue ſhall be eſteem'd liues deereſt friend,
               Not curſed author of a deſperate end.
            
            
               7
               Thou art a child, nor ought childhood fits,
               But games, ſports, playes, then game, ſport, play;
               Such gentler rule, becomes ſuch childiſh wits:
               Thy childiſh wit, that no high things muſt way.
               Thou in thy wars maiſt naked arrowes vſe,
               Yet ſuch as ſhall no deadly wounds infuſe.
            
            
               
               8.
               Let old Stepfathers war with ſword and ſpeare,
               And in a Sea of blood win victorie:
               Vſe thou thy mothers fight, that yeelds no feare,
               Nor for the ſonnes loſſe makes the parent crie.
               Let doores be broken in thy nocturne Iarres,
               And be adornd with garlands midſt thoſe warres.
            
            
               9.
               Let men and maidens take their ſports by ſtealth,
               Let maidens vſe their words with cunning art:
               Now let them kindly ſend their Louers health,
               And ſuddenly with chiding wound their hart.
               And barring faſt the doores, ſhut out their loue,
               VVhere let them waile, and yet no pitie moue.
            
            
               10.
               Theſe warres ſhall pleaſe thy gentle humor beſt,
               In theſe teares ſhalt thou ſport, not cauſd by death;
               Death ſhall not ſee thy Torches at her feaſt,
               Nor morning funerals thy fiers breath.
               Thus hauing ſaid, Loue ſhooke his golden wings,
               And bid me end the worke my pen begins.
            
            
               11.
               Come then ſick youth vnto my ſacred skill,
               VVhoſe loue hath fallen croſſe vnto your minde:
               Learne how to remedie that pleaſing ill,
               Of him that taught you your owne harmes to finde.
               For in that ſelfeſame hand your helpe is found,
               VVhence firſt ye did receiue your careful wound.
            
            
               
               12
               So th' earth which yeelds vs herbs of ſouerain grace
               Doth nouriſh weeds, of vertue peſtilent;
               The burning nettle chuſeth oft her place,
               Next to the Roſe, that yeelds ſo ſweete a ſent.
               
                  Achilles Speare, that wounded his ſterne foe,
               Reſtord him health, & curde the greeuous blow.
            
            
               13.
               Now what preſcriptions we do giue to men,
               Maides thinke them ſpoken vnto you likewiſe:
               To both parts we giue weapons, vſe them then
               With ſecret Art, and with diſcretion wiſe.
               Of which if ought you finde that ſeemes not fit,
               Know in examples many things are writ.
            
            
               14
               And profitable is our Argument,
               To quench that ſecret and conſuming flame:
               To free thy minde from ſin and ill intent,
               To looſe thoſe bands that drew thee into ſhame.
               
                  Phillis had liu'd had I her Tutor been,
               That three times thice walkt path ſhe oft had ſeen.
            
            
               15.
               Nor Dido dying from her ſtately Tower,
               Should haue beheld the Troians thence to flye:
               Sorrow ſhould not haue had ſo ſtrong a power,
               To cauſe the mother do her owne to dye.
               
                  Tereus though Philomela might him pleaſe,
               Should not through ſin a graundſiers title ſeaze.
            
            
               
               16.
               Giue me Paſiphae, ſhe ſhall ceaſe to Loue
               The filthy ſhape of that ſtraunge monſtrous beaſt,
               Bring Phaedra forth, and I will ſoone remoue
               Her deepe inceſtuous luſt, that neuer ceaſt.
               Liude Paris, Hellen he ſhould not deſire,
               Nor ſhuld the Greekes waſte Pergamus with fire.
            
            
               17.
               Had wicked Scylla read our argument,
               
                  Niſus ſhould not haue loſt his fatall haire;
               Ile teach you to aſſwage the greedy bent
               Of burning luſt, and make the weather faire:
               Ile ſteare your Ship aright in ſeas of loue,
               And from each rock I will you ſafely moue.
            
            
               18.
               
                  Ouid was to be read with ſtudious care,
               When firſt your loue began with fruite to growe,
               
                  Ouid is to be read, in your ill fare,
               When firſt your loue with deep diſdain ſhal flowe.
               I do profeſſe to gaine your libertie,
               Then follow me, reuenge your miſerie.
            
            
               19.
               Be preſent ô thou Prophet,Appollinem medecine & Poëſe
                        •
                     s Deus invocat. Poets praiſe,
               Phiſicks firſt finder out, and nurſe alone;
               Crowne me profeſſing both, with laſting bayes,
               For both are vnder thy protection.
               Raine ſiluer ſhewers of skill into my breſt,
               That I may ſhewe each wretch the way to reſt.
            
            
               
               20.
               Whiles well thou maiſt, and ere that ſecret warre
               Be throughly kindled in thy troubled minde,
               If thou repent, ô run not on too far,
               Retire, ere greater cauſe of griefe thou finde.
               Tread down the ſtarting ſeeds of ſpringing wo,
               And turne thy Steed, ere he vntamed grow.
            
            
               21.
               Delay giues ſtrēgth, time ripes the greeneſt grape,
               And makes corn ſtiff, that was a weak ſpring-weed:
               The greateſt tree that fartheſt ſpreads his ſape,
               Was firſt a wand, or but a litle ſeed.
               Then mought it be thrown down, drawne vp, ſoone broke,
               Now ſtands it ſtiffe, & conquers euery ſtroke.
            
            
               22.
               Conſider firſt, where thou doſt thrall thy hart,
               To whom thou voweſt thy ſeruice and thy loue,
               And if the burthen cauſe thine inward ſmart
               From out the yoke with ſpeed thy neck remoue:
               Stop the beginning, for Phiſick comes too late,
               When time hath drawn the wound to deſperate ſtate.
            
            
               23.
               Defer not therefore to the comming hower,
               For he that at the preſent is vnapt,
               Shall finde delay diminiſh ſtill his power,
               Vntill at length he wholly be intrapt.
               Louers excuſes ſeeke of long delay,
               And euer fitteſt deemes the following day.
            
            
               
               24.
               But each ſmall minute giues occaſion
               Of deeper thraldome, Fancy ties by ſlight:
               See how by many ſtreames collection,
               There doth ariſe a flood of wondrous might.
               Drops multiplied do grow to running ſprings,
               And ſprings vnited forth a Riuer brings.
            
            
               25.
               If that thou hadſt foreſeene how great a ſinne,
               
                  Myrrha, thy wicked luſt did powre on thee,
               Thou neuer ſhouldſt haue hid thy ſhamefull chin
               Within the barke of that ſtill weeping tree.
               Oft haue I ſeene an eaſie ſoone curde ill
               By times proceſſe, ſurpaſſe the Leachmans skill.
            
            
               26.
               But for we ſtill delight to taſte the fruites
               Of melting pleaſure, and bewitching Loue,
               We wooe our ſelues with long protracting ſuites,
               And daily promiſe from it to remoue:
               Meane while the flame we feed within vs ſtill,
               For deeper rootes the weed and tree of ill.
            
            
               27.
               But if the time of this firſt cure be paſt,
               And long-fed loue doth lode thy fainting hart,
               A worke of greater moment now is caſt,
               Vpon my promiſe, and of deeper Art.
               Yet will I not caſt off the ſicke decaide,
               Though late it be ere he implores my aide.
            
            
               
               28.
               
                  Paeantius ſonne ſhould haue redeemd his health,
               By cutting off that firſt corrupted part,
               Though after many yeares times gon by ſtealth,
               He ending warfare was recurde by Art.
               I that but now did launce the wound in haſte,
               Now wiſh thou ſlowly ſlying time to waſte.
            
            
               29.
               Yet ſeeke to quench thoſe flames, that newly burn,
               With thoſe, whoſe furie paſt do now decline:
               Giue Raynes to running rage, and do not turne
               Her race, and ſhe will kill her ſelfe with time.
               Each violence at firſt is wondrons ſtrong,
               And hardly yeeldeth paſſage vnto wrong.
            
            
               30.
               He is a foole that may the Riuer paſſe
               By ſmall declining vnto either ſide:
               And yet will ſtriue againſt the ſtreame, alas,
               And euer be far from his purpoſe wide.
               Me thinks I ſee a minde impatient,
               That neuer ſubiect was to Arts true bent.
            
            
               31.
               Contemne this Counſell as of ſlender skill,
               And ſcorne th' admoniſher as fond and vaine:
               But then will I apply me to his will,
               And vndertake my promiſde taske againe.
               When as his wounds wil beare a touch, a ſtraine,
               And eke himſelfe beliue I do not faine.
            
            
               
               32.
               Who would forbid the mother for to weepe
               Vpon the dead hearſe of her deareſt ſonne:
               This is no time that ſhe ſhould patience keepe,
               This is no place to ſay ſhe muſt haue done:
               When with her teares her mind is ſatiſfied,
               By words her griefe may beſt be mollified.
            
            
               33.
               By time muſt medicines be meaſur'd forth,
               For in fit time wines profit and delight:
               But out of ſeaſon they are little worth,
               And brings the body to eternal night.
               Moreouer, vnto flax thou addeſt fire,
               Forbidding vice, contraring his deſire.
            
            
               34.
               In vnfit times, by ill meanes, or ſtraunge place,
               Nor euer ſhalt thou ſo thy Patient cure:
               When then thou ſeeſt thy ſelfe in better caſe,
               Able or hard preſcriptions to endure,
               See firſt thou fly from ſloathful Idleneſſe,
               And ſtill be doing ſomewhat more or leſſe.
            
            
               35.
               Sloath drawes thee on, and leads thee vnto Loue,
               Sloath the chiefe cauſe, and foode of pleaſing ill:
               Shake off but Sloath, and idle eaſe remoue,
               Blinde Cupid ſhall his arrowes vainely ſpill:
               His bowe ſhall breake, and to the ground ſhall fall,
               Yea and his firy brands extinguiſh all.
            
            
               
               36.
               Euen as the Palme-tree loues the Riuers ſight,
               And as the Alder ioyes the Waters ſide,
               As Reeds in ſlymie Mariſhes delight,
               So Loue doth euermore with ſloath abide.
               Loue hates all buſie braines as deadly ill:
               If then thou wilt not loue, be buſie ſtill.
            
            
               37.
               Languor, and Feebleneſſe, and ſloathful play,
               Time drownd in Wine, and loſt in drowſie ſleepe,
               Steales from the mind her wonted ſtrength & ſtay,
               Whiles all her ſpirits dead, no watch do keepe:
               Then in ſlips Traitor Loue her enemie,
               And doth depriue her of her libertie.
            
            
               38.
               Loue euermore a ſhadow is to Sloath,
               Attending on her alwaies as her Page,
               To be imployde with buſineſſe its loath:
               It hates all care, at trouble ſtil doth rage.
               Adde then vnto thy minde ſome chiefe affaire,
               Stil to preſerue from Loues infectious ayre.
            
            
               39.
               There are the ſeates of Iudgements Iuſtice ſee:
               There are the Lawes go learn to plead for truth;
               Thou haſt ſome friend in trouble, ſet him free:
               Thus ſhalt thou euer fly fond Fancies ruth.
               Or clad thy ſelfe in ſteele and ſhining armes,
               Pleaſure ſhal fly, and neuer worke thy harmes.
            
            
               
               40.
               Behold the Parthian, who ſlying fights,
               Now Captiuate the cauſe of our new ioyes,
               Conquer thou Cupids ſenſual delights:
               As then the Parthian haſt to his annoy;
               So in thy double conqueſt mayſt thou weare
               Two Trophies, and vnto thy Gods them beare.
            
            
               41.
               As ſoone as Venus from th' Aeolian Speare
               Receiude her wound, ſhe left the bloodie field,
               She left the care of that vnconſtant feare
               Vnto her Louer, by his ſtrength to wield:
               Some aske why fraile Aegistus burnd in ſinne?
               The cauſe is plaine, Sloath did his vertue winne.
            
            
               42.
               Diuers were ſlack, and many proued ſlowe,
               Some came but late, before proud Troyes wall,
               To which the youth of Greece did daily goe,
               Concluding their long toyle with Illions fall.
               Would he the exerciſe of rough warres daine,
               His nature could not ſuffer any paine.
            
            
               43.
               Would he haue ſpent his ſpeech to plead for right,
               
                  Greece wanted matter for his vehement tongue,
               All that he could, he did euen to his might,
               Leaſt nought he ſhould to Loue he tun'd his ſong:
               So came that childe to vndertake ſome paine,
               So ſtil he doth a childiſh boy remaine.
            
            
               
               44.
               The Countrey alſo doth delight the minde,
               With pleaſant ſtudies of ſweet husbandry:
               This care the greeuouſt cares & griefes doth binde,
               Quickly forgets and makes all ſorrow flye.
               Yoke then thy Oxen well taught to obay,
               And furrow vp the earth in good aray.
            
            
               45.
               Bury therein thy quicke and liuely ſeede,
               Which thy fat fields in time ſhall multiply
               Yeelding thee treble gaines with happie ſpeede,
               Behold the Apple bough how it doth ply.
               And ſtoope with ſtore of fruit that doth abound,
               Scarce able to ſuſtaine them from the ground.
            
            
               46.
               Marke well the gentle muſicke of each ſpring,
               Whiles through the Peebles it doth make her way:
               See how thy Lambes with tender teeth do wring,
               And choyſely crop the ſweeteſt herbes away.
               The gentle Lambes that alwaies heard togither,
               Louers of companie, louing one another.
            
            
               47.
               Loe how the Goates vnto the Rocks do ſpeede,
               Their empty dugs for their young kids to fill:
               Attend the muſick of the Shepheards Reede,
               How his true Curre awaites to do his will.
               O how the woods reſound on euery part,
               Of kyne that ſtill bewaile their Calues depart.
            
            
               
               48.
               How ſwarmes of Bees from bitter ſmoke do fly,
               Eaſing the crooked Pillers of their neaſt:
               How Autumne yeeldeth fruites aboundantly,
               And Sommer welcomes Ceres to his feaſt.
               The Spring with flowers guilds the pleaſant field,
               And Winters Froſt with fier we beguilde.
            
            
               49.
               The Husbandman in time conuenient,
               Gathers his Grape, & thence draws pleaſant Wine.
               The Gardner hath his ſlips in order bent,
               Refines the earth, and plots it with his line.
               Euen thou maiſt plant, and graffe, and ſet, & ſowe,
               Cauſe water many miles through pipes to flowe,
            
            
               50.
               Is it fit time to graffe? make then one Tree,
               Adopt an other, and preſerue his life,
               There let him ſtand ſtill couered and ſtill free,
               From th'iniuries of time, and weathers ſtrife:
               Thy minde thus buſied with this pleaſant care,
               Loue diſappointed from thee flyeth faire.
            
            
               51.
               Or giue thy minde to Huntings ſweet delight,
               For ſtately Dian that purſues in chaſe,
               And conquers each vntamed beaſt in fight,
               Giues Venus ſtill foule ouer throwes and baſe.
               Follow the fearefull hart with skilfull hound,
               Or with thy net encompaſſe him around.
            
            
               
               52.
               Adde diuers terrors to the flying hart,
               And with thy Speare transfixe the cruell Bore,
               So thou all wearie at the dayes depart,
               Shalt ſoundly ſleepe till Sun the day reſtore.
               No idle thoughts ſhall rule thy fantaſie,
               Nor pleaſing dreame thy weaker ſenſe ſhall trie.
            
            
               53.
               More gentle is that pleaſant exerciſe,
               To fowle with ſhaft, or cloſely hidden Net,
               Nor do theſe ſports of leſſe reward diſpiſe,
               For alſo they do Cupids treaſon let:
               Or hide thy compaſt Hooke with pleaſing baite,
               Deceiuing Fiſh that do for foode awaite.
            
            
               54.
               With theſe, and other ſuch, ſtill feed thy minde,
               For by thy ſelfe thy ſelfe muſt be deceiu'd,
               Till thoughts of loue quite vanquiſhed thou finde;
               Thou onely (let me herein be beliud)
               Though deereſt loue implore thee ſtill to ſtay,
               Abſent thy ſelfe by iorneyes euery day.
            
            
               55.
               I know the ſweet remembrance of thy loue,
               (Which newly thou forſak'ſt wil cauſe thee weepe,)
               And ſtay thy foote that it no ſtep remoue,
               Altring the purpoſe, which thou mindſt to keepe.
               But by how much thou ſhalt deſire to ſtay,
               So much the faſter ſee thou ſpurre away.
            
            
               
               56.
               Be patient, and learne by dayly vſe,
               To ſuffer theſe afflictions of ſicke mindes.
               Wiſh not for rayne, fit matter of excuſe,
               Or Sabboths that from iorneyes doe vs binde,
               Nor Allium, that moſt vnlucky thing,
               Which euermore with it miſchance doth bring.
            
            
               57.
               Thinke not how many thouſands thou haſt paſt,
               But looke how many miles do yet remaine:
               Nor with delay ſtudy the time to waſte,
               To ſtay neere home do no occaſion finde:
               Number thou not the dayes, the weekes the houres,
               Nor look thou back vnto thine home-bred bowers.
            
            
               58.
               But fly forth ſtill and with the Parthian fight,
               Who findes beſt ſafety in retyring ſtill,
               Some one will call my precepts hard, and right,
               He ſayes, yea I ſubſcribe vnto his will.
               But for to keepe our health in perfect ſtate,
               Much muſt we ſuffer of a deſperate fate.
            
            
               59.
               Oft haue I taſted Sirups of ſharpe touch,
               Againſt my will, to cure my maladie:
               But when my appetite deſired much,
               All ſorts of meates they did to me deny.
               To free thy body from diſeaſe and paine,
               Both ſword, and fire, & what not wilt thou daine?
            
            
               
               60.
               If that in greateſt thirſt and moiſtures lacke,
               Thou muſt not touch one drop of ſhewring raine,
               Then to redeeme thy minde from ſorrowes wracke:
               Wilt thou refuſe to ſuffer any paine?
               Sith it ſo far exceeds this humane mold
               Of baſe borne fleſh vnto corruption ſold.
            
            
               61.
               But yet the hardeſt entrance of our Art,
               And greateſt labour that furmounts the reſt,
               Is to endure, and beare the firſt times ſmart:
               Behold how hard it is, to make th'young beaſt,
               Firſt brooke the yoke, or back an vntam'd lade,
               And yet in time they are moſt gentle made.
            
            
               62.
               But thou art loath to leaue thy Countries bound,
               Thy fathers cottage, and his dwelling place,
               Yet ſhalt thou go beyond thy natiue ground,
               Though to returne thou turneſt ſtill thy face:
               Thou faigneſt faire excuſe, not Countries lack,
               But thy faire Miſtreſſe Loue doth call thee back.
            
            
               63.
               Well being paſt great comfort to thy minde,
               Thy iourney, fellowes, and ſtrange fields will bring,
               Yet thinke not this ſufficient, but beware,
               Leaſt thou returne, ere Loue hath tane her wing,
               Still abſent be, and ſtill vnknowne paths tread,
               Till euery ſparke of Loue lie cold and dead.
            
            
               
               64.
               For if thou do returne cur'd but in part,
               Loue will againe renew his ciuill warre,
               And euery day will ſtill augment thy ſmart,
               Sith thou returneſt to thy griefe from farre.
               But let him eate the hearbs of Theſſalie,
               
               That Magicke thinkes will cure his Maladie.
            
            
               65.
               Yet auncient is that damned Socerie:
               But wiſe Appollo, Poets chiefeſt guide,
               Doth point vs out for better meanes to trie:
               And certaine helpes, on which we muſt abide.
               Then by my will no Magicke ſhalbe vſde,
               No charming verſe which many haue abuſde.
            
            
               66.
               No ghoſt ſhalbe commaunded to ariſe
               Out of the graue, where it ſhould ſleepe in reſt:
               No witch, whoſe lims by age growen weatherwiſe,
               Shall cauſe the earth rend open her wide breſt.
               Corne ſhall not ſhift from field to field at all,
               Nor ſhall the Sun growe dim, or wax 
                     ••
                  d pall.
            
            
               67.
               As erſt it did, ſhall Romes faire Riuer pay,
               He wonted tribute to the Midland Sea▪
                  
               
               And ſtil ſhall Phoebe courſe her wonted way,
               Drawne by her milkwhite ſteeds, that ſwifteſt be.
               No Wiſard reading backward ſhall vncharme,
               Or liuing Sulphure driue away Loues harme.
            
            
               
               68.
               What remedy did Phaſis flowers yeeld
               
                  Circe, when thou wouldſt not from Cholcos god▪
               
               What helpt the weedes of all the Perſian field
               When as the windes Vliſſes ſayles did blow.
               Each guile thou did'ſt attempt to make him ſtay,
               A blaſt of winde yet waſted him away.
            
            
               69.
               Yea thou did'ſt practiſe through thy deepeſt arte,
               To quench thoſe flames that did moleſt thy minde,
               Yet did they euermore procure thy ſmart,
               And vnto deeper ſorow did thee binde.
               Thou that could'ſt change men into diuers kinde
               Could'ſt not reuerſe the paſſions of thy minde.
            
            
               70.
               And when he would depart, thou thought'ſt to ſtay
               Him with ſweet wordes, with which thou fild'ſt his eare,
               I cannot hope, thou ſaid'ſt, but humbly pray,
               To make me your ſole ſpouſe, which much I feare:
               Yet am I worthy it, though that thou skorne,
               Daughter to Phoebus of a goddeſſe borne.
            
            
               71.
               O yet delay thy iorney ſome ſmall ſpace,
               Short ſtay for great requitall I require,
               With fauour may I aske a ſmaller grace:
               See how the Sea contraries thy deſire,
               With troubled Billowes, which ſhould cauſe thee feare:
               Stay then for winde that will thee ſafely beare.
            
            
               
               72.
               What cauſe haſt thou to haſten thus thy flight?
               Here ſtands no aduerſe Troy to trouble thee:
               No foe to call thee forth to bloody fight,
               But loue and peace dwels here, from danger free.
               Yet onely I from them haue tane this wound,
               Which vnto thee ſubiected hath this ground.
            
            
               73.
               This and much more in vaine her tongue did ſay,
               But wiſe Vliſſes alwayes ſtopt his eare;
               And hoyſing his braue ſayles, fled faſt away,
               The winde her loue, and words away doth beare.
               Yet ſtill her torments did the more increaſe,
               Yet ſtil of curſed ſpels ſhe ſeeketh eaſe.
            
            
               74.
               But all her magicke, and ſpright binding arte,
               Diminiſht nothing of her furious loue,
               Ne ought did take from her conſuming ſmart,
               Ne ought her heliſh torments did remoue;
               Ye then that fondly loue, and faigne would leaue,
               In magicke ſpels doe not at all beleeue.
            
            
               75.
               But if great cauſe of buſineſſe thee retaine
               Within the Citie, where thy miſtris dwels,
               Follow my counſaile freedome to regaine,
               Which for the Cities preſence I will tell.
               He woonne his freedome and did quite him wel,
               That once eſcapte vnworthy loues lowe Hell.
            
            
               
               76.
               This thou deſireſt him, I wonder at,
               And of my medicines he ſhall not need:
               To thee alone my Rules I will relate,
               Whoſe inward wounds do neuer ceaſe to bleed,
               Who loueſt, & wouldſt faigne that knot vnbinde,
               And know'ſt not how, & ſeekſt the way to finde.
            
            
               77.
               Recount vnto thy ſelfe each ſuttle Art,
               Each wicked Act of thine vnworthy Loue:
               Vnfold before thine eyes each loſſe, each ſmart,
               Which by her meanes and for her thou doſt proue:
               This hath ſhe ſtolne, & that thus muſt you ſay,
               Yet this or that will not her ſtealing ſtay.
            
            
               78.
               But euen houſhold goods, and gods and all,
               She quite hath fold with couetous deſire:
               Lo thus proteſting ſhe doth Record call
               Her faith, yee falſifies it, O the ſtoute lyer,
               How often hath ſhe ſhut me out her gate?
               There ſuffering me my ſorrowes to relate.
            
            
               79.
               Yea ſhe applies her ſelfe to ſtraungers laſt,
               And ſcorne my loue, ô moſt vnhappie I,
               Vnto her baſe apprentiſe ſhe doth truſt,
               Thoſe ſecrets which to me ſhe doth denie:
               The oft remembrance of ſuch cruell wrong▪
               
               Wil root thy fancie vp though grounded ſtrong.
            
            
               
               80.
               Preſent them often then to thy ſick minde,
               For hence the ſpring ſhall riſe of happy hate,
               O would thou couldſt ſeeme eloquent, to binde
               More ſtrong perſwaſions to thy ſickly ſtate.
            
            
               81.
               Lately I ſet my fancy on a maide,
               That fully anſwerd not to my deſier,
               And therefore ſtriu'd my fancy to haue ſtaide,
               A poore Phiſition to ſo great a fyer:
               Yet the remembrance of her vilder parts,
               Releaſt the furie of tormenting ſmarts.
            
            
               82.
               How ill and excellent vnſhapt her thigh,
               Yet to confeſſe the truth, it was not ſo:
               How foule her armes, thus would I ſay and ſigh,
               Yet if they were not thus, I well did know:
               How ſhort of ſtature, yet her ſtature tall;
               Thus enuie loathſomneſſe to me did call.
            
            
               83.
               Good things do neighbour bad, and ſit them by,
               Oft vertue thus of vice doth beare that blame,
               Faigne to thy ſelfe, and tell thy ſelfe a ly,
               And cloath her vertues with foule vices ſhame.
               Thus ſhalt thou change thy mind with ſubtill art,
               And weare away thy ſtill encombring ſmart.
            
            
               
               84.
               If ſhee be fat, that ſhee is ſwollen ſay:
               If browne, then tawny like the Affricke Moore:
               If ſlender, leane, meger, and worne away,
               If courtly, wanton, worſt of worſt before:
               If modeſt, ſtrange, as fitteth woman-head,
               Say ſhe is ruſticke, clowniſh, and ill bred.
            
            
               85.
               Yea whatſoeuer gift, (for none hath all)
               Thy miſtris wants, intreat her ſtill to vſe:
               If that her voyce be ill, or cunning ſmall,
               Importune her to ſing, nee'r let her chuſe:
               If that ſhe cannot moue her feete in meaſure,
               To ſee her daunce, ſtill let it be thy pleaſure.
            
            
               86.
               Is ſhee of ſmall diſcourſe, and ſlender wit?
               Conuerſe with her, that ſhe may wound thine eare,
               To inſtruments hath ſhee not learn'd to fit
               Her fingers? then deſire a Lute to heare.
               Hath ſhe an ill vncomely and ſtrange gate?
               Cauſe her to walke both earely forth and late.
            
            
               87.
               Hath ſhee a ſwelling, and downe hanging breaſt?
               Deſire thou ſtill to ſee her faire white skinne;
               Are her teeth blacke or wants ſhee of the beſt?
               Relate ſome merry ieſt that ſhee may grinne:
               Is ſhee compaſſionate? tell then ſome woful caſe,
               So ſhall ſhe ſhew thee Anticks in her face.
            
            
               
               88.
               Earely deſire to ſteale of her a ſight,
               Ere ſhee hath cloath'd her with her beſt attire:
               We are ſeduced by vaine errors might,
               And gay apparell kindles our deſire.
               Then is ſhee ſhrowded all in ſtone and golde,
               And of her ſelfe, leaſt part her ſelfe doth holde.
            
            
               89.
               Oft ſeeke for whom thou lou'ſt in company,
               And great reſort of other goodly dames:
               By this deuice new loues beguiles thine eye,
               And drawes thy firſt deſire to farther blame:
               Come all vnthought of ſudden in the place,
               So ſhall ſhe be vnarm'd in weaker caſe.
            
            
               90.
               So ſhalt thou diſappoint her in her guile,
               See her defects, and coole thy burning loue;
               Yet truſt not to this rule, which other while
               Fallacious and dangerous doth proue:
               For careleſſe hauiour that doth baniſh art,
               Hath mighty force, to hold a wounded hart.
            
            
               91.
               Yet whiles with curious skill ſhee paintes her face,
               Be not aſham'd, but preſſe thou to her ſight:
               Then ſhalt thou finde her boxes in the place,
               Wherein her beauty lyes, and borrowed light.
               Then ſhalt thou ſee her body all begreaſ'd
               With ointments that hath thee ſo greatly pleaſ'd.
            
            
               
               92.
               Of ſauour worſe then Phineûs tables were,
               Whoſe filthineſſe a plague to him was ſent,
               With theſe my ſtomack could not often beare,
               But euermore to eaſe it ſelfe was bent;
               But now euen what we vſe in midſt of Loue,
               I will thee teach that paſſion to remoue.
            
            
               93.
               For by all meanes we muſt this fier expell;
               But I do ſhame euen needfull things to ſhowe:
               Yet thou by thoſe which I to thee ſhall tell,
               Mayſt well conceiue the reſt, and eaſie knowe.
               For ſome diſpraiſe my rimes to enuie bent,
               And ſay my Muſe is ſhameleſſe impudent.
            
            
               94.
               Yet ſince I ſee ſo many that I pleaſe,
               That all the world my ſporting lines receaue,
               Let this, or that man enuie at my eaſe,
               Diſpraiſe my pen, and me of praiſe bereaue:
               Detracting enuie Homers writ hath blam'd
               Who ere thou be, he Zoilus hath nam'd.
            
            
               95.
               Yea ſacriligious tongues hath torne thy verſe,
               By whoſe good guide the Troyans gaind this land:
               The loftieſt things Ioues thunderbolts do perſe;
               And winds encounter what doth higheſt ſtand.
               So enuie euer aymeth at the beſt,
               And will not giue them any time to reſt.
            
            
               
               96
               But thou, who ere thou be, that thus my Muſe
               So much offendes through looſer libertie,
               If in thy wrath diſcretion thou canſt vſe,
               Then to each ſubiect, his apt verſe applie:
               Stout warres deſerue a Homer to diſplay
               Their battailes, conflicts, and their good array.
            
            
               97
               What place may there be found for ſweet delight,
               For Reuels, Triumphs, Loues and merriment;
               Matters of State, Tragedians do report,
               For loftie Stiles becomes ſuch drirement.
               No humble muſe muſt there ſound his ſtil horne,
               There buskins, but no baſe ſhoes muſt be worne.
            
            
               98
               The Iambicke freely taunts his enemie,
               Whether his laſt foote ſlow, or ſwift doth proue,
               The legicke ſings of loue, and archerie,
               With ſhafts, ſuch as from louers eyes do roue,
               And with her louer wantonly doth play,
               And ſweetly ſpeake, and plead, implore and pray.
            
            
               99
               
                  Achilles honor ſhines not in the verſe
               Of Cyrens Muſe, where ſports do better proue,
               And ſtately Homer, thou muſt not reherſe,
               
                  Cydippe, young Acontius deereſt loue:
               Who can endure Andromache ſhould play,
               The ſports of Thais, and her wanton lay?
            
            
               
               100.
               Who acteth Thais, wrongs Andromache,
               
               One perſon cannot fit him to both parts:
               But I will play that part, and Thais be,
               Our ſports are libertines, free are our hearts:
               Sith then all ſhame we baniſh from our verſe,
               
                  Thais is mine, I will her part rehearſe.
            
            
               101.
               If then my lines do fit a wantons lay,
               Gnawe thine owne gall, fonde enuy hold thy peace,
               For we haue wonne the laſting crowne of bay,
               And cleerd the blame wherein we did diſpleaſe:
               Breake enuie, breake in thine owne foule deſpite,
               For we haue got renowne, and glory bright.
            
            
               102.
               For ſtill with honour, fames deſire doth grow;
               But at the foote of this high climing hill,
               My weary Steeds do pant and faintly goe;
               As much to vs by their according will:
               Our Elegies confeſſe to vs they owe,
               As from his worke to Virgill praiſe doth flowe.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            ¶ An expoſition of the Poeticall examples,
mentioned in this firſt Booke of the
Remedie of Loue.
            
               
                  TYDIDES, That is Diomedes, the ſon
of Tydeus & Deiphiles, he was the moſt
ſtrong & valiant of all the Greekes, except
Achilles & Aiax: he wounded Venus
in the right hād; whiles ſhee defended
Aeneas, yea, & alſo Mars, the God of warre, her Paramour.
            
               Achilles, in a conflict woūded Telephus king of Miſſia,
who denyed paſſage to the Grecians through his kingdome,
bound for the ſiege of Troy, of which when no remedie
could be found, he receiued from an Oracle, that hee
could not otherwiſe be healed, but by the ſame Speare wherwith
he was woūded: Afterwards therfore being reconciled
to Achillis, he obtained that he might make an emplaſter
of the ruſt thereof, and ſo was restored to his perfect health.
            
               Phillis, Lycurgus daughter, who entertained Demophoön,
returning from the Troian warre, admitted
him to her bed: with cōdition, that aſſoone as he had ordered
his home-affayres, he ſhould returne againe and marry
her. But he being detained by vrgent occaſions, and ſtaying
longer then the appointed time, ſhee hanged her ſelfe,
and gaue an ende to her loue and life, in one inſtant.
            
               Dido. How ſhe after Aeneas departed frō her, fayning
a ſacrifice, burned her ſelfe, it is too vulgar to be repeated.
            Troians. A people of Aſia.
            
               Medea. The daughter of Aeta king of Cholcos, ſhe
entertayned Iaſon in his expeditiō for the Goldē fleece,
               
which ſhe taught him how to win, and after ſled away with
him, married him, and bare vnto him two ſonnes. Afterwards
ſhe was forſaken by him, who tooke vnto his ſecond
wife, Creuſa the daughter of Creon, King of Corinth,
which Medea tooke ſo greeuouſly, that artificially encloſing
fire in a Forcet, ſent it vnto her for a token: with which, ſhee
and the Pallace before day was burnt vp. Herewith Iaſon
being enflamed, ran forth to be reuenged on her, but ſhe ſeeing
him comming, tooke vp her two ſonnes which he begate
on her, and in their fathers ſight murthered them, by
cutting their throates, and then through her witchcraft ſhe
was taken vp into the Clowdes, and ſo went vnto Athens.
            
            
               
                  
                     Tereus.
                     Philomela.
                   Tereus hauing rauiſhed Philomela,
(who went to ſee her ſister Progne
whom he had married) that his ſinne might not be diſcloſed
he cut off her tongue, and impriſoned her, but being a
cunning work woman, ſhe wrote the whole proceſſe of her iniury
in an handkercheffe, and ſent it to her ſister: who in
reuenge thereof, killed her owne ſonne Itys, and gaue his
fleſh boyled & roſted vnto her husband to eate: vnto whom,
after he had wel fed thereon, ſhe preſented the childes head:
wherat he being angry, followed his wife to haue ſlaine her,
but ſhe was turned into a Nightingale, & he into that bird
which the Latines cal Vpupa, and ſome falſly tranſlate, a
Lapwing.
            
               Paſiphae, The wife of Mirios, who being in loue with a
Bull, by the helpe of Dedalus her Bawde, found out a way
how ſhe might lie with him: yea ſhe cōceiued & brought out
a Minotaure, which was half a maā & half a Bull: which being
encloſed in the Labyrinth, was after ſlain by Theſeus.
Phaedra, Wife to Theſeus, who falſly accuſed Hippolitꝰ
               
his ſonne of whoredome, becauſe hee would not ſatiſfie her
luſt, in lying with her, and ſo wrought his death.
            Hee is not I thinke, that hath not heard how Paris king
Priamus his ſonne of Troy, ſtole Hellen from Greece,
how the Graecians, which are a people of Europe, in reuenge,
after 10. yeeres ſiege, deſtroyed Troy, called alſo by
the name of Pergamus: wherefore we will eaſe our margeant
of this tedious note.
            
               Scylla, daughter to Niſus, who falling in loue with
Minos her fahers enemie, cut off his goldē hayre, and preſented
him therewith, thinking by this great argument of
her loue, to win his grace: but he, though by her meanes he
ouercame her father, hated ſo much her impietie, that hee
vtterly refuſed her, and ſhe, throwing her ſelfe into the ſea,
at his departure, to ſwimme after him, was turned into the
bird Ciris, a Larke. Ouid.
            
            
               Prophet, that is Apollo, whom Poets doe make their
God: hence are they crowned with Lawrell, which tree is
conſecrated to him: hee alſo for his skill in the natures of
hearbes, is recorded for the inuenter or finder out of that
moſt neceſſary Art of Phyſicke.
            
            
               Myrrha, the daughter of Cinarus king of Cyprus,
who deſiring her fathers companie, by the deuice of her
Nurſe, enioyed her filthie luſt: and was deliuered of Adonis:
which when her father knew, he would haue ſlayne her,
but ſhe flying from his fury, was turned into a tree of that
name, which euermore weepeth as it were, and lamenteth
her impietie.
            
               Paeantius ſonne, that is Philoctetes, the companiō of
Hercules, who after his death enioyed his arrowes, and being
drawne to the Troian warre, by the fall of one of them
was wounded in his foote, which grew to be almoſt incureable:

for which cauſe he was left behind in the Ile of Lemnos,
& after by Vliſſes was fetcht vnto Troy, which being
ſackt, he went into Calabria, where Machaon reſtored
him to health.
            
               Cupid, the ſonne of Venus, Loues archer. &c.
            Parthian, a people of Aſia, in auncient times the moſt
earneſt enemies of the Romans, they excelled in ſhooting,
which they ſo veſd in flight, that they more endamaged
their foes thereby, then by any handy conflict, and yet defended
themſelues alſo. Of which Iuſtine lib. 41. Fugam
ſepe ſimulant, vt incautiores aduerſus vulnera inſequentes
habeant. & paulo poſt. Plerum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                in ipſo ardore
certamini praelia deſerunt, & paulo poſt pugnam
& fugam repetunt, & cum maximè viciſſe te putes
tunc tibi diſcrimen ſubeundum eſt.
            
               Aeolion ſpeare, Diomedes ſpeare, looke this before.
            
               Aegiſtus, the ſonne of Thieſtis by Pelopeia, he murthered
Agamemnon, being ayded by his wicked wife
Clytemneſtia, whom he vſed in whoredome and beaſtly
luſt, and was after ſlaine himſelfe by Oreſtes, Agamemnons
ſonne.
            
               Ceres, the Inuentrix of plowing and tilling, ſowing
corne, and making bread.
            
               Diana, daughter to Iupiter & Latona, and brother
to Apollo by the ſame birth, ſhe, for the loue of virginitie,
fled the company of men, and inhabited the woods, dedelighting
her ſelfe with hunting, whence ſhe is named:
The Lady and goddeſſe of Hunters.
            
            
               Allium, by this hearbe which we call garlicke, antiquitie
hath noted hieroglifically euill lucke.
            
               Theſſalie, a countrey in Greece, firſt named Aemonia;
whither Medea fled with Iaſon, after that by her
helpe he had ouercome the Dragon: in it there were great

ſtore of witches, and it aboundeth with hearbes, which they
thinke moſt needfull for their miſchieuous practiſes.
            
               Romes fayre riuer Tiber, ſo named from Tiberius,
king of Albania, who was drowned therein, as Liuie our
Poet, faſt. 2. recordeth. Theſe wonders which Ouid here
reciteth, are but the effects of coniuration, the ſenſe of all
is but this: as if he had ſayd: Seeke not to expell loue
by ſpelles, coniuration or witchcraft, becauſe they
haue no force to remoue it.
            
            That part of the Ocean which entereth at Hercules
Pillars & Midland ſea, goeth Eaſt to Tripolis, & then
North to Conſtantinople. And the Ocean is all that ſea
which compaſſeth the now 4. and according to ſome, the 6.
knowne continents or parts of the earth.
            
               Phoebe, the ſame whom they call Diana, Cynthia &
Luna, of vs, the Moone, ſiſter to Phoebus the Sunne, from
whom ſhe hath her name: ſome faigne that her chariot is
drawne with white horſes, ſome with fiſhes.
            
               Phaſis, whiles Vliſſes in his wanderings through the
Midland ſeas eſchewed the rough waters Leſtrigoniae, he
was by tempeſt driuen vnto Colchos, where Circe inhabited,
a great and skilfull Sorcereſſe, who being in loue with
him, reſtored his companions into their former ſhapes of
men, being now transformed into Hogges. But when notwithſtanding
he would needs depart and leaue her, ſhe did
what ſhe could by charmes & incantations to ſtay him, but
they proued all vayne, and ſhe vtterly forſaken. Phaſis is
a great riuer in that countrey and Towne alſo, ſcituate on
that riuer in Colchos a countrey of Aſia, full of hearbes
which they vſe in their witchcraftes: as Hor. Car. l. 2. od.
witneſſeth. Ille & venena Colchica & quicquid vſquam
concipitur nefas tractauit.
            
            
               
In this countrey, Circe & Medea two notable witches
inhabited,
            
               Daughter to Phaebus of a goddeſſe borne. For Circe
was daughter to the Sonne, by the Nymph Perſes.
            
            
               Affricke, one of the 4. partes of the world. &c.
            
               Phineus, the ſonne of Agenor king of Arcadia, according
to ſome, he married Sthenobea, on whome he begate
Orythrus and Crambus, whom by the perſwaſion of
their mother in Law Harpalicae his ſecond wife, he cauſed
to be made blind: for which impietie, himſelfe firſt loſt his
ſight, then was vexed by the filthie birds or monſters called
Harpeiae: and laſtly was ſlayne by Hercules. After hee
found his vnfortunate ſonnes wandering on the deſolate
mountaines, and vnderſtood their miſeries.
            
               Homer, whoſe diuine poeſie is admired of all men, but
Zoilus a Sophister, who liued in the time of Ptolomie, to
whom he dedicated his worke, wrote againſt him, and expected
ſome great reward for his labour. But in long and
vayne expectation he grew very penurious, inſomuch that
hee procured one to begge ſomewhat of the king for his reliefe:
to whom Ptol. anſwered, That he wondred, that
whereas Homer had ſuſtained the liues of ſo many
thouſands, ſo long before dead, he being more learned
then Homer, ſhould be ſo beggerly, as not able to
maintaine himſelfe. From him all other Detractors are
commonly called Zoili.
            
            Ioues thunderbolt, the lightning, &c.
            
            
               Iambicke, a moſt rayling and bitter kind of verſe, &c.
            
               Elegies, another ſorte of verſe, and vſed in an other
faſhion, for being moſt mild and pleaſant, is vſed in
the Cantoes, Sonnets, & complaints of louers and
diſports.
            
            
               
               Cyrens muſe, Chalimachus borne in Cyrene, the
moſt excellent writer of Elegies amongſt the Grecians: he
wrote a notable worke of the beginnings & firſt inſtitution
of ſacrifices and holy dayes, not vnlike vnto our Poets
bookes De faſtis, but he intituled his Aetia.
            
            
               Acontius & Cydippe, a pleaſant Comicke fiction.
Acontius a young man of Coa, who going vnto Delos,
to the ſacrifice of Diana, fell in loue with Cydippe, but
deſpayring thereof, becauſe he neither equalled her in birth
or riches, he wrote on an apple, at the leaſt to teſtifie his loue,
theſe two verſes.
            Iuro tibi ſacrae per myſtica ſacra Dianae
            
            Me tibi venturum comitem, ſponſum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                futurum.
            Which ſhe finding and reading, vnwitting who it was
that wrote it, raſhly ſwore to marry him: And afterwards
as often as ſhe ſhould haue bin married to any other, she fell
into ſome grieuous ſickneſſe, ſo that the matter being opened
to her parents, they were contented in the end to make
this marriage.
            
               Andromache, the wife of Hector, whom after Pyrrhus
carried into Greece, and married to Hellen, another
of Priams children.
            
               Thais, a notable ſtrumpet, borne in Alexandria, that
to encreaſe her gaynes, went vnto Athens, whoſe name the
comicke Poet Maenander, celebrated in his verſe.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               I Thought it not amiſſe (courteous Reader)
to adioyne vnto this ſmall labour of mine,
theſe two following Epistles, of which one is
tranſlated out of Ouid, the other is an anſweare
therevnto. Which chiefly I did, leaſt
the ſweete exerciſes of that honorable and
thriſe renowned Sapho of our times, ſhould
euen the leaſt of them, be loſt in the obſcure
night of ſad ſilence, and Obliuion: and then, eſpecially the ſubiect,
and the matter ſo fitly agreeing and participating with the former,
I could not but couple them together in all points elſe, a
moſt vnequall match. Wherein I hope the greateſt fault that I
haue committed, is, but that it hath not the firſt place. Yet take this
old Prouerbe with a right application for my iuſt excuſe.
            All is well that endeth well. And ſo end I.
               Reader farewell.
            
         
         
            
            Dido to Aeneas.
            
               
                  Aeneas would from Dido part,
               But Dido not content,
               She mou'd him firſt with words,
               And then this Letter ſent.
            
            SO at Meanders ſtreames,
            when fates bids life be gone:
            The ſnowe white Swan on moſſie graſſe,
            out-ſtretched tunes his mone.
            Not hoping thee to moue,
            this ſuite I vndertake,
            The heauens at the motion fround
            when firſt we did it make:
            But fame of due deſert,
            my body and my minde
            So lewdly loſt; the loſſe is light,
            to looſe theſe words of winde.
            Reſolu'd thou art to go,
            and wofull Dido leaue:
            Thoſe windes ſhall blowe thy faith away
            that ſhall thy ſailes vpheaue.
            Reſolu'd thy ſhips at once,
            and promiſe to vntie,
            To ſeeke Italian Realmes, which yet
            thou knowſt not where they lie.
            Nought mou'd, with Carthage new,
            nor walles that growing be,
            
               
Nor that there was committed all
            the ſoueraigntie to thee.
            Thou leaueſt things full made,
            thou ſeekeſt new to make,
            To ſearch about for Lands vnfound,
            Land found thou doeſt forſake.
            But graunt the land thou finde,
            to thee who will it giue?
            Why will the ſoyle to ſtraungers yeeld,
            whereon themſelues do liue?
            Thou muſt an other Loue,
            An other Dido finde:
            And which againe thou maiſt vndo,
            An other promiſe binde.
            When wilt thou into forme
            a Towne like Carthage bring:
            And from thy Pallace top behold,
            thy ſubiects as their King?
            If all things elſe ſucceed,
            and nothing croſſe thy minde:
            What place will euer yeeld to thee
            a wife to thee ſo kinde?
            For I like waxen torch
            in Sulphur rold do burne:
            Each day, each night Aeneas makes
            vnto my thoughts returne.
            Vnthankfull he indeed,
            And deafe to what I giue:
            And ſuch, as were I not a foole,
            I would without him liue.
            Yet though his thoughts be ill,
            I hate him not therefore:
            
               
Complaine I do of his vntroath,
            complaining Loue therefore.
            Thy daughter Venus ſpare,
            thy brother hard embrace:
            O brother Loue, within thy Campe,
            point him a Souldiers place.
            Or me, who firſt began,
            for Loue I not diſdaine,
            Let him but onely ſubiect yeeld,
            to this my carefull paine.
            But ah I am beguilde,
            his boſtes are boſted lyes:
            Of mothers line: from mothers kinde,
            in all his courſe he flyes.
            Thee ſome vnwieldie ſtone,
            or Rockey Mountaines bred:
            Or oakes which on high rocks do grow,
            or beaſts by Rauen fed.
            Or Sea with windes turmoild,
            as now thou ſeeſt it ſho:
            Yet thitherward art ready bent,
            in ſpight of waues to go.
            What mean'ſt thou? winter lets,
            let winters ſuite preuaile:
            See with what force the Eaſterne blaſts
            the rolling waues aſſaile.
            Since windes and waters do,
            then thou more iuſtice ſhowe,
            Let me, what more to thee I would,
            to winde and waters owe.
            I am not ſo much worth,
            which ſure thou doſt not thinke.
            
               
That while on Seas from me thou flyeſt,
            thy ſelfe in Seas ſhouldſt ſhrinke.
            Thou precious hatred bear'ſt,
            and pearſt exceeding hie:
            If ſo thou mayſt of me be rid,
            thou count it cheape to die.
            The windes their windie force
            anon will lay aſide:
            And Triton will with Azure ſteeds
            On leueld waters glide.
            Now (would the gods) as they
            ſo thou couldſt chaunged be:
            Thou wilt vnles thy hardneſſe do
            far paſſe the hardeſt tree.
            What if of furious Seas
            the force thou didſt not know?
            Which tride ſo oft and found ſo ill,
            yet ſtill to ſea wilt go.
            And though they ſerue at will,
            when thou doſt Anchors way:
            Yet in ſo long a voyage, chaunce
            no fewe miſchaunces may.
            And ſure to croſſe the Seas,
            ſmall fruite faith-breakers gaine:
            That place on falſe deceiuers doth
            inflict their falſhoods paine.
            But moſt when Loue is wrongd,
            for why? of Loue the Dame,
            Firſt naked out of watrie waues,
            about Cythera came.
            Leaſt hurt who hurteth me
            vndone, vndo I ſhall,
            
               
I feare, and leaſt by wrack on ſeas,
            In ſeas my foes ſhall fall.
            Liue: ſo I better ſhall
            then thee by death deſtroy:
            Thou of my death, not I of thine,
            the Title ſhall enioy.
            Suppoſe a whirlwinde ſwift,
            God make theſe words but winde
            Catch thee vnwares, what courage thē,
            what thoughts will paſſe thy minde?
            Loe, ſtraight with falſhood fraught,
            thy periur'd tongue appeares:
            And Dido driuen by Troians guile,
            of life to ſhort her yeares.
            Of thy betraied wife,
            will ſtand before thy ſight:
            The Image ſad; diſheneiled,
            with bleeding wounds bedight.
            Let come (then wilt thou ſay)
            I haue deſeru'd this all:
            And bent at thee thou wilt ſuppoſe,
            what euer lightnings fall.
            Both ſeas and thou do rage,,
            let both and breathing take:
            This ſmall delay (no ſmall reward)
            thy Iourney ſafe ſhall make.
            For thee my care is leaſt,
            thy childe let ſpared be:
            Thou haſt the glory of my death,
            ſufficient that for thee.
            What hath thy little ſonne?
            what hath thy gods deſeru'd?
            
               
That them the waters ſwallow ſhould
            from fyers force preſeru'd.
            But falſe thou haſt no ſuch,
            as me thy brags haue told,
            Nor euer didſt on ſhoulders lift,
            thy gods and father old.
            Thou lyeſt in this and all,
            thy tongue his guilefull part
            Begins not firſt on me to play,
            nor I firſt feele the ſmart.
            Aske where the mother is,
            of faire Iulus gone:
            Her ſtonie husband her forſooke,
            and ſo ſhe died alone.
            It pittied me to heare,
            which iuſt recompence:
            For me had bene, but that ſuch paine
            is leſſe then mine offence.
            That thee thy gods condemne,
            my heart doth me aſſure:
            Who ſeuen yeares now on land on ſeas
            ſuch toſſing doeſt endure.
            I thee by wrack vpthrow'n
            in harbour ſure did ſaue,
            And ſcarcely hauing heard thy name,
            to thee my Kingdome gaue.
            O would with theſe good turnes
            I me content had found:
            And that in famous fame of mine
            were buried deepe in ground.
            That day my woe was wrought,
            when vnder ſtooping bower
            
               
Of moſſie denne we met alone,
            compeld by ſodaine ſhower.
            Some howling ſounds I heard,
            the Nymphs I thought did ſo,
            They Furyes were, who in that ſort
            foretold my fatall woe.
            Chaſt Law of ſhamefaſt Loue,
            reuenge on me this blame:
            Ill to Sicheus kept, to whom
            aye me I go with ſhame.
            Whoſe ſacred Image I
            in marble Chappell keepe,
            With leauie branches hid from ſight,
            and wooll of whiteſt ſheepe.
            Hence thrice I heard me cald,
            I knew his well knowne voyce,
            Himſelfe thrice ſayd: Come Dido, Come:
            
            with ſoftly wiſpring noyſe.
            I come without delay,
            which once was onely thine,
            Yet me the more to linger makes,
            this ſhamefull fact of mine.
            But pardon thou my fault,
            whoſe deed might well deceaue,
            To others he in mine offence,
            the leſſe offence doth leaue.
            His mother heauens Impe,
            his ſire a godly lode,
            Vnto his ſonne by reaſon bred
            ſure hope of his abode.
            If needs I muſt haue er'd
            mine error had good ground,
            
               
Put faith in him, he no way els
            vnworthy ſhall be found.
            My faults to end perſiſt,
            as they at firſt begun:
            And their vnluckie ſpindels ſtill
            in one like tenor run.
            My husband fell to ground
            before the Altars ſlaine,
            My brother of that wicked act
            doth reape the wicked gaine.
            My ſelfe exild, his graue
            and countrey both forſake:
            And forced am, by foe purſude
            vneaſie wayes to take.
            I land on land vnknowne
            eſcapt from foe and waue:
            And bought the ſhore which freely yet
            to thee falſe wretch I gaue.
            A Towne I built, whoſe wals
            far out extended lie:
            Prouoking places neere about
            maligning to enuie.
            Wars grow, poore ſtranger I,
            and woman vext with warres:
            Scarſe know how armour to prouide
            and ſtrength my gate with barres.
            When thouſands to me ſu'de:
            now all againſt me come:
            Grieu'd that before their beds, I haue
            preferd I know not whom.
            Why ſtick'ſt to yeeld me bownd
            into Hiarbas hands,
            
               
I will not ſticke to yeeld mine armes
            to bide thy wicked bands.
            A brother eke I haue,
            who wicked hands anew,
            Imbrewed firſt in husbands blood,
            would faine in mine imbrew.
            Lay downe thy ſacred Gods,
            whom touching doſt pollute,
            Vnſeemly with vngodly hands
            doth godly worſhip ſute.
            If they from fire eſcapt,
            that thou mightſt them adore:
            That euer they eſcapt from fire
            thy Gods repent them ſore.
            And what, ô wicked man,
            with child if Dido be:
            And of thy ſelfe ſome part of thee
            there lies inclosde in me?
            The Dame and ruthfull babe
            at once ſhall be forlorne:
            And by thy meanes to death be broght
            who yet was neuer borne.
            So with his parent ſhall
            
               Iulus brother die:
            One death at once ſhall two diſpatch,
            whoſe liues in one doth lie.
            But God bids thee to go,
            would God he had forbid
            To come; that of thy Troian troupes
            my Carthage had bin rid.
            This God no doubt your guide,
            doth you thoſe tempeſts rayſe:
            
               
And makes you on thoſe flowing floods
            ſo long to ſpend your dayes.
            To Troy backe to turne,
            it ſcarſe were worth thy payne:
            If as whiles Hector liu'd it was,
            ſo now it were againe.
            Not to Seamander you,
            but Tibers ſtreames doe goe,
            Where graunt ariu'd, what are you els,
            but ſuch as no man know?
            But as that land is hid,
            and from thy fleet doth make,
            It ſeemes old age will ſooner thee,
            then thou it ouertake.
            Yet rather as my dower,
            this Realme of mine receaue,
            With all Pigmalions wealth I brought,
            and farther wandering leaue.
            
               And into Carthage Troy
            with better hap tranſlate,
            Where thou ſhalt ſacred Scepter beare,
            enthron'd in royall ſtate.
            If thou do wars affect,
            or if thy ſonnes deſire,
            Of triumph matter to procure
            by martiall meanes aſpire:
            That nought may wanting be,
            ſuch foes we will him yeild,
            This place for lawes of peace is apt,
            apt is for ſpeare and ſheeld.
            Now by thy mother thou
            thy brother quiuer'd boy,
            
               
By the companions of thy 
                  •
               light
            thy gods, the gods of Troy.
            
            So may thy remnant left,
            in field all conqueſt win,
            As Troian warre of all thy loſſe,
            the finall end haue bin.
            
               Aſcanius liue his yeeres,
            with all good fortune bleſt:
            And ſoftly may the buried bones
            of old Anchiſes reſt.
            Spare now, ô ſpare thine houſe,
            which giues it ſelfe to thee:
            But that indeed I haue thee lou'd,
            what fault canſt find in me?
            Of Pythia I am not,
            nor great Mycenae borne,
            My husband nor my father hath
            againſt thee armour worne.
            Of wife if thou thinke skorne,
            not wife, cut hoſteſſe call:
            So thine ſhe be, what Dido be,
            ſhe nought regards at all.
            The ſeas to me are knowne,
            on Affricke coaſt that lie:
            At times they do free paſſage graunt,
            at times they do denie.
            When weather will permit,
            hoyſe ſayle and ſet from land:
            For now the lauuching of thy ſhippes
            the flowing weedes withſtand.
            Charge me to wait the time
            thou ſhalt go ſure away:
            
               
Not then, no though thy ſelfe deſire,
            my ſelfe will let thee ſtay.
            Thy mates ſome reſt require,
            thy Fleet ſore rent with waues:
            And ſcarſely yet halfe rigd anew,
            for ſome ſmall reſpite craues.
            For what haue I deſeru'd?
            what owe to thee I may
            Henceforth, for all my marriage hopes,
            I craue but ſmall delay.
            Whiles ſtormie ſeas grow calme,
            while cuſtome tempers loue:
            How patiently miſhaps to beare,
            I ſhall the practiſe proue.
            If not, my life to ſpill
            with full intent I mind:
            Of crueltie thou canſt not long
            in me a ſubiect find.
            Would God thou didſt but ſee
            mine Image as I wright:
            I wright, and full againſt my breaſt
            thy naked ſword is pight.
            And downe my cheeks along
            the teares do trickling fall:
            Which by and by in ſtead of teares,
            ingrayne in blood I ſhall.
            How well with this my fate,
            theſe gifts of thine agree,
            To furniſh our my funerall,
            the coſt will ſlender be.
            My breaſt ſhall not be now
            firſt pierced with this blade,
            
               
For why? there is a former wound,
            which cruell Loue hath made.
            
               Anne ſiſter, ſiſter Anne,
            
            ill priuie to my falt,
            Performe thy laſt obſequious loue,
            vnto my bones thou ſhalt.
            When flames haue me conſum'd,
            write not on marble graue:
            
               Here Dido lies, Sicheus wife.
            
            but this verſe let me haue.
            Aeneas, Dido gaue
            
            
               both cauſe and ſword of death:
            
            
               And Dido vſing her owne hand,
            
            
               depriu'd her ſelfe of breath.
            
         
         
            
            Aeneas to Dido.
            
               
                  Aeneas read what Dido wrote,
               And ſent her this replie;
               And ſought to cure the cureleſſe wound,
               Which Dido made to die.
            
            
               WHen my deare Countrey once moſt ſtately Troy
               
               Of Aſie Queene of gods the handy worke,
               Mine eyes beheld the furious flames deſtroy,
               Which hidden erſt in wodden horſe did lurke.
               I deemd me drownd in deepeſt gulfe of wo,
               Deeper then which, no griefe could make me go.
            
            
               But when my fortune guided me to ſee
               Poore old Prince Priam at the Altar ſlaine,
               More deepe then deepeſt fell I one degree,
               And felt increaſt my paſt increaſing paine.
               And cryed enrag'd: Conſpire now heauens all,
               
               
                  I am at worſt, no worſe can me befall.
               
            
            
               Yet ſince Creuſa my moſt louing wife,
               Of nobleſt birth, and no leſſe noble mind:
               My deare Creuſa loued more then life,
               In hapleſſe haſte I flying left behind:
               Where weary ſhe, or miſſing of her way,
               To bloody Greekes, a bloody death did pay.
            
            
               
               And ſince my father comfort of my care,
               I loſt likewiſe, by death from me bereft,
               My faithfull friends by ſhipwrack ſwallowed are:
               And is there yet ſome further ſorrow left?
               Some further wrack to make me more accurſt?
               Since fier, ſword, ſeas, & death haue done their worſt?
            
            
               In vaine alas I doubt of what I know,
               And ſeeke at thee what in my ſelfe I finde,
               I muſe: Liue I and know this? thee forgoe,
               To whom ſo many, ſuch deſerts me binde.
               What words can ſerue this anguiſh to diſplay,
               Where waight of woe, doth reaſon ouerway?
            
            
               Yet ſince thy ſelfe haſt made thy pen deſcry
               Thy griefes to me, which I with griefe haue red:
               Vouchſafe (ſweet Queene) to lend theſe lines thine eye,
               And daine to know what reaſons haue me led.
               And as thou knowſt them, take them to be true,
               The truer they, the more their truth I rue.
            
            
               And firſt (O Queene) I neuer will denie,
               On me beſtow'd more fauours can be told,
               By any words; nor euer greeue ſhall I,
               
                  Eliſas name in memorie to hold:
               Whiles of my ſelfe, my ſelfe ſhall mindfull bide,
               Whiles liuely breath, theſe lims of mine ſhal gide.
            
            
               
               But for the reſt, in briefe I neuer ment,
               (Deeme not amiſſe) by ſtealth my flight to take:
               Nor neuer yet pretended ſuch intent
               To any wife, an husband me to make.
               I ſought it not, I came for no ſuch band,
               When toſt by ſeas, I lighted on this Land.
            
            
               If friendly Fates ſuch grace to me would yeeld,
               As there to reſt, where I to reſt would chooſe:
               Sweete Troy that now lieſt equall with the feeld,
               Thou ſhouldſt at leaſt, not all thy bewties looſe.
               In thee rebuilt againe I would replace,
               The vanquiſht remnant of the Troian race.
            
            
               But now Appollo bids to Italie,
               
               To Italie the Lycian gods commaund:
               Here muſt our home, our reſt, our countrey bee:
               To this our Loue, to this our life is paund.
               If thou a ſtranger, countries ſtrange mightſt ſeeke,
               What in like caſe, lets vs to do the leeke.
            
            
               I neuer do recline my head to reſt,
               When night the Earth in moyſtie ſhade bewraps:
               But fancie ſtraight with fearefull ſights oppreſt,
               Preſents my father in ſleepe-waking naps.
               This place with terror bidding me to leaue,
               And not my ſonne of fatall Lands bereaue.
            
            
               
               And now of Gods the fatall Meſſenger
               From Ioue himſelfe (they both my witneſſe be)
               Hath meſſage brought, I ſaw the god moſt cleere:
               I plainely heard what words he ſpake to me.
               Leaue then with plaints to ſet vs both on fier,
               Conſtraind I go, not with wine owne deſier.
            
            
               And what wight can neceſſitie reſiſt,
               Whoſe Iron bands, both men and gods enchaine?
               What ſhe hath ſpun, who ſtriueth to vntwiſt,
               Or ſenceleſſe is, or pleaſure takes in paine?
               The ſturdie tree holds not his foote ſo faſt,
               As lythie Reed, that bends to euery blaſt.
            
            
               Who euer ſaw thoſe, which of Neptunes land
               The waued ſoyle with yoked Ores to plow:
               With top and top againſt the ſtorme to ſtand,
               Which Aol's youth with bluſtring breath doth blow
               They rather yeeld vnto his windie will,
               Then chooſe their liues in bootleſſe ſtrife to ſpill.
            
            
               And is it then my life I hold ſo deare,
               That life to hold, I Dido would forgoe?
               Or is it death that I ſo much do feare,
               That death to flye I would procure her woe?
               Then Gods me graunt a liuing death to leade
               In greefe, in ſhame, ſtill dying neuer dead.
            
            
               
               But care of my ſucceeding progenie,
               To whom by fates forepointed is their place:
               To whom by heauens of earthly Monarchie,
               The crowne to weare foregraunted is the grace:
               This care I ſay▪ with care for to fulfill,
               The gods beheſt reuerſed hath my will.
            
            
               And honors ſelfe, (which long a ſleepe hath laine,
               Rockt in Loues cradle) now awaked new,
               Cries on vs both: and ſhall he crie in vaine:
               To leaue him quite, or yeeld him ſeruice dew?
               You hitherto haue euer famous beene,
               Forget not now, what fame becomes a Queene.
            
            
               And me whom men (perhaps vnworthy) call,
               The godly wight and ſecond vnto none:
               In Pietie, from pietie to fall,
               Were fouler blot, then any other one.
               Admit (O Queene) that I by thee be ſtaid,
               By wandring Fame, what will of both be ſaid.
            
            
               Loe here the man that out of Troy burn'd,
               Preſeru'd his gods, now quite by him contemn'd:
               Lo here whoſe chaſte affection cleane is turn'd
               To lawleſſe luſt, late by her ſelfe condemn'd.
               He leaud, ſhe light, he wicked, ſhe vnwiſe,
               This fame to earth, this earth will blaze to skies.
            
            
               
               You know that Monſters many eyes and eares,
               Liſtning and prying ſtill to heare and ſee,
               Her tongues and wings which infinite ſhe beares,
               As lying oft, ſo flying alwayes be.
               Of Peeres and Princes euer ſpeaking worſt,
               It is her kind, ſhe was by enuie nurſt.
            
            
               You thoughtleſſe ſit within your Princely bower,
               Or minding only loue or liues delight:
               Your fame meanetime, like tender ſpringtide flower
               The buſie blaſts of bitter tongues do bite.
               Each deed, each word, yea countenance and thought
               Of ſimpleſt ſort, are vnder cenſure brought.
            
            
               It is our fate, if not our fault it be,
               Which higheſt mounted, ſet on Fortunes wheele,
               With our owne ſenſe we neither heare nor ſee,
               Which makes vs pinched long before we feele.
               For foes are pleas'd and would it not amend,
               And friends are grieu'd, yet dare not vs offend.
            
            
               Go then Aeneas, honor bids thee goe,
               Honour vnto whoſe yoke the freeſt necks are thrall:
               For her ſake fly, if wilt not for thine owne:
               Though what herein befals, to both befall.
               Proteſting ſtill that no miſlike or hate,
               Mou'd thee to go, but force of cruell fate.
            
            
               
               For were but Dido halfe ſo finely formd,
               VVere Didos eyes but halfe ſo beamie Ieate:
               VVere Didos face, but ſuch as might be ſcornd,
               Her Country poore, her Towne a ſimple ſeate,
               Yet hauing there ſuch louing kindneſſe found,
               VVhat flinty breaſt to loue would not be bound.
            
            
               Much more in me, kind hearted Venus child:
               Not by the lame Smith, but her luſtie Loue:
               My blinded brother might his bower▪ build,
               VVhere ſo great helps encourage him to proue.
               Her forme, her face, her eyes, her ſeate, her ſoyle,
               Diſdaining match, ſo farre from taking foyle.
            
            
               I both Oenone and the Spartan Queene▪
               
               I courtly Dames, and Nymphs of woods and wels:
               I haue Chryſeis & Bryſeis ſeene,
               Yea, Venus ſelfe, in whom perfection dwels.
               But if ſome god to chuſe would me aſſigne,
               I all would prayſe, but Dido ſhould be mine.
            
            
               But hard's my choiſe, when there the thundering
               (Iove, deſtruction threatens if I diſobay:
               And here my friendly foe, heart-purſuing Loue,
               By all his powers, coniures my mind to ſtay.
               Alas, ye gods▪ your diſcord lay aſide,
               
                  I am but one, and cannot go and bide.
            
            
               
               Or Ioue frame thou my deſtinies anew,
               Allot to others fertile 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Or rather Loue at once bid both adew,
               And both reſtore to former libertie.
               By reaſons rule, the younger and the child,
               Should to the elder and the father yeild.
            
            
               But thou madde dogge, whoſe reaſon lies in rage:
               Who no rule els, but retchleſnes doth know,
               Nor reuerence beareſt to thy fathers age,
               Nor from thy brother canſt abſtaine thy blow.
               And leaſt for that fault might with thee be found
               By onely vs, thou didſt thy mother wound.
            
            
               But not to loue, nor any els that dwell
               In ſtarrie houſe, I for my ſelfe would ſpeake,
               Let gods, let men, let ghoſts of gaſtly hell,
               Their wrath on me, with all their mallice wreake:
               Let me be toſt as erſt, with wracke on ſeas,
               With warre on land, nor here nor there in eaſe.
            
            
               Let all that els can mind or body grieue▪
               
               Grieue without meane, my body and my mind:
               Only to thee, that only didſt relieue
               My woes and wants, let me not proue vnkind.
               But thankfull ſtill, that fame may ſo relate
               Me thankful ſtill, but ſtil 
                     •
                  fortunate.
            
            
               
               For where the Seas before mine eyes thou ſet,
               With other daungers likely to enſue:
               And how I will an other Dido get,
               Alas I meane no getting of a new.
               My head is buſied more a thouſand fold,
               How ſince I muſt, I may forgo the old.
            
            
               And who hath paſt as I, the ſtormes of fire,
               Which crazie towers threw topſie turuie downe:
               Will litle care, though winters ſtormie Ire
               With ſwelling face, makes Tethis face to frowne.
               In ſum, I can all paine with patience take,
               But not (ô Queene) with patience thee forſake.
            
            
               Not that I doubt leaſt proud Hyarbas power,
               Shall able be, to make my Dido thrall:
               
                  Carthage is ſtrong with many a mightie tower,
               With broad deepe ditch, vauntgarding ſtately wall.
               This may and will thee from the Tyrant rid,
               Thee from thy ſelfe, ô Gods the luck forbid.
            
            
               Where Loue with loſſe, Impatient meetes with Ire,
               Shame calls in ſorrow, hatred brings diſdaine;
               And all in one, do oftentimes conſpire,
               To kill the Patient, ſo to cure the paine.
               Which done, for ſhame away each other ſlides,
               But ſhame, as ſhameleſſe euermore abides.
            
            
               
               Far better read ſometimes a Wizard old,
               How of loſt Loue to eaſe the cureleſſe wound:
               When Paris left her to honour told,
               Wherein ſhe ſaid, ſhe greateſt comfort found.
               Her hearbs and charmes eaſed not ſo her hart,
               As theſe plaine precepts of his homely Art.
            
            
               He bad her baniſh both from ſight and minde,
               All Monuments, but chiefly from her ſight:
               VVhich he departing thence, did leaue behinde,
               As pictures, garments, armes, and all that might
               His abſent perſon to remembrance bring:
               For loue of ſight, ſight doth from obiect ſpring.
            
            
               Refraine (qd. he) from comming in the place,
               VVhich hath bene priuie to your ſweeteſt ioyes:
               Neuer record, or euer with diſgrace
               His words and deeds, but cauſe of your annoyes.
               Deem him & them, and when you think him on,
               Thinke what cauſe had the Traitor to be gon.
            
            
               But yet at firſt in no ſort ſeeke to ſwage,
               Theſe eager torments of heart-breaking griefe:
               But whiles Rage runneth, yeeld to running rage,
               Till time takes truce, and reſpit brings reliefe.
               For mightie beaſts, and mightie paſſions both,
               By following tam'd, by ſtop are made more worth.
            
            
               
               Obſerue thou muſt as diet to this cure,
               That Idleneſſe and loanlineſſe thou flie:
               That vertuous accounts ſtill thou haue in vre,
               And ſort your ſelfe with fitting companie▪
               
               For Loue erects in idle breaſts his throne,
               And like a Monach loues to ſit alone.
            
            
               Thus much and more the good old man did teach,
               That Ida Nymph, in that forſaken ſtate,
               As he was hers, ſo let him be your leach,
               Since vnto me all praiers comes too late.
               Religion, Honour, Deſtinies decree,
               Three by poore one, how can reſiſted bee?
            
            Tout Seule.
            FINIS.
         
      
   