
      
         
            
            
               
               A IOVRNALL OR DAILY REGISTER OF all those warlike Atchieuements which happened in the Siege of Berghen-vp-zoome in the Low-countries, betweene the Armies of the Marquesse Spinola Assaylants, and the Prince of Orange, Defendants, of the said Towne; together with the raising of the SIEGE.
            
               IN THE END IS added two Letters, which discouer the Errours fore-conceiued of the successe of that Siege, and the after-Designes of the Spanish Armies, if they had taken in Bergen: with some particular accidents of warre, which were occasions of mirth to the beholders.
            
            All faithfully translated out of the Originall Low-Dutch Copie.
            
            LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, Bartholomew Downes, and Thomas Archer. 1622.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE IOVRNALL OF THE SIEGE OF Bergen-vp-zoome.
            
            
               TO omitte that which being besides our purpose, cannot bee expected of vs; namely, the antiquity of this towne, & the siege of it by the Prince of Parma, 1588. both which may bee seene in our Dutch Stories: Wee will now come to the late siege of the Marquesse Spinola; and set nothing downe, but what we haue had from very good hands, or haue seene our selues.
            The Marquesse Spinola and Don Lewis de Valasco, hauing gotten Steenberghen by composition; the conquered Prouinces of the Netherlands reioyced mightily, by making of bone-fires vpon the rumor thereof; in such manner, as if the fish which they thought to catch, had had the hooke alreadie in his jawes.
            The Spanish Forces not resting here, went presently thereupon the eighteenth of Iuly, 1622. to assault Berghen-vp-Zome, and fell instantly vpon the Horneworke, which lyeth neere to the Rayberg; but they were brauely repulsed by the Citizens, and those few souldiers which were left within the same.
            
               
The Prince hearing this newes, sent immediately out of his Campe neere the Rhyne, diuers Companies into this Citie.
            The aforesaid eighteenth of Iuly, being holy Munday, the Enemie began (according to their custome) in stead of ringing the Mary-bell, to cry out ioyntly, Iesu Maria, three times together: but wee not vsed to such songs or tunes, wondred at it, and were partly afraid, not knowing what they meant by it.
            The same night, some of our Garrison went to take possession of a high ground, without the Gate towards Steenberghen.
            
            The nineteenth of Iuly, sixtie of our horse made a sally, intending to see wherefore they cryed out the last night behinde the Raybergh. The Enemie perceiuing them, thought to sound an Alarum with their Trumpets; but our horse without any long deliberation set vpon them, and tooke two Trumpetters, besides seuen or eight horse, and brought them into the Citie, none of the said sixtie horse being hurt at all. By this happie attempt our courages increased: and when we espied off from our Steeple, the aide comming vnto vs, and the Enemie then ceasing with his Ordnance: some of our Garrison cried out aloud to them, That they had caried their Ordnance to the Lombard.
            The twentieth and one and twentieth arriued here, these three following Regiments, viz. of the Lord of Lockeren, of Colonell Hinderson, and of Colonell Fama; so that our Garrison amounted at that time to fiue thousand men. There came likewise

with them these Enginers, namely, Captaine Ralfe Dexter English-man, Mr. Dauid of Orleans, Mr. Tretorain, Mr. Omkees, Mr. Klair, Mr. Byuordt, and another English-man.
            They went presently, hauing aduised with Mounsieur Rhyhouen, Gouernour of the Citie, to fortifie the olde workes and raise new, which were necessarie for defence; the Rauelins and Lines being designed out, were in one night raised brest-high, and the next night perfected and brought to their full height, the most part of those workes being made without the Steenbergher gate, for without the gate towards Wowe, there was an Horne-worke begunne foure or fiue yeare since, and left vnfinished. In the meane time, our Ordnance mounted vpon the North sconse, to Boere Verdriet, and the Bosh-gate, was night and day discharged vpon our Enemies, which endammaged them exceedingly, as not discerning as yet where our bullets lighted: wherefore they made a defensiue worke of Bavins, about a quarter and a halfe of a league distant from the Citie, vpon the way towards Halteren.
            
            The two and twentieth on a Friday, being the day of S. Mary Magdalen, our Souldiers went with three thousand foote, and foure troopes of horse to wake the Enemies out of their sleepe. They marching without the gate towards Wow, left the Garden of Mr. Verwels on their left hand, and the Raybergh on their right; and entred by the back-side into the Quarter of Don Lewis de Valasco, being there intrenched. Our horse hauing giuen a signe of the passage found, both the English and Scots
               
came on very furiously: and the Enemies being already awakened, cried out Vienza, Vienza; and ours crying out, Quickly, quickly, kill, kill; set valiantly vpon the Enemies, and slew many of them; and hauing spent their gunpowder, and perceiuing that a third thousand came not on to second them, they sounded a retreate with the Drumme (being deepely entred into the Enemies Quarter) and taking their way behinde the hill to the Citie, they thanked their fellowes for the succour which they expected.
            We vnderstood afterwards, that sundrie Gentlemen with a Sergeant Maior, and two Captaines, besides fiue hundred of the Enemies souldiers, were slaine in the same skirmish: on our side Captaine Seaton was killed, and another Captaine hurt, besides fiue and twentie souldiers slaine; but our men brought a Cornet with his men into the Citie.
            In the meanetime wee laboured very hard on three small redoubts, which in a right line lead to Kick-inde-Pot: the new Horne-worke without the gate towards Wow, was likewise taken in hand, and diuers other workes made higher and thicker.
            Without the gate towards Steenberghen, they laboured likewise very hard on the Horne-worke, and in the Quarters of the Lord of Lockeren and Mounsieur Fama, there was made also a Line of an hundred and sixtie rods, (euery rod containes thirteene foot) because they conceiued the Enemie about to erect two batteries behinde the Roffelbergh, on this side of the Rysbergh.
            
            In those daies, the enemies considering that the

Garrison discharged their Ordnance vpon them, and sallied forth at their crying of Iesu Maria, they left the same. Whereupon our souldiers mocked them, saying that they had compelled the Enemies to forsake their redeemers: but I thinke they did it, because they were beaten vpon two of our Ladies daies before.
            The three and twentieth of Iuly, the Enemie began to play with his Ordnance, without the gate towards Steenberghen, vpon the hauen, he hit likewise sometimes the roofes of the houses within the city, the tops of the Ships, and the railes of a Bridge: spending that day three and twentie shot, without doing any great hurt. The same night the city wrought hard vpon all their workes; and principally on the North side, seeing the Spanish Campe erected diuers batteries vpon that side. This night our horse sallied forth both on the South and North side, and draue away his sentinels and watches, causing also an alarum in his Campe: They tooke certaine horse, and prisoners, and brought them into the city, so that they were in some trading.
            In these daies there came to vs, many bauins, baskets, boards, beames, and other such like prouision.
            The foure and twentieth there was brought to vs, good store of gunpowder, lead, matches, granades, fire bals, and other munition: We shot the same day fiercely with our Muskets, seeing the Spanish forces began to approach. In the euening

about ten a clocke the enemie discharged eight cannon shot againe, so that certaine women which were not vsed to the roaring of the Ordnance, grew very heauy and prepared themselues to die, but they were laught at. At the same time also, some few left the city for feare.
            From the fiue and twentieth vntill the eight and twentieth, there was done nothing of any moment, but onely that our workes were fortified and strengthned daily; the trees without the citie were cut downe (the citizens lending their hatchets to the said purpose) and conueied thither. There sallied now and then a few at a time forth, and returned with prisoners and horses.
            The enemie also hauing gotten more forces, began on the North side to approach, creeping and crinckling on like a snake. The fiue and twentieth, they threatned vs, that they would beat vs quite away, being S. Iames his day, for the honor of that Saint: but we vnderstood by their owne souldiers, our prisoners, that the same day one of our Cannon shot, slue 100. of the enemies.
            The eight and twentieth and nine and twentieth, the Enemie beganne about foure a clocke in the morning, to play with his Ordnance vpon the city, but he did little hurt, but we mighitly endammaged his new battery with our shot, and spoiled one of his peeces.
            
               August.
            
            The first of August 80. of our horse sallied forth,

behinde the high ground, taking their way, and leauing the trenches of the enemies; they not contenting themselues by giuing an Alarum vnto the Camp, slue likewise diuers, and brought sundrie prisoners and horse into the Citie; many being incited by their good successe, sued daily for leaue to sally forth, but they were delayed till better opportunitie.
            The second day our Ordnance shot cruelly vpon the Spanish Campe, thereupon about two a clocke in the night, our Garrison with fortie Musketiers sallied forth to make the Enemies to rise out of their sleepe, and slue aboue an hundred of them. Whereupon there arose likewise an Alarum in their Campe, and our Garrison continued the skirmish with them, vntill the afternoone the next day, at which time they returned victoriously to the Citie.
            The third, fourth, fift, and sixt, there was nothing done but working vpon the fortifications and shooting, and the old Maior of the Citie on the sixt day lost both his legs by a Cannon-shot, and died vpon it.
            The seuenth and eight day, there came diuers of the Enemies souldiers running to our Citie, being very neere two hundred.
            The ninth day, some of our souldiers, both horse and foot, sallied forth behinde Burghuliet, and slue there diuers of the enemies, beside them which they hurt, returning home; and although

they were not ouer-loaden with bootie, they yet gaue God thankes, for that they escaped without the losse of any man, which happens but seldome.
            The tenth being vpon Saint Laurence day, there was an Alarum giuen in the North Quarter, but it was not knowne at the same time within the Citie: there came at the same instant a strong conuoy into the Enemies Campe, with all kinde of warlike prouision: this night they laboured hard on both sides at their fortifications. The Enemie gaue a token in the North, that hee would giue vs an assault; wherefore, we would not weaken any Quarter, to make it destitute of necessary defence, in case of necessitie.
            The tenth and eleuenth we sallied forth vpon the Enemie, and skirmished with him: the Captaine Fryers Lieutenant behaued himselfe in the said skirmish as valiantly, as euer any souldier did in our time, and offered vp his soule with such a garland of Laurell for the Country: likewise Mounsieur de Preau, Cornet of Mounsieur de Mee, jealous of his honour, went with him to the heauenly ioyes, leauing the rest in this vnhappie and miserable world.
            From the eleuenth vntill the fourteenth, the Enemie shewed himselfe very ciuill and peaceable; but in the meane time our Cannon did not cease.
            
               
The fifteenth, there was made a halfe-moone neere vnto the corner of Beckaff.
            
            The sixteenth came the Enemie in the night, about ten of the clocke, stealing vnto one of our Sentinels Perdu, hee discharging his Musket, made an Alarum, and retired to the little halfe-moone, neere vnto the Horne-worke of of Beckaff, being closely followed by the enemies; vpon his arriuall the Pitch was presently set ouer the fire, and they paid them home, as you shall heare.
            Captaine Cary, Captaine Ralfe Dexter, and all other Captaines vnder the command of the valiant Colonell Hinderson, ranged themselues presently in battell-array, to resist the Spanish forces with their valour: the Colonell aforesaid, sent likewise some to the little halfe-moone before mentioned, to aide them within it. The Enemie being very furious, would not let passe twelue a clocke, for the day before was the Assumption of our Lady, hoping, perhaps, thereby to haue the better successe.
            We being yet hardly in order, the Enemie came, without making any noise, close vnto vs, but as soone as he perceiued our bullets, hee cried loude out, with a generall crie fuera viliaco: The besieged cried likewise, Take the Roague, kill, kill, so that the skirmish grew very hotte: but the Enemies perceiuing that

they could doe no good with their furie, retired quietly by the side of the halfe-moone; and afterwards set presently vpon the Garrison againe, crying as they did before; but they were likewise beaten backe: and although they assaulted the said halfe-moone eight times, and got twice vpon it, yet were they continually repulsed; at euery assault the Enemie had fresh men; but the English and the Scots withstood them, without being once so much as relieued, a great while, vntill they called for aide, and were presently thereupon seconded by the Low-Country-men, whereupon they shot together so fiercely vpon the Enemies, that they gaue ouer the halfe-moone, after they had lost many hundreths vpon the place; and intrenched themselues behinde the same worke. Whiles this fight lasted there were shot three thousand Cannon shot (namely, from the Bosh gate, the Horne-worke, and the Contrescarpe at the Wow-gate) amongst the Enemies, and did for the most part light vpon the Enemies, because their matches were seene.
            In the said fight was the valiant and generous Collonell Hinderson, shot with a musket in the vpper part of his thigh, standing at the same time vpon the Rampeir, being brauely at push of Pike with the enemie, and being fallen from the same, in his heauy armour, he was carried to

the Hage where he died, Captaine Carie and the Enginer Captaine Ralph Dexter, went likewise the same way (after they had valiantly fought) besides one hundred twenty fiue of our souldiers. This fight lasted from ten in the euening vntill fiue a clocke in the morning. The enemie lost in this fight one Count, fiue Captaines, diuers Lieutenants and Ensigne-bearers, besides eight hundred souldiers.
            The same day there was a cessation of armes for the space of an houre agreed of, to burie the dead on both sides: In the meane time, the Enemie working very strong, contrary to the agreement, we discharged our Ordnance vpon them, and slue many, and the Enemie doing the like, the dead were for certaine daies left vnburied.
            We perceiued about the same time, that the Enemie was verie sorie in regard of the misfortune happened vnto him, and would seeke meanes to reuenge himselfe.
            In those daies came certaine Switsers besides other souldiers into the citie; Likewise the Italians which lay nere vnto the Quarter of the Lord of Lockeren, began to shoot diuers of our men with long Harquebuses through the heads, vsing this deuise: they tied greene grasse about their owne heads, that they might not be perceiued, when they looked ouer the Rampeirs to shoot, for they seemed only like some greene earth cast into the aire.
            
               
But afterwards we perceiuing their deuise, discharged our shot vpon the grasse aforesaid, striking downe the same many times, with the head, and whole body.
            The twentieth being Saint Laurence day, after the Vespers were sung, the enemie came againe about ten a clocke, at one side of the halfe moone, and would by force leape ouer the Ramparts; the Swissers which were lately arriued perceiuing the same, began to curse and sweare, daring them to come ouer, they in the meane time thrust fiercely at them with their pikes; but the Swissers slashed them againe brauely in peeces with their curtle-axes. This fight increasing, the whole quarter rose in armes, and discharged certaine thousands of Musket shot vpon the enemies, and flung granades likewise, and other fire workes amongst them, in such manner that the enemie lost againe aboue 500. men, and we had 20. slaine, and about 50. hurt.
            The one and twentieth came six Companies into the City; and the enemie shooting very cruelly, we answered them with the like; It was the same day resolued in the citie, to build a halfe moone vpon the hauen, betwixt the North Sconse and the citie.
            The two and twentieth, three and twentieth, and foure and twentieth, were two English Ensignes slaine with Musket shot, the one being

hit by a Fryer, who was very skilfull in discharging of the long Harquebuse. The same day there went two troupes of horse hence towards Breda, 60. more got leaue to goe by land thither, and went in the night forth from the Bosh gate, riding behinde Burgvliet and arriued the next day at Breda, with 18. prisoners; almost all our workes without the city were perfected at the same time, but yet euery day we laboured hard vpon the trauerses or trauers lines and offcuttings and such like.
            The six and twentieth and seuen and twentieth there came seuen companies into the Citie with Collonell Morgan, the Landgraue Philips of Hessen, and the Yonker William of Nassaw, so that the Garrison was at the same time ten thousand strong; it seemed that at the same instant, the enemie would attempt something on the waters side; but we within prepared our selues to resist him.
            In those daies there rose an Alarum in the city, for that a Corporall with 10. or 12. souldiers, fell about noone vpon the approaching enemies, sallying forth out of the Quarter of the Lord of Lockeren; after they had slaine some few, they returned all safely backe, bringing away diuers Muskets and shouels.
            Collonell Morgan in those daies with a Frenchman being Captaine of the Trunckes, surueyed

all the workes and mines: those Truncks were almost all made in two or three daies.
            The nine and twentieth the Enemie made a worke of bauins opposite vnto the Coninsbergh and the furthermost halfe moone, neere vnto the new horne-worke aboue the Crabbe sconse: Whereupon we shot fiercely and cast granades and fireworkes vpon the Enemies, killing aboue an hundred of them, and burning the greater part of their bauins, before our retreat. The Enemie being desirous to reuenge this spite, Don Inigo de Brosgado gaue an onset vpon a little halfe moone, lying at the quarter of Monsieur Famaes Quarter without the line: Our souldiers beat them off sundry times very valiantly, with musket shot and granades; hereupon the Enemie caused his horse to driue them on againe; so that with much adoe they intrenched themselues at last behinde the said little halfe moone: Our souldiers kept the Enemies backe, with granades and burning of straw, vntill their fellowes had pillaged the dead. The Enemies lost here 500. men, besides those which were hurt, Don Ioan de Portugals Corps (being slaine among the rest) was afterwards ransommed for 500. Gilders; which is 50. li. Sterling. On our side were killed the Lieutenant of the Lord of Lockeren, Captaine Hans Vande Bosh, besides twentie souldiers: Moreouer there were forty hurt.
            
               
The last of August, and the first of September, the Enemy would approach with rowling Trenches about the Coninsbergh, but hee was beaten backe.
            The 2. of September there happened a Skirmish in the out-workes, and wee droue the Enemies with our Canon and Granades, out of some of their formost workes, taking afterwards with vs the Instruments which they left behind them, with other such commodities. The Enemy lost there many; on our side there were 20. slaine, and 12. or 14. hurt. The same Euening the Enemie made Boone-fires (in regard of the Victory which hee pretended that Don Cordua had gotten against Count Mansfield, and the Duke of Brunswicke, passing through Brabant) and discharged his Ordnance: in the meane time the Spanish retreated a little from their worke on the Northside, and our Forces getting notice thereof, went presently thither and pulled it downe, carrying the boards and other materialls into their Garrison.
            The 3. wee had newes from Breda, of Count Mansfields arriuall there: in the euening was all our Cannon as well within as without the City, discharged to welcome Count Mansfield; the Enemy answered vs with 8. or 10. Shot. The same night our Garison inuaded againe the Enemies Workes, on the North side, and pulled a great part of the same downe to the ground, and tooke almost all the Bavins away, without any resistance or opposition of the Enemies.
            
               
The 4. the Enemy assaulted our halfe moone on the North-side foure times in one night; but our Garison driuing them backe, assaulted them afterwards in their owne Campe, and tooke aboundance of Pikes from the Enemies, and burnt great store of their Bavins, (brought thither to fortifie withall) we saw 30. of the Spanish Campe lying dead vpon the ground, besides others which lay here and there dispersed; wee had two slaine, and three or foure hurt.
            The 5. and 6. there happened certaine strange Accidents, which are rehearsed at the latter end of this Booke.
            The 7. we blew vp one of our Mines on the North side, perceiuing that the Enemie had likewise one there, which also burst as well as ours; wee repair'd our Worke presently againe, and lost nothing by it.
            Our Garison went the same euening betwixt ten and eleuen a clocke towards the Enemies Trenches, and made them to retire close to their Batteries. We tooke there aboundance of Bauins for the space of two howers together, and destroyed his Gabionbaskets, with sundry other workes.
            The 8. day in the afternoone, Don Cordua arriued in Spinola's Campe, being accompanied with 56. or 57. Companies, and certaine Ordnance to strengthen the Siedge. We heard this day that the E
                  •…
               my

was raysing a Fort at Saint-Vliedt, a place lying betwixt Lillo and this City.
            The 9. wee burnt on the North side great store of the Enemies Bauins, which hee had brought thither to aduance his approaches.
            The 10. our Garison sallied forth againe on the North side, and tooke away all the Bagges of the Enemies by day light, which they had prepared to fill vp our ditches withall, and to assault our Workes afterwards, they are filled with stones, and so bigge, that a man hath much adoe to carry one of them.
            The eleuenth and 12. our Souldiers continued both in the North and South side of this City, to endamage the Enemies by their sallies: the Workes which hee made in the night, we spoyled in the day, beating him out of his Trenches, with the death of many of his Souldiers, burning some of his Bauins, and taking away the rest euen in our owne quarters.
            In the same dayes, and the eight next following, there came 20. 30. or 40. of the Enemies dayly running vnto vs, for want of pay, as they told vs.
            The 13. and 14. the Enemy shot very furiously vpon the City, and did much hurt to diuers Houses and Steeples; but God be praised few persons were hurt: This night hee approached with a Line from the Wood, towards the great Horne-worke, lying

South-west from the City; but wee stayed him presently with a Counter-line.
            The 14. our Soldiers beat the Enemies out of their Trench on the South-side, and slew all that they could meet withall, and finding there two Barrels of Beere, dranke them both quite vp, and so hauing gotten some booty of Apparell and Armes, they returned backe againe into our workes.
            The 15 in the night, the English and Scots, vnder the Command of Collonel Morgan, assaulted the Enemies quarters; and hauing driuen them away, they tarried there till morning, and eat vp all their prou
                  •…
               t, and cast downe 50. Roddes of the Enemies Line, which hee had newly begunne; but the next night the enemies wrought on the same againe, resoluing to finish it fully. But it is a very memorable thing to tel; an English Grey-hound which followed his Maister when hee sallyed forth, senting and snuffling about in the Enemies quarter, found there a Bagge of poysoned Bullets, (which are against the Law of Armes) and brought the same vnto his Maister. And I, getting some of them of the Sergeant Mayor of the English, sent them to my friends for a raritie. The same day about 100. of our Horse of Berghen, rode forth from Breda, and tooke seuen or eight Horse of the Enemies, neere Huysberghen, about a League and a halfe from hence, lying South-east from this City: and afterwards they sent sundry Troopes close to the Raybergh, and brought 75. Horse into Breda.
            
            
               
The 16. the Enemy blew a Mine vp on the North d e, whereby two of ours were kild, and foure or fiue hurt: but wee set presently vpon the Enemies, and caused them to retire.
            The 17. there were sent hither backe againe from Breda, 60. of our Horse, which lay within this City before.
            The Enemy at this time threatned vs mightily; wherefore there was order giuen, that all the Companies should tarry for the space of eight daies without the Citty; whereas they in former time returned vsually the fourth day into the Towne.
            About the same time wee got many Horses of the Enemies; but seeing wee wanted pasture for them, there were many times good Horses sold for the value of 1. 2. 3. or 4. shilling sterling money; yea, the English bartered them away sometimes for a little Tobacco.
            The same day wee laboured on both sides, night and day without ceasing, and principally vnder and about the forsaken halfe moone, lying in the South part of the City, vpon the corner of the great horneworke, neere vnto the Wood; both wee and the Enemies hauing vndermined the very same piece: but our Mine was eight foot deeper then theirs. About the euening wee blew vp a counterfeited or false Myne, which wee had made vpon purpose not farre from the other: the Enemy thereupon thinking, and vnderstanding likewise by the Runagates, that our Mine was blowne vp, without hauing taken any effect;

they thought to make vse of theirs, and to draw our men thither by inticements: but the Foxe had inuited the Crane, as the Prouerbe saith. Collonel Morgan hauing sent a little before 200. Musquettiers into a Ditch, with charge to make an Alarum into the very Trenches and Workes of the Enemies; which by them was so brauely performed, that they droue the Enemies close to the Rayebergh, and into their owne Quarter, where they were strongly seconded. Then began our Musquettiers softly to retire, and forsooke the ground which they had gotten, only in policy, to leade the Enemies another manner of dance then the Spanish Pauin: They followed our men hard, and came in great numbers into the compasse of the aforesaid forsaken halfe-moone, and further too, where they were saluted by our bright and well-oyled Musquets, and afterwards blowne vp into the ayre both by ours, and likewise by their own Mynes too, when they little suspected any such matter, as is aforesaid. They made a pittifull noyse and a lamentable cry, and our Garison setting vpon them, kild many (which were sunke into the sand by the blowing vp of the Mynes, some sunke therein vp to their middle, some vnto their brests, and some vnto their shoulders) knocking them downe with their pieces in such manner, that wee gat our purpose of them. Wee might likewise haue blowne vp the Enemies battery, neere vnto the aforesaid halfe-moone, and endamaged him mightily thereby, seeing wee had a Myne vnder the same, if our Commanders generally had consented thereunto; the Enemies had

11. Pieces planted vpon the said battery, and annoyed vs mightily.
            The 18. they were labouring hard on both sides, at their Trenches, Mynes, Lines and Trauerses, and had some small Skirmishes with vs, wherein sundry were hurt; so that the linnen which some Patriots or wel-willers of the Countrey had sent thither, was well imployed in the dressing of the wounds: there were likewise made 1500. Cushions for the breast, and aboundance of head pillowes for the sicke or hurt Souldiers.
            The 19. wee perceiuing that the Enemies would blow vp one of their Mynes, (in the Quarter of the Collonel Fama, and the Lord of Loqueren, neere vnto the forsaken halfe moone) wee went all out of our Myne, which was hard by the same) except a Frenchman and two other, which after the Enemy had blowne vp his Myne, were yet found aliue and drawne out: hereupon the Enemy came fiercely on, thinking that hee had paid vs home, with a purpose to settle himselfe vpon the forsaken halfe-moone; for a while wee resisted them, and they following vs afterwards at our Retreate, were blowne vp by our Myne; and buried aliue, this happened betwixt 11. & 4. a Clocke in the afternoone.
            The 20. the Enemy began from all sides to shoot very fiercely vpon the City, endamaging mightily the Church and Steeple of the same, in such manner,

that the ordinary waiter nor no body else durst abide therein: Wee supposed that the Enemy did this because Mounsieur de Greue, Gouernour of Isendycke, was burning and ransacking Flaunders with 2000. Souldiers and 200. Marriners. This same day Don Garcia Piementelli, a braue Souldier, was kild by one of our Mynes, so that Spinola was very sory for his death.
            The 21. wee blew two Mynes vp without the Bosh-gate, and saw the Enemies flying vp into the Ayre like Storkes. At Antwerpe they call now our City, Berghen bring on, in stead of Berghen vp Zoom, seeing there haue beene so many brought and sent thither from sundry places. But they dare no more assault vs so freely as they did in the beginning. We haue our hands dayly full of worke: but it is no matter; for whereas wee lose one man, the Enemy loseth tenne.
            We thought that they would haue broken vp the Siedge vpon our fasting or prayer day, seeing the approaches were forsaken by them, about the Quarter of Collonel Fama, and the Lord of Lockeren.
            
            It is remarkable to consider, that of so many iron Bullets which both high and low are dayly shot into the City, but few hurt or kill any, there is such store of them that are daily sent to the Store-house with Wheele-barrowes, and the Children play with the Musquet bullets which fall vpon the streets, vsing

them in stead of earthen Bullets (with which the Children in the Low-countries are vsed to play: for Custome being another nature as it were, both Men, Women and Children haue beene so vsed to the thundering of the Shot, that it causeth no astonishment or alteration in them any longer-
            The same day wee sallied forth on the North Quarter, and hauing driuen the Enemies out of their Trenches, wee burnt their Bavins and Faggots, pulled downe their Lines, and slew many of them.
            The 22. wee blew vp 3. Mines with good successe neere vnto the English Quarter, endamaging mightily both the Souldiers and Workes of the Enemies. But the fourth Myne which wee blew vp likewise thereabouts, towards the euennig, did exceeding great hurt, burying the Enemies aliue in the Mynes, wherevpon there rose an Alarum in their Quarter, and almost all night long sixe of our batteries, and three of the Enemies played with their Ordnance incessantly.
            The 23. and 24. wee were busie about blowing vp of our Mynes round about the City, and to surprise our Enemies: wee made likewise Counter-workes against his Workes, or new approaches,

in such manner, that wee saw the same day about all our Quarter, great store of our Enemies slaine and swallowed vp by our Mynes: and it being very hot in those places, in regard of our Musquet shot, the Enemies durst not come to fetch them away; so that they became food for the Crowes and Wormes, and all this was effected with small losse of ours.
            The 25. 26. and 27. the Enemies blew their Mynes vp, first in the North-west, and afterwards two Mynes in the South-east of the City, but did no hurt to vs nor our Workes: it is true that an Englishman and a Swisser were swallowed vp by the Sands vnto their knees, but they were presently drawne out by their feere; and against all expectation brought off aliue.
            The 28. the Enemy was drawing a Trench East, South-east, toward the way of Wowe: but curs blew vp a Myne about foure a Clocke in the afternoone, through the Command of the two Collonels Fama and Lockeren, lying North-west from the Citty, close to the sorsaken halfemoone, which tooke very good effect.
            There was order giuen before by the said Collonels, that certaine Pioners should bee in readinesse with their Mattocks and Spades, and certaine Souldiers with halfe-Pikes, to sally forth

when the Myne should bee blowne vp, to leuell the ground euen and plaine againe, so that our Souldiers might passe ouer it and set vpon the Enemies.
            All this was very happily by the ayd of God performed, without any damage of ours, pulling besides a great deale of the Enemies Worke to the ground, and being afterwards seconded by 220. men, vnder the Command of Captaine William Van Fama, Brother of the Collonel, they filled vp the Enemies rowling Trenches, which are nery narrow but deepe, and killed there a hundred and fifty of the Enemies, with Rapiers, Courtleaxes, Mattocks, Hatchets, Spades, and such like tooles, taking also seuenteene Prisoners which were brought afterwards into the City, as likewise the booties gotten, of mony, Ierkins, Cassocks, &c.
            I must not forget here to relate how that Youncker William of Nassau, base or naturall Sonne to the Prince of Orange, was not onely a Spectator, but likewise an Actor in this Fray, running with a Sword in his hand amongst the thickest of them, and hauing afterwards gotten one of the Encmies halfe Pikes, did braue Seruice with it, and was none of the first that came off, hee was onely hurt in the little finger.
            
               
The same night the English did likewise an admirable Exploit in their Quarter, Captaine Clerke being the inuenter of it. They digged a cóncauity vnder the Trenches of the Enemies, which lay vpon a high ground: The Spanish Souldiers perceiuing the noyse and rumbling vnder ground, ranne partly away (as being afraid to bee blowne vp) those which tarried, were afterwards when ours had broken through the ground, likewise driuen away, or slaine: This was such an inuention, as was yet neuer heard of before, by digging vnder the Enemies, to take from them their aduantages, and keepe them.
            Collonel Morgan likewise deceiued the Enemies very cunningly: hee commanded certaine Hattes to be set vpon stickes behind the Baskets in our new halfe-moone, to make the Enemies beleeue our Souldiers were lying there, and so it fell out indeed, for the Enemy supposing the very same, came and cast therein diuers Granades, but few of them tooke fire kindly, although they could not haue done any great hurt amongst the Hats and stickes: in the meane time our Souldiers came stealing and creeping vpon them, and made themselues maisters of the halfe-moone, before which they had shed so much blood in former time, getting now the same againe by a deuice without losse of blood: before 10. of the Clocke, all things were mended and

repayred in the same, and the Gabions placed the English shooting from betwixt them vpon the Enemie. At the same time the English got in the South-east 60. places of ground from the Enemies. And in the North-west Quarter, the Garison got likewise 50. paces from them.
            The 29. we assaulted againe the enemies rowling or dry trenches, and slue some of them, so that they trebled their Watches to preuent more mischiefe. We blew vp a Mine in the afternoone, and after set vpon the Enemy, but lost 9. or 10. & among them a French Ensigne. We slue a Captaine of the Enemies, and a great number of soldiers, and tooke diuers prisoners.
            The 30. day before sixe a clocke in the morning, there were threescore of the Enemies fledde vnto our Citie, being for the most part Italians.
            
            The same day our Burgomaster receiued a Letter from Breda, sent by his brother, the Contents were this: That Count Henry of Nassaw towards the euening would come with his Horse to Rossendale to logde there, and that the Prince of Orange was following him, with sixe and twenty thousand Foote, and eyght thousand Horse, being all fully resolued to adventure their liues and bloods, for the honour of God, the welfare of these Lands in generall, and our rescuing.
            
               
THe 1. of October, wee perceiued that the Enemy had remoued almost all his Cannon, which were planted on the North side: wee thought hee would haue welcomed the Prince of Orange therewith, but yet they were not so courteous.
            The same day there came diuers of the Enemies Souldiers running vnto vs, saying that all the Baggage and Ordnance was remoued, except onely some fewe Field-Peeces, or Colverings.
            The same time, there arriued many Troopes of Horse in the South Quarter of the Enemies, little thinking to come to the remouing of the Siege. In the meane time they shot fiercely with their Musquets, and gaue vs certaine false Alarums; thinking to draw our Forces of both Quarters vpon their Mynes. But wee suspecting that they would depart with a stinke or a smell, would not come to them, but saluted them with our Cannon and Musquet shot. They blew vp afterwards their Mynes which were ready, although they could not annoy vs any way with them.
            The 2. day there came an hundred and fiue and twenty of the Enemies to vs, telling vs, that Spinola was breaking vp. Wee in the meane time played with our Ordnance vpon them. About

noone they fired Spinolaes Quarter, and planted themselues in Battle-aray, as if they had beene afraid that wee would take the prize or booty from them: marching partly in the afternoone, and partly in the night following to their South Quarter, which likewise was almost all sired. They stood all night in order of battle, and sent the baggage away towards Antwerpe: the Foote followed the same, the Horse keeping in the meane time the Arriere-gard. But our Ordnance spared neyther Gun-powder no Lead, but gaue them their Farewell as well as they had before giuen them their wellcome. Our Souldiers visiting Spinolaes Campe in the meane time, found there Armes enough for fiue and twenty hundred men, and diuers Instruments, materials, and waggons, besides their vnburyed dead bodies, and great store of sicke and hurt men, complaining and lamenting against their owne Commanders. We brought them into the Citie for charities sake, and cured them as fitting.
            The Enemy departing hence with dishonor, had lost since the Siege 11000. men which were slaine, besides those which were runne away hither and thither, there being in this one Citie full two thousand of them.
            Wee haue lost in this Siege sixe hundred braue men, besides those which are wounded,

whereof there are a great number.
            God bee praysed for our Deliuery, and the Prince and the Souldiers commended for their good endeuours.
            There haue beene discharged since the first ariuall of the Enemy 200000 Cannon shot, both within and without the Citie.
         
         
            
            The Copies of two Letters written from Antwerpe, the first by a good Protestant, dated the 24. of September, and the other by a Romish Catholike, dated before the 13. of September.
            
            DEarely beloued Brother in the Lord, it is now long agoe, since I receiued any Letters from you: It is true that I vnderstood by a Messenger, that you were well before the siege, hoping now the like. For asmuch as concerneth vs, we are in health, God be praised. Furthermore, we heare here daily of nothing else but heauy newes. First, in regard of the great store of wounded and hurt men, which are daily brought hither, with twenty, thirty, yea, sometime forty Waggons at a time, lamenting and complayning pittifully, they dye also many times desperately vpon the Waggons, cursing the houre of their birth. Secondly because wee heare daily such ill newes of Bergen vp Zome, for it is here reported, that the Spanish forces are gotten into your Walles, and sweepe the streets cleere with their Ordnance, in such manner that none dare walke the same by day light: They say here likewise, that the Towne is vndermined vnto the Steeple of the Church too, that the enemies deferre onely the blowing vp; vntill such time as they shall be sure, that the Church is full of Hereticks; relating moreouer that no Shippes can any more goe forth, or come into your Hauen, so that the Citie is not able to hold out aboue eight or tenne

dayes, adding thereunto, that the best Ordnance, besides the Horse, and all what was of any value, was sent thence already, and that whatsoeuer is left within it, is like to fall into their hands very shortly; and here are many which lay great wagers vpon the surrendring vp of the said City: Therefore I pray you to send me word by word of mouth, or by writing (as you shall thinke it most conuenient) how all stands.
            
               Vale, Antwerpe, the 24. of Septem. Anno 1622.
            
               The second Letter.
               COsen, I haue written to you in former times, that Holland was in great danger, and I hope that you perceiue now, that I informed you of the truth, and therefore will resolue to come ouer vnto vs, if you please, I shall send you a Pasport to preuent all suspicion of your absolute departure. For it will not be long ere Holland will fall into vtter confusion and miserie. I doubt how you can escape in such a case, though you be a Catholique: for our Iesuites say, that the greatest part of the Hollandish Catholiques are poysoned by the potions of the Heretickes, making this comparison, that an Iron which hath once taken the ayre of the Load-stone, participates presently of the same nature; in such manner, that it cannot be taken away, or driuen out by fire.
               Wherefore I am afraid that you will speed no better then the Catholiques haue done, which were in Prague, or Heydelberg, or those sometimes did, when

this City was sackt, where the Souldiers answered them which desired to be spared for their Romish religions sake, that there was no mercy to be found at their hands, but if they were Catholiques, it should be the better for their soules.
               Can you looke now for any thing else, then a surprisal, and generall ouerthrow, seeing the Emperour and all Kings are on our side? You haue relyed and trusted vpon a bulrush, therefore I pray you to come speedily away, for our forces intend suddenly to make an end of the siege before Bergen. And haue therefore appointed a Clergie for the diuine seruice, and a Gouernour to command in the Citie. Afterwards, Marquesse Spinola is to set vpon Tertolen, and all the Islands of Sealand. Don Lewis de Valasco shall besiege Sluys, Don Gonsales de Cordua, shall with his forces, keepe the Campe of the Prince of Orange, in awe. Count Henry Vanden Bergh, with the Baron of Anholt, and the Bauarian forces shall inuade Friesland. Therefore I pray you come presently hither, and deliuer me from my feare; seeing that at euery Canon shot I am doubtfull of your life, suspecting you to be slaine therewith: Doe likewise your best endeauour to draw all other good Catholiques out of that cursed Sodome, Antwerpe the 13. of September, Anno 1622.
            
         
         
            
            Tragedies and Commedies of BERGEN.
            
            
               The Bullet must haue a lighting place.
               A Souldier being shot through the hand, after hee was dressed, went to the Well vpon the market place to wash himselfe: in the meane time, there comes another dead Bullet, & pierced his cheeke, without doing any other hurt: this vnfortunate Souldier, takes the Bullet out of his mouth, and returnes to the Surgeon to be dressed againe. The Surgeon espying him, was very angry; for that hee had so carelesly spoyled his late dressing; but when he perceiued how the case stood, he said vnto him, ryming in Lowdutch, Misfortune runnes round, some it hits vpon the head, and you in the mouth.
               
            
            
               He is well kept, whom God keepes.
               Three Children playing in the streete, there fell a Bullet down vpon a corner stone about the Bosh-gate, and rebounding, stroke the three Children downe, so that they all cryed out for feare; but before any came to helpe them, they had got vp of themselues, and played againe as before, without any other amazement: for vse takes away feare.
            
            
               Whom God hath ioyned, shall no man put asunder.
               A Bullet vnderstanding this Prouerbe, strooke in

betwixt a Suter and his Loue, and cast Iohn vpon Margaret. Fortune, and misfortune stand one next another.
               
            
            
               The more knaue, the better lucke.
               Three Spaniards playing at Dice vpon the head of a Drumme, a courteous Bullet shot by the Garrison, with a great noyse tooke the Drumme quite away, so that they altogether strucken with amazement, fell to the ground; their fellowes thinking that they had beene strooke dead, couered them ouer with Straw; but within a while, they crept all vp againe, not being hurt any manner of wayes.
            
            
               One mans fortune, is another mans misfortune.
               This Bullet hauing not yet left grazing, tooke afterwards, seauen legges of seauen sundry Wallounes quite off; which was a pittifull sight to behold: this iron Bullet was cast at Luycke, therefore I say, ill payeth his owne Master.
            
            
               A good bit spared, is for the most part eaten by the Catte.
               A Corporall, with those Souldiers vnder his command, hauing gotten in a night halfe a Barrell of Beere, with great paines, and danger of their liues, and sitting round about it, a drye Bullet tooke the Can out of one of their hands, and flew afterwards into the Barrell, in such manner, that the Hoopes hit them on the heads, and one amongst the rest, said, if I had not knowne the like before, I would haue sworne it had beene Witchcraft, and complayning of this mischance said: The mouth thought the throat

cut; Multa cadunt inter calicem fupremaque labra. There fals much to the ground betwixt the cup and the lip.)
            
            
               Schollers goods pay no Custome, in the Empyre.
               But it seemeth that the Bullets take no notice thereof; seeing they pursued the learned N. N. in his house, yea, in his priuate studie, yet our Bullet respected his learning so much, that it suffered him to rise from his seate to reach for a Booke, before it would take possession of his place; doing according to the Childrens saying; who rises from his seate, loseth his place, he hearing the Bullet with a great noyse to take his roome, said, There is nothing more vncertaine then life, and nothing more certaine then death.
               
            
            
               Wish and haue.
               A fellow standing with his long necke, looking ouer a Rampire, heard the Bullets whizzing, with great feare, and said to his fellow, I wish I might haue a phillip with a glancing Bullet, to shew that I had beene in the warres. A Souldier hard by, ouer-hearing him, very nimbly tooke a Musket bullet, and threw it at him as he went downe from the worke, hitting him in such manner vpon the head, that he sunke downe, and cryed out, I am dead, I am dead; the Souldier running to him to make him rise, takes the Bullet vp; he who thought himselfe shot, desiring to haue the Bullet, asked for it, but the Souldier refused to giue it him, alleadging, great miracles might be done with a Bullet wherewith a man was shot; but at last he agreed thereunto, though vpon this condition; that he should giue him a peece of money, and a Bottle of Wine, which

we dranke verv merrily; and then suffered him to goe away with his Bullet. Children are well pleased, when they haue their desire.
               
            
            
               Nothing venture, nothing haue.
               An Englishman desiring to get a Spaniards cloathes, which lay dead without the Pallisadoes, neere to a halfe Moone; imboldened himselfe to leape ouer the Pallisadoes; and hauing tyed two Matches together, he fastened them about the Spaniards necke, and being leapt ouer the ditch againe, he beginnes to draw the dead bodie to him: but the match breaking, hee scratcht his head, and taking a new courage, went to him againe, and cast him into the ditch, and hauing stript him, put on his cloathes, his fellowes in the meane time shooting very fiercely with their Muskets vpon the Spaniards; aimed at him likewise not knowing any thing else, but that he was a Spanyard, hee thinking to climbe ouer the Pallisadoes, hung fast by the breeches, and crying for helpe, his fellowes tooke him off, so that he came safe backe againe (and is a Felt-maker now in London) saying, Hauing is sure, getting is chance.
               
            
            
               Two curst dogs bite not one another.
               A Marriner drawing downe with a Boat-hooke, the Gabion-baskets of one of the enemies Rampires, a bolde Spaniard takes hold on the hooke, to pull it out of his hand; but at last, after great haling and pulling, the Spanyard letting it goe, being not so well experienced in that weapon, the Marriner cryed out for helpe, intending to draw the Spanyard ouer, but

he crying out very fearefully, his fellowes pulled him backe in such manner, that his Gloue rending where it had catcht hold, they fell both to the ground, with great laughter of the Spectators, which saide, In an equall match, there is no hurt done.
               
            
            
               Take hee de what you catch at.
               An English Gray-Hound running vpon the Wals of the Citie, it happened that a Bullet was shot thorough the Rampire, which the dogge perceiuing, snapt at, thinking to get a good mouthfull, but hee was by the same throwne downe the Walles, wherewith his chaps being hurt and bloody, hee sung out his doggish Musicke.
               There are diuers other Iests happened, but this Paper is not able to hold them all.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   