
      
         
            
            
               THE
FIFT LAMPE of VIRGINITIE:
Conteining sundrie forms of christian
praiers and meditations, to bee
vsed onlie of and for all sorts and degrees
of women, in their seuerall ages and callings;
as namelie, of Virgins, Wiues,
Women with child, Midwiues,
Mothers, Daughters, Mis
                  •
               resses,
Maids, Widowes,
and old women.
            A Treatise verie needfull for this time,
and profitable to the Church: now
newlie compiled to the glorie of
God, & comfort of al godlie
women, by the said T.B.
Gentleman.
            
               Matth. 26. verse 46. Watch and praie, that ye enter not into temptation:
the spirit is readie, but the flesh is weake.
            Imprinted at London by H. Denham,
dwelling in Pater noster Rowe, at
the signe of the Starre, being
the assigne of William
Seres.
1582
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Christian praiers and meditations, to
be vsed of and for all sorts and degrees
of women, in their seuerall
ages and callings.
            A praier for silence, shamefastnes,
and chastitie.
            
               THERE is nothing
that becommeth a maid
better than sobernes, silence,
shamefastnes, and
chastitie, both of bodie &
mind. For these things
being once lost, she is no
more a maid, but a strū
               pet
in the sight of God,
howsoeuer shee disguiseth
hir selfe, and dissembleth
with the world. I
therefore most humblie
beseech thee, O mercifull Father, from whome commeth
euerie good and perfect gift, and without whom,
we are not able to doo anie thing: that thou wilt so order
my tongue, and dispose my talke, that I speake nothing,
but that becommeth my state, age, and person;
neither that I delight to heare anie talke, that might
in anie point mooue me to lewdnes or lightnes, seeing
that euill words corrupt good maners. Giue me also
such shamefastnes, as may plucke me awaie from the
delectation, either of thinking, speaking, hearing, seeing,

or dooing euill; that my whole delight may be in
vertue, in godlines, in eschewing idlenes, in giuing my
selfe continuallie to some godlie exercise; but aboue all
things, in thinking and speaking of thee, in reading
thy blessed word and heauenlie lawe, which is a lanterne
to my feete, and a light to my paths.
            Moreouer, suffer neither my mind to be defiled with

                  •
               uill thoughts, nor my bodie to be corrupted with anie
kind of vncleannes; but giue me grace so to order my
selfe in eschewing idlenes, and wanton wicked companie,
that my mind being free from euill affects, and my
bodie cleere from all vncleannes; I may be found a
meete temple for the holie Ghost to inhabit. And if it be
thy good pleasure hereafter to call me vnto the honourable
state of matrimonie, that I may bring also vnto
mine husband, a pure and vndefiled bodie, and so liue
with him in thy feare, vnto the praise and glorie of thy
blessed name,
            Amen.
         
         
            A praier to be said of single women against all euill behauiour,
vice, and vanitie, and for the obtaining of modestie,
chastitie, and all maidenlie vertues.
            ALmightie and euerliuing GOD,
which art of a pure, chaste, vnspotted,
& eternall essence: chaste minds
please thee, and godlie conuersation
thou likest well. Wherefore I beseech
thee, create in mee a cleane
hart, O Lord, and keepe mee from
vncleane cogitations, harlotrie,
whooredome, and all impuritie. Take from me a wanton
eie, and let me not gaze vpon the beauti
                  •
                or comlie
personage of anie man, least I be taken in his snares;
but giue me grace to shun ill companie, least I come
to shame and reproch. Turne awaie mine eies, I saie,
good Lord, from beholding a beautifull man, and keepe

me from immodest, wanton, and effeminate persons,
whose delight is all the daie long in chambering and
wantonnes, in excesse of wine, vaine pleasures, and all
maner of wickednes and riot. As for many idle words,
much babling, filthie speech, and scurillitie, let them be
so far from mine hart, that they neuer come once into
my mouth or lips. Preserue me, O Lord, and keepe me
from all the snares of Satan, from all allurements,
intisements, prouocations, & occasions of sin, & transgressing
thy most holie commandements; as namelie,
from pride, nicenes, sloth, & idlenes; from pranking,
pricking, pointing, painting, frisling, & decking of my
self to appeare piked, feate, gorgious, & gaie in the eies
of men: from taking too much libertie to gad abroad
to see and to be seene, or to prance in pride arrogantlie;
from haunting euill companie, and resorting to bankets,
weddings, idle games, heathenish sports, & dissolute
plaies, and pastimes, vaine pleasures, and filthie
dalliance and dansings, the extreame of all vices: finallie,
from all enuie, arrogancie, ambition, impudencie,
piertnes, boldnes, rashnes, vnshamefastnes, dissolute
laughing, excessiue feeding, retchlesnes, dissolutenes,
deliciousnes, wantonnes, lightnes, inconstancie,
curiositie, and from all other euill behauiour, vice, and
vanitie, good Lord, for thine holie name sake deliuer
me: least of a member of Christ, I prooue a member of
the diuell, by following the works of the flesh, and loosing
that inestimable treasure of great price, mine honestie,
chastitie, and virginitie.
            Oh let me not, I beseech thee, with Dinah, Dalida,
Salomen, & such like dansing damsels, become equall
with the vngodlie, by plaieng the foolish virgin, as they
did, and in liuing vngodlie or dishonestlie, to the shame
and great griefe of my friends, and to mine owne infamie,
destruction, and damnation: but grant, O good
and gratious God, that both inwardlie with a pure

conscience, cleane soule, chaste hart, and vnpolluted
mind: and outwardlie with an vnspotted bodie, holie
vessell, and vndefiled members, after the good example
of Sara, Rebecca,, Ruth, Iudith, Susanna, the virgin
Marie, and such other godlie women, I may Christianlie
serue, worship, and glorifie thee in true faith,
feare, and loue, and in perfect chastitie, shamefastnes,
sobernes, demure
                  •
               es, modestie, measure, thriftinesse,
scarsitie, diligence in house, care of deuotion, meeknes,
holines, puritie, and all other vertues bodilie & ghostlie:
that when the celestiall bridegroome, my Sauiour
Iesus commeth, I hauing my Lampe replenished
with oile, may with those fiue wise virgins be found
readie euen at midnight to meete the bridegroome, and
happilie enter with him to the wedding, there with
thine elect virgins to taste of all the good fatnes of the
pleasures of paradise.
            And if it shall please thee hereafter to prepare me for
an husband, and to call mee vnto the holie state of honourable
marriage: assist me, I beseech thee, that in
thy feare, with honestie of bodie and good fame, not of
curiositie, or incontinencie, nor through sinister practise
and priuie contracts; but with chaste and holie
loue, with continuall praier and lawfull meanes, and
that with the consent and agreement of parents and
friends on both sides first carefullie obteined, I may
(euen before the flower of mine age be past, if it be thy
will) enter thereinto, and be presented of them as a
pure virgin to Christ, especiallie considering that thou
hast therefore ordeined that state of life, that the virgin,
which hath not the gift of single life, feeling hir infirmitie,
and to auoid fornication, might marrie, and
take an husband in the Lord: as also that mankind in
chaste wedlocke may be multiplied, and that an holie
Church (which both in this world, and for euer shall
praise thee) might be gathered and chosen.
            
               And forasmuch, O Lord, as a prudent, a wise, and a
godlie man commeth from thee, and is thy gift; who
onlie triest the harts and reines, and knowest the verie
secret cogitations and conditions of all men: prouide
I beseech thee, and giue me vnto a man of vnderstanding,
of sound and Christian religion, of wise gouernement
and behauiour; of a good life and vertuous disposition:
euen such an husband, I say, as may be faithfull,
constant, gentle, honest, tender, and louing vnto
mee; and godlie, zealous, sincere and religious in thy
sight: but from an vnwise, irreligious, vnfaithfull, and
wauering minded man, from an hastie, testie, rash, heddie,
furious, bitter, angrie, vnthriftie and couetous
husband, good Lord for thy holie name sake deliuer me;
and grant, that obteining at thy fatherlie hands a
good husband, euen according to mine (or rather thine)
owne hart, and being holilie coupled togither in Christian
loue and puritie, we may both liue togither vertuouslie
and quietlie in thy feare, without sinne or
shame, and also die in a good age godlie and Christianlie
in thy faith, without eternall death and condemnation,
through Iesus Christ our Lord,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another.
            LOrd, thou hast commanded by thine
holie Apostle, that wee should abstaine
from fornication, and that euerie
one of vs should knowe how to
keepe our vessell (that is our bodie)
in holinesse, chastitie, and honour,
and not in the lusts of concupiscence
and vncleannes, as doo the heathen
which knowe not God. I beseech thee giue me grace to
behaue my selfe according to this thy holie commandement,
that in this my single life and state of virginitie,
I defile not my bodie with whoredome, adulterie, fornication,

or with anie other filthinesse and vncleanenesse;
but so order my selfe with all honestie, sobrietie,
chastitie, and purenesse of life, that I may glorifie thee
my Lord God, both in soule and bodie,
            Amen.
         
         
            Or praie thus:
            ALbeit, most mercifull Father, mariage
is honourable among all persons,
and the bed vndefiled; yet forasmuch
as partlie for the tendernesse
of mine age, I am not apt for
holie wedlocke, and partlie through
thine exceeding and aboue naturall
gift (for none can liue chaste, except
thou giue hir that gift) I liue yet free from the sweet
yoke of Matrimonie, I hartilie praie thee, that as I
haue receiued of thee the gift of continencie and virginitie,
so I may haue grace from thee to bridle my selfe
from lusts, & from all foolish appetits: and to frame my
life in all godlie & vertuous exercises both of the bodie
and mind: yea so go foorth I praie thee to continue and
increase this thy gift of chastitie in me, that I may the
more freelie and quietlie in all godlie patience and sufferance
serue thee, and care for those things that
please thee and pertaine to thy glorie; and also that I
passing ouer the time of this my yong age in thy feare,
in godlie trauels, vertuous labours, and maidenlie behauiour,
may eschew all euill lusts, riotous resorts,
and wanton companie: that when it shall please thee
to call me to the holie and honourable order of blessed
wedlocke, I may bring with me a cleane, chaste, and
vndefiled bodie, and so be apt and fit to liue in that godlie
state of Matrimonie, auoiding all fornication,
whoredome, and vncleannesse, all dissention, strife, and
debate, that thou maiest blesse me and my mariage;
prosper my godlie trauels; send me good successe in all

my doings, and make me a ioifull mother in seeing
my childers children, according to thy holie
promise, which liuest and reignest
verie God, world without
end,
            Amen.
         
         
            For the grace of Gods holie spirit, to resist all sinfull
motions, and keepe pure the state of single
life, praie.
            OH Lord the king of glorie, and God
of all power and might, which hast
promised to powre thy spirit vpon
all flesh, vpon virgins, maidens, and
yong women, and to giue the holie
Ghost to thy children, whensoeuer
they shall aske the same of thee in
thy Sonnes name in their praiers:
and allowest none to be pure virgins and thy children
indeede, but such as keepe themselues vnspotted of the
world, and walke before thee in the rule of thy lawes,
and obedience of thy commandements. Oh Lord, thou
knowest I would faine walke with thee from my virginitie,
in righteousnesse and holinesse. My desire is to
walke before thee in a pure conscience, chaste mind, and
vndefiled bodie. But alas, deere God, I confesse the corruption
of my nature, polluted in the first woman Eue
in Paradise, is such; and my weakenesse and vnablenesse
to stand in temptation is so much, and the custome
of sinne hath gotten such dominion ouer me, that
I am not able of my selfe so much as to thinke a good
thought, much lesse to doo anie thing that is good and
acceptable in thy sight. Wherefore, oh most louing Father,
take not thy grace and holie spirit from me thine
handmaid; leaue me not to my selfe, neither forsake
me, for then I am vtterlie 
                  •
               ast awaie. For thou seest, O
Lord, that if thou doo but shadowe thy selfe a little, and

depart from me, into how manie grieuous and horrible
sinnes I fall; how much more then, Lord, if thou
shouldest vtterlie forsake me, leaue me to my selfe, and
take thy grace and holie spirit vtterlie from me? Therfore,
oh most intreatable God, I beseech thee consider
my manifold imperfections, womanlie weakenesses, &
miserable corruptions, which dailie turne me out of
the waie, and drawe me from thee, and powre downe
thy grace and holie spirit plentifullie vpon me thine
humble handmaid. Yea giue vnto me also thy most holie
word, thy patience, loue, meekenesse, integritie, righteousnesse,
iustice, temperaunce, sobrietie, chastitie,
peace, long-suffering, faith, goodnesse, holinesse, and all
other thy vertues, fruites of the spirit, and ordinarie
meanes, whereby I may be so instructed, taught, and
guided, gouerned, protected and defended in this my
single life and state of virginitie, that I neuer offend against
thy diuine Maiestie, or mine owne soule and b
                  •
               
die, but that I may haue power and strength from
thee continuallie to stand against all the secret assaults
and open temptations of mine enimies, both bodilie
and ghostlie: yea grant, O deere Father, that I may
through thy mightie power working in my weake vessell,
haue continuall victorie ouer all hellish hagges,
and also triumph ouer them in all their assaults and
temptations, as manie holie virgins and women haue
done in all ages, so that togither with them I may
walke before thee in the purenesse of my virginitie,
with a good conscience, in perfect righteousnesse
and true holinesse acceptable in thy sight, all
the daies of my life, according to thy
will, through Iesus Christ our
Lord and onlie Sauiour
and redeemer,
So be it.
            
         
         
            
            Another praier in the behalfe of all Virgins, or single
women, for the keeping of obedience, modestie,
chastitie, puritie, and cleannesse
of liuing.
            O Diuine spirit, God the holie Ghost,
which abhorrest, despisest, and fliest
from all vncleannesse, filthinesse and
dishonestie; and which dooest contrariwise
both reioice, and hast great
delight and pleasure to be resident,
and dwell in chaste, pure, cleane, and
virginall mindes: I thine humble
handmaid meekelie beseech thee, both for my selfe, and
all other virgins and maidens, that as through thy benignitie
and gentlenesse, we beare and carrie about in
this our weake, fraile, and earthen vessels, the same
most excellent and notable treasure; so through thy
goodnesse and fauour we may keepe and preserue it safe
and whole, vnpolluted or defiled anie manner of waies
as we ought. Make vs gladlie to reuerence our elders,
and by the good motherlie admonitions and sincere
honestie of the best and most godlie women, to institute,
frame, and order our trade of liuing. Cause vs
also to bridle our lusts and appetites, and continuallie
to exercise our selues with labour both of bodie and
mind, in patience and sufferance, that we may be apt
and fit both for maidenlie and hus
                  •
               ifelie affaires. Let
vs not giue our selues to much idlenesse, deintie fare, euill
companie, and dissolute pastime; and in all the recreation
of our spirits, let vs beware of intemperancie
and lightnesse, and alwaies vse reuerence, shamefastnesse,
and modestie. Take from vs, O God, all nicenesse,
wantonnesse, prodigalitie, and lasciuiousnesse, especiallie
in the presence of our elders. Let vs euer both
in time and place remember our selues to be women,

and not beasts, yea yong women, and not babes, and
therefore to take heed that our manners and conditions
exceed the manners and properties both of beasts
and of babes: neither let vs thinke our selues women
or matrones wise enough of our selues to teach our
selues; but being free from all selfe-weening, selfe-loue,
and presumption, let vs rather knowe that we lacke
as yet manie instructions and godlie lessons; and giue
vs grace to learne them at their hands, whomethou
doest appoint ouer vs to gouerne and teach vs, that so
we dailie more and more pleasing thee with pure harts
and vndefiled bodies, may with those wise virgins,
come vnto that blessed life which knoweth no corruption,
in the which thou, togither with the Father, and
his Sonne my louing Spouse, and heauenlie Bridegroome,
liuest and reignest one immortall and inuisible
God, blessed and praised for euer and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier to the same effect.
            MOst sweet Lord Iesu Christ my heauenlie
spouse, which art the glorie
of the Father, and the brightnesse
of the euerlasting light, I thine vnwoorthie
handmaid, beseech thee for
thine incomprehensible diuine Maiestie,
that thou wilt giue vnto me
a godlie preparation of mind, puritie
of hart, simplicitie of spirit, and cleannesse and chastitie
of bodie. Oh kill I beseech thee sweet Iesu, and
vtterlie extinguish in me all inordinate lusts; pull out,
and plucke vp by the rootes what vice soeuer is in me,
and take quite awaie whatsoeuer displeaseth thee in
me. So rule, temper, and dispose all both mine outward
and inward senses, as also all the force and powers
of my mind, that through thy grace I may refraine,
preserue, and keepe my selfe from all vniust, and

naughtie workes, from all euill cogitations and
thoughts, from all wicked and peruerse purposes,
willes, intents, and affections, which fight against thy
holie and blessed commandements. Grant moreouer,
that I may loue thee aboue all things; that nothing
may delight or please me but thou alone; that I may
seeke, will, desire, and couet nothing that is contrarie
and repugnant to thy heauenlie will, and good pleasure.
Finallie, grant O most gentle Iesu, that heere in
this world, I may so godlie liue, and vertuouslie behaue
my selfe both in this my single life, and afterward,
that in the last daie of my life I may be found
readie with the wise virgins, pure, holie, cleane, and
vndefiled, and so through thee the celestiall Bridegrome
most happelie enter, and be caried into the celestiall
countrie of ioies eternall,
            Amen.
         
         
            A praier to be said for all virgins and maids
generallie.
            O GOD, the former of our bodies,
and the inspirer of our soules, which
neuer despisest anie age; reiectest no
sexe; nor esteemest anie estate or condition
vnwoorthie of thy grace; but
art the Creator and redeemer of all:
defend with the shield of thy protection
all those thy seruants and
handmaids, whom it hath pleased thee to indue with
the gift of continencie, and virginitie; that they, which
yet be free from the sweet yoke of matrimonie, by the
helpe of thy grace subduing all sinfull motions and
concupiscences of the flesh, and being giuen to all good
works, and holie exercises both of the bodie and mind,
may be vnseparablie vnited to the loue and obedience
of thy Sonne their spouse, Lord, and Sauiour Iesus
Christ, We beseech thee also, O Lord, minister and giue

thou vnto them weapons of defence, not carnall, but
spirituall, that thou gouerning both their members
and senses, sinne and wickednes may neuer be able to
beare rule in them, nor preuaile against their bodies
or soules; and that they alwaie liuing in thy feare,
grace, and fauour, Satan the friend to the bad, and so
to the good, may not be so bold to claime them as his,
whose vessels thou hast consecrated, to glorifie thy
name in puritie of life. O let the dew and moisture of
thy heauenlie grace quench and asswage their naturall
heate: and let the fire of perpetuall chastitie inflame
their harts and minds. Let not their modest 
                  •
               nd
shamefast faces be blotted with anie reproch, neither
let securitie or negligence at anie time be hurtfull vnto
them. Take from them all occasions of offence, and
suffer them not to endure anie open infamie; but let
there be in them a warie chastitie, adorned and inarmed
with a liuelie faith, firme hope, and sincere charitie,
that their minds by thy gift being thus prepared
to continencie, their vertue by the power of thy grace
may be of force to incounter with the suggestions of
Satan, & vanquish all his mightie assaults, and that
by despising things present and transitorie, they may
euer followe with desire, and at the last obtaine the
ioies to come. Finallie, make them, O Lord, alwaies
to prefer abstinence and temperance before banketing
or bellie-cheere, and cause them to giue themselues to
the reading of holie scripture, to diuine contemplations,
and meditations, before feasting, wantonnes, and
excesse or riot; that being fed with praieng, filled with
instruction, and illuminated with watchings and holie
exercises, they may purelie performe and fulfill the office
of true virginitie, in this their state of single life,
and become meete spouses for the bridegroome. And
lastlie grant, O gratious God, that thou thus defending
and shielding these thy seruants both externallie

and internallie with the spirituall weapons of thy
grace and holie vertues; they, and euerie of them, may
be well able to passe through the pikes of Satans
host, and run their race in all holinesse, puritie, and honestie,
without anie offence to thee or the world, to the
confusion of Satan, and the exaltation of thy glorie,
through the same Lord Iesus Christ their euerlasting
spouse, and our most blessed redeemer: to whom with
thee, O Father, and the holie Ghost, be all praise, honour
and glorie, for euer and euer, Amen.
            
            Of Uirginitie, reade more in the beginning of the sixt Lampe,
         
         
            A lamentation of anie woman, virgin, wife, or widowe, for
hir virginitie or chastitie, lost by fornication or adulterie:
not vnapt also to be vsed of anie Christian sinner, or sinfull
soule adulterated and fallen awaie by sinne from hir
spirituall spouse Christ Iesus.
            
               CAP. I.
               IN the bitter affliction, griefe of
minde, and torment of conscience,
I go about to speake vnto
him that sitteth vpon the tribunall
seat, accompanied with the
Saints in heauen. And how
can I speake, when as the tong
is tied, and the lips dare not
once mooue or wag? The tong
doth not his office; the throte is dammed vp; all the
senses and instruments are polluted with iniquitie:
but I will proceed on, and first I will fall to the ground
on my knees, and make mine humble supplication vnto
the blessed spirit, that he will helpe me seelie wretch,
which dare not, by reason of the horror and superfluitie
of my sinne, craue ought at the hands of God. Yea, and
I beseech you also, O yee Saints, both holie men and
women of God, liuing here, with watrish eies and wet

cheekes soken in dolor and paine, to fall downe before
the mercie-seate of God, to intreate and make intercession
for me miserable sinner.
               Wo is me, bicause of the sorowe of mine hart! Wo
is me, that my soule is thus afflicted! Wo is me, that
am compassed thus on euerie side, and shut vp in my
sinne, and that there is no health in me! Wo is me, O
mother, that euer thou broughtest me foorth a righteous
woman to be conuersant in vnrighteousnes; for
a religious woman to fall into extreme impietie; an
heire of the kingdome of God, but now an inheritour
of the kingdome of the diuell! Wo is me, O mother,
which broughtest me foorth a perfect Christian; yet a
wretch found walowing in all impietie: a virgin beautified
with honour and dignitie; yet in the end blemished
with shame & ignomi
                     •••
                  : a woman beset with manie
euils, & choked vp with infamous dooings! Wo is
me, O mother, which broughtest me foorth, as an high
and loftie turret, yet suddenlie turned downe to the
ground; as a fruitfull tree, yet quicklie withered; as
a burning lampe, yet foorthwith quenched; as a running
fountaine, yet by and by dried vp. Wo is me, that
euer I was bedecked with all gifts and graces, and
now seeme pitifullie depriued of all.
               But who will minister moisture vnto the temples
of my head? And who will giue streames of teares
vnto mine eies, that I may bewaile my selfe in this
my sorowfull plight? Alas, O chastitie, how shall I
bewaile thee? Alas, O virginitie, how shall I lament
thee? O all you my friends and kindred, tender
my case, pitie my person, in that I am dangerouslie
wounded. Pitie me, O all ye my friends and kindred,
in that I am now become an abiect person. Pitie me,
O ye my friends, in that I am now with sorowe come
to naught. Pitie me, O ye my friends, in that I haue
now troden vnder foote the seale and cognizance of my

profession, and ioined in league with the diuell. Pitie
me, O ye my friends, in that I am reiected and cast awaie
from the face of God and man: it is for my lewd
life, that I am thus polluted and noted with open
shame. Bewaile me whome the Angels haue bewailed;
bewaile me whome all the Saincts haue bewailed;
bewaile me whome euerie woman hath bewailed.
Bewaile me O all ye virgins and women vnder
heauen, in that I am fallen from my glory, and haue so
wilfullie quenched the lampe of pure virginitie. The
Lord made and ingraffed me a fruitfull vine, but in
steed of pleasant clustred grapes, I brought forth pricking
thornes; therefore bewaile me also, for that in
steed of grapes I brought forth brambles. But let the
welspring of teares be stirred vp, and let my cheekes be
watred; let them flowe vpon the earth, and moisten it,
for I am soken in sinne, and borne in mine iniquities.
I see my virginitie lament ouer me. I see all ioie sorowing
for mee. I see the spider ouer my seate building
with cobweb, by reason of mine absence. I see and behold
my selfe all sorowfull and pensiue. Euerie creature
sorroweth at my case: for I was woont heeretofore to
powre out praises vnto God for them all. Alas, what
haue I felt? and how am I fallen? Alas how am I
thus come to naught? There is no sorrowe comparable
to my sorrowe; there is no affliction that exceedeth
my affliction; there is no bitternesse that passeth
my bitternesse; there is no lamentation more lamentable
than mine; neither is there sinne greater than
my sinne, and there is no salue for me.
            
            
               CAP. II.
               WHere is that good shepheard of the soules?
Where is he that went downe from Ierusalem
to Iericho, which also salued and cured
him that was wounded of the Iewes?

Where is he that came from Iudea to the Citie Sichem
in Samaria, which also there liuelie touched the
woman of Samaria with hir faults, and yet gaue hir
drinke of his spirituall grace and life, to hir and others
conuersion? Where is he that in the Temple so mercifullie
deliuered hir that was taken in adulterie, and
would not suffer hir to be condemned to death as she
had deserued? Where is he, I say, that healed the sinfull
sinner Marie Magdalen, by casting out of hir seauen
Diuels, and forgiuing hir manie sinnes, bicause
she loued much, to hir perpetuall fame and glorie?
Seeke me out also, O Lord, and cure my wounds; deliuer
me from my deserued condemnation: heale me,
O God, haue mercie vpon me, and forgiue me all my
sinnes, which am fallen from the higher Ierusalem;
which haue broken the vow I made in my baptisme;
which haue prophaned my cognisance, and polluted the
holie temple my bodie, in that I haue dealt too iniuriouslie
with thy blessed name. Alas that euer I was seduced;
alas that euer I fell against thy will and commandement.
What shall I saie? Or what shall I doo
most wretched caitife that I am? I being defolate of
so great comfort, am vexed with sorowe for verie greefe
of hart, that I am cast out from the sight of thine eies.
Wo be vnto me, from how great goodnesse, into how
great mischiefe am I fallen? Whether purposed I to
go, and whither am I come? Where am I, and where
am I not? Whom did I studie to attei
                     •
                  e vnto, and
what euils haue I obteined? I went about to lighten
others, and behold I haue darkned my selfe. I endeuoured
to bring others from death to life; but alas, I
haue brought my self from life to death. I that minded
to present others before God, haue presented my
selfe before the Diuell. I that desired to be found a
friend, and a fauourer of godlinesse and chastitie, am
found a fo, and a furtherer of vncleannesse and iniquitie.

I that should haue set my selfe against the assemblies
of the wicked, and reprooued their lewd doings,
haue now found shame & the most pestilent wound of
the Diuell amongst the vngodlie. I that should haue
allured others to the knowledge of the Sonne of
God, am now become ignorant and vnskilfull in the diuers
slaights of Sathan, which commonlie entrap
men and women.
               Wherefore after much alluring and sifting, they
promised me (vnhappie woman) craftie conueiances
to auoid the subtiltie of Sathan; but afterward, the
Diuell in the same night transformed into an Angell
of light, reasoned with me, saieng, When thou art alone,
get thee vp, and go vnto them, and if in case they
perswade or entise thee, then condiscend, and harken
vnto them, do it, and cease not, neither stagger thou at
the matter, till they be satisfied. And againe, the Diuell
going before to prepare the waie, whetted their wits
to deuise mischiefe against me seelie wretch: he sowed in
their minds adulterie, fornication, dissimulation, and
deceit; but I, oh vnhappie creature, skipping out of my
bed at the dawning of the day, could not finish my
woonted deuotion, neither accomplish my vsuall praier
and christian exercises, but following too much mine
owne fleshlie affections, folded and wrapped my selfe in
the snares of the Diuell. I got me vnto the bed of the
wicked, and required of them to performe the couenants
in the night, which we had made the day before.
               Oh seelie soule! oh blinded hart! how didst thou not
remember thy promise and vow made in baptisme, to
forsake the diuell, the world, and the flesh? O foolish
mind! how didst thou not bethinke thy selfe what
would followe? O witlesse braine! how didst thou not
vnderstand so damnable a defiance? O thou sense of vnderstanding
(I saie) where didst thou sleepe in such
senseles securitie? O but it was the Diuell, which prouoked

thee so to slumber and snort, that in the end he
might slaie thine vnhappie and wretched soule.
               Alas, he bound my mightie men, and spoiled me of
my knowledge; he bound my mightie men and wounded
me. I answered but in a word, and foorthwith became
reprochfullie defamed: I spake vnaduisedlie, and
felt spite. The diuell raised an assemblie of wicked
ones about me; and when I consented to obeie their
filthie lusts, then pronounced he against me strait, this
iust sentence; M.C. saith he, hath plaid the harlot; M.
C. hath committed adulterie, and defiled hir fathers
house, and hir husbands bed.
            
            
               CAP. III.
               O Thou diuell, what hast thou done vnto me?
O thou diuell, how hast thou wounded me?
I bewailed somtime the fall of Dinah and
Thamar; but now haue I felt far woorse
my selfe. I bewailed heretofore the fall of
Aholla, and Ahollibah; but now am I fallen much
woorse my selfe. I bewailed heretofore the fall of Cosbie,
Bersabe, Rizpa, Tamer, and the Leuits wife; but
now haue I felt far woorse my selfe. I haue bewailed
heretofore the state of all sinners; yet now am I plunged
in them all. For I haue beene more bold than Apam;
more impudent than Memphetica Potiphers
wife; more shameles than Lots two daughters; more
wicked than Baara, or Salomen; and more bloudie
in persecuting than Iesabel. Dinah, and Thamer,
through violence offered them, were defloured against
their wils; but I with all greedines haue most filthilie
followed my fleshlie desires. Iudith decked hir selfe
brauelie of a right discretion and vertue, for the safegard
of hir people; but I for voluptuousnes and pleasure
of the flesh, to allure the eies of all men, and catch
the soules of the simple in the net of sinne, and snares

of Satan. Susanna being secretlie and forciblie assaulted,
sighed, and thought it better to crie, and shrich
out, that she might so fall into the hands of hir enimies,
and suffer death without the deed dooing, than to
sin in thy sight by consenting vnto their wicked wils;
but I both openly and priuilie haue followed too much
the deuises and desires of mine owne hart, and too soone
consented to those that haue burnt in lust towards
me. It was Dinahs libertie that brought hir to hir
fall; but it is mine owne wanton eies, mine owne rash
tongue, and mine owne wilful follie that hath brought
me to this sinfull fall and great confusion. And as she
was the cause, that manie of the Sichemites lost
their earthlie possessions and liues; euen so my lewdnes
hath depriued me of the spirituall gifts, which
somtime haue flowed with heauenlie riches. And euen
as she being seuered from hir father and brethren, and
cleauing vnto strangers and forreners, endured great
annoie; euen so I in satisfieng the lusts of notorious
sinners, haue brought my selfe captiue vnto captiues,
and made my selfe the bondslaue of sinne.
               For alas my parents liue, yet am I an Orphan and
fatherlesse. Alas my brethren and freends are liuing,
yet am I comfortlesse and freendles. Alas my husband
liueth, yet am I a widowe. Alas my children be aliue,
yet am I barren. Alas euerie creature reioiceth, and
I alone am forsaken and sorrowfull. Alas O house
wherein I was gladsome. Alas O familie wherein I
sate full merrie. Alas O holie Ghost, thou spirit of puritie,
which heeretofore camest downe vpon me, why
hast thou forsaken me? I am forsaken, and become desolate,
because of the corruption and filth of mine iniquitie.
Bewaile me, O all ye virgins, that am defloured
of all virginitie. Bewaile me, O all ye womenkind,
that am depriued of all chastitie and goodnes. Bewaile
me, O ye blessed people of God, which am banished

from God. Bewaile hir that is bereaued of the holie
Ghost. Bewaile me, that like a foolish virgin am thrust
out of the wedding chamber of my spouse Christ. Bewaile
me, who once was thought worthie the kingdome
of God, now altogither most vnworthie. Bewaile
me that am abhorred of the Angels, and seuered
from the Saints of God. Bewaile me for that I am
condemned to eternall punishment. Bewaile me, for
that I am heere languishing on this miserable earth,
and thus now tormented with the prick of conscience.
               I do feare death, because I am wicked. I doo feare
the dreadfull daie of iudgement, for that I am damned
for euer. I do feare the punishment, for that it is eternall.
I doo feare the Angels, which ouersee the punishment,
bicause they are void of mercie. I doo feare out
of measure all the torments; and what I shall doo, I
wot not, being thus on euerie side beset with miserie.
If there be anie man or woman which can, I beseech
them now assist me with their earnest praiers, and
with their sorrowfull teares. For now it behooueth
me to shed infinite teares for mine infinite sins. Who
knoweth whether the Lord will haue mercie vpon
me; whether he will pitie my fall; whether he will
tender my person; whether he will be mooued with my
desolation; whether he will shew mercie vnto mee;
whether he will haue respect vnto mine humilitie, and
incline his tender compassion towards me, as he hath
done to Rahab, Marie Magdalen, the woman of Samaria,
and the woman taken in adulterie, besides manie
others?
            
            
               CAP. IIII.
               BUT I will prostrate my selfe before the
thresholds and porches of the Church, that
I may intreat all people, both small and
great, and I will saie thus vnto them;
Trample, and tread me vnder foot, which

am the foolish salt, the vnsauorie salt. Treade on mee,
which have no taste or relish of God; treade me vnder
foote, which am fit for nothing. Trample mee vnder
your feet as a Iesabell, for I am a daughter of Sodom
and Gomer, that deserueth to obteine no mercie, nor
to haue anie pitie or compassion to be shewed vnto me,
but to be quite forgotten, and put cleane out of all remembrance.
               Now let the virgins mourne and lament, for that
their fellowe virgin is defiled. Now let the maidens
and damosels mourne, for that their companion is
fallen. Now let the wiues, widowes, yong women and
matrons mourne, for that a fellowe sister is fallen.
Now let all women both old and yong, maried and vnmaried,
bond and free mourne and lament, for that an
aduancement of virginitie and womanhood is shamefullie
fallen, and hath broken hir faith and promise
made both to God and man. Wo is me that I fell so
lewdlie. Wo is me that I fell most dangerouslie, and
cannot rise againe.
               Assist me O holie spirit, and giue me grace to repent.
Let the fountaine of teares be opened, and gush
out into streames; to see, if peraduenture I may haue
the grace worthilie and throughlie to repent, and to
wipe out of the booke of consciences, the accusation
that is printed against me. But thou, O Lord, thinke
not vpon polluted lips, neither weigh thou the tongue
that hath vttered lewd things, but accept thou repentance,
affliction, and bitter teares, the dolor of the hart,
& the heauinesse of the soule, and haue mercie vpon me,
and raise me vp from out of the mire of corruption, for
the puddle thereof hath euen choked me vp. Wo is me
that sometime was a pearle, glistering in the golden
garland of glorie, but now throwne into the dust, and
trode in the mire of contempt. Wo is me that the 
                     •
                  ault
of God now lieth in the dunghill. Wo is me that the

temple of the holie Ghost is thus prophaned, and made
a cage of vncleane spirits. Wo is me that thy holie
house of praier is become a den of fee
                     •
                  ds. But how
great streames of lamentations shall wipe and purifie
mine humble hart? Now I will addresse my selfe and
turne my talke vnto God. Why hast thou lifted me vp,
and cast me downe? For as thou hast exalted me with
the diuine word of thine heauenlie wisedome; so mee
thinks, I sticke in the depth of sinne, which my selfe
haue wrought. I had not committed this impietie,
vnlesse thou hadst withdrawne thine hand from me;
but it is thy pleasure, O Lord, which art good, to doo
all things gratiouslie: and I of the other side being a
foolish and fraile woman, haue foolishlie fallen.
               But why, O Lord, hast thou shut my mouth by thy
iudgements threatened in thine holie word against
adulterers and sinners? Haue I beene the first that
herein haue sinned? Or am I the first that fell? Why
hast thou thus forsaken me, being desolate and reiected?
Why hast thou thus banished me from among
thy Saints, and astonied me to read thy iudgements
and lawes? What is he or she borne of a woman that
sinneth not? What man or woman is there now, or
euer was conuersant here vpon earth, and did none
iniquitie? This I saie, bicause thou hast thus forsaken
me. Dauid, Bersaba, and the woman of Samaria,
sinned too bad in thy sight; yet after their repentance,
thou receiuedst them in mercie. Likewise Peter a professor
of truth, and Marie Magdalen, after their fall,
wiped awaie their bitter passions, that they suffered,
with salt teares, sleaing sinne, and purging awaie the

                     •
                  enom of the serpent, not continuing long in the puddle
of infidelitie; but they of fauour were thought
woorthie of mercie. And this I speake, to the
end these things may take effect also
in me miserable sinner.
            
            
               
               CAP. V.
               WO is me, that I fell thus wickedlie! Wo
is me, that my aduenture in these things
was so vnfortunate: but now I humblie
beseech thee, O Lord, inasmuch as I haue
felt far woorse, call me backe, O Lord, for
that I tread a most perilous and ruinous waie that
leadeth vnto death. Grant me that good guide and teacher,
the holie Ghost, that I be not made a pricking
hedgehog, and become an habitation for diuels: but
that I may tread vnder foote the diuell, which trode
me, and ouercomming his sleights, be restored againe
to my former health, puritie, and saluation. Remember
not, O Lord, the iniquitie of thine humble suter,
who sometime haue celebrated vnto thee the fruits of
virginitie. Remember not, O Lord, the iniquitie of me
seelie woman, who made answere too soone with wicked
language, & too rashlie gaue my consent to naughtinesse.
               Now, O all yee virgins and women, which behold
my wound, tremble for feare; let your loines be girt,
and your lamps burning; and take heed that ye slumber
not, neither fall into the like crime; but take heed,
watch and praie, and come iointlie, which haue the
same measure of faith; let vs assemble togither, and
rent our harts, and prouoke streames of teares to gush
out of the temples of our heads. For when these run
and flowe vpon the face of the earth, there will followe
remission of sinnes, the paines will be auoided, and the
torments shall not be felt. I mourne, and am sorie from
the hart roote, O ye my friends, that euer I fell from aloft.
I haue fallen and am brused; there is no health in
me. Let all women lament ouer me, bicause of this my
dangerous fall; let the garlands and crownes of virgins
lament ouer mee, for that I am seuered from among

their blessed assemblies. Let the whole Church
of Christians lament and bewaile my wofull case, for
that I am so ruinous, decaied & wasted. Let all people
generallie lament ouer me, for that I haue my deaths
wound. I see the clouds in the skie shadowing the light
from me, and the sunne hiding his bright beames. And
now ye doo all see and perceiue that my mouth is shut,
and that shame and confusion hath couered my face.
But bewaile me, and lament this my bitter sorrowe;
bewaile me, which am in like case with the reprobate;
bewaile me that am woorthie to be troden vnder foote
as mire and dung of euerie one that goeth by the way;
bewaile mee that am become nothing but rottennes
and wormes; bewaile me that am taken awaie and
made a publike example of reproch to all women, and
an inheritour of death and damnation, and all bicause
I would not vnderstand the feare of the Lord, and liue
after his commandements; bewaile mee that am
transformed into a dog, a sow, and filthie goate, by
trespassing against mine owne soule and bodie, by dishonesting
my friends, and dishonouring my God.
            
            
               CAP. VI.
               WHat shall I doo that am thus beset with
manie mischiefes? Alas O death why dooest
thou linger? I had rather thou spite me
and beare me malice, than pitie me. O sathan,
what mischiefe hast thou wrought
vnto me? How hast thou pierced my brest with thy poisoned
dart? Thinkest thou that my ruin will auaile thee
anie thing at all? Thinkest thou to procure vnto thy
selfe ease and rest, while that I am greeuouslie tormented?
Who is able to signifie vnto me whither my sins
be wiped and done awaie? or whither I haue escaped
the paines which greatlie I feared, and most iustlie
deserued? Who is able to signifie vnto me, whither I

shall be yet againe coupled and made companion with
the virgins and saints? O thou Lamb of God Christ
Iesu my sweet and onlie sauiour, haue mercie vpon me
sinfull woman, for that I am not worthie to heare the
message of them that bring such glad tidings, but presuming
far worse prattises, haue heard the terrible
threats of the Euangelists. Alas, O the bosome of Abraham,
the paradise of heauen, and presence of God,
that I am depriued of. Alas that I became partaker
with the rich man of his condemnation in the horrible
pit, and partner of his thirst in the bitter place, full of
sorowe and heauinesse. Alas, sweet Iesu; alas, O bountifull
Iesu; alas, O mine onlie mediator, intreat the father
for me I beseech thee, that I be not cut off frō the
coasts of 
                     •
                  ion, nor debarred of y• bosome of my father Abraham,
the which I haue so greatlie longed after, yet
not worthilie, bicause of my great sinne. For, behold O
Lord, I fall down before thy mercie seate. Haue mercie
vpon me, which mourne thus out of measure, which
haue horribly offended against heauen, against thy maiestie,
against my friends, against the Church and congregation
                     •
                  
& against mine owne soule. Haue mercie vpon
me the sinfullest woman aliue, which haue sinned too
bad in thy sight. Haue mercie vpon mee the wretch of
wretches, which haue shed my salt and bitter teares,
whose miserable case euerie creature hath lamented.
Oh Lord, why hast thou broken down my hedge & strōg
holds, and taken away thy grace and holie spirit from
me; so that the wild Bore out of the wood, Sathan,
hath destroied me; and the wild beast of the field hath
eaten me vp? Rid me, O Lord, from the roaring Lion.
The whole Church and assemblie of saincts doth make
intercession vnto thee for me, which am an vnprofitable
seruant, and vnworthie member thereof. The holie
and vnspotted Lamb Christ Iesus thy deere and onlie
beloued sonne, doth continuallie and incessantlie intreat

thee for me, which haue greeuouslie offended both
him and thee, O blessed Trinitie, that thou wilt shew
mercie vnto the wandering sheepe, which is subiect to
the renting teeth of the rauenous woolfe. Saue me, O
Lord, out of his mouth. Suffer me not to become the
sacrifice of sinne, but let downe vpon me thy holie spirit,
that with his firie countenance, he may put to
flight the crooked feend of the Diuell, that I may be
brought home againe vnto thy wisedome; that the
bill of sinne written against mee, be
                     •
                  blotted out and
cancelled; that the sowe may be washed from hir filthines;
the dog eate of the crumbs that fall from hir
maisters table, and a sinner worsse than Marie Magdalen,
yea chiefe of all sinners, be saued. O let my lamentation
cease in the euening, and cause mee to receiue
ioie in the morning. Let my sackcloth of sorrowe
be rent asunder; gird me with ioie and gladnesse; let
me be receiued once againe I beseech thee into the ioie
& fauour of my God and father; let me be yet thought
worthie of his kingdome, through the earnest petition
and praiers of the whole Church of Saincts, which
soroweth ouer mee, and humbleth hir selfe continuallie
vnto thee: yea rather, through the onlie mediation,
and vehement intercession of my Lord and Sauiour
Iesus Christ: to whome with thee, O Father, and the
holie Ghost, be all honor, glorie and dominion, for euer
and euer,
               Amen, Amen.
            
         
         
            Another lamentation of a woman that hath lost hir
virginitie and chastitie: or of a Christian soule
polluted with sinne.
            O My soule, wash away thy sinnes, purge
thee of thine iniquitie, and make the rest of
thy life agreeable to the word of truth. O
thou vnhappie soule, yea thrise vnhappie
woman, behold I say, whole mountaines

couered with thy sinnes, and great vallies ouerlaid
with thine iniquities. O my soule, once purged with
the pilles of grace, endowed with the gifts of the holie
Ghost, and espoused as the most pure virgin to the
faithfull louer our sauiour. But out alas, what haue I
done, or whome haue I thought of? My sauiour was
once my louing spouse, bicause of my chastitie; but now
alas he is become a seueare iudge to punish mine iniquitie.
O vnhappie remembrance of so great a losse?
Why doest thou so aggrauate my greefe? Or why doth
both good and euill thus torment me? Alas, alas, is it
not inough for mine euill conscience iustlie to prick me,
and the punishments due therefore to torment mee,
but must the remembrance of a good conscience also,
and the deserts due to the same condemne me? Fie vpon
thee wretch, that thou art to lose so rich a treasure,
which thou canst neuer recouer.
            O comfortlesse creature, why wert thou so vnhappie
to lose that, which hath made thee to be pointed at of
the righteous, and to be laughed at of the vngodlie? O
lampe of virginitie, how art thou quenched? Once I
was a spouse, but now an abiect; late a souereig
                  •
               e,
but now a slaue. Why hast thou thus preuented me?
And in what a filthie puddle of iniquitie hast thou
plunged me? O fornication the defiler of my mind, and
the destroier of my soule; why hast thou bewitched my
mind, and enchanted my soule? Why hast thou cast me
headlong from the throne of my sauiour, and placed me
amongst the condemned soules of sinners? O griefe of
griefes, why doest thou thus sting? Bicause I haue lost
such a iewell. O sorrowe of sorrowes, why doest thou
thus wound mee? Because I haue lost such a treasure.
Behold, behold alas what monsters haunt me. On the
right hand stands greefe to torment me, and on the left
sits sorrowe to condemne me; but yet I confesse it is
worthilie: for thou O my soule hast bene a traitor to

God, periured to Christ, and an adulteresse to thy sauiour,
and therefore deseruedlie thou art fallen from the
tabernacle of truth, to the dungeon of the diuell. O
thou abiect of God, and slaue to Sathan, nay rather,
the disdainer of the Deitie, and embracer of iniquitie!
for thou O my soule, lieutenant vnto sinne, first refusedst
the seruice of thy sauiour, and (of thine owne accord)
enthralledst thy selfe to the Diuell. O miserable,
yea more than miserable change! Alas, what a pallace
hast thou forsaken, and what a prison hast thou chosen?
Alas what a sauiour hast thou sold, and what a slaue
doest thou serue? Oh madnesse of mind, oh foolishnesse
of hart, what hast thou done? What I say hast thou
done? Hast thou forsaken thy sweet spouse and sauiour,
and embraced that rauening woolfe the Diuell? Hast
thou lost thy louing bridegroome, to followe the filthie
fleshlie pleasures of the world?
            O sinfull soule, how wretched is thy state? O wicked
wretch, how sinfull is thy fall? Oh my God, whence
proceede these irkesome stings of sinne? Or who can
make satisfaction for such heapes of iniquities? O thou
miserable wretch my sinfull soule, why dooest thou not
cast thy selfe headlong into the dungeon of griefe,
which of thine owne accord didst throwe thy selfe into
the filthie sinks of sinne? O thou polluted creature,
why dooest thou not burie thy selfe in the bowels of sorowe,
which so willinglie wallowedst in the kennell of
shame? O thou sinfull helhound, why dooest thou not
drowne thy selfe with the waues of weeping, which
hast so often swoome in the seas of fornication? O sting
of sinne! O rod of sorrowe! O daughter of heauines!
torment me, scourge me, plague mee, crucifie mee, and
trample and tread me as a filthie rag vnder your feet.
I haue deserued it, yea I haue sought it; for I haue
most impudentlie contemned, yea and most arrogantlie
prouoked you, nay rather God, not you; and therefore

now shew your authoritie in executing the giltie to
death, that ye may be reuenged for your God. Let the
sinfull fornicatrix feele the punishments she hath deserued,
and drinke deepe of the cup of shame she hath desired.
O thou my sinfull soule, it is now high time for thee
to shew the fruits of repentance, which hast so long
straid from the fold of the godlie virgins, and erred
from the paths of the righteous women. Bath thy
selfe I saie in the sweet streames of repentance, which
so often hast wallowed in the filthie puddles of vnrighteousnes.
            O God of all consolation and securitie, I durst not
sue for anie fauour at thine hands, vnlesse I had
brought in my bosome a pardon for my sinnes, procured
by repentance in the death of Christ, which heere with
teares I present vnto thee, desiring thee good God of
consolation (if again with the dog I returne to my vomit,
and wallowe in my sinnes as the sow in the mire)
then to driue me from the countrie of the godlie, and to
banish me like a vagabond from the court of my sauiour
and spouse; yea I desire of God it may be so, and I
hope in Christ it shall be so. And although I am not
woorthie to lift vp mine eies to heauen to call to my
God for grace, by reason of the multitude of my misdeeds,
which alwaies are as red as scarlet in my sight,
yet am I not vnworthie with continuall weeping and
crieng for grace to loose them. For seeing my soule is
constrained through greef of conscience, to powre forth
praiers to my God for his mercie and grace, it is meete
it should be done with great contrition of heart, and
continuall mourning. Consider therefore, O my soule,
what thou hast done, and what plagues thou hast deserued
for losing thy virginitie. Ponder (I say) lament,
and remember O my soule, before thou end the short
pilgrimage of this life, how thine aduersarie the Diuell,
like a roring lion, lies lurking in euerie corner to

deuoure thee, and sends out his messengers into all
places to entrap thee. O my God, what doo I see on
earth but engins to entrap me? What, I say, can I
behold, but baites to entise mee? Alas, and out alas,
what doo I heare? A cōfession of mourners, a crashing
of teeth, and a great multitude of howlers. Wo is me
alas. For me thinks I see great flames of fire; huge
balles of wild fire, and fornaces full of boiling leade,
and all approching neere vnto me.
            Alas, what meanes these strange cries of monstrous
woormes? What diuelish spite doth thus inflame
them, and what firie flame doth so torment them? O
yee hellish hagges, frieng with heate, and frowning
with furie; why are yee so cruell to those that lie howling
amongst you? Is there no meane, no remedie, nor
no end of this your punishments, and are these O my
God the torments which are prepared for filthie fornicators,
and contemners of thy commandements; of
which I am one, yea the cheef of all sinners? And must
I needs abide these infernall plagues? Then O my
soule, why art thou not afraid? And thou my hart why
dooest thou not rent in sunder? Alas, alas, how suddenlie,
yea and how greeuouslie the serieants of sinne
now seeme to arrest me? Alas I saie, what wicked actions
mine aduersarie sinne hath found against mee?
But oh cruell sinne, whether wilt thou carrie me? And
thou my God, whither wilt thou leade me? If I haue
committed this horrible crime which deserueth death,
O yet remember I praie thee that thou art my Sauiour.
If I haue broken the bands of chastitie, O yet
call to mind that thou art my redeemer. O my God, if
I haue done any thing that deserueth death and damnation,
yet forget not how that thou sheddest thy pretious
bloud to saue me. And therefore, O my mercifull
God, be not so seuere, in marking what is done amisse
of me; but let thy mercie preuaile and couer all my secret

and open faults. Remember thou saiedst by the
mouth of the Prophet, I will not the death of a sinner, but
that he should conuert and liue. My God, which canst
not lie, what meanest thou to say that thou wouldest
not the death of a sinner, if thou throwe him into the
bottomlesse pit of hell? Dooest thou meane that thou
carest not for the death of a sinner, when thou committest
him to the slauerie of the diuell? Is this thy meaning
I say, when thou saiedst, I had rather he should
turne and liue?
            I am a sinner, O my God; if therefore thou haue no
delight in the death of a sinner, then who shall let thee
to take compassion vpon mee sillie woman? If thou
hadst rather he should turne and liue, then who shall
withhold thy countenance from me sinfull wretch? If
the hugenesse of my sinnes deserues a wound, the care
of so gratious a father prepares a salue. God forbid
that the wickednesse of a sinner, repenting hir of hir
sinne from the bottome of hir heart, should surmount
the mercies of so bounteous a Sauiour. O therefore
remember me most louing father, I beseech thee, because
thou art my redeemer, and take compassion vpon
thine vnwoorthie handmaid, because thou art my sauiour.
Respect not, O my God, the iustice due to so greeuous
a sinner; but remember thy louing kindnesse towards
thy creature. Remember not, O Lord, the offences
of a sore transgressor, but call to mind the mercies
of a louing sauiour. I confesse, O Lord, that my
sinnes both old and new, deserues eternall condemnation,
and that no repentance is able to make satisfaction
for the least of my faults, and yet by faith I am assured
of my saluation, bicause thy mercies surpasse thy
iudgements. Spare me therefore, O Lord, for my soule
appealeth from the seate of thy iustice, to the throne of
thy mercie. O deliuer me, because thou art almightie.
Oh saue me sinfull woman, because thou art mercifull,

and take compassion vpon me, wretched woman, for
thy beloued sonne Iesus Christes sake, who liueth
and reigneth with thee and the holie Ghost, one God,
euer world without end, Amen.
            
            God the Father of all comfort and consolation, blesse,
keepe, and defend me from all the illusions and suggestions
of sathan, now and euermore; also giue me grace
to walke in thy feare, Amen.
            
            Reade more of this in the Quéenes meditation, page
10. and 16. 17. &c. in the second Lampe.
         
         
            A praier of Marie Magdalens repentance.
            O Good Iesu, the onlie hope of the penitent
person, which opening the
bowels of thy compassion, and to declare
and shew a token of thy great
loue, didst gratiouslie giue absolution
and pardon of all hir sinnes to
Marie Magdalen, that greeuous
sinner, and sinfull woman, at what
time she touched with great remorse and sorrowe, stood
weeping before thee, and powring foorth abundance of
teares, washed thy feete, and kissing them, wiped them
with the heare of hir head, in token of hir hartie repentance
and sorrowe for hir forepassed sinfull life spent in
adulterie and vncleannesse. O despise not me also I beseech
thee most mercifull Iesu, which am a more sinfull
woman, and now likewise most humblie with great remorse
of conscience and sorrowe for my sinfull life past,
doo prostrate my selfe before the feete of thy mercie, washing
them with the inward teares of contrition, and
kissing them with the lips of deuout & earnest praier.
And vouchsafe, O sweet Christ, to make me meete to
heare thy voice so full of loue and compassion, so full of
elemencie, sweetnesse, and mercie, which the same Marie
Magdalen was made woorthie to heare, that as

hirs, so also my manifold sinnes and offences committed
against thee, and thy whole Church, and mine owne
bodie and soule, may quite be forgiuen, and washed awaie
by thine onlie grace and merits, O blessed Sauiour
Iesu,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier of the woman taken
in adulterie.
            O Most tender harted Iesu, which so
gentlie deliueredst the woman taken
in adulterie, and so mercifullie
sentedst hir awaie in peace, and vncondemned
of thee, from hir accusers.
Behold, my adulterous soule
standeth heere before thee, which so
often hath forsaken thee hir true
and faithfull spouse, as she hath consented to the vile
suggestions of the adoulterous and corrupt enimie.
Alas, my conscience accuseth me, yea and all my lewd
works and wicked actions doo all bewraie, and condemne
mee. But, O Lord, enter not thou into iudgement
with them I praie thee, neither doo thou remember
mine old or new offences, to plague them as they
deserue; but deliuer me also a most sinfull wretch, and a
woman corrupted and abused in adulterie. Deliuer
me, I saie, a woman altogither giltie of horrible iniquities,
from mine accusers, and being fullie persuaded
in my conscience, that I am freelie forgiuen of
thee, and from this and all other my crimes and offences
absolued, pardoned, and quitted before the tribunall
seate of thy iudgement, let me now depart in
peace and vncondemned. For it is thy propertie alwaies
to haue mercie, and to spare sinners that repent
and turne vnto thee, as I doo heare at this present
vnfeignedlie: yea, there is no end of thy mercies
and compassions to such as forsaking their old sinnes,

doo vnfeignedlie seeke and cleaue vnto thee: to whome
therefore with the Father and the holie Ghost be blessing,
praise, power, and dominion, now and for euer,
Amen.
            
            Of this matter reade more in the latter end of the sixt Lampe,
and in diuers places of the seuenth Lampe.
         
         
            A praier to be said of anie damsell, daughter,
or maiden child.
            O Most mercifull God, and heauenlie
Father, which hast commanded mee
to honor my parents, by whome I
was borne and doo liue; for such obedience
doth please thee, for thy beloued
Sonne Iesus Christes sake;
and thou hast promised to reward
the same with long life, manifold benefits,
and heauenlie blessings: I humblie beseech thee
O Lord, giue to my parents, and all other that I am
bound vnto in this world, a long life, and protect them
from all miseries, hurt, and danger. Also, grant mee
grace to obey them and all others, which haue authoritie
ouer me, in deed, and in word, and in all patience,
that I may haue thy benediction and blessing. Let mee
helpe my parents in their age, and neuer greeue them
as long as they liue: and if their vnderstanding faile,
let me beare with them, and neuer in my lustie youth
despise them. Imprint in my mind the paines, which
my mother hath endured for my sake, not onlie before
I came out of hir wombe, but also till I was of anie
discretion, for which cause, be it far from me, that I at
anie time make hir sad, or out of quiet, through anie my
lewd behauiour and disobedience.
            Furthermore, O mercifull God, and heauenlie Father,
I beseech thee forgiue me the sinnes of my tender
age and youth, whereby I haue, and do still offend both

thee, and my louing parents. Pardon them I saie, O
Lord, for thy mercie sake. Remember not my rebellions:
make me both to knowe my follie, and to be hartilie
sorie for mine offences. Place before mine eies continuallie
the example of our sauiour Christ, which in
his childhood was obedient vnto his parents, thereby,
both teaching and shewing to all children what their
dutie is. Keepe me, O Lord, from the wicked companie
of vngodlie men, and when they shall entise me, let me
not walke in the way with them. Refraine my feete
from their paths, least I come into the dangerous and
suspicious iudgements of other folke, and hazard therby
mine honestie, chastitie, and good name and vertue,
to the perill and hurt both of my selfe and my parents.
Increase, O Lord, not my yeares onelie, but also my
wisedome, chastitie, shamefastnesse, sobernesse, temperance,
and all kind of vertue and obedience requisite in
a godlie child, that I may growe in fauour both with
thee, and all good men and women, through thy beloued
Sonne our Lord and sauiour Iesus Christ,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another verie necessarie praier to be said of anie
daughter or maiden child.
            FOrasmuch as in thy holie word (O
almightie God and heauenlie Father)
it is said, that a wise daughter
is an heritage vnto hir husband,
but she that liueth dishonestlie, bringeth
hir father to heauinesse: againe,
A daughter that is bold or
past shame, dishonoureth both hir
father, and hir husband, and the vngodlie shall regard
hir, because she is not inferiour vnto them, but both
hir father and hir husband shall despise hir, because of
hir foolishnesse: I beseech thee therefore, take from mee
a stout stomach, an incorrigible hart, an impudent

mind, an vnshamefast eie, and a bold countenance, with
all other vices, and marks of a reprobate and disobedient
child, and in stead thereof, giue vnto mee a gentle
spirit, a meeke hart, an humble mind, a demure looke, a
sober countenance, an affable and seruiceable bodie,
with all other good graces and comelie conditions of a
chast virgin, and godlie child, towards hir parents.
            Oh suffer me not to be of the number of those shamelesse
children, that sticke not to reuile and cursse their
father and mother to their face, nor of those stubborne
and wicked daughters, which as the Prophet complaineth,
doo rise vp and rebell against their owne mothers,
setting their commandements at naught, & vtterlie
refusing to be corrected by them for their amendment.
Yea far be it from me, O Lord, with Lots two
daughters, to make my father dronke to vncouer his
shame: neither with curssed Cham, let me not reioice
or laugh at the dishonour of my parents, especiallie
sith I knowe that my honor commeth by them, and
that their reproch is in deed my dishonour. And though
my parents forsake me, and count me as a stranger,
yet giue me grace neuer to forsake them vtterlie, nor
to saie of them as Leah and Rahel said of Laban their
father, We haue no more portion or inheritance in
our fathers house: but rather make me through the
gift of thy grace obedient and verie willing to suffer for
thy sake, my parents to worke thine and their willes
in me, yea though it be to my losse (if thou thinkest it so
good) without anie resistance, striuing, grudging, or deniall,
euen as Isaac did to his father Abraham,
Iepthaes onelie daughter did vnto him, Lots two
daughters vnto their father, and the seauen children
of the woman in the Machabees vnto their mother,
&c. that with these vertuous and godlie children, I
may be blessed and haue mine obedience crowned and
rewarded.
            
               Moreouer because thou O Lord, in the old law hast
straightlie commanded, that the daughter which looseth
hir virginitie, and plaieth the harlot in hir fathers
house, should be stoned to death, yea though afterward
she be married to an husband (which beastlie vice of
filthie whoredome, fornication, and vnchastitie, how
greatlie thy sacred maiestie doth abhor and detest by
this lawe, besides other examples of thy iudgements
mentioned in the scriptures, it may and doth easilie appeare.)
Assist me therefore, I humblie praie thee, that
by watching and praier, temperance, holie exercises,
moderation and abstinence from superfluous meates
and drinks, and ouermuch fi
                  •
               e fare, which makes the
mind waxe wanton and ouerlustie, I may so tame this
my bodie, crucifie my flesh, and bring it into subiection
to the spirit, with all the affections and desires thereof,
that I may neuer with Thamar pollute my fathers
house, nor sin against thy maiestie, my friends,
and mine owne soule and bodie, by ouerpassing the prescribed
limits and bounds of honestie and chastitie.
            Giue me grace, that I follow not the concupiscence
of the flesh, neither prouoke my senses by vnbrideled
libertie, with Dinah to abuse my selfe, and trespasse against
my parents and friends to their harts griefe, against
my selfe to mine owne publike shame, and reioicing
of mine enimies, and against thee and my country,
to other euill example and ouerthrowe. Sanctifie me,
I saie, O holie father, that I defile not my selfe with
carnall vices, riotousnesse, bellie-cheere, nor vnlawfull
pleasures. Suffer me not to cast off thine holie spirit,
thereby to make my bodie the house of filthie feends,
which carrie awaie, and cast headlong all intemperat,
vnchast, and secure or retchlesse persons, into euerlasting
destruction, but driue far from my hart all euill
thoughts, from my mind all wicked concupiscence, and
from mine eies all vnchast lookes; yea, be thou euer so

mercifull vnto me, O Lord, as to helpe me continuallie
with thy diuine power, that the holie spirit, which
thou didst powre into me at my baptisme, may beare
the rule in all my members, and so preuaile ouer the
flesh, and all the mordinate affections of the same, that
being renewed dailie after thy holie spirit, I may the
better walke in the spirit, and serue thee in righteousnesse,
obedience, and true holinesse, all the daies of my
life, to the honor of thy sonne, which is the most excellent
floure and crowne of all pure virginitie.
            Finallie, if heereafter it shall please thee not to continue
in me the gift of virginitie or single life, or that my
father or friends, thinking it vncomelie for me to passe
the floure of mine age, to auoid all other further inconueniences,
shall iudge it needfull for them, respecting
mine infirmitie, to marrie me, and so to performe that
weightie matter, and ease themselues of so great a
charge, care, and burthen, by dooing their dutie betimes,
and not neglecting their authoritie and office,
as Iudah did towards his daughter in lawe Thamar,
to the perill and hazard of both their good names
and honestie: then grant, I beseech thee, O deere father,
that I for my part not so much as desiring mariage,
much lesse to shew my selfe to long therefore by
anie meanes, may be content to leaue all the care and
charge of that businesse, wholie vnto my parents or
friends, who no doubt loue me no lesse, than I loue my
selfe. And let me be fullie persuaded, that they will
prouide no lesse diligentlie for me, than they would for
themselues, but much better, that all whisperings,
close communication, sinister practises, and priuie contracts
being of me vtterlie eschued, as a thing most vngodlie,
and in deede far vnbeseeming anie Christian
child, yea as things abhorred euen among the Infidels,
I may after the good examples of Rebecca, Leah,
Sarah, and such like holie virgins, & obedient daughters,

most willinglie allow and approue the authoritie,
power, and pruiledge of my parents and friends ouer
me heerein, and resigning all my will to their wils,
be verie well content to be ruled by them in all things
they shall doo in thee, as becommeth a well nurtured,
and obedient child, labouring also by all earnest and
feruent praier, to further the matter, that I may
bring a chaste mind in a chaste bodie, vnto a vertuous
husband, to thy glorie.
            And grant, that my parents and freends also for
their parts, as thou hast commanded, Deuter. 7, 3. may
carefullie endeuour by all possible and studious diligence,
to prouide for me their daughter, a man of vnderstanding,
wisedome, pietie, and honestie; euen such
an husband, Lord, as is no Idolater, or irreligious
woorshipper of God, no Atheist, Infidell, or vngodlie
man, nor one that shall let or hinder me from vertuous
liuing, but such a one as is both wise, godlie, vertuous,
holie and religious, one that serueth thee, O God sincerelie,
and liueth in thy feare christianlie, and will
gladlie prouoke, exhort, and helpe me to liue accordinglie.
Finallie, grant I beseech thee, that my parents or
freends, without anie respect of their owne gaine or
commoditie, may seeke me an honest husband, and marie
me in thee, O Lord; neither let them with couetous
Laban sell me to their seruants in recompense of their
seruice, as Leah and Rebecca were, nor yet with that
hypocrite Saule giue me vnder pretence of fauour, to
snare and betraie the innocent, as Michal and Merab
were giuen to Dauid. But considering that the
knot of marriage cannot be lightlie loosed or dissolued,
sauing onlie by death, let them with great studie, and
deliberation, with good aduisement and counsell doo
it, yea with such diligent care, and faithfull discharge
of their owne duties to thee, O God, with such loue
and entier affection towards me their child, and with

such due regard to the man, vnto whome they shall
match me (as namelie not so much for anie his externall
goods of the bodie, as chiefelie for the inward vertue
and goods of the mind) that in euerie respect it may
be trulie said they haue verie well ioined and married
me in the Lord, to the reioicing of all parties, so shall it
come to passe, that they thereby shall not onlie procure
vnto me their daughter perpetuall ioie, comfort and
felicitie, by causing my marriage to become easie and
well-liking vnto me, but also prouide by this meanes
for themselues such a sonne in lawe, as shall be a faithfull
freend, a dailie succour, and continuall aid vnto
them, euen in their old age, to their great comfort and
thy glorie; which grant, O blessed God for his sake, who
was most obedient, not onelie to his blessed mother
Marie, but also vnto thee his celestiall Father, thy h
                  •
               
               lie
sonne Iesus, I meane, to whome with thee, and the
holie Ghost, be now and euer eternall praise & thanks,
and vniuersall power, rule and dominion, Amen.
            
            You may reade in the sixt and seuenth Lamps more
of the dutie of daughters.
         
         
            A praier to be said of a daughter in lawe
that is married.
            FOr asmuch O almightie God, as
through the corruption of our nature,
the common custome and opinion
of most are, that all mothers in
lawe beare a stepmothers hate vnto
their daughters in lawe: and
contrariwise, that daughters in
lawe for the most part, beare no
great good loue and charitie towards their mothers
in lawe: the cause of both which hatred or enimitie, as
it is found vaine and vnchristian, so it seemeth to arise,
when on the one side the mother is discontent that all

hir sonnes loue should be turned vnto hir daughter in
lawe: and when the wife on the other part cannot suffer
any to be loued but hir selfe; as though the motherhood
of the one were lessened by the daughter in lawe,
and the wifehood of the other, were minished by the
mother in lawe; or as though friendship were impared
by the multitude of freends, when rather in troth, it is
the more increased, and strengthened by alliance and
mariage, and therefore either ought to beare with others
infirmitie, and charitablie to be reconciled one
to another, if at anie time bralles, hatred, strife or discord
rise or chance betweene them.
            Therefore to auoid the causes of this common hatred
betwixt me and my mother in lawe, and that we
may the better liue louinglie and christianlie togither,
as becommeth vs, both before God and the world, to
the good example of all other; grant O God, I beseech
thee, that my mother in lawe for hir part may be content,
that hir sonne my husband doo loue me his wife as
his deere mate, and inseparable companion, with
whome he ought to dwell, without anie displeasure. Againe,
that I hir daughter in lawe for my part, knowing
my husband and I am all one, may not onlie take
and repute his parents to be my parents, but also
may be willing, and verie well pleased that my husband
doo loue hir also as his owne mother, as vnto
whome he is greatlie bound, and oweth much louing
kindnesse for these great benefits receiued of hir; I
meane, his life, his nourishing, and bringing vp in the
feare of God, but especiallie, bicause I gladlie doo or
would loue mine owne mother also, as nature thereto
bindeth me, and for that I both see and know how that
by this my mother in lawe, as by an instrument and
meanes appointed of thee, I now presentlie enioie this
my husband, hir sonne, for whose sake therefore at the
least, I am bound both by the lawes of God & nature,

(forsomuch as we are now no more two, but one flesh)
to loue, cherish and obeie this my mother in lawe in
thee, as if she were mine owne mother.
            Grant I saie, O gratious God, that my mother in
lawe may loue me hir daughter in lawe, no lesse than
Naomie loued Ruth & Orpha, and that she may giue
me good counsell, teach me, instruct me, praie for me,
and doo all such things as may be an example vnto me,
both of godlines, chastitie, and sobernesse. Driue far
from vs all hatred, enuie, brallings, and contentions.
Suffer hir not I beseech thee, O Lord, to make anie
discord or variance betweene my husband and me for anie
cause; but and if anie chance betweene vs, grant
that she rather to the vttermost of hir power, by hir
wisedome, and good motherlie counsell
                  •
               giuing, may auoid
it, and reconcile vs againe, that thus she bearing
a motherlie affection towards me, it may so come to
passe, that both my husband may be the more bound to
loue hir, not onlie for that she is his deere mother, but
also bicause she hath thereby bene the cause of a great
part of his felicitie, in that he hath mee both a more
chaste, sober, louing, obedient, and vertuous wife, and
better agreeing with him, by the meanes of this hir
motherlie instruction, and graue godlie counsell; and
also I be no lesse bound to loue hir, and to beare none
other mind towards hir, than if she were mine owne
mother, as Ruth did to Naomie, and Sara to Anna,
by reason that I also haue by this hir graue aduice,
and wise teaching, both gotten to my selfe more knowledge,
a
                  •
                made better, and haue my husband hir sonne
more plesant, louing, and tender vnto me. This grant
not onlie vnto vs, O good father, but also to all other
mothers and daughters in lawe, for Iesus
Christes sake, our onlie
Lord and sauiour.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            Another praier to be vsed of a daughter
in lawe.
            THou hast commanded in thy holie
lawe, O almightie God, that all
children should honor their parents
as they will obteine the promise of
long life, and blessings of their parents
vpon earth, and contrariwise
auoid thy cursse, and the cursse of
their parents pronounced against
all disobedient and vngodlie children: grant therefore
vnto me, whom it pleaseth thee after the death of mine
owne mother, to keepe still as yet in the number and obedience
of a child, by giuing me this woman to be my
mother in lawe, in stead of mine owne mother, whome
thou hast taken vnto thy selfe, that sith I am now hir
child by adoption and affinitie, I may according to thy
commandement, fulfill and doo all that dutie, which I
owe and is due vnto hir, euen as vnto mine owne naturall
mother, if she were heere aliue, and that not for
a shew or outward pretence of loue, but with true obedience,
and due reuerence, from the verie hart vnfeignedlie,
bicause I knowe it shall be rewarded of thee
whatsoeuer I doo vnto hir, be it good or ill.
            O let me not be in the number of those wicked daughters
in lawe, which as the Prophet saith, doo impudentlie
rise vp, and contempt
                  •
               ouslie striue against
their mothers in lawe. Let all contumelie, despite, rancor,
brallings, tauntings, curssings, slanderings, reuilings,
vpbraidings, with such other like wicked and
vnchristian behauiour, either in thought, word, or deed,
of a reprobate and accurssed child of Sathan, be far
from me, that so I may auoid the plagues threatned,
and obteine the blessings promised.
            Take from me, I saie, O Lord, all hardnesse of hart,

euill custome, vaine opinion, churlish conditions, and
disdainefull or coie behauiour, neither let me willinglie
greeue hir, or in anie thing be offensiue vnto hir, as
long as we liue togither. O let me not, I saie, through
euill maners, lewd disobedience, and peruerse rebellion,
be a vexation of mind to this my mother in lawe
and parents, as Iudith and Bathcath, the two wiues
of Esau were to Isaac, and Rebecca their father and
mother in lawe, but giue me grace after the good counsell
of Raguell, and the holie example of Sara his
daughter, to obeie this my father or mother in lawe,
as she did Anna and Tobit hir father and mother in
lawe, to honor hir in deed and in word, and in all patience,
and to vse all gentle, courteous, mild, meeke, and
sweet words, yea all childlike dutie, and christian behauiour vnto hir for thy sake, that thereby I may win
hir good will and motherlie fauour more and more towards
me.
            Grant, that I knowing my father and she to be now
all one flesh, as my husband and I am one bodie, may
reckon and repute hir now also to be as mine owne
mother, and to take my husbands parents for my parents,
and so to loue, cherish, reuerence, and obeie them
in euerie condition, no lesse than as mine owne naturall
parents, that being seruiceable alway vnto them,
and fulfilling in all points the roomth and dutie of a
good and godlie daughter in lawe, I may find them againe
the more to loue, cherish, and prefer me as their
owne daughter.
            Let me not be displeased, if my husband loue his owne
mother, but rather as it becommeth a good and a vertuous
wife, if I see he doth not behaue himselfe towards
hir like a naturall sonne, giue mee both grace
and wisedome quietlie to exhort him, and friendlie to
desire him to behaue himselfe better towards hir, that
she seeing and well knowing my chastitie of bodie, my

louingnesse towards my husband, and my good will and
gentle nature towards hir, may through these vertues
(if she be curst) alter hir fierce mind towards me, and
turne it to good, and be the better content with me,
neuer heereafter to hate me, either as a daughter in
lawe, or as a stepdaughter.
            Finallie, grant that after the good example of vertuous
Ruths obedience to Naomie hir old mother in
lawe, I may with great humilitie, entirelie loue hir,
hartilie praie for hir, and dutifullie honour, serue, cherish,
and obeie hir; yea, and to spare no painefull diligence
to doo hir all the good I possiblie may or can, in
thee, and for thee: that thus obeieng, nourishing, and
susteining my mother in lawe in hir necessities, none otherwise
than if she were mine owne mother, and bearing
patientlie at hir hands all infirmities and miseries
for thy sake while I liue, may to thy glorie, and others
good example, declare my good affection and great
loue that I beare towards hir, as she that standeth
both in awe and feare of thy commandements, and
gladlie endeuoureth to obeie thee and my superiours
in all things, according to thy word, and that this my
mother in lawe may also sometime worthilie saie of
me to my praise and others encouragement, as Naomie
said of Ruth, namelie, that I am better in
troth vnto hir, than seuen of hir owne
sonnes. This grant O God, for thine
owne glorie sake, and my comfort
and commendation in Christ
Iesus, to whome with
thee & the holie Ghost,
be all honor, glorie,
and praise, for euer
and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            A praier to be said of anie woman, when she is
woed of anie man to be his wife.
            O Lord God of our fathers, creator of
heauen and of earth, the sea, and all
that in them is, which workest all
things according to thine owne
purpose and will, which rulest the
harts of all men and women, and
disposest them after thine owne
counsell, as seemeth best to thy godlie
pleasure. Oh good God, the preseruer of mankind, in
thy great loue, by thy godlie prouidence, thou didst prouide
and giue vnto our first father Adam a fellow-helper,
not onlie like vnto himselfe, but euen of his owne
bodie and substance, commanding them to increase and
multiplie, to the figuring and coniunction of thy deere
sonne Iesus Christ our continuall and onlie mediator,
and thy holie congregation, for the which blessed be
thy name for euer.
            Oh thou God of all comfort, and father of all mercie,
when thou art angrie with vs for our sinnes, then
shewest thou vs mercie, and in time of trouble and
temptation thou forgiuest sinnes, to all them that call
vpon thee faithfullie. To thee therefore, oh deere father,
I turne my hart, and direct mine eies, as thou
hast commanded vs to doo in all our needs and necessities;
beseeching thee to be mercifull vnto me, oh deere
God, and heare me thy poore handmaid and worke of
thy hands. Thou hast made all mankind of the mould
of the earth, and hast wrought in me and this man
that now woeth mee, according to thy good pleasure.
Thou hast regenerated vs by thy holie spirit, and new
created vs in thy deere sonne Iesus Christ, vnto good
works, that we should walke in them; so that we can
not, nor may not come togither in marriage after the

manner of the heathen, which be ignorant, and knowe
not thee to be their God.
            Now therefore O louing father, to whome all harts
are open and knowne, in this beginning of our loue,
and coniunction of our minds, I humblie beseech thee,
so to order our affections, and rule our harts and desires,
that therein we seeke nothing but thy glorie, and
the profit of thy Church. Therefore in Christes name
I praie thee, suffer vs not to go amisse, but as a father,
helpe and guide vs to a right marriage, in the which
we may liue honestlie and prosperouslie, euen as we
ought to thy honour: and either deliuer vs from all euill
lusts, and concupiscence of the flesh, and defend vs
from all slander and shame, whereby anie offence may
be giuen to thy people; or else in thy good time take vs
out of this earth and miserie. Thou knowest, O Lord,
that I haue not fished with poison, nor endeuoured to
allure him by deceipts & charmes to loue me, and that
this coniunction of our minds is not begun in vs for
voluptuousnes nor of lust, but onlie in the feare of thee,
and for the desire of Christian societie and mutuall
loue, and the increase of godlie fruit, to the profiting of
thy holie congregation. We knowe, O Lord, that it is
thou onelie that prouidest the marriage, that hast
the harts of vs both in thy hand, and that giuest the
will to consent and make choice, or ordinarie election;
and that thy counsell standeth not in anie mans power,
neither can anie man alter or diminish thy purpose.
Wherfore I most humblie beseech thee, most mercifull
father, that if this coniunction of our minds and
loue be thy worke and counsell, that thou vouchsafe, for
the glorie of thy name, to giue vs some token and true
certificate thereof, by the increasing, and stedfastlie stablishing
our godly loue in thee, that thou wilt performe
the same in vs in thy good time, to thy glorie, and our
comfort, that we may the more perfectlie loue, and

rightlie serue thee.
            But if it be a false persuasion, or temptation of the
enimie to deceiue vs, and to drawe vs from thee; then
good Lord, for thy deere sonne Christes sake I beseech
thee, so to alter our loue, and change our minds, so order
and guide vs, that we may soone be certified thereof;
that thereby we may flie all occasions of euill, and
the more zealouslie cleaue vnto thee, and in our trie
                  •
               g
to stand stedfast in patience, so that neither selfe-will,
nor the lusts of our corruptions doo deceiue vs: and if
it be for chastening, which I confesse we haue not onlie
deserued, but sore and greeuous punishment for our
manifold and greeuous sinnes; yet for thy deere sonne
Iesus Christes sake, oh deere God, which hast said,
that thou delightest not in our destruction, I most
humblie beseech thee, that we may by thy mercie come
againe into thy fatherlie fauour, and after our great
sorrowe and heauines, we may obteine perpetuall ioie
and consolation, and be receiued into the fellowship of
thy faithfull & fruitfull seruants and Saincts. Grant
this deere father, for thy beloued sonne. Iesus Christes
sake our onlie peace and mediatour, So be it.
            
         
         
            Another praier to be vsed of anie woman, before the
solemnisation of hir marriage.
            I Beseech thee, O father, which art
neither made nor begotten, marrie
me now and for euer vnto thy sonne,
marrie mee vnto him in righteousnesse
and iudgement, in godlinesse, in
mercie, and in compassion: marrie
me, I saie, vnto him in faith, that I
may trulie knowe thee my Lord and
God, which wilt not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he repent and liue.
            O thou onlie begotten sonne of God, ioine me now,

I beseech thee vnto thy bodie, that ingraffed in thee, I

                  •
               ay drawe from thee the iuice of life, and of heauenlie
wisedome.
            Defend me, O holie Ghost, and thine whole Church,
against the rage of Sathan, the world, the flesh, and
the diuell, and let all things that I doo, please thee: for
thou, O glorious Trinitie art my husband, which louest
me, my God, whom I worship, and the head whervnto
I am subiect. To thee be glorie and praise both of
men and Angels now and for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier to be vsed of the man or woman,
a little before they be married.
            O Eternall Father of thy welbeloued
sonne our Lord and sauiour Christ,
which art the maker and king of all
creatures, we thanke thee from the
bottome of our harts, for that thou
hast not cast mankind fallen from
thy grace through sin, into euerlasting
destruction, as thou didst the
diuell; but of thine vnspeakable goodnesse and secret
counsell, thou broughtest foorth thy sonne Iesus, and
madest him an husband, that hauing taken our flesh
vpon him, he might marrie the faithfull vnto himselfe.
Immortall praise and glorie to thee, for reuealing this
thy couenant to mankind from time to time by teachers,
and for calling vs to his heauenlie marriage, by
thy ministers: we beseech thee, by and for the same thy
sonne, so to change and confirme our hearts by thy spirit,
that adorned with the wedding garments of righteousnesse,
faith, holie loue, chaste minds, and good conscience,
and without all hypocrisie, dissimulation, and
without the sinne against our owne conscience, wee
may approch to this honourable estate of matrimonie,
and be found in the number of thine elect.
            
               Let vs now trulie be espoused in faith and vertue, to
thine heauenlie spouse, and be ingraffed in his flesh.
Let vs be two in one flesh, and so cleaue to him, that
we may be one spirit, and so drawe the heauenlie motion
of faith, comfort, ioie, and eternall life from him,
that alwaies we may be (though two bodies) yet but
one soule. Finallie, our troublesome race beeing finished,
bring vs with thine elect, vnto thy visible companie,
that for euermore we may remaine in the spouse of
the vniuersall Church in eternall companie and comfort,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another meditation and praier, declaring how Christ
adorneth the nuptiall feast with his
bodilie presence.
            O Eternall, true, and almightie God,
which at the first creation of the
world, after thou hadst made man
an image of thy wisedome and goodnesse,
bearing such shape as thine eternall
sonne at a time determined
did take vpon him, and afterward
of thy secret counsell, through thy
word, didst vtter these words, It is not good for man to be
alone. Thy will it was that from a few, euen two, the
whole multitude of mankind should proceed, and a sacred
Church (honouring thy name religiouslie, and sincerelie
deliuering vnto posteritie to come, the true
knowledge of thy word) should proceed. Thy will it is,
that both our weake nature may liue purelie in the
lawfull state of marriage, and thy Church multiplied
more and more through the generation of the godlie.
            O gratious God, which art pure from all spot of impuritie,
and wouldest that the cleere vnderstanding of
holinesse should shine in vs, that approching vnto thee
in praier, we might discerne thy goodnesse, from the nature

of incestuous and polluted gods. By thy chaste
and holie spirit, we humblie beseech thee, purge our
harts, that in an holie and chaste conuersation we may
be coupled togither to serue thee, vtterlie renouncing
thine enimie the diuell, which is the author of incestuous
lawes, contrarie to thy commandements; forbidding
men to marrie for none other end, but that both
the one by licentiousnesse of life, might be forgotten,
and flocks of wicked men through their lewd conuersation,
be withdrawne from thee to eternall miserie.
            Be it far from vs, O God, that so much as in thought
we should either so dishonour thy sacred maiestie, or
hurt our selues. And we beseech thee, strengthē vs weak
ones with thy diuine power, that we neuer be drawne
from thee our God through sinfull desires of the flesh,
which hinder our praiers, the onelie comfort of the
Saincts distressed in this miserable life: neither forgo
the sweetnes and ioie of a godlie conscience, through
hardnesse of hart, and horrible blindnesse, wherewith
lewd liuers are commonlie punished, nor when the
course of this mortall life shall be cut off, we feele not
those torments appointed for the wicked, according to
that terrible threat, Euerie soule which shall commit
these abhominations, shall perish from among the people.
            
            And thou, O sonne of God, which hast ordeined the
loue of married folks to be a mysterie of a woonderfull
and heauenlie thing; instill into our minds and breasts
both sense of that celestiall wisedome, and a true desire
of our coupling to thee. In thee a true and burning
good will towards man (whose nature thou tookedst on
thee) is inflamed: such a comfortable affection of vnfeigned
loue should the chast bridegroome beare towards
his beloued wife, and the bride likewise to hir husband.
Thou louest and makest much of thy flesh; thou nourishest
and dooest comfort the faithfull ingraffed into thee
by true faith; and so should man and wife, beeing one

               
                  ••
               esh, loue togither hartilie without all dissimulation.
            Behold, the Church, according to the auncient custome
of espousals, lieth before the altar, beseeching
thee to reconcile thine eternall father vnto vs, and to
receiue vs into thy societie. O our spouse most heauenlie,
make vs partakers of that couenant, which thou
entredst into with our nature. Blot out all the filthinesse
of our sinfull flesh by thy merite; transforme
vs into new, through thine holie spirit, and make vs by
the same spirit to be one with thee, depending vpon
thee.
            And forasmuch as thy diuine pleasure is to haue this
heauenlie marriage to be celebrated among manie
troubles in this miserable life, where wine is not alwaies
to be had, and the face of thy Church is manie
times like our water pots, our fraile bodies oppressed
with euils, filled to the full with water and teares;
where also we are troubled, if we be not heard when
we make our praiers, and hardlie we can bridle our
selues with patience to expect thine houre: assist and
strengthen vs, that these fraile vessels of ours, in
which thy Church hath hir nest be not broken, through
the malice of Sathan, and rage of tyrants. Graunt,
that in crosses and troubles of this life, we may constantlie
depend vpon thy counsell and assistance, and
doo that thing onlie which thou hast commanded, and
gratiouslie prouide, that in that ioifull houre thy seruants
and ministers may powre out the sweet wine of
thy voice, giue comfort in our greatest needs, and bring
vs to thee, which art the truth and the life; so that
when this temporall marriage shall take an end, wee
may drinke new wine with pleasure in the feast of thy
father,
            Amen.
         
         
            
               
                  Ecclesiasticus 15, verse 2.
                  As a pure virgin newlie married, doth friendlie entreate
hir husband; so shall iustice and wisedome being pure and

vndefiled, greatlie entertaine hir louers.
               
               Or thus: Wisedome, as a wife married of a virgin, shall receiue or
entertaine him that feareth God, and keepeth the lawe.
Reade more in the fourth Lampe, page. 615.
            
            A praier to be vsed of a virgin newlie married togither with
hir husband, the first night before they ioine togither in the
dutie of marriage, after the godlie example of Sara and
Tobias, who made and vsed the same before they
laie togither, for the space of three daies;
as appeareth, Tob. cap. 8. 9.
            
               A sentence out of Tob. cap. 6. verse 17. worthie to be
called to memorie of all new married
folkes.
               THey that receiue marriage after such a fashion, that they
shut God out from them, and from their hart, and giue themselues
to their owne lusts, euen as it were in Horsse and Mule,
which haue no vnderstanding: vpon such hath the diuell power.
               Therefore when thou takest an husband, and art come into the
chamber, withhold thy selfe from him awhile, and giue thy diligence
vnto nothing but vnto praier with him, that Sathan may
haue no power ouer you, that ye may be receiued into the companie
of the holie Patriarchs; and finallie, that ye may obteine the
blessing and fauour of God, euen holie and sound children, the
fruits of your bodie; and knéeling on your knées, saie one after another,
as followeth.
            
            
               ¶The Praier, or petition.
               
                  Husband.
                  BLessed and praised be thou, O Lord God of
our fathers, and blessed is thine holie and
glorious name for euer.
               
               
                  Wife.
                  Let the heauens blesse thee, O God,
yea the earth, the sea, the welles, the flouds, and all
the creatures that be therin, praise and magnifie thee.
               
               
                  
                  Husband.
                  Thou madest Adam of the mould of the
earth, and gauest him Eua his wife for an helper and
staie.
               
               
                  Wife.
                  Of them came mankind, O Lord, and thou hast
said, It is not good that a man should be alone, let vs
make him an aid like vnto himselfe.
               
               
                  Husband.
                  And now, O Lord, thou knowest, I take not
this my sister to wife for fornication or voluptuousnes,
but vprightlie in thy feare, for continencie, and onlie
for the loue and desire of children, in whome thy name
may be blessed for euer.
               
               
                  Wife.
                  Thou knowest also, O Lord, that I thine handmaid
am pure from all sin with man, and that I haue
consented to take this my brother, whome thou hast
kept for me to be mine husband, not for anie pleasure or
fleshlie lust, but in thy feare, and for the desire also of
children, that in the seed of Abraham I may obteine
thy blessing in children.
               
               
                  Husband.
                  Therefore haue mercie on vs twaine, being
the deerelie beloued children of our parents, and
cause vs to magnifie thee more perfectlie, and to offer
continuallie vnto thee the sacrifice of thy praise, and of
our health and sweetnesse, for thy mercies extended towards
vs.
               
               
                  Wife.
                  Haue mercie vpon vs, O Lord, haue mercie
vpon vs, and as thou hast put awaie from vs the enimie
that persecuted vs, and made vs ioifull in thee; so
according to thy great mercie deale mercifullie with
vs still, and grant that we may come whole and sound
each to other, and become aged togither.
               
               
                  Husband.
                  Thy blessing, O God, be now and euermore
vpon vs, and vpon both our parents: and as thou, O
Lord, of thy goodnesse, hast ioined vs togither, so by the
vertue and power of thy holie spirit, blesse vs, and multiplie
and increase vs, that we may togither see our
children, and our childrens children vnto the third and

fourth generation.
               
               
                  Wife.
                  Yea, let our seed be blessed of thee our most high
and holie God, that all people may knowe that thou
onlie art God, reigning in all the earth, and to be blessed
and praised for euer.
               
               
                  Husband.
                  Heare our praiers O God, and for thy holie
name sake, grant our request, through the intercession
of our onlie mediatour and sauiour Iesus Christ our
Lord.
               
               
                  Wife.
                  Amen deere God, Amen.
                  
               
               God the Father blesse vs, God the Sonne blesse vs, God the
holie Ghost blesse, preserue, and kéepe vs: the Lord mercifullie
with his fauour looke vpon vs, and so fill vs with all spirituall benediction
and grace, that we may so liue togither in this life, that
in the world to come, we may haue life euerlasting,
               Amen.
            
         
         
            Another verie necessarie and fruitfull praier, to be
often vsed of all married couples, for the obteining
of a godlie, louing, and quiet life, in
that honourable state of Matrimonie.
            FOrasmuch as it hath pleased thee
(O almightie God, the creator and
anthor of all things) to direct both
our minds, rule our hearts, and call
vs from single life, vnto this holie
state of honourable wedlock, whereby
through thy mercie we haue not
onlie escaped the entising snares of
Sathan our ancient enimie, the euill example of the
wicked world, and the vnlawfull lusts of fraile flesh, and
so consequentlie the horrible iudgements of eternall
damnation, if so be that we now inseparablie liue togither,
according to thy holie ordinance, and our promise
made each to other before thee and all the Angels,
but also by this our happie coniunction, we presentlie

enioie and feele to our great comfort, the ioifull iewell
of a quiet conscience, free from all euill delights, in filthinesse
of sin, and occasions of offence: we therefore
thy humble seruants, heere prostrate on our knees, according
to our bounden dutie, with pure and thankefull
minds, acknowledging this great benefit to be in
deed thy singular gift, doo meekelie render vnto thy diuine
maiestie most humble and hartie thanks, euermore
praising thee therefore, and saieng: Blessed art
thou, O our God and heauenlie father, which art the
author of our marriage, and of this our coupling togither,
and blessed be thy most holie and glorious name
for euermore; yea, let heauen and earth, the sea, and all
the creatures therein, praise, blesse, extoll, woorship,
and magnifie thy sacred maiestie both now and hencefoorth
for euermore, Amen.
            
            And now, O mercifull father, considering with our
selues what need we haue to be very circumspect, carefull,
and watching to doo our duties, seeing how woonderfullie,
subtillie, and despitefullie the diuell in these
most perillous daies, deludeth, scorneth, forbiddeth,
and enuieth this holie state; and how few matrimonies
there be, without chidings, brallings, tantings,
repentings, bitter curssings, fightings, and diuorcings,
which things vndoubtedlie (the more is the pitie)
are commonlie almost euerie where committed among
all estates, through the instigation of the ghostlie
enimie Sathan and his impes, who take great delight
therein: forsomuch also as we are not ignorant
how busie that old aduersarie of mankind is, to banish
the sweet loue, inuiolable constancie, and pleasant concord,
which to our continuall comfort, should alwaies
be betwixt vs; and how in stead thereof, he busilie laboureth, and bendeth his principall craft to bring in
horrible hatred, dreadfull dissention, vnpleasant strife,
irkesome lothsomnesse, and bitter discord, euermore (as

it were from aboue ho
                  •
               ering in the aire) assaulting
our nature and condition, and neuer ceasing to laie
craftie traines to catch vs, and still assaieng to attempt
all things that may interrupt and hinder ou
                  •
               
harts desire, and godlie purposes, if we giue him neuer
so little entrie, intending by this meanes, either by voluntarie
separation, or compulsorie diuorcement, vtterlie
to breake and dissolue this godly knot, so fast knit
by thee, to most godlie vses; either else at the least continuallie
to encomber it with diuers displeasures, great
greefes, and manifold miseries, to our (alas) no little anoie
and perill, both of bodie and soule, to others offence
by euill example, and most of all to thy high displeasure,
and great dishonour and slander of the Gospell,
which we O deere God professe.
            We therefore thy humble seruants, being verie desirous
to auoid all these miseries and snares of Sathan
our ancient enimie, and to liue peaceablie, holilie,
and comfortablie togither in this holie state of wedlocke,
as becommeth vs in the feare of God, first confessing
our owne infirmitie, weakenes and vnablenes
in anie thing to resist or withstand as we ought so vehement,
mightie, and strong assaults, inuasions, and
temptations of the diuell: and secondlie, knowing no
other waie or meanes how to preuent the spitefull
malice of so deadlie a foe, but onlie in flieng by earnest
and continuall praier vnto the throne of thy promised
helpe and mercie, euen through the hope we haue christianlie
conceiued in the promise of so readie releefe and
happie helpe, made by thee to all that call vnfeignedlie
vpon thee, in the name of Iesus Christ thine onelie
sonne our sauiour. We, I saie, thy poore seruants in
this faith, presume and are bold to present our selues
now before the sacred seate of thy most high maiestie,
most humblie crauing, and hartilie begging of thee,
that for the same thy deere sonne Iesus Christes sake,

thou wilt vouchsafe in mercie fauourablie to behold
and visit vs, and by thine omnipotent power and puissant
might, so represse, bridle, and restraine thou the violent
force, and piercing power of our ghostlie enimie,
and mortall fo, which thus continuallie seeketh to deuour
vs, and most maliciouslie endeuoureth, and spitefullie
practiseth by all possible meanes, to banish our
loues, to exile our ioies, to abandon our comforts, yea
especiallie to dissolue our vnitie, to cancell our bonds,
and breake our concord: that this our marriage (thy
gratious aid and readie assistance alwaie furthering
the same, and prospering it) may happilie be free from
all the wicked suggestions, cruell assaults, and vngodlie
temptations of our deadlie aduersarie, and also deliuered
from all those euils, mischiefes, miseries, inconueniences,
troubles, and calamities, which Sathan so
busilie laboureth to infect, fester and intangle this our
holie state withall. Giue vnto vs, I saie, O good Lord,
the holie helpe of thy grace, and Angelicall aid of thy
diuine spirit, so to rule and gouerne our hearts, and to
knit and conioine our minds and willes togither in
perfect loue, vnitie, and concord, that we be at no time
by anie diuision or bitter discord disseuered or diuorced
one from another, but may continuallie be vigilant
and carefull both by dailie inuocating vpon thy holie
name, and also by all possible diligence, and earnest indeuours
on both parts, to striue and fight valiantlie against
all the temptations of Sathan, and other the
enormities, euils, mischances, and miseries, whatsoeuer
may happen vnto vs by his pernicious instigations,
wicked motions, and most perillous suggestions.
            Grant, O deere God, that as we are now of necessitie
compelled by thy holie ordinance to liue inseparablie
togither, being conioined by thy word in mutuall
loue and felowship, as one bodie & one flesh: so we standing
in awe of thee, and setting thy holie feare euer before

our eies, may through the working of thy grace
liue togither holilie, godlie, chastlie, purelie, peaceablie,
quietlie, louinglie, agreeablie, and comfortablie, in
all happie felicitie, perfect ioie, sweet amitie, perpetuall
charitie, and continuall concord all our liues long;
and that good Lord we praie thee, without anie hate,
debate, chiding, bralling, tanting, threatning, disliking,
repe
                  •
               ting, vpbraiding, irkesomnesse, lothsomnesse, abhorring,
detesting, diuorcing: finallie, without anie
deadlie dissention, bitter curssing, and vnnaturall fightings,
or other vnchristian and vncharitable behauiour;
because in deed it is one of the three things that so
greatlie pleaseth thee, a man and his wife to agree louinglie
togither.
            O Lord, let not the wicked vices of stiffe stubbornenesse,
wilfull will, froward fiercenesse, comberous testinesse,
mallipert checkings, sharpe words, and selfe-loue
be found to reigne in either of vs: neither suffer
vs, we praie thee, at anie time to giue place vnto the
prouocation of wrath, and hot hastie furies of the
mind, least thereby we begin vnhappilie to wea
                  •
               e to
our selues the web of all wo, sorowe, and calamitie (as
manie now adaies doo) by promoting the wicked purpose
of the diuell, or by setting forward of his worke, or
finallie, by following his di
                  •
               elish temptations, and the
wrath of our harts; in giuing place without anie resistance,
to euerie thing preiudiciall and hurtfull to
this our blessed state, and honourable degree. But giue
vs grace rather good Lord, we entirelie beseech thee before
all things, to take heed that by no meanes we giue
anie occasion to our ghostlie enimie, to let or hinder our
praiers, and holie exercises, through dissention or discord,
and diligentlie to applie our selues stoutelie to resist
euill, and to weed out by little and little the noisome
w
                  •
               eds of vncomelie demeanour, vnchristian behauiour,
rude maners, churlish conditions, euill dispositions,

and vngodlie extremities, out of our hearts and
minds, with the wholesome precepts of thy diuine
word, the which giue vs grace diligentlie both to
heare, reade, meditate, and imitate day and night, that
in time we dooing our duties each to other, as therein
we be taught of thee, may reape and feele the fruit
thereof hourelie, to both our comforts in Christ, and
thy glorie.
            And because it cannot otherwise possible be, but that
offences shall sometimes either be giuen or taken betwixt
vs, by reason of the manifold discommodities
that come with this commoditie: suffer vs not good
Lord we beseech thee, to stand stiffe at anie time in our
owne opinions, faults, or wilfulnesse; or to mainteine
impudentlie and incorrigiblie our errours, by friuolous
excuses, and vngodlie reasonings; neither yet busilie
to find fault each with others, calling each for others
dutie towards our selues, and in the meane time
neglecting our duties both to thee, our selues, and others:
yea rather giue vs the grace of thy holie spirit,
to acknowledge our faults and follies each to other,
with charitable forgiuing one another, and mutuall
reconciliation, that we may be well pleased, and contented
one with another, and in all things each of vs
beare and forbeare others infirmities and weakenesse.
Grant that either of vs may doo our best, diligentlie
to performe our duties one to the other, as becommeth,
and we haue vowed and promised; as namelie,
to praie hartilie and often one for another, to labour
to the vttermost of our powers to frame, vse, and
occasion our selues to softnesse, meekenesse, gentlenes,
lenitie, and long sufferance, bearing well in worth such
ouersights, as chance and passe in our life and conuersation,
and still drawing, during life, the sweet yoke of
our fellowship, equallie in one concord of hart, and agreement
of mind; so shall it come to passe, that all strife

and debate shall be cleane banished, and pleasant loue,
sweet amitie, and continuall concord shall be embraced
of vs; so shall we haue our harts staied in stable truth,
and comfort in all perils and necessities, and most happelie
passe through the dangers of the troublesome sea
of this wretched world in great ioie and peaceable
quietnesse, to our comfort, our neighbours profit, and
thy glorie, which God grant.
            Finallie, if thus we doo godlie and christianlie vse our
holie state of matrimonie, we shall not onlie be armed
on euerie side, the better to escape the snares of the
world, the flesh and the diuell; but also enioie the ioifull
iewell, and most singular benefit of a quiet conscience:
yea, so shall all discommodities, worldlie or ghostlie, be
taken away from vs, and all things both spirituall and
temporall, turne to our commoditie and pleasure. To
conclude, so shall our praiers be heard, and gratiouslie
granted vnto vs, and God euen our owne God continuallie
followe vs with his benediction, and blesse vs
both within and without, at home and abrode, and
giue vnto vs all those his good gifts and benefits, perteining
or needfull either to our bodies or soules, which
he hath so often promised in his word, to powre vpon
all such as loue, feare & serue him both heere and in the
life to come: the which good things that they may the
better be fulfilled, and more effectuallie happen and
come vnto vs heere present in the due time, as thou seest
need, and we hartilie wish and desire; we humblie
praie thee, O most excellent father, who art in deed the
verie authour of our marriage, to be now and alwaies
present with vs by thy grace and holie spirit, plentifullie
powred into our harts, which may perpetuallie
continue loue, concord, and charitie betweene vs, and
luckelie defend, keepe, and mainteine vs in this honourable
estate, that neither we be ouercome with anie
temptation, nor with anie aduersitie. Finallie, grant

vs thy blessing, fauour, and protection in this world,
and in the world to come endlesse ioie and eternall felicitie,
through the onlie merits of our sauiour Iesus;
to whome with thee, and the holie Ghost our maker,
redeemer and sanctifier, be euerlasting praise, honor
and glorie both now and for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier to be vsed of married folkes, to liue
chastlie and purelie in holie matrimonie,
and to auoid the filthie lusts of
whored
                  •
               me.
            FOrasmuch as (O heauenlie father)
we trulie acknowledge thee an holie
and righteous God, our onelie
God and maker, the knower most
trulie of our weakenes and infirmitie,
our readie and gratious helper,
our guide and director to holinesse,
and the onlie author of the blisfull
state of matrimonie, whereby all thy chosen children
might liue in chastitie and holinesse, and auoid the vnchast
life of whoredome and vncleannesse. Grant vnto
vs we beseech thee, that being called by the spirit vnto
that holie state for our lawfull remedie, to saiue our
weakenesse, to quench the raging lusts of old Adam,
and in holines to beget children for the increase of thy
kingdome, we may liue togither therein in thy faith,
feare and loue, dutifullie, louinglie, and peaceablie
with modestie, in lowlinesse and chastitie all the daies
of our liues: that both our conuersations togither in
all respects being coupled with feare, and framed with
one consent, according to thine holie will, and to the
godlie edifieng of others, representing by it, in all
points the mysterie figured betweene Christ and the
congregation, thou maist haue pleasure in our godlie
behauiours. Blesse vs in all our enterprises, and make

vs fruitfull and ioifull parents.
            And to the increasing of our ioie O Lord in thee, we
humblie praie thee, that thou wilt of thy great mercie
giue both vnto vs, and to the offspring of our bodies
lawfullie begotten, thine heauenlie grace, that as we
most christianlie endeuouring our selues to traine
them vp in thine holie nourture and doctrine, so they
likewise by the infusion of thine heauenlie grace, may
haue their hearts prepared to receiue and hold sure
for euer the onlie word of righteousnesse, that lightneth,
clenseth, best ruleth, and most trulie directeth the
soules of the righteous, to the plaine and most pleasant
path that leadeth to the life euerlasting, through
the merits of Christ Iesus thy sonne our Lord,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier to be vsed of such married couples,
as where the woman is not past child-bearing.
            O Mercifull Lord, and heauenlie father,
which by thine almightie power
hast made all things of naught;
which also (after other things set in
order) didst appoint, that out of man
(created after thine own image and
similitude) woman should take hir
beginning; and knitting, ioining
and sanctifieng Adam and Eue togither in marriage,
didst teach that it should neuer be lawfull to put asunder
those, whom thou by matrimonie hadst made one.
O gratious God, which hast consecrated the state of
matrimonie to such an excellent mysterie, that in it is
figu
                  •
               ed and represented the spirituall marriage and vnitie
betwixt Christ and his Church, looke mercifullie
with thy fauour from heauen vpon vs thy poore creature
                  •
               ,
whome it hath pleased thee in mercie to call
from single life, and to ioine by free consent togither in

this holie state of honourable wedlocke. And as thou,
O eternall God, the giuer of all spirituall grace, and
the author of euerlasting life, didst send thy blessing
vpon Abraham and Sara, to their great comfort; so
vouchsafe to blesse vs, O Lord, and to send thy benediction
vpon vs thy seruants: yea, so sanctifie vs
twaine, and powre plentifullie vpon vs the riches of
thy goodnes, so sowe the seeds of eternall life in our
minds, and fill vs with all spirituall benediction and
grace, that as Isaac and Rebecca liued faithfullie togither,
euen so we, carefullie keeping thy commandements,
diligentlie obeieng thy holie will and pleasure,
and alwaies guided by thy good and gratious spirit,
may trulie performe, and surelie keepe the vow and
couenant betwixt vs made before thee and the congregation,
and may euer remaine, persist, and abide in
perfect amitie, stedfast peace, and continuall concord,
vntill our liues end. Grant also, that we may profitablie
& fruitfullie learne our seuerall duties, either towards
other, and both towards thee, out of thy holie
word, and in deed fulfill the same to the furtherance of
vertue, and auoiding of all offence, that so seruing and
pleasing thee both in bodie and soule, as those godlie
men and women did, to thy glorie, and their perpetuall
renowne, we (as persons highlie in thy fauour, and
shrowded alwaies in safetie vnder the comfortable
wings of thy mercifull protection) may most happilie,
prosperouslie, and ioifullie, like fruitefull parents, seeing
our childrens children, vnto the third and fourth
generation, liue long togither vnto our perfect age in
thy holie loue, and all godlie honestie, to our comfort,
and thy glorie, and at the last rest with them in the bosome
of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and be fellow-heires
of the euerlasting kingdome in eternall
life, through Iesus Christ our
Lord,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            Another praier for all wedded folkes
generallie.
            O Most holie God, and mercifull father,
which of thy singular prouidence,
and woonderfull wisedome,
didst ordeine matrimonie in Paradise,
and that in the time of innocencie,
for the multiplieng and conseruation
of mankinde, thereby togather
vnto thy selfe continuallie
out of godlie families, an holie Catholike Church,
which may rightlie acknowledge, serue, and celebrate
thine holie name for euermore, and deliuer the true
vnderstanding of thee vnto posterities, by one generation
to another. This thine institution did thy sonne,
God, coequall with thee, and coeternall, confirme and
adorne in Cana of Galile, by turning water into good
wine. A notable honouring of marriage doubtlesse, for
Christ not onlie to be present himselfe at the nuptiall
feast, but also to set out the same with the first miracle
that he wrought after his natiuitie. Likewise, the holie
spirit doth witnesse by the word deliuered vnto vs,
and saith, that marriage is honorable among all. And
the same thy spirit reioiceth in three things, which are
commended both before God and man, viz. in the concord
of breethren, in the loue of neighbours, and in a
man and his wife that agree well togither; for such
as be at variance, can neither call vpon thee as they
should, nor please thee as they ought.
            O eternall God, it is sufficientlie apparant with
what a rage and insatiable hatred Sathan the most
deadlie enimie to all thy works, doth labour and set
himselfe to the breaking off, and ouerthrow of this thy
sacred ordinance: wherefore we beseech thee, impart
thy fauour, as vnto vs heere present, so vnto all married

folks else-where, that both we and they may acknowledge
thee to be the author and institutor of this
knitting togither in wedlocke; and beleeue stedfastlie,
that we and they are in a good estate, wherein we may
please thee: for hauing this comfort, we shall more willinglie
and cheerefullie discharge the duties of our calling,
in true confidence, and calling vpon thy name. But
such as doubt of their kind of life, hauing their consciences
wounded, and minds troubled, can neither call
vpon thee trulie, nor cheerefullie go about and finish
their affaires. Grant therefore vnto vs, and vnto all
and euerie married bodie, that in true faith and confession
we may retaine the indissoluble chaine of wedded
state, and the strong bonds of godlie felowship, that
we may loue one another, and in the sweate of our
browes eate our bread, and bring vp our children
which thou shalt giue vs, or hast giuen vs, in all godlinesse,
through instruction, and information of the Lord,
and neuer feare the crosse, which accompanieth this
kind of life.
            O worke thou so, good Lord, that Sathan by no
meanes weaken and ouerthrowe this thine ordinance;
nor that we married folks, wearied with the
troubles of wedded life, raise no mortall hatred among
our selues, and so detest and abhorre this thine holie
institution, and seeke vnlawfull separations and di
               
                  •
               orcements:
for else by this engin of incredulitie, and
snare of mistrust, being comprehended, we shall easilie
rush headlong into enormous offences, by casting off
the yoke of the Lord, and be carried through dissention
into horrible confusions of concupiscence, to adulterie,
whoredome, & wicked forsakings, so long, till polluted
with filthie spots, & defiled with most horrible staines,
we and they bring our selues headlong into euerlasting
torments. Grant therefore, O most mercifull
God, that all being now at debate, may come quicklie

to amitie, and be reconciled in thy name, and beeing
mindfull of the knot of marriage, and mutuall bond
made betweene them, may dwell and liue from hence
forward peaceablie and louinglie togither in true
faith and feare of thy name.
            Grant that husbands abusing their authoritie ouer
their wiues, doo not exercise tyrannie ouer their
wiues; but rather loue them, and dwell with them according
to knowledge, giuing honor vnto them as vnto
the weaker vessell, euen as to them which are also
heires of grace and life. Likewise grant, that matrons
and wines contemne not their husbands, denieng subiection,
but rather studie by chaste obedience, and holie
conuersation and lowlinesse to ouercome them. Let
neither hate other extreamelie, and so violate the state
of marriage, and bring themselues out of thy fauour,
through their discord and contention, whereby their
praiers be interrupted; for where neither part do their
dutie, there must needs ensue first pouertie, subtiltie,
lieng, and all impietie, afterward a wounded conscience,
and last of all, vtter despaire.
            O most chast God, which didst therefore institute the
order of matrimonie, that by the same both the weake
nature of mankind might liue purelie in lawfull wedlocke,
and an holie Church be gathered vnto thy selfe,
giue thy blessing to vs, and all which are married, that
we and they may haue godlie children, and their wiues
prooue like the fruitefull vine, and their children appeare
like the oliue branches round about their table,
and may see their childrens children, the peace and
safetie of thy Church, the which Christ thy sonne repairer
of mankind, by taking our flesh vpon him, hath
coopled to himselfe, which liueth and reigneth with
thee in the vnitie of the holie spirit, a God
blessed and praised for euermore,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            A praier to be said of a yong married woman,
or, a VVife.
            O Lord, forasmuch as thou of thy fatherlie
goodnes hast vouchsafed to
keepe me from my tender age vntill
this present, and hast now called me
from my single life, vnto the holie
state of honorable wedlocke, that I
liuing therein, might according to
thine ordinance, bring foorth children
vnto thy glorie, giue me grace I most entirelie beseech
thee, to walke worthie of my vocation, to knowledge
my hus
                  •
               and to be my head, to be subiect vnto him, to
learne thy blessed word of him, to reuerence him, to obeie
him, to please him, to be ruled by him, peaceablie
and quietlie to liue with him, to weare such apparell
as is meet for my degree, and by no meanes to delight
in costlie iewels, and proud gallant vestures; but alwaie
to vse such cloathing, as becommeth a sober,
chast, and christian woman, circumspectlie and warelie

                  •
               o looke to my houshold, that nothing perish through
my negligence; and alwaies haue a diligent eie, that
no dishonestie, no wickednesse, no vngodlinesse be committed
in my house, but that in it all things be ordered
according to thy holie will, which art woorthie all honour,
glorie and praise for euer and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another.
            MErcifull and gratious God, forasmuch
as through thy grace I am placed in
the state of matrimonie, and called to
the charge of a familie, wherein doing
my dutie, I may please thee; giue grace
to me thy handmaid, that I may haue

                  •
               hy feare alwaies before mine eies, and loue thee my

maker and redeemer aboue all things in this world.
Next imprint within my brest an intire affection of
good will towards mine husband. Let mee honour
him, cherish him, and loue him aboue all men, and onlie,
as my part is, and I haue promised. Grant that my
will, according to thy commandement, may be in subiection
to mine husband, and obeie him in all equitie,
and that the hid man of mine hart be vncorrupt, with
a meeke and quiet spirit, adorned with all kind of vertue:
for after this manner in time passed, the ho
                  •
               ie
women which trusted in thee, attired themselues, and
were subiect to their husbands. Reforme the manners
of thine handmaid, and make me in my conuersation
modest, and honest; make me in visage, shamefast; in
words, temperate; in wit, wise; in going, sober; in
conuersation, meeke; in correction, pitifull; in life, circumspect;
in companie-keeping, warie; in promise,
stedfast; in loue, constant; take from me all crabbednesse,
curstnesse, stubbornesse, and shrewdnesse; and let
mee haue an especiall care by vertue and friendlie
words, to mitigate the anger of mine husband, if at anie
time he be displeased, and let me absteine from all
such things as I knowe will offend him.
            Furthermore, giue me grace to bring vp my familie
and children (which thou hast or shalt giue me) in all
honestie and vertue, to the honor of thy most holie
name, and my comfort. Assist me in like sort, that diligentlie
I may saue, not wastfullie or negligentlie consume
those things, which of thy mercie thou hast and
dooest giue to the maintenance of mine houshold; but
grant that I may doo my dutie to the vttermost of my
power, whereby I may haue to giue to the poore, and
to releeue the needie. Blesse vs, O Lord, from vnthri
                  •
               
               tie
seruants, which will waste, and wickedlie consume
that which painefullie we haue gathered. Also, make
me patientlie to suffer the troubles and affli
                  •
               tions of

married life, and to continue in my dutie, albeit manifold
miseries doo arise, persuading my selfe, that by affliction
my faith is tried. O Lord, vnto thy protection
doo I commend my selfe, my louing husband, with all
ours. Uouchsafe O gratious God, to keepe vs all from
sinne, shame and destruction, through Christ our Lord,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier to be vsed of anie Noble woman, &c.
when she is married, or afterward.
            O Most mercifull Lord and sauiour
Iesu Christ, which to expresse thy
most burning affection towards thy
best beloued spouse the Church, hast
offered thy selfe vpon the altar of
the crosse, to sanctifie and cleanse
hir by the washing of water thorough
the word, and to make hir
glorious for thy selfe, without spot or wrinkle, or anie
such thing: and also coopled thy selfe to hir, by suffering
vpon thine owne flesh the punishment which was due
vnto hir. Ioine me I beseech thee vnto thy bodie, that
ingraffed in thee, I may drawe from thee the iuice of
life, and of heauenlie wisedome. Marrie me for euer O
sweet Christ, vnto thy selfe, in righteousnes and iudgement,
in godlines, mercie and faith, that I may trulie
knowe thee my Lord and my God, which wilt not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he or she repent and
liue. Giue me grace also, that I neuer delight in mine
owne beautie or fairenesse, and so plaie the harlot, by
following mine old lewd louers, which promise me
bread and water, wooll, flaxe, oile, wine, and drinke, to
entise me to follie; but make me with a chaste bodie,
and pure affection, to serue thee in chast matrimonie,
and to loue my husband vnfeignedlie from my hart
without dissimulation, so that he may safelie trust in

me as in his true turtle, and sweet and deere companion;
and I may render vnto him good for good, not euill
for euill. Giue me grace so to keepe my selfe in great
feare of thee, that being well occupied in my businesse,
temperate in my words, faithfull to my husband, well
ordered in my person, peaceable with my neighbour,
honest among mine owne familie, and shamefast among
strangers, I may thereby conserue the reputation
of mine estate and degree, to thy glorie especiallie,
mine owne renowne and vertue, and others good
example.
            Driue awaie Sathan the mortall enimie to this
thine ordinance, that he sowe not contentions and
bralles betweene vs. Cut off all occasions of debate,
and sinister suspicions, that so in a true conioining togither
of minds, we may in this world liue vertuouslie
according to thy word. Defend mee (I saie, O deere
Christ) and thine whole Church, against the rage of
sathan, the world, and the flesh. Doo thou vouchsafe for
euer to loue, cherish, and comfort such as are engraffed
in thy flesh. Purge and wash me continuallie from my
s
                  ••
               nes, filthines and spots, through thy great mercie
and merits. Finallie, decke me with thy gifts and goodnes.
Wash mee with water, and purge me with thy
bloud; annoint me with thine oile of gladnes; put vpon
me the robes of righteousnes, and couer me with
the glorious purple; adorne mee with the pretious
stones of vertue, and place vpon mine head glorie and
honour, that all mine ornament may be inward, and
that I may please thee through liuing in thy faith and

                  •
               eare, and hoping in thy mercie. For thou, O sweet Iesu
Christ art mine husband, which tenderlie louest me;
my God, whome I worship; my head, wherevnto
                  •
               
I am subiect; and my bridegrome, with
whom I hope in heauen to reigne
eternallie,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            Another praier to be said of anie noble woman, ladie,
gentlewoman, or modest matrone married.
            FOrasmuch as it hath pleased thee,
O heauenlie father, of thine inestimable mercie, to bring me to this
high estate of dignitie, and to put
me in possession of a place of honor
as a matrone for other women to
behold; grant vnto mee, I humblie
beseech thee, that in all my dooings
I may followe the example of all vertuous and graue
matrones, which are specified and described for our example
in the holy scripture; that is, to be as louing and
obedient vnto my Lord and husband, as Sara was to
Abraham, as Susanna was to Ioachim, and as
humble, loiall and wise as Abigaell was to King Dauid, Hester to King Ahesuerus, or the blessed and noble
virgin Marie was to Ioseph. Grant also, I beseech
thee, that I be neither proud, presumptuous, ambitious,
disdainefull of others in comparison of my selfe;
high-minded, nor a boaster in mine owne bloud, kindred,
beautie, wit, or dignitie, but with the noble
Queene Hester, to saie, Thou knowest my state, O
Lord, and that I hate this signe of preeminence and
worship, which I beare vpon my head, what time I
must go foorth to be seene, and that I abhor it as an vncleane
cloth, and that I weare it not when I am quiet
alone by my selfe; that bearing alwaies an euen
mind, and hauing an humble opinion of my selfe, as she
that knoweth hir selfe to be but dust and ashes, and
en
                  •
               bled by thee, from whome alone commeth the true
nobilitie and gentrie, to so manie as are borne of thee,
and made thy children through faith, I may laie awaie
all pompe and pride, nicenes, tendernes, and disdaine,
and euer set more by others, than by my selfe, yea, and

thinke my selfe worsse than anie other in thy sight, to
the end I may alwaies liue vertuouslie, holilie, shamefastlie,
soberlie, and chastlie, in all meekenes, gentle behauiour,
discreete conuersation, prudence, wisedome,
learning, vertue, and puritie, both in bodie and soule,
both before thee and all men, as becommeth a christian
and faithfull woman, and such a one as will be a true
imitator of Rebecca, Hester, and the rest of those holie
matrones and noble women mentioned in the scriptures,
that all other seeing my good example of life, may
praise thy name, and be encouraged thereby to glorifie
thee in their vertuous conuersations, world without
end,
            Amen.
         
         
            A praier to be vsed of the wife that hath a froward and
bitter husband, as a present remedie against
the mischiefe of di
                  •
               orcement and
separation.
            O Most wise and prouident GOD,
which in the beginning didst create
man in thine owne image, and out
of him didst make the woman, and
didst bring hir vnto the man, that
she might be an helper vnto him;
and therefore thou causedst him to
saie and confesse, that she was flesh
of his flesh, and bone of his bones; thereby teaching
him not onlie the holie and indissoluble band of loue, vnitie,
and mutuall societie, that ought to be betweene
man and his wife, as for whose sake he ought to leaue
father and mother, and to clea
                  •
               e vnto hir, but also the
most s
                  •
               cred and blessed coniunction and knitting togither
of our Lord Iesus Christ, & his sanctified Church
and people; so that no man can breake or despise that
bond and vnitie, but he must needs be giltie of presumption
against God, and of the wilfull breach and contempt

of his ordinance.
            Wherefore, oh Lord, sith it hath pleased thee to
match me in this most honourable state of marriage,
according to thy diuine prouidence; I beseech thee to
make him an head vnto me, and my selfe an helper vnto
him, according to my creation, and as thy holie institution
requireth. And because thy holie word is the onlie
rule, and ordinarie to gouerne and direct our liues; I
hartilie desire thee oh good God, giue this mine husband
thy grace and holie spirit, and so open thou his
wits and senses, that hauing by the light of thy grace
the true knowledge and vnderstanding of thy holie
word in all discretion, he may knowe how to walke in
his vocation, both towards mee his poore wife and
yoke-fellowe, and all others, as becommeth him, and
thereby become vnto me not so bitter a despiser and
hater, but a true louer, sweet freend, and godlie gouernour.
            Thou, O good father, seest the great lacke and necessitie
that I thine handmaid haue, of a wise guide,
graue counseller, holie instructor, and continuall comforter.
O therefore I beseech thee, looke vpon my
trouble which I endure; consider my reproofe and reproches
that I beare in my bosome; pitie my miserie,
ease me of so great a burthen, and releeue my great
need and necessitie. Make this my husband I saie, O
deere God, a head, a vaile, and defence vnto me for my
preseruation and safetie: for if we thus bite and deuour
one another, it cannot possible be, but we shall be consumed
one of another. Make him therefore tender,
carefull and comfortable vnto me thy weake creature,
if it be thy good pleasure; and grant, that according to
his promise made before thee, and as thou hast commanded
else-where in thy holie word, he may with perfect
and holie loue, cherish, nourish, and loue me as his
owne flesh, and as Christ loueth his Church, and as

she that is heire togither with him of the grace of life,
that our praiers and godlie exercises to the benefiting
of our soules and bodies, be not interrupted or hindered.
Grant that he forsaking all other, may cleaue onlie
vnto me, as becommeth, without separation, and
that he may dwell with me as a man of knowledge,
and christian behauiour and gouernement, to thy glorie,
my comfort, and others edifieng.
            But alas, I must needs confesse vnto thee my God,
that I am most vnwoorthie of so good a be
                  •
               efit: for I
haue not walked in this most honorable state purelie,
and holilie, according to thy diuine ordinance, whereby
I haue made my selfe much more vnworthie to haue
so pretious a gift at thy fatherlie hands: and if it be thy
good pleasure with frowardnes, bitternes, and vnkindnesse,
yea, the hatred and disdaine of my husband, thus
to correct me for my fault, I most hartilie thanke thee
for it. And I beseech thee, so to order me in all things in
thy great mercie, that I neuer murmur or grudge
impatientlie against thee for the same, nor doo anie
thing either against thee or my husband, whereby thy
maiestie may be displeased, my husband offended, or thy
Gospell and people slandered: but deere God, giue mee
perfect patience, I beseech thee; and cause thou me to
plucke mine eies from this my husband and yokefellow,
in too narrowlie beholding his infirmities, and
make me to behold thee my God in this thine holi
                  •
                ordinance,
and to looke vpon my selfe, and the wallet before
me, that I may see mine owne slips and faults, and
learne to pull the beame out of mine owne eie first, before
I find fault with the mo
                  •
               e in his. Grant, I saie,
that we may louinglie, and with the spirit of meekenes,
beare one anothers burthen; and that I for my
part may quietlie beare the frailtie, infirmities and
faults of my husband, with more patience, mildnesse
and modestie, than hitherto I haue, so that mine example

may be to the comfort and commoditie of other
to doo the like.
            Oh Lord, thou seest the great corruption of my nature,
and the pronesse thereof to sin, and my weakenesse,
infirmitie, and vnablenes to stand in temptation:
laie no more on me therefore deere father, than thou
wilt make me able to beare, nor suffer me not to be
tempted aboue my strength, but in the middest of my
temptations make such a waie and issue for me to escape
out of dangers, that may happen by the instigation
of Sathan or his members, as shall seeme best to
thy diuine prouidence and wisedome, so as the same
may be to the furtherance of thy glorie, the profit of
the Church, and the comfort of my conscience, by Iesus
Christ mine onlie mediatour and sauiour, So be it.
            
         
         
            A praier to be vsed of the wife for hir husband, before,
or in his trauelling by land.
            TO thee, O Lord Iesu Christ, I commend
my husbands going foorth,
and his comming in; his iourneie,
and his returning, beseeching thee
happelie by the hand of thy grace,
to leade him the way he is about to
go (or ride) and purposeth now to
take: gratiouslie defend him O good
God, from the crafts, deceits, and lieng await of all his
enimies, as well bodilie as ghostlie: Mercifullie
keepe and preserue him from all perils both externall,
and internall, and finallie, by
thine ineffable clemencie & grace,
bring him safe, whole, and vnhurt
home againe from
all danger,
So be it.
            
         
         
            
            Another.
            O Lord which art the waie, the truth,
and life, thou hast promised in the
holie scriptures, that they which
put their trust in thee, and looke for
helpe at thy hand, and take thee for
their mightie defender and strong
castell, shall be preserued harmelesse,
and walke in all their iourneie safelie,
and without danger: for thou thy selfe wilt take
charge of them, and shadow them vnder thy mercifull
wings, so that none euill shall chance vnto them. Yea,
as thou didst send thy holie Angell with Abraham
and Tobit, and with other thy faithfull seruants to
be their guide and defender, and to make their iournie
prosperous, so wilt thou send thy blessed Angels with
them that wholie depend on thee, and with strong
faith commit themselues to thy most godlie tuition,
which shall safelie keepe them in all their waies, yea,
and sooner hold them vp with thine hands, then they
shall dash their foote against a stone.
            This thine accustomed gentlenesse towards thy
seruants, and these thy louing promises encourage methine
handmaid greatlie at this present to come vnto
thy maiestie, and according to my dutie most humblie
to beseech thee, that as my husband now in thy name
hath taken this his iournie vpon him, so thou wilt
vouchsafe him thy mercy and grace, both in the beginning,
entrie, gate, and ending of this his trauell and
iournie, and that thou which art our God, wilt keepe
him both going out, and comming in, and direct his
feet that he erre not in his waies.
            O Lord I beseech thee, giue thine holie Angels
charge ouer him, to keepe him in thy faith and 
                  •
               eare
wheresoeuer he goeth, to take care for him, to defend

him from all misfortunes, and to bring him prosperouslie
to that place where his busines lieth. Let them
guide him I saie, O Lord, too and fro, throughout all
his iournie, euen as Tobit the yonger was guided of
the Angell Raphaell vnto Gabaell, habiting in Ragis
a Citie of the Medes. O Lord our God, direct thou his
steps, that he fall into no perill either of soule or bodie.
Blesse thou him, I saie, in this his iournie, and preserue
him both from the clawes of theeues and murtherers,
and from the iawes of deuouring beasts. Let
him find fauour wheresoeuer he commeth, and let him
honestlie be intreated in all places; and his busines being
happilie ended, and his iournie prosperouslie finished,
doo thou vouchsafe to bring him safelie home againe
of thy mercie and goodnesse, that I may praise
thee.
            In all his waies be thou present with him, as thou
wast with Iacob, trauelling into Mesopotamia, and
descending into Egypt. Likewise, as thou didst conduct
the Israelites through the red sea, and through the vncomfortable
and perillous wildernesse, going before
them by day in a piller of a cloud, and by night in a piller
of fire, so be thou with my deere husband alwaies in
all places, and leade him in all this his iournie, and
bring him home againe in safetie. Be thou both his
companion and conducter, O Lord: for into thy hands
I commend both his life, and all that he hath. Finallie,
graunt that I continuing his faithfull, trustie, and louing
spouse heere at home, he may find both me and all
his in good health and peace, both of bodie and soule
at his returne; through our Lord Iesus
Christ, which liueth and reigneth
with thee in the vnitie of
the holie spirit, a God
for euermore,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            A praier to be vsed of the wife for hir husband being
a Captaine or Souldiour, and gone
a war-fare.
            ALthough, O most sweet Iesu, there
is nothing more commended and set
forth vnto vs in thy holie scriptures
than peace, vnitie, quietnes and
concord, vnto the which also not onlie
Moses and the Prophets, but
thou and thine Apostles also doo
therein diligentlie exhort; and contrariwise
vehementlie dehort and dissuade all men
from discord, enmitie, malice and war, bicause nothing
is more seemelie for man, than to embrace amiable
peace, friendlie concord, and quiet amitie: yea, the verie
creation, shape & birth of man proueth euidentlie,
man to be formed and made vnto peace; yet such is the
monstrous malice of Sathan that old enimie of mankind,
that he goeth about like a roaring Lion seeking
whom he may deuoure, and with all manner of labour,
sweateth to banish peace from the children of men, and
in sted thereof, violentlie to thrust in discord, tumults,
seditions, wars, bloud-sheading, man-slaughter, destruction
of realmes and countries, cities and villages,
intending by this meanes, to make hauocke of all
togither, so that he furiouslie raging in his members,
prouoketh manie times thy seruants for the defence of
their countrie, and the safegard of their wife, children,
families, and people, to go on warfare, and to wage
battell with their enimies. I therefore most humblie
beseech thee, to assist my husband, and all such as iustlie
attempt anie wars against their enimies, and mightilie
to defend them against their aduersaries, that they
may receiue through thy puissance, a glorious victorie,
and noble triumph.
            
               S
                  •
               nd thine holie Angell vnto him and them, that he
may pitch his tents among them, and ouerthrow their
enimie for them. Giue vnto my husband, and all Captaiues
and souldiers, thy grace so to behaue themselues
in the seruice of wars with all godlines, honestie,
and compassion, that thou mais
                  •
                haue a pleasure to
be present among them, to be their chiefe and grand
Captaine, and valiant defender. Suffer not him and
his felow souldiers to be discouraged for the multitude
of their enimies; but being armed with strong faith,
let him and them wholy depend on thee, the most mightie
conquerour, with whom it is all one to helpe in few
or in manie, and with that prince like warriour Dauid,
boldlie to saie in the midst of their troubles, The Lord
is my light and my defence, whome shall I feare? The
Lord is my health and the defender of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? Though mine enimies pitch pauill
                  •
               ons
against me, yet shall not my hart feare; though
men of war rise against me, I will trust in the Lord my
God. And when thou hast giuen him the victorie ouer
his enimies, giue him also a thankefull hart, that he
may confesse to haue got the victorie not by his horsse,
bowe, nor gun, nor yet by his owne strength and policie,
but by thine almightie power, and so be encouraged
for euer after to magnifie thy holie name,
            Amen.
         
         
            Or thus.
            OH Lord, the world is nothing else but
a sea of trouble: heere the diuell stormeth,
there the world frowneth: on
euerie side the flesh assaulteth vs, so
that our life may well be tearmed a
warfare, and our daies a treasure of
dangers. Oh Lord, with the anchor
of thy mercie vp-hold vs, that w
                  •
               e
sinke not in the sea of this troublous time, but guide

vs with thy holie spirit, that our liues may please thee,
and we in our death praise thee, through Iesus Christ
our Lord. Defend, O Lord, the righteous cause of my
husband thy seruant, now gone a warfare. Assist him
with strength against his enimies, with the wisedome
of thy spirit, against the policie of man, that being thoroughlie
armed and guided by thee, he may fight manfullie
in thy quarrell, to the building of thy Church, and
vtter rebuke of hir aduersaries. Without thee, O
fountaine of goodnes, and God of his estate, I know he
can doo nothing; arme him therefore with thy grace,
with the buckler of thy word and complet armour,
that he may be able not onlie to war with, but also ouer-match
Sathan his deadlie foe, and all his hellish
band, that setteth it selfe against thee and thine annointed.
Enrich him, O God, with thy mercie, that he may
be able to take vpon him the white raiment of faith,
and being clothed with it, may stand sure against the
foming ministers of the diuell, that no storme may ouer-turne
or dismaie him. O Lord, keepe thou him from
all wrastling affections; from inordinate motions defend
him, O God, and let all discord be remoued, wherby
the Pellicane children desirous of bloud, may be disseuerd:
but nourish, O God of loue thy babes with
the spirit of patience, that he and they being of one
mind, may doo their duties, applie their endeuours, and
bend their forces and whole strength to the reedifieng
of our mother Sion the Church, which trauelleth
with sorowes, and sinketh in the mists of heresies, vnlesse
thou pull hir out by the hand of thy mercie; which
doo, O gratious God, I beseech thee, and plant the tree
of peace among vs; let it flourish to the gladding of
our hearts, that all dissention cut off, we may be linked
in one knot of christian vnitie, gathered into one sheepfold,
to be guided by thee our onlie and one shepheard.
Let not the members of thy bodie be sundred, but cherish

and nourish them with a full persuasion of brotherhood,
in the vnitie of our sauiour, and thou our onlie
father; to whome with the holie Ghost be euerlasting
glorie, praise & dominion, now and for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            A fruitfull praier to be said with teares of all godlie women,
in the time of bloudie battell, when they see their husbands,
themselues, and their children and familie, citie and
countrie in danger of destruction and sacking.
by the cruell enimie.
            O Lord our heauenlie father, and euer-liuing
God, wee thy wretched
and most miserable creatures confesse
and acknowledge, wee haue
woorthilie deserued the rod of thy
correction and punishment, and doo
merit manie sharpe & bitter stripes,
that knowing thy blessed and glorious
will, haue of set purpose contemned thy diuine and
heauenlie precepts; for which cause, the sentence of thy
wrath is sharplie kindled against vs, man, woman, and
child, euen as it hath been against thy chosen people
Israell, in the daies of our fore-fathers, who glorieng
in their wickednes (as we haue done) were plagued in
the fulnesse of thine indignation (as wee iustlie are.)
The sword of their enimies beset them round about,
and he mined them 
                  •
               n on euerie side. The Iebusites, the
Ammonites, the Philistines, & the Ammorites oppressed
them diuerslie, their strong holds were rased, their
cities were beseeged, their houses were ransackt, their
goods confiscate, and their riches were carried awaie
by force of the bloud-thirstie enimie. Their yong men
were led awaie captiue, their virgins were wofullie
defloured: but in fine, when thou O Lord God didst behold
their hartie and earnest repentance and contrition,
thou didst withdrawe thy frowning countenance,

and sent them speedie and safe deliuerance. One while
thou Lord sentest them Moses, to bring them out of
the seruitude of Pharao, the stonie & stubborne harted
king of the Egyptians, another while Iepthah set
them free from the sword of the Ammonits, wherwith
they were greeuouslie afflicted. And to make thy power
and excellent glorie fullie knowne, thou gauest Samson
such fortitude to bridle the proud Philistines. Ouer
and besides these, thou of thy loue and miraculous
goodnes, hast made feeble women mightie and victorious
conquerours; namelie, Debora was a shield to the
people, Iudith comforted the distressed Bethulians,
and cut off the head of proud Holophernes, that thou
good Lord, when thou beheldst their teares and hartie
sorowe for their offences, didst prepare thy selfe to
go foorth with their hosts: thou thy selfe (I sate) with
the breath of thy nostrels, didst confound and ouerthrowe
their enimie.
            Euen so good Lord, thou most mightie and mercifull
God, which art King of glorie, and Lord of hosts, the
gouernour of all creatures, and the onlie giuer of all
victories, whose power no creature is able to resist,
and who alone art able to strengthen the weake against
the mightie, and to vanquish infinite multitudes
of thine enimies, with the countenance of a few of thy
seruants, calling vpon thy name, and trusting in thee.
Be thou now present with vs in the fulnes of thy diuine
power, to helpe and deliuer vs and thy people
from the crueltie of our enimies. And although our
sins haue instlie deserued to be punished with the sword
of thy vengeance, yea, though we women for our abhominable
pride and filthines, haue merited to haue all
violence vsed against vs in all vncleannesse by the enimie;
as our virgins to be rauished, the wombe of our
maidens opened and defiled, the thighes of our wiues
and daughters discouered, and their wombs polluted,

and all generallie to be put to shame, reproch, and confusion;
yea to the slaughter, and to haue our beds and
bodies bathed in bloud, yet looke mercifullie vpon vs
with the eies of thy fauourable pitie, who trulie and
earnestlie repent vs of our sins, and forget our corrupt
and most filthie o
                  •
               fences. O let our contrite and sorowfull
harts be a meane to mooue thee to haue pitie and
compassion vpon vs, our husbands and children, and to
vanquish thy displeasure iustlie conceiued against vs
and our husbands, children and families, people and
countrie.
            Be thou present, I saie, O almightie God with vs, &
our husbands thy souldiers, in this time of our wars,
great necessitie and trouble; fight thou their battels
for them, set thy hand to helpe and assist them against
the enimie, be present with vs, I saie, in this time of
perill and danger. Go thou foorth with our armies and
hoasts, and fight thou on our side, then shall we be assured
to preuaile. Let not the multitude of our furious
foes dismaie vs anie whit: for victorie we doo knowe
consisteth not in the power nor strength of manie men,
neither yet in the strength of horsses, armour, nor weapons;
but it is thou, O mercifull father, and mightie
God, that giuest the conquest, where, and to whome
thou pleasest. To thee therefore in this great perplexitie,
and bloudie battell, doo we flie and appeale, beseeching
thee of thine inestimable loue and kindnes, for the
loue of our sauiour Iesus, to looke vpon our true repentant
harts, and in the fulnes of thy miserations
and pities, to saue our liues from the sword, and our
goods from the spoile, and deliuer vs and set vs free
from the hands and power of our raging enimies; abate
their pride, asswage their malice, confound their
deuises, and to pardon all our sins and greeuous offences,
that being armed with thy defence, and preserued
by thee from all imminent perils, we vow and dedicate

our harts and minds wholie to walke in integritie
and newnes of life, to glorifie thee the onlie giuer
of all victorie, which grant, good Lord, through the merits
of thine onlie sonne our sauiour Iesus Christ, to
whom with thee and the holie Ghost, be attributed all
praise, power and dominion for euer and euer world
without end,
            Amen.
         
         
            A praier to be said of anie wife or daughter for hir husband
or father, being a Merchant-venterer,
or otherwise making his voiage
by Sea.
            O Almightie Lord God and most mercifull
father, maker of all things,
who by thine insearchable wisedome,
didst create that mightie
globe of the world, the heauens,
earth, sea, and all things else therein
conteined: vouchsafe I beseech
thee to be mine husbands (or my fathers)
aid and defence in this his dangerous voiage
which he hath presumed to take, reposing his onlie
trust and confidence in thy mightie mercie, to be deliuered
and preserued from all manner of dangers and
ieopardies, that may happen either vpon the sea, or on
the drie land.
            Thou knowest, O Lord, and most mercifull father,
that all those that trauell by sea, are subiect to the hazard
of diuers calamities, either to be tossed at the
pleasure of the wind and waues, either to be dashed violentlie
vpon the maine rocks, or to sticke in the quicksands,
or to be despoiled both of life and goods, by the tyrannie
of pirats; but yet what crosse or affliction soeuer
happen vnto him, grant that he may acknowledge
freelie, that it is but a iust punishment for his and mine
offences, because from the first houre of our natiuitie,

we haue beene more apt and prone to followe the filthie
appetites of our owne desires, than to exercise
our selues in the true waie of thine vndefiled lawe.
Notwithstanding, what crosse soeuer (I saie) thou
shalt thinke good to laie vpon him; yea, though thou
suffer him to be drowned of the waues, and swallowed
downe into the deapth of the whales bellie with Ionas
(from which good Lord deliuer hun) yet let him not
despaire of thy mercie, for thou art the same God foreuer,
thy right hand is not shortened, neither is the
greatnes of thy power diminished. When Ionas laie
three daies and three nights in the whales bellie in the
sea, yet didst thou at last (O mighties God) deliuer him
safe and sound, and sentest him to preach thy name to
the great citie of Niniue. Thou art yet the same God
(I saie) thou wast at that time, neither is thy power
abridged at all, and therefore, although my husband
or father be neuer so shaken with winds, turmoiled
with tempests, tossed with the waues; yea, although he
were vtterlie deuoured of the whale-fish in the bottome
of the sea; yet I confesse, and so let him acknowledge,
that thou art able to deliuer him from all these
dangers; yea, from the verie iawes of death.
            To thee therefore doo I thine vnwoorthie handmaid,
make my humble supplication and intercession for my
husband (or father) T.B. now passing the seas, vnto thee
doo I his seelie poore wife (or child) S.B. powre foorth my
feruent and hartie praiers in my deere husbands or fathers
behalfe, because thou onlie art the castell of both
our comforts, and his bulwarke, his watchman, his
keeper and defender, his sure rocke, and hope of his salnation.
To thee onlie and to none other doo I commit
and commend him wholie bodie and soule, goods, ship,
fraught, and all that belongeth vnto him. Uouchsafe
I beseech thee to blesse him, preserue and keepe him in
health, and giue him grace so to behaue himselfe in this

his iournie, and at all times, that in no part he offend
thy diuine maiestie, or prouoke thee to be angrie with
him. Direct his course safelie vnto the hauen & mart.
Protect him and saue him and all his from the crueltie
and force of the water-flouds. Leade thou him foorth,
and bring thou him in. Be thou, O God, his onlie staie
and defence, whether he sleepe or wake, liue or die, sinke
or swimme, vpon the waters, as well as vpon the land,
and brieflie in all places, and in all times and seasons,
shield and preserue thou him, as my trust is in thee.
            Thou knowest, O Lord, that this trade is not of his
deuising, nor yet proceeding of anie humane inuention;
but thou, O father, of thy meere mercie didst reueale
the mysterie thereof to thy seruant Noah, in commanding
him to frame an Arke that might fleete vpon the
flouds, wherein he and his familie onlie, to the number
but of eight persons, were saued in the great deluge or
floud, when all the world else for the greatnes of iniquitie,
perished altogither, and were vtterlie confounded
and drowned in the mightie waters that ouerflowed
the whole earth. Uouchsafe therefore I beseech thee, O
most mightie God, and mercifull father, the ruler and
gouernour both of heauen, earth, and sea, with all
the creatures conteined therein, in thy mercie so to dispose
the wind and the weather, and to giue my husband
(or father) such successe in this his voiage and
iournie, which he hath now presumed to take, onlie vppon
a sure faith & assurance of thy mercie, that it may
turne him to no danger, dammage, losse, or misfortune,
but that he may alwaie be deliuered from all the dangers
both of the sea, pirats, and enimies; and so, that
he may be safelie conducted by thy mercifull protection
and assistance, and haue a safe and prosperous returne
home againe into his countrie, as was righteous
Noah in his arke, and as may be most to thy glorie, my
comfort, and his commoditie.
            
               Behold I thine hand-maiden, whom thou hast ransomed
and redeemed, doo crie vnto thee; yea euen I, as
now a s
                  •
               litarie woman, left all desolate alone, whom
thou hast with thy pretious blood redeemed, doo still crie
and call hartilie vpon thee for my deere and welbeloued
husband, or father, according to my dutie, and thy commandement.
Heare me, O God my sauiour, the hope of

                  •
               ll the ends of the earth, and of all them that be in the
sea a far off. Heare me, I saie, O mercifull father: for
now my deere husband or father, is conuersant in a
troublesome sea, and perillous waters. O stand thou
vpon the shore of thy heauenlie countrie, and looke at
his perils. Lord saue him for thy name sake, that he
perish not. Gouerne his ship with thy right hand by
the helpe of thy grace, that he perish not in the waues
of the stormie sea, that the tempest of the waters

                  •
               rowne him not, and that the deepe swallowe him not
vp; but Lord, grant him so to keepe his course amiddes
the vast seas, betweene the most perillous rockes of
Scilla and Caribdis, and to hold so with the anchor of
faith and hope in thee and in thy crosse and passion,
that he may escape the danger of both those dangerous
rocks, and be guided by thee the morning light,
and sea-star of daie, sonne of righteousnes, that he may
come safe to land, both outward and homeward, without
losse of man, ship, or fraught: so will I yeeld thee
immortall thanks, & perpetuall praises for thy fatherlie
benefits, and my tongue shall record thy works of
glorie for euer and euer, which thou dooest for the children
of men, both vpon the sea and land. Yet, O father,
not my will, but thy blessed will and secret counsell be
fulfilled, both in him, and in me: and I beseech thee set
thy feare alwaies before mine eies, and indue me with
such plentie of thy grace, to strengthen my weakenes
and frailtie in falling, that in this my husbands or fathers
absence, I may continue faithfull and godlie in

my vocation, and persist in faith, loue and holines with
modestie. Make me diligent to rule well my children
and familie, and to keepe them in all christian obedience,
that I may get my selfe a good report of all men.
Let me abandon all vaine pleasures & fond delights,
which beguile vnstable soules. Make me to shun and
auoid all vnprofitable practises, all idlenes, s
                  •
               oth and
securitie; and let me be well giuen and disposed to all
huswifelines, sobrietie, godlines, and chastitie, keeping
home, instructing my houshold, and praieng continuallie
day and night, because of my great necessitie, that
so liuing purelie, and behauing my selfe christian
                  •
               e in
all obedience towards thee, and loiall faithfulnes towards
my husband, or father, I may giue occasion to
the aduersarie to speake well of the professors of the
Gospell, to thy glorie, and my comfort in Christ Iesus,
to whome with thee and the holie Ghost be all honor
and glorie now and for euermore,
            Amen, Amen.
         
         
            When your husband, or father, is come safe home
from his iournie, giue God thanks therefore,
and saie:
            I Thanke thee (O heauenlie father)
for this thy great mercie and grace,
which thou hast shewed vnto mee
thine vnwoorthie hand-maid, both
in hearing and granting mine humble
requests, & also in leading foorth
and bringing in, and causing this my
deere husband, or father, to returne
and come home againe safe and sound in good health to
my great ioie and comfort. This I acknowledge and
confesse, O Lord, is brought to passe euen through thy
meere mercie, gracious goodnes, and holie blessing,
which thou of thy woonted clemencie, and bountifull liberalitie,
giuest and extendest to all them that keepe

thy holie word, and doo thereafter.
            Blessed and praised therefore be thy most holie name
for euer; and I beseech thee, O gratious God, grant
now both vnto my husband (or father) and me, whiles
we liue heere in this vale of miserie (where we haue no
abiding, dwelling place, or permanent citie, but looke
for one else-where with thee in our celestiall home) a
sure and quiet conscience, to loue each other of vs in
thee and for thee, and to serue thee, loue thee, and praise
thee with all our harts, with all our strength, and with
all our soules, for euer and euer; through thy sonne Iesus
Christ our Lord, who is our onlie rest and peace, to
whome with thee and the holie Ghost, three persons
and one inuisible God, be all praise, dominion & thanks
for euer and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            A praier and thanks-giuing to be said, when your husband
(or father) with his ship, is safelie come
home from his voiage by sea.
            O Most mercifull Lord, and heauenlie
father, I render vnto thee most
humble and hartie thanks, for the
manifold and great mercies which
thou from time to time hast mercifully
bestowed vpon me, both for my
soule and bodie. And amongst other,
O father, I thanke thee for the good
and prosperous successe, which thou in thy mercie hast
giuen my husband (or my father) in this his voiage and
iournie, deliuering him and his from all the dangers
of the same, disposing all things by thy good prouidence
to a good and happie end, and now safelie bringing him,
with ship and fraught, home into his owne countrie
and house, to my great comfort, and his commoditie.
Let this thy fatherlie fauour, O Lord, be both vnto
him and me a sufficient cause to mooue vs continuallie

to render thanks vnto thee, and wholie to depend vpon
thy mercifull prouidence, both in prosperitie and aduersitie,
and that we may so walke before thee, as thy
glorie alwaie may shine in vs, and that our tongues
may be instruments of thy praise at all times, and in
all places, euen all the daies of our life; that we thus
liuing in thy faith, feare, and loue, and in the obedience
of thy holie commandements, may passe the time of
this our pilgrimage in peace, concord, mutuall loue
and amitie, so that when the same is ended, wee may
liue and reigne with thee for euer and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            When your husband, or friend, is in prison and endurance,
or otherwise persecuted, or in trouble, and affliction,
see that hartilie you praie for him, and saie
as followeth.
            O Lord, Father of mercie, and God of
all consolation, which rulest and disposest
all things after thine vnsearchable
wisedome; and workest
in thy creatures, according to thy
blessed will, which is alwaie good
and godlie, howsoeuer blind & fraile
flesh iudgeth of it. I knowe, and vnfeignedlie
confesse thine omnipotencie and almightie
power. I knowe that thou art able to doo what thy
good pleasure is. I knowe that thou bringest downe to
the graue, and fetchest vp againe. Thou punishest
with pouertie, and makest wealthie againe. Thou
throwest men into the darke dongeons, and loosest them
out of prison againe, breaking euen the gates of brasse,
and smiting the bars and bolts of iron asunder. Thou
dooest put downe and exalt againe. Thou woundest and
healest; yea, thou O Lord killest, & makest aliue againe.
            Oh, woonderfullie dooest thou worke in thy creatures,
especiallie in them, whome thou hast appointed to be

vessels of mercie, and inheritors of thine eternall glorie.
If they at anie time greeuouslie offend thy diuine
maiestie (as we be all sinners, and readie at euerie moment
to fall) thou dooest neither long winke at their
wickednes, nor yet euer cast them off from thy fauour,
but like a louing phisician with some emplaister or
salue, although bitter to the flesh, yet wholesome to the
soule, thou healest them, and like a tender and gentle
father, correctest them with some temporall punishment;
that by this meanes they escaping euerlasting
punishment, may repent them of their vngodlie behauiour,
confesse their wickednes, flie vnto thy mercie,
and for euer after be the more circumspect in treading
the paths of thy holie lawe.
            On this manner didst thou handle the Israelits,
when they offended thy fatherlie goodnes. On this
manner didst thou deale with King Dauid, and the
Prophet Ionas for their disobedience, with manie other;
whome notwithstanding for thy mercies sake, after
they had acknowledged their offences, and called
vpon thy holie name, thou woonderfullie deliueredst,
a
                  •
               d broughtest againe as it were out of the perillous
seas, into the hauen of quietnes.
            I therefore thy poore creature and sorrowfull hand-maid,
perceiuing in thy holie word so large fountaines
of thy great mercies plentifullie issuing out towards
all them that be of a contrite heart, and broken spirit,
am bold (notwithstanding mine vnwoorthines, by reason
of my manifold sins) to come at this present vnto
thee, and that for thy promise sake, most humblie he seeching
thee, that as thou deliueredst Ionas out of the
whales bellie, Ioseph and Daniel from prison, Peter
thine Apostle out of ward and durance, Dauid from
the hands of his enimies, Susanna from the power of
hir aduersaries, with manie other: so in like manner,
thou wilt deliuer and set at libertie thy seruant, and my

faithfull and deere husband T.B. and that in such sort,
that it may be to thy glorie, to his health, to the comfort
of me his wofull wife, and sorowfull children and
friends, and to the reioicing of so manie as vnfeignedlie
loue thy blessed word.
            And although, O God, I formine imperfection am
not worthie to craue and enioie so great and comfortable
a benefit at thy mercifull hands; yet I doubt not,
but for thy deerelie beloued Sonne Iesus Christes
sake, thou wilt most fauourablie heare me, most fatherlie
pitie me, and most bountifullie grant me this mine
humble request; and I againe receiuing this notable
benefit of my deere husbands deliuerance at thy hand,
shall not be vnthankefull, but continuallie magnifie thy
holie and glorious name, which dealest so fauourablie
with thy seruants, when they call vpon thee in the
name of Iesu Christ thine onlie begotten Sonne, and
our alone mediator and aduocate, to whome with thee
and the holie Ghost, be all praise and honor for euer and
euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            When your husband or other friend is deliuered out of
anie trouble, looke that you giue God hartie
thanks therefore, and saie:
            SO often as I consider thy woonderfull
works, O blessed and heauenlie
father, which thou workest of thine
owne good will, for so manie as in
their trouble and aduersitie flie for
refuge vnto thy holie name, as vnto
a strong hold and mightie fortresse;
I cannot but confesse and acknowledge
thy singular kindnes and vnspeakeable good will,
which thou continuallie through thy fatherlie goodnes
bearest towards thy seruants, and for the same not merited
of anie, but freelie of thy mercie giuen, I render

vnto thee, according to my most bounden dutie, most
hartie praises and entire thanks, in consideration
whereof, the children of Israell being in miserable captiuitie,
lamentablie lamenting before thee their too
much sorrowfull state, by hartie praiers; after that
thou hadst deliuered them from the land of seruitude,
brast out into exceeding great praises, glorifieng thy
most holie and blessed name, for their sweet and comfortable
deliuerance. The Citizens of Bethulia likewise
being in great distresse, called vpon thy glorious name;
and thou most mercifullie deliueredst them, and they againe
with merie voices and more ioifull harts, soong
vnto thee most hartie thanks. In like manner, when
thou hadst deliuered Ioseph, Daniel, Dauid, Peter,
and manie other thy seruants from their sorowes and
calamities; oh who is able to expresse with how readie
and glad minds they magnified thee, & thy holie name.
            I therefore sinfull woman, excited and stirred vp
with the godlie examples of these thy seruants, knowing
how greatlie thou delightest in the sacrifice of
praise, confessing also (such is my beggerie) that I haue
none other thing woorthie to offer vnto thy diuine maiestie,
at this present addressed and prepared to celebrate
thy great mercies, do magnifie thy blessed name,
and render vnto thee most humble thanks, and immortall
praise, that it hath pleased thee of thine exceeding
goodnes, the rather at the contemplation of my
poore praiers, to shew thy fauourable mercie, in the deliuerance
of thy seruant, and my deere husband T.B. vnto
my singular ioie and great comfort.
            For this thy benefit (most beneficiall father) I so
hartilie thanke thee, as hart can thinke; most intirelie
be seeching thee, that thou wilt giue him and me, and vs
all, euen so manie as loue thy blessed word, neuer to be
vnmindfull of this thy benefit, nor to commit any thing
heereafter that should offend thy fatherlie goodnes, or

prouoke thy wrath against vs, least through our disobedience
we, after this, feele more bitter tokens of thy
heauie displeasure, than hitherto we haue done; but in
all our enterprises so to behaue our selues according to
thy blessed will, that thou maist delight in vs as a father
in his children. And vouchsafe to blesse vs with all
spirituall blessings, to enrich vs with the knowledge
of thy heauenlie word, and to worke in vs a life conformable
to the same, that other seeing our godlie manners,
and christian conuersation, may be encouraged to
embrace thy blessed word, to magnifie thy holie name,
and in all points to frame their life according to
the rule of thy holy commandements, through
the inspiration of thy blessed spirit, to
whome with thee, and thy deerelie
beloued Sonne Iesus Christ,
be all praise, honor and
glorie for euermore,
            Amen, Amen.
         
         
            Praiers to be said of women with child,
and in child-bed, and after
their deliuerie.
            A praier to be vsed of a woman with child.
            O Almightie and mercifull Father,
which of thy bountifull goodnes hast
fructified my wombe, and of thy gratious
blessing, hast created in me a
reasonable creature; I most hartilie
thanke thee, not onelie for this thy
gratious gift, but also for that thou
hast at all times, sith I conceiued,
preserued me from all perils both of soule and bodie,
and hast so moderated all my nips, pinches, and pangs,

that I haue hitherto right well escaped them.
            I acknowledge, O Lord, that iustlie for our 
                  •
               infull
transgression of thy commandements, thou saiedst vnto
the first woman, our grand-mother Eue, and in hir
to vs all; I will increase thy sorowe, when thou art
with child: with paine shalt thou bring foorth thy children.
All our paines therefore that we suffer in this
behalfe, are none other thing, but a woorthie crosse laid
vpon vs by thy godlie ordinance, to the which with hart
& mind I humblie submit my selfe, trusting surelie, and
being fullie persuaded in my faith, that thou callest
none into perill and danger, but both thou canst, and
wilt at conuenient season deliuer them.
            Thou most gratious God hast commanded vs in all
our trouble to call vpon thee for aid and helpe: and not
only hast commanded vs, but also of thy mercifull goodnes
hast promised to vs good deliuerance, saieng, Call
vpon me in time of trouble, and I will deliuer thee. O
good Lord, how greatlie doo these words comfort my
hart, and susteine my seelie soule? Who would not
greatlie reioice, that knoweth certainlie almightie
God to be present with him in his trouble? Saith not
God thus? Or euer they call (saith he) I shall answere
them. While they are yet but thinking how to speake,
I shall heare them. And in the Psalme, I am with him
(saith God) in his trouble, out of the which I will deliuer
him. What a comfortable Lord is this? He is
more readie to helpe, than we to call for helpe. He is
more readie to giue grace, than we to aske it. There
was neuer anie yet that with a pure faith asked grace
of his Lord, but he had it. Christ saith, Aske and ye shall
haue. Euerie one that asketh, hath. He that saith euerie
one, excepteth none. Uerelie, verelie, I saie vnto
you (saith Christ) whatsoeuer you shall aske my father
in my name, he shall giue it you. Our sauiour Christ
saith this, and he is God, and shall not I hearken to

my Lord Gods commandements & promises? Uerelie
I will sticke surelie to it: for sure I am, that sooner shall
heauen and earth perish, than Gods promises be vnperformed.
For albeit euerie man naturallie is a lier
and deceiuer, yet God is alwaies true and iust in all
his words and promises. I will therfore make my sute
vnto him, whome I need not go far to seeke: for he is euerie-where
present with his elect, and is nigh vnto
all them that call vpon him faithfullie, and thus will
I praie vnto him.
            FAther of mercie, and God of comfort and all consolation,
I thy poore hand-maid humblie beseech thee for
Christ Iesus sake, and in his blessed and holie name,
that thou wilt vouchsafe to forgiue me all my sins and
trespasses, that I haue heeretofore offended in against
thy godlie maiestie, either in thought, consent, delectation,
word or deed; and that thou wilt heereafter during
my life, mercifullie preserue me from transgressing of
thy commandements, and dailie increase in me perfect
repentance for my sins, a sure purpose of amendment
of my life, and a diligent studie to walke in thy commandements.
Increase in me also a liuelie faith, a sure
hope and charitie. Ingraffe in me humblenes of hart,
meekenes of mind, cleannes of conscience. Grant mee
that I may be wise, sad, sober, discreet, circumspect, and
well aduised in all my saiengs, and that I may stronglie
ouercome all the temptations of mine enimies, the
diuell, the world, and the flesh, and that whether I be
sleeping or waking, eating, drinking, or whatsoeuer I
doo, all may be to thine honor and glorie. Grant me also
that I may humblie reuerence my husband, and faithfullie
loue him, and be obedient to all his honest, lawfull,
and godlie requests. And chieflie of all, grant mee,
O Lord, that I may feare and dread thee: for well assured
I am, that looke how high the heauen is in comparison
of the earth, and so great is gods mercie towards

them that feare him. Looke how wide the East is from
the West, so far hath he set our sins from vs; yea, like
as a father pitieth his owne children, euen so is the
Lord mercifull to them that feare him.
            And as touching my deliuerance of this burthen,
and thy gratious gift, I am right well assured, that vnlesse
thou prosper my trauell, all womens helpe, and all
physicke is in vaine: but my full trust is, that like as
thou hast created this child in me, and hast breathed into
it the spirit of life; so at such time as shall be feene
most meete to thy most godlie maiestie, thou both canst
and wilt prosper the childs birth, and my deliuerance.
In consideration whereof, I humblie beseech thee of
thy fatherlie pitie to strengthen me, in this my dangerous
labour and trauell, and so susteine me, that I may
patientlie beare all my throwes, and pangs, and according
to thy promise, suffer me not to be tempted aboue
my strength, but in the midst of my temptation, make
a way to come out, that I may beare it.
            Increase my faith, O most mercifull sauiour Christ,
that I may constantlie beleeue thy word, which saiest,
Ye shall be sorrowfull, but your sorrowe shall be turned
into ioie. A woman when she trauelleth, hath sorrowe,
for hir houre is come; but when she is deliuered of the
child, she thinketh no more of the anguish, for ioie that
a man is borne into the world. I be seech thee therefore
in the dangerous time of my trauell, grant me speedie
deliuerance, and ioifull beholding of my child, that I
being a merie and ioifull mother, may render vnto
thee honour, laud, praise, and thanks, for thine aboundant
mercies, and gratious gifts and benefits.
            And finallie, aboue all things I beseech thy gratious
goodnes to endue my child with grace, that it may be
one of the number of thine elect, baptised, and regenerated
in the holie Ghost, and that at the yeeres of discretion,
it may learne to knowe thee: and knowing

thee, may trust surelie in thy mercie: trusting in thy
mercie, may hartilie loue thee: louing thee, may feare
to displease thee: and fearing to displease thee, may bee
obedient to thy commandements, and finallie, atteine
euerlasting ioie and felicitie, through our Lord Iesus
Christ, which liueth and reigneth with thee and the holie
Ghost, world without end, So be it.
            
         
         
            Another praier of a woman with child
before hir trauell.
            O Almightie and mercifull God, maker
of heauen and earth, which for
sin, hast enioined to me, and all woman
-kind, a greeuous paine, to
bring foorth children, I mislike not
this thy decree, but I acknowledge
the same to be holie, irreprehensible,
and good: for all that thou hast created
and ordeined are verie good. Wherefore I beseech
thee, in the name of Christ thy welbeloued Sonne, assist
me in my paines, helpe me in the danger of deliuerance,
and conuert my mourning into mirth. In the
meane season, keepe thou mee, with the child in my
wombe, from all hurt and danger, Grant also, that my
child yet vnborne, may come into this world sound and
perfect without deformitie. Protect me likewise with
thy fauour, whereby I may escape all danger, feare,
frights, and vntimelie deliuerance. Bring into my
mind all my misdeeds and offences, that vnfeignedlie I
may be sorie for them, and walke heereafter warelie in
my calling; and when the time of my deliuerance shall
approch, assist me with thy grace, and bring out my
child in good time well proportioned, according to thine
image, and restore me to my woonted strength if it be
thy good pleasure.
            Giue also vnto my newlie borne babe, togither with

outward baptisme, thine holie spirit, whereby it may
be regenerated vnto euerlasting life, admitted into the
societie of thy saincts, and continue in thy seruice, and
godlie conuersation euermore. O Lord God mercifull
father, into thine hands I commend both my selfe, and
my child, doo with vs as it pleaseth thee; thou hast made
and redeemed me, therefore thy will be done. In thee
will I trust, as long as I shall liue. Thou art my refuge
in Christ our Lord and sauiour,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier of a woman with child
before hir labour.
            AL thy waies are iust, oh deere father,
and thy iudgements are true altogither:
for worthilie doth man liue in
the sweate of his face, and the woman
bring forth children with much
paine and trauell, and with great
danger. Yea, O mercifull father, this
paine is not a sufficient punishment
for the greeuous transgressions, wherewith wee and
our fore-fathers haue transgressed thy most holie will.
The punishment in respect of our demerits is too small,
but in respect of our weakenes, too great for vs without
thee to endure. Wherefore, as I acknowledge, O
mercifull father this trauell in child-birth, which now
approcheth, to be a iust reward of my manifold sins: so
I acknowledge also thy readie arme of defence, stretched
out ouer me, and ouer all them that call vpon thee
in faith. Grant therefore, O deere father, that I may
in faith praie, and wait for that time of my trauell patientlie:
that I may endure it when it shall be present
constantlie and thankefullie; knowing, that although
I then feele some tast of the reward of sin, yet I feele
not all, and that little which I then feele, thou dooest
presentlie reward.
            
               The which comfortable and glad issue, grant me, O
Lord, if it be thy good pleasure: and hauing receiued
such fruit of my bodie, grant me moreouer wisedome
and strength to bring it vp in thy feare, and to trauell
as it were againe with it, till it be borne againe into a
heauenlie life, to the glorie of thy holie name, and my
great ioie, so that it may finallie in Christ Iesus, be
partaker of those blessings, which thou dooest plentifullie
raine downe vpon the faithfull and their seed for
euer. And bicause I am not woorthie to present this
my suite to thy heauenlie maiestie, of my selfe, a most
wretched and sinfull woman; I offer it in the name of
the righteousnes, and in the strength of my Lord and
sauiour Iesus Christ, praieng furthermore as he hath
taught vs to praie, Our father, &c.
            
         
         
            Another praier of a woman with child
before hir trauell.
            OH most deere father, Lord of heauen
& earth, which gouernest all things
by thy wisedome, so that nothing is
done without thy prouidence. Thou
causest the winde to blowe, the
stormes and seas to arise, and in
their chiefest rage, with a word
thou stillest them againe. Thou sendest
fire, raine, and snowe from heauen, threatening
great destruction, and yet not one of them can passe the
bounds that thou appointest them, so that they go, and
doo onlie what thine almightie word hath commanded
them, the bounds and measures where of they may
not, neither are they able to passe: whereby most d
                  ••
               re
God, thine almightie wisedome and power is manifest
vnto vs in all thy works; but most chieflie in the woonderfull
worke of the forming of man, who of a maruellous
small and loathsome substance, is made a liuing

creature, and nourished within the closure & intrailes
of the womb, and hauing a soule or mind infused into it
by a heauenlie beginning, is alwaie desirous to be returned
againe, as out of a strange countrie into his
owne.
            Therefore, O heauenlie father, I yeeld thee most hartie
thanks, that thou hast vouchsafed to count me worthie,
and made me the shop and receptacle of this thy
most excellent worke. And I beseech thee, most louing
father, that as thou hast giuen me aptnes and power
to conceiue and receiue thy creature and workemanship
into my bodie, so thou wouldest giue me power
and strength, to beare and to nourish it, vntill it come
to good perfection, and that I may safelie bring foorth
the same. Thy goodnes, oh gentle father, did at the beginning
appoint and ordeine that this thy worke of
propagation, and bringing foorth of man, should be to
vs easie, pleasant, and without danger. But our sins
alas, deere God, through the disobedience and breaking
of thy lawe and commandements, hath made it to be
dangerous, painefull, and full of perill, which thou
didst laie vpon our grand-mother Eue, and vpon all vs
hir posteritie, as a correction and punishment for sin:
and therefore I confesse deere God, that through my
manifold sins, I haue not onlie deserued this thy rod
of correction, but far sorer, and more greeuous punishment,
yea euen thy wrath, were it not that thy mercie
exceedeth all thy works, and thy tender loue towards
vs is such, and so great, that in thy iustice thou thinkest
vpon mercie, and hast not onlie giuen thy deerelie beloued
Sonne to shed his pretious hart bloud, to take awaie
our sins, but also hast chosen vs in him before the
world began, to be thy children, by whome thou hast assured
vs, that thy fatherlie care and godlie prouidence
ouer vs is so great, that euen the verie heares of our
heads are numbered in thy sight.
            
               Wherefore, oh most mercifull father, I am bold to
run presentlie vnto thee with all my trust, hope and
confidence, that thou hast giuen me, praieng and beseeching
thee, for thy great mercies sake, for thine infallible
promise and truth sake, which neuer faile anie
that put their trust in thee, and for thy Sonne Iesus
Christes sake, oh most mild and mightie worker, that
thy clemency may refresh and restore in me, that which
my sins haue hindered and corrupted; and either take
from me the great labour and dangerous trauell that
my sins haue deserued, & the feare that it hath brought
me into for the same, so that I shall not need such power
and strength, such care and industrie as my corruption
now seeketh and requireth; or else so qualifie,
mitigate and order all my throwes, paines, pangs,
and pinches of this my child-birth, that the trauell
thereof doo not surmount, nor ouercome my strength,
further than thou, oh father wilt make mee able to
beare, & endure the same, or else encrease my strength,
encourage my mind, and fortifie my senses so, that I
may without mistrust, despaire, or grudging against
thy maiestie, beare the labour to the end. For my God
and deere Father, I doo knowe and assuredlie beleeue,
that all my paines and throwes are so in thy fatherlie
ordering and working, that onlie so far foorth shall they
be painefull and greeuous vnto mee, and no further,
but as thy diuine prouidence doth appoint.
            Assist mee therefore, oh most deere father, with thy
most cheerefull present, and readie helpe, and comfort
me with thy holie Ghost. For deere father, as thou didst
laie this rod of correction vpon vs for our sins, that we
should conceiue in sorrowe, and beare in perill: so Lord,
thou of thy goodnes didst promise, that we should bring
foorth. Therefore, oh most louing and pitifull father, according
to this thy holie promise, I beseech thee, send
me good deliuerance of such a child, as may be to the

praise of thy holie name, a witnes and testimonie of
thy good will, and blessing to this most honourable
state of matrimonie, and also by thine holie institution
of baptisme, may be made of the number of thine elect
children, and heire of thine eternall kingdome, by
the merits and deseruings of thy deere Sonne Iesus
Christ, in whose name, I beseech thee furthermore as
he hath taught and commanded me, saieng: Our father
which art in heauen, &c.
            
         
         
            The same praier more breefe.
            THY wisedome and power shine
foorth in all thy works, O Lord, but
yet much more greater, more manifest
and more woonderfull are they
in the shaping of man. Of how
small beginning dooest thou make so
maruellous a liuing thing, infusing
a soule into it, whose originall is
from heauen, to the intent he should long to returne
thither, as into his countrie? And now that thou hast

                  ••
               uchsafed to make me, as it were thy worke-house,
wherein to fashion so singular a worke; I most humblie
and hartilie thanke thee, beseeching thee, that as
thou hast giuen me abilitie to conceiue, so thou wilt
giue me strength to the perfecting of the thing that is
in breeding, that I may safelie both beare it, and bring
it foorth. Trulie thou, O mercifull father, hadst of thine
owne goodnes made this worke of child-bearing easie,
but our sinne hath made it sorrowfull and full of danger.
O most gratious worke-man, let thy pitifulnes amend
the thing which our sinfulnes hath marred, and
either abate my paine, that I may not haue need of so
great strength, tendance, and running; or else increase
my strength, power, and courage, that I may be able
to ouercome all the paines of my trauell,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            The same praier againe in Meeter.
            THY wisedome Lord in all thy waies,
            and power great to performe it,
            We cease to search, and onlie praise,
            They passe so far the reach of wit.
            And thus we muse and maruell much
            at all thy works, and yet we find
            No maruell nor no wonder such,
            as dailie forming of man-kind.
            Of such beginning, such an end,
            and of such séed, such fruit to growe,
            With Dauid well we may contend,
            to maze, to muze, and nothing knowe.
            The matter earth, the shape from heauen,
            doth knit both soule and flesh in one,
            Whereof such strife is them betwéene,
            from whence they canie, they would be gone.
            And yet in all thy wonders great,
            thy mercie Lord doth far passe all,
            Which dooest vouchsafe to worke this feate,
            in me poore wretch thy bond and thrall.
            And as good Lord thou dooest me make
            thy shop, to shape thy worke therein,
            Thy hand-worke so doo not forsake,
            but end the thing thou dooest begin.
            Thy goodnes Lord did once make light
            this burthen now, which sore doth gréeue,
            Untill which wo did wrap each wight,
            the wofull worke of wofull Eue.
            That Eue hath lost, let Christ restore,
            that guilt hath made, let grace amend,
            Why should the fault of Eue doo more
            than grace in Christ? God it defend.
            Oh Lord, the time approcheth néere,
            that throwes of Eue I must sustaine,
            
               And that I may the same well beare,
            increase my strength, or lesse my paine.
            Thy will this burthen on me laid,
            thy goodnes eke will ease the same,
            Where Christ hath once the ransome paid,
            why should the déed of Eue bring blame?
            Thus O Lord I me in thy will
            doo put, eke wholie in thy hand,
            I will not once swarue from thy skill,
            to die, or liue, to fall, or stand,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another godlie and earnest praier to be said of euerie
Christian and faithfull woman, in the time of
hir trauell or child-birth, vsed of the
vertuous Ladie, Frances
Aburgauennie.
            ALmightie God, my heauenlie and
most mercifull father, I feele thy
promised punishment at this present
to take effect on me, which for the
gilt and transgression of my progenitors,
hath beene by thy diuine maiestie,
iustlie pronounced against me,
and the whole generation of Adam.
Great and intollerable are these bitter pangs and
pearsing paines, that in this my trauell of child-birth,
I endure and abide. Now feele I as it were a cruell
and sharpe conflict betwixt death and life; now feele
I (O Lord) the rod of thy correction, according to thy
iustice laid heauie vpon me, for the vse and exercise of
sin and iniquitie; yet when it shall please thee good Lord
looke vpon me with the eies of thy fatherlie compassion
and pitie, and according to the multitude of thy manifold
mercies, be thou now present with me. Arm
                  •
                mee,
O mightie God with perfect patience, ioifullie to beare
thy correction, and in the middest of these my sharpe and

bitter brunts of greefe, giue me grace still to call vpon
thee.
            Strengthen me a poor wretched woman, giue mee
comfort and heauenlie consolation from aboue, and
when thou shalt thinke it meet and conuenient, send me
safe deliuerance, that I may enioie the fruit of my
wombe, the sight whereof shall adorne and decke me
anew with ioie and gladnes, otherwise, good Lord, if in
this season thou determine to take mee hence vnto thy
selfe by thy messenger death, to whose stroke all creatures
(when thou thinkest it meet and expedient) shall
bow, make me constant and faithfull in thee, whose I
am, whether I die or liue. Forget my sins and offences
committed by mee against thee. Let the bloud of the
Lambe Iesus wash away my deformitie. Let the spots
of my corruption be purged, and taken awaie. Let my
infected soule that is putrified therein, be purified
therein. Giue me grace alwaies, whether I liue or
die, to call vpon thee continuallie. Giue me power to
pitch my confidence onelie and alone in the bloudie
wounds of Christ Iesus, to whome in this my distresse
I flie, and appeale for remedie and comfort. Grant this
O gratious God, which liuest and reignest world
without end,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier of a woman being in trauell.
            LORD saue mee, or else I perish:
Lord haue mercie vpon me a sinner.
Pitifull Iesu shew thy mercie vnto
me, and let the light of thy countenance
shine vpon me, that I be not
swallowed vp of greefe and sorrowe.
Lord, sweet Lord, thou sendest thy
seruants to call me to the marriage:
the fatlings and oxen are killed, and dinner is readie.
Lord giue me grace to come vnto thee, that I beeing

freed from sin, and eased of sorrowe, the fruit of sin, may
marrie thee in the couenant of thy mercie, and banquet
with thee face to face at the table of ioie in the
heauenlie Ierusalem. Lord, louing Lord, and gratious
God, blesse the fruit of my wombe, and take it into thy
familie. For I beleeue Lord, that thou becamest of
God, the son of man, to make it and all other, whome
thy father hath giuen thee, the children of God thy heauenlie
father. According to my faith therefore, O Lord,
be it vnto me. Open the doore of thy mercie, and lodge
my child in the vertue of the couenant; that being my
God, and the God of my seed, I may glorifie thee both
now and euer, and offer vp the sacrifice of praise, and
the fruits of a ioious spirit vnto thee. Lord and father
of heauen, it is thy will that all men should be saued,
thy will be done, and saue me and my child by thy mercie,
I beseech thee,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another meditation in Meeter, to be said of a
woman with child.
made by. W.H.
            In time of trouble call on mee,
            And I will then deliuer thee.
            THE time drawes nigh, of bitter painefull throwes,
            how long I shall the same endure, God knowes.
            O Lord my God, I humblie aske of thée,
            make haste swéet Christ, and safe deliuer me.
            As I by sin, deserued haue right well
            such paine as this: yea more than tongue can tell.
            Yet ah my God, turne not awaie thy face,
            nor me forsake in this so sharpe a case.
            This wombe and fruit that springeth in the same,
            hast thou create to glorie of thy name.
            Opprest with paine, O Lord, when I shall bée,
            make lesse the same, so much as pleaseth thée.
            
               And grant good God, thy creature may procéed,
            safelie on liue, with mercie at my néed.
            In Christes name I will my trauell sho,
            now holie Ghost come comfort me in wo.
            Come father déere, and let thy power descend,
            O Iesu Christ thy mercies great extend.
            Ah God behold my dolour and my smart,
            swéet holie Ghost, my comforter thou art.
            Take part with me, and heare my wofull crie,
            Ex
                  •
               uli me, miserere mei.
            Amen.
         
         
            In long and sore labour call earnestlie vpon God, and saie
to your comfort the 6. 38. 51. 102. 30. and 142.
Psalmes of Dauid, commonlie called
the seauen penitenti all Psalmes,
or the Psalme of a peniten
                  •
               
sinner:
            Or else this 22. Psalme of DAVID following, called
The complaint of Christ on the Crosse.
            MY God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me? It seemeth that I shall
not obteine deliuerance, though I
seeke it with lowd cries.
            My God, I will crie all the daie
long, but thou wilt not answer; and
all the night long I make pitious
mone, without taking anie rest.
            The meane time, thou most holiest seemst to sit stil, not
caring for the things y• I suffer, which so oft hast helped
me heeretofore, & hast giuē to thy people Israel sufficiēt
argument and matter to praise thee with songs, wherwith
they haue giuen thanks to thee for thy benefits.
            Our fore-fathers and mothers were woont to put
their trust in thee, and as often as they did so, thou didst
deliuer them out of their distresse.
            As oft as they cried for helpe to thee, they were deliuered:
as oft as they committed themselues to thee,

they were not confounded, nor put to anie shame.
            But as for me, I seeme rather to be a worme than a
woman, the doonghill of Adam and Eue, the outcast of
the vulgar people.
            As manie as haue seene me laugh, haue laughed me
to scorne, and reuiled me, and shaking their heads in deriston
at me, haue cast me in the teeth, saieng:
            She is wont to boast and glorie that she is in great
fauour with God, wherefore let God now deliuer hir,
if he loue hir so well.
            By thy procurement, O Lord, I came out of my mothers
wombe, and thou gauest me good comfort, euen
when I sucked my mothers breasts.
            Through thy meanes I came into this world, and
as soone as I was borne, I was left to thy tuition,
yea, thou wast my God, when I was yet in my mothers
wombe.
            Wherefore go not far awaie frō me, for danger is euen
now at hand, & so none in earth will or can help me.
            Manie buls haue closed me in both strong and fat,
they haue compassed me round about.
            They haue opened their mouth against me, like vnto
a lion that gapeth vpon his praie, and roareth for
hunger.
            I am powred out like water, and all my lims losed
one from another, and my hart is melted within me as
it were waxe.
            All my strength is gone and dried vp like vnto a tilestone,
my tongue cleaueth to the roofe of my mouth, and
at the last I shall be buried in the earth, as the dead be
woont.
            For dogs haue compassed me round about, and the
most wicked haue conspired against me, they wound euen
my verie hart, hands, head, and feet.
            I was so vngentlie intreated of them, that I might
easilie number all my bones, and after all the paine and

torment that they did to me, with greeuous countenance
they stared and looked vpon me.
            They diuided my cloaths among them, and cast lots
for my coate.
            Wherefore Lord I beseech thee, go not far from me,
but for-as-much as thou art my power & my strength,
make haste to helpe me.
            Deliuer my soule from danger of the sword, and keepe
my life destitute of all mortall helpe, from the violence
of the infernall dog.
            Saue my soule from the mouth of the lion, and take
me from the hornes of the vnicornes.
            So will I shew vnto my breethren and sisters the
maiestie of thy name, and when the people are most assembled
togither, I will praise and set foorth thy most
worthie acts and deeds.
            All that worship the Lord, praise him; all the posteritie
of Iacob magnifie him, all ye that be of the stocke
of Israell, with reuerence serue and honour him.
            For he hath not despised and set at naught his poore
hand-maid, bicause of hir miserie, nor he hath not disdainefullie
turned awaie his face from hir, but rather
as soone as his poore hand-maid cried vnto him for
helpe, he heard hir by and by.
            I will praise thee therefore with my songs openlie
in the multitude of people, and I will performe my
vowes in the sight of them that honour thee.
            The poore shall eate and be satisfied, they shall praise
the Lord, that studie to please him, and as manie of
you as continue still such, your harts shall liue.
            All the ends of the world shall consider these things,
and be turned to the Lord, and all heathen nations
shall submit themselues, and doo homage vnto thee
my God.
            For the Lord hath a power roiall, and an imperiall
dominion ouer the heathen.
            
               The most mightie & greatest of all them that dwell
on the earth, haue eaten, and after that they haue tasted
the spirituall gifts of the Lord, they haue submitted
themselues, and made humble suite vnto him.
            Yea, and all the dead, which are buried in the earth,
shall kneele and make reuerence in his honour, because
he hath not disdained to spend his owne life for them.
            They that shall come after vs, shall honour and serue
him. These things shall be written of the Lord, that
our posteritie may knowe and vnderstand them.
            That they also may come and shew these things to
the people that shall be borne of them, that the Lord
hath done these things, which be so maruellous.
         
         
            The praier in long and dangerous trauell of child, to
be vsed either of the woman hir selfe, or by the
women about hir in hir behalfe.
            HAue mercie vpon me, O Lord, haue
mercie vpon mee thy sinfull seruant,
and wofull hand-maid, who
now in my greatest need and distres,
doo seeke thee: behold, with grieuous
groanes & deepe sighes, I crie
vnto thee for mercie. Euen now
while thy heauie hand in chastening
is vpon me, doo I powre out my soule, and make my pitious
mo
                  •
               e, and humble supplication vnto thee my
God, for mitigation of my miserie. For lo, thou seest,
how I pant with paine, and grone through griefe, and
trauell in sore labour before thee, togither with all thy
creatures, sighing in my selfe, and waiting for thy readie
helpe, and my speedie deliuerance foorth of this distres.
Oh Lord, am not I now that wofull wight,
who with all the sorrowes of a trauelling woman, am
oppressed in thy sight? Yea, thou seest in what pitifull
plight I am, drawing nigh towards my trauell, and

hearest me sorrowfull wretch crieng out in my pangs,
as she that is destitute of all mortall helpe. Alas, how
tediouslie doo I trauell of this child: how pinching
pangs doo I iustlie suffer for my sins? I haue a long
time, O Lord, held my peace, suppressing my throwes
so long as my womanlie strength will suffer. I haue
beene quiet and still, and refrained my selfe, I saie, as
much as I am able; but now alas, such and so intolierable
is my greefe, so manie and vehement are my
throwes; yea, so continuall and tedious is my trauell,
that without thee, I can not possiblie anie longer forbeare,
but am forced through bodilie paine, and inward
greefe, to shrich and crie alowd vnto thee, and that with
teares, for speedie comfort and heauenlie helpe, that
she which is in sore labour, may find mitigation of hir
paines, through thy mercie, and being readie to bring
foorth, may be deliuered through thy power. For except
thou, O Lord, make a waie out, that which is conceiued,
can not be borne.
            Oh Lord, this daie is a gloomie daie, a bitter time
and terrible houre, a daie (or night) of anguish and tribulation,
of sorrowe and perturbation, vnto the verie
soule of thine hand-maid: for the babe is come vnto the
place of the birth, and lo, it seemeth that thou for my
sins hast shut vp the dores of my wombe, and caused the
babe to stand still like to be stiffled. What shall I saie,
O my God, what shall I doo? Haue mercie vpon mee,
O Lord, haue mercie vpon me, and helpe me. Make a
way out for my deliuerance, for in me there is no helpe,
no strength, nor power to bring that foorth that I haue
conceiued. It is thou onlie, O Lord my God, which
hast fashioned it in my wombe, that must doo it. Oh
therefore put foorth speedilie thine almightie hand, and
helpe me, and giue me strength and patience to endure
whatsoeuer for my sins it shall please thee to laie vpon
me in this my sore labour.
            
               O good God, thou that hast promised to intreate
those gentlie that beare yoong, haue mercie vpon thine
hand-maid, and vouchsafe to shew that tender care and
fatherlie fauour vnto mee that am full weake & feeble:
helpe me speedilie that stand in great need thereof. For
without thee, I confesse there is no deliuerance nor
saluation in the earth to be expected, neither can anie
worldlie meanes preuaile anie thing at all heere in
this action.
            Oh Lord, thou art he that hast drawne me out of my
mothers womb long since, and hitherto hast had a tender
care ouer me, so that thou hast caused me to looke vp
vnto thee, when I did hang yet on my mothers breast:
so soone as I was borne and came foorth into this
world, I was committed vnto thee, and euen then thou
didst declare thy selfe to be my God and father. Now
then, O Lord, when so great miseries doo approch and
enuiron me, I beseech thee be not thou far from me, neither
forsake me which am destitute of all manner of
succours besides.
            Come holie Ghost, and regard the sorrowes of thy
hand-maiden: for behold, he that is mightie hath humbled
me greatlie. O blessed trinitie, come visit a wretch
that now (as thou seest) is entred into hir secret chamber,
and hath shut the dores about hir to hide hir selfe
for a little while, vntill thine indignation be ouerpassed.
Come, I saie, O glorious and almightie God, come
speedilie, and through thy diuine power worke thou all
our works for vs heere in secret, that we may praise
thee openlie. For thou art my God, and my soule hath
greatlie longed for thee both daie and night. Yea, with
my spirit within me doo I hartilie and earnestlie seeke
thee, earlie and late; oh would God that I might find
thee whome my soule loueth! For in the waie of thy
iudgements, O Lord, doo I wait. I constantlie abide in
mi
                  •
               e aduersities, wherewith thou dooest woorthilie afflict

me, and put my trust onlie in thee, from whome I
expect speedie deliuerance in thy good time. Thy sweet
name, O Iesu, and the remembrance of thee is now the
thing that my languishing soule so much longeth for
                  •
               
O come therefore vnto me at the last, and comfort me;
satisfie my longing to the full, and deliuer thy faithfull
hand-maid, and sorrowfull seruant out of this extreame
sorrowe, and easelesse paines, that I may no
longer crie and saie, Why is my heauines continuall,
and my paines so intollerable? How is it Lord, that
for no intreatie thou wilt not deliuer thine hand-maid
from such indurable greefes? How long shall I suffer
the paines of the birth, and the anguish of the trauell?
Now long Lord shall my bowels thus sound like an
harpe, my bones and sinewes be racked asunder, and
mine inward parts be thus greeuouslie tormented for
my sins. Consider, O Lord, how I am troubled, how
my wombe is disquieted, and my hart wambleth within
me for anguish. Wilt thou haue no compassion on a
wretch? Wilt thou cause me thus to trauell still in
paines intollerable, and greefe vnspeakeable? Wilt
thou not bring foorth that which thou hast formed, that
I may be deliuered of that which I haue conceiued?
            Alas, O Lord, alas my God, yea my deare and onelie
God, wilt thou not heare the lamentable cries, and regard
the inward teares, of a wretch that trauelleth,
& laboureth so sore with child, euen the wofull voice 
                  •
               
mournfull lamentation of thy hand-maid, and daughter
(I saie, though vnworthie,) that thus all the daie
long sigheth, crieth, and stretcheth out hir feeble han
                  ••
               
vnto thee in heauen, calling for thy heauenlie helpe and
succour? Oh Lord, spare me, oh deare God, haue mercie
vpon me, and my babe! Shall I be the graue of my
child? Shall I giue death the fruit of my bodie, for the
sins of my soule, and my first, (second, or third) 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
for the transgressions of my youth? Alas, shall that perish

in the wombe, which is conceiued by thee; or shall
it die in the birth, and not be borne, which thou hast so
mightilie fashioned? Hast thou shut vp the doores of my
wombe in thy displeasure, and couered me with the
shadowe of death, that the birth may not come out?
Wilt thou cause that to die in the birth, I saie, which
is the woonderfull worke of thy almightie hand? God
forbid, oh God forbid. Oh saue me, and my babe, I beseech
thee, and let it not be as a thing borne out of time,
either as an infant which neuer sawe the light; neither
let it perish or be slaine, so soone as it commeth
out of the wombe: but open thou the wombe and
bring it foorth safelie, that I may set it on my knees,
and giue it sucke with my brests. Oh finish the thing
mercifullie, which thou hast begun so gratiouslie in
me, and let me reioice rather that a man-child is borne
into the world; els why am I in this plight? Wo is
me now that euer I sinned; for how shall I be able to
endure all the sorowes and pangs of a trauelling woman,
which are now, or hereafter shall be iustlie laid
vpon me. O Lord, thou seest my hart fainteth, my face
looketh pale, yea sounding with a sighing and gasping
soule, I crie out, and saie, Alas that euer I sinned. Wo
is me that euer I offended so louing a God, so mercifull
a Sauiour, so deare a redeemer, so holie and blessed a
sanctifier. Alas for this daie, which is so dreadfull, that
none may be likened vnto it. And out alas for the time
of this perplexiti
                  •
               , of this sorowe and griefe, which I
now sensiblie feele and endure, both in bodie and mind;
for it is like the daie and time of Rachel. My sorowe
and trouble may be compared to Phinees wiues trouble,
my state and condition seemeth to me and others,
to be not much vnlike vnto theirs, I saie; from the
which neuerthelesse for thy great mercie sake, good
Lord, I beseech thee deliuer me, and saue me and my

                  •
               abe from the graue, as my trust is in thee,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            Another.
            O GOD make speede to saue me, O
Lord make hast to helpe me. Make
no long tarieng, O my God, least I
be like to those that go downe into
the pit. How long, Lord, wilt thou
forget me? How long shall I bee
plucked a sunder with these griping
greefes and pinching pangs, of
deadlie throwes? How long shall I a wretch expect
thy gratious comfort and readie helpe? How long
wilt thou forget thy creatures, O Lord, for euer? How long
wilt thou hide thy face from thy hand-maid thus being
in miserie? Shall my greefe euer continue, & my paines
neuer cease? What is my power, O Lord, that I
should endure such pangs? Or what is my strength,
that I may abide such throwes? Surelie, O God, thou
knowest my strength is not the strength of stones, neither
is my flesh or bones made of brasse, or iron. For in
troth there is in me no helpe, nor in anie mortall creature,
anie reliefe or succour; yea all strength is vtterlie
taken from me, and there is none that I can find to
helpe me: therefore without thy helpe, strength, and
patience, it is impossible for me to continue in this
perplexitie. Oh spare me therefore a litle, that I may
recouer my strength, before I go hence, and be no more
seene. O Lord cast not awaie thy seruant in thy displeasure,
but let it be thy good pleasure to deliuer me. Make
hast, O Lord, to helpe me. Wilt thou absent thy selfe
for euer; or hast thou shut vp thy louing kindnes in displeasure?
Is thy mercie cleane gone, and thy promises
come vtterlie to an end for euermore? Chasten me, O
Lord, and correct me; but giue me not ouer vnto death,
neither shut vp my soule with the wicked in the graue.
Let not mine enimie saie, So, so, I haue deuoured hir.
For I come vnto thee with those good women in the

Gospell, and falling downe at thy feet in trembling and
feare, I humblie beseech thee, saieng, O sweet Iesu, O
sonne of Dauid, O Lambe of God, that ta
                  •
               e 
                  •
               t awaie
the sinnes of the world, haue mercie vpon me. O Lord
haue mercie vpon me that am grieuouslie vexed with
nipping throwes: Lord helpe me, Lord heare me, and
vouchsafe to grant me the thing that I long for, and
destre; that is, that thou my maker, and preseruer, wilt
speedilie come and comfort me, & mitigate these griefs,
now after the time that thou hast plagued and tormented
me with all thy stormes: and in great compassion
haue mercie vpon me, and my seelie infant, that it
be not like the vntimelie fruit, or like the birth that dieth,
and is borne togither. After this night, and houre
of calamitie ouerpassed, let the pleasant morning of
comfort luckilie shine vpon me, that by time I may
heare and feele thy goodnes and mercie in obteining at
thy hand a comfortable issue, and deliuerance: for in
thee onelie is all my trust. Quicken me, O Lord, for thy
name sake, and for thy mercie and righteousnes, bring
my soule and bodie out of this distres, and ease me of
these paines, for I am thy seruant. O come and comfort
me thy weake creature, in these mine afflictions,
with the presence of thy holie spirit, that euen in death
I may find life. For vn
                  •
               er thy protection and defence,
mercie and fauour, doo I wholie repose my selfe. Lord
into thy hands I commend my spirit, preserue and keep
me, relieue, ease, and speed me, O Lord thou God of
truth; for thou hast redeemed me. Thou hast beene my
succour, leaue me not now, nor forsake me, O God of
my saluation. What profit is there in my bloud, when
I go downe to the pit? Shall the dust giue thanks vnto
thee, or shall the graue declare thy truth? O therefore
haue mercie on me good Father, for thy holie name
sake, euen for thy deere sonne Iesu Christs sake, I saie,
haue compassion vpon a wretch that calleth vpon thee

in his name: and vouchsafe now yet at the length, to
shew some good token of thy fauour and mercie vpon
me, and that for my good, and speedie deliuerance, that
they which hate me, may be ashamed, & they that loue
me be comforted, and praise thee togither with me; because
thou, O Lord, hast had mercie on me, and holpen
me, and sent me a speedie deliuerance of this burden,
and made me a ioifull and glad mother of this child to
thy glorie. So shall my soule magnifie thee, O Lord,
and my spirit shall euer reioice in thee, O God my Sauioue:
yea so shall I be ioifull in thy saluation, and I
will not cease to celebrate thy name among the saints,
and sing vnto thee the sugred songs of Sion, to the
perpetuall praise of thy renowmed name, and erernall
glorie of thy most sacred maiestie, world without end,
            Amen, Amen.
         
         
            Praiers and thanks-giuings to be vsed of women in child-bed,
after their trauell and deliuerance, and at their
churching or purifieng (as they call it.)
            O My Lord God, I thanke thee with
all my heart, wit, vnderstanding, and
power, for that thou hast vouchsafed
to deliuer mee out of this my most
dangerous trauell, and hast sent into
this world out of my wofull wombe
this child, a creature of thine owne
fashioning, forming and shape, like
vnto the rest of the children of thy creation; for which
I am not able worthilie inough of mine owne fraile
nature to giue to thee condigne thanks, praise, honour
and glorie, for thy so great benefits shewed vnto me, in
pulling me out from the pit-brinke of death, easing and
releeuing all my wofull sorrowes, labours, pangs, and
most greeuous throwes, bitter anguishes, & vnspeakeable
paines, which I could neuer haue escaped, without

out thy most singular aid, helpe, releefe and succour.
Wherefore I thy most humble hand-maid, with stedfast
and pure hart and hands, doo powre out before thee
my Lord God and onlie sauiour, these my simple praiers
of thanks-giuing (the fruit of my faith, hope, trust,
charitie, and assured confidence which I haue in thee)
assertaining my selfe, that now thou hast preserued me
for a further triall of my vocation and seruice towards
thee in this vale of transitorie life, wherin I may haue
time, by thy diuine permission and sufferance, to direct
all my steps in thy waies, and to honour and glorifie
thee in my soule and bodie with condigne thanks, in reioising
in thy holie name, according to thy most blessed
word, wherein thou hast declared that a woman, as
long as she is in trauell of hir child-bearing, she is
sorrowfull, heauie, and full of anguish and intollerable
paines; but as soone as the child is borne, she learneth
straight-waies to forget all hir paines, not remembring
them anie longer, and to reioice, for that she hath
brought foorth a child into the world. Euen so, O Lord,
fareth it with me thy poore, humble, and obedient seruant,
now reioising, in that it hath pleased thee to
make me a glad mother, in bringing foorth this my
child, whome now I doo present before the face of thy
diuine Maiestie, with an earnest zeale of a godlie spirit,
and most pure affection, praieng and beseeching
thee, O euerlasting God, heere to preserue this child,
according to thy most holie will, that it may enioie
the benefit of all thy heauenlie sacraments, to
loue and serue thee in purenes of life, as a
faithfull member of the christian congregation
wherein thy name by it may
be glorified, honoured, and praised,
world without end,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            Another praier and thanks-giuing to be said of euerie
faithfull woman in child-bed, after the time of hir deliuerance,
vsed of the vertuous Ladie,
Francis Aburgauennie.
            HOW much, and how greatlie am
I bound to laud, praise, and extoll
thee (O my Lord God?) Euen now
was I assailed in my bodie, being a
wretched and sinfull woman, with
sundrie and diuers dolours, and
greeuous gripes of perillous pains,
in such sort, that my agonies abounding,
death himselfe seemed to me to knocke at the
gates of my bodie; the rod of iustice laie so heauie vpon
me, so that I iudged my selfe a creature more meet for
the graue, whose clamour I thought still sounded in
mine eares, than to reape the benefit of life. By my
paines, Lord God, in this my trauell, I am forced to
confesse and acknowledge, that thou art iust in thy
promises, and readie to punish sin and iniquitie. By
this my safe and sure deliuerance, I am bound to acknowledge,
that with thy iustice thou alwaies frequeatest
pitie, commixing thy mercie and iustice togither,
in such sort, that I must needs confesse thee to be
most righteous and mercifull. I can not (O my God)
but protest, that thou hast dealt fauourablie with me;
and those paines which I abode, were laid vpon me
for my sin and wickednes, and yet hast thou not dealt
seuerelie with me, neither giuen sentence against me
in thy furie, which haue iustlie deserued the same. For
hadst thou, O Lord, respected my deserts, I had perished
euerlastinglie, and beeue vtterlie confounded.
            My greeuous groanes throwne foorth vnto thee,
pearsed the verie bowels of thine annointed sonne Iesus
Christ, who beholding mine agonies and bitter

paines, became an intercessor to thee for me, through
whose earnest intreatie, and louing meditation, thou
conuertedst thy displeasure to mercie, and for his sake
alone that died vpon the crosse for mine offences, thou
hast asswaged my torments, and in the fulnes of thy
bountie and louing kindnes, thou hast giuen me a liuing
soule to glad my hart; for the which, I am bound
of right to giue thee hartie and humble thanks, humblie
beseeching thee, being now faint and feeble in bodie,
to strengthen me in soule, mind and hart, that my
tongue may be the organe that may continuallie publish
foorth thine euerlasting praise. Grant this, O gratious
God, for the loue of thine onlie begotten Sonne
Iesus Christ, to whome with thee and the holie Ghost,
be giuen all laud, power and dominion, for euer and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier of a woman in child-bed,
after deliuerance.
            OF dutie, O Lord, I lift vp mine eies
and mind vnto thee, and giue thee
most humble and hartie thanks for
thine infinite goodnes, which hast
not onelie beautified and blessed me
most abundantlie with common,
rare, and woonderfull gifts and benefites:
but euen now also hast
vouchsafed of thy free mercie to send me safe deliuerance,
and to giue me this infant and child as a token
of thy loue towards me: the which so great a treasure
and blessing, though I be not able to deserue; yet most
louing father, for Christs sake I beseech thee, that thou
wilt confirme thy fauour more and more towards me.
And take this infant into thy tuition & defence, whom
I offer present vnto thee with hartie praier, and neuer
suffer him to fall into such vnkindnes wherby he should

loose the force of thy grace: but that he may perceiue
thee continuallie to be his mercifull Father, through
thine holie spirit working in his hart, by whose diuine
power he may so preuaile against Satan, that in the
end obteining the victorie, he may be exalted vnto the
libertie of thy kingdome,
            Amen.
         
         
            Heere you may saie or sing to the glorie of God, and your
owne edifieng, the 103. the 30. and the 116. Psalmes
of Dauid.
            A praier to be vsed of a woman at hir purification,
or Churching.
            O Eternall father of thine onlie sonne
our Lord and sauiour Christ, which
in the common-weale of Israel, ordeinedst
according to thy wisedome,
& adornedst with excellent statutes
necessarie for the state of man-kind,
and signifieng secret and heauenlie
things, didst make diuers lawes
concerning vncleannes, and the keeping of women
with child; and an other for the first borne, and that not
onelie to put vs in mind of order in this life, and thankfulnes
towards thy Maiestie: but also to teach, that
this our giltie and polluted nature, like the fowle menstruous
cloth of a woman, is washed by the blood of thy
sonne, which is the first borne, thy substantiall image,
and the word sounding thy will, whom from the heauens
thou commandest to be harkened vnto. Gouerne
me by thy first and onlie begotten sonne, and giue vnto
me thy most defiled amd polluted hand-maid, thy holie
spirit, that earnestlie I may bewaile mine vnworthines,
vilenes, and vncleannes, aske helpe at thy mercifull
hands, be this day purified both bodie and soule by
the blood of thy Sonne, and be redeemed by him vnto
true pietie, holines, and in
                  •
               egritie which pleaseth thee,

that through him I may be presented vnto thee with a
pure and cleare mind, and for his sake I may be adopted
into thy children, & find fauour in thine eies,
            Amen.
         
         
            Or you may giue thanks and praie as in the booke of common
praier, and saie to your selfe, or with the Minister, as
followeth.
            FOr-as-much as it hath pleased thee, O almightie
God of thy goodnes, to giue me safe
deliuerance, and hast preserued mee in the
great danger of child-birth, I therefore heere
in the Church and congregation, giue hartie thanks
vnto thee, O God, and saie:
            
               Psalme. 121.
               I Haue lifted vp mine eies vnto the hils, from
whence commeth my helpe.
               My helpe commeth euen from the Lord,
which hath made heauen and earth.
               He will not suffer my foote to be mooued, and he that
keepeth me will not sleepe.
               Behold, he that keepeth Israell, shall neither slumber
nor sleepe.
               The Lord himselfe is my keeper, the Lord is my defence
vpon my right hand.
               So that the sun shall not burne me by day, nor the
moone by night.
               The Lord shall preserue me from all euill: yea, it is
euen he that shall keepe my soule.
               The Lord shall preserue my going out, and my comming
in, from this time foorth for euermore.
               Glorie be to the father; &c. As it was in the beginning, &c.
            
            
               Let vs praie.
               
                  Lord haue mercie vpon me,
                  Christ haue mercie vpon me,
                  Lord haue mercie vpon me,
               
               Our father which art in heauen, &c.
               
               
                  
                     O Lord saue me thy sinfull seruant,
                  which put my trust in thee:
                  Be thou vnto me a strong tower,
                  from the face of mine enimie.
                  Lord heare my praier,
                  and let my crie come vnto thee.
               
            
         
         
            Let vs praie.
            O Almightie God, which hast deliuered
me thy most vnwoorthie handmaid
and sinfull seruant, from the
great paine & perill of child-birth.
I hartilie thanke thee, and humblie
praise thy holie name for euer and
euer. Grant me now also I beseech
thee, most mercifull father, that I
through thy helpe may both faithfullie liue and walke
in my vocation, according to thy will in this life present,
and also may be partaker of euerlasting glorie in
the life to come, through Iesus Christ our Lord,
            Amen.
         
         
            Praiers to be said for women with child, before, or in
trauell, by the Mid-wife, husband, or anie other
man, or woman.
            THou, O Lord, art woonderfull in all
thy works, and whatsoeuer thy good
pleasure is, that dooest thou easilie
bring to passe; neither is there anie
thing impossible with thee, that
thou wilt haue done. And albeit this
thine almightie power sheweth it
selfe abundantly in all thy works;
yet in the conceiuing, forming, and bringing foorth of
man, it shineth most euidentlie. At the beginning, O
heauenlie Father, when thou hadst made man and woman,
thou commandedst them to increase, multiplie,

and replenish the earth; if through the subtill entisements
of Satan they had not transgressed thy commandements
by eating of the forbidden fruit, the woman,
whom thou hadst appointed the organe, instrument,
and vessell, to conceiue, nourish, and bring foorth
man, through thy woonderfull workmanship, had without
anie labour, paine, or trauell, brought foorth hir
fruit. But that which thy goodnes made easie, sinne
and disobedience hath made hard, painfull, dangerous,
and (if thy helpe were not) impossible to be brought to
passe; so that now all women bring foorth their children
in great sorrowes, paines, and troubles. Notwithstanding,
thou shewest thy selfe vnto thy creatures a father
of mercie, and God of all consolation. For that which
through their owne imperfection and feeblenes, they
are not able of themselues to bring to passe, thou thorough
thine vnspeakable power makest easie in them,
and bringest vnto a fortunate end.
            Wee therefore being fullie persuaded of thy bent
and readie goodnes, of thy present helpe, of thy sweete
comfort in all miseries and necessities: knowing also
by the testimonies of thy holy word, how great and intollerable
the pains of women are that trauell of child,
if through thy tender mercies they be not mitigated
and eased, most humblie praie thee for Iesu Christs
sake thy sonne and our Lord, to assist, and helpe (as all
other women else-where in like case) so especiallie this
thy seruant. S. B. here now in trauell & labour; that by
thine almighty power both they & she may safely bring
foorth that by thy goodnes they or she hath conceiued,
and that thy louing kindnes may make that easie and
tollerable, which sinne hath made hard and painfull.
            Ease, O Lord, the paines which thou most righteouslie
hast put vpon hir, and all women, for the sinne
and disobedience of our grand-moother Eue, in whome
all we haue sinned; and giue both vnto thy seruant

here present, and vnto all such as haue conceiued and
be with child, strength to bring foorth that which thou
woonderfullie hast wrought in hir, and them. Be present
now with hir, & them, in their trouble; according
to thy mercifull promise helpe hir, and them, and deliuer
them. Let thy power be shewed no lesse in the safe
bringing foorth, than in the woonderfull framing or fashioning
of the child. Make perfect that which thou
hast so gratiouslie begun in hir, & them, so that it may
come vnto good succes. Make hir, and them, glad and
ioifull mothers, that she, and they, through thy goodnes
being safelie deliuered and restored to their old health,
and strengths, may liue and praise thy blessed name
for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier for a woman with child.
            IN the beginning of the world, O father
of heauen, after thou hadst formed
man of the slime of the earth,
and yet prince ouer all creatures, it
pleased thee of thy goodnes to create
a woman of his side, aswell for his
solace, as for the continuance of his
seed: it was thy word vnto them,
Increase & multiply. This increase was easie, but mother
Eue hath made it hard, by passing the bounds of
thy will, to all hir posteritie; so that the woman conceiueth
and bringeth foorth in great paine, and painefull
trauell, the fruit of hir wombe. In so great paine, O
Lord, in such extreme pangs, that vnlesse thou quench
the flame of hir sorrowes with the water of comfort, it
it impossible for hir to beare that into this vale of miserie,
which thou of thy goodnes hast framed, and she
conceiued, Wherefore thou God of woonders, and father
almightie of heauen, as thou hast by the slaughter
of thine onelie Lambe, taken awaie the sinnes of

the wicked world, and condemned sinne in the flesh: so
take awaie the pangs of child-birth, the fruit of sinne,
from all womankind, especiallie from this woman,
that bearing ioifullie that which she hath conceiued
fruitfullie, and thou hast fashioned gratiouslie, she may
glorifie thee most carefullie, and praise thee most thankfullie,
the onelie staie of hir estate both now and euer.
            Amen.
         
         
            Another.
            O Good true harted Lord Iesu Christ,
like as thou didst comfort and deliuer
thy disciples, and all elect and
chosen men and women in all their
need, martyrdome, and paines,
which they suffered of the tyrants
wrongfullie, and didst also cure and
heale them of their wounds, paines
and smart, through hope of the crowne of euerlasting
life: euen so vouchsafe thou (which art the helpe of all
them that call on thee in trouble and need) to deliuer
this poore weake vessell, which is heere bound with a
fruit after thine owne similitude and likenes, notwithstanding
that she hath deserued in transgressing of thy
holie commandements, to bring foorth hir children in
paines and wo, that she may be made a glad and ioifull
mother through the new creature with good speed, that
the child may haue name and Christendome, and that
the mother may be purified to thy honour, and to hir
health,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier for a Queene being with a child.
            O Almightie father, in whose fauour the
virgin Marie was highlie blessed among
women, by the birth of Christ thine onlie
Sonne our Sauiour, who also by thine
omnipotent power, didst safelie deliuer
both hir, and hir cousin Elizabeth, and also

so mightilie deliueredst the Prophet Ionas out of the
whales bellie, amids the foming sea. Defend, O Lord
we beseech thee likewise thy seruant R. our Queene
with child conceiued, and so visit hir in and with thy
godlie gift of health, that not onlie the child thy creature
within hir conceiued may ioifullie come from hir
into this world, and receiue the blessed sacrament of
baptisme, and enioie therewith dailie increase of all
princelie and gratious gifts, both of bodie and soule;
but that also she the mother through thy speciall grace
and mercie, may in the time of hir trauell auoid all excessiue
dolorous paine, and abide perfect and sure from
all perill and danger of death, with long and prosperous
life, through Iesus Christ our Lord,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier for a Queene, Noble woman, or
Ladie with child.
            O Most righteous Lord God, which
for the offence of the first woman,
hast threatned vnto all women high
and lowe, a common, sharpe, and ineuitable
malediction, and hast enioined
them, that they should conceiue
in sin, and being conceiued, should be
subiect to manie & greeuous throws
and torments, and finallie, be deliuered with the danger
and ieoperdie of their life, we beseech thee, for thine
exceeding great goodnes, and bountifull mercie, to asswage
and mitigate the straightnes of that lawe, and
to embrace into the bosome of thy fauour and mercie,
our most gratious souereigne Ladie Queene R, or our
most deere sister A. P. C of P. being now at the point
of hir deliuerance; so helpe hir now, O Lord, that without
danger of hir life, she may ouercome the sorrowe
and paine, and in due season bring forth a child, in bodie
beautifull and comelie, in pregnant wit, notable and

excellent, in mind noble and valiant, so that afterward
she forgetting the trauell, may with ioie laud & praise
the bountifulnes of thy mercie, and togither with vs
praise and blesse both thee and thy holie name world
without end. This, O Lord, we desire thee, we beseech
thee, and most hartilie craue of thee. Heare vs, O Lord,
and grant vs our petitions,
            Amen.
         
         
            A generall forme of praier for all women with
child, and in child-bed.
            O Most wise God, eternall Father of
thy beloued Sonne our Lord and
sauiour Christ, Creator and keeper
of all thy creatures, which through
thine excellent wisedome and counsell,
hast enioined to woman-kind,
that in paine & sorrowe they should
bring foorth children, whereby not
onlie this world is replenished; but a Church which
doth celebrate thy name for euer, is gathered vnto
thee. And for-as-much as the paine of a woman in trauell
is most extreame, which makes the Prophets manie
times to repeate the same, in exaggerating the
afflictions of punishments which the holie spirit doth
threaten vnto the impenitent: we beseech thee in the
name of Christ thy Sonne, be mercifull vnto all women,
either with child, or in child-bed; giue them grace
to call into mind the decree and pleasure of thine heauenlie
will. Let them neuer striue against thee through
impatience, but in true faith, and inuocation of thy
name, suffer thy crosse quietlie, knowing that by the
seed of the woman, which hath broken the head of the
old serpent, they are reconciled vnto thee. In this seed
which is Christ, the cursse is cleane taken awaie, and
blessing restored vnto vs, that we may receiue the promise
of the spirit, and the inheritance of eternall life.
            
               O almightie God, conuert now the sorrowes of women
in trauell into gladnes, that they remember not
their paines with mourning, for ioie that a man-child
is borne into the world. Comfort them in the midst of
their anguish, and helpe as well the mother as the
babe, speciallie in the danger of deliuerance. For if thou
blessed God be not present, they perish vndoubtedlie,
all the world can not helpe them in that extremitie. O
eternall God, which of the seed of man framest the liuing
infant in the mothers wombe, and nourishest the
same congealed in bloud, that the flesh within the time
of ten moneths may take shape, drawing nourishment
from the mother; we are all the woorkmanship of thine
hands: we giue thee thanks, Lord, for fearefullie and
wonderfullie are we made, maruellous are thy works,
and that our soules knowe right well. Our bones are
not hid from thee, though we were secretlie made, neither
our substance in the inner parts of our mothers
wombe. Thine eies did see our substance being vnperfect,
and in thy booke were all our members written.
Thy hands haue made vs, and fashioned vs altogither.
With skin and bones hast thou couered vs, and
ioined vs togither with bones and sinews. Thou hast
giuen vs life and grace, and thy visitation hath preserued
our spirits. Grant we beseech thee to all infants
yet vnborne, that knit togither with their due veines
and members, they may come foorth into this world
sound and perfect without fault or deformitie: and
grant that they being borne vpon their mothers sides,
may be ioifull vpon their mothers knees, and sucke the
milke of comfort out of the breasts of hir loue, to the
reioising of the mother. Staie the furiousnes of wicked
spirits, that they shewe not their tyrannie vpon
yoong infants. Keepe all women with child, that no
waie being terrified, frighted, or troubled extreemelie,
they be vntimelie deliuered.
            
               Giue grace also to the babes newlie borne, that togither
with their outward baptisme, they may be receiued
into the congregation of the faithfull with
wholesome water, through the renewing and regeneration
of the holie spirit, which thou wilt plentiouslie
powre vpon them through Iesus Christ our Sauiour,
that being iustified by grace, they may be made heires
according to the hope of eternall life, and become new
creatures through him. Strengthen all women deliuered,
and lieng in child-bed, that beeing restored to
their woonted health, they may glorifie thee their helper
in the time of need, and learne afterward to repose
their whole confidence in thee, which art nigh vnto all
that call vpon thee, to all (we saie) calling vpon thee in
truth. And if at anie time through thine vnsearchable
iudgement an vntimelie birth, or vnluckie deliuerance
happen; so comfort, O mercifull father, the mournefull
and sad parents, that they faint not with sorrowe, but
beleeue rather that the woful chance is a triall of their
faith, hope and patience. For thou art a mercifull and
gratious God, forgiuing our sins. Though thou art
angrie with our wickednes, yet in thy displeasure thou
remembrest thy mercie, that the troubled may take
comfort, and the afflicted find grace. For this doo all thy
seruants persuade themselues, that if they be tried,
they shall be crowned, if they be troubled, they shall be
deliuered, and if they be chastened, they shall be saued,
for thou hast no plesure in our damnation, which bringest
faire wether after stormes, & gladnes after teares.
Thy name, O God, be praised for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            The same praier more breefe for women with
child generallie.
            O Heauenlie father, and eternall God, which
through thine vnspeakable wisedome hast
enioined woman-kind, that in paine and sorrowe
they should bring foorth children, and replenish

the earth: O Lord, we beseech thee giue them
grace to call into mind this thy decree, and pleasure,
and thereby patientlie to beare the greefe and groanes
incident vnto them. Conuert Lord their sorrowes into
gladnes, through a luckie deliuerance, and let them remember
their paines no more, for ioie that a man is
borne into the world. Comfort them in the midst of
their anguish, and helpe as well the mother as the
babe, especiallie in the danger of deliuerance. For without
thine assistance they perish vndoubtedlie, all the
world cannot helpe them. Grant to all yet vnborne,
that knit togither with their due veines and members,
they may come into this world sound and perfect,
without all deformitie. Staie the furiousnes of wicked
spirits, that they shew not their malice and tyrannie
vpon yoong infants. Blesse all with child, that no waie
being terrified, or troubled extreamelie, they bee vntimelie
deliuered. Giue grace to all babes newlie
borne, that togither with their outward baptisme,
they may be receiued into the congregation of the
faithfull, and be made new creatures, filled with the
holie Ghost, euen from their mothers womb. Strengthen
all women deliuered, with thy vertue and power,
whereby they may receiue their woonted health, and
glorifie thee their helper in the time of need, learning
afterward to repose their whole confidence in thee,
which art nigh vnto all that call vpon thee, euen to all
that call vpon thee in truth. And if at any time through
thy sufferance and vnsearchable pleasure, an vntimelie
birth, or (if without offence we may saie) an vnluckie
deliuerance doth happen; comfort, O mercifull God
the pensiue parents, that they despaire not through
sorrowe, but thinke rather that the wofull chance is a
triall of their faith, hope, and patience; and so confesse
thee to be alwaies as good and gratious God, forgiuing
sins, and remembring mercie in thy great displeasure,

that the troubled may take comfort, and the afflicted
find grace. For thus doo al thy seruants persuade them
selues, that if they be tried, they shall be crowned if
they be troubled, they shall be deliuered if they be chastised,
they shall be saued: through our Lord Iesus
Christ,
            Amen.
         
         
            A praier to be said of euerie Christian midwife for hirselfe,
before she execute hir office.
            O Heauenlie Father, which at the beginning
didst appoint woman to bee
the organe, instrument, and vessell to
receiue, nourish, & bring foorth man
through thy woonderfull workmanship
without anie labour, paine, or
helpe of flesh and blood: but afterward
through the sinne and disobedience
of our grandmother Eue, hast made that which
before was easie, now to become hard and painefull,
yea dangerous and impossible (if thy helpe were not)
for them to be brought to passe, and now as a meane
hast ordeined man to be a god to man, and made woman
through thine vnspeakable power working togither
with him, to helpe & ease woman, which through
their owne imperfection and feeblenes are not able in
this case and time of their sore labour, to helpe themselues.
For as much as it hath pleased thee among manie
other more worthie, to call me thy most vnworthie
hand-maid to the office of a midwife among the daughters
of Israel, and made me an instrument and means
vnder thee to comfort them in their sorrowes, cherish
them in their child-beds, ease them in their pains, and
to further them in their deliuerance, with all possible
paines and conuenient speede that I may, and can, in
thee and for thee. I most hartilie thanke thee, and praise
thy holie name and maiestie; beseeching thee of grace

and vertue to walke worthie of this my calling, in all
holie obedience to thee, and thy word; to thy glorie, others
profit, and mine owne saluation in Christ.
            And because I knowe and feele mine owne weaknes,
and must needs confesse how that of my selfe I am far
vnable to discharge mine office, with such dutie as apperteineth,
without the assistance and helpe of thine
almightie power and holie spirit, to strengthen me
therein. For it lieth not in the power of flesh and bloud,
no nor in all the helpe of the world, to go through with
so great a worke and weightie enterprise as this is:
but it onlie and alone belongeth vnto thee our creator,
and maker of heauen and earth. Therefore blesse thou
so my weake labours, and further my paines, that the
fruit thereof may redound to the praise of thy name,
& profit of thy people, and their posteritie. Take from
me all ignorance, negligence, slouthfulnes, slacknes,
and disdaine; yea from all vnmercifulnes, rough handling,
hardnes of hart, contempt of others, falshood,
crueltie, and bloudgiltines, good Lord deliuer me: and
in steed thereof, make me wise-harted, skilfull, louing,
gentle, tender, pitifull, cherefull, comfortable, helpfull,
painefull, watchfull, strong, able, readie, willing, carefull,
diligent, & faithfull, euen for thy sake onelie, without
respect of filthie lucre, to pleasure all women at all
times in my calling, to the full discharge of my conscience
and dutie, both before thee and the world.
            And, O Lord, to the end there may be found no fault
in my ministerie, nor anse woman or child said to be
hurt or perish in their trauell, by my negligence or ignorance;
and that I may auoid all slander and reproch,
I beseech thee, O almightie God, worke thou all my
works for me, and that which thou beginnest by me, finish
it I praie thee also by me, to the glorie of thy name,
and giue me euer good lucke, and prosperous successe,
through the power of thy spirit, in all my womanlie and

lawfull enterprises, enioined of thee as a necessarie businesse
to be done, that they may come to a fortunate
and desired end in thee, as I hartilie wish and praie. Finalie
blesse me, O God, with all thy good gifts of grace,
vertue, skill, and cunning, as thou didst thy holie seruants
Shiphra, and Puah, the two graue matrons,
godlie women. and famous midwiues of the Hebrue
women in Aegypt; that I fearing thee more than men,
as they did, and being faithfull to my patients, as they
were, may not onelie moue thee to haue mercie on me,
and to prosper me in making my house to increase, as
thou didst them; but also by mine obedience and vpright
dealing in mine office, thy people may be multiplied,
and the families of thy true Israelites increased,
to the praise of thy glorie, the exaltation of thy
power, & renowme of thy name, through Iesus Christ
our Lord,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier to be said of the midwife, when she
goeth about to doo hir office.
            OH my celestiall Father, be now mercifull
vnto me thy repentant handmaid,
and sinfull seruant, fled from
mine enimies vnto thy helpe and
succour. Impute not vnto me my
sinnes for Christs sake, for I haue
heard thy fatherlie voice, and yet it
soundeth dailie in mine eares out
of heauen, promising mee and affirming constantlie
thy selfe to be appeased, pleased, and at one with
me, for thy Sonne my sweet Sauiour Iesus sake,
whom thou commandest me to heare, and beleeue, who
I am sure is made of thee my righteousnes, my satisfaction,
my reconciliation, my peace-making, my mediatour
and intercessour with his praiers, my fulfilling of
the lawe, my deliuerer, and the whole wholie accomplisher

of all my iust desires, and my sauiour Christ Iesus
God and man. In whose blessed and holie name at
this present I attempt and take in hand to doo mine office,
according to my vocation, for thy glorie, and this
womans profit, ease, comfort, and helpe, in thee: desiring
thy gratious goodnes, most mercifull Lord and
Father, for thy dearly beloued sonne sake Iesus Christ,
who without all helpe of man was conceiued and begotten
of thee his father before all worlds; and who also
without anie helpe of woman, was borne & brought
foorth into this world for our sakes, of his blessed mother
Marie the virgin. For his sake, I saie, vouchsafe
to prosper it, further it, and to giue it happie increase,
whatsoeuer I take now in hand iustlie and fortunatelie
to finish the same. O holie Father, worke thou all
our works for vs here in secret, that we may praise thy
name openlie before all people! O prosper thou the
works of our hands vpon vs! Prosper thou our handie
worke, and blesse all things which I take in hand with
thy blessed increase, and let me doo nothing in this my
action hurtfull either to the mother or hir babe; neither
let me seeke mine owne will, but euer to praie that
thy will be fulfilled here now in earth of vs, as it is in
heauen of thine angels. And lead vs not into temptation,
but deliuer vs from all euils present, and to come:
            Amen, Amen.
         
         
            In doing hir office, let the midwife praie thus
with hir selfe, and saie.
            I In the name of God, Amen, Preuent vs, O
Lord, in this action, and all our doings, with
thy most gratious fauour, and further our
labours with thy continuall helpe: that in
this and all our works begun, continued, and ended by
thee, and in thee, we may glorifie thy holie name, and finallie
by thy mercie obteine euerlasting life, through
Iesus Christ our Lord,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            Or else thus.
            THE glorious maiestie of the Lord our God
be vpon vs. Prosper and direct thou, O God,
the worke of our hands vpon vs. O prosper
thou our handi-worke, and this womans labour,
that we may bring foorth more fruite in our age,
to flourish with praises in the Church of Saincts to
glorifie thee,
            Amen.
         
         
            If the woman haue verie sore labour, and be long in trauelling,
and in danger of death, then let the mid-wife,
and all the women assistant about hir, kneele downe,
and praie one after another, hartilie and

                  •
               arnestlie, as followeth.
            
               Midwife.
               O Lord remember not our offences, nor the iniquities
of our fore-fathers and mothers, neither
take thou vengeance on our sins, but
spare vs, good Lord, O spare thy people whom
thou hast redeemed with thy most pretious bloud, and
be not angrie with vs for euer.
            
            
               Women.
               Correct vs, O Lord, and yet in thy iudgement, not in
thy furie, least we should be consumed, and brought to
nothing.
            
            
               Midwife.
               Lord haue mercie vpon vs.
            
            
               Women.
               Christ haue mercie vpon vs.
            
            
               Midwife.
               Lord haue mercie vpon vs.
            
            
               Altogither.
               Our Father which art in heauen, halowed be thy
name, thy kingdome come, thy will be done, &c.
            
            
               
               Midwife.
               And leade vs not into temptation,
            
            
               Women.
               But deliuer vs from euill, Amen.
            
            
               Mid.
               O Lord saue this woman thy seruant and
hand-maid.
            
            
               Wo.
               Which putteth hir onlie trust in thee.
            
            
               Mid.
               O Lord send hir present helpe from thy holie
place.
            
            
               Wo.
               And euermore mightilie defend hir.
            
            
               Mid.
               Let the enimie haue none aduantage of hir.
            
            
               Wo.
               Nor the wicked approch to hurt hir.
            
            
               Mid.
               Be thou now vnto hir, O Lord, a strong
tower.
            
            
               Wo.
               From the face of all hir enimies visible and
inuisible.
            
            
               Mid.
               Lord heare our praiers.
            
            
               Wo.
               And let our crie come vnto thee,
            
            Amen.
         
         
            Midwife.
Let vs praie.
            O Most mightie God, our heauenlie
Father, we beseech thee looke downe
mercifullie from heauen; behold visit,
releeue, and ease this wofull woman
thy seelie seruant, which is greeued
now with sore labour, tedious
trauell, and bitter paines. Looke vpon
hir with the eies of thy mercie,
and extend thine accustomed goodnes to hir now in
this hir perplexitie. And for-as-much as hir pangs and
paines seeme vnto vs most extreame, and hir trauell
verie dangerous, both to hir selfe and hir babe, giue hir
grace we beseech thee patientlie to endure this thy
crosse of griefe and groanes incident therevnto for hir
sins, and be thou present with hir, O blessed God, to

helpe both hir and hir babe in this hir sore labour. O
comfort and ease hir in the midst of this hir anguish
and greefe: for without thine assistance, vndoubtedlie
she must needs perish, for vaine is the helpe of man; we,
nor all the world can not helpe hir.
            O come quicklie therefore we beseech thee good Lord,
and helpe thou hir in this hir great need and extremitie:
worke thou all our works for vs to thy glorie, and
hir comfort. Defend hir from this imminent danger
of deliuerance. Keepe hir in perpetuall peace, hope, patience
and safetie. Strengthen hir faith and womanlie
weakenes, and visit hir, O Lord, according to the time
of life, as thou didst Sara, Rebecca, Thamar, Hanna
and Elizabeth thy holie hand-maids.
            Blesse hir, and preserue hir we beseech thee, O Lord,
that no waie being terrified, frighted, or troubled extreamelie,
she neither murmur against thy works, and
saie with Rebecca, Seeing my greefs are so great, why
am I thus with child? Neither faint through sorrowe,
nor be vntimelie or vnluckilie deliuered: but grant that
in true faith, and continuall inuocation of thy holie
name, she may be saued, and now suffer thee quietlie to
worke thy good will and pleasure, according to thy diuine
decree and secret iudgements vpon hir, either for
hir sins, or for thy glorie, and our example, vntill according
to thy promise in thy good time, she do receiue comfort
for hir sorrowe, mirth for hir mourning, gladnes
for hir sadnes, ioie for hir woe, euen by mitigation of
these hir miseries, ease of hir anguishes, release of hir
labours, dispatch of hir pangs, deliuerance of hir burthen,
and speedie birth of hir babe borne into the world,
through the might of thy mercie, and power of thy
compassion, to the glorie and high exaltation of thy
name, as both she and we most hartilie wish, long for,
e
                  •
               pect and desire, yea, and with teares and sighs doo
vnfeignedlie cra
                  •
               e of thee, and that through the onlie

mysterie of Christ his holie incarnation, blessed birth,
and painfull passion, So be it.
            
         
         
            For a woman that trauelleth before hir time, and is in
great perill, praie as followeth.
            ALmightie God, which in thy secret
iudgements diddest once strike the
wife of Phinees, being great with
child, with such a sudden fright and
feare, when she heard that thy arke
was taken by the enimie, and both
hir husband and hir father slaine by
thee with sudden death; that thou
causedst hir presentlie through grieuous pangs and
bitter paines that came vpon hir in that instant, to
bow hir selfe, and trauell before hir time, wherein with
great sorrowe she died. We beseech thee in the name of
thy deere sonne our sauiour Iesus Christ, be mercifull
vnto this wofull woman thy hand-maid and humble
seruant, whom now in thine vnsearchable iudgments
thou hast visited also, as it seemeth, with the wofull
chance of vntimelie trauell, to the triall of hir faith,
hope, and patience in thee. And let not this time of hir
sorrowe, we praie thee, be vnto hir as the time and
houre of Rachel, and Phinees wiues trouble was vnto
them: but by thy mightie power and mercie deliuer
hir there-from, if it be thy will, as hir onelie trust is in
thee. And to this purpose, staie, we beseech thee, the furiousnes
of the wicked spirits, that they shew not at
this time, their tyrannie and malice, either vpon hir or
hir seelie babe; and so blesse, preserue, and keepe both
hir, and it, that she may be no waie terrified, frighted,
vexed, or troubled, either in bodie to faint, or in mind to
murmur and despaire, through the extremitie of intollerable
paines; nor at this time for anie anguish be
compelled to be deliuered before hir time, to hir discomfort.

But grant that she may yet tarrie quietlie
and patientlie, vntill the time be fulfilled, which thou
in the course of nature full wiselie hast set: at which
time of life, and not before, we beseech thee, O Lord,
then certinlie to come againe vnto hir, that she maie
dulie and safelie be deliuered, and hir child come to life,
to hir comfort, and thy glorie.
            Neuerthelesse, if it shall seeme good vnto thee for all
this, now in thy secret iudgements, either for hir sins,
or for thy glorie, and our terrour by example, to hasten
(through laborous pangs, & pinching throwes) an vntimelie
birth vpon hir, or if it shall please thee to cause
(without offence be it spoken) an vnluckie or vnnaturall
deliuerance to happen, as now vnto hir at this
time, as iustlie we confesse thou maist, if thou respect
hir and our sinnes committed against thy maiestie, and
not rather thy mercie promised to all that faithfullie
call vpon thee, as we here now doo) then not our wils,
but thy will, which is euer in all things best, be now &
euer fulfilled & done, both in hir, & hir babe, and in vs, to
the glorie of thy holie name. Onelie we craue of thee,
and that in the bowels, and for the tender mercie of
our Sauiour Iesus Christ, that thou wilt yet grant
hir abundance of thy grace, both patientlie to abide
thy fatherlie correction, & faithfullie to beleeue thine
infallible promises; so that for no paine, or extremitie
of torment or anguish, either in bodie or mind, she may
not be discouraged, discomforted, shrinke, faint, or fall
from hir faith or hope in thee: but thanking thee for all
things that may happen vnto hir, let hir feele yet in
hir bodie such ease, and mitigation of hir paines, and in
hir soule and conscience such comfort and consolation
from thee, that she may assure hir selfe of thy fauour
and mercie in Christ, to haue forgiuenes of all hir sins,
togither with the release of all hir miseries, and so after
triall, this thy troubled hand-maid may take comfort,

hoping to be crowned; and after trouble this thy
afflicted seruant may find deliuerance, grace, health,
and euerlasting saluation: through Iesus Christ our
Lord and onelie Sauiour,
            Amen.
         
         
            If the woman trauelling be at the point of death,
praie as followeth.
            O Most mercifull God, which according
to the multitude of thy mercies
doest so put away the sinnes of those
which truelie repent, that thou remembrest
them no more: open thine
eies of mercie vpon this thy hand-maid,
now in great danger of death,
who most earnestlie calleth vpon
thee, desiring pardon and forgiuenesse of all hir sinnes
and offences committed against thee, and thy people.
Renew in hir therefore, O most tender harted father,
whatsoeuer hath beene decaied by the fraud and malice
of satan, or neglected by hir owne carnall will and
frailenes. Preserue and continue this weake and distressed
member, in the vnitie & bosome of thy Church,
consider hir broken and contrite hart, accept hir lamentable
teares, mitigate hir intollerable throwes
and pangs, asswage hir paines & greefes, and release
hir vtterlie of all hir miserie and wo, as shall be seene
to thy heauenlie wisedome most expedient for hir, and
conuenient for thy Church. And forasmuch as she still
calleth vpon thy holie name, and putteth hir full trust
to be saued onlie in thy mercie, impute not vnto hir
the manifold sinnes of hir former life passed, but
pardon them, and take hir vnto thy high
fauour: through the bloudie merits
and deere death of thine onelie
begotten sonne Iesus Christ
our sauiour,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            Or praie thus.
            O Pitifull physician, and healer both
of soule & bodie, Christ Iesu, vouchsafe
to cast thine eies vpon this thy
poore sinnefull creature, our deere
sister M. B. who is here thy captiue,
bound with the burden of childbirth,
greefe, & vnspeakable paines
in the chaine of sinne and death, for
our transgression in our grandmother Eue, turning
this hir weaknes and greefe, to thy glorie, & hir health
and safe deliuerance. And vouchsafe, good Lord, to send
hir patient sufferance, that she may stedfastlie continue
to the end in these extremities, that she may with a
true and perfect faith in thee, fight now a good fight,
and stand manfullie against all the temptations of the
diuell hir mortall enimie, when she may no longer continue.
O Sauiour of the world, saue hir, which by thy
crosse and precious bloud hast redeemed hir,
            Amen.
         
         
            Adde this blessing.
            THE almightie Lord, which is a most strong
tower to all them that put their trust in him,
to whom all things both in heauen, & earth,
and vnder the earth doo bow, and obey; blesse
preserue and keepe this our sister, and be now and
euermore hir buckler and defence, against all hir enimies,
and make hir to knowe and feele in hir soule and
conscience, that there is none other name giuen vnto
man, in whom, and through whom, she may receiue
ease, comfort, health, deliuerance, and saluation,
but onelie in the most holie, blessed, and venerable
name of our Lord Iesus
Christ,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            A praier of instruction to be vsed of the women in health,
attendant about the sicke and languishing woman in
sore trauell, for themselues.
            O Most mercifull God, and most louing
Father, we beseech thee haue
mercie vpon vs, and aid vs with thy
grace & holie spirit, that we (which
be yet in good health and safetie, and
looke according to the condition of
our nature, for the like hour of ad
               
                  •
               ersitie,
but with more mercie and
mitigation of our paines, than as it seemeth our sister
here endureth, if it be thy will) may learne to feare and
dread thee, may loue and embrace thy holie word, and
that we may set thee before vs as a scope and marke
wherevnto we may direct all our dooings, and that we
boing alwaies mindfull of this thy crosse and heauie
iudgement laid vpon all women in the loines of our
grandmother Eue, for hir and our transgression, and euermore
remembring the vnspeakable pangs, intollerable
paines, and most bitter agonie of death, may so
prepare our harts, and arme our selues, that we may
order all our deeds from hence-foorth in all holie and
chast obedience, both towards thee, and our husbands.
or heads, as well becommeth right christian women,
and modest matrones, to thy glorie; and as doo and
and haue done all godlie women, which feare thee in
all ages, that in the end we obteine to be fellowheires
with them of euerlasting life, in the kingdome
of heauen, through the merits of our
deere Lord and sweetest Sauiour,
Iesus Christ the righteous,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            Another godlie and effectuall praier to be hartilie said of
the women assistant, if the woman in sore trauell
or child-bed lie in the pangs of death, and
be a passing this life.
            O Lord God almightie, the Father,
the Sonne, and the holie Ghost,
three persons and one onlie God,
the Lord of life, and the destroier of
death, with whom to be is life, and
from whom to be is death, who as
a louing father, mercifull redeemer,
and freendlie caller to repentance,
hast now visited with the scourge of hard, painefull,
and greeuous trauell (or with vntimelie birth,vnfortunate
deliuerance) and sore sicknes, thy most sinfull
daughter, yea thy spotted creature, defiled seruant, and
greeuous sinner S. B. to cause hir to knowe hir selfe;
and to confesse hir wickednes, and so to come to thee at
this thy calling, to knowe thee, and onelie to crie and
call vpon thee for comfort. Now thou, O Lord, whose
propertie is euer to haue mercie, and freelie to forgiue
those that faithfullie come vnto thee, we thine humble
hand-maids, with heauie harts, most humblie beseech
thee, looke downe from heauen with thine accustomed
eies of compassion vpon hir, cast behind thy backe hir
innumerable and greeuous sins, throwe them all (both
old and new) from hir, as far as is the East from the
West, yea scrape the memorie of them out of thy sight,
quite forget them, and freelie forgiue them hir as hir
onlie trust is in thee. O Lord be thou now vnto hir at
hir most time of need, a tower of strength, a place of refuge,
and a defensible God, to keepe, strengthen, and defend
hir from the danger of the diuell, now readiest to
disquiet hir, and destroie hir; against desperation, now
busiest to greeue hir; against death, now likest to

strike hir, and against hell now gaping to deuoure hir.
            Oh heauenlie father, aid thou now hir. Helpe hir,
and establish hir in the firme faith of thy truth. Comfort
hir now, O sweet Christ; and continue hir in the
knowledge of thee hir onlie sauiour, which art now in
hir extreamenes, and pangs of death, readie to shew
thy selfe vnto hir, as hir sauiour, crucified on the crosse
to comfort hir. Therefore now saue thou hir from sin,
deliuer thou hir now from eternall death, hale hir from
hell, embrace hir, hide hir in the holes of thy bloudie
wounds, as thy deere doue, and beare hir manifold sins
on thy backe. And thou, O holie spirit, strengthen thou
now hir weake, fainting, and sounding spirit against
sathan, that standeth now nigh hir to seduce hir.
Saie thou now to sathan, Auoid sathan, and command
thy holie angels and blessed spirits now to aid
and assist hir. Let thy comfort cleaue fast vnto hir, thy
mercie keepe hir, thy grace guide hir, thy paines ease
hir, thy crosse releeue hir, and thy death reuiue hir.
            Oh almightie God, the giuer of all health, and if it
be thy good will to lengthen hir daies in this life, to
spare hir for a season, to mitigate hir pangs, to ease hir
of hir paines, to releeue hir of all these wofull sorowes,
and most greeuous throwes, to deliuer hir of this most
dangerous trauell, and send into this world out of hir
wofull wombe hir child a sound and perfect creature,
after thine owne image, and so restore hir to hir former
health, as thou hast done hir and manie others heeretofore
in like case, that she thereby may once againe visit
thy temple, and be purified, sanctified, and dedicated
vnto thy honor and glorie, the commoditie of hirs, and
comfort of vs all hir friends, kindred, and neighbours.
Weio
                  •
               fullie saie, Thy will O Lord be done, and not
ours. But if it be not thy will so, but that she, according
to hir instant desire, must now being preuented with
vntimelie labour and birth, through perillous trauell,

needs drinke of the cup of Rahels and Phinees wi
                  •
               es
potion, and go the waie of all flesh; then, O Lord, thou
in whose hands are the harts of all flesh, arme hir, we
humblie beseech thee, with thy perpetuall grace, peace,
patience, and perfect confidence in thee; increase hir
faith, helpe hir vnbeleefe, annoint hir with the oile of
gladnes in thee, ease hir of hir extreme paines, be thou
nigh vnto hir, and driue the diuell far from hir, aid hir
with thy holie angels, giuing hir grace so quietlie to
take this thy fatherlie chastisement and visitation in
good woorth, that in this hir painfull life, yea and in
the verie end thereof, she with perfect memorie & sure
trust, commending hir selfe wholie to thee, may in hart
ioifullie still saie, and we hir deere sisters and faithfull
freends and neighbours for hir, as followeth.
         
         
            When she is departing, and yeeldeth vp the ghost, then
adde and saie this that followeth.
            FEtch now againe, Lord God Father,
into thy holie hands, that
which thy puissant might hath shapen;
command thy holie angels
now to aid hir, and safelie to bring
hir to thee, and now place thou hir
amongst thy chosen children, and
blessed heirs in thine eternall kingdome,
prepared for them that are written in the booke
of life. Fetch now againe, Lord God sonne, that which
thou of thy meere mercie hast so wiselie gouerned, and
bought with thy pretious bloud: now ioifullie receiue
hir, and saie vnto hir as thou saiedst vnto the penitent
theefe, This day shalt thou be with me in paradise.
Take againe now, Lord God holie Ghost, that which
thou of thy onelie fauour hast louinglie kept, and guided
in this region of sinne, and vale of miserie, and now
louinglie leade thou hir with Rebecca, and Lazarus,

to eternall ioie and rest. This grant hir, O holie and
most blessed Trinitie, good Lord almightie, three persons
and one verie God: vnto whome be all honour,
praise, and glorie, for euer and euer:
            Amen, Amen.
         
         
            Another praier while she yeeldeth
vp the ghost.
            THE mightie God of angels, and
former of all things visible and inuisible,
in whose hands is onelie life
and death, light and darknes, and
all the motions of the soule and bodie,
without thee most mightie God,
all things had beene nothing, and
of nothing, all things are made by
thee: without thy Christ, and thy blessed spirit, which
is one coeternall Trinitie, all flesh were accursed, all
consciences molested, and all soules vtterlie damned,
from light into darknes, from freedome into euerlasting
reprobation: but by Iesus Christ thine onelie
sonne, we thanke thee deere father of all mercie, that
now it hath pleased thee to take to thy mercie at this
present time, our deere sister S. B. whom thou hast elected,
consecrated; and now she shall by thy mercie and
pitie, be sanctified vnto thee in the death of Christ, to be
a citizen of eternall glorie. Now we perceiue that flesh
and bloud doth forsake hir, and all hir worldlie strength
faileth hir: now are the organes yeelding vp the heauenlie
sound, hir soule commeth now vnto thee, good
Lord receiue it to thy mercie, into thine euerlasting
glorie, where as Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, Sara,
Rebecca, Rahel, and the blessed virgin
Marie, are continuallie. To thee, oh
heauenlie Father, be incessant
honour & glorie, for euer
and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            After hir departure let the women kneele downe also,
and giue thanks as followeth.
            ALmightie God, with whom doo liue
the spirits of them that depart
hence in the Lord, and in whom the
soules of them that be elect, after
they be deliuered from the burden of
the flesh, be in ioie & felicitie: thou
I saie, O mercifull God, the father
of our Lord Iesus Christ, who is
the resurrection and the life, in whom whosoeuer beleeueth
shall liue, though he die; and whosoeuer liueth
and beleeueth in him, shall not die eternallie, who also
taught vs (by his holie apostle S. Paule) not to be
sorie as women without hope, for them that sleepe in
him: we giue thee hartie thanks, for that it hath pleased
thee to deliuer this woman our sister, out of the wofull
miseries of this sinfull world, meekelie beseeching
thee, O Father, to raise vs from the death of sinne, vnto
the life of righteousnes, that when we also shal depart
this life, we may rest in Christ, as our hope is this our
sister doth; and that it may please thee of thy gratious
goodnes, shortlie to accomplish the number of thine efect,
and to hasten thy kingdome, that at the generall
resurrection in the last daie, we with this our sister, and
all other departed in the true faith of thy holie name,
being found acceptable in thy sight, may haue our perfect
consummation and blisse both in bodie and soule, in
thy eternall and euerlasting glorie, and receiue that
blessing, which thou, O Christ, shalt then pronounce to
all that loue & feare thee, saieng; Come ye blessed children
of my Father, receiue the kingdome prepared for
you from the beginning of the world. Grant this we
beseech thee, O mercifull father, through Iesus Christ
our onlie mediatour, redeemer, and sauiour,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            A praier and thanks-giuing to be vsed of the mother, or
women about hir, after the child is baptised.
            ALmightie and euerlasting GOD, who hast
vouchsafed to regenerate this infant by water
and the holie ghost, and hast giuen vnto it
forgiuenes of all his sinnes, and receiued it
into the number of thy children, and heires of eternall
life: I thanke thee for thy gratious goodnes, fauour, &
mercie towards it. And I humblie beseech thee also, O
Lord, to strengthen it so with thy holie ghost the comforter,
that it may lead the rest of his life according to
this good beginning. Let thy fatherlie hands, I praie
thee, be euer ouer it, and blesse ti, dailie increase it with
thy manifold gifts of grace, giue it the spirit of wisedome
& vnderstanding, the spirit of counsell & strength,
the spirit of knowledge and true godlines: fulfill it
with the spirit of thy holie feare, faith, and praier, and
so lead this child in the knowledge and obedience of thy
holie word, that (being euer defended with thy heauenlie
grace) it may continue therein for euer, and dailie
increase in thy holie spirit more and more, vntill in the
end he obteine the gift of euerlasting life, in thy celestiall
kingdome: through Iesus Christ our Lord,
            Amen.
         
         
            If the child, or yong infant, be verie sicke, and lie sore pained
with anie greefe, or whensoeuer else it be visited
with anie dreadfull disea
                  •
               e, praie ouer it, and
saie as followeth.
Lord heare our praiers, And let our crie come vnto thee. Let vs praie.
            O Mercifull Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ,
the onelie begotten Sonne of the liuing Father,
redeemer of all men, through all ages;
whose nature is pitifull, not onelie to the

strong and stout, but also to the weake and simple, as
babes, infants, and children; we here assembled most
hartilie desire and praie thy glorious maiestie, for this
seelie infant and child, which hath not the capacitie to
praie for it selfe, lieng here in paines and pangs of sorrowfull
sicknes, beseeching thy grace, that with y• same
pitie wherewith thou sufferedst the babes and children
to come to thee in the Gospell, and laiedst thy blessed
hands vpon them; thou wilt also respect with the same
eies of compassion, and consider this poore babe, seelie
child, and weake infant, sore greeued with sicknesse.
Grant, we beseech thee, that as it beareth, and here
sheweth the image of sinfull Adam, by suffering for
sinne; so it bearing the liuelie image of thy heauenlie
gift, may by thy grace be deliuered and helped, from
that which now by nature it suffreth. So that like as
it is with vs partaker of thy holie baptisme; so it may
also with vs be partaker of thy helpe and consolation.
And forasmuch as the paines of the same poore child
seeme greeuous and vehement; we beseech thee so mitigate
the vehemencie thereof, that by the releeuing and
easing of it, we also (especiallie his sorowfull parents)
may be comforted, dealing with it according as it shall
seeme good to thy diuine wisedome, whether by death to
call it, or by life to restore it, so that whether it go or tarie,
it may be thine, and at the last with thine elect be
made partaker of that blessed resurrection. when thou
shalt appeare. In whose name we praie furthermore
for it and our selues, as thou in thy holie Gospell hast
taugth vs, saieng: O our Father which art in heauen, halowed
be thy name, thy kingdome come, thy will be done
in earth as it is in heauen, giue vs this daie our dailie bread,
and forgiue vs our trespasses, as we forgiue them that trespas
against vs, and leade vs not into temptation, but deliuer
vs from euill. For thine is the kingdome, the power and the
glorie for euer and euer,
            
            Amen.
         
         
            
            Thanks-giuings for women after deliuerance
of childe.
            A thanks-giuing and praier to be said of the father, so
soone as he heareth that a child is borne vnto him,
and his wife safelie deliuered.
            O Eternall God, and heauenlie father,
the creator and preseruer of mankinde,
thou knowest the fraile and
weake nature of man, and hast in thy
mercifull louing kindnes for his
comfort and remedie, ordeined him
the most honourable state of marriage
to liue and walke in, commanding
them to increase and multiplie, and hast promised
the fruit of the bodie to be a blessing, and a witnes of
thine eternall councell of this most honourable state,
to all them that loue and feare thee. Wherefore, oh
heauenlie father, I most hartilie thanke thee, that it
hath pleased thee to call me into this most holie and honourable
state of marriage, and hast vouchsafed to giue
me this infant thy creature, as a witnes and testimonie
of thy good will towards the same, and a token of
thy promised blessing to thy children. And that it hath
pleased thee also to deliuer this thy poore hand-maid
my yoke-fellowe, and mother of this thy creature,
from the sin-plague of sorrowe and perill, in bringing
foorth as thou appointedst the same, to our grandmother
Eue. And now, oh deere and most mercifull father,
I most humblie beseech thee to giue vnto me, and to
this my yoke-fellowe or wife thy seruant, thy grace &
holie spirit, and so renew the same in vs day by day,
that both we may liue and walke chastlie, honestlie and
holilie, as becommeth thy children to liue and walke in
so honourable a state before thee; and that we may doo
our duties in education, and bringing vp of this thy

blessing and creature in godlie nourture and discipline,
and in true information in thee, oh Lord, & thy Sonne
Iesus Christ: and also that this thy creature may doo
his dutie in harkening and obeieng; so that of no part,
anie fault be found in vs, that may giue occasion to the
vngodlie to speake euill of thy truth and holie name,
nor of this holie and honourable state, but rather that
they which knowe not the truth, may through the example
of our good conuersation, be brought to the
knowledge of thy truth, whereby they may be made
members of thy Church, and praise thee for all thy benefits,
through thy mercie and louing kindnes powred
vpon vs. Grant this, oh most mercifull father, for thy
deere Sonne sake, Iesus Christ, our onlie mercie-seate
and mediatour, in whose name I praie thee, as he hath
taught me, saieng: O our father, &c.
            
         
         
            Here may be said or soong to the glorie of God, and your
edifieng, the 8. the 127. the 128. Psalmes of Dauid, and
Benedictus: or the song of Zacharie, which he made at
the birth of his sonne Iohn the Baptist; as Luke, cap. 1.
and in the beginning before the Psalmes in meeter.
            Another thanks-giuing to be vsed of the mid-wife, or
women assistant, after the safe deliuerie of a
woman in child-bed.
            O Eternall and almightie God, thy
power and might is to be praised
and magnified for euer: for in the
greatest weakenes of man, thy power
is seene; in his greatest dangers
thy saluation is knowne. Therefore
we praise thy name, and giue thee
thanks for all thy great mercies and
wonderfull works; namelie Lord, we giue thee thanks
for thy mercie shewed to this our sister at this time, in
bringing hir, through manie and great dangers of

child-birth, and in giuing hir the fruit of hir bodie. It
was thy hand, O Lord, that hath done it: for it is a
worke greater than all the wisedome & power of man.
Deere father, we beseech thee, euer hereafter to deliuer
the mother, and the child, out of all their dangers, as
may best make to thy glorie, and their saluation in Iesus
Christ our Lord. Touching vs, we thanke thee for
blessing our labours, and furthering the works of our
hands; beseeching thee, that we beholding thy outstretched
arme, and rich mercies, may be drawne by them
to serue thee in feare and reuerence all the daies of our
liues,
            Amen.
         
         
            An other thanks-giuing, to be said for the safe deliuerance
of anie woman in child-bed, or at hir churching,
as it is called.
            AMong other thy benefites, & those
innumerable, which thou dailie bestowest
vpon vs thy needie & poore
creatures, this is not the least, O
most mercifull father, that thou of
thy tender goodnes doest vouchsafe
for the conseruation of man-kind, to
preserue the women that are with
child, and to giue them safe deliuerance of their burden,
by this meanes making them glad and ioifull mothers.
For this thy benefite and good will towards vs,
we so hartilie thanke thee as hart can thinke; beseeching
thee to worke such thankfulnes in the hart of
this thy seruant S. B. and all other women in like case,
by thy spirit, that they being not vnmindfull of this
high benefite of their safe deliuerance, wrought onelie
by the sauiour of all man-kind, may shew themselues
thankfull vnto thee for this thy goodnes, and neuer forget
that thy present helpe, and most sweete comfort,
which thou mercifullie shewedst vpon them in their

great trauels, labours, and paines, when they fled vnto
thy holie name for succour, as vnto a strong tower,
bulworke, and holie defence. Go foorth, O Lord, to
make them the ioifull mothers of manie children: endue
them with long life, that they may see their childers
children: and the children that thou giuest vnto
them, make thou, as in age, so likewise in wisedome,
and in the abundance of thy holy spirit to increase, that
they may haue fauour, both with thee, and with all good
men, vnto the glorie of thy most blessed name,
            Amen.
         
         
            The mothers praier for hir childrens good
education.
            O Eternall God, creator and preseruer
of all man-kind, the giuer of all
spirituall grace, and the onlie author
of eternall life; I most hartilie
thanke thee, that it hath pleased thy
fatherlie goodnes to giue me these
thy creatures the fruit of my bodie
as a witnes and testimonie of thy
fatherlie fauour and good will towards this most honourable
state of matrimonie. Oh Lord, as thou hast
giuen them vnto me, so I beseech thee vouchsafe to giue
me thy gifts both spirituall and bodilie, that I may
haue competent wherwith to educate and bring them
vp. Haue mercie on me, oh Lord, and giue vnto them
thy grace and holie spirit, and open thou their wits
and senses, and giue them the true knowledge and vnderstanding
of thy holie word, a louing affection, and
obedience vnto the same, and a true faith in it. Giue
them wisedome, vnderstanding, knowledge, and discretion,
docilitie, capacitie, and facilitie to comprehend,
take and receiue doctrine, learning, nouriture and discipline,
that they may be made worthie instruments
of thy glorie, and profitable members of thy Church, to

the aduauncement of thy glorie, the edifieng of thy
Church, and the comfort of my conscience: by Iesus
Christ our Sauiour,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier to be vsed of euerie godlie mother, for
the godlie proofe of hir child; made for
the Ladie Lettice.
            O Most mercifull Lord God almightie
onelie, which art gratious and
good, as by thy diuine will & power
this my child was formed and made
a liuing creature, consisting of bodie
and soule, in the wombe of me his
naturall mother, from whom he is
departed into this world by naturall
birth, weake and impotent, of fraile and sinfull
substance, by his owne propertie inclined to ignorance
and sinne; and now inuironed with thousands of malicious,
mightie, and subtill enimies both bodilie and
ghostlie, which waite for the seducing & leading of him
to perill, death, and destruction, wherevnto all mankind
is prone; and were it not for thy mercifull grace
and tuition, soone ouercome. So be it thy will, O most
gra
                  •
               ious Lord, in the abundance of thy mercies and
loue, for Christs thy deere sonnes sake, with thy fatherlie
eie to looke vpon him, & to blesse him, powring plentifullie
of thy heauenlie gifts vpon him, that being preserued,
brought vp, and nourished in diuine knowledge,
faith, feare, and obedience of thee, through true profession
of thy sweete sonne Iesus, in the sinceritie of the
Gospell, he may growe rich and beautifull in all godlines
and vertue, in all his waies and proceedings, seeking
the kingdome of eternall glorie, through firme &
abundant faith, and holie conuersation in Christ our
sauiour, working all righteousnes, filled with meeknes,
brotherlie loue, obedience, cheerfull hope, desire of heauenlie

things, contempt of the world, and mightilie
armed with thy grace, and strengthened by thine assistance,
to vanquish the power of sinfull flesh, and satan,
that hauing victorie in the end, he may ioifullie triumph
in thy presence, O God, with the rest of thy beloued
saints, to giue honour and continuall praise to thy
most holie name in blisse euerlasting: through thy deere
sonne our mercifull Lord and Sauiour,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier of the mother for hir child.
            ALmightie & euerlasting God, which
of thine infinit mercie and goodnes
hast promised vnto vs that thou wilt
not onelie be our God, but also the
God & father of our children: I beseech
thee, that as thou hast vouchsafed
to call vs to be partakers of
this thy great mercie in the felowship
of faith: so it may please thee to sanctifie with thy
spirit into the number of thy children, this infant,
which thou hast giuen me; to the end that he comming
to perfect age, may confesse thee onelie the true God,
and whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ, and to serue
him, and be profitable vnto his Church in the whole
course of his life; that after this life beeing ended, he
may be brought as a liuelie member of his bodie, vnto
the full fruition of thy ioies, in the highest heauens,
where thy sonne our sauiour Christ reigneth with thee
world without end,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier to be vsed of the mother, for the good
education of hir youth and children.
            OH gratious God, in knowledging that thou
louest all things which thou hast made of thy
goodnes; and that thing cannot perish which
is committed to thy charge: now I come

vnto thee with my tender children, committing them
into thine hands, and desiring thee to couer them
vnder the wings of thy prouident mercie. Hew and
square the rough table of their hearts: of stonie,
make them fleshie, that being softened by the deaw of
thy blessings, they may beare the seales of adoption in
thy Sonne Christ. O Lord guide them in this darke
vale of vanitie with the light of thy fauour, that escaping
the dongeon of sin, they may walke in newnes of
life, and lodge alwaies in thine holie will. Imprint in
their harts, faith, hope, humilitie, chastitie and charitie,
that following thee, they may be humble and meeke,
holie, vertuous, perfect and godlie, as thou art. Indue
them with the spirit of feare, that they may kisse thee
in faith & liuelie obedience, and thou be neuer angrie
with them, but louing vnto them, as the mother is to
hir tender sucklings,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier for the godlie and vertuous life
of thy childe.
            O Lord God, and Father of our Lord
Iesus Christ, and father of all them
that beleeue, which hast said by the
mouth of Salomon the sonne of
Dauid, that an vndiscreet sonne is
a greefe vnto his father, and an
heauines vnto his mother that
bare him: and that the wise sonne
maketh a glad father, but an vndiscreet bodie shameth
his mother; that it would please thee so to conduct and
guide this my sonne S. in his waie, that he may acknowledge
and confesse that thou art the author of
his life, that he may serue and honor thee without
feare in all truth and righteousnes, and growing in
age, he may be mortified in spirit, that he may be filled
with wisedome, and that thy grace be with him. To

conclude, that by that meanes, keeping thy precepts,
he may prolong his daies heere vpon earth, obeieng vs
his parents, whom thou hast chosen as instruments
for to place him in this world. Giue vnto him, O Lord,
such ease for the commoditie of this life, that vnder colour
of pouertie, he doo not couet or steale other mens
goods, and take thy name in vaine, or trusting vpon his
prosperitie, he denie thee, and saie, What fellowe is the
Lord?
            On the other side grant him grace, that he may acknowledge
that he that ploweth is nothing, neither he
that watereth; but thou Lord which giuest the increase.
Finallie, when thou shalt depriue and take him
from all the commodities of this present life, giue vnto
him the like constancie, as thou didst giue vnto thy
faithfull seruant Iob, who seeing himselfe afflicted on
euerie side, did neuer murmur against thee; but falling
downe vpon the ground, worshipped thy maiestie, and
blessed thy name: for all which things we his parents
praie thee in the fauour of thy welbeloued Sonne, he,
I saie, who was obedient vnto thee, euen to the death
of the crosse, our Lord Iesus Christ, to whom be glorie
for euer and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            A praier to be vsed of anie mother in lawe.
            FOrasmuch, O mercifull God, as it
is commonlie said, that step-mothers
be malicious towards their
husbands children, and hate their
daughters in lawe, bearing no
great loue and charitie towards
them: I being verie desirous to falsifie
this report in my selfe, whom it
hath pleased thee now by marriage to make a mother
of so manie motherles children, and that I may foreuer
be free from anie least suspicion of such offence, and

neuer found guiltie or culpable of like malice and hatred
towards the innocent, doo now most humblie beseech
thee of thy goodnes, so to rule the fond fansies of
my mind, and crooked conditions of my corrupted nature,
with the grace of thy holie spirit, that I neuer be
carried awaie with passions and braids of the mind,
to plaie the tyrant ouer these my husbands children,
nor by anie meanes shew my selfe rough, rigorous,
hard-harted, or vnresonable towards them; but being
guided with discretion, reason, and good consideration,
let me haue compassion and pitie of their tender and
weake age, yea let me loue them I saie hartilie, and
count them euen as mine owne, knowing that friendship
maketh all things common among friends, much
more wedlocke (being the highest degree not onlie of all
friendship, but also of all bloud and kindred) doth of dutie
require the same in me; as also especiallie remembring,
that vndoubtedlie my children shall finde such fauour
of others, whither I die or liue, as I haue shewed
to other mens children. For looke with what measure
we meate, with the same shall we be sure to be measured,
as saith our Sauiour, Which thing well considered,
grant I beseech thee, that I may vnfeignedlie loue
these my husbands children, and be vnto them that
which I heare them call me so oft, that is, a mother;
not a step mother, or mother in lawe, after the vulgar
opinion, in word and outward shew onlie, but a mild, a
gentle, & tender louing mother in deed and good faith,
comforting, cherishing, and instructing them euen as
their owne naturall mother would. O let me neuer
hate or abhor them whom thou hast thus conioined vnto
me in house, friendship, aliance and bloud, and made
to be brethren and sisters vnto my children. Neither
suffer me at anie time to wreake conceiued ire, wrath,
and displeasure vpon these poore orphans and motherles
children, but make me to vse all motherlie curtesie,

lenitie, and good behauiour towards them, euen as if
they were mine owne.
            Also concerning my daughters in lawe that are maried,
let me not be discontent that they are bloud of
their husbands more than I; nor thinke my motherhood
anie whit diminished thereby, as she that would
seeke to win loue, by hating them that offend me not:
but take from vs good Lord I beseech thee, all occasions
of strife, contention, bralling, chiding, and vnnaturall
fallings out; and if anie discord chance betweene
vs, make vs also both most wiselie with all our might
to auoid it, and speedilie with willing minds to reconcile
our selues each one to the other againe, as becommeth
vs, that others seeing our mutuall loue, concord,
and godlie behauiour each to other, may by our good
examples take occasion worthilie to glorifie thee in vsing
the like.
            Finallie, grant me grace that with Naomie and other
godlie women, to the vtmost of my power, skill,
and abilitie, I may both loue, cherish, and instruct my
daughters in lawe, giuing them good counsell, and also
doo before them in my conuersation all such things
as may be examples vnto them both of chastitie, sobernes,
and all manner of godlines and vertue, so shall it
come to passe that I (ruling mine affections modestlie,
and behauing my selfe curteouslie and motherlie in
deed towards these my children in lawe, as to mine
owne) shall not onelie auoid the great number of
troubles and miseries, which otherwise crueltie and
contention would bring vpon mine head, but also by
that meanes obteine great loue and reuerence of these
my children in lawe againe towards me, and procure
to my selfe a most holie, delectable, sweet, peaceable, and
quiet life with my deere husband, to thy glorie, and our
eternall felicitie. Grant this, O father, for thy deere
Sonne sake, our onlie Lord and Sauiour,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            The mistresse or dames praier for hir selfe,
and hir familie.
            THy commandement is by thine holie
Apostle, O most mercifull Lord
Christ, that masters and mistresses
should intreat their seruants and
hand-maids gentlie, putting awaie
threatenings, and dooing that vnto
them which is iust and equall: forasmuch
as we also haue a master in
heauen, with whome there is no respect of persons.
Grant I most hartilie praie thee, I may so order my
men-seruants, and maid-seruants, that I attempt
none vnrighteousnes against them; but so vse my rule
and authoritie ouer them, that I may alwaies remember
that thou art the common Lord of vs all, and
we all thy seruants. Againe, that I may not forget
that we be all brothers and sisters, hauing one father
which is in heauen, and looke for one glorious kingdome,
where thou, with the father and the holie ghost,
liuest and reignest true and euerlasting God for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another.
            TO haue children and seruants, is
thy blessing, O Lord; but not to order
them according to thy word, deserueth
thy dredfull cursse. Grant
therefore, that as thou hast blessed
me with an houshold and familie: so
I may diligentlie watch, that nothing
be committed of the same
that might offend thy fatherlie goodnes, and be an occasion
of turning thy blessing into curssing: but that so
manie as thou hast committed to my charge, may eschew

all vice, imbrace all vertue, liue in thy feare, call
vpon thy holie name, learne thy blessed commandements,
heare thy holie word, and auoiding idlenes, diligentlie
exercise themselues euerie one in his office, according
to their vocation and calling, vnto the glorie of
thy most honorable name,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier of dames or mistresses.
            O Lord God almightie, our heauenlie
father and most merciful Lord, thou
art my life, my soule, and my bodie;
yea all the good which I haue, and
all whatsoeuer is mine, al that thou
hast giuen vnto me, of thee haue I
receiued it. Make therefore, and ordeine
thou, O beloued God in heauen
all them in my house, and in my handling, downe
lieng, and vprising, after thy good will and pleasure,
thee to loue, serue, and obey, euerie one to his profit.
For I beleeue in thee, in thee is all my trust, that thou
wilt not forsake me, nor my husband and children, nor
anie of my familie and houshold. Defend vs Lord from
sinne, shame, and sicknesse, and from all euill. Send vs
thine holie angell, that he may defend vs in all our
deeds and liuing, that he may lead vs foorth the right
way, that we may not talke, doo, or thinke anie thing against
thy holie commandements and will; but thereafter
to liue, worshipping thee, and praising thee foreuermore:
through Iesus Christ our Lord thy beloued
sonne,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another.
            O Gratious God, I commend vnto thy protection
my house, and all that thou hast giuen
me; my whole familie, my husband, and children;
beseeching thee to giue me the power of

thy holie spirit, that I may well and holilie rule, gouerne,
nourish, and bring vp these my children and familie,
in all godlie feare and knowledge of thy holie
word: and that I may be vnto them an example of all
godlines and vertue, to the praise of thy holie name:
through Iesus Christ our Lord,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another.
            O Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, father
of mercie, and God of my life; I
beseech thee for thy sonne Christs sake,
haue mercie vpon me & mine husband,
and vpon the houshold and familie that
thou hast giuen me: and powre thy
wholsome benefites vpon vs alwaies sufficientlie, for
our liuing, for our soule and bodie. O thou great rich
husbandman, let thy great riches enrich our pouertie,
thy mercie beare our sinnes, thy grace susteine and
comfort our frailnes, thy holie angell keepe vs from satan,
and from all euill; that our conuersation may be
honest, faithfull, and plentious in all good works, and
we saued through the merits of Iesu Christ our Lord,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier to be said of all christiam masters and
mistresses, both for themselues and other in
like condition.
            ALthough, O Christ, thou most high
Lord, all power both in heauen
& in earth be giuen vnto thee of thy
heauenlie father; and albeit thou
hast giuen vs a commandment, that
we should not desire to be called masters,
or mistresses: for we haue but
one master, which thou art, & all we

brethren and sisters, hauing one father which is in
heauen. Yet forasmuch as thou, according to thy blessed
will, hast appointed some superiours, some inferiours,
some masters and mistresses, some seruants, and
hand-maids, some to command, some to obey, some to
rule, some to serue; and by this meanes such as be
in superioritie, haue obteined by thy holie word the
name or title of masters or lords, mistresses or dames,
bicause they haue seruants & hand-maids vnder them,
and rule ouer them according to thy good pleasure and
godlie appointment, which art the most supreame
power, and most excellent maiestie, King of kings, and
Lord of lords, to whom all things both in heauen, and
in earth, and vnder the earth, doo bow their knees, and
giue reuerence and honour, whose praise also euerie
nation and language doth aduance and set foorth, confessing
that thou art the Lord Iesus Christ, vnto the
glorie of God the father: we most humblie beseech thee,
which art the greatest master, and most high Lord, to
send thy holie spirit vpon vs, and all such as are called
masters or dames here in earth, and haue superioritie
vnder thee; that we, and they, remembring our selues
to be thy seruants, and that we also haue a master in
heauen, with whom there is no respect of persons, may
put awaie all threatnings, all crueltie, all vnrighteousnes,
and doo that vnto our seruants, which is iust
and equall. Grant that we intreat not euil our seruants,
and hand-maids, which worke truelie, nor the
hireling that is faithfull vnto vs. Grant that we be
not as lions in our houses, destroieng our houshold
folks. and oppressing such as are vnder vs: but rather
that we cherish and loue our faithfull and discreet seruants
and maids, euen as our owne soule; and by no
meanes suffer them to be unrewarded for their paines
taking, nor yet at the last to be driuen to beggerie for
their true seruice dooing: but that we liberallie rewarding

them according to their deserts, may shew our
selues to be thy true seruants, which leauest no man
vnrewarded, but giuest to euery one according to their
deeds: to them that doo well, and continue in well dooing;
glorie, honour, peace, immortalitie, and euerlasting
life: to them that doo euill, and continue in the same; indignation,
wrath, displeasure, trouble, sorowe, and eternall
damnation. Grant therefore, O Lord, that we and
all temporall masters & dames, may in all our dooings
resemble thee, which art the heauenlie and euerlasting
master; and so behaue our selues both towards our
seruants, and all other, according to thy blessed will,
that at the last day we may be found in the number of
them, to whom thou shalt saie; Come ye blessed of my
father, possesse the kingdome which was prepared for
you from the beginning of the world: Lord let it so
come to passe,
            Amen.
         
         
            The maid-seruants, or hand-maids praier.
            ALl estates, O Lord, depend vpon
thee, king & begger, magistrate and
cleargie-man, master and scholer,
all come of thee, and me thou hast
made a poore hand-maid & seruant,
which I doo not onelie willinglie
beare, knowing thou hast allotted
me this calling; but also manie
waies I haue to thanke thee for it. For thou hast not
onelie deliuered me from the slauish seruice of satan,
but also dooest by this my yoke, restraine the wanton
reliques of stained nature, preseruing me from the
pampering of the old man, in pleasures and idlenes.
Secondlie, that I am not seruant or hand maid to any
heathen, Turke, or Saracene; but to a Christian, in
such a place where thy Gospell is preached freelie and
fullie. Thirdlie, and especiallie, bicause thou hast called

me vnto such an estate of life, as wherein I knowe I
doo well please thee. For who liueth after the Gospell,
if not I, who get my liuing with the sweat of my
brows? I doo not glorie here in vaine, but to thee therfore
be the glorie, who hast turned the curse into such a
blessing. O Lord giue me grace to consider this, that I
may be more diligent in my calling, more earnest in
seruing thee than euer I haue beene heretofore: forgiue
me all that is past, and guid me in all things to
come, that I may neuer halt in my vocation, nor doo
my seruice deceitfully to the eie, as a man-pleaser. Giue
me a sound and perfect faith in thy sonnes bloud, O father,
wherein he hath washed (of his great mercie) my
poore soule; that notwithstanding I serue a mortall
man and woman, yet aboue them in all things I may
serue thee: to whom be all glorie and dominion, both
now and for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another.
            O Christ our Lord and sauiour, which
being the Sonne of the liuing God,
yea God himselfe from euerlasting,
didst not disdaine at the will of thy
heauenlie Father, to make thy selfe
of no reputation, to become man, to
take vpon thee the shape of a seruant
and to obeie thy fathers commandement
to the death of the crosse for our saluation,
refusing no seruice, no trauell, no labour, no paine, that
might make vnto the comfort of man-kind. I most
humblie beseech thee, to giue me and all seruants grace
to practise thy humilitie and obedience; that as thou
most willinglie didst serue and obeie thy heauenlie fathers
good pleasure, so I and they in like manner may
with most hartie affection, serue and obeie our bodilie
maisters and dames, in all things that fight not with
thy blessed word; not with eie-seruice as men-pleasers,

but in singlenes of heart, fearing thee, O God, that
whatsoeuer we doo, we may doo it hartilie, euen as vnto
the Lord, and not vnto men; forasmuch as we are
sure, that we shall receiue the reward of the heauenlie
inheritance of thee, O Lord Christ, whome also wee
serue, while trulie and faithfullie we serue our bodilie
maisters and dames. Grant that I thine humble
hand-maid, and so manie as are vnder the yoke of seruitude,
may count our maisters and mistresses worthie
of all honour, that the name of God be not euill spoken
of, nor his doctrine standered, and that we may obeie
them with all feare; not onlie if they be good and curteous,
but also though they be froward and testie, and
please them in all things; not answering them againe,
nor picking ought from them: but she wing all good
faithfulnes and trustines towards them, that in all
things we may doo worship vnto the doctrine of thee
our God and Sauiour; to whom with the father, and
the holie Ghost, be all honor, praise and glorie, for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            Or praie thus.
            O Lord, we seruants are commanded
by thy blessed Apostles, that wee
should honor and obeie our bodilie
maisters and dames with feare and
trembling, not onlie if they be good
and courteous, but also though they
be hastie and froward; and serue
them not with the eie as men-pleasers,
but with singlenes of hart; not churlishlie answering
them againe, nor piking, stealing, or conueieng awaie
anie part of their goods vniustlie; but she wing all
good faithfulnes vnto our maisters and dames, as
though wee serued God, and not men and women,
Grant me grace, I most humblie beseech thee, so to
serue and obeie my maister and mistres, and all other

my superiours, that there may be found no fault in me,
but that I behauing my selfe vprightlie, iustlie, faithfullie
and trulie in my vocation, may doo worship to the
doctrine of thee my God & sauiour in all things,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier to be said of an hand-maid, waiting-woman,
or maid-seruant.
            GRatious God, and Lord almightie,
which by the pretious bloud of thy
Sonne Iesus Christ, hast redeemed
me a miserable wretch, from perpetuall
slauerie, and pulled me out of
the power both of sin, death, darkenes,
hell, and damnation: I beseech
thee grant, that I be neuer ashamed
of this my seruile state and condition, wherein, according
to thy good pleasure and will, I am placed. Neither
let me vnpatientlie murmur at anie time against
my mistres and betters, nor enuiouslie detract from
the estimation of them or others; but giue me grace to
doo thy will continuallie in singlenes of hart, as vnto
Christ, with all possible good-will, seruing the Lord and
not men. Suffer me not malapertlie to vpbraid my
maister or mistres with their faults or infirmities,
when they rebuke me for mine; neither yet let me murmur,
contemne, or despise them, as Hagar the handmaid
of Sara did hir dame Sara that reproued hir:
but rather make me, I praie thee, as louing, curteous,
gentle, attendant, and dutifull vnto mine, as Abrahams,
and the hand-maids of Iudith and Susanna
were vnto them. O most mercifull God, assist me I saie
with thy holie spirit, that I may obeie these my carnall
rulers and gouernours, not onelie if they be good
and meeke, but also if they be euill and froward, and
that with all feare, so long as they command me nothing
contrarie to thy commandement. Bicause thou

wilt haue me to doo so, neither let me be forced for anie
euill speeches, or rough-handling of my dame, to flie
or runne awaie from hir, as Hagar did from Sara, to
hir no litle sorrowe and miserie: but giue me grace rather
to humble my selfe as a corrigible seruant vnder
hir hands, to confesse my faults, and amend my maners
and crooked conditions; especiallie knowing hir power
ouer me to be of thee, and therefore that the seueritie of
my dame should not make me to neglect my duetie and
seruice; but patientlie and constantlie for thy sake to
endure my labours, and to tarrie and abide out all my
terme of seruice to the end, euermore calling vpon thee
by hartie praier for hir, and that thou wilt not suffer
me to be hurt by anie hir euill dealing towards me,
but preserue and keepe me alwaies safe by thy power
from all euill.
            Furthermore, I praie thee, let not satan suggest or
entise me to doo anie euill or wicked deed vnknowne to
my dame, to my dishonestie, or hir damage, thereby to
cause strife or bralles to arise, either within or without,
to my selfe or others: but let it be a greefe vnto me
to heare them by anie misreported or standered, or to see
them by anie meanes abused, and hindred or hurt in
goods or name. Giue me grace alwaies to obeie my
good and curteous gouernours, not with eie seruice, as
a man-pleaser, but in singlenes of hart, as she that
more feareth thee than flesh and bloud. And make thou
me so faithfull and trustie in all my busines, that nothing
be at anie time either marred or lost, of those
things committed to my charge, either through my
negligence, or vnthriftines. O keepe my hand, I praie
thee, from picking, filching, purloining, and stealing;
and my tongue from curssing, taunting, answering againe,
and euill speaking: neither let me with an euill
eie, wicked affection, careles mind, and vngodlie intent,
behold anie of those things put into my custodie and

keeping, nor vndiscreetlie diminish, impaire, or lessen
them. Make me to be content with my wages, & when
I shall depart, to go awaie quietlie, carrieng nothing
of my masters or dames goods, to the value of a mite,
with me, but onelie that which is mine owne. And in
the meane while increase thou my health, and grant
strength to all my lims and members of my bodie, I
beseech thee, that I may by that meanes be the better
able to earne my wages, and doo my dutie, to the benefite
of my master and dame, whom I serue, as I hartilie
desire. Giue me also vnderstanding wiselie to go about
their affaires and busines, and prosper thou the
works of mine hands, to the blessing and enriching of
them and their families.
            Let the eies of thy seruant wait vpon thee, O Lord
my God, vntill thou, which dwellest in the heauens,
haue mercie vpon me: and the eies of thy hand-maid
attend and looke diligentlie vnto the hand of hir mistresse,
that my soule be neuer filled with the scornfull
reproofe of the wealthie, nor with the despitefulnes of
the proud. Make me true both in word and deed, vnto
those whom I serue, and with all possible care and industrie
to declare my fidelitie and obedience, by my
faithfull, painfull, and trustie seruice, and by preferring
still their busines to mine owne necessitie. Make thou
me godlie, religious, and holilie giuen to all vertuous
exercises. Giue me grace to praie often, and hartilie,
for my master and mistresse, their children, friends, and
all their familie, and for the whole Church. And let thy
holie feare be alwaies before mine eies, to shunne and
auoid all occasion of sinne and offence, both in my selfe
and others, that I may be worthilie accompted in the
number of those godlie seruants and maids, on whom
thou hast promised to powre thy holie spirit, and that
thou also my souereigne Lord and master, maist testifie
for my righteous and faithfull seruice, by blessing my

labours, and rewarding mine industrie and diligence,
as thou didst all the godlie seruants and hand-maids
in the old time: and thereby giue me ample occasion to
laud and praise thee all the daies of my life. Finallie,
whatsoeuer I shall go about to doo, doo thou vouchsafe
to blesse me, O God, & let it both be begun, continued,
and ended in thee, and also tend euermore to the glorie
of thy name, the wealth of my master and mistresse, the
full discharge of my dutie, and the increase of my faith
and blessing in thee, euer for Iesus Christs sake thy
sonne and my sauiour, who being verie God, equall
with thee, laid aside his glorie; and being Lord of all,
made himselfe of no reputation, and tooke on him the
forme of a seruant, willinglie to submit himselfe to the
most shamefull death of the crosse, for our redemption:
to whom therfore, with thee, and the holie ghost, three
persons and one God, be all honour, praise, power, rule
and dominion, for euer and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            The poore widowes mite, conteining seuen
meditations, or praiers in meeter, for the obteining
of Gods mercie, and the forgiuenes
of sin against desperation, to be said or soong
                  •
               
gathered by William Hunnis, one of the
Gentlemen of hir Highnes Chappell,
and maister to the children
of the same.
            AH helples wretch, what shall I doo, or which way shall I run?
            The earth be wraies, & heauen records the sins that I haue do
                  ••
               
            
            The gates of hell wide open stand for to receiue me in,
            And fearefull f
                  •
               ends all readie be to torment me for sin.
            Alas where shall I succour finde? The earth doth me denie,
            And to the sacred heauens aboue I dare not lift mine eie.
            If heauen and earth shall witnes be against my soule for sin,
            Untimelie birth (alas) for me much better then had bin,
            
               And now despaire approcheth fast with bloudie murthering knife,
            And willeth me to end my gréefes by shortning of my life.
            Shall I despaire? Thou God forbid, for mercie more is thine,
            Than if the sins of all the world were linked now with mine.
            Despise not then most louing Lord the image of thy face,
            Which thou hast wrought and déerelie bought with goodnes of thy grace,
            And since the bloodie price is paid, and bitter paines all past,
            Receiue my plaints, accept my spirit, and mercie grant at last,
            So shall my soule reioice, and still for mercie crie,
            Peccaui, peccaui, miserere mei.
            
               The second meditation.
               THou God that rulst & reignst in light that flesh can not attain,
               Thou God that knowst the thoghts of men are altogither vain,
               Thou God which neither tongue of man, nor angell can expresse,
               Thou God it is that I doo séeke, thou pitie my distresse.
               Thy seate, O God, is euerie-where, thy power, all powers extend,
               Thy wisedome cannot measured be, for that it hath no end.
               Thou art the power and wisedome too, and sole felicitie,
               But I a lumpe of sinfull flesh, nursse of iniquitie.
               Thou art by nature mercifull, and mercie is thy name,
               And I by nature miserable, and thrall of sin and shame.
               Then let thy nature O good God, now worke his force in me,
               And cleanse this nature of my sin, and heale my miserie.
               One depth good Lord another craues, my depth of sinfull crime
               Requires thy depth of mercie great, for sauing health in time.
               Swéet Christ grant y• the deapth of grace may swallow vp my sin,
               That I thereby may whiter be, than euer snowe hath bin.
               So shall my soule reioice, and still for mercie crie,
               Peccaui, peccaui, miserere mei.
            
            
               The third meditation.
               BEfore thy face, and in thy sight, haue I, deuoid of shame,
               O Lord, transgressed willinglie, I doo confesse the same:
               Yet was I loth that men should knowe or vnderstand my fall,
               Thus feard I man much more than thée, thou righteous iudge of all.
               
                  So blind was I and ignorant, yea rather wilfull blind,
               That suckt the combe, and knew the Bée had left hir sting behind.
               My sins O God to thée are knowne, there is no secret place,
               Where I may hide my selfe or them, from presence of thy face.
               Where shall I then my selfe bestowe? Or who shall me defend?
               None is so louing as my God, thy mercies haue none end.
               In déed I grant, and doo confesse, my sins so heinous be,
               As mercie none at all deserues; but yet thy propertie
               Is alwaie to be mercifull to sinners in distres,
               By which thou wilt declare and shew thy great almightines.
               Haue mercie Lord on me therefore, for thy great mercies sake,
               Which camst not righteous men to call, but sinners part to take:
               So shall my soule reioice, and still for mercie crie,
               Peccaui, peccaui, miserere mei.
            
            
               The fourth meditation.
               MOst gratious God doo not behold the number of my sin,
               Nor yet consider with thy selfe how wicked I haue bin.
               But rather thinke I am but dust, or as the withered haie.
               Which flourisheth to daie in féeld, to morrowe shorne awaie.
               My flesh rebels against the spirit, my spirit too weake is found,
               By sin conceiued in mothers wombe, my soule first caught hir wound.
               My flesh is fraile, too weak & vain, to do the thing I should,
               And what I would not, that doo I, contrarie that I would.
               Thou séest, O Lord, how weake I am, not able for to stand,
               Without the succour, helpe and aid, of thy most mightie hand.
               And what is he that will not staie the man thats like to fall,
               Or will refuse the sicke to helpe, for helpe when he doth call.
               If thou wilt laie vnto my charge, the burden of my sin,
               O Lord the conquest is but small that thou thereby shalt win.
               For why, thy glorie and thy praise in mercie doth consist,
               Unto the which I yéeld my selfe, to doo with what thou list.
               My soule shall trust in thée, and still for mercie crie,
               Peccaui, peccaui, miserere mei.
            
            
               The fift meditation.
               IF I demand what mercie is, thou God wilt answere me,
               That mercie is the aboundance great, of thy heauenlie pitie;
               
                  With which thou viewst the afflicted sort that on the earth doo lie,
               And what is this compassion then, but proofes of thy mercie?
               Our fathers old the same haue felt, and now in rest do raigne,
               And thou art still the selfe-same God, for euer to remaine.
               Our fathers were conceiued in sin, and so are we likewise,
               Wilt thou compassion shew on them, and children theirs despise?
               One faith in Christ we all professe, one God in persons thrée,
               As thou compassion hadst on them, compassion haue on me.
               Ponder O God, my harts desire, most humblie doo I craue,
               And doo awaie all my misdéeds, and so compassion haue.
               And as of sinners manie a one, whose number is vnknowne,
               Thou didst vouchsafe to drawe to thée, & make them all thine owne:
               So now vouchsafe most gentle God, likewise to drawe me in,
               And make me righteous by thy grace, forgiuing me my sin.
               So shall my soule reioice, and still for mercie crie,
               Peccaui, peccaui, miserere mei.
            
            
               The sixt meditation.
               MOst mightie God, I doo confesse ten thousand times & more,
               Thou hast me washed from my sin, and salued still my sore.
               But I through sin am falne againe, and fowler now am made,
               Than euer was the filthie swine, with mire ouer laid.
               How oftentimes shall we forgiue, each other that offend?
               Seuentie times seuen, the scripture saith, which signifieth no end.
               If man to man such fauour shew, that wretched caitiues be,
               How much more thou, O gratious God, to them that call on thée?
               It is thy nature to forgiue, my nature can but fall,
               Though thou be iust in all thy works, thy mercie passeth all.
               What time a sinner doth repent, and turne to thée at last,
               All sins foredone, thou wilt forget, thy promise so hath past.
               Behold O God I turne to thée with sorrowe for my sin,
               And do repent euen from my hart that I so lewd haue bin.
               Now wash me Lord yet once againe, with fountaine of thy grace,
               That I among the sacred saincts, with thee might haue a place.
               So shall my soule reioice, and still for mercie crie,
               Peccaui, peccaui, miserere mei.
            
            
               
               The seuenth and last meditation.
               LIke as the guiltie prisoner stands, before the iudge so tride,
               With quaking breath, & shiuering lims, his iudgement to abide:
               Euen so, O God, before thy face, in fearefull state I stand,
               And guiltie crie to thée my iudge, and now hold vp my hand.
               Nothing have I to pleade for life, no goodnes is in me,
               Of sin, deceipt, and wickednes, guiltie, good Lord, guiltie.
               Thus by thy righteous doome O God, and sacred lawe diuine,
               Condemnd am I to endles paine, through iust deserts of mine,
               Alas, what then is to be said, or what is to be done?
               For mercie yet will I appeale to Iesu Christ thy sonne.
               For neuer yet hath it béene heard, since first the world began,
               That Iesu Christ did turne his face from anie sinfull man,
               Which unto him for mercie came with sad repentant minde,
               O Lord shall I then be the first that shall no mercie finde?
               Shall I be she thou wilt despise, that humblie commes to thée?
               No, no, swéet Christ, thy promise is for to deliuer mée,
               Wherefore my soule, be glad, and crie incessantlie,
               Peccaui, peccaui, miserere mei.
               FINIS.
               W. H.
            
         
         
            A praier to be said of a widowe, immediatlie after
the death of hir husband.
            ETernall and mercifull God, father
of our Lord Iesus Christ, which according
to thine heauenlie pleasure
hast taken now my deere and louing
husband R. B. out of this world,
whereby I am a poore afflicted widowe,
and my seelie children fatherlesse:
vnto thee doo I crie in this my
miserie, O mine assured aduocate; haue mercie on mee,
a forsaken orphane, and after thy great goodnes pardon
all my sinnes, which I haue committed against
thee. Turne vnto me, O Lord, and take mercie on me:

for my soule is become a widowe, and I am alone and
comfortlesse: looke vpon the teares of my widowhood,
and behold mine affliction and miserie. Oh my Lord,
now releeue my necessitie, as thou didst releeue that
widowe of Sarepta, whom thou didst most miraculouslie
preserue by thy prophet Elias. Take the like pitie
on me now, I saie, untill thou returne: ah shew thy
selfe vnto me, that I may be comforted; assist me, behold
my necessitie, and deliuer me out of all my troubles.
Grant likewise, that sith thou hast taken awaie
from me the vaile of mine eies, mine head and deer husband,
with whom I was preserued from all dangers,
and of whom peraduenture I was vnworthie: I may
yet find fauour now in the sight of all gouernours and
magistrates, whom in thy holie word thou hast commanded
to be as an husband and guid vnto me, that I
be not iniuried by the vngodlie, contrarie to all reason
and equitie. In like sort, let me find patrons and honest
men, which will haue a tender consideration of this
my present estate, and succour me at times with godlie
counsell. Protect me, oh my God, from all false tongues,
which are like rasures cutting deceitfullie, and as the
sharpe arowes of a mightie man. Deliuer me, O Lord,
from slander, and from the obloquie of wicked men,
which with poisoned words haue bent their bowe to
cast downe the poore and needie, and to slay such as be
of a right conuersation. Furthermore, I beseech thee,
giue me grace to liue in this my desolate state of widowhood,
chastlie, and godlie, shewing my selfe an example
of godlines to others, and trusting wholie in thy
mercie at all times. Let me patientlie and christianlie
endure all crosses laid vpon me, and continue faithfullie
in making of supplications night and day. Behold,
as the eies of a maiden are vpon hir mistresse; so are
mine eies bent vpon thee my Lord God, vntill thou
haue mercie, Haue mercie on me, O Lord, haue mercie

on me, for I am full of reproch, and my soule is euen as
a weaned child from the mothers brests. Heare me, O
Lord, as my trust is in thee, for Iesus Christs sake thy
sonne our Lord and sauiour,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier of a widowe.
            O Lord I thanke thee, that thou hast
scourged me thus with the death of
mine husband. He was deer vnto me,
O Lord, euen bone of my bones, and
flesh of my flesh; for whom I forlooke
both father and mother, to cleaue
vnto him. He by the couenant of matrimonie
was made one bodie with
me: thou gauest him vnto me, and thou hast taken him
from me, blessed be thy name for euer. The bands of
death haue sundred me from him for a while; but I
hope, O Lord, by the power of thy holie spirit, that nothing
shall be able to separate me from thee mine onelie
Iesus, the onelie ioie of my soule. Put the axe of thy
mercie, to the roote of my wanton nature, and cut it
off, that I doo not marrie the vanitie of this wicked
world: but put vpon me the garment of innocencie,
and tie about my hart the iewell of faith, that I maie
onelie marrie thee in the couenant of thy heauenlie father,
louing Iesus, and haue nothing to doo with the
adulterer the diuell, the father of deadlie fornication.
This is the onelie bed of ioie, wherein I will sleepe, O
Lord; and the onelie arke of all comfort, wherein I will
saile; till I shall see thee face to face: to whom be praise,
and honour, both now and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            A praier to be said of widowes, for widowes.
            GRatious & faithfull God, father of orphans,
and iudge of widowes, which by thy word
hast commanded that none iniurie be done to
widowes and fatherlesse children: I beseech

thee haue pitie on me desolate woman, and my poore fatherlesse
children, and vpon all widowes and orphans
else where through the world: be thou our patrone and
defender, and minister such things vnto vs as thou
knowest we dailie stand in need of, whether it be meat,
clothing, or else what, for our sustentation. Let magistrates
thy ministers releeue the oppressed, iudge the
fatherlesse, and defend the widowe against all oppression
and wrong. Grant that our patrons may fatherlie
looke vnto vs widowes, and all men gladlie and godlie
prouide for vs and our orphans. Moreouer, giue all
men grace for their parts not to hurt vs or ours anie
waies, but to the vttermost of their powers to helpe
vs: bicause pure religion, and vndefiled before thee is,
to visit the fatherlesse and widowes in their aduersitie,
and to keepe our selues vnspotted of the world. In
like sort grant, that I, and all widowes, for our parts
may at all times, and in all our afflictions, put our
whole trust in thee the liuing God, our Lord & father,
and continue in supplications and praiers night and
daie, auoiding filthie pleasure, vncomelie gesture, and
vndecent behauiour, whereby either others may bee
offended, or our selues defamed, or at the least suspected
of lightnes. Blesse thou my fatherlesse children, O heauenlie
father, togither with all yoong pupils vnder
heauen, that by thy prouidence and fatherlie care they
may be honestlie and godlie brought vp in thy feare vnto
euerie good worke, whereby they may alwaies feare
thee their cheefe father, obeie their tutors & teachers,
harken vnto good counsell and correction, and so increase,
as in yeres, so in wisedome, both in the fauour
of men, and of thee their God. And I beseech thee, O
Lord, defend all married folke, with their children, that
through thy displeasure purchased by their wickednes,
they perish not with the sword, nor otherwise by vntimelie
death be dispatched, that their wi
                  •
               es proue not

widowes, nor their children fatherlesse. Oh blesse vs,
Lord, with thy fauour, euen for Christs sake thy welbe
                  •
               
loued sonne,
            Amen.
         
         
            The same praier more at large to be vsed generallie for
all widowes and orphans.
            O Most mercifull and faithfull God,
father of orphans, and iudge of widowes,
looke downe from heauen,
thou which considerest our labour
and sorrowe, and in whose hands all
our saluation doth consist. The poore
is left to thee, for thou art the helper
of the fatherles. The Lord doth
heare the desire of the poore; thou preparest their
hearts, and thine eare harkeneth therevnto, to helpe
the fatherles and widowe vnto their right, that the
man of the earth be no more exalted against the miserable,
We beseech thee, O most righteous auenger,
haue thou a consideration of all widowes and orphans,
and prouide for them, by ministring cloaths
and nourishment vnto them. Haue pitie on them, in all
their perils and necessities; stretch out thine helping
hand and deliuer them, as thou didst that widowe,
whose pitcher of oile, by the Prophet Elias, thou didst
so increase with thy blessing, that not onelie she deliuered
hir children in bondage for debt, out of the hands of
hir creditors; but also of the oile she sold and had wherwith
to susteme both hir selfe and hir children. For thou
art the Lord which carest for strangers, and releeuest
the fatherles and widowe, but destroiest the waies of
the vngodlie. Thou art touched with care of the afflicted,
and despisest not the desires of the fatherles, nor
the widowe when she powreth out hir praiers before
thee. For the teares running downe the cheeks of the
widowe, ascend vp into the heauens, and hir crie against

him which wrings it out by oppression.
            Gra
                  •
               t therefore, O mercifull God, that in the sight
of all gouernours and iudges, they may find fauour,
and haue equall iudges and patrones of their matters,
that the iudgement of the stranger and fatherles
be not peruerted, nor the cause of the widowe neglected,
but that iudgement may be sought according to
thy lawe, the oppressed holpen, iudgement giuen for the
orphane, and the widowe defended. For thou hast giuen
a straight commandement vnto all iudges, saieng:
Keepe equitie and righteousnes; deliuer the oppressed
from the power of the oppressor. Do not greeue nor oppresse
the stranger, the fatherles nor the widowe, and
shed none innocent bloud: for thou art the God which
wilt auenge thine elect that crie vnto thee. Thou keepest
truth for euer and euer, dooing iustice to the oppressed
with wrong. Now therefore deliuer thou, O
Lord, the fatherles and widowe out of the pawes of
the rauening theeues, which eate vp the houses of the
widowes, vnder the pretence of godlines, and colour
of right: deliuer them (I saie) out of the hands of wicked
iudges, which faine and inuent lawes to suppresse
the poore, and to hurt the cause of the base among the
people, that widowes may be a praie for them, and
that they may rob the fatherles; such peruerse iudges,
O Lord God, in the daie of their visitation and calamitie
from a far thou wilt vtterlie destroie.
            Appoint vnto orphanes and widowes faithfull patrons,
which will be touched with an earnest care of
their welfare. And also, giue vs willing minds to pleasure
widowes, & fatherles children, according to our abilitie
to deliuer the poore when he crieth, & the fatherles
which hath none to helpe, to susteine and helpe him
that is readie to fall, to comfort the widowe, euermore
to be as a father to the fatherles, and from our tender
yeares, to minister instruction to the widowes, and suffer

them neuer to perish, but in blessing to blesse them,
and to fill them with bread. For pure religion and vndefiled
before thee, O Lord our father, is to visit the fatherles
and widowes in their aduersitie, and to keepe
our selues vnspotted of the world. For he which is mercifull
towards the orphane as a father, and sheweth
himselfe as an husband towards his mother, in taking
the defence of their cause vpon him, he shall be as an obedient
son of the highest, and thou God wilt more fauour
him, than a mother can pitie hir son: but they
which despite the sighes and teares of the widowe, and
keepe backe their loafe that the fatherles eate not
thereof, and suffer them to perish for want of cloathing
and apparell: yea, which lift vp their hands to afflict
them, they shall greeuouslie be punished, their shoulders
shall fall from their ioints, and their armes be
broken from the bones of them. O mercifull God, extend
thy fauour vpon all widowes, that at all times,
and in all afflictions they may trust in thee the liuing
God, and continue in supplications and praiers night
and daie, being diligent, in all good works, not occupied
in pleasures, neither wanton, light, idle, wandering
from house to house, no tatlers, nor busie bodies, no
speakers of things vncomelie, nor giuers of occasion,
whereby thy word may be blasphemed. Keepe all parents,
that they being taken awaie either by war or
vntimelie death, their wiues be not widowes, and
their children orphans, running heere and there a
begging. Be thou their helper and comforter, euen for
Christes sake our Lord and sauiour,
            Amen.
         
         
            The orphane or fatherles childs praier.
            O Lord, so narowe is the mouth of charitie, so
consumed is the fire of Christian loue, that
where the foxes haue their holes, and birds
their nests, yet haue we poore fatherles children

and orphans, no place to rest our heads on. As
pilgrims we wander from place to place, and are driuen
with the wind of pinching pouertie vpon the seas
of this world to seeke releefe; but alas, and wo to the
world for it. The rich man deuoureth all superfluouslie,
or else hoordeth vp to fill his garners niggardlie,
so that Lazarus may not only walke amidst the streets
naked, but also lie begging at the gates sore, and yet go
without, euen the crumbs that fall from the table, to
ease the time of his necessitie. O Lord, therefore doo I
poore orphane flie vnto thee; haue thou mercie vpon
me: for it is onlie thou which fillest with thy blessing euerie
liuing thing. I am better than a farthing sparrowe,
O Lord thou knowest it, and I acknowledge it
to my comfort; feed my soule with the flesh of thy sonne,
and let me drinke of his bloud, that seeking first thy
kingdome, I may in the end be crowned with glorie,
and sit at the table of ioie in heauen with thee. O Lord
grant this I beseech thee,
            Amen.
         
         
            The old womans praier.
            O God of our fathers, and Lord of all
grace, throughout all nations, all
ages, and generations past, present
and to come, and which powrest
bountifullie vpon all flesh the treasures
of thine heauenlie vertue and
wisedome, grant I humblie beseech
thee not onlie vnto my selfe, which
am now become aged, and full of daies; but also vnto
whomsoeuer thou hast giuen the blessing of long life
and manie yeares, to liue in this vale of miserie, to be
mothers of manie children, to multiple vpon the
earth, to increase heere thy kingdome, and to be as organs
and instruments of thee, preserued to set foorth, as
we ought, the glorie of thy maiestie: that thou wilt

vouchsafe alwaies so to indue me, and all sage and ancient
matrones, with the spirit of truth, vnderstanding
and knowledge, with thy fatherlie wisedome, will
to holines, deuotion, granitie, temperance and constancie;
that the vnexpert, the iuniors, yonger women,
and inferiours, which through want of time, the affects
of youth, and void of the like gifts of grace, can
not deale as they should, for thy glorie in the common
wealth of the Church, may yet by our sober, sound, and
graue conuersation followe vs, as true patronesses of
pietie, be ruled by vs, guided, instructed, wel trained vp,
and christianly counselled, that vnto vs aged and graue
matrones againe, by such iust desert, and cleere shining
light of our good example, our due honor, worthie estimation,
condigne worship, humble submission and reuerence,
may most amplie for thy glorie dailie redound
towards vs: so shall it come to passe, that now at all
times, and in all ages, from tender youth, to verie old
age, through generations, and all posterities, thy holie
name shall be magnified in righteousnes and true holines,
with all ioifulnes, lauds, thanks-giuing, heere
and for euer in the euerlasting world to come, through
thine onlie free grace in the merits most pretious of
thine onlie Sonne our Lord Iesus Christ,
            Amen.
         
         
            Ad this Psalme, or praier.
            O Lord, which woorkest woonders,
which cheerest my hart with remembring
thee, and which inlightenest
my youth; despise not mine
old age, but make my bones to reioice,
and my hoarie heares to waxe
fresh againe as the eagle.
            Cast me not off in the time of mine
age: forsake me not now when my strength faileth me,
but as thy mercie hath come in the beginning of my

life, so helpe me now in mine old age and weaknes,
and let it finish the end of my course, to thy glorie, and
my comfort.
            For thou, O Lord, hast beene my trust euen from my
youth, vpon thee haue I staid my selfe from the wombe.
Thou art he that tooke me out of my mothers bowels,
that didst helpe me in my youth, and hast preserued me
euer since I was borne and conceiued.
            Thou, O God, hast taught me from my youth euen
vntill now; O therfore forsake me not now in mine old
age, and graie head: but as thou hast begun, so continue
thy benefites towards me, that thy liberalitie may
haue perfect praise, & that I may tell yet of thy woonderous
works, and shew thy power vnto them that
shall come after me.
            Haue mercie vpon me, O Lord, haue mercie vpon
me: for behold, my life is wasted, my daies are spent,
my yeeres are past, my strength faileth, & the marrowe
in my bones is consumed for age.
            The beautie of youth is gone, the glorie of age and
graie-head is come: I have beene yoong, and now am
old; full of daies am I, and striken in yeres: yet haue
I seene nothing, no nor done anie good in thy sight. I
haue spent my yeres as a thought, or tale that is told;
my daies are gone like a shadowe, and I am withered
awaie like grasse.
            The time of my pilgrimage is but greefe & sorrowe,
few & euill haue the daies of my life beene: and I haue
not attained vnto the yeres of the life of my grandmothers,
in the daies of their pilgrimage.
            The time of our life is threescore yeres and ten, and
if we liue till fourescore yeres, yet is our strength then
but labour and sorowe; for it is cut off quicklie, and we
flie awaie: so soone canst thou turne man to destruction,
and bring the sonnes of Adam to naught.
            One daie with thee, O Lord, is as a thousand yeres,

and a thousand yeres in thy sight are but as yesterdaie
which is past, and as a watch in the night: and our age
is nothing in respect of thee.
            Thy yeres, O Lord, endure through all generations,
and thy daies are without end or beginning: yea heauen
and earth shall perish, but thou shalt endure, they
shall all waxe old as doth a garment, and as a vesture
shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed, but
thou art the same, and thy yeres shall not faile.
            But the daies of men surelie are determined, which
he can not passe, and the number of his moneths are
knowen to thee: thou hast appointed him his bounds
and terme of yeres, which he can not go beyond.
            Thou hast numbred all our daies, which vade awaie
suddenlie like the grasse: for we are soone dispatched,
and easilie consumed.
            A man in this world is euen like a vapour or shadow
that quicklie vanisheth awaie. For all flesh is grasse,
and the glorie thereof as the floure of the field, which
flourisheth in the morning, and afterward withereth
and vadeth.
            Behold, our daies are to be measured, they are as it
were but a spanne long, and our age is nothing to
speake of.
            Our age is folden togither, and taken awaie from
vs like a shepheards cotage: our life is cut off, and
our daies shortened by our sinnes, like the thred of the
weauer, which is suddenlie broken off.
            We are but strangers in this world, & soiourners,
as were our forefathers: our daies on earth also are
but a shadowe; our life speedilie goeth awaie like the
weauers shuttle, and it abideth not.
            We are as nothing, Lord, in respect of thee; and verelie
euerie man liuing is altogither vanitie, yea infancie,
childhood, youth, middle age, and old age, all are
but meere vanitie.
            
               Wherefore, O Lord, teach me to number my daies,
that I may yet applie mine hart vnto wisedome: and
bring foorth more fruit euen in mine old age.
            O let me knowe mine end, and the number of my
daies, that I may be certified how long I haue to liue,
and what is yet to come.
            Instruct me, O Lord, that being alwaies mindfull
of my mortalitie, I neuer promise to my selfe manie
yeres, nor long life in this pilgrimage of ours: so shall
I not liue securelie, deferring my conuersion to thee
from daie to daie, nor yet put confidence in this fraile
and vncertaine life, as did that rich man, saieng, Soule
thou hast much good laid vp in store for manie yeres,
take thine ease, eate, drinke, and be merie; whose soule
notwithstanding was taken from him the same night.
            But giue me grace, that in thy feare I may dailie
prepare my selfe to depart out of this prison and lothsome
dungeon of my soule.
            Now let me remember thee my Maker, in the daies
of my old age, and in the yeres wherein I find no pleasure,
but paine and greefe, whiles the sunne, the light,
the moone, and starres begin to waxe darke, and the
clouds of continuall miserie seeme to remaine after the
raine, to the increasing of my greefe.
            Now let me thinke on thee my Creator, whiles [my
hands] the keepers of the house [of my bodie] doo tremble,
and the strong men [my legs] doo bow themselues,
and the grinders [my teeth] doo cease or stand still; bicause
they are few, and they that looke out by the windowes
[mine eies I meane] waxe darke and dimme.
            Now let me remember thee, my Maker, whiles the
doore [of my lips and mouth] beginneth to be shut, by
the base sound of the milner, or grinding, [when my
iawes, I saie, are scarse able to chawe my meat.] And
I rise vp at the voice of the bird, or crowing of the
cocke [bicause I can not sleepe.] And whiles all the

daughters of musike [euen my windpipe and eares]
are abased, and become deafe, and not able to heare
singing.
            Whiles I am afraid to climbe high, bicause of my
weaknes; and stoope downe, for feare least anie thing
should hit me. Whiles feare is in the waie, & I tremble
as I go, and am afraid of stumbling. Whiles the
almon tree [my head] doth florish [with white heares]
and the verie light grashopper is a burden [vnto it to
beare.] And whiles all lust is past and driuen awaie.
            Now I saie, O Lord, euen now yet let me call to
mind thee my creator, before I go to the house of mine
age, or long home, [the graue] I meane, and the mourners
go [lamenting my death] about the streetes. Or
euer the siluer lace [the sinewes and marowe of my
backe bone] be taken awaie: and or the golden ewer or
well [of that litle yellow skin that couereth my brainepan]
be broken: or the pitcher [of my two great veines]
be crackt at the well [of my liuer:] or the wheele [my
head] be broken vpon the cisterne [of my hart, out of
the which the powers of life are drawne.]
            Euen now, I saie, at the least, O my Creator, let me
remember thee, before I [which am but dust] doo returne
againe to the earth from whence I came; and
my spirit and soule returne to thee, O God, that gauest
me it.
            For all is but plaine vanitie, and nothing more certaine
than death: though nothing more vncertaine
than the houre thereof.
            Therefore let me haue alwaies before mine eies an
image and meditation of my departure, the better to
knowe the fleeting and vanitie of this combersome and
vncertaine life, that I may liue to thee my God, being
sound in faith, and strong in hope, looking with cheerefulnes
for the daie of my departure, and the ioifull appearing
of thy sonne Iesus Christ my redeemer.

And as long as I abide in this tabernacle of my decaied
and forworne bodie, let me with all studie minister
to my faith, vertue; to vertue, knowledge, to knowledge,
temperance; to temperance, patience; to patience,
godlines: vntill this tabernacle being laid awaie,
I shall passe ouer to my long home and dwelling place,
not made with hands, but euerlasting in the heauens,
where I shall be clothed with eternall glorie and immortalitie,
when this my earthlie house is put off, and
destroied by death.
            Grant also, O God, that trusting firmelie to thy promises,
I may be readie, and glad to returne from this
vale of miserie, to mine euerlasting and celestiall countrie:
for while I am in this bodie, I wander from thee
my God. For now I walke in faith, not in the full and
perfect enioieng and possessing of eternall good; wherefore,
whether I be at home, or from home, let me endeuour
my selfe to be acceptable in thy sight.
            Make me a faithfull seruant, and wise virgin, alwaie
hauing the lampe of faith readie light, and with the
oile of thy grace and merits prepared in my hand, and
still looking for the comming of the bridgrome my Lord
and Sauiour Iesus: (for I knowe not when he will
come, at the euening, or at midnight; whether at the
cocke-crowing, or in the dawning of the daie) least by a
sudden houre of death I beeing ouertaken, and as it
were caught in the fowlers trap, I be found vnreadie,
and haue a repulse among the foolish virgins: but contrariwise,
by prudent watching in true conuersion and
repentance, I may continuallie couet to be dissolued,
and to be with Christ my redeemer.
            Grant also, deere Father, that at the verie point of
death, hauing escaped all hardnes and temptations, I
may triumph like a conquerour, & behold the presence
and power of thine holie spirit: and let my last words
be that, which thy sonne did vtter vpon the altar of the

crosse, saieng, Father into thy hands I commend my
spirit: and when my spirit is taken from me, heare yet
O God, the grones of my hart.
            And the houre glasse of life & death being outrun and
come, let thy seruant and hand-maid depart in peace,
bicause mine eies haue seene thy saluation, which thou
hast prepared before the face of all people: a light to be
reuealed vnto the gentiles, and the glorie of thy people
Israell; through our Lord Iesus Christ,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier to be vsed of old women.
            OH my sweet Lord Iesus Christ, my
creator and reformer, which wilt
that no man perish, neither delightest
in the destruction of soules:
heare me wretched woman, and inueterated
sinner, which walowe in
wicked life. The whole time of my
pilgrimage is threescore yeres: few
and euill haue the daies of my life beene, and I am now
placed in the darke euening of my life: neither looke I
to attaine vnto the yeres of the life of my forefathers
or mothers in the daies of their pilgrimage. I am full
of yeres and daies, I saie, O Lord; but in deed more full
of vices and sinnes. Mine offences are not a few, but
an huge heape of an innumerable sort of sinnes, neither
are they small or veniall sinnes, but great, mortall,
and deadlie. My sinfull conscience accuseth me, and the
large abundance of mine iniquitie beateth my hart in
peeces. This deceitfull world, in which I dreame, and
loiter, faileth me, my forworne and withered bodie
threateneth my decaie. This house of claie waxeth verie
ruinous in euerie part thereof. The graie heares, a
token of my manifold afflictions for sinnes, are plentifullie
growen vpon me, and my strength is quite gone;
to teach me to knowe the vanitie and brittle state of

this life. To conclude, my life is short, mine end doubtfull,
my destruction horrible. Death now beginneth to
search me out euerie where; the diuell doth laie snares
for me on euerie side, time passeth awaie, the houreglas
is almost run, my candle is almost burned out, and
thine euerlasting iudgement draweth on.
            Alas, what shall I sinfull woman doo, for I haue
prouoked thee my God, and all other thy creatures against
me; bicause thou knowing my forepassed sinfull
life, dooest see nothing in me without spot and offence.
I haue shut my selfe out of thy presence, when thou
didst call me to euerlasting life; and I haue receiued
that old enimie of my grandmother Eue into my soule,
which persecuteth me vnto death; my conscience (I
saie) doth vexe me; the damnation to come, which I
haue so deepelie and often deserued, doth feare me,
which through mine owne merits or deserts I can
not possiblie put awaie or auoid. When I consider it
with my selfe, oh how intollerable is that horror vnto
me! When I doo well ponder and regard it in my selfe,
oh how ineuitable is death to be differred or put awaie
from me! that now am euen a figure of death it selfe,
and carrie him euidentlie about me, in my pale face,
and leane lims; yea, so far am I from flieng awaie
from death, that as it seemeth, I rather now post speedilie
after him. Moreouer, to acquit my selfe before
thee, I cannot possiblie doo it; for that I haue as manie
accusers as sins, as many witnesses as hoarie heares.
Yea, thou thy selfe my sweet God, who best knowest me,
art my iust accuser; thou art the true witnes of my
deeds, thou art my righteous iudge, and if thine euerlasting
iustice refuse me, then both thine enimies and
also mine, with whom I haue plight the troth of my
friendship, are my heauie accusers. No holie man or
woman, yong or old, doth speak for me, or in the life euerlasting
may speake for me, and those that might in

their dailie praiers in this life helpe me towards thee,
I (alas) with all scornefull reproch and contempt haue
cast them awaie, and vtterlie refused their good companie;
but my verie mortall aduersaries I haue too willinglie
receiued, euen into my bosome.
            Now therefore being alone in secret, I lie flat vpon
the ground, destitute of all helpe, confounded, and had
in derision of all. Now in the last age of my withered
life, when my glorie should be my graie head, that is, my
wisedome and feare of God ioined with much experience,
my reproch alas is increased by my follie; and bicause
I haue not behaued my selfe iustlie and wiselie
before other my iuniors, old age, that should be a crown
of glorie, when it is found in the waie of righteousnes,
and ioined with vertue, is now turned into infamie
in me, and to be abhorred, by reason of my manifold
sins and vices. For though I haue liued long, yet bicause
I am waxed old in wickednes, I shall be nothing
regarded, and my last age shall be without honor
through my doting defiled life. To conclude, there
draweth on apase the daie of thy fearefull iudgements,
in which all my deeds shall be tried and sifted to the vttermost
and innermost secret thoughts of my hart. My
reproofes shall be reuealed, and my opprobrious and
shamefull works shall be brought to light and openlie
seene, for that I haue beene a barren and vnfruitfull
tree, and being throwne into euerlasting fire, I shall
there burne foreuer, and of those whom I haue lewdlie
accompanied my selfe with, shall I be vexed, who also
after the sentence of eternall damnation giuen vpon
me, shall teare me, and without anie intermission
or end most cruellie shall minister torments vnto
me, whom they shall not cease crucifieng for euermore,
neither will there euer at anie time anie waie of mitigation,
ease, or mercie appeare, or be found at their
hands.
            
               Wherefore, O louing Lord, and souereigne Sauiour,
there remaineth now no more vnto me sinfull woman,
worne out with miserie, but thy branching mercie
to reioice my hart, to quicken mine appaled spirits,
and to renew mine age as doth the eagle; for that in
the same thy mercie, and through the same thy compassion
and fauour, I (almost spent, wasted, and consumed
to dust) doo yet breath and liue to call vpon thee, who
art gentle, mild, and verie mercifull, both to old and
yoong, man, woman and child, and wilt not the death,
no not of an old and ancient sinner as I am. O be
mindfull therefore of me, my sweet God, bicause thou
art my creator, and I thine vnworthie creature and
hand-maid. Do not loose the works of thine own hands,
through my greeuous sins and lewd deserts. Thou art
my redeemer and sauiour, therefore saue me sinfull woman
(through thy grace, mercie, and fauour) whome
through thine owne iustice thou maist worthilie cast awaie
into damnation. O God be mercifull vnto me a
sinner, and grant pardon to hir that repenteth from
the bottome of hir heart. O giue not foorth (I beseech
thee) the voice of thy sentence according to my demerits,
but like as thy mercie before hath come in the beginning
of my life, when thou tookest me out of my mothers
wombe, so let it conclude the end thereof, when
thou shalt turne me againe into the mother of all
things, to remaine with thee for euer, world without
end,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier to be said of an old Woman.
            OH God, which continuest still the same, and
dooest remaine for euer subiect to no tearme
of yeares and time, whose yeares shall neuer
faile, and the remembrance of whom eternallie
endureth from generation to generation, worlds
without end.
            
               Haue mercie vpon me thy sinfull hand-maid, for behold
I (as all thy works else both in heauen and earth)
by little and little, am waxen old, as is the garment by
long vse; as a vesture am I outworne, I saie, & greatlie
changed. My strength abateth more & more, I perish
and consume hourelie, and am withered awaie like
mowne grasse or haie. Howbeit, Lord, if praise bee
seemelie in the mouth of so old a sinner, or if rottennes
and dust may presume to giue thanks vnto thee; then
lo, I thy wretched creature humblie laud and magnifie
thy maruellous mercies extended towards mee,
from my first conception in my mothers wombe, vntill
this present houre; yea, would God I could tell what
to render vnto thee, O Lord my God, for all thy benefits
towards me, which hast not taken me awaie hastilie,
nor cut off my daies by death, as I iustlie deserued, but
let me run the race of this life, and suffered me to passe
the tempestuous seas of this dangerous world, and
liue vnto so good an age.
            Now therefore, as it hath pleased thee in mercie to
augment the number of my yeares, to lengthen thus
my daies, and to satisfie me with long life heere vpon
earth, to my comfort (for the which I offer and paie vnto
thee the sacrifice of praise:) so I call still vpon thy
holie name, beseeching thee to vouchsafe in like goodnes
to grant me grace, that during the remnant of my race
and little time of being yet to come, I may liue still to
glorifie thee, by endeuouring my selfe dutifullie to further,
and helpe not onlie the yonger sort of women, and
my freends and kindred, but also my verie enimies, and
the Common-weale, wherein I liue, with such good
councell, wisedome, and discretion, as it hath pleased
thee in mercie to reueale vnto me, or by experience in
this long course of my life I haue obteined; that shewing
my selfe a guide vnto godlines, and an example of
vertue vnto all, I may worthilie haue that honor and

dignitie attributed and giuen vnto me, which is due
vnto the image and portrature of wisdome, vnto a matrone
of modestie, and to an instructer or teacher of honestie
and vertue.
            Furthermore, take from me the foule vice of auarice,
wherewith old age is most commonlie infected, and incline
my hart vnto thy testimonies, and not vnto couetousnes;
and grant that I may euer eschew and auoid
all sloth, waiwardnes, and lasciuiousnes. Teach me yet
to number my daies, that I may applie my hart vnto
wisedome, and giue me grace to weigh and consider diligentlie
with my selfe, what the graie heares in my
head, and this my crooked and riueled bodie postulateth
and requireth; euen that I vse apparantlie graue
manners, and vertuous conditions. O let me remember
how that I doo dailie drawe neerer and neerer vnto
death; that mine out-worne bodie is bowed downe towards
the ground, and that my graue is at hand,
wherein by death I shall ere it be long enter to be consumed
into earth and dust, from whence I was taken,
that knowing this my earthlie house and tabernacle
shall be destroied, I may laie aside all the vaine pleasures
and delights of this wretched world, and giue my
selfe wholie to looke for death, and patientlie in watching,
fasting and praieng abide his comming.
            And bicause my life is now lamed with age, broken
with infirmitie, and oppressed with sorrowes, I come
crieng vnto thee oh mercifull God, sighing in my soule,
and saieng; Oh would God that thou O Christ, of thy
heauenlie pitie, hauing released the heauie burthen of
my sins, wouldst commaund mee thine humble hand-maid,
to laie aside the fardell of this flesh, that I might
passe hence by death, vnto the endles ioies of paradise.
For now I ware weerie of this painefull, sinfull, and
corruptible life; I begin to loath and detest this
queene of pride, this mistres of all mischiefe, and hand-maid

of hell: yea therefore in deed I sigh and grone, desiring
that this ruinous and rotten tabernacle of mine
earthlie house, wherewith I am yet clothed and burdened,
might be destroied, to the end I might be clothed
and compassed with the building giuen of God,
euen with our house of unmortalitie, which is from
heauen, that mortalitie might be swalowed vp in life.
For I loue rather to remoue out of this fraile bodie,
and to dwell with thee, O Lord: and with S. Paule I
hartilie wish and desire to be dissolued, and to be with
thee; for I would faine see thee. And bicause no man can
see thee, and liue here, behold therefore, O Lord, I can
find in my hart to die here, & leaue this life, that I may
see thee. Let me see thee, that I may die here, I desire
not to liue anie longer, I had leuer die, that I may liue
with thee in the kingdome of heauen, which is the blessed,
the chast, and holie life,prepared of thee, O father,
for them that loue thee, where youth neuer waxeth old,
where life neuer weareth out, where there is no age,
nor anie miserie or infirmitie of age, where there is no
lame, crooked, or foreworne person, but all growe vp to
perfect men and women, after the full measure of the
age of Christ, there in happie eternitie and full suretie
of the incorruptiblenes of thine euerlasting immortalitie,
to reioice with thine elect saints, and praise thee
for the gift of perpetuall blisse and happines: through
Iesus Christ our Lord,
            Amen, Amen.
         
         
            A praier to be said of anie woman, generallie for all women,
that they may haue in remembrance the fall of their
grandmother Eue, and be moued therby the rather
to turne to God, and liue in their calling according
to his will.
            FOrasmuch, O heauenlie Father, as at the
beginning when thou madest man and woman,
thou didst place them both in paradise,
and there blessing them in their state of innocencie,

didst giue them also a lawe of obedience in paine
of eternall death & damnation, to be straightlie of them
obserued and kept; which through the spite & sleights
of satan, was most miserably broken, working his purpose
by the woman Eue, whom he foresawe to that
speciall end to be an organ & most apt instrument of al
mischeefe, for hir owne destruction, hir husband Adams,
and their whole posteritie for euer. Bicause in hir, our
grandmother Eue, as in the first transgressour, we are
all spotted, haue lost our innocencie, and haue sinned to
eternall death, and should therefore haue beene damned
for euer, vnlesse through thy mercie, O God, in
the promised seede, the seede of the woman, Christ Iesus
thy sonne, which brake the head of the serpent,
we did ground our assured faith and confidence to be
saued.
            I beseech thee, and that most humblie, O louing father,
to haue mercie vpon thine inheritance, the whole
generation and ofspring of our old parents Adam and
Eue; & so worke in the harts of all vs women, that we
especiallie may haue in our remembrance the originall
of our spot & corruption, of our frailtie, deadlie fall, and
most readie inclination to all wickednes: and to crie
continuallie vnto thee, to attaine such strength of thine
heauenlie grace, through the working power of thine
holie spirit, that the sleights of satan may be preuented,
& we inwardlie purged of all bitternes, fiercenes,
lightnes, inconstancie, idlenes, pride, stoutnes, and of
all impuritie, and wickednes: and to liue in our calling
with meeknes, mildnes, peace, humblenes, quietnes,
exercising all maner of puritie, clennes, sobernes, godlines,
and holines, as becommeth vnfeigned professors,
and the true daughters of holie Sara, following hir
example in all obedience and well dooing, to thine honour
and glorie, and our eternall saluation; through
Iesus Christ thy sonne our euerlasting Sauiour, who

liueth and reigneth with thee and the holie ghost,in all
honour and glorie, worlds without end,
            Amen.
         
         
            A praier to be said of all deuout women, for the light of
ladie Vertues lampe, and recouerie of hir frends and hand-maids
(grace, repentance, faith, hope, and saluation)
lost, and for the ransoming of their soules from
the captiuitie of sinne.
            O Most mightie God and heauenlie
king, vouchsafe to haue respect vnto
vs miserable women, which are so
wrapped in wretchednes in this
world, that we are altogither vnworthie
to be comprehended within
the compasse of thy compassion: O
Lord of all flesh, if it be lawfull for vs
disobedient seruants, to charge thee our beneficiall
Lord and master, with thy freendlie & vndeserued promises;
behold then we thy hatefull hand-maids craue,
that thou haue no pleasure nor delight in the death of
vs filthie sinners. Thou art the same God thou wert,
when thou didst redeeme vs with the pretious sanguin
oile of thy deere sonne: thy grace is yet as great, thy
goodnes no lesse glorious, thy power is inuincible, thy
diuine Deitie not diminished, thy bountie nothing abated,
and that which must be our onelie helpe, thy mercies
as much manifold. It pleased thy maiestic to send
messengers into the world, that they might encounter
with the seruants of satan; namelie thy grace, ladie
vertues pilote, to encounter with vaine desires; repetance,
to banish sinne; ladie vertue, with hir freends
faith and hope, to driue awaie the dread of death and
desperation; and finallie saluation, to preuent the force
of the hellish furies.
            But alas thou seest, O Lord, how fraillie we haue
dealt with thee, & with thy messengers: thou knowest
likewise, that we haue not beene in readines willinglie

to receiue or accept the light of ladie vertues lampe,
when it shined vpon vs, to guid vs in the waie to euerlasting
life; but haue too retchleslie extinguished it
with worldlie vanities, and wilfullie shadowed it with
our sinnes, whereby we haue fallen from vertue; not
she by vs, but we by wanting hir, doo vade: faith, not by
vs, but we with want of faith doo faint: hope, not by
vs, but we with want of heauenlie hope doo halt: they
of themselues are strong, but we without them are
weaker than weaknes it selfe. Recouer vs in them, O
God, that we (who now shame to shew our selues in
thy presence) may find through Christ, some occasion
of countenance, when we come with our lamps of
pure faith, cleerlie burning in our hands, to meete the
bridegrome, and implore thy fauourable sentence in
the great iudgement daie of thy comming.
            O vouchsafe yet once againe to extend thy manifold
mercies, for ransoming our soules from the captiuitie
of sinne. We without thine aid, are miserable: we
without thy fauourable regard, are more than miserable,
and woorse than woorst wretched. Suffer not the
works of thine hands, which thou hast ordeined for the
increase & multiplieng of thy kingdome, to be flames
of infernall fire, and to burne in the gulfe of horrible
hell, as we iustlie haue deserned, for so be astlie abusing
our selues, and the gifts of nature and grace, which
thou hast giuen vnto vs. It is thy power, not our priuiledge;
it is thy grace, not our goodnes; it is thy mercie,
not our merits, that must stand vs in steed. To vse
circumstances in our sute, O God, what auaileth it?
Thou knowest our desire, before we demand; thou
knowest our want, before we wish; thou knowest what
we need, before we aske; thou knowest our sute, before
we seeke. O vouchsafe therefore to supplie what we
sue for; heare vs, and helpe vs; make vs worthie to attaine
vnto that freedome which we haue forsaken: let

thy mercie preserue that which thy power hath made,
and wisedome beautified. Thy glorie, O God, shall be
thine; if anie benefite be ours, thou knowest our necessitie,
and we hope thou dooest pitie our miserie.
            Yet bicause it pleaseth thee to be praied vnto, we
therefore come vnto thee, humblie in spirit, though
fraile in flesh. It is thou, not our s
                  •
               lues, that must
make the flesh agreeable to the spirit. It is thou, not
our selues, that must ouer-rule our nature with thy
grace, our lusts with thy loue, our soules with reason.
And although thou knowest how to bring it to passe,
better than can be surmised in our thoughts; we craue
yet, Lord, that thou wilt graffe in vs thy grace, make
vs readie to repentance, let the light of ladie vertues
lampe shine still on vs, to guid vs in the waie to euerlasting
happines. Uouchsafe also to haue fauourable regard
vnto those, on whom the light of hir lampe hath
shined; and that such, on whom it hath not shined, may
be at thy will and pleasure vnshadowed. Grant, I saie,
that wheresoeuer shee curteouslie offereth the vse of
hir lightned lampe, it may be freendlie accepted both
in court and countrie. Let manie buie it, but mo vse it;
let manie craue it, but mo hold it; and when they haue
it, let them not shadowe or extinguish it with worldlie
vanities, nor quench it with the water of sinne: and
when they receiue it, let them be in readines, both to
vse and preserue it with all diligence & willingnes. Finallie,
grant that all may mainteine the light thereof,
not onelie during their naturall liues, but after to all
posteritie, at the disposition of thy diuine power and
prouidence. Moreouer frame in vs a fixed faith, to the
fort of thy felicitie. Let hope haue onelie respect to saluation,
that we may supplie the place thou hast prepared
for the wise virgins. Let thy diuine power direct
the discontinuing of our soules captiuitie. Let thy pitie
be prest, to make thy mercie mitigate our miserie.

Let thy grace guide vs, and thy mercie O God obteine
freedome for vs, that our lamps beeing replenished
with the oile of thy merits, we may walke in the light
thereof with hartie hope to the gates of heauen, now
wide open, to meete the great King, and all the mightie
multitude of angels, who with vnspeakeable glorie
shall come, readie to receiue vs most royallie, and
intirelie to entertaine and accompanie vs to the celestiall
palace and paradise of all pleasure, there with all
the holie companie of Angels, Archangels, Powers,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors,
Uirgins, yea, & our owne parents & Kindred, to enter
and sing psalmes of praise, and songs of thanks-giuing
to thine immortall Maiestie, to whom with thy
Sonne and holie Ghost, be euerlasting laud, perpetuall
praise, and greatest glorie, both now and for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another praier made vpon the similitude of the
ten virgins, Matth. 25.
            O Lord Iesu Christ, thou good spouse
and heauenlie bridegroome, giue me
grace like the wise virgins, both
with a right intention, and vpright
dealing, to doo good works, and also
to perseuere and continue in the
same watchfullie and diligentlie
vnto the end. And bicause it is not
sufficient, to haue once giuen my selfe to followe thee,
vnlesse I continue; doo thou teach me wiselie to make
prouision in time, that hauing plentie of the oile of thy
grace and gifts in the lampe of my soule, I may neuer
contemne thine honor, nor faile in the mid-way; but being
found readie and watchfull, I may be thought
worthie to enter ioifullie with thee vnto the wedding.
I beseech thee also, O Lord, make knowne vnto mee

mine end before it come, and suffer me not to depart
this life, before I haue confessed my faults, and thou
haue forgiuen me my sins, that in the hour of my death,
neither thy wrath may fall vpon me, nor the power of
darkenes hurt or inuiron me; but let me be found such
a one at the daie of examination and triall, as I did
appeare and shew my selfe at the day of my regeneration
and baptisme, through Iesus Christ our Lord,
            Amen, Amen.
         
         
            A generall Confession of sinnes, with a praier for
mercie and grace, verie necessarie to be
vsed at all times.
            O Almightie God my heauenlie father,
I confesse and acknowledge
that I am a miserable and wretched
sinner, & haue manifold waies
most greeuoustie transgressed thy
most godlie commandements, thorough
wicked thoughts, vngodlie
lusts, sinfull words, and detestable
deeds in my whole life. In sin am I borne and conceiued,
and there is no goodnes in me, inasmuch as if thou
shouldest enter into thy narrowe iudgement with me,
iudging me according to the same, I were neuer able
to abide or suffer it; but must needs perish and be damned
for euer, so little helpe, comfort, or succour is there
either in me, or in anie other creature. Onlie this is my
comfort, O heauenlie father, that thou didst not spare
thine onlie deere beloued Sonne, but didst giue him vp,
vnto the most bitter and most vile & slanderous death
of the crosse for me, that he might so paie the ransome
for my sins, satisfie thy iudgement, still and pacifie thy
wrath, reconcile me againe vnto thee, and purchase me
thy grace, fauour, and euerlasting life. Wherefore,
through the merit of his most bitter death and passion,

and through his innocent bloud-shedding, I beseech
thee O heauenlie father, that thou wilt vouchsafe to
be gratious and mercifull vnto me, to forgiue and
pardon me all my sins, to lighten my hart with thy holie
spirit, to renew, confirme, and strengthen me with a
right and a perfect faith, and to inflame me in loue towards
thee and my neighbour, that I may hencefoorth
with a willing and glad hart walke as it becommeth
me in thy most holie commandements, and so glorifie
and praise thee euerlastinglie.
            And also, that I may with a free conscience, and quiet
hart, in all manner of temptations, afflictions, or necessities,
and euen in the verie pangs of death, crie
boldlie and faithfullie vnto thee, and saie, I beleeue in
God the father Almightie, &c.
            
            But O Lord God heauenlie father, to comfort my
selfe in affliction and temptation with these articles
of the Christian faith, it is not in my power; for faith is
thy gift: and forasmuch as thou wilt be praied vnto,
and called vpon for it, I come vnto thee, to praie and beseech
thee both for that, and for all other things necessarie
for me and thy whole Church, euen as thy deere
beloued Sonne our Sauiour Christ Iesus hath himselfe
taught vs, and from the verie botome of my hart
I crie and saie, O our father which art in heauen, &c.
            
         
         
            A praier for the Queenes Maiestie and the
Realme.
            O God, most excellent creator and preseruer
of all things, we cast our selues downe before
the feet of thy maiestie, and inwardlie
feeling how vnworthie we are to haue
our praiers heard of thee, we dare not lift
vp our eies to heauen.
            Neuertheles, whereas we are conceiued in sin, and
therefore (as all Adams children) deserued vntimelie

death, yet thy fatherlie hand hath brought vs foorth,
and caused vs to be borne, yea and granted vs to liue
in this blessed time of thy Gospell, to the intent that
dieng with Christ, we should rise againe to eternall
life.
            But alas (wretches that we are) we haue deserued
thy iust indignation, by returning to our old vomit;
and yet thy grace surmounteth our sinne, continuallie
calling vs to thy sheepfold, by the voice of thy gospell.
Blessed be thy holie name for sending vs that light,
when we were in darknesse; that spirituall drinke,
when we were in deadlie thirst; that heauenlie foode,
when we were hunger-sterued. And like honour and
praise be ascribed to thee onelie, O Lord, for giuing vs
such, so wise, so zealous, so godlie, and carefull gouernours
of thy chosen Church of England, whom thou
hast raised vp by the light of thy gospell, to guid vs in
the same thy light, and to feed vs with the same thy
heauenlie food.
            We magnifie thy name daie and night, for that inestimable
benefit of thine, bestowed vpon vs thy people
of England, in calling thy chosen creature, the
nurse of this thy church, our Queene, and Gouernour,
from worldlie vanities, to the care of thy kingdome,
and into the communion of thy saints, by the preaching
of the Gospell; when we gaue not sufficientlie attentiue,
and diligent eare to thy blessed word, albeit thou
didst correct hir, and other ingratfull creatures of this
our nation, with thy rod; yet euen in this point also
thy clemencie surmounteth our double wickednes. For
behold, when as thy iustice might haue depriued vs of
hir, thou of thine infinite mercie didst deliuer hir out of
prison, set hir free from the lions iawes, crowned hir
with a diadem of gold, and put the roiall scepter of this
realme in hir hand.
            Moreouer, O singular and most pretious treasure of

treasures, thou through hir meanes and ministerie,
hast brought againe Christ Iesus, once banished out
of England.
            These, most mercifull Father, be the principall iewels
of thine inestimable riches bestowed vpon vs;
which the more excellent they are, the lesse are we worthie
of them; bicause we haue misbehaued our selues
towards thy maiestie, in dailie sinning more and more
against thee; in so much that feeling the same in our
conscience, we be driuen well neere to despaire. But
when we call to mind thy sure and sweet promises in
Christs pretious blood, we are thereby refreshed, and
recouering strength by hope, approch to thy throne
boldlie, not offering anie thing for the satisfaction of
our sinnes, but onelie crauing, that the oblation of
thine annointed, which is the iustifier and sanctifier of
all that are to be iustified and sanctified, may make vs
cleane, and so receiue vs into thy tuition. And seeing obedience
pleaseth thee better than the fat of sheep; and
the sacrifice of our lips, better than the flesh and blood
of beasts, grant that we may finish our mortall race
in shewing foorth thy praise, and keeping thy holie
will.
            And forasmuch as thou hast thought good to set vp
thy seruant our Queene, a woman, and a fraile vessell,
ouer vs, to gouerne this kingdome, and that she must
render an account thereof (a hard thing so to doo) before
the iudgement seat of thy Sonne Christ: send
downe, we beseech thee, O Father, send downe such
grace from thy high throne, vpon thy daughter our
Queene Elizabeth, as thou knowest most necessarie
for the performance and execution of so great a
charge.
            Thou hast giuen hir Councellers; grant that she
may vse their counsell happilie: indue them with godlie,
righteous, and carefull harrs, that they may be

both willing and able simplie & faithfullie to consult,
and also prouidentlie to prouide, aswell for thy church,
as for hir, and vs hir people.
            It is thy grace, O Lord, that we hir people renewed
with thy word, doo suffer our selues to be nourished
with the same: send foorth therfore faithfull shepherds,
godlie and true teachers, to feed vs: and driue awaie
all hirelings, and rauening woolues, from this
flocke of thine, and of thy sonne Iesus Christ.
            Besides this, so blesse vs the sheepe of thy pasture,
that we may neuer denie thee the chiefe honour, our
Queene thy deputie hir obedience, and our neighbours
mutuall loue.
            Furthermore, of thy goodnes mainteine peace and
tranquillitie, defend our Queene, hir kingdome and
countrie, from bloudie warres: and especiallie protect
hir, and vs, from hollowe harts, & from ciuill tumults
and conspiracies, which haue shaken the greatest part
of Christendome.
            And bicause the affliction of euerie poore creature
apperteineth to hir, in so much as she is thine; inspire
the magistrates vnder hir with thy holie spirit, that
they may willinglie and carefullie mainteine iustice,
and prouide for the releefe of Christs poore members,
whose treasures both she, and we, and all others are,
whom thou hast blessed with thy earthlie benefites.
Heare our praiers, we beseech thee, for the sake
of thy sonne Iesus Christ our redeemer:
to whom with thee, and thy holie
spirit, bee all honour and
glorie for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            Morning and Euening praiers.
            A praier to be said in the morning.
            ALmightie and eternall God, my
Creator and louer; I praise, adore,
and blesse thee, for that in mine offences
and vngratefulnes thou hast
so mercifullie and leisurelie forborne
and suffered me to liue euen vnto
this houre, wherevnto by thy benefites
thou hast brought me, giuing to
me thine vnworthie and reprochfull hand-maid, both
life and necessaries therevnto belonging, appointing
angels to be my keepers. O good God, who knoweth
whether til euening my life shall be prolonged, or what
death is appointed for me: Oh mercifull Lord God, and
heauenlie Father, that I may with hartie repentance
truelie repent my sinnes, and inwardlie bewaile that
euer I offended thy godlie maiestie; suffer not my soule
to depart this bodie, before it be (through thy mercie
perfectlie reconciled & adopted vnto thee by thy grace)
bedeckt with thy merits and vertues, inflamed with
perfect charitie and acceptable vnto thee, according to
thy will.
            O mercifull Lord Iesu Christ, if these things which
I desire, doo stand with thy pleasure, grant them, I beseech
thee, although I be not worthie to be heard. Yeeld
and giue, I beseech thee of thine infinite mercie, that
by the merits of thy passion I may be purged from all
my sinnes, and that at the houre of my death I may
be striken with true and vehement contrition, and beeing
knit with thee in perfect charitie, I may immediatlie
die vnto thee my sooeet Redeemer, safelie and freelie,
from all damnation. Neuertheles in all these my requests,

O best beloued Iesu, I doo fullie and wholie offer
and resigne my selfe vnto thee, to be altogither disposed
and ordered according to thy will, and to suffer
for thy glorious name sake, desiring this one thing at
thy hands, that thou wilt remember my fragilitie, vnworthines,
vnstablenes, and miseries; togither with
thine owne goodnes and most charitable mercie, praieng
thee neuer to forsake or leaue me, but that thou
wilt alwaies possesse and gouerne me, according to thy
will,
            Amen.
         
         
            Another Morning praier.
            OH Lord my God, and most benigne
Sauiour Iesus Christ; who, when
I was not, didst creat and make me
capable of the souereigne and onelie
good, and being made a thrall and
bondslaue through my forefathers
trespasse, didst redeeme me with thy
most pretious blood, and losse of thy
sacred life, abiding the torments due to my trespasses,
to acquite and rid me from the same. For these, O Lord,
and all other thine inestimable benefites; namelie, for
hauing preserued me this night past, and all the time
and daies of my life hitherto, I yeeld thee most humble,
zealous, and obedient thanks, offering my selfe wholie
to thee, as I am wholie thine; beseeching thee also of
thine infinite clemencie, to preserue me this daie, and
euer, from anie waies offending thee, and to direct all
my thoughts, words, and works, to thine euerlasting
glorie. Mine estate and calling is, as thou knowest, O
Lord, inuironed with manie difficulties and dangers;
and through mine euill customes and wicked inclinations,
hardlie can I, without thy speciall assistance,
passe this daie, no not one minute thereof, without offending
thee in manifold sinnes. Keepe vnder therefore,

O Lord, my concupiscence, and refresh my conscience
with the dewes of thy diuine grace. O giue me
strength, I praie thee, to fight the good fight of faith,
more coragiouslie and perseuerantlie than hitherto I
haue done, and make thou me able to subdue all wicked
suggestions of the enimie.
            Trulie Lord, heere in humilitie and sinceritie of hart,
I protest neuer willinglie by thy gratious fauour to
offend thy lawes and commandements anie more. I
detest all sin, and whatsoeuer may anie waies displease
thy sacred maiestie. I desire to loue thee, feare thee, and
serue thee this daie and euermore, and to direct all
mine actions to thine honor and glorie. Assist me Lord
with thy grace, and enrich my pouertie with the plentie
of thy merits, for in the vnion of that charitie, wherwith
thou discendedst from heauen in the blessed virgins
wombe, and afterward offredst vp thy selfe on the
crosse in sacrifice for our sinnes, in the vnion of this thy
incomprehensible charitie, I saie, I offer vnto thee
whatsoeuer I shall doo, thinke, or speake this day; beseeching
thee, through thy mercifull goodnes, to accept,
gouerne, blesse, and enrich me, and all that I go about,
in such sort as thy glorie may be thereby procured, my
neighbours welfare occasioned, and mine owne soule
better fortified and prouided. To thee my sweet and onlie
sauiour Christ, with the Father, and the holie ghost,
be all glorie and praise euerlastinglie,
            Amen.
         
         
            A praier for the Euening, when you go to rest.
            O Most gratious Lord, and mercifull Father,
I thy sinfull creature, and most
vnworthie hand-maid, prostrate in my
hart before thine high maiestie, most
humblie beseech thee of mercie and forgiuenes
of all my sinnes & iniquities that
I haue this day committed against thee: yea and euer

sith the time that I was conceiued in my mothers
wombe vnto this present instant: and most hartilie I
thanke thee, that thou hast preserued me hitherto from
all such offences, as I haue not fallen in, and whereinto
anie other person through his owne fault and thy
sufferance hath fallen, into the which I also without
doubt should haue fallen, hadst not thou with thy grace
preuented me, saued me, supported me, and susteined
me. That I haue fallen manie waies, my great fault
and blame it is, for the which in most humble wise I
aske mercy and forgiuenes of thee. That thou hast preserued
me, thy great goodnes, mercie, and grace it is, for
the which with all my hart I thanke thee. And now I
beseech thee most mercifull father, that thou wilt no
more be angrie with me, neither hencefoorth forsake
me; but that thou wilt continuallie, not onelie assist,
fortifie, and strengthen me, against the assalts of the
diuel, but also be my succour, and defence in this night,
and alwaies to my liues end, against all sinne & iniquitie.
And that thou wilt vouchsafe also of thine abundant
bountifulnes, if it be thy will, to refresh my brittle
bodie so with conuenient rest this night, that I may
the more readilie, freshlie, and promptlie with all diligence
serue thee to morow, according to that state that
thou hast set me, and called me vnto; so that all my life
may please thee, and through thine assistance be so ordered
and gouerned, that after this vaine and transitorie
life, I may attaine the life euerlasting: through
Iesus Christ our Lord, So be it.
            
         
         
            Or else praie thus before you go to bed.
            O Lord Iesus Christ, whose bottomlesse goodnesse
we haue to thanke for all things, who
hast giuen the most cleere light of the daie
time, as well to the good as to the euill, to go

about such affaires and busines as we haue to doo:
and hast mercifullie giuen the louelie silence of the
night for the strength of our weake and feeble bodies,
to be refreshed with lieng at rest, and to put awaie the
carefulnes of our minds, and for the asswaging of our
harts sorrowes; whereas to all them that loue thee,
thou thy selfe doest much better accomplish and performe
all those things within in the hart, to whom
towards all dueties and acts of godlie conuersation,
thou doest for their faith sake, much more cleerelie shew
the lampe of thy light, than the sunne shineth bright
vnto the world, and whom thy promises doo not suffer
at anie time to waxe weerie, the comfort and consolation
of thy spirit doth much more effectuallie wash awaie
all heauines of hart, than doth the sleepe of the
bodie: so that the whole man doth not in anie more
safelie, or more sweetlie repose him selfe, than in thy
mercie, our most gratious Redeemer. I beseech thee,
that whatsoeuer I haue this daie committed or done
through humane frailtie and negligence, that hath offended
thine eies, thou according to thine accustomed
goodnes forgiue it me. And also grant thou, that this
night to come, thou prospering, it may be luckie vnto
me; thou being my keeper, it may be pure, and thou
being my defender, it may be safe from all mightie illusions
of the wicked spirits: so that this rest & sleepe
which I shall now take, may restore both my bodie and
my soule more fresh and lustie against to morrowe, to
ferue thee in the perfect obedience of a Christian woman.
And forasmuch as this life hath not so much as
anie one houre of assurance vnto vs, when the euentide
thereof shall come, and the sleepe of this bodie and
flesh shall grow vpon vs (out of the which we shall not
awake, vntil such time as at the angels trumpet, euen
the dead also shall be raised) I beseech thee, that thou
wilt at that time lighten the eies of my soule, so that

the lampe of my faith may not then be extinguished
with the fiue foolish virgins, and I sleepe in euerlasting
death: but contrariwise, with the fiue wise virgins,
hauing my lampe of pure faith cleerlie burning, I may
be accepted and peaceablie rest in thee, vnto whom euen
the dead doo liue, which liuest and reignest with
God the father, and the holie ghost, for euer and euer,
world without end, Amen. Our Father which art, &c.
            
            Into thy hands, O Lord, I commit my spirit; for
thou hast redeemed me, O Lord, thou God of truth.
            Unto him that is able to keepe vs that we fall not,
and to present vs faultles before the presence of his
glorie with ioie; that is, to God, onelie wise, our
Sauiour, be all glorie and maiestie, dominion
and power, praise and thanksgiuing,
both now and for euer;
            Amen, Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            A Table conteining the seuerall titles of
euerie particular praier comprised in this
fift Lampe, whereby the reader may
readilie vnderstand the right vse
of the same, and applie them
accordinglie.
            
               A Praier for silence, shamefastnes, and chastitie.
               Page. 1.
               A praier to be said of single women against all euill behauiour,
vice, and vanitie, and for the obteining of modestie,
chastitie, and all maidenlie vertues.
               2.
               Another of the same.
               5.
               Another.
               6.
               For the grace of Gods holie spirit, to resist all sinfull motions,
and keepe pure the state of single life.
               7.
               Another praier in the behalfe of all Virgins, or single women,
for the keeping of obedience, modestie, chastitie,
puritie, and cleannesse of liuing.
               9.
               Another praier to the same effect.
               10.
               A praier to be said for all virgins and maids generallie.
               11.
               A lamentation of anie woman, virgin, wife, or widowe, for
hir virginitie or chastitie, lost by fornication or adulterie:
not vnapt also to be vsed of anie Christian sinner, or sinfull
soule, adulterated and fallen awaie by sinne from hir
spirituall spouse Christ Iesus, diuided into sixe seuerall
Chapters.
               13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 24.
               Another lamentation of a woman that hath lost hir virginitie
and chastitie: or of a Christian soule polluted with
sinne.
               26.
               A praier of Marie Magdalens repentance.
               32.
               Another praier of the woman taken in adulterie.
               33.
               A praier to be said of anie damsell, daughter, or maidenchild.
               34.
               Another verie necessarie praier to be said of anie daughter,
or maiden-child.
               35.
               A praier to be said of a daughter in lawe that is married.
               40.
               
                  Another praier to be vsed of a daughter in lawe.
               43.
               A praier to be said of anie woman, when she is wooed of
anie man to be his wife.
               46.
               Another praier to be vsed of anie woman, before the solemnisation
of hir marriage.
               48.
               Another praier to be vsed of the man or woman, a little before
they be married.
               49.
               Another meditation and praier, declaring how Christ adorneth
the nuptiall feast with his bodilie presence.
               50.
               A praier to be vsed of a virgin newlie married, togither with
hir husband.
               53.
               A sentence out of Tobie, worthie to be called to memorie
of all new married folks.
               ibidem.
               Another verie necessarie and fruitfull praier, to be often vsed
of all married couples.
               55.
               Another praier to be vsed of married folks, to liue chastlie
and purelie in holie matrimonie.
               62.
               Another praier to be vsed of such married couples, as where
the woman is not past child-bearing.
               63.
               Another praier for all wedded folks generallie.
               65.
               A praier to be said of a yong married woman, or wife.
               68.
               Another of the same.
               ibidem.
               A praier to be vsed of anie Noble woman, &c. when she is
married, or afterward.
               70.
               Another praier to be said of anie Noble woman, Ladie,
Gentlewoman, or modest matrone married.
               72.
               A praier to be vsed of the wife that hath a froward and bitter
husband.
               73.
               A praier to be vsed of the wife for hir husband, before, or in
his trauelling by land.
               76.
               Another.
               77.
               A praier to be vsed of the wife for hir husband being a Captaine
or Souldiour, and gone a war-fare.
               79.
               Another of the same.
               80.
               A fruitfull praier to be said with teares of all godlie women,
in the time of bloudie battell, &c.
               82.
               
                  A praier to be said of anie wife or daughter for hir husband
or father, being a merchant-venterer.
               85.
               When your husband or father is come safe home from his
iournie.
               89.
               A praier and thanks-giuing to be said, when your husband
(or father) with his ship, is safelie come home from his
voiage by sea.
               90.
               When your husband, or friend, is in prison and endurance,
or otherwise persecuted, or in trouble, and affliction.
               91.
               When your husband or other friend is deliuered out of anie
trouble.
               93.
               A praier to be vsed of a woman with child.
               95.
               Another of the same.
               99.
               Another.
               100.
               Another.
               101.
               The same praier in meeter.
               105.
               Another godlie & earnest praier to be said of euerie faithfull
woman in the time of hir child-bed, vsed of the vertuous
Ladie Francis Aburgauennie.
               106.
               Another praier of a woman being in trauell.
               107.
               A praier in meeter to bee said of a woman with child,
made by W.H.
               108.
               A praier to be said in long and dangerous trauell.
               112.
               Another.
               117.
               Praiers and thanks-giuings to be vsed of women in childbed,
after their trauell and deliuerance.
               119.
               Another vsed of the vertuous Ladie Francis Aburgauennie.
               121.
               Another.
               122.
               A praier to be vsed of a woman at hir purification, or Churching.
               123.
               Praiers to be said for women with child, before, or in trauell,
by the mid-wife, husband, or anie other man or woman.
page.
               125.
               Another.
               127.
               Another.
               128.
               
                  Another praier for a Queene being with child.
               ibidem.
               Another praier for a Queene, Noble woman, or Ladie with
child.
               129.
               A generall forme of praier for all women with child, and in
child-bed.
               130.
               The same praier more breefe for women with child generallie.
               132.
               A praier to be said of euerie Christian mid-wife for hir selfe,
before she execute hir office.
               134.
               Another praier to be said of the midwife, when she goeth about
to doo hir office.
               136.
               Another.
               137.
               A praier to be said of the midwife and all the women about
hir, if the partie be in long and sore trauell, and in danger
of death.
               138.
               For a woman that trauelleth before hir time.
               141.
               If the woman trauelling be at the point of death.
               143.
               Another.
               144.
               A praier of instruction to be vsed of the women in health,
attendant about the sicke and languishing woman in sore
trauell.
               145.
               Another godlie and effectuall praier to be hartilie said of
the women assistant, if the woman in sore trauell or childbed
lie in the pangs of death, & be passing this life.
               146.
               When she is departing and yeeldeth vp the ghost.
               148.
               Another of the same.
               149.
               A praier to be said after hir departure.
               150.
               A praier and thanks-giuing to be vsed of the mother, or women
about hir, after the child is baptised.
               151.
               If the yoong infant be verie sicke, and lie sore pained with anie
greefe, or whensoeuer else it be visited with anie
dreadfull disease.
               ibidem.
               A thanks-giuing and praier to be said of the father, so soone
as he heareth that a child is borne vnto him, and his wife
safelie deliuered.
               153.
               Another thanks-giuing to be vsed of the midwife, or women

assistant, after the safe deliuerie of a woman in childbed.
               154.
               Another thanks-giuing to be said for the safe deliuerance of
anie woman in child-bed, or at hir churching.
               155.
               The mothers praier for hir childrens good education.
               156.
               Another praier to be vsed of euerie godlie mother, for the
godlie proofe of hir child; made for the Ladie Lettice.
page.
               157. 158. 159.
               A praier to be vsed of anie mother in lawe.
               160.
               The mistres or dames praier, &c.
               163. 164. 165.
               The maid-seruants, or hand-maids praier.
               168. 169. 169.
               Another praier to be said of an hand-maid, waiting woman,
or maid-seruant.
               170.
               The poore widowes mite, conteining seuen meditations or
praiers in meeter, for the obteining of Gods mercie, and
the forgiuenes of sin, to be said or soong, gathered by
William Hunnis.
               173.
               A praier to be said of a widowe, immediatlie after the death
of hir husband.
               177. 179.
               A praier to be said of widowes, for widowes.
               ibidem.
               The same more at large to be vsed generallie for all widows
and orphans.
               181.
               The orphane or fatherles childs praier.
               183.
               The old womans praier.
               184. 185. 191. 194.
               A praier to be said generallie for all women, that they may
haue in remembrance the fall of their grandmother Eue.
page.
               197.
               A praier to be said of all deuout women, &c.
               199.
               A praier made vpon the similitude of the ten virgins.
               202.
               A generall confession of sinnes, &c.
               203.
               A praier for the Queenes Maiestie and the Realme.
               204.
               A praier to be said in the morning.
               208. 209.
               A praier to be said in the euening.
               210. 211.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   