
      
         
            
            A LETTER OF A CATHOLIKE MAN Beyond the ſeas, written to his friend in England: INCLVDING Another of Peter Coton Prieſt, of the Society of Ieſus, to the Queene Regent of France.
            
            Tranſlated out of French into English.
            TOVCHING The imputation of the death of Henry the IIII, late K. of France, to Prieſts, Ieſuites, or Catholicke doctrine.
            Cypr. Epiſt. 55. ad Cornel.
            Haec eſt vera dementia, non cogitare, & ſcire, quòd mendacia non diu fallant.
            This indeed is madnes, not to thinke and know that lyes do not long deceaue.
            Permiſſu Superiorum: M. DC. X.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
               DEARE Syr, hauing vnderſtood by one of yours, that both you & other of our friendes there, haue byn much aſtoniſhed of late with the ſuddaine newes of the execrable ſlaughter of the Great and Potent Monarch Henry the IIII. King of France: I nothing meruailed, the ſame aſtoniſhment being common to vs heere, and I thinke to all the Chriſtiā world. But hauing further vnderſtood by the reading of yours, that there with you, the ſame ſo deteſtable a parricide was imputed commōly to Prieſts, or Ieſuites, and by ſome to the Pope himſelf, but by the moſt part to Catholick Doctrine: for anſwere The occation of writing this letter.of yours, I ſent you firſt the Copy of a letter of a principall man, no leſſe then a Counſeller of France, namely Monſieur du Wick the Gouernour of Cales his brother, writtē by his own hand to a friend of his in Italy, which I my ſelfe turned into Engliſh, word for word, as it was

ſet downe by him in French; where he writeth, that the miſerable wretch that killed the ſayd King, affirmed that neuer any man perſwaded him to that enterprize of his: the which (ſayth he) we all belieued, becauſe in all his examinations, & interrogations, euen vntill he was put to death, he perſcuered ſtill cō
               ſtant in the ſame aſſertion.
            Beſides I certified you of a certayne Booke which was written heere in Italy in anſwer of our Kings Booke about the Oath, which being preſented to his Holines, as it is ſayd, was not permitted to be printed, becauſe of a raſh aſſertion therin contayned about the queſtion of killing of Kings. For which cauſe the Authour therof ſeeking to print his ſayd booke in Germany, was through the prudency (as I vnderſtād) chiefly of an Engliſh Gentlemā remaining in thoſe parts, forbidden likewiſe there to print it.
            But things which ſince haue hapned, haue made me leſſe to meruaile, that there with you ſuch things were ſpread: when

as in Frāce, yea in Paris it ſelfe in the middeſt of ſo Noble and Catholike a Citty, in the eyes & eares of thē that knew the contrary, and in the cleare ſhining light of the truth it ſelfe, the cōmon enemy of truth hath had ſo much power, as to find ſome impudent inſtrumēts, to affirme & publickly to preach the ſame calumnie. The Ieſuits iniuriously ſlaundered.But truly was it ſayd, Fortior est omniū Veritas, & vincit: Truth is ſtrongeſt of all things, and will ouercome at length: although for a while by ſome violence it may remaine oppreſſed, or diſguiſed. For ſo euen now in France, in the ſayd Citty of Paris, it is come to paſſe, that Ieſuites which were in part, although far of, calūniated about that matter, being afterwards heard, and the truth knowne, not only haue byn iuſtified & deliuered frō ſuch a falſe & iniurious ſlaūder: but alſo honoured & eſteemed more thē before, as moſt louing & loyall ſubiects to that Noble Monarch, which had beene in his life time alwaies ſo louing & affectionat towards thē, as all the world knoweth:

And who at the very inſtāt of ſo vnworthy a calumniation, imployed thēſelues to honour the ſame King, as their moſt deare Father, in trāſporting with great ſolēnity his own hart, bequeathed to thē by himſelf in his life time, & deliuered thē after his death by cōmandmēt of the Q. Mother, Regent of Frāce, to the Noble Vniuerſity de la Fleſche, built for thēſelues of late years by the ſaid King of glorious Memory. And becauſe I haue by good hap gottē the fight of a little Treatiſe writen in the Frēch tongue, expreſly in Cō
               futatiō of the falſity, begō to be ſpread in Paris, againſt the Ieſuits, the wch alſo doth fully anſwere to the like calūnious oppoſitiōs, & falſe obiectiōs ſpread abroad by the treachery of the common enemy of truth there in your parts: I thought it neceſſary to turne it into the Engliſh tōgue, that ſo the truth may there alſo be known to the honor & glory of the author of all truth, & cōfort, not only of the īnocēt, but alſo of al thē, that with true charity deſire to know the truth, & maintaine the ſame.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                        A LETTER DECLARATORY OF THE COMMON Doctrine of the Fathers of the Society of Ieſus, conforme to the Decrees of the Coūcell of Conſtance: VVritten to the Queene, Mother of the King, Regent in France. By Father Peter Coton of the ſame Society, his Maieſties ordinary Preacher at Paris. 1610.
                        
                        
                           
                              MADAME,
                        
                        GOD ordained in the old Teſtament that the kidd ſhould not be boiled in the milke of his damme, to ſignify, as Philo the Iew doth expound it, that one which is already afflicted, is no more to be oppreſſed with new affliction.
                        According to the which rule, deriued from nature it ſelfe, thoſe of our Society did hope, that with this dolefull accident, the terrour wherof hath ſhaken the two poles of the Chriſtian world, they might haue had at leaſt their breath free to ſigh, after their incōparable loſſe: A loſſe, which is as particuler to them, as generall and cō
                           mon

to all. But it hath happened to them as to men which find themſelues vnder the ruine of a houſe, where one ſtone doth not expect the other to couer and ouerwhelme them, vpon whome it falleth. We were both in mind & body occupied about the tranſporting of that precious gage, and remarkable pledge, which it hath pleaſed your Maieſtie by the hands of the Prince of Conty, to giue conſigned vnto vs, and to the which the Chiefe Lords of France rendred the laſt honours: when ſome no welwillers of the Catholike Religion, and of thē of our profeſſion, to purchaſe vs in famy, and to make their gaine of our abſence, ſpread abroad certaine rumors, ſo farre from all likelihood and probability, that a man would neuer haue thought, that ſuch ca-Iumnies could euer, euen in any mad mood, enter into the thought of a reſonable ſoule.
                        All this began by the occaſion of a naughty booke, the doctrine wherof hath 
                              Mariana his opinion cō
                              demned by all other writers of the Society,byn rightfully condemned by the Court of Parliament; ſome maintayning, that the doctrine of the Booke was the common doctrine of all Ieſuits; others, that the doctrine was ſo proper to his Author, that many of the ſame Society had written the contrary, and altogeather had condemned it ſome yeares agoe in the body of a Prouinciall

Congregation: the which controuerſy men and the Court of Parlament in Frāce.
                           without paſſion did ſtraight determine, cō
                           cluding that this would be knowne by diſauowing therof, and therefore that it was to be expected what we would ſay therin. Wherupon I my ſelfe hauing beene named particulerly, haue taken occaſion at this preſent to take pen in hand, briefly to repreſent vnto You (Madame) as to Her, who is ſingulerly affectioned to the true Religion, moſt intereſſed in the good of this whole State, and the moſt aſſured refuge that innocencie can haue, that which the Doctors of our Society haue written vpon this ſubiect. Knowing that nether the greatnes of buſines would eaſily permit you of your ſelfe to ſeeke them out, nor the ſmall affection which backbiters do beare vnto vs, would permit them to make you the true report.
                        And after that, I will ſhew with the The Authors intentiō.ſame breuity, what is the common ſenſe and opinion of our Society, ſpread through the whole world, touching the matter wherof we ſpeake: Laying for a ground of all, ſuch verity as cannot be called into doubt, no not by them which may be foūd moſt hatefull and enuious of this floriſhing Crowne. I meane that the matter which was debated in the Councell of Conſtance, &

which afterward hath beene declared more at large by the Catholick Doctors, touching the expulſion of Tyrants, doth not at all touch the happy, renowned, and moſt honorable memory of him, of whome now we be waile the death; his life hauing byn as farre from all blame of Tyranny, as it hath beene, and ſhalbe alwaies to all the Monarches of the Earth, a modell of piety, iuſtice, clemency, valour, benignity, and fatherly affection towards his ſubiects.
                        
                           Tolet. Firſt of al preſenteth himſelfe the moſt Illuſtrious Cardinall Tolet, a man of rare learning, Spaniſh by nation, and French by affection, who in the 5. booke and 6. chapter of his Summe, teacheth in expreſſe tearmes, That, it is not lawful to attempt any thing againſt the life of a Prince, allthough he abuſe his Princely power: adding therunto that to maintaine the contrarie, is an hereticall doctrine, condemned by the Councell of Conſtance.
                        
                        
                           Bellarmine. The moſt Illuſtrious and moſt learned Cardinall Bellarmine, anſwering to the very ſame obiection in the thirteenth chapter of his Apologie to a Booke of the king of Great Britany, ſpeaketh thus: I haue neuer read, nor heard it ſayd, that euerlaſting life hath beene promiſed to them that attempt againſt the life of kings: but rather

to the contrary I haue read, that this propoſition, Euery Tyrant may, and ought lawfully to be killed, was long ſince condēned in the fiftēth ſeſſion of the Councell of Conſtance. True it is, that Iohn VVickliffe an Engliſhmā whome the Proteſtantes doe ſo much eſteeme, and haue put forth his prayſes in the fore-front of their Hiſtories, taught, That no temporal, nor Eccleſiaſticall Prince retayneth any longer his power and authority, after he is fallen into any mortall ſin: the which error of his, the ſayd Councell condemned in the eight ſeſſion.
                        
                           Valētia. 
                           Gregorie of Valentia, a man of eminent learning, as is manifeſt by the publique teſtimony of Italy, Spayne, and Germanie, writing vpon the ſixtie foure Queſtion of the ſecond Part of S. Thomas, and conforming himſelfe therin to the doctrine of other Schoole-Deuines, determineth, in no wiſe to be lawfull to attempt againſt the life of the Prince, although he abuſe his authority.
                        
                           Salmer
                                 •
                              
                            
                           Alſonſus Salmeron in the thirteenth Tome of his workes, expounding the thirteenth Chapter of the Epiſtle to the Romans, affirmeth the ſame, citing the Councell of Conſtance, and referreth the fact of Aöd, againſt Eglon King of the Moabites, to the expreſſe & manifeſt commandement of God, whereof

of no man ought to be iudge in his owne cauſe.
                        
                           Del-Rio. 
                           Martin del-Rio, a famous man likewiſe in all kind of learning, in his Commentaries vpon Hercules Furens of Seneca, the 920. number, ſayth; That, that ſaying of the Poet is dangerous: and there alleageth to the contrary, the decree of the Councell of Cō
                              ſtance, which decree vpon this ſubject cannot to often be inculcated, repeated and declared to the People.
                        
                           Heiſſius. 
                           Sebaſtian Heiſſius in his Apologeticall declaration of the Aphoriſmes attributed to the doctrine of Ieſuites, ſheweth by Mariana's owne wordes, that he hath ſpoken out of his owne opinion. And he himſelfe perceauing that he did exceed the Iimits of the common doctrine, acknowledged his doctrine to be ſubiect to errour, and ſubmitted himſelfe to the cenſure of whome ſoeuer. And by and by after he ſetteth down his owne, and the common opinions of all Deuines of our Society, the which he oppoſeth againſt the opinion of the ſayd Mariana.
                        
                        
                           Becanus. 
                           Martin Becanus in the anſwere to the ninth Aphoriſme, remitteth the Reader to the Councell of Conſtance, ſhewing that the lawfull Princelooſeth not his ſuperiority, although he become a Tyrant,
                        
                           
                           Gretſer. 
                           Iames Gretſer Reader of Deuinity at Ingolſtad, in his Booke intituled Veſpertilio Haretico-politicꝰ, anſwering to the obiectiōs which were made him out of the opinion of Mariana, ſaith with Heiſſius, That the common opinion is to be followed, leauing that of Mariana, which he himſelfe ſubmitteth to other men.
                        
                           Leſſius. 
                           Leonard Leſſius Reader of Deuinity at Louaine, in the ninth Chapter & fourth doubt of his ſecond booke de Iuſtitia & Iure, affirmeth likewiſe, according to the common ſentence, That it is not lawfull to enterprize againſt the perſon of the Prince, although he ſhould abuſe his authority, grounding his ſaying vpon that aduertiſement of the Prince of the Apoſtles: Seruants be ſubiect to your maiſters, and not only to them which be good and modeſt, but alſo to the froward and ill conditioned. And after that he alledgeth the decree of the Councell before mentioned.
                        
                           Serarius 
                           Nicolas Serarius writing vpon the thirteenth chapter of the booke of Iudges, in his firſt queſtion, doth ſhew that the fact of Aod cannot, nor ought to ſerue the deteſtable Aſſaſſines, parricides, and murtherers of their kings, for their defence or example.
                        
                           Azor. 
                           Iohn Azor in the ſecond part of his morall

inſtitutions, the eleuenth booke, fifth c
                              •
                           apter, and tenth queſtion, doth ſhew him ſelf yet a more rigorous enemie of the bould and ſacrilegious enterprizes of them who attempt againſt the 
                              〈…〉
                           e of their Princes: where he teacheth, that it is not lawful to go about to kil, no not thē who ſhould haue vniultlie inuaded any ſtate: grounding his doctrine chifely vpon this, that no man ought to be condēned before he be heard, & without diſcuſſiō of his cauſe, of the which noe particuler man can be a cōpetēt Iudge.
                        
                           Richeome. As for Lewis Richeome, his Apologie makes perētory proofe of the irrecōciliable hatred which he beareth to the doctrine of them, that teach againſt the authoritie of kings: in ſo much that the L. Paſquier himſelfe a Criticall Cenſurer of his works, hauing repeated his wordes in his third booke, and fifth chapter, praiſeth him, and ſayth, he cannot but loue him, adding theſe words: Yet I muſt needs honour thee ſeing thee ſo to paint the Idaea of obedience of a ſubiect towards his King. A praiſe which he might haue giuen to many others of the ſame Society, who hauing examined this matter with S. Thomas, and all the Schoole deuines, do all conclude conformably to the Sorbones, and to the Decree of the Councell of Conſtance.
                        
                        Theſe then being the opinions and the

determinations of theſe doctors, graue, and principall men of our Society; what preiudice can the particuler opinion of one Mariana bring to the reputation of a whole Order? the which being, according to the Inſtitute, moſt carefull to maintaine all holy ordinances of the Church, and bearing reſpect to the power and authority of Kings, who for the temporal, depend on God only, hath long time ſince diſauowed the lightneſſe of this rouing pen: and namely in the Prouincial Congregation of France, held in the Citty of Paris the yeare 1606. where The opinion of Mariana condemned in a Cō
                              gregatiō of the Society in Frāce and miſ liked by the Generall of the ſame order.more then this, the Reuerend Father Claudius Aquauiua General of our Society, was requeſted, that thoſe who had written in preiudice of the Crowne of France, ſhould be repreſſed, and their bookes ſuppreſſed. Which the ſayd Reuerend Father did afterward very earneſtly and exactly, being moſt ſory that by ouer-ſight, he being abſent and knowing nothing, nor hauing ſeene the workes, one ſhould vſe therin his conſent: the words which he vſeth in his anſwere are theſe. VVe haue approued your Congregations iudgment, and carefulnes, and haue byn very ſory, that no body perceaued the fault, vntill the bookes were printed: the which notwithſtanding we haue preſently commanded to be corrected, & will vſe great care herafter, that ſuch things happen no more.
                        
                        
                           
And ſo it is, that now you ſhould ſcarce haue found ſo much as one copy of Mariana, if it had not beene for the pernicious liberality of the heyres of VVechell, who are Malice of Proteſtants.knowne to be of the pretended reformed Religion, and haue printed the ſame booke at their owne coſtes and charges: moued not ſo much, as it is to be preſumed, with deſire to ſerue the publique, as to hurt in particuler our Society. Some haue thought that they haue added ſomewhat of their owne, others haue iudged that the bookes of the firſt impreſſion were yet worſe, but this controuerſy ſerues to no purpoſe: for although it were ſo, and that no body had holpen the firſt ſo imprudent pen, yet is there no cauſe, why that one mans pen ſhould more hurt the body of our Society, then the writings of Iohn Petite, and others his like, ſhould hurt the Vniuerſities and Orders of which they were Schollers, Bachelers, Maiſters, and Doctors.
                        But, Madame, ſeeing that I haue heere aboue promiſed to expound clearly and diſtinctly, what is our opinion touching the queſtion we haue propoſed: now I come to it, which ſhalbe the ſecond part or this diſcourſe.
                        1. All the Ieſuites generally and particulerly will confirme, euen with their own

bloud, that they haue not in this matter, or The generall opinion of Ieſuites touching Kings.any other, any beliefe, doctrine, or opinion, then that of the Catholike Church.
                        2. That amongſt all ſorts of gouernement and publicke adminiſtration the Monarchie is the beſt.
                        3. That ſuch is the ſpirituall gouernmēt of the Church, which is vnder the Vicar of Ieſus Chriſt ſucceſſor of S. Peter: ſuch is the temporall gouernment of the State and Realme of France, which dependeth of the perſon of the King our Soueraigne Lord and Maiſter.
                        4. That the Kinges are, as Homer calleth them, the children and foſters of God, or rather his own liuely Images as ſayd Menander:
                        
                        5. That they are annointed, and therfore called the Chriſts of our Lord, to the end (as ſayth Simeon the Archbiſhop of Theſſalonica) that euery one may vnderſtand that they be inuiolable, and ſhould be reſpected as holy and ſacred things.
                        6. That it is a damnable hereſy, as holy Irenaeus noteth 1400. yeares agoe to thinke Tren. l. 5. c. 24.
                           that Kings are giuen to men caſually: ſeeing that all power comes of God, and therfore ſayth S. Iſidore of Damieta, in the moſt ancient pictures we ſee a hand put out of heauen, which ſetteth the Crowne vpō the head of Kings.
                        
                           
                           
                              Rom. 13. 1. 7. That he which reſiſteth kinges or rebelleth againſt them, purchaſeth to him ſelfe his owne damnation, according to the doctrine of the Apoſtle.
                        8. That obedience is due vnto them, not for that they are vertuous, wiſe, potēt, or indued with any other laudable qualitie, but becauſe they are Kings, eſtabliſhed by God himſelfe.
                        9. That our Kings of France are the eldeſt children of the Church, enioying rare and ſingular priuiledges, aboue the common, of other Kinges of the world.
                        
                           3. Pet. 2. 10. That it is not lawfull to denie to thē obedience, & much leſſe to reuolt againſt them, although they were vicious, froward, hard to ſuport, as the ſame Apoſtle ſpeaketh.
                        11. That being ſuch, we ought to pray for 
                              Baru. 1. 11.them as the Prophet would haue to be done for the proſperity of Nabuchodonoſor, and his ſonne Baltazar, & that the afflictions, loſſe of goodes, perſecutions, and other in commodities which are endured patiently, not rebelling therefore againſt their Superiours, are things very acceptable to God, & conforme to the praiſe which in like caſe S. Paul giueth to the Hebrews, and to that ordināce wch he hath publiſhed in the Church, ſaying: Euery ſoule be ſubiect to the Superiour powers.
                        
                        12. And therfore that not onely it is not

lawfull to lay hands vpon their Perſons, but that it is an execrable parricide, a prodigious treſpaſſe, and a deteſtable ſacriledge.
                        13. That the decree of the Councell of Conſtance in the 15. Seſſion ought to be receaued of all and maintayned inuiolably.
                        14. That the declaration of the Sorbon of the year 1413. & that alſo of the 4. of Iune of this preſēt yeare is good, wholſome & holy.
                        15. That euery one ſhould ſtand vpon his guard, and take heed of diuers bookes that are ſpread abroad, contrary to the Lawes, the reading of the which is not onely in this matter very dangerous, but ſo much the more to be feared, by how much the Authors of them being to our great griefe ſeparated from the Catholike Church, make no accompt neyther of the Councell of Conſtance, nor of the Catholike Cenſures and Doctors aboue mentioned, yea rather (which is to be lamented) they are the more obſtinate in their opinions by oppoſing themſelues, and thereby they thinke to get the greater praiſe and admiration from others.
                        
                           The pious intentiō of the Authour. I would cite bookes, quote the places, and alleadge the words, were it not that it is farre better that ſuch thinges remaine ſwallowed in the bottomleſſe pit of forgetfulnes, and that it is more to the purpoſe to make knowne, that innocency is far ſtronger

then recrimination.
                        And for the ſame cauſe alſo I would haue abſtained altogeather from this aduertiſment, had it not beene to ſhew thereby, that the body of our Society cannot be infected by the opinion of one only perſon, the which hath beene ſo authentically diſauowed by the ſame: no more then thoſe of the pretended reformed Religion doe not hould themſelues any whit intereſſed by the erroneous Doctrine of ſome of theirs, whome they reiect, difauow, and condemne; being willing to liue with vs vnder the Lawes of our Realme, and with the obedience and voluntary ſubmiſſion which we do render to the Scepter of our Kinges; perſwading my ſelfe, that if they had the pen in hand which I haue, they would ſpeake with vs & thūder out Anathema, with one common voice againſt thoſe infamous Authors. Which being maturely and wiſely conſidered, as well by the Court of Parliament, as by the ſacred Colledge of Sorbon, they haue not made any mention in their arreſt and decrees of the Doctrine of Ieſuits, knowing very well as iuſt iudges and Doctors, that faultes are perſonall, and that there would be no innocency in the world, if the fault of one were imputed to another: and that this hath beene a lamentable and

incommunicable property of the ſinne which the firſt man committed to haue byn extended vpon others, becauſe his poſterity was repreſented in his perſon, knowing alſo on the other ſide by the frequent depoſition of the malefactor, that Mariana had not in any thing holpen to this execrable parricide, nor could help, conſidering the malefactour had not ſufficient knowledge of the Malicious dealing.tongue in which his booke was written. Wherein is diſcouered the vncharitable intentiō of thoſe which ſpread abroad that he knew all the booke by hart, thereby to caſt the publique hatred of all this miſcheefe vpon others, then vpon the guilty.
                        This is it, Madame, wherein we do moſt humbly beſeech you to imploy your Soueraigne authority, and to ordaine that all thoſe writings, which are in their beginning matches to kindle rebellion and within few howers become fire brāds of ſeditiō, be taken away from before the eyes of the French: you are our Soueraigne Lady endowed of God with high vnderſtanding, & with ſuch vertue as you haue but few your equals, who doth ſee clearely of what importance it is, that we liue all vnited, if not in one faith (ſuch being theſe iniurious times) at leaſt in fidelity, obedience, and mutuall affection, to the conſeruation of

peace. We haue a King which doth repreſent vnto vs in his yong age, the wit & ſubſtance of the great Henry his Father your huſband, and the which with the increaſe of yeares will haue (if it pleaſe God to continue vpon him his benigne influences) his valour, his prudence, his happines, & his experience: it pertayneth to vs to cheriſh this treaſure; to ſerue with al our harts this great & litle Maiſter; to obey willingly You his moſt worthy Mother, our Regent, & Miſtreſſe. And to the end that nothing do trouble the vnion which only after God can conſerue this potent Monarchie, and make it all wayes dreadfull to her enemies; how much were it to be deſired, Madame, that none could perceiue amongſt vs any backbytings, that the impoſtures were baniſhed, and the impoſtors receyued their recompence due to their calumnie; that hatreds were rooted out, and when any ſiniſter report is made, that each one ſuſpended his iudgement: and in a word, according to the coūſaile of the Apoſtle, that all maintayne inuiolably the band of Charity.
                        The Otacouſtes & Proſagogides of this time are greatly to be feared: men know alſo that your Maieſtie would willingly haue ſuch tongues receiue their recompence, of the anciēt Quadruplators: but if they receiue

it not of mē, they muſt expect it of the incuitable iuſtice of him, that is the author, protector, & at length remunerator of Innocency.
                        
                           The Society moſt expoſed to hatred. Our little Society is amongſt, and aboue all the religious families, the moſt expoſed to the hatred and calumny of them that will not take the paine to know it: you know Madame how often the late King our good Maiſter hath fauourably defended it: & made it reſpected. You cā beare witneſſe, and none better then you, that whereſoeuer was that great Prince, there had we a King, a Father, and a Protector: but alas he is here no more, that great Henry hath beene violently taken away from vs.
                        Oh France, the eye of Chriſtendome, the roſe of Empyres, the pearle of the world, An Apoſtrophe to Frāce.
                           how great is this thy loſſe? how horrible is this thy ſhip wracke? France the fauorite of heauen, the wellbeloued of God, who hath taken from thee the mantle of glorie, which did couer thee? the Crowne of honour which ſtood ſo high ouer thy head? Who hath ſo (oh choſen of God) who hath ſo afflicted thee? But thou our poore Society which dideſt not ſubſiſt but by the benefit of that Monarch, who hath made thee ſo deſolate? Who hath abaſed thee ſo lamentably? who hath ouerwhelmed thee ſo miſerably? The miſchiefe is cōmō to al, but

it is in ſinguler manner proper to thee. The blow hath ſtrooken the whole bodie of the kingdome, but it wounded thee almoſt to death: oh how true is it, & how ſēſibly doſt thou feele it, that the ſorrow that can be expreſſed is not to be called ſorrow, and I which write theſe things, how iuſt cauſe haue I, yea more then any other to let my ſelfe run into the accents of a doleful voyce, & to ſay, farewell the wonder of Kings, farewel the ornament of the world, our ioy, our glory, our honour; farwel the Father of the cōmonwealth, the reſtorer of the State, the ſecōd foūder & chiefe benefactor of our Society; farewell my King, my Prince, my defēder, you had giuē vs in this vale of miſeries the repoſe that here could be had: reſt you then in peace and remaine for euer amongſt the lilies and the roſes, free from the thornie care and ſolicitude of this Monarchie: enioy happily not earth but heauen: here you haue beene the moſt eminent ſubiect of the fauour of god, be now there aboue, and for euer the obiect of his mercyes; the Lawrells of this baſe earth were to much ſubiect to withering, your head expected others more freſh and flouriſhing: the victories, the triumphes, the Empyres, which pertained to you here beneth, were to be chāged into a glorie much more

eminent; liue then for euer enioying that poſſeſſion ſo much deſired: your happineſſe will make vs breath, your abſence wil make vs ſigh, & the place where we eſteeme you to be, will make vs ſeeke after you: for relying vpon the mercie of God, the wofull circumſtances of your deceaſe haue not depriued vs of the hope to ſee you againe in the ſhining ſplendor of one common day, where we ſhall find the principall himſelfe and all the circumſtances of this wofull diuorce of ours: and during the irckeſomenes of this expectation, you, Madame, with the King his liuely image wil wipe away ſome part of our teares, we will acknowledge his perſon in your perſons, his Crowne in your Crownes, his Kingly authority in yours; and although all your Subiects be obliged thereunto by all ſort of dutie, our Society being therto boūd extraordinarily hath giuē me charge to preſent before your Maieſty the moſt ſincere vowes of her fidelitie, and the moſt affectioned offers of her moſt humble ſeruice, the which (Madame) I doe as willingly, as I can with ſinguler affection.
                        
                           Your Maieſties moſt humble Seruant, moſt obedient, and moſt faithfull Subiect, PETER COTON of the Society of IESVS.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
BY this letter is ſufficiently layd open to the eyes of the whole world, the iniquity of all thoſe, that now a dayes are ſo deſirous to find ſome kind of fault or ſuſpicion thereof in ſome one Ieſuite or freind of theirs, therby to traduce & calumniate the body of the whole Order, although otherwiſe innocent and wholy deteſting the ſame, as if the will of the whole Order were repreſented in the perſon of each one of them, no leſſe then, in the perſon of Adam only, was repreſented all mā
               kind. The abſurdity whereof is ſo manifeſt that it requireth not any further explication: for ſo ſcarce any community, linage, or ancient familie ſhould now be found in England, or France, or any Countrey whatſoeuer, which hath not often beene ruined by one crime or other, of true or falſe imputation, to ſome one of their body, contrary to that indgement of God: Filius non portabit iniquitatem patris; & anima quae peccauerit ipſamorietur.
            
            
               
This only was ſufficient in that Catholike Countrey, not only to diſcouer God hath turned this ſlā
                  der raiſed againſt the Society to the beſt.the malignity and iniuſtice of ſuch farfetcht accuſations, but alſo to obtayne for ſatisfaction of ſo publike an iniurie publike fauour of the Prince, and loue of the people, with whoſe great applauſe the ſayd Ieſuits are now by eſpecial grace incorporated into the body of the Vniuerſitie of Paris, and begin to open their Schooles, which may be accoūted a very iuſt remuneration: ſeeing their firſt leauing of teaching came by a like fact of one mā imputed to their whole Order; although the ſame man was not ſo much as of their Order, nor then, any of their ſchollers, but one that before in his life time had only frequented their ſchooles, chiefly becauſe that it was found, that not only they deſerued not any ſuch imputation for any fact or fault of theirs; but contrariwiſe for their great affectiō and ſeruice, which alwayes they ſhewed towards their King and Countrey, deſerued all contrary commendations and fauour

for that alſo beſides their houſe wherein they dwelt before, beſides the Colledg in which they began againe to teach, they haue begun to build the third houſe for their Nouitiate, and that not only by the Princes graunt, permitting the ſame, but alſo with his owne liberality allowing for the charges therof. This is the nature of vertue, the more to increaſe & flouriſh, the more it is reſiſted and kept downe.
            Wherin it is to be obſerued, that although for defence of the Ieſuites in Paris, it ſufficed (as by the fore ſaid letter only The Society in fact and doctrine as obſequious to Kings as any other Order.it appeareth) that the opinion of Mariana was not the opinion of the Society: which, as by the place there quoted, and by experience through the whole world is euident, is, as much as any Order or Congregatiō may be, addicted to all due obedience towards Magiſtrates, Princes and Kings; & do inſtruct their ſchollers and hearers, and all that any wayes depend on them, in the ſame obedience, ſubiection, and reuerence towards all

ſortes of Superiours, and eſpecially towards their Soueraignes. Yet that, which either for modeſties ſake in defending thēſelues, or els for breuity in ſuch a letter ſemed beſt to thē to omit, as not ſo much needfull at that time (they hauing all the reaſon on their ſide,) I thought good not to neglect, ſeeing it maketh not a little more for the full anſwere to yours about Ieſuites and Catholicke Doctrine; and this is:
            
               
                  Mariana not reſolute in the opinion for which he is cō
                  demned by the Aduerſaries. That Mariana himſelfe, who by the aduerſaries was choſen amōgſt al the Ieſuits, as only guilty of that great treſpaſſe of killing of Kings, ſaith nothing but by manner of probleme, examining the queſtion pro & contra, bringing the proofes of both parts: which being done, as he inclineth more to the one ſide then to the other, ſo doth he not preciſely determine any thing on either, as abſolutely true & certayne, but as ſeeming to him more probable, & therfor perſwadeth not any man to follow one or the other opinion, but contrariwiſe ſubmitteth & offereth

himſelfe ready to follow other mens better iudgement, & to thanke them for it: his words being theſe, which euery mā may read in the Author himſelf, Haec noſtra ſentētia est, ſincero animo certe profecta, in qua falli poſſum vt humanus: ſi quis meliora attulerit, gratias hab
                     •
                  am.
            
            
               
                  Mariana ſpeaketh only of Tyrāts. And this opinion that there Mariana doth propoſe as indifferent, to be proued or diſproued by other men, what opinion is it? Is it of killing of Kinges wherof now the queſtion is? Nothing leſſe, he handleth no ſuch queſtion▪ there is no ſuch doctrine in the Catholicke Church. Wherof then ſpeaketh he in that place? Of killing of Tyrants: for the which queſtion the King of Spayne to whome the booke was dedicated, and by whome it is both praiſed and priuiledged, was neuer offended with the Author: nor yet Henry the IIII. late King of France, as if ſuch thinges had beene written againſt them, they moſt worthily thinking themſelues farre from any ſuſpicion of Tyranny: for the which

cauſe alſo the Emperor Charles the fifth, was neuer angry with Soto, his Confeſſarius, nor any other Kinges haue beene offended with other Authors, who heretofore haue written an hundred times more, and more reſolutely then Mariana, in defence of the ſame opinion. Neyther are they indeed to be eſteemed eyther true ſubiects, or wiſe men that find any fault with ſuch mens writings, as written againſt their Kinges, thereby eſteeming their owne Kinges Tyrants, or ſuch as worthily may feare to be taken for ſuch.
            Finally wheras Mariana about this 
                  Mariana his book and doctrine cōdemned for hatred to the Society.matter affirming the leaſt of all men, is yet moſt of all, yea only amongſt all accuſed, and his writinges therefore condemned and burnt with ſuch ſeuerity & rigour; it is manifeſt they could not be cōdemned for the doctrine they did cō
               tayne, but for the Authors ſake that wrote them: nor the Author himſelf ſo iniuriouſly vſed for his owne ſake, but for the coate he weares, & for the badge of the name of Ieſus, which both he and

his booke doth carrie. They are enemies of that holy name, that condemned Mariana for any ſuch Doctrine. They are only the enemies of Ieſuites, that ſo calumniouſly deriued the crime from one Mariana to all Ieſuites. They are enemyes to Catholike Religion that accuſe the Catholicke Church of any ſuch doctrine.
            
               Sathan the Author & Father of all Iyers & ſlanderers. And hereby we may eaſily come to find the firſt ofſpring of all theſe calumnies: the firſt & only author and teacher of all calumniators, is Satan the head calumniator himſelfe. Who knoweth not this ancient fraud & accuſtomed fetch of that cōmon enemy both of God, & all mankind, who hath no more potent meanes to reſiſt the honour of God, to oppreſſe his ſeruants, and hinder the progreſſe of true vertue and religion, then to bring all good men, as oppoſite to him, and his endeauours, into ſuſpicion with Kings, and Emperors, calling them in queſtion for matters of State? So did he vſe Aman in the old Teſtament

as an inſtrument to bring into diſgrace with King Aſſuerus the people of God, diſperſed throughout his Prouinces, ſlaundering them for ſeditious and contrary to the lawes of his Realme. So Daniel was caſt into the Lions den, becauſe he had done againſt the lawes of the Medes and Perſians, forſooth he ſerued and adored God almighty, whome they acknowledged not for God. Likewiſe Antiochus held all for traytors, and An ancient deuiſe to draw matters of religion into crims of State.violators of his Law, whoſoeuer vnder his Dominions kept & obſerued the law of God. Samuel therfore had good cauſe when he was ſent of God to annoint for King, Dauid the ſonne of Ieſſe, to be afraid that Saul would kill him, as guilty of treaſon againſt his Crowne, who already had the poſſeſſion therof, and who afterward being poſſeſſed with a Diuell ſought continually to make away Dauid, although a true ſeruant of God, and him, only vnder pretence of ſtate.
            
               Exāples in the new teſtament And in the new Teſtament what other meanes had the Diuell to batter the Ghoſpell, and oppugne our Sauiour him

ſelfe, then by the Iewes, as his inſtrumēts to accuſe him before Pontius Pilate, to call him in queſtion of ſtate, as ſeditious, and forbidding to pay tribute to Ceſar, and calling himſelfe King; the which bare accuſation without any proofe is of ſuch nature, ſo potent, and ſoe odious amongſt worldly men, that be the fact neuer ſo falſe, wherof a man is ſo accuſed it ſufficeth to diſcredit and opreſſe him, be he neuer ſo innocent, as may appeare Our Sauiour called into queſtiō for matter of ſtate againſt the Emperour, & condemned for the ſame.by that example of Chriſt our Sauiour, who was the moſt innocent of all men, yea innocency it ſelfe. For although Pilate ſeeing him guiltleſſe, endeauoured to deliuer him: yet the malicious redoubling that accuſation, & therwith threatning Pilate himſelfe, ſaying if thou let him go, thou art not a friend to Ceſar, they ſo terrified him with the only name of Ceſar, that ſtraight he let himſelfe be carried away, to the greateſt act of iniuſtice that was committed ſince the world began. Wherin the Diuell hauing had ſo good ſucceſſe, as to haue condemned Chriſt, and put to death the Author of

life (but yet ſo, that in fine all fell vpon his owne head, our Sauiour therby being exalted in glory, and all mankind deliuered from the Diuells tyranny) hath ſtill continued by the ſame way, as moſt aſſured & effectuall to perſecute all Gods ſeruants, and true followers of Chriſt.
            And therfore the Apoſtles following ſtraight after, were forced alſo againſt ſuch calumnies opēly to teach and commād Chriſtians to obey their Soueraigns, and magiſtrates, to pray for them, to render them tribute to whom tribute appertaineth, and honour to whome honour. After the Apoſtles the ancient Doctors of the Church were alſo forced often to imploy their pennes, and ſhew that true Chriſtians were not enemies of Emperours, but did offer ſacrifices for their ſtate and proſperitie: and yet becauſe thoſe Emperours, as worldly and wicked men, preferred the leaſt thought of their owne eſtate before the greateſt reaſons that might be alleaged for the defence of innocency, alwayes ſuch calumnies haue preuailed, as firſt againſt

the head himſelfe, ſo after againſt his members and followers.
            
               Gods ſeuere puniſhment vpon vniuſt iudges. Although at length by the almighty power of God, truth hath alwayes had the victory, & the Diuell togeather with his inſtruments haue byn confounded. As is notorious firſt in the old Teſtamēt by Aman, by the enemies of Daniel, by Saul, and Antiochus their deathes: and in the new, by Pilate who died in baniſhment, and by the whole nation of the Iewes, who were firſt ſo miſerably deſtroyed by Titus and Veſpaſians armie, & haue alwayes ſince remayned as vagabonds vpon the face of the earth. Afterward what miſerable deathes haue befallen all thoſe Emperours that by ſuch vniuſt wayes haue perſecuted the Church of God, vnder colour of ſtate, it were too lōg here to rehearſe: it will ſhortly come to your view fully ſet down in the ſecōd part of a learned Treatiſe cōcerning Policy and Religion. So that allwaies they haue byn inexcuſable before God & mā, who haue concurred by power of Princes, to the oppreſſing of good men, vnder

the calumnious pretext of dealing in State matters.
            
               Hereſies haue firſt ſprōg vp in our dayes by rebellion. But moſt inexcuſable in this our dayes, is this calumniation obiected by Heretickes to the Catholicks, and Catholicke doctrine, it being on the contrary ſide proper to Hereticks to impugne their Princes, and to Hereticall doctrine to maintaine it as lawfull, yea the only meanes wherby hereſies haue ſprong vp, & Hereticks firſt entred into the world, haue beene their rebellions againſt their Magiſtrates, their lawfull Kings, and Princes. The reaſon wherof is manifeſt; Hereſie being of her owne nature a ſeparation and diuiſion from the body of the Catholicke Religion, and therfore muſt needes begin with rebelling againſt the Catholicke Church, and conſequently againſt their Catholicke Kings and Soueraigne Princes. But the experience hereof is much more manifeſt: for as Luthers, Zuinglius, Caluins, and all other hereticks beginning of innouation, came by teaching all their followers, that Princes may be reſtrayned by force, purſued,

iudged, & puniſhed by the people, excommunicated, depriued, depoſed, and caſt into hell by the Miniſters, condemned and put to death by inferiour Magiſtrates, whenſoeuer in their opinion, they become Tyrants, and oppoſite to the Ghoſpell, as writeth the Author of the booke of Dangerous poſitiōs, in his fourth and fifth chapter, and the Author of the Suruey of pretended diſcipline. Their practice of the foreſaid doctrine hath byn too too well knowne through the whole world.
            
               The practiſe of Proteſtantes in matters of rebelliō. For firſt in Germany, Luthers followers incited by ſuch doctrine of his, tooke armes and rebelled with ſuch violent headines throughout all that Countrey againſt their owne Prince, that, as Sl
                     •
                  ydan a Proteſtant Author affirmeth, at that only time beſides the euerſion of infinite numbers of fortreſſes, and Caſtles, aboue an hundred and thirty thouſand people were ſlaine. And afterwards the followers of Luther deuiding themſelues into different ſects of Luther aniſme, Zuinglianiſme, Caluinianiſme, Anabaptiſme, new

               Arianiſme, and the like, with ech of them followed euery where new rebellions againſt their Princes: as you may ſee, which way ſoeuer you looke, either towardes the North, where you ſhall find freſh memory of their rebellions in Saxony, Denmarke, Sueueland, Polonia, and Tranſiluania: or towardes the South in Zwitzerland, Griſons, Sauoy, and their Confines, where Zuinglius himſelfe in the Cantons of Switzerland his owne countrey was the chiefe ſtirrer of rebellion, and was ſlayne himſelfe in the field. And at Geneua, Caluin, Beza and other Miniſters incited the Subiects againſt the Duke of Sauoy, and other their naturall Princes.
            Towardes the Eaſt the Heretikes ioyned their forces with the Turke himſelfe, againſt the Emperour their Soueraigne: and ſo Boſcaine that famous Caluinian Rebell, forced the ſaid Emperour to leaue him for his life tyme the Princedome of Tranſiluania. Towards the weſt, to wit in France through the which I haue trauailed ſome time, and there

haue ſpent ſome yeares of my age, I haue ſeene in all places where I haue beene, ſuch pittifull ruines of Townes, and Fortreſſes, and haue heard recounted ſuch Barbarous, yea rather Beaſt-like cruelties committed in their rebellions, that the only memory therof ſufficeth euery where for a perpetuall infamy and confuſion of thoſe that are there of the pretended reformed religion.
            In Flanders alſo, what part therof hath beene free from the like ruines, & maſſakcres effectuated by thē that there rebelled againſt their natural Soueraigne, of whome as yet remayneth one part in Holland and Zeland? in Scotland what ſeditious rebellious were ſtirred vp firſt againſt the noble Queene Marie Regent of Scotland, Grandmother to our Soueraigne that now raigneth, by thoſe ſtirring Miniſters, Knox, Goodman, Dowglaſſe and others: & afterward againſt Queene Marie Regnāt, Mother of our Soueraign by the Lords of the Cōgregation as they called themſelues, indeed Hereticall rebells, with direction of their Miniſters,

aſſiſting them in perſon and all according to the rules of their Ghoſpel, that is of Hereſy, whoſe ſubſtance and nature is, as before is ſayd, to be of it ſelfe a rebelliō againſt the Catholike Religiō, & Catholike Kings, & Princes. And to cō
               clude with England, we haue ſeene that in fiue yeares time, or therabout of the Catholike raigne of Queene Marie, were broached and ſet on foote more Rebellions by proportiō, then in fortie yeares of her Proteſtant Siſter Queene Elizabeth next following her.
            And this is the cauſe why in theſe Coū
               treys Rebellious doctrine proper vnto Proteſtants, and condēned by Catholicks.wiſe men diſcourſing of this matter, eſteemed it a moſt ridiculous thing that Lutherās or Caluiniſts or any other Hereticks ſhould obiect to the Catholike Church the doctrine of rebellion, and killing of their Kings and Princes, which is a thing ſo contrary to al Catholike Religion, and ſo naturall to hereſy it ſelfe as appeareth by the Coūcell of Conſtance Seſſ. 15. where they are condemned for heretikes that doe obſtinatly hould any ſuch propoſitions: that euery Tyrāt ought

                  
to be killed: and that he may be killed both lawfully and meritorouſly, by any vaſſell or ſubiect of his: and that by any deceiptfulnes, or ſubtilitie: notwithſtanding any oath or agreement made to the contrary: & that without any ſentence or iudgment. Theſe were the propoſitiōs of Wickliffe then cōdemned by that Catholike Councel: theſe are the propoſitiōs of the hereticks of our time, Luther, Caluin, Beza, Buchanan, & others their companions, & by thē moſt iniuriouſly reſtrained in particuler to the Princes thē liuing, as namely to Charles the 9. King of France, yea to the Q. Mother & al her whelpes, as they tearmed thē, that is, all her honorable Childrē, the ſayd King Charles with al his brethren: likewiſe Q. Mary of Englād, & other Princes of Germany: which doctrine, & practice of the hereticks of our time, is condemned by the doctrine and practice of the Catholike Church at this time: ſo that the hereticks obiecting to Catholikes any ſuch doctrine or practices, do but vſe the way of preuention, like naughty womē who knowing what

is to be obiected to them, will firſt of all in ſcoulding obiect it to others.
            And here comming to make an end of my Letter, I haue thought good to ad one thing in ſteed of newes, and in few wordes let you vnderſtand, what is the What ſtrangers doe iudge & ſpeake of the oath of allegiāce and the propoſing therof▪
               iudgement here about the Oath that you cal of Allegiāce, the rumor wherof is now ſpread through the whole world, & many books are abroad about that ſubiect: the wiſeſt ſort of men heere, leauing a fide their iudgements about the queſtions themſelues ſet downe in that oath, to wit about the Kinges lawfull right & title to the Crowne, & of other forraine Princes authoritie, as they ſay: leauing I ſay the diſcuſſing of them aſide, they doe much diſproue the only propoſing therof to ſubiects, to be by them confirmed by oath. For ſay they, a King already in peaceable poſſeſſiō of his Crown, ſhould no more propoſe to his ſubiects the diſcuſſion of his rights and titles, for that no mā of any conſciēce can ſweare any ſuch thing whithout perfect examination, triall, and knowledge therof,

by the which he may be ſure in Conſcience of ſwearing truly, and ſo the ſubiects are forced to enter into diuers conſiderations of many circūſtances which were more cōuenient for thē to belieue, thē to examin, being ſuch oftētimes that learned Lawiers cōming to diſcuſſe thē, are ſo doubtful, that neither they, nor the Princes thēſelus wilbe ſo bould to ſweare them; being content to remaine in Lawfull poſſeſſion againſt any pretender that ſhall oppoſe himſelfe. Yea if by any ſuch occaſion of queſtiō made about any ſuch right, or title, warre ſhould chance to be waged, the ſubiects are to belieue their Princes and Countreis cauſe to be iuſt, & may without any preiudice of their ſaluation, yea are bound to ſhed their bloud in ſuch a cauſe: yet are not they bound, nor the Prince himſelfe, to take an oath, that his cauſe is iuſt; and therfore it were great imprudency for a Prince in ſuch a cauſe, to tender ſuch an oath to his ſouldiers: for ſo he ſhould find his companies much diminiſhed, and therof would follow that euident abſurditie, that if

the ſouldiers of ech ſide ſhould ſweare their owne Kinges cauſe to be iuſt, all the ſouldiers of one ſide muſt needes be forſworne, it being as Deuines do hold, impoſſible, that any warres ſhould be iuſt on both ſides, no more then in law that ech part ſhould haue truth and iuſtice on his ſide, becauſe that ſuch queſtions that eyther by warre, or by Law are to be decided, doe alwayes conſiſt in a contradiction, by affirming, and denying one and the ſame thing: and by ſuch oathes, as the one ſide muſt alwayes needes bee forſworne, ſo the other muſt needes do ill in ſwearing raſhly ſuch doubtfull things.
            
               The diſcuſſing of the Popes Authority not conuenient. Much leſſe is it thought conuenient to propoſe to ſubiects the examining of the power & right of any forraine King, or of the Authoritie of the Pope himſelfe aboue Kings and Princes, not only for the ſame reaſons, but alſo becauſe therby many learned men which before were quiet, and without any queſtion yealded obedience to the prince, are not only forced openly to refuſe ſuch an

Oath pertaining to faith, about the Authority of Chriſt his Vicar vpon earth, but alſo openly to profeſſe the contrary, both by word and writing.
            
               Forced ſwearing more hurtfull then profitable. And ſuch ſort of Oathes that are taken by force, with doubt of mind, and ſcruple of conſcience, doe rather hurt then good, euen to that end to the which they are giuen. For whenſoeuer any occaſiō ſhould happē of ſhewing their loue and affection towards their Prince, they would allwayes be found moſt backward that haue beene ſo iniuriouſly forced to take ſuch Oaths againſt their wil, and peraduenture would diſpenſe with themſelues for the performance of them, as vniuſtly exacted, and raſhly made: and they would alwaies be found moſt faithfully in keeping all loyalty towards their Prince, who do offer themſelues moſt ready to ſweare the ſame, and do plainely refuſe to ſweare any more. For as this, they do refuſe for their duty towards God: ſo that, they will performe for their duty towardes their King, and towards God that gaue them him: Quia
               
               omnis potestas à Deo eſt: and this is according to our Sauiours preſcript, Reddere 
               
                  Matt. 22▪
               
               quae ſunt Caeſaris Caeſari, & quae ſunt Dei Deo.
            
            This only all wiſe men in theſe parts do agree vpon, wherin I aſſure my ſelfe no man with you of any wiſdome, will any way contradict, that euery ſubiect is bound in Conſcience to obay his lawfull Prince, and that alſo to promiſe by Oath when it ſhalbe exacted. And ſuch an Oath although in other Realmes through the whole world is not wont to be exacted of all ſubiects, but only of the Magiſtrates and Gouernours of others; yet ſuch occaſion may fall out, that it may ſtand with prudence to tender it to euery one in particuler: and ſuch an Oath of obedience towardes his Prince and Soueraigne, no good Catholicke will refuſe, nor Catholicke Doctrine doth diſallow.
            
               Yours euer T. A.
            
            
            
         
      
   