
      
         
            
            
            THE
DVMBE DIVINE
SPEAKER,
(*⁎*)
OR:
Dumbe ſpeaker of Diuinity.
            A
Learned and excellent Treatiſe, in praiſe of
Silence: ſhewing both the dignitie, and
defectes of the Tongue.
            Written in Italian, by Fra. Giacomo
Affinati d'Acuto Romano.
And truelie tranſlated by A. M.
            
            AT LONDON,
Printed for William Leake, dwelling in Paules
churchyard, at the ſigne of the Holy-ghoſt.
1605.
         
         
            
            
            To his moſt reſpected, and very dearely
eſteemed kinde friend-Maſter Iohn Stermyn,
a true louer of learning, and furtherer
to all ſtudious endeaueurs.
            
               SIR, hauing acquainted you with
this long and laborious tranſlation
(a ſubiect ſo learned and excellent
as in any language (I thinke) the
like is rare to be found) And finding
you willing to giue it entertainement:
I diſcharged my affections
frō all great men of the world,
ſuch as looke on learning awry, and
aſquint, or with a nod, or, I thanke yee, requite great ſtudious
labours, And made choice of you, whome I knowe not onely capable
of greater matters in your ſelfe, but a moſt kind fauourer
of any paines this way imployed.
            The Author in Italian calles it: Il Muto che Parla Concetti
Scritturali. And the beſt Engliſh title I coulde giue it (in
my mind) is, The dumbe Diuine Speaker: or, dumbe Speaker
of Diuinitie, becauſe the whole courſe of matter is thereon
abſolutely grounded, and in ſilent dumbneſſe, deliuereth an exquiſite methode for the gouernment of our ſpeaking.
            Take you the honour of my paynes, as one whome entirely I affect,
with you, I giue the world my labours beſt benefite: expecting
from you but your wonted kindneſſe, And if the world giue me
good words, tis all I aske of it.
            
               Yours in all true affection,
A. M.
            
         
         
            
            Fra. Giacomo Affinati to the Reader,
yeelding a reaſon for the title of his Booke.
            
               HEE knowes my heart, that rules
the affections of euery ſoule,
how deſirous I haue beene
from time to time, to be anie
way helpfull to my neighbour,
to declare my ſelfe no vnfruitfull
tree, planted within the
flouriſhing boſome of the
Church. And therefore with
the occaſion of a moſt gentle
ſpirite, bemoaning the infinite vaine trauailes of many,
ſuch as (indeede) deſerue no acknowledgement of the
world: I impoſed an eternall ſilence vpon my ſelfe, and to
asſiſt the world (thereby) ſo much as lay in me, and to raiſe
it vp from thoſe weightie oppreſſions of wicked moleſtatiōs
(according to the ability of mine own weak ſtrength)
Firſt I publiſhed the Mount of holy tribulation, and now
my Dumb diuine Speaker, in prayſe of Silence, So called,
becauſe I approoue by authoritye of ſacred Scripture,
that whenſoeuer we ſpeake well, and as becommeth vs: it
is not we that ſpeake, but the holy ghoſt, which then moueth
the organe of our ſpeeche. Non enim vos eſtis qui loquimini,
ſed ſpiritus patris veſtri qui loquitur in vobis.
            
            Heereupon, Chriſt caſting foorth the diuell that was
dumbe, out of the poſſeſſed bodie, the holy Euangeliſte

telles vs, that the dumbe ſpake. Erat Ieſus eijciens Demonium,
& illud erat mutum. Et cum cieciſſet Demonium, loquutus
eſt mutus. Wherein we haue to noate, how the Euangeliſt
ſayth, that the diuell was dumb, who being caſt out of the
poſſeſſed bodie, he doeth not ſay, that the diuell ſpake
which was dumbe, but he that was poſſeſſed: referring the
dumbneſſe, not to the diuell as firſt was affirmed, but to
the bodie poſſeſſed, which (hauing beene dumbe) ſpake.
Et cum eieciſſet Demonium, loquutus eſt mutuis.
            
            Now although the right ſenſe be, that he who firſt was
dumbe, ſpake, the diuell being throwne out: yet notwithſtanding,
agreeing with the hidden voyce of the letter, it is
true that the dumb ſpake, abyding alſo in his dumbneſſe,
becauſe he ſpake well, as the Euangeliſt noteth; Et loque.
batur rectè: hee being dumbe, and yet ſpeaking by the
meanes of the holy ſpirite, therefore wee alſo are ſilent,
and God ſpeaketh in and by vs, when we ſpeake well and
decentlie, and thus is it true that the dumbe man ſpake.
            This haue I ſet downe in fauour and defence of the title
of this Treatiſe, wherein I purpoſe to deliuer the excellencie
of Silence, and how it is much better to keepe ſilence,
then to talke, in regard of the numberleſſe offences,
that men do fall into by their tongues only. Which labor,
if I may perceiue the worlde gratefully to accept, or the
leaſt apparant ſigne of thankefulneſſe to proceede from
thence: I promiſe, that ſpeedily I will deliuer to the Preſſe,
another as excellent and profitable a worke, entitled: The
world turned topſie turuie: or, the vpſide downward; diſcourſing
of God, of the Angelles, of the heauens, of ſubluna
                  •
               ie
things, and of Microcoſmus, or the little world man, approouing
how they are all ouerturned.
            In the meane while, vouchſafe with gentleneſſe to read
this treatiſe, which may the more ſpeedily haſten on the
other. And pray vnto the Lord for me, that I may be a diligent

ligēt obſeruer ofſilēce, which is ful of al ſecuritie & ſafety,
and abounding in all ſacred bleſſings. Whereupon Dauid
ſayde, that the Iſraelites reioyced when they were quiet,
which made them afterward be brought to the porte of
their owne pleaſures. Laetati ſunt quia ſiluerunt, & deduxit
eos in portum voluntatis corum. For great ioy
haue they that keep ſilence, becauſe therby
they offend not god, but in their ſilence
they do alwaies contemplate theire
cheefeſte happineſſe, and (euen
as in a ſafe harbour) haue
perpetuall quietneſſe.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The cheefe heades and Argumentes,
that are diſcourſed on in this labour: and
the ſeuerall application of Scriptures
to them.
            
               Of trueth and
Of Lying.

                     96. If I ſaye the trueth, why doe yee not beleeue
me. Iohn. 8.46.
                     When he ſpeaketh a lye, then ſpeaketh hee of
his owne. Iohn. 8.44.
                  
               
               Of Silence.

                     22. 42. He rebuked them, and ſuffered them not to ſay
that they knew him to be Chriſt. Luk. 4. 41.
                  
               
               Of Flatterie.

                     81. They anſwered Ieſus, and ſaide; we cannot tell.
Mat. 21. 27.
                     Maſter, we know that thou art true, and teacheſt the
way of God truely, &c. Math. 22. 16.
                  
               
               Of Wiſedome.

                     54. Be wiſe as Serpentes, and innocent as Doues.
Math. 10. 16.
                  
               
               Of Murmuring.

                     137. 147. 156. But they that were Scribes and Phariſies
among them murmured, &c.
Luke. 5. 30.
                  
               
               Of the double
tongue.

                     166. This people draweth neere vnto me with their
mouth, and honoreth me with their lips; but
their hart is far off from me. Mat. 15. 8.
                  
               
               Of the dumb
Diuell.

                     111. Then he caſt out a Diuell, and he was dumbe.
Luke. 11. 14.
                  
               
               Of the Angels
ſpeaking.

                     And when the Diuell was gone out, the dumb ſpake.
ibid.
                  
               
               Of the gift of
tongues.

                     112. And they were filled with the holy ghoſt, and
began to ſpeake with other tongues. Act. 2. 4.
                  
               
               Of Hypocriſie.

                     166. 173. 182. When yee faſt, looke not ſowre as the hypocrits
do, for they diſfigure their faces,
that they might ſeeme vnto men to faſt
Mat, 6. 16.
                  
               
               
                  
Of Repentance.

                     127. When I held my tongue my bones conſumed,
through my daily complaining. Pſal. 32. 3.
                  
               
               Of Mercenaries

                     190. But an hireling, and he which is not a ſheepheard,
neither the ſheepe are his owne, ſeeth
the wolfe comming, and leaueth the ſheep
and flieth. Ioh. 10. 12.
                  
               
               Of Blaſphemie.

                     And men boyled in great heate, and blaſphemed
the name of God &c. Apoc. 16. 9.
                  
               
               Of the excellency
of the worde of
God.

                     69. And they ſaid; Thou haſt a Deuill. Ioh. 7. 20.
                     Neuer was man heard to ſpeake the like.
Iohn. 7. 46.
                     And the people preaſed vpon him, to heare the
word of God.
                  
               
               Of raſh iudgement.

                     151. Iudge not according to the appearance.
Iohn. 7. 24.
                  
               
               Of vain glory.

                     182. I am not like other men, &c. I faſt twiſe in the
weeke: I giue, &c. Luke. 18. 11. 12.
                     The fooliſh virgins tooke their lamps, but tooke
no oyle with them. Mat. 25. 3.
                  
               
               Of the myſtery
of opening the
mouth.

                     O Lord open thou my lippes, and then my
mouth ſhall ſhewe foorth thy prayſe.
Pſal. 140. 9
                     Ieſus opened his mouth, and taught them.
Mat. 5. 2.
                  
               
               Of brotherly
correction.

                     If thy brother offend againſt thee; goe and tell
him his faulte betweene thee and him alone,
&c. Mat. 18. 15. 16.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A
MOST EXCELLENT AND
LEARNED DIALOGVE, IN PRAISE
OF SILENCE: DECLARING BOTH
THE DIGNITIE AND DEFECTES OF
THE TONGVE.
            The Speakers in this Dialogue, are the right reuerend Lord Counte
Claudio, Biſhop of Placentia: and the moſt honorable Lord Lodouico
Rangone his brother, Marqueſſe of Gibello, &c.
            
               
                  The Argument.
                  It is here diſcourſed in a pleaſing controuerſie, whether Silence or speaking,
merits moſt praiſe. And, the one contrarying the other very familiarly,
eache ſtriues to maintaine his cauſe by ſoundeſt reaſons:
ſomtimes producing authorities from holy writ, and other whiles from
the auncienteſt Philoſophers. At length (after a ſweete and ſententious
arguing) they conclude, that there is more ſecuritie in ſilence,
then indiſcreete talking: in regard, that while eache man ſtriues to
speake best, his owne conceite doeth ſooneſt deceiue him. And this
is confirmed by diuine proofes, wittie ſayings of Philoſophers, and
naturall reaſons.
               
               Chap. 1.
               
                  
                     CLAVDIO.
                  The ſweetneſſe of humane
conference is ſo pleaſing,The Induction to this diſcourſe. gladſome
and delightfull, as I receiue no
meane iniurie (my Lord) by your ſilence.
This taciturnity of yours, is ſuch
a mighty affliction to me, as I can better
forbeare my dayly food, then to be
thus depriued of your ſpeeche. Seeing,
to a hart downe-preſſed with ſorrow
(as mine is) much more auaileth the
ſweete language of a true friend, then
the phyſick of a ſkilfull doctor to an infirme bodie, and more vertue
haue friendly conſolations, to free the hearte from all oppreſſing
paſſions, then phyſicks ſweeteſt ſirrops,Varietie of ſentence. in reſtrayning the furie of
a Feuer. And yet do you hold your peace? may it not ſuffice you,

that you haue ſo long time forborne to anſwere my letters, but
now likewiſe to ouercharge my thoughts with this inſupportable
ſilence? The occaſion of your denying anſwere to my writings, as
alſo your enioyning me to ſilence, haue equall reaſon to this your
obſtinacie. But albeit you kept me ſo long from your deſired lines,
yet now deny mee not the benefite of your ſpeeche.A friendly enforcement, to vrge an anſwere. Dumbe, and
ſilent ſtil? What are you made of ſtone, that you haue a head without
a tongue, or a tongue immooueable without ſpeeche? Or, being
ouercharged with the greatneſſe of miſe
                        •
                     ies (as Paule the Apoſtle
was) you know not how to expreſſe them? Or by the multitude
of matters, which trouble your ſenſes, are you robb'd of the
meanes for their deliuerance,Sentence. as, if aboundance made you the poorer?
Or, as the man deepely pondering on celeſtiall cauſes, becomes
(by carneſt apprehenſion) ſo obliuious and tranſported from himſelf,Similie.
as (not remembring where he is) a ſweete deceipte perſwades him
that he is in heauen, yet afterward (as a fraile man) finds himſelf to be
vpon the earth?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  He knowes enough,Sentence. that truely knowes how to hold
his peace.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  But ſilence is ſometimes the occaſion of much hurt;One ſentence quitted with a contrarie. and
therefore is to be ſuſpected.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Euery word ſhould not be anſwered: and ſometimes,The nature of queſtioning, & anſwering.
quiet ſilence is much more commendable, then tedious and prolixious
ſpeeche: but your Lordſhip (beeing aſſured of my loue) might
reſt ſo ſatisfied, and (with my delight) to delight your owne ſelfe: ſo
much the rather, becauſe it paſſeth for a generall prouerbe, that deeds
are men, and words women.
                     Prouerbe.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Tis true, but yet it was no lye that Solon ſayd,Solons opinion of ſpeeche. 
                     that
speeche or words are the image of deeds, as alſo the figure of humane life:
                     and a Glaſſe doeth not more liuely expreſſe the ſhape of the body,Socrates concerning ſpeeche.
then ſpeeche doeth the true forme of the minde: whence, Socrates
reputed ſpeeche, as a thing moſt neceſſarie, whereby to knowe the quality
of humane nature. Hereupon was it, that a friends ſonne of his beeing
ſent vnto him,Example. that he might gather, what aptneſſe remayned in him
toward Philoſophie and ſtudie of humanitie, he ſaid vnto him: 
                     Tell
them (if thou wilt) that I ſhall knowe thee. The tongue then is as a
touchſtone,Sentences. whereby to know a man: for, the veſſell will ſauour of
the wine contained in it: and, by the breath (ſometimes) may be gathered
what meate hath beene eaten.Pſal. 45. 1. 2. To this end alſo Dauid ſayd: Eructauit
cor meum verbum bonum; dico ego opera mea regi. Lingua mea

calamus ſcrib
                           •
                         velociter ſcribentis: My hart will vtter foorth a good
matter, I will intreate in my workes of the king. My tongue is as the
penne of a ſwift writer.
                     Alluſion. As if hee would haue ſayde, becauſe my
hearte is ſo good, as it can contriue no euill, therefore (by the
tongue) it ſendeth foorth good and holie wordes, whereby my
deedes are correſpondent to my hearte, ſo that they feare not to
approache the preſence of the higheſt king, moouing the tongue
with equall readineſſe, as the penne of a ſwift ſcribe ſtirreth it
ſelfe. And queſtionleſſe I take it to bee ſo, becauſe, it is as kinglie
a matter to mooue the hand to worke,
                     Sentence. 
                     as the tongue to speake, whence
grew the prouerbe expreſſing a minde conſtant:Prouerbe. 
                     The worde of
a King. If then your honour will but graunte thus much, as to reſolue
mee,Deedes, or wordes which are of moſt eſteeme, and how they differ. which is in moſt eſteeme, deedes or wordes, the one
I will not denie to bee of greate price, by how much the more it expreſſeth
the conceites of the heart, and reueales the paſſions of the
minde, or elſe wee muſt giue no credite to Ariſtotle, who plainelie
ſayth, thatAriſtotles opinion of wordes. 
                     Voces ſunt notae earum quae ſunt in anima paſſionum.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  To obſerue a time for ſilence, hath euermore beene
held a commendable qualitie.
                        S. Grego Nazian his iudgement on words, and compariſon of them. Saint Gregorie Nazianzene ſaith,
That wordes haue the proportion of merchandiſe, and the voyce is like
a ſhippe. Therefore when the merchandiſe of my ſpeeche, which
from the cloſe ſtorehouſe of my breaſt, would bee tranſported
to the citie of your minde; ſuddenlie from the porte of my mouth,
it gettes cariage (by the ſhippe of my voyce) and with the winde
of breath,Alluſion. glydes through the ſea of the ayre, deliuers her lading
in the hauen of your ea
                        •
                     es, and thence preſſeth on to offend
the hearte. Heereupon (perhappes) it was, that Salomon called the
tongue,Alluſion to the words of Salomon. 
                     a reward giuen vnto man, to the end, that therewith hee
ſhould prayſe his Creator, and, in recompence of ſo many bleſſings
giuen him by God, he ſhould returne him the praiſe of a holie
confeſſion. Dedit enim mihi Dominus lingu
                           •
                        m mercedem
meam,
                     Eccle. 51. 30. 
                     & in ipſae laudabo eum.
                     A Similie to ſound purpoſe, comparing ſpeeche with merchā
                        diſe, and anſwering that of Greg. Nazian.
                      
                     The Lorde hath giuen me a tongue
for my rewarde, wherewith I will praiſe him. But, as it is not
alwayes a time for nauigation, or ſpreading foorth ſayle to euerie
winde that blowes, but rather to expecte a proſperous gale,
for making of a ſecure voyage, without hazarding the ſhippe
againſt a rocke, whereby both goods and merchaunte may mimiſerably
periſhe: euen ſo, ought wee not to launche foorth
from the porte of the minde, the merchaundiſe of wordes

by the veſſell of our voyce, at euerie raſh and vnaduiſed ſeaſon, but
rather to awaite the opportunity of occaſion. For, hee doeth not
thruſt himſelfe to ſo manifeſt perill of life, that aduentures on the glib
waters of the Sea in a little, fraile, and ſlender wodden bottome: as
he may be ſaid to do, who is hourely in daunger of death, by ſpeaking
careleſſely and indiſcreetely. Therefore ſayde the wiſe man;
Vita & mors in manu linguae;
                     Prou. 8. 21. 
                     Life and death are in the power of the
tongue. Much better then is it to bee ſilent, then lauiſh of ſpeeche,
becauſe to ſpeake well,Of ſpeaking well and ill. is the worke of a wiſe and very ſenſible
perſon, and euery man is not able to ſpeake with ſecuritie, for
ſpeaking otherwiſe, his ſpeeche doth but offend the eares of others.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  If life and death lie in the hand and power of the
tongue,An Obiection concerning life and death, conſiſting in the power of the tongue. then one may be as guiltie of death that ſayes nothing, as
he that ſpeakes ouermuch. And Dauid complained heereof, repenting
that he had held his peace: whence may bee gathered, that if
the bones be decayed, which ſignifie the powerfull vertue (for as the
bones ſupport the bodie,Similie. ſo doeth vertue the ſoule) what ſhall we
ſay then of theſe wordes: Quoniam tacui, inueterauerunt oſſa mea.
While I held my tongue,
                     Pſal. 31. 3. 
                     my bones conſumed? Likewiſe, Eſaye the Prophet
was ſorie he had beene ſilent,Eſay. 6. 5. and therefore lamenting ſayde:
vae mihi, quia tacui: woe be to me, becauſe I held my peace. Now on
the contrarie,Iob. 39. 38. 
                     Iob, that admirable ſpectacle of patience, repented
himſelfe becauſe he had ſpoken, ſaying: Vnum loquutus ſum, quod vtinam
non dixiſſem: Once haue I ſpoken, but I will anſwere no more.
Then as well may he erre that ſpeakes not in time,Obſeruation for a time to ſpeake, for auoiding of error in either. as hee that is ſilent
when hee ſhoulde ſpeake, and therefore I may counte him a
foole, that makes no obſeruation of a time to ſpeake, which made
the wiſe man ſay: Stultus caeditur labijs: the fooliſh in talke ſhall be beaten:
                     Pro. 10. 9.
Meaning (in my minde) thus, the fooliſh man that obſerues no
time of ſpeeche, takes occaſion from his owne lippes to be ſilent,
when he ſhould ſpeake,A foole ſpeaks moſt, when he ſhould do it leaſt. and talkes liberally, when he ought to be
ſilent: therefore let him beare blame from an others tongue, and
ſtripes from other mens hands, becauſe in euery thing there is time
to be obſerued.Eccle. 3. 1. 7. 
                     Omnia tempus habent: tempus tacendi, & tempus loquendi:
To all things there is an appointed time, a time to keep ſilence,
and a time to ſpeake.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     Well, admit that by ſilence a man may runne into
ſome defect, yet neuertheleſſe, beyond infinite compariſons, and
with out all queſtion, farre greater defects and harmes enſue by ſpeaking

then ſilence.
                     How a foole may appeare to be wiſe. 
                     For if a fooliſh man would appeare to be wiſe and
ſenſible, the beſt counſell I can giue him is to be ſilent. Becauſe, as
Cicero ſayth in one of his Epiſtles,
                     Cicero in Epiſt. 40. The tryal whether a man be good or
euill, is gathered by his actions: but to know whether he be wiſe or fooliſh,
is beſt diſcerned by his ſilence or ſpeaking: for by holding his peace, hee
may appeare to bee wiſe, euen in the eie of a learned man. And if
wee will credite what Salomon ſayeth in his Prouerbes,
                     Prou. 17. 29. 
                     hee
there affirmeth: Stultus quoque ſi tacuerit, ſapiens reputabitur,
& ſi compreſſerit labia ſua, intelligens: A foole when hee holdeth
his peace, is accounted wiſe: and hee that ſtoppeth his lippes, prudent.
                  Did you neuer ſee a notable Idiote intrude himſelfe into a graue
publique diſputation?A Similie of a fools outward ſhew of wiſedome, or apparance of follie. where, if he ſtand liſtening with great attention,
it ſeemes to the beholders, as if he perfectly vnderſtood all there
ſpoken, although (indeede) he be capable of iuſt nothing; but if perchance
he fal to babbling, his pouertie of vnderſtanding is ſoone diſcouered,
and manifeſtly then his ignorance appeareth: this is a caſe ſo
plaine and apparant, as multitude of proofes are needeleſſe in it. But
if a teſtimonie out of holy Scripture may paſſe for payment, liſten
then to Iob,
                     Iobs aduiſe to his friends, how to ſeeme wiſe. that greate Prince of the Eaſt, who deſiring that ſuch
friends of his, as came to viſite him in his bitter affliction, might
ſhewe themſelues to bee wiſe and diſcreete, ſayde: Vtinam taceretis,
vt putaremini eſſe ſapientes: Oh that you woulde hold your
tongue,
                     Iob. 13. 5. 
                     that it might bee imputed to you for wiſedome. This often
comes to paſſe, becauſe fooliſh men can hardelie holde theyr
peace.
                  
                     Solon the Philoſopher,Example. the very wiſeſt amongſt all the Grecians,
ſeeing himſelfe in companie of many buſie talkers, ſate very ſtill and
ſilent,Perianders words to Solon, concerning his ſilēce. whereat Periander (a man of great wiſedome, and king of Corinth)
marueiling, thus ſpake. Among ſo manie men that conferre together,
wherefore doth Solon onlie hold his peace? Is it becauſe thou art
a foole, or wanteſt thou wordes to expreſſe thy minde? Whereto
Solon anſwered:Solōs anſwer. 
                     A fooliſh man cannot ſit ſilent.
                  
                  It is likewiſe written of Zeno the Philoſopher,Example. who beeing inuited
to a ſumptuous banquet, which the Athenian Senate made for
certayne Embaſſadours of Licaonia, and arguing pleaſauntlie, as
often wee ſee it frequented in banquetting: hee alone ſpake neuer
a worde,The Embaſſadour of Lycaonia h
                           •
                        s ſpeeches to Zeno, & his reply. as beeing the wiſeſt of them all, whereat the Embaſſadours
wondering, ſayde to Zeno. What ſhall wee anſwere to our
king, if hee demaunde of vs concerning thee? Whereunto Zeno thus

wiſely replyed; Say to your king, that you ſawe a man in Athens at a
costly banquet, round engirt with cuppes, yet not drinke, with delicate
vtandes, yet eate litile; in company of many that talked, yet he onely
kept ſilence. I ſeeke not by this example to perſwade you, that I
am wiſe, becauſe of holding my peace, but it rather contentes
mee, not to bee eſteemed fooliſh, by ouermuch prattling:
in regarde that there is no proofe ſo perfecte, of knowing a
wiſe man from a foole, but onely by the liberalitye of the
tongue.
                  
                     Plato (on a time) beeing demaunded,Example. 
                     what courſe or obſeruation
were beſt to be kept, for ſoundeſt and trueſt knowledge of men? anſwered
thus.Platoes opinion how men are ſooneſt to be knowne. 
                     Men are ſoonest approoued by theyr ſound, as veſſells or glaſſes
made of earth are: for as the pot or glaſſe is knowne by ſounding,
whether it be broken or whole, ſo are men by the ſound of ſpeeche
knowne, either to be good or bad. For, the proude man (willingly) talks
of nothing but ambition or ſuperioritie: the riche man, of gold and
wealthie poſſeſſions:The different nature of men in their talking, according to their owne inclination. the quarreller, of fightes, braules and contentions:
the glutton, of feaſtes and banquetting: the enuious, of malice:
the ſlothfull of ſoft beds, eaſe and idleneſſe; the player, of varieties
of ſportes and delightes: the detractor, of murmuring and
ſlaunders. Wherefore I holde it better to be ſilente, then talkeatiue.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  But how can a man bee ſilent, if hee haue a tongue to
ſpeake, as hee hath eyes to ſee, eares to heare, noſtrilles to ſmell,
handes to worke, feete to goe, and all his bodye to vſe ſenſibly?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     The greater difficultie any worke endures in the
attayning,
                     A very ſententio
                           •
                        s anſwere. 
                     ſo much the more honour crowneth the atchiuemente
thereof, and therefore it is written of vertue; that it is to be gotten
by ſweate and labour: Virtutem poſuere Dei ſudore parandam. Pythagoras
held ſilence in ſo high eſteeme, that Atheneus relateth in
his ſeauenth booke,
                     The reckoning that Pythagoras made of ſilence. that of ſome beaſtes he would taſte moderately,
and offer others in ſacrifice to the Gods: but in all his life time he would
neuer touche a fiſh, becauſe he made ſome reuerend reckoning therof,
as obſeruing ſome diuine quality therin (what I know not) only for taciturnity.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  What diuine matter could the Philoſopher note to bee
more in the fiſh, then in any other brutiſh creature? this ſeemes to
mee a certayne ſolemne foolerie, eſpecially in ſo auncient a Philoſopher.
               
               
                  
                  Lodouico.
                  Euery creature ordayned for foode to man,All creatures haue a kind of voyce, but the fiſh onely. hath
(how much or how little it matters not) ſome kinde of voyce, except
the fiſhe onely, which hath no voyce at all: whereupon, this
Philoſopher obſeruing a perpetuall ſilence in fiſhes (as a matter
meerelye diuine) hee reſpected them with a very great opinion. And
hence it may bee (according to the Poets opinion) that fiſhes are called
Ellopes,
                     Plin. lib. 9. cap. 17. 
                     quaſi vocis inopes. Aſſuredly, there is nothing more dangerous,
then loquacity, nor any thing more eaſie to be imagined (without
offence) then ſilence:Ciceroes commendation of Cato. which made Marcus Tullius Cicero to commend
Cato infinitely, who ſpake alwayes ſo wiſely, that neuer any
worde came from him, the ſpeaking whereof he afterwarde repented.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  
                     Diogenes the Cinick was contrarie to Pythagoras,
for hee not onely made no reſpecte at all of fiſhes, but (belike) was
ſo well pleaſed with them, that hee ſedde very heartilye on them.
Nor can the opinion of that greate wiſe man ouerſway me, becauſe
anie extreamitie cannot bee free from enormitie:Sentence. and as blameworthie
doe I holde it, not to ſpeake when neede requires, as to
ſpeake ouer-largely when ſilence were better. Let mee allowe the
counſell of Cato,
                     Cato his aduiſe in ſpeaking. 
                     to ſpeake nothing, except it haue bin well ſpoken
before, whereon repentaunce neuer enſueth. But I know you will tell
me, that euery man cannot be a Cato: therefore it behooueth him rather
to be ſilent, then venturing vpon the perill of ſpeeche, to fall
therby into defect. And ſhould it be ſo, the tongue then might be ſorie,Pythagoras in teaching ſilence, did not will perpetual ſilence.
to bee giuen vs but in vaine, nor was Pythagoras himſelfe alwayes
ſilent, but tooke ſometime delight in ſpeaking, and as
hee was a Philoſopher that taught many Schollers, ſo it was
very neceſſarye hee ſhoulde ſpeake vnto them. Now among other
thinges which hee taught them, ſilence (you ſaye) was
the principall inſtruction, and not to ſpeake till a certayne
time.
                  Saint Ierome ſpeaking (of him) vpon Eccleſiaſticus,
                     Saint Ierome his wordes concerning Pythagoras. ſayeth: Pythagoricorum
diſciplina eſt tacere per quinquennium, & postea eruditiùs loqui. Others ſaye, that onely for two yeeres hee impoſed
ſilence on his Schollers, and not fiue: but let it bee howſoeuer,
it ſufficeth that this ſo long ſilence was to no other end, but to
teache them to ſpeake the better, and with wiſedome, ſo that his
intent was not they ſhoulde bee alwayes ſilent,Others opinion of Pythagoras teaching of ſilēce. but whenſoeuer
they ſpake, to ſpeake wiſely. Some others do hold that he did not altogether
prohibite them of ſpeeche, but becauſe hee woulde not

haue a new-come Scholler, to demaunde the occaſion of ſuch things
as they then reade in the ſchoole: which by good reaſon he might
doe, in regarde the Scholler ought to credite the Maſter, if hee
meane to receiue any profite at all by him: for if he giue no beleefe
to the Maſter, he will neuer be capable of learning any thing. This
made Ariſtotle ſaye;Ariſtotles leſſon to young learners. 
                     Addiſcentem oportet credere: ſo much the
rather, becauſe for manie thinges hee can render no other
reaſon, but onelie the rule of the firſt inſtructer.
                  Small profite were it to the childe, who, while hee ought retaine
the Alphabet in his memorie, for the better combining of wordes,
and reading perfectly; to waſte the time in friuolous queſtions, demaunding
importunatly of the maſter, vpon what occaſion A was
called A, and B named B. and why not either of them H or P?
whereof no other reaſon can be yeelded, but onely the will of the
firſt teacher.A defence of Pythagoras ſilence. And if it bee ſo, Pythagoras had reaſon, to cauſe his
Schollers to obſerue ſilence, to the end they might learne (in time) to
ſpeake the more perfectly.Eccle. 15. 18. The ſame did Salomon alſo teache: Antequam
loquaris,
                     Sentence. 
                     diſce: Learne before thou speake: The man that
ſpeakes without premeditation, oftentimes falles into an vnthought-on
repentaunce, and gladlye woulde returne his wordes
back againe, when it is ouer-late to do it.
                  Of this opinion likewiſe was Lacedemon Chilo,
                     Chilo, concerning the tongue. of whome Diogenes
Lacertius reporteth, that hee vſed often to ſaye: It ought neuer
to bee permitted, that the tongue ſhoulde goe before the minde,
as meaning, that whatſoeuer was to bee ſpoken of, it ought to be
verie well thought on firſt. The like did the bleſſed virgin, before
ſhee woulde anſwere the Angell Gabriell:
                     Luke. 1. 29. 
                     Cogitabat qualis eſſet
iſta ſalutatio: Shee thought what manner of ſalutation that ſhould bee.
Let it ſuffice then, that ſilence is not better then ſpeeche, though
more commendable is it for a man to hold his peace, then ſpeake
peremptorilie without iudgement, becauſe vnapt ſpeaking merits
as greate a checke, as vnneceſſarie and ill ſhapen ſilence. This
made Cicero ſaye;Sentence. 
                     Tacere noli vbi non oporiet: and Cato the Vtican
confirmed the ſame,Cicero, and Cato Vtica, their ſeuerall opinions of ſilence and ſpeaking. ſaying; Tum demum ſilentium abrumpito, cùm
ea loqui poteris, quae ſunt indigna ſilentio. And often times it
happeneth, that ſtricte ſilence may occaſion more inconueniences,
yea, ſome whiles greater, then liberall ſpeaking.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  A man may bee doubtfull whether he ſpeake wiſelie
or no: and preſuppoſing that he talketh alwayes reaſonably, many

times is deceiued in his owne opinion, and becommeth worthie
of verie much blame. Moreouer, albeit he ſpeake nothing but
the trueth,The raſh ſpeaking of trueth may cauſe danger to life. yet often it falleth out, to endaunger life: as a thouſand
examples doe giue faithfull witneſſe of the ſame, wherein I account
it may beſt to bee ſilent, and more ſafetie ſhall I therby gaine,
then (perhappes) by reporting them, conſidering (as hath bin already
ſayd) as to ſpeake wiſely,Sentence. ſo to be ſilent, beſt declareth what the man
is.
                  
                     Dauid knowing how harde a thing it was to ſpeake without
blame,Pſal. 140. 3. deſired the Lorde: to ſet a watch before his mouth, to the end
hee might let no wordes paſſe, but ſuch as were to the prayſe of
God,Dauids deſire for aſſiſtance in his ſpeaking. the profite of his neighbour, and good of himſelfe. Hee deſired
alſo, that hee would keepe the doore of his lippes, that hee might
ſpeake with wiſedome, and vtter nothing which was not to be ſpoken:
Pone Domine cuſtodiam ori meo, & oſtium circumſtantiae in
labijs meis.
                     Pſal. vt ſup. 
                     Dauid deſiring to ſpeake, yet ſo ſtrongly watched and
defenced, it is a ſigne ſufficient enough, that to ſpeake well, is a
matter very hard. And ſo could his Sonne Salomon ſay: Omnis labor
hominis in ore eius:
                     Eccle. 6. 7. 
                     All the labour of man, is for his mouth. Dauid
ſpeaking further of this burdenous taske, ſayth of talkatiue men;
Labor labiorum ipſorum operiet eos:
                     Dauids opinion of ſuch as are talkatiue. 
                     The labour of theyr lippes ſhall bee
ſo greate, as to couer them. As if he would haue ſayde (in mine opinion)
that the fruite of vaine labour, in ſpeaking among the wicked,
ſhall bee theyr paynes eternall, whereon followeth: Cadent
ſuper eos carbones, in ignem deiicies eos, & in miſeriis non ſubſiſtent:
Vpon them ſhall fall hote burning coales, and the Lorde ſhall ſend them
into vnquencheable fire. If this bee ſo, is not ſtricte ſilence better
to bee endured, then by ſpeaking wickedlie, to incurre ſuch daunger?
                  Salomon was the onely wiſe king,
                     Salomon his care for his ſpeaking. 
                     that euer in this worlde liued
among men: yet founde hee ſuch difficultie in ſpeaking vnreprooueably,
and the forwarde tongue ſo hard to bee brideled, as in
bitter ſighing hee ſayde. Quis dabit ori meo cuſtodiam, & ſuper labia
mea ſignaculum certum,Eccle. 22. 2
                           •
                        . vt non cadam in ipſis, & lingua mea non perdat
me? Who ſhall ſet a watch before my mouth, and a ſeale of wiſedome
vpon my lippes,Chryſoſt concerning the office of the tongue. that I fall not ſuddenlie by them, and that my tongue
deſtroye me not? S. Iohn Chryſoſtome ſayth: that like office as the
doore hath of the houſe, hath the tongue (in the mouth) of the minde.
And Hugo,Hugo in lib. de 12. abu. 
                     in his booke of the twelue abuſes, ſayth. We ought to remember,
that Dauid and Salomon deſired a watche and a doore, not

a wall, becauſe if a wall ſhould be placed there it would debarre the
power and libertie of ſpeache:The reaſon why Dauid & Salomon deſired a watch & a doore, and not a wall before their lips. but ſetting a dooore there, to be opened
and ſhut as time requireth, ſignifieth, that there is a time to ſpeake and
a time to be ſilent, yet euer to haue this care in our conuerſing, to keepe
the doore of our mouth cloſed, becauſe we are alwaies in perill of corrupt
ſpeaking. Furthermore he addeth, that we ſhould open the doore of our
mouth at meete and lawfull howers: as in the Church, at praier,
in our Studies, at our bookes, and in our bed-chambers, at priuate meditation.
The Church ought to be free, from all vaine babbling and arguing,
our ſtudyes voide of corrupt reading, and our Chambers, ſole
ſanctuaries for diuine meditating.
                  So then wee ought to keepe the doore of our mouthes cloſe ſhut,The mouth is to be kept ſhut but to religious offices.
but onely to religious and holy occaſions, becauſe it is hard to fall in
arguing, without offence to God or our neighbour: therefore I iudge
it more meete to be ſilent, then (by talking) to haue the mind in perill
of daungerous compaſſing,Periander his Sentence. and me thinks Periander ſayd very well;
Audito multa, loquere pauca; Heare much, but ſpeake little.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  I deny not, that we ought to heare much, and ſpeake little:
but I ſay, that the impeaching of a mans ſpeeche, is a matter as
hurtfull as any talking.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  You ſhall find fewe of the auncient or modern Philoſophers,
but they haue much more commended ſilence, then ſpeaking
hauing abſolutely ſet downe, that greater hazard is in ſpeeche,
then taciturnitie.Cleobulus, concerning a wiſe man. 
                     Cleobulus Lindus, one of the Grecian ſeauen Sages,
ſayde, A wiſe man is more ſollicitous to heare, then to talke; for by
hearing he learnes, but by talking looſeth: Audiendi, quàm lo quendi
ſtudioſior eſto. Who heareth much, and ſpeaketh little, may beſt diſcerne
falſehoode from trueth, and erre very little, if he be not blinded
in reaſon, and robb'd of vnderſtanding.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Yet I finde it written, that hearing and liſtening
much,Much liſtening to others ſpeeche, bewrayes a weake wit. is the ſigne of a young greene head, which perhappes hee
may the rather doe, through the ſlender experience he hath in matters;
and then I count it better to bee mute, knowing nothing, then
by ſpeaking vnwiſely to offend the eares of others, for in ſpeaking
wittilie, fewe words are needefull. Adoleſcentis ſcito eſſe (ſayeth a
learned man) audire quidem multa, loqui autem paucis, prudentis.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Perhappes his reaſon may iumpe with that of Zeno
Elateus,
                     Zeno his reaſon, why Nature gaue a man two ears, and but one tongue. to weet, becauſe Nature hath giuen him one tongue onelye,
and two eares, therefore hee ſhoulde ſpeake little, but

heare much, his wordes are theſe: Aures tibi 
                           •
                        b id ſcito binas eſſe,
& os vnicum, vt plurima audiens, loquaris pauciſſima. This Philoſopher
was ſuch an eſpeciall louer of ſilence, Example. that his countrey beeing
vſurped by a mightie Tyrante, and hee much labouring for the
libertie thereof, was by the Tyrant committed to priſon: where,
beeing put to greeuous tortures, and inſupportable tormentes, onelye
for diſcouerie of the priuate coniuration, hee (to ſree the reſt from
beeing reuealed) with his owne teeth bit foorth his tongue, and
ſpat it afterwarde in the bloudie Tyrants face, as contented rather to
endure eternall ſilence, then (by his tongue) to iniurie his countryes
louers, and copartners.
               
               Finis Cap. 1.
            
            
               
                  The Argument.
                  Proceeding further on, it is here approoued, that the firſt inſtruction a
man ought to haue, is to speake diſcreetely, without offence to any.
Heere (in an ample diſcourſe) the negligence of Fathers in their
families is much reprooued, for not inſtructing their children in ſilence,
whereby they may attaine to a perfect order of ſpeaking.
For which purpoſe, many curious ſentences of the auncient Philoſophers
are herein entercourſed, beſide diuers other out of holy Scriptures.
               
               Chap. 2.
               
                  
                     CLAVDIO.
                  Epaminondas,Epaminodas his aduiſe, to heare more then ſpeake. 
                     that
mightie Duke and glorie of the Thebanes,
commending ſilence, ſayde:
that a man ſhould be more deſirous to
heare, then to speake: Audiendi potiùs
quàm loquendi cupidum, te ipſum
praebeto.Prouer. 10. 20. 
                     And to this purpoſe the wiſe
man wrote: In multiloquio non deerit
peccatū: qui aut ē moderatur labia ſua,

                        •
                     rudentiſſimus eſt: In many words there
cannot want iniquity, but he that refraineth
his lips is wiſe.Sentence. 
                     He cānot be far frō error, that delightes in much

talking; therefore a wiſe man thinketh much more then hee
ſpeakes.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Such was the counſell of Pittacus the Mitylenian, one
of the Grecian ſeauen wiſe men,Pittacus his counſell, not to let the tongue run before the mind. adding further: Lingua non praecurrat
mentem: for when the tongue gads before the mindes preconceit, the
diſcourſe cannot paſſe vnguiltie of error.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Me thinks then the tongue ſhould be commaunded to
ſilence, and the mind to forethinke: Imperalinguae, ſayde Saſiades.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  In the time of Ariſtotle,
                     A notable Example, how Iſocrates taught a talkatiue Scholler to learne ſilence, or to ſpeake well. there liued an Athenian
Sophiſter, a learned Doctor, called Iſocrates, who had manie
Schollers in the arte of Oratorie: among the reſt, a young man
(verie talkatiue) came vnto him, beeing named Careo and intreated,
that hee woulde accept of him among the reſt of his Schollers,
onelie to learne the arte of Rhetorique, whereto hee condiſcended:
but couenaunting about the price, Iſocrates demaunded
double ſalarie of him, beyonde anie other Scholler: He, deſirous
to knowe the reaſon thereof, and alleaging greate iniurie offered
him therein, Iſocrates thus anſwèred. You ſpeake much,
and very euill, wherefore to teache you to speake well, I muſt labour
you with two faculties, one, how to holde your peace, the other, how
you ought to speake: which double paines makes me to demaund double
wages.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  An excellent anſwere (in good ſooth) worthilie beſeeming
ſuch a Philoſopher and Oratour, and verie apte to checke
the bablarie of young heades nowe in theſe dayes, who are verie
prodigall in ſpeeche, whereof they ought to bee much more
ſparing,Apollonius iudgement of Ioquacitie, and ſilence. in regarde (according to Apollonius) loquacitie is full of errours,
and ſilence moſt ſecure. In euery degree (to ſpeake little)
is beſt beſeeming, but in youthe (aboue all other) it is moſt neceſſarie:
and in a young man it is an ornamente ſo fayre and
beautifull, as the curling hayres doe not more embelliſhe a delicate
virgine, the chaine of golde about her necke, the pendentes
at her eares,How commē
                        dable ſilence is in a young man. the bracelettes about her wriſtes, the iewell
on her breaſt, and the vnualuable gemme on her finger; as gratious
modeſty, and ſweetly beſeeming ſilence, doth decorate and ſet forth
a ciuill young man.
                  Euerie one ſhoulde bee very niggardlie of ſpeeche, and youth not
ſpeake at all, excepte they bee queſtioned. Adoleſcens (ſayeth
Salomon) loquere in tua cauſa vix cùm neceſſe fuerit,
                     Eccle. 32. 8. 
                     Thou

that art young,
                     Seneca approueth ſeldom ſpeaking a great quietnelle to the mind. 
                     speak if neede require, and yet ſcarcely when thou art
twiſe aſked. Becauſe (ſaith Seneca) there is not any thing, that renders
a more commodious quiet to the minde, then ſeldome or little speaking,
and taking liberty to thinke on how much ſoeuer. Therefore the ſweetneſſe
of conuerſing, and the delicacie of reaſoning, is ſome kinde of
viandes, ſo reliſhable and pleaſing, or, as a ſallade, ſo agreeing with
the appetite: that (by little and little) it guideth men to the diſcouerie
of great ſecretes, little leſſe, or no otherwiſe, then as wine and
loue doeth, from whence (without order) growes a thouſand ſcandals
and vexations.
                  Hereupon we reade,Anacharſides, his wittie and iudicious ſentence. that Anacharſides, (a learned Philoſopher
and an honorable Scithian, brother vnto Cadnidus king of Scithia,)
in a fayre Quadrant, wherein his owne picture was curiouſlie painted,
wrote this ſentence: Continere a lingua, gula, & venere: as meaning,
that the ſinne of the tongue was no leſſe, then that of gluttony
or luxurie.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Nay rather greater, if there neede any degree of
order: for, placing the continencie of the tongue in the beginning,
he alludeth thereby, that the ſinne thereof is worſe then that of gourmandiſe
or luxurie: which, if in euery man it be vnſeemely, in young
men then aboue all other it is moſt contemptible.The firſt leſſō for parents to teache theyr children, according to the rule of Dauid. The firſt precept
therefore, that parents ſhould teache their children, is, to ſpeake modeſtly,
and vnder controwlements.
                  
                     Dauid had many ſonnes, whome he inſtructed from their infancie
in diuine precepts, and that which he taught them fuſt of all,
was, to praiſe God, and ſpeake holylie: for being exalted to the kingdome,
and lying vpon his royall bed, hee called his children about
him and ſayd:Pſal. 112. 1. 2. 3. 4. 
                     Laudate pueri Dominum, laudate nomen Domini.
And they, with obedient childrens voyces, in true and holy ſimplicitie,
ſayd. Sit nomen Domini benedictum, ex hoc nunc, & vſque in ſaeculum.
A ſolis ortu vſque ad occaſum, laudabile nomen Domini. Excelſus
ſuper omnes gentes Dominus, et ſuper caelos gloria eius. Bleſſed be
the name of the Lord, from henceforth and for euer. The Lords name is
praiſed from the riſing of the Sunne,
                     The honour and praiſe of God, is that which Parēts ought to teach th
                           ••
                         children firſt of all. 
                     vnto the going downe of the ſame.
The Lord is high aboue all nations, and his glorie aboue the heauens:
with all the reſt that followeth. Theſe diuine prayſes were the firſt
documents which he taught them to ſpeake, and this ought to be the
firſt inſtruction of euery faithfull father or mother, to teache their
children in their very tendereſt yeares, to mooue their lippes firſt in
laude of their maker.
                  
                     
The vine, the Iuie and the mellone are plants alike, which of their
owne nature will not exalt themſelues: but if by chaunce they finde
any tree neere neighbouring, then they wil claſpe and wreathe about
it, and (by the helpe thereof) attaine to ſuch ſtrength, as oftentimes
they goe beyond them in height, which of themſelues they were not
elſe able to doe, but continuallie ſhould (elſe) creepe along vpon the
ground.An Alluſion to the former naturall Example: how children do imitate their parentes behauiour. Euen ſuch (perhappes) might prooue the condition of young
childrē, of themſelues knowing nothing, they would remaine dumbe
as it were: but following the ſteppes of theyr parentes, and learning
by them to talke, hearing murmuring, curſing, ſwearing and vnſeemly
ſpeeches in their parents, their weake & naked vnderſtanding begins
euen then to apprehend the ſame, and often times, before they know
well how to call for breade, can readily blaſpheme God, ſweare, curſe
and ſpeake euill.
                  So on the contrarie, by the Parents good example, they may increaſe
in vertue, make profit of holy exerciſes, and learne to liue chriſtianlie:
but if they ſhewe them wanton and laſciuious ſportes, banquets,
vncleanely actions of life, frayes, diſorders and ſuch like, then
ſhall ye heare from them nothing but the fruits of ſuch inſtruction,
blaſphemies, oathes, reuilings and falſe forſwearings, in which
corrupt courſe and wicked qualities, they learne many times to outgoe
all other lewd children, yea and perhaps their bad Parents themſelues.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Aſſuredly it is moſt true, and to this purpoſe I can tell
you a very pretie ſtorie.An hiſtoricall example, declaring the naturall inclination of children after their parents courſe of life. In the Sea (among other kinde of fiſhes)
there chaunced to be ſome commonly called Crabbes or Creuiſſes,
which had many feete, and alwayes vſed to goe backwarde, quite
contrarie to all the reſt among whome they liued. Their father and
mother ſeeing them goe thus backward, began to reprehend them
for it, in this manner. My children (quoth the father) we haue begotten
you, and brought you vp hitherto with no meane care, and
now in recompence of our greate trauaile, will you ſo ſhame vs,
that beeing growne to indifferent ſtature, you haue not yet learned
how to goe, but ſhape your courſe quite contrarie to all other
that liue among vs? You ſee that we are in a daungerous place,
where the greateſt fiſhes doe eate vp the ſmaller frie, therefore to preuent
the ſubtill wiles of our enemies, labour your ſelues to goe forward,
and not backward: otherwiſe, if you hold on ſtill this gate, you
may meet with our aduerſaries, and ſo be moſt pittifully deuoured by
them.
                  
                     
The young ones hearing this, began to bee very ſorrowfull, and
practiſed to goe otherwiſe ſo well as they could but ſtill it fell out to
be backward,What is engraffed by nature can neuer be altered. as indeed by nature they could do no otherwiſe, which
when the Parents againe beheld, they ſayd vnto them. Fie fie children,
goe not ſo, for this is the onely way to fall into our enemies
mouthes: whereon the children replyed. We pray you, that you would
goe before vs, that by your example wee may learne our footing.
Then went they foorth, and going backwarde as they before had
doone, the children thus ſpake. Woulde you haue vs goe forwarde,
and you your ſelues doe nothing but come backwarde?
How can wee (without your inſtruction) learne to goe aright,
but euen (as your ſelues doe) muſt keepe on in this wrong
courſe?
                  In like manner,The Alluſion of the 
                           •
                        xample, to the good or bad preſidents of parents to their children. as (at firſt) good documents are eaſilie put into the
childrens vnderſtanding, and as they heare honeſt and decent ſpeeches
from the lippes of their parents; euen ſo doe they learne and
practiſe the like or the cōtrary. Better were it for ſuch parents, if they
had bin borne dumbe, then giue ſuch euill example to their children,
whereby God is highly diſhonoured, and their neighbours much offended.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     A Boue maiore diſcet arare minor, 
                     ſayeth the auncient
Adage.
                     A true prouerbe. 
                     As by diuine precepte the Sonne ought to obey the
Father, ſo the Father ought to bring vp his Sonne in good education:
and the firſt leſſon of all ſhould bee, to glorifie God, and
then, how to ſpeake with wiſedome and gouernement. Plutarche
ſheweth in his booke of education,
                     Crates the Philoſopher, his ſpeeches concerning parents. 
                     that Crates the Philoſopher
was ſo greeued at negligent parentes, ſuch as plainely declare
themſelues to haue no care at all for the inſtructing of theyr children,
that hee was wont to ſaye. If it were lawfull for mee, to aſcend
into ſome eminent place of the Citie, where I might as eaſilie bee
hearde, as ſeene: with a bolde and reſolute courage, I would crye out;
Oh men, into what a bottomleſſe depth doe you fall? bestowing all your
ſtudie, in ſcraping riches together for your children: and of thoſe children
to whome you would leaue it, you haue not ſo much as one iuſt
thought or reſpecte. Quorſum euites hommes, qui omne in comparandis
diuitiis veſtrum ſtudium ponitis, filior
                        •
                     m verò,The words themſelues out of Plutarch. quibus ea
relinquatis, nullam curam ſuſcipitis? And truely Crates ſpake with
very great reaſon.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Such kinde of men are like to them that take greate

care for a cloſe neate ſhooe, and regard not how much it wringeth
or paineth the foote. They are very induſtrious and carefull to
hoorde vp bagges for theyr Sonnes,A good leſſon for rich men. but what they ſhoulde moſt regarde,
they leaſt reſpect: they torment themſelues for vaine commings
in, but hardly will ſpend a crowne on a good Schoolemaſter,
that might bring them vp in holy and vertuous behauiour.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Vpon this occaſion was it,A worthy example fort couetous fathers and neceſſarie in theſe dayes to be regarded. that Ariſtippus the Philoſopher,
grewe into great rage againſt a father of a familie, who being
deſirous to haue his ſonne vertuouſly brought vp, found out a
maiſter meete for the purpoſe. Demaunding of him, what he would de
require for his ſonnes inſtruction, the maiſter anſwered. Sir, you ſhall
giue me a thouſand drachmaes. The couetous father, falling into an
inconſiderate admiration, replyed. By God Hercules (Sir) you aske too
much, with a thouſand drachmaes I can goe buy a ſeruant. Sir, ſayd the
Philoſopher, for this thouſand drachmaes, you ſhall haue two ſeruants,
to weet, him that you would buy, and your ſonne to.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Very wittily anſwered, ſeeing no man can be truelie
ſaide to be free,Plutarch his amazement at the great negligence in parents, towarde their childrē. but only he that is vertuous, and by his vertues reſiſteth
all vices whatſoeuer. Which made Plutarch not a little amazed,
as may euidently be diſcerned by this ſentence. Canere diſcunt homines,
ſaltare, & equo inſidere, & tamen tanta eſt mult orum dementia, vt
literarum ſtudiis non curent inſtituendos liberos. Men are apt and diligent
to euery thing, except liuing vertuouſly, and will diſpend
much in any other matter whatſoeuer, to pleaſe and content theyr
children: but to traine them vp in vertuous life, which ought to bee
theyr verie cheefeſt endeauoure, thereof they haue no care at
all.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  But Philip king of Macedon,
                     Philip of Macedon, reioyced that his ſonne Alexander was borne in the time of Ariſtotle. father to Alexander the
greate, hee did not ſo, for when Alexander was borne, hee gaue
thankes to the Gods, that his birth happened in the time of Ariſtotle
the excellent Philoſopher, who might inſtruct him, and to whoſe dilligent
care he whollie committed him. It ſufficeth brute beaſtes to
haue theyr ordinarie ſuſtenance, not knowing any other good belonging
to them: but viands only are not ſufficient for man, for his deſire
ſtretcheth into hidden vertues, which beautifie and ennoble his
minde.
                  They that prouide nothing elſe for their children, but the goodes
of Fortune,Of the goods of Fortune, and an apt reſemblance. which are ſubiect to all caſualties and iniuries of time:
doe nouriſh and bring them vp no otherwiſe, then as if they were
Dogs, Goates, Oxen and ſuch like beaſtes, whoſe ſpeciall care is all

for victualles, and not for vertue, which ſinne ought rather to bee
imputed to their parents,The reaſon why Diogenes did beate a Schoolmaſter. then to themſelues. Vpon this occaſion
was it, that Diogenes the Cinick, (ſeeing a diſſolute boy abuſe himſelfe
in the ſtreete as he went) knowing the Schoolemaſter to whoſe
charge he was committed, calling him aſide, hee did well fauoredly
beate him, ſaying: Why haſt thou brought vppe this boy no better?
                  
                  
                     Plutarch he would hauc the Father, mother and master, not onely to
giue example to theyr children of not ſinning,
                     Plutarchs aduiſe to Fathers and mothers. 
                     but likewiſe to be patterns
to them of commendable, good and woorthie actions: to the end, that
they (beholding their children as in a moſt cleere glaſſe) may not onely
reſtraine them from all lewde and wicked attempts, but alſo forbeare
vndecent and diſhoneſt ſpeeches, practiſing nothing elſe but deedes of
vertue. For, as a weake ſucking childe, will receiue any wholeſome
medicine,Similie. beeing mingled by the nurſe among his milke: euen
ſo doe children (by theyr parentes) apprehende eyther good or euill
behauiour. But you haue ſome Fathers,For cockering parents. ſo nice, and tender in bringing
vp theyr children, as (not to offend or diſpleaſe them any way)
they leaue their lewde and naughtie qualities vnchaſtiſed, & ſo they
grow on in all wickedneſſe whatſoeuer.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  It fareth with them, as it happened to that mother,
whoſe Sonne (by ſome miſhappe) was fallen into the Riuer,Example of an ouer-fooliſh mother. and ſo
ſtanding by, ſeeing him readie to ſinke, was afrayde to helpe him,
not daring to faſten on his lockes to pulle him foorth, leaſt in ſo doing
ſhee ſhould hurt him: but ſtoode fondly crying out in fooliſh
compaſſion, till her Sonne was vtterly drowned in deede. Or as it
befell to Helie,
                     Example of Heli the prieſt and his bad children. the Prieſte and Iudge of the Hebrewe people, who
through neglecte of reprehending his two ſonnes, was the cauſe, that
God ſuffered them to bee ſlaine miſerably by the Philiſtines in war:
and himſelfe periſhed by ſudden death, falling back from the ſeate
whereon he ſate, breaking his neck in the fall. Or as it fortuned to
king Dauid,
                     Example of king Dauid, and Amnon his Sonne, and afterward of Abſolons rebeilion againſt him. who not reproouing Amnon, for the vnchaſte acte
committed with his owne ſiſter (as loath to diſpleaſe him, becauſe
in deede he dearely loued him) procured God, to let him be ſlayne
by his owne brother Abſolon, in the merrie ſporting time of a ſheepſhearing
banquet: and that Abſolon ſhould likewiſe rebell againſt
him, chaſe him foorth of his owne kingdome: and that Salomon
ſhould alſo become an Idolater, ſo that all his ſonnes (almoſt) dyed
miſerably. Therefore the holy Ghoſt ſayd well: Qui parcit virgae, odit
filium ſuum: qui autem diligit eum inſtanter erudit.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Lodouico.
                  Such Fathers may be compared to the Iuie,An excellent Similie, with the alluſion thereof. that hugs
ſo cloſe to the tree, and pretending to beautifie and adorne it, winds
and writhes it ſelfe ſo faſt about it, as in fewe moneths it makes it
drie and dead. The very like doth that father and mother, that is
too nice and fond of their child: with kiſſes they kill it, with ſweete
meates they poyſon it, and with cockering make it vnapt to any vertuous
action.An eſpeciall matter to be noted. Therefore it was the pleaſure of God, that ſuch as were
appointed for the ſeruice of his maieſtie, they ſhould be trayned vp
from their verie childhoode,Leuit. 26. in the diuine worſhip of him, as we may
reade in Leuiticus. Hence was it that the wiſe man ſayde: Curua ceruicem
filij tui ab adoleſcentia ſua.
                     Eccle. 30. 12. 
                     Bow downe the neck of thy ſon while
he is young. And he giues a reaſon for the ſame, in another place of
that very Chapter:Eccle. 30. 8. 
                     Equus indomitus euadet durus, & filius remiſſus euadet
praeceps: An vntamed horſe will be ſtubborne, and a wanton child
will be wilfull.
                  
                  It is ouerlate to reſiſt the enemie, when hee hath alreadie ſurprized
the Citie:A ſententious allegation, and to good purpoſe. and little auayles it, to caſt ſalt vpon the fleſh, that before
is putrified. Inſtruction (then) is moſt needfull for children, and
without all doubt, the firſt vertue that Parentes or Schoolemaſters
ought to teach youth, is to reſtrayne the tongues libertie, and to
ſpeake vnder correction,Cato his aduiſe for a childs firſt inſtruction. and, if we will credit morall Cato, he ſayth:
Virtutem primam eſſe put a compeſcere linguam. The firſt vertue
that a Christian childe ſhoulde be taught, is to bee ſilent, or to
speake vnder chaſtiſement, which vertue is of ſuch excellencie,
as it makes vs neere neighbours, or like vnto God: Proximus
ille Deo eſt qui ſoit ratione tacere, ſayth the ſame Cato.
                  
                  
                     Dauid in a dialogue which he compoſed, where the ſpeakers are
onely God and himſelf, falling into queſtions with the Lord, he ſaith.
Lord,
                     Pſal. 15. 1. 2. 3. 
                     who ſhall dwell in thy Tabernacle, and who ſhall rest vpon thy holy
mountaine?
                     Dauids Dialogue between God and himſelfe: agreeing with the former ſayings of Cato. The Lord anſwereth: He that walketh vprightly, and worketh
righteouſneſſe speaketh the truth in his hart, and hath no deceite
in his tongue. Heere may be apparantly diſcerned, how conformably
Cato ſpake with Dauid, conſidering, that he that thinketh the truth in
his heart, and offendeth not with his tongue, he ſhall dwell neereſt vnto
God: it is euen all one with his wordes, to weere, hee that refrayneth
his tongue, and knowes reaſon when to be ſilent, is neere vnto
God.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Nay more, he is like vnto God, for he that ſpeaketh the
truth with his mouth, and in his hart thinketh no deceipt, is like vnto
God, who is the ſame truth. Therefore Salomon ſayde well, that

life and death is in the power of the tongue:
                     Both life and death is in the tongues power. becauſe he that delighteth
to ſpeak alwaies the truth, is in true life with God, that giueth life to
all things: and he that delights in lying and deceipte, is contrarie to
God,Prouer. 18. 21. and ſo conſequently is dead from him: Mors & vita in manu
linguae.
                  
                  As,Similie and Alluſion. among all things that are to bee deſired, there is nothing more
affected then life, euen ſo all our daylie labour and endeauour is the
more willingly purſued, for the maintenance of this preſent life:
which we do hold in ſo deare reſpect, and are ſo much enamoured
thereof, as although we knowe there is another life, much better and
no way ſubiect to death, yet doth this life ſo highly pleaſe vs, and inexorable
death is ſo horrible to vs,Men would gladly taſte of immortall life, but are loath to leaue this frayle tranſitory life. as wee woulde gladly take any
paynes whatſoeuer, to tranſporte vs quickly to that other life, without
touch or taſte of the ſting of death, or depriuation of theſe earthly
goods and ſpoyles. Oh, we would fayne bee ſoone cloathed with
immortality. If then we would hunt this track with ſuch earneſt deſire,
we ſhould be ſomewhat mindfull of our tongues cuſtodie, which
is the laylor (as it were) and keeps the key both of life and death;The tongue is the Iaylor, that keepes the key of life and death. with
all our harts we ſhould loue the truth, which is the onely occaſion of
life, and, with the ſwift celeritie of an Hart, flye from fooliſh talking,
lyes and vaine babbling, the very begetter and nouriſher of moſt horrid
and abhominable death.2. Cor. 5. 4. 
                     Nam qui ſumus in hoc tabernaculo, ingemiſcimus
grauati, eò quòd nolumus expoliari, ſed ſuperueſtiri, vt abſorbeatur
quod mortale eſt à vita: For indeed we that are in this tabernacle
ſigh and are burdened, becauſe we would not be vnclothed, but would be
clothed vpon, that mortality might be ſwallowed vp of life, thus ſpake the
Apoſtle to the Corinthians.
                  
                  If then life and death bee in the hand and power of the tongue,
you ſee what an eſpeciall care ſhould bee had thereof, becauſe in
no parte of the bodye can we carie any greater perill of life, then in
the tongue,The tongue is the gate, whereby life paſſeth forth, and death enters in. which is the gate (as it were) whereby life paſſeth foorth,
and death enters into vs. A bad creditour is this tongue with ſo rich a
treaſure, as is the pretious and vnualuable iewell of life: it beeing a
member ſo voluble, ſoft, vnſtable, without boane (which might
giue it more firmeneſſe) and hazarding life continuallye to
infinite daungers. Well did the Apoſtle knowe this, when he ſayd
to the ſame Corinthians:2. Cor. 4. 7. 
                     Habemus autem the ſaurum iſtum in vaſis
fictilibus: But we haue this treaſure in earthen veſſels. Since then the
cuſtos of our ſoule is ſo fraile, we goe in dayly dreade of looſing the
treaſure of celeſtiall grace.
                  
                     
What thing can be more frayle then the mouth? which by a turne
of the tongue, may make ſhipwrack both of temporall and eternall
life; offending with blaſphemies the maieſtie of our omnipotente
God, and by one iniurious word (oftentimes it comes to paſſe) life is
miſerably loſt: for, a generous minde is more aggreeued at an
iniurious word,An excellent and wittie Sentence. then is a ſlaue or villayne by the ſtroake of a weapon.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     Perhappes this is the true ſenſe and meaning of that
ſentence of Salomon, becauſe, in effect, a pleaſing word is ſweete, and
much contents a mans minde, and a bitter ſharpe taunte mooues
much ſtrife and diſcorde.
                     Pro. 15. 1. 4. 
                     So ſaith he: Responſio mollis frangit iram;
ſermo durus ſuſcitat furorem: A ſoft anſwere putteth away wrath: but
grieuous words ſtir vp anger. And againe he ſaith: Lingua placabilis,
lignum vitae: quae autem immoderata eſt, conteret spiritum: A wholeſome
tongue is a tree of life: but the frowardnes therof is the breaking of
the mind.
                  
                     Cain offended God more with his tongue (denying ſo preſumptuouſly
the diuine mercie:Ge
                           •
                        e. 4. 13. 
                     Maior eſt iniquitas mea, quàm vt veniam
merear:
                     Caine offended God more with his blaſphemous tongue, then he did with his murdring hād. 
                     My ſinne is greater then can be pardoned) then he did with his
hand in killing his brother Abel. For with his tongue he vttered moſt
horrible blaſphemic, and with his hand he but committed a murther:
with his tongue he offended God, with his hand his neighbour:
with his tongue he did contrarie to the firſt table, with his hand to
the ſecond: with his tongue he flatly denyed Gods mercie, with his
hand he tooke away vniuſtly the life of his brother: by his tongue he
depriued himſelfe of pardon, and by his hand, his brother of
life.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The wicked wretch lyed, becauſe it is proper to God,
to pardon,Caine lyed, in regard that Gods mercy, is greater thē his iuſtice. and he neuer chaſtiſeth, but when our obſtinacie prouoketh
him to iuſt diſpleaſure. The Church therefore obſerueth a good
Collect: Deus cui proprium eſt miſereri ſemper, & parcere, &c. O God
whoſe nature and property is euer to haue mercy and to forgiue, &c.
Likewiſe, by the infiniteneſſe of his mercy, as by the moſt effectuall
meanes of all: he ſhewes vnto vs his omnipotencie, ruling and reigning
ouer al, and pardoning euery one whatſoeuer, that truely repenteth
him of his ſinnes. Therefore ſaith the Church: Deus qui omnipotentiam
tuam, parcendo maximè, & miſerando manifeſtas, &c. Worthily
therfore did Cain taſte the iuſtice diuine, for denying ſo impudently
the ſoueraigne mercy thereof.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Moreouer, Lucifer fell not from the ſupreme pole,

neyther by auarice,Lucifers proude words threw him downe into hell. nor gluttonie, nor luxurie, but fell onelye
through the proude wordes which hee vttered againſt God, when
hee ſayde: I will aſcend aboue the height of the cloudes, and exalte
my throne beſide the ſtarres of God, I will ſit vpon the mounte in
the congregation of the North,
                     Eſay. 14. 12. 13. 
                     and I will bee like to the moſt high.
Therefore very deſeruedly, he that ſayd, hee would aſcend vp into the
higheſt place, fell downe into the bottomleſſe depth, and hee that
would needes be like to God himſelfe, became a moſt loathſome
and venemous Serpent, that he might no more exalte himſelfe aloft.
                  The rich glutton,Example of the rich glutton. without doubt had many ſinnes, becauſe beeing
one giuen and addicted to the pleaſures of the bodie, hee could not
chooſe but commit many errors: and among the reſt, the Euangeliſt
ſheweth, that he was ſo wretched and inhumane, that hee permitted
his very dogges to goe beyond him in compaſſion,Luke. 16. 21. for they licked
the ſores of the poore begger Lazarus, but himſelfe denyed
him the very leaſt crumme of bread. He was dedicated to delightes,
for euery day hee made ſumptuous banquets and daintie feaſtings.
He was proude in his garments: for albeit he was no King, yet
notwithſtanding he wore royall purple and riche ſilkes, and
although he had not a kingdome to gouerne, yet would he go like
a King in his clothing.The glutton complained moſt of his tongue in hell torments. Neuertheleſſe, being caſt into the burning
flames of hell, he complained of nothing ſo much, as of his tongue,
becauſe therein he ſuffered inſupportable anguiſhe: ſo that he
begged of good father Abraham (with maine inſtantneſſe) nothing
elſe, but that he would ſend Lazarus to coole his tongue,
to dip his finger in colde water, and therewith but touch his burning
tongue.
                  The reaſon hereof (perhappes) may be, that hee had committed
greater ſinnes in talking, then by his eyes in ſeeing, by his hands in
working or playing,A note for beleie Gods & banquetters. or by his mouth in eating. For it is a matter very
vſuall at banquets, that there are not ſo many diſhes fedde vpon, or
quaffing carowſing glaſſes drunke off: as liberty of talke paſſing
through the table, diſhoneſt ſpeeches, backbiting of friends & neighbours,
and infinite other irkeſome annoyances.
                  In warre they can kill no men but ſuch as are preſent, but at banquets
they murder them that are abſent:How men are murdered, & yet not being preſent. they fley off the very skinnes
of the dead, yea, a many yeares after, onely to kill them afreſh, and
wounde both preſent and abſent perſons, with the keene edged
ſworde of the tongue:Pſal. 56. 6. 
                     Lingua eorum gladius acutus, venenum aspidum

dum inſanabile, ſo ſpeakes the Prophet Dauid of the wounding
tongue.
                  Therefore well and worthily was the byting tongue of the glutton
tormented, more then any other member of his body. And
iuſtly ought the tongue to ſuffer,The iuſt puniſhment of the Gluttons tongue. which (as an vnfaithfull retayner
of life and death) permitted death to enter by vnaduiſed ſpeeches,
and baniſhed life away by the ſelfe ſame occaſion: and deſeruedlye
is the tongue made vnworthie of pitie, which (beeing defeated
thereof) coulde crye:Luke. 16. 24. 
                     Pater Abraham miſerere mei, &
mitte Lazarum vt intingat extremum digiti eius, & refrigeret linguam
meam: Father Abraham, haue mercie on me, and ſend Lazarus,
that he may dippe the tip of his finger in water, and coole my
tongue; a iuſt recompence, for that which was pleaſing to his owne
taſte, and which hee did denye to miſerable Lazarus. Thus
therefore may you ſee it to bee moſt true; Vita & mors i
                           •
                        
manu linguae,
                     Pro. 18. 21. both life and death is in the power of the
tongue.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  
                     A populous citie, abounding in all wealth, cannot
bee expoſed to the ſubtilties of a beſieging enemie,
                     The ſoule is in more daunger by the tōgue, then a citic by enemies. 
                     by ſo manye
daungerous and perillous wayes, as is the ſoule of him that hath no
reſtraynt of his tongue. Sicut vrbs patens, (ſaith the wiſe man) & abſque
murorum ambitu: ita vir, qui non poteſt in loquendo cohibere spiritum
ſuum;Pro. 25. 29. A man that refrayneth not his speeche, is like a City which
is broken downe, and without walles. Therfore we haue great reaſon to
ſay with Dauid:Pſal. 140. Pone Domine cuſtodiam ori meo, & oſtium circumſtantiae
labiis meis: Set awatch (O Lord) before my mouth, & keep the door
                        •
                     
of my lips.
               
               A citie (without guarde) in time of ſuſpicion, ſtands euermore in
daunger,Sentence, and Alluſion. and the man that hath no gouernement of his tongue while
he is in this world, can want no enemies, but howrely goeth in perill
of his death. The Church commending her ſpouſe, faith in the
Canticles:Cant. 4. 3. 
                  Sicut vitta coccinea labia tuae, & eloquium tuum dulce: Thy
lips are like athreed of ſcarlet, and thy talke is ſweete. As if the holy
ghoſt would haue ſayd: Becauſe thou delighteſt me my loue, thy lips
are like to ribands of ſcarlet die, and thence it enſueth, that thy
ſpeeche is ſweete, euen as if there were milke and honie vnder thy
tongue.
               
                  Lodouico.
                  What ſimilitude hath a riband of ſcarlet die with the lip?
I vnderſtand not this ſimilie.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  It is a goodly ſimilitude, and very commendable vnto

our purpoſe. It was a cuſtome among beautifull young Damoſells,A cuſtome obſerued by young beautifull maydens in elder times.
with ribands or ſtrings of ſilke, to gather their locks of hayre together,
and make a comely ornament thereof, treſſing and plaiting all
the ſcattering ſtragglers amōg them, to the end they ſhould not hang
looſely about their ſhoulders, but ſtand very gallātly creaſted on the
head, and moſt commonly the band was of the ſcarlet dye or colour.
Now, this was not done for pride, but herein cōſiſted their morall ſignification;
                  The band of the ſcarlet die,The morall ſignification of the cuſtome, worth obſeruation. figured diuine loue, wherwith they bound
vp the lippes of the celeſtiall ſpouſe, to weet, a holy and religious
ſoule, to the end, that from thence ſhould iſſue foorth no diſordered
talke or ſpeeche: eyther of wicked enuie, as did Lucifer to Eue: or
of proude preſumption, as hee alſo did againſt God: or of auarice,
as did the rich man in the Goſpell,Luke 12. 19. who ſayde, Anima mea, habes
multa bona pofita in annos plurimos: requieſce, comede, bibe, spulare;
My ſoule, thou haſt much goods layed vp for many yeares: liue at eaſe,
eate, drinke and take thy pleaſure. Or of vaineglory, as did the Phariſey
in the Temple, who vaunted of his prayer and faſting: or of vnchaſte
inciuilitie, and ſuch like other vices. But all their words were
bound together with the band of ſeruent charitie, and heereof it
bare the verie name. By meanes whereof, they placed and ordered
their ſpeeches ſo decently, as the holy ſpouſe might become enamoured
of them, & it prooued a very hard matter for them to breake
ſilence, for they remayned as rauiſhed with his diuine voyce: Sonet
vox tua in auribus meis,
                     Cant. 2. 14. 
                     vox enim tua dulcis. Let me hear thy voyce, for
they voyce is ſweete.
                  
                  But the indiſcreete man,Of the indiſcreete mans behauiour in talking, to the danger of his owne ſoule. that hath not this ligament to ſtaye
his lippes: ſpeakes, and afterwarde thinkes thereon, whence
(often) enſueth repentaunce for ſo raſh ſpeaking. This band is a
moſt excellente reſtraynte, leaſt the tongue ſhoulde erre at randome,
and it is a thing very highly pleaſing to God, when the
tongue vttereth no immodeſt ſpeeches, but ſuch as are full of heauenlye
loue, to the honour of his name, to the edification of our
neighbour, and profitable to whoſoeuer ſhall conuerſe with vs:
for the lippes beeing bounde vp in this manner, are at heauenlye
libertye, and frees the ſoule from all anguiſhes whatſoeuer,
according to the wiſe mans ſaying;Prouer. 13. 3. 
                     Qui cuſtodit os ſuum, &
linguam ſuam, cuſtodit ab anguſtiis animam ſuam; He that keepeth
his mouth and his tongue, keepeth his ſoule from deſtruction.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     It is ſo certainely. Oh in how many perilles, and in
how many narrowe ſtraytes, doth hee finde himſelfe, that hath no
bridle for his tongue,
                     S. Auguſtine approoueth them moſt guilty, that crucified with their tongues our Sauiour Chriſt. 
                     in whoſe power remayneth both life & death?
Saint Auguſtine, vpon the Pſalmes, ſaith, That they were more faultie,
who crucified Chriſt with their tongues, crying; Crucifie him, Crucifie
him, then they that were guilty of his death, or they that fixed him faſt
to the Croſſe with nayles: for they had not faſtned him to the Croſſe with
theyr handes, till the other had firſt crucified him with theyr
tongues.
                  And hence (perhaps) enſued the difference betweene the Euangeliſtes,Mark. 15. 25.
about the houre of Chriſtes crucifying: for Saint Mark ſayth,
that when the miniſters crucified Ieſus it was the third houre: Erat
autemhoratertia, & crucifixerunt cum. Neuertheleſſe S. Iohn ſayth:Iohn. 19. 14.
                     Erat autem ferè hora ſexta. But the reſolution is this, that from the
third houre,A note worthy to be remembred. the Iewes crucified him with their deuiliſh tongues, deſiring
of Pylate, that hee would let him bee crucified, and at the
ſixt houre, they made him faſt with nayles to the Croſſe.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Oh deteſtable tongues, tongues more ſharpe then
nayles:Pſal. 56. 6. 
                     Lingua eorum gladius acutus: becauſe they pearced further,
then the other had power to penetrate. Many ſinnes had the Babylonians,
after they became Idolaters worſhipping the Image Bell.
Proude were they that by a Tower would aſcend vp to heauen, as if
it were to take the kingdome from God himſelfe:The builders of Babell were Heretiques, in tweening to reſiſt God by theyr tongues which drew the confuſion of tongues among them, albeit God had many other meanes to haue puniſhed thē by. they were heretiques in thinking to make reſiſtance againſt God, and by that exalted
tower to eſcape from death. Notwithſtanding, God inflicted
no other puniſhment vppon them, but ſet a deuiſion of diuers
languages among them, ſo that one vnderſtoode not what
another ſayde: but in the tyme of theyr building, if one called
for water, hee ſhoulde haue ſtones brought him, and
when hee woulde haue ſtones, then they woulde bring him
lyme.
                  God could haue chaſtiſed them in diuers other degrees, but it
pleaſed him onelye to deuide them by theyr tongues: as beeing (perhappes)
more offended at the proude words they vttered, then with
the tower which they builded, and ſurely they diſhonored God more
in theyr ſpeeches, then they could doe with theyr manuall labour.Gene. 11. 4.
                     Venite, faciamus nobis ciuitatem, & turrim, cuius culmen perting
at vſque ad coelum, & celebremus nomen noſtrum, antequam
diuidamur in vniuerſas terras. Come, let vs build vs a cittie and a

                           〈◊〉
                        , whoſe top may reache vnto the heauen; that we may get vs a

name, leaſt we be ſcattered vpon the whole earth. If God ſhould alway
chaſtiſe the murmuring tongue againſt his glory, in this manner: men
would be far greater louers of ſilence then they are, and better a duiſed
in theyr ſpeaking.
               
               Finis Cap. 2.
            
            
               
                  The Argument.
                  Heere are deliuered many examples of worthy men, true affecters of
ſilence: And in this Chapter, they diſcourſe on the fower excellent
qualities of ſilence, and how they do adorne a man; a very ſweet and
profitable Dialogue, for ſuch as deſire to talke diſcreetly.
               
               Chap. 3.
               
                  
                     LODOVICO.
                  Silence in time beſeeming
ſeeming it,Sentence. is much more prayſ-worthie,
then a choyſely deckt Oration,To ſpeake according to time & place, is the teſtimony of a wiſe man.
becauſe to ſpeake with an adorned,
poliſhed and ſmoothe ſtile, is the office
of a Rhetorician: but to talke according
to apt time and place, is the
apparant ſigne of a wiſe man. Therefore
very wittily anſwered Acaticus
the Philoſopher,Acaticus the Philoſopher. to ſuch as demaunded
of him, what was the reaſon why
he ſpake ſo little in the frollique ſeaſon of a coſtly banquet: I haue
conſumed much more time (quoth he) in learning to know when I ſhould
be ſilent, then to speake curiouſly, and vpon no occaſion.
                     The ſaying of learned Omulus. And Omulus
was woont to ſay; when thou entreſt into an other mans houſe, ſhewe
thy ſelfe more ready to dumbneſſe and deafneſſe then to talk or babbling,
and couet to heare the deeds of others: becauſe he that is talke atiue,
offendeth many eares, but he that receiues example by other folkes murmuring,

may take the leſſe occaſion of ſinning. S. Hierome wrote,Sentence. 
                     Non
eſſet murmurator, ſi de eſſet auditor.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  There is no higher philoſophie in the world, then to be
ſilent, and know how to reſtrayne the tongue: which the more glib
and ready it is to moouing,Iob ſpake in the bitterneſſe of his ſoule. Ioh. 10. 1. ſo much the ſooner it becomes a ſower of
diſcords. When Iob ſpake, his ſpeeches were in the anguiſh of his
ſoule, as one that was a deare friend to ſilence, for thus ſaith hee: Loquar
in amaritudine animae meae: I will speake in the bitterneſſe of my
ſoule. And this is an eſpeciall grace which God beſtowes vppon his
deareſt children,An eſpeciall gift of God to his deare children. that albeit in ſpeech they cannot maſter men, yet by
ſilence (ſaith Plutarch) they come neer vnto God.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Aquinas, a great Doctor of the Church, was ſuch a louer
of ſilence and taciturnitie, as his Schollers were wont to tearme him
the dumbe Oxe. He holding concluſions in the preſence of Albertus
Magnus his maſter,Thomas Aquinas tearmed by his maſter Albertus Magnus, the dumb Ox. to the amazement of all the by-ſtanders,
beeing very profounde in learning, as alſo ſhort and ſententious in
his anſwers: his Maſter thus preſaged of him; thou ſhalt hencefoorth
Thomas bee called the dumbe Oxe. But yet this Oxe, when
he ſaw his time, made ſo lowde a bellowing, as it was heard almoſt
the whole world ouer: and yet his voyce is audibly heard vniuerſally
in the Schooles, as a Father of greate reading and worthy memorie.
                  I reade of Agatonus a learned man,Agatonus and Theodanas, two memorable louers of ſilence. who for thirtie yeares ſpace,
caried continually a ſtoane in his mouth, only for inſtruction how to
hold his peace. Theodanas like wiſe a religious Father, it is written of
him that thirty years together he was ſilent: not becauſe he knew not
how to ſpeake (for he was moſt skilfull in the Latine, Greeke & Hebrew) but in regard he very wel knew, how many inconueniences do
proceed from the tongue.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  I call to mind (very aptly for this purpoſe) how I haue
read in the holy Scripture,
                        Numb. 19. 15. Gods commā
                        dement concerning vnclean veſſels. that God expreſly commaunded: Vas quod
non habuerit operculum, necligaturam deſuper, immundum erit: The
veſſels that be open, and haue no couering faſtned vpon them, ſhall be vncleane.
This law god made, becauſe what veſſel ſoeuer, that had no couerture,
or not bound aboue with ſome cloth or paper: it could not
chooſe but be the receptacle of al vncleanneſſe, flyes would get into
it, duſt would fill it, and it could containe no liquor, but it would corrupt
it.
                  Much more then ſhould wee be carefull of the veſſell of our heart,An excellent alluſion, framed vpon the former place of Scripture.
which is in the vpper part of our bodie, to weet, the mouth: if that bee

not kept cloſe: it will ſoone become a receptacle for deuilles, for
vayne thoughts and all other filthineſſe. And if it be not bound with
ſome ſcarlet band, whereof we haue already ſpoken a little before,
reſtraining and buſying our lippes in holy reaſonings, and vertuous
exerciſes, which may be to the glory of God, and our neighbours edification:
the heart will be (as in a veſſell of vncleanneſſe) moſt filthy
and to Gods eyes very abhominable, the lips will vtter nothing elſe
but detractions, murmurings and blaſphemies, and the mouth ſhall
bee as a forge for all vileneſſe, a ſtinking ſepulcher of corruption.
                  
                     Dauid ſpeaking of the like vncleane mouth,Pſal. 5. 11. ſaith: Sepulchrum patens
eſt guttur eorum, linguis ſuis dolose agebant: Their throate is an open
ſepulcher, and they flatter with their tongues. It behooueth vs then,
to cloſe the vpper part aboue, of this veſſell of our heart, which is our
tongue: leaſt it fall to bee vncleane, and looſe the little goodneſſe
remayning in it, before it bee filled vppe with the duſt of vanitic.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The onely beſt couerture for this veſſell, is ſilence,Silence is the onely beſt couerture for the veſſell of the hart. which
is the guarde of the conſcience, a bridle from inſolence, the beautie
of innocence, and a ſigne of ſapience. Silence is the guarde or watchman
of the conſcience, becauſe ouerlauiſh talking cannot be without
ſome defect: In multiloquio non deeru peccatum,
                     
                        Prou. 10. 20. Similie. ſaith the wiſe
man: In many words there cannot want iniquitie. And as that treaſure
cannot bee ſafe, which is in a cheſt without a keye: euen
ſo the vnualuable riches of grace and vertue,Alluſion. haue no ſecuritye
in an immoderate man of ſpeeche, for very quicklie is the conſcience
offended.Example. In the time of warre, men gladly will abide in the
Citie well walled, furniſhed with artillerye, and ſtrongly guarded
with Souldiers:Alluſion. euen ſo a wiſe man makes known his ſecurity in the
ſtrong caſtle of God, which is walled round about with ſilence.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Aſſuredly,1. How ſilence is the guarde of the conſcience, with a moſt excellent compariſon of the tongue. whoſoeuer doth but obſerue the great workmanſhip
of the tongue, may almoſt cōpare it to a city or a very ſtrōg
Caſtle, wanting neither able wals, munited rampires, & very artificial
counterskarfes. For it is bound together with very ſtrong nerues, after
the manner of a city wel foundationed, ſeated aloſt in the cheefeſt
part of the body, enuironed with teethe, as if they were ſo manie
armed Souldiers, kept in with the lippes, as ſtrong defenſiue
Bulwarkes: but if the keye of ſilence wante, then all is in
vayne. Therefore ſayde the Prophet Eſay:
                     Eſay. 30. 25. 
                     In ſilentio & in
ſpe 
                           •
                        rit fortitudo veſtra. In quietneſſe & in hope ſhal be your ſtrength.
                     
In ſilence and hope,Silence and hope the ſtrongeſt defence. becauſe they that obſerue the diuine precepts,
awaiting in patience and firme hope, without any murmuring: the
heauenly bounty wil fortifie them in ſuch maner, as no diſaſters ſhal
ouercome them.
                  Epaminondas a moſt excellent painter, was a man curious enough in
ſeeing of the world, but very ſparing of his ſpeech: who being vrged
by the Rhodians, & very earneſtly intreated, that he would tell them
what excellent and worthy things, in his voyages by Sea, & trauailes
on the land he had ſeene, anſwered them very wiſely. I haue ſayled by
Sea two yeares (quoth hee) to learne how to catch fiſh:Epaminondas his diſcreete anſwere to the Rhodians, concerning what he had ſeene in his trauailes. I haue abode ſixe
yeares in Aſia, to learne the art of painting, and eight yeares I liued in
Athens, to learne how to hold my peace. And I tell you of a truth, that I
haue not gained ſo much by fiſhing and painting, as ſilence onely hath
been beneficiall to me, therfore (I pray you) trouble me not with talking.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  This painter, without knowledge (perhaps) what the
conſcience was, kept it well enough by the gift of ſilence. Now to
follow the order already begun,2. The bridle of inſolence, with a very apt compariſon, and Alluſion. in prayſe of this vertue, it is ſecondly
the bridle of inſolence. You know, that on goodly and worthy horſes,
they vſe to beſtow coſtly bridles: but on Iades, or ſuch as are of
no eſteeme, a halter or horſe coller is ſufficient to hold him withall.
Euen ſo iuſt men, ennobled by theyr vertues (who beare Chriſt the
Monarche of the world by theyr obedience, of whom the wiſe man
ſaith;Sap. 7. 12. 
                     Anima iuſti ſedes eſt ſapientiae:) they haue in theyr mouthes the
bridle of ſilence, wherwith they check al vnprofitable ſpeeches, & are
guided by the way of vertue, forſaking indiſcreet & vnſeemely language,
doing according to the ſaying of Salomon: Verbis tuis facito
ſtateram,
                     Eccle. 28, 29. 
                     & fraenos ori tou rectos: weigh thy words in a ballance, and
make a ſure bridle for thy mouth.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  If Prince Pitheus had had this bridle in his mouth,Example of Prince Pitheus.
he neuer had ſo obſcured his victories by vnaduiſed talking, as Plinie
ſheweth in one of his Epiſtles: for this is the common bane of
ouermuch prating, The words of ſuch men are little credited. What
more famous Oratour euer liued,Example of Cicero. then Cicero, an eſpeciall friende
to his countreys common wealth? Yet Marke Anthonie cauſed
him at length to be ſlayne, for no other occaſion, as is ſayd, but onely
the wāt of this bridle, elſe had he not ſo wretchedly ended his dayes.
                  The horſe hauing the bridle in his mouth,A good note for ſuch as are ſlaunderers & backbiters. can eate no kind of prouēder,
nor bite any beaſt neer him: euen ſo, the man that hath the bridle
of ſilence, cannot bite his neighbours good fame, nor cōtaminate
the eares of others with lewde ſpeeches.
                  
                     
Phormio the Philoſopher fledde the concourſe of men, eſpeciallie
the Monkes of Aegypt, making his abode altogether in the deſerts,
and beeing demaunded the reaſon thereof, hee returned this anſwere.
Beaſtes do offend men,The reaſon why Phormio the Philoſopher ſled the company of men. either by biting with theyr teeth, ſmiting
with theyr hornes, or kicking with theyr feet: But men iniurie one
another, by theyr eyes gazing or ſtaring; theyr heartes daungerouſlie
contriuing; theyr fiſtes walking; theyr feet purſuing; and theyr tongues
defaming. Therefore it is better liuing harmeleſſe, among b
                        •
                     ute beaſts
in the woddes, then among euill tongues (helpeleſſe) in the walled citie.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  We ſee then that ſilence is the only meanes to eſcape
theſe euills, for firſt it is not only the watchman of the conſcience, ſecondly,3. The beauty and glory of innocence, with a ſingular example to approoue the ſame.
the bridle of inſolence, but thirdly it is the beauty or glory of
innocence, preſeruing vs from offending both God and our neighbour.
                  
                     Valerius Maximus, In his ſeauenth booke and eleuenth chapter
declareth, that Xenocrates the Chalce donian Academicke Philoſopher,
Scholler with Ariſtotle to Plato, perceiuing himſelfe to bee
preſent at a ſerious arguing, where was much babbling and offenſiue
ſpeeches: he ſate him downe, and ſpake neuer a word at all. And being
asked, why in ſuch an eſpeciall time of conference, he ſate thus
ſilent among ſo many,Xenocrates his witty anſwere. diſcreetely thus he replyed. Becauſe I haue
diuers times repented me for talking, but it neuer greeued me that I
held my peace: Quia dixiſſe me altquando poenituit, taeuiſſe ver
                           •
                         nunquam.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  The wiſe man ſpeaketh little, but a foole opens his
mouth without iudgement:Seuerall Sentences, whereto is added their proper Alluſions. drie wood without moiſture, makes a far
greater noyſe in burning, then that which is greene: a veſſell empty,
ſoundes alowde being ſmit on, but one that is full, makes no noyſe
at all: So he that hath little wit in his head, it is no maruaile if hee
be heard lowde enough; but the wiſe man, that knowes what inconuenience
attends on the tongue, he weighs euery word in the ballance,
before he will let them paſſe his lippes. For, as the Prophet Eſay
ſayth:Eſay. 32. 17. 
                     Cultus iuſtitiae ſilentium: The beauty of iuſtice is quietneſſe.
If then the ornament of iuſtice be ſilence, and the honour of a iuſt
man conſiſteth therein: it may eaſily appeare, in what eſtate they
are that talke at large and indiſcreetly.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Of talkeatiue men there is no more account made,
then of vniuſt men.A ſingular Example. And hence it may bee the Philoſopher grounded
his reaſon, when it was tolde him that a prating fellowe had

ſpoken euil of him, he made anſwere, That he cared not: for, quoth he,
Auditus debet eſſe robuſtior lingua,
                     The eare ought to be ſtronger then the tongue. 
                     cùm ſingulis hominibus ſint ſingul
                           ••
                        
linguae, & aures binae: The eare ſhould be ſtronger then the tongue, for euery
man hath two eares, & but one tongue. This is a leſſon for many, to
heare much, and ſpeake but little, becauſe we ſpeake but with one
tongue, and heare with two eares. Wherefore a Philoſopher reprooued
verie well a great talker, in theſe verſes following.
               
               
                  Cùm nihil auſcultes, ſed plurima vana loquaris,
                  Vna tibi melius auris, quàm or a duo.
                  Nam geminas aures nobis Deus, os dedit vnum;
                  Nos audire decet plurima, pauca loqui.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Laſtly,4. The badge or ſigne of wiſedome. this moderate ſilence is the ſigne or badge
of wiſedome, which made holy Iob ſaye to his friendes: vtinam taceretis,
vt putaremini eſſe ſapientes: I would you would be ſilent, that you
might be accounted wiſe.
                     Iob. 13. 5. When the water in a flood or riuer is deepe,A Similie to approoue his aſſertion.
it maketh no lowde noyſe, but where it is ſhallowe, it runneth with
the more audible murmure. Therefore it was woont to bee ſayde,
that the little perling brooke ranne with a farre more delicate
noyſe,The Alluſion. then the deepe channell: whereby wee may gather, that
the deeper a man is grounded in learning, ſo much the more
hee ſauoureth of ſilence.Prou. 18. 4. And ſo ſayeth Salomon in his Prouerbes:
Aqua profunda verba ex ore ſapientis viri: The wordes
of a wiſe mans mouth,
                     Sentence. 
                     are like deepe waters, therefore where is much
prating, there can bee but little prudence. There is a ſaying vſed (almoſt)
generally through the world,Prouerbe. when wee ſee a man of many
wordes, we ſay, he hath more wordes then monie. Which prouerb
was receiued from Salomon,
                     Prouerb. 14. 25. for he affirmeth. Vbiplurima ſunt verba,
ibi frequenter egeſtas: where many wordes are, there wante attendeth.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Vndoubtedly it is ſo.An example comparatiue wiſe, betweene a poore trader, and a rich merchant, with the alluſion thereof. For a poore traffiquer paſſing
through a citie, with his poore ſtocke of commodities, ſtepping
vp on a bulke, hauing a garment on his backe hardlye worth three
pence, may prate and chat there long enough, but no body reſpects
eyther him or his trinkets. A rich merchants caſe is quite contrary, he
ſhal ſcarſely need to open his mouth, but they will intreate him to let
them haue his cōmodities. So fares it with the head that hath litle wit
in it, the tongue of ſuch a one is euer gadding, therefore the prince of
the Peripatecians ſaide:Sentence. 
                     Adpauca reſpicientes, de facili denunciant; a
wiſe man hath none but well weighed words:Eſay. 8. 6. 
                     Aquae Siloe currūt cum
ſilentio.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Lodouico.
                  It ſufficeth then, that the fewe wordes of a wiſe
man, are farre more acceptable then the braying of a foole,
whereupon the wiſe man ſayde:Eccle. 9. 17. 
                     Verba ſapientium audiuntur
eum ſilentio, plus quàm clamor Principis inter ſtultos: The
wordes of the wiſe are more hearde in ſilence,
                     Breuity more commendable then tedious circumſtance. 
                     then the crye of
him that ruleth among fooles. The breuitie of ſpeeche hath beene
alwayes more gratious, then tedious prolixitie: but in theſe our
dayes, it is moſt of all eſteemed, and thereon hath riſen the
prouerbe:Prouerbe. 
                     Gaudent breuitate moderni: for the cheefeſt grace conſiſteth
not in multitude of words, but in ſpeaking little & with wiſedome,
wherupon the Poet wrote,

                        Scire loqui decus eſt, decus eſt & ſcire tacere,
                        Haec duo ſi poteris ſcire, peritus eris.
                     
                  
                  If the Oratour be breefe,An example of a pleaſing Oratour to his Auditory. it is much commended in him, and this
breuitye rayſeth a new deſire in his audience to heare him againe:
but if he be vngratious, preſently euery one ſayth, God bee praiſed,
that yet he hath (at laſt) found the way out of his il-pleaſing argumēt.
So that a man cannot deceiue himſelf by vſing few words: for by prolixe
arguing, the verye perfecteſt Oratour may appeare tedious.
                  There came to a king of our time, two Embaſſadours, and the
firſt of them made a long and tedious Oration,An example of two Embaſſadours ſent vnto a king of late dayes. ſo that the king
turned & ſhifted himſelf many times about in his Chayre as he ſate,
onely beeing wearied with ſo large a circumſtance. At laſt, when
himſelfe pleaſed, he came to a concluſion, not without greate maruaile
in the by-ſtanders, who admired not a little at the great patience
of the king. Now while he prepared to heare the other, fearing
mightily he woulde fall into the former mans faulte: this ſecond Embaſſadour,
beeing no leſſe tyred with the others talke, then
the king himſelfe was, honourably ſpake theſe fewe lynes following.
Sacred Maieſty, this my companion hath dwelt ſo long
vpon his Oration,
                     An apparant teſtimony of a wiſe man. 
                     as there remaynes nothing elſe forme to ſaye:
but onely to exhort your highneſſe, to graunte what hee hath required
in his speeche, for our good and your owne: otherwiſe, expect
an Oration as long againe. Highly was the king pleaſed with this
ſecond Oratour, and falling into a princely ſmile, tooke order: that
whatſoeuer the firſt Embaſſadour had deſired, ſhould bee foorthwith
executed, to cut off all occaſion of any more hearing
him.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Not much vnlike to this Oratour, was the Embaſſador ſent

from the Abderites,
                     Example of Agis king of Lacedemon, and the Abderites Embaſſadour. to Agis king of Lacedaemon, who making likewiſe
(before that ſtate) a very long Oration, at laſt required an anſwer
to his Embaſſie, whereto the king thus gratiouſly replyed. Returne
home to Thrace, and tell the men of Abdera, that you ſtood ſo long vpon
your Oration, as I had no time left to make anſwer to it. Verily, ſo
long a tale (without wiſedome) is not to bee ſo much wondred at, as
that he to whome God hath giuen legges to walke away, will yet ſit
ſtill to liſten ſuch friuolous babbling.
               
               Finis Cap. 3.
            
            
               
                  The Argument.
                  Herein is handled, which is the hardeſt matter for a man, either ſilence
or speaking. And to this purpoſe eache one alleageth ſeuerall reaſons,
with many examples out of the auncient Philoſophers, as alſo
authorities out of the ſacred Scriptures: they ſhew likewiſe, many inconueniences
which ariſe by the tongue. A diſcourſe very excellent,
curious and ſententious.
               
               Chap. 4.
               
                  
                     LODOVICO.
                  In regarde of what
hath beene ſaide alreadie, I hold it
much better ſometimes to bee ſilent,
then talke with tediouſneſſe to the
hearers,For ſuch as take delight to heare themſelues talke. and no credite at all to the
ſpeaker: but men are commonly ſo
addicted to their owne priuate conceites,
that they thinke themſelues to
ſuffer greate violence, if they talke
not.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  In your iudgement then,
which do you hold as the hardeſt matter for a man, to talke, or to

hold his peace?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     It is as difficult a thing to open the mouth well,
                     Sentences anſwering eache other. 
                     as it
is to know, how to cloſe it againe: becauſe wee finde fair ſilence as
commendable, as is the verie comlieſt ſpeaking. Dauid called very
inſtantly to the Lord:
                     Pſal 140. 3. Pone domine cuſtodiam orimeo, & oſtium circumſtantiae
in labijs meis:Example of Dauids care in ſpeaking. Set a watch O Lord before my mouth, and
keepe the doore of my lips. At an other time he prayed: Domine labia
mea aperies,Pſal. 50. 16. & os meum annunciabit laudem tuam: Open thou my lips
O lord,Pſal. 119. 131. and my mouth ſhall ſhew foorth thy praiſe. Againe he ſayde: Os
meum aperui & attraxi ſpiritum: I opened my mouth and panted. And
another time, dumbely as it were: Ego autem ſicut mutus non aperiens
os ſuum:Pſal. 38. 13. I am as a dumbe man that openeth not his mouth.A time for ſpeaking, and a time to be ſilent.
                     And the reaſon of all this was: becauſe it is as harde to ſpeake
well, as it is to bee ſilence: Tempus tacendi, & tempus loquendi.
                  He that would not faile in his ſpeaking, ſhould pray vnto the Lord
that he would firſt inſpire him with what he ſhould ſay, and afterward
he may the boldlier ſpeake:Sentence. learne firſt to bee ſilent, and then
prectiſe how to talke. So did holy Dauid, he prayed in ſilence to the
Lord, that he would inſtruct him what he ſhould ſay, and the Lord
anſwered him:Pſal. 81. 10. 
                     Dilataos tuum, & implebo illud. What can we otherwiſe
gather heereby, but that queſtionleſſe, it is as great a labour to
ſpeake well, as likewiſe it is to bind the tongue to ſilence, beeing naturally
as procliue to talking, as the eyes to ſeeing, the feete to walking,
and the hands to working? This great paine of ours in ſilence
or ſpeaking,Eccle. 6. 7. 
                     Salomon declared, when he ſaid: Omnis lab or hominis in
ore cius: All the labour of a man, is for his month.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  What labour is it for a man to holde his peace? Let
him but keepe cloſe his mouth,He can doe little, that cannot hold his peace. and it ſufficeth. Sayeth not Ouid:
                     Quis minor eſt autem, quam tacuiſſe labor?
To talke well, is another manner of matter: it behoueth the Oratour
to buſie himſelfe not a little, in ſearching his topicks, for neate
tearmes, quaint courſe, ſignificant wordes and proportionate conceites,
to amplifie and adorne his Oration, leaſt it come ſhort of his
hearers lyking.The reaſon why ſo many Schooles were erected for learning. For this purpoſe were ſo many Schooles erected, of
Grammer, Rhetorique and Philoſophie, not onely to teache an order
in diſcourſe without error: but alſo how a man ſhould hold his peace,
wherein there needs no other ſtudy or paines, but only cloſing of the
mouth.
               
               
                  
                  Lodouico.
                  But this cloſing of the mouth,The cloſe the mouth is harder then to ſpeake. is as labourſome, as
it is to ſpeake, and harder too. I denye not, that for comely ſpeaking,
good ſtudie is requiſite, and onelye learned wiſe men knowe
that courſe of ſpeaking: but I tell you againe, that abſolutelye it
is a more difficult thing to bee ſilent, then to talke. We ſee ſuch
as are dumbe,Example of ſuch as are dumbe. to labour themſelues much by ſignes becauſe they
cannot retayne the motion of nature, hindered by the tongue:
therefore they make a ſhift with geſtures, ſuch as in the tongue are
meerelye forbidden. Conceptum ſermonem tenere, quis poterit?
Who can withholde himſelfe from speaking?
                     Iob. 4. 2. ſayd Eliphaz the friend
of Iob. Who can refrayne his tongue, and not thruſt foorth the conceite
of his minde? ſurelye no man (I thinke) without greate difficultie.
                  Such is the power of nature, gadding to ſound the thoughts of others,
as it is able to make the dumbe to ſpeake, if we dare credit the
opinion of Herodotus.
                     Herodotus his example of Atys the dumb Son to Croeſus king of Lydia. For he telles vs, that Atys the Son to Croeſue
king of Lydia, hauing neuer ſpoken before in al his life time, ſo ſoone
as he ſaw one lift vp his armed right hand, to take away the life of his
father, vpon the ſurprizing of the city, ſo much preuayled the natural
inſtinct of ſpeaking, (accompanied with greefe and childlike pittie,
which gathered ſtrength to breake the controwling ligament, that
till then had denyed the paſſage of ſpeeche) that crying out alowde,
he ſayd: Oh deare Father, take heed. Conceptum ſermonem tenere, quis
poterit?
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  This perhaps may be more attributed to the loue of a Son
to his father, and the intire reſpect of his iniuried begetter, then to the
voluntarie torrent of nature.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Both to the one and other may we moſt truly refer it,The attribution both to the one and other.
becauſe both the one and other are of like equality in power: yet we
may rather conduce it to the violent torrent, in the very ſwiftneſſe of
his courſe, then to the conceite of the mind, the other beeing the
way-gate for paſſage of ſpeeche.Example of Philippides the Poet, and kind Lyſimachus. 
                     Philippides the Poet was very gratious
in the eye of Prince Lyſimachus, ſo that he offered to graunt him
whatſoeuer he would deſire of him, and would needs vrge him to requeſt
ſome thing: the Poet replyed. I deſire nothing, in reward or gratitude
of all my paines, but only that you would neuer acquaint me with any
of your ſecrets.
                  
               
               
                  A man is euer ſo forwarde in diſcloſing his conceytes, that Architas
the Tarentine ſayde:
                  Example of Architas the Tarentine. If one were in heauen, to conſider the beauty
of the ſtarres, the wandering order of the Planets, the variable

influences of the celeſtiall spheares, and the goodly diſpoſition of the inferiour
creatures; all theſe would ſeeme nothing ſweete vnto him, except
he had a kind companion, with whom he might confer vpon them.
Conceptum ſermonem tenere,Example of the lawe amōg the Lydians for ſilence. quis poteſt? It is ſuch a hard thing to
keepe ſilence, that although there was a law among the Lydians,
that ſuch, as talked ouermuch, ſhould be eyther condemned to the
Gallyes, or learne with others to practiſe ſilence for a certayne time:
yet more woulde willingly goe rowe for many yeares on the Seas,
then conuerſe among the Citizens to learne ſilence, this dooth Plutarch
teſtifye to vs.
                  Quintilian concerning ſilence. Quintilian wrote: Nullam difficiliorem eſſe
puto, quàm tacendi virtutem: There is no vertue more paynefull
to be followed, then ſilence, this ſilence is a maruellous harde matter.
               
               
                  Tiberius taught a talkeatiue Senatour ſilence,Example how Tyberius taught a talkatiue Senatour ſilence. for the ſpace of a
whole yeare together: but to behold his antique tricks & behauiour,
was admirable, for he did more harme by his nods and fooliſh becks
then others did by talking to him: ſuch ſtrong impreſſure ſuffered naturall
vſe, as geſtures ſeemed odious, in regard of the tongue, & were
ſufficient to haue ſoftned the ſeuerity of Caeſar: which being ſo, Conceptum
ſermonem tenere, quis poteſt? Mydas had the eares of an Aſſe,
as the Poets tell vs, but he couered them ſo cunningly vnder his royal
crowne,Example of the Barber to king Mydas, vnable to containe the kings deformity. with a fine nightcap, as none knew his monſtrous deformity
ſaue only his Barber, who was prohibited from diſcloſing it, vpon the
ſeuere penalty of death. But he, being not able to withſtand the naturall
enforcement of reuealing the ſame, went into a hollow caue of a
forreſt, and there he cryed alowd many times to himſelf, Mydas king
of Phrigia hath the eares of an Aſſe.
               
               Of the holy Apoſtles themſelues it is written,Example of the Apoſtles, and Chriſt himſelfe. that they could not
retaine within them, the high celeſtiall ſecrets, reuealed to them by
the holy ghoſt, and Chriſt himſelfe: Non poſſumus quae vidimus, &
audiuimus non loqui: For we cannot but speake the things which we haue
heard and ſeene.
                  Act. 4. 20. Howbeit, it is a higher myſterie in the Saints: & this
which in the Apoſtles was a vertue, to other is giuen by naturall inſtinct.
How can an Organe but ſound,A very apt Similie to this purpoſe. the bellowes feeding it with
breath, & the Organiſts fingers playing vpon it? Non poſſumus quae vidimus,
& audiuimus non loqui: it is not poſſible to bee ſilent, but only
by the eſpeciall grace of God.
               
                  Claudio.
                  Silence is no greater a gift of God,Silence is no greater a gift of God, then wiſe ſpeaking. then ſpeaking with
wiſedome, and the flowing eloquence in the Apoſtles, was the work
of the holy ghoſt, not the heate of Nature. But albeit ſilence

is ſuch a hard impoſition, yet a wiſe man findes it no difficultye
at all in him, who by the compaſſe of reaſon meaſures all his
wordes.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Alas my Lorde, doe you not know, that Salomon
himſelfe was of my mind, reputing it ſo impoſſible a thing to order
the talking tongue, that he ſayd: Domini eſt gubernare linguam: The
anſwer of the tongue is of the Lord.
                     Prouerb. 16. 1.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  This ſaying, that God onely hath the gouernement
of the tongue,God onely hath the gouernment of the tongue. approues not ſo much the difficulty of ſilence, but likewiſe
of ſpeaking. And if ſo many examples by you alleaged, may
make men beleeue, that it is a matter almoſt impoſſible for a man to
hold his peace: I can produce as many men more, who not only haue
ſpoken little, but (in a manner) haue beene alwayes ſilent. Moreouer,
ſome of thoſe men by you rehearſed, were takē for indiſcreet perſons
and worthy of reprehenſion, and namely Eliphaz, who ſayd, Conceptum
ſermonem tenere quis poteſt? But they whom I will ſpeak of, were
men of wiſedome, & worthy of prayſe, as already we haue deliuered
many others.
                  You reade of Pambus the Abbot,Example of Pambus the Abbot, concerning the beſt leſſon that euer he learned. a man of great holineſſe, who
by the ſame of his goodneſſe, procured a reuerend Biſhoppe to come
and viſite him: but in all the time of his beeing with him, hee would
not ſpeak one word. His attendāts taking it in very euil part, imputed
it to him as inciuility, diſcurteſie and vnmanlineſſe, to be ſilent in a
time ſo much beſeeming ſpeech. The patient man ſayde vnto them:
My ſonnes, I could neuer read a better leſſon, nor learne at any time a
dostrine more profitable, then to be ſilent. And of this mind hee ſtill
continued, vntill it pleaſed the Lord to ſend for him. Socrates wrote
a booke,Socrates his book to teach ſilence. wherein nothing elſe was read or taught, but onely ſilence.
If there were Schooles in the city, for inſtruction of ſilence, how many
would quickly learne to ſpeake very eloquently? Then all iangling,
corrupt talking, murmuring, detracting, blaſpheming and lying,
would ſoone ceaſe.Sentence. 
                     He knowes not how to ſpeake, that knowes not
how to be ſilent, ſo ſayd Socrates to his Schollers. But Plutarch is repugnant
to Socrates, for in his booke de educatione liberorum, hee
hath ſet downe:Plutarch contrary to Socrates. 
                     That he which talkes little hath need of a little reading.
                  
                  As the veſſell is knowne by the ſound to be full or emptie:Similie. ſo by
talking is a wiſe man and a foole diſcerned.Eſay. 8. 6. 
                     Aquae Siloe currunt
cum ſilentio.
                     Iob. 39. 37, 38. 
                     Iob ſpake once, and repented himſelfe; Vuum loquutus
ſum, quod vtinam non dixiſſem, & alterum, quib us vltrà non adam.

Manum meam ponam ſuper os meum,
                     Talking deliuers a ſigne of lightneſſe. becauſe talking giues a ſigne of
lightneſſe, as himſelfe confeſſeth, for if he had held his peace, then he
had wanted the cauſe of repentance. Qui leuiter loquutus ſum, respondere
quid poſſum? Dauid (as already hath bin declared) to receiue
no cauſe of repentance by ſpeaking, prayed the Lord to ſet a watch
before his mouth. And Iob councelled his friends to ſilence, becauſe
they might appeare to be wiſe:
                     Iob. 13. 5. 
                     Vtinam taceretis, vt putaremini ſapientes.
If then ſilence be ſo commodious for a foole,Silence beneficial for a fool. to keepe his follie
from diſcouerie: howe much more is it beneficiall for a wiſe
man?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Taciturnitie is very neceſſarie in a foole,Difference of ſilence in a foole and a wiſe man. for manifeſting
his follie: but in a wiſe man contrarily is ſpeeche neceſſary,
for apparancie of his wiſedome: otherwiſe, how could it bee knowne
which is wiſeſt, if both hold their peace?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The foole holdes his peace,Anſwere to the queſtion. Similie, and the alluſion thereof. onely to ſeeme wiſe, but
the diſcreete man doth it, becauſe he is ſo indeede. As ſweete liquor
beeing put into an vncouered veſſell, looſeth his perfection, and the
goodneſſe therof quite vaniſheth, as apparātly may be noted in wine:
euen ſo a man of a many words, who hath his mouth ſtill open to talking,
looſeth the ſweet ſauour of deuotion, & the goodneſſe of al perfection
vaniſheth quite from him. Seneca ſent ſundry writings, & many
books ful of great learning to Lucullus: but laſt of al he ſent a letter,
regiſtred in the fift booke of his Epiſtles,Seneca his letter ſent to Lucullus. & it is the 40: where he
writes, that the ſum of all he had ſo learnedly ſet downe, was, that he
willed him to be ſlowe in ſpeaking: Summa ergo ſummarum haec eſt, tardiloquum
te eſſe iubeo.
                  
                  
                     Vincentio Belnacens, of the order of Preachers, ſets downe in his
looking Glaſſe,Vincentio Belnacens, his anſwer to Foelix the Doctour. that being asked by Felix the Doctor, if he ſhoulde
praiſe his neighbour or no, anſwered, like a louer of ſilence: that it
was good to praiſe him, but much better to hold his peace. The reaſon
hereof I gueſſe to be this, that becauſe it often happeneth, by the mutability
of a mans mind, if once we haue commended a man, it may
fall out afterward, the ſame perſon may commit ſome act worthy of
reprehenſion, and ſufficient to diſgrace the former prayſe: therefore I
iudge it better to commend a mans neighbour after he is dead,The time when a man may beſt be commended, according to Salomon. when
neyther hee that prayſes, may be taxed of flatterie, nor the partye
praiſed (by the blemiſh of elation) may bee further tempted. And
Salomon ſpeaketh to the ſame purpoſe: Ante mortem ne laudes hominem
quemquam, quoniam in filiis ſuis agnoſcitur vir: Iudge no
man bleſſed before his death,
                     Eccle. 11, 30. 
                     for a man ſhall bee knowne by his children.
                     Eccle. 11. 2.
                     
And againe: Non laudaueris hominem in vita ſua; Commend not
a man in his life time. Euen as if hee woulde haue ſayde, A man
is ſo vnſtable by nature, that hee hath no certainty, therefore leaſt
thoſe praiſes beſtowed on him at any time, ſhould fall afterwarde
into check and reprehenſion: I hold it beſt, not to commende
him while hee is liuing, becauſe hee may committe ſome act
deſeruing blame, and obſcure thereby all the former prayſes.
                  Wherfore it is beſt commending,Praiſe is then beſt beſeeming when one action is not to be contraried by another. when there is no perill that one
action may contrary another, which is, after death, when euery thing
is ſecure and out of danger; when he hath attained the long wiſhed
port; when he is certain of triumph; when neither (for paſſed occaſions)
there is any greeuing, nor feare of misfortune, by any thing that
can happen.Sentence. Let it ſuffice then, that it is better to be ſilent, then talkeatiue,
and as eaſie is ſilence to a wiſe man, as taciturnity is difficult to a
foole: therfore it ſhal very well become vs, to make bars & doores for
our mouthes, to open & ſhut at meet times, for feare of fayling, according
as the wiſe man ſaieth:Eccle. 28. 25. 
                     Fac ori tuo oſtium & ſeram: Make a door
and a bar, and a bridle for thy mouth.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  In ſuch manner (belike) was ſilence figured by our elders.Example of our firſt mother Eua, and of Lucifer the proud Angell.
If Eua & Lucifer had had this bar neither the one nor other had
vttered ſuch lyes againſt the diuine honor as they did: Eua in weening
to beguile the diuine commandement, and Lucifer in thinking
to abate the greateſt glory by his fooliſh preſuming. She could tel the
deuil,Gene. 3. 2. 3. 4. 
                     that God had commanded, that not only they ſhould not eate of the
Apple, which he vrged to her, but much leſſe, they ſhould not haue the
boldneſſe to touch it, leaſt they died. And the other audaciouſly affirmed
againſt the diuine precept, that they ſhould not dye at all, but preſently
become as Gods, knowing both good and euill: Ne quaquā morte moriemini
ſed eritis ſicut Dii, ſcientes bonū & malum. If they had bin mute
& ſilent, much better had it bin both for them and vs.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  A greater lye was that of the woman,The womans ly was greater then that of the Deuil: for ſhe was the inuentreſſe of lying, & taught it to the deuil, by two ſeuerall lyes. then the other of
the deuill, for the woman was the inuentreſſe of lying, and taught it
the deuill. The deuill went but to tempt the woman, when hee
ſayde: Cur praecepit vobis Deus vt non comederetis ex omni ligno paradiſi? As yet the deuill had vttered no lye at all. But the woman
anſwered, and in her anſwere toulde two ſeuerall lyes.
De fructu lignorum quae ſunt in paradiſo, veſcimur. De fructu
ver
                           •
                         ligni, quod eſt in medio Paradiſi, praecepit nobis Deus ne comederemus: we eate of the fruits of the trees of the Garden. But of the

fruit of the tree, which is in the midſt of the Garden, God hath ſaid; Ye
ſhall not eate of it. Hitherto ſhe ſpake truth, but preſently after theſe
words,The two lyes. followed two lyes: Et ne tangaremus illud; neither ſhall ye touch
it, there is one; Ne fortè moriamur; leaſt that ye dye, there is the ſecond.
                  For God commaunded not, but that they might touch the fruite
of the tree, onely his charge was, that they ſhould not taſte thereof.
Neyther did God put death to the tranſgreſſours for touching, in
the precept,Gen. 2. 17. but abſolutely ſayd: In quacunque enim dic comederis ex
eo, morte morieris: In the day thou eateſt thereof, thou ſhalt dye
the death. The deuill hearing, and faſtening hold vpon theſe two
lyes; of himſelfe (like a good ſcholler) he ioynes two worſer vnto
them:The deuil, like an apt Scholler, ads two worſe lyes to the womans. one, in denying death named to the offenders, the other,
in making promiſe of a diuinitie: Nequaquam moriemini,
there is the firſt; ſed eritis ſicut dit, ther's the ſecond. Thus became
the woman Schoolemiſtreſſe to the deuill, and from theſe two
perſons (as from a fountaine) ſprung all other lyes by imitation.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  If they had bin ſilent, much better had their condition
beene, and ſuch a pernicious euill had neuer beene inſtructed to
vs.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  But if ſuch harme doe enſue by the tongue,
wherefore did God then beſtowe it vpon man?A demaund worth the obſeruation. and why did
Chriſte reſtore the dumbe to ſpeeche? Had it not beene much
better for vs, to haue beene borne dumbe, then by hauing a tongue,
to put our ſelues in perill, of committing therewith a thouſand guilty
ſins?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Becauſe as much good as euill may come by the tongue,
according to the vſe thereof:Anſwere to the demaund by an apt compariſon. therefore the tongue may be compared
to riches, which are good and naught, according to the vſe & abuſe.
Therfore ſayd Chriſt: De ſermonibus tuis iuſtificaberis, & de ſermonibus
tuis condemnaberis:
                     Math. 12. 37. 
                     By thy words thou ſhalt be iuſtified and by thy
words thou ſhalt be condemned. Hence was it (as I thinke) that Dauid
called the tongue a ſword:Pſal. 56. 4. 
                     Lingua eorum gladius acutus: Their tongue
is a ſharpe ſworde. The ſword is a weapon offenſiue and defenſiue, according
to the vſe:Compariſon between the tongue, and a ſword. (not as the Mo
                        •
                     iō, ſhirt of maile or Corſlet, which
are armes only defenſiue) and ſo is the tongue good or euill, as it is
vſed.
                  We haue already ſaide, that the wiſeman is like a couered veſſel,
which lets not fly from him, or vainely breatheth foorth the liquor

of diſcretion.Sap. 8. 
                     Quaſi vas auri ſolidum, ornatum omni lapide pretioſo.
The foole is like a veſſell too,Compariſon of veſſels for proofe of a wiſe man, and a foole. but there are ſome veſſells of honour,
others of ignominy, ſome moſt noble, others vituperous, according
as their vſes are: euen ſo is it with the tongue, good & bad, according
as it is wrought withal, the empty & fooliſh are veſſels, but broken
ones, looſing all, & not knowing how to retaine the licquor of wiſedome.Eccle. 28.
So ſpake the holy ſpirit hy Salomon: Cor fatui quaſi vas confractum,
& omnem ſapientiam non tenebit.
                  
                  The Prophet Dauid in one of his Pſalmes, calles the tongue the
pen of a ready writer.
                     Compariſon of the tongue to a writers pen. The penne is an inſtrument for writing, which
being put into the hand of a skilfull ſcribe, makes a fayre character:
but in the hand of a bad writer, makes a letter loathſome to be lookt
on.Pſal. 44. 2. 
                     Lingua mea calamus ſcribae velociter ſcribentis. With the pen may
be written both good and euill:An excellent Alluſion, worth the regarding. the holy ghoſt moouing the penne of
our tongue, it writes in the hearts of the faithfull, the wordes of eternall
life: but beeing guided by the hand of a wicked ſinner, it
makes brutiſh letters, of lying, ſlaundering, blaſpheming and euill
ſpeaking.
                  One friend hauing inuited another to ſup with him, he commanded
his ſeruant,Example of the goodneſſe and badneſſe of the tongue. that he ſhoulde goe buy the very beſt thing in the
market, to make his ſupper the more honorable. He went, and according
to the charge of his maſter, he bought a tongue, which beeing
brought home to the houſe, the maſter fell into choller, and becauſe
hee had dallyed with him diuerſe times ſo before, hee ſayde vnto
him. Thou euer doeſt the contrary to what I commaund thee, I charged
thee to buy the beſt thing in the market, and ſee, thou haſt bought
the woorst, neuer fulfilling what I enioyne thee to doe: therefore
ſince thou takeſt a delight in thwarting mee, goe buy the woorſt thing
that is to bee ſolde in the market. The ſeruaunt went agayne, and
bought an other tongue, whereat the maſter chafing much more,
the ſeruant ſaid (and I thinke it was Aeſope) There is nothing better or
worſe in the whole world,
                     A wittie ſententious anſwere of a Seruant. 
                     then the tongue, which is the cauſe both of
much good, and much euill: a ſentence not ſo excellent as true, and agreeable
to that of the wiſe man,Pro. 13. 21. 
                     Vità & mors in manibus linguae.
                  
                  
                     Seeing then the tongue is the cauſe of much good,
                     To what end God gaue the tongue to man. 
                     to that end
God gaue it: but as it is the meane of many euilles, it ought to bee
bridled, and talke but at due times. Homo ſapiens tacebit vſque ad
tempus:Eccl. 20. 7. laſciuus autem & imprudens non ſeruabit tempus: A wiſe man
will hold his tongue till be ſee opportunity: but a foole and a trifler will regard

no time.Eccle. 28. 22. Multi ceciderunt in ore gladij, ſed non ſic quaſi interierunt
per linguam ſuam:Of the euill tongue. There be many that haue periſhed by the edge
of the ſword, but not ſo many as haue fallen by the tongue. And ſo diſcourſing
on ſtil of the wicked tongue,
                     Eccle 28. 16. 17. 21. 18. 25. that it hath broken downe ſtrong
cities; ouerthrowne the houſes of Princes; driuen nation from nation;
depreſſed the ſtrength of the people, and telling an infinite number of
euilles more, at laſt he ſayth for a concluſion: Mors illius mors nequiſſima,
& vtilis potius infernus quam illa: The death thereof is an euill
death, hell were better then ſuch a one. Could he ſpeake worſe, what
a wretched thing then is a wicked tongue? Flagelli plaga liuorem facit,
plaga autem linguae comminuit oſſa: The ſtroke of the whip maketh
markes in the fleſh, but the ſtroake of the tongue breaketh the boanes.
                  As many other goodneſſes do enſue, by the tongue of a iuſt & prudent
man,An excellent Similie. whoſe ſweetneſſe cannot be declared. It is a heauēly thing
to heare the delicate ſound of muſicall inſtruments: but much more
delightſom is the harmony which a holy tongue makes. Tibiae & pſalterium
ſuauem faciunt melodiam, & ſuper vtraque lingua ſuais. The
pipe and the pſalterion make a ſweet noyſe,
                     Eccle. 40. 21. 
                     but a pleaſant tongue is aboue
them both.
                     The powerfull and pretious vertues of a good tongue. For it prayſeth God, conuerteth ſoules, curbs the deuil,
opens heauen, ſhuts vp hell, appeaſeth the Iudge, comforts the offendour,
admoniſheth the ſinner, counſelleth the doubtfull, pacifieth the
vnquiet, ſatisfieth the afflicted, correcteth (with loue) the falty, encourageth
the weake, inſtructeth the ignorant, extolleth vertue, condemneth
vice, and performeth an hundred thouſand other good offices.
This tongue is ſilent, & ſpeakes in meet time, & although at ſome ſeaſon
it appeareth to be dumb, yet (another while) it declareth it ſelfe to
be very eloquent. Eſt autem tacens, & non habēs ſenſum loquelae: & eſt
tacens, ſciens tempus apti temporis: Some man holdeth his tongue, becauſe
he hath not to anſwere: and ſome keep ſilence, waiting a time conuenient.
                  
                  Therefore it is good to ſpeake, and as good to be ſilent: hard is it
to keep ſilence,Sentences coupling together. but much more hard to ſpeake with wiſedome. For
the tongue being the Embaſſadour of the hart, it is moſt certaine, that if
there be loue in the hart, the tongue will manifeſt loue (as Minas the
Philoſopher writeth) If there be hatred,
                     Minas the Philoſopher, his conceit of the tongue. 
                     it wil publiſh diſdaine, if ſorrowe,
it will vtter lamentations. Which oftentimes is the cauſe of many
euills, becauſe not all things concealed in the heart, ought the
tongue to diſcouer, and therfore it is far better to be ſilent, according
as Ouid counſelleth.
                  
                     Eximia eſt virtus praeſtare ſilentia rebus.
                     
                        
Atque grauis eſt culpa tacenda loqui.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Neuertheleſſe Ariſtotle ſaith,Ariſtotle concerning the difficulty of ſilence. 
                     That it is far more difficult
to hold ones peace, then to speake: wherupon, being asked, which
of theſe two things ſeemed to him the hardeſt, replyed, to conceale a
ſecret. As I was one day talking with Signior Cipriano Calphurnio an
eſpeciall friend of mine, he made proffer of telling me a very great
matter,An Example of himſelfe. prouided that I would lock it vp hidden in my hart, but I anſwered
him according to Ariſtotles opinion. Good Sir (quoth I) do me
ſo much curteſie, as not to bind me to that, which you cannot do your ſelf:
you cannot keep ſo great a ſecret concealed, and yet wil you tie me to ſtrict
retaining it?
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     Ariſtotle ſaith,To be ſilent is the hardeſt matter, Ariſtotle. 
                     That to be ſilent, is the hardeſt matter, becauſe
ſilence is the ground of prudence, and prudence is an beroycall vertue,
not to be imitated of all, for many learned men haue bin imprudent.
Plato writeth,Wiſedom conſiſteth in ſilence, Plato. 
                     That a man cannot be wiſe, except he be able to retaine a
ſecret. And yet your Honor would not be bound to ſilence, not becauſe
wiſedome is contayned in euery part therof, but in regard of the
binding diuers other, to keepe in ſilence a like ſecrecy, which may
prooue a matter very perillous.An example to ſound purpoſe, concerning the diſcloſing of a ſecret. A man may perhappes (vnder deepe
charge) manifeſt a ſecret to a friend of his, and (with the like prouizo)
reueale it to diuers other beſide, which paſſing in that order among ſo
many, may prooue in the end to fall out damageable: & then, he not
perfectly remembring to how many he told it, may vniuſtly tax his
very trueſt friend of vnfaithfulneſſe. Therfore, much better is it, not to
know another mans ſecrets, then by knowing them, to oppoſe himſelf
to ſo manifeſt perill, when as others being therewith likewiſe acquainted,
they may ſcape free, and he onely be blamed.
                  But ſilence is a thing ſo noble,One mans blame may light vpon an other. that it is very highly pleaſing to god,
as may be eaſily gathered, if we but conſider, that his diuine Maieſtie
would not haue his ſecrets knowne to any perſon whatſoeuer: wherby
we may ſee,God iealous of his ſecrets. that he would not admit the knowledge of what hee
would do in a day, nay, much leſſe, what he intended in an hour. Moſt
ſecret is God in all his affayres, whereupon the Prophet ſpake not at
randome,Eſay. 45. ſaying. Secretum meum mihi, ſecretum meum mihi: My ſecrets
I keep to my ſelfe, &c. And Cato likewiſe ſayd: Proximus ille Deo
eſt, qui ſcit ratione tacere: He is likeſt vnto God, that knowes with reaſon
how to hold his peace.
                  
               
               Finis Cap. 4.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  Wherein is declared, how God spake ſo little, as he ſpake but once or
twiſe onely: And how man ought to keep an eternall ſilence, otherwiſe,
he that alwayes talketh, ſinneth. Who was the firſt that brake ſilence,
as well in heauen, as in earth. How it is to be vnderſtood, that
God onely is truth, and euery man a lyar: conſidering that many
haue ſpoken the truth, as well Philoſophers of the Gentiles, as alſo
many Chriſtians: A diſcourſe ful of learning, & pleaſing curioſities.
               
               Chap. 5.
               
                  
                     CLAVDIO.
                  Well then my Lord, if
God be ſo iealous of his ſecrets, and
hath ſo little reuealed them: it behooueth
vs in this caſe to confeſſe, that he
ſpeakes much leſſe, and is very ſpaing
of his ſpeeche.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  God is ſo abſtinent of
his ſpeeche,God ſpake but once or twiſe only, according to Dauid▪
                      as I find but that once or
twiſe onely he ſpake: nor is this any
once it of mine own, but the Prophet
Dauid witneſſeth it, who ſpeaking of
God,Pſal. 62. 11. ſayth: Semel loquutus eſt Deus, One time onely God spake, and
two things onely he ſayd: Duo haec audiui, quia poteſtas Dei eſt, & tibi
Domine mifericordia, quia tu reddes vnicuique iuxta opera ſua.
Theſe two I heard, that power belongeth vnto God, and to thee O Lord
mercy, for thou rewardeſt euery one according to his worke.
                     Iobs proofe of the ſame. This is alſo
confirmed by the authoritie of Iob, who maintaining God to be a
louer of ſilence,Iob. 33. 14. ſayth: Semel loquitur Deus, & idipſum ſermo non repetit;
Can there be found any greater taciturnity then this?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  God ſpeaketh very little, if he neuer ſpake but once or twiſe.
But,A demaund vrging the contrary to the former obiection. how can this agree with the bleſſed S. Paul, a preacher to the
people, a veſſell of election, and the trumpet of the holy ghoſt? For
he writing to the Hebrewes, ſayeth. Multifariè, multiſque modis
elim Deus loquēs patribus in Prophetis.
                     Heb. 14. 2. 
                     Nouiſſimè diebus istis loquutus
                     
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
no other end, was made ſpeeche, conioyned with the eternall word
actiue: Omnia per ipſum facta ſunt: All things were made by it: but to
agree with the paſſiue of our humanity:Iohn. 1. 3. 
                     Paſſus ſub Pontio Pilato,
                     Of the eternal word actiue, conioyned with the paſſiue of our humanity. 
                     It
ſuffered vnder Pontius Pilate; by meanes of the verball coniunction
of his ſubſtance onely; neyther for any other end did it aſſume fleſh
in the chaſte virgins wombe, then to declare, therby, the word ſpoken
at firſt.
                  Moreouer, what Chriſt did and ſaid in the world, was a manifeſting of what the Godhead had in his mind, as is witneſſed in the
words of the Euangeliſt Saint Iohn, where moſt highly he ſaith: Quod
factum eſt,
                     Iohn. 1. 4. 
                     in ipſo vita erat. Which more cleerely he replicateth in his
wonderfull Apocalips,Apoc. 4. 11. ſaying: Quia tu creaſti omnia, & propter voluntatem
tuam erant, & creata ſunt: For thou haſt created al things, and
for thy wills ſake they are, and haue bin created.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  If they haue bin,A School-like cauile, for further reſolution. how are they now created? If now they
be created, then before they were not: it ſeemeth repugnant to ſaye,
that firſt they haue beene, and yet afterwarde they are now created.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  As if your Honor knowes not,A ſententious and learned anſwere. that before the Architect
buildeth a palace, he hath the Idea ſhaped thereof. They were
firſt in the diuinities minde, & afterward they were created: not that
firſt of all they were in Potentia, and afterward in act, or ſo to be expected
from God: becauſe in God there is no ſuch power, which is
called defectiue, but euery thing in him is perfectly in act. In vs, between
the deed & the act (according to the ancient Adage) is a great
alteration:In God, between doing and ſpeaking, is no differēce. but in God, between doing and ſpeaking, there is no difference
at all. Ipſe dixit, & facta ſunt; ipſe mandauit, & creata ſunt. And,
to returne to our argument firſt of all begun,Pſal. 48. 10. God is ſayd to ſpeake
vnto vs, alwayes eternally in the heart, by his holy lawe, and by his
creatures, which ſerue vnto vs as ſo many tongues, as Dauid
diſtinctlye ſpeaketh in his 48. Pſalme, and as the three children,
in the fierye furnace of Babylon, doe affirme in theyr
ſong.
                  It ſhall be neceſſarie therefore for vs, to be alwayes ſilent, becauſe
he that alwayes ſpeaketh,The diuine word is the liuing conceites of the Father vnderſtāding. ſpake but two things onely, as before hath
bin declared, and ſo we may ſay, Semel loquutus eſt Deus. The diuine
word is the liuing conceite of the Fathers vnderſtanding, which becomming
fleſh, expreſſed the conceite of the Godheads mind: Ipſe
enarrauit,
                     Iohn 1. 14. 
                     & docuit omnia. Alſo himſelfe ſayd to his beloued diſciples:
Omnia qua audiui à patre meo,
                     Iohn 8. 38. 
                     nota feci vobis. So that whatſoeuer he

ſayde, it was to expreſſe the eternall will, and though they may
ſeeme to bee ſundry diſcourſings, yet in ſubſtaunce they are all
but one: whereupon it may bee truely ſayde, Semel loquutus eſt
Deus.
                  
                  And becauſe it is a word eternall, it would therefore haue an eternall
ſilence, which made Dauid ſay: Te decet
                     ſilentium. 
                     hymnus Deus in Sion. As
if he would haue ſaid,A venerable explication of the lngly Prophets words. it is a matter moſt commendable (O Lord) that
to thee ſhould be giuen an eternall ſilence, becauſe thou ſpeakeſt eternally:
for it is not lawfull, that while thou ſpeakeſt, wee thy creatures
ſhould likewiſe be talking, but to ſtand in humility liſtening to
thee: Te decet, &c.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  By your fauour my Lord, if it bee a matter of dutie,
to ſtand alwayes mute and huſht in ſilence: wherefore doe you then
reaſon ſo much, & not obſerue the ſame in ſilence, which you preach
vnto me?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Theſe wordes of mine, are my ſilence, and the word
of God alſo:An excellent anſwere, well worthie the noting. my ſilence they are, becauſe while I ſpeake vnto you
of matters diuine, I hold my peace, and God ſpeaketh by mee.
An vnhappie wretch were I, if I ſhould ſpeake, as of my ſelfe, becauſe
I ſhould then tell nothing but lyes, and be a manifeſt breaker of ſilence.
Doe not you know:Pſal. 115. 2. 
                     Omnis homo mendax: Euery man is a lyer?
And how greatly God dooth puniſh lying: Perdes omnes qui
loquuntur mendacium:
                     Pſal. 5. 6. 
                     Thou ſhalt deſtroye them that speake
lyes.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Why then belike I am a lyar. I thanke you for your kindneſſe.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Who makes any doubt of that? are not you a man?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  I make no queſtion that I am a man: but (by your leaue)
I am no lyar.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  You are a lyar,God is onely truth, and al men lyars: how vnderſtood. becauſe you are a man, if you will
giue credite to Saint Paul, who, confirming the former ſaying of the
Prophet Dauid, wrote to the Romanes: Eſt autem verax Deus,
omnis autem homo mendax: Let God be true, and euery man a lyar. If
God be only true,Rom. 3. 4. and euery man a lyar: you being a man, are alſo a
lyar, except (from the community of men) you know how to diuide
your ſelfe.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  I know very well that I am a man, and yet no lyar, becauſe
I haue alwayes delighted in the trueth.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  If the truth be ſo pleaſing to you, and yet you are a
man: it is becauſe you haue no knowledge of your ſelfe, nor of

your owne excellencie.Though all men be lyars, as beeing the ſonnes of mē, yet trueth makes them the ſonnes of God, and ſo no lyars. For though euery man be a lyar, yet in thus
much you are not a lyer, by how much you are not the ſonne of a
man, but the ſonne of God: becauſe, Mendaces filii hominum in ſtateris;
The children of men are vanitie, the chiefe men are lyars, to lay

                           〈◊〉
                         vppon a ballance, they are altogether lighter then vanity. Then,
in ſpeaking the truth, and delighting therein, and not beeing a man,
but the child of God, you are no lyer. Deus de Coelo prospexit ſuper
filios hominum, vt videat ſi eſt intelligens, aut requirens Deum. Omnes
declinauerunt,
                     Pſal. 61. 9. 
                     ſimul inutiles facti ſunt non eſt qui faciat bonum, non eſt
vſque ad vnum.
                     Pſal. 52. 1. 2. 
                     God looked downe from heauen vpon the children of
men, to ſee if there were any that would vnderſtand, and ſeek God. Euery
one is gone back, they are altogether corrupt, there is none that dooth
good, no not one; but if one, it was Chriſt, who beeing a man, was God
alſo.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Whence proceedeth it, that al men were lyers, and vnprofitable?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Becauſe it pleaſed him to become both God and
man,How God gaue power vnto men, to become the ſonnes of God & be no lyars. it was to diuert man from infinite former euilles, and to heale
him of as infinite infirmities, particularly thoſe of the vnderſtanding,
to the end hee ſhould not be a lyar: but by delighting in the truth, he
gaue power vnto men to become the ſonnes of God. Dedit eis poteſtatem
filios Dei fieri. So by the meanes of this ſingular grace, Lying
ceaſſed in men,Iohn 1. 12. becauſe they ceaſſed to bee the ſonnes of men.
Moreouer,Pſal. 81. 6. they are ſayd to be Gods: Ego dixi Dij eſtis, & filii excelſi
omnes. I haue ſayd you are Gods, & you are al children of the moſt high.
If then they are Gods,
                     Rom. 3. 4. 
                     God is truth: Eſt autem Deus verax, Then are
they truth as he is: as Gods by participation, redeemed by grace of the
Sauiour,
                     Venerable Bede, his words of the children of God. 
                     bought with the price of the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt, borne againe
with the water of holy Baptiſme, and made eternall heyres of the kingdome
of heauen: this is venerable Bedes opinion, vpon the Epiſtle of
Saint Paul to the Romanes.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  I dare ſay nothing againſt ſo great a Doctour: but if
(for further inſtruction) it be lawfull to aske, I would gladly know of
you:A queſtion of very great import, concerning thoſe that are to bee tearmed the ſonnes of God onely. if onelye thoſe men, which are called the ſonnes of God, or
Gods by participation (how many ſoeuer they be) be true, and all other
men beſide are lyars; as for example the Gentiles, depriued of
faith, ſeparated from the Church, ſonnes of the deuill, yet they ſpeaking
ſometimes truth, in that many of them (by theyr writings) haue
giuen occaſion to vs Chriſtians, to know the truth, yea, and by ſome
of their compoſitions? And if the adopted Sonnes of God onely bee

true, it is then moſt cleere, that not all Chriſtians, that know and
ſpeake the truth, are the ſons of God, in forſaking their father Chriſt,
and making themſelues (by ſinne) the ſonnes of the diuell. How then
do only the ſonnes of God, and not the ſonnes of men, ſpeake the
truth?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  I anſwere,The former demaund. that inaſmuch as the Gentiles, and Chriſtians
(onely in name) ſpeake the trueth, they are true, by how much
they participate of the firſt trueth,Learnedly anſwered. God himſelfe: but for the reſt, by
that which is to be expected (as of their owne nature) they are falſe
and lyers.Pſal. 43. 3. Hereupon was it that Dauid ſayd: Emitte lucem tuam, &
veritatem tuam, ipſa me deduxerunt, & adduxerunt in montem ſanctum
tuum, & in tabernacula tua: Send thy light and thy trueth,
let them leade mee, let them bring mee vnto thy holy mountaine,
and to thy Tabernacles.
                     Similie and the Alluſion thereof. As water (of it ſelfe) hath no colour at all, but
is ſo much the more coloured, as colour commeth vpon it: euen ſo
man, inſomuch as he is of himſelfe, is a lyer, but inſomuch as he partakegth
of the cheefe truth, to weet, God the only authour of truth; ſo
much is he true.
                  Another anſwere (in declaration of Dauids wordes) can I make
you,An anſwere to the other ſaying of Dauid: Omnis homo mendax. as thus. In Dauids ſaying: Omnis homo mendax, is as much to ſay
as that a man partaketh more of his not beeing, then of his beeing:
therefore in ſaying, that euery man is a lyar, and a lye beeing the deniall
of the trueth, is the trueth ſpoken, and the ends of both are conuertible,
ſince that Bonum, verum, & ens conuertuntur, according as
the Philoſopher ſaith.The differēce between the truth, & a lye. All that which is true, is good: and all that
which is good, is true: then that which is a lye, hath neither beeing,
nor goodneſſe, but onely may be tearmed, a priuation of beeing, of
trueth, and of goodneſſe.Pſal. 5. 6. When Dauid ſaith; Omnis homo mendax, he
meanes, that man is nothing as of himſelfe, and into nothing ſhall he
returne, without the onely truth, God himſelfe. As (to the ſame effect)
he ſpeaketh in another place:Pſal. 38. 8. 
                     Veruntamen vniuerſa vanitas omnis
homo viuens: Surely man in his beſt eſtate is altogether vanity, which
is euen as much, as when he ſaith; Omnis homo mendax.
                  
                  And the more that we conſider a man in this manner,How to conſider man, as he is of himſelfe, and as he is of God. the more we
ſhall find him to be a lyar and nothing, be he a ſtill fitter, a trauailer,
or how elſe to be comprehended: but conſidering him as partaking
with the trueth it ſelfe, and his infinite goodneſſe and eſſence, wee
ſhall find him to be true, good, and that he hath a perfect beeing.
Omnis homo mendax,
                     Marcilius Ficinus vpon Plato. 
                     is likewiſe as much to ſay (according to Marcilius
Ficinus vpō 
                     Plato) that a man knowes much more by negation, then

by affirmatiō, becauſe lying is a negation of the truth: ſo, in Dauids ſaying,
Euery man is a lyar, importeth, that ſo far as a mans own knowledge
extēdeth,Of mans knowledge, & how far it extendeth. he knows more by denying, thē by affirming. I know
that God is not a ſtone, wood, not a ſtar, and yet I know not directly
what he is. I know that the ſoule is not a body, nor mortal, but yet cā
                     not
ſo readily tell what it is indeede.
                  
                     Heereto will I ioyne another deſcription, which perhappes may
better fit you, becauſe it commeth from an Angell-like doctor, and
very hetoycall in all his doctrine,
                     The opinion of a learned Father in compariſon of the trueth. 
                     and thus it is. The truth (ſayth hee)
importeth a certaine adequation or leuelling of a thing with the vnderſtanding:
but things do appeare one way to our apprehenſion, and quite
contrarie to the diuine intelligence, becauſe that our vnderſtanding
taketh his cognition of the thing: therefore the being of the thing, is the
cauſe and meaſure of the truth thereof.By things that are, or are not the trueth is ſooneſt diſcerned. 
                     Hereupon ſayd the Philoſopher,
in his firſt booke called Periermenia, and the Chapter treating
de oratione: Exeo quod res eſt, & non eſt, oratio dicitur vera, vel
falſa. Then thus it commeth to paſſe, that our intelligence may bee
true and falſe, according to the thing equalled, or not equalled.
                  But becauſe that which may be, and not be, hath neede of another
ſuperiour agent, to the end it may bee, and without which it remaineth
in it ſelfe,Similie of the Ayre, and our vnderſtāding. as nothing; as the Ayre without light, ſhould
remayne alwayes darke: Euen ſo fares it with our vnderſtanding,
except it bee illumined by the trueth it ſelfe, it continueth
euermore (euen in his very beſt condition) in lying. Therefore (herehence)
it may well be ſayd, that for ſo much how-euer▪ as is to be expected
of man in himſelfe, euery one is a lyer, according to his
owne beſt intelligence: and he is only true in no more, then he partaketh
with the onely cheefe trueth.Pſal. 33. 3. We ought to ſay with Dauid to
God, Emitte lucem tuam, & veritatem tuam, for he is the truth it ſelfe,
and the diuine intelligence is the cauſe & direction of things: becauſe
of himſelfe he is indeficiently true,How any thing is truly ſaid to be true. and euery thing (in ſo much) is ſaid
to bee true, by how much, it is conformed to the diuine vnderſtanding.
                  In like manner, if we take the trueth from part of a thing, man of
himſelfe hath not the trueth, becauſe of his owne nature he becommeth
nothing,Man (of his owne nature) becommeth nothing. euen as of nothing hee was created; But the diuine
nature onely hath of it ſelfe the trueth, which neyther is of nothing,
nor can be conuerted into nothing. Your honour then, and euerie
man elſe, is a lyer, as of himſelfe; but yet doe ſpeake the trueth, in ſo

much, as you or they partake of the onelye trueth. Hee that will
ſpeake then,The eternall wiſedome, the beſt ſchoelemaſter in ſpeaking. muſt firſt learne, and let him haue no maſter but the
eternall wiſedome, the woorde, the perfecte trueth, to the end
hee become not woorthye of reprehenſion: tghen ſhall our diſcourſing
neuer breake ſilence, becauſe it will bee the eternall
worde that ſpeaketh, and not wee our ſelues: our ſpeaking
will be but miniſterially, not originally, inſtrumentally, not caſually.
Non enim vos eſtis qui loquimini,
                     Math. 10. 20. 
                     ſed ſpiritus patris veſtri qui loquitur
in vobis: For it is not you that speake, but the spirit of your father which
ſpeaketh in you.
                  
                  Saint Stephen ſpake in ſuch māner as none could conuince him,Example of S. Stephens ſpeaking to many Natiōs. in
diſputing among ſo many ſects of the Cilicians, Alexandreans, Cyrenaicans,
and Aſians: but in what ſorte? Non poterant reſiſtere ſapientiae,
                     Act. 6. 10.
                     & Spiritui qui loquebatur: They were not able to reſiſt the wiſedome
and the Spirit, by which he ſpake. I do not ſay, that they could not reſiſt
Stephen in himſelfe, but the wiſedome and Spirit whereby Stephen
ſpake. Non poterant reſiſtere ſapientiae & Spiritui qui loquebatur.
For Stephen ſaid nothing of himſelfe,S. Stephen ſpake nothing of himſelfe, but the holy Ghoſt ſpake by him. but the holy Spirite did ſpeake
by the mouth of Stephen, and other of the Prophets: and albeit ſome
of them were ſinfull men, yet they ſpake not accordingly, neither did
they ſo vnderſtand and themſelues, becauſe they ſpake not, but the diuine
word; Non enim vos eſtis qui loquimini, ſed Spiritus Patris veſtri, qui
loquitur in vobis.
                     Mat. 10. 20.
                  
                  
                     Doe you thinke,
                     Example of Caiphas the high prieſt. 
                     that the high prieſt Caiphas vnderſtood himſelfe,
when (in Councell) he foretold of Chriſt: Expedit vt vnus moriatur
homo pro populo, ne tota gens pereat: It is neceſſary that one man dy for
the people,Iohn 18. 14. and not that they al ſhould periſh? Aſſuredly no; Non enim ſciebat
quid diceret,Caiphas ſpake as Balaams Aſſe did. 
                     but ſpake euen as Balaams Aſſe did, that vnderſtood
not him ſelfe.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  
                     And did Balaam vnderſtand him ſelfe,
                     Example of Balaam. 
                     or his own Prophecie,
when he foretold of Chriſt: Orietur Stella ex Iacob, & conſurget
virga de Iſrael?Numb. 24. 17. There ſhall come a ſtar of Iacob, and a ſcepter ſhall
ariſe of Iſraell, &c.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     Aſſuredly,
                     Of the man that feareth the Lord. 
                     I thinke he vnderſtood not his prophecie,
but ſpake accordingly as his Aſſe did. The man that feareth the
Lord, ſayth Salomon: In medio eccleſiae aperiet os cius, & implebit cum
Dominus Spiritu ſapientiae & intellectus,Eccle. 15. 5. & ſtola gloriae veſtret illum:
In the mids of the congregation ſhall he open his mouth, with the
Spirit of wiſedome and vnderſtanding ſhall be fill him, a
                        •••
                     loathe
him with the garment of glory. Heereuppon was it that God

ſayd to Dauid Dilata os tuum,Pſal. 41. 10. & implebo illud: Open thy mouth wide,
and I will fill it.Luke 21. 15. 
                     And Chriſt himſelfe ſayd to his diſciples: Ego dabo
vobis os & ſapientiam, cui non pot erunt reſiſtere & contradicere omnes
aduerſarij veſtri: I will giue you a mouth and wiſedome, where againſt
all your aduerſaries ſhall not be able to speake nor reſiſt.
                  When we tell a lye,When we tell a lye, we break ſilence, as 
                           〈◊〉
                         Caiphas did. becauſe, Ex propriis loquimur, we breake ſilence,
as Caiphas did, when hee ſayde of our Sauiour: Blaſphemauit:
quid adhuc egemus teſtibus? Vos audiſtis blaſphemiam. Reus eſt
mortis:
                     Mat. 26. 65. 66. 
                     He hath blasphomed, what haue we any more neede of witneſſes?
now you haue heard his blasphemie. He is worthie to die. At
this very inſtant he brake ſilence, becauſe he ſpake of himſelfe, and
told a great lye, and ſpake much euil, therefore, Omnis homo mendax.
Silence, ſilence, O man, ſince thou art like an infant, that knowes not
how to ſpeake,Man is like an Infant, that knowes not how to ſpeake. but onely mutter and mumble: therefore hold thy
peace, for feare of being diſgraced, ſuffer God to ſpeake, liſten then,
& attend well what he ſaith vnto thee, and that is ſufficient: Te decet
ſilentium Deus.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Seeing then that man hath ſuch need to ſpeake with
much diſcretion, ſeeing alſo he ought not to breake ſilence, and in
regarde ſometimes hee ſpeakes,Silence broken, and yet not broken by ſpeaking. yet ſilence is not broken, and otherwhiles
hee ſpeakes, and then it is broken: I haue a deſire
to knowe, who was the firſt that euer brake ſilence in the
world?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     In heauen, it was Lucifer, on earth, it was Eua. God
ſpake with his omnipotent voyce,
                     Who were the firſt that euer brake ſilence, both in heauē and earth. 
                     and the firſt that offended his
maieſtie with breache of ſilence, after he had vttered, Dixit, &
facta ſunt: was Lucifer, when, with preſumptuous ſpeeches, ſtanding
in the emperiall place, and ſeeing himſelfe indued with excellent
giftes,
                     Eſay. 14. 13. 14. 
                     he ſayde. In Coelum aſcendam, ſuper aſtra Dei exaltabo
ſolium meum, ſedebo in monte teſtamenti, in lateribus Aquilonis. Aſcendam
ſuper altitudinem nubium, ſimilis ero Altiſſimo. I will aſcend into
heauen, and exalt my throane, aboue beſide the ſtars of God: I will ſit
alſo vpon the mount of the congregation, in the ſides of the North. I will
aſcend aboue the height of the clowdes,Lucifers reward for his proude breach of ſilence. and I will be like the moſt high.
But as a iuſt puniſhment to ſuch pride, he was caſt headlong from the
imperiall ſeate, into the infernall bottomleſſe depth. Veruntamen ad
infernum detraberis,Eſay. 14. 15. in profundum laci: But thou ſhalt be brought
downe to the graue, to the ſides of the pit, with infinite ignominies, as
Eſay in a long ſtile declareth. And Saint Iohn likewiſe in the Apocalips:
                     Apoc. 12. 9.
Proiectus eſt Draco ille magnus ſerpens antiquus, qui vocatur Diabolus:

And the great Dragon, that old Serpent, called the Deuill, and
Satan was caſt out.
                  
                     The ſecond that brake ſilence,
                     Gen. 3. 2. 3. 
                     but on earth, was Eua, when ſhe ſaid
to the Serpent:
                     How our mother Euc became the ſecond breaker of ſilence. Defructu lignorum que ſunt in paradiſo veſcimur: De
fructu vero ligni quod eſt in medio Paradiſi praecepit nobis Deus, ne comederemus
& ne tangeremus illud: We eate of the fruit of the trees of
the garden: But of the fruit of the tree which is in the mids of the garden
God hath ſaid, you ſhall not eate of it, neither ſhall you touch it; Perceiue
ye how mightily he miſſayed, and with what importunity he ſpake?
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Oh, how much ouer-licentiouſly, and with what indiſcretion
he ſpake?Silence in her had bin much better. She might yet haue held her peace, and not broken
ſilence, or if ſhe would needs ſpeake, at leaſt haue auoyded lying: for
God neuer cōmanded that they ſhould not touch the tree. He commanded
them indeed,Of one commandement ſhe made two. not to eate thereof: but this little command ſeemed
ſo ſtange to them, that being but one, yet ſhe would needs make
two of it, as already you haue ſaid before: Mentita eſt iniquitas ſibi.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  If ſhe had rehearſed only that which God had commā
                     ded
them, ſhe had not broken ſilēce at all; becauſe there was nothing
that he had ſpoken, but it was in compaſſe of the diuine word, which
euermore we ought to haue in our mouthes,She brake not ſilence, till ſhe ſpake of her ſelfe. for Spiritus & vita ſunt.
But when ſhe ſpake of her ſelfe, ſhe ſpake very euill, & brake ſilence,
whereupon ſhe was puniſhed very ſeuerely.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  She would needs talke, yet knew not with whom ſhe
talked, not conſidering,The woman knew not with whom ſhe talked. that the very firſt time of her talking, it was
with a lyer, with a three-mouth'd tongue, that neuer ſpake truely: the
father of lying, the inuenter of lyes, the accuſer of our brethren: Accuſator
fratrum noſtrorum,
                     Apoc. 12. 10. 
                     qui accuſabat illos ante conspectum Dei
noſtri die ac nocte: The accuſer of our brethren is caſt downe, which accuſed
them before our God day and night.
                  
                  And becauſe he had too long a tongue,The Deuill had too long a tongue. he was throwne foorth of
the glorious Palace of heauen, euen, Quando factum eſt praelium magnum
in Caelo: when there was a great battell fought in heauen.
                     Apoc. 12. 7. And hee
brake ſilence,Eſay. 14. 14. and ſaid in proude words: ponam ſedem meam ad Aquilonem,
ero ſimilis Altiſſimo. And with the rumour of the weapons:
Dum Draco committeret bellum cum Michaele Archangelo, & Draco
pugnabat, & Angeli eius.
                     Apoc. 12. 7. 
                     And there was a battell in heauen with
Michaell the Archangell, and the Dragon fought and his Angels. She
did not note his variable and vnuſed habit, his diſſembled ſpeeche,
with ſo many impertinent pratlings, and all but lyes?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  She made more account of a ianglers words, couered

with a little ſweet taſte of honor,The woman couetous of honor. wearie of their preſent eſtate, and
coueting to be Gods and immortall, then of the infallible trueth of
God.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  And yet ſhee might very well haue diſcerned by his
curious queſtionings, an apparant ſigne of his malice, and that his
wordes were full of trecherie, fraude and diſſimulation. The woman
might haue ſaid to the Serpent:How the woman might haue anſwered the Serpent. What haſt thou to do, to know
the occaſion of the diuine commandement? Is he not God, and my
Lord? all that he doth, is it not iuſt? Is it not in him to command, and
is it not our duty to obey?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Behold, how much the cuſtody of the tongue importeth:
if our firſt Parents had not erred, we ſhoulde neuer haue falne
into ſo many intricate labyrinthes.
               
               Finis Cap. 5.
            
            
               
                  The Argument.
                  Declaring, what cuſtodie we ought to haue of our tongue, to auoide errour
in our speaking. Of the ſeuerall wayes, where by the tongue paſſeth,
when we talke: which although they be foure in number, yet one
onely guarde is ſufficient for them all.
               
               Chap. 6.
               
                  
                     CLAVDIO.
                  A very ſingular document
doth the kingly Prophet Dauid
giue vs,King Dauids leſſon, for cuſtody of the tongue. vppon the cuſtodye of the
tongue, and it is in his thirtie eighth
Pſalme: Dixi, cuſtodiam vias meas, vt

                           •
                        on delinquam in lingua mea,
                     Pſal. 38. 1. 2. 
                     Poſui ori
neo cuſtodiam, dum conſiſt eretpeccator
aduerſum me: I ſaid, I will take
heed to my wayes, that I ſinne not with
my tongue. I wil keep my mouth bridled,
while the wicked is in my ſight. Euē
                     
as if he had intēded to ſay; I will haue a ſpeciall reſpect of my life, that
I fall not into error by my tongue, there being ſo many wayes of fayling
therby.An applicatiō to the Prophets words. Therefore haue I ſet a good guard vppon my mouth, the
wicked ſtanding alwayes ready againſt me, to noate, if I ſpeake any
thing which I ought not.Pſal. 38. 3. Wherefore, to preuent fayling: Obmutui, &
humiliatus ſum, & ſilui à bonis, &c: I was dumb & ſpake nothing, I kept
ſilence, euen from good, &c.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  What wayes are thoſe, which make ſuch neceſſitie of
beeing well kept by vs,His demaund cōcerning the meaning of the Prophets ſpeeches. to preſerue the tongue from erring in talking?
what hath the tongue to do with wayes? Is there any walking
for the tongue? By the way we go, and by the tongue we ſpeake: by
the one we haue the vſe of our feet, by the other we declare the conceite
of the minde, and the thoughts of the hart. What may Dauids
ſaying ſignifie: I will take heed to my wayes, that I ſin not with my
tongue. Me thinkes he ſhould rather haue ſayd, I wil take heed to my
wayes, that is, I will conſider, which is the good way, to the end my
feete fayle not in going; or I ſtray from the right path wherein I
ought to walke: or that I ſtumble againſt ſome ſtone or ſtumpe; or
vnaduiſedly fal into ſome pit. But, ſaying I wil take heed to my wayes
becauſe my tongue ſhall not erre: I know not what wayes thoſe
ſhould be.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  I anſwer,An anſwere to the demaund by a familiar Similie. that as the feet goes by many & ſundry waies,
now vpon plaines, then down in vallies, now on ſteep mountaines,
then by hūble hillocks & flowring meadows, now this way now that
way: Euen ſo doth the tongue go by ſundry wayes, which ought very
wel to be lookt vnto,The fowre ſū
                        dry wayes of paſſage, for the tongue in ſpeaking. to the end the tongue erre not. And very cōpendiouſly
are they reduced into four cheef or principall ways, to wit, the
way of the vnderſtāding; the way of the wil: the way of the power iraſcible,
& the way of the power concupiſcible. It behooueth that theſe
wayes ſhould be direct, cleane, voyd of all filth of error, & purged frō
all duſt of humane ſpotted affections▪ if the tongue, & the words iſſuing
from it, ſhall come forth free from the ſtayne of error.
                  And firſt of all,1. The way of the vnderſtā
                        ding; & how to purge it. it is needfull for the vnderſtanding way, to be purged
of al faults, becauſe if the vnderſtanding falter not in his conceit,
by apprehending wrong & falſly: then the tōgue cānot fayle (by him)
in pronoūcing his words, for the tōgue is the embaſſador of the vnderſtanding.
Hence is it, that the diuine vnderſtanding, beeing
vncapable of tranſgreſſion in his conceite,Pſal. 119. 86. can likewiſe commit
no ſcape at all in deliuerie of his wordes, therefore Dauid
ſayd: Omnia mandata tua veritas: All thy commandements are true.
                     
Moreuer,Of the bleſſed and celeſtiall Spirits, & how they erre not. the celeſtiall ſpirits and bleſſed comprehenders, becauſe
they are vnited in an ineffable manner with the eternal truth of god:
by cōtinual ſplendor of the bleſſed light of glory, they cannot erre at
all in their conceits, and therfore much leſſe in their words. And ſo is
euery vnderſtanding illumined, by the diuine light internally in inuiſible
manner, as (by the work of the holy ghoſt) the Apoſtles were illumined,
and many other Saints: by meanes wherof, the whole world
became enlightned,Pſal. 76. 4. 5. according as Dauid (in a very high ſtile) foretold.
Illuminans tu mirabiliter à montibus aeternis, turbati ſunt omnes inſipientes
corde, &c. Vpon the which place it is now no time to philoſophize.
                  Let it ſuffice then,When the intellectuall way is not agreeable to the truth, the tongue erreth that when the intellectuall way is not right,
and conformable to the eſpeciall trueth: the tongue then erreth, and
violently breakes foorth into lyes, as Lucifer did, who tolde a lye of
God, ſaying to our firſt parentes; Nequaquam moriemini: Or into
error of faith,Gen. 3. 4. as Caine did, who was the firſt heretique, & denied the
diuine mercy:Caine the firſt Heretique. Or into blaſphemy & murmuring, as many ſinners haue
done, and yet doe.
                  Secondarily,2. The way of the will, and how to clenſe it. we ought to clenſe the way of the will, to keepe the
tongue from offending, becauſe the will is that which commandeth
the power of our ſoule, according as the vnderſtanding firſt proponeth.
Therefore, leaſt the tongue ſhould ſtumble by this way, wee
ought to purge it of inordinate deſires, and of thoſe appetites gouerned
by pride, by thoſe of vaine glory, of ambition, auarice and enuie:
to the end the tongue may not ſpeake proudely, as Lucifer did, or
vaingloriouſly,Very pertinēt Examples. as Antiochus did, or ambitiouſly, as Nebuchadnezzar
did, or couetouſly, as Iudas Iſcar
                           •
                        ot did, or enuiouſly, as Caiphas
did.
                  This way of the will,The way of the will, is to be kept by the guarde of reaſon. is to be kept with the guarde of reaſon: Dixi
cuſtodiam vias meas. Our will ſometimes is blind, and therefore all
that we would, cannot be good and iuſt. As the ſentence of the iudge
cannot be ſayd to be good, becauſe hee hath giuen it after his owne
pleaſure:Similie, and the alluſion thereof. but as it is giuen according to the order of iuſtice. So then,
that the will may not wander, and (by his example) the tongue ſtray
after;The neceſſitie of reaſon. of neceſſitie it muſt be accompanied with reaſon. For this cauſe
was it, that God (at firſt) gaue vs, not onely the freedome of the will,
but alſo gaue reaſon therewithall, to ratifye and confirme our
will.
                  Wherein Gods gift may not much amiſſe be compared to the familiar
example of a king,The reaſon, why God at the firſt gaue man free will, with an excellent compariſon, worth the obſeruance. who giuing the gouernment of a prouince,

to a noble perſonage of his Court, who, becauſe he hath no knowledge
in the lawes (as oftentimes in falles out, that many haue not)
grants him the aſſiſtance of skilfull Lawyers, by whoſe meanes the
Prouince may be ſwayed according to the lawes. So in the kingdom
of our ſoule,Alluſion of the compariſon, in the kingdome of the ſoule. God gaue the will, the authority of rule: but becauſe it is
ſometimes blind, and ſuffers it ſelfe to be deceiued by her proper appetites,
he deputed reaſon for her aſſiſtance, wherby the ſoules kingdome
became better gouerned, then when it wanted the aſſociation
of reaſon.
                  But in God it is not ſo,The differēce in God. becauſe, whatſoeuer he willeth, is iuſt, and to
make any thing whatſoeuer iuſt, his diuine will is onely ſufficient, as
being moſt direct, moſt firme and infallible. Therfore the holy Apoſtle
ſayd:Epheſ. 2. 11. 
                     Deus operatur omnia ſecundum conſilium voluntatis ſnae. God
worketh all things after the counſell of his own will. What care then we
ought to haue, for this way of the will, be iudge your ſelfe, in regard
it is ſo exceeding fallacious, and ſooner falne in, then we are aware
of.
                  Thirdly,3. The way of the power concupiſcible, or luſting, and purgatiō therto belonging. with all heed and diligence, we muſt regard the way concupiſcible,
cleering it from the filth of carnall corruptions, of corporal
delectations, and diſhoneſting of the ſenſes: for otherwiſe, the
tongue will ſtagger vppon a thouſand vile ſpeeches, ſhameleſſe repetitions,
and bee too free in prophane and vnhoneſt examples.
                  Fourthly,4. The way of the power inaſcible, of greefe or anguiſh, and the good guardance thereof. we muſt ſet a good guarde on the way of the power iraſcible:
which, to the end it may be a good, direct & ſmoothe faire way,
we ought to clenſe it from all hatred, rancour, euil will and anger: otherwiſe,
the tongue walking this ready and ouer-tractable way, will
eaſily ſtumble vpon raſh ſpeeches of reuēge, deliuering many imprecations,
iniuries, villanies, blaſphemies, and (like an vntamed horſe) fal
downe vpon diuers rubs of infernall vices, ſpeaking idlely and fooliſhly,
without any regard, eyther of Gods honour, the honeſt fame of
our neighbour, or our owne priuate good: whereupon the wiſe man
ſayd,The mouth of a foole. 
                     The mouth of a foole is like vnto an earthen veſſell, wherein follie
boyleth, as if it were water.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  It is moſt certaine:Prouer. 15. 2. 
                     Os fatuorum ebullit ſtulitiam, The
mouth of a foole babbleth out fooliſhneſſe.
                     The mouthes of angry men, like vnto a pot boyling on the fire. And therefore angry men
haue their mouthes like a pot, which boyling vppon the fire, ouerfloweth
the water, conſuming what was contained in it, by diſperſing
it round about it, and ſo quencheth out the fire, with ſuch goodneſſe
or fatneſſe as ſwimmed vpon the top of it. And laſt of all, remaining

quite empty, by the great power of heat (exhaled from the flaming
fire) breaketh it ſelfe to many pieces.
                  Euen ſo the angry man,Alluſion of the compariſon, to the angry man. his hart being once heated with diſdaine,
deliuereth foorth from his mouth, fooliſh words of blaſphemies, of
calumnies, of infamies, and of high diſhonor: whereby, according as
the fire burneth, he doth ſcandalize the preſent, backbite the abſent,
quencheth the light of ſenſe with the infernall water of rage, and ſo
putteth out quite the bright fire of reaſon: and being thus blinded or
become quite emptie,Cato his ſaying of the angry man. he knowes not what he doeth, according to
the ſaying of Cato. Impedit ira animū, ne poſſit cernere verū. And being
thus ouer-hot, prouoked on ſtill by cōtinual boiling, the goodneſſe of
diuine grace ouerfloweth from him, and being once emptied of that,
he cracks in pieces preſently, which made the wiſe man ſay; That the
hart of a fooliſh man is like a broken veſſel,
                     Eccle. 27. 
                     that cānot containe the matter
of grace in it: Cor Fatui quaſi vas confractum.
                  
                  If we ſet but a little pipkin to the fire, euery ſmall blaze of fire enuironing
it,Two ſingular Similies. ſufficeth to fetch forth al the water cōtained in it: but with
a great pot it is not ſo. As alſo a little water-brooke, by euery ſudden
ſhowre it is filled and ouerfloweth, ſtreaming away quite out of his
bed: the like cannot be ſeene in a maine great Riuer, for if it ariſe out
of his vſuall reſt,Alluſion of the Similies, to the hart of man. it prooueth to do an infinite dammage. Our hart is
ſo narrowly limited that (by euery little diſtaſte) we are ſtrangely altered,
and being in this teaſty tetchy way, preſently we let flye foorth
much vnſeemelines.The differēce in God. But with God it is not ſo, for he is ſo infinite and
ſpatious, as (ouer-readily) he is not drawne to be angry with vs, wherfore
it it written of him:Exod. 34. 6. 
                     Dominator Domine Deus, miſericors & clemens,
patiens & multae miſerationis: The Lord God is ſtrong, mercifull
and gratious, ſlow to anger, and aboundant in goodneſſe & truth.
                  
                  There be ſome kind of angry men,The excuſe of ſome kind of angry men. who, if they be reprooued for
their faultes, will excuſe themſelues, ſaying. It is very true, that I am
cholerike, and eaſily induced to diſdaine, and do ſpeake very iniuriouſly
in my furie: but, quickly I am appeaſed, and ſoone caſt off
all rage; ſo, by ſeeming worthie of this excuſe, they perſwade themſelues,
not to bee the worſt ſort of men, though vſe makes a habite,
Sentence. and their violence (at length) growes to bee as greate as any others.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  In my iudgement,One ſmall woūd as ſufficient to take away life, as many together. this anſwere of theirs is very ridiculous:
becauſe, a man as ſoone dyeth by one ſmall mortal wound, as by
the receite of a thouſand: for one ſtroake that pearceth ſoundly, is
ſufficient to kill a man. It importeth as much, that any thing

may bee as ſuddenly deuoured in a fierce flaming fire, as if a longer
time it lyeth (to like purpoſe) in a ſofter fire,Similie. for it ſufficeth,
that it is burnte: but God bleſſe vs all from ſuch a
tongue.
                  Chriſt ſayd to his diſciples, that the faithful, (among the other miracles
that they ſhoulde accompliſh and worke in the primitiue
Church,) one ſhould be this; That if they drunke of any poyſonous or
mortiferous liquor, yet they ſhould thereby receiue no harme. Et ſi mortiferum
quid biberint, non eis nocebit.
                     A ſingular expoſition vpon the words of Chriſt. Vpon which words ſpake that
golden mouth: If thou ſhalt be defamed by a venemous tongue, vilified,
iniuried, and yet art not therby prouoked to reuenge: it is a ſigne of great
faith. Let vs then take good heed to this dangerous way, & if we fall
not therby, our cariage will be the more commendable.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     As the terreſtriall vapours do not aſcend to the Moons
heauen:
                     Similie and Alluſion. 
                     euen ſo iniuries and angers doe not ariſe into the generous
breaſt of the wiſe.
                     Marcilius Ficinus of two kinds of furies and follies. Marſilius Ficinus ſaith; That furies and follies are of
two kinds. One is bred in the braine, and they that endure this fury, are
called fobles. The other receiueth life from the hart, and they that
hàue this diſeaſe, are tearmed implacable angrye men: but in
mine opinion, this ſeconde infirmitie is farre worſe then the
firſt.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Seneca telles vs, in the booke which he wrote of anger,
That anger is not good for any vertuous thing,Seneca his iudgement of anger. much leſſe then doth it
incite to any couragious dispoſition, becauſe neuer can any vice be helpful
to vertue. And this doctrine he deliuered againſt certain men, who
excuſed themſelues, that (without anger) they could not do any magnanimous
act:
                     Seneca, his anſwer to ſuch as could do no valiāt act, but in anger. 
                     whereto Seneca anſwered. That anger is a very perillous
thing, and ſuch things as be perillous, are better to be kept farre
off, then neere at hand: for more eaſily is reſiſtance made in the birth
or beginning, then we can tell how to gouerne it, beeing once gotten
vpon vs.Ariſtotle concerning anger▪
                      Ariſtotle affirmeth, That anger is good, yet not good to be as
a leader, but as a Souldier, for ſo much the leſſe then ſhal it work in cruelty.
Pſal. 4. 5. 
                     And I thinke, this is that kinde of anger, which Dauid ſpake
of, when he ſaid: Iraſcimini, & nolite peccare: Be angry, but ſin
not.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  And Seneca,
                     Seneca yo
                           •
                         further cōcerning Anger. as anſwering Ariſtotle, ſaith, That
if anger be obedient to reaſon, it ought not to be called anger but by
ſome other name. And afterwarde; If anger ſhall be reckoned as
a good Souldiour, then will he be obedient to counſell. Gods will
is not, that reaſon ſhould take any help of ſin. Therfore ſaith Seneca,

anger can neuer be good, either little or much. And if Ariſtotle
woulde haue anger to animate men to the battaile: why then we
may maintayne drunkenneſſe to bee profitable,Of drunkenneſſe. for it maketh men
bolde, furious and ſpleenefull, and boldneſſe maketh men verye
forward. Therfore I thinke, that Seneca, being growne into anger againſt
his ſeruant, would not then chaſtice him, but only ſayd: Caederem
ſi non iraſcerer:
                     Seneca would not ſmite his ſeruant in anger. 
                     I would ſmite thee, if I were not in anger, as
fearing, that choller ſhoulde take away the light of reaſon from
him.
                  Diogenes likewiſe, being ſpit in the face, & in the publique market
place,
                     Example of Diogenes his anſwere to one that did ſpit in his face 
                     by a very inſolēt young man, ſayd to the ſaucy youth. Non quidem
iraſcor, ſed dubito an iraſci oporteat: Truely (young man) I am not
angry at this bold part of thine, but I ſtand thinking with my ſelfe, whether
I ought to be angry or no, becauſe thou haſt done but like a foole, &
I ought to cary my ſelfe as becomes a wiſe man.
                  
                     Cato handling a cauſe in the Senate houſe againſt Lentulus,
                     Example of Cato, vpon the abuſe of Lentulus to him. 
                     Lentulus
growing into rage againſt him, prepared a mouthfull of ſpittle,
and ſpat it ful in the midſt of his forehead. Wherewith Cato was not
mooued any iot to anger, but only ſayd: Now will I ſay Lentulus, that
ſuch men are deceiued, as ſhall ſay that thou haſt not a mouth, & matter
foule enough in it.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Oh what examples do liue, of rare patience and great
wiſedome, which touch (to the very quick) our vniuſt haſtineſſe. He
that of pure gold formeth a faire kind of money,A worthy compariſon, with the Alluſion therof. he doth no deed at al
of wonder: but he that from a maſſie log of Lead, can draw a golden
piece of money, it is an act of far greater vertue. The like may be ſaide
of thoſe gentile ſpirits, which, from men ſo beaſtly and full of anger,
could declare in themſelues ſuch noble vertues, all which was nothing
elſe, but good knowledge, in well looking to the way of the
power iraſcible.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  The only beſt meanes,Example of Ioſuah his taking the city of Hai. to keepe our ſelues vntoucht
of this vice of anger, is to flye from it by wiſedome, in the ſame manner
of flight as Ioſuah obſerued, in taking the city of Hai. For if we
will ouercome the paſſionate & angry,Ioſu. 8. wee muſt take our flight, and
keep vs far enough off from them. Dauid won honor to himſelf, in flying
from Abſolon,
                     Example of Dauids flight from Abſolon, and Shemei. and reputed it as his glory, not to take reuenge on
Shemei, but referred all ſuch power to the Lord, ſaying with a
verye cheerefull countenaunce: Tu autem Domine ſuſceptor
meus es, gloria mea, & exaltans caeput meum, &c. Tu percuſſiſti
omnes aduerſantes mihi ſine cauſa,
                     Pſal. 3. 3. 7. 8. 
                     dentes peccatorum contriuiſti.

Dominus eſt ſalus, &c. Thou O Lord art a buckler for me, my glory,
and the lifter vp of my head, &c. Thou haſt ſmitten all mine enemies,
(without cauſe) vppon the cheek bone,
                     Dauids cariage of himſelf in his anger. 
                     thou haſt broken the teeth of the
wicked Saluation belongeth vnto the Lorde, &c. And the ſelfe ſame
royall Prophet, when (with a full tide of furie) he was aſſalted; he preſently
made his recourſe to ſilence, for feare of falling, as knowing,
that when a man ſpeaks diſorderly,Pſal. 76. 4. he is angry: Turbatus ſum, & non
ſum loquutus.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  But Hannibal did far otherwiſe,Example of Hannibal, and of another Tyrant recorded by Seneca for when he ſaw a ditch
filled with the bloud of men, he ſayd: Oh what a noble spectacle is this?
And, of another Tyrant, Seneca telleth vs in his book of anger, & the
fift chapter, who hauing in one day ſlaine thirty men, very proudly he
walked vpon the dead carkaſſes, and ſpeaking very arrogantly in his
owne language, beeing the Greeke, ſayde: Oh what a thing is
rule?
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  But Dauid beeing a moſt hardie knight, and an
vnconquerable king, becauſe he would not fall into ſuch a brutiſh
ſinne,Pſal▪ 38. 2. ſet a ſure watch vpon his mouth: Poſui ori meo cuſtodiam.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  But if the tongue haue theſe foure wayes,For many waies of offending, there ought to be as many of preuenting. according as
hath been already declared, namely, of the vnderſtanding, of the wil,
the way of the powre concupiſcible, & the way of the powre iraſcible:
why then, (in reaſon) the guardes or defences for theſe wayes,
ought likewiſe to be foure, otherwiſe, how can one only defēce ſerue
for ſo many wayes?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Let me tel you, that theſe fowre wayes, albeit they
are (among themſelues) diuers, neuertheleſſe they are all confined to
one place onely,Similie of many places ſorting to one meeting, with the Alluſion. which is the mouth, the manſion of the tongue. Haue
you neuer ſeene, that for paſſage to one place there haue been fundry
wayes, which haue met altogether in one concluſion? Euen ſo theſe
fowre wayes are limited to one mouth, for which, one good guarde
will be ſufficient to keepe it. Poſui ori meo cuſtodiam. And this is no
other then wiſedome, or, as (we may otherwiſe tearme it) diſcretion,
which together,Of Euſtochia, Eubillia, and Sineſi in their ſeuerall powers for inſtruction of ſpeech. with Euſtochia, Eubillia and Sineſi, do make a moſt
ſecure guardance: the one coniecturing the beſt for vs, the ſecond
counſelling what wee haue to doe, and the laſt iudging all to bee
iuſt.
                  Is not this a moſt ſafe ſtability, inſtructing vs when we ought to
ſpeake, how much we ſhould ſpeake, and in what manner we are to
ſpeake? what words we may vſe, to whom we are to ſpeake them, and

the place beſeeming vs to ſpeake them in? what a more faithful keeper
can we deſire then this,Example of a skilfull maſter in Rhetorique. to preſerue vs from al idle wandring, and
freeing vs from all deceiuing? well may hee bee called a moſt skilfull
maſter in Rhetorique, that teacheth how to ſpeake aduiſedly, that is;
when we ought to ſpeake, and not alwaies; how much, and not ouer
immeaſurably abounding, or fooliſhly too little; in what manner, and
not irregularly: to whom, and not to euery perſon; where, and not in
euery place. They that in their ſpeeche doe not obſerue this rule, of
how much, when, the manner, to whom, & the place, ſhal find themſelues
neuer free from error.
                  Greate neede then is there of this guardian; eſpecially, Dum
conſiſteret peccator aduerſum me: while the wicked ſtand watching
vs, it behooues vs to ſpeake within compaſſe, and with diſcretion,
becauſe they lend a liſtening eare to vs.The deuill continually watcheth all our ſayings, and in what manner. Greate neede alſo hath wiſedome,
to ſtand as a true faithfull watchman, becauſe euermore the
deuill diligentlye waiteth to note all our imperfections: not,
whether wee ſpeake like Ciceronians, or no, but whether wee
breathe foorth into blaſphemies, murmurings, or euill ſpeakings.
                  If a man talke among his friends only,Similie. they will eaſily beare with
any defect whatſoeuer: but being amidſt his enemies, eſpecially ſuch
a one as the deuill is, it behooues him to weigh euery word: Dum
conſiſteret peccator.
                     Example of the iuſt mans hearing vs, and his interpretation of our ſpeeches. if the iuſt man only heare him, his watchman ſtil
is in his company, and is as vigilant for him as him ſelfe. If he ſpeake
well, the iuſt man commends it; if euil, he excuſes it, or reprehends it
with charitie; if he ſpeake of a doubtfull matter, which may bee taken
both in good and euill ſort, the iuſt man conceiues it in the beſt
kind.
                  But the deuill,Of the deuill, and the wicked man his diſciple, and their interpretation of our words. and the wicked man his diſciple, they ſtand alway
to point our ſpeeches, interpreting them in the worſt ſenſe, and taking
all in euill part: If a man ſpeake grauely, and well; the deuill
ſayes, he doth it proudely, and to make himſelf eſteemed, as one learned
and wiſe. If he ſpeake of meane and eaſie matters: hee interprets
it preſently, that he is ignorant. If he giue any almes: he ſayes hee
does it in hypocriſie, and to be accounted an eſpeciall man. If he ſing
Pſalmes, as in prayſe of his Lord and maker: he implyes, that he hath
time to do nothing elſe. If he be at his prayers: hee ſayes, it is only
for ceremonie. If hee faſt, hee ſayes, it is becauſe he would bee
talkt of. If he eate but to ſuffice neceſſitie: he ſcandalls it foorthwith
to be immoderate gourmandize. If he ſpeake well: he blames

him for it. If he ſpeak ill, he murmurs at it▪ and thruſts in a great deale
of worſe matter then euer the other thought on. If there be any caſe,
of doubt in queſtion: he will be ſure to ſupport ſtil the badder ſide.
                  So that we ſee,How needfull a good watchman is for the mouth. how needful a good watchman is for the mouth, &
what counſell is to be taken with wiſedome, for whatſoeuer we ſay,
to the end, we fal not by our ſpeaking: otherwiſe, we ought to keepe
our ſelues ſilēt, becauſe he can ſet down nothing of ſilence, as otherwiſe
he may, of the words vnaduiſedly vttered by the tongue. The
Prophet Dauid, being filled with the holy Spirit, called to all men, &
charitably exhorted them in this manner:Pſal. 33. 12. 13. 
                     Quis eſt homo qui vult vitam,
diligit dies videre bonos? Prohibe linguam tuā a malo, & labia tua
ne loquantur dolum. What man is he that deſireth life, and loueth long
daies for to ſee good? keepe thy tongue from euil, and thy lips that they
ſpeake no guile.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  According to your counſell then, it is better for a man to
hold his peace,A man is not ſo good, but ſomthing may be defectiue in him. then oppoſe himſelfe to ſo manifeſt perill; in regard, a
man is neuer ſo good, but ſomething may be defectiue in one part or
other. As for the talkeatiue perſon, he deſires nothing more, then to
compaſſe occaſion of offending by his venemous tongue, and immediatly
he wil out with it, if there be neuer ſo little cauſe for opening
his mouth.
                  We read in the book of Kings,2. Reg. 22. 37. that in the laſt battaile which King
Achab had againſt the king of Siria,
                     Example of king Achab, being wounded from an vnknown hād. he was wounded with an arrow
from an vnknown hand: now, albeit Achab went very well armed into
the battayle, as was conuenient for a King to doe, yet did this
arrowe pearce him at an vnarmed part of his body, and he dyed of it.
In like manner, although a man be round about armed with ſingular
vertues,A notable Alluſion of the former place. yet, if he leaue neuer ſo little a place diſcouered & vnarmed,
wherat a man, of an euil diſpoſitiō, may let fly from the bow of a wicked
intention, the enuenomed wounding arrow of his vile ſpeaking
tongue, he will offend him to the death.
                  Of which kind of men Dauid ſayd:Pſal. 64. 3. 4. 
                     Exacuerunt vt gladium linguas
ſuas, intenderunt arcum rem amaram, vt ſagittent in occuliis immaculatum:
They haue whet their tongue like a ſword, and ſhot for their
arrowes bitter words: to ſhoot at the vpright in ſecret, they ſhoot at him
ſuddenly & feare not.
                     The euill intended to others, re
                           •
                        ods backwards on the wicked. Yet many times it comes to paſſe, that they
which vituperiouſly bēd the bowe of their lying tongue, and againſt
the innocent, doe come to the like themſelues, as they purpoſed againſt
others, and the venemous arrowe of infamy rebounds back at
their own breaſts.

Hence grewe the Prouerbe,Prouerbe. that a lye hath but ſhort legs, and hereupon
the woorthye Prophet ſayde in the fore-recited Pſalme:Pſal. 64. 8.
                     Sagittae paruulorum factae ſunt plagae eorum, & infirmatae ſunt
contra eos linguae eorum. They ſhall cauſe theyr owne tongue to
fall vppon them, and whoſoeuer ſhall ſee them, ſhall flye away.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  A moſt cleere example of what you haue ſayd▪ wee
reade in the booke of Chronicles,2. Chron. 32. 15. 16. 17. where is ſhewen, that the moſt
proude king Senacherib,
                     Example of king Senacherib, in his proude intent againſt Ezechias, and baſphemous ſpeeches againſt God. ſeeking to become Lorde of all Ezechias
kingdomes, and (to terrifie the people) ſent certaine Embaſſadors to
them, who (in his name) ſpake ſuch impertinent ſpeeches, and ſo full
of pride againſt the omnipotent God of Iſraell, as I beleeue the like
are not to be read in all the holy Scriptures.
                  
                     Therein they exalted ſo highly his ſtrength, blaſpheming the power
of the almightfull God: as they did not ſtick to affirme, that
God had not the ability to deliuer them out of the Aſſyrians hands.
Si enim nullus potuit Deus cunctarum gentium, at que regionum liberare
populum ſuum de manu mea, & de manu patrum meorum, conſequenter
nec Deus veſter poterit eruere vos de hac manumea. Sed &
alia multa locuti ſunt ſerui eius contra Dominum Deum, & contra
Ezechiam ſeruum eius. Epiſtolas quoque ſcripſit plenas blaſphemiae in
Dominum Deum Iſrael, & loquutus eſt aduerſus eum. For none of all
the Gods of any nation or kingdome, was able to deliuer his people out
of my hand, and out of the hand of my fathers: how much leſſe ſhall
your God deliuer you out of my hand? And his ſeruants ſpake yet more
againſt the Lord God, and againſt his ſeruant Ezechias. He wroté alſo
letters, blaspheming the Lord God of Iſraell, and speaking againſt
him.
                  For which,Gods iuſt reuenge on the pride and blaſphemie of Senacherſb. God, as a iuſt rewarder, without Senacheribs becomming
Lord of any one citie, or ſleying any perſon, ſent an Angell,
and ſo ſmote the very nerue of Senacheribs armie, that, as ſaith the
Prophet Eſay, (in whoſe time this ſlaughter was made) Egreſſus eſt
autem Augelus Domini, & percuſſit in caſtris Aſſyriorum centum octoginta
quinque millia:
                     Eſay. 37. 36. 37. 38. 
                     The Angell of the Lorde went out, and
ſmote in the campe of Aſhur, an hundred foureſcore and fiue thouſand.
                  
                  But that which rendereth more admiration,Senacherib murdered in the Temple, by his owne ſons. is, that Senacherib
returning in an infamous flight to Niniuie, and beeing ſacrificing in
the temple of his Idoll Neſroch: his owne ſonnes Adramelech and
Saraſar there murdered him. All this befell him, not for what hee did

in act, but becauſe his tongue talked ſo blaſphemouſly. If hee had
fought with his power, and kept ſilent his infamous tongue:Senacherib ouerthrowne by his owne lauiſh tongue. perhaps
his puniſhment had not bin ſo ſeuere, or his ſucceſſe againſt the people
of Iſraell had bin better, as it fell out with many other: Inf
                           •
                        rmata
eſt contrae eum lingua eius. By his thngue he loſt ſo mighty an armie,
which (by ſilence) hee might (perhappes) haue defended with his
hands.
                  The young Amalekite, who (with the tydings of king Sauls death)
brought the Crowne and bracelet to Dauid,
                     Example of the young Amalekite who had ſlain king Saul, by his owne report. confeſſing, how willingly,
and in meere pittie he had ſlayne Saul, who had before fa
                        •
                     ne vpon
his owne ſword, the armie of the enemy comming ſo faſt vpon him:
was iudged worthie of death by royall Dauid, not ſo much for what
he had done, as in regard of the words he ſpake. Sanguis tuus ſuper
caput tuum.
                     2. Sam. 2. 16. 
                     Os enim tuum loqutum eſt aduerſum te, dicens: Ego interfeci
Chriſtum Domini: Thy blood be vpon thine owne head, for thine
owne mouth hath teſtified againſt thee, ſaying: I haue ſlaine the Lords
annointed.
                  
                  As if Dauid would haue ſayd;The Authors interpretatiō of king Dauids ſpeeches to the Amalekite, for belying himſelfe. If thou do ſuffer the death, which already
thou haſt beſtowed vpon an other: doe not complaine of mee,
who (as a Iudge) commaunds death to be giuen thee. But exclaime
vpon thy ſelfe, that with thy ſworde haſt ſlaine the king of Iſraell,
whoſe very garment thou oughteſt not to haue touched. And ſince
with thy tongue thou makeſt vaunte of thy homicide, therfore thou
haſt condemned thy ſelfe to death. Infirmata eſt contra eum lingua eius:
with thy ſword, thou ſleweſt Saul, and with thy liberall tongue,
thy ſelfe.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Let vs therfore ſet a watch before our mouth, and let vs
haue a great care of our ouer-ſlippery tongue,Sentence. for feare of incurring
the like miſaduenture: for, to a generous ſpirit, ſomtimes a bad word
is much more iniurious, then a wound receiued by a Launce.
               
               Finis Cap. 6.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  Declaring, that to keepe our ſelues idle wandering in our talking,
it behooueth, that our ſpeeche ſhould haue fiue conditions or qualities,
which the tongue it ſelfe hath, namely: ſweete, Roſe coloured,
ſharpe flexible, and cloſe couched, which are approoued by many authorities
of Scripture, as alſo witty ſaying of the Philoſophers, and
naturall examples.
               
               Chap. 7.
               
                  
                     LODOVICO.
                  If Senacherib, the
young Amalekite, and all ſuch as
haue endured like puniſhment, wold
haue ſet a ſure guarde vppon theyr
tongue: without doubt they had deliuered
their ſoules from many anguiſhes, whereinto (elſe) they had never
falne.Proner. 19. 16. 
                     Qui cuſtodit os ſuum, & linguam
ſuam, Cuſtodit ab anguſtus aniuam
ſuam: He that keepeth his tōgue
and his mouth, keepeth his ſoule from
anguiſhes, ſayth the wiſeman.
                  
                     Plutarch telles vs,Plutarch his example of the Lydians againſt infamy. 
                     That the Lydians, as well ſentenced them with
death, that (by their tongues) robd men of their good fame, as him that
tooke away the life of any Citizen: holding the guilt of infamie to be as
great as the abhorred act of murder: for, to lay hand to the weapon
vniuſtly, is euen as much, as to breed an vniuſt quarrel with the tōgue.
Therefore that our diſcourſing may bee free from all ſuch blamefull
note, it ought to haue fiue properties, which the tongue it ſelfe hath.
                  The tongue is ſoft and delicate;The fiue properties which the tongue it ſelfe hath, and their alluſiō to our ſpeeche. ſweete and Roſe coloured; ſharpe
in forme of a Launce; flexible and voluble, cloſe kept, walking but in
a little roome. In like manner, our talk ought to be ſoft, by benignity,
Roſe coloured, as ſweetned by honeſty, ſharpned by ſeuerity, pleaſing

by ſagacity, cloſe kept by diligent cuſtody. He that hath his
talke ſoftned by compaſſion, ſweetned by loue, ſharpned by correction,
made tractable by diſcretion, and cloſe ſhut vp by heedfull caution,
can very hardly faile in his ſpeaking.
                  Firſt of all then we wil thus begin:1. Our ſpeeche ought to be ſoft and pleaſing. Our ſpeeche ought to be full of
pleaſing, becauſe there is nothing that more mooueth a man to loue,
then doth gentle ſpeeche, ſweete, compaſſionate, milde and benigne,
as well in anſwering, as in reproouing the faultes in others. Manie
ſtriue to ouercome men by the ſtrength of armes: but they are not
ſuch, as by a gentle ſweete perſwaſion, haue brought men to doe
euen what themſelues woulde. Whereuppon aroſe the wittie
Prouerbe:A ſententious Prouerbe. Men are bounde by wordes, and beaſtes by cordes.
And Salomon in his Prouerbes ſayeth:Prou. 15. 1. 
                     Lingua mollis du itiem
confringit: for a ſweete ſpeeche ſuppreſſeth furie, and extinguiſheth
the ſparkes of anger in a harde and implacable
mind.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Why this is euery day plainly enough diſcerned, becauſe
many are chaſtiſed by ſweete ſpeeches, that by rude and ſharp language
would become much worſe.Similie and the Alluſion thereof. As the diamond reſiſteth vpon
the hardeſt ſteele, yet neuertheleſſe is broken with the ſoft blood of
a Goate: Euen ſo, Reſponſio mollis fragit iram, ſermo durus excitat furorem:
                     Prouerb. 15. 1. 
                     A ſoft anſwer putteth away wrath, but grieuous words ſtir vp
anger.
                  
                  He that will get himſelfe many friends, and appeaſe the diſpleaſure
of his enemies, muſt folow Salomons counſel.Eccle. 6. 5. 
                     Verbū dulce multiplicat
amicos, & mitigat inimicos. A ſweet talke multiplieth friends, & pacifieth
them that be at variance.
                     Example of Abſolons pleaſing words. This was apparantly to be noted in Abſolon,
who by ſweet ſpeeches (though very fraudulent) in little time
compaſſed the loue of the people, yea, & that in ſuch ſort, as he boldly
attempted to depriue his Father of the kingdome.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  With this dulcitude of ſpeeche, there hath bin nothing
(almoſt) left vnattempted: as may be ſeen in thoſe two great Orators
Cicero and Demoſthenes,
                     Example of the two great Oratours Cicero and Demoſthenes. the one the light of the Latine, the other of
the Greek tongue. What ſhould I talke of their attemptings? There
was nothing which they vndertook, but they obtaind it by the ſweetneſſe
of their ſpeech. For Lactantius Firmianus declareth, that Apollonius
the Philoſopher hearing Cicero in his Oration, was ſo tranſported
with admiration beyond himſelfe:The words of Apollonius to Cicero. that after ſome ſmal recouery,
he ſaid to Cicero in the publique preſence; Cicero I commend thee, &
am amazed at thee.
                  
                  
                     
                     Xenocrates the Philoſopher,Example of Xenocrates & Palaemon. Example of Cato Cenſorius. by this ſweetneſſe of ſpeeche, quite
changed the vile baſe behauiour, of a bad luxurious man called Palaemon.
Cato Cenſorius, being accuſed fortie foure times, before a Senate
ſo much to be feared as that of Roome: knew ſo well in his Orations
how to defend himſelfe, as euermore he went away iudged innocent.
Example of Aegeſias, Platoes ſcholler. 
                     Aegeſias the Scholler of Plato, read ſo ſweetely vpon the immortalitie
of the ſoule: that many (for meere ioye, and to attaine
that high felicitye,) accounting it no crueltye to themſelues,
layde violent handes on theyre owne liues, vntill Ptolomeus
prohibited him, to diſcourſe any more vppon that matter.
                  Heereuppon the auncient Poets feigned,Example of Amphron the Son of loue. that Amphion the Son
of Ioue, by muſick onely, without any other myſterie, builded the
walles of the city of Thebes, the ſtones moſt commodiouſly laying
themſelues one vpon another, as if by a skilfull maſters hand they
had beene ordered.Example of Ariō of Lesbos. Alſo Arion Miten
                           •
                        us of Lesbos, with his harpe
drew the Fiſhes (netleſſe) out of the Sea, ſo that himſelfe rode vpon
the back of a Dolphin, which brought & ſet him ſafely on the ſhore.
Alpheus by his ſweete ſinging,Example of Alpheus, and of Orpheus. tamed the wildeſt and moſt cruell
beaſtes. Orpheus by the ſound of his harpe, made the woods to
mooue, the floodes to daunce, and the ſtoanes to leape about
him.
                  We may allude all this to the ſweetneſſe of their ſpeeche,Alluſion to the ſweetneſſe of their ſpeech▪
                      as the
alluring of men, conuerſion of ſinners, and they beeing before moſt
vnciuill and barbarous, to make them thus become verye meeke
and tractable.Example of the Apoſtles and Martyrs. As wee may reade of the bleſſed Apoſtles and
Martyres, who conuerted the moſt ſtearne and bloodieſt Tyrantes.
                  Wee haue a prety ſtorie of one M. Iordanus, deſcribed by
Antonius the Archbiſhop of Florence, who preaching in Vercellis,
                     An excellent Hiſtory of M. Iordanus, a Preacher in Vercellis. where (in thoſe times) was the generall place of ſtudying: he deliuered
the word of God in ſuch ſweete and gratious manner, as, within
fewe dayes after, he drew the reuerend Doctors, Fathers and diuers
Noble men, to forſake all things elſe, and practice preaching onely.
Wherupon, Gualterus Teutonicus, Regent of the other Artes ſtudies,
fearing to looſe all his Schollers likewiſe, ſayde in the publique
Schoole to them:Gualterus Teutonicus, his words againſt lordanus. 
                     Take heede you goe not to heare the preaching of
M. Iordanus, for he poliſheth his words with ſuch ſweeteneſſe, as
dooth an harlote, when ſhee betrayeth and catcheth the ſoules of
men.
                  
                  
                     
But what enſued of this?Gualterus himſelfe rauiſhed with hearing the world. He that ſought to withdrawe others,
was firſt of all taken himſelfe, euen ſo ſoone as hee went but to heare
him. And then he became quickly of another minde, perceiuing
all other ſtudies to be but vaine and fruitleſſe, in compariſon of the
heauenly ſweetes of the ſoule, for there is no ſweeteneſſe aboue that
of the word of God.Pſal. 18. 11. 
                     Quàm dulcia faucibus meis eloquia tua, ſuper mel
orimeo.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  What mightier maruaile,The ſweetneſſe of the ſpeeche of Chriſt, to his very enemies. to approoue the ſweeteneſſe
of Chriſtes ſpeeche, (the like whereof was neuer heard) then at the
very time when they came to take and bind him? hearing but his
words, they ſtood as men amazed, and forgetting the commaundement
impoſed vpon them, they returned back to the giuers of that
charge,Iohn. 7. 46. ſaying: Nunquam ſic loquutus eſt homo: Neuer as man heard
to speake the like. So ſweet was his ſpeaking, as he drew infinite multitudes
after him, ſo that the city beeing vnable to containe them,
they flocked foorth after him into the fields, among the mountains,
and on the Sea ſhoare, with great ſtriuing among them for taking
places,Luke. 5. 1. according as S. Luke declareth: Cùm turbae irruerunt in Ieſum,
vt audirent verbū Dei, &c. And the people preaſed vpon him, to heare
the word of God, &c.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Great efficacy vndoubtedly was there in the ſweet words
of Chriſt,The miniſters of the Phariſies forget their firceneſſe at Chriſtes ſpeaking. that it could make the miniſters of the Phariſies to forget
their fierceneſſe, they comming againſt Chriſt like ſo many roaring
lyons, or moſt cruel Tigers, to lay faſt hold vpon him: wherupon, they
could doe any other thing elſe, but that which they then came for.
Whereat the Phariſies being amazed, and filled full of railing againſt
him, imagined in their harts, that they were alſo become ſome of his
followers.
                  
                     Dauid had reaſon to ſpeake thus of the voice of Chriſte:Pſal. 29. 4. 5.
                     vox Domini in v
                           •
                        rtute, vox Domini in magnificentia. Vox
Domini confringentis cedros. The voice of the Lorde is mightye:
the voice of the Lord is glorious. The voice of the Lord breaketh
the cedars. And not the cedars only, but the ſtonie and adamantine
harts,Religious preachers participating with the vertue of Chriſts voice. he breaketh and cruſheth in pieces. But more amazement
I account it, to ſee that religious holy Preachers, participating with
the vertue of Chriſte ſhould haue ſuch wonderfull ſweetneſſe in
their woords as to drawe the whole world (in a maner) after them.
Some whereof haue conuerted more then an hundred thouſand heretiques:
others that haue reduced to chriſtian beleefe, more then fiue
and twenty thouſand Iewes, and aboue eight thouſand Saracens.

For this, were they accounted, Euen as ſimple veſſells, prepared to containe
the ſeed of the diuine word,
                     The words of S. Auguſtine of himſelfe. as S. Auguſtine ſaith, ſpeaking of himſelf.
Ego, quid ſum, niſi cophinus ſeminato is, id eſt Chriſti? Ipſe dignatus
eſt in me ponere ſemen, quod ſpargo vobis. Nolite ad vilitatem 
                           •
                        ophini
respicere ſed nobilst at em ſeminatoris.
                  
                  So ſweet, delicious and delicate is the word of God, as it ſurpaſſeth
the ſweetneſſe of honie, then which there is nothing ſweeter in the
world.Iudg. 14. 18. 
                     Quid dulcius melle? what is ſweeter than hony? quoth they that
expounded the riddle of Sampſon.
                     The word of God is ſweeter then hony. The word of God, ſaith Dauid, exceedeth
hony in ſweetneſſe: Quàm dulcia faucibus me is eloquia tua,
ſuper mel o
                           •
                        i meo? as much to ſay: Oh lord, how ſweet are thy words vnto
me, that they ſurpaſſe the ſweetneſſe of hony, when I haue them in my
mouth?
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  A very rare example of the ſweetneſſe of the diuine word,Example of the ſweetneſſe of the word of God, in Sauls ſeeking the death of Dauid.
I remember I haue read in the firſt book of Samuel, and the 19. chapter,
when wicked Saul purſued the death of iuſt Dauid, fearing that
which was to follow afterward, namely, that he ſould ſucceed him
in the kingdom: he hearing, that Dauid was with Samuel in Ramah,
among other Prophets, hee perſwaded himſelfe, that Dauid was
gone to vſurpe his kingdome, and to haue himſelf annointed king of
Iſrael by Samuel, to whome this office appertained. Albeit, he was
with the Prophet prayſing God, yet hee ſent a greate number of
ſouldiours, to the end they ſhould ſurpriſe and bring him to his preſence.
Sauls ſouldiors praiſed god among the Prophets, according as they were ſeuerally ſent. But they beeing come where Dauid was with the holy Prophets,
and hearing them ſo praiſe the Lorde: beeing touched likewiſe
by the ſpirite of the Lorde, they forgotte the Kings commaundement,
and began alſo to praiſe God, and to prophecie.
                  
                     Saul expecting their returne, and perceiuing they came not,
grewe vehement ſuſpicious, that they were growne abbetters of
Dauid: wherefore all-enraged, he ſent other miniſters, and more in
number then the firſt were, but to them it happened as it did with
the other. Saul hauing intelligence hereof, began to burne in a more
violent furie, and ſent the thirde band of miniſters, but in a larger
companye, to execute what was before intended. They beeing
come to Ramah, ſuch was the power of the worde of
God, that they no ſooner entred among the reſt, but they
did as the firſt and ſecond, and prophecied likewiſe among
them.
                  When the king heard this, much more enflamed with anger and

deſperate hate,Saul, incenſed with rage, goeth himſelfe to Ramah, and there was conſtrained to praiſe God alſo among thē. he mounted on horſeback, and rode along himſelfe
with a great multitude: but ſo ſoone as he came neer the place of Ramah,
his very ſelfe (O mighty miracle of God) euen honied with hearing
the word of God, forgetting his former fierceneſſe; he alſo began
to praiſe the Lord with the Prophets. So that he deſpoiling himſelfe
of his royall garments, prophecied among the reſt in the preſence
of Samuel, and euen naked as he was, he ſung the diuine praiſes
all that day and night,The prouerbe in Iſrael. whereuppon aroſe the Prouerbe in
Iſrael:2. Sam. 19. 
                           •
                        4. 
                     Num eſt Saul inter prophetas? Is Saul alſo among the Prophets?
                  
                  
                     Such was the power, preheminence and ſweetneſſe of the word of
God,
                     2. Sam. 19. 
                           •
                        4. 
                     as it changed the very hearts of the hearers. Et expoliauit ſe Saul
veſtimentis ſuis, & prophetauit cum caeteris coram Samuel, & cecinit
nudus tota die 
                        •
                     lla, & nocte. And Saul ſtript off his garments, and he prophecied
alſo before Samuel, and fell down naked all that day and all that
night.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Oh miraculous ſweetneſſe of the word of God, but
let vs proceed in our order begun: our ſpeech then muſt be ſweet and
ſoft,2. Our ſpeech ought to haue the Roſe colour of honeſty 8: charity. as the tongue it ſelfe is. Secondly, our talke ought to haue the
Roſe-bluſh colour of honeſty and charity, becauſe, as the tongue is
naturally red & Roſie-coloured: euen ſo ought our language to haue
the die of honeſty and modeſty, as alſo the crimſon & flame tincture
of charity: for in our words, no one is to bee profered, fauouring of
diſhoneſty,A check to the vnſeemly language vſed now adayes. or iniurious to the edificatiō of our neighbor. Theſe dayes
of ours, do witneſſe the world to be grown ſo diſſolute, & our talk ſo
vnſeemely: as very hardly do any words iſſue from vs, but they relliſh
of diſhoneſt ieſtings, yea, of ſhameleſſe, ſcurril and very impudent diſſoluteneſſe.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The worlde can giue no other then it hath,Sentence. and becauſe
it is full of all vncleanneſſe, vncleane likewiſe needs muſt our
talke be.An excellent compariſon, and his Alluſion. The excellent Phyſitian knowes by the tongue, the infirmitie
of the bodie, and when the diſeaſe is deadly: in like manner, by
ſpeeche is diſcerned the integritie or corruption of the hart, and the
healthfulneſſe of the ſoule. This was not onely the opinion of Socrates,
but alſo of Salomon himſelfe, as is to be ſeene in many places of
his Prouerbes:Prouer. 12. 18. 
                     Lingua ſapientium ſanitas eſt: I he tongue of wiſe men is
health. As if he would haue ſayd: wil you know if the ſoule be ſincere,
& whole from ſin?An implicatiō of Salomons words. Awaite then the words proceeding from it: becauſe
the ſickneſſe of the ſoule appears, by the courſe of ſpeeche, deliuered
by the tongue.
                  
                     
The world, becauſe it is full of pride, luxurie and auarice, therfore
alſo the vtterance of our words ſauour of the worldlye cogitations
feeding the hart,Our words anſwerable to our worldly cogitations. which are eyther voyde of honeſty, or empty of charity.
S. Iohn the Apoſtle ſaw in the Iſle of Pathmos a wonderful viſion
ful of terror,Apoc. 16. 13. & very dreadfull to the ſight, his words are theſe. Et vid
                           •
                        
de ore Draconis, & de ore beſtiae, & de ore pſeudoprophetae exire ſpiritus tres immundos in modum Ranarum.
                     Of S. Iohns viſion in the Iſle of Pathmos. 
                     And I ſawe three vncleane ſpirits,
like Frogges, come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out
of the mouth of the beaſt, and out of the mouth of the falſe prophet.
                  
                  The dragon is the deuill the inuenter of pride;Application of the viſion, by the Author. the beaſt is the
fleſh, which beaſt-like liueth in al filthie luxuriouſneſſe; the falſe Prophet
is the deceiuing world, of whome enſueth all auarice whatſoeuer.
All theſe three ſpirits iſſued foorth in the likeneſſe of Frogges, becauſe
theſe three in ſinning haue ſome ſimilitude with the Frogge.
The Frogge leapeth aloft,Three qualities in the frog anſwerable to the former application: of Pride, vncleanneſſe and auatice. behold there is pride: delights to liue
in the filthye myre, there is the vncleanneſſe of beaſtlye luxurye:
it likewiſe croakes, and with a ſcreeking confuſed noyſe
or noate, diſturbeth quietneſſe, there is auarice, which filleth a
man with all diſtraction, and daylye moleſteth the quiet of the
mind.
                  
                     The world then being ouer burdned with theſe three foule vices,
how can there be any honeſt or charitable ſpeeches, beautified with
the roſie colours of honeſty & charity?
                     2. Iohn 2. 16. Omne quod eſt in mundo, aut
conc
                        •
                     piſcentia carnis eſt; aut concupiſcentia oculorum, aut ſuperbia vitae.
All that is in the world, is the luſt of the fleſh, the luſt of the eyes, and the
pride of life.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  The third qualitie or condition beſeeming vs in
our ſpeeche,3. Our ſpeeche ought to be like a weapon, ſharpe: as it is in reſemblance. is, that after the manner of a weapon, it ſhould be ſharp,
for ſo the tongue it ſelfe appeareth to be: and this ought (according
to time and place) to reſemble ſuch a weapon, by pointing at, puniſhing
and correcting the faultye. Therefore it is written, that
the holy ghoſt deſcended vpon the diſciples, in the forme of clouen
fierie tongues,Alluſion of the fierie tongues on the Apoſtles. not onely as alluding, that our talke ought to
bee full of charitie: but alſo, to note the aptneſſe, and readineſſe
of the worde of God in vs, which after the manner of a cutting
ſworde, diuideth the ſoule from ſenſuall and carnall cogitations,
and ſeperates it whollye from the worlde. Viuus eſt enim
Dei ſermo,
                     Heb. 4. 12. 
                     & penetrabilior omni gladio ancipiti, & pertingens
vſque ad diuiſionem animae ac ſpiritus, compagum quoque ac medullarum,

& diſcretor cogitationum & intentionum Cordis. The word of
God is liuely, and mighty in operation, and ſharper then any two edged
ſword, and entreth through, euen to the diuiding aſunder of the
ſoule and the spirite, and of the ioyntes and the marrowe,
and is a diſce
                           •
                        ner of the thoughtes and the intentes of the
hart.
                  
                  This weapon brought Chriſt into the world:What weapon our Sauiour brought into the world, and what power it hath. 
                     Non veni pacem
mittere, ſed gladium. With this weapon is the father diuided frō the
Son, one brother from another, and the wife from the husband. With
this weapon ſhall the Iewes bee diuided from their Iudaiſme, the
Gentiles from their idolatrie, and be made good Chriſtians. VVith
this weapon ſhall the ſhameleſſe bee diuided from his vncleanneſſe,
the couetous from his monie bags, the wrathfull from his furiouſneſſe,
the high looker from ambition, the glutton from his ſurfetting,
&c.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  
                     There comes now to my remembraunce, an excellent
matter, which I haue read in the firſt booke of the kings of
Iſraell,
                     Example of the Prophet Elias, when he fled from queene Ieſabell. 
                     and very apt to this purpoſe of ours. The Prophet Elias flying
away (verye poorely) through the vaſt deſertes, beeing fearefull
of the wicked Queene Iezabell: the Angell of the Lorde
appeared vnto him, and thus ſpake. Quid hîc agis Elia? What doeſt
thou here Elias? And he anſwered. Zelo zelatus ſum pro Domino
Deo exercituum,2. Kin. 19. 9. 10. quia dereliquerunt pactum Domini filii Iſrael.
Altaria tua deſtruxerunt, & Prophetas tuos occiderunt gladio, &
derelictus ſum ego ſolus, & quaerunt animam meam vt aufer ant
eam. I haue bin very iealous for the Lord God of hoaſts, for the
children of Iſrael haue forſaken thy couenant, broken downe thine Altars,
and ſlaine thy Prophets with the ſword, and I only am left, and
they ſeek my life, to take it away. Et ait Dominus ad eum. Vade,
& reuertere in viam tuam per deſertum in Damaſcum:1. King. 19. 15. 16. 17. cumque
perueneris illuc, vnges Hazael Regem ſuper Syriam. Et Iehu filium
Namſi vnges Regem ſuper Iſrael: Helyſeum autem filium
Saphat, qui eſt de Abel-meula, vnges Prophetam prote. Et erit quicunque
fugerit gladium Hazael, interficiet eum Iehu: & quicunque
fugerit gladium Iehu,The anſwer of the Lord vnto Elias. inter ficiet eum Helyſeus. And the lord ſayd vnto
him. Go, returne by the wilderneſſe vnto Damaſcus, and when thou
commeſt there, anoynt Hazael king ouer Syria. And Iehu the ſon of
Namſi, ſhalt thou anoint king ouer Iſraell: and Helyſeus the ſon
of Saphat of Abel-Meholah, ſhalt thou anoint to be Prophet in thy
roome. And him that eſcapeth from the ſword of Hazael, ſhall Iehu

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
ſlay, and him that eſcapeth from the ſword of Iehu, ſhall Helyſeus
ſley.
                  In this we haue to note,What we haue eſpecially to note in this worthie example. that Helyſeus was a man humble, meeke
and godly, vnarmed and vnskild in the art military: neuertheleſſe, it
was the will of God, that they, who had not the power (by armes) to
kill theſe two potent kings of Syria and Iſraell, men of great valour,
approoued warriours, and very bloodie; yet (with this weapon only) a
peaceful Prophet ſhould do it, a man, whoſe office was to preach, not
to bee ſeene in combates, to preache vnto the people, not to war in
armes.
                  Doubtleſſe, hereby it may be alluded, that more ſtrength had the
vnarmed Prophet Helyſeus,
                     Alluſion of the whole Hiſtory by this powerful weapon of Gods word. with this weapon of the word of God,
then thoſe moſt mightye kings, with their huge ſquadrons of armed
Souldiours: and much better ſucceſſe ſhoulde attend on the
courage of Helyſeus, in pacifying by benignitie, then on the armed
kings, in the very hoteſt of their crueltie. And more good did Helyſeus,
by his ſpeaking only, then Hazael and Iehu by their fighting: ſuch
is the efficacy of the word of God, as it penetrates the ſoule beyond
the body.
                  VVhich is euidently to be ſeene in the conuerſion of nations,Example of the couuerſiō of Nations, by poore vnarmed men, exceeding the might of all the Monarchs in
which office, more hath beene wrought by vnarmed men, of poore
and meane condition, with the weapon of the diuine word, ſubducing
the whole worlde to the kingdome of Chriſt: then coulde
the mightye Monarches of the Aſſyrians, the Perſians, the Grecians
and the Romanes, with all their infinite powerfull Armies.
And this (I thinke) was that weapon, that iſſued foorth of the mouth
of God, cutting both wayes, after the manner of a ſword, as Saint
Iohn telles vs, becauſe God (by his worde) remitteth the offence,
Apoc. 2. 16. and pardoneth the puniſhment: Exibat gladius vtraque parte
acutus ex ore eius: Out of his mouth went a ſharpe two edged
ſword.
                  
                  But if our words ought to haue the condition of a weapon, & ſuch
likewiſe is the ſhape of the tongue it ſelfe: for what cauſe then ſayth
the Prophet,Eſay. 2. 4. ſpeaking of the cōming of the Meſſias, that in his time,
Conflabunt gladios ſuos in vomeres,
                     A queſtion cōcerning the time of the Meſſias comming. 
                     & lanceas ſuas in falces: They ſhall
break their ſwords into mattocks or plough ſhares, & their speares into
ſithes: what hath a mattock to doe with a ſword? the ſword is apt to
cut withall, and the mattock to delue withall.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Two things (in my mind) would the holy ghoſt allude
herby,Anſwere, by the Alluſion of the holy ghoſt. ſaying, that in thoſe times, of ſwordes ſhall be made mattocks.

Firſt, in regard of the great peace, all warlike battailes then ceaſſing,
according as the Angels likewiſe foretold of the birth of Chriſt: Et in
terra pax hominibus bona voluntatis:
                     Luke 2. 14. 
                     Peace in earth, and towards men
good will. Secondly, of the great fruit enſuing by the word of God, deſigning
by the mattock or plough ſhare, the māner that ought to bee
obſerued in digging vp, or tilling the hearts of men by the worde of
God, ſignified in the weapon.
                  If the husbandman would furrowe vp his grounds,Compariſon betweene the huſband mās plough ſhare, and a ſword, for their ſeuerall vſes. hee can neuer
do it with a ſword, nor breake abroad the hard knit clods, if that way
he goe to worke, the earth likewiſe will bee vnapt in rendering the
expected fruit: but if he take his mattock, plough ſhare and ſuch like
other meete inſtruments, he will make it tractable for producing the
ſowen ſeede. The ſword or weapon ſignifieth the poliſhed ſpeech, adorned
with rhetoricall colours,Alluſion of both in their true natures. & a thouſand quaint ſubtilties of arguments.
The mattock figureth the eaſie ſpeeche, domeſticall, familiar,
ſincere, cordiall, without ornament or vaine tearmes, which
better fitteth for the heartes compunction, and is more apte to
produce the fruite of conuerſion, beeing cluttered before, among
the hard clods of ſinne; then the adorned kinde of ſpeaking,
curious and artificiall, deſigned by the ſword or weapon.
                  The auncient Philoſophers and Oratours,The Philoſophers & Orators curioſity. becauſe they would
teache their lyes and follies: they intricated them, and beguiled
men with picked, poliſht and nice kindes of phraſes. The trueth of
the Goſpell,The plain and ſincere trueth of the Goſpel. it hath no neede of any ſuch ornament, nor ought a
Chriſtian to fit himſelfe with ſuch curioſities, in reproouing of ſinne,
and correcting the ſinner; but rather, hee ſhoulde make his playne
mattock more plyant and readie, in deluing vp the ſtubborne harts
of wretched men. Therefore Chriſt euermore ſpake with a materiall
tongue, deliuering many parables, ſimilitudes and examples.
                  An vnhandſome woman,Compariſon between a forced beauty, & a true naturall complexion. deſtitute of beautie and naturall comlineſſe,
ſeekes by deceiptfull and lying colours, to make her ſelfe
appeare beautifull: but ſhe that (from her naturall mother) is adorned
with good feature & excellent fayreneſſe, great wrong ſhall ſhe offer
to nature, in ſtriuing artificially to make her ſelfe more fayre: for
the greater paynes ſhee takes, to ſeeme beautifull by lying tinctures,
An excellent Alluſion of the compariſon. the more deformed (in time) ſhee aſſuredlye makes her ſelfe.
The Euangelicall doctrine (of it ſelfe) is ſo fayre, and ſurpaſſing in
riches of naturall beautie, that ſhee hath no neede of artificiall

or vayne rhetoricall ornament:No vain gloſſe is to be ſet on the word diuine, with the manifeſt hurt enſuing therby rather great wrong is done to her natiue
beautie, adorning it with vayne colours & coyned phraſes, ſuch
as prophane Oratours were wont to illuſtrate & ſet forth their groſſe
lyes withall.
                  A matter much to be blamed, and yeelding no fruit at all: becauſe
while the auditors liſten, not to the ſubſtance of what is ſayd, but to
the cunning gloſſe and idle ornament only: they looſe the intire doctrine
& truth of the ſpeech, and hang their attention only on vanity,
which makes them, not to put in diligent execution, what is then ſaid
vnto them, but only to lend a little admiration to friuolous eloquēce,
the cauſe of much harme in our chriſtian common wealth.
                  I pray ye (my Lord) in curteſie tell me,A demaund by way of compariſon, of a beſieged city, and the meeteſt meanes of reſiſtance. were it not to be reckoned
as an expreſſe follie, if an armie of enemies ſhoulde come againſt this
city, and engirt it with ſeuere beſieging round about, and then the citizēs
did not preſently run to take weapōs in their hands for defence
of it, darting their ſhafts and quarries againſt the enemy, or what munition
elſe they could poſſibly deuiſe to help it. But, if (in ſtead of repulſing
them by the harquebuz and Cannon) they ſhoulde throw on
their enemies heads, ſweet hearbs & flowers, might they not iuſtly be
tearmed, deſolators of the cōmon good, & the very cheefeſt enemies
vnto their own natiue country?
                  Such (the more pitty) are many chriſtians in theſe times of ours become,
Alluſion to the neglect of many in theſe dayes, for the reproofe of ſin. who ought with words moſt feruent and effectuall (euen like
vnto the ſharpeſt pearcing arrows) boldly reprooue the vile ſinnes of
men: but they (in ſtead therof) caſt flowrs of faire and fruitleſſe words
on their heads, which not onely looſe the vigor of all compunction,
but delights, and begets a pleaſing itching in the eare, whereof God
greatly complained by the Prophet Ieremie:
                     Ierem. 48. 9. 
                     Date florem Moab, quia
florens egredietur, & ciuitates eius deſertae erunt, & inhabitabiles.
Giue flowers vnto Moab, that it may flye and get away: for the cities
therof ſhall be deſolate, without any to dwel therein. As if he would haue
ſaid, Ironicè: Is it euen ſo? Do you thus giue flowers to Moab? You
giue him a goodly remedy for his hurt:The Authors applying of the Prophets words. if he floriſh ſo delicately, as
making that his beautie; miſerable Moab, this will be the cauſe of
thy ruine, and the deſtruction of the faireſt cityes in thy kingdome.
                  Then preſently followeth: Maledictus qui facit opus Domini fraudulenter,
                     Ierem. 48. 10. 
                     & maledictus qui prohibet gladium ſuum à ſanguine: Curſed
be he that doth the worke of the Lord negligently, and curſed be hee
that keepeth back his ſword from blood. Euen as if he woulde haue

ſayd,A good note for vayne and idle headed preachers. Curſed be he that doth the Lords worke with fraude, and (with
deceiuing ſpeeches) is the cauſe of the loſſe of ſoules, not drawing
the ſword of the tongue in due time, reprehending ſinners, fetching
blood at euery blowe, with ſharpe words, yet full of charitie and
feruent zeale. So when the ſword of the word is not adorned with
vnfruitfull ſpeeche, therof we ought to make a mattock, apt and meet
to dig vp the ſtubborn earth of mens harts, to the end, it may become
capable of increaſe, by a good conuerſion.
                  
                     A certaine Greeke Oratour went to Lycurgus Prince of the
Lacedemonians,
                     Example of a Greek Oratour, and how Lycurgus anſwered him. 
                     ſaying: That he would read Rhetorique to the people
of the common wealth, becauſe they spake very rude and groſſely: to
whom Lycurgus anſwered. We better affect our plaine country wiſedome,
then vaine flouriſhing eloquence: therefore you may go into Licaonia,
for men are there louers of artificial eloquence, which here we make
no account at all of.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  An anſwere worthily beſeeming ſuch a Prince,The common wealth looſeth moſt by lack of well ſpeaking. becauſe
the common wealth looſeth nothing by lack of ſpeeche, but
by defect of ſpeaking well. An artificiall deuiſe, is not far off from
deceipte, and our words ought rather to taſt of want of curious ornament,
then to be any thing defectiue from the trueth: therefore I
cannot but highlye allow your deſcription of the ſword and mattock.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  In the fourth place,4. Our ſpeech ought to ſhew the flexibility of the tongue. we ſay, that our talke ought to
ſhew the flexibility of the tongue, which is to bee done by wiſedome
and diſcretion; as the tongue is apt and pliant in yeelding euery
way, ſo ought our talke to be very diſcreete, varying our diſcourſings,
according to the condition of ſuch men as wee conferre
withall,The offices of this flexibility and agreeing with the ſubiect whereof we ſpeake. Sometimes
comforting the afflicted, with the ſweetneſſe of our wordes;
ſometimes inſtructing the ignorant, with charitie; ſometimes reproouing,
with ſeueritie, anſwerable to the offence: ſometimes
commending (with trueth) the good; and ſometimes blaming (as
iuſtly) the bad, with ſignificant ſpeeches: yea, to ſuffer our ſelues
with them all, to be tranſformed (as it were) into all; to put on the
garmente of all, onely to helpe and preſerue them all, according as
Saint Paule did:2. Cor. 9. 22. 
                     Omnia omnibus factus ſum, vt omnes facerem ſaluos:
I am made all things to all men, that I might by all meanes ſaue
ſome.
                  
                  The dog hath a tongue very flexible,Compariſon of the tongue of a dog. ſlender and fine, and is ſo
medicinable withall, as there is no ſore or other harme happening

on his bodye, but it healeth it, onely by the office of his tongue,
becauſe hee can bring it to the place, and tenderlye licke it.
The verye like propertie ought our tongue to haue,Alluſion to the offices of our tongue. for our
wordes ſhoulde bee profitable, medicinable, and helpefull to euerie
weake ſinner, beeing caſt downe vppon the death-bed of
his ſinnes, and there lying languiſhing and deſpairing, to his
ſoules greate daunger. Our tongue by wiſe and diſcreete flexibleneſſe,
muſt bee apte and readie to diuers offices, as were the
tongues of the Apoſtles, who (for generall benefite) ſpake in
many languages:Act. 2. 11. 
                     Audiuimus eos loquentes noſtris linguis magnalia
Deiwe heard them speake in our tongues, the wonderfull workes of
God.
                  
                  The Naturaliſtes doe tell vs,Example of the Bears producing her young ones. that the Beare bringeth foorth her
young, without any forme: but by licking, and paſſing ouer them in
diuers kindes with her tongue, ſhe giues them at length a true ſhape
and ſimilitude. The like ought euery one to do, that reprehendes an
other mans defectes,Alluſion to Prelates, Preachers, and fathers of families, ſhewing what is required in the office of their tongues. but eſpecially Prelates, fathers in their families,
and Preachers, to whome (in regarde of their offices) the reproofe of
ſins (in their ſonnes and ſeruants) eſpecially appertaineth: which appearing
to them, that they are (in a manner) meerely miſſhapen and
brutiſh, without any figure of true chriſtianitie, they ought, with the
tongue, and the office of the mouth, to pearce ſo far into them, that euen
(as it were) by licking their ſore ſoules, and wiping away the foulneſſe
of their inward infirmities, they may make a ſinfull man become
like vnto God, adorned with vertues, beautified with ſpirituall
graces, variably, and (in many manners) vſing the readineſſe
of the tongue, according to the nature and varietie of the ſubiect.
                  For example, ſomtimes highly, of the ioyes of Paradiſe; ſometimes
lowly,A methode or manner of obſeruation, in their ſpeaking as occaſion ſerueth. of the baſenes of this deceiptfull world: ſeuerely & in a ſharpe
key, ſhewing (with rough words) the paines infernall: plainly and pathetically,
laying open ſinne, and the vaine folly of the ſinner: ſweetly
& in a milder phraſe, declaring the incomparable reward of the bleſſed:
boldly & without fear, checking preſumptuous perſons, renegates
and infidels; ſpeaking ſometime with the tongue of a man, & ſomtime
(if it were poſſible) with the tongue of an Angel, according to the diuerſity
of perſons with whom we talke, and for the ſaluation of all, as
S. Paul did,2. Cor. 14. 18. ſaying: Gratias ago Deo meo, quoniam omnibus vobis
linguis magis loquor: I thank my God, I speak languages more then you
all.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Claudio.
                  I perceiue that our ſpeeche ought to bee like a cleere
chriſtaline fountaine,Similies or compariſōs of what the tōgue ought to be. or, as a tranſparent Glaſſe without any ſpot,
that it may transforme it ſelfe into all things repreſented before
it: that by taking the ſhape of all, it may bee beneficiall to
all.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Let vs come now to the fift qualitie of the tongue,5. Our ſpeeche ought to be cloſe couched, like vnto the tongue, with his two guardians.
which is, that it muſt lye cloſe couched, and be warilie kept by two
guardians, to weet, the teeth, and the lips: whereby, the diuine workman
may ſeeme to allude, that our ſpeeche ſhould bee very circumſpect,
corrected, and faſt bound (as it were) together, according as the
tongue is knit and combined, and firſt of all, to bethinke our ſelues
very well,Prouer. 10. 14. before wee let any worde paſſe from vs. Antequam loquaris,
diſce: becauſe many euils doe proceed from the tongue, when
lauiſhly it runnes at randome, without premeditation what is to be
ſayde.2. Pet. 3. 10. To this effect ſayde the Apoſtle: Qui enim vult vitam diligere,
& dies videre bonos, coerceat linguam ſuam à malo, & labia eius
ne loquantur dolū: If any man long after life, and to ſee good dayes:
let him refraine his tongue from euill, and his lips that they ſpeake no
guile.
                  
                  
                     Pliny reporteth in his naturall Hiſtorie,Plinie and Solynus, of the nature of the Crocodile. and Solynus alſo affirmeth
the ſame, that the Crocodile is a beaſt big enough, neuertheleſſe it
hath but a little tongue: and by reaſon he cannot put it foorth of his
mouth, therfore he can forme no voyce at all with it. Euen ſo, they
that are greateſt in vertues,Alluſion of the Example. moſt prudent in their actions, and ſhine
fayreſt in goodneſſe: they ought to be ſparing of their ſpeech, & very
ſhort of tongue,Prou. 10. 2
                           •
                        . as knowing very perfectly: that In multiloquio non
deerit peccatum.
                     Iames 3. 5. And Saint Iames ſayth: Lingua quidem modicum eſt
membrum, & magna exaltat: The tongue is a little member, & boaſteth
of great at things, therefore it ſhould be guided by experience: hereupon
it hapned, that many of the Philoſophers bound themſelues to
perpetuall ſilence.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  At any hand then the tongue muſt haue a ſtrict bridle,
The tongue muſt be kept in, like fire. that it may bee kept within (as I thinke) like fire, leaſt it
ſhoulde blaze abroade the flaming words of anger, furie, and diſdaine:
Apoc. 9. 18. 
                     De ore eorum procedebat ignis, & fumus, & ſulphur: Out of
their mouthes went foorth fire, and ſmoake, and brimſtone. The
tongue is impriſoned within the teeth,The tongue impriſoned like a theefe. like a theefe that hath fetters
on his feete, and manacles on his handes: leaſt getting abroade,
hee ſhould robbe other men of their honeſt fame. Acuerunt
linguas ſuas ſicut ſerpentes,
                     Pſal. 140. 3. 
                     venenum aspidum ſub labiis eorū: They haue

ſharpned theyr tongues like ſerpents: Adders poyſon is vnder their lips,
ſayth Dauid.
                     The tongue chayned vp like a dog. It is chayned vp faſt like a dog, leaſt if it ſhould get
looſe, it might ſnatch and bite at other mens honor, with foule detraction:
Erue à framea Deus animam meam, & de manu canis vnicam
meam.
                     Pſal. 22. 20. 
                     Deliuer my ſoule from the ſword, my deſolate ſoule frō the power
of the dog.
                  
                  To good purpoſe is it, that our tongue ſhould be ſweete, Roſe coloured,
ſharpe and flexible: but how much more neede hath it to bee
cloſe couched,Moſt neede of all for the tongue to be cloſe couched. and impriſoned, like a chaſt and comely mayden, leaſt
thereby ſhould iſſue forth the virginall puritie of our ſoules, & ſo become
deflowred, by the craftie and watchfull adulteries of the deuill.
                  There bee many that haue all theſe properties of the tongue,
but in quite contrary manner to our deſcription.Many haue theſe ſeuerall qualities, but in a contrarye kind. They are ſweete of
tongue, but how? in flatterie: they are Roſe coloured, but in rage,
anger and rayling: they are ſharpe, but in detracting: they are agill
and flexible, but in various, deceiptfull and vnconſtant ſpeaking:
they are cloſe couched and ſhut vp too, but in enuying, as
loath to imparte to others any goodneſſe (if they haue any at all) that
themſelues are poſſeſſed of: So, they will be ſure to brag, that they
haue theſe fiue conditions, although it bee in a cleane contrary nature.
               
               Finis Cap. 7.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  Approouing, that indiſcretion in talke, makes the wiſe man himſelfe to
be reputed as a foole, and many haue incurred very great daungers,
by talking careleſly and vnaduiſedly. Among all tongues, the tongue
of the flatterer is moſt perillous, and, by breathing foorth many euils,
it interdicteth the trueth, especially among Noble perſonages, in
whoſe houſes flatterers do moſt of all abound, onely to enioy the goods
which they poſſeſſe. This is confirmed by many liuely examples, ſundry
probabilities out of holy Scripture, and other ſimilitudes: All which
do plainly prooue, how diſpleaſing to God, and hurtfull to men, is this
wicked vice of flattery, that (like another Iudas) kils a man with kiſſing.
               
               Chap. 8.
               
                  
                     LODOVICO.
                  The improuidence
of many men in their talking, procu
                     
                        •
                     eth
diuers important diſorders in any
common wealth: onely through

                        •
                     he tongues want (in ſpeech) of thoſe
conditions, which (for iuſt and equall
direction) are moſt neceſſarie in diſcourſing.
Plato, of the hart of man, for refraining the tongue. And in regard Plato telles
vs, That the heart of man endureth
greater labour in refraining the tōgue,
then in amendment of life: me thinkes
men ſhould therefore imploy all their forces, in curbing the tongue,
to preuent infinite euills, and inconueniences of weightie import,
yea, verily ſuch, as when a man ſpeakes confuſedly, and without aduiſe,
how wiſe ſoeuer he be, yet he is reckoned but as a foole or a mad
man.The cenſure that is giuē on indiſcreet mē. And then this iudgement paſſeth on him, that many are wiſe by
booke, which are but fooles in talke, and in ſpeculation they know
much, but in practiſe are moſt ignorant: the reaſon hereof is alleaged
by Cicero, in one of his Epiſtles, where hee ſayeth, That a man is
knowne to be good or bad by the workes that he dooth:
                     Cicero his opinion of mēs workes and words. 
                     but whether he
bee fooliſh or wiſe, that is diſcerned by the wordes hee speaketh.
                  
                  If a man be held for a fool in his country, by the words he ſpeakes:

what auayles inſtruction of doctrine, to make him moſt learned? I
haue known diuers, that in the doctors Chaire, or pulpit, for diſputation,
no man could go beyond them in learning: but yet in familiar
conference,Familiar & ſociable conference, beſt bewrayeth him that is wiſe indeed. or ſociable conuerſing, none likewiſe could outſtep them
in fooliſhnes. Wherupon, look what honor they won in the chaire or
pulpit, they loſt it apparātly out of the ſchool, which makes me of this
mind, that a cōtinual ſilence were better out of the School, for maintenāce
of the reputation gotten by learning, than (by ſpeaking weakly)
to ſtaine the glory of good letters, with the idle froth of his owne
ſillineſſe.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Such kind of men are apt to teach others good doctrin,Many teache others, that want wiſedom themſelues.
yet haue as much need themſelues to be taught wiſedome: therefore,
for the better apprehenſion of this vertue, the Schoole of Pythagoras
were moſt meeteſt for them. But whence comes it (I beſeeche you)
that in the doctors Chaire,Why a doctor in the Chaire, and a foole in conference. men are ſo wiſe, and yet in familiar conference,
are little leſſe then fooles, be getting themſelues hatred by
their owne tongues? For doubtleſſe, if ſo many enuy them for their
learning, as many ſurely are aſhamed of their conuerſation, & all this
happeneth by the tongue only.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  If you would know the reaſon hereof, it is thus, when
they reade to their Schollers,When men ſpeak with the tongues of their Maſters, they are wiſe, & fools, when they ſpeake with their own they talke with other mens tongues, euē
with thoſe of the doctours, which they haue ſtudied: but in their own
familiar diſcourſing, they pronounce no more then the hart ſuggeſts:
& the tongue being the true tel-tale of the hart, if the heart do keepe
within the boſome, either laſciuiouſneſſe, pride, folly, immodeſty or
ambition, euen ſuch are the ſpeeches that flye from the tōgue. Theſe
are excellent inſtructers of others in the ſpeculatiue caſes, but haue
mighty need of the practiue themſelues, beeing empty of diſcretion,
yet full of ſciences.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  I remember a ſingular example to this purpoſe, which I
haue read of a certain king,Example of a king, and his three Sons, to approoue their wiſedom. who being the Father of three Sons: wold
needs approoue, which of them was the wiſeſt, & (after his deceaſe)
meeteſt for the gouernment of his kingdome, & began in this māner
with them. My Sons, you haue diuers times deliuered by open apparance,
& inſtant requeſts made vnto me, which of you three I would
leaue as ſucceſſor of my kingdome: which now I am reſolued to let
you know, & he ſhall be the only man among you three, that anſwers
to my queſtion with greateſt wiſedom, & thus it is. I would know of
you all, (if you might be tranſformed) to what kind of Foule you wold
beſt fancy to be compared, and likened?
                  
                     
The firſt anſwered,The firſt Son would be like the Eagle. I would be like the Eagle, which is the bird of
Ioue, and flyeth higher then all other foule: it ſtedfaſtly looketh vpon
the Spheare of the Sun, and is the impreſe for euery Prince, in regard
of his eſpeciall prerogatiue.The ſecōd Son would be like the Peacock. The ſecond ſayde, I would bee like
the Peacock, who hath the moſt delicate and faireſt feathers of all
Birds whatſoeuer. Quoth the third, I would be like the Crane, becauſe
he hath the longeſt neck,The third Son choſe to be like the Crane, & his reaſon. among all the foules of the ayre, and
if hee had but the gift of ſpeeche, he woulde be very wiſe and diſcreete
in talking: for, whatſoeuer his heart conceited, hardly, and
long time firſt would it be, before the mouth vttered it, becauſe they
ſtand ſo far aſunder. And in this ſpace, he may very well conſider
and deliberate, if what he hath to ſay, bee worthy vtteraunce or
no.
                  A matter very eſpecially beſeeming a king,A note for kings. rather then any other,
who ought, in dooing or ſaying to bee gouerned by wiſedome, to
ſhunne the euill report,A worthie Sentence. of dooing ſomthing vnbeſeeming the wreath
royall: as one very well ſayde: Qui bene vult fari, oportet meditari.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  This third Son (in my iudgement) was worthier of
the Crowne, then both the other, becauſe he had greateſt reſpect to
the office of royall dignity.Example of king Pirrhus, anſwering his Sons. 
                     Pirrhus king of the Epirotes did not thus,
who beeing demaunded by his ſonnes, to which of them he would
leaue the ſucceſſion of his kingdome, made anſwere: Hee ſhall be my
ſucceſſour, that hath his ſword keeneſt. Alluding thereby, that hee
would leaue his Realme to him, who was apteſt (by armes) to defend
it: neuer conſidering, that oftentimes a kingdome is better defended
by diſcreet ruling,The ſtrength of kings conſiſteth in their ſubiects loue. & winning the harts of the people, then by ſtearne
vnciuill Armes: for the principall nerue of the king, is the loue of his
ſubiects, which by wiſedome is ſooner wonne, then by ſeuerity of
war.
                  Many kings had the Iſraelites, but none wiſer then Salomon, and
thence it enſued,Example of Salomon. that he enioyed his gouernement in the felicity of
peace: ſo that not only he was neuer diſturbed with wars, but likewiſe
euery king accounted himſelfe happy, that could attain to be combined
with him in amity.Example of Dauid. 
                     Dauid was a martiall man, endued with great
ſtrength both from God and nature, ſo that in his younger dayes, he
puld a Beare and a Lyon in pieces: Neuertheleſſe, in the wordes
that he ſpake, hee declared himſelfe, to haue the neck of a Crane,
and truſted more in wiſedome,Pſal. 46. 12. then in his owne might: Meditatus
ſum nocte cum corde meo, exercitab am, & ſcopebam ſpiritum meum.
                     
Signifying therby,The Authors inference vpō the words of Dauid, worthy of all men to be regarded. this to be his conceite. Before I would open my
mouth to ſpeake, before I would let looſe my tongue to ſpeeche, &
before I would mooue my lips to forme a word: Iimagined well in
my heart, during the night time, on that which in the day enſuing, I
was to vtter, becauſe I would deliuer nothing with my mouth, that
might not become the dignity of a king. My ſpirit exerciſed & practiſed,
by forethinking, & then afterward pronouncing the ſame with
my to
                        •
                     gue, it was to the glory of god, & edifying of my neighbour:
therfore I ſwept, purged and clenſed my thoughts, from al the filth of
malice, ſlattery, infamy and trechery.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Quite contrary do they,Of ſuch as ſpeake whatſoeuer comes firſt to mouth Pſal. 40. 9. that vtter whatſoeuer comes
firſt to mouth, laſhing it liberally foorth, without conceiting and
foredeeming, whether it be good or euill, of whome wee may well
ſpeake that ſaying of Dauid: Ecce labia mea non prohibebo, Domine
tu ſciſt
                           •
                        s I will not refraine my lips, O Lord thou knoweſt. This is the reaſon
why they commit many errors, and become euen vnlike an vntamed
horſe without a bridle: beſide, oftentimes, by defect of the
lips,The defect of the lips do endanger both body & ſoule. the whole body and ſoule do ſuffer greeuance, dearly repenting,
what the tongue hath wilfully blabd abroade: which, if not in this
world, yet aſſuredly in the other, as Dauid, in very ſignificant wordes
teſtifieth in the 140. Pſalme,Pſal. 140. 8. 
                     Labor labiorum ipſorum operiet eos: Let
the miſchefe of their own lips come vpon them.
                     Why the Latins called the lips Labia. And therfore I think the
Latins called the lips Labia; à labendo, quia per labia homo labitur in
praeceps.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Some hold, that he would, or elſe might haue ſayd;
Labor labiorum ipſorum anguſtiabit,
                     Dauids words further commented on. or rather veſtiet eos: but in ſaying
that the trauaile of the lippes ſhall couer them, ſignifieth, that there
ſhall bee no parte of the bodie or the ſoule, but it will be anguiſhed,
by the defect of the lippes. Moreouer, ſuch will bee the payne of
the error, committed by the lippes, that their rage and choler
beeing waſted, the damned ſhall deuoure vp their owne tongues,
according as of ſome of them, the Secretarie of Chriſt Saint Iohn
telles vs in his Apocalypſe: Et commanducauerunt linguas ſuas prae
dolore, & blasphemauerunt Deum coeli prae doloribus & vulneribus
ſuis: And they gnawed their tongues for ſorone, and blasphemed the
God of heauen, for theyr paynes and their ſores.
                     A warning to the man negligent in his talking. Be more carefull
and reſpectiue (Oh negligent man) in thy talking, and conſider (miſerable wretche) how manye are damned in hell, not ſo much for
what they haue doone, as for their vile and blaſphemous words ſpoken.
               
               
                  
                  Claudio.
                  
                     Sampſon was a man of woonderfull ſtrength,Example of ſtrong Sampſon, ouercome by the words of a woman. yet
ſo ſoone as he was ouercome by an immodeſt ſillie woman, he was
bound, and deliuered into the hands of his enemies, who pluckt our
his eyes, and made him (like a beaſt) to grinde in a mill: all which
happened to him, by beeing ouer careleſſe of his tongue, and too
too readye in the labour of his lippes.Dauids exhortation. 
                     Dauid exhorteth them,
that forethinke not well what they woulde ſaye, to lay a puniſhment
on themſelues, anſwerable to ſuch neglect, thereby to preuente
a farre greater detriment:Pſal. 4. 5. 
                     Quae dicitis in cordibus veſtris,
& in cubilibus veſtris, compungimini: Examine your own harts,
and in your chambers, and be ſtill, as meaning, to inflict the penaltie
there,Of the chaſtiſemēt of the heart. where the crime was committed. The heart firſt contriued
it, before the tongue ſpake it; the hart firſt cried guiltie, ere the
tongue did blab it: therefore the heart muſt haue his due chaſtiſement
impoſed on it; Sacrificate ſacrificiū iuſtitiae &c:
                     Pſal. 4. 6. 
                     Offer the ſacrifices of
righteouſneſſe, &c.
                  
                  This ſacrifice of righteouſneſſe, ſaith old Father Auguſtine,
                     S. Auguſtine. is the
very ſame, where of king Dauid ſpeaketh in another place: Sacrificium
Deo ſpiritus contribulatus,
                     Pſal. 50. 18. 
                     cor contritum & humiliatum Deus non
despicies: The ſacrifices of God are a contrite ſpirit, a contrite and a broken
heart (O God) thou wilt not despiſe.
                     The ſentence on the hart, for cauſing the tongue to ſin, and the ſoules ſacrifice for the heart. In the hart was firſt of all conceiued and committed the ſinne of the tongue, therfore the Iibbet of
death ſhould firſt be ſet vp for the hart, & there, the ſoule dooing her
true repentance, ſhee is to endure the iuſtice of ſacrifice on her ſelfe,
cauſing the hart to be intirely ſory, euen from the very bottom therof,
& to weep bloudy tears, in true compunctiō, promiſing, neuer to miniſter matter more to the tongue, without ſincere & deliberate premeditation.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  The flatterer ſhould haue ſome reaſon,A leſſon for the flatterer, to refraine his tongue, in ſinning againſt nature. to refrain his
glib and oylie tongue, becauſe ſilence is much better, then falſe and
coyned lying ſpeeches: for that is a ſinne againſt nature, becauſe, the
tongue being the diſcouerer of the heart, in ſpeaking otherwiſe then,
then as the hart thinketh, it appears to haue ſome want in his naturall
office. Pliny affirmeth,Plinie, concerning the two veynes of the tongue. 
                     That the tongue of a man hath two veines, one
correspondent to the hart, the other agreeable to the braine, the place
where reaſon makes his abiding.
                  
                  It ſeemeth, that the diuine architect did this, to inſtruct thereby,
that we ought not to haue one thing in the tongue, and another in
the hart: much leſſe ſhould wee profer,An excellent Alluſion. with the tongue, all that is
hidden and lockt vp in the heart, but only thoſe things, wherof reaſō
                     
hath firſt taſted. Whereupon the wiſe man ſayd: Qui ambulat fraudulenter,
reuelat arcana: qui autem fidelis eſt, celat amici commiſſum,
The flatterer praiſeth and blameth,The flatterer obſerueth the humor of him he wold flatter not according to what he hath
in his heart, but agreeable to that, which hee perceiues pleaſing to
him whome he would flatter: therefore he neuer faſtneth on any proper
ſentence, but turnes and windes ſtill euery way, not much vnlike
the clapper of a bell,Apte compariſons. or like a vane on a houſe top, as the winde
bloweth.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The Satyrick Poet, Iuuenal, paints him forth (to the life)
in a Satyre of his.
                  
                     Rides? maiori cachinno concutitur.Iuuenall his verſes of the flatterer.
                     
                     Flet, ſi lachrimas aſpexit amici;
                     Nec dolet: iguiculum, brumae ſi tempore poſc
                           •
                        s,
                     Accipit endromidem; ſi dixeris, aeſtuo, ſudat.
                     Nocte dieque poteſt alienum ſumere vultum,
                     A' facie iacta
                           •
                        e manus, laudare parat us.
                  
                  
                     Plato in his Phedon,
                     Plato his cenſure of the flatterer. and in Menexemus, calles the flatterer,
A wilde furie infested in man, and au vncleane deuill, that with vnhappie
meates, and hurtfull brutiſhneſſe, nouriſheth defiled thoughtes.
He compares him likewiſe,1. He names him. 
                     To a Iuggler, an Enchaunter, or a poyſoner,
                     2. He cōpares him.
                     who by deceiuing wordes, worke mens mindes to their owne willes.
Hee giues him alſo the name Of a ſeperator, becauſe he is diuided
in himſelfe,
                     3. He alludes him. 
                     keeping one thing in his breaſt, and vttering another
with the tongue The Graſhopper bathed in oyle, dyeth, but afterward,
being waſht with vinegar,A compariſon of the flatterer to the Graſhopper, & the Alluſion. he comes to life againe: Euen ſo,
many are ſlayne by the oyly tongue of a flatterer, which afterwarde,
by a iuſt reprehenſion, doone with charitie, doe recouer life againe.
                  
                     This made holy Dauid ſaye, Corripiet me iuſtus me in miſericordia,Pſal. 141. 5.
& increpabit me: oleum autem peccatoris non impinguet caput meum.
Let the righteous ſmite me, for that is a benefit, & let him reprooue me,
and it ſhall be a pretious oyle, that ſhall not breake mine head. The
reaſon heereof, his ſonne Salomon teacheth vs, where hee ſayeth:
Meliora ſunt vulnera diligentis,Prouer. 27. 6. quàm frrudulenta oſcula odientis.
The woundes of a louer are better then the falſe kiſſes of a
                        •
                      e
                        •
                     emie.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Let euery ſuch tongue be dumbe in a chriſtian common
wealth,Pſal. 31. 18. 
                     Muta fiant labia doloſa; Let the lying lips be made dumb,
                     Flatterers cō
                        pared to Sāpſons Lyon.
which are like to the Lyon ſlayne by the Nazarite Sampſon, that had
hony in the mouth,Judg. 14. 8. and within the bowells was all full of vermine.

Euen ſuch are flatterers, all honye in their mouthes, but their inwards
very verminous,Flatterers cō
                        pared to the whiteſt Swans and ſtinking with foule putrified intentions. They
are like vnto Swans, who haue ſweete ſongs in their mouthes, and
are ſo adorned with the whiteſt feathers, as euerye one woulde
iudge theyr fleſh to bee as white and ſightlye: notwithſtanding,
it is blacker then quenched coales. Therefore the children of Iſraell
were forbidden to feede on them,Leuit. 11. 18. as wee may reade in Leuitieus.
                  
                  In like manner,Alluſiō to the former compariſon. the tongue of the deceiuer, which in apparance
makes ſhewe of a white conſcience, onelye by fayre ſpeeches, and
ſweete ſound of counterfeited commendations: dooth neuertheleſſe
declare by euident proofe, that theyr heartes are fowllie diſeaſed,
and their conſciences very oughly deformed, which makes mee
holde it for an eſpeciall good rule, to keepe out of the ſent or ſauour
of ſuch,Compariſō of the Swans death with the flatterer. and by no meanes to haue any conuerſation with them. The
Swanne dyeth ſinging, and the flatterer (in his falſe prayſings)
falles downe deade in ſinne, and couets the death likewiſe of all
ſuch as liſten to his lyes, therefore; Muta fiant labia doloſa.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  And who knowes (my Lorde) whether the holye
ſpirite made alluſion to this or no, when (as wee reade in Deuteronomy)
the Iſraelites were commaunded:Deut. 22. 11. 
                     Non indueris veſtimento, quod
ex lana linoque contextum ſit?
                     Example of the Iſraelites prohibition, to weare garments of linnē and wollen. 
                     Thou ſhalt not we are a garment of diuers
ſorts: as of wollen and linnen together? Little did the Lorde reſpect,
whether the Hebrewes garments were wouen either of wollen, or of
linnen; but he well foreſawe, that men were not truely ſimple, and
adorned with puritye. Therefore hee prohibited a commixed garment
of wollen and linnen,The authors application of the prohibitiō, and Alluſion to the ſpeeches of the flatterer. as forbidding (thereby) a double and mixed
inwarde cloathing. As for example; all deceiptfull arguings,
kinde ceremonies, complementes, ſuting both to vile and wicked
purpoſe. And ſuch are the ſpeeches of the flatterer, and falſe hearted,
euen according to their reſemblance within, for there they appeare
to bee ſoft and delicate like linnen: but let them bee ſearched
throughlye, and they will bee found to bee more ſharpe, then the
rougheſt wooll; yet ſeeming, to be of moſt holy and obſeruant kind of
life.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  This ſimilitude is more conuenable for hypocrytes,Of Hypocrits ſuppoſed to be figured in this ſimilitude.
then any other of fraudulente and deceiuing condition: for
outwardly, they will bee thought to bee of very ſtricte life, onelie,
that the worlde may repute them to be holy: yet inwardly, are very

impure and loathſome in their harts,Eſay. 29. 13. of whom it is written: Populus
iſte ore ſuo, & labiis ſuis glorificat me, cor autem eius longè eſt à me:
This people come neer vnto me with their mouth, & honor me with their
lips: but haue remooued their heart far from me. In regard therfore ſilence
is ſo conuenient, and more pleaſing to God, then this idle labour
without fruite:Hipocrites are diſgracefully ſilent. 
                     Muta ſiant labia doloſa. For they are ſayde
to be diſgracefully ſilent, and ſtrooke dumbe eternallie, whoſe
prayſes are vnfruitfull, and of no regarde in the preſence of
God.
                  But, ſpeaking of the flatterer, me thinkes, he hath a moſt apt compariſon
with the voyce called Eccho, whereof the wiſe man ſpeaking,Sap 17. 18.
ſayth: Reſonans de altiſſimi
                           •
                         montibus Eccho: The ſound or Eccho
that anſwereth againe in the hollow mountaine.
                     The flatterer cōpared to the voyce of Eccho, with the deſcription of Eccho, and what it is. Eccho is the reſoūding
of the voyce, or of a noyſe formed in concaue places & cauerny, & rebounding
thence back again, ſuch as perchance are the vallies, amōg
the moūtains or ſtony places, & it hath this property: that if you ſing,
it ſings again, if you lament, it lamēteth, if laugh, it laugheth, if ſpeak,
it ſpeaketh, and in breefe, it is a counterfetting Ape of the voyce of
man.
                  Such in all reſpects is the flatterer,Alluſiō to the flatterer. imitating the actions and geſtures
of him whom he ſeeketh to flatter: there is neuer any diſtinct or
proper ſentence in his mouth, but euermore he directs himſelfe by opinion
and forme,The flatterers behauiour. If his obiect ſpeake well or ill, he affirmeth all: if
he greeue, he alſo greeueth: if he laugh, he likewiſe ioyeth, and
dooth euery thing till hee reache the height of his owne intent.
                  This vice raignes too plentifully in princes Courts, and great mens
dwellings,Where flatterers are moſt abyding. for they are the places of flatterers ſtipēdary wages, wherfore
I hold it was ſayd to very good purpoſe: Reſonans de altiſſimis
montibus. Becauſe they cannot liue in lowe vallies, or in the humble
dale of poore mens houſes,Poore places are no habitations for flatterers. where is no hope of any profite at all:
therefore they flye to the higheſt, to the eminent mountaines of
the greate, and to the goulden Sunne-ſhine of wealthye Seigniors.
                  Moreouer,Another compariſon of Eccho. it is to be noated, that as the Eccho neuer anſweres
where a firme voyce is made, or when one ſmiteth, but as it were a
far off, and in a contrary or ouerthwart place: Euen ſo the flatterer
ſhapes his blow,How the ſame holds with the flatterer. & formes the appearance of faire words, in the eye
only of him he flatters, but elſe-where it reſoūdeth, in a further place
it reuerberates, and the intention is in a quite contrary kind. Landant

quem perdere volunt,
                     Flatterers compared to wine. ſayth the goulden tongu'd Oratour. They are
like vnto wine, which makes a ſhewe of deſcending downe to the
heeles, yet mounts aloft vp into the head. Therefore, the great Lords
of this world of ours,A ſentence for great Lords. that haue their houſes filled with flatterers, are
more beggers, and barren of truth, then of mony.
                  A rare example,An excellent example of king Antiochus, & a poor country man, recorded by Plutarch. and highly fitting our purpoſe, Plutarch telles vs,
of king Antiochus, who going diſguiſed into the cottage of a plaine
country peazant, demaunded of him, What he heard abroade reported
of the king. The poore man anſwered, and tould him the truth; That
very much euill was spoken of him, to weet, that he was an vniuſt
man, a mightie taxer of his people, a despiſer of the poore, and diuers
ſuch like other ill qualities. The King returning to his Palace
royall, called for his ſecret chamberlaynes and pages, commaunding
them to put on his kingly veſtimentes, and taking the
crowne from off his owne head, deliuered this moſt woorthye
ſentence. Auferte iſtam hinc, ſine qua, vera de me audio, & reſciſco.
                     A good noate for kings.
                     Take away this Crowne from before me, without which, I can heare
the trueth of my ſelfe, but with it, a thouſand lyes are toulde
me.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Great is the infelicity of Princes,Princes and great men ſeldome heare the trueth of themſelues. and potent Lords,
who very ſeldome, or neuer know the trueth of themſelues, onelye
through the occaſion of falſe and lying tongues. Miſerable is hee,
who by giuing eare to the fraudulente prayſes of flatterers, knowes
not his owne peculiar defectes: which (in feare of his dignitie)
the good are likewiſe kept back from telling him, perceiuing him
altogether caried away with theyr abhominable flatteries, whence
ſpringeth manye daungerous inconueniences,The words of S. Gregory. according as Saint
Gregorie aſfirmeth. Delinquentem namque eum redarguere
nullus praeſumit, & in exemplum culpa vehementer extenditur,
quando pro reu
                           •
                        rentia ordinis peccator honoratur.
                  
                  The peſtilent tongue of a flatterer, is compared to the tongue
of a Cat,The flatterers tongue compared to the tongue of a Cat. which although it bee verye flexible, and ready, yet
it is notwithſtanding verye hurtfull, and much enciting to the
conſumption: for, verye gladlye ſhee will licke a fat bodye,
and (by little and little) conſume him to lank leaneneſſe. The verye
ſame propertye hath the flatterer: for, with his falſe tongue,
hee will neuer leaue prayſing the riche,How it holds in the flatteres ſmoothing, and euen
licking (as it were) away the fatneſſe of theyr temporall goods,
till (by little and little) hee drawe awaye all, leauing him verye
lanke, and leanelye diminiſhed: wherefore woorthilye ſpake

the wiſe man of ſuch a tongue:Eccle. 20. 15. 
                     Qui enim edunt pau
                           •
                        m illius,
falſa lingua ſunt: They that eate his breade, speake euill of
him.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Right well may they bee called falſe tongues, becauſe
they haue no other then a feigned appearance,Compariſon of a ſhadowe. euen like vnto
a ſhadowe, which hauing no ſubſtaunce at all in it ſelfe, followeth
the bodye oppoſed to the light, and by deceiptfull appearaunce,
woulde make it ſeeme greater then it is: ſo that a childe, or a
Peigmei dwarfe, thinkes himſelfe thereby to be as greate as a Giant.
And ſo,The ſhadow counterfeits al the actions of the body. without any adiunction of ſubſtaunce, growes greater and
greater by vanitye, counterfetting all the motions of the bodye,
ſtandes, ſittes, walkes, and mooues, according as the bodye ſtands,
fittes,Alluſion to the flatterer. walkes or mooues. The very like qualities may wee obſerue
in a flatterer, imitating and purſuing euerye action of his flattered
obiecte, ſo long as the light of proſperous fortune laſteth:
but that once clowding, the flatterer hides his heade alſo, as
lacking more light, whereby hee might ſtill followe the ſame
body.
                  The prayſes of ſuch mouthes,Of the praiſes of a flatterers tongue. although they raiſe thee (in imagined
greatneſſe) to the heauens, ſet thy conceites on fire, with worthineſſe of a diademe, and make thee preſume beyond all compaſſe: yet
all this notwithſtanding, thou waſt but a man at the firſt, thou art
now become no more; as for their commendations and vain counſels
they were but idle ſhadows, hauing no other ſubſtance, but what thy
follies lent them.Compariſon of Apes, Parrats and Parochitoes voyces. Apes are they, in imitation of mens actions, Parats
or Parochitoes in theyr voyces, ſpeaking no more, then by the
eare is taught them. They haue no certaintie of ſentence, no ſtability
in appearaunce,Compariſon of water. no permanencie in opinion: but euen (like vnto water)
doe take the forme that the figure giues it, eyther round, ſquare
or triangulare. Let this peſtiferous tongue bee ſilente, vnwoorthye
of anye vſe of ſpeeche. Muta fiant labia doloſa.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  This accurſed kinde of tongue,The flatterers tongue robs a man of the trueth. beſides his nouriſhing
the ſinner in all vice & diſorder, it robs him of the very deareſt thing
he hath in all the world: namely, the trueth, for which men imploye
their very vttermoſte endeuours, and labour the very depth of all
their ſtudies: whereupon, they that ought moſt to be informed of the
trueth,Compariſō of dumb dogs. become banquerupts of it, by theſe dombe dogges, that better
knowe how to fawne, then barke: Canes muti non valentes latrare:
They are all dumb dogs,
                     Eſay. 56. 10. 
                     they cannot barke.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sen
                           ••
                        a writing moſt elegantly vpon this ſubiect,Seneca in Epiſt. ad liber. fayeth in his
Epiſtle ad liber. ſuum. Monſtrabo cuius rei inopia, laborant magna
faſtigia, & quid omnia posſidentibus deſit; ille ſcilicet qui veritatem
dicat.
                     Seneca in Epiſt. 2. And in the ſecond Epiſtle he iuſtifieth the ſame: Incredibile eſt
multis, quàm magnos viros dulcedo orationis abducat Cookes are likewiſe
reſembled to flatterers,Compariſon of Cookes. for they dreſſe the viands, and order thē
in ſuch māner, as they know to be moſt pleaſing to their Lords taſte.
Biou of Boriſthenes,
                     Bion his anſwere of the moſt dāgerous beaſt. the Athenian Philoſopher, & a great Sophiſter,
being asked, what kind of beaſt among al the reſt, was moſt daungerous,
preſētly replyed, & very wiſely, Inter fer as, tyrānus; inter manſueta, adulator.
Among the wilde, the tyrant, among the gentle, the flatterer.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Aſſuredly, among the wilde beaſtes, what is more
hurtfull and cruell, then they of tyrannous nature: who vniuſtlie will
ouerſway & command, where they haue no right, kill, robbe and
vſe violence,The flatterers tongue exceedeth the crueltie of wilde beaſts. againſt all equitye? Yet dooth a flatterers tongue
ſurpaſſe this cruell tyrannye: becauſe, vppon ſuch manifeſte
inſulting, the reſt haue meanes, to ſaue themſelues by flight:
but the flatterers trecherous prayſes, embraceth, inueigleth and
ſo nouſleth, as men dye by ſuch deceiuing, and, by ſhewe
of giuing life, receiue their owne death, onelye becauſe the effectes
worke contrary,Compariſō of the flatterer, to a looking Glaſſe, when a man ſees himſelfe in it. to what the tongue vttereth. Like to a
looking Glaſſe, which if one take in his hand, and looke circumſpectly
into it, hee ſhall euermore behold contrary operations
to what himſelfe dooth. If he looke into the Eaſt, the ſhadow
repreſented in the glaſſe, it lookes directly into the VVeſt:
if he turne to the Weſt, then it beholds the Eaſt: if hee mooue
the right arme, it ſtirres the left: if he cloſe the right eye,
it ſhuts the left. And euen thus is the behauioure of flatterers,
they commend with theyr mouthes, when they condemne
in theyr heartes, and when you imagine theyr mindes to be moſt
of all on friendſhippe, then are theyr heartes fixed onely vpon your
purſe.
                  This made the Prophet Dauid to ſay:Pſal. 12. 1. 2. 
                     Dimiuutae ſuut veritates à
filiis hominum. Vana loquuti ſunt vnuſquiſ que ad proximum ſuum; labia
doloſa, in corde, & corde loquuti ſunt: The faithfull are failed frō among
the children of men. They ſpeake deceitefully euery man with his neighbour,
                     The flatterer aptly cōpared to an Hailot in her behauiour
                     flattering with theyr lippes, and ſpeake with a double hart.
Not vnlike the Harlot, that hath diſhoneſt wordes in her mouth,
when her intent is to the purſe, which beeing once emptye,

her vayne talke then ceaſſeth. Euen ſo deales the flatterer, riches
once ended, all commendations are concluded: therefore
as the fire is not nouriſhed without fuell,Two excellent Similies. or the Lampe without
oyle, ſo flatterers cannot liue, but where ſubſtance and wealth
is.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Our breath is hot or cold,Compariſō of our breath, according as the mouth is cloſed or oepned: ſo in flatterers as the purſe is ſhut or opened. according to the motion
of the mouth: if you extend or enlarge the mouth wide,
the breath that commeth foorth is verie warme and hote; but
make a reſtrainte with the lippes, and then the breath will bee
as cold againe. Some reſemblaunce likewiſe haue flatterers
with this ſimilie, if the purſe mouth be largelye opened, and
good ſummes of money doe come foorth: as wide doe they then
ſtretche theyr mouthes, and no warmthe ſhall want of their hote
prayſings, beſide, well tuned ſongs or Panegyricks of woonderfull
oſtentations. But reſtrayne the purſes ſtrings, to a narower compaſſe,
and let no money at all bee ſeene: then, as cloſe will they keepe theyr
lippes, and curtall vp theyr fayre ſpeeches, altering then the former
noate, to a recanting Palinode, ſinging nothing but checks, blames
and by-nippes, in cold breath, according to the ſaying of Dauid: Sepulchrum
patens eſt guttur corum,
                     Pſal. 13. 5. 
                     linguis ſuis dolosè agebant: Their
throate is an open ſepulcher, with their tongues they haue deceiued.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  To this kinde of deceiuing, I thinke the wiſe
man made his alluſion,The wiſe mās counſel, not to iudge wine, by the pleaſātnes or ſweetneſſe. when hee ſayde, that wee ought not iudge
the wine, according to the pleaſing ſweeteneſſe thereof: becauſe in
drinking, it may relliſhe ſweete to the taſte, but in the ende, bite
like a Serpent, and caſt his deadlye poyſon abroade, like vnto a
Cockatrice, therefore wee ſaye: Dulcia ſunt amica natur
                           •
                        , and
hence it comes, that a man beeing a friend to ſweet things, happens
to be ſtifled by them.Prou. 23. 31. 32. 
                     N
                           •
                         intuearis vinum quando flaueſcit, cùm
splenduerit in vino color eius. Ingreditur blandè, & in nouiſſimo
mordebit vt coluber, & ſicut Regulus venena diffundet.
                  
                  They that are delighted ſo much (as Alexander Magnus) with
the ſweete praiſes of their flatterers,Alexander delighted with his flatterers praiſes. become alſo by them ſtuffed
and filled full of pride, like bladders bigge ſwolne with wind, and
no other ſubſtance at all in them. Whoſe ending (commonly) is like
that of Acteons,
                     Acteon deuoured by his owne dogs. beeing eaten vp by the dogges which himſelfe
had nouriſhed. VVherefore the Prophet Eſay, foreſeeing
this euill, and that by ſuch like beguilings of the tongue,

many do ſuffer thē
                     
                        •
                     elues to be deceiued, thus ſpake. Popule 
                           •
                        eus, qui
te beatum dicunt,
                     Eſay. 3. 12. 
                     ipſi te de
                           ••
                        piunt. O my people, they that terme you happy,
do deceiue you.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  I am (my Lord) of your opinion, that the ſweete deceiptes
of ſuch, do induce to much euill: & by their pleaſing, do foſter
vp many vices.Antiſthenes his iudgement of flatterers. 
                     Antiſthenes, Prince of the Cynick ſect, Iudged it leſſe
harme to light into power of Rauens, then into the hands of flatterers.
And another Philoſopher, quarrelling with one about words, many
vnſeemely ſpeeches (threatning death) paſſed between them.Example of one quarrelling with a Philoſopher. Quoth
one of them: Perhpas I may line to ſee thee hangd, and then the Rauons.
to come peck aut thine ayes; whereto the other anſwered. Perhpas I
may liue to ſee thee fall among flatterers, for Rauens peck out the eyes
but of the dead onely, whereas flatterers dig them forth while we are li
                        
                           •
                        ing.
Wherefore, they that giue maintenance to ſuch counterfaite
tongues,Compariſon of blind men, and the Alluſion. are euen like vnto blind men, who very well heare what is
ſayde vnto them, but cannot behold any thing done. So are the flutterers
heard & their blandiſhments fly liberally in mens faces: but
fight of their dealing is bereft thē, they are led away by their ſmoothe
enticing, till ſweetelye they haue deuoured all their ſubſtaunce
vp.
                  This made Diogenes call Ariſtippus (Dioniſius flatterer) a dog:Diogenes, Ariſtippus, Cō
                        ſtantine Horace. and
another time, a well coucht ſnare. Conſtantine called the flatterer, a
Moth. Horace the Lirick Poet; giues him the name of a Fox. Aeneas
Siluius reporteth, that Sigiſnound the Emperor, ſoothing a flatterer
vp in his follie,Aeneas Siluius concerning Sigiſmund the Emperor. and vſing familiar geſtures with him, at laſt lifted vp
his hād, & gaue him a good box on the eare, & the other finding fault
with this iniury done him, ſayd: Alas my Lord, why do you ſmite me?
the Emperor replyed. Why doſt thou bite me? A blowe is the beſt reward
for a bite.
                     Sentence. And in ſooth, it may be very aptly ſo tearmed, becauſe nothing
bites the ſoule more, in feeding it with the vaine breath of idle
vices.
                  The flatterers tongue dealeth,Compariſō of a mother, and her young Son. as a mother is wont to do with her
young ſon, who crying, becauſe ſhe gaue him a blow for falling, ſhe
then payes him another, in a kind perſwaſion, that ſhe did it to no other
end, but becauſe he ſhould looke ere he leapt. So the flatterer, hauing
made a yong nouice of his eare-tyed fondling,Alluſion to the flatterers behauiour. and ſo ſhrunke
him, that he is ſcant able to ſtād any lōger, he giues him blowes, with
one bitter gird or other, which the fool taking vnkindly, the flatterer
ſhrinks away from him, bidding him, to be better aduiſed afterward.
And then (though too late) he can well perceiue, that he commended

vices to him,The fruits of folly, found afterward. as if they had been vertues, that he led him in infamous
courſes, which true friends would haue checkt him for, and now as
the flatterer ceaſſeth, euen ſo his former ſhame and follye ceaſſeth.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Theſe latter words of yours, make me call to minde
an excellent example,Example of the builders of Babell. which we read in holy Geneſis, of Noahs poſterity,
who ſayde one to another: Venite, faciamus nobis Turrim,
cuius culmen pertingat ad Coelum. But they could not finiſh their
labour begunne,Gen. 11. 4. for God confuſed their tongues in ſuch manner,
as one vnderſtoode not what another ſayde. VVhereby enſued,
that when the murmurer asked for Lyme aboue, they beneath wold
bring him vp ſtones, and when as hee did call for ſtones, then hee
ſhould bee ſure to haue water. Heereuppon they were enforced to
giue ouer worke, which before continued in progreſſion, ſo
long as they beneathe coulde ſupplye theyr demaundes aboue.
                  The infamous Tower of ſinne,A morall explication of the former Example. pride and vayne glorie, wretched
worldly men builded vp, againſt God, to make their names
glorious on the face of the earth: and ſo long it laſted, and ſo high aſcended,
as, while their ſeruants and flatterers could miniſter matter
to them, extolling what they did, ſoothing their conceite, and magnifying
their vaine actions, the onely ſtuffe and furniſhment, to
build vaine glories towers withal. Whereas, if their ſinnes had beene
reprooued, their mightie follie and inſolence checked: the worke
had beene left off, and the weight of their offences better remembred.
                  
                     Philopoemines rehearſeth,Example of Philopoemenes ſētence on a Trumpetter. that a Trumpet of the contrarye Armic,
beeing taken in the battayle, the Generall gaue commaund
that hee ſhoulde bee ſlaine: to whome the Trumpet anſwered?
Wherefore ſhould I be ſlaine, that neuer vnſheathed my ſword againſt
any man in the field? Whereto the Generall replyed. Albeit with
thy weapon thou haſt not kild any man, yet with thy mouth thou haſt
giuen death to many, prouoking on the violent furie of the battatle,
by the ſound of thy trumpet ſent from thy mouth.
                     How flatterers do murther men. Euen ſo doe
flatterers murther more, by falſe extolling and ſupporting their vices,
then are ſlayne in a field of enemies, by the hands of valiant ſouldiers;
which made the Prophet Ieremie ſaye:Ierem. 50. 4. 
                     Venite, percutiamus cum
lingua.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  It is moſt true, that much (beeing gotten by the
falſe tongue.) makes more errors eſcape, then elſe would haue bin

committed. Seneca decalareth, that euery time Xenocrates ſounded
his Trumpet,Example of Alexanders readineſſe in vnſheathing his ſword. 
                     Alexander the greate, hearing it, would draw foorth
his ſword, although he was not in war, yet euen as if he had been
in the battaile fighting. The dancing inſtructer, or teacher of dancing,
no ſooner heareth the Lute or the Violen, but his feet begin to moue
preſently:Example of the dancing teacher. & ſo ſoone as the flatterer lets his lying tongue walke, it
puffes vp proud minds immediatly, which conceite of their own vain
glory.
                  
                     VVhen Ieroboam made the golden Calues,
                     Example of Ieroboam, & his golden Calues. 
                     and the people
honoured them as ſo many Gods: there wanted no pray
                           •
                        ers of
his workemanſhippe, cup-quaffers, ſingers, dauncers and feaſters.
                     Example of Aaron. 
                     So when Aaron erected the golden Calfe, in the plaine
by the ſteepe mounte Sinai: mayne commended this ill acte
of Aarons,Exod. 32. 4. 5. 6. 
                     ſaying: Hi ſunt Dij tui Iſraell, qui te eduxerunt
de terra Aegypti: Theſe bee thy Gods O Iſrael, which brought
thee out of the land of Aegypt. VVhereuppon, they builded Altars,
offered ſacrifices, making ſolemne feaſtings, they ſung,
ſounded and daunced,
                     Aarons view of the peoples vanity. 
                     at the dedication of theyr Altars: Quod
cum vidiſſet Aaron, edificauit altare coram eo, & praeconis voce
clamauit, dicens: Cras ſolemnitas Domini eſt. Surgenteſque
mane, obtulerunt holocauſta, & hoſtias pacificas, & ſedit populus
manducare, & bibere, & ſurrexerunt ludere. When Aaron ſawe
that, he made an Altar before it, and Aaron proclaymed, ſaying:
To morow ſhall be the holyday of the Lord. So they roſe vp the next day
in the morning, and offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings:
alſo the people ſate them downe, to eate and drinke, and roſe vppe to
play.
                  See what enſueth of the flattering tongue,Alluſion to the flattering tongue. of howe much
euill it was the occaſion, by infamous prayſes. If Ieroboam and
Aaron had had anye about them, that in charitye and zeale
woulde haue reprooued them, as they had manye flatterers,
commending theyr vnworthye worke: doubtleſſe they had
neuer moulded and framed thoſe Calues. Therefore very well
ſayde the Prophet Oſe,
                     Oſe. 7. 3. ſpeaking of ſuch flatterers: In malitia ſua
laetificauerunt Regem. They make the king glad with their wickedneſſe.
                     The tongue of the flatterer nurſeth vp much euil, in the common wealth, and princes houſes
                  
                  If this tongue of the flatterer, doe nurſe vp ſo much euill in the
commonwealth, but more eſpecially in Princes Palaces, and great
mens houſes: much better were it for all Chriſtendom, to ſentence it
ſelfe with perpetual ſilence, and be (as it were) eternallye dumb, then

either by geſtures of the bodie, or with the tongue, to be flatterers of
any. An infectious plague, a damnable diſeaſe, a ſweete poyſon, and
a deadly hony baite,A ſecond Iudas, killing by kiſſing. is the tongue of a flatterer: inueigling by entiſing,
poyſoning by ſmoothe perſwading, and (like to a ſecond Iudas)
killing men by kiſſing.
               
               Finis Cap. 8.
            
            
               
                  The Argument.
                  Diſcourſing of the leaſing and lying tongue, what an infamous ſinne a
lye is, and how highly God is pleaſed with trueth: of whoſe excellencie
and beauty, ariſeth a profitable ſhort diſcourſe, concluding,
that a ſtrict ſilence is more commendable, then telling of lyes. which
are a greatly diſpleaſing to God, becauſe he is the truth himſelfe. Alſo
approouing, that lying is ſo brutiſh and damnable, a
                        •
                      no one can ſo
much as thinke thereon, without a purpoſe, to deface ſome part of
trueth.
               
               Chap. 9.
               
                  
                     LODOVICO.
                  Flatterie (for certaintye) is a
moſt vile ſinne,Lying is a greater ſin then flattery. as already hath beene at large
approoued, but (in any caſe) I account that to
be a greater ſinne then it, which (by contemning
the trueth) flatters it ſelfe more then the
flatterer can doe; for, if the flatterer were not
liſtened vnto, neither could he continue, or any
one be flattered by him. But man is ſuch an enemie,
Man is an vtter enemy to reprehenſion. to reprehenſion of errors committed, as he can no ſooner heare
himſelfe (by trueth) reprooued: but immediately ariſeth, an inteſtine
hatred toward the reproouer, whereupon firſt ſprung the auncient
adage,Prouerbe. 
                     Verit as odium parit. From hence afterward enſued; that,

in regard men were ſo enuious againſt reprooſe, others became as ſilent,
contrary to the debt of charity, and no man woulde check his
neighbours vice, becauſe he made a ſcruple of diſpleaſing him: but rather
commended his error, as if it had bin a vertue, & this was no other
then meer flatterie it ſelfe.
                  Man of himſelfe is ſo proude by nature,Man is a great louer of liberty. as he would not willingly
be reprehended: beſide, he is ſuch a louer of liberty, as he would haue
all things lawfull, which likes himſelf to act. Trueth hath a greate
proportion and ſimilitude,Compariſon of the truth to hony. with hony, which although it be ſweete:
yet neuertheleſſe, beeing applyed to any wound, it makes it to ſuffer
great anguiſh. So the trueth, though it be amiable, moſt excellent,
and of all to be deſired,Alluſion. yea euen of the lyer himſelfe, who albeit he
lyes willingly, and hath therefore no regard, but of them to whome
he telles his lyes:The wounded ſinner, how he takes reprehenſion. yet notwithſtanding, to the vulnerated and ſmitten
ſinner, very greeuouſly gaſht and wounded with ſinne, it is painefull
and bitter, when his faultes are iuſtly reprooued by trueth. Therefore
the Prophet Eſay, lamenting for ſuch, called them: The ſons of lying,
louers of lyes, and enemies to the diuine lawe, which is nothing elſe but
the truth.Pſal. 119. 86. For Dauid ſayth: Omnia mandata tua veritas: All thy commandements
are trueth.
                  
                  Hereupon it aroſe, that men would ſay to holy Prophets, and preachers
of the trueth:Mens reproouing of Prophets & preachers. ſpeake of taſtable things, and ſuch as are pleaſing,
ſtand not to diſturb our content with reprehenſions. Filii mendaces,
filii nolentes audire legem Dei, qui dicunt vident ibus; nolite videre, loquimini
nobis placētia.
                     Eſay. 40. 15. Afterward it came to this paſſe, that euery one
perceiuing, how loth men were to haue their iniquities blamed:
ſome gaue themſelues to publique applauſe,Time ſeruers and pleaſers of mens affections. and became pleaſers of
mens affections, not onely forbearing to reprooue them, but meerely
extolled them. Whereat God grew ſo aggreeued, as he ſayd by Ieremie
the Prophet.Ierem. 5. 30. 31. 
                     Stup
                           •
                        r & mirabilia facta ſunt in terra: Prophetae prophet
abant mendacium, & ſacerdotes applaudebant manibus ſuis, & populus
meus dilexit talia, quid igitur fiet in nouis ſimo eius? An horrible
and filthy thing is committed in the land: The Prophets prophecie lyes,
& the prieſts receiue gifts in their hands, and my people delight therein.
What will ye then do in the end thereof? As much to ſay, as when
ſhall theſe lyes appeare before the high trueth, God himſelfe?
                  
                     Of theſe and ſuch like,
                     S. Pauls prediction of ſuch louers of flatteries. 
                     that loue flatteries, and become refuſers
of holy correction, Saint Paul foretold, when he wrote vnto Timothy.
Erit enim tempus,2. Tim. 4. 3. 4. cùm ſanam doctrinam non ſuſtinebunt. Sed ad ſua

deſideria coaceruabunt ſibi magiſtros, prurientes auribus, & 
                        •
                      verit
                        •••
                     
quidem auditum auertent, ad fabulas autem conuertentur. For the time
will come, when they will not ſuffer wholeſome doctrine. But hauing
their eares itching, ſhall (after their owne luſtes) get them an heape of
teachers: and ſhall turne their eares from the truth, and ſhall be giuen
vnto fables. Man then becōming a contemner of truth, was the cauſe
why ſo many gaue themſelues to flatterie, & to lyes, wherby we may
ſafely ſay: Veritas odium parit.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  A monſtrous birth, of ſo faire and noble a mother, was it
for trueth to beget hatred.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  A thouſand examples doe giue faithfull witneſſe, of
this infamous child birth.1. Sam. 10. 33. 
                     Saul grew into hatred againſt Ionathan his
owne Son,Example of Saules hatred to Ionathan. becauſe with trueth he excuſed the innocence of Dauid,
and reprooued his vnfatherly cruelty and vniuſt perſecution. Balaac
the king of the Moabites hated Balaam,
                     Example of Balaacs hate to Balaam. becauſe he tould him the
truth, and could not curſe the people of Iſrael. Achior the Ammonite
was hated of Holofernes,
                     Numb. 23. 8. Prince of king Nabuchadnezzers army, &
cauſed him to be ſtrictly bound to a tree, becauſe he told the trueth,Iudith. 6. 14.
in ſpeaking of the Hebrew people.
                  For ſpeaking the trueth,Example of Achior, hated by Holofernes Iudges. 9. 21. 
                     Ionathas the Sonne of Gedeon was murthered
by Abimilech, reproouing him but iuſtly. Ieremie, reprehending
king Aſa,
                     Example of Ionathas, and of Ieremie. was therefore caſt in priſon, with fetters on his feet.
Iohn Baptiſt, telling king Herode of his vnlawfull mariage, loſt therefore
his head. Daniell, becauſe he told the Babylonians, that Bel & the
Dragon were not Gods,2. Chron. 16. 10. was caſt into the den of Lyons. All the holy
Martyrs were ſlaine by wicked Tyrants,Example of Iohn Baptiſt and Daniell. and other iuſt men moſt cruelly
perſecuted, for no other cauſe, but for openly ſpeaking and iuſtifying
the trueth.Luke. 3. 19.
                  
                  I haue read of a vertuous religious man,Dan. 14. 31. & according to ſome writers,
Example of the holy Martyres ſlaine by wicked tyrāts. it was venerable Beda of England, who had his eyes puld out for
ſpeaking the truth, in manner following. In ſearch of ancient monuments
in Rome, there was foūd a goodly door of Marble, on the forefront
wherof,A notable Example, of venerable Beda of England, whoſe eyes were pluckt out for ſpeaking the 
                           〈◊〉
                        . theſe letters were engrauen. P. P. P. S. S. S. R. R. R. F. F. F.
many good wits were called, to expreſſe the true ſenſe of them, but
none knew directly how to conſtrue them. At laſt this reuerend man
was ſent for, becauſe (in thoſe times) he was greatly eſteemed: for the
ſame of his ſtudy in good letters, was far & neer renowmed. He looking
on theſe myſterious letters, gaue the true interpretation of them,
as followeth.
                  The three P. P. P. ſignified Pater Patria Profectus eſt. the three S. S. S.
                     
were thus read, Sapientia, Secum Sublata eſt. the three R. R. R. had this
meaning, Regnum Romae Ruet, the three F. F. F. were thus interpreted.
Ferro, Flamma, Fame. And becauſe he told the truth, he was thought
to prognoſticate the ruine of Rome, and for his reward, had his eyes
pluckt out.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Alas my Lord, what needes ſo long a diſcourſe, or expence
of time, in approouing, how odious trueth hath been, and yet is
to the world it ſelfe?Example of the Son of God himſelfe, and how the world vſed him. For, the only truth it ſelfe, the Son of God, what
trauailes endured he in the world? al which he ſuffered for the trueth,
for confeſſion whereof, the Nazarites, his neighborly compatriots,
would haue throwne him from the mount whereon their citty was
builded.
                  
                     For the trueth, the Iewes tooke vp ſtones to ſtone him withall: for
the truth, they proſecuted him euen to death, & at laſt, he dyed for
the truth.
                     Iohn. 14. 6. Ego ſum veritas: I am the truth. Ego in hoc natus ſum, & ad
hoc veni in mundum,Iohn 18. 37. vt teſtimonium perhibeam verit ati. For this cauſe
am I borne,Iohn. 8. 46. and for this cauſe came I into the world, that I ſhould beare
witneſſe vnto the truth. Hee came to teache trueth to the world. Si
veritatem dico vobis, quare non creditis mihi? And If I ſay the truth,
why do ye not beleeue me? He came to teach vs the holy law, whoſe precepts
are not other then truth.
                     Pſal. 119. 86. Omnia mandata tua veritas: All thy
commandements are truth. The kingdome of heauē ſuffereth violēce:
and to apprehend it, there are no armes more meet then truth. Scuto
circundabit te verit as eius:Pſal. 91. 4. His truth ſhall be thy ſhield and buckler.
                  
                     When Chriſt aſcended into heauen, he promiſed nothing elſe to
his diſciples,
                     Iohn. 14. 3. 
                     but the ſpirit of trueth. Expedit vobis vt ego vadam. Si
autem abiero,Iohn. 16. 7. mittam ad vos ſpiritum veritatis. It is expedient for you
that I goe away: but if I depart away, I wil ſend you the comforter, the
ſpirit of truth. If the holy ſpirit do teach men any thing, it is nothing
elſe but truth.
                     Iohn. 16. 13. Cùm autem venerit ille Spiritus veritatis, docebit vos
omnem verit atem. Howbeit, when he is come which is the ſpirit of truth,
he will leade you into all truth.
                  
                     If the Father would be worſhipped, he would haue it done in ſpirit
and truth:
                     Iohn. 8. 36. Adorabunt patrē in ſpiritu & veritate: They ſhal worſhip
the Father in ſpirit and truth.Iohn. 17. 17. 
                     If that we be made free: verit as liberauit
vos: The truth hath ſet you free. The word of God is nothing elſe
but trueth: Sermo tuus verit as eſt: Thy word is trueth. If Chriſt be perſecuted.
it is for ſpeaking the trueth Quaeritis me interficere,Iohn. 8. 40. hominem,
qui veritatem vobis loquutus ſum: you goe about to kill me, a man that

haue told you the truth.How God is ſayd to be ſory for Lucifer. 
                     If God be ſayd to be ſorie for Lucifer, for no
other cauſe is it, but for hauing forſaken the trueth. Ille homicida erat
ab initio, & in veritate non ſtetit, quia non eſt veritas in eo. He hath
bin a murtherer from the beginning,Iohn 8. 44. & abode not in the trueth, becauſe
there is no truth in him.
                  
                     If God be ſayd to greeue for men, he lamenteth for nothing elſe,
but becauſe they left the trueth,
                     How God is ſayd to greeue for men. 
                     and addicted themſelues vnto lyes.
Non eſt in ore eorum veritas, cor eorum vanum eſt. Filii hominum vſque
quò graui Corde, vt quid diligitis vanitatem, & quaeritis mendacium?
Pſal. 5. 9. There is no trueth in their mouth, within they are very corruption.
O ye ſons of men,Pſal. 4. 2. how long will you turne my glory into ſhame, louing vanity,
God ſweares the trueth. and ſeeking lyes? If God do ſweare, he ſweares the trueth: Iurauit
Dominus Dauid veritatem,Pſal. 132. 
                           •
                        1. & non fruſtrabitur eum. The Lord hath
ſworne in trueth vnto Dauid,How God drawes neere to any man. and he will not ſhrinke from it. If God do
draw neere to any man, it is in regard of the truth: Prope eſt Dominus
omnibus inuocantibus eum in veritate. The lord is neer vnto all that cal
vpon him in trueth.Pſal. 145. 18.
                  
                  
                     If he giue heauen to vs mortalles,
                     How god giues heauen to mē, Pſal. 15. 1. 2. 3. 
                     it is onely to ſuch, as ſpeake the
trueth. Domine, quis habitabit in tabernaculo tuo, aut quis requiſcet
in monte ſancto tuo? Qui loquitur veritatem in corde ſuo, qui non egit
dolum in lingua ſua. Lord, who ſhall dwell in thy Tabernacle, who ſhall
reſt in thy holy mountaine? He that speaketh the trueth in his hart, he
that hath no guile in his tongue.Nothing is more acceptable to God, then trueth. 
                     There is nothing more acceptable
to God, then trueth is, becauſe he is the trueth it ſelfe. Therefore Stobeus
telles vs, that Pythagoras being demanded; what thing men ought
to doe,Pythagoras, his anſwere concerning trueth. to be like vnto God, made anſwere: Let them speake trueth becauſe
God is trueth, the center for full confirmation, & the ſcope wherat
all vertues aime.
                  Aeſchines the Philoſopher and Oratour, the corriuall of Demoſthenes,Aeſchines, in an Oratiō againſt Demoſthenes, of the power of trueth. 
                     in a certaine Oration which he wrote againſt him, ſayeth,
That the power of trueth is ſuch, as without it, all ſtrength is weakeneſſe;
all wiſedome, follie; all temperance, turpitude; all iuſtice, reuenge; all humility,
deceipt; all patience, to no purpoſe; chaſtity is hurtfull; riches are
but loſſe, and pitty meere vanity. For trueth, among all ſubſtances, it is
the cheefeſt; among the heauens, the imperial; among mettals, pure gold;
among the elements, the fire; among pretious ſtones, the Carbuncle; among
Sciences the moſt celebrate. And as without light, light cānot be
ſeen, euen ſo without trueth we can neuer attaine, ſee nor enioy God, the
only ſoueraigne trueth of all.
                  Anacharſis the Philoſopher,
                     Anacharſis the Philoſopher, ſpeaking of trueth. 
                     ſpeaking of the trueth, ſayth. It is a

health free from all ſickneſſe; a life that neuer dieth; an antidote that
preſerueth all; a Sun without ſetting; a Moone neuer eclipſed, a doore
neuer ſhut; a walke neuer weary; neither is there any thing in the world
more high, more profound, more long, more large more auncient or more
new, then is truth, the light of heauen, and splendour of the earth. The
trueth is in ſuch eſteeme with God,
                     God wil neuer pardon him that belyeth the trueth. 
                     that albeit (in his owne bounty)
he winkes at ſome ſinnes, yet will he neuer pardon him that belyeth
the trueth, which made the holy Prophet to ſaye: Perdes omnes qui
loquuntur mendacium.Pſal. 5. 6. Thou ſhalt deſtroye all them that speake
lyes.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     And woorthily too,
                     No ſin more oppoſite againſt God, then lying is. 
                     becauſe there is no ſin, which
more oppoſeth it ſelfe againſt God, beeing the trueth ſelfe, then
lying dooth. For it is a ſin againſt nature, which peruerteth and defaceth
all naturall order, in regard that nature did ordaine the voyce
and speeche, to the end, that thereby one might manifeſt to another,
Ariſtot. in Perier. the true conceipte of his minde, as the Philoſopher affirmeth
in the firſt chapter of his Periermenia.Plato in Thymeus. 
                     VVhence Plato
likewiſe tooke occaſion in his Thymeus, to ſaye: Propter hoc
nobis datus eſt ſermo, vt praeſtò forent mutuae voluntatis indicia.
                  
                     They then that ſound otherwiſe with their words, then the heart
thinketh,
                     Tho. Aquin. in 2. 2. Q. 110. a. 3. Alber, Mag. 2. 
                     do lye, and go againſt the order naturall. Wherfore the Angelical
doctor, in his 2. 2. q. 110. a. 3. ſayth. Innaturale eſt, & indebitum,
quòd aliquis voce ſignificet, id quod meute non habet. And his maſter
ſaith, 2.Sen. D. 35. ſen. d. 35. Mendacium grauis ſimum eſt, in quantum eſt privatiuum
ordinis ſecūdum mores, ad optimum finem, qui eſt veritas. And
Tully making of lying,
                     Cicero, defining lying. 
                     ſayth. Mendacium eſt falſa ſignificatio vocis,
cum intentione fallendi. Lying (then) beeing ſuch an enormous ſinne,
deſeruedly ſhould lyers be ſeuerely puniſhed, as enemies to God, &
ſons of the deuill.
                     S. Ambroſe his aduiſe. Therfore (ſaith Saint Ambroſe,) Brethren, keep your
ſelues from lying, becauſe all ſuch as loue lyes, are children of the
deuill,S. Chriſoſtom. Chriſt (ſayeth Chriſoſtome, vppon Saint Matthewe)
is ſuch a louer of the trueth, as hee will make no acceptaunce of a
lyer.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  If by the faireneſſe of the light,Compariſon of light and darkneſſe, and the Alluſion. the fowle deformitie
of darkeneſſe is diſcerned: by the excellencie of trueth, we may
eaſilye perceiue the brutiſh ſhape of lying, which is a vice ſo infamous,
The deuill durſt not lye, in his owne ſhape. as the deuill himſelfe (the father of lyes) had not the courage
to do it in his own proper forme, but tooke vpon him the ſhape of a
Serpent. And Saint Paul ſayth, that oftentimes he chaungeth himſelfe

ſelfe into an Angell of light, when hee woulde faſten a beleefe of
lyes in men.2. Corin. 11. 14. 
                     Ipſe enim Sathanas tranſfigurat ſe in Angelum lucis.
For Sathan himſelfe is transformed into an Angell of
light.
                  
                  Moreouer,The deuils children imitate their father. his miniſters and children doe the ſame, knowing
there is nothing more infamous and odious to men, then lying is:
therefore of them writes the ſame Apoſtle to the Corinthians: No
                           •
                        
eſt ergo magnum, ſi miniſtri eius transfigurentur velut miniſtri iuſtitiae,
quorum finis erit ſecundum opera ipſorum.
                     2. Corin. 11. 15. 
                     Therefore it is no great
thing, though his miniſters transforme themſelues, as though they
were the miniſters of righteouſneſſe, whoſe end ſhall be according to
their works. Trueth is ſo faire and ſo louely, as they themſelues that
take delight in beguiling others with a lying tongue, hould nothing
dearer,A lye is odious to the lyer him ſelfe. neither can bee more diſpleaſed, then to bee deceiued
with a lye. Can there then be ſound any thing more brutiſh, more
miſſhapen and horrid, then is a lye, that is ſo offenſiue to him
that telles it? God cannot abide it, becauſe he is trueth it ſelfe:
the deuill, when he does it, transformes himſelfe into an Angell of
light: and man, he mantles it vp in colours, and ouerclokes it
with ſome ſhewe of trueth, becauſe hee woulde not bee held for a
lyer.
                  
                     Chilo,
                     Chilo Lacede. diſcourſing on truth. diſcourſing on trueth, ſayth. It is a publique faithfull bond,
that neuer periſheth: a ſhield, that cannot bee pearced through; a
firme certainty, neuer to be perturbed: an army, that cannot be daunted:
a flower that neuer fadeth: a Sea, neuer tempeſted: a ſafe arriuing
port, without any perill. Shall then ſuch an excellent thing as trueth
is, bee counterpoiſed with a matter ſo miſſhapen as a lye
is?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  A lye is ſo offenſiue to the Lord,Anſelm de Mē. Lib. 2. 
                     as holy Anſelme
ſayeth, That God, as patron of the vniuerſall world, may (in ſome
ſort) be ſayd to dispenſe with theft, not accounting it ſuch a weighty
ſinne, as he tolerated the fault of the children of Iſrael, who deſpoyled
the Aegyptians of all their gold and pretious things, winking
likewiſe at the breache of the other precepts: but he neuer yet dispenſed (for
at were a great ſin to ſay he did) with lying, being a thing moſt pernicious
and damnable, euen a meere denying of himſelfe, who is the onely
truth.
                  Beſide,Chriſt neuer called any, ſon of the deuill, but the lyer. it is well worthy conſideration, to note, that Chriſt neuer
called any ſinner, Sonne of the deuill, but onely the lying man.
Vox ex patre diabolo, eſtis, & deſyderia patris veſtri vultis facere:
                     Iohn. 8. 44. 
                     illae

homicida erat ab initio, & in veritate non ſte
                           •
                        it. Ye are of your father
the deuill, and the luſtes of your father ye will do: he hath beene a
murtherer from the beginning, and abode not in the trueth.
                     A note worth the obſeruation. Can there
be found a greater infamy in the world, then this, to be the ſon of the
deuill; the ſubiect of the deuill; gouerned by the deuill; poſſeſſed with
the diuell, and directed by the deuill? How can a man ſtand, but like
one confounded, when he but thinks of vttering a lye? whereby he
makes himſelf moſt odious to God, & to al creatures which are capable
of reaſon.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  A miſerable procreation, a moſt vile ſeruitude, an accurſed
ſubiection, & a moſt deteſtable gouernment. Lying polluteth the
vnderſtanding (whoſe only obiect is trueth) & there becommeth the
root of diſloyalty,Lying polluteth the vnderſtanding, & what harmes it doth. the occaſion of fraude, the mother of malice, the
nurſe of violence, the cordiall of detraction, the heire of murmuring,
the goſſip of hypocriſie, the deſtructiō of truth, the perditiō of neighbourly
faith, the rooter vp of true friendſhip, and the vtter loſſe of
faith,A lyer is not beleeued whē he telles the truth. concord,
vnity and peace. He that takes a delight in lying, is ſo
generally hatefull and condemned, that he cannot be beleeued when
hee ſpeaketh truelye, and euery one points at him with his finger.
                  Lying is become ſuch a merchandiſe through the whole world,
Lying is becōe a merchandiſe in the worlde. as there are very fewe merchauntes, but they make a vſe thereof.
But (by the iuſt iudgement of God) ſee what enſueth thereon, when
they expect to become rich, they growe very poor, and not knowing
the reaſon thereof, can ſay nothing elſe, but that their traffique makes
no ſuch returne now, as heeretofore it hath doone, laying all the
blame on fortune, and vnluckie ſpeeding; whereas rather they ſhold
ſay, that it is the deſertfull chaſtiſement of God, and that for their
owne defrauding in their trade, the trade it ſelfe defraudes them. Euen
ſo is deceipte puniſhed with deceipte,Sentence. and lying is corrected by
lying.
                  So ſayeth the Propet Dauid: Mendaces filii hominum in ſtateris,
                     Pſal. 62. 9. 
                     vt decipiant ipſi de vanitate in idipſum. The children of men are
but vaine, deceiptfull vpon the weights, and are altogether lighter
then vanitye it ſtlfe.
                     Of ſwearing, both in the ſeller and buyer. Hee that ſelleth, ſweareth, that the ware is
good, and he that buieth, ſweares, that it is naught: the one or other
lying, offendeth God, contaminates his owne conſcience,
and beguileth his neighbour, euen as if with the thruſte of a
Launce,Pſal. 5. 6. at one ſtroke, three are ſeuerally wounded. Now what
woulde you haue God do with this lying tongue? Pordes omnes qui

loquuntur mendacium.
                  
                  Therefore was it (ſayeth Saint Auguſtine,S. Auguſt. ſup. S. Iohn. 
                     writing vpon Saint
Iohn,) That Chriſt our Sauiour chaſed the buyers and ſellers foorth of
the Temple in Ieruſalem, in ſigne, that by their lyes, they ſhall be driuen
foorth of the heauenly Temple.Iohn. 1. 9. Eiecit omnes vendentes & ementes de
templo.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Let me tell you my Lorde, that lying (at this day) is
riſen to ſuch a height, as wee can hardly truſt any man, ſuch is the
mighty aboundance of lyers:To what a head lying is 
                           〈◊〉
                         owne in theeſe dayes, Writings of Notaries neceſſarie, as neceſſarie euils. whereby enſueth, that euen to writings,
confirmed by witneſſes, fortified with ſeals, and made authenticall
by publique Notaries, great outrage is committed, a thouſand
deceipts interpoſed, & no meane ſtore of lyes enforced, to beare
down a plaine & manifeſt truth.
                  I deny not but the writings of publique Notaries are neceſſarie,
as neceſſarie euilles, that take head onely by the worldes malice:
yet in former ages, ſuch tranſcriptes were thought vnmeete, becauſe
men were then ſo true, both in worde and deede, as one
honeſt ſimple worde, ſtoode in ſteede of an authenticall inſtrument.
                  
                     Laban was a man very cauillous and ſtricte,Example of the couenants between Labā and Iacob. notwithſtanding,
betweene him and Iacob his ſonne in lawe, in ſo many couenants as
paſſed betwixt thē, in ſteed of writings, they made a heape of ſomewhat,
or ſet vp a ſtone on end like a piller, in ſign & witneſſe of an inuiolable
faith, which by Laban was called in his proper tongue, Tumulus
teſtis,
                     Gen. 31. 47. & by Iacob,
                     Gen. 23. 15. 
                     Aceruus teſtimonij. Abraham buying a field
of ground his word only ſerued,Example of Abrahās bargaining. inſtead of a moſt firme bargain and
contract.
                  Of this faithfulneſſe in men, it enſued that God giuing the lawe
of circumciſion,The lawe of Circumciſion not written. cauſed it not to be written, but to paſſe by tradition
to poſterity, and they inuiolably obſerued it. But afterward, the
malice of men encreaſing, and getting ſuch head, that they defrauded
the moſt auncient contractes, and the ſoundeſt eſtabliſhed
couenauntes:The reaſon why God gaue his Lawes in writing, but not in paper. vndoubtedlye, if God had pleaſed (ſimply from
his own mouth) to haue deliuered his laws, without manifeſt ſetting
them down in writing, they would haue inſerted a thouſand lyes (deuiſed
out of their owne braines) among them.
                  Hereupon it followed, that afterward, when he gaue his lawes to
the Hebrewes, he gaue them in writing, not ſimply in paper, ſet down
with a weak pen, or eaſily to be blured or raced out: but gaue them ingrauen
in the hardeſt marble, to the end, that neither by the force of

knife, or any other inſtrument whatſoeuer, they might be altered or
defaced.
                  Doe you not ſee (my Lorde) that although the holy Goſpell was
faithfully written,The deuill hath deuiſed many meanes, to abuſe the holie writings of the Euangeliſtes. by the bleſſed Euangeliſtes, the Scribes and Notaries
to the higheſt God: yet notwithſtanding, the ſeducing deuill
and Father or lyes, hath ſought continual
                        •
                     ye, to ſullie the pure
whiteneſſe thereof, with a thouſand black errors, neuer ceaſſing,
to rayſe vp hereſie and ſchiſmes in the Churche of
God?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  
                     I remember, and very pertinent to this purpoſe, that
the Aegyptians made ſuch ſtrict account of their word, as for maintenance
thereof,
                     Herodotus, deſcribing the Aegyptians forme of making their cō
                        tracts. 
                     they haue loſt their liues. Whereupon, Herodotus, a
moſt auncient writer, making report of the Aegyptians, ſayth. That
in making a bargaine, a confederacy, or a coniunction of new amity, one
ioyneth his greater fingers▪ to the other parties, and eche letteth them
bloud. Afterward, with their tongues they lick off the bloud, wherewith
eche ſigned the others hand, inferring by this ceremony, that firſt they
wil make expence of their vttermoſt drop of bloud, & willingly dy, rather
then ſpeake falſe, or lye one to another.
                  
                     If ſuch faithfull dealing were at this daye in the worlde, men
wold be aduertiſed by ſo many warnings,
                     Theſe dayes want ſuch preſidents. 
                     and neuer ſtand with ſuch
ſuſpicious thoughts, euermore fearefull to be deceiued. For in deed,
theſe dayes doe affoord ſuch plentie of lyers, as we may ſaye with
the Prophet Oſe.Oſe 4. 1. 2. 3. Non eſt veritas interra. Mendacium & maledictum
inundauerunt; propter hoc lugebit terra, & infirmabitur omnis
qui habitat in ea. There is no trueth in the land. By ſwearing and lying,
they breake out. Therfore ſhall the land mourne, and euery one
that dwelleth therin ſhall be cut off. A greate chaſtiſement was this
which God denounced againſt lyers, in regard that for ſo deteſtable
a ſin, all the dwellers vpon earth ſhould be taken away. And very
woorthily, is ſuch a puniſhment inflicted on them (ſayeth Father Auguſtine
vpon the Pſalmes) becauſe by lying,S. Aguſt. ſup. Pſalm. they diuide themſelues
from what is, and adhere to that which is not, therfore their ſentence
is, to be made iuſt nothing. Per des omnes qui loquuntur mendacium.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  A man capable of reaſon, making accounte of honor,
ſhould at leaſt (in regard of honour it ſelfe) ſpeake the trueth,
becauſe there can be no greater confronting of a man, then to beare
him downe with lyes. For the lyer hath no credite with any man,
and while he labours to maintaine a lye,A lyer hath no credit with any man, and cals god to witneſſe his lye. he doeth but ratifie it with

lye vpon lye, falſe oaths and vehement aſſeuerations, yea many times
hee calles God to beare witneſſe of his lying. Can there bee a
greater ſinne then this, to outface the vncreated trueth it
ſelfe?
                  In the kingdome of Bohemia,
                     Example of a cuſtome obſerued in Bohemia. (although there be lyers there, as
well as in any other part of the world) yet notwithſtanding, they
hold it for moſt certaine, that hee that telles a lye in the iudgement
place, vndoubtedly that verye yeere ſhall dye, and ſooner by
ſome euill kinde of death, then otherwiſe: for feare whereof, you
ſhall haue very fewe there forwarde to ſwearing. Now albeit this
is but a ſuperſtition, life and death remaining in the Lordes hand
onely: yet we cannot but confeſſe it for moſt true, that God (as a iuſt
Iudge) will giue ſeuere correction to lyers and falſe ſwearers, either
earlie or late, as we vſe to ſay. And what ſayth the wiſe man? Os quod
mentitur, occidit animam:
                     Sapien. 1. 11. 
                     The mouth that ſpeaketh lyes, ſleyeth the
ſoule.
                  
                  And we may hold it for moſt certaine, that as there is no agreement
at all between light and darkneſſe:Similie. euen ſo there can be no ſtanding
together of God the higheſt truth, & wretched lying man, acccording
as himſelf ſaith,Apoc. 21. 27. by S. Iohn in his Apocalyps: Non intrabit in
eam aliquid coinquinatū, aut abhominationem faciens, & mendacium.
And there ſhal enter into it no vncleaue thing, neither whatſoeuer worketh
abhomination or lyes.
                  
                  Now let vs ſee,A good leſſon for Lyers. what thing is more abhominable, more miſerable,
more dolorous, more fooliſh and more impious, then for a man
to depriue himſelfe of all goodneſſe, of glorie eternall, and to bee
condemned into euer burning fire, in the company of moſt horrible
deuils: only for vaine wordes, that endure no longer then their very
vtterance?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The face of trueth is ſo ſweete and amiable,The priuiledges of the ſons of truth. and
the priuiledges of her ſonnes are ſo famous, as euery one reporteth
the greatneſſe of them, and without dreade of any penaltie,
they may boldly ſpeake the trueth. The honeſt true ſpeaking man
may goe euerye where,The true man goes with his face vnmaſked. with his face vnmasked, all men repoſe
truſt in him, none can accuſe him, without anye feare hee may
freely talke with all men, and hee ſhall bee ſure neuer to wante
friends.
                  Looke vpon the contrary ſtampe, I meane the lyer and falſe ſpeaking
man,The Lyer is shunned of all men. he is ſhunned of al, he playes leaſt in ſight, he is accounted
as lothſome, no man dare truſt him, none will beleeue him, no, euen

when he ſpeaketh the trueth. Moreouer, trueth is of it ſelfe ſo ſtrong,
as it ouercomes all things, and ſo durable, as it contendeth with eternitie.
Pſal. 117. 2. 
                     Veritas Domini manet in aeternum. The trueth of the Lord endureth
for euer. Bethinke your ſelfe (my Lorde) I pray ye, of that ſo
publike ſentence, which the yong man gaue to Darius, in fauour of
the trueth.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  I remember the yong mans glorious victory, againſt
his other companions: but I haue forgotten the māner, & what were
his words to them.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Among the infinite multitude of moſt noble Courtiers,
The Historie of the three young men in the Court of king Darius. which Darius king of Perſia had attending on him, there were
three very comely and wiſe young men, beeing of the Guarde, and
keepers of the kings perſon, awaiting in his ſecret lodging as chamberlaines.
Theſe met together, and concluded to propound, or vtter
foorth an Enigmae in the preſence of the king, and he, that in the
iudgement of the kings wiſe councell, did with greateſt diſcretion
vnfold it, ſhould haue moſt pretious gifts, & ſit next in perſon to the
king,Eſdras. 3. 4. 5. 6 as is at large to be read in the booke of Eſdras.
                  
                  All three did put, vnder the pillowe royall, the ſolution of the
myſticall ſentence,What thing was the ſtrongeſt. conſiſting of theſe fewe wordes: What thing
in the world was ſtrongeſt. Being left vnder the bed pillow, as hath bin
ſaid already, the firſt ſaid, that the ſtrongeſt thing was wine, the ſecond
ſaid, the king was ſtronger,
                     1. wine. but the third, whoſe name was Zerobabell,
he wrote,2. The king. 
                     that women were ſtrongeſt, but yet trueth ouercommeth all
things.
                     3. women: but truth ouercō
                        meth al things
                  
                  The king beeing riſen from his bed, eche one ſeuerally preſented
his ſolution, and all the Magiſtrates, Senators, Conſuls & Pretors
of Perſia, being congregated together: the Enigmae was publiquely
read in the preſence of them all, as alſo the meaning therof: wherupō
the yong men being called, they were commāded (one after another)
to yeeld a reaſon of their ſeueral opinions, & the firſt in order, beginning,
thus ſpake;
                  I ſay that wine is ſtrongeſt, becauſe the power thereof ſeduceth
all mens mindes,The firſt man maintaineth the power of wine. yea euen the kings, or the very wiſeſt men in the
worlde; it makes a man ſecure and iocond, and to forget all melanchollie,
debt, dreade of the king, or any publique magiſtrate: it
cauſeth him to take armes, and ruſh into very perillous ſtratagems,
yet in ſhort while after, all theſe things doe vaniſh from remembrance.
                  He ceaſſing,The ſecōd mā, approuing the power of kings defēdeth the ſame very ſtrongly. the ſecond followed in this manner, Men doe poſſeſſe

both Sea and land, and the king is aboue them all, who only by his
authoritie, without ſtirring from his regall throne, makes but a beck
and it is obeyed, giues but commaunde to his ſubiectes, and they
fulfill what he would haue doone: he throwes downe houſes, ruinateth
citties, killeth men, abafeth mountaines, exalteth vallies, enioyneth
tributes, erecteth Palaces, buildeth cities, planteth vines and
other trees, the king onely keepes in his royall citie, and his commaunde
ſtretcheth to infinite others, yet none dare bee ſo hardy
as to diſobey it. Is hee not ſtrong then, quoth hee? and ſo concluded.
                  The thirde appearing, in an humble habite, and very comely
behauiour, made lowe reuerence to the kings Maieſty, and afterward
to all his aſſembled Councell, and thus beganne to maintaine his
ſolution.The third mā iuſtifieth, firſt, the might of women. Greate Lordes, in ſo much as I diſcerne the king to
bee ſtrong, and wine alſo ſtrong, enforcing dotage and vnaduiſed
boldneſſe yet find I another thing to go beyond both the one & the
other. Now what may it be, that ſo highly predominateth, if not a
woman?
                  A woman brought foorth the king, and all thoſe men that ouerrule
both Sea and land, yea, thoſe that planted vines, from whence
the wine commeth, yea, eche one of them, that doe ſuch memorable
deedes of valour, was borne of a woman, who is the glorie of
man, his iewell, ioye and cheefeſt contentmente, from whome
(it appeares) hee cannot bee ſeperated. If hee get riches, if hee
haue heapes of gold and ſiluer, if hee enioye pearles, iewelles
and pretious ſtones, if he haue faire and coſtlie garments: yet if he ſee
a woman acceptable in his eye, he giues them all to her, euen with
higheſt contentment.
                  He forſakes his Father that be got him: his mother that gaue him
birth, and man giues himſelfe (in ſo bountifull manner) to his wife,
as he neither mindes his deare country, his moſt affected friendes, or
any thing elſe beſide, but only addicts himſelfe to a woman. Nay,
that which is much more, many do leaue their own houſes, and (with
armed weapons) enter woods and other places, to ſet vpon paſſēgers,
yet bring their infamous theft home to their eſteemed women. Diuers
haue ſlaine themſelues for women, others haue become
fooliſh and mad, and others liued as ſlaues and poore ſeruantes for
them.
                  I haue ſeen Apemena, daughter to Bezacis, & Concubine to the
king, ſit vpon his right hand, and (with vndaunted boldneſſe) take

frō off the kings head, his Crown imperial, & ſet it on her own head:
nay more, & far beyond that (O mighty impudency) ſhe grew on into
ſuch audaciouſnes, as ſhe dared to giue the king a blow with her hād,
& he patiently endured it. Is not a woman much ſtronger, then either
wine, or the king?
                  The king in his Maieſty, and all his congregated counſellers,
ſtoode amazedly looking one vpon another, deliuering geſtures
of greate admiration: when yet, the thirde young man beganne
againe, and ſpake concerning trueth, in order enſuing.
                  Great is the earth,The third mā defendeth the omnipotent power of truth excelſe the heauens, and moſt ſwift the courſe
of the Sunne, for in one day he wheeles about the whole globe of
the earth: but he that made all theſe things by his high wiſedome,
made alſo the truth, which is far more ſtrong then all things elſe created.
All countries calles vpon trueth, heauen it ſelfe hath bleſſed
it, all the creatures honoured it, yea, haue ſtood in feare and
trembling of it, becauſe there is no iniquitye at all in
it.
                  The king is wicked, wine is wicked, women are wicked, all the
ſonnes of men are wicked, and all their workes wicked, for there is
no trueth in them, and in their wickedneſſe they periſh: but the
trueth continueth ſtedfaſt, it begets ſtrength of it ſelfe, and ſtands
on ſtrict tearmes with eternity: it liueth euer, winneth victory ouer al
things: it is no accepter of perſons, iudgeth all iuſtly, without either
feare or reſpect.
                  In truthes iudgement there is no ſinfull thing, but is throughlie
full of power, rule and emperie, the maieſtie thereof abydeth,
to all times and ages, and for a finall concluſion to approoue
his wordes, hee ſayde: Benedictus Deus veritatis, and ſo ceaſſed.
                  No ſooner had hee impoſed ſilence to his ſpeeche,The whole Senate applaude the power of trueth. but all the
whole Senate, of moſt noble ſpectatours, with an high voyce and
cheerefull applauſe, accorded to the ſentence of this third yong man,
and cried out:1. Eſdras. 4. 41. 
                     Magna eſt veritas, & praeualet. Then did the king accept
him as his Couſen, and promiſed to giue him whatſoeuer hee
would demaund. But he (like a iuſt man) deſired onely, that the king
woulde but bee mindfull of his vow made to God, for reedifying
the Temple of Ieruſalem againe, and reſtauration of all thoſe
veſſelles of gold and ſiluer, which ſerued for the vſe of ſacrificing.
               
               
                  
                  Lodouico.
                  An excellent Enigmae, an excelleent interpretation,
and ſo much the more excellent, as in agreeing and conſenting,
with that which the holy Scripture ſayeth on the behalfe of trueth:
Veritas Domini manet in aeteruum: The trueth of the Lord endureth
for euer. Which is ſo ſtrong, that it ouercommeth all things, euen as
oyle mounteth abue all other liquors: and becauſe the trueth is
God himſelfe, there can bee nothing imagined more ſtrong then
hee.
                  A lye hath ſhorte legges,A lye hath ſhort legges, and haltes euery where. ſayth the aunciente prouerbe, and
his halting is very ſoone diſcerned, for it laſtes no longer then
comming to diſcouerie, and then it departes with moſt infamous
reproofe. And in regarde it is ſuch a hatefull vice, I ſuppoſe, the
wiſe man wrote thus thereof:Eccle. 20. 24. 
                     Potior fur, quàm aſſiduitas vir
                           •
                        
mendacis: perditionem autem ambo haereditabunt. A theefe is
better then a man that is accuſtomed to lye, they both ſhall haue
deſtruction to heritage.
                     Of theeues & lyers, both are theeues. For both are theeues, one ſtealeth mens
goods, the other ſtealeth trueth, honour and reputation from
men.
                  For euer let this accurſed tongue bee dumbe, becauſe it is better
to bee ſentenced with eternall ſilence, neuer ſo much as to dare to
ſpeake one word: then to vtter falſhoode, to the diſhonour of him
that ſpeakes it, the daunger of our neighbour, and iniurie of God
the trueth it ſelfe. Muta fi
                           ••
                        t labia doloſa.
                  
               
               Finis Cap. 9.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  Wherein, according to the courſe hitherto continued, they now diſcourſe
on the ſeuerall tongues of the detractor and murmurer, and
vpon what occaſion, the Deuill (hauing a great delight to lye, and
accuſe vs) was ſayd to be dumbe. Herein likewiſe are handled, many
deceipts of the Deuill, many myſteries of confeſſing our ſinnes vnto
God: And how one angellis ſayd to ſpeake vnto another, without
ſight of eche other; A diſcourſe very curious, learned and profitable.
               
               Chap. 10.
               
                  
                     CLAVDIO.
                  Hell is better, then an
euill tongue, ſayth the holy ghoſt, by
the mouth of Salomon.
                     Eccl. 28. 18. 21. 
                     Multi ceciderunt
in ore gladij: ſed non ſic, quaſi qui
interierunt per linguam ſuam. Mors
illius, mors nequiſſima, & vtilis infernus
potius quàm illa. There be many
that haue periſhed by the edge of the
ſword, but not ſo many as haue fallen
by the tongue.
                     A wicked tōgue is worſe then the paine of hell. 
                     The death thereof is an
euill death: hell were better then ſuch a
one. How is it poſſible, that the tongue (how vile ſoeuer it be) ſhould
not be better then hel? If there be no greater paines, then thoſe of hel,
how is the tongue ſayd to be worſe then hell?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Exceeding great are the paynes of hell, I cannot deny
it, but yet they hurt not ſo much as the byting tongue doth: which
blaſphemeth God, murmures againſt the Saintes, and ſpeaketh
euill of men.Hell hurteth none but the dāned, but the tongue offendeth God and his Saints. Hell hurteth none, but ſuch as are thereinto condemned:
but the tongue outrageth God and his Saintes, whome
hell by no meanes can offend. And more profitable is hell, then the
wicked tongue, becauſe hell (being duely conſidered on by vs)

makes vs refraine from ſin: but the euill tongue is the cauſe of many
ſins: for, by hearing the murmurings one of another, we are eaſilie
drawne to iudge and ſpeake euill.
                  Therefore the holy ghoſt affirmeth, that the wicked tongue, as
meaning (perhaps) that of the detractour, murmurer and defamer,
hath ſome reſemblance with the diabolicall tongue,The Deuilles tongue. which ceaſſeth
not to accuſe vs before God, according as Saint Iohn ſayth. Proiectus
eſt accuſator fratrum noſtrorum,
                     Apoc. 12. 10. 
                     qui accuſabat illos ante conspectū Dei
noſtri die & nocte. The accuſer of our brethren is caſt downe, which accuſed
them before our God day and night.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  It is a ma
                        •
                     ucilous matter, and well woorthie conſideration,
how the deuill, beeing ſo great a murmurer, that he ceaſſeth
not day and night,The Deuill being ſo great an accuſer how is he ſaide to bee dumbe? to accuſe vs before God, of all our negligences,
be they neuer ſo ſmall: yet how he ſhould ſometime hould his
peace, in ſuch manner, as is written of him in Saint Luke. Erat Ieſus
eijciens Daemonium, & illud erat mutum. Then he caſt out a Deuill, and
he was dumbe.
                     Luke 11. 14. How could ſo great a talker, an accuſer, a detractour &
a defamer, hold his peace, and obſerue ſilence?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  You haue brought an important matter into the field,
conſiſting of greater difficultie,Three kindes of ſpeaking, & three kinds of tongues. then it appeares to be. We find that
there are three kindes of ſpeaking, and as many kinds of tongues, to
weet, of the mind, of the mouth, and of the act or work: of all which,
Dauid ſpeaking, ſayth. Labia doloſa, in corde & corde loquuti ſunt.
Flattering with their lips,
                     Pſal. 12. 2. 3. 4. 
                     and ſpeaking with a double hart: there is the
firſt tongue,1. The tōgue of the minde. and the firſt kind of talking. Diſperdat Dominus vniuerſa
labia doloſa, & linguam magniloquam. The Lord cut off all flattering
lips, and the tongue that speaketh proude things: there is the ſecond
tongue,2. The tōgue of the mouth. and ſecond kind of talking. Linguam noſtram magnificabimus,
labia noſtra à nobis ſunt, or, opera noſtra à nobis ſunt: quis noſter
Dominus eſt? with our tongue we will preuaile, our lips are our own;
or our workes are our owne, who is Lord ouer vs? there is the thirde
tongue,3. The tongue of the deede or worke. and third kind of talking, whereof it ſeemes the holy ghoſt,
ſpeaking by the wiſe mans mouth, ſayth. Lingua tertia multos commouit,
& diſperſit illos de gente in gentem.
                     Eccle. 28. 16. 
                     The double tongue hath diſquieted
many, and driuen them from nation to nation. Wicked (then)
is the firſt tongue, that is, to thinke euill in the heart; worſe is the ſecond,
Of al the three tongues together, in their badnes. that is, to ſpread abroad the euill conceited, by ſignificant ſpeeches;
but worſt of all is the third tongue, that is, to put in effect, the
euill deuiſed and pronounced.
                  
                     Great was the ſinne of good Noahs ſucceſſors, thinking (in pride

of minde) to builde that infamous Towre,All the three tōgues exampled, in the builders of Babel. as meerly oppoſing themſelues
againſt God: but worſe was it, when one expreſſed to an other
(with wordes full of loftineſſe) their deteſtable thoughts; yet
worſt of all, was their putting the ſame in execution. And it is to
be noted, that God had neuer deuided their tongues, but when (in
effect) they builded the tower.
                     Gen. 11. 5. 7. 8. Deſcendit autem Dominus vt videret
ciuitatem & turrim, quam aedificabant filij Adam. But the Lord came
downe, to ſee the city and towre which the ſonnes of Adam builded. And
a little after, God ſaid. Venite, deſcendamus, & confundamus ibi linguam
eorum, vt non audiat vnuſquiſque vocem proximi ſui. Atque ita
diuiſit eos Dominus, ex illo loco in vniuerſas terras, & ceſſauerunt aedificare
ciuitatē. Come on, let vs go down, and there confound their lāguage
that euery one perceiue not anothers speech. So the Lord ſcattered them
from thence vpon al the earth, and they left off to build the city. Wherby
may be gathered, that the holy ghoſt meant them, & the third tōgue,
ſpoken of by the wiſe man,
                     Eccle. 28. 16. Lingua tertia multos commouit, & disperſit
illos de gente in gentem.
                  
                     My Lord Iacono da voragine,Example of the Archbiſhop of Genoa, in a Sermō of his. 
                     the Archbiſhop of Genoa, & of the
Preachers order, ſayd in one of his Sermons preached in Lent: That
this monſter, which hath three tongues, like an infernall Cerberus, is he,
that is al theſe together, to weet, a flatterer, a detractor, & a diſcord breeder,
Three tōgues to be cut out. or, as we may ſay, a diſſention ſower, out of whoſe head, all theſe three
tongues muſt be cut, and he be enforced to perpetuall ſilence. The firſt
tongue,
                     Eſay. 3. 11. 
                     becauſe it deceiueth: Popule meus, qui te beatum dicunt, ipſi te
decipiunt,1. For deceiuing. O my people, they that lead thee, cauſe thee to erre. The ſecōd,
becauſe it defameth: Sepi aures tuas spinis, & linguam nequam noli audire,
2. For defaming. & ori tuo facito oſtia, & ſeras auribus tuis. Hedge thy poſſeſſion
with thornes, and make doors and bars for thy mouth. The third,
                     Eccle. 28. 24. 
                     becauſe
it conturbeth:
                     3. For moleſting. Calumnia conturbat ſapientem. Slander troubleth a wiſe
man. Now let it be what ye wil, it ſufficeth, that we find three ſorts of
tongues, & three kinds of ſpeaking, to wit, of the mind, of the mouth,
and of the work.
                  
                  With the mind God is ſayd to talk,How God is ſaide to talke with the Angel, the ſoule and the deuil, in the minde, the firſt kinde of ſpeaking. with the Angel, with the ſoule
& with the diuel, not becauſe God hath any need (by ſpeaking) to vnderſtād
the thoughts of others, for he knoweth all things before they
are thought, but for manifeſtation of his wil vnto vs. We cannot then
ſay of the diuel: Et illud erat mutū, becauſe (in this māner) he ſpeaketh
greeuouſly, for he neuer ceaſeth to thinke, & to contriue euill againſt
god, againſt the Angels, & againſt men: &, what he hath wickedly cō
                     plotted,
if he could put it in execution, he would willingly do it.
                  
                     
By the ſecond kind of diſcourſing,The ſeconde kinde of ſpeaking, with the mouth, as one man to another. namely, the mouth, one man
ſpeaketh to another in this world. The Angels and the diuel likewiſe
ſpeake in this manner, when forming ay
                        •
                     ry bodies, they appeare vnto
vs in humane ſhape, & talke according to our vſe. Or elſe, when entring
into humane bodies, they mooue the tōgues of them according
to their own willes: & in this manner of ſpeaking, we may ſay of the
diuel; Et illud erat mutum, not in moouing, but hindring the vſe of any
poore mans tongue.
                  With the word of worke,The woorde of work, the third kind of ſpeaking▪ ſo God ſpeaketh, the deuill and the good Angell, &c. God ſpeaketh, and the Angell with
the diuell, but not any thing neer together, the diuell with the Angel
or with God: becauſe the diuel hath no power at all againſt God, or
againſt the good Angel, therfore (in this ſort) we may ſay; Et illud erat
mutum.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  So then hee ſpeakes, as if hee ſpake not. Is it not
written, that hee made the greate battaile in heauen? Then hee
bawled lowde enough,How the Deuill ſpeaketh with the word of woorke, demaunded. againſt Michaell the Archangell, by
this kinde of talking, and euerye houre (with the tongue of
worke,) hee oppoſeth himſelfe againſt God and his Saintes,
tempting them in variable manner, and of Chriſt it is written,
that hee tempted him in the wilderneſſe in diuers
kinds.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  I denye not, that the diuel ſpeakes ſometime with
God,An Anſwere to the demād. and with the holy Angels, by the word of work abſolutely: but
I ſay, that the deuill thereby can neither hurt God, or his bleſſed
Angels. And although that Chriſt our Sauiour was tempted, and
Michaell the Archangell combated with Lucifer, yet both the one
and other remained conquerors: for of the ones victorie it is written;
Math. 4. 10. 
                     vade Sathana, non tentabis, &c. and of the others, ſaith Saint
Iohn;
                     Apoc. 12. 9. 
                     protectus eſt Draco, ille magnus ſerpens antiquus, &c. Behold
then how the diuell, although he worke many thinges againſt
God and his Angels,The Deuill cannot perſonally offend God or his Angelles. yet cannot hee perſonally offend either the one
or other, and whatſoeuer the infernall ſpirits doe contriue, againſt
the diuine lawe and naturall order, they doe it by diuine permiſſion,
wherefore wee may ſaye, in this manner of ſpeaking, the diuell is
dumbe.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  
                     I am ſatisfied, and am perſwaded, that Chriſt ſpake of
theſe three kindes of talking, when he made this difference: inter reum
iudicio,Math▪ 5. 22. reum conſilio, & reum gehennae ignis: guilt of iudgement,
guilt of a Councel,Three ſeuerall kinds of guiltines. and guilt of hell fire. Vpon which words venerable
Beda diſcourſing, ſayth. In primo eſt vnum, ſ. ira ſola; in ſecundo ſunt

duo,Venerable Beda on the three guilts. ſ. ira & vox; iram ſignificans; in tertio ſunt tria, ſ. ira, vox,
& in voce vituperationis expreſſio, &c. according to his begunne diſcourſe.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  The Angell ſpeaketh with God,How the Angell ſpeaketh with God, like the Scholer to his maſter. &c. not after ſuch manner,
as the maſter talketh with the Scholler, to teache or inſtruct: but
in ſuch ſort, as the Scholler ſpeakes to the maſter, to learn ſome knowledge
of him. The Angell reaſoneth with God, to conſult, on what
himſelfe hath in duty to do, or (as one ſtriken in admiration, of Gods
infinite excellencies) breaketh forth into diuine praiſes, with a very
fiery affection. Or elſe, the Angell talketh with God, in a mute voice,
as declaring thereby, ardent charity, and moſt amorous deſire, the
actions of an inflamed or burning heart.How the holy ſoule talketh with God, which the Deuill cānot doe. In this manner likewiſe,
the holy ſoule talketh (in her kind) with God, both in prayer and contemplation:
but the diuels are dumbe, and know not how to ſpeake
in this manner; wherefore, remaining thus ſilent, and bard from
the diuine prayſes, wee may very well ſaye: Et illud erat mutum.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  What kinde of conferring is this, in one Angell
with another? And how can one Angell diſcouer his will to another,
but others (beeing by) muſt know it? Or can a man manifeſt
his heart to another man, without others apprehenſion, or taſte
thereof?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  One Angell conferreth with another,How one Angel conferreth with another, by the word of the minde. by the worde
of the mind, manifeſting his will, by a certeine kinde of naturall
light, whereby hee directeth his thought to one, euen him that
ſhould know it, and to whome his will extendeth, and not to any
other. In this manner, is one Angell ſayd to ſpeake to another, whether
it be an Angell of light, or of darkneſſe: and this happeneth thus,
becauſe the will mooueth (as commaundreſſe) the vnderſtanding to
his operation,Intelligence is in the vnderſtāding in three kinds. and intelligence abydeth in the vnderſtanding after
three manners, that is to ſay, habitually, actually, & as it is related or
imparted to others.
                  A cleare caſe is it,Act of the wil. that by the act of the will, vnderſtanding paſſeth
from the firſt to the ſecond acte, and from the ſecond to the third.
When our mind wold conſider any thing actually, it iſſueth from the
firſt to the ſecond act,Speech of the minde. and ſpeaketh to it ſelfe, becauſe the interiour
conceit of the mind, is called the word and ſpeech of the mind. When
(afterward) the conceite of the mind is ordained or prepared, to report
it ſelfe to another by the will of the Angell: then is that conceit
manifeſted in ſuch ſorte, as the others can take no knowledge

thereof, although there bee a thouſand Angels together. Nor can
wee in this manner tearme the diuell to bee dumbe,Howe the Deuill can not be ſaid to be dumbe. becauſe
that this kind of ſpeaking communeth with all of angelicall nature.
                  Beſide, one Angel may confer with another, by the word of work,
whereby is diſcouered in liuely effect what was the intention:Angels may cōferre by the word of work. nor in
this kind is it abſolutely to be ſayd; Et illud erat mutum, becauſe one
diuel may demonſtrate to another, his will with the worke. As when
the diuel filled Iob ful of vlcers,Example of the Deuls plaguing of Iob. & tooke from him all the goods of
fortune, the other diuels could plainely perceiue, that Sathans intent
was to bring Iob to deſperation, and to make him blaſpheme his Creator;
but hee deceiued himſelfe, becauſe it ſorted to a contrarye
effect.
                  One Angel alſo ſpeaketh to another,The ſpeech of illuminatiō, only vſed by the ſuperiour Angels, with the inferiour. by communication of the
light diuine, manifeſting the diuine reuelations, which doe immediatly
depend vpon God. Which kind of ſpeaking is called illumination,
one Angel illuminating another. Nor do all the Angels confer together
in this manner, but only the ſuperior with the inferior, & wee
may ſay that all the Angels of darkneſſe are dumbe, beeing vnable to
ſpeake in this ſort: becauſe the diuine iudgementes are not reuealed
to them, they beeing depriued of celeſtiall grace, and condemned
to the eternall horrors, therefore it is true, that illud erat mutum.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  All theſe reaſons are faire, woorthy and quaint enough;
but yet it ſeemes to me a very great matter, that the father of
lyes,Inſinuatiō for further ſatiſfaction in this point. that importunate ſhameleſſe accuſer, that iangling falſe tel-tale,
who delights ſo much in lying: ſhould be ſayd to be dumb, to hold his
peace, and obſerue ſilence.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  A thouſand other reaſons there are, wherefore the
diuell ſhould be called dumbe, and euery one far better then other:
but I ſuppoſe,Offer of further progreſſion. that I haue anſwered formally enough to your doubt;
yet, if I thought, that (by length of argumente) I ſhoulde not
growe tedious and offenſiue to you, I coulde produce you diuers
other.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Your talke is ſo ſweete, your diſcourſe ſo ingenious,
and my deſire ſo inſatiable, (not that I couet to heare matter
of noueltie,The proceeding accepted kindlie. as perhappes this may appeare to bee, which (by
the curioſitie) affoordes as greate commoditye:) that I hope
to attende you in the height of contentment, without any thought
or touche of tediouſneſſe. Say on then, without anye eye to

length of time, which, I dare aſſure you will ſeeme ſhort enough, except
it may grow to offend your ſelfe: otherwiſe, to me it is moſt welcome.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Sometimes,Exāple of one man oufacing an other with a lye. when two men confer together, and (in
talke) one of them telles a lye, as ſtriuing to make it mainely beleeued,
if (peraduenture) there ſteppeth one in vnlooked for, who knows
at firſt ſight (as we ſay) the trueth of the matter, and how falſly the
one informeth the other: vndoubtedly, if it were not for manly reſpect,
publique diſgrace, or ſuch like modeſt forbearance, me thinkes
he ſhould ſay; Hold thy tongue lyer, do not I know how fooliſhly thou
lyeſt, and how ſhameleſly thou ſtriueſt to make a lye beleeued?
                  
                  The doctrine of truth,The firſt proofe, confirmed by an aū
                        cient father. according to the opinion of a learned father,
conſiſteth in three things, to weet, In the thing that is to be beleeued;
in that which is to be hoped for, and in the thing that is to be done.
for the deuill, talking to man with his three 
                        •
                     orked Cerberine tōgue,
as the enuyer of mankind, and as the deprauer of the diuine honour;
he teacheth the quite contrarie of all that is to be beleeued, he cheriſheth
men in dooing vnciuill actions, and ſuch as beſeeme not the
diuine aſpect, making promiſe of vaine things, altogether woorth iuſt
nothing.Chriſt thruſts the lye into the deuils throate. But Chriſt comming in place, the maſter of trueth, and hearing
ſo many lyes vttered by him, thruſts the ly into the deuils throat,
and with the triple corde of trueth, binds faſt his tongue; enſtructing,
the verity of things that are to be beleeued, the honeſtly of things that
are to be done, & promiſeth the eternity of heauenly things, which
are only to be hoped for. Oh, wold you not then, & at ſuch a time, haue
this damned lyer to reſt ſilent, to be mute & dumb frō any more lying?
Et illud erat mutum.
                  
                  Yet better.The ſecond proofe of the truth it ſelfe. Ieſus Chriſt is the truth it ſelfe, Ego ſum via, veritas &
vita: I am the way, and the trueth, and the life. This alſo could his very
enemies themſelues confeſſe, when (fraudulently) they ſayd to Chriſt:
Magiſter,
                     Mat. 22. 16. 
                     ſcimus quia rectè dicis & doces, & non accipis perſonam, ſed
viam Dei in veritate doces:
                     Luke 20. 21. 
                     Maſter, we know that thou ſayeſt and teacheſt
right, neither doſt thou accept mans perſon, but teacheſt the way of
God truely.
                     A lye is quite contrarie to the trueth. Contrary to trueth is a lye, the deuill is the inuenter, the
father and begetter of lyes▪ now, would not you, that Chriſt comming
vpon the earth, and deliuering this eternall truth, that the father
of lying (deſpight his heart) ſhoulde haue his mouth lookt vp,
and ſtand dumb? Therefore it is written, that Illud erat mutum: Comminatus
eſt 
                           •
                        i Ieſus,
                     Mark. 1. 25. 
                     dicens: Obmuteſce. Ieſus rebuked him ſaying: Hold
thy peace.
                  
                  
                     
                     Yet better. Chriſt is called the wiſedome of the eternall father. Nos
autem praedicamus Chriſtum crucifixum,The third proofe, of the wiſedōe of the father. Iudaeis quidem ſcandaelum,
Gentibus autem ſtultitiā. Ipſis autem vocatis Iudaeis at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Graecis, Chriſtum
Dei virtutem, & Dei ſapientiam. We preache Chriſt crucified, vnto
the Iewes euen a ſtumbling block,2. Cori. 1. 23. 24. and vnto the Grecians, fooliſhneſſe.
But vnto them which are called, both of the Iewes and Grecians, we
preache Chriſt the power of God, and the wiſedome of God▪ &c. It could
not be otherwiſe poſſible,
                     When the eternal wiſedōe ſpeaketh, the Deuil muſt be ſilent. 
                     but this eternall wiſedome being ſpeaking
on earth, the deuill muſt needs then be dumbe & ſilent, yea, euen in
deſpight of his cheefeſt height of malice. For; Sapientiam autem non
vincit malitia; Malice cannot ouercome wiſedome, therfore, maugre all
his miſcheefe and malice,
                     Sap 7. 30. 
                     he is dumbe: Et illud erat mutum. Et increpans
non ſinebat ea loqui.Luke. 4. 41. He rebuked them, and ſuffered them not to
ſpeak, &c. For it is againſt equity, when the eternall wiſedome ſpeaketh,
that foule malice ſhold be prating too, ſo much the rather, becauſe
he can neuer open his mouth, but lyes are ready to iſſue forth:
Cum loquitur mendicium,Iohn. 8. 44. ex propriis loquitur: When he speaketh a lye,
then he speaketh of his owne, &c.
                  Better yet.The fourth proofe, of the woord of the father. Chriſt is the word of the eternal father: contrary to a word
is ſilence or to be mute, or (at the leaſt) contradictory. The deuill euermore
oppoſeth himſelfe againſt God, therfore at the preſence of
the word,The Deuill ſpeakes not at the woords preſence. he ſpeakes not: Et illud erat mutum. And I am ſure you wold
not otherwiſe, but when the Creator ſpeaketh, the creature (whether
he wil or no) muſt hold his peace.
                  Better yet.The fift proofe, of the tongue to ſpeake, giuen only to man. Among all the creatures, to man only, was giuen a
tongue that coulde ſpeake, for albeit many other creatures haue
tongues yet can they not ſpeake with them, but man alone. The Aſſe
that Balaam rode o
                        •
                     , ſpake, but vnderſtood not what he ſpake, when
he ſayd,Numb. 22. 28. 29. 30. turning aſide to his ſmiter: Quid feci tibi? Cur percutis me
ecce iam tertio? what haue I doone vnto thee? that thou haſt ſmitten me
now three times?
                     Balaams Aſſe ſpake, but vnderſtood not what he ſayd. whereto Balaam anſwered: Quia commeruiſti, & illuſiſti
mihi: vtinam haberem gladium vt te percuterem: Becauſe thou haſt
deſerued it and haſt mocked me: I would there were a ſword in my
hand for now I wold kill thee. And the Aſſe replyed againe: Nonne animal
tuum ſum cui ſemper inſedere confueuiſti vſque in praeſentem diem?
Di
                           •
                        , quid ſimile vn quam fece 
                           •
                        m tibi? Am I not thine Aſſe, which
thou haſt ridden vpon ſince thy firſt time vnto this day? haue I vſed at any
time to do thus vnto thee? &c. But in al theſe lamentatiōs which the
Aſſe made, hee neuer vnderſtood himſelfe, becauſe hee was but a
beaſt.
                  
                     
But what greater beaſt is there then the deuill, who is called by
Saint Bernard:
                     The wordes of S. Barnard cōcerning the Deuill. 
                     Beſtia omnium bestiarum beſtialiſſima: the beaſt among
all beaſts, the very beaſtlieſt? And a reuerend Father, at the very point
of ſurrendring vp his ſoule to his Creator, ſayde, vpon the deuils appearing
to him:A reuerent father, at his giuing vp the ghoſ
                           •
                        e. 
                     Quid aſta
                           •
                         hîc cruenta beſtia? Why ſtandeſt thou heere
thou bloudy beaſt? Likewiſe S. Iohn in many places of his Apocalyps,
calles him the beaſt, and, in the ſhape of a beaſt, diuers times he ſawe
him.Apoc. 17. 8. 
                     Beſtia quam vidiſti, fuit, & non eſt, & aſcenſura eſt de abyſſo.
The beaſt that thou haſt ſeene, was, and is not, and ſhall aſcend out of
the bottomleſſe pit. The deuill then beeing ſuch a greate deformed
beaſt, who voluntarily hath abandoned his cheefeſt good, how
would you then that he ſhould ſpeake? therefore, Et illud erat mutum.
                  
                  Yet better.The ſixte Proof, of Adās tranſgreſſing Gods commā
                        dement. When Adam tranſgreſſed the diuine commandement,
God came, and reprooued him greatly for it: but he excuſed himſelf,
by ſaying, that he had not eaten, but only, as fearing to offend his beloued
companion. Mulier quam dediſti mihi ſociam, dedit mihi de ligno
& comedi:
                     Gen. 3. 12. 13. 
                     The woman which thou gaueſt to be with me ſhe gaue me
of the tree, and I did eate. God reproouing Eua for the fact, ſhe alſo
excuſed her ſelfe, by ſaying, that the Serpent, the beaſt infernall had
deceiued her.The Deuill ſtood dumbe, without any excuſe. 
                     Serpens decepit me, & comedi: The Serpent beguiled me,
and I did eate. But the deuill ſtood as dumbe, and ſayd nothing in excuſe
of his ſin, therfore; Et illud erat mutum.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  What ſhould the wicked beaſt haue anſwered in excuſe
of his euil: but that he did it on meer malice, on rooted & inueterate
enuy, not by frailty, or any other ſuggeſtion, could he ſay he ſinned?
Som other reaſons more proper, wold I haue had you alleaged, wherby
this mutiner might be called dumb: becauſe all theſe hitherto rehearſed,
though they be very good, yet none of thē hath ſo ſmooth a
taſt, as abſolutely to 
                        •
                     i
                        •
                      my deſirous appetite.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  We may ſay that he is called dumb,The ſeauenth proofe, of the Deuils making vs all dūbe by his falſe ſuggeſtions. becauſe he makes
vs all dumb with his falſe ſuggeſtions, and by them he worketh ſo
much as he can: for example. That we prayſe not the Lord, neither
ſpeak to him in our prayers, nor confeſſe the multitude of our ſins, but
in al & for al, we hold our ſelues ſilent rather. Therfore (perhaps was it)
that the mā poſſeſſed with the deuil, wherof the Euangeliſt ſpeaketh,
where he ſaith,Mat. 12. 22. 
                     Et illud erat mutum; was not onely dumb, but blind &
deafe likewiſe,Example of the blind man in the Goſpel. ſo that (in no māner) he could either prayſe God, giue
good exāple to his neighbour, or confeſſe the greeuous burdē of his
own ſins, to weet, neither with his heart, or any kind of other geſture.

For, if a man ſees not the good examples of others, nor heares th
                        •
                     
holy documentes of heauenly doctrine, nor can require with his
tongue, what appertaineth to the health of his ſoule: very vnaptlie
can his hart (being naturally inclined to euil) think any good thought
without the eſpeciall aſſiſtance of God.
                  Hence was it,The maner of the Deuils afflictions layd on the blinde, and their ſeuerall ends. that to bring this poore wretch to extreame neceſſitie,
he lockt vp his eares, becauſe he ſhould liſten to no godly doctrine;
ſhut vp his ſight, to the end, he might not behold other mens
good examples; and becauſe he ſhould not preuent his owne ruine,
he tied a knot vpon his tongue, leaſt he might (otherwiſe) prayſe the
Lorde, admoniſh his neighbour, confeſſe his faults, aske ſupply for
his wāts, and confer (chriſtianlike) among his friends: and beeing (by
him) reduced to this lamentable eſtate, he hoped afterward, that he
would fall into the ſinne of deſperation.
                  He is alſo called dumbe,An other reaſon, why he is called dumbe. by the effectes which he worketh in vs,
and by the infamous conqueſt he maketh of vs. In like manner, as
Scipio Emilianus was called Affricanus, onely for conquering Affrica,
                     Scipio Affricanus. and ioyning it to the Romane Empire. Or, in ſuch manner as Titus
Manlius,
                     Titus Manlius ſirnamed Torquatus. who killing (in a combate) a knight of Fraunce, and taking
a chaine from his neck, which hee put about his owne: was
called Torquatus by the chaine, which in the Latine idiome
is tearmed Torques. So the deuill, making a man dumbe, and bereauing
him of the vſe of ſpeeche, is therefore called dumbe himſelfe.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  An honeſt ſtranger,The eight proofe, by cō
                        pariſon of a Prince, beſieging a Citie round about. in good ſadneſſe (my Lorde) is
this, that for the good lodging allowed him, returneth ſuch an vnkind
counter-chaunge. The vile deuill dealing with this poore man,
like as a Prince doth: who, becauſe he would domineer ouer ſome
citye, beſiegeth it firſt round in euery part with his army, ſo that on
no ſide ſuccor can be expected. Wherupon, the Citizens ſeeing themſelues
in this deſperate eſtate, do ſurrender themſelues vp into their
enemies hands.
                  So did Holofernes when he beſieged Bethulia,
                     Example of Holofernes his beſieging of Bethulia. with an hundred
thouſand foote Souldiers, and twenty two thouſand horſemen: he
damd vp all the paſſes, quite chaunged the water courſes, ſo that in
the ſpace of twentie dayes, they had not in the citie one droppe
of water. Theyr caſe beeing thus deſperate, they reſolued to
giue vp themſelues, (as a preye) into the Armies power, and had
doone ſo, but that (by a ſupernaturall helpe) God ſent them ſuccour.
                  
                     
So dealt the deuill with this poore man,Alluſion of the Deuils dealing with this blinde man. Damming vp the torrent
of ſpeech or eloquence, cloſing vp the way-gate of hearing, and robbing
him of the cheerfull benefite of ſight: that then drouping down
into deſpaire, he might (by none of thoſe organes) expect any ſuccour.
That ſo hauing, by no way of the ſences, any entrance left for
helpe, he ſeeing no man elſe to do good, that (by their example) hee
might conuert; he hearing no preaching againſt ſinne, that his heart
thereby might take a loathing of it, and he, ſpeaking not one word
with his tongue, leaſt by true contrition, and conſeſſion of his ſins to
God, he might call and crye to him for help in this extremity, might
deſpaire and dye.
                  Herein,The ninth proofe by cō
                        pariſon of a ſleeper in a cloſe chāber. the deuill obſerued the rule of him, who entring into a
chamber to ſleepe, commaundeth thoſe of the houſe, to keepe ſtrict
ſilence, ſhut vp the windowes, lock vp the doores, to the end, that not
onely any noiſe might offend him, but alſo, that the leaſt glimſe of
light ſhould not be diſcerned.Alluſiō to the poore man. So did the diuell with this poore man,
he impeached euery ſenſe, that could yeeld him any ſeruice toward
helpe or health, that the body being ſo ſhut vp in obſcurity, the ſoule
it ſelfe might alſo dwell in darkneſſe, neuer more to look on the light
of celeſtiall grace.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  The deuill is an enemy to euery good worke,The tenth proofe by the Deuils hindering vs, from confeſſing our ſinnes to God. and
therefore he makes vs dumbe, when we would enter into the cloſet
of our heart, and lay open to God (by true confeſſion) the multitude
of our ſinnes. And this he dooth, becauſe we ſhould not vnfold our
infirmity, to the true phyſition of our ſoules, therefore he then ſtriueth
moſt to make vs dumb, when ſilence ought moſt of all to bee broken.
                  Little cares the Iaoler,Compariſō of a Iaylor, or priſō keeper. or (as we may rather ſay) the priſon keeper,
if his priſoners walke about the houſe at liberty, without fetters
on their feete, or manicles on their handes, when the priſon gate is
ſafe ſhut, vp, and himſelfe keepes the keye thereof. Euen ſo, little
cares the deuill, if the miſerable ſinner haue his hands at liberty, to
giue almes, or doe any other good deede, if his feet alſo be vnbound,
to viſit the ſick, the impriſoned, or to goe where any other neede is
required:An excellent Alluſion, well worth the marking. ſo that the doore of the mouth be faſt lockt vp, whereby he
might call to his Lorde and maker, to tell him the weight and burthen
of his ſinne, that lyes very heauily vpon his ſoule, therefore it
may be very well ſayd: Et illud erat mutum. I thinke the Prophet Eſay
meant as much,Eſay. 52. 2. when he ſayd: Solue vincula colli tui, captiua filia
Sion: vntye, or take from thy neck, the ſnare that holds thee captiue, Oh

daughter Sion, that is to ſaye, the ſinfull ſoule to forſake her
ſins.
                  Among al the chaines or ſnares for thraldome,The eleuenth proofe, by a chaine or ſnare faſtened about the neck, by way of compariſō. that which is faſtened
about the neck, is the very worſt of all other, becauſe, by the leaſt
twitch of reſtraint, a man therby may be ſtrangled & dead. Although
the theef in the priſon, haue his hāds & feet ſhackled, yet notwithſtā
                     ding,
he hath ſome hope of life, either by fauour of friends, or by a
great ſum of mony, or elſe by flight. But when he ſees the hangman,
to faſten a cord or chaine about his neck, he takes himſelf to be quite
diſpatcht, and no longer hope of life then remaineth. In like manner,
the wretched ſinner,Alluſiō to the wretched ſinner, by the benefit of his ſpeech. though his hands and feete be reſtrained from
any good acte, yet it hurteth him not ſo much, as to loſe the libertye
of his ſpeeche, to haue his throate and windpipes paſſage
ſtopt.
                  For, if he haue but the freedome of his tongue, there is ſound hope
of inward health, for that organe will yet intreate for him, ſpeaking
ſincerely, ſimply, humbly, purely, faithfully, nakedly, mournefully, diſcreetly,
freely, ſtrongly, inceſſantly, ſhamefaſtly and obediently, he
may haue remedy for all euilles whatſoeuer, by this happy meanes of
calling to God, before his caſe be vtterly diſpatcht. Therefore the diuel
(more then by any other reſtraint) watcheth to ſtifle vs with this
dumb coller,The Deuil his dumbe coller. for then he counts himſelf ſure of his prey, neuer doubting
the perdition of the poore ſinners ſoule, in which reſpect we may
wel ſay; Et illud erat mutum.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The very engine and ſnare of the woolfe, who, the firſt
thing he doth with his prey,The twelfth proofe, by cō
                        pariſon of the woolf and the poore beaſte. faſtens his teeth ſurely to the throat of
the beaſt, to the end he ſhould not cry: for by crying, the watchfull
dogs (being neer hand as keepers) might recouer the poor beaſt out
of his teeth. So deales the infernal woolfe, with poore, iuſt, innocent
ſheep or lambs,Alluſion to the infernall woolfe. for ſo are they called by Chriſt himſelf in the Goſpel,
for many reſpects: Statuet quidem oues a dextris ſuis: He ſhall ſet the
ſheep on his right hand.
                  
                  The firſt thing he dooth,Math. 25. 33. he ſeeks to ſtrangle them by the throat,
to the end, they ſhould not crye out, to the careful watchmen of their
ſoules,Preachers are, or ought to be, the carefull watchmen of our ſoules. the Preachers and diſpenſers of god his ſacred bleſſings, (who
haue the furniture for their ſoules ſafety in their keeping, and watch
daye and night, for defence of theyr flockes,) leaſte by theyr
prayers, preachings and deuoute exhortations, they ſhoulde
regaine them, from the deuouring teethe of this infernall
wolfe.
                  
                     
For he cares not, though they ſhew ſome fewe fruites of faith, as
giuing almes to the poore, hoſpitality to the harbourleſſe, and praying
for the oppreſſed:The Deuill moſte hinders our calling vpon god. but (by no meanes) muſt they call to God and
his miniſters, to lay open the foule deformities of their ſinnes, to reueale
the true compunction of their heartes, but ſmother all in ſilence,
ſtifle one penitente thought, with a thouſand preparations
to deedes farre worſe and worſe, and (as apte for his purpoſe)
hee hath fiue ſeuerall ſharpe teethe,The Deuill hath fiue ſeuerall teeth to gripe withall. wherewith hee gripes
them.
                  The firſt, is ſhame, for when a man ſinneth, the deuil depriues him
of all bluſhing,Of the firſte tooth, ſhame. and euery good or manly reſpect, till he comes into
the Church, and then he reſtores it him againe, and his comely bluſhing
colour may be perceiued, euen with intire remembraunce of his
heauy tranſgreſſions. But what dooth he vpon this? when he 
                        •
                     ees the
poore ſinner ready to talke with God, and to vnlade the fraight of
his ouerburthened conſcience: euen then he intricates his mind with
a thouſand ſtrange thoughts, & rounds him in the eare with ſome ſilent
ſuggeſtions, as thus.
                  If thou diſcloſe thy ſecret ſinnes to God,The malitious ſuggeſtiōs of the Deuill whē we are in the Church, talking with God. or ſhewe thy ſelfe to be
aſhamed of them, and intendeſt a perfect courſe of repentance: why,
others being by, and ſeeing thee, they will throwe the Publicanes diſgrace
in thy teeth, and ſay; thou art an hypocrite, a diſſembler, makeſt
a ſhew of outward holineſſe, and art (indeed) but a very deuill. So, euery
one will be doubtfull of conuerſing with thee, as hating hypocriticall
and formall holineſſe: and where before, thou waſt reputed
for an honeſt man, of fellowly, friendly and ſociable conuerſation;
thou ſhalt now be held for a reformed foole, a melancholy, preciſe &
captious companion, with a thouſand other ſuch helliſh obiections,
wherwith you are better acquainted in this kind, then I can expreſſe
them.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     This toothe is to bee broken in his mouth,
                     How the Deuils firſt tooth is to be brokē. 
                     with a
god ſound ſtroke, and let it bee, the perfect conſideration, that at
length hee ſhall bee diſcouered to all the worlde, according as God
ſpake by the Prophet Nahum.Nahum. 3. 5. Reuelabo pudenda tua in facie
tua, & oſtendam in Gentibus nuditatem tuam, & regnis ignominiam
tuam, &c. I will diſcouer thy skirtes vpon thy face, and will
ſhewe the nations thy filthineſſe, and the kingdomes thy ſhame
&c.
                  
                     Socrates walking through the city,Exāple of Socrates, ſeeing a yong man cōming forth of an harlo
                           •
                         houſe. eſpied a yong mā, who ſtood ready
to ſtep forth of an harlots houſe, but ſo ſoone as he ſaw Socrates,
                     
he returned into the infamous houſe, as one aſhamed. But Socrates
paſſing on, ſayd to the young man: Non te pude at exire, ſed intraſſe:
Thou oughteſt not be aſhamed to come foorth of that bad houſe, but rather
for thy entring into it. Euen ſo the ſinfull ſoule, it ſhould not be
aſhamed to iſſue foorth of the infamous houſe of ſinne,Alluſiō to the ſinful ſoule. the manſion
and dwelling of the deuill, but for firſt entering into it rather; it
behooueth vs therefore to bee carefull of breaking out this
tooth.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The ſecond tooth,The deuils ſecond tooth: Feare of repentance. is the feare of repentance, whereto
the offended conſcience ſpeaketh, and 
                        •
                     aith, it is the ſinne of luxury,
for chaſtiſement whereof, let the pampered ouer-hot body faſt with
bread & water. But the deuil watching (as before) his fit opportunity,
tunes the tongue with this anſwer;The deuils hinderance. I am not able to faſt, or forbeare
what my appetite deſireth, what repentaunce then is likely to enſue
vpon this nice nature?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  This tooth is to be broken, and that very eaſilie, by
due conſideration of the paines eternall.How the deuils ſecond tooth is to be broken. So may wee ſoone refute,
& put down the deuil when he frights vs with the feare of repētance,
to tell him: That a greater feare hath ſurpriſed thee, euen the ſufferāce
of thoſe paines, which neuer will be ended.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The third tooth, is the vaine hope of long life, vrging
the ſinner,The deuils third tooth: Hope of long life. to procraſtination of repentance, by a falſe perſwaſion
of liuing long time: as truſting in the iocond youth of years, the
ſtrength of our members, and the preſent health of bodie. Neuer remembring,
how fraile this mortall life is,The deuils falſe perſwaſiō
                        ▪
                      compared by holy Iob, to
the wind, to a ſhadow, and to a flour, things that vaniſhe altogether,
with a glaunce of an eye or a puffe of breath.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  If we would breake this toothe with ſmall trauaile,
let vs then conſider,How the deuils third toothe is to be broken. that there is nothing more certaine then death,
nor more vncertaine then the houre thereof. And that, as the fiſh becomes
taken by the hooke, and dyes, when he thinkes to liue a longer
date,Similie. and voide of 
                        •
                     aking: euen ſo is man in the hand of death,
caught when he moſt hopeth of long life.Alluſion. According as the wiſe
man ſayth.Eccle. 9. 12. 
                     Neſcit homo finem ſuum▪ ſed ſicut piſces capiuntur hamo, &
ſicut aues laqueo comprehenduntur, ſic capiuntur homines in tempore
malo, cum eis extempſo ſuperuenerit No man doth know his tim
                           •
                        , but as
the fiſhes which are taken in an euill net, or as the birds that are caught
in the ſnare: ſo are the children of men ſnared in the euill time, when it
falleth vpon them ſuddenly.
                  
                  When the ſimple bird feedes moſt ſauourly on the baite, then

without any meanes of eſcape is ſhe taken.Compariſō of the birds feeding, with the Alluſion. And euen the very ſame is
the caſe of man, when leaſt he thinketh on the hour of death, in this
vnexpected hour is he taken, & fals into death, the fowlers ſnare: therfore
with this conſideration, we may break the tooth of vain & bootleſ
                        •
                     e
hope.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The fourth tooth,The Deuils fourth tooth: Careleſnes of riotous ſinnes. is this weake opinion, that by no
meanes we muſt repent vs, of any huff-cap or riotous ſinne, becauſe
(ſaith he) they are tearmed but good fellowſhip, tricks of youth, or
manly qualities. Beſide, if we ſhould repent them, it were but needleſſe,
for (within a day or two) we ſhal fall into the ſame againe, and
then the labour of repentance may be very wel ſpared.The Deuills inſinuation. And what enſueth
hereō? only this conceit is daily buzz'd into our eares by the diuell:
That we haue a certaine kind of good will, to leaue off theſe vanities,
but the more we ſtriue to forgo them, the more our nature faſtneth
liking on them, and ſins incident to nature, doe admit tolleration.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  This tooth muſt needs be puld out,How the Deuils fourth tooth is to be puld out. for by breaking
it, ſome piece or ſtump may be left behind. Conſider but thus much,
The knight or Souldiour may well be counted fooliſh, that, returning
greeuouſly wounded from the battaile,Compariſō of a wounded Souldiour. will not ſuffer himſelfe to be
dreſt, or his hurts bound vp, but (in a brauery, and to be reputed a luſty
gallant) ſaith to the Chirurgian; Thou ſhalt beſtow no paines vpon
me, becauſe to morrow I muſt needs be in the battaile againe. Foole,
foole, might the Chirurgian anſwer him, is it not better going wel &
halfe cured, then weakely, and with thy bloud ſtreaming forth about
thee?
                  In a far worſe eſtate is the ſinner,Alluſiō to the ſinfull man. that makes ſo ſlight an account
of repentaunce, and will not giue ouer ſinne, becauſe his nature
affecteth to ſinne. Fall downe vpon thy knees, put on a more
humble and tractable ſpirit, and deſire thy Lorde God to giue thee
grace, that thou maiſt abſtaine from all ſinnes whatſoeuer: and if
thou doe thy part in true penitence, ſo much as lyes in thee, thou
ſhalt finde God readye (at all houres) to aſſiſte and ſtrengthen
thee.The Deuils fift 
                           •
                        ooth: preſuming too much vpon Gods mercie.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The fift tooth, is preſumption, relying too much
vpon the diuine mercy, and ſaying within thy ſelfe: God is ſo mercifull,
as hee will not permit mee any way to periſh. Hee pardoned
Peter his owne denyer;The ſinners alleadging of Exāples in his owne preſūption. 
                     Paul, his Churches greeuous perſecuter;
Mathew, the rich couetous tol gatherer; Zacheus the Publican, Mary
Magdalen the great ſinner, the Samaritane her hereſie; the woman

her adultery, and the theefe his iniquitie, why then he cannot chuſe
but pardon me too. This preſumptuous wretch neuer conſidereth the
true and intire repentance of all theſe before named, and the eſpecial
graces of God (therby) conferred vpon them; ſuch as he beſtoweth
not vpon euery one, but only on thoſe, that in ſingleneſſe of ſoule, &
vnfayned repentance ſeeke after them.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  This tooth may be broken,How the Deuilles firſt tooth is to be broken. by due conſideration, that
many are the eternall paines of hell, and many are condemned to
endure them, for preſuming too raſhly vpon the diuine mercy; weening
to compaſſe that ſaucily, which is no way to be had but by true
ſimplicity, or to haue a labourers hyre for idleneſſe, when, he that
worketh not, muſt haue no wages. Vnwiſe may we call him, who being
falne into a quagmire,Compariſō of the man falne into a bogge or quagmire. with a purſe full of mony in his hand, & in
very great perill of periſhing, wil yet refuſe, to catch hold on a cord,
caſt to him from a friends hand, that by vſing ſome meanes to faſten
it about him, he may the ſooner be drawne out of daunger. But he,
like a fooliſh man, loth to let fal the purſe out of his hand, becauſe he
would not looſe ſuch a ſum of mony: refuſeth the cords helpe; ſo (at
one inſtant) the purſe and his life are loſt together.
                  In a far worſe caſe do I account the ſinner,Alluſiō to the ſinner, that refuſeth peace in due time offered. that refuſeth to accept
the diuine mercy in due time, but preferreth a fooliſh delight before
it, & ſo is damned wilfully: for Miſericordia, is ſayd to be, quaſi miſerorum
chorda. We by our ſinning, doe fall into the bottomleſſe depth
of hel,Of Mercie. as Dauid ſayth, Infixus ſum in limo profundi; I ſtick faſt in the
deep mire,
                     Pſal. 69. 2. & god, in meer compaſſion, caſts forth the cord of his mercy,
An excellent compariſon. to ſaue vs from periſhing in our ſins: but then, vaine loue to this
world, which we hold in the hand of our hart, will not permit vs (for
lucre thereof) to take hold vpon it. Let vs therefore learne to be wiſe,
and know when this gracious bleſſing is offered vs.
                  It comes,Similie of Time or occaſion. after the manner of time or occaſion, figured by our elders
with a hairy forefront, but a bald ſcalpe behind, whereon grew the
prouerbe: Fronte capilloſa; poſt eſt occaſio calua. Let vs not ſuffer our
ſelues to be caught of this rauening woolf,Prouerb. nor be ſtricken dumbe by
him: but breaking his helliſh teeth, crye out with the Prophet Dauid,
that we may be heard:Pſal. 120. 2. 
                     Ad Dominuin cùm tribularer clamaui, & exaudiuit
me: when I was in trouble I called vpon the Lord, and he heard me.
For, to be ſilent in ſuch neceſſity, is a moſt diuelliſh and deteſtable error,
therefore let vs ſay; Et illud erat mutum.
                  
               
               Finis Cap. 10.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  Continuing on ſtill the ſame matter and diſcourſe, with diuers other
excellent reproofes of this mighty ſinne of vnwillingneſſe to repent,
and eaſing our conſciences of the heauy burden of ſin, wherein no
ſilence is to be kept. And that the detractors tongue is like the Serpents:
Alſo, how we ought ſometimes to crye out, and ſometimes to
hold our peace.
               
               Chap. 11.
               
                  
                     CLAVDIO.
                  God commaunded in
Deuteronomy,
                     The thirteenth proofe, by a Virgin defloured in the Cittie. the two and twentieth
Chapter, that, if a virgin were
defloured in the city, ſhe ſhould be
publiquely ſtoned to death by the
people, and he yeelds the reaſon for
this ſo ſeuere puniſhment. Quia non
clamauit cùm eſſet in ciuitate:
                     Deut. 22. 24. 25. 26. 27. 
                     Becauſe
ſhee cryed not, beeing in the city.
For if ſhe had cryed out, perhaps, the
impudent man would not haue been
ſo forward, in committing ſuch a great miſdeed: & by her not crying
it appeared as an euident ſigne, that ſhe condiſcended to this luſtfull
act.
                  
                     But if it ſo happened,
                     Of the virgin defloured in the fielde. 
                     that in the field ſhee was deflowred, then
God commaunded, that the man onely ſhould be ſtoned, and not
the woman: becauſe although ſhe had there cryed out, ſhe could not
haue had ſuch helpe, as ſhe might in the city. Sin autem in agro repererit
vir puellam, &c. Et apprehendens concubuerit cum ea; ipſe mortetur
ſolus, puella nihil patietur, nec eſt rea mortis: quoniam ſicut latro
conſurgit contra fratrem ſuum, & occidit animam eius; ita a & puella perpeſſa

eſt. Sola erat in agro, clamauit, et nullus affuit qui liberaret eam.
But if a man find a betrothed maid in the field, and force her, and lye
with her, then the man that lay with her, ſhall dye alone. And vnto the
maid thou ſhalt doe nothing, becauſe there is in the maid no cauſe of
death: for as when a man riſeth againſt his neighbour, and woundeth
him to death, ſo is this matter. For he found her in the field, the maide
cryed, and there was no man to ſuccour her.
                  Our ſoule is this faire young virgin; virgo Iſrael, proiecta eſt in
terram ſuam,
                     Alluſion of the cōpariſon. 
                     non eſt quiſuſcitet eam: The virgin Iſrael is left vpon her
land,
                     Amos. 5. 2. 
                     and there is none to raiſe her vp. Oh how many ſoules ſhal be ſtoned
eternally in hell fire, for not being ſubiected to this cry of hearty
repentaunce? becauſe the diuell hath ſo ſtopt their throats, as they
cannot crye to god at all, but ſitting wilfully dumbe, and ſtubbomly
vnrepentant, deſeruedly they periſh. Whereas, if they had followed
Dauids rule, and (by maine ſtearne voice) broke the diuels dumbe
ſtrings; they might haue triumphed at the ſight of his owne deceipt,
and caſt in his teeth, that repentance only, is able to free any ſoule frō
him, & ſo haue giuen him this bone to gnaw on, Et illud erat mutum.
                  
                  Sometimes I haue ſeene diuers Gentlemen, yea euen of this city
very well deriued,The foureteenth proofe, of eloquent worldly ſpeakers and drowſie ſluggards when they ſhould talke with God. to bee moſt gratious in ſpeeche, and (in their familiar
conference) ſo eloquent, as they needed not giue place to the
very perfecteſt Oratour, ſo excellently were they prouided for this
fraile worlde. Notwithſtanding, when they ſhould come to talke
priuately with God, to lay open before him the heauy loade of their
ſinnes, to ſpeake in the true eloquent key of a repentant ſoule, with
prayers and petitions to pearce the heauēs: they haue ſhewen themſelues
ſleepy, ſluggiſh and made of lead as it were, nay, meerely
dumb, and ſo ſilent, as they coulde hardlye affoorde to open theyr
mouthes.
                  In like manner, wee finde diuers women of a quick and ready
tongue,Of women quick enough of tongue, for any thing cō
                        cerning pride. for any thing concerning pride, voluptuouſneſſe, or what
their peeuiſh humour affecteth, as at playes, vaine paſtimes or ſuch
like delights. But let them come into the Church, where attonemente
is to bee made, betweene god and their wretched polluted
ſoules, the diuell then ſtrikes them dumb, drowſie and negligent. Or
if they talke at all, he will be ſure to fit them another kind of way,
with talke of proude attyres, praiſing of idle faſhions in ſuch and
ſuch goſſips, or deuiſes of delicates for the bellie, or where to meete
at ſome wanton exerciſe. So, in ſtead of repenting their ſinnes, they

heape ſinne vpon ſinne, extolling their owne vertues (if perhaps they
haue any at all) far worſe then the Phariſey, which eyther in man or
woman is to be highly reprooued.
                  A learned Doctour affirmeth,The fifteenth proofe, of an inward feſte
                        
                           •
                        ing wound. that, Omne nociuum incluſum magis
nocet, whereby we may gather, that putrifaction within a wound,
cauſeth greater anguiſh, then when it is drawne foorth, for then the
paine is more tollerable.Alluſion to the cōpariſon▪
                      Euen ſo, the ſoule that hath many ſinnes
hidden in it, is not much vnlike to ſuch filthy putrifaction: for if
by the launcing rancour of true repentance, they be not gotten forth,
and pardon obtained, they wil ſo much the more painfully afflict the
ſoule, bite the conſcience, and ſuffer the mind to inioy no quiet.
                  As may be ſaid of him,Similie. that nouriſheth melanchollie in his hart,
whereby he pines and droupes away, euen til death make ſeazure on
him,Eccle. 30. 25. according as ſayth the wiſe mā. Multos enim occidit triſtitia, &
non eſt vtilitas in ea. Sorrow hath ſlaine many, and there is no profit in
it. But if a man vtter his griefe to a faithfull friend, that knowes how
to comfort him: Oh what a cheering ioy is it to the poore afflicted
hart?Prouer. 16. 24. for Salomon ſaith; Fauus mellis compoſita verba, dulcedo animae,
ſanitas oſsium. Faire woordes are as the honie-comb
                           •
                        , ſweeteneſſe
to the ſoule, and health to the bones. How can the ſoule be in health,
that is full of putrifaction,Of the Phariſaicall ſinfull ſoule. and ouercharged with ſinne? and deales
as the Phariſey did; boaſte of good deeds, and hide therby foule ſins?
it is like to one let bloud, that giues paſſage to the beſt, and keeps the
worſt behinde.
                  In Phlebotomy or bloud-letting,Compariſon of Phlebotomy or bloud letting. when wee ſee the good bloud to
come firſt foorth, we vſe to ſay; it is a bad ſigne, becauſe the good
bloud leauing the body, and the bad making no iſſue at all, it is held
to betoken the death of the patient. On the contrary, when the
corrupt and putrified bloud firſt makes his paſſage, it is a ſignall of
health to the partie.Alluſiō to the compariſon. Euen ſo, when a proude and an opinionate ſinner
comes to conferre with God, ſtanding vpon the conceipt of his
owne well deſeruing in ſome kindes, and ſhall preſume to ſay: O
Lord, I haue not robbed, I haue not blaſphemed thy name, I
haue not committed adulterye, and other ſuch like cleerings of
him ſelfe: It is an apparant ſigne, that as foule ſinnes are remayning
behinde, and as greatly doe endaunger the death of the
ſoule.
                  Nor is this to be held as any repentaunce at all,Of vayne and idle iuſtifying of our ſelues, vrged onely by the deuill. or contrite confeſſing
our tranſgreſſions to God: but rather a deuilliſh exaltation,
and vaine-glorious iuſtification of our ſelues. For humble confeſſion

and true repentaunce, is a free accuſation of our ſelues for all faults
committed; without vaunting of any good worke whatſoeuer,
which is neuer doone, but by the craft of the diuell, making
vs dumbe in our dutie, as himſelfe is dumbe: Et erat illud mutum.
This kind of taciturnirie, or rather dumbneſſe, begets great euilles
in the ſoule, and becomes the ruine of the conſcience, as Dauid affirmeth
in one of his Pſalmes:Pſal. 32. 3. 
                     Quoniam tacui, inueterauerūt oſſa mea,
dum clamarem tota die. When I held my tongue, my bones conſumed,
through my dayly complaining, as if he would haue ſayd, becauſe I was
ſo ſilent my bones waxed old,Alluſion to the prophets woordes. to wit, my vertue became weakned,
while I continued crying all the day.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  What a confuſed ſpeech is this of Dauid? If he held
his peace, how did he cry all the day? and if he cryed all the day, how
was he ſilent? A man cannot crye, and hold his peace too, both at one
inſtant, & yet Dauids words are:A Queſtion of Dauids ſpeech, crying, and ſilence. 
                     Quoniam tacui, dum clamarem tota
die, inuterauerunt omnia oſſa mea. Becauſe I haue bin ſilēt, while I cryed
all day, all my bones are waxed old: how can it ſtand, a man to be ſilent,
and cry too?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Dauid ſpeaketh of ſuch ſinners, as already I haue ſpoken
of to you,
                     The anſwer to the former queſtion, of ſuch as are ſilent, & yet do cry too. 
                     who, after the guiſe of the Phariſie in the Goſpell, at
one inſtant time are ſilent, and yet cry too, crying out aloude of their
own merits, and ſinging their owne praiſes in a loftie ſtraine. Gratias
ago tibi Deus, quia non ſum ſicut caeteri hominum, raptores, iniuſti,
adulteri, velut etiam hic Publicanus. I
                        •
                     iuno bis in ſabbatho: decimas
do omnium quae poſſid
                        •
                     o.Luk. 18. 11. 12. Oh God I thanke thee, that I am not as
other men, extortioners, vniuſt, adulterers, or euen as this Publicane.
I faſt twiſe in the weeke: I giue tithe of all that euer I
poſſeſſe.
                  Doe you not heare,Boaſting of good deeds, but keeping ſinne in ſilēce. of how many things they cry out aloude,
and yet are ſilent enough of their owne ſinnes? they talk not of ſuch
things as may abaſe them, but boaſt of all things that may vainely
aduance them, by meanes whereof, they fall downe into darkeneſſe,
according as this proude Phariſie did. Therefore in our ſecret communing
and talking with God, we ſhold not be ſilent of our ſins, but
cry loude enough on them, & if any good actions haue attended our
liues, to reſerue them in ſilence, without ſo much as a thought of thē:
for that is a place wherein to accuſe our ſelues iuſtly of al our crimes &
not to make vaunt of any good work.
                  They that thus phariſaically do cry out on their merites,Of the conſumption gottē in the bones▪
                      and ſilently
keep their ſins in their own boſoms; get a conſumption in their

bones. Inueterauerunt oſſa mea, quoniam tacui dum clamarem tota
die.
                     Simily. The bones doe ſignifie our vertues, for, as bones doe
ſupporte the bodie,Pſal. 35. 10. ſo doe vertues vpholde the ſoule: Omnia
oſſa mea dicent: Dòmine, quis ſimilis tibi? All my bones ſhall ſay:
Lord,
                     The Prophet Dauid his meaning. 
                     who is like vnto thee? Dauid then ſaying that by his crying,
his bones waxed old & conſumed, he meaneth, that the power of our
vertues are weakned, by concealing our vices, and vaunting of our
vertues.
                  And old thing muſt needes be weake, ſuch is the ſtate of the
ſoule,Sentence, and the ſame alluded. ſeeking to hide from God her ſecret ſinnes, and all this is the
worke of the diuell, therefore, Et illud erat mutum. But bleſſed bee
God, who ſent his onely begotten Sonne, to diſſolue this ſtrict bondage,
& cruſh in peeces this vile ſnare of the deuill.1. Iohn. 3. 8. 
                     In hoc apparuit
filius Dei, vt diſſoluat opera Diaboli: For this cauſe appeared the Sonne
of God, that he might looſe the works of the diuell: therfore we reade,
that Chriſt caſt the diuel out of the mans body, & pardoned his ſins
alſo.
                  Chriſt came not into the world,The ſixteenth proofe, by Chriſt his cō
                        ming into the world. to take ſinners out of it, but to
take away the ſinnes of the worlde, which are the workes of the
diuell, therefore Saint Iohn Baptiſt ſayde not, Ecce qui tollit peccatores
mundi, but Ecce qui tollit peccata mundi. The taking away
from the worlde,Iohn. 1. 29. of the adulterer, the mankiller, the couetous
vſurer,The taking away of ſinners in their ſeueral offences, appertaineth to Iuſtice. the theefe, and the blaſphemer: that appertaineth to the
office of iuſtice, which giueth ſentence of hanging, beheading,
burning, and other kindes of death prouided for malefactors.
But Chriſt came to take from the worlde the ſinne, not the ſinner,
to weete, adulterie, pride, ambition, idolatrie, murther, vſury,
& ſuch like:The diuels intent. Chriſt takes away the ſins, & iuſtice the ſinners; but the
diuel (if he might) he woulde take away both vertue, and the vertuous
too.
                  Chriſt,Chriſt compared to a painter. in taking away ſinne from the ſinner, deales as the painter
dooth, in taking a blemiſh from his picture: with a dexterious
hand, & the perfect vſe of his penſill, he takes away the offence, yet
harmeth not the picture.A moſt excellent Alluſion. God hath ſtampt in vs his owne perfect
figure, and made his Sonne in all points like vnto vs, ſin only excepted,
what fairer portraite then this was euer drawne in the
world?
                  But the deuill,The malice of the diuell, to Gods faire 
                           〈◊〉
                        . enuying this rare piece of workemanſhip, by his
craft and ſubtiltie, made a ſtaine firſt in the very forehead, and afterwarde
in other places, disfiguring mightilie ſo curious a maſter

piece▪ and holding on his courſe ſtill, to marre the whole together,
hinders euery good meane that might reforme it againe. The ſtaine
in the forehead, he couers that with ſome proude vaile, the ſtayne in
the hearte, hee hides that with fonde oſtentation, and ſo for euerie
blemiſh, he hath an apt couerture, to make vs hide and conceale our
ſinfull infirmities.
                  But the penitent ſoule,The courage of the penitēt ſoule. though ſmitten dumbe by this vile enemy,
cryes out in anguiſh of ſpirit to her Creator, and he dipping his penſill
in the purple of his paſſion, makes her as pure and perfect as euer
ſhe was before.The ſinnes, not ſinners. 
                     Tollit peccata mundi, non peccatores. And the deuill
working in vs this hurtfull ſilence, is ſure to doe it when wee haue
moſt need of ſpeech, yea, of crying out loudeſt vpon our heauy tranſgreſſions,
therefore we may ſtill ſay, Et illud erat mutum. We can do
no greater ſpight to the deuil,How to ſpight the deuil moſt. then by breaking ſilence with Dauid,
and crying to the Lord, that hee would take compaſſion on our ſinfull
ſoules.S. Auguſtine. Therefore ſayth Saint Auguſtine. Si tegis peccata tua,
Deus detegit: ſi detegis, Deus tegit illa, pallio gratiae, & miſericordiae.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Hereupon (it may be) was it,Oſe. 13. 1. that the Prophet Oſea
ſayd,The ſeauenteenth proofe: by interpretatiō of Ephraim and Iſrael. that, Ephram ſpeaking, a great feare came vpon Iſraell: Loquente
Ephraim, horror inuaſit Iſraell. Ephraim, by interpretation, is
ſharpe, and Iſraell, the man that ſaw God. The ſinner ſheweth great
ſharpnes againſt the deuill, when (by true contrition) he layes open
his ſoule to God, in which ſenſe we may terme him to bee the ſame
Ephraim. As for Iſrael, well may we tearme him to be Lucifer, who
ſaw God, he being one of the chiefeſt and moſt noble angelicall ſpirits
that God created.
                  Now the deuill can haue no greater feare,The deuils greateſt feare and di
                           •
                        may. horror and diſmay, then
when he ſees a contrite ſinner, to accuſe him ſelfe of ſinne, and (without
any thought at all of merit) to condemne himſelfe, as vnworthy
to come in Gods ſight, for then are his ſinnes pardoned in the death
of his deare ſonne, and the deuill looſeth the ſoule which he thought
he had wonne.
                  And who can tell,The eighteenth proofe, the Prophet Ezechiels words expounded. but that the Prophet Ezechiel had the like meaning,
in thoſe myſterious words which he ſpake: Loquutus ſum ad
populum mane, & mortua eſt vxor mea veſpere? I ſpake vnto the people
in the morning, and at euen my wife dyed? as if he would haue ſaid.
A great matter is this that hath happened vnto mee, O Lord,
becauſe I ſpake vnto the people in the morning,Ezech. 24. 18. and to me my
wife is dead at euening, it may bee therefore (perhaps) my wife dyed

by night,The Authors application of this place of Scripture. becauſe in the cleare morning I ſpake to the people.
Our wife is our ſinne or tranſgreſſion, which (in committing of it)
we take as our conſorte: and ſhe being naught and wicked, ſeekes to
dye ſecretly, and in the darke euening of wilful deſpaire, as aſhamed
of her owne lothſomneſſe. But in the bright morning, that is, in
the contrite clearing of our conſciences, by the luſtre of diuine grace,
which ſhewes our foule deformity, and makes vs humbly acknowledge
al our ſins (from the bottome of our hearts) to God alone, then
is the diuell made mad and highly diſpleaſed.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Why then I perceiue,The nineteenth proofe by compariſō of the keepe
                           •
                        s of a Citie. that ſometimes we ought not only
to be ſilent, but to ſpeake likewiſe, and cry out with a lowd voice, in
ſuch manner as the keepers of a City do exclaime, hearing the enemies
drums and trumpets neer at hand, intending the cities ruine &
ſpoile. So then, not with mute voice, but rather in the loudeſt note of
repentance,Alluſiō to the former cōpariſon. we ought to breake ſilence in ſuch a dangerous ſeaſon,
ſeeing our deadly deformed ſins (our very grand capital enemies) ſeeking
all aduantages againſt the noble city of our ſoule. Whereto the
careful watchmen & keepers therof, the reuerend, Fathers, Preachers
and miniſters of the word,Eſay. 62. 6. doe dayly inuite vs, as beeing put in truſt
with the charge of ſo worthy a city. According as the Prophet Eſay
ſayth. Super muros tuos, Ieruſalem, conſtitui cuſtodes: tota die & tota
nocte in perpetuum non tacebunt. I haue ſet watchmen vpon thy walls, O
Ieruſalem, which all the day and all the night continually ſhall not
ceaſe. How can they ceaſe, ſeeing ſo fierce and mortall enemies, in
armed preparation comming againſt vs?Eccl. 21. 4. 
                     Quaſi romphaea bis acuta
omnis iniquitas plagae illius non eſt ſanitas. All iniquitie is as a two
edged ſword,
                     Two ſeuerall wayes whereby the Launce of our ſinne is made ſharpe. 
                     the wounds whereof cannot be healed. Two wayes is the
Launce of our ſinnes made ſharpe, depriuing vs both of grace and
glorie, killing both the body and ſoule together, and offending both
God and our neighbour: robbing vs of glory, condemning vs into
hell fire, confounding our vnderſtanding, and quite blinding, our
will. How then can the carefull keepers of this Citie holde their
peace, ſeeing ſuch cruell enemies comming on vs, and armed with
ſuch dreadfull weapons?Ierem. 4. 19. 
                     Non tacebo (ſaith the Prophet Ieremy) quoniā
vocem buccinae audiuit anima mea, & clamorem praelij. I cannot be ſtill,
for my ſoule hath heard the ſound of the trumpet, and the alarme of the
battell.
                     The dreadfull ſh
                           •
                        king of our mortall building. Who can chuſe but cry now? and cry out with an affrighted
feare, when this mortal building is to be ſhaken with ſuch dread &
terror? Contritio ſuper contritionem vocata eſt, & vaſtata eſt omnis terra;
repentè vaſtata ſunt tabernacula mea,
                     Ierem. 4. 20. 
                     ſubitò pelles meae. Deſtruction

vpon deſtruction is cried, for the whole land is waſted, ſuddenly are my
tents deſtroyed, and my curtaines in a moment.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  They alſo that are mindfull of the day of the Lord,What they doe, that are mindful of the day of the lord▪
                      ſo
dreadfull and terrible, can do no otherwiſe, but euen break ſilence, &
cry out in teares. They likewiſe, that ruminate on the infinite fauors,
and ſingular graces hitherto extended toward them, cannot abſtain,
but break forth into diuine praiſes, euen as the Prophet Eſay did. Qui
reminiſcimini Domini,
                     Eſay. 62, 7. 
                     ne taceatis, & ne detis ſilentium ei, donec ſtabiliat,
& donec ponat Ieruſalem laudem in terra. Oh you that are mindful
of the Lord, keep not ſilence, and giue him no reſt, till he repaire, und
till he ſet vp Ieruſalem, the praiſe of the world. as if he wold haue ſaid,
O you that remember God,The prophets woords applied. you that are mindfull both of his iuſtice
and mercy; in no caſe ſee you be ſilent, neither let him enioy any reſt:
vntill he eſtabliſh, and bring our ſoules into that land of promiſe, ſo
worthy of all glory and eternall laude.
                  But al this crying out, is not any part of our ſpeaking, but euen the
voice of god himſelfe,The twentieth proofe: as we haue ſaid before, & therfore, by our crying
out in this manner, we breake not ſilence; for ſuch a ſilence ſhalbe
with god,How God ſpeakes by vs, and not we our ſelues. as a loud ſpeaking voice. As we may note in the man poſſeſſed
with the diuel, who being ſilent in this ſort, Ieſus threw out the
diuel, to the end of the poſſeſſed mā might ſpeak▪ 
                     Erat Ieſus eiiciens Demonium,
                     Luke. 11. 14.
                     & illud erat mutum: & cùm eieciſſet Demonium, loquutus eſt
mutus. Ieſus caſt out a diuel which was dumb, & when the diuel was gon
out,
                     How the dumbe man ſpake, and not the Deuill. 
                     the dumb ſpake. The dumb mā ſpake, but not the diuel, for it pleaſed
god to hear the man ſpeak, in regard he ſpake well; Loquebatur
rectè: but he would not admit the diuell to ſpeake, becauſe he could
ſpeak nothing but euil, & as a detractor. In like māner, when (in their
diſſembling ſpeeches) they praiſed him,Sentence. Chriſt immediatly made thē
ſilent, becauſe, the praiſe of a defamer is but meer infamy. Such is that
of the diuel,Luke. 4. 41. therefore; Increpans, non ſinebat ea loqui, and the reaſon
hereof is alleaged by Salomon:
                     Eccle. 15. 9. 
                     Non eſt ſpecioſa laus in ore peccatoris.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The ſilence then that is acceptable to god,The 21. proofe agreeing with the wordes of Eſay. it may be, is
the ſame whereof Eſay ſpeaketh, ſaying. Sede tacens, & intra in tenebras
filia Chaldaeorum, quia non vocaberis vltra Domina regnorum. Sit
ſtil,
                     Eſay. 47. 5. 
                     & get thee into darkneſſe, Oh daughter of the Chaeldeas, for thou
ſhalt no more be called the Lady of kingdomes.
                     Chaldea ſignifieth a harlot, with the alluſion therof. 
                     Chaldea by interpretation,
is Scortū, as much to ſay as an harlot, and what elſe is this harlot,
but euen the ſinful ſoule, who hath broken faith with God, by the
meanes of ſin: and, of a beautiful ſpouſe, which ſhe was to God; (Sponſabo

te mihi in fide;
                     Oſe. 2. 20. 
                     I wil mary thee vnto me in faithfulneſſe:) is now become
the harlot of the diuel?Ierem. 3. 1. 
                     Tu autem fornicata es cum amatoribus
multis, in via ſtabas expectans eos. Thou haſt plaid the harlot with many
louers, thou haſt ſit waiting for them in the wayes. Therfore ſaith God
to the ſinful ſoule: Sit down falſe wretch, hold thy peace, ſpeake not
for ſhame, but get thee hence into cloudy darkneſſe.
                  Three things therfore ought euery penitent ſinful ſoule to do,The three duties of euerie penitēt ſoule. for
obtaining remiſſion at the hands of god: to ſit downe, to be ſilent, &
enter into darkneſſe.
                  Sit downe,1. To ſit down. for quieting of the mind. For, as the Philoſopher ſaith:
Anima quieſcendo fit ſapiens. Sit down, becauſe by ceaſing from ſin, &
taking repoſe from temporall affaires, the mind may be the better eleuated
to god.Ierem 3. 
                           •
                        . 
                     Sedebit ſolitarius, & tacebit, & leuabit ſe ſuper ſe. There
is nothing that more exalteth our ſpirit to contemplation of celeſtiall
things,Nothing makes vs to minde heauen more thē ou
                           •
                         retyremēt frō the worlde. then keeping our ſelues far off from worldly occaſions, and
with a ſweet ſilence to be retired into ſome ſolitary place, free from
the offenſiue noyſes of the world.
                  Secondly, we ought to hold our peace, not prattle on temporarie
traſh,2. To be ſilent. except as deſpiſing it,Sentence. for, much more is the hart mooued to
compunction, by ſuch a contemplatiue ſilence, then by a tedious talkatiue
proteſtation,Ezech. 21. 6. therefore ſaith Ezechiel; Ingemiſce tacens in conturbatione
ſpiritus.
                     Plinie and Iſodorus, of a people in India. 
                     Mourne therfore ſilently in affliction of ſpirit. Pliny
& Iſodorus do both report, that there are certain men in India, which
haue no mouthes, by want whereof they can neither ſpeak nor eate:
but in ſtead of meat, they ſmell vnto trees, by the odour whereof
they liue and are nouriſhed, and geſtures do ſerue them, in place of a
tongue.The Example alluded to a penitent ſinner. A penitent ſinner ought to imitate this ſtrange kind of
people, ſilently to contemplate, faſt, and feede more on celeſtiall
ſweete fauours, then on theſe worldely ſurfetting meates and
drinkes; which doe but nouriſh the bodye in all ſinne and iniquitie.
                  Thirdly,3. To enter into darkeneſſe. we muſt enter into darkneſſe, that is, to ſhun all popular
reſort, to lock our ſelues cloſe vp in our chamber, or repaire to ſome
priuate ſhady place, where no entiſing matter whatſoeuer, may corrupt
the eye, & ſo withdrawe the minde from zealous meditation.
In former times,Example of holie mens liues in forme
                           •
                         times: and how we may behaue our ſelues now. diuers holye men haue choſen to liue in moſſie
caues, in vaſt vnhaunted deſertes, and ſolitarie places, where
none coulde haue acceſſe to hinder their good purpoſes. But
I doe not wiſh the like in theſe dayes, for I know, that a ſilent
roome to a mans owne ſelfe, maye bee as fit a ſanctuarye

for his troubled ſoule as an other. And there he may thinke on all
the trauailes of our Sauiour, who ouercame all the darkneſſes of
death and hel, and in his bloode waſht away his cole black ſinnes,
to make him a white Sainte in the kingdome of heauen: therefore
Sede, tace, intra tenebras.
                  
                  When a man is not buſied about vaine diſcourſings,The benefits enſuing by ſitting alone by our ſelues. but ſitteth
alone quietly by him ſelfe; the more eaſily may he contemplate, on
the obſcure darkneſſe of his own iudgement, as alſo of hel, death and
ſin:Example of Iacob. wherupon it is written, that the Patriark Iacob ſtood ſilently conſidering,
on the myſterious words of his ſon Ioſeph: Pater verò rem
tacitus conſiderabat.
                     Gen. 37. And Daniel,
                     Example of Daniell. at the apparition of the Angell that
ſpake vnto him, was ſilent, & with humble lookes beheld the earth:
Deieci vultum meum ad terram,
                     Dan. 10. 15. 
                     & tacut: I ſet my face toward the
ground,
                     The happines of ſilence. 
                     and held my peace. Happy is he, that with like holy taciturnity,
fixeth his eyes on the earth, contemplating, that himſelf is but earth,
and into earth he muſt returne again. This will ſchool him, from opening
his mouth to ribald ſpeeches, blaſphemous ieſts, oaths and curſings,
as alſo to all infamy and detraction.
                  And who knows,God his permiſſiō of the Deuill, to binde vp the tongue. whether (to this end or no) God permitted the
diuel to bind vp the tongue, as ſeeing, how ready it was to many euill
offices? wherfore, for amendment therof, God ſuffered the diuel to enter
the mans body, ſo to ſtrike dumb the ouerlauiſh tongue, and (by
this chaſtiſement) it became recouered: whereupon it is written, that
after this correction, it ſpake more perfectly; Et loquebatur rectè.
                  
                  Many ſpeak,Many ſpeake, but fewe ſpeake well. but very few ſpeake wel, for they open their mouthes
to detraction and murmuring, and the tongues of ſuch are venemous
like vnto that of the Serpent: which, in the deadlineſſe of his poyſon,
appeares to be black,The venemous tongue cōpared to the Serpents. & becauſe it mooueth with all poſſible ſwiftneſſe,
it ſeemes to be forked. So is the diueliſh tongue of the defamer
and murmurer, black in meer malice, venemous & mortiferous, dangerous
both to the liuing and dead.Alluſiō of the compariſon. It is alſo forked, by being ſharpe
ſubtile and ſwift to infamy, and by defaming, hurteth both the defamed,Pſal. 140. 3.
and the defamer. Wherof Dauid ſpeaking, ſayth, Acuerunt linguas
ſuas ſicut ſerpentes, venenum aspidum ſub labiis eorum. They haue
ſharpned their tongues like ſerpents; Adders poyſon is vnder their lips.
                  
               
               Finis Cap. 11.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  Diſcourſing on the murmuring and detracting tongue, and how fitly
it ſhould be bound to eternall ſilence; for the praiſe thereof is
ſhame, and the honour, moſt hatefull. Alſo, that the detractor
is not onely abhominable, but is meerly abhomination it ſelfe: for
whatſoeuer he ſees, he makes a moſt vile interpretation thereof.
               
               Chap. 12.
               
                  
                     LODOVICO.
                  There is a certain
little broad kind of creature,A compariſon of the Scarabe Flye, that breedes in foule dung or putrified carion. deriued
or bred out of carion or foule putrifaction,
which although ſometimes
(like the fleeteſt little bird) it towreth
toward heauen, and with an vnpleaſing
buzzing, would chide (as it
were) at all the other ſoules: yet is it
ſo full of rotten corruption, as, after
a ſilly flight, and a little ſorie harſh
ſinging, he returnes back to his ſtinking
place of creation, and, as abhorring the height of heauen,
ſeemes moſt proude of his noyſome habitation, and loathing to feed
on odoriferous things, doth feede or glut himſelfe with filthineſſe
onelye.
                  To ſuch offenſiue Scarabes,Alluſiō of the detractour & murmurer, to that foule Flye. may I compare the detractour and
murmurer, who, though they ſeeme like little broad birds to vulgare
opinions, when (in diſſembling charity) they reprooue other
mens defects: yet it may plainely be diſcerned, how noyſome they
are in their owne nature, euen while they haue other mens infirmities
in their mouthes. For by their murmuring and peruerſe ſpeeches,
they ſeeke to ſoyle and beſmeare euery good deede and vertuous

intention, euen as if they were of thoſe Phariſies, which murmured
againſt Chriſt, becauſe he exhorted to repentance, receiued ſinners,The Phariſes that murmured againſt Chriſt.
and conuerſed among them. Et murmurabant Phariſaei &
Scribae, dicentes: Quia hic peccatores recipit, & manducat cum illis.
The Scribes and Phariſies murmured, ſaying: He receiueth ſinners, &
eateth with them.
                     Luk. 15. 2.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  A very deuiliſh tongue. They murmured, that the
Phyſitian was come to viſite the ſick;Compariſons how the Phariſes murmu
                        
                           •
                        ed. that the Chirurgian ſhoulde
heale the plague; that the ſheephearde ſhoulde bring back to his
deare eſteemed flock, the affrighted ſtrayed Lambe; that the myſticall
widdow ſhould ſearche diligently for her loſt groate; & that
the heauenly Schoolmaſter ſhould come to enſtruct earthly ignorant
ſchollers.
                  But it is no maruell:Sentence. for the veſſell muſt needes taſt of that which
was cōteined in it. That great wiſe Hebrew king of Iſrael, who drew
men from the very fartheſt Pole,Example of Solomon. to heare his admired wiſedom; ſpeaking
of the wicked, as fitting this purpoſe, vſed theſe words. Oculus
mali ad malum.
                     Prouerb. 14. 19. And in another place, vnder other wordes, he alſo
affirmeth;Prouerb. 21. 4. 
                     Lucerna impiorum peccatum, which is as much to ſay, as,
whatſoeuer the wicked ſeeth, is ſin, or, the ſight of the vngodly, is ſin.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  How can this ſtand; that what the wicked beholdeth,
is ſin? or how can this be true, Lucerna impiorum peccatum, that the
eye of the vngodly lookes onely at euill?A queſtion demanded, how it can be ſayd, that whatſoeuer the wicked mā ſees, is ſin. why then, if a ſinner come
into the Church, and do heare there diuine ſeruice, or a Sermon, and
afterward (among other faithfull men) receiue the bleſſed ſacrament,
of our Lord and Sauiours memorable death left vnto vs, which (hauing
ſight) he cannot do, but he muſt needs looke on the Preacher, as
alſo the other vpon him, ſhal that be reputed to him as ſin? If this argument
hold, that the wicked ſeeth nothing but euill, then it muſt
needs be ſo, which I think not poſſible: how then is Salomon herin to
be vnderſtood?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  My good Lord, the wiſe man (in mine opinion) cold
not deuiſe to haue ſpoken better, and Ariſtotle approoues this ſentence
very ſufficiently,Anſwere is made by Ariſtotles learned ſentence. in his vulgar propoſitions: Vnumquodque recipitur
per modum recipientis▪ Euery thing is receiued, according to the
nature of the bodye that receiues it, and not according to the nature
of the thing it ſelfe receiued. Heereupon it followeth, that
the thing abſtracted or receiued (in his owne nature) ſtandes
ſeperated from any contrarie matter, and yet partaketh or relliſheth
of that which receiues it, and ſeemes to make it of an

other nature.
                  Wee may example the ſame by our intelligence or vnderſtanding,Example of our vnderſtā
                        dings perfection.
which, the more important and materiall occaſions are thereto
imparted, the more it declares it ſelfe in perfection, and houldes a
higher reſpect of them, then of thoſe things that preſent leſſe matter
of regarde. For our vnderſtanding ſits as mid-way ſeated, betweene
the thing apprehended or entertayned, and the body which
receiues the ſame, and ſo declares his perfection or weakeneſſe in
the receipte. And all this hath no other reaſon for allowance
thereof, but becauſe that euery thing is receiued or entertained,
according to the bodyes nature or qualitye receiuing the
ſame, and not after the nature of the thing it ſelfe entertayned.
                  And heere-hence is it,Cōpariſon of a Garden of Orenge trees. that in a garden of Orendge trees, all
beeing planted in one and the ſelfe ſame ſoyle, all alike in
neereneſſe, all husbanded by one and the ſame gardener, all nouriſhed
with one kinde of manuring, watered all with one water,
and warmed all with one ſelfe ſame Sunne: that yet notwithſtanding,
they are ſo variable in taſte, as one is ſweete, another
ſower, and others of a middle ſauour betweene bothe. And
whence proceedeth this varietye, if not onely becauſe: vnumquodque
recipitur, per modum recipientis?
                  
                  This ſecret is much more merueilouſly diſcouered,Compariſō by the art of engrafting or planting. in the admirable
art of engrafting, eſpecially when we ſee to hang vpon one & the
ſelfe ſame bough, the Peare, the Plum, the Cheſnut, and the Seruiſe,
who ſtealing ſeuerally their ſap from the earth, by hidden and vnperceiueable
wayes, are yet all nouriſhed through one trunke or ſtock,
and haue ſuch a contrary and pleaſing variety, as it is both a goodly
ſight to behold, and very ſtrange alſo in conſideration: wherein can
nothing elſe be ſayde, but becauſe vnumquodque recipitur, per momodum
recipientis. So then is this propoſition of the wiſe man to be
vnderſtood:How the wiſe mans propoſition is to be vnderſtood. 
                     Oculus mali ad malum, and Lucerna impiorum peccatum.
Not, that he which beholdeth a wicked man, is therefore a ſinner; but
becauſe the wicked man takes good things in an euil kind, as a murmurer
or detractor knowes not how to ſpeak wel of any man. And
hence grew the bad ſpleen of the Scribes & Phariſies, becauſe chriſt
receiued and called poore ſinners to repentance.The heretiques abuſing of the ſacred Scriptures, & the godly mās good vſe of thē
                        ▪
                     
                  
                  I pray you my Lord tel me, what thing is or can be more holy then
the ſacred ſcripture? and yet the heretique ſucks therout falſe opinions
and diueliſh deuiſes; where contrarywiſe, the true Chriſtian

gathers nothing but ſound and perfect doctrine. Doth this diuerſitie
then ariſe by the decrees or determinations ſet downe in holy Scriptures?
Not ſo my Lord: for if the ſacred Scriptures ſhould haue beene
the birth thereof, they would yet alſo be the occaſion of infinite hereſies,
which were a moſt wicked thing but to imagine ſo: rather let
me aſſure you, that it happeneth no other way, but vnumquodque recipitur,
per modum recipientis.
                  
                  The water of heauen batheth both the vine and the hemlock,Compariſō of the vine and the Hemlock: the Bee and the Spider, & their alluſion.
yet the one is moſt wholeſome, the other poyſonous. The Bee and
the Spyder ſoare abroade, and feede both together vpon one flowr:
yet the one ſucks hurtfull poyſon, and the other moſt ſweete delicious
hony, which ſtill affirmeth, that vnumquodque recipitur, per modum
recipientis. Therefore, what the euill man ſees, in this kind hee
conuerteth it to euill: Oculus mali adm malum: Lucerna impii peccatum.
A talkeatiue defamer knowes not how to ſpeake well of any
one.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  I remember an excellent example to this effect,Example of Pliſtoanax ſonne to Pauſanias. of
Pliſtoanax ſonne to Pauſanias, and (as I thinke) king of the Lacedaemonians,
who beeing enformed, that a deteſtable foule tongu'd ſlaunderer
had ſpoken well of him, made anſwere very worthily. Let it be
falſly deliuered to this euil man, that I am dead, becauſe in all his life
time before he neuer spake well of any liuing man. When a Hen hath
good and ſufficient meate giuen her by the maid ſeruant,A Simile worth the obſeruation. ſhe will yet
oftentimes forſake it, and goes to ſcrape in muck heapes, to feede
there vpon wormes: where, if ſhe chaunce to light vpon a pretious
pearle, ſhe rather pleaſeth her ſelfe with the poore worme, and leaues
the pearle there couered, by her owne caſting earth vpon it. Euen ſo
the murmurer and detractor,Alluſiō to the murmurer & detractour. ſetting all good and honeſt workes aſide,
(which are expoſed onely for common benefite) ſeekes induſtriouſly
(altogether) into other mens weakneſſes, to load them with
blames and reprehenſions, according to the nature of that filthie
creature which takes ſuch delight in durt & ſlyme, as therein ſhe is
buried, being aliue.
                  As the like may be ſayd of the Rauen,Compariſō of the Rauen, alluded to the detractour. which makes his beſt nouriſhment
of ſtinking carrion, & feedeth mainly vpon dead carkaſ
                        •
                     es;
yet (for all that) will not touch a liuing body. Euen ſo the detractors
tongue, is ignorant in ſpeaking well of any, how great and good ſoeuer
their deſeruings be:Compariſō of a Butchers dogge, with the alluſion. but runnes all about, onely to faſten vpon
honour, fame and vnblemiſhed reputation. Like vnto the dog of a
butcher, ſayth Bonauenture, in dicta ſalutis. Chap. 19. that euermore

hath his mouth all goarie. Such are theſe euill ſpeaking tongues,
alwayes tincturde with bloud, full of defamation, and beſmeared
with wounding ſlanders, & fatten thēſelues greedily on their neighbours
honour.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Meer doggiſh tongues,Cōpariſon of dogs that bark at the moone, & the alluſion therof. that know not how to be ſtil,
but alwayes are barking, and when they heare no noiſe at all, or haue
nothing elſe to barke at: then (with lowde importunate voice,) they
barke at the moone and bright glittering ſtars. So doe theſe noiſefull
men, euer runne about to ſeeke new matter of infamie, as dreaming
ſtil on freſh grounds of detraction: but when they want matter
to raile againſt men, they ſtick not to murmur againſt God and
his ſaints▪ Such vile kind of tongues, vnapt to ſpeak or conceit wel of
any, be they neuer ſo good and honeſt: if they contend at any time againſt
their own bad nature, they wil be ſure to vtter lyes, eſteeming
them far better then the trueth.
                  Vpon this occaſion, I call to minde a notable example of Apelles
of Epheſus a moſt excellent painter,Example of Apelles drawing the picture of king Antigonus. drawing the counterfeite
(with admirable skill) of Antigonus King of Macedon, brother to
Alexander the great, who hauing but one eye, he drewe him in ſuch
artificiall manner, as that part of deformity could not be diſcerned.
And beeing demaunded, for what reaſon he had not figured him ſo
apparantly, as both the one and other eye might be beheld,The painters witty anſwer aptly applyed. replyed
thus. Let it ſuffice that I haue drawne him with his naturall lineaments
& made no appearance of deformity in the ey defectiue, let another paint
his picture, as him pleaſeth. The murmurer is not of this painters mind,
ſtudious to couer meane blemiſhes and miſlikes, but rather ſtriues to
ad more enforcement of blame, making ſtrict enquiry after mens vices
only: as throwing al deſertfull merit aſide, or whatſoeuer (for vertue)
ought iuſtly to be cōmended, therfore is it rightly ſayd of ſuch by
Salomon:
                     Prouerb. 17. 11. 
                     Sēper iurgia quarit malus: Angelus autem crudelis mittitur
contra 
                           •
                        um. A ſeditious perſon ſeeketh only euil, and a cruel meſſenger
ſhall be ſent againſt him.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Very woorthilie doeth God ſend a cruell meſſenger
againſt the murmurer,The cruell meſſenger ſent by god againſt the murmurer▪
                      becauſe himſelfe was moſt cruell againſt
his neighbour, ſtirring vp vniuſt and 
                        •
                     auſeleſſe quarrelles,
becauſe indeed he knew not elſe how to liue, without ſpeaking falſe
and iniuriouſly of ſome body, manifeſtly declaring, that where hee
could not hurt with his hands, hee would bee ſure to doe it with
a ſpightfull tongue. Heereupon, Bruſonius telles vs in his firſt
booke,Example of Zoilus. that Zoilus beeing asked, what was the reaſon hee ſpake

euill of euery one, returned this anſwer: I speake ill, becauſe I can do
no ill.
                     Zoilus tearmed the Father of detractours. This was the infamous Poet that wrote againſt Homer,
and hee is the father of detractors: whereupon, all thoſe that write
againſt men of merite, are called Zoili, and hence it was that Ouid
ſayde.
                  
                     Ingenium magni liuor detractat Homeri;
                     Quiſquis es, ex illo, Zoile nomen habes.
                  
                  
                     La
                           •
                        rtius declareth in his ſecond booke, that Socrates being made
acquainted,Socrates his anſwere, of one that ſpake euil of him. how there was one in the city which alwayes ſpake euil
of him, made this anſwere: Quia benè loqui neſcit. As if this greate
Philoſopher would haue ſayde: I little regard, if that talkeatiue fellow
ſpeake alwayes badly of me, becauſe I do not alwayes badly: and
he neuer ceaſing to ſpeake euill, confirmes the ſame, becauſe hee
knows not how to ſpeak wel of any. And yet notwithſtāding, in ſomwhat
I may merite part of praiſe, which if it ſhould come out of his
mouth, were iuſt none at all.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Of the ſame opinion was Seneca, in writing thus.
Malè de te loquuntur homines,
                     Seneca writing on the ſame occaſiō. 
                     ſed mali; mouerer ſi de me M. Cato, ſi
Laelius ſapiens, ſi duo Scipiones iſta loquerentur. Nunc malis diſpli
                           •
                        ere,
laudari eſt. Non poteſt vllam authoritatem habere ſententia, vbi qui
damnandus eſt, damnat. Malè de te loquuntur homines; mouerer, ſi iudicio
hoc facerent; Nunc morbo faciunt; non de me loquuntur, ſed de ſe.
Malè de te loquuntur, qui bene neſciunt loqui: faciunt, nō quod mereor,
ſed quod ſolent, &c.
                     When men of good conuerſation doo ſpeake hardly of a man, it is more to be weighed then cōming from bad mens mouthes. As if he would haue ſayde. I ſhould haue taken
it offenſiuely, if that men of good and honeſt life had ſpoken euill
of me: but becauſe themſelues are wicked, they ſpeake but what
is pleaſing to themſelues, and therefore I care not what they ſay of
me, becauſe the very deſpightfulleſt ſpeeches of bad men, is higheſt
commendation to an honeſt man. The ſentence of him that deſerueth
condemnation, hath no merite in condemning another. I ſhould
indeede be mooued, if this were doone with iudgement, but ſeeing
they doe it by innated wickedneſſe, they doe nothing at all againſt
me, but meerely condemue themſelues, as thoſe that know
not how to ſpeake well of any man, much like vnto ſuch dogges,
which (not by fierceneſſe, but by naturall conſuetude) barke
and make a bawling: but barking dogges neuer prooue good
hunters.
                  The ſame did Salomon alſo cleerely expreſſe,Prouerb. 14. 2. ſaying: Ambulans
recto itinere, & timens Deum, despicitur ab eo, qui infami graditur via.
He that walketh in his righteouſneſſe, feareth the lord, but he that is

leude in his wayes, deſpiſeth him. If then good men are deſpiſed and
defamed by the guilty, it is a good ſigne to be blamed by the like
detractors, and not to be taken as any matter troubleſome. For when
men of bad life, do ſcorne the good for honeſt actions, it is euen no
otherwiſe, then as if the blind ſhould floute other men becauſe they
ſee; or as if the lame ſhoulde checke others for going vprightlye.
                  Or in like caſe,Compariſō to very good purpoſe, in ſeueral kindes: but iumping al in one period. as if a villaine of the mountaines of Iurea, ſhold
breake into laughter, when hee ſees another man without a greate
pogh or throate bag hanging downe his breaſt, and ſayes he lacks a
member of his body, becauſe all that liue there haue the like. So
may it be well ſayd, Ambulans recto itinere, & timens Deum, deſpicitur
ab eo, qui infami graditur via. As it is no diſgrace to the Sunne, or
the day,An excellent Similie, and wel alluded. becauſe their cleare ſplendour & brightneſſe is not pleaſing
to night-haunters, ſuch as the Owle, and other creatures, louers
of darkneeſſe: Euen ſo is it no ſhame to bee ſlaundered by the
wicked, whoſe tongues are quite out of tune, if they ſhould talk well
of any man.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Moreouer,It is a ſhame to be praiſed of an euill tongue. it is a ſhame to be commended by ſuch
infamous tongues: and happily, in this reſpect was it, that our Sauiuiour
Chriſte made the deuils ſilente, when they confeſſed him to
be Chriſte:Luke. 4. 35. 
                     Et increpans non ſinebat ea loqui, quia ſciebant illum eſſe
Chriſtum.
                     Eccl. 15. 9. Salomon in like maner ſaith: Non eſt ſpecioſa laus in ore
peccatoris, quia non eſt a domino miſſus: Praiſe is not ſeemely in the
mouth of a ſinner,Seneca, concerning the praiſes of wicked men. for that is not ſent of the Lord. Becauſe, as Seneca
ſaith. The praiſe of wicked men, is a manifeſt inſtance, that the praiſed
is like vnto the praiſer. Sit tibi tam triſte laudari a turpibus, quàm
ſi laudaberis ob turpia.
                  
                  Therefore Antiſthenes the great Philoſopher, was very much offended,
when he heard that certayn lewde liuers had highly commended
him,Antiſthenes his greef for a bad mans commendation. according as Diogenes Laertius tels vs, which made him
ſay, Wretched that I am, I feare no greater miſhap could haue befalne
me: O me miſerum: metuo, ne in crimen aliquod inciderim. An other
Philoſopher alſo being tolde, that ſome of euil conuerſation had liberally
praiſed him,Example of another Philoſopher. anſwered. Alas, what euill haue I doon? As
knowing, that the wicked extol vices only, and throw what ſcandale
they can vpon vertue.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  As fitting this purpoſe,Seneca his ſentence of euill men. there is a verie notable ſentence
written by morall Seneca: Argumentum eſt recti viri, malis diſplicere.
It is an argument ſufficient enough of goodneſſe, not to pleaſe the

euill. The ſelfe ſame is affirmed by the father of Latine eloquence,
Cicero,
                     Cicero to the ſame purpoſe. where he ſayth. That the praiſe of laudable men only, is ioyfull
and acceptable. Ea eſt profecto iucunda laus, quae ab his proficiſcitur,
qui & ipſi in laude vixerunt.
                  
                  There is no account then to be made, of the praiſe or blame of
ſuch pratlers, whoſe commendation begetteth no honor, neither
their reproofe any blamefull preiudice: becauſe their praiſe more
hurts then helpes, and ſuch blame is more cordiall, then able to
corrupt.
                  Alſo the holy Apoſtle Saint Peter ſayth,S. Peter to the like effect. that nothing can be hurtfull
to a good-follower. Quis eſt qui vobis noceat, ſi boni aemulatores
fueritis?
                     1. Pet. 3. 13. 14. 
                     Sed & ſi quid patimini propter iuſtitiam, beati. Who is he
that will harme ye, if you follow that which is good? Notwithſtanding,
bleſſed are yee, if you ſuffer for righteouſneſſe ſake. What hurt can he
doe,Dauid his rule for our obſeruation. whoſe praiſe is infamy? Let vs then haue the iuſtice of God before
our eyes in all our actions, & then we may ſay with Dauid, when
ſuch men praiſe,Pſal. 60. 5. or ſpeake euill of vs: Domine memorabor iuſtitiae tuae
ſolius, and this is ſufficient.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Theſe talkeatiue murmuers are not much vnlike to
diuelles,Murmurers are compared to diuels in their temptations. who ſometimes by the meanes of their temptations, are
the cauſers of our greate good, in making vs more mindefull of our
walking before God. Euen ſo the ſlaunderous detracting tongue
giues occaſion for amendement of ſome vice offenſiue to the ſoule,
and of liuing more vprightly, without any apparant note or mark,
for auoyding of occaſion of blame by others. Whereupon Diogenes
the Cinick ſayde.Diogenes his allowance of enemyes, as wel as friends, for the trial of good life. 
                     That for liuing well and vprightly, there is
as much neede of cruel enemies, as of louing kind friends: for looke what
friends doe worke by charity, enemies make triall thereof by malice. So
that oftentimes, the caſe prooues more beneficiall, beeing ſtrained
to his vttermoſt, by reproouing, murmuring, and the trecherous
practiſes of enemies: then the light checks, ſouple perſwaſions, or
vaine pitty of friendes. Therefore muta fiant labia doloſa: becauſe
the one helpeth accidentallye, and the other by deliberate
ſtudie.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  So odious to God are theſe detractors, as Salomon being
not contented to tearme them abhominable,Prouerb. 24. 9. doth call them alſo
abhomination it ſelfe.The reaſon wherefore Salomon cals the detractor abhomination it ſelfe. 
                     Abhominatio eſt hominum detractor, The detractor
is abhomination, could he ſpeake any worſe? Leſſe had he ſaid
of their deſeruings, if he had tearmed them but abhominable: but in
calling them abhomination it ſelfe, hee could not paint foorth any

thing more deteſtable. For, if Abominari, doe ſignifie pro malo omne
habere, then in calling them abhomination, he meaneth, that they are
vnhappineſſe it ſelfe, and not any prediction or augurie therof: which
made him ſay a little after.Prou. 24. 21. 22. 
                     Fili mi, detractoribus ne miſcearis, Quoniam
repentè conſurget perditio eorum, & ruinam vt riuſque quis nouit? As if
in other wordes hee woulde haue ſayde. My Sonne, take this
counſell of me, conuerſe not with mē of an euil tongue, becauſe they
are conioyned (as it were) with their owne ruine.
                  Therefore God cannot long time ſuffer ſuch talkers,Compariſō of the Sithe of an vnſkilfull mower: and the Authors alluſion to Salomons wordes. who with
their tongues, like the Sithe of an vnskilfull mower, make a bundle
of all hearbs together, reputing them all to be naught worth. As, very
excellently Dauid doth paint them forth in one of his Pſalmes. Poſuerunt
in coelum os ſuum, & lingua eorum tranſiuit in terra. They ſtretch
forth their mouth vnto heauen, and their tongue goeth throw the world.
And who knows my Son,Pſal. 73. 9. if thou (with them) doeſt not euen chaſtiſe
god himſelf? and therfore as a companion of their crimes, ſhalt thou
alſo be partaker of their puniſhment. Therefore, Detractoribus ne miſcearis.
                  
                  This is many wayes to be diſcerned clearely enough, and by diuers
very liuely examples. But among all other, I remēber one, which
is recoūted by S. Gregory,
                     Example out of S. Gregorie in the fourth booke of his Dialogues. in the fourth book of his dialogues, of a very
honeſt womā, who was neuertheleſſe much ſubiect to the vice of
detraction, & very eaſilie drawne to murmur againſt any body. But
drawing neere her death, it pleaſed God ſo in iuſtice to puniſh her,
as al that part of her head wheras her tongue lay, was burnt round about,
and not any other place of her body toucht.
                  In the booke of examples,Example of a religious man: in lib. Exemp. diſt. 9. the ninth diſtinction, and the 57. example,
it is regiſtred of a man of religious habite, but one very vicious in
his life, who was greatly addicted to the ſin of detraction. And finding
himſelfe to waxe very ſick,Ex. 57. hee was exhorted by diuers of his
friends, to ſend for ſome reuerend diuine, and betweene God and his
ſoule to remember the bad courſe of his life paſt, that hee might aduiſe
him to the ſpeedier repentance: but he made them anſwere, that
he could not doe it, becauſe his caſe was diſpatcht already. They not
giuing him ouer ſo, but ſtill earneſtly ſolliciting him, deſired him
not ſo much to regard the greeuouſneſſe of his ſinnes, as to thinke
on the infinite mercies of God,A fearfull exā
                        ple of Gods iuſtice, to bee well regarded of all detractours. who neuer withdrawes his eye from
a repentant ſinner. Suddenly his tongue (in this his ſtiffe impenitencie)
ſtarted out of his head, whereat hee making an offer in anger to
ſtrike, wrote afterward theſe words with his finger on the wall; This

wicked tongue is the cauſe of my damnation. Furthermore it is ſayd,
that his tongue continued ſwelling in ſuch ſtrange manner, as hee
could by no meanes drawe it back into his mouth, but dying in this
horrible manner, gaue a feareful example of eternall damnation to al
detractors.
                  Let vs fly then from this diueliſh vice, and get farre enough off
from the like infamous tongues: becauſe their wicked company is to
be ſhunned of all men that are weake in vertue. Detractoribus ne
miſcearis.
                     What cōpanie we ought to make election of. Seeke therefore, to conuerſe and company with ſuch as are
grounded in vertue, and do hold in due eſteem true ſanctity of life.
For, as the Sun beames on foule mud, is not a iot attainted, but brings
that moiſt filthineſſe to dry duſt:Similies, and their alluſiōs to vertuous men. Or, as good ſtrong wine ſwallows
vp and conuerts water into his own ſubſtance; And quenched coales
are by cloſe keeping quickly kindled againe: Euen ſo doe vertuous
men reduce the vitious into perfection, without any taint or iniury
to their owne goodneſſe.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  I am of opinion (my Lord) that it is better keeping off
a loofe, then comming neere to ſuch diabolicall tongues: becauſe we
are then more ſecure that they cannot contaminate vs, how weake
ſoeuer we be, then we are certaine to win them from their innated
vices. Saul prophecied among the holy Prophets, yet for all that (among
vile men) he was the very vileſt.Seuerall Exā
                        ples wel worth the reſpecting. 
                     Laban by Iacob became exceeding
rich in ſubſtance, but yet was very poor in beleef and goodneſſe.
Potiphar by Ioſeph grew euermore to be a maruellous ſubſtantiall
man, but in himſelfe he increaſed the largeſt meaſure of wickedneſſe.
Wherby we may for a certainty perceiue, that the ſaying of
the Lyrick Poet is moſt true: Quo ſemel eſt imbuta recens, ſeruabit
odorem teſta diù.
                  
               
               Finis Cap. 12.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  Murmuring is an infectious ſinne, worſe then any other diſeaſe, and
eaſie to be taken, therefore it behooueth vs to flye the company of
talkeatiue detractors, becauſe they are the originall of many euilles.
Whence it is that murmuring firſt ariſeth. VVhat
puniſhment God hath inflicted on murmurers: who haue leapt
out of themſelues (as it were) to faſten hold on other mens imperfections,
and ſtealing much leſſe then they looked for, at laſt vtterly
loſt all. How they haue ioyned the tongue with the eare; how they haue
deceiued themſelues ouer-much in iudgement, by their owne dangerous
facility in ſpeaking euill of all men, to which God will giue (as a
chaſtiſement) a perpetuall ſilence. With an exhortation of the holy
ghoſt, not to defame, but to refraine speaking euill of our neighbor.
               
               Chap. 13.
               
                  
                     CLAVDIO.
                  We neede make no
doubt, but that it is much better to
keep our ſelues far off,In ſeeking other mens health, we may fooliſhlie looſe our owne. then to abide
neer ſuch wickedneſſe, knowing our
owne weakneſſe; leaſt while we ſeek
other mens health, we fooliſhly looſe
our own. Neuertheleſſe, whoſoeuer
can reduce ſuch tongues to perpetuall
ſilence, it wil appeare in him to be
a very great office of charity. Murmuring
is an infectious diſeaſe:Example of Myriam the Siſter of Moyſes, ſmitten with a leaproſie. for
we may read, that Myriam the ſiſter of Moſes, murmuring and ſpeaking
euil againſt her ſayd brother, ſuddenly ſhe became a Leaper,
quite couered ouer with a white ougly ſcurfe, not much vnlike a
fold of ſnowe. And this happened by the iuſt iudgement of God,
who appearing in the piller of the cloude, after her thundring foorth
thoſe diſdaynefull ſpeeches, in the preſence of the two brethren

                     Moſes and Aaron, Myriam was ſmitten with the aforenamed
leproſie.
                  Now albeit Moſes and Aaron were great in the fauour of God,
and laboured him very inſtantly with their godly prayers for her:Numb 12. 14.
yet could they not otherwiſe preuaile, but that for ſeauen dayes ſhe
muſt be ſequeſtred from the people. If the puniſhmēt ſhold alwayes
be inflicted anſwerable to the ſin, detraction & murmuring beeing
ſuch an infectious euil,Detraction & murmuring moſt infectious. as nothing in the world whatſoeuer ſooner
hurteth: iudge you by the chaſtiſement of Moſes ſiſter with leaproſie,
what ſhould bee layde on ſuch as ſinne therein, the diſeaſe beeing
as readye in catching, as the lauiſh tongue is in detracting.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Woorthily (in mine opinion) was it ſo ordered, to
ſunder ſuch a byting tongue from all the other people, leaſt it might
alſo happen to infect them too. For heere was not any regard, how
(euen but a little before) they had prophecied, in compoſing this worthy
ſong.Exod. 15. 2. 
                     Cantemus Domino, glorioſe enim magnificatus eſt, equum,
& aſcenſorem deiecit in mare. We wil ſing vnto the Lord, for he hath
triumphed gloriouſly: the horſe, and him that rode vpon him, hath he
throwne in the ſea. Neither was there any reſpect made of Moſes and
Aaron his brother,Moſes a prince, and Aaron the high prieſt, both beloued of God. the one a Prince, the other the high Prieſt & both
beloued of the Lord, wherefore thus in iuſtice the lord did puniſh her.
If god ſhold alwayes thus chaſtice this great ſin, there would not be
found, neither could there be heard, ſo many detracting & grudging
tongues, a meer infectious plague among the people: but ſilence wold
be held in more venerable eſteem, and found to be not ſo neceſſary, as
profitable.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  It is ſuch a pernicious thing, I meane this helliſh vice of murmuring,Of few wordes do often ariſe infinite diſcords.
that oftentimes, of very few words do ariſe infinite diſcords,
for the holy ghoſt ſaith by the mouth of Salomon: A ſcintilla vna augetur
ignis, & ab vno doloſo augetur ſāguis: Of one little spark is made
a great fire,
                     Eccl. 11. 32. 
                     & of one deceitful mā, is bloud encreaſed. As of one ſpark a
great flame is kindled,Similie, & the alluſion. ſo by one malitious murmurer greate ſins are
encreaſed.
                  Sometimes a fooliſh body puts a ſpark of fire to the ſide of a poore
mans houſe,A compariſon of difference in doing or committing a harme, according to the malicious intent. & without doing any further harme departeth. But then
there comes another more fooliſh, or rather more malitious then the
firſt, who ſo ſtirs & blowes the little ſparke, that it breaks forth into a
great flame, which burnes, conſumes & brings the whole houſe into
aſhes. If the ſecōd had not ſtird & blown it, the ſpark perhaps had dyed
of it ſelf, neuer mounting vp to a flame, or harming the poor houſe.

A great fault was it in the firſt, but much greater (me thinkes) in the
ſecond.
                  He commits a great ſin, that (as but a ſpark) is the firſt murmurer
and deprauer of his neighbour,The compariſon very ſingularly alluded to the murmurer and detractor. there is no queſtion to be made of
that: but yet a far greater ſin is it in him, that (as the diuels mouth or
bellowes) comes & blowes that ſpark to a flame, adding more violēt
ſtrength therto, of viler infamy then before was thought on, & meerly
without any regard at all. But often times it happeneth, that ſome
part of that which the lauiſh tongue hath fondly vttered in ſcorne or
ſpight,A bad tongue doth ſomtimes good againſt his owne will. ſorteth to a very good ſignall or forewarning, & ſomewhat
that hath bin raſhly thrown forth, in meer furie or diſdain, appeareth
afterward, as if it had bin pronounced by mature or deliberate counſel.
Therfore we may ſay, A ſcintilla vna augetur ignis, & ab vno doloſo
augetur ſanguis, id eſt peccatum: not only in deliuering the fault to
many, but likewiſe by enlarging it, & ſpeaking much more thereof
then himſelfe hath heard.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  This accurſed ſin ariſeth of ouermuch readineſſe, in
prying into other mens errors & eſcapes, without one looke into our
owne imperfections.Compariſō of the awe the Schoolmiſtres keepes her Schollers in, while ſhe abideth in the ſchoole. When the Schoolemiſtreſſe for inſtruction of
yong maidēs, either in reading, ſowing, knitting or ſuch like, abideth
in the ſchool; you ſhall ſee them all with their heads held downward,
very earneſt at their bookes & needles, obſeruing wary & feareful ſilence.
But let her be gon out of ſchoole, or neuer ſo little out of ſight,
ye ſhall ſee them preſently forſake their ſeates, leape, skip and runne
ſinging about, committing a thouſand vnhappy pranks. And if there
be any there, that would apply or tend their exerciſe, they cannot doe
it, becauſe they are ſo diſturbed by the other.
                  Euen ſo, when a man hath a care of himſelfe, reaſon (like a warie
ſchoolmiſtreſſe) awaiteth vpon the powers and faculties of his bodie,Alluſion to the former compariſon in a very materiall caſe.
which (according as children in the eye of their miſtreſſe) do all their
offices quietly, and by the true direction of reaſon. But ſo ſoone as a
man ſtarts out of his owne care, and will needes become a conſiderer
of other mens defectes, their liues, dealings and behauiours: then
growe the powers of the ſoule to be diſturbed in ſuch ſort, as no
one of them can rightly doe his dutie as hee would, for attending
onely to others imperfections. Yet many times it happeneth, that
this their diſquiet, becomes the occaſion of amēdment in others, and
fals out to be their own perdition by offending both god, their neighbors
and themſelues.
                  For as a Riuer,Compariſō of a Riuers ouerflowing his bāks or boūds. when it ariſeth tempeſtuouſlie out of his owne

bed or bounds, and runnes many wayes circling it ſelfe ouer the
neighbouring fields and meadowes, doth ſullie them with her mud,
and (for the time of her there abiding) ſeemes to doe them hurt, but
returning much troubled, leaues them ſubiect to the more fertility: So
the man that mounts out of conſideration of his owne proper life,The cōpariſon in very apt manner alluded to the incōſiderate mā. &
with the mind (as with a troubleſome torrent) ſerpent-like runs winding
& turning about other mens blames, ſnatching at euery one as
opportunity ſerueth him: If they (by the ſanctified vertue of patience)
can but ſupport ſuch ſnarling, the one wil remain with his mouth ful
of filth, & the others defects be much amended, for the detractor ſhal
look like a foule troubled water, condemned by euery one, and all
muddyed with the mire of his owne baſe murmuring.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  If the detractor ſtep out of himſelfe, as the miſtreſſe
ſomtime doth out of her ſchoole, leauing the powers of the ſoule
ſomewhile quite abādoned,Detraction is the cauſe of forgetfulneſſe, and makes a man a theefe to himſelfe. euen as Schollers do then giue ouer al
regard of ſchoole: why then detraction becomes the cauſe of forgetfulneſſe
of himſelf, becauſe while ſo importunately he attēdeth
vpon others, himſelfe ſteales from himſelf, which cannot be without
moſt greeuous hurt to himſelfe: Becauſe, what greater fauour
can the maſter of a houſe do to a theefe, then both he and all his familie
to goe out of doores,Compariſō of a mans voluntary yeelding to his owne robbing, & in what nature the ſame is alluded to al the faculties in the detractors body. and leaue it without any faithfull guardian
at all? I hope (without dread) the theef may then, as commodiouſly
as his own hart can wiſh, rob & beare away whatſoeuer him
pleaſeth.
                  The biting murmurer, being altogether gone quite out of himſelfe,
and from his owne peculiar conſideration, applying all the
powers of his vnderſtanding, to other mens infirmities and defects,
and cauillouſly catching hold whereſoeuer he can: his wil is wholly
addicted to ſpeake euill of others: his memorie particularly reckōs
vp other mens errors. The hearing liſtens willingly what is ſayd of
others, in murmuring, detracting, or the leaſt euil ſpeaking. The
ſight hath the eyes of Argus, prying into other mens ſlips, but in his
own he is as blind as the Moale. The fecte run ſwiftly to acquaint
the eare with other mens blames & taints: and the hands haue ſome
office too,What time the diuel choſeth for his entrance into man, and how he makes man a theefe to himſelfe. not ſo much as pardoning a poor pen & paper, but al ſides
ſhall be fild full of other mens infamy.
                  Now enters the diuel into this empty houſe, beeing left quite
vnmaſtred and forſaken of the careful ſoule, and there he ſteales &
makes booty of al what is good ſoeuer, that they may neuer more
be helpful to poor wretched man. Thus while he goes about playing

the theef to others, he becomes robd himſelfe, & while he ſteales
away another mans good fame with his vile tongue, his owne ſoule
(left vnlooked too) is caried away by diuels, & ſo without gayning
any thing, himſelfe looſeth all things.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Oh extreame miſery, oh wonderfull folly, oh intollerable
error! How much more neceſſarie were a holy taciturnity, a
ſweet ſilence? nay, much better were it to haue no tongue at al, then
thus to be the cauſe of our own deſtruction. Not to heare onely,
might ſuffice to make vs ſilent,If there wanted a liſtner, there would be no teltale. for what is he that would tel a thing
to him who imployes all his power not to heare it? Therefore very
wel ſayd S. Ierome, Si deeſſet auditor, non eſſet murmurator. Nemo enim
libenter illi aliquid narrat, qui narrantem grauiter, & moleſtè
audit.
                  
                  They that willingly giue eare to detractors,Two apt compariſons. do reſemble ſuch as
dreſſe vnſauory meat, to the end it may laſt long. Or like them that
refuſe to withhold & check a dog from biting, but rather prouokes
and ſets him on with greater violence; a very diueliſh and wicked
kind of courſe. If a man would haue reſpect to his owne actions, and
were no curious inueſtigator after other mens defects, he cold haue
no occaſion of murmuring.Of the foure myſterious beaſtes in Ezechiell. 
                     Ezechiel the Prophet ſawe thoſe fowre
myſterious beaſts, that went al with their faces forward, and neuer
turning backward, as ſome others do: vnumquodque ante faciem ſuam
ambulabat:
                     Ezech. 1. 9. 
                     They returned not, but euery one went ſtraight forward.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  To what purpoſe doe you produce a thing ſo manifeſt?
They that be not backward-legd,Sentence. how ſhould they otherwiſe goe
but directly forward? It is euident, that when thoſe horſes went, they
went toward their look, & not backward, as ſomtime children doe
in ſcorne. Therefore I count it but as ſuperfluous, that the Prophet
made ſuch a deſcription of theſe foure myſterious beaſts.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  He ſayd very well, and without any diſſimilitude
at all: vnumquodque ante faciem ſuam ambulabat.
                     Some kinde of men that goe backwarde. Becauſe there
are ſome kinde of perſons that goe backwarde, and ſuch are
they, who after the manner of wanton dallying children, do badly;
going backward, onely but to behold other mens infirmities,
not hauing their owne liues before their eyes. Such is the behauiour
of murmurers and detractors, of whome we may ſay: Quaſi
per riſum ſtultus operatur malum:
                     Prouer. 10. 23. 
                     It is a paſtime to a foole to doe
wickedly.
                  
                  The Prophet ſpeaking,The Authors interpretatiō of the Prophets words, and his application of them. that euery one of the beaſts wēt with his face

forward, giueth vs to vnderſtand therby, that they had their liues before
their eyes: becauſe iuſt men doe liſten to themſelues, conſider
their owne actions, and according as they find the leaſt blemiſh, ſo
they doe ſeeke for amendment thereof. God deliuer vs from ſuch, as
haue their liues hāging behind their backs, as murmurers and detractors
haue, carying a watchful eye vpon other mens liues & defectes,
but neuer look into their own weakneſſes. Of whom Dauid ſaith. Exixſtimaſti
inique,
                     Pſal. 50. 
                           •
                        1. 
                     quod ero tui ſimilis: arguam te, & ſtatuam contra faciem
tuam. Thou thoughtſt wickedly, that I am euen ſuch a one as thy ſelf:
but I will reprooue thee, and ſet before thee the things that thou haſt
doone.
                  
                  Theſe are the wordes of God himſelfe, which he will ſpeake to
the ſlaundering ſinner, in the finall ſtrict iudgement, euen as if hee
would haue ſayd. Thou thoughtſt, wicked wretch, that I was like
to thee,The authors conceite of gods ſpeaking to the wicked ſinner. and that as thou throweſt thy ſinnes behind thy back, ſo I
woulde be as forgetfull of them too. But thou art deceiued, for
I will approoue thee with reaſon, how much thou haſt erred,
both in thy wicked life, as alſo thy dayly ſinnes, and I will ſet them
all before thine eyes, to the end, that thou maiſt ſee them with a bluſhing
countenannce, and the ſhame of them confounding thee, thou
maiſt thinke with thy ſelfe, what paines thou haſt in iuſtice deſerued.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  This moſt ſeuere iudgemente, the ſame Dauid,
with more expreſſe wordes (in the name of God) ſpeaketh of in another
place. Erubeſcant impij, & deducantur in infernum, muta
fiant labia doloſa.
                     Pſal. 31. 19. 
                     Let the vngodly bee put to confuſion, and bee
put to ſilence in the graue. Let the lying lips be put to ſilence, inferring
hereby: That the wicked lyer, and long tongu'd detractor, at the day
of finall iudgement ſhall be made aſhamed,The lyer and detractor ſhall be caſt into hell. and caſt down into hel;
where the infamous lying lippes ſhall murmur in paines. And this
puniſhment ſhall befall them, becauſe they haue abuſed iuſt and
innocent men, with proude, diſdainefull and wicked ſpeeches. Quae
loquūtur aduerſus iuſtum iniquitatem,
                     Pſal. 31. 20. 
                     in ſuperbia, & in abuſione. Which
cruelly, diſdainefully & despightfully ſpeake againſt the righteous. God
keep vs from this tyrant of other mens fame, which ſo vilely, euen as
if they were ſlaues,Dauids deuout prayer to God. wil handle good men. Therefore in deuout prayer
ſayd Dauid to God: Redime a calumniis hominum, vt cuſtodiā mandata
tua.
                     Pſal. 119. 134. 
                     O deliuer me from the ſlanders of men, and I will keepe thy
precepts.
                  
                  Slaues are redeemed or deliuered, and becauſe that detractors are

worſe then tirants,Detractours are worſe thē Tirants in oppreſſiō of their people, approued by compariſons. which with ſhamefull cruelties doe oppreſſe their
people, therefore the Prophet vſeth the word Redimere. Beſide, the
detractour tortureth more grieuouſly and inſupportably with his
vile tongue, then the tyrant can doe: for though the tyrant torments,
puniſhes and depriues men of goods, liues, or otherwiſe, yet notwithſtanding,
he moleſtes not ſuch as willingly will ſerue him. But the
defamer, he ſpeakes euill generally, murmures againſt euery man, &
offendeth euery one. Nay, that which is much worſe, looke whatſoeuer
he but dreameth on, he wold haue the ſame taken for a truth, and
for a truth he deliuers it abroad to others.To ſay and vnſay, all is one with the ſlaunderer. So that to ſay or vnſay, or
how many wayes ſo euer he can deuiſe, whereby to abuſe mens ready
credulity, be it in good or euill kinde, all is one, he cares not, and a
thouſand examples may for this be produced.
                  When Haman,
                     Example of Haman. being oppreſſed with his proude hearts anguiſh,
threw him ſelfe downe vpon the bed of Queene Heſter,
                     Heſt. 7. 7. entreating
her with teares for his life: ſhe thought he would haue ſlaine him
ſelfe with griefe, and yet he did it but to deceiue the vertuous Lady.
When Iaacob departed from Laban,
                     Example of Laban. 
                     Laban imagined that Iaacob
had ſtolne his Idols:Gen. 31. 33. but vpon ſearch afterward, hee found no ſuch
matter.Example of Ioſeph. When Ioſeph inuited his beloued bretheren to a ſumptuous
banquet, they were perſwaded that Ioſeph meant to murther them,
but neuer did ſuch a thought enter the heart of Ioſeph.
                     Gen. 43. 32. 
                     Eli the
Prieſt ſeeing the lips of Hannah to mooue in the Temple,Example of Hely. and yet
not anſwere him in all her long prayer:1. Sam. 1. 13. ſuppoſed her to bee drunke,
when as ſhe was rapt vp in diuine meditation.
                  The diſciples of our Sauiour durſt not conuerſe with Paul,
                     Example of the Diſciples. as thinking
him not to bee conuerted,Act. 9. 26. but that he continued ſtill a cruell
perſecutour of the Chriſtians, yet was he already made by Chriſt a
veſſell of election.Example of Ieremy. 
                     Ieremy going foorth of Ieruſalem by the gate of
Beniamin, the keeper thought that he would haue fled to the Chaldeans:
                     Ierem. 37. 13.
but the keeper was deceiued in Ieremie, for he meant to goe
and diuide a portion of ground in the land of Beniamin.
                     Example of the Iewes. The Apoſtles,
hauing receiued the grace of the holy ghoſt, ſpake to the admiration
of all,Act. 2. 13. in variable languages: but the Iewes thought them to
be drunke with new wine, wherin they were deceiued, for they were
not full ofWe ought not to be ouerhaſty in ſpeaking & iudging. wine, but of the holy ſpirit. We ſhould not therefore be
ouer haſty in ſpeaking and iudging, but firſt looke into the certaintie
of the matter.
                  God knoweth al things by his eternity, neuertheleſſe when (for our
example) he would chaſtiſe the Sodomites, it ſufficed not, that he had

heard,God came downe to ſee the Sodomits in their ſinning againſt him. in his hig heſt habitation, the infamous rumours which they
made, in the execrable and abhominable citie of Pentapolis; but hee
would perſonally goe downe to ſee, if their workes were correſpondent
to their deedes, and that their tongues confirmed their vile actions.
Whereupon the ſacred teſtis tels vs, Dixit itaque dominus,
Clamor Sodomorum & Gomorrhaeorum multiplicatus eſt,
                     Gen. 18. 20. 21. 
                     & peccatum
eorum aggranatum eſt nimis. Deſcendam, & videbo vtrùm clamorem,
qui venit ad me, opere complerint, an non ita, vt ſciam. The Lord then
ſaid, Becauſe the cry of Sodom & Gomorrah is great, and becauſe their
ſinne is exceeding grieuous, I will goe downe now, and ſee whether
they haue done altogether according to that cry, which is come vp vnto
me:
                     The readines of ſome in ouer raſh cenſuring and iudging others. 
                     and if not, that I may know. Yet for all this, ſome buſie tongu'd
murmurers are ſo ready in iudging, blaming and determining, not
onely without any fore-thinking, but meerely in raſh conceite, as
whatſoeuer they heare, it is preſently taken for a truth, though there
be an hundred witneſſes to the contrary.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Theſe men (perhaps) haue tyed their tongues to their
eares,Of ſuch as tie their tōgues to their eares. and their hearing to their talking: for, any thing they heare,
they preſently bruite it abroad, defaming and detracting with wondrous
facilitie,Pſal. 73. 9. which made Dauid vtter that excellent ſentence. Poſuerunt
in coelum os, & lingua eorum tranſiuit in terra. They ſet their
mouth againſt heauen, and their tongue walketh through the earth.
                  
                  In ſaying,The Authors expoſition of Dauids ſentence. that they haue ſet their mouth againſt heauen, and theyr
tongue walketh through the earth, he ſignifyeth, that they are very
quick and indiſcreet in talking, yea, there is nothing whereof they
prate not, as well of difficult matters, as of ſuch as are eaſie, as well of
high, honorable, and perſons great in dignitie, as of meane, baſe and
popular degree, as well of Lords, as of vaſſailes, as well of guiltie, as
of the innocent, iudging of all, and determining of all ouer-readily, &
moſt maliciouſly. For where there is no mature counſell or deliberation,Sentence.
the ſentence can neuer be free from error.
                  And theſe men (I thinke) are thoſe ſtammerers or corrupt ſpeakers,Of ſtāmerers and corrupt ſpeakers ſignied by the prophet.
whereof the holy Prophet maketh relation, that thruſt foorth theyr
wordes ſo nimbly, as they are ſcantly vnderſtood, and a great ſinne
it is to lend eare to ſuch. Lingua balborum velociter loquetur. The
tongue of the ſtutterers ſhal be ready.
                     Eſay. 32. 4. They know not how to ſpeake,
and yet they wil be talking and cenſuring on al: but better were it to
be without a tongue, then to haue it ſo ouer-long, and apt to ſpeak
euill.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Theſe buſie ianglers, which vtter all that they heare, and

care not whom they ſlaunder,Example of certain bulles in India, according to Plinie: alluded are like to certaine Bulles in India, of
whom Plinie reports in his hiſtorie, that they haue their tongues ſo
long, as they reach out vnto their eares. So theſe men haue tongues
ſtretcht out to their eares, declaring, iudging and deprauing whatſoeuer
they heare. They haue a heart each of them, but not to containe
any thing,Compariſō of a brokē glaſſe: alluded. rather it reſembles a broken glaſſe, looſing whatſoeuer
liquour is put into it. Euen ſo theſe bad qualitied men, they
can keep nothing ſecret, but if they hap to be ſilent, it is but when
they ſhall liſten to another mans infamy, although there is nothing,
either in this world or the other more precious, then good fame &
honeſt reputation.
                  Hence was it that the holy ghoſt ſayd:Eccle. 16. 9. 
                     Audiſtis verbum aduerſus
proximum? commoriatur in te,
                     A good leſſon for mē to obſerue, in hearing or reporting ſpeeches of their neighbours. as if he would haue ſaid. Haſt thou
heard thy neighbour defamed, and knoweſt not whether it be true
or no, yet knoweſt that euery man is a lyer, and the tongue too ready
in backe-biting and ſlaundering? Make account, as if thou
hadſt not heard it, holde thy peace, make no report of it. For beſide
thy offending God therein, and defaming thy neighbour againſt
the law of charitie; thou ſhalt iniurie thy brother in a thing
ſo precious as his honor is, and yet thy ſelfe gaine no honor at all
therby, becauſe thou wilt be held but for a tatler, a news-caryer, &
ſhalt be in danger of ſpreading lyes abroad, vnder an imagination
of telling the truth.
                  So ſhalt thou be knowne but for a detractour, a lyer, and a telltale,
and no man will beleeue thee when thou ſpeakeſt the truth:
therefore, Commoriatur in te, let it die in thee. Blab it not abroad,
holde thou thy peace, and keep ſilence, for it is better to bee ſilent,
then to ſpeake euill,Detractiō offends as wel amans owne ſelfe, as others. becauſe detraction offendeth both others and
thy ſelfe. But by holding thy peace of others infamy, thou honoreſt
God in his creature, and hurteſt not thy ſelfe, nor offendeſt thy
neighbour. Holde then all detractours, murmurers and falſe ſpeakers,
to be vnworthy the company of any Chriſtian.
               
               
                  Finis Chap. 13.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  There is not any thing more vneaſie or inſupportable, neyther leſſe deſeruing
loue, then the tongue of the ſlaunderer and deprauer. And
more eaſilie the Aegyptians might ſuffer the plague of Frogges, then
we can indure the defamers tongue. What the cauſe was, why God
ſent ſuch a puniſhment vpon the Aegyptians, by creatures ſo vile, &
vnapt to offend. How difficult a thing it is to heale the plague of
the tongue, declaring and approouing, that God onely muſt heale it:
as he healed Aegypt, purifyed the lips of Eſay, and reſtored ſpeech to
the dumbe. The murmurer is woorſe then a theefe, and is figured in
the rauenous birdes, reiected in the diuine ſacrifices.
               
               Chap. 14.
               
                  
                     LODOVICO.
                  
                     Diogenes, the Cinicke
affirmeth: That there is not any
thing more laborious, then to traffique
with bad men, nor any thing
more comfortable,
                     Among bad men, none is more to be ſhunned then ſlaunderers. 
                     then to dwell among
honeſt men. But hereto I adde,
that among bad men, there is no
company more hatefull, and worthyer
to be fled from, then thoſe
kinde of men, which be addicted to
detraction and ſlaunder, as deſpiſed
both of God and men,Slaunderers are giuen to the world as a plague. being like vnto croaking Frogges, who can
doe nothing but make a noiſe, in their vnpleaſing and offenſiue maner.
And as they were giuen to Aegypt for a diuine puniſhment: ſo
are murmurers and deprauers giuen to the world,A great myſtery in Gods ſending of Frogges to the Aegyptians: compared with the offenſiue qualities of other creatures. euen as a plague,
or as the ſcourge of God.
                  There wanted no myſterie, in that our omnipotent God ſent to
the Egyptians, as a great ſcourge and puniſhment, frogges, for they
are a moſt vile kinde of creature, begotten of the corruption of foule

fennie waters, and are likewiſe ſo weake in offending, that hauing no
poyſon (as ſerpents haue) they may be handled. They haue no teeth,
as dogges that can bite: they haue no force in their feete, as horſes
haue, to ſtrike with their heeles: they haue no hornes, as Oxen,
wherewith to doe harme: they haue no talants, like Eagles, therby
to grapple: they haue no pawes, as Beares and Lyons, to teare
in peeces withall: they haue no pointed briſtles, like the hedgehog,
to pearce through any thing: they haue no weapons, like men, therewith
to kill: nor are they rauenous like wolues, that liue by deuouring.
                  
                     And yet were they ſent as a principall plague from God to the
Aegyptians, and that in ſuch aboundance, as both water and lande
produced infinite ſtore of frogs: ſo that not onely the houſes were ful
of them, but their beds, tables, furnaſſes, & the very cupbordes wherin
they kept their foode. Ecce, ego percutiam omnes terminos tuos Ranis.Exod. 8. 2. 3. 4.
Et ebulliet fluuius ranas, quae aſcendent, & ingredientur domum
tuam, & cubiculum lectuli tui, & ſuper ſtratum tuum, & in domos ſeruorum
tuorum, & in populum tuum, & in furnos tuos, & in reliquias
ciborum tuorum. Et ad te, et ad populum tuum, & ad omnes ſeruos tuos
intrabuntranae. Beholde, I will ſmite all thy countrie with Frogges.
And the riuer ſhall ſcrall full of frogges, which ſhall goe vp and come
into thine houſe, and into thy chamber where thou ſleepeſt, and vpon thy
bed, and into the houſe of thy ſeruants, & vpon thy people, and into thine
ouens, and into thy kneading troughes. Yea, the frogges ſhall climbe vp
vpon thee,Dauids acknoledgement of this prodigie. and on thy people, and vpon all thy ſeruants. This prodigie
alſo Dauid regiſters in one of his Pſalmes, ſaying: Dedit terra eorum
ranas, in penetralibus regum ipſorum.Pſal. 105. 30. Their land brought foorth frogs,
euen in their kings chambers.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  It is a matter much in vſe among noble men,A cuſtome obſerued among noblemen, being iniuried by a baſe perſon: ſeruing as a compariſon to this purpoſe. that if
eyther they, or elſe ſome knight of honorable reſpect, doe receiue any
iniurie by ſome meane or vile perſon, their generous ſpirit
ſcornes to drawe a weapon to wound him: but commaundes ſome
ſeruant of theirs (of baſe condition) to take a cudgell, and ſoundly to
beate him therewith. Contrarywiſe, if the wrong proceede from a
noble man, or his equall, it mooues his bloud the more, and for the
abuſe receiued, hee couets with his owne hand to acte an honorable
reuenge.
                  Among the bruite beaſtes of loftie diſpoſition,The ſame is exampled among brute beaſts. we may not the
like, euen by a meere naturall inſtinct, which makes the Lyon refraine
turning to euery beaſt that abuſeth him. Alſo the Greyhound

and dogges for the chaſe, with others of like generous qualitie, they
ſcorne to deale with any vile creature, or any dogge of gentle condition,Petrarchs report of a dogge that ſcorned to fight with a Lyon.
albeit they may barke, and make a contemptible noiſe at
them. But Petrarche tels vs of a dogge of Alexanders, who was
of ſuch a gallant condition, that hee diſdained to fight with a
Lyon: notwithſtanding hee oppoſed him ſelfe againſt an Elephant,
which is a beaſt of immeaſurable ſtrength, and ſurlynes of
minde, exceeding other beaſtes in greatnes, and of all other the moſt
diſciplinable.
                  God was very highly diſpleaſed at obſtinate Pharao king of
Aegipt,
                     God offended with Pharao for withholding his people. for afflicting his beloued people of Iſrael, contemning his
diuine commandement, and refuſing to let them paſſe to their ſacrifices;
promiſing, yet afterward denying his promiſes to God, by the
meanes of Aaron and Moyſes. There was no neede, that a maieſtie
ſo great, a perſon ſo illuſtrious, and a Monarch ſo almightie, as God
himſelfe is, ſhould come in proper perſon, to reuenge him ſelfe vpon
a petty king of Aegipt. Moreouer, hee ſcorned to ſend one of his
attendants, of ſoueraigne and Angelicall vertue, but for better ſubduing
the obſtinate pride of a heart therein ſo hardened: he ſent
vile and loathſome creatures, filthy, and made of putrifaction, ſuch
as Frogges are, which although they wanted weapons to endanger
him withall, yet had they voices wherewith to wearie him, &
thereby they kept ſuch a continuall wicked ſounding in his head, as
he could neuer ſleep.How odious this plague of Frogges was to the Aegyptians. And ſuch was the noyſe of their hatefull croaking,
as the Aegiptians could not vnderſtand themſelues in ſpeaking
one to another, hauing their houſes full, their tables full, and
their beds ful: beſide, ouer and aboue the filthyneſſe which naturally
they had, they were creatures moſt hatefull to looke on, and loathſome
to touch.The Plague of detractours & backbiters worſe then that of Frogges.
                  
                  Much worſe is the plague of Detractours, murmurers and lewde
ſpeakers in the world, and farre more tollerable were the frogges,
as alſo more eaſily their vile voices to be endured: then the others infamyes,
curſings and abhominable raylings. For, with their deuilliſh
tongues,Compariſōs of the wicked tongue with the Frogges qualities and how they agree in their ſeuerall natures: they offend the maieſtie of God, murder the fame and
reputation of their neighbour, and bring their owne polluted ſoules
to wilfull perdition.
                  A great ſimilitude hath the wicked tongue with the frog, but yet
goes beyond it in vilenes of qualitie. For, as the frog abydeth alwayes
in muddye lakes and troubled waters: ſo the lewd tongue
delighteth in deprauing his neighbour, and neuer commendeth any

man for the vertues he poſſeſſeth.
                  The frog is bred of the dirte and corruption in mooriſh grounds:
ſo is the back-biting and ſlaunderous tongue deriued of a putrified
hart, as alſo of an erronious and peruerſe conſcience. The frog with
his horrid voyce, neuer ceaſeth croaking day not night: and the detracting
tongue neuer lacks matter of murmuring, permitting others
to take no reſt, but alwayes moleſts them with new deuiſed
villanies, and will not let it ſelfe ſleep, leaſt it ſhould looſe time in
harming others.
                  
                     Pharaos Magicians and Enchaunters, could not deliuer Aegipt
from this great plague of frogs,God only is to deliuer the world of the wicked tōgue. but onely God him ſelfe muſt ſend
them away, by reaſon of the two bretheren Aaron and Moyſes, by
whoſe earneſt prayers, his omnipotencie was pleaſed to rid them
thence. Euen ſo, God onely muſt take away this great plague from
the world, of the murmuring, ſlaundering and detracting tongue.
Domini eſt gubernare linguam.
                     Prouer. 16. 1. 
                     The rule of the tongue is of the
Lord.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     This difficultie is ſfficiently diſcouered in the Prophet
Eſay,Example of the prophet Eſay, how his mouth was purified. 
                     whoſe mouth was puryfied with one of the ſublime Seraphims,
which with the tongs or tanackles, taking a burning
coale from the Altar of the Lord, touched his tongue therwith, &
ſo his lips were made free from all pollution.
                     Eſay. 6, 6. 7. Et volauit ad me (ſaith
he) vnus de Seraphim, & in manu eius calculus, quem forcipe tulerat
de altari. Et tetigit os meum, & dixit. Ecce tetigi hac labia tua, & auferetur
iniquitas tua, & peccatum tuum mundabitur. Then flewe one
of the Seraphims to me, with an hot coale in his hand, which hee had taken
from the Altar with the tongs. And hee touched my mouth, and
ſayd. Loe, this hath touched thy lips, and thine iniquitie ſhall bee taken
away, and thy ſinne ſhall be purged.
                  It is a doctrine ſufficient enough,Concerning thoſe Angells ſent by God to the worlde & how he ſends them. & an opinion concording with
the beſt diuines, that God neuer ſends to the world, for execution
of his workes, but onely thoſe Angels of the vtmoſt or loweſt Hierarchie;
except when he will doe ſome acte of ſome important conſequence.
Among all his maruailous and mighty workes, the moſt
principall was that, of the ineffable incarnation of the Word, wheron
afterward ſucceeded the redemption of the whole world, which
was ſent & pronounced by the Archangell Gabriel. If to deliuer a
Sacrament ſo vnexpreſſable, & to treate on a matter ſo important, he
ſent onely but one Archangell:
                  If God ſent to cure the tongue of a ſinner, who was not one of

the worſt in the world, but one of his moſt glorious Prophets of the
olde Teſtament, not an Angell, nor an Archangell, but one of his
higheſt and nobleſt Seraphims, which doe holde the chiefe place
neereſt vnto God: it may ſerue as an eſpeciall argument, that to
heale a hurtfull biting tongue, it is a matter of greateſt difficultie.
                  If to make sound a holy man,The cure or recouery of the wicked tongue, belongeth only to God himſelfe. and ſuch a one as Eſay was, there
needed to ſend foorth a Seraphim: then to recouer the tongue of a
murmurer and an euill defamer (which knowes no good of it ſelfe,
neyther is able to ſpeake well) doubtleſſe it requires the omnipotencie
of God him ſelfe; Domini eſt gubernare linguam. I doe not ſay,
that he needeth to come in perſon, for the helping of an infamous
tongue, but yet I ſay, that not without a great myſterie, ſent hee an
Archangell to pronounce the incarnation of the woord, and alſo to
purifie the lippes of one of his cheefeſt Prophets, ſent he a Seraphim.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  
                     What ſay you, a Seraphim? Doe wee not read, that
Erat Ieſus eiiciens Daemonium,Luk. 11. 14. & illud erat mutum? Ieſus caſt foorth a
deuill,Mat. 12. 22. and he was dumbe? And in Mathew alſo: Oblatus eſt ei Daemoniū
habēs, caecus & mutus, & curauit eum, itae vt loqueretur & videret.Seuerall examples performed by our Sauiour himſelfe.
Then was brought to him one poſſeſſed with a deuill, both blinde and
dumbe, and he healed him, ſo that he which was blind and dumbe, both
ſpake & ſaw. And of an other dumbe man, it is written: Obtulerant
ei hominem mutum, daemonium habentem. Et eiecto daemonio, loquutus
eſt mutus.Mat. 9. 32. 33. They brought vnto him a dumbe man, poſſeſſed with
a deuill. And when the deuill was caſt out, the dumbe spake. And of
another, both deafe and dumbe, Saint Marke writeth, that Chriſt
waſhed with ſpettle the tongue of the dumbe, opened his mouth, and
of his proper authoritie, and (with his owne hands) he healed him, in
ſuch manner,
                     Marke. 7. 35. 
                     that, Solutum eſt linguae eius vinculum, & loquebatur
rectè: And the ſtring of his tongue was looſed, and he ſpake plaine. Is
not this a matter of farre greater maruell, then the ſending of a Seraphim?
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  If my memory doth not deceiue me,Concerning the dumbe man, whereof the ſeueral Euangeliſts doe make differēt mention. the ſame dumbe
man, whereof Saint Luke ſpeaketh in his eleuenth Chapter; is the
ſame which Saint Mathew recordeth in his twelfth Chapter, and the
ſame alſo whereof Saint Marke makes mention in his ſeauenth
Chapter. For, according to the ſacred doctours opinion, eſpecially
Beda, and he who is termed the tongue of golde, it is all one, and the
very ſelfe ſame man, which was blinde, deafe and dumbe. S. Luke
                     
onely tels vs, that hee was dumbe, and that Chriſt healed him, making
no mention at all eyther of deafeneſſe or blindnes.A noate worth the obſeruation. But bee it
howſoeuer, for ſo much as is to be ſayd concerning the worke, God
doth a greater miracle, in curing a man of an euill tongue, then by
giuing health to any other bodilye infyrmytie. Therefore
let the vngodlye talker bee aſhamed, and the infamous
tongue bee ſtrycken dumbe:Pſal. 13. 18. 19. 
                     Erubeſcant impii, & deducantur
in infernum, muta fiant labia doloſa: Let the wicked bee
put to confuſion, and to ſilence in the graue. Let the lying lips bee
made dumbe.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Since it is ſuch an infectious euill, and ſo hard of his
owne nature to be cured, we may then as boldly ſay, that the puniſhment
therof muſt needs be great, if the penaltie as iuſtly do anſwere
the offence. Saint Paul writing to the Corinthians,
                     1. Cor. 6. 10. ſaith: Necmaledici,
nec rapaces, Regnum Dei poſsidebunt: No raylers, nor theeues
ſhall inherite the kingdome of God. What difference make you (my
Lord) betweene raylers & theeues?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Aſſuredly,what differēce is betweene raylers and theeues, by cō
                        pariſon of either. if we ſhall but yeld to that, which a little
before we haue ſet downe, much more doth a byting ſlaunderous
tongue rob and ſteale, then a theefe can do by his vniuſt rapine. For
the one ſteales a mans good fame, the other but his goods or garments,
of much leſſe value then a mans honor is, for preſeruation
wherof, diuers haue willingly loſt their liues, but neuer any for their
goods or garments, which do make no more thē a bare outward ceremony
to life, neyther were euer affected or eſteemed among the
wiſe.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  If thoſe men that be theeues,The diuerſitie of puniſhmēt on raylors & theeues. ſhal not inioy the kingdome
of heauen, and among the efes, the moſt deuouring and vileſt
man, is he that hath an infamous tongue: it muſt needs follow then
by reaſon, that greater puniſhment ſhall the detractour, murmurer
and defamer haue, then the poore needy theefe. And yet theeues
may be cut off by the gallowes, but no iuſtice is awarded to the detractour:
therfore the world ſwarmes more full of wicked tongues,
then it doth of theeues.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Who knowes (my Lord) if that God,Of the rauenous foules forbidden in ſacrifice. forbidding the
ſacrifice of rauenous theeuing foules in the olde Teſtament, ſuch as
the Eagle, the hauke, the vulture, the kyte, and ſuch like birds, which
feede onely vpon rapyne,Deut. 11. 13. 14. 15. and are nouriſhed with rawe fleſh, as detractours
and inſolent defamers, do fatten them ſelues on men both
aliue & dead, who knows (I ſay) in ſpeaking of theſe rauenous birds,

whether he aymed at theſe kinde of bad men or no?2. Cor. 10. 11. becauſe, Omnia
in figura contingebant illis. Al theſe things came vnto them for examples.
And as the foules were reputed vncleane, & not fit for the ſacrifice:
ſo all ſuch theeuing men, are held vnworthy to inherite the
kingdome of heauen, figured by the celeſtiall Ieruſalem.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Your opinion,Det
                           •
                        actours called theeues in ſacred ſcripture, according to the Septuagint. my Lord, differs not much from the purpoſe
in that thoſe men which by the Prophet Ezechiel are called detractours,
according to our vulgare edition, agreeing with the ſeauenty
interpreters, are alſo tearmed theeues. Viri detractores fuerunt
in te, ad effundendū ſanguinem & ſuper montes comederunt in te, ſcelus
operati ſunt in medio tui. In thee are men that carrie tales to ſhed bloud,
in thee are they that eate vpon the mountaines,
                     Ezech. 22. 9. 
                     in the midſt of thee they
commit abhomination, thus ſpeakes our edition. But the Septuagint
haue it: Viri latrones fuerunt in te, &c. And very worthyly
are they called theeues, for worſe are the theeues of our
good fame and honeſt repute, then the ſtealers of our treaſure, as
very ſufficiently hath already been ſayd.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Yet we haue to conſider one thing more in the detractour,One thing to be cōſidered in the ſtanderer.
which is, that if he ſpeake the trueth, we ſhould make great reckoning
thereof: but when he falſly defameth, no account at all is to
be made of it, becauſe at length the truth will vndoubtedly appeare.
There are certaine rauenous birds,Example of rauenous birds, that haue no feathers to fly with all, and others of high flight, with their alluſion. that haue no feathers for flight,
or if they doe flye at all, they be able to holde out but a little while,
as the Eaſtridge and ſuch like. Others there be that fly very high, as
the Eagle, the kyte, the Goſhauke, &c.
                  Euen ſo is it in the infamies of the detractour and murmurer,
for thoſe diſgracefull reports, which are grounded vpon real defects,
and vndoubted truth of the deed, are to bee feared, becauſe they
haue the wings of truth, and therefore doe not eaſily fall out of
mens remembraunce, in regard thoſe powerfull feathers do mightily
ſupport them. But thoſe that are maliciouſly vttered, and
vniuſtly are oppoſed agaynſt apparant trueth: they can hardlye
holde out flyght, nor flye any long while, wanting the
wynges of truth, and therefore are not a iotte to bee reſpected.Cōpariſon of the belyed Suſanna.
Such was the infamy bruited agaynſt chaſte Suſanna,
which becauſe it was founded on falſhood, it had no permanence,
but (with the heyght of honour) ſhe was thereof acquitted.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  
                     Chriſt our redeemer will deliuer vs from the feare of
ſuch detractours, as appeareth by the gracious promiſe made

to the patient ſufferers:
                     Math. 5. 11. Beati eſtis cùm maledixerint vobis homines:
Bleſſed are ye when men reuile ye. And God exhorts vs by the
Prophet Eſay, not to feare the iniuryes of men, or the ſlaunders of
the murdering tongue.
                     Eſay. 51. 7. 8. Audite me qui ſcitis iuſtitiam, populus meus
lex meae in corde, nolite timere opprobrium hominum, & blaſphemias
eorum non metuatis. Sicut enim veſtimentum, ſic comedet eos
vermis: & ſicut lanam, ſic deuorabit eos tinea: ſalus autem mea in
ſempiternum erit.The Prophets exhortation, againſt the feare of mens reuilings. Harken vnto me, yee that know righteouſneſſe, the
people in whoſe heart is my law. Feare ye not the reproach of men, neither
bee yee affraide of their rebukes. For the moth ſhall eate them
vp like a garment, & the wormes ſhall eate them like wooll: but my
righteouſneſſe ſhal bee for euer, & my ſaluation from generation to
generation. Oh perpetuall conſolation to poore defamed men, the
firmeſt hope that ſlaundered ſoules can haue. Therefore Saint
Ierome in an Epiſtle of his,
                     
                        S. Ierom praiſed God for ſuffering him to be ſlaundered. 
                     gaue great thankes to God, That
hee had made him worthie to bee hated of the world, and falſlie
ſlaundered. Gratias ago Deo meo, quia dignus ſum quem mundus
oderit.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Wee ought not onely, to make no account of
talkatiue babblers, becauſe they cannot hurt vs, and very gladly
ſhould we ſuffer them,Slaunder oftē times brings truth it ſelfe to light. in hope of the promiſed reward: but alſo
to weigh them as nothing, in regard it often happeneth, that by the
impoſition of a ſlaunderous calumnie, the truth it ſelfe is brought
to light. Which makes me to conceiue, why Dauid likened the
detractours tongue to an arrowe:Pſalm. 57. 5. 
                     Filii hominum, dentes 
                           •
                        orum
arma, & ſagittae, & lingua eorum gladius acutus: The children of
men, whoſe teeth are ſpeares and arrowes, and their tongue a ſharpe
ſwoord.
                  
                  
                     The arrow (ſayth Saint Ierome to a friend of his) if it bee ſhot againſt
an hard ſtone,
                     S. Ierome his compariſon of an arrowe ſhot againſt a ſtone, alluded to the arrowe of detraction. 
                     it ſometimes rebates the point, or breakes, or if
it rebound backe, it woundeth the archer that ſent it from his bowe. So,
the arrowe of detraction, being let looſe againſt a iuſt man, who is
as the ſolide rocke of conſtancy: it returnes back vpon the vniuſt defamer,
and offends his owne proper author, euen like vnto an other
Perillus.
                  
                  
                     And this is alſo veryfied by the ſaying of the holy ghoſt, from
Salomon.Eccle. 27. 25. 26. 27. 29. Qui mittit in altum lapidem, recidet in caput eius, & plaga
doloſa doloſi diuidet vulnera. Et qui foueam fodit, incidet in eam,
& qui ſtatuit lapidem proximo ſuo, offendet in eo. Et qui laqueum
alii ponit, peribit in illo. Facienti ne quiſsimum conſilium,

ſupra ipſum deuoluetur, & non agnoſcet vnde adueniet illi. Whoſo
caſteth a ſtone on hye, caſteth it vpon his owne head, and he that ſmiteth
with guile, maketh a great wound. Whoſo diggeth a pit, ſhall fall therein,
and he that layeth a ſtone in his neighbours way, ſhall ſtumble theron.
And he that layeth a ſnare for another ſhall be taken in it himſelfe.
He that worketh euill, ſhal be wrapped in euils, and ſhall not know from
whence they come vnto him.
                  Nay, yet there is a worſe matter for theſe detractours, becauſe it
followeth:Let ſlaunderers make vſe of this heauy threatning. 
                     Laqueo peribunt, qui oblectantur caſu iuſtorum, dolor autem
conſumet illos, antequam moriantur: They that reioyce at the fall
of the righteous, ſhall be taken in the ſnare, and anguiſh ſhall conſume
them before they dye. Let theſe wicked tongues then bee mute, for
leſſening & abridging their owne harmes, before ſuch iudgements
fall vpon them, from the omnipotent hand of God So ſhall they bee
ſure to eſcape offending their neighbours, with the poyſoned arrow
of their tongues, and likewiſe be free from ſuch dreadfull puniſhments.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  It may be (my Lord) theſe biting tongues ſtriue to
imitate Camelles,Example of Camelles, according to Plinie, Hiſt. who (as Plinie reporteth in his naturall hiſtorie,
the eyght booke and eighteene Chapter) when they would drinke,
beholding (as in a perfect glaſſe) in the cleare water before them,
the brutiſh ſhape of their own huge bodies:Nat. Lib. 8. Cap. 18. by the me
                        •
                     re diſpleaſing
ſight of ſo bad a ſpectacle, they ſtirre their feete, and
trouble the water, that it may be voyde of ſuch meanes to ſhew
their owne vglineſſe, and then with contented mynde they
drinke.
                  So theſe deuiliſh tongues,The Example very excellently alluded to deuiliſh tongues. becauſe in ſanctitie of life, goodneſſe
of manners, and glorious fame of vertuous men, their owne deteſtable
brutiſhnes plainly appeares, euen as in a chriſtall glaſſe, ſhewing
their helliſh vices and abhomination of life; therfore they ſtamp,
make muddy, and ſcandalize others faire reports, to the end they
may not ſee their owne loathſomneſſe in them. But in ſeeking to
ſullie others ſplendour their own credit becomes clouded, & their
owne ſoules are endangered, before they can impaire other mens reputatiō.
Euē like him, that ſeekes to ſpoile a white wall with a coale,
before the wall is any thing iniuried, his owne fingers are firſt of
all defyled.
                  Haue you neuer ſeene (my Lord) that ſuch as haue ſerious affaires
in the Court,A very apt & witty Similie. either to viſite ſome noble man, or to follow a ſuite of
great importance, their attending ſeruantes of baſe degree,

ſuch as the horſe-keeper or foote-boy,Example of Lackeys or Seruingmēs abuſing the walles in Courte. hauing waited ſome while
for his maſter: at length, wearied with attending, and willing
rather to be badly imployed, then ſo to ſtand idle, knowing nothing
elſe then to doe, with an extinguiſht torch, or a coale, he findes
him ſelfe work vpon the white wall, drawing a thouſand fooliſh
gaudes, and diuers times ſets downe diſhoneſt lynes or ſentences,
or ſuch noates as him ſelfe may well be aſhamed of. The like alſo
ſome times wee ſee in priſons, by men reſtrained of their libertie,
ſeeking to ſhunne idleneſſe, with ſuch a bad and vndecent exerciſe.
                  Not much vnlike to theſe men,Alluſion to thoſe of wicked tongue againſt good mens fame & repute. are they of euill tongue, who hauing
nothing elſe to ſay, nor knowing otherwiſe how to buſie their
braines: doe take the foule coale of infamy, and therewith deface
the white wall of others good fame. But firſt of all, they deforme
themſelues with deadly iniquitie, before they can ſtir their tongues
bad penſill,Pſal. 13. 5. to ſet downe other mens imperfections. Linguis ſuis doloſe
agebant: iudica illos Deus. God keepe vs from ſuch wicked
tongues, and impoſe vpon them (in his diuine goodneſſe) a perpetuall
ſilence.
               
               
                  Finis Chap. 14.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  Diſcourſing of the double tongue, to wit, that of the hypocrite and falſe
man, who hath one thing in his mouth, and another in his heart:
Whereby he makes himſelfe hatefull to God, to the very deuils, and
alſo to men. Of an hypocrite, what thing it is, how hardly he is to be
knowen of men, and of deuils: being compared to the Comedian; the
gallant dogge, that hath a ſmooth quick tongue; and to the vapour
exhaled by the Sunne vp into the ayre. The hypocrite hath his mouth
in heauen, and his tongue on earth. And he is alſo compared to the
ſwoord of Holofernes, of Saul, and of Goliah. &c.
               
               Chap. 15.
               
                  
                     LODOVICO.
                  But what ſhall wee
ſay of ſuch double men,Of double mē, ſpeaking one thing, and thinking another. as haue one
thing in their heart, and yet ſound
another with their to
                        •
                     gue? Not
much vnlike to the flattering tōgue,
whereof we haue already ſaid ſomwhat,
and becauſe they both are
lyers, the continue not long, but euen
till their deceipt is diſcouered.
For,Eccl. 5. 11. as the wiſe man ſayth. Non ventiles
te in omnem ventum, et non eas
in omnem viam. Sic enim omnis peccator probatur in duplici lingua.
Be not carryed about with euery winde, and goe not into euery way:
for ſo doth the ſinner that hath a double tongue.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  
                     Ariſtotle alſo confeſſeth the ſame,A
                           ••
                        iſtotle his compariſō of the vaine floriſh of Life. and giues the reaſon
therof. Becauſe (ſaith he) none can comment more on colours then the
woman which is addicted to paint her ſelf: yet it laſts but a little while,

reſembling a vaine flouriſh of life, which at laſt is diſcouered, by the
wiles, cunning ſleights, and fraudulent ſtratagems thereof. Nemo poteſt
diù fictam ducere perſonam.
                     Sentences to good purpoſe But what is the concluſion? the
woolfe eates vp the ſheepe, though hee come to him in a lambes
cloathing, and the foxe will deuour the pullen, though in outward
ſhewe he ſeemes not to care for them: euery one turneth to his
owne naturall inſtinct, therefore Diſsimilium infida ſocietas. When
we haue talked all that we can doe, yet at the laſt our own deedes
will accuſe vs.
                  When our Sauiour rayſed the Rulers daughter of the Synagogue,Marke. 5. 41.
he tooke her by the hand;Of Chriſts rayſing the Rulers daughter, and what the Author gathers therby. 
                     Tenens manum puellae, and then ſayd:
Tabitha kumi; Quod eſt interpretatum; Puella (tibi dico) ſurge;
Which by interpretation is; Maiden, I ſay vnto thee, ariſe. As if hee
would allude thereby, that he would haue vs ready to doe good
workes, ſignified onely by the hand. But the hypocrite puts out
his gloue onely, which hath a falſe reſemblance to the hand, and ſo
the workes of hypocrits ſhall paſſe without any eternall reward. So
the man is ſure to be knowne by his works, as the tongue when it
lyes, euen as the double man, that ſpeaks one thing, & does another.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  But by your patience,No eaſie matter to know an hypocrite, the knowledge of the heart belonging onely to God. my Lord, I take it not ſo eaſie a
matter, to know an hypocrite or a double hearted man, as thus in
ſlight words you ſeeme to paſſe it ouer. For, if man him ſelfe, no, nor
the Angels, but onely God alone knowes the inward of the heart;
Deus autem intuetur cor, how can your ſpeeches holde? The hypocrite
ſpeaking holy words, and doing deeds correſpondent to thoſe
words, may want onely the Chriſtian perfection of a good intent.
becauſe vertue conſiſteth not in the verbe,Sentence. but in the aduerbe, that
is to ſay, not in lip-labour, praying, giuing almes, faſting, pardoning
offences outwardly, puniſhing the body, ceremonious viſitation of
pryſons, or the ſicke, and ſuch like, but in doing al the ſaid deeds,
truely, well, iuſtly and really to the glory of God.
                  We not knowing the inſide of the heart,How farre our outward iudgement reacheth it ſelfe. nor the intention of the
worke, but hearing onely godly ſpeeches, and ſeeing deeds done according
to ſuch words, it appeares to me impoſſible (which is more
then difficult) to know whether the tongue be double or pure.
                  And to go on yet a little further,The hypocrite hateful to God, to men, and to the deuils thēſelues. by more thē cōiecture. We know
that the counterfeite mā not onely offendeth God, who ſees the corruptiō
of his vnclean hart, but alſo he becōes hateful to mē, in diſcouering
of his deceit. Nay, he is odious to the deuils thēſelues, ſo ſoone
as they perceiue his diſſēbling life: becauſe, declaring a ſāctified life

in deeds & words, & not agreeing therwith in trueneſſe of intention,
he is but reputed onely to be a man of a vertuous life, & ſo becomes
he therby moſt diſpleaſing to the infernall ſpirits. Tell me then, can
there be ſeene in the world a more brutiſh mōſter then the hipocrite?
hated of God, contemned of men, & offenſiue to the very deuils?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Your argument (at the firſt ſight) ſeemes to be a matter
vnanſwerable: but whoſoeuer conſiders the opinion of Ariſtotle, and
(with the eye of ehe minde) contemplates the inſtabilitie of mans
life;Ariſtotle his opinion of our lifes inſtability. 
                     which can not long time perſeuer in one and the ſame condition:
ſhall finde it not ſo intricate a caſe as you make it, to diſcouer
the diſſembling of an hipocrite. And your ſelfe, in confeſſing,
(that he is odious to men) do differ not a iot from Ariſtotles iudgement,The hipocrits holy life is to get his owne intent.
which is: That man cannot long time continue in a feyned
life, but in the end his corrupt rottenneſſe will be made manifeſt. It
euidentlie appeareth, that the hypocrite, in counterfeyting a religious
kind of life, vntil he may reach to his own intent, the ſame being
once obtained, he then returneth to his former ordinatie life againe.
                  The Prince of the Tribunes to the moſt cruell king Antiochus,
                     Example of the Tribune to king Antiochus. diſſembling
a peace in goodly proteſtation of words: cauſed the moſt
bloudy maſſacre in Ieruſalem, as made euery one (in meere compaſſion)
that either heard or read of this cruell example, to ſhed fountaines
of teares. So deales the double tongue and hipocriticall mā,
ſuch is the end of his purpoſe and ayme: with the feigned words of
a friend, to carry an outward colour of kindneſſe, euen the valiant
knight Ioab ſlewe Abner in Hebron.
                     2. Sam. 3. 27.
                  
                  The like by enuy did he to the Prince Amaſa,
                     Ioabs killing of Abner and Amaſa. with whom counterfeiting
as a great friend, meeting him vpon the way in the open
field, and friendly ſaluting him, ſaying: Salue mi frater, Art thou in
health my brother?
                     2. Sa. 20. 9. 10. Then taking him by the beard with the right hād,
as if he meant to kiſſe him: drewe forth his ſwoord with the left
hand, and (before Amaſa could be aware of him) ſmote him therewith
vnder the fift rib, ſo that all his bowels fel out vpon the ground,
Qui percuſsit eum in latere, & effudit inteſtina eius in terram, & mortuus
eſt, nec ſecundum vulnus appoſuit.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  This doubleneſſe of tongue which now you ſpeake
off,The doubleneſſe of tōgue is the effect of anger. it is moſt true, that it laſteth but for little time, becauſe it is the effect
of anger, which being once ſet on working, ſuddenly breaketh
foorth to his effect, and then it can no long while endure: as your
examples alreadie alleaged doe very well teſtifye, for it is the propertie
of anger, to purſue (ſo ſpeedily as it can) the hated conceipt.

But in an hypocriticall man,The property of anger. who may neuertheleſſe be without diſdaine
or fury, the rehearſed examples are not verified, becauſe not
all thoſe, that keepe one thing in the breaſt, & deliuer another with
the tongue, are to be called hypocrites.
                  
                     But they are truely and properly hypocrites,
                     Of ſuch as may iuſtly be tearmed hypocrites. 
                     who feigne a Saint-like
behauiour, and vtter honeſt words, yet in any vertuous action,
are (notwithſtanding) inwardly ſuch diuels, as they are without piety
and any religion at all. As were the Scribes and Phariſies, of whome
our ſauiour ſpeaking,
                     Mat. 15. 7. 8. 
                     ſayth: vae vobis hypocritae, bene propheta
                        •
                     it de
vobis Iſayas, dicēs, populus hic labijs me honorat, cor autem corum longè
eſt à me. Woe to you hypocrites, Eſay prophecied wel of you. This people
draweth neer vnto me with their mouth, and honoreth me with the lips,
but their hart is far off from me.
                  And in a thouſand other places we reade, that ſuch are properly
called hypocrites, which in a lying habite, haue ſeemed to be obſeruers
of the diuine lawe,The nature & behauiour of hypocrites, to be Saints in the eyes of mē
                        ▪
                      but a good intention hath altogether bin
wanting in them. In regard, that whatſoeuer they haue doone, hath
not beene to the honour of God, but to be reckoned as Saintes in
the eyes of men. Wherefore it is ſayde, that receperunt mercedem ſuam,
                     Mat 6. 2.
                     they haue their reward. And theſe hypocrites haue practiſed long
time to perſeuere in ſuch a lying kind of life, becauſe their hope and
intent is, to go masked in ſheepes cloathing, vntill the very houre of
their death.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  It merits ſome blame, my Lord, that you will reduce a
name generall for feigners onely, to ſuch as may ſeeme to diſſemble
well, and yet no way be really the ſame in trueth.Who is rightly ſayd to be an hypocrite, according to Budeus. 
                     Becauſe an hypocrite
(if we ſhall giue credite to Budeus) is euery diſſembler, that
repreſenteth any other condition then he is indeede. Heereupon, ſtage
players, and all kind of Comedians were tearmed hypocrites, and
the action of Comedians called hypocriſie and diſſimulation, becauſe
themſelues were but Apes of mens actions, repreſenting diuers
other perſonages in liuely imitation.Demoſthenes his anſwer cō
                        cerning the firſt & cheefe part of an ch And this to be true, we
reade it approoued by that greate greeke Father of eloquence,
who beeing asked what was the firſt and cheefeſt parte of an Oratour,
conſtantly anſwered, Hypocriſis, ſimulation, hypocriſie. Being asked
againe, what was the ſecond parte, returned the ſame anſwere
Hypocriſis, and on the thirde demaunde, for the thirde
parte of an Oratour, did alwayes make the ſelfe ſame anſwere.
                  For to ſpeake vprightly, the principall part of an Oratour, is hypocriſie,

that is, imitation: to imitate the geſture, voyce, words and
action of ſom perſon, that the ſubiect (whereof the Orator ſpeakes)
maketh relation vnto.Some can diſſemble more cunningly thē others. So then, euery one that reſembles another bodies
perſon, is called an hypocrite, & it is not meant of him onely (as
you ſay) that ſhews himſelf in appearance to be good, yet afterward
prooues naught, whoſe diſſembling (happily) is not ſo hard to be noted,
Math. 7. 16. as it is in the contrary body. Beſide, Chriſt himſelf ſaith, A fructibus
eorū cognoſcetis eos. You ſhall know them by their fruits.
                  
                  It may be there are ſom, who are more perſeuerāt in a diſſembling
courſe of life, then others can be, the better to compaſſe & gaine in
their own greedy deſires, & all is done with a golden tongue, which
yet may prooue but copper too. But let the woolfe be cloathed or
ſhaddowed in a ſheeps skin, euen as cunningly as he can deuiſe to be,
yet in the end, ſome part of his body muſt needs be diſcouered, & ſo
he ſhal come to be generally known;An hypocrite by one meanes or another will be diſcouered. Either by his head, that is, the
beginning of his peruerſe actions: or by his feet, that is, his progreſſion
in his diſſēbling works: or by his tayle, that is, the vttermoſt end
of al he can do. Let it ſuffice then: Nemopoteſt diù fictam ducere perſonā,
as likewiſe the Comical perſon, can not always of himſelf abide
in place to fill the Scene.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  I did not deriue this name of hypocrite, from his ampleneſſe, or large ſcope in diſſembling, but gaue it according to the
vſe of the world in theſe our dayes:Hypocriſie deriued from the courſe of the world now adayes, pointing out ſuch as are hypocrites. which tearmes them to be hypocrites,
that do faigne themſelues outwardly, to be full of great holyneſſe,
alwayes praying, and ſeeming euermore to be (as it were) euen
tied or vnited to god himſelfe, in their ceremonious kind of praying:
but their harts in ſoundneſſe & true effect, are very far off, both from
his moſt ſacred maieſty, & any good or vertuous action. Transfiguring
themſelues (like their father) into Angels of light, albeit inwardly
they are ſuch ſaints, as ſeeming to haue the lips of the Cherubines,
that ceaſe not continually to praiſe the Lord, do containe yet within
them ſuch diuels harts, as neuer make an end of blaſpheming god. Of
whom we may wel ſay that ſentence of the royal Prophet Dauid. Et
dilexerūt eum in ore ſuo,
                     Pſal. 78. 36. 
                     & lingua ſua mentiti ſunt ei. Cor autem eorum
nō erat cum eo, nec fideles habiti ſunt in teſtamento eius. They flattered
him with their mouth, & diſſembled with him with their tōgue. For their
hart was not vpright with him, neither were they faithfull in his couenaunt.
                  
                  Now if you will haue it,How Comedians and Stage players ar ſayd to be hypocrites acording to S. Baſill. that ſtage-players ſhall be ſayd to be hypocrites,
we may then with as much reaſon ſay, that ſuch behauior as

comes from thoſe Comedians, doth beſt bewray the nature of hypocriſie.
For many times may be eaſily ſeene, that one of bad or baſe
cōdition, one of the very meaneſt among the people, taks on him the
ſhape or Idea of a perſon royal, in very rich & coſtly habilimēts, with
graue geſture, witty ſpeeches, & kingly cariage, ſo that euery ſimple
& vnwary eye, is pleaſingly deceiued in him. Yet at the length, when
his counterfeited garments are caſt off, & he returned into his owne
proper apparell;The compariſon alluded to the hypocrite wel worth noating. then his true nature and quality is diſcerned. Euen ſo
the hypocrite, making a proteſtation of holy ſpeeches, ſuch as may
ſeem pleaſing (outwardly) in the eye of heauen: afterward, when his
lying & diſſembled cloake is thrown off, then hel takes hold of him,
and quite bereaues him of heauens happineſſe.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  O tongue,The tongue cōpared to the Greyhounds or beſt hūting hounds. thou accurſed deceiuer, twofold, or double, like
to the beſt & moſt eſteemed Greyhoundes or hunting dogs, whoſe
tongue is ſo apt & pliable, as very eaſily it is euery way turned double.
And who can tel, but that this might be the meaning of the prophet
Dauid,
                     Pſal. 68. 25. whē he ſaid: Lingua canum tuorū ex inimicis ab ipſo? The
tongue of thy dogs in the bloud of the enemies?
                  
                  Theſe men are at one inſtant,Hypocrites, in heauen & on earth at one inſtant. both in heauen, & on earth: for their
vnclean lips in praiſing of god, do appear to ſeek nothing but his diuine
glory; but in true effect, they go licking like the wandring Bee,
among al the fraile flowrs of worldly glory, which (in one moment)
vaniſh ſuddenly away.Iob. 20. 5. Wherupon, Iob that great Prince of the Eaſt
ſaid: Gaudium hypocritae ad inſtar pūcti: The ioy of hypocrites is but a
momēt.
                     Pſal. 73. 9. Therfore ſaid Dauid: poſuerūt in coelum os ſuum, & lingua eorū
trāſiuit in terra: They ſet their mouth againſt heauē, and their tongue
walketh through the earth.
                  
                  To haue the tongue in or aloft toward heauen,How the tongue is ſaid to be in heauen. is nothing elſe, but
to talk ouer liberally of heauēly things: wheron grew the old Adage
Noli ponere os in coelū,
                     How the tongue is ſaid to be vppon earth. as much to ſay, as, with vncleane lips let no man
talke of heauēly matters. And the tongues extention vpon earth, may
(happely) be taken in this kind, by ouer great affection to the things
of this world.How in bothe places at one inſtant. And as the Bee couets hony, euen ſo do double tongu'd
hypocrites, ſpeak with their diſſembling mouthes, of celeſtiall happineſſe, but their deſires ſtretch wholly to worldly glories.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Let vs then ſay of theſe trewantly tongues,Compariſō of exhaled vapours, ſhining like ſtars, & aptly alluded to diſſēbling hypocrites. that they
are like to earthy vapours, exhaled by the Sun vp into the ayre, ſhining
by night as if they were bright ſtars: but falling downe to the
ground. Simple children tell their parentes they ſawe faire ſtars fall
down to the earth. So is it with your diſſembling hypocrits, feigning

wonderfull ſanctity with their tongues, which to the ignorant and
ſimple, makes them to ſeeme like glorious ſtars of the firmament:
wheras indeed, they are but meer flaſhes of the diuel their father. Of
whom it is written.Eſay. 14. 12. 
                     Quomodo cecidiſti de coelo Lucifer, qui manè oriebaris?
How art thou fallen from heauen O Lucifer, Sonne of the morning?
                  
                  Euen ſo may we ſay to theſe ſaint-like tongues, and diuels in hart,
when, in the iudgement they ſhal fall like vapours, into the infernall
depth: How happens this, poor wretches? you that appeared like ſhining
lampes in heauen, that thus like thin vapours you are miſerably
faln to the earth? And what ſhall the wicked anſwer again? Qui vertit
linguam ſuam,
                     Prouerb. 17. 21. 
                     incidet in malum. A naughty tongue ſhal fal into euil.
Euen as if he wold ſay, they that ſpeak doubly, as falſe hypocrites do,
fall into euil, that is, into hell, or hell fire.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Wherfore ſhould falling into euil, ſignifie falling into
hell, or hel fire? what, are there no other euils, but those of hell, and
hell fire?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  It is an vniuerſall rule,How falling into euill, is ſaid to be falling into hell, or hell fire. not onely in Philoſophy, but
alſo in diuinity, that when we find any voyce ſimply, without any
adiūct, it is takē for the principal ſignified by that ſame voyce, according
to the very analogy: vox ſimpliciter prolata, debet accipi pro ſuo
potiori ſignificato. The wiſe man then ſaying, that the double
tongu'd man ſhall fall into euill, adioyning no other words thereunto:
teacheth vs to vnderſtand & looke into the thing what it is,
that is called the true euill indeede, becauſe, whatſoeuer of
it ſelfe is abſolutelye euill, is vtterly repugnaunt to the trueſt
good.
                  There is nothing that hinders ſo much the fruition of the cheefeſt
good,The priuation of the cheefeſt good, euē God himſelfe. and ſtretcheth to the paine of puniſhment, as the damnable
euill of hell doth, which is the caſtigation of the true euill
committed in fact, & that is it, which truely depriueth vs of the
trueſt good, euen of God himſelfe. Incidet in malum, id eſt in infernum,
qui vertit linguam ſuam. And of the Princes infernall we may
ſay, that euen they alſo (by their euill tongues) fell into the bottomleſſe
deep;Oſe. 7. 16. according as Oſe, prophecying of them before, ſaid. Cadent
in gladio principes eorum, à furore linguae ſuae. Their Princes fall by the
ſword, for the rage of their tongues.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Why then me thinkes the Prophet Dauid ſaid wel,
in ſpeaking of this wicked tongue, and comparing it to a ſword:
Pſal. 57. 6. 
                     Et lingua eorum gladius acutus. And, as oftentimes it happeneth, that

a man (by miſchance) hurts himſelfe with his owne weapon:Cōpariſon of a man hurting himſelfe by his owne weapon: alluded. the like
doe theſe men with their owne tongues, euen confound themſelues,
and become woorthy of eternall horror. So that we may ſay
of them, as of Saul, who was murthered by his own proper weapon:
and Dauid did cut off the head of Goliah, with his owne ſword. The
like dealt the chaſte matrō 
                     Iudith with Holofernes, ſmit off his head
with his owne weapon.
               
               Finis Cap. 15.
            
            
               
                  The Argument.
                  The hypocrite, becauſe he hath holy words onely, without deeds, is compared
to the glow-worme: to the ſtatue which Nebuchadnezzer ſaw
in his dreame, that had a head of gold only: he hath his left hand about
God, and his right vnder his head. He hath more faces then one,
disfiguring it to appear only, but not to be good indeed: he goes foorth
of his owne confines; he ſuffers himſelfe to be guided in his actions,
like vnto a brute beaſt: with his beſt vertue he buieth ſlēder rewards,
and hangs his praiſe vpon other mens lips. He is like to the brood hen,
that cals her young ones to eat, and almoſt ſtarues her ſelfe to death:
like to the theefe, that ſhooes a horſe backward, to deceiue the purſuer;
with many other worthy compariſons againſt the double hypocriticall
tongue.
               
               Chap. 16.
               
                  
                     LODOVICO.
                  Now,The hypocrite very aptly cō
                        pared to the glow-worme, or glaze-worme, that ſhines brightly in the night ſeaſon, and is not ſeen in the day unto. what might
I ſay, if mē were inwardly ſo good,
as they are inwardly naught, deſeruing
eternall death, and onely by
their falſe tongues? May they not
rightly be compared to the glow-worme?
a thing which is of no bigneſſe,
and which in the ſummer
time when it flyes in the darke,
ſeemes as if it were ail fire in appearaunce
to vs, and yet by daye it

doth deliuer no light at all. So may we very well ſay of the hypocrit,
that in the dark ſeaſon of this preſent life (when we can diſcerne no
hidden things, but by faith onely, he then appeares to be kindled (as
it were) with celeſtiall fire. But in the bright day of eternity, when
euery thing ſhall be clearely diſcouered, then it will be euidently
ſeen, how much he was depriued of charity, how empty of al heauēly
loue, and how that all his goodly words, were vtterly voyde of true
effects. Alſo, how much he ſpake only by ſpeaking to appeare, and
not indeed to be holy like to falſe imaginations, hauing no reall eſſence,
& to no other end but only, that he might be eſteemed, reuerenced
& honored of men. Hence commeth it, that it was ſaid of ſuch
men,Math. 6. 2. 
                     Receperūt mercedem ſuā; They haue their reward, not that which
god in his goodnes wold haue beſtowē on thē: but rather that vanity
is enough for them, & therfore vanity is their reward, themſelues being
indeed nothing elſe, but a little vain-glory.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Miſerable men,The reward which hypocrites do moſt gape after. they might as eaſily haue laboured for
the true reward, the certain aſſurance of eternall glory: but like giddy
headed fools, forſaking a certainty, they ſtroue for a little ſmoake
of worldly honor, which quickly was caried away with the winde.
The deuout ſoule the ſpouſe of Chriſt. But the holy & deuout ſoule, the ſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt, ſhe is of another
mind of whom it is written. That ſhe hath the left hand of her
ſpouſe vnder her head, & his right hand doth ſweetly embrace her.
Cant. 2. 6. 
                     Laeua eius ſub capite meo, & dextera illius amplexabitur me. His left
hād is vnder mine head, and his right hand doth imbrace me.
                  
                  The right hand of God,Of the right hand of God, and why ſo called. is the glory of Paradiſe, wherupon the euerliuing
father ſayd to the Son: Dixit Dominus Domino meo, ſede à
dextris meis: The Lord ſaid vnto my lord: Sit thou at my righthand. And
it is called the right hand,Pſal. 110. 2. becauſe it is free frō al ſiniſter things whatſoeuer.
Of the left hand of God, and where the holy ſpouſe placeth it. The left hand is the glory of this fraile life, and the honors
which this preſent world doth affoord.
                  The holy ſpouſe puts her huſbands left hand vnder her head, as one
vtterly careleſſe of this worlds vaine honors; deſiring only to be imbraced
with his right hand,Pſal. 73. 24. that is, to be circled & engirt with his
neuer fayling glory.Pſal. 3. 3. 
                     Cum gloria ſuſcepiſtime; Thou haſt receiued me to
glory.
                     The hipocrite ſeekes after the left hand of worldly vanity, making no account at al of the right hand. 
                     Gloria mea, & exaltans caput meum: My glory, and the lifter vp
of my head.
                  
                  The hypocrite, with the glory which he giues to god, and with the
holy words which he vtters to other, like one bereft of his wits, ſeeks
only after the left hand of worldly preferments, making no account
at all of the celeſtial glories: but thinkes he ought to do euery thing

cōtrary, that is, to lay the left hād of worldly honors vnder his head,
as if he were ſleeping vpon the pillow of promotion, there is nothing
elſe in him to be reſpected.
                  As for the right hand, wherof the heauenly ſpouſe makes her vſe,
to wit, a longing hart, filled full of earneſt & enflamed deſires, holily
to aſpire, to be circled about with his eternal loue, & round embraced
in the armes of his brightneſſe, in him there is not ſo much as one
thought admitted thereof.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Whoſoeuer doth aduiſedly note the hypocrite, being
adorued with the name of a Chriſtian, full of ſuch ſincere and
holy wordes: ſhall apparantly perceiue, that he is not much vnlike
the myſterious image,The hypocrite cōpared to Nabuchadnezars Image in his dreame. which Nabuchadnezzer king of the Aſſyrians
ſawe in his dreame. His head was of the fineſt gold, the breaſt
and armes of ſiluer, the belly and thighs of braſſe, the legs of yron,
and the feete, partly of yron, partly of earth: But from a high
moūtaine there came a little ſtone, & ſmiting the earthy part of the
ſtatue, broke this immeſurable Coloſſus, and bruiſd it into the ſmalleſt
duſt.
                  The hypocrite hath his head of gold,For the head, & how the cō
                        pariſon holds in the hypocrite, in euery part according to the Image. becauſe he ſeems to glory in
the name of a Chriſtian, & his works alſo are chriſtian-like, ſo much
as by outward appearance cā be diſcerned. And they that heare him
to vtter forth ſuch ſanctified ſpeeches, do meerly iudge him to be a
ſaint of Paradiſe; ſo much for his golden head.
                  But the trunk or body is not anſwerable to the head, becauſe the
breaſt & armes are of ſiluer.The breaſt & armes. His inward thoughts, are ſignified by the
breaſt, & his outward worksare diſtinguiſhed by the armes, being altogether,
tyed to worldly reward, & infinite in auaritious ſcraping together,
therfore are they thus denoted by ſiluer.
                  His belly is of braſſe,The belly and thighes. a mettal ful of noiſe & ſounding, which ſignifies,
that whatſoeuer he doth, is but to get him a name in the world,
and only to compaſſe a fame of holineſſe.
                  His legges are of yron,The legs. for the hypocrite walketh many countries,
leaues no wayes whatſoeuer vneſſayed, to purchaſe eyther
ſpirituall or temporall authority, to the end he may rule and ſwaye
ouer others, with the yron rodde of tyrannicall gouernement.Pſal. 2. 9. 
                     Reges
eos in virga ferrea, & tanquam vas figuli confringes eos. Thou ſhalt
bruiſe them with a rod of yron, and breake them in pieces like a potters
veſſell: this ſignifieth the yron, which tames all other mettals whatſoeuer.
                  Hee hath his feete of earth,The feete. for the hypocrites affections are

all carnall, and therefore thus ſignified to be earthie. The hypocrites
works are ſo intereſſed with vanity, that whatſoeuer he doth,
it is onely to gaine mony, or elſe to purchaſe fame of the world, or
for ſome temporary authority: neuer hauing the glory of God before
his eyes, which ought to be cheefeſt preferd in all our actions.
Pſal. 115. 2. 
                     Non nobis Domine, non nobis, ſed nomini tuo da gloriam.
Not vnto vs O Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thy name giue the
glorie.
                  
                  
                     Woorthily therefore doth Chriſt (the corner ſtone) deſcend,
                     The ſtone, Chriſt the corner ſtone. 
                     bruſing all into ſmall duſt, and diſſoluing all his vaine thoughts into
nothing. Tunc contrita ſunt pariter ferrum, teſta, aes, argentum &
aurum,Dan. 2. 35. & redacta quaſi in fauillam aeſtiuae areae, quae rapta ſunt vento:
nulluſque locus inuentus eſt eis, &c. Then was the yron, the clay, the
braſſe, the ſiluer and the gold broken all together, and became like the
chaffe of tbe ſummer flowers, and the wind caried them away, that no
place was found for them. And the ſtone that ſmote the image, became
a great mountaine, and filled the whole earth.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Deſeruedly doe hypocrite; want a right intention,
and hauing a vaine reſpect in all their actions, our Sauiour ſpake
very well of them,Math. 6. 16. when he ſayd. Nolite fieri ſicut hypocritae triſtes,
exterminant enim facies ſuas,
                     Of the face of an hypocrite. 
                     vt appareant hominibus i
                           ••
                        unantes. When
ye faſt, looke not ſowre as the hypocrites do: for they disfigure their faces
that they might ſeeme vnto men to faſt. Speaking of hypocrites hee
ſayth,Of the face of a true chriſtiā. that they looke ſowre, and disfigure their faces. But when he
ſpeakes of the true chriſtian, who doeth all things to the honour of
God, he vſeth then the ſingular nūber, ſaying.Math. 6. 17. 
                     Tu autem cum ieiunas,
&c. Et faciem tuam laua. But when thou faſteſt, &c. And waſh thy
face.
                  
                  Hereupon was it, that in ſpeaking of the hypocrites face, he vſeth
the number of moe then one: Exterminant facies ſuas. But in
ſpeaking of the iuſt man, he vſeth the ſingular number onely: becauſe
the end of the iuſt man is b
                        ••
                      one, that is, the glory of God
onely, but many are the vayne ends of hypocrites; Exterminant facies.
                     The ſeuerall faces of the hypocrite. For the hypocrit hath now the face of one that is earneſt in prayer,
then by & by of an almes-giuer: anone of an apoſtolical preacher, &
afterward, of a deuout faſter, but he hath none of all theſe faces truly
and in deed.
                  His owne proper face, beeing a very diueliſh face, is fearefull to
behold, and euery one flyes from it, euen the diuell himſelfe. But
the iuſt man hath one face onely, and that is moſt Angell-like, as

we may read of S. Stephen the glorious martyr:Acts. 6. 15. 
                     intuebātur faciem eius,
tanquam faciem Angeli: They ſaw his face, as it had bin the face
of an Angell.
                  
                  The hypocrite hath many faces,The hipocrite is the Ape of many perſons, directing his actions to many ends. not onely becauſe he is the Ape of
many perſons, as in a Comedy we may ſee, that one man playes the
parts of many: but alſo in this regard, that he directs his workes to
many ends, namely, to temporal profit, to worldly honor, to pleaſe
men, and a thouſand other vnwoorthy deſeignes: which the iuſt
man neuer doth, but addicteth all his actions to the glory of God
onely.
                  And this word Exterminant,
                     The ſignificatiō of the word Exterminare. is not quite voyde of myſtery; Exterminare
hath no other ſignification, but to iſſue foorth, to ſtep beyond
or out of our bounds & limits. Now the hypocrites confynes are,
where with holy words he may cloke a diueliſh hart, & therein is he
ſayd to go beyond his true confines.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  What are thoſe limits or confines, which hypocrites do
vſe to outgoe or paſſe?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The confines or boundes of the vniuerſall world,
How hipocrits are ſayd to go beyond theyr bounds. are onely two, heauen, and earth. Hypocrites by their counterfeite
kind of life, are extermined and baniſhed both from heauen, and
earth, from God, and from men, and ſo they looſe both the one and
other reward. That of heauen, becauſe Receperūt mercedem ſuam;
                     Math. 6. 2. 
                     They haue their reward. And that on earth, becauſe in a moment it
vaniſhed and left them; Spes hypocritae peribit;
                     Iob. 8. 13. 
                     The hope of hypocrites
ſhall periſh.
                  
                  Hatefull they are to God and men;Hypocrites hateful to god and men. 
                     Exterminant facies ſuas, More
eſpecially, becauſe they neuer ſhew a true countenāce: for it followeth,
vt appareant, that they might ſeem vnto men, but he ſayth not, vt
ſint; becauſe whatſoeuer they do, they do it but to appeare onely, and
not to be truly the ſame indeed.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  What a miſſhapen monſter is this? But tel me (my Lord)
I pray you, vpon what occaſion was it ſaid; Nolite fieri, and not much
rather; Nolite facere? In mine opinion, it had bin better ſayd, I would
not haue ye do, as hypocrites do, then ſaying, I wold not haue you be made
like to hypocrites.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Do you not know (my Lord) that this difference is
betweene men,The differēce between men & brute beaſts in their actiōs. and brute beaſtes in their actions: that the one doth
freely whatſoeuer he will: but the other, beaſtes I meane, are led
meerely by nature, and a determinate fantaſie to their attemptes, or
otherwiſe they are not able to do any thing?
                  
                     
The ſaying then of Chriſt concerning hypocrites; Nolite fieri, implyes
thus much, not to be led (after the manner of beaſts) to their
actions, by blind ſenſe, and not by reaſon.
                  Heerein their folly manifeſtly is diſcerned, ſeeing that by ſuch
workes, wherewith they made a ſhew of winning heauen, euen as if
they had bin the iuſteſt men in the world: they haue therby purchaſed
their owne damnation, neuer to looke vpon the bright face of
heauen.
                  
                     And Petrus Chriſologus ſayth,
                     Petrus Chriſologus concerning the hopocrites actions. The hypocrite with the ſharpe lance
of vertue, murthereth vertue it ſelfe: kils faſting with faſting, empties
prayer by praying, and by mercie, dries vp the flowing fountaine of
mercy.
                  Hypocriſie is all one with the Feuer, procuring a fiery burning by
cold drinking:Hypocriſie compared to the Feuer and Dropſie. or as the dropſie is in the body, euen ſo is hypocriſie to
the ſoule. The dropſie encreaſeth thirſt by drinking, and the ouerdrunk hypocrite, dyeth with thirſt, gaping hourly for more & more;
but euer with an extraordinary greedineſſe, after idle ſhaddowes of
fleeting vaineglory.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  He committes an intollerable follie, that by vertue
ſeekes to purchaſe the fauours of men,Grego. in Moral. Cap 8. becauſe (for a vile matter)
he partes with an importaunt iewell: and that which might haue
made him fitte for heauen, he barters away for fruitleſſe breath, the
copper coyne of mens vaine praiſe, and ſinkes therewith deſeruedly
to hell; So ſayeth Saint Gregory in the eighth of his Morralles.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  
                     It is ſo vndoubtedly,
                     Thom. Aquin. in Sum. Lib. 1. Cap. 9. 
                     and thereupon ſayd the goulden
tongu'd diuine, That the delectation of humane praiſe, laſteth no
longer then it is heard, and the reliſh therof dyeth with the very taſt. For
when the word is ſpoken, the worth is ended, a folly ſo great, as there cā
                     not
be imagined a greater.How true cō
                        mēdation is to be ſought. 
                     He that is deſirous of eternall commendation,
muſt not ſeeke that which comes from men, but from the ſearcher
and examiner of all harts:
                     2. Cor. 4. 5. Tunc erit laus vnicuique à Deo: Then
ſhall euery man haue praiſe of God. There is no ſecurity (ſaith a learned
Father) in committing ones glory to the tongues of men, which are like
cheſts without either lock or key.The tongues of men▪ are like Cheſts without lock or key. Hug. Car. For when it is referred to another mans
liberty it is no longer in thine own power, but in the others, either to cō
                     mend,
or to condemn thee.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  How perillous it is, and without any ſecurity at all, to
commit our own praiſe into an others power, is very eaſie to be diſcerned.
Therefore hypocriſie, in his earneſt affection to popular applauſe,

is compared to the weeuel,Hypocriſie cō
                        pared to the weeuel, that eats the flowr in the corne, and leaues the husks. Iohn Climack. from whom we cannot ſo cloſely
keep the corne, but he ſteales into it ſo ſoone as it is threſhed: and to
the end it may not be ſowed, to ſpring againe to a further encreaſe,
he filcheth away the ſbſtance, leauing nothing but a diſſēbled empty
huske. Euen ſuch is hypocriſie (ſaith Iohn Climachus) which ſtealeth
away all our honeſt deſeruings, ſo that no other reward is to be expected,
but this bare breath of vaine glory: Receperunt mercedem ſuā,
                     Math. 6. 2. a price
ſo vile, as worſe is not to be thought on.
                  A foole may that merchant well be called,Hypocrites compared to merchants. which brings moſt
pretious wares into ſo poore a city, as yeelds no man able to buy
the very meaneſt of them. Such merchants, are hypocrites, who ſell
theyr workes by a ſignall formality, of praying, exhortation, teaching,
faſting, and open giuing of almes in this world, where there
is no man, that can giue them the condigne value to ſuch good deeds
doon in ſincerity, and therefore they ſell them but for a little vaine
commendation.
                  You ſhall ſometimes ſee a Preacher preache for many years together,
An eſpeciall note for ſuch preachers as are time obſeruers, & the pleaſers of mēs priuate humours. to the amazement of all his hearers, euen as if at his lippes
there hung no meane perfection, but rather ſuch power and efficacy
in his ſpeeches, as many ſtubborne minds haue bin won by him to
god, euery one admyring and honouring him, euen as if he were another
Paul. Neuertheleſſe, among ſo many by him conuerted, himſelfe
remaineth peruerted, by executing this his Apoſtolicall office, onely
for the applauſe of poore mens breath, & for his own aduancement
to honor in the world. Wheron it followeth, that by helping others to
heauen, he goes himſelfe to hell, cauſing others to be repentant, yet
himſelf hath continued impenitent in his ſins, thirſting after a little
praiſe and vainglory of men, & looſing therby the grace and true glory
of heauen.
                  Agreeable with the brood Hens quality,Men pleaſing preachers cō
                        pared to the brood Hen. calling the other chickēs
to meat, but famiſheth her ſelf. Or they are like the horſe, that brings
bottles of wine home to the houſe, and drinketh nothing but water
himſelfe.
                  
                     Caeſar and Alexander cheered on their ſouldiers▪ and boldly encouraged
them to the battaile,Example of Alexander & Caeſar. but yet were themſelues the formoſt
in fight. In like manner, with greateſt heart and ſpirit did the
Princes,Example of Moyſes, loſuah & Gedeon. 
                     Moyſes, Ioſuah and Gedeon lead on Gods armies, and the
Prieſts ledde on the Ark of the Teſtament, when others ſtood and
noted their woorthy example. But theſe hollow harted hypocrites,
ſend out others before them, and tarry at home themſelues

immooueable, becauſe after the manner of the Phariſies, Dicunt
& non faciunt,
                     Why God gaue vs one tongue & two hands. 
                     they talke onely, but do nothing, except it bee by
contraries. Whereas, God hauing giuen vs one tongue, and two
hands; he implyeth thereby, that we ſhould worke much, but talke
little.
                  The Nurſe firſt takes the food into her owne mouth, and hauing
prepared as it ought to be,Cōpariſon of the Nurſe feeding her child: alluded to the hypocrite. then ſhe nouriſheth her child therwith. But
the hypocrite, without once taſting himſelfe the foode of any good
actiōs, feeds the people with faire words: preaching faſting, but himſelf
with a ful belly, exalting vertue in others, being moſt vitious himſelfe,
and condemning others couetouſneſſe, when his owne hart is
moſt greedy and inſatiable.
                  
                     But what ſayth S. Paul concerning theſe people? Qui alium doces,
Rom. 2. 21. te ipſum non doces? Qui praedicas non furandum, furaris? Thou
which teacheſt another, teacheſt thou not thy ſelfe? Thou that
preacheſt a man ſhould not ſteale, doſt thou ſteale? Heereto may
we adde this ſentence of the Prophet. Cum ipſi limpidiſſimam aquam
biberitis,Ezech. 34. 18. 19 reliquam pedibus veſtris turbatis? Et oues meae his quae conculcata
pedibus veſtris fuerant, paſcebantur, & quae pedes veſtri turbauerant,
haec bibebant. Haue you drunk of the deep waters, & muſt you
trouble the reſidue with your feet? And my ſheep eat that, which ye haue
troden with your feet, and drink that which you haue troubled with your
feete.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  I remember, and very well fitting to our purpoſe,
a notable myſticall note,Example of the ornamēts appointed for the prieſthood and this it is. Among all the ornaments
appointed for the Prieſthoode, the cheefe and moſt eſteemed
was that tearmed rationall: whereuppon was written this
myſterious word; Lemma, which beeing interpreted, ſignifieth doctrine
and trueth. As alluding thereby, that the principall thing
in a Prieſt, ought to bee diuine doctrine, coupled with the trueth
of deedes; becauſe, Turpe eſt Doctori, cùm culpa redarguit ipſum.
                  
                  They are like to ſo many Tantaluſſes,
                     Hypocrites compared to Tantalus. that are in the midſt of water,
and yet dye with thirſt. And in them is that ſentence of old Iſaack
verified, vox quidem, vox Iacob, manus autem manus ſunt Eſau:
The voyce is Iacobs voyce,
                     Gen. 27. 22. 
                     but the hands are the hands of Eſau. For
in voyce and doctrine onely, they ſeeme to haue the tongue of our
Sauiour, who (according to his humanity) was of Iacobs houſe or
ſtock; Et regnabit in domo Iacob in aeternum. And he ſhall reigne ouer
the houſe of Iacob for euer.
                     Luk. 1. 33. But their handes, that is, theyr

workes, they are of Eſau, in whom the wicked and reprobate are
figured.
                  They ſeeme as if they ſoared vp to heauen,Compariſō of theeues, that ſhoo their horſes backward, to preuent purſuit, alluded to hypocrites. but ſinke down (indeed)
to hell. Not much vnlike vnto thoſe theeues, who hauing ſtoln
ſome great booty in the city, do cauſe their horſes to be ſhod backward,
ſo when the purſuers do imagine them to be ſtill within the city,
they are fled far enough off from it. Euen ſo is it with hypocrites,
they haue their horſe-like bodies ſoaled or ſhod backward, they pray,
reprooue, admoniſh, preache and do ſuch things, as in our eyes are
reputed to be holy: but all is doone the contrary way, becauſe they
gape after humane glory and oſtentation, without any care of the diuine
honor at all. Therefore, when ſometimes we think in our ſelues
that they are in the celeſtiall Ieruſalem, they are in helliſh Babylon
it ſelfe.
                  Might not this tongue as eaſily haue laboured the way of ſaluation,
Eccle. 5. 11. as thus (by abuſing it ſelfe) work his owne damnation? Peccator
cognoſcitur in duplici lingua, The ſinner is known by his double tongue;
as when one thing is ſounded by the mouth, and taught in doctrine,
and a quite contrary matter is in the deed.A double tongue, one of the mouth, an other of the deede. A double tongue is this,
one of the mouth, another of fact: with the one we make ſhewe of
mounting vp to heauen, and with the other fall wilfully downe into
hell.
               
               Finis Cap. 16.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  The tongue of the hypocrite, when it teacheth or enſtructeth, is like many
branches, ſeuerally grafted vpon one ſtock: or, as when vpon thornes
there hangeth grapes: or like the fooliſh virgines, that had euery thing
anſwerable to the wiſe, but yet ſtaied without; wheron, a notable doubt
is reſolued. It is alſo compared to the Eſtridge, whoſe wings do reſemble
the Haukes in colour, but yet are not able to beare her body aloft:
Or like to the vayne woman, who becauſe ſhe would ſeeme faire,
paints her ſelfe. How much it bebooues vs to be ready, in ſubduing
the appetite of vaine-glory, which is diſcouered moſt, in ſtriuing to
speake fine and curiouſly.
               
               Chap. 17.
               
                  
                     LODOVICO.
                  If the works of hypocrites
are contrary to the doctrin
which they teache, or if not contrary,
yet at the leaſt ſtrange and diuers:
Compariſō of diuets fruits growing vpon one ſtock. then it may be well ſayde of
them, as it is of thoſe engraffed plāts
or ſtocks, whereon not onely we behold
fruits of the ſame kind to grow,
but oftentimes) and to be maruaild
at) among the leaues of the Medler,
to grow the Seruiſe, & vpon one
ſelfe ſame tree, the Pomegranate & the ordinary Apple to branche
foorth, & where the white grape blancheth, the red to ſhew it ſelfe
ſubſtantially, as in like manner the red with the white.
                  Euen ſo in hypocrites are theyr owne proper fruites diſcerned,The alluſiō to hypocrites, in the fruites of their workes.
                     
which be naught & wicked: A fructibus eorum cognoſcetis eos: By
their fruits ye ſhall know them. And they haue an ingraffing too,
which is by the voyce and doctrine of Chriſt, wherefore it is ſayd
of them:Mat. 23. 3. 
                     Omnia quaecunque dixerint vobis, ſeruate, & facite: ſecundum
opera verò eorum, nolite facere: All therefore whatſoeuer they
bid you obſerue, that obſerue and do: but after their works do not: theſe
men are meere mercenaries, becauſe they doe all for worldly reward.
                  The mercenary or hyreling,Of mercenaries & hirelings, that ſeek their owne benefit in the church of god. although he layes not downe his life
for his flock, yet notwithdanding, he feedes them (for ſo it is needefull)
by doctrine: but this auoydes not his ſinfull guilt, in regard he
ſeeks after reward and temporal glory; Sua quaerentes, non quae Ieſu
Chriſti▪
                     
                     Coloſſ. 3. 1. 
                     They ſeeke not thoſe things that are aboue with Ieſus Chriſt.
They ſeeke their owne priuate commodity in the Church of God,
neuertheleſſe, they preache Chriſt, after the manner of the Phariſies,
who for their owne benefit preached the law of Moſes, but yet
they obſerued it not:Math. 23. 3. 4. 
                     Dicunt enim, & non faciunt: For they
ſaye, and doe not. And againe, Alligant autem onera grauia
& importabilia, & imponunt in humeros hominum: digito autem
ſuo nolunt ea mouere. They bind heauy burthens, and grieuous
to be borne, and lay them on mens ſhoulders, but they themſelues wil not
mooue them with one of their fingers.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  How can this be?Iohn. 10. 5. 8. If Chriſt ſay that the ſheep heares
them not? Non audierunt eos oues: quia non nouerunt vocem alienorum.
The ſheep did not hear them, for they knew not the voyce of ſtrangers.
If they doe not heare them, it may perhappes be by this reaſon,
becauſe their voyce ſoundes not as the true voyce of a ſheepheard.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  This queſtion is anſwered, and it is the anſwere of
Saint Auguſtine.
                     How the ſheep do heare mercenary hypocrites, according to Saint Auguſtine. 
                     That the ſheep do not heare them, neither can they
heare ſuch mercenary hypocrites of themſelues; but they heare in them
the voyce of Chriſt. Becauſe there are two things in theſe hyreling
hypocrites, as a little before we haue declared. One is their works,
and this proude voyce of Phariſaicall and hypocriticall workes,
the ſheepe of Chriſt is deaffe to,Two voyces in hypocrites. and heares not. Alienum autem
non ſequuntur, quia non nouerūt vocem alienorum: therfore it is ſaid;
Secundum autem opera eorum facere nolite.
                     Iohn. 10. 5. 8. The ſecond is the voyce
of Chriſt,Math. 23. 3. which voyce only is heard of the flock: Omnia quaecunque
dixerint vobis ſeruate, & facite. This is the true ingraffing, and god
(this while) by them is preached, but when they ſpeake as of themſelues,

then are they not hearde,When men ſpeak of them ſelues, they are not heard. nor liſtened to by the
flock.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  But by your Lordſhippes good fauour, heere I will
vſe the words of Chriſt himſelfe:Math. 7. 16. 
                     Nunquid colligunt de ſpinis vuas,
aut de tribulis ficus? Doe men gather grapes of thornes, or figges
of thiſtles? How is it poſſible to gather grapes from the
thornes?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Yet my Lorde it is ſo.In what māner grapes may be vpō thorns, and yet be differēt in root. Haue you neuer ſeene
the grape to hang vpon a thorne? And yet though the thorne
ſeeme to beare the grape: the grape hath one roote, and the
thorne another. The Lambes doe take that which comes from
the roote of the vine, beeing the ſacred Doctrine of Chriſt himſelfe,
and they leaue that which proceedes from the roote of
the thorne, whereon the grape but appeareth to hang, which
is nothing elſe but the meere oſtent of a mercenarie hypocrite.
                  The mercenary hypocrite who goes about merchandizing for
worldly glory, hauing and deliuering the true grape of holy doctrin,
you may not refuſe to take it,In what kinde an hipocriticall hireling is to be heard. becauſe it is the voyce of Chriſt in a
ſheepheard. But when you come to his owne works and actions, reiect
them vtterly, becauſe they are pricking thorns, proceeding from
their own proper root, and therfore cannot chuſe but pearce & prick.
And as of thornes the grape thus may be gathered, ſo from hireling
hypocrites, the very voyce of Chriſt may be heard, & ſo is it ſaid; Colligitur
de spinis vua.
                  
                  But what ſay I;How the works of hypocrites may appeare to be good, and yet want the true intent. that the thornes are their wicked works? why
their works in themſelues oftentimes (to the outward appearance of
man) are very good, and yet becauſe the intention is not good in it
ſelfe, the worke ſorteth not to his due end, nor is according as humane
iudgement prognoſticated. This is clearely to be diſcerned,
in the apt ſimilitude giuen by Chriſt of the tenne virgins, fiue
wiſe, and fiue fooliſh, well woorthie to bee eſpeciallie noated.
                  The virgins were ten in number, appointed to entertaine and
honour the Bridegroome,An example moſt excellent of the ten virgins. all are chaſte, all haue lampes in their
handes, and euery one hath her lampe readie lighted. All goe
by night to meete the bridegroome, all ſlumber, all ſleepe, and
all are called to this ſolemne wedding; yet fiue are tearmed
fooliſh,Mat. 25. 1. 2. 3. &c.
                      and fiue are called wiſe. Fiue had admittaunce into
the pallace of the wedding, and to fiue the gate is ſhutte againſt

their faces. Fiue doe reioyce in the eternall ſpouſall, and fiue
doe ſuffer eternall paines, for not hauing reſpect to the prepared
nuptiall, the ſolemne wedding day, the bridall reioycing: who is
not filled with admiration, and who dooth not wonder at this
raritie?
                  Heere is no ſpeech at all vſed of the couetous,Of ſuch as are not ſpoken of, to be preſent at this wedding. the adulterer,
the murderer, the blaſphemer, the wrathfull, the belly-God,
or luxurious liuer, for then all maruaile might iuſtly ceaſe, becauſe
ſuch perſons are not worthy to bee bidden to this eternall
wedding. But virgins are onely ſpoken of, elected for the
meeting of the celeſtiall bridegroome, and therefore it is not
otherwiſe to bee credited, but that they were all furniſhed of
garments meete and beſeeming ſo ſolemne a feaſt, and adorned
with the rich habylimentes of precious vertues, as alſo with
workes full of ſanctitie. All which notwithſtanding, fiue are reputed
to bee fooliſh, and fiue wiſe, fiue thought worthy to enter
the pallace of the bridegroome, and fiue condemned to eternall
horror.
                  It is a matter of no meane admiration,Another exā
                        ple of ſpeciall conſequence, & meete to be regarded. that in one and the ſelfe
ſame Citie, there ſhall be found many religious perſons, all Chriſtians,
and obſeruers of the diuine precepts. All faſt, and chaſtiſe
their rebellious ſenſes, all pray, all exhorte to liue as becommeth
Chriſtians, to flye vice, and imbrace vertue. And yet (for all this)
but ſome of them are to bee ſaued, and others condemned; what
may be the reaſon of this ſo ſtrange a caſe? If while ſome prayed, others
played; If while ſome ſang Pſalmes and the diuine prayſes, others
carolled prophane and idle ſongs; If while ſome ſtroue to
tame their inordinate affections, by faſting and deuout meditating,
others did nothing elſe but cram their paunches; If while ſome gaue
almes,No wonder if the wicked & reprobate doe periſh, but a great maruaile, that among ten, fiue are choſen, & fiue refuſed. others practiſed how to rob the poore of them: Heere it
were no wonder, that to the one ſort, the gate of heauen ſhould be
opened, and deſeruedly ſhut againſt the other, that the one might
worthily be called wiſe, and the other iuſtly reputed as fooles. But
being all virgins hauing all their lampes ready lighted, wherby may
be gathered, that they all laboured to doe good works. Yet ſome of
them to be ſaued, and ſome condemned; vndoubtedly, my Lord,
this is a matter full of maruaile, able to ſtrike a man into no meane
aſtoniſhment, and therefore well worthy of great and deep conſideration.
               
               
                  
                  Claudio.
                  Whence comes (my good Lord) this difference of eythers
end?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  It comes (as I take it) by the variable intention of
the workers.The variable intēt of mē in their workes. This is that teſtimonie of our conſcience, which
makes our actions to be glorious, whereof S. Paul ſpeaking, ſayth:
Gloria veſtra haec eſt, teſtimonium conſcientia veſtrae: your glory and
reioycing is this, the teſtimony of your conſcience.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  What is that teſtimonie of our conſcience?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  It is that,Of the teſtimonies of a good conſiēce whereof Saint Paul, ſpeaking to the Corinthians,
ſayth: Quòd in ſimplicitate cordis, & in ſinceritate Dei, &
non in ſapientia carnal
                           •
                        , ſed in gratia Dei conuerſati ſumus in hoc mundo.
                     2. Cor. 1. 12. 
                     That in ſimplicity and godly pureneſſe of heart, and not in fleſhly
wiſedome: but by the grace of God, we haue had our conuerſation in the
world.
                     Holy words in the mouth, & good deedes in the hands is not ſufficient. It is not enough then to haue holy words in the mouth, and
vertuous actions in the hands, but he that requires a pure & ſincere
hart, would haue all directed to his diuine honor, and not for the atchieuemēt
of worldly glory, as the fayning tongue of vaine hypocrites
daily doth.
                  
                     By this you may perceiue,
                     A good father of the church, his good admonition. 
                     how true that is, which a great Paſtour
of the holy Church ſayd, in one of his Homilyes made on the
21. Chaper of Saint Mathewe, where hee affirmeth; That a vaine
commendation, and a friuolous appetite, to be admired for holineſſe,
makes vtter loſſe of the fruites of good workes. Therefore hee vſed
often to ſpeake in this manner. Saepè vos fratres chariſsimi admonui,
praua opera fugere, & mundi huius inquinamenta deuitare;
ſed hodierna die, (O great word) Sancti Euangelii lectione compellor
dicere, vt & bona opera quae agitis, magna cautela timeatis, ne
per hoc quod à vobis rectè geritur, aut gratia humana requiratur,
ne appetitus laudis ſubrepat, & quod foris oftenditur, intus à mercede
vacuetur, &c.
                  As perchaunce it happened vnto the fooliſh virgins,The Authors conceipt of the fiue fooliſh virgins. who hauing
(in their actions) ſought more after humane glory, then that which
belonged to the diuinitie, they were therefore depriued of the celeſtiall
banquet. The like may alſo bee ſayd of the double tongue,
which labours onely for humane applauſe, and into which ſinne diuers
preachers often times doe fall, only by the craft and deceipt of
the deuill.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Why then,Iob. 39. 16. of ſuch men is truely verified, that notable
ſaying, which we read in Iob: Penna ſtruthionis ſimilis eſt pennis

                           •
                        aerodii, & accipetris. Haſt thou giuen the pleaſant wings vnto the

Peacockes,
                     Compariſō of the Peacocke and Oſtriche alluded to the hypocrite. 
                     or wings and feathers vnto the Oſtriche? Yea, it is true,
but the one flyeth aloft, and the other cannot raiſe it ſelfe from
the earth. Euen ſo it is with hypocrites, who are like to Saints in
their outward behauiour: but in their deedes, when others doe
ſoare vp to heauen like Eagles, they cleaue to the earth, as onely affecting
earthly prayſes.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  The ſoldiours of Gedeon,
                     Example of Gedeons Souldiers warring againſt the Moabites. when they went to warre
agaynſt the Moabites, euery man held in his left hād a little pitcher,
and a lighted lampe within the ſayd pitcher. So when they were
to giue the aſſault about the midſt of night, they brake their pitchers,
and the lighted lampes might then bee diſcerned, when
ſounding the dreadfull trumpets, they cryed out with a loude
voice,Iudges. 7. 20. 
                     Gladius Domini, & Gedeonis; The ſwoord of the Lord, and
of Gedeon. No man named his owne proper weapon, but exalted
onely the ſwoord of God and of Gedeon, and yet each one carryed
his owne peculiar armes.
                  In like manner,How we ought to apply the former Exā
                        ple, and make vſe thereof in our ſelues. not to bee depriued of the honourable palme
of victorie, ought we to demeane our ſelues, when we breake the
earthen veſſels of our hearts, with true contrition and vnfeined
repentaunce; that then in our hands the light of holy and religious
workes might ſhine and appeare, when we take the trumpet
of zealous preaching in our mouthes, wee ought to reprooue others
by brotherlike affection And when againſt the world, the
fleſhe and the deuill wee enter combate, no other voyce ought to
be heard among vs, but Gladius Domini; attributing al to the Godheads
glorie.Pſal. 115. 2. 
                     Non nobis Domine, non nobis, ſed nomini tuo da gloriam.
Not vnto vs O Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thy name giue the
glory.
                  
                  Moreouer,Our duety in labouring for the glorie celeſtiall. when in labouring for this conqueſt of celeſtial glory,
wee ſhall here ſeeme to be faynt and ouer-wearied; we ought
to ſtriue to holde out ſo much as we may, not in regard of the glorie,
but in reſpect of the farre greater occaſion, that thereby wee
haue to loue,In what mānner we ought to flye from hell. prayſe, and glorifie God. So in like caſe, we ought
to ſhunne and fly from hell, not ſo much for feare of incurring the
paines therto belonging, as in more eſpeciall regarde that God is
not there honored and loued, but hated and continually blaſphemed.
Hereupon grew that feruent ſpeeche of Anſelme,
                     Anſelm. in lib. de Beat. Chap. 190. in the
booke he made of bleſſednes chap. 190. Mallem purus a peccato,
et innocens gehēnam intrare, quàm peccati ſorde pollutus coelorum regna
tenere. I had rather being innocent and cleare from ſinne,

enter into hell: then to holde place in heauen, polluted with ſinne.
A ſentence beſeeming a zealous inflamed ſpirit, deuoted onely to
the glory of God: which is able to ſuppreſſe the ſpirit of vaine-glory
in any chriſtians breſt. For that onely depriues him of ſo rich a benefit,
as enſues by the due praiſes giuen to the Almightie.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Deſeruedly doth the feygning tongue looſe the fruite
of eternitie, which for the ſilly price of humane praiſe, exhortes, reprooues,
admoniſheth and teacheth; And as ſayth diuine Dioniſius,
14. De diuinis nominibus.
                     Dioniſ. lib. 14. de diuin. nom. One defect ſuffiſeth, to make that a matter
cannot be good in it ſelfe, and one blemiſh is enough, to make a
thing vnſightly; therefore ſaith he: Bonum conſurgit ex integra cauſa,
malum autem non.
                  
                  He is ſayd to be a worthy knight,Cōpariſon of a good knight, and how he is beſt knowne. that is a good houſe keeper, an
almes giuer, a viſiter of the ſicke, louing, frequenting the Church,
and doing diuers other vertuous actions: but if he be a loyterer in
other matters of life, that very ſtaine onely ſerueth to confound all
the reſt. Euen ſo, the hypocrit vſeth many prayers, exhorteth to doe
well, to performe many godly actions: and commendable examples:
but he wants the good end in him ſelfe, and the perfect intention.
Math. 23. 5. 
                     Omniae faciunt vt videantur ab hominibus. This onely ſuffiſeth
to checke all his other actions, and make them to be helde bad, becauſe
this aymed end of the worke is not good; And that is it onely
which giueth the name to the worke,The ſaying of S. Ambroſe. according as S. Ambroſe ſaith:
Intentio tua, operi tuo, nomen imponit. Thy irtent doth giue the name to
thy worke.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  It is a great fault in that vaine woman,Compariſō of a vaine womā, that tricks vp her ſelfe to pleaſe others, beſide her husband. that delights
to ſpend the whole morning, in painting & colouring her ſelfe,
Ieweling her haire, aduauncing her periwig, curling and plaiting
her lockes, adorning her coronet with variety of flowers, loading
her body with precious garments, chayning her necke and
breſt with circlets of goulde and pearle, putting on coſtly bracelets,
vnualuable rings on her dayntie fingers, and with variable
perfumes and rich vnguents of Arabia, to fill the ayre with
precious odours as ſhe paſſeth along: And yet all this labour is beſtowen,
onely to ſeeme beautifull, and to pleaſe another beſide
her husband: then which, ſhe can offer him no greater indignitie.
                  Our ſoule is the ſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt,The compariſon applyed to the ſoule of man. by the ordained meanes
of holy baptiſme, where the ring of fayth is freely deliuered vnto
her; Sponſabo te mihi in fide; I will euen marry thee vnto me in faithfulneſſe.
                     
Oh in what hatred may the celeſtiall husband take it, when
ſhe with ſo many ſmooth (but lying) ſpeeches, for all his holy exhortations,
good inſtructions, and celeſtiall preachings, by her raſhe
and ouer-ready tongue, returnes him none but falſe anſweres, euen
like vnto a giddy idle headed damoſell, deſirous onely to bee
pleaſing to other men, and no care at all appeares in her, of delighting
in her true and heauenly bride-groome.Math. 23. 5. 
                     Omnia opera ſua faciunt
vt videantur ab hominibus: All their workes they doe for to be ſeene of
men.
                  
                  Such temptations we ought to reſiſt with great violence,Example of the Iſraelits in rebuilding the Temple of Ieruſalem, and fearing the Samaritās and doe
as the Iſraelits did, in reedifying the Temple of Ieruſalem, who for
feare of the Samaritans, which had round beſieged them, did performe
the building worke with one hand, and held a ſword in the other,
to offend the enemy withall. Vna manu ſua faciebat opus, & altera
tenebat gladium. Aedificantium enim vnuſquiſque gladio erat accinctus
renes.
                     Nehem. 4. 17. 18. 
                     And they that builded, did the worke with one hand, and
with the other helde a ſword. For euery one of the builders had his ſword
girded on his loynes.
                  
                  The like is required in vs,A duety required in vs in the like caſe, but eſpecially in Preachers. with one hand wee ought to doe good
workes; and with the other to beate away the temptations of vaineglorie,
which the ſubtill deuill doth moſt of all vſe, eſpecially when
he ſees, that Preachers doe ſtriue to appeare gracious, and pleaſing
to their hearers.
               
               
                  Finis Chap. 17.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  Wherein thoſe are reprooued, that are good onely of their tongue, but
wicked in their deedes. Reſembling the poore man, who would faine
take a rich wife, but (in regard of his pouertie) none in his owne
country will accept of him: Wherefore, cloathing him ſelfe in
ſtrange garments, hee trauailes to ſpeede where he is not knowen.
Such men are compared to builders, that lay vnwrought ſtones in
the foundation, but aloft to the eye, they place curious ſtones of richer
labour. They are alſo like to Pyrates on the Seas, with lying banners:
like to the Sichemites: like to Ioſeps cloake: like to the wife of
Putiphar: and like to the aprons of figge leaues, which Adam and
Eue made for themſelues. They are like to Ahaz the king: like to
the Dolphine: like to the Phyſitian, that cures others, yet helpes not
himſelfe. They are like the white wall ſhewen to Ezekiel: they are
good for others, and hurtfull to them ſelues: Here is ſome ſpeeche
vſed, of the great paines threatened to ſuch, as alſo of the reprehenſion,
which God in his iudgement will giue them: A ſubiect, by how
much the more curious, by ſo much it is the more true and profitable.
               
               Chap. 18.
               
                  CLAVDIO.
                  But what ſhall we ſay
of them, who onely haue a good
tongue, and vtter foorth many holy
ſpeeches: yet in their actions are
moſt vile, and whatſoeuer they performe,
is done but as an outward
ſigne or ceremonie.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Such people may bee
iuſtly compared to a certaine poore
man,Cōpariſon of a poore man, coueting to haue a wealthy wife. who being deſirous to ioyne
him ſelfe in a wealthy mariage, becauſe
he was knowne in his owne country, to be little better then a

begger, and in regard of his exceeding pouertie, no woman would
eaſily be drawne to accept him as her husband: makes meanes to
get garments of richer eſtimation, forſakes his natiue ſoyle, and
goes farre off, to finde a wife where he is not knowne: And being
by his habilyments imagined Noble, Gentle, or otherwiſe, of large
reuenues and poſſeſsions,Truth wil diſcouer it ſelfe in the end. compaſſeth a liberall dowrie. But when
the beguiled woman comes home to his dwelling, and perceiues he
is moſt poore, and ready to ſtarue thorow meere want; imagine then
her alteration.
                  Such kinde of men are the worlds hypocrites,The compariſō holds truly in the worlds hypocrits. who becauſe in thē
ſelues, and of their owne knowledge, they are moſt wretched and
vile, therefore in outward apparance, they will cloath themſelues
with the garments of the godly, vſing all ſmooth and hypocriticall
perſwaſions, to the end they may reach the height of their own
deſires. But in the end, euery ſuch ſoule ſhall myſerably periſhe
by famine eternally in hell, her owne wretchedneſſe being euidentlye
layde open, and (as a iuſt iudgement) bee damned
for euer.Pſal. 31. 22. 
                     Erubeſcant impii, & deducantur in infernum, muta fiant
labia doloſa.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  This ſort of hypocrits,Hypocrits cō
                        pared to builders, in making a rude foundation, and a curious top-piece. as haue no other goodnes in
them, but the ſound of the tongue onely, are like vnto builders, who
in the foundation of their worke, do lay rude & vnwrought ſtones.
But higher and neerer to publique ſight, they place other ſtones,
that are more curiouſly poliſhed and laboured, onely to make the
worke the more regardable.
                  The hypocrite, that hath onely holy words in his mouth, hath the
foundation of his building rude and vnſeemely, wanting a true intention,
a pure heart, and ſole deſire of Gods glory. Now this
rotten foundation of auarice, of fond vaine-glory, or of any other
hatefull vice whatſoeuer, he buries all theſe, onely to make a
bottome of them. But aloft in the forefront, or in the very face and
chiefeſt appearance of the worke, there goodly & Saint-like words
are liberally affoorded.
                  The iuſt and faithfull man,The iuſt and faithfull man, quite cōtrary to the hypocrite. hee doth all things quite contrary
to the hypocrite, which makes his foundation to bee moſt
precious, becauſe whollie it is layde on Chriſt him ſelfe, the
abounding treaſure of all celeſtiall riches. Fundamentum aliud
nemo poteſt ponere,
                     2. Cori. 3. 11. 
                     praeter id quod poſitum eſt, quod eſt Chriſtus
Ieſus. Other foundation can no man lay, then that which
is layde, which is Chriſt Ieſus. On what a precious foundation

doth the iuſt man lay in his ſpirituall building, whereon, all other
rich ſtones are plentiouſlie heaped, according to the beauty of
ſo fayre a building? Vnuſquiſque autem videat quomodo ſuperaedificet.
Let euery man take heed how he buildeth.
                  
                  When God,How God began his building in creation of the world. being the onely chiefe Architect of all things whatſoeuer,
began his building of this goodly world: he dealt quite
contrary to thoſe builders, that make their beginning at the
ground-worke or foundation, with vnſhap't ſtones, rubbiſh and
ſuch baſe traſhe. Hee went another way to woorke, and as a
mayne beautie to his faire fabricke, hee began with the firmament
of heauen; and that was the luſtre of his foundation and beginning:
Gen. 1. 8. 
                     Vocauit Deus firmamentum coelum: God called the firmament,
heauen.
                  
                  The like did he when he framed the building of the little world,
Man,How god framed his building of the little World, Man. to adorne him with the more admirable beautie, he placed
firſt (as his foundation) a reaſonable ſoule in him, which was ſo faire
and goodly, as it receiued forme & ſhape euen from him ſelfe. Therfore
when the ſoule is taken away, the building of our body falleth
into cinders.
                  When he builded the moſt noble palace of the militant Church,How God builded the palace of the militant Church.
he placed (as a moſt precious foundation thereof) our redeemer
him ſelfe, euen Ieſus Chriſt. Fundamentum aliud nemo poteſt ponere,
praeter id quod poſitum eſt, quod eſt Chriſtus Ieſus.
                  
                  The hypocrite doth all his works quite contrarie,1. Cori. 3. 11. and therefore
his building falles ſoone to the earth.The hypocrits building ſoon falles to the ground. And euen as God made a confuſion
of tongues, among the proude builders of the Tower of Babell:
euen ſo at length will hee confound this hypocriticall building
tongue, that doth all things whatſoeuer, onely for pride
and vaine-glorie, which infamous kinde of building muſt needs
fall to the ground, according as that tower did, becauſe: Deus ſuperbis
reſiſtit.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  The hypocrite dealeth like the Pyrate,The hypocrite compared to the Pyrate, or Rouer on the Sea. or (as we may
otherwiſe tearme him) the Rouer on the Sea, who becauſe he would
not be knowen for a theefe and robber, ſpreadeth falſe Enſignes
vpon his toppes: which giuing ſome ſecurity to the miſtaking paſſengers,
they are by this meanes fraudulently ſeazed on. Euen ſo
the counterfeyting tongue, diſplayeth forth very glorious enſignes,
and teacheth the ſame words that Chriſt him ſelfe taught: but hee
then inueigleth, makes a pray of the poore ſoule, and murders it,
like as the heretique doth, who onely in tongue confeſſeth Chriſt,

but in his deeds is all deuill.
                  The Painter buſieth him ſelfe greatly to ſet downe the ſhape of
a Crucifixe,Compariſō of a painters curious making of a Crucifixe. in very liuely colours; with ſuch naturall lineaments, euen
as if all the muſcles and ſinewes of the body were perfectly to
be diſcerned. But if a man ſhould aske him, if all his diligence
had been imployed, onely for the loue hee bare vnto Chriſt, hee
would make anſwere (if he ſhould ſpeake but plainly and from his
heart) Truely my Lord, to tell you but the troth, I had little remembrance
of him when I did it, nor could I deuiſe how to paint
him perfectly; but what I haue here done, was onely to ſell my labour
at the dearer rate.
                  Such (for all the world) is an hypocrite in his words,The painters example verified in the hipocrite. hee tranſformes
them wholly into Chriſts appearance, but not for the loue he
beares to Chriſt, but rather to winne eſtimation of the world.
Euen as arch-heretikes vſe to doe, or like ſo many Heroſtratoes,
ſtriue to make them ſelues famous to the world, and greedily to
graſpe vp riches.
                  Agreeable to the falſe Sichemites,
                     Exāple of the Sichemites. who circumciſed them ſelues,
according to the manner of the Hebrews, onely to inherit their
goods and poſſeſſions.Gen. 34. 22. 23 
                     Si circuncidamus maſculos noſtros, ritum gentis
imitantes, ſubſtantia eorum, & pecora, & cuncta quae poſsident,
noſtra erunt. If all the men children among vs bee circumciſed,
                     The reward of the Sichemits for their hypocriſie. 
                     as they are circumciſed, ſhall not their flockes, and their
ſubſtance, and all their cattell bee ours? Neuertheleſſe it happened
vnto them quite contrarye, for the thyrd day following
the circumciſion, they were all put to the edge of the
ſwoord: ſuch was the permiſſion of God, becauſe they were
not circumciſed for obſeruation of the Lawe, but onely in regarde
of auarice. In like manner the falſe tongue, that
with the colourable pretexte of the name of Ieſus Chriſt,
ſeemes to bee ſeriouſly imployed for his diuine glory: labours
onely for his owne couetous rewarde, but when hee thinkes
this greedy hoped-for gaine is gotten, he is miſerably ſlaine by
eternall death.
                  Many of theſe hypocrites doe much buſie them ſelues in counterfeited
ſpeeches,Hypocrits preſume into the preſence of princes, to gaine promotion. to get into the preſence of Princes, onely for
aſcente to ſome high place of dignitie. But when the goale is once
gotten, then their peruerſe natures are apparantly diſcerned, and
that their outward humilitie, was onely but to cloake their inward

pride:Hypocrites compared to the Hauke. Whereupon, in their following courſe of life, they ſeeme like
the hauke, that takes her flight a farre off, when ſhe meanes to ſeaze
on the ſimple doue, as if ſhee had no intent at all that way: but
ſodainly ſhee windes in vpon her, and graſping her in her tallents,
killes and eates her.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  This kinde of ambitious hypocrits, are yet more ſupportable
then the other,Ambitious hipocrits better to be endured thē the other, reſembling ſcar-crowes. for theſe men, although inwardly they are
deuils: yet notwithſtanding, outwardly they ſhew them ſelues like
Saints in holy ſpeeches, and ſerue as good examples to others, for
the lewd ſinner feareth to offend in their preſence.
                  They reſemble the figure made of ragges and cloutes, commonlie
called, ſcar-crowes, which is ſet foorth on the boughes
of trees, to affright away the birdes from feeding on the fruits,
and in this kinde (perhaps) they may alſo bee tearmed profitable.
                  But afterward,A worſe hypocrite then the former. we muſt needes come to an other ſort of them,
who are farre worſe then are theſe, becauſe their words are meerely
hypocriticall, appearing to be true louers of holyneſſe: but
their workes are moſt wicked. Becauſe they exalt humility, and
are proude them ſelues; they praiſe chaſtitie, and yet are luxurious;
they preach almes-giuing, yet rob the poore of it; they magnifie
iuſtice, yet are ſtrong theeues them ſelues. Such were the
Pharyſeys,Example of the Phariſeys. who ſayd to the man that was borne blinde; Da gloriam
Deo; Giue glorie vnto God; as if they had been wondrous zealous
of the diuine honor:Iohn. 9. 23. neuertheleſſe, they did all onely to robbe
Chriſt of his honor.
                  Of this temper alſo was King Ahaz,
                     Example of king Ahaz. to whom (as Eſay
ſayth) God ſpake, that he ſhould aske a ſigne of his redemption
from him,Eſay. 7. 11. 12. which ſhould be giuen him. Pete tibi ſignum à
Domino Deo tuo, in profundum inferni, ſiue in excelſum ſuprà. Aske
a ſigne for thee of the Lord thy God, either in the depth beneath,
or in the height aboue. But he made refuſall, ſaying: Non petam, &
non tentabo Dominum: I will not aske, neither will I tempt the Lord.
Which he did, not in humility, or for obſeruation of the diuine
precept,Deut. 6. 16. which was giuen to the people of Iſraell, Non tentabis
Domiaum Deum tuum;
                     Ahaz refuſed the miracle, becauſe he would not honor God. 
                     yee ſhall not tempt the Lord your
God. Nor was this miracle to tempt God, becauſe God him ſelfe
willed that he ſhould aske it: but he would not aske it, becauſe
he would not giue ſuch glory to the true God, but euen as a wicked

idolater, deſpiſed, that the diuine power ſhould haue any honor
at all.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  This is a moſt deteſtable kinde of hypocriſie,Example of Iaacob, when his ſonnes preſented him the garment of Ioſeph. and
well may we ſay of ſuch men, as did the good olde afflicted Iaacob,
when being preſented deceiptfully, by his ſonnes, with the altered
garment of his beloued ſonne Ioſeph, tinctured with the counterfeited
bloud of a beaſt; After he had wondred and wondred againe
therat,Gen. 37. 33. thus he ſpake in a teareful voice. Tunica filii mei eſt, fera peſſima comedit eum, beſtia deuorauit Ioſeph. It is my ſonnes coate, a wicked
beaſt hath deuoured him, Ioſeph is ſurelie torne in peeces.
                  
                  So may the holy Church ſay to this hypocriticall kinde of ſonne;What the Church may ſay to this hypocritical ſon.
It is moſt true, that thou waſt borne to be my ſonne, becauſe I gaue
thee life in baptiſme, and (concerning thine outward part)
thou haſt ſtill the ſame garment that I gaue thee, which is nothing
elſe but Chriſt: Induimini Dominum Ieſum Chriſtum; Put
on yee the Lord Ieſus Chriſt. And Chriſt thou nameſt, & Chriſt
thou preacheſt, and of him thou talkeſt in priuate or publique
meetings, or in familiar conference among thy freends. But
yet in very deed, although Tunica filii mei ſit, this bee my ſonnes
coate; Fera peſsima deuorauit filium meum, the wicked and immane
beaſt of hypocriſie hath ſlayne him. Becauſe, inwardlye
hee is nothing elſe but all vanity, all deuill, all fleſh, all
ſinne;The inward part of an hypocrite. And hence proceedes it, that Fera peſsima deuorauit
filium meum. My ſonne hee is onely by his coate, and outwardly
by his voyce, but inwardly hee hath no part at all of
him.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The glory of our ſoule conſiſteth not in the garment,Wherein the glory of the ſoule cōſiſteth
but in the heart, according as the father of Salomon (ſpeaking of the
ſpouſe) ſayth:Pſal. 45. 13. 
                     Omnis gloria eius ab intus, circumamicta varietatibus:
She is al glorious within, her cloathing is of broydred gold. Firſt he prayſeth
her inward endowmēt, Omnis gloria eius ab intus, & afterward
talketh of her outward cloathing, Circumamicta varieattibus: becauſe
he would firſt haue the affection of the heart, and afterward
requires effectuall workes.
                  
                     So dealeth nature likewiſe, firſt ſhee createth and produceth
the heart,
                     Example of Nature in her work of man. 
                     and afterward the other members. But hypocrites
(ſayth Saint Gregorie) are Artiſtes, who caring nothing at all
for the inward parte,S. Grego. de Heret. beſtowe all their induſtrie for embelliſhinge
the outwarde, couetinge rather to imitate arte then

nature.
                  Theſe retainers of the garment onely,Example of Potifars wife with Ioſeph. are like to the incontinent
wife of Potiphar, who being enamoured on the comely young
man Ioſeph, and ſeeking to conſtraine him to the immodeſt acte
of luſt: he fled away▪ nothing remaining in her violent hand, but
his cloake onely.Gen. 39 12. 
                     Qui relicto in manu eius pallio, fugit, & egreſſus
eſt foras. He left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out.
So theſe hypocriticall voyces,The exāple alluded to hipocrites. are cloakes onely, that is, they haue
the name of Chriſt in their handes, and not the myſticall Ioſeph
Chriſt in their hearts.
                  
                     After that Adam had ſinned,
                     Example of Adam after he had ſinned 
                     feeling his owne rebelling nature,
he hid himſelfe, remembring that he was naked, not coun
                           •
                        ing it
ſufficient for him, that his ſhame was couered with fig tree leaues.
Conſuerunt folia ficus,Gen. 3. 7. 9. 10. & fecerunt ſibi perizomata. They ſewed figge
tree leaues together, and made them ſelues breeches. Wherupon, when
(vnthought on) God called him, and ſayd, Adam vbi es? Adam
where art thou? Hee anſwered; Timui eò, quòd nudus eſſem, & abſcondi
me; I was afraide, becauſe I was naked, therefore I hid my
ſelfe.
                  It is not enough for hypocrites,The fig leaues of holy words is not ſufficient for Hipocrites. to be hidden with the fig leaues
of holy words, becauſe the ſearching eye of God penetrates euen
into the heart; Dominus autem intuetur cor. Therefore when they
thinke that they haue ſubſtantially enough couered their ſhamefull
abuſed bodyes, they ſhall euen then moſt vituperiouſly bee made
manifeſt to the whole world:N
                           •
                        hum. 3. 5▪
                      
                     Reuelabo pudendatua ante faciem tuam,
& oſtendamin gentibus nuditatem tuam: I will diſcouer thy skirts
vpon thy face, and will ſhew the nations thy filthyneſſe, and the kingdoms
thy ſhame.
                  
                  
                     Little ſhall it then auaile them,
                     The Dolphin guides other Fiſhes into the net and keepes him ſelfe our. 
                     that they haue had holy words
in their mouthes, and haue exhorted others to doe well. Or, like
vnto the Dolphin, haue conducted other fiſh into the net, and kept
them ſelues out of the fiſhers power, cloſe by the rocke. Therefore
are they thus reprooued: Quare tu enarras iuſtitias meas, & aſſumis
teſtamentum meum per os tuum?Pſal. 50. 16. 17. Tu verò odiſti diſciplinam, &
proieciſti ſermones meos retrorſum. &c. Why doſt thou preach my laws,
and takeſt my couenant in thy mouth?An excellent interpretatiō made by the Author, vpon the Prophet Dauids words Whereas thou hatest to bee reformed,
and haſt caſt my words behinde thee.
                  As if he wold haue ſaid. Thou thoughtſt (perhaps) that to ſaue thy
ſelfe, certaine outward workes were onely ſufficient. Thou

wicked and vngodly wretch, couldſt thou imagine it enough for
thee, to preache to others, that they ought to doe good,
and yet thou thy ſelfe to deale moſt badly? I tell thee, this not
onely is diſpleaſing to mee, but I will turne my ſelfe into anger
and fury againſt thee, and in the trembling day of iudgement,
I will ſay vnto thee; Impudent and graceleſſe as thou art,
wherefore didſt thou not firſt purge and make cleane thine owne
lippes? Why didſt thou not firſt cleanſe thy owne diſſembling
tongue, before thou wert ſo bolde, as to preach my law therewith?
How durſt thou, by ſo impure a paſſage, and a way ſo beaſtly,
It were good that all hypocrits ſhould remember this. giue ſcope to matter ſo white and immaculate? Hereby haſt
thou made others holy, and at the ſame inſtant time refuſed all
diſciplyne thy ſelfe, when being careleſſe of my Lawe, there is
no foule ſinne whereinto thy ſelfe haſt not falne. Oh fayre Sepulcher,
An excellent compariſon. full of all vnſauourie ſent within. Thou art as a bell, calling
others to ſerue God, and yet keepſt thy ſelfe without the Church:
Or art as that vngodly wretch, who onely ſoundeth well with
his tongue, but doth commit abhominable and moſt irreligious
deeds.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  A great penaltie (queſtionleſſe) will fall vppon the
wicked man, that with his tongue hath been the meanes of others
ſaluation, by exhortation, preaching and reprehenſion, and yet
thereby is the cauſe of his owne damnation.The hipocrite compared to the Phiſition. Hauing (like vnto the
Phyſition) cured and made others healthfull, yet remaines him
ſelfe in moſt weake and ſickelie eſtate, the which begetteth
him an intollerable enuie, and a hatred more then can be ſpoken
of.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  In ſuch a one is verified that prophecie of Micheas.
Tu ſeminabis,
                     Mich. 6. 15. 
                     & non metes; tu calcabis Oliuas, & non vngeris
Oleo; & muſtum, & non bibes vinum: Thou ſhall ſowe,
but not reape; thou ſhalt tread the Oliues, but ſhalt not annoint thee
with the Oyle;
                     The Prophets words very aptly verified in diſſembling hypocrites. 
                     and make ſweet wine, but ſhalt not drinke wine. Becauſe
in very deede, theſe men doe ſowe the moſt fertile ſeede of
Gods word, and yet ſhall not gather the eternall fruite thereof,
in regard they doe all for the pleaſing of men. They treade
the Oliues, as ſeeming to bee full of ſanctitie, but yet in
proofe are quite emptie,what it is to be empty of heauenly loue. therefore they ſhall alſo remaine depriued
of the diuine mercy.
                  
                     They gather the grapes, as declaring to haue great charitie by

their feruēcy in ſpeech:
                     Pſal. 36. 8. 
                     yet they ſhal neuer drink of the wine, becauſe
they are voide of that loue celeſtiall, wherewith the ſoule ſhould be
filled. Inebriabuntur ab vbertate domus tuae, & torrente voluptatis
tuae potabis eos.Agge. 1. 5. 6. They ſhall be ſatisfied with the fa
                        •
                     neſſe of thine houſe,
and thou ſhalt giue them drinke out of the riuer of thy pleaſures. And
that alſo of the Prophet Aggeus: Ponite corda veſtra ſuper vias veſtras.
Seminaſtis multum, & intuliſtis parum; comediſtis, & non
eſtis ſaturati; bibiſtis, & non eſtis inebritati; operuiſtis vos, &
non eſtis calefacti, & qui mercedem congregauit, miſit eas in ſacculum
pertuſum. Conſider your owne waies in your hearts: you haue
ſowen much, and bring in little; yee haue eate, but yee haue not
enough; yee drinke, but yet yee are not filled; yee cloath ye, but ye
be not warme;The Authors explication of theſe ſeuerall ſcriptures, according as he appropriates the ſenſe vnto hypocrits. and he that earneth wages, putteth the wages into a
broken bagge.
                  As if he would haue ſaid. O you hypocrites, that haue Chriſt onely
in your tongues, conſider now faithfully your owne errours, and
with al your harts, think whether there euer hath bin the like follie
or no. Hath it not been a wonderfull fooliſhneſſe in you, that you
haue ſowed ſo much ſeede of Gods ſacred word, and yet your ſelues
haue gathered in no fruite at all, onely by your vanitie, attending altogether
vpon the pleaſure of men.
                  You haue eaten, yet neuer would you be ſatisfied; becauſe you
could not taſte the ſweetneſſe of the heauenly bread of wiſedome,
which (neuertheleſſe) you gaue plentifully enough vnto others. You
haue drunke; but neuer were ye filled with celeſtiall loue, onely
yee did but wet your lippes therewith, and neuer receiued any
iotte thereof downe into the heart. You cloathed your
ſelues with the garment of Ieſus Chriſt, hauing it ſtill readie
on your tongues,To ſuch as couet to hold grace with the people. by often preaching; but neuer were yee
warmelie clad with his ſanctifyed loue. And (which is much
worſe) you that haue made profeſſion, to accumulate great
wages, by the exceeding grace you helde with the people:
haue yet put vp your money, and the wages of your ouer-great
labour of bodye, of vnderſtanding and memorie, (oh
intollerable follie) into a rotten purſe, that had no power
to contayne the money. Therefore, all your reward (in an
vnrepayreable moment) is quite loſt, and all the hope you
had of heauen (if any you had at all) is vtterlye voyde and
fruſtrated.
               
               
                  
                  Lodouico.
                  Oh lying tongue, oh fraudulent tongue, oh moſt
treacherous and betraying tongue.Example of Ezekiels viſiō on the wall. That obſcure Prophet Ezekiell,
ſawe a moſt goodly proſpectiue vpon a wall, and while
he admired the wondrous beautie vpon the wall, God ſayd vnto
him:Ezek. 8. 8. 9. 10 
                     Ezekiell, take an inſtrument, and digge the wall, which
ſeemeth ſo ſtupendious to thee. Fode parietem: He digged, and behelde
a doore, and God commaunded him to enter in thereat: he
entred, and ſawe dreadfull ſerpents, as alſo beaſtes of diuers kinds.
Et ingreſſus vidi, & ecce omnis ſimilitudo reptilium, & animalium abominatio,
&c.
                  
                  Such are theſe hypocrits,The Prophets ſpeeches holding compariſon with hypocrits. faire in lookes, Saints in ſpeeche, but
in their hearts full of all filthyneſſe. From which effects the Lord in
mercy deliuer vs, and let vs beſeech him to gouerne our tongue, to
make cleane our lippes, & rather quite to bereaue vs of our tongue,
then it ſhould offend the creator thereof by doublenes, and much
better for vs were eternall ſilence, then ſuch diſſembling fraudulent
ſpeech.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Hypocriſie is a ſinne againſt nature,Hypocriſie, a ſin againſt nature, & what prouiſion ſhe makes for euery valuable thing. not onely in
regard that the tongue ought to bee the ambaſſadour of a faithfull
heart, but alſo, becauſe we ſee that nature hydeth or makes prouiſion
for euery pretious thing whatſoeuer. As pearles, them ſhee
hydeth in fiſh ſhelles; vnualuable rich ſtones, in the earth or ryuers;
Corall, in the bottome of the Sea; Golde, vnder cauernie
mountaine; apples and other like fruites, among leaues; grapes
alſo vnder their ſhelter; the heart, in the very ſecreteſt place of
the body; and things of meaneſt moment, if not hidden, yet ſhadowed
with ſome kinde of defence. But the hypocrite, the little
goodneſſe that remaineth in him, hee hydes it from all men by
the helpe of a diſſembling glib tongue, and his imperfections
or wickedneſſe, hee conceales it with all the arte hee can deuiſe.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  So doe bankerupt merchants,Bankerupt Merchants in their behauiour, hypocrits compared to them. or ſuch of ſlender ſubſtance,
whatſoeuer they haue, they ſet it foorth to open viewe, as
making ſhewe of farre greater matters to bee in their ſhoppes.
But if they be demaunded for a chayne of golde, parle, corall,
or any other thing then thoſe hanging foorth vpon theyr
ſtalle, they will ſmoothly anſwere. I pray you Sir pardon me,
I had ſuch, but indeed they are ſolde, and I would gladly pleaſe
yee with what is heere left. Such are theſe counterfeiting diſſemblers,

ful of all gay and goodly words, but their hearts are vtterly
empty of any vertue.The hipocrite compared to a Ship riding vnder full ſpread ſailes, but empty of any merchandize.
                  
                  A gallāt ſhew makes a Ship, ryding vnderful ſpread ſayles, adorned
with faire banners wauing in the winde, and euery one runnes
gladly to ſee her, when by a proſperous gale ſhe puts into the port.
But afterward, when they perceiue that ſhe is emptie of merchandize,
the greedy beholders then ſtand as men confounded. A Ship
voide of any merchandiſe, and ſeeming full to the eye, ſayling onely
by the winde of vaine mens breath, and coueting to arriue at honour
and high applauſe, ſuch, and no other is the falſe hypocrite.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  They want no wickednes, yet liue as ceremonious examples,
Hypocrites are like to vncharged Cannons. euery one fearing them for their appearaunce of holynes: like
vncharged Cannons, dreadfull onely at the firſt beholding: and not
much behinde theſe, are ſacrilegious blaſphemers, and periured perſons.
               
               
                  Finis Chap. 17.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  Wherein is declared, that the ſinne of blaſphemy is moſt great and
greeuous, inſomuch that it exceedeth euery other ſin, euen thoſe
of the Infidelles, and of the Iewes, who crucified our Lord and Sauiour.
It is aggrau
                        •
                     ed by many circumſtāces, and hath no apparant excuſe,
as diuers other ſinnes may ſeeme to haue. It is a ſinne eternall,
in regard of the exerciſe thereof; becauſe among all ſins, blaſphemy
only remaineth with the damned, euen as charity dooth among
the bleſſed, and is puniſhed with euery part of the law. It is the ſin of
vnthankefulneſſe, the puniſhment whereof ſometime beginneth in
this world, and yet is neuer finiſhed. It is a manifeſt ſigne of damnation,
and a ſin ſo abhominable, as the holy Scripture ſomtime forbeareth
to name it, among the rehearſall of other grieuous offences.
A diſcourſe very profitable, ingenious, neceſſary and woorthy to be
noted, for feare of falling into a ſin ſo horrible and deteſtable.
               
               Chap. 19.
               
                  
                     LODOVICO.
                  
                     Seeing there is no
ſinne ſo great in a Chriſtian, as blaſphemy
is, whereby he derogates
from the ſupreme goodneſſe, which
is the onely obiect of charity:
                     Thom. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 10. Art. 3. Therfore
it is a moſt mighty ſin, in regard
it oppoſeth it ſelfe againſt the chriſtian
faith, & hath in it the weightineſſe
of the ſin of infidelity, which being a
notorious ſin in his own nature, (as
ſayth the diuine Doctor) 2. 2. q. 10.
ar. 3. It therfore followeth, that the ſin of blaſphemy hath hardly any eequall,

or appertaining to the ſelfe ſame kind.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  How can it be,Blaſphemie may be committed without iniurie to faith. that the ſinne of blaſphemy hath in
it the burthen or weight of infidelity? For blaſphemy may be
committed, without preiudice to faith, and ſo much the rather,
becauſe it appertaineth not properly to blaſphemy, to ſwerue or
diſſente from that which ought eſpeciallye to bee beleeued,
and that is the onelye thing that conſtituteth infidelity.
                  Therefore it often happeneth,Of raſh Blaſphemous ſpeches, the hart not cōſenting therto. that when the blaſphemer is in
choller, he vttereth that with his tongue, whereunto properly in
humane beleef, he conſenteth not. As perhaps, in ſaying, that god can
not lette me from winning this game, or the like vile words, & yet
(for all that) to think within himſelf that he can.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  I will anſwere you with a diſtinction, neceſſarie
for the clearing of ſuch a doubt,Three wayes whereby to fal from Gods goodneſſe. to weete. That in three ſeuerall
manners we may derogate from the diuine and ſupre
                        •
                     me goodneſſe.
                  Firſt with the vnderſtanding only,1. By the vnderſtanding. that is, in imagining a falſe
conceit againſt God.
                  Secondly,2. By the wils deteſtation. by adioyning to that former falſe conceiued opinion, the
deteſtation of the will.
                  Thirdly,3. In vttering of blaſphemies contrary to beleefe. (without hauing a falſe imagination, accuſtomed onely
to the deteſtation of the will,) to vtter many blaſphemies,
though beleefe of them be otherwiſe, and be but deliuered with
the tongue onely, according to the ſame example your Honour
gaue of the gameſter. Albeit blaſphemy is not a falſe opinion
of the vnderſtanding, derogating from the diuine bountie,
for that is called infidelitye, which is the error of vnderſtanding,
and of ignoraunce, with the pertinacye of the
will.
                  Neuertheleſſe,How blaſphemy coupleth it ſelfe with infidelity, in our ſpeaking againſt the cō
                        feſſion of our faith. becauſe in blaſpheming, words are vttered with
the tongue, euen as if they were breathed from an infidell, and againſt
the diuine goodneſſe it ſelfe, as infidelity is woont to doc,
(by attributing to God ſuch thinges as are no way conuenable for
him. or, by denying things eſpecially to him belonging, or, in giuing
to the creature, what is onely meete for God and no other)
in theſe, or the like, blaſphemy carieth the very ſame greatneſſe,
which infidelity dooth, becauſe it offendeth the ſame obiect as
infidelitie dooth, and deliuers the ſame falſe opinion as infidelitie
dooth, although not by conſenting, but in beleeuing otherwiſe
of them, then with the tongue is manifeſted, and ſo it oppoſeth

it ſelfe againſt the confeſſion of faith.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  If it be ſo, it muſt then of neceſſitie be affirmed, that
blaſphemy ſhuts vp within it ſelfe, the very ſin of infidelity, or at
leaſt,How blaſphemy may be in the will, & in the deſire. apparantly in the pronunciation. And it may be alſo both in
the will, and in the deſire, as in conuicting and calumniating (by
ſome examples) the power diuine. To wit, in deſiring to haue it be beleeued
that euery thing is poſſible, which is impoſſible, & therby diſpleaſeth
the higheſt omnipotency. And if it be thus, we may as then
wel confeſſe, that blaſphemy (in this kind) is far more great then infidelity.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  It is not to be doubted,Two kinds of blaſphemy. but that blaſphemy (perfected
with this vile intention) is much worſe: becauſe there is blaſphemy,
although it be vttered on the behalfe of God, he beeing
thereby blaſphemed, as the behalfe of the blaſphemer, in his owne
nature.
                  When one,1. Of vnbeleeuers blaſphemy. not beleeuing (as an Infidell) that he ſpeakes blaſphemy
againſt God, yet dooth it, the blaſphemie is onelye on
gods part blaſphemed, and not on the part of the blaſphemer, but it
is blaſphemy onely according to him, and not to him that vttered it
foorth.
                  But when blaſphemy is deliuered by one that beleeueth in chriſt,
2. Of a Chriſtiās blaſphemy. it is then meerely blaſphemy on gods part in it ſelfe, by giuing or taking
away what to god is onely conuenient. And alſo on the behalf
of the blaſphemer, that robs or attributs to god, that which he knows
& beleeues, to be no way agreeable to him. And ſo is the blaſphemy
the more perfected, and made far greater by beleefe, then without
beleefe.
                  
                     And this is not onely the opinion of S. Auguſtine, in the booke he
wrote againſt lying,
                     S. Auguſt. in Li. de Menda. Chap. 19. 
                     Chap. 19. but alſo it is confirmed by the authority
of Saint Peter, who in one of his Epiſtles, ſpeakes againſt thoſe
beleeuers, as do turne to the ſame ſin, as is in the weight of infidelity.
                     2. Pet. 2. 20. 21. 22. Facta ſunt cis poſteriora deteriora prioribus. Melius enim erat illis non
cognoſcere viam iuſtitiae; quàm poſt agnitionem retrorſum conuerti
ab eo, quod illis traditum eſt ſancto mandato. Contingit enim eis
illud veri prouerbij; Canis reuerſus ad ſuum vomitum, & Sus lota
in volutabro lut
                        •
                     . The later end is worſe with them then the beginning.
For it had beene better for them, not to haue knowne the way
of righteouſneſſe, then after they haue knowne it, to turne from
the holye commaundemente giuen them. But it is come vnto
them, according to the true prouerbe; The dogge is returned to

his own vomit: and, the Sowe that was waſhed, to the wallowing in the
myre.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  What an enormous ſin is this? what vice more diabolicall,
exceeding all other miſdeeds, how great ſoeuer? It outgoeth
the ſin of the Paganes,Blaſphemie goes beyond the ſin of the Paganes, becauſe what they ſay they beleue to be true. becauſe, though the infidell ſpeaketh
of God what ought not to be ſpoken, yet notwithſtanding, he
beleeues that what he vtters with his tongue, is true.
                  VVhat though the Turke and the Iewe doe deny Chriſt to be
the Sonne of God, and that Marie ſhould be a pure virgin? It is
no great matter in him to breath foorth ſuch blaſphemie, becauſe
his beleefe is ſuch, and hee thinkes that hee ſpeakes truelye.
                  But much worſe is it in a Chriſtian,How abhominable blaſphemie is to a true Chriſtiā. to call his redeemer a traytor,
and the bleſſed virgin a ſtrumpet: yet knowing and beleeuing it not
to be true, but rather what he ſpeakes, is vttered in meere contempt
of his creator. So, in naming, vilely or abuſiuely, the members or
parts of chriſt, or of his ſaints in deſpightfull manner, the very like
may be ſayd.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  By your leaue (my Lord) if then to name the parts
of Chriſt,Of gods name or his Saints in ſwearing. and of the Saints, or ſpeaking ſomtimes as ſwearers are
woont to do: By God, by holy God, by the good God, by the bleſſed
Lady and ſuch like,His poſition to be further reſolued. is this the ſinne of blaſphemy? If alwayes in enunciatiue
blaſphemy (to vſe the very ſcholaſticall word) there be a
falſity: we yet in naming the members of Chriſt, or of the Saintes, or
ſaying, By the bleſſed God, By thee O good God, & ſuch like, we deliuer
no falſity at all, becauſe chriſt had really all the parts of a man, &
god is truly good, and moſt holy; how then can this be tearmed blaſphemy?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  I anſwer,The Anſwere well worth the obſeruation. that albeit the blaſphemer in his violent heat,
ſhall diſdainfully name the parts of Chriſt, or of his ſaints, or ſay, By
bleſſed god, though he ſpeak true, and free from an falſeneſſe: yet
notwithſtanding, becauſe he vtters it as a contēptible thing, he makes
it falſe by conſequence, for neither in God or his ſaints, is any thing
to be contemned.
                  And this kind of blaſphemy, not onely is committed ſomtime
with ſignificant tearmes, but alſo with the geſture and motion of
the body, and albeit in the pronuntiation of a very true thing,Example of one mans deſpiſing an others repute. but
yet it is doone in a moſt ignominious manner. As ſomtimes, one man
(deſpiſing the honor and reputation of another) ſayth: Oh, you are a
man of God; Oh, you are a Saint of Paradiſe, and yet in his owne

hart tearmes him, a man of the diuel, and a fiend of hell. Of this nature
haue ye many blaſphemers in the world, vttering holy words,
but with vnholy intention, yet not daring to ſpeake one hereticall
word, for feare of publique puniſhment.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  You haue begun well, proceed I pray you.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The ſin of blaſphemy is worſe then that of murther,
The ſinne of blaſphemie worſe thē the ſinne of murder. becauſe oftentimes it happeneth, that if the man killer could compaſſe
his reuenge, and kill his enemy, without offence of his diuine
maker, he would willingly do it. But beeing thus diſabled, he will
ſtill retaine his murthering intent, wherein hee highly offendeth
God. But not ſo immediatly as the blaſphemer treſpaſſeth, who principally
& directly oppoſeth himſelf againſt god, blaſpheming & abuſing
him in meer deſpight.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  But vnder your fauour, my good lord, I am of a contrary
opinion with S. Auguſtine,
                     S. Auguſt. in Enchirid, Chap. 12. who in this Enchiridion, Chap. 12.
ſayth, That the ſin of manſlaughter is more hurtfull, in taking away
the life of a man, then is the ſin of blasphemy, which can bring no
iniurie at all to God. If then murther hurteth more then blaſphemye,
it muſt needes bee allowed to bee the greater
ſinne.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  If we ſhall conſider homicide and blaſphemy,Blaſphemie & homicide ſeuerally to be conſidered. accorcording
to the obiect againſt which eache ſinneth, there is no doubt
to be made, but that blaſphemy (without all compariſon) is a greater
ſin, then an hundred thouſand murthers: becauſe it is immediatly
againſt God, an obiect infinit, & the other is againſt our neighbor,
an obiect finite.
                  But if we haue regard to the effect of eithers hurt:The effect of eithers hurt in power. then homicide
is much greater then blaſphemy, becauſe homicide is more hurtfull
to our neighbour, then blaſphemy is or can be to God.
                  Now becauſe in the greatneſſe of the fault,The greatnes of the fault is meaſured by the intent of the wil. more regard is to be
had to the intent of the will, then the effect of the act: therefore, in
regard the blaſphemer ſimply purpoſeth, to do dammage to the honor
diuine, albeit the wicked effect cannot ſo ſucceed, but in vaine is
let looſe the arrow of the biting tongue; abſolutely, and without all
queſtion, the blaſpheamer ſinneth more, then the mankiller
dooth.
                  It is ſuperior alſo to the ſin of hereſie,Blaſphemie is aboue hereſie. which beleeueth, that whatſoeuer
the tongue vttereth, is true: but the diueliſh lips of the blaſphemer,
ſpeaketh ſuch things as himſelfe beleeueth not, and willeth
likewiſe the thing that cannot be.
                  
                     
                     It is worſe alſo then the ſin of the Iewes,
                     Blaſphemie exceedeth the ſinne of the Iewes in crucifying Chriſt. 
                     who crucified our
bleſſed Lord and Sauiour, whereon Saint Auguſtine ſayth, writing
on the 12. Chapter of Saint Matthew: Magis peccant blasphemantes
Deum triumphantem in coelis, quam qui crucifixerunt eum ambulantem
in terris. They ſinne more that blaſpheme God triumphing
in heauen,S. Auguſt. in Mat. Cap. 12. then they that crucified him walking on the
earth.
                  
                     The reaſon hereof is deliuered by Saint Paul:
                     2. Corin. 2. 8. Si enim cognouiſſent,
nunquam Dominum gloriae crucifixiſſent. For had they
knowne it, they would not haue crucified the Lord of glorie. Yet this
ignoraunce is not altogether excuſed.
                     Act. 3▪ 17. Scio fratres, quia per ignorantiam
feciſtis: I knowe bretheren, that through ignorance ye did
it.
                  But the blaſpheming Chriſtian, he knowes him to be God, and
therin he ſinneth the more greeuouſly:Similie. and ſo much the rather, as by
how much more noble the offended perſon is, euen ſo much the
greater is the offence augmented.
                  The Iewes offended a Chriſte mortall,The Iewes, & the Chriſtians offences ſeuerall. but the Chriſtian offendes
a glorious Chriſt in heauen, to whome hee promiſed faith
and obedience in baptiſme, which by the Iewe was neuer promiſed.
                  Moreouer,The Iewes crucified chriſt once only, the Chriſtian by blaſphemie, infinite times. the Iewes crucified him at one time onely, but the
Chriſtian blaſphemeth his maker a thouſand times in an houre, and
ſo much as in him lieth renueth his tormēts: makes wider the Launces
wounde; encreaſeth the number of his laſhes; prepares a newe
Croſſe; forgeth new nayles in the fire of his wicked heart; filles a
freſh ſpunge with gaule & vineger; makes a more pearcing wreath
of ſharpe pointed thornes; ſpittes more abhominable filth in his
face, and does euerye other thing to his greater vexation.
                  Beſide al this,Blaſphemy goeth beyond Idolatrie. blaſphemie (then which, more cannot bee ſaid of it)
ſeemeth to goe beyond idolatrie, becauſe the one taketh the honor
due to God, and the other giueth it vnto infamie. If a defect poſitiue
be greater then a defect priuatiue, then blaſphemie may be ſaid
to be the greater ſinne; for the vngodly wretched ſinner baſely reprocheth
his creatonr, and idolatrie doth but depriue God of his
due honor.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  This greeuous ſinne is yet further aggrauated, becauſe
there is no one thing whatſoeuer,There is no one thing to mooue a man to blaſpheme God; but many to incite him to thankfulnes. that can mooue a man to
blaſpheme God: but there are many and infinite, whereby to giue

him alwayes iuſt occaſion, of rendring endleſſe thanks euery hour,
for ſuch aboundant graces conferred vpon him, as well ſpirituall
as corporall, beſide thoſe two moſt ſignall benefites, of creation
and redemption. Yet the wicked ſinner, when he ought to
ſeeke all meanes, by Hymnes, Pſalmes and ſpirituall ſonges, to
praiſe and glorifie his creator, he vnthankfully turneth his tongue
to reproachfull infamies and diſhonours, Oh ſin too inſupportable!
                  Euery other ſinne (more or leſſe) hath ſome excuſe and motiue,Euery other ſinne hath ſome excuſe, but blaſphemy hath none at al
except this horrible vice of blaſphemy. The proude man perhaps
is mooued, by ſome imagined excellencie he hath in himſelf, more
then he ſees in any other, whether it be of vertue, beauty, riches or
nobility.
                  The ambitious man may be vrged, to make vaunt of himſelf, as
by hauing many ſubiects, or much treaſure, to purchaſe a high prelacie
or temporall eſtate. Euen as the couetous man, may make the like
commodity of his welthy bags: The glutton, of his ſurfetting ſweetneſſe
in meats & drinks: The luxurious, of his fleſhly delectation: The
angry, of his accounte of honour: And the ſlothfull, of his bodilie
reſt.
                  Let it ſuffice, that euery ſinner hath ſome formall appearance,Euery ſinner can pretend ſome motiue to his ſinne, but the blaſphemer none. as
therby moouing him to ſin, & which he would faine alleadge in his
own defence, if he might do it without offence to the maieſty diuine.
But cōcerning blaſphemy, what can be ſaid to incline any mā therto?
nothing at al: neither ſenſuality, neither delectation, nor mony, honor
or any reward whatſoeuer.
                  Moreouer,Men are natuturally inclined to praiſe & honor God. we are naturally inclined to praiſe & honor god, as being
the only vniuerſal benefactor, that ſo largely imparteth to vs (vnthankful
wretches) his ſingular graces. Hauing then no occaſion at al,
that might induce vs to this vice, it deliuers vs vp the more inexcuſable,
& makes the ſin much greater then any other.
                  As for example the ſin of luxury,Example of luxurie in an old man more offenſiue thē in a yong. it is held more great & offenſiue
in an old man, then in one of younger years, who by nature may haue
more inclination therto (though in no age whatſoeuer it is to be excuſed)
Yet in an old man it is moſt ſhamefull, as Cicero (the father of eloquence)
affirmeth in the firſt booke of his Offices:
                     Cicero lib. 1. de officiis, 
                     Luxuria, cùm
omni aetati ſit turpis, tum ſenectuti foediſſima eſt. In like caſe, though all
ſins in a Chriſtian are euil, yet blaſphemy is the moſt odious beyond
all other.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  As it is the moſt ſhamefull ſinne, and furtheſt

from any excuſe: ſo muſt you then alſo of neceſſitie confeſſe,
that it deſerueth greater puniſhmente, then any of the other
ſinnes.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  It is not be doubted,Sentence. but where the fault is greateſt,
the penalty ought as largely to be extended. Wherupon, among
other paines denounced by Saint Iohn in his Apocalyps,
                     Apoc. 16. 10. one is, that
they gnawed their teeth for ſorrowe. Et commanducauerunt linguas ſuas
prae dolore,
                     The puniſhment of blaſphemy beginneth often in this life. 
                     &c. And many times it comes to paſſe, that (by the iuſt
iudgemente of God) the puniſhment thereof beginneth in this
world.
                  Saint Gregory, in his fourth booke of dialogues declareth, that
this vice is ſo much diſpleaſing to God, as a child of fiue yeares old
in Rome,
                     Example of a yong child in Rome. being caried in the armes of his mother, & blaſpheming the
name of god, was ſuddenly ſnatcht away by the diuel, & neuer afterward
ſeen any more.
                  In Mantua,
                     Example of gāſters at play in Mantua. diuers gameſters being playing at the tables, & abuſing
the name of Chriſt and the bleſſed virgin: their eyes fel preſētly
out of their heads, vpon the tables as they plaid.
                  A ſouldier in the dioceſſe of Rhemes,
                     Example of a Souldier in Rhemes. one day blaſpheming the holy
name of god, was ſuddenly ſurprized with the falling ſickneſſe, &
falling on the ground in the preſence of many, he rent and tare himſelfe
moſt miſerably all the day following, caſting & vomiting his
very entrails vpward, & in breathing forth his laſt words, moſt impiouſly
he recommended his ſoule to the diuell.
                  An other alſo,Example of an other in the ſame parts. abuſing there moſt horribly the name of his creator,
renting his bleſſed body peecemeale in ſunder: his owne body
miraculouſly ſplit in ſunder, euen in the ſame parts he ſo wickedly
blaſphemed, and dying in deſperation, gaue both ſoule and body to
the diuell.
                  In Florence there was a man much addicted to blaſpheming, and
one day among the reſt,Example of one in Florence. as he held on this vile courſe againſt god,
being in the company of diuers his familiar friends, he was ſuddenly
lifted vp into the ayre by the diuel, where being deſpoyled of his garments,
they fel down piece by piece to the ground, but no part of his
body was euer after ſeene.
                  A mariner dwelling in Siracuſa,
                     Example of a Mariner of Siracuſa. beeing greatly giuen to ſwearing
and balſphemy, vpon a day (the ſea being very mild and calme)
he would needs leape into the water to ſwimme: and albeit he was
exceeding skilfull in that quality, yet (by the diuine permiſſion) hee
ſunk and drowned. But being afterward fiſhed for, and found by his

friends & companions, & a due inquiſition being made of the body,
there was nothing found wāting, but his accurſed tongue only, wherwith
he had ſo often blaſphemed his maker.
                  But why ſtray I thus after miracles,Infinite other Examples to this purpoſe might be alleadged. impoſed as diuine chaſtiſemēts
vpon blaſphemers, whereof an infinite number might be produced.
If your Honor would ſee whole beadroles of authentical caſes in this
kind, read but the Garden of Examples, compoſed by the reuerend father,
Maſter S
                           •
                        rafino Razzi, of the Preachers order in the city of Florence.
But let it ſuffice, that this ſin is ſo abheminable in the ſight
of God, as euen in this life hee many times doth beginne to puniſh
it.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Very worthily ought the puniſhment to begin in good
time, and to endure much longer then any of the other: becauſe, if
the penalty ſhould be conformable to the offence,Blaſphemie outſtretcheth time, and continueth for euer. as there is no fault
that laſteth longer then blaſphemy, ſo ought the inflicted pain to be
correſpondent, which muſt needs ſtretch further then the allotment
to other ſins, for blaſphemy outgoeth time, and continueth eternally.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Doth blaſphemy then endure for euer?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  It is a common opinion among the reuerend diuines;
That as charity is the cheefeſt vertue,Cōpariſon of Charity, as the cheefeſt vertue of all, and Blaſphemie the very worſt of all ſinnes whatſoeuer. moſt perfect and maieſticall,
becauſe it onely remaineth eternally, (all the other vertues ſeuerally
hauing an end, but yet anſwerable to their ſeuerall actions:) So
blaſphemy is the very worſt of all ſins whatſoeuer, not only becauſe
it is committed in this life, but alſo in regard it liueth for euer in hel,
as an eternall exerciſe for the damned; other ſins, hauing alſo (according
to their action) an end and period. Therfore ſayth Saint Iohn
in his Apocalyps. Blaſphemaueruut Deum coeli, prae doloribus & vulneribus
ſuis.
                     Apoc. 16. 11. 
                     They blaſphemed the God of heauen, for their paines, & for
their ſores.
                  
                  
                     And the Angelicall Doctor,
                     Thom. Aquin, In. ſum. 2, 2. Q. 13. Art. 4. 
                     in his 2. 2. q 13. art. 4. vſeth theſe
formall ſpeeches. Et credibile eſt, quod poſt reſurrectionem erit in eis
etiam vocalis blaſphemia, ſicut in Sāctis vocalis laus Dei. That as
in heauen the Saints with cheerefull voyces ſhall praiſe the lord, ſo is it
moſt certaine, that the damned with horrible voyces ſhall blaſpheme
him.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  The ſinne of blaſphemy then, continuing longer
then the other ſinnes, we may by good reaſon make this addition
thereto.Sins extēt enſueth by his long laſting. Becauſe the ſin, by how much it laſteth, ſo much the greater
is his extent; blaſphemy going beyond all, muſt needes be ſayd

to be more greeuous then them all. As contrarywiſe, by how much
vertue continueth,Charity is eternally ioyned with god. ſo much the more noble it is. So charity ought to
be eſteemed the worthieſt among all vertues, becauſe it is that
which is eternally ioyned with God, and neuer hath ending, whereuppon
the Apoſtle ſayeth.2. Cor. 13. 13. 
                     Nunc autem manent fides, spes, charitas,
tria haec: maior autem horum eſt charitas. And now abideth
faith, hope and charity, euen theſe three: but the cheefeſt of theſe is
charity.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  If a man may be knowne by his ſpeech,A man may be known by his ſpeeche, according to Socrates. of what quality
he is
(according to the opinion of Socrates): And if by the
language he ſpeakes, may alſo be gathered of what nation he is: (as
whether he be an Italian, Spanyard, Germane French, Engliſh, Greek
or Hebrew, as Peter was known by his ſpeech. Galilaeus es, nam & loquela
tua manifeſtum te facit.Math. 26. 73. Thou alſo art a Galilean, for euen thy
ſpeech
bewrayeth thee.)
                  VVhy then,A blaſphemer is eaſily diſcerned by his ſpeaking, ieſting & ſwearing, to be of the prouince of hell. when we perceiue a man to be addicted to blaſphemy,
in ſuch manner, as by frequent vſe in his ſpeaking, he will
ieſtingly both ſweare and blaſpheme: we may iuſtly ſay of him;
This man is of the prouince belonging to the kingdome of hell,
becauſe his diueliſh language dooth manifeſtly accuſe him. Ipſi
de mundo ſunt, ideo de mundo loquuntur: They are of the worlde,
therefore ſpeake they according to the worlde.
                     Iohn. 14. 30. So ſayde Chriſt to
his diſciples, as if hee woulde haue further added, in this manner;
                  The quality of the ſoule,The quality of the ſoule is beſt known by our ſpeech. it is better knowne by ſpeeche, then
by any other way elſe whatſoeuer: therefore let it be no maruayle
in you, if the children of this world, do ſpeak world-like, euen as they
that are of God, do conferre on none but thoſe things belonging to
god.
                  Hereupon we may well ſay, that the blaſphemer is of the infernall
kingdome, becauſe he vſeth the ſame language which the
damned do, who are doomed for euer to that abyding. Euen as
contrarywiſe the exerciſe of the heauenly Citizens, is euermore to
be lauding and prayſing God. Beati qui habitant in domo tua
Domine,
                     Pſal. 19. 55. 
                     in ſaecula ſaeculorum Laudabunt 
                           •
                        e. Bleſſed are they, Lord, that
d
                           •
                        ell in thy houſe, for they ſhall prayſe thee for euer and euer.
                  
                  Three ſeuerall prouinces or kingdoms did god make,Three ſeueral kingdomes made by God, eache hauing his ſeuerall language. and eche one
hath his proper language: to wit, the prouince celeſtiall, the terreſtriall,
and the infernall.
                  
                     
                     The language celeſtiall, is to bleſſe and prayſe God eternally.
Et quatuor animalia, ſingula eorum habebant alas ſenas in circuitu,
& intus plena ſunt oculis, & requiem non habebant die ac nocte,1. The lāguage celeſtial.
dicentia: Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus Dominus Deus omnipotens,Apoc. 4. 8.
qui erat, & qui eſt, & qui venturus eſt. And the foure
beaſtes had eache one of them ſix winges about him, and they were
full of eyes within, and they ceaſed not day nor night, ſaying: Holy,
Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and which is, and which is
to come.
                  
                     The language of the terreſtriall kingdome,
                     The language terreſtriall. 
                     is to ſpeake
of thinges that are terreſtriall: Qui de terra eſt, de terra eſt, & de
terra loquitur:Iohn. 3. 31. He that is of the earth, is of the earth, and ſpeaketh of the
earth.
                  The language of the infernall iuriſdiction,The language infernall. is to ſpeake euill,
curſe and blaſpheme both God and his Saints:Eſay. 8. 21. 
                     Cum eſurierit, iraſcetur,
& maledicet Regi ſuo, & Deo ſuo, & ſuſpiciet ſurſum:
When he ſhall be hungry, he ſhall euen fret himſelfe, and curſe his king
and his Gods, and ſhall looke vpward. If by the tongue, he ſhall be
knowne whether he be a ſtranger or no:Euil ſpeakers are of the infernal kingdome. then is it moſt euident,
that cuill ſpeakers and blaſphemers are of the infernall kingdome.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Moſt wretched blaſphemer, who beeing paide with
his owne euil,The tongue was made to praiſe God withall. neuer thinkes of amending his tongue, nor altering
his bad language: but beeing aſſured of his harme, perſeuers in the
blame. And the tongue which was made for to prayſe God
withall, he turnes it to curſe and blaſpheme him. VVhich is a ſinne
ſo execrable and abhominable,The Scripture vſeth the word bleſſing, in ſteed of blaſpheming. as ſometimes it falleth out
that in the holy Scripture, where it ſpeaketh of blaſphemy, there is
vſed in ſteed therof the word bleſſing, as refuſing to vſe that wicked
phraſe.
                  
                     As we haue it in the firſt booke of the Kings,
                     1. King. 21. 10. 
                     where when wicked
Iezabell found out two falſe witneſſes againſt Naboth,Example of the witneſſes againſt Naboth 
                     to win
occaſion of putting him to death, the ſame witneſſes teſtified, that
Naboth had blaſphemed God and the king; ſaying. Benedixit Naboth
Deum & Regem. For which he was vniuſtly led foorth of the city,
and ſtoned to death by all the people. At illi viri diabolici, dixerunt
contra eum teſtimonium coram multitudine. Benedixit Naboth Deum
& Regem. Quamobrem eduxerunt eum extra ciuitatem, & lapidibus
interfecerunt. And the wicked men witneſſed againſt Naboth
in the preſence of the people, ſaying Naboth did blaſpheme

God and the king. Then they caried him away out of the city, and ſtoned
him with ſtones, that he died.
                  The like may we reade in the firſt and ſecond chapters of the
hiſtory of Iob.
                     Example of the diuelles words to God againſt Iob. in the very wordes of the diuell to God, ſpeaking
againſt Iob: Tange cuncta quae p
                           •
                        ſſidet, niſi in faciem benedixerit tibi:
Touche all that hee hath, to ſee if hee will not blaſpheme thee to thy
face.
                     Iob. 2. 11.
                  
                  
                     And the wife of Iob,Example of Iobs w
                           •
                        fes words to him. 
                     exhorting her husband to curſe and blaſpheme
God, vſed ſcripture quite contrary, ſpeaking the word bleſſing,
in ſteed of curſing. Dixit autem illi vxor ſua; Adhuc tu permanens
in ſimplicitate tua?Iob. 2. 9. Benedic Deo, & morere. Then ſaid his wife vnto
him; Dooſt thou continue yet in thyne vprightneſſe? Blaſpheme God,
and dye.
                  The ſacred Scripture hath great reſpect in but ſpeaking or naming
the word blaſphemy;The vngodly tongue of mā makes no regard of blaſphemy. yet the vngodly and wicked tongue of
man, makes no regard at all of it, but euen with heart and mouth
blaſphemeth his Creator. Could God more exaggerate this diueliſh
ſinner, then by vſing contrarye wordes in the deſcribing
thereof?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Blaſphemy is likewiſe the vice of ingratitude,Blaſphemy is the ſin of ingratitude. becauſe
in ſigne of gratification, euery creature is obedient to the
Lorde, bleſſing and prayſing him after his manner. Yet man,
endued with more ſingular giftes then all other creatures, hee
onely blaſphemeth him,Pſal. 119. 91. and none but hee. Ordinatione tua perſeuerat
dies, quoniam omnia ſeruiunt tibi. They continue euen
to this daye by thine ordinaunces, for all are thy ſeruantes.
                  
                  The tongue which God gaue vnto man, becauſe therwith he ſhold
lande him; to make it the engine of curſing? oh ſin intollerable. Dedit
mihi Dominus linguam (ſayth the wiſe man) & in ipſo laudabo eum.
                     Eccle. 51. 22.
                     The Lorde hath giuen me a tongue, wherewith I will prayſe
him.
                  
                  The blaſphemer is worſe then the brute beaſtes,The blaſphemer is worſe then brutiſh beaſts. who doe all
magnifie the Lorde, as Dauid willeth them in his laſt Pſalme:
Let euerie thing that hath breath, praiſe the lorde. And the
three children,Pſal. 150. 6. in the middeſt of the fierie furnace, inuited all
the workes of the omnipotente, to praiſe him. Benedicite omnia
opera Domini Domino,
                     Dan. 3. 60. 
                     laudate, & ſuperexaltate eum in ſaecula.
All ye workes of the lord, bleſſe yee the lord, praiſe him, and
exalt him aboue all things for euer. Onely the vngodly ſinner

blaſphemeth him.
                  The heauens wheele about in their courſe,All creatures (in their kind) doo praiſe the Lord, and mā onlie blaſphemeth him. the Starres twinkle,
the Sunne guides the worlde with his beames, the Moone
ſhines, the fire heates, the ayre breathes, the ſea
                        •
                     bs and flowes,
the riuers run, the lakes ſtand ſtill, the earth fructifies, the plants liue,
the beaſtes haue ſome meaſure of vnderſtanding, the birdes
chaunte their noates, the fiſhes glyde about in the waters, and
euerye creature (in his kinde) giues laude to his creatour, vnthankefull
man onely blaſphemeth him. Et iugiter tota die nomen
meum blaſphematur.
                     Eſay. 52. 5. 
                     My name all the day continually is blaſphemed.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     Happy Dauid,Pſal. 33. 1. 
                     who euermore praiſed his creator: Benedicam
Domino in omni tempore,Sundrie exā
                        ples of praiſes giuen to God, By Dauid in himſelfe. ſemper laus eius in ore meo: I will
giue thankes vnto the Lord, his praiſe ſhall be in my mouth continually.
                  
                     Good old Tobias forewarned and ſchooled his onely ſonne to
this leſſon,
                     Toby. 4 19. 
                     ſayng. Omni tempore benedic Deum, & pete ab eo,Olde Tobies leſſon to his ſonne. vt vias
tuas dirigat, & omnia conſilia tua in ipſo permaneant, Bleſſe thy Lord
God alwayes, and deſire of him that all thy wayes may be made ſtraite.
and that all thy purpoſes and counſels may proſper.Dauids charge to his ſons & ſeruants. Dauid alſo himſelf,
was no ſooner in the morning riſen from his bed, but he charged all
his children and ſeruants to glorifie the Lord.
                     Pſalm. 113. Laudate pueri Dominum,
laudate nomen Domini. Praiſe O ye ſeruantes of the Lord,
praiſe the name of the lorde: the lyke dooth hee in the 134.
Pſalme,
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  But ſome there are,Example of too many now in theſe dayes that doe quite contrary, who
riſe no ſooner in the morning out of their beds, but (full of impatience)
giue ſome ſudden commaund to their ſons or ſeruauntes, and
becauſe they bee not as ready in executing of what they woulde
haue them: preſently they breake foorth into horrible blaſphemies,
and ſeuere imprecations, ſo that the very firſt moouing of their
lippes, and firſt word deliuered from their tongues, is infamy and
diſgrace to their creator. VVhich greeuous ſin being ſo frequent
in committing, if ſomtime the puniſhment thereto belonging, were
but as ready from God in following: there would hardly be found
ſo many diueliſh tongues in the world, if not for the loue of vertuous
deeds, yet at leaſt to auoyde the terror of ſo condigne an infliction.
                  
                     Lewis,
                     A memorable Example of Lewis king of France, how he vſed two blaſphemers. called the holy and Saint-like King of Fraunce, cauſed
the tongue of a blaſphemer to bee cut foorth of his head. And ſo

offenſiue was this ſinne vnto him, as (at another time) he commaunded
the lips of a blaſphemer to be feared with a hot burning yron,
ſaying. I woulde very gladly endure this puniſhment in mine owne
perſon, conditionally, it might ſort to ſuch a happy ſucceſſe, as (by that example)
the hatefull vice of blaſphemy might neuer more be heard in my
kingdome.
                  
                  But now adayes, you haue men apt and ready enough, to puniſh
ſuch praters or talkers, as any way do fpeak againſt their own worth
and eſteem; but none are found to reprooue them, that ſpeake open
blaſphemy againſt God and his ſaints.
                  
                     The diuine lawe commaunded,
                     Example of Gods law againſt blaſphemers. 
                     that the blaſphemer ſhould be
ſtoned by all the people. Educ blasphemum extra caſtra, & ponant
omnes qui audierunt, manus ſuas ſuper caput eius, & lapidet eum populus
vniuerſus.Leuit. 24. 14. 16 Bring the blasphemer without the hoaſt, and let all that
heard him, put their hands vpon his head, and let all the congregation
ſtone him. Againe. Et qui blasphemauerit nomen Domini, morte moriatur.
And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, ſhall be put to
death.
                  Therefore Senacherib King of the Aſſyrians,
                     Example of blaſphemous Senacherib, & his Army. beſieged Ieruſalem,
and blaſpheming the name of the Lorde, the night
following (by Gods appointmente) 185. thouſand of his ſoldiours
were ſlaine, and himſelfe murthered by his owne
sonnes.
                  The lawe Eccleſiaſticall enioyned, that the blaſphemer, for ſeauen
weekes together, euery Friday ſhould faſt with bread and water,Ex de mal. c. ſtatuimus.
and euery Sabboth day at Euening prayer time, he ſhould ſtand
before the Church door,Example of the law Eccleſiaſticall. without cloke, without hoſe or ſhooes, bare
headed, his girdle or a coard about his neck, and other ſuch like penalties
were inflicted on him, onely to make this ſin moſt odious to
the people.
                  The imperiall lawe of Iuſtinian the moſt Chriſtian Emperour
commaunded,Example of the Emperor Iuſtinians lawe. that the blaſphemers head ſhould bee ſmitten
off.
                  
                     Among the very Paganes alſo,
                     Example of the law amōg the Paganes. 
                     there was a terrible lawe, as wee
may reade in the third Chapter of Daniel, where it is ſhewen, That
Nebuchadnezzer, hauing ſeene the great marueyles of God, in the
three children put into the fiery Ouen, commaunded, that whoſoeuer
did blaſpheme that God, ſhould be ſlayne, his houſe ouerturned,
                     Dan. 3. 96.
                     and raced from the foundation. A me ergo poſitum eſt
hoc decretum, vt omnis populus, tribus & lingua quaecunque loquuta

fuerit, blasphemiam, contra Deum Sidrach, Miſach, & Abednago,
diſpereat, & domus eius vaſtetur. Therefore I make a decree, that
euery people, nation and language, which speake any blaſphemy againſt
the God of Sidrach, Miſach and Abednago, ſhall be drawn in pieces, &
their houſes ruined.
                  And Mahomet himſelfe,Example of Mahomet the ſeductor. who was drawne by the diuell to ſeduce
ſo many ſoules, commaunded that his body to be deuided and
cut in quarters, that ſhold blaſpheme God, Chriſt or the bleſſed virgine.
                  If all lawes haue condemned the blaſphemer, not only among
beleeuers, but euen among the very Infidelles themſelues: it may
then eaſily appear, what an abhominable and deteſtable ſin it is, and
that it were much better to bee without a tongue, then thereby to
offend ſo highly our creatour, redeemer and glorifier. Muta fiant
labia doloſa.
                  
               
               
                  Finis Chap. 19.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  Approouing that it is better to haue no tongue at all, and to be ſilent eternally,
then to fall into any of the before remembred vices. What
benefit enſueth by the priuation of speeche, of which, although we
ſhould haue no vſe at all, yet we are not voyde of the ſpeeche of the
mind; which is much more excellent, and ſooner liſtened vnto by god
himſelfe, then to the careleſſe and idle babbling of the lippes. He
that wanteth ſpeeche, is disburdened of a heauy loade, and may the
eaſier preſerue himſelfe from many heauy charges: becauſe by the
tongue of the body, we pleaſe men onely, but by the tongue of the hart,
we become pleaſing to God. Euery man hath two lippes, but the iuſt
man hath his vpper lip much greater then the nether. Contrarywiſe,
the wicked man hath his nether lip ſo great, as therewith he couereth
his whole face, and all the ſtrength of bad men conſiſteth in their
lips; which is approoued by a ſhort, yet ſweet diſcourſe, and afterward
pleaſingly concluded on the befalf of ſilence, approouing it to be much
more allowable then ſpeeche.
               
               Chap. 20.
               
                  
                     LODOVICO.
                  Purſuing this caſe of
the blaſphemer, we may (without any
doubt at all) ad to the reſt which
is gon before,What he ſeeks that by blaſphemy oppoſeth himſelfe againſt God. that in regard the oppoſeth
himſelfe immediatly againſt
his Creator, thereby he coueteth no
leſſe, but would enforce (as much as
in him lieth) that he neither is, or
ſhold be iuſt, good, omnipotēt, wiſe
and merciful. And he that deſireth
or ſeeketh after theſe things, would
willingly haue God not to be God.
                  In like manner, when he wold haue him to be voide of eies, wherby

he beholdes his ſinnes, and diſcouers his deceiptfull deuiſes: he
wiſheth him alſo to be as empty of power, whereby to puniſh him,
or to cenſure him with paines of condemnation. And faine he wold
haue ſuch a potency to remaine within him ſelfe, whereby he might
as eaſily afflict his creator, as hee dares venture with his deuiliſh
tongue, to blaſpheme and abuſe him.
                  This is a denying of the diuinity in God,Blaſphemy leads to the denying of the Godhead. with a meere helliſh &
deuilliſh preſumption a ſinne ſo immane and monſtrous, as much
better were it, not to haue a heart to thinke it, or a tongue to vtter
it. A ſinne ſo horryble, that the Iewes (by nature obſtinate, and addicted
to many vices) would yet ſtop their eares from hearing it, &
rent their very garments in peeces, in ſigne that it did ſplit their very
hearts in ſunder, when any ſuch blaſphemy was deliuered: as we
may read in the Actes of the Apoſtles, in the Goſpels, and in many
other places of the holy Scripture. Who can heare a worſe or viler
thing then blaſphemy is?
                  
                     Will yee liſten what Saint Bernard ſaith thereof,
                     Bernard in Cant. Septuageſ. Serm. ſecundo. 
                     in his Canticle
of the Septuageſi. Serm. 2? Vult ergo non eſſe Deum, qui quantum in
ipſo eſt, aut vult eum impotentem, aut iniuſtum, aut inſipientem eſſe
vult. Crudelis planè, & omnino extrema malitia, quae Dei potentiam,
iuſtitiam, ſapientiam perire deſiderat; Qui autem vult Deum eſſe iniuſtum,
vult non eſſe Deum: & qui deſiderat Deum non eſſe; nonne
quantum in ſe eſt Deum occidit?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  I could wiſh ſuch a one, not onely to bee depriued of
his tongue, wherewith he hath ſo blaſphemed the diuine goodnes of
God: but rather (then to offend in any of the before named vices,)
that he had no life at all in him, euen any one whatſoeuer that ſhold
be ſo diſpleaſing to his heauenly maker.
                  Many times it happeneth,A benefit is neuer truely knowen, but by the loſſe of it. that ſickeneſſe is much more auaileable
then health, not onely, becauſe vnthankefull man ſcarſely knows
a benefit giuen him by God, till firſt he haue endured the loſſe therof:
but in regard alſo, that infirmitie, and debilitie in our naturall
forces, doth beget and bring foorth the ſurer health of the ſoule.
Such a hurt is worthily to be wiſhed for, that ſhewes it ſelfe to bee
a remedie to a farre greater inconuenience, and is a ſecure eſcape
from harme of higher qualitie. But this being vtterly vnknowen in
our ſelues, we cannot deuiſe how to helpe it, and wee being ouerſlouthfull
in ſeeking redreſſe, doe thereby grow to a more daungerous
weakeneſſe of the minde, which taking away the light of the
ſoule, becomes a prouder nouriſhment to the fleſh. Much better

then doe I reckon the infirmitie of the body,The health of the ſoule, is better then that of the body. that engenders the
ſoules health: then the health of that, which weakens and makes the
ſoule to be ſicke.
                  Wee often times doe fooliſhly conceipt in our ſelues, that by recouerie
of health after ſome long ſickneſſe, wee are quite ſet free
and eſcaped from death. But euen then doe wee run with the greateſt
haſte of all toward him, and are euen neereſt to death, when we
imagine him to bee furtheſt off.we are neereſt to death, whē we thinke him furtheſt off. The depriuation of ſpeech, nay,
death it ſelfe is farre better, then long time of life, and offending our
heauenly creator, by thoſe meanes which were made for his laude
and magnifying.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Priuation or lacke of ſpeech,The lacke of ſpeech begets the quiet of the minde. begetteth the ſecurity
and quiet of the minde. Many, meere innocents of thier hands, haue
yet beene condemned by their tongues, becauſe they haue fondly
taken great pleaſure, in appearing before men, to haue done ſuch
things as they neuer did, nor perhaps euer could do, and ſo haue
made them ſelues guiltie by their tongues, of that which their hands
neuer performed.
                  As in the like caſe it happened to the young Amalekite,
                     The yong Amalekites belying of him ſelfe for the death of king Saul. who
vaunted before Dauid, that hee had ſlaine king Saul, as hoping
to haue gotten (thereby) a great reward, becauſe Saul was
a moſt heauie enemy to Dauid. But albeit hee was cleerelye
innocent of the fact, yet notwithſtanding, hee bare the penaltye
of a murderer, onelie by belying him ſelfe, and accuſing
him ſelfe of a deede, which hee neuer thought to doe. Whereupon
Dauid ſayd to him. Sanguis tuus ſuper caput tuum. Os enim
tuum loquutum eſt aduerſum te,
                     2. Sam. 1. 
                     dicens; Ego interfeci Chriſtum
Domini. Thy bloud be vpon thine owne head, for thine own mouth
hath teſtifyed againſt thee, ſaying; I haue ſlaine the Lordes annointed.
                  
                  I ſay againe,What labour is required in the well and orderly deliuery of our ſpeech. that the want of ſpeech, is the occaſion of much
quiet, becauſe it is no meane labour, to ſpeake well, to make anſwere
in due time, and to apt purpoſe; to talke gratiouſly, and to
giue proportionable geſture to our words; to adorne our ſayings
with comelineſſe; to deliuer ſentences with ſweetnes; to accompany
our ſpeeches with the bodies ſeemely behauiour; ſometimes
ſpeaking lowde, ſometimes lowe; now ſweetlie, then more
ſharplie.
                  But this (you will ſay) is the labour onely belonging to an Oratour.
Yet let me tell you, that the want of ſpeech in conſideration

of the many harmes, whereinto a man falles by the tongue onely:
is the chiefe way to much quietneſſe, and the meanes to preuent
innumerable euils. Diuers haue deſired, that they could neuer haue
ſpoken,Of Cicero & Demoſthenes whoſe tōgues were their death. but neuer attained to ſuch a happineſſe. If Cicero the father
of Latine eloquence, and Demoſthenes, the ſplendour of the
Greeke tongue, had euer been dumbe: both the one and other had
longer liued, and death had been more ſufferable to them, and much
leſſe grieuous.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Queſtionleſſe, whoſoeuer conſidereth our humane
frailcie, and how procliue a man is to faile in his ſpeaking: will
allowe dumbeneſſe to be farre better then ſpeeche.What benefits enſue on the lack of ſpeech He that hath
loſt the vſe of ſpeech, hath alſo loſt the arte of lying, the conſuetude
of deceiuing, the inſtrument of enmitie, the organe of quarrelling,
the ſower of ſlaunders, and the broacher of blaſphemies.
                  Many more are they, that by their wordes haue become infamous,
then by their deedes: for there is no part of our body, more
ready to doe harme, and harder to bridle, then the tongue of man is.
Therefore, they that know them ſelues apt to faile thereby, and
conſequently, to fall into the vices whereon wee haue ſo long diſcourſed;
me thinkes, ſhould rather wiſh them ſelues to be dumbe,
then to couet the engine of their owne vnhappines.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  It is very true,It is great riches to bee poore in euil. in regard it is a great treaſure, to be
poore in euill. Whereupon we may ſay, and very truely, that ſuch
as are borne without the vnhappy tongue, are borne to be rich,
and they that haue ſuch a wicked kinde of tongue, doe looſe for
euer the eternall riches.How to finde by looſing, & looſe by finding. Thus (by a new way) may wee become
wealthy, looſing by finding, and finding by looſing, becauſe there
is no worſe thing, then to haue an euill tongue. Euen ſo by conſequence,
there is nothing better, then in hauing it, to remaine as
depriued thereof, ſeeing he that gets much that way, looſeth much
more an other way.Eſay. 31. 9. 
                     And the tongue is as a fire, which conſumeth any
thing. Labia eius repleta ſunt indignatione, & lingua eius quaſi ignis
deuorans.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  But what ſhall we ſay (if the tongue be not good) that
many yet haue been found to be of innocent tongues, euermore
praiſing therewith their Creator? If then to looſe an euill tongue,
is to get great riches, to looſe a good tongue, is to looſe greater
riches.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Hee that hath loſt his tongue,Sentence. hath not loſt his

heart. He remaines onely depriued of that member, wherewith hee
could appeare pleaſing but to men,The hart only is pleaſing to god, the tōgue winnes but praiſes of mē. but is not robbed of his heart,
wherewith he pleaſeth God onely. Being then not ſecured by that
member, which wonne him but the bare pleaſing opinion of
men: it is beſt for him to preſerue the heart carefully, whereby hee
may be thankefull to God, to whom, though hee cannot ſpeake
with his materiall tongue, yet may he liberally and freely expreſſe
his whole heart.
                  And if the wicked be ſaid to haue the lippes of the heart,The wicked haue the lips of the heart. how
chaunceth it that the iuſt haue them not alſo? Of the wicked ſaith
Dauid: Labia doloſa, in corde, & corde loquuti ſunt: Flattering with
their lippes,
                     Pſal. 12. 2. 
                     and ſpeake with a double heart.
                     The iuſt haue the mouth & tongue of the hart. The iuſt haue the mouth
and tongue of the heart, wherewith they may freely ſpeake vnto
God, which made Dauid ſay of him ſelfe. Non eſt occultatum os
meum à te, quod feciſti in occulto. My bones are not hid from thee,
though I was made in a ſecret place.
                     Pſal. 139. 15. Or, as if he ſhould ſay. Lord,
the mouth of my heart, which thou haſt created for me in the moſt
ſecret part of my body: from thee it is not hidden, becauſe thou
ſearcheſt into the ſecrets of the heart, and heareſt the moouing
of the lippes of the thoughtes. Dominus autem intuetur
cor.
                  
                  Praiſe then the Lord with the tongue of the heart,God liſtens more to the tongue of the heart, thē that of the voice. becauſe he
is wont to be much more attentiue to that kinde of language, then
to the other idle talkatiue noiſe of the voice. And in the preſence
of his omnipotent Maieſty, there is no clamour more loude, more
vehement, nor more moouing, then that of the heart is, becauſe
otherwiſe (as we haue already ſayd) hee onely delighteth in ſilence.
                  This clamour did that Shepheard of his flocke, and (afterward)
the guide to numberleſſe people,Example of Moiſes crying to God in ſilence. 
                     Moyſes, breath foorth, when praying
(in ſilence) with a moſt earneſt ſpirit, his zealous cryes entred the
eares of the Almighty, which made God himſelfe ſay: Quid clamas
ad me?
                     Exod. 14. 15. 
                     Wherefore cryeſt thou vnto me? He ſpake not, neither mooued
his lippes, and yet it is ſayd, he cryed. As we perceiue then, that
he whom god heares, is not dumbe, becauſe he ſpeaketh to him with
his heart: euen ſo may we ſay, that he who hath loſt the tongue of
outward crying, and of the voyce whereby hee would ſtriue to be
vnderſtood, neyther wantes his materiall tongue, nor voyce vocall.
                  Moreouer,Lack of ſpeech giues freedom to our thoughts. loſſe of the vſe of ſpeech, hath been very aduantagious

to diuers men, becauſe thereby their thoughtes haue had the
more gentle freedome. Which made King Dauid ſay, that it behooued,
to ſet a good watch before the tongue. Pone Domine cuſtodiam
orimeo,
                     Pſalm. 141. 3. 
                     & oſtium circumſtantiae labits meis. Set a watch O Lord
before my mouth, and keepe the doore of my lippes.
                     Pſal. 39. 2. 2. 
                     Dixi cuſtodiam vias
meas, vt non delinquam in lingua mea. I ſayd, I will take heede to
my waies, that I ſinne not with my tongue. Poſui ori meo cuſtodiam,
dum conſiſteret peccator aduerſum me. I will keep my mouth bridled,
while the wicked is in my ſight. And Salomon his ſonne ſayd, that it
behooueth (with all diligence poſſible) to keep the heart, as that
which is the fountaine of life.Prouer. 4. 23. 
                     Omni cuſtodia ſerua cor tuum, quoniam
ab ipſo vita procedit. Keep thine heart with all diligence for therout
commeth life.
                  
                  Being then depriued of the tongues vſe, eyther by nature or fortune,
thou art disburdened of this watch-charge: and being to keep
one watchman onely, thou art eaſed of a moity of the trouble, by
being able to preſerue (with greater facilitie) things ſo reduced to
a ſmall number, yet of greateſt value, then thoſe that are amounting
to many in their number.
                  And it may yeeld thee ſome contentment beſide,The tongue hath hurt many, and holpē but fewe. to looſe that
onely member of the body, which hath holpen very fewe, but hurt
many. Becauſe it is the Seminary of warre, diſſenſious, ſtrifes,
adulteries, blaſphemies, periuries, fraudes, flatteries, and of an
hundred thouſand other vices beſide. Better then is the tongue of
the heart, whereby God may be pleaſed, and no man ſcandaled:
then that of the mouth, whereby God delighteth not to be ſpoken
vnto, and infinite euils haue redounded vnto men.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Your diſcourſe,The cuſtodie of the tongue very difficult. my Lord, may be allowed for the
more authenticall, by how much wee know the cuſtodie of the
tongue to be very difficult. Whereupon, many haue been enforced
to attempt impoſſible waies, only to containe (in good cōpaſſe)
the ſlippery tongue.
                  
                     Francis Petrarche the Poet,An excellent example, of a man that deſired to ſtudie the Scriptures. and an Oratour moſt famous, tels
vs of a deuout man, who was very deſirous to learne the ſtudy of
ſacred letters or diuinitie. And to that end entred into a Schoole,
where hearing this verſe of the thirtie eight Pſalme, at his very firſt
entraunce; Dixi cuſtodiam vias meas, vt non delinquam in lingua
mea &c. He preſently went foor
                        •
                     h of the Schoole, and would neuer
after come into it againe. A pr
                        •••
                     y while after, the Maſter (by
chaunce) meeting him on the way, and marueiling he had in ſuch

ſort forſaken the Schoole: demaunded, vpon what occaſion hee
had ſo ſoone giuen ouer his new-begun ſtudy? Whereto the holy
man thus anſwered. I haue found ſo much to doe, to obſerue
but one document, which I heard in my very firſt leſſon, concerning
the keeping of my tongue, and which all my life time hytherto
I was neuer able to compaſſe: that I will firſt attaine the perfection
of that one precept, before I preſume vpon any other.
                  This good man accounted it meerely ſuperfluous,It is ſuperfluous, to heare much, and practiſe little. to heare
many leſſons, without putting any one of them in execution.
Therefore, it appearing to bee ſuch a hard matter, to keepe the
tongue in an abſolute cuſtodie; he would haue no one to ſeeme otherwiſe
learned, then as they haue truely followed the perfection
of their leſſons.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Aſſuredly, it is moſt difficult for a man, to preſerue
him ſelfe innocent in ſpeaking: becauſe we are ſo ouer-ready, to
talke of worldly matters, euen as men that haue no way made clean
their affections.The reaſon why a man hath two lips to his mouth. A man hath two lippes neceſſarily belonging to
ſpeeche, one beneath, and the other aloft aboue the mouth, becauſe
humane argument is but two-fold, and no more; that is, of
matters ſoueraigne and celeſtial, and of meaner things, baſe and terreſtriall.
                  The two lippes are diſtinct: notwithſtanding, in forming of the
word, they aptly vnite them ſelues according to time. Euen ſo, albeit
celeſtiall things are furtheſt off from matters terreſtriall,The vſe of celeſtiall & terreſtrial things and
thoſe diuine, from them that are humane: yet ought were to vnite
them together, and ſo farre to ſerue our turne with earthly occaſions,
as they may ſtead vs in our duety to heauen. Holy men haue
ſpoken of them both ſo gratiouſly together, that the holy Ghoſt
ſaid of them: Diffuſa eſt gratia in labiis tuis, propterea benedixit te
Deus in aeternum:
                     Pſal. 45. 2. 
                     Grace is powred in thy lippes, becauſe God hath bleſſed
thee f
                           •
                        reuer.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Quite contrary are the vngodly,Example of Zacharias. who ſpeake ſo vngratiouſly,
as God is forced ſometime to make them be ſilent. As he did
to talkatiue Zacharias,
                     Luk. 1. 20. albeit a good man: Eris tacens, & non poteris
loqui:
                     Example of the talking deuils. 
                     Thou ſhalt be dumbe, & not be able to ſpeake. And he did the
like to the bolde talking deuils: Et imperans, non ſinebat ea loqui: He
rebuked them,
                     Luke. 4. 41. 
                     & ſuffered them not to ſpeake. And the like he ſaid to
the vnthankfull ſinners:Example of the thankleſſe ſinners. 
                     Tacete qui habitat is in inſula: Be ſtill ye that
dwell in the Iles.
                     Eſay. 23. 2.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Lodouico.
                  Iuſt men are like to goodly faire hounds,Iuſt men cō
                        pared to goodly hounds. which haue
their vpper lippe much greater then the lower. So doe iuſt men more
gladlie talke of celeſtiall affaires, then thoſe belonging to the world.
God commaunded Moyſes,
                     Example of the propoſition table. that he ſhould make for the propoſition
Table, a couer of golde, and for the couer a high golden crowne.
Facios illi labium aureum per circuitum.
                     Exod. 25. 24. 25. 
                     Et ipſi labio coronam interaſſilem
altam quatuor digitis, & ſuper illam alteram coronam aureolam.
                  
                  This Table we may ſay to be the iuſt man,The iuſt man compared to to the table. whoſe heart is like vnto
a rich table, furniſhed with all ſweet meates of vertue, wherein
God him ſelfe ſo highly delighteth, and whereon hee pleaſeth to
eate and drinke, euen as if he were a fellow-commoner with him.
Si quis audicrit vocem meam,
                     Apoc. 3. 20. 
                     & aperuerit mihi ianuam: intrabo ad
illum, & coenabo cum illo, & ipſe mecum. If any man heare my voice,
and open the doore, I will come in vnto him, and will ſuppe with him, &
he with me.
                  
                  His lippes are made of the pureſt golde,The lips of the iuſt man. as a couerture to a holy
receptacle, and the wordes of ſuch a ſanctified veſſel, are full of
moſt ardent and perfect charitie. And therefore is a high crowne
of eternall reward layde vp in ſtore for him, yea, a golden crowne
of perpetuall honour.Eccl. 45. 12. 
                     Corona aurea ſuper caput eius, expreſſa ſigno
ſanctitatis. A crowne of golde vpon his head, bearing the forme and
marke of holyneſſe.
                     Pſal. 8. 5. 
                     Gloria & honore coronaſti eum. Thou haſt crowned
him with glorie and honour.
                  
                  Now the wicked are quite contrarie to the iuſt,The wicked contrary to the iuſt man. for they haue
the nether lippe farre greater then the vpper, becauſe they talke of
nothing but earthly and carnall things:Iohn. 3. 31. 
                     Qui de terra eſt, de terra loquitur,
as if he would haue ſaid. They that haue their hearts made
of earth, do talke altogether of earthly things, becauſe the tongue is
the meſſenger of the heart, and Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur.
                  
                  They haue their lips of their mouths, anſwerable to the cogitations
of their hearts.Wicked men compared to ſwine, in all their behauiour. Therefore they gladly diſcourſe on earthly affaires,
becauſe their nether lip is ſo great: being iuſtly herein compared
to ſwine, whoſe ſtrength conſiſteth wholly in their lippes;
with them they delue into the earth, roote vp plantes, breake
downe doores, and remooue ſtones out of their places. Euen ſo the
vngodly Oratour and careleſſe ſinner, all their power is in humane
eloquence, and in the ne
                        •
                     ues of worldly buſineſſe, which they continually
exalt and applaude, making no account at all of celeſtiall &
inuiſible treaſures.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Theſe men may bee compared to certayne people

of Ethiopia,
                     Iſidorus in Etim. Lib. 11. Plinie. in Hiſt. Nat. Lib. 14. of whom Iſidorus ſpeaketh in the eleuenth booke of his
Etimologic, and likewiſe Plinie in his naturall hiſtorie, deſcribing
them to be very monſtrous. Their faces being all plaine and euen:
but their ne
                        •
                     her lippe is of ſuch huge largenes and length, as therewith
they couer all their face, to defend it from the heate of
the Sunne, and ſo they wander about the Ethyopian mountaines.
                  Euen ſo wander the wicked through the blacke Ethiope of this
world,How the wicked doo wander through the Aethiopia of this world. ouer-warme and ſweltring in all naughtineſſe. They are ſo
monſtrous and imperfect, that they haue faces plaine and ſmooth,
and walke as voide of all vnderſtanding; wanting the cleare ſighted
eye of diſcretion, the pearcing ſauour of deuotion; the ſolicitous
care of obedience, the delicate taſte of contemplation, and the
ſoft touche of milde compaſſion. So that wee may very well ſay of
them.Pſal. 115. 5. 6. 7 
                     Oculos habent & non videbunt; nares habent & non oderabunt;
aures habent, & non audient, manus habent & non palpabunt; os
habent et non manducabunt. They haue eyes and ſee not; they haue noſes
& ſmell not; they haue eares and he are not; they haue handes and
touch not; they haue mouthes and eate not.
                  
                  Onely they haue their nether lippe ſo large,The lower lip of the wicked couers al their face. as therewith they couer
their whole face: becauſe by their vaine talking, they cloke,
couer and cloude all their lewde life, making that as a vaile, to obſcure
their detraction, flattering, deceiuing, diſſembling, murmuring,
deriding, lying, boaſting, defaming, ſlaundering and blaſpheming.
                  
                     All their ſtrength conſiſteth in their lippes; they byte & wound
with their lippes;
                     Of the lips of the wicked. Gladius in labiis eorum; Swords are in their lips.
They lye with their lippes:
                     Pſal. 59. 7. Abhominatio eſt Domino labia mendacia:
The lying lippes are abhomination to the Lord.Prouerb. 12. 23. 
                     They flatter with
their lippes:
                     Mark. 7. 6. Populus hic labiis me honorat: This people honoureth
me with their lippes &c. They poyſon with their lippes: Venenum
aſpidum ſub labiis eorum:Pſa
                           •
                        m. 140. 3. Adders poyſon is vnder their lippes. They
ſowe ſtrife with their lippes:
                     Prouer. 18. 6. Labia ſtulti miſcent ſe rixis: A fooles
lippes cauſe ſtrife. They kill and ruinate ſoules with their lippes:
Labia ipſius ruina animae eius:Prouer. 15. 7. His lippes are a ſnare for his ſoule.
They ſmite, and ſhall be ſmitten with their lippes: Siultus labiis
verberabitur:Pro. 16. 8. He that is fooliſh in talke ſhall be beaten. They burne
with their lippes:
                     The whole power of the wicked is in their lippes. In labiis eius ignis ardebit: Fire burneth in his
lippes.
                  All their whole power is in their lippes, becauſe the greateſt euill

the wicked can doe, they doe it with their lippes: moouing them to
blaſphemies, euill ſpeaking, lying, ſtrifes, and therefore were they
better to be depriued of them, then haue vſe of them, to their owne
damnation, diſhonor of God, and detriment of their neighbour.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Let vs pray then to the Lord, to ſtrike them dumbe, or
to chaunge their lippes. Or if the lippes of the heart be to abide with
them, that they may not mooue them to his diſgrace, not be offenſiue
to the chaſte eares of good men, by their Gomorriſh ſpeeches,
and cryes of Sodome, ſo highly diſpleaſing to the Almightie. Muta
fiant labia doloſa.
                  
               
               
                  Finis Chap. 20.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  Hee that would talke with God, muſt eyther learne to bee ſilent, or
speake farre otherwiſe then he did before: becauſe his heart is
to bee firſt purged of wicked thoughtes, and his lippes made
cleane from ſpeaking of euill. Hee that conferres with God,
muſt either holde his peace, or ſpeake very little, in regard of
the greatneſſe of diuine myſteries. Or he muſt talke highlie, by
a new kinde of ſpeaking, as being lifted vp by diuine aſſiſtaunce
of the holy Ghoſt. For approbation whereof, diuers ſound teſtimonies
out of ſacred Scripture are produced. As of Moyſes,
Ieremie, Daniell, Paul, and the other Apoſtles, Silence alſo
makes the foole to ſeeme wiſe, and the want of ſpeech is the
gift of God, as well as talking in many languages. Heerein likewiſe
is diſcourſed, whence it proceedeth that ſome are borne dumbe,
and others very hard in deliuery of their words, or elſe doe ſpeake
very ſlowly.
               
               Chap. 20.
               
                  
                     CLAVDIO.
                  To be ſilent, we haue
already diſcourſed and approoued,
that it is very behoouefull for all
men, as well the good, as the bad,
the fooliſh,Fooles by ſilence do ſeem to be wiſe. as the wiſe: becauſe
ſuch commendation awaiteth on
ſilence. as if the fooliſh man doo
but holde his peace, he appeareth to
be wiſe; At the leaſt in this, that in
refrayning ſpeech, he acquainteth
not others with his follie, which
made the wiſe mā ſay.Prouer. 17. 28. 
                     Stultus quoque ſit acuerit, ſapiens reputabitur,

et ſi compreſſerit labia ſua, intelligens. Euen a foole (when hee holdeth
his peace) is counted wiſe, & he that ſtoppeth his lippes, prudent.
                  
                  If ſilence doe cauſe the very foole to be reputed wiſe,Silence is no meane grace in a wiſe man. how much
more grace then doth it giue to a man wiſe indeed? Marke what Salomon
further addeth:Prouer. 17. 27. 
                     Qui moderatur ſermones ſuos, doctus & prudens
eſt: & pretioſi ſpiritus vir eruditus: He that hath knowledge, ſpareth
his words, and a man of vnderſtanding is of an excellent ſpirit.
                  
                  If then god doe take away from the wicked the vſe of ſpeech,Two benefits enſuing to the wicked by wāt of ſpeech.
two admirable benefits enſue to him thereby. One is, that he ſhall
appeare to him that knowes him not, to be dumbe, and to be a wiſe
man. The other is, that he cannot hurt his neighbour, by euill example
of murmuring and lewde ſpeaking.
                  We may therefore ſay,Silence is the gift of God, as well as ſpeaking well. that as it is the gift of god to ſpeake well,
and in variable languages, as the Apoſtles (by the worke of the
holie ſpirit) did: Euen ſo is it the gift of god, to be ſilent, and
depriued of that member, wherewith we may much offend the
diuine goodneſſe, and little helpe our neyghbour: for the one
holdes his peace by vertue, and the other by infirmitie. Therefore
very elegantly ſaid the wiſe man.Eccl. 20. 6. 7. 
                     Eſt autem tacens, & non
habens ſenſum loquelae, & eſt tacens, ſciens tempus apti temporis.
Homo ſapiens tacebit vſque ad tempus. Some man holdeth his
tongue, becauſe he hath not to anſwere, and ſome keepeth ſilence,
waiting a conuenient time. A wiſe man will holde his tongue, till hee ſee
opportunity.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Vpon this occaſion, we may lawfully (by your leaue
my Lord) demaund to know, whence it enſueth, that ſome are endued
(by nature) with a perpetuall ſilence, ſo that they know not
how to forme one word?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Ariſtotle ſaith;
                     Ariſtotle his opinion of the deafe and dumbe by birth. That if a man be borne deafe, it is neceſſary
that he ſhould alſo be borne dumbe: becauſe in not hearing, hee
knowes not how to forme the articulation of the voice, and the names giuen
to things in the firſt inſtitution, neither knoweth what is ſignified by
them. And this enſueth (as he affirmeth) Becauſe the tongue hath his
vſe by reaſon onely, and ſo attaineth to abilitie in diſcourſe, or in diſpute.
Whereupon it is neceſſary, to receiue the word or name from another, &
ſo to containe the ſignification therof in minde. Therefore neceſſarily
are they which are borne deafe, dumbe alſo.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  A good anſwere, and grounded vpon reaſon. But tel me
I pray you, whence cōmeth it, that ſome are ſo imperfect of ſpeech,
as they can hardly deliuer two words readily together, and others

haue their tongues ſo quicke and voluble.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  To haue the tongue ready,Of the quickneſſe and agility of the tongue, & how by naturall meanes it is cauſed, or hindered in the melācholic bodie. quicke and agill, it requireth
the ayde of much heate, and moderate dryneſſe. Wherfore, they
that be melancholie bodies, (as well by nature, as by ad
                        •
                     ſtion) are
tardy of ſpeech, becauſe their tongue is very cold and moiſte, abounding
alwayes with much water, and ſpettle in the mouth. By which
diſpoſition, they haue a very moiſte and relaxe tongue, becauſe they
ſpit much and often; which quality both ſlowes, and alſo greatlie
weakens the tongue, ſo that it cannot duely attend on the imaginatiue
part: which contrariwiſe better in the diſpoſed body, makes it
to be very ſtrong and gallant. And the tongue cannot run to ſpeake
ſo diſtinctly and readily, as when it receiueth due order from the
part imaginatiue, therefore being thus impeached, it huddles and
tumbles out words, which are not truly and rightly formed.
                  The Phlegmatike bodies likewiſe,Of bodies that are phlegmaticke. not being ouer moody & angry,
haue a very colde and moiſte braine; and therefore they are
not ouer ready in ſpeaking, their tongue being alſo relaxed by too
much humiditie. But when they are offended, then choler mountes
aloft, & rouzeth vp the heate on a ſodain, eleuating the imaginatiue
part: & they then may ſpeake as much as they pleaſe, for the tōgue
is not impeached,Of ſuch as are vnapt to be good Oratours. becauſe it is already wel heated. Such men can neuer
be good Oratous, becauſe they know not how to ſpeake, except
they baule and make alowd noiſe, which tires the patience of the auditours;
and yet the Oratours action neceſſarily requireth, that ſomtime
he ſhould ſpeake loude, and ſometime lowe.
                  Hereupon Ariſtotle ſearching into the occaſion,Of ſuch as knowe not how to ſpeake lowlie, according to Ariſtotle. why men being
tardy of tongue, knew not how to ſpeake in an humble key: found,
that the tongue which is faſtened to the palate, by reaſon of ouer
much humiditie, deliuers and frees it ſelfe better by rough violence,
then when leſſe ſtrength is put vnto it. As if a man, being deſirous
to lift a Launce from the ground,A very apt compariſon. holding it out at length:
more eaſilye (by a ſtearne ſtroke agaynſt the earth) ſhall
mount it aloft, then by lifting it vp at armes end by little and
little.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  It appeareth to me,The reaſon of ſtammering and vnready ſpeaking. that this defect commeth hot onely
ſo much by humiditie and coldeneſle, but likewiſe by ſuperfluity
of heate and dryneſſe: whereon it happeneth, that cholericke
men (being aduſt and fierie by nature) when they are
in heate, they cannot pronounce perfectly, but doe ſtammer in ſuch
ſort, as ſometime it cannot be diſcerned or gathered what they haue

ſpoken. Yet when they are quiet, and choler quite diſmiſſed, then
doe they vtter theyr mindes with very gracious eloquence. Which
in Phlegmaticke bodies is cleane contrary, who being quiet and
in peace, they ſeeme then as if they could not ſpeake at all: but let
them bee heated or angerly mooued, they talke with ſententious
phraſes, and flowing bountie of verie good words.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The reaſon of this is,How heate helpeth the part imaginatiue, and the tongue. that though it be true, that
heate both helpeth the part imaginatiue, & the tongue too, yet notwithſtanding,
becauſe men being in anger or furie, heate aduaunceth
more of his power, then is needfull or (indeed) conuenient,
he domineereth ouer the imaginatiue part, and thereby ſo immeaſurably
dryeth the tongue, that it cānot articulate the word as it ought
to be ſpoken. Wherfore, being in moderate quiet, theſe kinde of mē
doe ſpeake very well, becauſe (then) they haue that help of heate,
whereof the good imaginatiue part, & the tongue both haue eſpecial
need.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  If the impediment of the tongue in ſpeech, do come by
ſuperfluitie of colde and moiſture, or ſuperaboundance of heate and
dryneſſe: we may then ſay, that the Prince of Iſraels people, the law-deliuerer
Moyſes, he was hindred by the ſelfe ſame infirmitie, when
hauing talked with God, hee became to know his tongues infirmity:
which defect he had not before that time, but onely affirmed, that
he was not eloquent.The Authors conceipt of Moiſes excuſe to God, concerning his imperfection of ſpeech. Therefore, when God would ſend him as an
Ambaſſadour to king Pharao, he deſired the Lord not to ſend him,
but excuſed him ſelfe to God, after this manner ſaying.
                  I beſeech thee (O my Lord) lay not this burden vpon me, becauſe
the execution of ſuch an office, had need of ſuch an eloquent perſon,
as can very readily and with eloquence deliuer his Embaſſie, wherin
I know my ſelfe to be vtterly vnable. For ſince I thy moſt vnworthy
ſeruant, haue been ſo fauoured, as to heare my Lord ſpeake, and that
it hath alſo pleaſed thee, to ſpeak to me: from thence hitherto, I haue
knowne, that I am imperfect of tongue & very tardy in my ſpeech.
Obſecro Domine,
                     Exod. 4. 10. 
                     non ſum eloquens ab herì, & nudiuſtertius: & ex quo
loquutus es ad ſeruum tuum, impeditioris, & tardioris linguae ſum.
                  
                  This is a very great matter, and well worthy of as great conſideration.Moyſes perceiued his imperfection, after his ſpeech with God.
Before Moiſes had reaſoned with God, he very well knewe
that he was not eloquent. But afterward, when he had talked with
God, he thē perceiued him ſelfe plainlie to be a ſtammerer, & very
ſlack in ſpeaking. A farre greater defect is it doubtleſſe, to be a ſtammerer,
then not to be eloquent, becauſe the one is a defect poſitiue,

and the other priuatiue.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  How,The like exā
                        ple of the prophet Ieremie. & by what meanes in your opinion, my Lord, grew
this ſtrange alteration? Perhaps the talking with god cauſed this defect,
and it may be ſo, becauſe Ieremie the Prophet alſo, after that he
had ſpoken with god, found him ſelfe to be ſo depriued of ſpeech,
as he ſaid vnto god. Ah, ah, ah Lord, how is this that thou ſpeakeſt
vnto me? Thou telleſt me, that before I was begotten, thou hadſt elected
me, and before I iſſued foorth of my mothers wombe, thou
ſanctifiedſt me, to the end that I might bee without the blemiſh of
ſinne, and didſt ordaine me a Prophet vnto the nations. But remembring
what thou haſt ſaid vnto me, I finde my ſelfe as a childe, that
knowes not how to forme a word.Ierem. 1. 5. 6. 
                     Priuſquā te formarē in vtero, noui
te, & antequam exires de vulua, ſanctificaui te, & prophetam in gentibus
dedi te. Et dixi, Ah, ah, ah, Domine Deus, ecce neſcio loqui,
quia puer ego ſum. Whereby is euidently diſcerned, that neuer did
the Prophet Ieremie know how to ſpeake, but when God had firſt
ſpoken to him, to ſend him to preach.
                  Daniel the Prophet,
                     Exāple of the prophet Daniel
                           •
                         ſtanding by the riuer Tigris. 
                     a man of a moſt ſingular prerogatiue, in
the time of Cyrus king of Perſia, ſtanding in great heauineſſe,
afflicted with faſting and full of teares, by the ſide of the great
riuer Tigris: God came to reueale a ſecret of mightie importance
to him. And he ſtood as ſmitten dumbe, and could not open
his mouth to ſpeake a word.
                     Dan. 10 15. 16. 17. Cumque loqueretur mihi huiuſmodi
verbis, deieci vultum meum ad terram, & tacui. Et ecce
quaſi ſimilitudo filii hominis tetigit labia mea, & aperiens os meum,
loquuius ſum, & dixi ad eum qui ſtabat contra me. Domine mi, in viſione
iua diſſolutae ſunt compages meae, & nihil in me remanſit virium.
Et quomodo poterit ſeruus Domini mei loqui cum Domino meo?
Nihil enim in me remanſit virium, ſed et bal
                        •
                     us meus includitur &c.
And when he ſpake theſe words vnto me, I ſet my face toward the
ground, and helde my tongue. And beholde, one like the ſimilitude of
the ſonnes of man, touched my lippes: then I opened my mouth, and
ſpake and ſaid vnto him that ſtood before me. O my Lord, by the viſion,
my ſorrows are returned vpon me, and I haue reteined no ſtrength.
For how can the ſeruant of this my Lord, talke with my Lord, being
ſuch a one?Naturall ſtrength and ſpeeche fayled Daniell, in his talking with God. for as for me, ſtraight way there remained no
ſtrength in me, neither is there breath left in me. Wherein alſo
may be euidently noted, that not ſpeech onely, but euen all naturall
ſtrength wanted in Daniel, in the time of this his talking with
the Lord.
                  
                  
                     
                     Moyſes, without requiring any other ſigne of God, in confirmation
of being made his Ambaſſadour: he could holde this onely for
enough;The three exaxamples cō.ferred together. that, of being before but ſlender lie eloquent, hee was then
become alſo defectiue of tongue. And Ieremie, as a manifeſt token
that God had ſpoken to him, could declare this: that hee was become
like a childe, who ſcantly knowes how to forme the beginning
of any word. And Daniel, in atteſtation, that the Lord had
talked with him, alleaged his owne dumbenes.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Many are the anſwers, & all of them very pregnant &
proper, which might bee deliuered for the clearing of this doubt.
Firſt of all we may conceiue,The maieſtie and excellēcie of the preſēce of God. that the diuine Maieſtie is ſo high and
excellent, that all humane ſtrength ſtands as vtterly confounded, &
quite bereft of it ſelfe, euen at his meere preſence, except in mercie
it pleaſe him to vouchſafe ſome comfort. And albeit, in this ſuperabounding
celeſtiall glorie, the bleſſed ſpirits them ſelues haue
no other exerciſe, but to laude and praiſe him eternally (as Saint
Iohn declareth, of thoſe foue myſterious beaſtes, and of the twentie
foure moſt venerable Elders, with infinite multitudes of celeſtiall
ſpirits:) yet notwithſtanding, ſuch is the ouer-flowing
excellency of the Maieſtie diuine, as, little leſſe then ouer-preſſed
with ſuperfluitie of glorie, (after the manner of Peter, Iames and
Iohn vpon the mountaine Tabor,) it caſteth downe all countenances
whatſoeuer, in looking on it. Et ce ciderunt in conſpectu Throni
in facies ſuas,
                     Apoc. 7. 11. 12. 
                     & adorauerunt Deum, dicentes; Amen, Benedictio, &
claritas, & ſapientia, & gratiarum actio, honor & virtus, & fortitudo
Deo noſtro in ſecula ſeculorum. Amen. And they fell before the Throne
on their faces, & worſhipped God. Saying, Amen. Praiſe and glorie, and
wiſedome, & thankes, & honor, and power, and might, be vnto our God
for euermore, Amen.
                  
                  And although of the foure myſterious beaſtes it be written,A noate of no meane importaunce. that
they neuer ceaſed the diuine praiſes of god. Et requiem non habebant,
die ac nocte dicentia:
                     Apoc. 4. 8. 
                     Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus
omnipotens &c. And the like of the Elders, and all the other bleſſed
ſpirits is regiſtred, that they continually lauded god: yet notwithſtanding,
it is alſo written, that they all in like maner helde their
peace.Apoc. 8. 1. 
                     Factum eſt ſilentium in coelo, quaſi media hora. There was a ſilence
in heauen, about halfe an houre.
                  
                  And Dauid in one of his Pſalmes ſaith,Pſal. 65. 1. 
                     That to God there belongeth
ſilence,
                     The differēce in the two tranſlations. according to the tranſlation of S. Ierome; Te decet ſilenti
                           ••
                        
Deus in Ston. Albeit according to the vulgare trāſlatiō, it ſpeaks the

contrary, to wit; Te decet hymnus Deus in Sion. Yet notwithſtanding
all this, theſe two tranſlations are not truelie contrarie, although
at firſt ſight they may ſeeme the one repugnant to the
other.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  How can it be,The interpretation of the word Hymne. but that thoſe tranſlations muſt needes
be contrary, if the one ſay, ſilence belongeth to God, and the other
ſayes, a hymne. Saint Auguſtine alſo nameth a hymne, which
is a Greeke word, and in our language is as much to ſay, as
praiſe with a ſong. What coherence thence hath a hymne with
ſilence, or ſilence with a Song? He that holdes his peace, neyther
praiſeth nor ſingeth. If vnto god there belongeth ſilence,
then is not the hymne conuenient for him: or if the hymne bee
thought agreeable, then is not ſilence to be dedicated to him. Therfore
the one or other tranſlation is falſe, or one of them (vndoubtedly)
ſpeaketh not rightly.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  There is no contrariety in theſe two tranſlations, much
leſſe then are they repugnant one to an other.How the word Hymne and and ſilence agree together. The Hymne importeth
as much as ſilence, and ſilence holdeth equall with the hymne.
Nay then, let me tell you more, that the ſilence whereof now we
ſpeake, is begotten both of the hymne, and alſo of the ſound of
praiſe. And I dare make this additiō, that this ſilence ſpeaketh more,
then praiſe can doe in the hymne.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  I cannot conceiue how ſilence ſhould ſpeake more
then praiſe doth, neither how ſilence is engendred of the hymne.
Well wot I,The queſtion, how ſilence ſpeaketh more, then praiſe doth. that when I am ſilent, I ſpeake not, and when I praiſe
god in a ſong, ſuch as a hymne is, that I ſtand not dumbe in ſilence.
Except you pleaſe to be plainer then thus, I vnderſtand you not, and
this kinde of arguing ſeemes to me, like that of the Tuſcane Poet in
one of his Sonnets.
                  
                     E volo ſopra'l cielo, e ſon' in terra,
                     E nulla ſtringo, e tutto il mondo abbraccio.
                     I fly aboue the heauen, yet am on earth:
                     And gripe at nothing, yet graſpe all the world.
                  
                  Will this ſtrange birth euer bee like to that of Loue, which
brought foorth Ielouſie?Feare enſueth of ouer-much boldneſſe. or comparable to feare, that ſometime
is begotten by ouermuch boldeneſſe? whereon the ſame Poet
wrote.
                  
                     Sento di troppo ardir naſcer paura.
                     Of ouer-bolde, I finde that feare is bred.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Lodouico.
                  I ſayde,The anſwer, how ſilence is begotten of the Hymne: wheron he alleadgeth his firſt proofe. and ſo ſay ſtill, that this kind of ſilence is
produced by the Hymne, becauſe the celeſtiall ſpirits, beholding
the infinite maieſty of God, do breake foorth into continuall diuine
prayſes. But ſuch is the greatneſſe of the ſubject, as they are quite
tranſported out of themſelues, and in a ſweet obliuion of their-then-preſent eſtate, they are al as rapt vp with a maruellous aſtoniſhment
of God. Nor know they then otherwiſe how to do or ſay, (beeing
ouercome by this infinite admiration of Gods high glory) but euen
to ſtand all ſilent, diuinely contemplating this exceeding maieſty, &
ſo holding their peace, they do yet giue prayſes with their thoughts
mute voyces, & ſo ſing praiſes to him ſilently. Thus of the Hymne is
ſilence begotten.
                  I ſayd alſo,His ſecond proofe, how ſilence praiſeth more then the Hymne cā do. that this kind of ſilence praiſeth more, then the Hymne
can do. Becauſe, more ſwiftly do ſtil thoughts run in contemplation,
wherewith the bleſſed ſpirits prayſe the Lorde, then the quickeſt
tongue in the world, can beſtir it ſelfe in the forming of wordes.
And theſe voyces doe praiſe more, beeing thus bleſſedly in contemplation,
and with ſo ſacred a taciturnity, then the glibbeſt
tongue can reache vnto, with longeſt or loudeſt ſpeeche. Becauſe
the very ſubiect it ſelfe, outgoeth the greateſt and higheſt Oratorie.
                  What maruayle was it then,His anſwere concerning Moyſes, Ieremie and Daniell. Apoc. 8. 2. if Moyſes (hauing talked with god)
found an impediment in his tongue, and Ieremie knew not how to
forme a word; and Daniel remained as dumbe? when euen the ſanctified
ſpirits (themſelues) do hold their peace, and are driuen to ſilence,
onely by the woonderfull excellency of the obiect? Factum eſt
ſilentium in coelo. And ſo much the rather, becauſe thoſe ſpoken of
were but mortall men, and the other, are both immortall, and euer
bleſſed.
                  It is a matter oftentimes experimented,The greatnes of the perſon may daunte the beſt Oratour in his ſpeaking. that the greatneſſe of the
ſubiect, for, or to whome the ſpeeche is prepared, dooth daunt the
Oratour in ſuch ſort, as he becomes forgetfull of what he would ſay:
albeit the Oration had bin long time before premeditated, and conned
perfectly by heart, as we vſe to tearme it. Whereof I could alleadge
many examples, which for ciuilities ſake I am enforced to
forbeare.
                  Onely let me remember you but of the Queene of Saba,
                     Example of the Queene of Saba, comming to king Salomon: his third proofe. who
departed from her owne royall kingdome, to heare the admired
wiſedome of Salomon. Being come to Ieruſalem, and beholding
there the riches of Salomon, the adornements of the Temple, the

pretiouſneſſe of the veſſels, the beauty of the Kings Palace, the ſitting
of his ſeruants, their ſumptuous preparation, their coſtly foode
and variety of viands, the Maieſty of the kings perſon, his vnmatchable
wiſedome, and his ſpeeches deliuered with ſurpaſſing
grace. By ouer-abounding amazemēt, ſhe was quite caried from her
ſelfe, and ſhe had not ſo much boldneſſe left her, as but to ſpeak, neither
ſtrength to go, or ability to mooue, but ſtood tranſported with
vnſpeakable aſtoniſhment, euen like a body without a ſoule. So that
the holy ſcripture ſaith;2. King. 10. 5. 
                     Non habebat vltra spiritū; There was no more
ſpirit in her.
                  
                  What ſhall we hold it then to be,The example vrged on gods behalfe, and ſpeaking in his preſence. for vs to ſee and ſpeake with
God himſelfe, as did Moyſes, Ieremy and Daniel? Can there be any
greater amazement, to ſtrike dumbe, and make the tongue falter &
be imperfect, when euen the bleſſed themſelues do fall into ſuch an
extaſie? why then, I may wel ſay, that thus they prayſe him more by
ſilence, then they can by the Hymne; Te decet ſilentium Deus. Which
is a thing vnſpeakable, & goes beyond al humane power, & euen Angelical
praiſe it ſelf. Quantum potes, tantum aude, quia maior omni laude,
nec laudare ſufficis.
                  
                  Hereupon,His fourth proofe, by Dauid. and much to this purpoſe, Dauid hath a moſt excellent
ſentence: Cogitatio hominis confitebitur tibi, & reliquiae cogitationum
diem feſtum agent tibi. As if he wold haue ſayd. Lord, the iuſt man,
perceiuing thy greatneſſe,Pſal. 75. 10. prayſeth thee, and in his prayſings, is filled
full of moſt ſweete rauiſhing thoughts,The māner of the iuſt mans praiſing of God. which make ſo deep an
impreſſion into his mind, as they ceaſe not to ſolemnize & haile thee
for euer.
                  Likewiſe the bleſſed Saintes, ſinging thy diuine prayſes, do fall
into a merueilous aſtoniſhment.How the bleſſed ſing the praiſes of god. And this is the ſilence, wherewith,
pleaſing themſelues, they euermore laude thee, and in
their lauding, contemplate thee the higheſt Creatour after this
manner.Apoc. 4. 8. 
                     Non ceſſant clamare quotidie vna voce dicentes; Sanctus,
Sanctus, Sanctus Dominus Deus exercituum. And they ceaſed
not dayly to cry with one voyce, ſaying: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God
of Hoaſts.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  If at al houres, and euery moment, the celeſtiall ſpirits do
giue prayſe, both with a contemplatiue ſilence, and yet with voyces
alſo, do ſing to the ſoueraigne maieſty diuine, as you ſay: what needed
Dauid then to haue inuited them to laude him, in the Pſalme by
you ſo lately alleaged, as if otherwiſe they did not laude him at all?
His words are theſe. Laudate Dominum omnes Angeli eius, laudate eum

omnes virtutes eius. Praiſe ye the lord, all ye his Angels, praiſe him
all his Army.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  
                     Saint Auguſtine anſwers your demaund concerning
that Pſalme,
                     S. Auguſtines anſwer to this point. 
                     and that in very gratious manner alſo, ſaying. Although
it be moſt true, that the Angels, and all the bleſſed ſpirits are
neuer weary, neither can be wearied in their praiſes to God, (whereon
Saint Iohn ſayeth; Cantabant quaſi canticum nouum; They ſung
as it were a new ſong;Apoc. 14. 3. not that the Song was new, but by the great
ſweetneſſe, they receiued in the praiſes diuine, it ſeemed to them as
a new Song, onely by the inexplicable dulcitude therein contained:)
Yet notwithſtanding, Dauid inuites them after ſuch manner,
Compariſō of a Gardiner & his ſeruants. as the father of a family vſeth to doe. Or as a Gardiner,
who beholding his spade-men to labour luſtily, euen contending
(as it were) for moſt speede and agility, eache one ſeeking to
out-ſtrip his companion: Hee (in meere ioye) ſeeing in them
ſuch diligent cheerefulneſſe, ſayes to them. On, gallant ſpirits,
on, you labour luſtily. Nor ſpeakes he this, as if he thought them to
be ſlothfull and negligent, for he plainely perceiues them to worke
with courage: but, as one ouercome with ioy and contentment. Euen ſo
ſpake Dauid to thoſe celeſtiall ſpirits; Laudate Deum omnes Angeli
eius, &c.
                  But to returne to our own purpoſe,The ſame reaſon alleaged for Moyſes, Ieremy and Daniel. it is not to be maruailed at, if
(by the like or ſame reaſon) Moyſes found a defect to be in his tōgue,
if Ieremy & Daniel were ſmittē as dumb: being al aſſayled by the excellency
of ſuch a ſubiect, & glorious maieſty of the higheſt Creator,
whereupon the wiſe man ſayd:Prouerb. 25. 28 
                     Qui ſcrutator eſt maieſtatis, opprimetur
a gloria.
                  
                  Saint Paul was a great Preacher,Example of S. Pauls rapture. and a moſt eloquent Orator: neuertheleſſe,
he being mounted aboue the third heauen, & there beholding
the diuine ſecrets, he knew not what to ſay, but onely that
they were inexplicable. Audiuit arcana verba quae non licet homini loqui.
                     2. Cor. 12. 4. 
                     He heard words which cannot be ſpoken, which are not poſſible for
man to vtter.
                  
                  VVe may alſo ſay in anſwere of the before named doubt,Another anſwer, by our owne cōming to the knowledge of god. ſpeaking
of Moyſes and of Ieremy, that, when we our ſelues do come to
the knowledge of god, the more that knowledge encreaſeth in vs, ſo
much the more will our ſtrength grow enfeebled. And perceiuing
therby our own leſſe aptneſſe, both to his diuine praiſes, and alſo to
the right cognition of his infinite maieſty, we do come euen then to
the true knowledge of our own inſufficiency and vileneſſe.
                  
                     
Therefore,Moyſes excuſing of himſelfe to God. when Moyſes had heard God ſpeake to him, he
found himſelfe to be the leſſe fit for ſpeaking to men. Whereupon
grew his excuſe, that he was vnmeete for the meſſage to Pharaoh:
but much more need there was, that God would make choiſe of his
brother and companion Aaron, he being a man moſt eloquent. Obſecro
Domine,
                     Exod. 4. 10. 
                     non ſum eloquens ab heri & nudiuſtertius: & ex
quo loquutus es ad ſeruum tuum, impeditioris, & tardioris linguae
ſum.
                  
                  Whence we may learne this celeſtiall doctrine,The loue of heauen killeth the loue of the world. that, by how
much the more a man delighteth himſelfe in heauenly occaſions,
ſo much the leſſe apt ſhall he be for worldly matters, becauſe one
loue abates and extinguiſheth another. The loue of God chaſeth away
all loue of our ſelues, and of the world, & the neerer we neighbour
to our owne reſpect and vaine eſteeme of worldly affayres, the
further off are we from the loue of heauen.
                  The more a man talketh of God,The more we talke of God, the more we knowe our owne infirmities. and groweth to be truely holy,
the more knowledge hath he of his owne defects, euen as by the
brightneſſe of the day, the darke obſcurity of the night is diſcerned.
Therefore Daniel reputed himſelfe vnwoorthy, to talke vnto
God, ſaying; Quomodo poterit ſeruus Domini mei loqui cum Domino
meo?
                     Dan. 10. 17. 
                     How can the ſeruant of this my Lord talke with my Lord? As if he
would haue ſayd. I am not woorthy to behold, much leſſe to ſpeake
to the maieſty of my Lord, becauſe I am but a worme of the earth,
vile dirt and aſhes. And, in great humility, our forefather Abraham
vſed the like ſpeeches to God:Gen. 18. 27. 
                     Loquar ad Dominum meum, cùm ſim
puluis & cinis, I haue begun to ſpeake vnto my Lord, and I am but duſt
and aſhes.
                  
                  We may yet hereto adde another notable myſtery vpō this place,
conforming it to the opinion of the Philoſopher,Men are maſters of ſpeech, but God only is maſter of ſilence. who ſayd: that of
ſpeeche, men are maſters, but of ſilence, God onely is maſter. For
Moyſes, before he talked with god, ſpake well and freely enough:
but ſo ſooone as god ſpake to him, he became a ſtammerer. And Ieremy,
ſpeaking at the firſt very readily, god hauing ſpoken to him, he
knew not how to ſhape a word. Euen as Daniel (in the like manner)
became dumbe.
                  Al which happened,The differēce between our ſpeaking to God, and to men. becauſe there is great difference, between
our ſpeaking to god, and our conferring with men. In our ſpeaking
to god, we learne to be ſilent, as may be diſcerned by thoſe former
alleadged examples. And in that to men, we learne nothing elſe but
to talke onely. For he that among men talketh not, is held to be a

melancholiſt, blamed for a Saturniſte, reprooued with vnciuill
conuerſation, accuſed of vnmanlyneſſe, thought to be a clowniſh
companion, and nothing meete to holde ſocietye among
men.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  But the Apoſtles learned not like ſuch men to be
ſilent,How the Apoſtles learned their ſpeaking. for in regarde that they continually conuerſed with Chriſt,
by the meanes of him, they were made meet to receiue the holy
ghoſt. VVhich not onely depriued them of all dumbneſſe, or
other impediment in theyr ſpeeche, but, they being before
rude men of tongue, it altered them to moſt expert and eloquent
Oratours,No Oratour coulde equal any of the Apoſtles. yea, in euery kind of language. So that there was
no Oratour or Philoſopher, how learned or skilfull ſoeuer he
was, that coulde equall or goe beyond them, or knew how
to anſwere or conuince them in diſputation. Therefore, that
which Tyrantes coulde not attayne to, by deſpighting their
tongues; by rage, violence and cruell torture they compaſſed againſt
them.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  They firſt of all learned to be ſilent,The Apoſtles learned ſilēce before ſpeaking. ere to ſpeake,
and obſerued taciturnity, before ſpeech: that therfore when they began
to ſpeake, they might the better deliuer any other language, then
before that time they had vſed, and talk of another ſubiect then as yet
they had dealt in.
                  And as Ieremie in no one thing more ſhewed himſelf to be ſanctified,
and created a Prophet of the Lordes owne making, then
by becomming like a child,The ſeuerall compariſous produced together, for approbation of the Apoſtles ſpeaking. depriued of his ſpeech; and euen at
the very inſtant (as a very child) ſayd to the Lord Ah, Ah, Ah.
And as Daniel, in nothing elſe declared ſo manifeſtly, that God
had ſpoken to him, as by his loſſe of ſpeeche. And as Prince
Moyſes gaue no greater a ſigne of his talking with God, and of
his being choſen for his Embaſſador, and guide to the people of
Iſraell, then when ſuddenly he became ſtammering, and imperfect
of tongue: Euen ſo the holy Apoſtles, in nothing elſe more
apparantly witneſſed, that they had receiued the holy ghoſt, then
when by ſpeaking in ſeuerall new languages, it ſhewed in them
more vnuſuall, then their firſt accuſtomed ſpeeche was woont
to doo.
                  VVherein euidently may be diſcerned,What they learne, that talke with God. that ſuch as talke with
God, doo either learne to hold their peace, or to ſpeake otherwiſe
then at the firſt they did; The tongue being reformed, as
in like manner the hart is reformed, and ſo conſequently both

life and conſcience. For a good conſcience and a wicked tongue,
can neuer dwell together in one and the ſame habitation. He therfore
that talketh with God, either wanteth words and is ſilent,
or breaketh foorth into diuine diſcourſing, which is not our
talking, but our ſilence, as we haue before ſufficientlye prooued.
                  And euen in as abſolute manner may we ſay, that all they, which
in ſuch ſort do conferre with God,All that confer with God, learne ſilence. they learne nothing elſe but to
hold their peace, becauſe this new language is not ours, but it commeth
from God only. Non enim vos eſtis qui loquimini, ſed Spiritus
Patris veſtri,
                     Math. 10. 20. 
                     qui loquitur in vobis. It is not you that ſpeake, but the Spirit
of your Father, which ſpeaketh in you.
                  
               
               Finis Cap. 21.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  To the end, that in our diſcourſing we ſhould not grow offenſiue to God,
it behooueth vs (with deuout heartes) to beg of him that he would
purifie our minds, and purge our lippes. According as Dauid
did, who prayed to the Lord, that he would open his mouth, to the
end that he might woorthily praiſe him. And, without him, we cannot
speake well, becauſe he hath the keye of our mouth. Which is
approoued by a ſentence produced out of Eſay, where he ſayth, that
Chriſt is the key of Dauid. He therewith openeth the mouth, and
giueth not much of what we know to aske for, becauſe we ſhould require
things correſpondent to his greatneſſe. Moreouer, not onely
are the lippes opened therewith, but likewiſe the heart, the vnderſtanding,
the Scriptures, types and figures, yea, heauen it ſelfe, and
the mouthes of the Saintes and Prophets: and without this keye, all
things remaine ſhut vp, and euery mouth dumbe.
               
               Chap. 22.
               
                  
                     CLAVDIO.
                  I hold it then moſt neceſſary, leaſt
that our manner of communing together,What the Apoſtles did after Chriſtes aſcenſion vp into heauen. do fal
out to be guilty of blame, and woorthy of reprehenſion:
that we ſhould imitate the bleſſed
Apoſtles: who after they had gotten the ſweete
aſpect of the humanity of Ieſus Chriſt, by his
glorious aſcēſion vp to heauen, within few daies
after, they publiſhed to the world the holy faith, manifeſting to
euery one, the redemption made by the pretious bloud of

the Sonne of God, to baniſh idolatry, to illuminate the vnderſtanding
of Infidels, ouerſhadowed with the miſty fogge of vnbeleefe,
and by the extirpating of wicked vices, to ſowe plentifully vertues
all abroade. So all of them, returning deuoutly with the virgin
Mary into a place of quiet, there, with fiery ſpirits, enflamed
harts and earneſt deſires, they prayed to the Lord, that he would ſend
them the promiſed holy ghoſt: which ſhould fill them with ſanctified
zeale, and purifie their minds, diſperſe all cloudes of ſin, make
cleane their harts, purge their vnderſtandings, and refine their lips
with the burning fire of diuine loue. To the end, that their harts
might not contriue, nor their lips deliuer one word, diſagreeable to
the honor of god, iniurious to themſelues, or any way vnprofitable to
their neighbour.
                  In like manner,A dutie required on our behalfe. let vs beſeech the holy ghoſt, that the tongue
may not mooue, to miniſter a word, comming from an vncleane
thought; to the end our ſpeech may be free from folly. But that, as
they had the holy ghoſt, in the forme of fiery tongues; (Apparuerunt
illis diſpertitae linguae tanquam ignis,
                     Acts. 2. 3. 4. 
                     ſeditque ſupra ſingulos eorum:
Et repleti ſunt omnes Spiritu Sancto; There appeared vnto them clouen
tongues, like fire, and it ſate vpon eache of them: And they were all
filled with the holy Ghoſt.) Euen ſo, that all our talke may be enflamed
with chriſtian charity.Prayer the beſt way to begin withall. And for our better attayning herunto,
let vs firſt haue recourſe (as the Apoſtles had) to prayer: Erant omnes
perſeuerantes vnanimiter in oracione cum mulieribus,
                     Acts. 1. 14. 
                     & Maria
Maire Ieſu, & fratribus eius. They al continued with one accord, in prayer
& ſupplication with the women, and Mary the mother of Ieſus, and
with his brethren.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  The like did all the holy Fathers and Doctors:The Fathers and Doctours of the church vſed prayer. before
they prepared themſelues to their ſtudy, they would be priuate
in their Oratories, where (humbly on their knees) they implored
the help of heauen, in aſſiſtance of whatſoeuer they preſently
ſhould vndertake. Which gaue ſuch a bleſſing to all their labours,
being both begun and ended in prayer, as they were able to
reſolue all doubtes, expound all difficulte places, and we (from
them) to this day, haue the benefite of theyr ſanctified trauayles.
                  The ſame courſe alſo the Prophets obſerued.Dauids prayer for the opening of his mouth. Whereupon, Dauid,
knowing how eaſily a man might break ſilence by vain words,
deſired the Lord to open his lippes. Domine labia mea aperies, &
os meum annuntiabit laudem tuam.
                     Pſalm. 51. 15. 
                     Open thou my lips O Lord, and

my mouth ſhall ſhew foorth thy praiſe: to the end, that a holy touche of
Gods own hand, might purifie his mouth, euen as if it were to another
Ieremy.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Is there ſuch a difficultie in opening of the mouth,The hand of God muſt opē Dauids mouth. as
it muſt needs require the hand of God? We reade (notwithſtanding
your words) that Dauid opened his own mouth. Os meum aperui, &
attraxi spiritum;
                     Pſal. 119. 131. 
                     I opened my mouth, and panted; he was not then dumb
neither had his lips ſo contracted, that he ſhould need another to open
his lips. On what occaſion then ſhould he deſire the Lord, to
open his lips? Is the mouth a door lockt with a key, that Dauid of
himſelf could not open it, or had the Lord the key of his mouth in
keeping?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  There needeth no queſtion to be made,The mouth cōpared to a gate. but that the
mouth is after the manner of a gate, whereof the lips are as the very
door. If the mouth were not the door of the hart, Dauid neuer wold
haue ſayd:Pſalm. 141. 3. 
                     Pone Domine cuſtodiam orimeo, & oſtium circumſtantiae
labijsmeis:
                     Eccle. 28. 25. 
                     Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keepe the
doore of my lips. And his Son alſo would not haue ſayd: Orituo facito
oſtia, & ſeras auribus tuis: Make a door and a bar, and a ſure bridle for
thy mouth.
                  
                  If then the mouth be the door of the hart,The hart is a mans Exchequer or treaſurie. and the hart the Exchequer
or treaſury of whatſoeuer is pretious in man, and eſpecially
of life it ſelfe, as the wiſe man ſayth; Omni cuſtodia ſerua cor tuum,
quoniam ab ipſo vita procedit; Keep thine hart with all diligence, for
therout commeth life:
                     Prouerb. 4. 23. I ſhould hould it very requiſite, that the gate of
ſuch a pretious treaſary,The Lord only hath the key of the mouth. ought not to be free and ſet wide open to euery
one, but rather, that a ſound firme door ſhold be made before it,
well lockt and lookt vnto, the key wherof the Lord only hath, and he
alone gouerns it, as Salomon ſaith; Domini eſt gubernare linguam; The
Lord is the gouernour of the tongue.
                     Prouerb. 16. 2. When Dauid opened his mouth,Pſal. 81. 10.
it was becauſe god had before opened it, or giuē him the key wherwith
to open it, which cauſed him once to ſay: Dilata os tuum, & implebo
illud. Open thy mouth wide and I wil fill it.
                  
                  The mouth of that man,Of the mouth wherof the Lord keepeth not the keye. wherof the Lord keeps not & guideth the
key, remayns wide open, & al vncleanneſſe entring into it, it deliuers
foorth much euil, & is the occaſion of infinit diſorders. Which made
Dauid to compare it to a ſtinking graue, full of all filthineſſe. Sepulchrum
patens eſt guttur eorum,
                     Pſal. 5. 9. 
                     linguis ſuis doloſe agebāt. Their throat
is an open ſepulcher, and they flatter with their tongue. And this enſueth,
becauſe the tongue is not kept, and lockt vp by the Lord: therfore

it is not apt to ſpeak wel, but to vtter foorth notorious blaſphemies.
                  The bleſſed Apoſtles,Of the bleſſed Apoſtles, and holy Martyres. and al the holy Martyrs, who ouercame the
bloudieſt Tyrants with no mean amazemeut, by being moſt rare &
eloquent Orators: Chriſt both opened & did ſhut their mouthes, ſaying
to them.Luk. 21. 14. 15. 
                     Ponite ergo in cordibus veſtris non praemeditari quemadmodum
reſpondeatis. Ego enim dabo vobis os, & ſapientiam, cui non poterunt
reſiſtere omnes aduerſarij veſtri. Lay it vp therfore in your harts,
that you premeditate not what you ſhall anſwer. For I will giue you a
mouth, and wiſedom, where-againſt all your aduerſaries ſhal not be able
to speake,
                     The Authors inſinuation. 
                     nor reſiſt. As if he would haue ſaid. My ſons, reſolue with
your ſelues, that when you come before Tyrants, you enter not into
any premeditation, of what you ſhal anſwer them: for I wil mooue
your tongues mith ſuch wiſedom, as your very greateſt enemies ſhal
remain confounded, ſo that they ſhal be no way able to anſwer you.
Wherby may be clearly diſcerned,God hath the keye of the iuſt mans mouth. that God hath the key of the iuſt
mans mouth.
                  
                     Therefore Saint Iohn the Euangeliſt, the Secretary to Chriſt,
and profound ſearcher into celeſtiall ſecrets, writing by diuine
commaundement to the Biſhoppe of Philadelphia ſayth. Et Angelo
Philadelphiae eccleſiae ſcribe.Apoc. 3. 7. Haec dicit Sanctus & verus, qui
habet clauem Dauid, qui aperit, & nemo claudit, claudit, & nemo aperit.
Aed write vnto the Angell of the Church which is of Philadelphia.
Theſe things ſayth he that is Holy and True, which hath the key of
Dauid, which openeth, and no man ſhutteth, and ſhutteth, and no man
openeth.
                  If God haue the key of Dauid,
                     Why Dauid deſired the lord to open his mouth. it was no maruell then if he deſired
the Lord, that he would open his mouth, to the end he might
ſpeak without breach of ſilence. Domine labia mea aperies. The lord
likewiſe vouchſafe (in his mercy) to open our mouthes,Pſal. 51. 15. to the end we
may ſpeak woorthily of him, and then our talk ſhall neuer break ſilence.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  In ſearch and reſearch of the whole hiſtory of Dauid,
I could neuer yet find that he had any ſuch key.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  The myſtery muſt be ſought,Seueral expoū
                        dings of the key of Dauid. where the letter hath not
the ſenſe. Some do expoūd, that this key is the fulneſſe of the knowledge
and wiſedom of Chriſt.
                  
                     Aimonius ſaith,The expoſitiō of Aimonius. that this key is the incarnation of the word, which
(as concerning the humanity) had originall from Dauid, to whom
by eſpeciall prerogatiue it was giuen, to know the myſtery of the

incarnation.
                  
                     Helimanus ſayth,The expoſitiō of Helimanus. that this key is the grace of wiſedome, ariſing
from Chriſt the fountain of wiſedome.
                  Others doo affirme,Others, alluding it to the paſtoral office that this keye ſignifieth the Prelacy and
office paſtorall, which by ſoundneſſe of doctrine, accompanied
with good example of life, opens heauen to the godly; And contrariwiſe,
by ignorance & lewd courſe of life, opēs hel both to the wicked
and to themſelues.
                  Others woulde haue it,Others, to the power of binding and looſing. to bee the power of binding
and looſing, accompanied bothe with knowledge and order.
                  Others would haue it to be chriſt himſelfe,Others, to Chriſt himſelf who (as God) here
openeth the hart to holy inſpirations, the vnderſtanding to beleefe,
the will to loue, and Paradiſe to reigne in. All which are to be gotten
by this key, with endleſſe ſweating, innumerable ſufferings,
teares of bloud, and infamous death. Data eſt mihi omnis poteſtas in
coelo, & in terra.
                     Math. 28. 18. 
                     All power is giuen vnto me in heauen, and in earth.
And perhaps it was of this key,Eſay. 22. 22. the Prophet Eſay ſpake to Eliacim
the Prieſt, ſaying. Dabo clauem domus Dauid ſuper humerum
eius: And the key of the houſe of Dauid wil I lay vpon his ſhoulders.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  What keye is ſo heauy and ponderous, as need ſhoulde
require to lay it on a mans ſhoulder? A keye is vſually caried faſtened
to the girdle, or hid in ones pocket, purſe, boſome, or carried
in the hand,His queſtion for further ſatisfaction in this point. not on the ſhoulder. And ſo much the rather doo I
vrge this queſtion, becauſe, that the fulneſſe of the wiſedome of
Chriſte, nor the incarnation of the word, nor the grace of wiſdome,
nor the office of Prelacie, nor the power of binding or looſing
nor Chriſte himſelf is a weight ſo burdenous as to be caried on the
ſhoulders of a man.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  And yet it is ſo. What greater burthen is there I pray
you,The burthen impoſed on the Cleargy, & the ſeueral duties required in him toward his flock. then that of the Prelate? who ought to watch with Argus eyes,
and haue a vigilant care of his beloued flock, making ſpare of no
toyle or diſcommodity whatſoeuer. Sometimes ought he to feed
them with the bleſſed ſacraments, then with the foode of healthfull
doctrine. Now muſt he entice them with celeſtiall promiſes, thē
againe threaten them with eternall paines. Sometimes muſt he go
before them in holineſſe of life, and vertuous examples: then againe
ought he to follow them, with the knotted ſtaffe of repentance.
                  
                     
Now muſt he comfort them with ſweeteſt ſpeeches, then terrifie
them with rough and ſtearne reprehenſions.Compariſō of a mother trauayling with childe. And euen, as
if he trauailed with them, like as a mother dooth with her burthen,
and afterward had brought them foorth: ſo ſhould he
hugge them in his boſome, hauing the ſelfe ſame loue and reſpect
towards them, as a mother hath of her deer eſteemed Sonne, and
of them, as of himſelfe, and for them, as for himſelfe, for rendring
of his account in the day of lateſt iudgement, before the higheſt
ſheepheard and cheefeſt Prelate of all, euen God himſelfe. And do
you think (my Lord) that this loade lies lightly vpon the Churchmās
ſhoulders?
                  No leſſe painefull and greeuous is the power of binding & looſing,
The painfull burdē of binding and looſing. becauſe he to whom ſuch a charge is commitred, may (by his
own ignorance) looſe both his own, and all the ſoules committed vnder
his cure. As contrary wiſe, by his wiſedom, learning and chriſtiā
prouidence, he may alſo be the meanes to preſerue both them and
himſelfe.
                  The fulneſſe of grace in Chriſt Ieſus,The fulnes of grace in Ieſus Chriſte, and how the keye is applied to him. beſide that it is the key, and
beginning of our ſaluation, becauſe thereby the prophecies were
fulfilled, types and figures finiſhed, ſins cancelled, faults pardoned,
grace receiued, hell cloſed, heauen opened, Moyſes lawes concluded,
and the Goſpell declared: So, was it not a moſt painfull burthen
vnto Chriſt (according to the power of fleſh & bloud) to accōpliſh ſo
much in himſelfe, and to be the onely Captaine of ſo ſignall a victory?
                  Chriſt himſelf,Chriſte according to his humanitie, deſcē
                        ded of Dauid. who alone here vpon earth did open heauen, is this
key of Dauid; according to his humanity, deſcēding from the honorable
& royal ſtock of Dauid. A key very weighty to weak ſēſe, marueilous
burthenous to the diuel, a great load to the Gentiles, and of
infinite poiſe to the perfidious Iewes.
                  
                     Chriſt truely is that key,
                     The Croſſe of Chriſt the hā
                        dle or holde of this keye. 
                     and the hould faſt or handle to this
keye, was his glorious Croſſe made. Becauſe thereon hee
woulde open the adamantine gates of heauen. VVherefore,
ſpeaking of himſelfe, he ſayde. Oportes exaltari filium hominis:
Iohn. 3. 14. 15. vt omnis qui credit in ipſo, non pereat, ſed habeat vitam aeternam.
So muſt the ſonne of man be lift vp: That whoſoeuer
beleeueth in him, ſhoulde not periſh, but haue euerlaſting
life.
                  Before the death of Chriſt, through the lack of this key handle
the Croſſe (which with diſgrace) he afterward bare, for our honour

and eternall ſaluation) heauen was continually ſhut vp,Til Chriſt ſuffered on the Croſſe, heauē was continually lockt vp before. by reaſon of
the auncient enmity between God and man. Wherupon, euery one,
and very iuſtly too, ſhould (whether he would or no) haue deſcended
into the darke dungeon of the infernall parts. But no ſooner was the
key, Chriſt, faſtened to the handle of his Croſſe, but immediately
heauen opened.The ſigne of heauens preſēt opening. And, as a ſigne of the then preſent opening, at the
very ſame houre that Chriſt dyed, he ſayd to the good theefe: Hodie
mecum eris in paradiſo: This day thou ſhalt be with mee in paradiſe.
                     Luk. 23 43.
                  
                  Many would gladly haue entred Paradiſe before,Before chriſts death many ſought to enter paradiſe, but could not. but they cold
neuer compaſſe it, becauſe this key was wanting to them. Whereupon,
in regard the gate was adamantine, impearceable, or elſe very
ſtrictly ſhut vp: they deſired, either that the walles of heauen might
be broken, or that he would deſcend to them vpon earth: Vtinam
dirumperes coelos,
                     Eſay. 64. 2. 
                     & deſcenderes. Oh that thou wouldeſt break
the heauens, and come downe. Or that he would ſend the Lamb,
which might appeaſe the Godheades diſpleaſure, that peace
beeing obtayned,Eſay. 16. 1. heauen might bee opened. Emitte Agnum
Domine dominatorem terrae.
                     Gods ſending of the key. Stay a little while, ſayth God, and
then I will quickly ſend you the key.Eſay. 22. 22. 
                     Dabo clauem domus Dauid
ſuper humerum eius, & aperiet, & non erit qui claudat. So ſhal you
enter in at the doore as friends, and not climb ouer the walles like
theeues.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  But wherfore is Chriſt called the key of Dauid, if Dauid
neuer gaue him any key?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Do you not know (my Lord) that the fortreſſes,An excellent compariſō for proofe of the key. placed
at our vtmoſt confines, are commonly called the keyes of this
kingdome, becauſe they are ſeated in the beginning of the dominion.
And they being ſurprized, the whole kingdome is eaſily
taken, either by beſieging, or by ſtrength of armes, becauſe they
are the originall,How Chriſt is called the key of Dauid. doors and keys of the kingdome? So Chriſt is called
the key of Dauid, becauſe he is the originall of Dauid, as concerning
his diuinity,Rom. 1. 3. yet deſcēdeth of Dauid, according to his humanity:
Ex ſemine Dauid ſecundum carnem: Of the ſeede of Dauid, according
to the fleſh.
                  
                  And euen (as with a key) is ſhut and made faſt the door of a houſe:Compariſō of a key that locks the door of an houſe.
So, no one of the Prophets, being lockt vp neuer ſo faſt, opens better
to our vnderſtanding, and reueales the myſtery of the incarnatiō,
like vnto Dauid; To whom god (by an oath) promiſed the Meſſias.
Iurauit Dominus Dauid veritatem,
                     Pſalm. 132. 11. 
                     & non fruſtrabitur eum; De fructu

ventris tui ponam ſuper ſedem tuā. The Lord hath ſworne in truth vnto
Dauid, and he will not ſhrink from it: Of the fruite of thy body wil I ſet
vpon thy throne.
                  
                  Before the eternall father ſent this key into the world,1. The gate of heauen. and long
ere the Iewes prepared the Croſſe,Iohn. 3. 13. all the gates whatſoeuer were faſt
lockt vp. That of heauen: Nemo aſcendit in coelum, niſi qui deſcendit
de coelo. No man aſcendeth vp to heauen, but he that hath deſcended frō
heauen.
                  
                  
                     That of terreſtriall Paradiſe,
                     2. The gate of terreſtriall Paradiſe. 
                     kept by the Angel with a fiery ſword:
Collocauit ante paradiſum voluptatis Cherubim, & flammeum gladium
at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      verſatilem,Gen. 3. 24. ad cuſtodiendam viam ligni vitae. At the Eaſt-ſide of
the Garden of Eden, he ſet the Cherubims, and the blade of a ſword ſhaken
to keep the way of the tree of life.
                  
                     That of diuine myſteries;
                     2. Cor. 10. 11. Omnia in figura contingebant illis: Al theſe
things came vnto them for examples.3. The gate of heauenly myſteries.
                  
                  
                     That of the ſenſe of ſacred ſcripture: Quomodo poſſum intelligere
niſi aliquis oſtenderit mihi?Acts. 8. 31. How can I vnderſtand, except I had
a guide?4. The gate of holy ſcripture
                  
                  
                     That of the maruails of God: Non intellexerunt opera Domini: They
vnderſtood not the works of the Lord.5. The gate of gods maruels.
                  
                  
                     That of the Prophets mouthes:
                     Pſal. 28. 5. Ah. Ah. Ah. Domine ecce necſcio loqui.
6. The gate of the Prophets mouths. Ah. Ah. Ah. Lord I cannot speak. Domine labia mea aperies: Open
thou, O Lord, my lips. Et ecce erts tacens, & non poteris loqui: And behold
thou ſhalt be dumb, and not able to speak.
                  
                     That of the Tabernacle with the vaile:
                     Ierem. 1. 6. Prima die menſis primi, eriges
tabernaculum teſtimonij.Pſal. 51. 15. Et pones in eo arcam,Luke. 1. 20. dimitteſque
ante illam velum.7. The gate of the Tabernacle. The firſt day of the firſt moneth, thou ſhalt ſet
vp the Tabernacle, called the Tabernacle of the Cōgregatiō. And thou
ſhalt put therin the Arke of the Teſtimony, and couer the Arke with
the vaile.Exod. 40. 2.
                  
                  But Chriſt being come,How all theſe gates opened at the cōming of Chriſt. and the key handle of his Croſſe faſtened
to him; euen like the opening of a lock, ſo were all things preſently
opened and diſſolued.
                  
                     Foorthwith rent in two parts the vaile of the Temple:
                     1. The temple. Velum
templi ſciſſum eſt in duas partes, à ſummo vſque deorſum.Math. 27. 51. And
hehold the vaile of the Temple rent in twane, from the top to the bottome.
                  
                     The Prophets mouthes opened:
                     2. The Prophets mouths. Apertum eſt illicò os Zachariae,
& Prophetauit. And his mouth was opened immediatly, and he prophecied.Luke. 1. 64.
                  
                  
                     
                     The ſcriptures were opened and declared:
                     3. The ſcriptures. Tunc aperuit illis ſenſū,
vt intelligerent ſcripturas: Then opened he their vnderſtanding, that
they might vnderſtand the Scriptures.Luke. 24. 45.
                  
                  
                     Chriſts ſide opened:
                     4. Chriſts ſide. Lancea latus eius aperuit: A speare opened his
ſide.Iohn. 19. 34.
                  
                  
                     The graues & monuments opened:
                     5. The Graues. Et monumenta aperta ſunt: And
the graues opened themſelues.Math. 27. 52.
                  
                  Their eyes were opened:6. Their eyes. 
                     Aperti ſunt oculi eorum.
                     Luk. 24. 31.
                  
                  Heauen it ſelfe opened:7. Heauen opened. 
                     Apertum eſt coelum.
                  
                  Yea, the mouthes of men and women were opened, euery one
ſpake.8. Of men and women the mouthes opened.
                  
                  The bleſſed virgine Mary ſpake, and ſung with a cheerefull
voice: Magnificat anima mea Dominum: My ſoule magnifieth the
Lord.
                     9. The virgin Mary.
                  
                  
                     The ſimple ſheepheards ſpake: Paſtores loquebantur ad inuicem:
The Sheepheards ſayd one to another,Luke. 1. 40. &c.
                  
                     The wiſe men ſpake:
                     Luke. 2. 15. Vbi eſt qui natus eſt rex Iudaeorū? Where is the
king of the Iewes that isborne?10. The ſheepheards.
                  
                  The rude and vnskilfull Apoſtles,11. The wiſe men. who ſcantly before knew the
characters of the Hebrew tongue, became ſuch perfect Orators, as no
one could go beyond them in al kind of languages:Mat. 2. 2. 
                     Loquebantur varijs
linguis Apoſtoli.
                     12. The Apoſtles.
                  
                  And S. Iohn,
                     Acts. 2. 4. who before was accounted as ignorant; Neſcitis quid
petatis, ſpake then ſo loude, as that great doctor of the church S. Auguſtin,
could not imagin how to vnderſtand the true ſenſe of his high
words: Quid autem Sacramenti haberet, verbum caro factum eſt, nec
ſuſpicari quidem poterat.
                  
                  This key opened the eyes to the blind,The general benefit receiued by this key. the eares to the deaffe, the
tongues to the dumb, the vnderſtanding to the ſimple, and heauen
to the iuſt.
                  VVhen the handle of the Croſſe was faſtened to this keye,The greatnes of this key.
it grew ſo great, as then it could not be caried but vpon the ſhoulders:
Pſal. 129. 3. 
                     Supra dorſum meum fabricauerunt peccatores: The plowers plowed
vpon my back. Yea, it became ſo weighty, as it needed the help of Simon
Sirenus.
                  
                  And becauſe this key is caried by ſome, as tyed to their girdles, or
about their necks,Concerning the cariage of this key by mē now a dayes. or in their pockets, as your Lordſhip hath already
ſayd: Let me tel you that they are ſuch kind of men, as wil not know
the weightineſſe of the lawe of chriſt: but rather doo adorne
themſelues with it, as if it were with a key of gould, thinking it

enough to gloryfie themſelues, with the very bare name of being
Chriſtians.
                  Others doo beare it about in their pockets,Of pocketprofeſſors, fearefull cowards. and they are ſuch
weake faint harted cowards, as feare in preſence of the Churches enemies,
to be known for true chriſtians and ſeruants to their Maſter.
Hereupon, they hide this key ſo much as they can, neuer ſhewing
any ſigne of chriſtianity at al. Therfore did Dauid deſire this key,
& with it, that God would open his lips, leaſt otherwiſe he ſhould
break ſilence, euen according as it opened the Apoſtles mouthes;
Dabo vobis os & ſapientiam.
                     Luke. 21. 14.
                  
                  
                     And before he had this key,
                     Pſal. 38. 13. 
                     he lamented that he was dumbe:
Ego autem tanquam ſurdus non audiebam, & ſicut mutus non aperiens
os ſuum: I as a deaffe man heard not, and as a dumb man which openeth
not his mouth. Then with a deuout hart, he prayed the Lord to
open his lippes; Domine labia mea aperies: And God inſtantly opened
it,
                     Pſal. 51. 15. 
                     when he ſayd;
                     Pſal. 81. 10. Dilata os tuum, & implebo illud. It was opened
and filled with the heauenly ſpirit.
                     Pſal. 119. 131. Os meum aperui, & attraxi spiritum,
quia mandata a tua deſiderabam: I opened my mouth and panted,
becauſe I loued thy commaundements. And this came to him with
ſuch a gladneſſe and ſpirituall reioycing,
                     Dauids reioycing for this key. 
                     as all his life time afterward,
he did nothing but ſing ſweete Songs, whereon he vaunted
to his friends,
                     Pſalm 40. 3. Et immiſit in os meum canticum nouum, carmen
Deo noſtro: And he hath put in my mouth a new Song of praiſe vnto our
God.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  How is it poſſible to put words into the mouth?
What,Concerning words put into the mouth. do you count them like to receiued morſelles? But admit
they may be cramd into the mouth, had it not as well ſufficed, if the
Lord had ſayd to Dauid; Open thy mouth, as to ſay Enlarge thy mouth?
A great morſell is required for the mouth, if it muſt needs be enlarged
ſo wide.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Haue you neuer heard in diſputation,Cōpariſon of a Maſter ſpeaking to his Schollers, very aptly alluded. that the Maſter
(to ſupply the ignorance and weakneſſe of his Scholler) in commaunding
him to open his vnderſtanding, winnes occaſion thereby
to haue himſelfe anſwered? In ſuch a caſe we vſe to ſay, that
the maſter puts the words into his ſchollers mouth. So the lord commanding
our vnderſtanding to open, and illuminating the will, adminiſters
the words therby, & giues occaſion of ſpeaking woorthily
without error.Pſal. 144. 7. Which made him ſay to Dauid; Intellectum tibi
dabo.
                     Luke. 21. 14. 15 And to the Apoſtles he ſayd. Ponite in cordibus veſtris nō praemeditari
quē admodum respondeatis. Ego enim dabo vobis os, & ſapiētiam,

cui non poterunt reſiſtere omnes aduerſarii veſtri. Lay it vp therefore
in your hearts, that ye premeditate not what ye ſhall anſwere. For I will
giue you a mouth, & wiſedome, where againſt all your aduerſaries ſhall
not be able to ſpeake, nor reſiſt: this is called the putting of wordes
into the mouth.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  But what ſay you then, to the ſo wide opening or
enlarging of the mouth: becauſe that Dilatare, idem eſt quod
multum latare: in regard ſome great morſell was to be put into
the mouth?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  To ſpeake vprightly;Caietanus his interpretatiō of Dilata os tuum.
                      
                     Dilata os tuum & implebo, according
to the interpretation of the reuerend and learne Caietanus,
importeth thus much. Aske what thou wilt, that I may giue it thee.
Is not this a morſell beyond compariſon? And Dauid, knowing the
greatneſſe of the Godhead, would aske nothing of little moment,
but euen a matter moſt great and important, anſwerable to the maieſty
of him, of whom hee was to require it. Whereupon he ſaid.
Miſerere mei Deus,
                     Pſal. 51. 1. 
                     ſecundum magnam miſericordiam tuam.
Haue mercy vpon me O God, according to the multitude of thy
mercies.
                  
                  Implying thus much on Dauids behalfe,The implication of Dauids words by the Author, concerning what our requeſtes ought be to God. and euen as if hee had
thus minded to ſay. Lord, I haue required of thee, that thou wouldſt
open my lippes. Thou haſt (I thanke thee) opened them, and in the
opening, haſt further ſayd vnto me; Opē thy mouth alſo, & demaund
of me whatſoeuer thou wilt. I being a ſinner, and (in ſome meaſure)
conſiderate of the infinite power and maieſtie of thy perſon:
will require no children of thee, as Sara and Abraham did: Nor
foode to eate, like the murmuring Hebrew people in the deſert:
Nor death, as Elias did vnder the Iuniper tree: Nor long life, with
Haman of Siro: Nor the reward of good labour, as Peter did: Nor
a temporall kingdome, like vnto Iames and Iohn. But I deſire a
thing correſpondent to thine owne greatneſſe, to wit, that thou
wouldſt giue me thy grace, pardon me my ſinnes, cancell my foule
abuſings of thee, forget my weakneſſes, and take compaſſion on my
miſeries, euen according to the immeaſurable bountie of thy mercies.
This I aske, this I deſire, and this (with all my heart) moſt humbly
I ſue for: Miſerere mei Deus, ſecundum magnam miſericordiam
tuam.
                  
                  In this manner alſo ought we to open our lippes,The ſame f
                           •
                        ormand order to be obſerued by vs in our petitions. becauſe ſuch a
requeſt is highly pleaſing to God, and without any perill of breaking
ſilence. Let vs pray then vnto the Lord, that he would open our vnſtanding,

mooue the will, guide our tongue, and rule our lippes
in ſpeaking rightly: to aske nothing elſe, but what may be to gods
glory, our owne ſoules health, and our neighbours benefit. Domine
labia mea aperies. Let vs hartily pray vnto him, to giue vs ſuch things,
as are anſwerable to his high magnificence, agreeable to his glorious
maieſty: And not things worldly or momentary, becauſe in ſuch
requeſts, we ſhould offer high preiudice, and wrong to his wondrous
bounty.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Let me tell you,Example of Perillus requeſt made to Alexander. my good Lord, that if magnanimous
and great perſons, haue giuen more liberall giftes then haue been
asked of them: by how much god exceedeth them in power & omnipotencie,
by ſo much the more ought our petitions to bee anſwerable
in conformitie.
                  
                     Perillus, a friend to Alexander the great, required money of him
toward the mariage of his daughter, and Alexander gaue him fifty
talents. But Perillus dutifully made refuſall of them, deliuering acceptation
but of ten talents onely, and anſwered; That they onely
were ſufficient for him; whereto Alexander replyed: Ten may be
ſufficient for thee to aske, but not enough for Alexander to giue. If Alexander
had ſuch bounty and largeſſe in him,The example alluded. being but duſt and
aſhes: how much more, in liberalitie, will the greateſt god enlarge
his graces, to his ſonnes and ſeruants?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Why then, euen in as ſound reaſon, as god ſaid vnto
Dauid; Dilata os tuum, & implebo illud: may we in humilitie pray
vnto him; That he would purifie our vncleane lippes, and purge our
hearts of wicked thoughts and al vnmeete deſires, that no vaine cogitations
may bee there contriued, nor hurtfull ſpeeches from our
mouthes deliuered.
               
               Finis Cap. 22.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  That aboundance of words (without wiſedome) is not called eloquence,
but loquacity or babling. Therfore our words ought firſt to be brought
to the file, ere to the tongue, to auoide the errour of our folly in ſpeaking.
Therefore we ſhould pray vnto the Lord, that it would pleaſe
him to open our mouthes, and fill them with the holy ſpirit of wiſedome,
vſing euery morning duely, ſome eſpeciall godly prayer, meete
for ſuch a purpoſe. And becauſe Intus exiſtens Prohibet extraneum;
we cannot be capable of the bleſſed ſpirit, except we firſt euacuate
our owne proper ſpirit, which is the occaſion of infinite defects.
We muſt know, that there are not ſo many letters in the Alphabet,
as are the errours hourely committed by the tongue, that is not skild
rightly in ſpeaking of God. Heerein likewiſe is declared, what that
race or ſtocke is, whereof the wiſe man ſpeaketh, who haue in ſteed
of teeth ſharpe ſwoords. Alſo, what wiſedome is, according to the
Philoſophers, Peripatetikes, Stoickes & Diuines, with many other
memorable matters beſide.
               
               Chap. 23.
               
                  
                     CLAVDIO.
                  An excellent prayer
is that vſed by the Church, entreating
the eternall father, that hee
wold ſend his holy ſpirit, to purifie
our hearts, to the end, that we may
worthily loue and praiſe him. And
this ought we euery morning (riſing
out of our beds) to vſe, for paſſage of
the whole day after, without ſtaine
of ſinne, which is ouer-eaſie to bee
committed by the vnprepared heart

and ſlippery tongue.An excellent collect or praier obſerued by the Church for our inſtructiō. 
                     Deus, cui omne cor patet, & omnis voluntas
loquitur, & quem nullum latet ſecretum: Purifica, per infuſionem
Spiritus ſancti, corda noſtra, vt te perfectè diligere, & dignè laudare
mereamus. Amen. O God to whom al hearts are open, al deſires knowen,
and from whom no ſecrets can be concealed: Cleanſe the thoughts of our
hearts, by the inſpiration of the holy ghoſt, that we may perfectly loue
thee, & worthily magnify thee. Amen.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  A notable prayer,Cleanſing of our harts, purifying of our minds, & ſanctifying of our words. and very meete, to entreate of God
the cleanſing of our hearts, the puritie of our mindes, and ſanctification
of our words: to the end, that wee in ſpeaking might not
break ſilence, but rather that God may do it thē we, in ſpeaking by
the organe of our tongue. Wherefore Church-men, in the beginning
of their ſeruice both morning and euening, doe deſire the
Lord to deigne and vouchſafe the opening of their lippes, and ſanctifying
of their words:Pſal. 51. 16. 
                     Domine labia mea aperies, & os meum annuntiabit
laudem tuam. And adioyne thereto immediatly following,
as calling for the diuine aſſiſtance, without which, no good action
can be performed: Deus in adiutorium meum intende, Domine ad
adiuuandum me feſtina.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Let vs pray then to the bleſſed ſpirit,Without gods aſſiſtance, all our prayers are friuolous. that he would open
our lippes, to the end our prayers may be acceptable to God:
becauſe without him, all our ſpeeches doe breake ſilence, and our
prayers are vngracious, and not worthy to enter his diuine eares, according
as the Church obſerueth: Sine quo caſſae creduntur preces, &
indignae Deiauribus.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  The Organe will neuer ſound,Compariſō of the ſounding Organe, and application thereof. if the regiſter bee ſhut,
but the regiſter being opened, whereat the winde enters & touches
the keyes, the Organe foorthwith ſoundeth. So let vs open the
regiſter of the will, and we ſhall finde no hindrance to the winde
of the holy ghoſt, but preſently the ſound of our wordes will bee
heard, euen like a moſt ſweet ſong, and acceptable to god. Whereon
that happy and cheerefull aduenturous ſoule, ſpake in ſuch wiſe,
to make way for the hearing of her beloueds voyce:Cant. 2. 14. 
                     Sonet vox tua
in auribus meis, vox enim tua dulcis: Let me heare thy voice, for thy
voice is ſweet.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  
                     I cannot but allow of your counſell,
                     Of the iuſt man. 
                     therefore of the
iuſt man it is written in Eccleſiaſticus.Eccle. 15. 5. 6. In medio Eccleſiae aperiet os eius,
& implebit eum Dominus ſpiritu ſapientiae & intellectus, & ſtolae
gloriae veſtiet illum. Iucunditatem, & exaltationem the ſaurizabit ſuper
illum, & nomine aeterno haereditabit illum. In the middes of the

congregation ſhall ſhe open his mouth, with the ſpirit of wiſedome and
vnderſtanding ſhall ſhe fil him, and cloath him with the garment of glorie.
She ſhall cauſe him to inherite ioy, and the crowne of gladneſſe, &
an euerlaſting name.
                  It behooues him to open his mouth,He muſt deſire, that would obtain. that will haue ſuch a ſacred
morſell, and he muſt firſt requeſt, that is deſirous to receiue. Therefore
let vs giue attendaunce vpon God, that hee may open our
mouthes, and then to begge humbly of him what wee would haue;
not becauſe he is ignoraunt of our neceſſityes, but for the exerciſe of
our humilitie.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Into a mouth faſt cloſed,Sentence. there can no foode enter.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  He that will giue,The duety of giuers and receiuers, in giuing and receiuing. and he that will receiue, muſt of
neceſſity open both their handes, the one to giue, the other to receiue.
If he that giueth, doth not open his hand, he that would receiue
ſhall finde iuſt nothing. And in like manner, if he that receiueth,
do keep his hand cloſe, in vaine doth hee open that offers to
giue him. If god would beſtowe his grace vpon vs, and we keep
our hearts ſhut vp by ſinne, in vaine doth he beſtowe that labour.
And if we deſire god with open mouth, to graunt vs his grace, and
god finde reaſon to the contrary, our time ſpent in asking is to no
purpoſe. It behooueth therefore, that both the one and other,
the giuer and receiuer, and the receiuer and giuer, ſhould both of
them open their hands.
                  
                     Let vs open our mouthes,
                     How chriſt opened his mouth. 
                     that god may open his hand, to make
vs partakers of his heauenly fauours. Chriſt opened his mouth; Aperiens
Ieſus os ſuum: but it was to giue. The Apoſtles opened their
mouthes, but it was to receiue.
                     Mat. 5. 2. Aperiens Petrus os ſuum: Peter opened
his mouth.Acts. 10 34. Os noſtrum patet ad vos ô Corinthii;2. Cor. 6. 11. O Corrinthians,
Act. 8. 35. our mouth is open vnto you. Aperiens autem Philippus os ſuum;
Then Philip opened his mouth.A
                           •
                        t. 2. 4. Et repleti ſunt omnes ſpiritu ſancto;
And they were all filled with the holy ghoſt.
                  
                     Chriſt opened his mouth,
                     Chriſt opened his mouth to teach, & the Apoſtles to learne. 
                     but to teach: Docebat eos. The Apoſtles
alſo opened their mouthes, but to learne: Repleti ſunt omnes ſpiritu
ſancto, & caeperunt lo qui vartis linguis, And they began to ſpeake
with other tongues. They were filled with the ſpirit, becauſe Chriſt
in opening his mouth,
                     Math. 5. 2. 
                     breathed the holy ſpirit vpon them.
                     Act. 2, 4. Et inſuffla
                        •
                     it
in eos,Iohn. 20. 22. & dixit eis, Accipite spiritum ſanctum: He breathed
on them, and ſaid vnto them; Receiue the holy Ghoſt. The ſame likewiſe
doth he confirme to euery iuſt man: In medio eccleſiae aperiet

os eius, & implebit illum Dominus ſpiritu ſapientiae, & intellectus,
&c.
                  Often times on the Sea ſhoares,Example of fiſh ſhelles found on the Sea ſhoares, & applyed to the iuſt man. are found certaine fiſh ſhelles,
which at the riſing of the Sunne in the Eaſt, doe open of themſelues,
hauing a kinde of celeſtiall licquor congealed within them,
which prooues to be pearles and precious ſtones. Euery iuſt man
may bee tearmed this fiſh ſhell, left on the ſpatious ſhoare of this
trauailing world, but yet ſhut faſt together, as ſequeſtred from
the wicked and vngodly: At the riſing of Chriſt (the true Sonne
of this whole vniuerſe) in the heauen of his comforted ſoule, hee
will open by obedience, and hee hauing filled with the licquor
of eternall wiſedome, ſhall afterward make him to be like
to the pretious Margarite, ſhining in the faire palace of the militant
Church. But then laſt of all, he ſhall gliſter much more brightly, in
the heauenlie Court of neuer ceaſing glorie; Et ſtola gloriae veſtiet
illum.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  If the Lord ſhall thus fill him with his ſpirit,He whom god filles with his ſpirit, muſt firſt be emptied of his own. it behooueth,
that hee be firſt quite emptie of his owne ſpirit. Becauſe,
when a veſſell is full of one licquor, it is not capable of receiuing
an other. For, as the Philoſopher ſaith; Intus exiſtens prohibet
extraneum, and an other iuyce being to be put in, the other muſt bee
firſt euacuated.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  
                     Moſt certaine is it, that the iuſt man firſt expelleth his
owne ſpirit, and then the Lord filleth him with his diuine ſpirit.
This doth Dauid affirme in one of his Pſalmes,
                     Pſal. 104. 29, 30. 
                     when he ſaith. Auferes
ſpiritum eorum, & deficient, & in puluerem ſuum reuertentur. Emitte
ſpiritum tuum, & creabuntur, & renouabis faciemterrae. If thou
take away their breath, they dy and returne to their duſt. Againe, if thou
ſend foorth thy ſpirit, they are created, and thou reneweſt the face of
the earth.
                  As if he would haue ſaid.The Authors applying of the words. Lord, if thou take away their ſpirit, they
ſhall want their owne ability: but by increaſing thine in them, they
ſhall finde, that they were but duſt and aſhes. Becauſe, by grace thou
haſt euacuated their proper will, ſingular ſenſe, and priuate affection,
which giues them now to know both their own frailtie, & how
much they were ſubiected to miſery. But, by ſending thy ſanctified
ſpirit into them, thou haſt created a new man within them, formed
according to thine owne diuine will.Ephe. 4. 24. 
                     Induimini nouum hominem,
qui ſecundum Deum creatus eſt in iuſtitia, & ſanctitate veritatis.
Put on the new man, which after God is created in righteouſnes,

and true holineſſe.
                  
                  The iuſt man,Of the iuſt man, he being filled with the holy ſpirit. being filled with this ſpirit, ſpeakes holy wordes,
deliuers heauenly doctrine, frames arguments of truth, and grounded
altogether vpon gods worde. Eructauit cor meum verbum bonum;
                     Pſal. 45. 2. 
                     My heart will vtter foorth a good matter. And as a glaſſe
being full,A glaſſe ful of water compared to the iuſt man, in doing good to others. with a very little turning aſide, doth emptie ſome part
of the licquor contained in it: Euen ſo the iuſt man, with the leaſt
breath of an ardent ſigh, ſendes foorth part of his grace receiued,
vnto vs, making vs partakers of his inward bleſſings: and ſo by the
vertue of his good ſpirit, he purgeth and dryeth vp the watriſhneſſe
of our ſinne, ſo much as in him lyeth.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  How can this doctrine holde? If winde be of a colde
and moiſte qualitie, then it hath no drying vertue, if we doe preſſe it
according to the letter. I ſpeake not this to gaine-ſay you, but rather
to learne.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  
                     Ariſtotle the Prince of the Peripatecians,
                     Ariſt. in Prob. 27. part. 5. in his twentie
ſeauenth Probleme, and fift particle, going about to ſearch, by what
occaſion the winde, being of qualitie colde and moiſte, hath yet
notwithſtanding a drying vertue, anſwers him ſelfe thus. Becauſe it
takes away and euaporates the part more colde.
                     Of the nature of the winde. As if he would ſay.
The winde is of a temperate coldneſſe and humiditie, therefore it
makes the part more colde and moiſte to euaporate it ſelfe, as meaning
thereby mudde and water.
                  
                     The holy ghoſt is called a ſpirit,
                     Of the holy ghoſt. 
                     and winde: Tanquam ſpiritus
vehem
                        ••
                     tis:Act. 2. 2. As of a ruſhing and mighty winde. Veni Auſter, perfla
hortum meum,Cant. 4. 16. & fluent aromata illius: Ariſe O North, and come O
South, and blowe on my garden, that the ſpices thereof may flowe out
                        •
                     
                     becauſe it cooleth the heate of carnall concupiſcences. Therefore
the Angell ſpeaking of this ſpirit to the virgin Marie,Luk. 1. 35. 
                     ſaid. Spiritus
ſanctus ſuperveniet in te, & virtus altiſſimi obumbrabit tibi. The holy
ghoſt ſhall come vpon thee, and the power of the moſt High ſhall 
                        •
                     uerſhadow
thee.
                  This ſhadowing is expounded by almoſt all the doctours,How the word ſhadowing is expounded by the Doctours.
that it ſignifyeth, The taking away of all laſciuious or carnall
affections, and purgeth euerie looſe concupiſcence. When
therefore the holy ſpirit bloweth on the minde of him, that
liſtens to the woord of God, it cauſeth to euaporate and
vaniſh (by his expulſiue vertue) the exceſſiue coldeneſſe of
ſinne, which is of ſuch chilneſſe, as it freezeth vp the heate
of all charitie. So euacuating this colde, it diſpoſeth the ſoule

to quietneſſe, and to lend attention to the holy doctryne of
Chriſt.
                  
                     For Saint Iohn Chryſoſtome ſaith,
                     An excellent ſaying of S. Iohn Chryſoſtome. That, as it is not poſſible for the
earth to fructifie by water only, without winde: Euen ſo as impoſſible is
it, that the Doctrine of the iuſt, (which is as the water celeſtiall, & they
like pregnant cloudes;Eſay. 60. 8. Qui ſunt iſti, qui vt nubes volant? What are
theſe, that fly like a cloude) that they (I ſay) ſhould cauſe any fruite to
growe in the ground of our ſoules, without the ſweet breathing winde of
the holy ghoſt; which of it ſelfe diſpoſeth mens hearts to the hearing
of gods word, and makes them to bloome forth, after the manner
of the earth.
                     Mantuan. 
                     Euen as when Zephirus ſends his kindely blaſtes
abroad in the month of March, according to the Poet Mantuans deſcription.
                  
                  The iuſt man therefore opens his mouth, in the middes of the
people, and the Lord filleth it with the diuine ſpirit of wiſedome,
and from hence proceede infinite good fruites,The Apoſtle Peters firſt Sermon. to the ſoules of his
hearers. According as from the Apoſtle Peter it did, who at the very
firſt Sermon he made, conuerted to the faith of Ieſus Chriſt, three
thouſand perſons,Act. 2. 41. or thereabout, as is to be read in the Actes of the
Apoſtles, the ſecond Chapter.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Yet by your licence (my Lord) it is neceſſary for vs to
know, what wiſedome is: ſo much the rather, becauſe, according
to the Prince of Latine Oratorie,Wiſedome is required in an Orator, according to Tully. 
                     It is moſt expedient in an Oratour,
who without wiſedome, is tearmed ignorant, and his full tide of ſpeech
is called loquacity, not eloquence. Whereupon, being once demaunded,
what eloquence was, he anſwered: Nihil eſt aliud eloquentia, niſi
copioſe loquens ſapientia.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Iob maketh a long diſcourſe of wiſedome,
                     Iobs diſcourſe concerning wiſedome. 
                     ſearching
where it ſhould be, and what it was. Finally, after a long repetition
of ſententious wordes, and a very large inueſtigation of them,
he concludes. That God onely knoweth what it is. And he reuealing
the ſame vnto man, ſayth; That wiſedome is nothing elſe, but
the feare of the Lord.
                     Iob. 28. 28. Et dixit homini: Ecce timor Domini, ipſa
eſt ſapientia, & recedere a malo, intelligentia. And vnto man
he ſaid: Behold the feare of the Lord is wiſedome, and to depart
from euill is vnde ſtanding.Pſal. 111. 10 
                     And Dauid ſayth: Initium ſapientiae
timor Domini: The beginning of wiſedome, is the feare of the
Lord.
                  
                     The Peripatecians vſed to ſay.
                     The Peripatecians deAriſto. in lib. Eth. 6. Cap. 6. & Metap. lib. 1. Cap. 5. That wiſedome is an intellectuall
vertue, and, by the higheſt and moſt noble cauſes, makes thinges to be

knowen. Whereupon, in the ſixt booke of Ethickes, the ſixt Chapter,
and in the firſt of Metaphyſickes, the firſt Chapter, defyning a
wiſe man, Ariſtotle ſaith. Sapiens eſt qui ſcit omnia difficilia propter
certitudinem & cauſam; ipſum ſcire propter ſe quaerens, & alios ordinans,
& perſuadens. And a little after he ſaith; That the wiſe man
ought to be knowen, not onely by the cauſe, but alſo by the highneſſe of the
the cauſe.
                  According to the Stoickes,The Stoickes definition of wiſedome. and moral Philoſophers, ſuch perhaps
as were Seneca, Socrates and Boetius: wiſedome is taken for none
other, But a maſſe or a heape of morall vertues, which make a man
to be vertuous. Therefore according to this kinde of wiſedome,
Seneca ſayth in his booke of the tranquillitie of the minde;
That to a wiſe man there can happen no iniury or offence at all,
                     Seneca de tranqu. anim. 
                     to moleſt
the felicity of his minde, which (in the Stoicks opinion) ought to bee
imperturbable, and his heart adamantine.
                  But according to the ſacred Theologians or diuines,The diuines, concerning wiſedome. 
                     Wiſedome is a
gift ſupernaturally infuſed, whereby a man hath cognition of diuine
things, and of humane, by diuine and ſpirituall inſpiration, or by ſome
eſpeciall gratious vicinity to God.
                     The innocent man neereſt to God. And becauſe there is none more
neerer vnto God, then the innocent man, ſo cleane (as poſſible he
may be) from the foule ſtaines of ſinne, who (by ſuch innocencie) is
made apt to vnderſtand the ſecrets diuine: therefore ſayd Iob,
that wiſedome is nothing elſe, but the feare of God, and the cancelling
of ſinne: but yet inchoatiue, as Dauid ſaith, Initium ſapientiae
timor domini.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Let vs then cheerefully open our mouthes, and deſire
of God, that he would fill them with this ſpirit of wiſedome,
ſo neceſſarie to our owne ſoules health, and the good of our neighbour.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  He that partaketh not with this ſpirit,Of him that partaketh not with the ſpirit of wiſedome. his tongue is
like a ſharpe ſwoord, his lippes as offenſiue weapons, his teeth are
like arrowes, his mouth a moſt noyſome ſepulcher, his palate
full of maledictions, his heart of deceipts, and his wordes are
enuenomed dartes. Hence grewe Dauids ſpeeches, that they neuer
ceaſed from ſpeaking euill.Pſal. 9. 7. 8. 
                     Dixit enim in corde ſuo: Non mouebor
à generatione in generationem, ſine malo. Cuius maledictione os
plenum eſt, & amaritudine & dolo: ſub lingua eius labor & dolor. He
ſayth in his heart: I ſhall neuer be mooued, nor be in daunger. His mouth
is full of curſing, and deceipt, and fraude; vnder his tongue is miſchiefe
and iniquitie.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Lodouico.
                  Perhaps ſuch as theſe,Prouer. 30. 14. are they, of whoſe ſtirpe, Salomon
ſpeaking in his Prouerbes, ſayth: Eſt generatio, quae pro
dent ibus gladios habet. There is a generation, whoſe teeth are as
ſwoordes.
                     The wicked tongue compared to a ſword. Becauſe the wicked tongue, is after the manner of a
ſwoord, alwayes cutting. It cuttes our neighbours good fame, diuides,
ſeparates and teares in peeces the honour of others. Wherof
the diuine Muſition ſpeaking, agrees almoſt with Salomon
his ſonne. Filii hominum, dentes eorum arma & ſagitiae,
& lingua eorum gladius acutus.
                     Pſal. 57. 4. 
                     The children of men whoſe
teeth are ſpeares and arrowes, and their tongue a ſharpe ſwoord.
                  
                  As if he would haue ſayd,The Authors application, by the interpretation of Caietanus. according to the interpretation of
Caietanus. Such are the ſonnes of Adam, who haue their teeth like
launces, which are wont to offend neere at hand, and as arrowes, to
wound afarre off, and their tongue is a ſharpe ſwoord, to doe harme on
all aduauntages. And needes muſt it bee ſo, becauſe the tongue
that is not guided by God, and the mouth not opened by the Lords
owne hand: can pronounce nothing but blaſphemies and curſings,
euen like vnto an infernall tongue, directed by the diuell.
                  Therefore,How the wicked tongue cō
                        mits deadly ſinne, in ſeuerall manner, wel worth the conſideration looke howſoeuer it ſpeakes, it cannot but commit
mortall ſinne. Sometime by falſe impoſition of infamy. Sometime
by vaunting of a vile acte performed, which (notwithſtanding)
he neuer did. Sometime by making large addition to other
mens offences, and conuerting a ſmall ſticke, to a huge big
beame. Sometime in reuealing (contrary to charitie) other mens
hidden infirmities, to make our poore neighbour infamous among
many.The common behauiour of too many now adaies. Sometime by peruerting others intentions, iudging
ſiniſterly of mens hearts; calling faſting, couetouſneſſe; praying,
hypocriſie, and all other good actions whatſoeuer, thinking them to
be done to euill purpoſe.
                  Sometime in denying the truth, when being demaunded,
concerning other mens good deedes: wee anſwere ſlaunderouſly
of them, to the end that no good account may be made of
them. Sometime in concealing the good of others, wherewith,
though wee bee truely acquainted: yet we continue ſilent, being
asked: onely becauſe that thoſe goods ſhould neuer be knowen
of, nor any ſucceſſe to the right owner enſue by them. This cruell
ſilence, Gilbertus Porre tanus calleth pilling, polling or extortion.
Grauis rapacitas, cùm veram alterius gloriam, etſi mendacio non corrumpis, ſilentio praeteris, Liu
                           •
                        r enim excellentiam propriam ſēper cogitans,

alienam obſcurat.
                  
                  Sometime in compoſing infamous lynes,The trickes of knauiſh Critticks, on Stages, or elſe where. verſes or ſongs vpon
other mens concealed ſinnes, or ſpeaking like an impoſtor
on them. Sometime in reporting others diſgraces for a truth,
being onely but ſuſpected, and neuer in any force, yet this is
done eyther for hate or enuie. Sometime in ſhewing truely the
defectes of others,Hypocriticall ſeekers of conformity. and accuſing them thereof; yet not for any
zeale to iuſtice, nor becauſe (being corrected) they might be
amended, or to any other vertuous end: but only in meere hatred,
and to make them generally receiued for infamous. Sometime
by ſhewing (very ioyfully) and recounting in the height of
pleaſure, the errors of other men: onely to make but floutes and
ſcornes of them.
                  Sometime in giuing commendation,Trencher flyes, & paraſiticall table talkers. that others defamations
ſhould bee blazed abroad, and taking great delight in the publication
of them, inuiting others to giue them attention.
Sometime in blaſpheming and detracting the honour dyuine:
with an hundred, nay, a thouſand other ennormous offences.
                  Nor are there ſo many letters in the Alphabet,Not ſo many letters in the Alphabet, as abuſes in the tongue. as the tongue
daylie deliuers abuſes, in diuers and ſundry kindes of ſinning,
and yet no account at all is made thereof. God therefore
(of his goodneſſe) alwaies open our mouthes, to the end we
may not in ſuch grieuous manner, offend thereby both him and our
neighbour.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The greater part of the world (we ſee) doe runne into
theſe defects of the tongue.A very good aduiſe. But if firſt of all, they would conſider
on their owne wordes, ere they ſpake them, and poize them before
in the ballance of iuſtice, they would not fall into ſo many
offences.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  As a remedy for this great defect, wee ought to followe
the counſell,S. Ieromes counſell, for ordering of our words. which the great doctour of the Church Saint
Ierome giues vs: Prius ad limam quàm ad linguam verba veniant:
as if he would haue ſaid. If a man before he ſpeake, would
conduce the wordes which hee hath to vtter, firſt to the file or
touch, ere to the tongue, as conſidering whether they were
worthy or no, to come foorth of his breaſt, whether they be to the
diſhonour of god, or vnchriſtian preiudice of our neighbour:
no error at all ſhould be cōmitted. Becauſe all thoſe ſpeeches which
may otherwiſe proue ſuperfluous, wold thus be abated, & our words

would be much more corrected and adorned.
                  Now in regard that our weakneſſe is very great,How great our imbecility and weaknes is, without gods aſſiſtāce. and (without the
diuine aſſiſtance) all humane diligence is meerly but in vaine: let vs
doe as we haue already ſaid, the bleſſed Apoſtles did, that is, Let vs
retyre into the ſecret cloſet of our harts, and deſire the Lord, to ſend
vs his ſanctified Spirit: which puryfying the heart, examining
the thoughts, ruling the tongue, moouing the lippes, and procuring
paſſage of our words, all will bee well; Otherwiſe, neuer can the
tongue pronounce one onely word, except the heart be firſt made
cleane.
                  
                     For Saint Paul the Apoſtle ſaith,
                     We are not able to thinke one good thought. 
                     that without the diuine helpe,
we cannot ſo much as thinke one good thought, of our ſelues. Non
quòd ſufficientes ſimus cogitare aliquid à nobis, quaſi ex nobis, ſed
ſufficientia noſtra ex Deo eſt.2. Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are ſufficient of our ſelues,
to think any thing as of our ſelues: but our ſufficiency is of God.
                  It behooueth therefore,God firſt ſpeaking to our harts, our ſpeaking will be the better. that God doe firſt of all ſpeake in our
hearts, and then we may afterward ſpeak the better to others. Not
of our owne proper will, or after our owne peculiar conceipt; but as
learning of that, firſt ſpoken by God him ſelfe in our hearts. So ſhall
it not be we, that ſpeake, but God, who ſpeaketh by our meanes,
and ſo ſhall we be ſure not to breake ſilence.Math. 10. 20. 
                     Non enim vos eſtis
qui loquimini, ſed spiritus patris veſtri qui loquitur in vobis. For
it is not yee that ſpeake, but the ſpirit of your Father which ſpeaketh in
you.
                  
                  This is that whereof God ſpake by the Prophet Oſe,
                     Oſe. 2. 14. ſpeaking to
our ſoule: Ducam illam in ſolitudinem, & loquar ad cor eius: I will
bring her into the wilderneſſe and ſpeake vnto her heart.
                     The application of the Prophets words by the Author, to exceeding good purpoſe. As if God
would haue ſaid to the ſoule of a deuout chriſtian; To the end that
the ſoule of my deare and deuout ſonne, may not erre in talking, nor
ſcandalize the conne
                        •
                     ſation of others: I will leade her into the ſecret
deſert of holy contemplation, & there I wil do her ſo much fauour,
as to reueale vnto her the ſecrets of mine own heart, ſpeaking
in a ſilent voice to her heart. But yet in ſuch ſort, as when ſhe her
ſelfe by the ſound of her voyce would ſpeake to others, it ſhall not
be of ſuch myſteries, as ſhe goes about thinking on, or what words
ſhe ſhall vſe, nor of the things ſhe is to ſpeake of. Becauſe I will miniſter
to her thoughts, and I will guide her wordes, ſpeaking my
ſelfe within the ſecrets of her heart. Wherfore, ſhe ſhall haue nothing
elſe to doo, but onely to be a faithfull deliuerer of what I ſhall commit
to her ſpeaking.
                  
                     
This is the ſending of his holy Angels,The holy Angels inſpiring our ſoules. to inſpire our ſoules with
what we haue to doe, and they may ſay to them, that they ſpeake to
their hearts.Eſay. 60. 14. 
                     Loquimini ad cor Ieruſalem. He calles the ſoule Ieruſalem,
becauſe ſhe is made a Citizen of the Soueraigne Ieruſalem. Euen
in like manner as the Preacher vſeth to doe,Cōpariſon of the preachers words to his auditory. when hee tearmes his
preſent hearers, by the name of the whole Citie, ſaying; I ſpeake to
thee Roome; I ſpeake to thee Millaine; or I ſpeake to thee London;
that is, I ſpeake to you which are the inhabitants of Roome, or to you
Romaines, Londoners, &c.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  A very ſpeciall fauour is this,Gods great fauour in ſpeaking to the heart. which God doth vnto
man, in ſpeaking to the heart, to auoyde breach of ſilence, by importunity
of words. And moſt happy is that ſoule, to whom God
reuealeth his ſecrets diuine, and gouerneth his words, leaſt he ſhold
erre in praying, by not fayling in his ſpeeches, nor ſtumbling in reproofe
of other mens defects.
               
               Finis Chap. 23.
            
            
               
               
                  The Argument.
                  From whence it enſueth that man (being a creature ſo noble) yet notwithſtanding,
he committeth greater errours then any other creature
whatſoeuer. How God hath giuen him many helpes to preſerue
him from ſinne, and particularly, the precept of brotherly correction,
committed into the power of the tongue. The neceſſitie and excellencie
whereof is heere diſcourſed on. And that ſilence (in ſuch a
caſe) is prooued great babbling, and a grieuous ſinne, becauſe the
tongue may be a ſafety to our neighbour. They alſo ſhew the way
which we ought to obſerue, in correcting of our neighbour, as alſo
the qualitie of the precept it ſelfe, by approoued ſound doctrine,
and teſtimonies of holy Scripture.
               
               Chap. 24.
               
                  
                     LODOVICO.
                  As God ſpeakes
vnto the heart, thereby moſt highly
manifeſting his diuine ſecrets, to
his eſteemed ſonnes ſeruantes, leaſt
they ſhould erre in ſpeaking, or elſe
in any other humane action:Our duety of aſſiſting one an other by the tongues office. Euen

                        •
                     o ought we alſo to aſſiſt one another,
with the office of the tongue,

                        •
                     or auoiding of ſuch defects, as oftentimes
wee doe fondly commit.
Becauſe chriſtian charitie ſo requireth,
and he that di
                        •
                     igently imployes him ſelfe in the duety of charity,
reſembleth God him ſelfe, who ſeekes very many waies, whereby
to help man out of his ſinne. Whereupon it is ſaid by Ieremie; Si

ſeparaueris pretioſum à vili,
                     Iere. 15. 1
                           •
                        . 
                     quaſi os meum eris: And if thou take away
the pretious from the vile, thou ſhalt be according to my word.
                  
                  Euen as if he had ſaid.The Authours application of Ieremies words. Man is by nature fraile, apt to erre, corrupt
and led by giddy ſenſe: but thou, if by the keene ſwoord
of thy tongue, thou wilt ſeeke to ſeparate the precious ſoule of thy
neighbour from the vileneſſe of ſinne, thou ſhalt be like vnto me:
Who to raiſe man out of miſguidance, haue layde aſide honour,
life, and all other commodities whatſoeuer; and to me is giuen in
liew thereof, death, with mine owne bloud ſtanding bound,
to redeeme him from the cruell obiected articles of ſinne and the
deuill.
                  Well ſhal it become vs then, to labour duetifully for thoſe meanes,
wherby we might reſemble ſo great a maieſty, & a beauty ſo exquiſite,
as (without any like) that of god is.Of the help of our neighbor, & the reaſons binding vs therto. As alſo for the help of our
neighbor, we being equal bretheren in chriſt, deſcēded of one ſtock,
created by one and the ſame God, redeemed by one moſt precious
bloud, nouriſhed by the ſelfe ſame ſacraments, and hoping for
one and the very ſame glory.
                  Admit you were trauailing on the way with a freend of yours,Example of two trauailers together on the way. &
perchaunce ſhould meete with an enemy of his, who drawing forth
his weapon, attempts al the wayes he can to wound him: Would not
you lay hand to your ſword with your freend, & defend him to your
vttermoſt?
                  Our neighbour is mainly aſſaulted by ſinne,The example alluded to our neighbour. the capitall enemie
that ſeekes the ſlaughter of his ſoule, while we are in this miſerable
peregrination of this world together. We therefore, not to ſee the
death of our brother thus aſſailed by ſinne; ought to draw foorth the
ſword of the tongue; Lingua eorum gladius acutus, and (with him)
help to driue his aduerſary to flight,Many vertuous actions may be done by the tongue ſtriuing to cure his treſpaſſes,
with humble reprehenſions, and charitable exhortations. Becauſe, as
there be many ſins cōmitted by the tongue, ſo likewiſe are there as
many vertuous actions thereby to be performed: in which behalfe,
ſtrict ſilence is a fault as hainous, as is idle, vain & needles talking.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  If inſenſible creatures,The helpe the inſenſible creatures doe yeeld to one another. by ſo admirable an order in
nature, lend help one to another, & profit each other in their kinde,
led onely thereto by naturall inclination. As the Sunne in moſt
wondrous manner enlighteneth the Moone, the Starres and other
Planets, and ſhe alſo clearing the ougly darkneſſe of the night, giuing
an influence to the earth, whereby it yeelds to vs ſuch copious
bounty of precious fruites; The fire purging the ayre; the ayre

purifying the water; the water bathing and fertiling the earth, and
they (of all theſe giftes) are not ſcarſe or ſparing to vs.The giftes of god beſtowed on man. How much
more then ought men, being adorned with vnderſtanding, beautyfied
with reaſon, ennobled with ſenſes, and endued with
diſcourſe, bee forward in helpe, one to an other, eſpecially in ſo
weighty a caſe as ſinne is? which, robbing vs of grace, depriues vs
of glory, making vs meete for hell, by taking the bleſſed Angels
comfort from vs, and giues vs in ſtead thereof, the company
of deuils.
                  Therefore we ought to vſe all diligence,We ought to call for others ayde, if our own be not ſufficient for our neighbor. by being helpfull in this
kinde, euen to our vttermoſt: and if we finde defect in our own
abilitie, to call for the more powerfull aſſiſtance of others, who
may binde vp compaſſionately his bleeding wounds, and ſet
him on his owne beaſt in the ready way to heauen. All this wee
know truely to bee our duetie, therefore I cannot but account it
moſt maruailous, that man being the perfect creature and onely
noble, as he for whoſe ſeruice all creatures elſe in the world
were created, and him ſelfe ordayned for the diuine fruition:
yet notwithſtanding all this, hee, more then any other creature,
walkes from the intent of his end, and goes beyond them all in
greatneſſe of error.
                  It is not to be doubted,Man erreth beyond all other compariſon. but that the other creatures ſometime
doe ſwarue, yet very ſildome, caſually, or by ſome accident: but man
erreth much more, beyond compariſon, comming ouer-ſhort of his
purpoſed period, and therefore hath more need then any other creature,
of eſpeciall helping.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  All ſtrife is ſoone appeaſed,Sentence. the occaſion being conſidered:
Other creatures are not compoſed as man is. My reaſon is, that other creatures are not compoſed, as man
is. Therfore inſenſible and inanimate creatures, as are ſtones & ſuch
like, they haue a natural forme, whereon attendeth a natural propenſion
and inclination, ordained for them by God and nature, and
hereunto accordingly they alwayes worke, except they be by ſome
meanes hindred. From hence it enſueth, that heauy thinges euer
mooue toward the center of the earth,Example of heauy and light things. and light things vſually aſcend
toward the concaue of the Monne, if they be not violenced or
impeached.
                  Brute beaſtes likewiſe them ſelues,Ariſtotle concerning brute beaſtes. becauſe they haue their
fantaſie determinate to one thing, and by nature are guided
to their actions (according to Ariſtotle) therefore they cannot
be ſaid to erre. But man, endued at firſt with freedome of will,

hath not his fantaſie determined, but it is extended to many and almoſt
infinite things.The wil is the handmaid of vnderſtāding. For the will is the handmaide of our vnderſtanding,
which can do al things, either in the agent vnderſtanding,
whoſe office Eſt omnia facere, or in the poſſible vnderſtāding, whoſe
nature Eſt omnia fieri.
                  
                  Therefore the fantaſie of man is alſo indetermined.The fantaſie of man is indeterminate. And hence
growes the cauſe of often erring, becauſe our knowledge is by
meanes of the ſenſe, which onely gaines cognition of things ſenſible
and material. Therefore haue we little iudgement in matters
diuine and immateriall: yet are they the meanes to the inuiſible
things,Roman. 1. 20. as the Apoſtle ſaith to the Romanes. Inuiſibilia enim ipſius, à
creatura mundi per ea quae facta ſunt intellecta, conspiciuntur: ſempiterna
quoque cius virtus, & diuinitas, ita vt ſint inexcuſabiles. For the
iuuiſible things of him, that is his eternall power and Godhead, are ſeene
by the creation of the world, being conſidered in his workes, to the intent
that they ſhould be without excuſe.
                     The reaſon of our affecting the world more then heauen. Hereupon it comes to paſſe, that
we draw neerer to the matters of this world, then thoſe of heauen, &
fal into many infirmities, by the repugnancy which is between the
fleſh and the ſpirit.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  
                     The Angels haue in themſelues a prerogatiue of wil,
                     The wil of the Angells.
                     and therefore few of them do erre, no, not the third part. But men
doe altogether run aſtray, except they be powerfully aſſiſted by the
hand of heauen, whereof the Prophet Dauid beareth true witneſſe.
                     Pſal. 14. 2. 3. Deus de coelo prospexit ſuper filios hominum, vt videat ſi eſt intelligens,
aut requirens Deum. And what found he? Omnes declinauerunt, ſimul
mutiles facti ſunt, non eſt qui faciat bonum, non eſt vſque ad vnum.
All are gon out of the way, they are all corrupt, there is none that doth
good, no not one.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Let me anſwer you, that though the Angels are ſayd
to haue liberty of will,Man is cōpoſed of two cō
                        trary natures. yet notwithſtanding▪ being all ſpirits, they
haue not the repugnancy in ſenſe, according as man hath: who is
compoſed of two contrary natures, to weet, ſenſible and intellectuall,
whence that continuall repugnancy deriueth his birth, and is the
occaſion of many errors, which the Angels doo not commit, who
are ſimply of the intellectuall nature. Nor faileth thus the bruit beaſt
likewiſe, who hath his fantaſie determined
                        •
                      neither the inſenſible
creatures, who haue one ſole forme, and naturall inclination. God
neuertheleſſe gaue vnto man ſufficient helpe, to ſerue as a ſupply to
natures frailty.
                  To our firſt father Adam before his fall, he gaue originall iuſtice,

commerce with the Angels,God gaue Adam originall iuſtice, &c. reuealed knowledge, a perfect ſynderiſis.
and an hundred thouſand helps beſide.
                  To man (falne into miſery by naturall corruption) to defend him
from further tranſgreſſions,To Adam being falne, god gaue the lawe natural, &c. in the firſt world he gaue him the lawe
natural, an Angelicall cuſtody, celeſtiall viſions, and the aide of ciuill
conuerſation.
                  Afterward,The written lawe. he gaue the law written, diuine precepts, promiſes of
greate rewardes, the ſpeeches of Prophets, and the terror of
paines.
                  Since then,The law Euangelicall. he gaue the law Euangelicall, the infinite benefits
by the Words incarnation, the Goſpell preached, moſt mightye
miracles, a pretious death, a glorious reſurrection, Chriſts
victorious aſcenſion, the miſſion of the holy Ghoſt, and euangelicall
decrees.
                  
                     Among which,
                     Of brotherly correction. 
                     one is that of brotherly correction, a moſt ſacred
precept to helpe man from ſinning.
                     Math. 18. 15. Si peccauerit in te frater
tuus, vade, & corripe eum inter te & ipſum ſolum: ſi te audierit, lucratus
es Fratrem tuum. If thy brother treſpaſſe againſt thee, go, and tell
him his falt between thee and him alone: if he heare thee, thou haſt won
thy brother.
                  If then we may doo ſo much good by the voyce,What good may be don by charitable correcting of our brother. and by our
ſpeech: doubtleſſe it cannot be but a great ſin, in charity not to reproue
our brother, when in matter of leſſe weight, we ſtick not ſomtime
to break ſilence, by wicked oathes, curſings and blaſphemies.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Wee haue ſpoken ſufficiently already, that to be ſilent,
is much more commendable then ſpeech. But now we are alſo
enforced to ſay, that to hold our peace, is euen as great an offence.
Becauſe not only it is the Lords precept,How holding our peace is a great offence. that in ſuch a caſe we ought
to ſpeak; but likewiſe, then to be ſilent, may be the occaſiō of ruinating
the ſoule of an offending neighbour, and hazard our own vtter
loſſe of heauen alſo.
                  Wherfore the holy Prophet Eſay lamented,Eſa. 6. 5. that he held his peace
when he ought to haue ſpoken:The cauſe why Eſay cōplained of holding his peace. 
                     vae mihi quia tacui. And the cauſe of
his complaint was, that hauing ſeen the Lord ſit vpon a throne in infinit
maieſty, adorned with the higheſt glory, the yeer that Ozias
king of Iſrael dyed by a ſudden death: That he had not before, (with
a conſtant hart) reprehēded his ſins, wherby he might haue expected
ſome amendment of them. For he was the ſame king, that ſo boldly
durſt vſe the Prieſts office, contrary both to the diuine will, and the

Prieſthoods authority.
                  But the Lord being offended therat,The iuſtice of God vpon the king, that would needs goe beyond his regal authority. the king going to offer incenſe
in the Sanctum Sanctorum, as the high Prieſt was wont to do:
he was ſmitten by the higheſt Majeſty with a leproſie, in that part
of the forehead, where the high Prieſt vſed to weare a plate of fine
gold. For which heauy iudgement ſo faln vpon the king, the Prophet
cryed, vae mihi quia tacui.
                  
                  As if he would haue ſayd.The Authors implication. Wo is me, that I haue held my peace,
and not conſtantly rebuked the king in his ſinne, which (happily)
by correction he would haue amended. Moſt wretched am I,
if (by my negligence) the king haue loſt eternall happineſſe, becauſe
the Lord will demand, of me, the loſſe or ſafety of ſuch a ſoule,
And,Eſay. 6. 5. which is worſe; In medio populi polluta labia habentis, ego habito,
& Regem Dominum exercituū vidi oculis meis. I dwell in the mids
of a people of polluted lips, and mine eyes haue ſeen the king and Lord
of hoaſts.
                  
                  As adding thus.A leſſon for ſuch as little regard what is committed to their charge. Not only haue I fayled in admoniſhing the king,
but I dwel among a flattering people, who (with vncleane lips) not
only durſt not aduenture to reprooue the kings ſins for feare; but rather
ſoothed vp & flattered him in euil. Wherby, both Crown & Miter
haue hatched the more iniquities, nurſed & cockringly brought
them vp, and, (in reuerence to the Prince) ſinners haue bin honourred,
and ſoft pillows layd vnder the elbowes of wickedneſſe.
                  VVheron Saint Gregory ſayth in his Paſtorals:S. Greg. in Paſto. 
                     Delinquentem
namque eum redarguere nullus praeſumit, & in exemplum culpa vehementer
extenditur, quando pro reuerentia ordinis peccator honoratur.
Now albeit many haue murmured, none yet durſt vndertake the corage,
perſonally to reprehend ſin between him & thee, or face to face:
only through feare of puniſhments infliction.
                  In this caſe if befalleth vs,Example of Mice for theyr ſafety among their enemies. as it did to the Mice, who being in a
deep conſultation together, what they might beſt doo for ſafety of
their liues, being euery houre ſubiect to their enimies the Cats mercy:
thought it ſafeſt for them, euery one to hang a little bel about his
own neck, to ſerue as a ſufficient paſſe or warrant. Al allowed this aduiſe,
but vpon he ſucceſſe of ſome, few afterward would aduenture to
put it in execution.
                  Euen ſo fareth it with the correction of great men,The alluſiō to all the correctiō of greate mē. who haue terrors
& puniſhments, to ſupport in themſelues all vnlawful actions.
And this ſtrikes a feare in too many faint harts: becauſe S. Iohn Baptiſt
loſt his head for reproouing of Herode. As alſo the Apoſtles

and holy Martyrs, (in like caſes) loſt their liues.
               
               
                  Ludouico.
                  Such pils ought to be folded vp in Sugar,How reprehē
                        ſion is to bee deliuered. and reprehenſion
ſhould come with ſweetneſſe, not with bitterneſſe. Becauſe
Prelates ought oftener to exhort, then reprehend, as men that
are our Paſtors and Fathers, not Tyrantes to vs and perſecutors.
Agreeing with the counſell of Saint Paul.
                     1. Tim. 5. 2. 
                     Seniorem ne increpaueris,
ſed obſecra vt patrem: Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a
Father.
                  
                  
                     Antiſthenes being asked, wherefore he reprehended Princes,
and men placed in great dignity, with ſo much manſuetude, mildneſſe
and modeſty?The anſwere of Antiſthenes, for the rebuking of princes. anſwered (in my mind) very excellently. Becauſe
Princes (quoth he) are like vnto Bees, who if they be not warily and circumſpectly
handled, do ſtrike ſuddenly with the ſting. Euen ſo Princes,
if they be not reprooued with all humilitie and modeſty: they
eaſilye ſtrike with the ſting of power which they haue in
hould.
                  For poſſeſſed Saul,
                     Example of King Saule poſſeſſed. to haue the diuell caſt out of his body, there
was great need of a Muſitian, to play very ſweetly. Euen ſo, to raiſe
vp Princes and great men from their ſin,A leſſon for bould preſumers with princes. a ſweet and pleaſant correction
behooueth, rather more by entreating, then by controwling.
And to anſwer to the queſtion alredy mooued, before I further forget
my ſelf, if we but conſider whereon we haue already diſcourſed, we
may eaſily reſolue all intricate ſcruple.
                  It is true,There is a time apte for all things. that ſilence is more commendable then talking: but
Omnia tempus habent; tempus tacendi, & tempus loquēdi. To al things
there is an appointed time; a time to keepe ſilence, and a time to ſpeake.
Therefore (in this caſe) ſilence is a greeuous offence,Eccl. 3. 1. 7. becauſe by ſilence,
we are partly the cauſe of our neighbours ſoules loſſe: whereas
contrarywiſe, by ſpeaking, we might be a meanes of ſafety to the
ſame.
                  Moreouer,How ſomtime by ſpeaking we holde our peace. ſomtime by ſpeaking, we do hold our peace, and god
ſpeaketh by the vſe of our tongue. But in keeping ſilence, contrary
to the diuine precept, our ſilēce is a talkatiue babbling, wherwith we
endanger both our ſelues and our neighbour, that is, by the word of
work, not of the voyce.
                  Thus houlding our peace,How we breake ſilēce in holding our peace, and yet in talking are ſilent. we breake ſilence; and talking, are ſilent.
Or thus being dumb, we talke, and yet in diſcourſing we ſpeake
not, but God in and by vs. And further you muſt noate, that this
precept doth not alwayes bind, becauſe it is an affirmatiue precept,
which bindeth thus, but not alwayes. For ſuch precepts as are affirmatiue

meerly, are vertuous actions, wherin there is to be obſerued,
both manner, and rule.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  I know not what you meane by theſe affirmatiue precepts:
how many kinds of precepts are there? what, are there negatiue
precepts alſo?
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  There are found three ſeuerall kindes of commaundementes, whereunto all the preceptes diuine are reduced.
                  Some are negatiue,Of negatiue precepts. which doo alwayes binde, and for euer,
in all places, and at all times: As, not to ſweare and blaſpheme.
                  Some are affirmatiue,Of affirmatiue precepts. which doo bind alwayes, but not for euer,
but onely for a time: As, the giuing of Almes, to be continually
perfourmed: but yet, in time of neceſſity, the bond moſt bindeth.
                  Others there be,Of precepts conſiſting of both natures. which participate of both theſe before named
natures, being precepts affirmatiue and negatiue, binding alwayes, &
for euer: becauſe they haue two heads, one pertinent to the negatiue
precept, the other appertaining to the precepte affirmatiue.
                  Of this nature is reſtitution.Of reſtitutiō. For God commandeth thee not to retaine
the goods of others, which appertaineth to the negatiue precept.
He commands thee alſo to reſtore them back again, & this belongeth
to the precept affirmatiue.
                  The precept of brotherly correction,The precepte of brother lie correction. it is an affirmatiue precept, &
therfore bindeth alwayes, but not euer. Therefore there is great need
of obſeruing both the rule and manner, for feare of fayling. Which
by our Sauiour Chriſt himſelf is thus taught vs.
                  Si peccauerit in te frater tuus,Math. 18. 15. 16. 17. vade, & corripe eum inter te & ipſum
ſolum: ſi te audierit, lucratus es fratrem tuum. Si autem non audierit,
How it is taught vs by Chriſt himſelfe. adhibe te cum adhuc vnum vel duos. vt in ore duorum, vel trium,
teſtium ſtet omne verbum. Quòd ſi non audi
                        •
                     rit eos, dic Eccleſiae: ſi autem
Eccleſiam non audierit, ſit tibi ſicut ethnicus & publicanus. If thy
brother treſpaſſe againſt thee, go, and tell him his fault between thee &
him alone: if he heare thee, thou haſt won thy brother. But if he heare
thee not, take yet with thee one or two, that by the mouth of two or three
witneſſes, euery word may be confirmed. And if he will not vouchſafe
to heare then, tell it vnto the Church: and if he refuſe to heare
the Charch alſo, let him be vnto thee as an heathen, and a publicane.
                  
                     
Herein are three things to be obſerued,Three things things to be obſerued. namely the place, the
time, and the manner.
                  The place is noted, when he ſayth; Si peccauerit in te; If thy brother
treſpaſſe againſt thee,
                     1 The place for ſpeaking. that is. If thy neighbour ſinne ſecretly,
and thou onely knoweſt thereof, reprehend him in ſome remote
place, that no one may know thereof, for feare of giuing
therby ſcandale to others, and diſcouering (againſt charity) another
mans defects. To the end alſo, that the delinquent may the more
willingly amend, by perceiuing, that all this is doone vnto him in
loue.
                  The time alſo is to be reſpected,2 The time for ſpeaking. becauſe alwayes & at all ſeaſons,
it is not a time for reprehenſion. For it often falleth out, that the perſon
offending, is incorrigible. Which he wel knowing or perceiuing
that ſhold vrge the reproof, he ſtands not bound then to mooue correctiō,
leaſt the ſinner ſhold fal into greater guilt, but ought to take a
fitter opportunity.
                  Or elſe,Of time vnbefitting. if he know it to be no apt ſeaſon, euen immediatly vpon
the tranſgreſſion to ſtrike with reproof, his wiſedom (in forbearāce)
cannot be therfore impeached, & yet the ſinner in due time may be
alſo chaſtiſed.
                  Noah patiently awaited ſeauen dayes together,
                     Example of Noahs ſeauen dayes wayting for the doues returnes. 
                     hauing firſt ſent
foorth the dooue, and ſeeing her returne to be ſo quickly, without
bringing any ſigne of the waters ceſſation: then he ſent her foorth
againe, and then ſhee brought back the Oliue braunche with
her At illa venit ad eum ad vesperam, portans ramum Oliuae, virentibus
folijs in ore ſuo.Gen. 8. 11. Intellexit ergo Noe, quòd ceſſaſſent aquae ſuper
terram. And the Doue came to him in the euening, and loe,
in her mouth was an Oliue leafe, that ſhee had pluckt: whereby
Noah knewe, that the waters were abated from off the
earth.
                  In Noah is figured the chriſtian ſoule, remaining within the
Arke of our body.The Authors morall application of this example. The waters of the deluge are our ſinnes,
wherein, we (like poore wretches) are as drowned. VVhereof
Dauid ſpeaking, ſayth. Saluum me fac Deus, quoniam intrauerunt
aquae vſque ad animam meam. Saue me,
                     Pſal. 69. 1. 
                     O God, for the waters
are entred euen to my ſoule. The Doue repreſenteth brotherly correction,
and the Oliue branche, is the fruit of this brotherly admonition.
                  VVhen we behold our brother in the deluge of ſin,The forme of vſe for this application. we ought
to ſend foorth out of the Arke of the body (by the window of our

mouth) the doue of mild correction. Which returning vnfruitfully,
and without any ſigne of amendment at all, we ought not
therefore to deſpaire of his recouery. But after the example of
Noah, with patience to attend a time more opportune. In which
ſpace (perhaps) the waters of this wretched floud may ceaſe, by the
want of former proude conceit, and better conſideration of his own
eſtate.
                  VVhereupon,The ſecōd obſeruation for brotherly correction. ſending foorth againe the ſimple Doue, in kind
correction, and on meere charity: doubtleſſe ſhe will bring ſome
ſigne of the great floods fall, euen the very fruit of ſo good an endeauour,
and ſo thou haſt won thy brother; Lucratus es fratrem
tuum.
                  
                  We muſt in like ſort obſerue the manner,3. The māner. that is, charitably, with
ſweet words, and full of loue.
                  
                     Dauid draue the tormenting ſpirit foorth of Saul,
                     Example of Dauids diſpoſſeſſing Saule. not with ſtearn
ſtrokes, but with mild muſique.
                  
                     Eliſeus the Prophet ſent his ſeruant Gehezie with a ſtaffe, to reuiue
the ſon of the widdow,Example of Eliſeus ſending Gehezie to the widdowes ſon. which prooued to nothing: but when
afterward he came himſelf in perſon, and with his own limbs warmed
the dead-benummed limbs of the child, being lifeleſſe, he, ioyning
part to part, face to face, hands to hands, breaſt to breaſt, and
feete to feet, thus heating the child, he raiſed him from death to
life.
                  So,How we ſhould reuiue our brother from ſinne. when we would reuiue our brother, he being mortally wounded
with ſin, and euen almoſt dead in ſoule: we ſhould not ſend our
ſeruant with a ſtaffe, to doo ſuch correction as Pilate did to Chriſt;
Corripiam ergo illum,
                     Luk. 23. 22. 
                     & dimittam; I will chaſtiſe him, and let him
looſe.
                  
                  Neither ought we to vſe any rough or rigorous words.Our immitation of Elizeus. But like
to Eliſeus, warme the delinquents ſoule with the heate of charity,
and by compaſſionating his caſe, euen transforming our ſelues altogether
into him.Gal. 6. 1. According to the inſtruction of Saint Paul. Fratres,
& ſi praeoccupatus fuerit homo in aliquo delicto, vos qui spirituales
eſtis, huiuſmodi inſtruite in ſpiriu lenitatis, conſiderans teipſum, ne
& tu tenteris, Brethren, if a man be falne (by occaſion) into any
fault, you which are spirituall, reſtore ſuch a one with the ſpirite
of meekeneſſe, conſidering thy ſelfe, leaſt thou alſo bee tempted.
Being thus heated with the warmth of chriſtian charity, we ſhal raiſe
the ſinners dying ſoule, by the religious meanes and office of the
tongue.
                  
                     
Oh how pleaſing is this manner to me,The Authors commendatiō of this courſe. and I prayſe the true vſe
therof from time to time: becauſe, when we goe ouer haſtily to the
committed euil, the offender (hauing his ſenſes blinded) will not ſuffer
himſelf to be reprehended, but rather (in haughtineſſe of ſpirit)
wil euen approoue and maintaine his ſin.
                  VVherefore, looke how thou bloweſt the fire then, ſo much the
more thou kindleſt it,Compariſō of blowing the fire, alluded to our brothers nature. whereto if nouriſhment want, it will extinguiſh
of it ſelfe: Euen ſo is it with thy brothers cholerick and haſty
nature, being reproued too quickly of his committed error. Therfore
it ſhal become vs wel, to expect a while, & in our reprehenſion, to vſe
no loftineſſe, becauſe the ſinner in this caſe, may very aptly be compared
to a ſick man.
                  When a ſick body would feede on delicate and healthfull meates
for his diſeaſe,Compariſō of a ſick mans feeding. and yet are to him moſt diſpleaſing, though in their
owne nature very wholeſome: they vſe ſuch art in the deliuerance of
them, labouring to pleaſe his weak relliſh, as he hardly perceiueth
what they are.
                  The finner, by his ouerſurfetting on ſin, abhors all ſpirituall
meates,The applicatiō of the cōpariſon. how healthfull or delicate ſoeuer they be. He finds no taſt
in preaching, he hath no delight in praying, no mind to the holy Sacraments,
no pleaſure in faſting, nor any godly action agrees with
his reliſh. Nay, he is reduced into ſuch an eſtate, as he hath no feeling
of any ſpirituall matter. So that euen as Dauid ſayth; Omnem eſcam
abominata eſt anima corū; Their ſoule abhorreth al meat. Almoſt they
are ready to leaue their houſes,Pſalm. 107. 18. drawing on their lateſt breath, euē as
next neighbour to eternal death: Appropinquauerunt vſque ad port as
mortis.
                  
                  VVherefore in the adminiſtring of this healthfull foode of
brotherly correction,The adminiſtering of brotherly correction. that it may be willingly and louingly accepted:
you muſt ſhadow it in ſom ſubſtantial manner, to make it cary a
taſt of kind and comfortable words, after this, or the like obſeruation;
                  Deare brother, ſo it might not be diſpleaſing to you, I would deliuer
a few words greatly to your profit:The Authors inſtitution for the maner of correcting. wherein, God is my witneſſe
nothing elſe mooueth me but the honour of God, true brotherly charity,
and vnfeigned regard of your good. I know well, that ſuch
an offence hath eſcaped you, and no marueyle, for you are a frayle
man, like vnto others, therefore it makes no admiration in me. Becauſe
we are all weake, the ſnares ſo many, and the occaſions ſo numberleſſe,
as I know not how we ſhould eſcape falling into far greater

errors, yea, and much more often too. But after (by our own frailty)
we are encompaſſed with danger, it may not therfore be held for
reaſonable, that we ſhold long time cōtinue in ſo wretched an eſtate:
but rather ſeek after ſom remedy, as wiſe men are wont to do, & not
be careleſſe of help, like inſolent fooles.
                  Conſider brother,The allegatiō on Gods behalfe. that god is ſo good and patient, as we cannot
(with deuout harts) be ſo redy to aſk pardon for our ſins, but we ſhal
find him as forward in pardoning them. Wherfore I beſeech you, by
the bitter paſſiō of ſo louing a God, & in the very bowels of his endleſſe
mercies: that you wold take ſuch a courſe, as this bounty of his
may redound to your benefit, onely by true conferring with your
ſoule, on ſuch an eſcape, which I am bound louingly to tel you of, &
you (in as kind loue) to accept.
                  If manly entreaties may be auaileable with you, if you ſee me to
fal into this,The maner concerning our ſelues. or any other ſin: I pray you do me the like office of charity.
For oftētimes we are ſo blinded, that we take delight in our own
harme, & our affections do ſo ouermaſter iudgement: as euill ſeems
good, & good euil, iuſtice appears to be iniury, zeale hatred, and vertue
vice.
                  So,2. Kings. 4. 34. after the manner of another Eliſeus, who Incuruauit ſe ſuper
puerum; th
                           •
                        ew himſelf vpon the child: abaſing our ſelues, & confeſſing
our own frailty to be as great as his, we ſhal ſo warme his ſoule with
the heat of good words, & with the ſupple ſweetneſſe of feruent charity,
as he wil ariſe from death to life, and then we may ſay; Lucratus
es fratrem tuum.
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Theſe are the preſeruing ſirropes, of power able to reuiue
the ſickeſt ſinner, and keep him from falling into greater perils, as
alſo moſt effectual for his recouery.Reprehenſiōs compared to Phyſical pilles. And becauſe reprehenſions are
to ſinners, like bad ſauouring pils: it behooueth the brotherly reproouer,
to be ſo careful, as he do couer them with the fine gold of louing
ſpeeches. And becauſe,Compariſō of the Ague. by giuing drink to one troubled with an Ague,
euen in the heate when the fit is vpon him, is a meer nouriſhmēt
to the feuer: we ought to await the fits declination, & til the body be
more temperate.
                  So,The application. when we would admoniſh, if wee ſee the delinquent much
enraged, or in the ſuperfluity of paſſion: we muſt ſtay a while, vntil
the heate of anger be ouer, and the Feuer of paſſion be in his declination.
And then is beſt to adminiſter the healthfull ſtrengthning
of louing rebukes: for our taſte is ſo delicate, as otherwiſe it
will not endure reproofe. Nay, we muſt vſe great diligence, and

ſeek ſeuerall wayes, according to the quality of the perſon. Euen as
the Phyſitian doth, who conſidering the complexions of his patients,
Compariſō of the Phyſition. giues to the delicate complexion, a light and a ſweet medicin,
and to the contrary conſtitution, a medicine of like and anſwerable
nature.
               
               
                  Finis Chap. 24.
            
            
               
                  The Argument.
                  Wherein is diſcourſed, how important the precept of brotherly correction
is, and for auoiding error therein, all the words which our Sauiour vſed,
in giuing the precept, are diligently examined, and diuers good
conſiderations in that behalfe alledged. Moreouer, they handle ſeuerally
the number of corrections, which are to be vſed to our neigbor,
and by the office of the tongue, all iuſtified and warranted by proofes
of Scripture.
               
               Chap. 25.
               
                  
                     LODOVICO.
                  In ſuch a caſe as this
it behooueth vs to imitate hunters,Compariſō of huntſmen in their ſeuerall paſtimes.
who according to the variety of

                        •
                     h
                        •
                     ir ſports, prepare an anſwerable
vſe of inſtruments. To ſurprize the
wild Bore, they haue Bore ſpeares,

                        •
                     auelings and guns: for the Hare,
they haue Greyhounds: for Quailes
they haue ſpaniels, or a falſe call: for
fiſh, they haue nets: and for fowle,
ſundry kinds of Haukes. So ought

we to make difference between the Cleargy,Obſeruatiō for a differēce to be made in perſons. and vnderlings, between
thoſe of degree, and them of meaner ſort, between men
and children, between the cholerick and phlegmatick. Beſide,
no diligence ſhould want, in recouering a man from ſin: becauſe
the very beſt hath ſmall reaſon to boaſt, for there is none good, no,
not one.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  The diligence ought to be great, for the caſe is important,
and the neceſſity extreame. VVhen the good Patriarche
Ioſeph ſent his brethren,Example of the Patriark
                           •
                         Ioſeph. with their beaſtes laden with corne, from
Aegypt into Canaan, for the nouriſhment of aged Iacob: among
other good admonitions,Gen 45. 24. one was this; Proficiſcentibus ait; Ne
traſcimini in via. As they departed, he ſayd vnto them; Fall not out
by the way.
                     The Authors alluſion. As if he would haue ſayd. Deare brethren, you leade
theſe Aſſes laden with corne and mony, the way is long, the beaſts
weake, and diſgraces are euermore too ready at hand. Wherefore I
pray you, let peace be among you, becauſe, if one of you grow angry
againſt another, your cariage falling down, who ſhall help you to lift
it vp again?
                  All we are brethren,Applicatiō to our ſelues. trauailing from this earth to heauen, with
the fraile cariage of theſe our bodies like beaſts; vt iumentum factus
ſum apud te;
                     Pſal. 73. 22. 
                     I was as a beaſt before thee, and laden are we with
the weight of legall obſeruance. Now becauſe we are by nature
weake, by euery ſmall difficulty which we find in the law diſhartned,
and by the very leaſt temptation, which our infernall enemy vſeth
againſt vs, we are ſoone ſmitten to the earth, and ſo the ſoule
fals into ſin: If we ſhall wax cholerick among our ſelues, who
ſhall quiet vs? who ſhall admoniſh and brother-like reprooue vs?
Therfore,The way of this world. 
                     Ne traſcamur in via, let vs not fall out by the way, but with
charity aſſiſt our neighbour, with that louing and charitable word,
Corripe eum.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Many doo come very ſhort of this manner: therefore,
to auoyde wandring aſtray, we ought to attend and conſider
the words vſed by Chriſt himſelf in this precept. VVhat ſignifieth
this conditionall phraſe; Si peccauerit; If he treſpaſſe, or, if hee
ſinne?
                  
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  VVe may moderately philoſophize vpon the words
of this precept,The conditional word, If. the better to keep our ſelues in compaſſe. This conditionall
Si, If, I take it to ſignifie, that we ought only to reprooue
thoſe ſins, wherof we haue a certain knowledge, Sipeccauerit, If he
ſin, that is; If by chāce thou perceiueſt thy brother to ſin, correct him

brotherlike: but go not to make ſearche after other mens ſins, to
win occaſion (thereby) of reproouing thy brother.
                  And for this purpoſe,Exāple out of t
                           •
                        e old lawe. I call now to mind a notable occaſion. God
commaunded in the old lawe, that when one borrowed mony of
another,Deul. 24. 10▪ 11. he ſhould not enter his houſe to fetch his pledge: but ſtand
and await without doors patiently, vntill he brought it foorth to
him.
                  We (by our ſins) haue pawned our ſoules:The example applied. it is not neceſſary
therfore, that he (who comes to reprehend) ſhould enter our ſoules
houſe, making there a curious enquiry and ſearch, after other mens
tranſgreſſions, to compaſſe occaſion of imperious reproouing. For
Chriſt giues no ſuch commandement, but rather aduiſeth vs to ſtaye
without doors, that is: not to charge our neighbours weak conſciences,
with other mens infirmities: but, if we happen to ſee our brother
ſin, to correct him charitably; ſo ſignifieth this conditionall
Si, If.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  If we our ſelues are ſtained with the ſelfe ſame tranſgreſſions,
ought we then to imploy our officious tongues, in adminiſtring
correction?A ſētētious demaunde. How can a foule hand make the face cleane, except
it ſelf be firſt waſhed? Otherwiſe, the delinquent may vſe the
wordes of Chriſt vnto vs:Mat 7. 3. 
                     Quid vides feſtucam in oculo fratris tui,
& trabem in oculo tuo non vides? Why ſeeſt thou the mote that is
in thy brothers eye, and perceiueſt not the beame that is in thine
owne eye? Or elſe this other; Medice, curate ipſum; Phyſitian, heale,
thy ſelfe.
                     Luke 4▪ 23. For it appeareth, that by our correction, we may couer
our owne proper vices, which is no way conuenable in a Chriſtian.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  In ſuch a caſe,The words of Father Auguſtine. ſayth Father Auguſtin, We ought rather to
condole and weep with him, then come to correct and contro
                           •
                        le him, mutually
wiſhing one another to repentance, eſpecially, if the ſin be publique.
He ought not reprooue, that deſerues reproofe. For it will be a ſcandale to many, for him to be a reproouer,
that in himſelfe deſerueth reproouing: beſide, it is a ſin of very great
pride.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  If the delinquents ſinne be publique, ought the
correction (notwithſtanding) to be priuate? This breedes in mee
a doubt of Chriſtes wordes, who onely ſayth: Si peccauerit in
te:
                     Publique of 
                           •
                        ending muſt haue publique reproof. 
                     If he ſinne againſt thee, whether any other ſhould be preſent,
or no?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  If the ſin be publique, the correction ſhould be publique
alſo,1. Tim. 5. 20. ſayth the Apoſtle. Peccantos, coram omnibus argue, vt &

caeteri timorem habeant. Them that ſinne, rebuke openly, that the reſt
alſo may feare. VVe ought therefore to conſider well, how our brother
hath ſinned, and not blindly go to reprehenſion, till firſt we be
certain of the ſin, for preuention of others infamy & ſcandall. Si peccauerit.
ſayth Chriſt: therefore looke well before, and ſaye nothing.
                  Elſe in ſaying,Example of Lamech. I thought he had ſinned, it may fall out as it did to
vnaduiſed Lamech, who going on hunting, and ſeeing (he knew not
what) to ſtir among the leaues, imagining it had bin ſome wild beaſt
there hidden: drew his bow, and loſing his arrow, when he ſuppoſed
he had ſlaine a ſaluage beaſt, he found he had ſlaine his father
Caine. VVhereupon, repenting himſelfe for this ill ſhot arrowe,
Gen. 4. 23. he ſayd to his wiues Adah and Zillah. Audite vocem m
                           •
                        am
vxores Lamech, auſcultate ſermonem meum; quoniam occidi virum in
vulnus meum, & adoleſcentulum in liuore meo. Heare my voyce you
wiues of Lamech; for I would ſlay a man in my wound, and a yo
                           •
                        ng man in
mine hurt.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  If the ſin be ſecret,Of ſecret ſin, but againſt a community. but againſt a community, or
a whole State: a good mind (in me) is not enough for reprehenſion
of the offender, neither auayleth hope (by any reſpects) to
drawe him to amendment, what correction then ſhould ſuch a one
haue?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Beeing aſſured of no fruitefull ſucceſſe, as in this
caſe it cannot bee, you ought more to reſpect the weale publique,
then a priuate mans condition.In matter of faith. And, in matter of faith,
not onely the meaneſt ought (in humilitye) to reprehende the
mightier, but (in ſuch a caſe) an equall eſtimate ſhoulde bee
in correction, we beeing all Chriſtians, and all bound together
for defence of the faith. As Saint Paule reprooued Saint Peeter,
being aboue him,Galat. 2. 11. in regard of the ſcandall which might
ariſe. Reprehendi eum quia reprehenſibilis erat. He withſtoode him
to his face, for he was to be blamed. Therefore ſayth the greate
doctour of the Church:Thom. Aquin. Sum. Cap. 20. 
                     Whenſoeuer the daunger of the faith is
diſcerned, wee ought to withſtand it euen to life it ſelfe: Corripe
eum.
                  
                  VVe find two ſeuerall kinds of correction,Two kindes of correction. one is the acte
of iuſtice, as when the Iudge ſentenceth the guiltie: and this only
belōgeth to thē in gouernmēt,1. The act of Iuſtice. vpon whoſe ſhoulders lies the weight
of iuſtice.
                  The other is the act of charity,2. The act of charity. and particularly belongeth to euery

man. Therfore they which profeſſe religion, and yet vſurpe vpon
theſe words, they preſume on that which appertaineth to the
Iudge onely, and in ſtead of their tongue, doo ſtrike with a
ſword.
                  
                     Corripe eum inter te & ipſum ſolum; Tell him his fault betweene
thee and him alone.
                     Between him & thee alone. Not like vnto ſuch, as ſet vp writings, infamous
libels, and Paſquilling ſlanders on publique poaſts. Corripe eum inter te
& ipſum ſolum. And not in company of brauers, ſwaggerers,
ſworders and lawleſſe quarrellers, as ſeeking that way to pleaſe thy
mind.
                  He ſayth Corripe,
                     Correct, not kill. not Occide, correct, not kill, tell him, not defame
him, as now it is become the practiſe of the world. Corripe eum,
not ſeeke reuenge, becauſe ſuch correction belongeth to God
onely.
                  VVe are the ſonnes of God by adoption:Example of children offended. therefore, let vs
doo like vnto a childe when he is any way iniuried, firſt runnes
and telles his Father the wrong doone vnto him. And the fathe
                        •
                     
ſayth, to comfort him; Peace my Sonne, I will be thy reuenger.
                  So,Applicatiō to our ſelues. when any one hath offended vs, let vs freely pardon him, neuer
mooue a hand to wreake our wrong▪ it is enough for vs, that our heauenly
father knowes our iniury,Roman. 12. 19. & he will be our iuſt auenger. Mihi
vindicta, & ego retribuam 
                           •
                        is in tempore: vengeance is mine, and in
time I wil repay it.
                  
                  No ſooner had Cain committed his murder,Example of Cain. but immediatly God
ſaid: vox ſanguinis fratris tui clamat ad me de terra:
                     Gen. 4. 10. 
                     The voyce of thy
brothers bloud crieth vnto me from the earth; implying therby, that he
would be his reuenger.
                  Scarſely had Myriam ended her murmuring againſt her brother
Moyſes,
                     Example of Myriam to Moyſes. but ſuddenly the Lorde ſtrooke her with a leaproſie.
                  And you (my Lord) know much better then I,Example of Mary Magdalen, and of Martha. how much chriſt
deſended Mary Magdalen, againſt Iudas murmuring at the Phariſies
ſupper.
                  Alſo of her ſiſter Martha, who lamented that Magdalen would
not helpe her in her buſineſſe.
                  
                     But what was Chriſts anſwer?
                     
                        Chriſts anſwer Luke. 10. 14. 15. Martha Martha ſollicita es, & turbaris
erga plurima. Maria optimam partem elegit, &c. Martha Martha
thou careſt, and art troubled about many things. Mary hath choſen
the good part.
                  
                     
So was Iob defended by God,Iob. againſt the iniury of his three friends;Suſanna.
                     Suſanna from the old luxurious Iudges; and Dauid from the iniuries
of Saul.
                     Dauid.
                  
                  All that we ought to do,Our own duty. is to pray vnto the Lord, to giue vs patience,
and to illuminate the vnderſtanding of our enemy, to the end,
he may haue knowledge of his error: in this kind alſo ought we brotherly
to correct him; Corripe eum.
                  
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Ought we to correct him for eury ſin, or only for thoſe
which are tearmed deadly?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  For ought I can diſcouer by this Goſpell,Al ſins are not alike in quality. thoſe ſins
which are tearmed deadly, we ought in duty eſpecially to correct
them. And thoſe that are of leſſer kind or quality, we muſt correct
them too: or elſe I think, that the winking at them, may cauſe a fall
into a far greater offence.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Whence do you gather, that we ſtand bound (as it were)
to correct deadly ſins ſo eſpecially?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  From theſe fruitfull words of brotherly correction,
The correctiō of deadly ſins. when Chriſt ſayd: Si audierit, lucratus es fratrem tuum: If he
heare thee, thou haſt wonne thy brother. If by brotherly correction
we may gaine a brother, it is a ſigne he was loſt, and made
ſlaue to the diuell, which needs muſt enſure thorowe deadly ſin,
euen that which hazardeth the death of the ſoule for euer.
                  As for other ſins;Of ſins of leſſe quality. they take not away the grace of god quite from
vs, but only do make vs luke-warme in affection: Wheras by ſinning
deadly, it locks vp the gates of heauen againſt vs, except ther be immediate recouery. And Chriſt ſaying, thou haſt won thy brother, approoues,
that the deuil had great power ouer him: and reſcuing him
then in ſuch a dangerous eſtate, it ſhewes thee to be a deare brother
indeed.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  If the tongue can reache to ſuch a redemption, it
were a great ſin in vs, to be negligent of our neighbours good, eſpecially
in ſuch a caſe as this. But firſt we ſhould free our ſelues from
ſin, ſo much as lyes in vs to doo, Becauſe (as Cirillus Alexandrinus
ſayeth) that wee ought to open our mouthes in correction,
                     The words of Cirillus Alexandrinus. 
                     in ſuch
manner as we ſee the Cocke opens his to ſinging
                           •
                        , who firſt beates
him ſelfe with his winges, before hee chaunteth foorthe his
noates.
                  
                  So wee ought no to reprooue another man,Conſideration of our own faults. till firſt (with
the wings of good conſideration) wee haue well beaten our

ſelues, leaſt we ſhould ſtand guilty of the ſame crime, which we ſeek
to reprehend in our brother. Hereupon was it, that God ſayd to the
Prophet Eſay,
                     Eſay. 38. 12. ſending him to preach, and to correct his elected people:
Quaſi tuba exalta vocem tuam: Exalt thy voyce like vnto a
Trumpet.
                  
                  Before a man can ſound a Trumpet, he takes it in his hand, puts it
to his mouth,Compariſō of ſounding a Trumpet, applyed to preaching. there giues it breath, and afterward the ſound is heard.
So ſhould it be with him that preacheth to others, or him that will
correct his neighbour for any negligence. He muſt firſt take vp the
Trumpet in his hand, and prepare it with ſuch actions, as he himſelf
laboureth to reprooue in others: otherwiſe, he is vnwoorthy to
check another mans ſin, which cunningly he would cloake in himſelfe.
                  But let vs come now to the number of reprehenſions,Of the number of reprehenſions. which
cannot ſtand voide of doubting: becauſe to Saint Peter it ſeemed
ſufficient, when hee had allowed ſeauen times, for forgiueneſſe
of ſinne in our neighbour, with reproofe of the offences
committed. And Chriſt made him anſwere: Non dico tibi
vſque ſepties,
                     Math. 18. 22. 
                     ſed vſque ſeptuagies ſepties: I ſay not to thee, vnto ſeauen
times, but vnto ſeauenty times ſeauen times, what ſay you now to
this?
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  I ſay with S. Auguſtine, and all the cheefeſt doctors of
the Church,A finite number put by an infinite. that here Chriſt put a finite number, by an infinite. Septuagies
ſepties, ſeauenty times ſeauen times, implyeth ſo much, as
we ought alwayes to pardon, and in like manner to make our brotherly
correction. And if it pleaſe you to licence me, in ſpeaking my
mind concerning this number, you ſhall perceiue that I will approue
it to be ſo.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  Therin you ſhal do me a ſingular fauour, and I hope to
heare matter agreeing with your great iudgement.
               
               
                  Claudio.
                  Seauenty times ſeauen times, ſayth Saint Ierome,
are foure hundred and ninety.Seauenty times ſeauen times according to Saint Ierome. If you tahe away from the number
of 490. the laſt figure nullo, which of it ſelfe is nothing, there
remaineth behind a 9. and a 4. Nine and foure, do make thirteen.
Twelue are the Articles of our faith, & the one remaining ouer, ſignifieth
the defect or failing in them: therfore, we ought to reprehēd our
brother, euery time that he erreth in any of the twelue Articles of
the faith.
                  Seauenty time ſeauen times,According to S. Auguſtine. Saint Auguſtine ſayth, they are ſeauenty
ſeauen. To come to the number of ſeauenty ſeauen, they

value here eleuen times ſeauen. Ten are the diuine precepts: therefore
this accountable number, ſignifieth the ten commaundements,
and the odde one ouer, alludeth to the tranſgreſſion of them.
Wherefore, ſeauentie times ſeauen times, is as much to ſay, as that
we ought to reprooue our neighbour, euery time hee committeth
breach of any one of the ten diuine commaundements.
                  Moreouer,The writing of ſeauenty ſeauen by figures, alluded to the workes of mercy. ſeauenty times ſeauen times are written with two figures
of ſeauen, as thus, 77. Two times ſeauen doe make foureteene,
and ſo many are the workes of mercy, to wit, ſeauen ſpirituall,
and ſeauen temporall. Therefore in ſaying ſeauentie
times ſeauen, it importeth, that wee ought to reprehend our
neighbour, euery time hee fayleth in any of the workes of mercye.
                  Once againe,A ſecond cō
                        ceipt on the figures, by the ſenſes. 77. hath two figures of 7. and twiſe ſeauen (as I ſaid
before) are foureteene: in writing of foureteene, there is required a
1. and a 4. One and foure doe make fiue, and ſo many are the ſenſes
belonging to our bodie. Therefore, in ſaying ſeauenty times ſeauen
times, it implyeth, that we ought to admoniſh our brother, euery
time he erreth in his fiue bodily ſenſes: That is, eyther in ſeeing,
hearing, ſmelling, taſting or vainly touching.
                  Further yet,A third proof of the figures, by the ſeauen deadly ſinnes, and ſeauen ages of man. ſeauenty times ſeauen times, written as before with
two ſeauens, 7. and 7. are foureteene. Seauen in number are the
deadly ſinnes, contained in this word Saligiae. And ſeauen are the
ages of man, to wit, Infancy, Childhood, Youth from twelue to one
and twenty, Yong mans eſtate from twenty to thirty, Manhood,
Middle-age, and Olde decrepite age. According to which computation,
ſeauenty times ſeauen is to be vnderſtood, that in euery of
theſe ſeuerall ages, according as our brother falleth into deadlie
ſinne, we ought in charity to reprooue him.
                  In another 77. being twiſe ſeauen,A third proof, by the giftes of the holy ghoſt, & the vertues. we may ſay thus. Seauen are
the giftes of the holy ſpirit: wiſedome, vnderſtanding, counſell,
ſtrength, ſcience, pietie, and the feare of God. Seauen alſo are the
vertues, foure Cardinall, and three Theologicall: to wit, Iuſtice, Fortitude,
Temperance and Prudence; the other three, Faith, Hope and
Charity. Seauenty times ſeauen then may ſignifie, that we ought to
be helpful to our neighbor, euery time we perceiue defect in any of
theſe vertues, or the giftes of the holy ghoſt to growe weake in
him.
                  Much better ſaith Origen,
                     
                        S. Origen vpon S. Mathew. vpon Saint Mathew. Numerus ſex, videtur
eſſe operis, & laboris, ſeptimus autem repanſationis. Dicit autem

remiſſionem fieri oportere fratribus in hoc mundo degentibus, ſecundum
res huius mundi peccantibus. Si aliquis autem vltra ea peccata
peccauerit, iam non habebit remiſſionem. As if he would haue ſaid;
Euery time that a man ſinneth in this world, we ſhould alwaies pardon
him, and charitably correct him, becauſe the ſenary number
or that of ſixe is a number of paine and labour, and appertaineth to
this preſent life. But if hee perſeuer obſtinately in ſinne, as in the
contempt of eternall life, ſignified alſo in the ſeptenarie number,
being the number of reſt and quiet, wherein God him ſelfe ceaſed,
from all the workes he made in the creation: Remiſſion nor correction
is then any longer in our power, becauſe eternall are the torments
prepared for ſuch tranſgreſſions, ſpecified by the paines of
hell, & then he is wilfully cut off and diuided from the Church.
                  And that is it which he ſayth: Si Eccleſiā non audierit, ſit tibi et h
                           •
                        icus
& Publicanus.
                     Math. 18. 17. 
                     If he refuſe to heare the Church alſo, let him bee
vnto thee an heathen man & a Publican. Thus haue I prooued by
the number of ſeauenty ſeauen, that it alludeth vniuerſally by the
ſenſe, to the time preſent, and at all times elſe, wherein we ought to
labour our very vttermoſt, for the good and welfare of our neighbour.
               
               
                  Lodouico.
                  A very excellent and witty diſcourſe, whence may be
gathered, howe much we ought to eſteeme of brotherly affection, &
obſerue the rule of perfect charity.The cōmand of Chriſt for our neighbors good. For Chriſt him ſelfe hath commaunded
vs, to vſe ſuch diligence for our neighbours amendment,
not ſuffering him to run on vntill the houre, when no hope at all is
to be expected. And therefore hee hath ſet vt downe a manner
how. Firſt alone, by him ſelfe and thee to correct him. Afterward,
with two or three. Then in the preſence of all: which bringeth to
my remembrance, the ſentence of the holy ghoſt, ſpeaking of the
Church,Cant. 2. 9. and comparing it to a well ordered army: Terribilis vt caſtorum
acies ordinata.
                  
                  When an army is encamped,Compariſon of an Army encamped. about the armed ſquadrons Sentinelles
are appointed, who whatſoeuer they heare, they impart it to
one another, or elſe altogether doe aduertiſe the corps du garde therof.
With this goodly order is the Church defenced: Terribilis vt
caſtrorum acies ordinata.
                  
                  Wherefore when any helliſh rumour of ſinne is heard, which
might diſranke or diſorder this noble Army: one Sentinell aduiſeth
an other in this manner.The firſt Sentinell. 
                     Si peccauerit in te frater tuus, corripe
cum inter te & ipſum ſolū: there is the firſt Sentinell, Si te non audierit,

adhibe adhuc vnum vel duos,
                     The ſecond Sentinell. 
                     vt in ore duorum vel trium teſtium
ſtet omne verbum: there is the ſecond Sentinell. Si eos non audierit,
dic Eccleſiae:
                     The whole corps du gard. there is the whole corps du garde, and the very nerues
of the Army of the militant Church.
                  And well ſhall it become vs, to vſe all diligence, in the ſafety of
our neighbour, for whoſe ſoules freedome, Chriſt inſtituted his Sacraments,
and ſuffered patiently ſo many torments. And if ſo many
euils are eaſily committed, by our ouer-ready tongue, well may we
conuert it then to our neighbours benefit: as being aſſured, that ſuch
ſpeaking is acceptable to God; neither doe we breake the eternall
ſilence impoſed by his diuine Maieſty, becauſe this is our ſilence,
and his ſpeech: Dabo vobis os,
& ſapientiam.
                  
               
               FINIS Cap. vlt.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Table of the
Arguments.
            
               IT is here diſcourſed in a pleaſing controuerſie, whether Silence or
ſpeaking, merits moſt praiſe. And the one contrarying the other very
familiarly, each ſtriues to maintaine his cauſe by ſoundeſt reaſons▪
ſometime producing authorities from holy writ, and other whiles frō
the auncienteſt Philoſophers. At length (after a ſweete and ſent entious
arguing) they conclude, that there is more ſecuritie in ſilence,
then indiſcreete talking: in regard, that while each man ſtriues to
speake beſt, his owne conceipt doth ſooneſt deceiue him. And this
is confirmed by diuine proofes, witty ſayings of Philoſophers, and naturall
reaſons. Chap. 1. Fol. 1.
               Proceeding further on, it is here approoued, that the firſt inſtruction a
man ought to haue, is to ſpeake diſcreetely, without offence to any.
Heere (in an ample diſcourſe) the negligence of Fathers in their
families is much reprooued, for not inſtructing their children in ſilence,
whereby they may attaine to a perfect order of ſpeaking.
For which purpoſe, many curious ſentences of the auncient Philoſophers
are herein entercourſed, beſide diuers other out of holy Scriptures.
Chap. 2. Fol. 11.
               Heere are deliuered many examples of worthy men, true affecters
of ſilence: And in this Chapter, they diſcourſe on the foure excellent
qualities of ſilence, and how they doe adorne a man; a very
ſweet and profitable Dialogue, for ſuch as deſire to talke diſcreetly.
Chap. 3. Fol. 25.
               Herein is handled, which is the hardeſt matter for a man, eyther ſilence
or ſpeaking. And to this purpoſe each one alleageth ſeuerall reaſons,
with many examples out of the auncient Philoſophers, as alſo
authorities out of the ſacred Scriptures: they ſhew, likewiſe, many
inconueniences which ariſe by the tongue. A diſcourſe very excellent,
curious and ſententious. Chap. 4. Fol. 32.
               
                  
Heerein is declared, how God ſpake ſo little, as he ſpake but once or
twiſe onely: And how man ought to keep an eternall ſilence; otherwiſe,
he that alwais talketh, ſinneth. Who was the firſt that brake ſilence,
as well in heauen, as in earth. How it is to be vnderſtood, that
God onely is truth, and euery man a lyer: conſidering that many
haue spoken the truth, as well Philoſophers of the Gentiles, as alſo
many Chriſtians: A diſcourſe ful of learning, and pleaſing curioſities.
Chap. 5. Fol. 43.
               Declaring, what cuſtodie we ought to haue of our tongue, to auoide errour
in our ſpeaking. Of the ſeuerall waies, whereby the tongue paſſeth,
when we talke: which although they be foure in number, yet one
onely guarde is ſufficient for them all. Chap. 6. Fol. 54.
               Declaring, that to keepe our ſelues from idle wandering in our talking,
it behooueth, that our ſpeech ſhould haue fiue conditions or qualities,
which the tongue it ſelfe hath, namely: ſweet, Roſe coloured,
ſharpe, flexible, and cloſe couched: which are approoued by many authorities
of Scripture, as alſo witty ſayings of the Philoſophers, and
naturall examples. Chap. 7. Fol. 66.
               Approouing, that indiſcretion in talke, makes the wiſe man him ſelfe to
be reputed as a foole, and many haue incurred very great daungers,
by talking careleſlie & vnaduiſedlie. Among al tongues, the tongue
of the flatterer is moſt perillous, &, by breathing foorth many euils,
it interdicteth the truth, eſpecially among Noble perſonages, in
whoſe houſes flatterers do moſt of all abound, onely to enioy the goods
which they poſſeſſe. This is confirmed by many liuely examples, ſundry
probabilities out of holy Scripture, & other ſimilitudes: All which
do plainly prooue, how diſpleaſing to God, and hurtfull to men, is this
wicked vice of flattery, that (like another Iudas) kils a man with kiſſing.
Chap. 8. Fol. 82.
               Diſcourſing of the leaſing and lying tongue, what an infamous ſinne a
lye is, and how highly God is pleaſed with truth: of whoſe excellencie
and beautie, ariſeth a profitable ſhort diſcourſe, concluding,
that a ſtrict ſilence is more commendable, then telling of lyes, which
are greatly diſpleaſing to God, becauſe he is the truth himſelfe. Alſo
approouing, that lying is ſo brutiſh and damnble, as no one can ſo
much as thinke thereon, without a purpoſe, to deface ſome part of
truth. Chap. 9. Fol. 96.
               Herein, according to the courſe hitherto continued, they now diſcourſe
on the ſeuerall tongues of the detractor and murmurer, and
vpon what occaſion, the Deuill (hauing a great delight to lye, and

accuſe vs) was ſaid to be dumbe. Herein likewiſe are handled many
deceipts of the Deuill, many myſteries of confeſſing our ſinnes vnto
God: and how one Angell is ſaid to ſpeak vnto another, without
ſight of each other: A diſcourſe very curious, learned and profitable.
Chap. 10. Fol. 111.
               Continuing on ſtill the ſame matter and diſcourſe, with diuers other
excellent reproofes of this mightie ſinne of vnwillingneſſe to repent,
and eaſing our conſciences of the heauy burthen of ſinne, wherein no
ſilence is to be kept. And that the detractors tongue is like the Serpents:
Alſo, how we ought ſometime to crye out, & ſometimes to hold
our peace. Chap. 11. Fol. 127.
               Diſcourſing on the murmuring and detracting tongue, & how fitlye
it ſhould bee bound to eternall ſilence; for the praiſe thereof is
ſhame, and the honour, moſt hatefull. Alſo, that the detractor
is not onely abhominable, but is meerely abhomination it ſelfe: for
whatſoeuer hee ſees, he makes a moſt vile interpretation thereof.
Chap. 12. Fol. 137.
               Murmuring is an infectious ſinne, worſe then any other diſeaſe, and
eaſie to bee taken, therefore it behooueth vs to fly the company of
talkeatiue detractors, becauſe they are the originall of many euilles.
Whence it is that murmuring firſt ariſeth. What puniſhment
God hath inflicted on murmurers: who haue leapt out
of themſelues (as it were) to faſten holde on other mens imperfections,
and ſtealing much leſſe then they looked for, at laſt vtterly
loſt all. How they haue ioined the tongue with the ear; how they haue
deceiued themſelues ouer-much in iudgement, by their owne dangerous
facility in ſpeaking euill of all men, to which God will giue (as a
chaſtiſement) a perpetuall ſilence. With an exhortation of the holy
ghoſt, not to defame, but to refraine ſpeaking euill of our neighbor.
Chap. 13. Fol. 147.
               There is not any thing more vneaſie or inſupportable, neyther leſſe deſeruing
loue, then the tongue of the ſlaunderer and deprauer. And
more eaſilie the Aegyptians might ſuffer the plague offrogges, then
we can endure the defamers tongue. What the cauſe was, why God
ſent ſuch a puniſhment vpon the Aegyptians, by creatures ſo vile, &
vn apt to offend. How difficult a thing it is to heale the plague of
the tongue, declaring and approouing, that God onely muſt heale it:
as he healed Aegypt, purified the lips of Eſay, and reſtored ſpeech to
the dumbe. The murmurer is worſe then a theefe, & is figured in the
rauenous birdes, reiected in the diuine ſacrifices. Chap. 14. Fol. 156.
               
                  
Diſcourſing of the double tongue, to wit, that of the hypocrite and falſe
man, who hath one thing in his mouth, and another in his heart:
Whereby he makes himſelfe hatefull to God, to the very deuils, and
alſo to men. Of an hypocrite, what thing it is, how hardly he is to be
knowen of men, and of deuils: being compared to the Comedian; the
gallant dogge, that hath a ſmooth quicke tongue; and to the vapour
exhaled by the Sunne vp into the ayre. The hypocrite hath his mouth
in heauen, and his tongue on earth. And he is alſo compared to the
ſwoord of Holofernes, of Saul, and of Goliah, &c. Chapter.
15. Fol. 166.
               The hypocrite, becauſe he hath holie words onely, without deeds, is compared
to the glow-worme: to the ſtatue which Nebuchadnezzer ſaw
in his dreame, that had a head of gold onelie: he hath his left hand
about God, & his right vnder his head. He hath more faces thē one,
disfiguring it to appear onely, but not to be good indeed: he goes foorth
of his owne confines; he ſuffers himſelfe to be guided in his actions,
like vnto a brute beaſt: with his beſt vertue he buieth ſlēder rewards,
& hangs his praiſe vpon other mens lips. He is like to the brood hen,
that cals her young ones to eat, & almoſt ſtarues her ſelfe to death:
like to the theefe, that ſhooes a horſe backward, to deceiue the purſuer;
with many other worthy by compariſons againſt the double hypocriticall
tongue. Chap. 16. Fol. 173.
               The tongue of the hypocrite, when it teacheth or inſtructeth, is like manie
brāches, ſeuerally grafted vpon one ſtock: or, as when vpō thornes,
there hangeth grapes: or like the fooliſh virgins, that had euery thing
anſwerable to the wiſe, but yet ſtaied without; whereon, a notable doubt
is reſolued. It is alſo compared to the Eſtridge whoſe wings doe reſemble
the Haukes in colour, but yet are not able to beare her body aloft.
Or like to the vaine woman, who becauſe ſhe would ſeeme faire,
paints her ſelfe. How much it behooues vs to be readie, in ſubduing
the appetite of vaine-glorie, which is diſcouered moſt, in ſtriuing to
ſpeake fine and curiouſlie. Chap. 17. Fol. 182.
               Heerein theſe are reprooued, that are good onely of their tongue, but
wicked in their deedes. Reſembling the poore man, who would faine
take a rich wife, but (in regard of his pouerty) none in his owne
country will accept of him: Wherefore, cloathing him ſelfe in
ſtrange garments, he trauailes to ſpeede where he is not knowen.
Such men are compared to builders, that lay vnwrought ſtones in
the foundation, but aloft to the eye, they place curious ſtones of richer
labour. They are alſo like to Pyrates on the Seas, with lying banners:

like as the Sichemites: like to Ioſephs cloake: like to the wife of
Potifar: and like to the aprons of figge leaues, which Adam and
Eue made for themſelues. They are like to Ahaz the king: like to
the Dolphine: like to the Phyſitian, that cures others, yet helps not
himſelfe. They are like to the white wall ſhewne to Ezekiel: they are
good for others, and hurtfull to them ſelues: Here is ſome ſpeeche
vſed, of the greate paines threatned to ſuch, as alſo of the reprehenſion,
which God in his iudgement will giue them: A ſubiect, by howe
much the more curious, by ſo much it is the more true and profitable.
Chap. 18 Fol. 190.
               Herein is declared, that the ſinne of blaſphemy is moſt greate and
greeuous, inſomuch that it exceedeth euery other ſinne, euen
of the infidelles, and of the Iewes, who crucified our Lord and Sauiour.
It is aggrauated by many circumſtāces, and hath no apparāt excuſe,
as diuers other ſinnes may ſeeme to haue. It is a ſinne eternall,
in regard of the exerciſe thereof; becauſe among all ſinnes, blaſphemy
only remaineth with the damned, euen as charity dooth among
the bleſſed, and is puniſhed with euery part of the law. It is the ſinne of
vnthankefulneſſe; the puniſhment whereof ſometime beginneth in
this world, and yet is neuer finiſhed. It is a manifeſt ſigne of damnatiō,
& a ſin ſo abhominable, as the holy Scripture ſomtime forbeareth
to name it, among the reherſall of other grieuous offēces. A diſcourſe
very profitable, ingenious, neceſſarie & worthy to be noted for
feare of fulling into a ſin ſo horrible and deteſtable. Chap. 19. fol. 201▪
               
               Approuing that it is better to haue no tongue at al, and to be ſilent eternally,
then to fall into any of the before remembred vices. What
benefit enſueth by the priuation of ſpeeche, of which, although wee
ſhould haue no vſe at all, yet we are not voyde of the ſpeeche of the
mind; which is much more excellent, and ſooner liſtned vnto by god
himſelfe, then to the careleſſe and idle babling of the lippes. He
that wanteth ſpeeche, is disburdened of a heauy loade, and may the
eaſier preſerue himſelfe from many heauy charges: becauſe by the
tongue of the body, we pleaſe men onely, but by the tongue of the hart,
we become pleaſing to God. Euery man hath two lips, but the iuſt
man hath his vpper lip much greater then the nether. Contrarywiſe,
the wicked man hath his nether lip ſo great, as therewith he couereth
his whole face, and all the ſtrength of bad men conſiſteth in their
lips; which is approued by a ſhort, yet ſweet diſcourſe, and afterward
pleaſingly concluded on the behalfe of ſilence, approuing it to be much
more allowable then ſpeeche. Chap. 20. Fol. 216.
               
                  
Hee that would talke with God, muſt eyther learne to bee ſilent, or
ſpeake fa
                     •
                  re otherwiſe then hee did before: becauſe his hearte is
to bee firſt purged of wicked thoughtes, and his lippes made
cleane from ſpeaking of euill. Hee that conferres with God,
muſt either holde his peace, or ſpeake very little, in regarde of
the greateneſſe of diuine myſteries. Or hee muſt talke highlie, by
a newe kinde of ſpeaking, as being lifted up by diuine aſſiſtaunce
of the holy Ghoſt. For approbation whereof, diuers ſound teſtimonies
out of ſacred Scripture are produced. As of Moyſes,
Ieremie, Daniell, Paule, and the other Apoſtles. Silence alſo
makes the foole to ſeeme wiſe, and the want of ſpeeche is the
gift of God, as well as talking in many languages. Heerin likewiſe
is diſcourſed, whence it proceedeth that ſome are borne dumbe,
and others very harde in deliuery of theyr wordes, or else doe ſpeake
very ſlowly. Chap. 20. Fol. 226.
               To the end, that in our diſcourſing we ſhould not grow offenſiue to God,
it behooueth vs (with deuout heartes) to beg of him that he woulde
purifie our mindes, and purge our lippes. According as Dauid
did, who prayed to the Lord that he would open his mouth, to the
end that he might worthily praiſe him. And, without him, we cannot
ſpeake well, becauſe he hath the key of our mouth. Which is
approued by a ſentence produced out of Eſay, where he ſaith, that
Chriſt is the key of Dauid. He therwith openeth the mouth, and
giueth not much of what we knowe to aſke for, becauſe we ſhould require
things correſpondent to his greatneſſe. Moreouer, not only
are the Lippes opened therewith, but likewiſe the heart, the vnderſtanding,
the Scriptures, types and figures, yea, heauen it ſelfe, and
the mouthes of the ſaintes and Prophets: and without this keye, all
things remain
                     •
                   ſhut vp, and euery mouth dumbe Chap. 22. Fol. 239
               That aboundance of words (without wiſedome) is not called eloquence,
but loquacity or babling. Therfore our words ought firſt to be brought
to the file, ere to the tongue, to auoide the errour of our folly in ſpeaking.
Therefore we ſhould pray vnto the Lord, that it would pleaſe
him to open our mouthes, and fill them with the holy ſpirit of wiſedome,
vſing euery morning duely, ſome eſpeciall godly prayer, meete
for ſuch a purpoſe. And becauſe Intùs exiſtens Prohibet extraneum;
we cannot be capable of the bleſſed ſpirit, except we firſt euacuate
our owne proper ſpirit, which is the occaſion of infinite defects.
We muſt know, that there are not ſo many letters in the Alphabet,
as are the errours hourely committed by the tongue, that is not skild

rightly in ſpeaking of God. Heerein likewiſe is declared, what that
race or ſtoke is, whereof the wiſe man ſpeaketh, who haue in ſteed
of teeth, ſharpe ſwoords. Alſo, what wiſedome is, according to the
Philoſophers, Peripatetikes, Stoickes & Diuines, with many other
memorable matters beſide. Chap. 23. Fol. 251.
               From whence it enſueth that man (being a creature ſo noble) yet notwithſtanding,
he committeth greater errours then any other creature
whatſoeuer. How God hath giuen him many helpes to preſerue
him from ſinne, and particularly, the prec
                     •
                  pt of brotherly correction,
committed into the power of the tongue. The neceſſitie and excellencie
whereof is heere diſcourſed on. And that ſilence (in ſuch a
caſe) is prooued great babbling, and a grieuous ſinne, becauſe the
tongue may be a ſafety to our neighbour. They alſo ſhew the way
which we ought to obſerue, in correcting of our neighbour, as alſo
the qualitie of the precept it ſelfe, by approoued ſound doctrine,
and teſtimonies of holy Scripture. Chap. 24. Fol. 262
               Wherein is diſcourſed, how important the precept of brotherly correction
is, and for auoiding error therein, all the words which our Sauiour vſed,
in giuing the precept, are diligently examined, and diuers good
conſiderations in that behalfe alledged. Moreouer, they handle ſeuerally
the number of corrections, which are to be vſed to our neigbor,
and by the office of the tongue, all iuſtified and warranted by proofes
of Scripture. Chap. 25. Fol. 274.
            
         
         
            
            A
Table of the Authorities, alleaged by the
Author, out of the ſacred Scriptures in
this preſent worke, the better to declare
his expoſition of them.
            
               Geneſis.
               Chap. 4. 13. MY ſin is greater, then it can be pardoned. fol. 20▪
               
               Chap. 11. 4. Come, let vs build vs a city and a Tower, whoſe
top may reache vnto heauen, that we may get vs a name, leaſt we be
ſcattered vpon the whole earth. fol. 24
               Chap. 3. 2. 3. 4. VVe eate of the fruits of the trees of the Garden.
But of the fruit of the tree, which is in the midſt of the Garden, God
hath ſaid; you ſhall not eat of it, neither ſhall you touch it, leaſt that
you dy. fol. 38.
               Chap. 31. 47. Laban called it in his own language Tumulus teſtis,
and Iacob called it Aceruus teſtimonij. fol. 104
               Chap. 23. 13. Abraham ſaid to Ephron, I will giue thee the price
of the field, receiue it of me, and I will bury my dead there? ibid.
               Chap. 11. 5. The Lord came downe to ſee the city and the Tower,
which the ſons of Adam builded, &c. fol. 113
               Chap. 3. 12. The woman which thou gaueſt to be with me, ſhe
gaue me of the tree, and I did eate, &c. fol. 119
               Chap. 37. 11. But his Father noted well the ſaying. fol. 136
               Chap. 18. 20. 21. Then the Lord ſaid, Becauſe the cry of Sodome
and Gomorrah is great, and becauſe their ſin is exceeding greeuous: I
will go downe, and ſee whether they haue don altogether according
to that cry, which is come vp vnto me; and if not, that I may know.
fol. 154.
               
                  
Chap. 27. 22. The voyce 
                     〈…〉
                  
hands of Eſau. fol. 180
               Chap. 1. 8. God called the firmament heauen. fol. 192
               Chap. 34. 22. 23. If all the men children among vs be circumciſed,
as they are circumciſed, ſhall not their flocks, & their ſubſtance,
and all their cattell be ours? fol. 193
               Chap. 37. 33. It is my Sons coat, a wicked beaſt hath deuoured him,
Ioſeph is ſurely torne in pieces. fol. 195
               Chap. 39. 12. He left his garment in her hand, and got him out.
fol. 196
               Chap. 3. 7. They ſewed fig tree leaues together, and made them
ſelues breeches, &c. ibid.
               Chap. 18. 27. I haue begun to ſpeak vnto my Lord, and I am but
duſt and aſhes, fol. 236
               Chap. 3. 24. And at the Eaſt ſide of the garden of Eden, he ſet the
Cherubims, and the blade of a ſword ſhaken, to keep the way of the
tree of life. fol. 246.
               Chap 8. 11. And the doue came to him in the Euening, and loe
in her mouth was an Oliue leafe that ſhe had pluckt; whereby Noah
knew that the waters were abated from off the earth. fol. 270
               Chap. 45. 24. And he ſaid vnto them: fall not out by the way▪
fol. 275
               Chap. 4. 23. Then Lamech ſayd vnto his wiues Adah and Zillah,
Heare my voice yee wiues of Lamech, hearken vnto my ſpeech:
for I would ſlaye a man in my wound, and a young man in myne
hurt. fol. 277
               Chap. 4. 10. The voyce of thy brothers bloud crieth vnto me from
the earth. fol. 276
            
            
               Exodus.
               Chap. 34. 6. The Lord God is ſtrong, mercifull and gratious,
flow to anger, and aboundant in goodneſſe and truth. fol. 58
               Chap. 32. 4. 5. 6. Theſe be thy Gods O Iſrael, which brought thee
out of the land of Aegypt, &c. fol. 95.
               Chap. 15. 1. 2. We wil ſing vnto the Lord, for he hath triumphed
gloriouſly: the horſe, and him that rode vpon him, hath he thrown in
the Sea. fol. 148
               Chap. 8. 2. 3. 4. Behold, I wil ſmite all thy country with frogs.
And the Riuer ſhall ſ
                     •
                  rall full of frogs, which ſhall goe vp & come
into thine houſe, & into the chamber where thou ſleepeſt, & vpon
thy bed, and into the houſe of thy ſeruants, and vpon thy people, and

into thine O
                     •
                  ens, and into thy kneading troughs. Yea, the Frogs
ſhall climb vp vpon thee, and on thy people, and vpon all thy ſeruants. fol. 157
               Chap. 14. 15. Wherefore cryeſt thou vnto me? fol. 220
               Chap. 25. 24. 25. And thou ſhalt couer it with pure gold, & make
thereto a crown of gold round about. Thou ſhalt alſo make vnto it a
border of foure fingers round about, and thou ſhalt make a goulden
crowne round about the border thereof. fol. 223
               Chap. 4. 10. Oh my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither at any time
haue bin, nor yet ſince thou haſt ſpoken vnto thy ſeruant, but I am
ſlow of ſpeech and ſlow of tongue. fol. 229
               Chap. 40. 2. The firſt day of the firſt moneth, thou ſhalt ſet vp
the Tabernacle called the Tabernacle of the congregation. And thou
ſhalt put therein the Arke of the Teſtimony, and couer the Ark with
the vaile. fol. 246
            
            
               Leuìticus.
               Chap. 11. 13. Theſe ſhall ye haue alſo in abhomination among
the Foules, they ſhall not be eaten, &c. fol. 67
               Chap. 24. 14. 16. Bring the blaſphemer without the hoaſt, and let
all that heard him, put their hand, vpon his head, and let all the congregation
ſtone him. And he that blaſphemeth the name of the lord
ſhall be put to death. fol. 14
            
            
               Numbers.
               Chap. 19. 15. The veſſels that be open, and haue no couering faſtned
vpon them, ſhall be vncleane. fol. 26▪
               
               Chap. 24. 17. There ſhal come a ſtar of Iacob, and a ſcepter ſhall
ariſe of Iſrael, &c. fol. 51▪
               
               Chap. 22. 28. 29. 30. What haue I done vnto thee, that thou haſt
ſmitten me now three times? &c. fol. 118. 229
            
            
               Deuteronomy.
               Chap. 22. 11. Thou ſhalt not weare a garment of diuers ſorts, as
of wollen and linnen together. fol. 87
               Chap. 22. 24. 25. 26. 27. Becauſe ſhe cryed not, being in the City.
But if a man finde a betrothed maide in the field, and force her, and
lye with her, then the man that lay with her ſhal dye alone. And vnto
the maide thou ſhalt doo nothing, becauſe there is in the maide
no cauſe of death: for as when a man riſeth againſt his neighbour,
and woundeth him to death, ſo is this matter. For he founde her in
the field, the maide cryed, and there was no man to ſuccoure
her. &c. fol. 127.
               
                  
Chap. 14. 15. 19. The Eſtrich nor the night crow. And euery creeping
thing that flyeth, ſhall be vncleane vnto yee, it ſhall not be eaten.
fol. 161
               Chap. 6. 16. You ſhall not tempt the Lord your God. fol. 194
               Chap. 24. 10. 11. Thou ſhalt not goe into his houſe to fetch his
pledge. But thou ſhalt ſtand without, and the man that borrwed it
of thee, ſhal bring the pledge out of the doors vnto thee. fol. 276
            
            
               Iudges.
               Chap. 14. 18. What is ſweeter then hony?
               Chap. 7. 20. The ſword of the Lord, and of Gedeon. fol. 187
            
            
               1. Samuel.
               Chap. 19. 24. And Saul ſtript off his garments, and he prophecied
alſo before Samuel, and fell down naked all that day & al that night:
therfore they ſay, Is Saul alſo among the Prophets? fol. 71
            
            
               2. Samuel.
               Chap. 1. 16. Thy bloud be vpon thine own head, for thine own
mouth hath teſtified againſt thee, ſaying: I haue ſlaine the Lords annointed. fol. 65. & 218
               Chap. 20. 9. 10. Art thou in health my brother? And Ioab tooke
Amaſa by the beard, &c. fol. 168s
            
            
               1. Kings.
               Chap. 19. 9. 10. What doſt thou here Elias? And he anſwered, I
haue bin very zealous for the Lord God of hoaſts, for the children of
Iſrael haue forſaken thy couenant, broken downe thine Altars, and
ſlain thy Prophets with the ſword, and I only am left, and they ſeek
my life, to take it away, &c. fol. 73
               Chap. 21. 10. And the wicked men witneſſed againſt Naboth in
the preſence of the people, ſaying; Naboth did blaſpheme God & the
king. Then they caried him away out of the city, and ſtoned him with
ſtones, that he died. fol. 211
               Chap. 10. 5. She was greatly aſtonied, and there was no more
ſpirit in her. fol. 234
            
            
               2. Kings.
               Chap. 4. 32. 33. 34. Then came Eliſha into the houſe, and behold,
the child was dead, and laid vpon his bed. He went in therfore, and
ſhut the door vpon them twaine, and prayed vnto the Lord. After he
went vp, and lay vpon the child, and put his mouth on his mouth, &
his eyes vpon his eyes, and his hands vpon his hands, and ſtretched
himſelfe vpon him, and the fleſh of the child waxed warm. fol. 271
            
            
               2. Chron.
               Chap. 32. 15. 16. 17. For none of al the gods of any natiō or kingdō
                  
able to deliuer his people out of my hand, and out of the hand of my
fathers: how much leſſe ſhall your God deliuer you out of my hand?
And his ſeruants ſpake yet more againſt the Lord God, and againſt
his ſeruant Ezechias. He wrote alſo letters, blaſpheming the Lord
God of Iſrael, and ſpeaking againſt him. fol. 64.
            
            
               Nehemiah.
               Chap. 4. 17. 18. And they that builded, did the work with one
hand, and with the other held a ſword. For euery one of the builders
had his ſword girded on his loynes. fol. 189.
            
            
               Iob.
               Chap. 39. 38. Once haue I ſpoken, but I will anſwer no more.
fol. 4.
               Chap. 13. 5. Oh that you wold hould your peace, that it might
be imputed to you for wiſedome. fol. 5,
               Chap. 10. 1. I will ſpeake in the bitterneſſe of my ſoule. fol. 26.
               Chap. 4. 2. Who can withhould himſelf from ſpeaking? fol. 34.
               Chap. 33. 14. For God ſpeaketh once or twiſe, and one ſeeth it
not. fol. 43.
               Chap. 20. 5. The ioy of hypocrites is but a moment. fol. 171
               Chap. 8. 13. The hopes of Hypocrites ſhall periſh. fol. 177
               Chap. 39. 16. Haſt thou giuen the pleaſant wings vnto the Peacocks,
or wings and feathers vnto the Eſtrich? fol. 186
               Chap. 2. 11. Touch al that he hath, to ſee if he wil not blaſpheme
thee to thy face. fol. 112
               Chap. 2. 9. Then ſaid his wife vnto him, doeſt thou continue yet
in thine vprightneſſe? Blaſpheme God, and dy. ibid.
               Chap. 28. 28. And vnto man he ſayd; Behold, the feare of the lord
is wiſedome, and to depart from euil, is vnderſtanding. fol. 256
            
            
               Dauids Pſalmes.
               Pſalm. 45. 1. 2. My heart will vtter foorth a good matter, I will
intreate in my works of the king. My tongue is as the pen of a ſwift
writer. fol. 31
               Pſalm. 31. 3. While I held my tongue my bones conſumed. fol. 4
               Pſalm. 140. 3. All the labour of a man is for his mouth. fol. 9
               Pſalm. 112. 1. 2. Bleſſed be the name of the Lord, from hencefoorth
and for euer. The Lords name is praiſed from the riſing of
the Sun, vnto the going down of the ſame. The Lord is aboue al nations,
and his glory is aboue the heauens. fol. 13
               Pſalm. 15. 1. 2. 3. Lord, who ſhall dwell in thy Tabernacle, and
who ſhall reſt vpon thy holy mountaine? &c. fol. 18
               
                  
Pſalm. 140. 3. Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth, & keep the
door of my lips. fol. 22.
               Pſalm 5. 11. Their throate is an open ſepulcher, and they flatter
with their tongue. fol. 27.
               Pſalm. 50. 16. Open thou my lips O Lord, and my mouth ſhall
ſhew foorth thy prayſe. fol. 33.
               Pſalm. 119. 131. I opened my mouth and panted. ibid.
               Pſalm. 38. 13. But I, as a deafe man heard not, and am as a 
                     •
                  umb
man, that openeth not his mouth. ibid.
               Pſalm. 56. 4. Their tongue is a ſharpe ſword. fol. 39
               Pſalm. 62. 18. One time only God ſpake, and theſe two I heard,
that power belongeth vnto God, and to thee O Lord mercy, for thou
rewardeſt euery one according to his work. fol. 43
               Pſalm. 2. 7. The Lord hath ſaid vnto me: Thou art my Son, this
day haue I begotten thee. fol. 45.
               Pſalm. 64. 1. O Lord, praiſe waiteth for thee in Sion. ibid.
               Pſalm. 115. 2. Euery man is a lyer. fol. 47
               Pſalm. 5. 6. Thou ſhalt deſtroy all them that ſpeak lyes. ibid.
               Pſalm. 61. 9. The children of men are vanity, the cheefe men
are lyers, to lay them vpon a balance, they are altogether lighter then
vanity it ſelfe. fol. 48
               Pſalm. 52. 12. God looked down from heauen vpon the children
of men, to ſee if there were any that would vnderſtand, and ſeeke
God. Euery one is gone back, they are altogether corrupt, there is
none that doth good, no not one. ibid.
               Pſalm. 81. 6. I haue ſaid you are Gods, and you are all children
of the moſt high. ibid.
               Pſalm. 43. 3. Send thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let
them bring mee vnto thy holy mountaine, and to thy Tabernacle.
fol. 49
               Pſalm. 38. 8. Surely, man in his beſt eſtate, is altogether vanity. ibid.
               Pſalm. 41. 10. Open thy mouth wide, & I wil fill it. fol. 52
               Pſalm. 38. 1. 2. I ſayd I will take heed to my wayes, that I ſin not
with my tongue. I will keep my mouth bridled, while the wicked
are in ſight. fol. 54
               Pſalm. 38. 3. I was dumb and ſpake nothing, I kept ſilence, euen
from good. fol. 55
               Pſalm. 129. 86. All thy commandements are true, ibid.
               Pſalm. 4. 5. Be angry, but ſin not. fol. 59
               
                  
Pſalm. 3. 3. 7. 8. Thou O Lord art a buckler for me, my glory,
and the lifter vp of my head, &c. Thou haſt ſmitten all mine enemies (without cauſe) vpon the cheek bone, thou haſt broken the
teeth of the wicked. Saluation belongeth vnto thee O Lord, &c.
fol. 61
               Pſalm. 77. 4. I was aſtonied, and could not ſpeake. ibid.
               Pſalm. 34. 12. 13. VVhat man is he that deſireth life, and loueth
long laies for to ſee good. Keep thy tongue from euil, & thy lips that
they ſpeake no guile. fol. 63
               Pſalm. 64. 3. 4. They haue whet their tongues like a ſword, and
ſhot for their arrowes bitter words: to ſhoot at the vpright in ſecret,
they ſhoote at him ſuddenly, and feare not. ibid.
               Pſalm. 64. 8. They ſhall cauſe their tongue to fal vpon them, and
whoſoeuer ſhall ſee them, ſhall fly away. fol. 64
               Pſalm. 29. 4. 5. The voyce of the Lord is mighty, the voyce of
the Lord is glorious. The voyce of the Lord breaketh the Cedars.
fol. 69
               Pſalm. 140. 3. They haue ſharpened their tongues like Serpents:
Adders poyſon is vnder their lips. fol. 79
               Pſalm. 22. 20. Deliuer my ſoule from the ſword, my deſolate ſoule
from the power of the dog. fol. 80
               Pſalm. 77. 6. I called to remembraunce my ſong in the night, I
communed with mine owne heart, and my ſpirit ſearched diligently. fol. 83
               Pſalm. 40. 9. I will not refraine my lips, O Lord thou knoweſt.
fol. 84
               Pſalm. 140. 8. Let the miſchief of their own lips come vpon them.
ibid.
               Pſalm. 4. 5. Examine your own harts, and in your chambers and
be ſtill. fol. 85
               Pſalm. 4. 6. Offer the ſacrifices of righteouſneſſe, &c. ibid.
               Pſalm. 50. 18. The ſacrifices of God, are a contrite ſpirite, a
contrite and a broken hearte (O God) thou wilt not deſpiſe.
ibid.
               Pſalm. 141. 5. Let the righteous ſmite me, for that is a benefit, &
let him reprooue me, and it ſhall be a pretious oyle, that ſhall not
break mine head. fol. 86▪
               
               Pſalm. 31. 18. Let the lying lips be made dumb. ibid.
               Pſalm. 12. 1. 2. The faithfull are failed from among the children

of men. They ſpeake deceitfully euery man with his neighbour, flattering
with their lippes, and ſpeake with a double hearte.
fol. 91
               Pſalm. 13. 5. Their throat is an open ſepulcher, with their tongues
they haue deceiued. fol. 92
               Pſalm. 119. 86. All thy commandements are truth. fol. 97
               Pſalm. 91. 4. His truth ſhall be thy ſhield and buckler. ibid.
               Pſalm. 5. 9. There is no truth in their mouth, within they are very
corruption. fol. 100
               Pſalm. 4. 2. O you ſonnes of men, how long will you turne my
glory into ſhame, louing vanity, and ſeeking lyes! ibid.
               Pſalm. 132. 11. The Lord hath ſworn in truth vnto Dauid, and
he wil not ſhrink from it, &c. ibid.
               Pſalm. 145. 18. The Lord is neere vnto all that call vpon him in
truth. ibid.
               Pſalm. 15. 1. 2. 3. Lord, who ſhall dwell in thy Tabernacle,
who ſhall reſt in thy holy mountaine? He that ſpeaketh the truth
in his hearte, hee that hath no guile in his tongue.
ibid.
               Pſalm. 117. 2. The truth of the Lord endureth for euer. fol. 107▪
               
               Pſalm. 69. 2. I ſtick faſt in the deep mire. fol. 126▪
               
               Pſalm. 120. 2. When I was in trouble, I called vpon the Lord, &
he heard me. ibid.
               Pſalm. 35. 10. All my bones ſhal ſay: Lord, who is like vnto thee?
fol. 131
               Pſalm. 73. 9. They ſtretch foorth their mouth vnto heauen, and
their tongue goeth through the world. fol. 145
               Pſalm. 50. 21. Thou thoughtſt wickedly, that I am euen ſuch a
one as thy ſelfe, but I will reprooue thee, and ſet before thee the
things that thou haſt done. fol. 152
               Pſalm. 33. 19. Let the vngodly be put to confuſion, and be
put to ſilence in the graue. Let the lying lippes be put to ſilence.
ibid.
               Pſalm. 31. 20. Which cruelly and diſdainfully and deſpightfully
ſpeak againſt the righteous. ibid.
               Pſalm. 119. 134. O deliuer me from the ſlanders of men, and I
will keep thy precepts. ibid.
               Pſalm. 105. 30. Their land brought foorth Frogs, euen in their
kings chambers. fol. 157
               
                  
Pſalm. 57.5. The children of men, whoſe teeth are ſpeares and
arrowes, and their tongue a ſharp ſword. fol. 163
               Pſalm. 78. 36. They flattered him with their mouth, and diſſembled
with him with their tongue. For their hart was not, vpright
with him, neither were they faithfull in his couenant. fol. 170
               Pſalm. 68. 25. The tongue of thy dogs, in the bloud of thine enemies.
fol. 171
               Pſalm. 110. 2. The Lord ſaid vnto my Lord, ſit thou at my right
hand. fol. 174
               Pſalm. 73. 24. Thou haſt receiued me to glory. ibid.
               Pſalm. 3. 3. My glory, and the lifter vp of my head. ibid.
               Pſalm. 2. 9. Thou ſhalt bruiſe them with a rod of yron, & breake
them in pieces like a potters veſſell. fol. 175
               Pſalm. 115. 1. Not vnto vs O Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thy name
giue the glory. fol. 176
               Pſalm. 45. 13. Shee is al glorious within, her cloathing is of broydered
gold. fol 195
               Pſalm. 50. 16. 17. Why doſt thou preache my lawes, and takeſt
my couenant in thy mouth? whereas thou hateſt to be reformed, and
haſt caſt my words behind thee. fol. 196
               Pſalm. 36. 8. They ſhall be ſatisfied with the fatneſſe of thine
houſe, and thou ſhalt giue them drinke out of the riuer of thy pleaſures.
fol. 198
               Pſalm. 119. 55. Bleſſed are they Lord, that dwell in thy houſe,
for they ſhall praiſe thee for euer and euer. fol. 210
               Pſalm. 119. 91. They continue euen to this day by thine ordinā
                  ces,
for all are thy ſeruants. fol. 212
               Pſalm. 150. 6. Let euery thing that hath breath, prayſe the
Lord. ibid.
               Pſalm. 113. 1. Praiſe O ye ſeruants of the Lord, praiſe the name
of the Lord. fol. 219
               Pſalm. 139. 15. My bones are not hid from thee, though I was
made in a ſecret place. fol. 220
               Pſalm. 45. 2. Grace is powred in thy lips, becauſe God hath bleſſed
thee for euer. fol. 222
               Pſalm. 8. 5. Thou haſt crowned him with glory and honour.
fol. 223
               Pſalm. 115. 5. 6. 7. They haue eyes and ſee not, they haue noſes &
ſmell not, they haue eares and heare not, they haue hands and touch
not, they haue mouthes and eate not. fol. 224.
               
                  
Pſalm. 65. 1. O God, prayſe waiteth for thee in Sion. fol. 231
               Pſalm. 28. 5. They vnderſtood not the works of the lord. fol. 246
               Pſalm. 129. 3. The plowers plowed vpon my back, and made
long furrowes. fol. 247
               Pſalm. 40. 3. And he hath put in my mouth a new Song, of praiſe
vnto our God. fol. 248
               Pſalm. 51. 1. Haue mercy vpon me O God, according to the multitude
of thy compaſſions. fol. 249
               Pſalm. 104. 29. 30. If thou take away their breath, they dy, and return
to their duſt. Again if thou ſend foorth thy ſpirit, they are created,
and thou reneweſt the face of the earth. fol. 254
               Pſalm. 111. 9. The feare of the Lord is the beginning of wiſedome.
fol. 256
               Pſalm. 10. 6. 7. For he hath ſaid in his hart, Tuſh, I ſhall neuer be
caſt down, there ſhall no harme happen vnto me. His mouth is full
of curſing, deceipt and fraude, vnder his tongue is vngodlineſſe and
vanity. fol. 257
               Pſalm. 14. 3. 4. The Lord looked down from heauen vpon the
children of men, to ſee if there were any that would vnderſtand,
and ſeek after God. But they are all gone out of the way, they are
altogether become abhominable, there is none that doeth good, no
not one. fol. 265
               Pſalm. 69. 1. Saue me O God, for the waters are com in, euen vnto
my ſoule. fol. 270
               Pſalm. 107. 18. Their ſoule abhorred all manner of meat, & they
were euen at deaths door. fol. 272
               Pſalm. 73. 21. I was ignorant, euen as it were a beaſt before thee.
fol. 275
            
            
               Prouerbs of Salomon.
               Chap. 18. 21. Life and death are in the power of the tongue.
fol. 4
               Chap. 10. 9. The fooliſh in talk ſhall be beaten. ibid.
               Chap. 17. 29. A foole when he holdeth his peace, is accounted
wiſe, and he that ſtoppeth his lips prudent. fol. 5
               Chap. 10. 20. In many words there cannot want iniquity, but he
that refraineth his tongue, is wiſe. fol. 11
               Chap. 15. 14. A ſoft anſwere putteth away wrath: but greeuous
wordes ſtirre vp anger. A wholeſome tongue is a tree of
life, but the frowardneſſe thereof is the breaking of the mind.
fol. 20
               
                  
Chap. 25. 29. A man that refraineth not his ſpeech, is like a city
which is broken down, and without wals. fol. 22
               Chap. 13. 3. He that keepeth his mouth and his tongue, keepeth
his ſoule from deſtruction. fol. 23
               Chap. 18. 4. The words of a wiſe mans mouth, are like deepe
waters. fol. 30
               Chap. 14. 25. VVhere many words are, there want attendeth.
ibid.
               Chap. 16. 1. The anſwer of the tongue, is of the Lord. fol. 30
               Chap. 15. 2. The mouth of a foole, babbleth out fooliſhneſſe.
fol 57
               Chap. 12. 18. The tongue of a wiſe man is health. fol. 71
               Chap. 27. 6. The wounds of a louer are better then the falſe kiſſes
of an enemy. fol. 86
               Chap. 23. 31. 32. Looke not thou vpon the wine when it is red,
and when it ſheweth his colour in the cup, it goeth down pleaſantly.
But in the end it will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrice.
fol. 92
               Chap. 16. 24. Faire words are as the hony-combes ſweetneſſe to
the ſoule, and health to the bones. fol. 129
               Chap. 17. 11. A ſeditious perſon ſeeketh only euil, & a cruel meſſenger
ſhall be ſent againſt him. fol. 141
               Chap. 14. 2. He that walketh in his righteouſneſſe, feareth the
Lord: but he that is lewde in his wayes, deſpiſeth him. fol. 143
               Chap. 24. 9. The detractor is abhomination. fol. 144
               Chap. 10. 23. It is a paſtime to a foole to do wickedly. fol. 151
               Chap. 17. 21. A naughty tongue ſhall fall into euil. fol. 172
               Chap. 4. 23. Keep thine heart with all diligence, for thereout commeth
life. fol. 221
               Chap. 12. 23. The lying lippes are abhomination to the Lord.
fol. 224
               Chap. 18. 6. A fools lips cauſeth ſtrife. ibid.
               Chap. 15. 7. His lips are a ſnare for his ſoule. ibid.
               Chap. 30. 14. There is a generation, whoſe teeth are as ſwords.
fol. 258
            
            
               Eccleſiaſtes, and Eccleſiaſticus.
               Chap. 51. 30. The Lord hath giuen me a tongue for my reward,
wherewith I will praiſe him. fol. 3
               Chap. 3. 1. 7. To all things there is an appointed time, a time to
keep ſilence, and a time to ſpeake. fol. 4
               
                  
Chap. 15. 18. Learne before thou ſpeake. fol. 8
               Chap. 6. 7. All the labour of man, is for his mouth. fol. 9
               Chap. 22. 26. VVho ſhall ſet a watch before my mouth, and a ſeale
of wiſedome vpon my lips, that I fall not ſuddenly by them, & that
my tongue deſtroy me not? ibid.
               Chap. 32. 8. Thou that are yong, ſpeake if need require, and yet
ſcarcely when thou art twiſe asked. fol. 13
               Chap. 30. 12. 8. Bow down the neck of thy ſon while he is yong.
An vntamed horſe wil be ſtubborne, and a wanton child wil be wilfull.
fol. 18
               Chap. 28. 29. Weigh thy words in a ballance, and make a ſure
bridle for thy mouth. fol. 28
               Chap. 9. 17. The words of the wiſe are more heard in ſilence,
then the cry of him that ruleth among fools. fol. 31
               Chap. 11. 30. 2 Iudge no man bleſſed before his death, for a man
is knowne by his children. Commend no man in his life time.
fol. 37
               Chap. 28. 25. Make a doore, and a bar, & a bridle for thy mouth.
fol. 38
               Chap. 21. 14. The hearte or inner partes of a foole are like a
broken veſſell, he can keepe no knowledge whiles he liueth.
fol. 40
               Chap. 20. 7. A wiſe man will hold his tongue till he ſee opportunity,
but a foole and a trifler wil regard no time. ibid.
               Chap. 28. 22. There be many that haue periſhed by the edge
of the ſword, but not ſo many as haue falne by the tongue, &c.
fol. 41
               Chap. 40. 21. The pipe and the Pſalterion make a ſweet noiſe, but
the ſtroake of the tongue breaketh the boanes. ibid.
               Chap. 32. 6. Powre not out words where there is no audience.
fol. 45
               Chap. 15. 5. In the midſt of the congregation ſhall he open his
mouth, with the ſpirit of wiſedome and vnderſtanding ſhall he fill
him, and cloath him with the garment of glory. fol. 51
               Chap. 15. 1. A ſoft anſwer putteth away wrath, but greeuous words
ſtir vp anger. fol. 67
               Chap. 20. 15. They that eate his breade, ſpeake euill of him.
fol. 90
               Chap. 20. 24. A theefe is better then a man that is accuſtomed to
ly, they both ſhall haue deſtruction to heritage. fol. 110
               
                  
Chap. 28. 16. The double tongue hath diſquieted many, and driuen
them from nation to nation. fol. 112
               Chap. 9. 12. No man doth know his time, but as the fiſhes which
are taken in an euill net, or as the birds that are caught in the ſnare:
ſo are the children of men ſnared in the euil time, when it falleth vpon
them ſuddenly. fol. 124
               Chap. 30. 25. Sorrow hath ſlaine many, and there is no profit in
it. fol. 129
               Chap. 21. 4. All iniquity is as a two edged ſword, the wounds
therof cannot be healed. fol. 133
               Chap. 15. 9. Praiſe is not ſeemly in the mouth of a ſinner, for that
it is not ſent of the Lord. fol. 143
               Chap. 11. 31. Of one little ſpark is made a great fire, and of one deceitfull
man is bloud increaſed. fol. 148
               Chap. 16. 9. Haſt thou heard any thing againſt thy neighbour?
let it dy in thee. fol. 145
               Chap. 5. 11. Be not caried about with euery wind, and go not
into euery way, for ſo dooth the ſinner that hath a double tongue.
fol. 166
               Chap. 27. 25. 26. 27. VVhoſo caſteth a ſtone on high, caſteth it
vpon his own head, and he that ſmiteth with guile, maketh a great
wound, &c. fol. 165
               Chap. 45. 12. A crowne of gould vpon his head, bearing the form
and marke of holineſſe. fol. 223
               Chap. 2. 6. Some man houldeth his tongue, becauſe he hath not
to anſwer, and ſome keepeth ſilence, waiting a conuenient time.
fol. 227
               Chap. 15. 5. 6. In the midſt of the congregation ſhall ſhe open
his mouth, with the ſpirit of wiſedome and vnderſtanding ſhall ſhe
fill him, & cloath him with the garmēt of glory. She ſhall cauſe him
to inherit ioy, and the crowne of gladneſſe, and an euerlaſting name.
fol. 252
            
            
               Canticles or Salomons Song.
               Chap. 4. 3. Thy lips are like a thread of Scarlet, and thy talke is
ſweet. fol. 22
               Chap. 2. 14. Let me heare thy voice, for thy voice is ſweet.
fol. 23
               Chap. 2. 6. His left hand is vnder my head, and his right hand doth
imbrace me. fol. 174
               Chap. 4. 16. Ariſe O North, and come O South, and blow on my

garden, that the ſpices thereof may fly foorth, &c. fol. 255
               Chap. 6. 3. Terrible is an Army with banners. fol. 282
            
            
               The Prophet Eſay.
               Chap. 6. 5. Woe be to me becauſe I held my peace. fol. 4
               Chap. 14. 12. 13. I will aſcend aboue the higheſt of the cloudes,
and exalt my throane beſide the ſtarres of God. I will ſit vpon the
mount in the congregation of the North, and I will be like to the
moſt high. fol. 21
               Chap. 30. 15. In quietneſſe and in hope ſhall be your ſtrength.
fol. 27
               Chap. 32. 17. The beauty of iuſtice is quietneſſe. fol. 29
               Chap. 45. 9. My ſecrets I keep to my ſelfe, &c. fol. 42
               Chap. 14. 15. But thou ſhalt be brought downe to the graue, to
the ſides of the pit. fol. 52
               Chap. 37. 36. The Angell of the Lord went out, and ſmote in
the campe of Aſhur, an hundred foureſcore and fiue thouſand.
fol. 64
               Chap. 2. 4. They ſhal break their ſwords into mattocks or plough-ſhares,
and their ſpeares into Sithes. fol. 74
               Chap. 29. 13. This people come neer vnto me with their mouth,
and honor me with their lips, but haue remooued their hearts farre
from me. fol. 88
               Chap. 56. 10. They are all dumb dogs, they cannot barke. fol. 90
               Chap. 3. 12. O my people, they that terme you happy, do deceiue
you. fol. 93
               Chap. 52. 2. Vnty, or take from thy neck, the ſnare that houlds
thee captiue, Oh daughter Sion. fol. 121
               Chap. 62. 6. I haue ſet watchmen vpon thy walles, O Ieruſalem,
which all the daye and all the night continually ſhall not ceaſe.
fol. 133
               Chap. 62. 7. Oh you that are mindfull of the Lord, keep not ſilence,
and giue him no reſt, till he repaire, and till he ſet vp Ieruſalem,
the praiſe of the world. fol. 134
               Chap. 47. 5. Sit ſtill, and get thee into darkeneſſe, Oh daughter
of the Chaldeans, for thou ſhalt no more be called the Lady of kingdomes.
ibid.
               Chap. 32. 4. The tongue of the flatterers ſhall bee readye.
fol. 154
               Chap. 6. 6. 7. The flew one of the Seraphims to me, with an hot
coale in his hand, which he had taken from the Altar with the tongs.

And he touched my mouth, and ſayd. Lo, this hath touched thy lips
and thine iniquity ſhall be taken away, and thy ſin ſhall be purged.
fol. 159
               Chap. 51. 7. 8. Harken vnto me, you that know righteouſneſſe,
the people in whoſe hart is my lawe. Feare you not the reproache of
men, neither be you afraide of their rebukes. For the moath ſhall
eat them vp like a garment, and the wormes ſhal eat them like wol:
but my righteouſneſſe ſhall be for euer, and my ſaluation from generation
to generation. fol. 163
               Chap. 14. 12. How art thou falne from heauen O Lucifer, Son of
the morning? fol. 172
               Chap. 7. 11. 12. Ask a ſigne for thee of the Lord thy God, either in
the depth beneath, or in the height aboue. I will not ask, neither wil I
tempt the Lord. fol. 194
               Chap. 8. 21. VVhen he ſhall be angry, he ſhall euen fret himſelfe,
and curſe his king and his Gods, and ſhall looke vpward.
fol. 211
               Chap. 52. 5. My name all the day continually is blaſphemed.
fol. 213
               Chap. 31. 9. And the tongue is as a fire, which conſumeth any
thing. fol. 219
               Chap. 23. 2. Be ſtill yee that dwell in the Iles. fol. 222
               Chap. 22. 22. And the key of the houſe of Dauid will I lay vpon
his ſhoulders. fol. 243
               Chap. 64. 1. Oh that thou wouldeſt break the heauens, & come
downe. fol. 245
               Chap. 1
                     •
                  . 1. Send you a Lamb to the ruler of the world, from the
rock of the wilderneſſe. ibid.
               Chap. 60. 8. Who are theſe that fly like a cloude? fol. 256
               Chap. 6. 5. I dwell in the middeſt of a people of polluted lips,
and myne eyes haue ſeene the king and Lord of hoaſtes
fol. 267
               Chap. 38. 10. Exalt thy voice like a Trumpet. fol 280
            
            
               The Prophet Ieremy.
               Chap. 48. 9. Giue flowers vnto Moab, that it may fly and get away:
for the cities thereof ſhall be deſolate, without any to dwell
therein. fol. 76
               Chap. 48. 10. Curſed be he that doth the work of the Lord negligently,
and curſed bee hee that keepeth back his ſworde from

bloud. ibid.
               Chap. 18. 18. Come, and let vs ſmite him with the tongue.
fol. 94
               Chap. 5. 30. 31. An horrible and filthy thing is committed in
the land. The Prophets prophecie lyes, and the Prieſts receiue gifts
in their hands, and my people delight therin. What will you then do
in the end thereof? fol. 97
               Chap. 4. 19. I cannot be ſtill, for my ſoule hath heard the ſound
of the Trumpet, and the alarum of the battell. fol. 133
               Chap. 4. 20. Deſtruction vpon deſtruction is cried, for the whole
land is waſted, ſuddenly are my Tents deſtroyed, and my curtains in
a moment. fol.134
               Chap. 3. 1. Thou haſt plaide the harlot with many louers, thou
haſt ſit waiting for them in the waies. fol. 135
               Chap. 1. 5. 6. Before I formed thee in the wombe, I knew
thee, and before thou cameſt out of the wombe, I ſanctified thee,
and ordayned thee to be a Prophet vnto the nations, &c.
fol. 230
               Chap. 15. 19. And if thou take away the pretious from the vile,
thou ſhalt be according to my word. fol. 263
            
            
               The Prophet Ezechiel.
               Chap. 24. 18. I ſpake vnto the people in the morning, and at euen
my wife died. fol. 132
               Chap. 21. 6. Mourne therefore ſilently in affliction of ſpirit.
fol. 135
               Chap. 1. 9. They returned not, but euery one went ſtraight forward.
fol. 151
               Chap. 22. 9. In thee are men that cary tales to ſhed bloud, in thee
are they that eate vpon the mountains, in the midſt of thee they commit
abhomination. fol. 162
               Chap. 34. 18. 19. Haue you drunk of the deep waters, and muſt
you trouble the reſidue with your feete? And my ſheep eate that,
which you haue troden with your feet, and drinke that which you
haue troubled with your feet. fol. 180
               Chap. 8. 8. 9. Ezechiel, take an inſtrument and dig the wall, which
ſeemeth ſo ſtupendious to thee, &c. fol. 199
            
            
               To Prophet Daniell.
               Chap. 10. 15. I ſet my face toward the ground, and held my

peace. fol. 136
               Chap. 2. 35. Then was the yron, the claye, the braſſe, the
ſiluer and the gould broken all together, and became like the
chaffe of the ſummer flowres, and the wind caried them away,
that no place was found for them. And the ſtone, that ſmote the
Image, became a great mountaine, and filled the whole earth.
fol. 176
               Chap. 3. 96. Therefore I make a decree, that euery people, nation
and language, which ſpeake any blaſphemy againſt the god
of Sydrach, Miſach and Abednago, ſhall be drawne in pices, and
their houſes ruined. fol. 215
               Chap. 10. 17. How can the ſeruant of this my Lord talke with my
Lord? fol. 236
               Chap. 3. 60. All yee workes of the Lord, bleſſe you the
Lord, praiſe him, and exalt him aboue all things for euer. fol. 212
            
            
               The Prophet Oſeas.
               Chap. 7. 3. They make the king glad with their wickedneſſe.
fol. 95
               Chap. 4. 1. 2. 3. There is no truth in the land. By ſwearing and lying,
&c. they breake out. Therefore ſhall the land mourne, and euery
one that dwelleth therein ſhall be cut off. fol. 105
               Chap. 13. 1. Ephraim ſpeaking, a great feare came vpon Iſraell.
fol. 132
               Chap. 2. 20. I will euen marry thee vnto me in faithfulneſſe.
fol. 135
               Chap. 7. 16. Their Princes fall by the edge of the ſword, for the
rage of their tongues. fol. 172
               Chap. 2. 14 I will bring her into the wilderneſſe, and ſpeak vnto
her hart. fol. 260
            
            
               The Prophet Amos.
               Chap. 5. 2. The virgin Iſraell is left vpon her land, and there is
none to raiſe her vp. fol. 128
            
            
               The Prophet Micheas.
               Chap. 6. 15. Thou ſhalt ſowe, but not reape, thou ſhalt tread the
Oliues, but ſhalt not annoint thee with the Oyle, and make ſweete
wine, but ſhalt not drinke wine fol.
            
            
               The Prophet Nahum.
               Chap. 3. 5. I will diſcouer thy skirtes vpon thy face, and
will ſhewe the nations thy filthineſſe, and the kingdomes thy

ſhame. fol. 196
            
            
               The Prophet Aggeus.
               Chap. 1. 5. 6. Conſider your own wayes in your harts. You
haue ſowne much, and bring in little; you haue eate, but you
haue not enough; you drink, but yet you are not filled; you cloath
you, but you be not warme; and he that earneth wages, putteth the
wages into a broken bag. fol. 198
            
            
               The Prophet Eſdras.
               Chap. 4. 41. 42. Bleſſed be the Lord God of trueth: Truth
is greate and ſtrongeſt, and ouercommeth all things. fol. 107
            
            
               Wiſedome of Salomon.
               Chap. 7. 12. The ſoule of the iuſt is the ſeate of wiſedome.
fol. 28
               Chap. 17. 18. The ſound or Eccho that anſwereth again in the hollow
mountaine. fol. 88
               Chap. 1. 11. The mouth that ſpeaketh lyes, ſleyeth the ſoule.
fol. 106
               Chap. 7. 30. Malice cannot ouercome wiſedome. fol. 118
            
            
               Saint Matthews Goſpell.
               Chap. 12. 37. By thy words thou ſhalt be iuſtified, and by thy
words thou ſhalt be condemned. fol. 39
               Chap. 10. 20. It is not you that ſpeake, but the ſpirit of your father
which ſpeaketh in you. fol. 51
               Chap. 26. 65. 66. He hath blaſphemed: what haue we any more
need of witneſſes? Now you haue heard his blaſphemy, he is worthy
to dy. fol. 52
               Chap. 5. 22. Guilt of iudgement, guilt of a Councell, and guilt of
hell fire. fol. 114
               Chap. 22. 16. Maſter we know that thou ſayeſt, and teacheſt
right, neither doſt thou accept mans perſon, but teacheſt the way of
god truly, &c. fol. 117
               Chap. 25. 33. He ſhall ſet the ſheep on his right hand. fol. 112
               Chap. 12. 22. Then was brought to him one poſſeſſed with a
diuell, both blind and dumb, and he healed him, ſo that he which
was blinde and dumb, both ſpake and ſaw, &c. fol. 160
               Chap. 5. 11. Bleſſed are you when men reuile you. fol. 163
               Chap. 15. 7. 8. VVoe be to you hypocrites, Eſay prophecied well
of you; This people draweth neere vnto me with their mouth, and
honoureth me with their lippes, but their hearte is farre off from

me. fol. 169
               Chap. 7. 16. You ſhall know them by their fruits. fol. 170
               Chap. 6. 2. They haue their reward. fol. 174
               Chap. 6. 16. 17. VVhen you faſt, looke not ſowre as the hypocrites
doo: for they diſſigure their faces, that they might
ſeeme vnto men to faſt. But when thou faſteſt, &c. fol. 176
               Chap. 23. 3. 4. All therfore whatſoeuer they bid you obſerue,
that obſerue and doe: but after their works do not, for they ſay,
and do not. They bind heauy burthens, and greeuous to be borne,
and lay them on mens ſhoulders, but they themſelues will not
mooue them with one of their ſingers. fol. 183
               Chap. 7. 16. Do men gather grapes of thornes, or figs of thiſtles?
fol. 184
               Chap. 25. 1. 2. 3. The kingdome of heauen ſhall be likened vnto
ten virgins, &c. ibid.
               Chap. 23. 5. All their workes they do for to be ſeen of men.
fol. 189
               Chap. 26. 73. Thou alſo art a Galilean, for euen thy ſpeech bewrayeth
thee. fol. 210
               Chap. 27. 51. And behould the vaile of the Temple rent in twain,
from the top to the bottom. fol. 246
               Chap. 27. 52. And the graues opened themſelues. fol. 247
               Chap. 2. 2. VVhere is the king of the Iewes that is borne?
ibid.
               Chap. 5. 2. And he opened his mouth, and taught them ſaying,
&c. fol. 253
               Chap. 18. 15. 16. 17. If they brother treſpaſſe againſt thee, goe,
and tell him his fault, between thee and him alone, if he heare thee,
thou haſt won thy brother. But if he heare thee not, take yet with
thee one or two, that by the mouth of two or three witneſſes, euery
word may be confi
                     •
                  med. And if he will not vouchſafe to heare then
tell it vnto the Church, and if he refuſe to heare the Church alſo,
let him bee vnto thee as an heathen, and a publicane.
fol. 269
               Chap. 7. 3. VVhy ſeeſt thou the mote that is in thy brothers
eye, and perceiueſt not the beame that is in thine owne eye?
fol. 276
               Chap. 18. 22. I ſay not to thee, vnto ſeauen times, but vnto ſeauenty
times ſeauen times. fol. 280
            
            
               
               Saint Marks Goſpell.
               Chap. 15. 25. And it was the third houre, when they crucified
him. fol. 24
               Chap. 1. 25. Ieſus rebuked him, ſaying: hold thy peace. fol. 117
               Chap. 7. 35. And the ſtring of his tongue was looſed, and he ſpake
plaine. fol. 160
               Chap. 5. 41. And he tooke the child by the hand, and ſayd vnto
her Tabitha kumi, which is by interpretation, Maiden, I ſay vnto thee
ariſe. fol. 167
               Chap. 7. 6. This people honoreth me with their lips. fol. 224
            
            
               Saint Lukes Goſpell.
               Chap. 1. 29. She thought what manner of ſaluation that ſhold
be. fol. 8
               Chap. 12. 19. My ſoule, thou haſt much goods layed vp for many
yeares: liue at eaſe, eate, drinke and take thy pleaſure.
fol. 23.
               Chap. 21. 15. I will giue you a mouth and wiſedome, where-againſt
all your aduerſaries ſhall not be able to ſpeake nor reſiſt.
fol. 52
               Chap. 5. 1. And the people preſſed vpon him to heare the word
of God, &c. fol. 69
               Chap. 2. 14. Peace in earth, and towardes men good will.
fol. 75
               Chap. 11. 14. Then he caſt out a diuell, and he was dumbe.
fol. 112
               Chap. 4. 41. He rebuked them, and ſuffered them not to ſpeake.
&c. &c.fol. 118
               Chap. 18. 11. 12. Oh God I thanke thee, that I am not as other
men, extortioners, vniuſt, adulterers, or euen as this Publicane. I
faſt twiſe in the weeke: I giue tithe of all that euer I poſſeſſe.
fol. 130
               Chap. 15. 2. The Scribes and Phariſies murmured, ſaying: He receiueth
ſinners, and eateth with them. fol. 138
               Chap. 1. 33. And he ſhall raigne ouer the houſe of Iacob for euer.
fol. 180
               Chap. 1. 20. Thou ſhalt be dumb, and not be able to ſpeake.
fol. 222
               Chap. 21. 14. Lay it vp therfore in your harts, that you premeditate
not what you ſhall anſwer, &c. fol. 242
               
                  
Chap. 23. 43. This day thou ſhalt be with mee in Paradiſe.
fol. 245
               Chap. 1. 64. And his mouth was opened immediately, and he
prophecied. fol. 246
               Chap. 24. 45. Then opened he their vnderſtanding, that they might
vnderſtand the Scriptures. fol. 247
               Chap. 1. 40. The ſheepheards ſaid one to another. ibid.
               Chap. 1. 35. The holy ghoſt ſhall come vpon thee, and the
power of the moſt high ſhall ouerſhaddow thee. fol. 255
               Chap. 23. 22. I will chaſtiſe him and let him looſe. fol. 271
               Chap. 4. 23. Phyſitian heale thy ſelfe. fol. 276
               Chap. 10. 14. 15. Martha Martha thou careſt and art troubled
about many things. Mary hath choſen the good parte. fol. 278
            
            
               Saint Iohns Goſpell.
               Chap. 8. 38. I ſpeake that which I haue ſeene with my father.
fol. 46
               Chap. 1. 12. To them he gaue power to be the ſonnes of God.
fol. 48
               Chap. 7. 46. Neuer was man heard to ſpeake the like. fol. 69
               Chap. 18. 37. For this cauſe am I borne, and for this cauſe came
I into the world, that I ſhould beare witneſſe vnto the trueth.
fol. 99
               Chap. 8. 46. And if I ſay the truth, why do you not beleeue me?
ibid.
               Chap. 14. 3. It is expedient for you that I goe away: but if I depart
away, I will ſend you the comforter, the ſpirit of trueth, &c.
ibid.
               Chap. 8. 44. He hath beene a murtherer from the beginning,
and abode not in the trueth, becauſe there is no trueth in him.
fol. 100
               Chap. 8. 45. When he ſpeaketh a ly, then he ſpeaketh of his own,
fol. 118
               Chap. 10. 5. 8. The ſheep did not heare them, for they knew not
the voice of ſtrangers. fol. 183
               Chap. 9. 13. Giue glory vnto God. fol. 194
               Chap. 14. 30. They are of the world, therfore ſpeake they according
to the world. fol. 210
               Chap. 3. 31. He that is of the earth, is of the earth, and ſpeaketh
of the earth. fol. 211
               Chap. 3. 14. 15. So muſt the ſon of man be lift vp: That whoſoeuer

beleeueth in him ſhould not periſh, but haue euerlaſting life.
fol. 244
               Chap. 3. 13. No man aſcendeth vp to heauen, but he that hath
deſcended from heauen. fol. 246
               Chap. 19. 34. A ſpeare opened his ſide. fol. 247
               Chap. 20. 22. He breathed on them, and ſaid vnto them; Receiue
you the holy Ghoſt. fol. 253
            
            
               Acts of the Apoſtles.
               Chap. 4. 20. For we cannot but ſpeake the things which we haue
heard and ſeen. fol. 35
               Chap. 6. 10. They were not able to reſiſt the wiſedome and the
ſpirit, by which he ſpake. fol. 51
               Chap. 2. 11. We heard them ſpeake in our tongues, the wonderfull
works of God. fol. 78
               Chap. 6. 15. They ſaw his face, as it had bin the face of an Angel.
fol. 177
               Chap. 3. 17. I knew brethren, that through ignoraunce you did
it. fol. 206
               Chap. 2. 3. 4. There appeared vnto them clouen tongues, like fire,
and it ſate vpon eache of them. And they were call filled with the holy
Ghoſt. fol. 240
               Chap. 1. 14. They all continued with one accord, in prayer and
ſupplication with the women, and Mary the mother of Ieſus and
with his brethren. ibid.
               Chap. 8. 31. How can I vnderſtand, except I had a guide?
fol. 246
               Chap. 8. 35. Then Philippe opened his mouth. fol. 253
            
            
               Epiſtle to the Romanes.
               Chap. 1. 20. For the inuiſible things of him, that is, his eternall
power and Godhead, are ſcene by the creation of the world, being
conſidered in his works, to the intent that they ſhould be without excuſe. fol. 44
               Chap. 3. 4. Let God be true, and euery man a lyer. fol. 47
               Chap. 2. 21. Thou which teacheſt another, teacheſt thou not thy
ſelfe? Thou that preacheſt a man ſhould not ſteale, dooſt thou ſteale?
fol. 180
               Chap. 1. 3. Of the ſeed of Dauid, according to the fleſh. fol. 245
               Chap. 12. 19. Vengeance is mine, and in my time I will repay it.
fol. 278
            
            
               Epiſtle to the Corinthians 1.
               
                  
Chap. 1. 23. 24. We preache Chriſt crucified, vnto the Iewes euen
a ſtumbling block, and vnto the Grecians fooliſhneſſe. But vnto
them which are called, both of the Iewes and Grecians, we preache
chriſt the power of God, and the wiſedom of God. fol. 118
               Chap. 6. 10. No raylers, nor theeues ſhall inherit the kingdom of
god. fol. 161
               Chap. 4. 5. Then ſhall euery man haue the prayſe of God.
fol. 178
               Chap. 3. 11. Other foundation can no man lay, then that which is
layd, which is chriſt Ieſus. fol. 191
               Chap. 2. 8. For had they known it, they would not haue crucified
the Lord of glory. fol. 206
               Chap. 13. 13. And now abideth faith, hope and charity, euen theſe
three: but the cheefeſt of theſe is charity. fol. 210
            
            
               Epiſtle to the Corinthians 2.
               Chap. 5. 4. For indeed, we that are in this tabernacle, ſigh and
are burdened, becauſe we would not be vnclo
                     •
                  thed, but would be
cloathed vpon, that mortality might be ſwallowed vp of life.
fol. 19
               Chap. 4. 7. But we haue this treaſure in earthen veſſelles.
ibid.
               Chap. 9. 22. I am made all things to all men, that I might by all
meane ſaue ſome. fol. 77
               Chap. 14. 18. I thanke my God, I ſpeak languages more then you
all. fol. 78
               Chap. 11. 15. Therefore it is no great thing, though his miniſters
tranſforme themſelues, as though they were the miniſters of righteouſneſſe,
whoſe end ſhall be according to their works. fol. 102
               Chap. 11. 14. For Satan himſelfe is transformed into an Angel of
light. ibid.
               Chap. 1. 12. That in ſimplicity and godly pureneſſe of hart, and
not in fleſhly wiſedom. but by the grace of God, we haue had our
conuerſation in the world. fol. 186
               Chap. 12. 4. He heard words which cannot be ſpoken, which are
not poſſible for man to vtter. fol. 235
               Chap. 6. 11. O Corinthians, our mouth is open vnto you.
fol. 253
               Chap. 3. 5. Not that we are ſufficient of our ſelues, to thinke any
thing as of our ſelues; but our ſufficiency is of God. fol. 260
               Chap. 6. 1. Brethren, if a man be falne (by occaſion) into any

fault, you which are ſpirituall, reſtore ſuch a one with the ſpirit of
meekneſſe, conſidering thy ſelfe, leaſt thou alſo be tempted.
fol. 271
               Chap. 2. 11. He withſtood him to his face, for he was to be blamed.
fol. 277
               Chap. 2. 11. God worketh all things after the counſell of his own
will. fol. 57
            
            
               Epiſtle to the Epheſians.
               Chap. 4. 24. Put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteouſneſſe and true holineſſe. fol. 254
            
            
               Epiſtle to the Coloſſians.
               Chap. 3. 1. The ſeek not thoſe things that are aboue with Ieſus
chriſt. fol. 183
            
            
               Epiſtle to Timothy 1.
               Chap. 5. 2. Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father.
fol. 268
               Chap. 5. 20. Them that ſin, rebuke openly, that the reſt alſo may
feare. fol. 277
            
            
               Epiſtle to Timothy 2.
               Chap. 4. 3. 4. For the time will come, when they will not ſuffer
wholeſome doctrine: But hauing their eares itching, ſhall (after their
own luſts) get them an heape of teachers: and ſhall turne their eares
from the truth, and ſhall be giuen vnto fables.
            
            
               Epiſtle to the Ebrewes.
               Chap. 1. 1. 2. At ſundry times, and in diuers manners God ſpake
in the old time, to our Fathers by the Prophets. In theſe laſt daies, he
hath ſpoken to vs by his Son, whom he hath made heyr of al things,
&c. fol. 44
               Chap. 4. 12. The word of God is liuely, and mighty in operation,
and ſharper then any two edged ſword, & entreth through, euen to
the diuiding a ſunder of the ſoule and the ſpirit, and of the ioynts and
the marrow, and is a diſcerner of the thoughts and the intents of
the hart. fol. 73
            
            
               Epiſtle of Saint Iames.
               Chap. 3. 5. The tongue is a little member, and boaſteth of great
things.
            
            
               Epiſtle of Saint Peter 1.
               Chap. 3. 10. If any man long after life, and to ſee good dayes, let
him refraine his tongue from 
                     •
                  uill, and his lippes that they ſpeake no
guile, fol. 79
               
                  
Chap. 3. 13. 14. Who is hee that will harme you, if you follow
that which is good? Notwithſtanding, bleſſed are you, if you
ſuffer for righteouſneſſe ſake. fol. 144
            
            
               Epiſtle of Saint Iohn.
               Chap. 3. 8. For this purpoſe appeared the Sonne of God, that he
might looſe the works of the diuel. fol. 131
            
            
               Apocalyps.
               Chap. 4. 11. For thou haſt created all things, and for thy wils ſake
they are, and haue bin created. fol. 46
               Chap. 12. 9. And the great Dragon, that old Serpent, called the
diuel, and Satan, was caſt out. fol. 53
               Chap. 2. 16. Out of his mouth went a ſharpe two edged ſword.
fol. 74
               Chap. 9. 18. Out of their mouthes went foorth fire, and ſmoake,
and brimſtoane. fol. 79
               Chap. 21. 27 And there ſhall enter into it no vncleane thing,
neither whatſoeuer worketh abhomination or lyes.
fol. 106.
               Chap. 12. 10. The accuſer of our brethren is caſt down, which accuſed
them before our God day and night. fol. 112
               Chap. 17. 8. The beaſt that thou haſt ſeen was, and is not, & ſhall
aſcend out of the bottomleſſe pit. fol. 119
               Chap. 16. 10. They gnawed their tongues for ſorrow. fol. 208
               Chap. 16. 11. They blaſphemed the God of heauen, for their
paines, and for their ſores. fol. 209
               Chap. 4. 8. And the foure beaſts had eache of them ſix wings about
him, and they were full of eyes within, and they ceaſed not
daye nor night, ſaying: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty,
which was, and which is, and which is to come. fol. 211
               Chap. 3. 10. If any man heare my voyce, and open the doore, I
will come in vnto him, and will ſuppe with him, and he with me.
fol. 223
               Chap. 7. 11. 12. And they fell before the Throane on their faces,
and worſhipped God, ſaying, Amen. Praiſe and glory, and wiſedome,
and thanks, and honour, and power, and might, be vnto our
God for euermore, Amen. fol. 231
               Chap. 8. 1. There was a ſilence in heauen, about halfe an houre.
ibid.
               Chap. 14. 3. They ſung as it were a new Song. fol. 235
               
                  
Chap. 3. 7. And write vnto the Angell of the church which
is of Philadelphia; Theſe thinges ſayeth hee that is holy and
True, which hath the keye of Dauid, which openeth, and no
man ſhutteth, and ſhutteth, and no man openeth.
fol. 242
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A
Table, Alphabetically gathered, of all
the ſeuer all matters contained in this
Booke.
            
               A.
               
                  ABraham, in ſteed of an authenticall writing, gaue his word only.
fol. 104
               
                  Achaz, a wicked man, would not giue God his due glory, in requiring
a ſigne. fol.
               
                  Abſalon, by his flattering ſweetneſſe of ſpeech, attempted to depriue
his father of the Crowne. fol. 67
               
                  Acaticus, the Philoſopher, would not talke at banquets, and beeing
demaunded the reaſon thereof, returned a very witty anſwer.
fol. 25
               
                  Acteon, deuoured by his own dogs that he nouriſhed, ſo in like caſe
are men by flatterers. fol. 92
               
                  Agatonus, a religious man, who for thirty yeares ſpace caried a ſtone
in his mouth, to learne thereby ſilence. fol. 26
               
                  Agis, king of Lacaedemonia, reprooued the Embaſſador from the Abderites,
for the tedious length of his Oration. fol. 32
               
                  Aegeſias, Platoes Scholler, reading on the immortality of the ſoule,
many were thereby drawn to ſley themſelues. fol. 68
               
                  Alpheus, and his hiſtory. fol. 68
               
                  Amphion, and his hiſtory. ibid.
               
                  Amalechite, that vaunted how he had ſlaine king Saul, ſlew himſelfe
by his owne ouerlauiſh tongue. fol. 65
               Angels, in what manner they ſpeak to God, among themſelues, and
with men. fol. 115
               
                  Anacharſides the Philoſopher, had in a faire Quadrant of his owne
picture, written an excellent ſentence in praiſe of ſilence. fol. 13
               
                  
                  Anacharſis the Philoſopher gaue a goodly commendation of truth.
fol. 100
               
                  Antiochus renounced the veſture and ornaments regall, becauſe he
would not be flattered. fol. 89
               
                  Antiſthenes the Cynick, ſayd, there was leſſe harme to be had, lighting
among Rauens, then falling into the hands of flatterers.
fol. 93
               
                  Antiſthenes the Philoſopher greeued, becauſe a wicked man had
ſpoken well of him. fol. 143
               
                  Antiſthenes his anſwer concerning the reprehenſion of Princes, and
men in authority. fol.
               
                  Apelles of Epheſus, drawing the portraiture of king Antigonus, who
wanted an ey, painted him without any defecte at all: And being
therefore reprooued, made a witty anſwer. fol. 141
               
                  Apologie made to the Sea Crabbes by their Parents, whereby to reprehend
the lewde examples of Fathers in their families.
fol. 14
               
                  Apologie made by the Cats to the Mice. fol.
               
                  Alexander, what a liberall giuer he was. fol.
               
                  Apoll
                        •
                     nius the Philoſopher, prayſed ſilence, and reprooued loquacity
or babbling. fol. 12
               Apoſtles, their ſpeaking in diuers languages, for doing good to many. fol. 78
               Apoſtles, before they receiued the gift of tongues, they were deuout
in prayer. fol.
               
                  Apollonius the Philoſopher, was ſtricken with amazement at the
ſpeaking of Cicero. fol. 67
               
                  Architas the Tarentine ſayd, that nothing was delightfull, without
ſome friend. fol. 34
               
                  Arion, and his hiſtory. fol.68
               
                  Aron erected the goulden Calfe by the ſteep mountaine of Sinai.
fol. 95
               
                  Ariſtippus the Philoſopher reprehended a couetous father about his
Sonne. fol. 16
               
                  Ariſtippus the flatterer of Dioniſius, was by Diogenes called a dog,
and many other ſignificant names thereto appertayning.
fol. 93
               
                  Ariſtotle ſayd, that anger is good, but neuer fit to ſerue as a guide or
director. fol. 59
               
                  
                  Ariſtotle ſaide, that it is more hard to be ſilent, then to ſpeake.
fol. 42
               Artificiall and cunning ſpeaking, can very hardly be voide of deceit.
fol. 75
               
                  Atys, Son to king Croeſus, being borne dumb, did ſpeake by commaund
of nature. fol. 34
               Aſſe belonging to Balaam, what words he deliuered when he ſpake.
fol. 118
            
            
               B
               
                  Babylon, and the people thereof had many ſins, becauſe they were
proude, ambitious, heretiques, and Idolaters; notwithſtanding,
God chaſtiſed them by their tongues only. fol. 24
               
                  Balaam was like to his Aſſe he rode on. fol. 51
               Barber belonging to king Mydas, could not conceale his Lords deformity,
but cryed out in a caue, that Mydas had the eares of an
Aſſe. fol. 35
               
                  Beda, a venerable Father of England, had his eyes puld out of his
head, for deliuering an interpretation of the truth. fol. 98
               
                  Bethulia, very cruelly beſieged by Holophernes. fol. 120
               
                  Bion the Philoſopher, ſayd: That among wild beaſts, a Tyrant is the
worſt, and among the tame, the flatterer is moſt daungerous.
fol. 91
               Blame iuſtly belonging to the vnbridled tongue. fol. 27
               Bleſſed and ſ
                     •
                  nctified ſpirits attending vpon God, they cannot erre
either in their conceits or words. fol. 56
               
                  Bohemia, and the people thereof obſerue for a certainty, that ſuch as
do tell, or ſweare a ly in the iudgement place, vndoubtedly ſhall die
that ſame yeare. fol. 106
               Blaſphemy committed by Senacherib, and in Gods iuſtice ſharpely
puniſhed. fol. 64
               Blaſphemy hath in it the weight or burden of the ſinne of Infidelity.
fol. 202
               Blaſphemy ſomtimes is worſe then Infidelity. fol. 203
               Blaſphemy is more offenſiue in the chriſtian, then in the Infidell.
ibid.
               Blaſphemy out-goeth any ſin elſe. fol. 204
               Blaſphemy ſomtimes is committed, in ſcorning the truth, by geſtures
of the body, and without ſpeaking. ibid.
               Blaſphemy is worſe then the ſin of murder. fol. 205
               Blaſphemy is a greater ſin then hereſie; or the ſin of the Iewes in crucifying

Chriſt; and blaſphemie goes far beyond Idolatrie. fol. 206
               Blaſphemie hath no excuſe for it ſelfe, as other ſins do pretend to
haue. fol. 207
               Blaſphemers gnawe their tongues for a puniſhment. fol. 208
               Blaſphemie endureth longer, then any other vice whatſoeuer, and
the puniſhment thereof is of like length, and more intenſe or vehement.
fol. 209
               Blaſphemers are knowne by their manner of ſpeaking, to be of the
kingdome of hell. fol. 210
               Blaſphemie is ſo abhominable, that the holy Scripture refraineth to
vſe the word; but in ſteed of blaſpheming, vſeth bleſſing. fol. 211
               Blaſphemers are worſe then brute beaſtes, and euen do kill God, ſo
much as in them lieth. fol. 212
               Blaſphemie is puniſhed by all lawes. fol. 213
               The bleſſed do keep ſilence, as being ouercome with ioy, in beholding
the preſence of the maieſtie diuine. fol. 231
               Breuitie in ſpeaking hath alwayes been commendable. fol. 30
               
                  Budeus, defining an hypocrite, ſayth, That an hypocrite is euery ſuch
diſſembler, as takes vpon him to repreſent that which himſelfe is
not. fol. 169
            
            
               C
               
                  Cicero ſaid: That a man is known by his ſpeaking to be either wiſe,
or fooliſh. fol. 5.
               
                  Cato was highly commended by Cicero, becauſe he neuer ſpake any
word, whereof he repented himſelfe afterward. fol. 7
               
                  Chilo was wont to ſay: That the tongue ought not to fore-run the
mind. fol. 8
               
                  Cato of Vtica, and Cicero ſaid: That it was a great fault to be ſilent,
when neceſſity of ſpeaking was required. ibid.
               
                  Cleobulus, one of the ſeauen Sages of Greece, ſaid: that a wiſe man
is more ſollicitous to heare then to ſpeake. fol. 10
               
                  Careon, a yong man very talkeatiue, yet willing to learne the Arte
of Rhetorick, had a double ſalarie demaunded of him, to teache
him to auoide his euill talking. fol. 12
               
                  Cadnidus king of Scythia, was brother to Anacharſides the greate
learned Philoſopher. fol. 13.
               
                  Crates the Philoſopher, did much lament the negligence of thoſe fathers
of families, who were careleſſe of their childrens enſtruction.
fol. 15
               
                  Cato his aduiſe for a childs firſt erudition. fol. 18
               
                  
                  Cain did more offend with his blaſphemous 
                     •
                  ongue, in denying the
mercie of god, then he did with his bloudy hand, in taking away
the lif
                     •
                   of his brother. fol. 20
               No better couering for the hart of man then ſilence. fol. 26
               
                  Cicero was ſlaine for ouermuch ſpeaking. fol. 28
               How all the creatures do bring vs to the knowledge of god, and his
omnipotent greatneſſe. fol▪ 44
               The creatures are to vs in ſteed of as many tongues, wherby to ſpeak
vnto vs. fol. 46
               
                  Caiphas, the high Prieſt, vnderſtood not his own prophecy, and therfore
is ſaid to be like Balaams Aſſe. fol. 51.
               Compariſon of ſundry waies, wherby our feet make vſe of walking
and proofe of the like diuerſity of pathes, which the tongue hath
to goe by. fol. 55
               Concupiſ
                     •
                  ible, is a way whereby our tongue hath occaſion to paſſe,
and therfore that way requireth a very good guardian. fol. 57
               
                  Cain was the firſt heretique in the world. fol. 56
               
                  Cato his ſaying of the angry man. fol. 58
               
                  Cato his great patience, being abuſed by Lentulus. fol. 60
               Cruelty very great in Hanniball. fol. 61
               Couragious and generous ſpirits doe receiue more offence by a bad
ſpoken word, then a wound receiued by a launce. fol. 65
               Conditions fiue in number belonging to the tongue of man, & very
neceſſary in our manner of ſpeaking. fol. 66
               
                  Cicero, how much he was able to preuayle, only by the ſweetneſſe of
his tongue in ſpeaking. fol. 67
               
                  Cato Cenſorius was accuſed forty foure times before the Romane
Senate, and yet was euery time adiudged innocent. fol. 68
               Chriſt, mo
                     •
                  t ſweet in his ſpeeches to his very enemies: which made
the Phariſies bloudy miniſters to forget their fierceneſſe againſt
him. fol. 69
               Chriſt preached in a maternal tongue, including many parables and
ſimilitudes among his enſtructions. fol. 75
               The Crocodile in his qualities vſed as a neceſſarie obſeruation to be
had in a wiſe man. fol. 79
               
                  Cicero his opinion of mens works and words. fol. 81
               Compariſion of the Graſhopper, being bathed in oile, dyes, but being
waſhed with vinegar, comes to life againe. fol. 8
                     •
                  
               
               Commandement giuen by God, that the fleſh of Swans ſhould not
be eaten. fol. 87
               
                  
                  Conſtantine called the flatterer, a Moath. fol. 93
               Calues made of gold by Ieroboam, and honoured of the people as if
they had bin gods. So the like in Aaron, &c. fol. 95
               Chriſt, how many trauelles he endured, and all for the trueth which
himſelfe ſo dearly loued: the ſame is approoued by a very excellent
diſcourſe of trueth. fol. 99
               
                  Chilo the Philoſopher of Lacedemon, gaue a ſingular diſcourſe concerning
the excellency of trueth. fol. 102
               Chriſt neuer called any one, Son of the diuell, but the lyer. ibid.
               Circumciſion, vpon what occaſion God cauſed it not to be left as a
law in writing, & had ſuch an eſpeciall care of his commandements
deliuered in the time of Moyſes. fol. 104
               Conceite of the mind is called the word and ſpeeche of the mind.
fol. 115
               Confeſſion of our ſins, how neceſſary it is, and how highly offenſiue
it is to the diuell. fol. 121
               Confeſſors, Paſtors and Preachers, are compared to watchfull dogs,
that keep away the diuell the wolfe of our ſoules. fol. 122
               In confeſſion of our ſins before God, it is a moſt euill ſigne, when we
make a preſumptuous oſtentation of our owne doings, and do not
ſorrow for the offences which we haue committed. Reade much
ſaid to this purpoſe, in Fol. 125. 126. & ſo in the ſucceeding chapter.
Correction and puniſhment promiſed by god to detractors and euill
ſpeakers. fol. 161
               Comedians are Apes of other mens actions. fol. 169
               Confines or bounds, out of which the hypocrit goes, of himſelf. f. 177
               Charity is a vertue that liueth beyond all other whatſoeuer, and blaſphemy
is a ſin of the ſelfe ſame nature. fol. 209
               
                  Cicero and Demoſthenes, their tongues coſt their liues. fol. 219
               Cuſtody of the tongue is very difficult. fol. 221
               Cholerick men doo ſtammer in their ſpeaking, and a reaſon is deliuered
for the occaſion thereof. fol. 228
               Compariſon of cariage of keyes, how ſome do faſten them to their
girdles, others put them in their pockets, others weare them about
their necks, & ſome on their ſhoulders. fol. 247
            
            
               D
               
                  Diogenes the Cinick would eat raw fiſh. fol. 7
               
                  Dauid deſired of god, that he wold ſet a watch before his mouth, and
a doore of wiſedom before his lips. fol. 9
               Difficulty very great in ſpeaking well. ibid.
               
                  
                  Dauid and Salomon required of god, a doore and a watch for their
mouthes, and not a wall: wherein is deliuered an excellent myſterie.
fol. 10
               Dulcitude or ſweetneſſe of conference, is a certaine kind of viands.
fol. 13
               Defect of the tongue is worſe then gurmandiſe or luxurie. ibid.
               
                  Dauid, the firſt leſſon that he taught his children, when they roſe euery
morning out of their beds, was, to praiſe the Lord. ibid.
               
                  Diogenes, ſeeing a diſſolute boy to abuſe himſelfe in the ſtreet, went
and beat his Schoolemaſter, for bringing him vp no better. fol. 17
               Diſorder and inconuenience which enſueth, vpon the lack of reprouing
the faults of our children. ibid.
               Diſorder and offence occaſioned by feaſts and banquettings. fol. 21
               
                  Dauid ſomtimes prayed God, that hee would vouchſafe to open his
mouth, and at other times deſired that he would ſhut it. fol. 33
               Difficultie much greater to be ſilent, than to ſpeake. ibid,
               Doubt in a caſe reſolued, why the tongue (being the cauſe of many
euills) was giuen by god to man. fol. 39
               Delicacie more then muſique to the eare, is a good tongue. fol. 41
               Doubt very great, how it ſhould be true that euery man is a lyer.
fol. 47
               Deuill and the woman were the firſt that brake ſilence, both in heauen
and vpon earth. fol. 52
               Doubt concerning the words of Dauid, in his 38 pſalme: I ſaide, I
will take heed to my waies, &c. and an anſwere made thereto. fol. 54
               Doubt reſolued, about the foure wayes of the tongue. fol. 56
               Double, or twofold are our follies and furies: one being bred in the
braine, the other taking life from the heart. fol. 59
               
                  Diogenes very patient, & his mild anſwer when an indiſcreet youth
had ſpet in his face. fol. 60
               Deuill, a continuall obſeruer of our ſpeeches, and his malitious conuerting
them to his owne purpoſe, and how his wicked children
do learne the like of him. fol. 62
               Diamond, and the nature thereof, reſiſting the hardeſt ſteele, and yet
is eaſilie broken, or ſoftned with the bloud of a goate. fol. 67
               Doctors in the chaire, yet meere Dunſes in common conference,
whence it enſueth. fol. 82
               
                  Dauid a very powerfu
                     •
                  l king, yet he repoſed more truſt in wiſedom,
then in ſtrength. fol. 83
               Diſcourſe made by Zerobabell to king Darius, in commendation

of the trueth. fol. 109
               Definition made of lying. fol. 117
               Diuell durſt not tell a lye in his owne ſhape, but tooke vpon him the
Serpents ſhape. fol. 101
               Diuell, how he is ſaid to be dumb, and how he ſpeakes, with ſundry
other matters concerning him. fol. 113
               Diuell hath no power againſt god or his good Angels. fol. 114
               Diuell is a bloudy beaſt, and beaſtlier then al beaſts. fol. 119
               Diuell made the dumb man, to be deafe and blind alſo, and the reaſon
of his malice in ſo dooing. fol. 121
               Diuell compared to a Iaylor, or keeper of a priſon, to a hangman, &
to a wolfe. fol. 122
               Diuell makes vſe of our beſt actions, to his owne aduantage. ibid.
               Diuell hath fiue teeth in his head, & how they are to be vſed. fo. 123
               
                  Dauid cried out, and yet was ſilent all at one inſtant. fol. 130
               Diuell would take away both vertue and vertuous people out of the
world togither, if he could. fol. 131
               Diuell moſt of all diſmayd, when the penitent ſinner confeſſeth his
ſins to god. fol. 132
               Deſpiſing or defaming of good men by the bad, is an apparant ſigne
of vertue and goodneſſe. fol. 143
               Detractors are called abhomination it ſelf by Salomon, and are compared
to the Eſtridge. fol. 144
               Detraction a moſt infectious ſin, the detractor moſt abhominable,
compared to a theefe, to rauenous birds, to Perillus ſtatuary, the
Cammell, &c. fol. 150
               Double or twofold is brotherly correction. fol. 266
               Deuill, and his dumb coller to ſtifle men withall: which if he preuaile
withall, then he is beſt pleaſed. fol. 122
               Doubt very well reſolued cōcerning mercenaries & hirelings. f. 179
               Doubt ſatiſfied, concerning the ſin of blaſphemy. fol. 202
               
                  Daniell, talking with god, was ſmitten dumbe. fol. 230
               
                  Demosthenes ſlaine by his ſpeaking. fol. 219
            
            
               E
               
                  Epaminondas the Thebane, in commending ſilence, ſaid: That it behoued
a man to heare much and ſpeak little. fol. 11
               Example of wicked Parents, and of how many euills they only are
the occaſion. fol. 16
               Example of the rich glutton, and why his tongue is ſayd to be more
tormented, then any other member of his body. fol. 21
               
                  
                  Epaminondas the Painter, was a great obſeruer of ſilence, and made
a diſcreet anſwer to the Rhodians, concerning what he had ſeen in
the time of his trauailes. fol. 28
               Example of two Ambaſſadors, the one deliuering a long and tedious
ſpeech, the other ſpeaking briefly and wittily. fol. 31
               
                  Eua, of one commandement made two. fol. 52
               Example of great patience in Seneca, Diogenes, and Cato. fol. 60
               Example of the pleaſing ſweetneſſe of the ſpeech of man, and how
preuailing it is in power. fol. 67
               Example of mens eloquence very admirable: how one reading on
the immortality of the ſoule, cauſed many wilfully to ſlay themſelues,
and how another won him, that before had giuē his ſchollers
eſpeciall warning not to heare that man. ibid.
               Efficacy and excellency of the word of god. fol. 69
               
                  Elyſeus the Prophet, how much he preuailed by the word of god only,
more then powerfull kings by their Armies could do. fol. 74
               Example of a king and his three Sons, for ſeuerall proofes of their
wiſedoms, & how needful it is for men to ſpeak vnder correctiō. f. 82
               Example of the harme that enſueth by improuident talking. fol. 85
               Eccho, what manner of thing it is, how it is formed, & in what place.
fol. 88
               Example of a Trumpetter taken in war, and Philopoemines ſentence
on him to be ſlain, only for the ſound of his Trumpet, ſent from his
mouth: alluded to the caſe of the ſlatterer. fol. 94
               Example out of the ſacred ſcriptures, approouing how highly trueth
hath bin hated and abuſed. fol. 99
               Example of Aeſchines the Orator, who ſaid: That, without the truth,
euery ver
                     •
                  ſe was vice in it ſelfe. fol. 100
               Example of the Egyptians, in making a bargain, or renewing of amity,
they let their fingers bloud, and ſigne one another therwith, in
token of their perfect continuance. fol. 105
               
                  Ephraim, and what the word ſignifieth. fol. 132
               Example very ſtrange, of a ſlanderous woman, and what a greeuous
puniſhment God ſent vpon her. fol. 145
               Egyptiās ſeuerely puniſhed by god, when he ſent the plague of frogs
among them, in ſuch aboundance beyond the reſiſtance of man.
fol. 156
               
                  Exterminare, and the ſignification therof. fol. 177
               Examples very dreadfull concerning blaſphemy, and the heauy puniſhments
thereon inflicted. fol. 208
               
                  
Example, that wicked men haue the lips of the hart. fol. 220
               Exemption or priuation of the tongue is better then to haue it. f. 221
               Example of a man that deſired to ſtudie the Scriptures, and the anſwer
he made for leauing the Schoole, vpon his very firſt leſlon. ibi.
               Example of wicked men, who haue their lower lips very great, like
vnto ſwine, and like to certaine people in Aethiopia, that can couer
their whole face with their nether lip. fol. 224
               Example of the wicked, that they are depriued of all their ſenses, &
haue their lips only wherwith they perform al their actions. ibid.
               Exchequer or a rich treaſurie is the hart of man. fol. 241
               Excellencie of the graces beſtowed by Chriſt vpon the bleſſed Apoſtles,
and holy martyrs. fol. 242
               Excellent myſterie, concerning the key of Dauid. ibid.
               Eccleſiaſticall perſons, what an Excellent Collect or Prayer is by
them obſerued on mornings in the church. fol. 251
               Eloquence, what it is, according to Cicero. fol. 256
               
                  Elizeus, how he raiſed vp the widdowes dead child, ſo ought we to
reuiue our brother, being dead in ſinne. fol. 271
            
            
               F
               Friendly and familiar ſpeeches, how greatly they preuaile in quietting
the afflicted thoughts of a man, and ſuch words do ſerue many
times in ſtead of pretious antidotes. fol. 1
               Fathers of a family, the firſt enſtruction they ought to giue their children
and ſeruants, is to praiſe god. fol. 13
               Fathers ought to vſe their children, as huſbandmen doe the vine, the
Iuy, and the Mellone. fol. 14
               Fathers ſhould go before their children, in good examples, and ciuil
behauiour of their liues. fol. 15
               Force and power of ſilence. fol. 27
               Facility in ſpeech, vſing a breefe and comely decorum, hath alwayes
bin much more commended, then prolix & tedious arguing. fol. 31
               
                  Felix the doctor was anſwered by Vincentio Balnaceus: That it was
not good to praiſe a man in his life time. fol. 37
               Fools are full of words, and yet are reputed wiſe by ſilence. ibid.
               The fooles mouth is like a pot boyling vpon the fire. fol. 57
               Furies and frenzies are of two kinds, and do receiue their originall
from ſeuerall cauſes. fol. 59
               Flight is the only remedy againſt Anger. fol. 60
               Fiue properties or conditions very neceſſarily required in our ſpeaking
               
                  
king and diſcourſing one with another. fol. 66
               Force extraordinary in pleaſing words. fol. 67
               Feare and amazement in the Phariſies at the preaching of chriſt, &
alteration in the harts of their miniſters of 
                     •
                  uſtice. fol. 69
               Fond ſpeaking, without wiſedom, how dangerous it is, & the ſame
is approoued by many examples. fol. 85
               Falſe and feyned ſpeaking is a ſin againſt nature. ibid.
               Flatterers and their nature deſcribed. fol. 86. and ſo the end of the
ſame chapter. fol. 86
               The flatterer tearmed by Plato by diuers names. ibid.
               The flattere likened to the lyon ſlaine by Sampſon. ibid.
               Flatterer compared to the Swan: To the garment wouen of linnen
and wollen: To Eccho, and to wine. fol. 87
               The flatterers beſt liue in great mens houſes. fol. 88
               The flatterer hath no direct kind of ſpeech. ibid.
               The flatterers tongue compared to the tongue of a cat: To the ſhadow
following the body: To the Ape: To the Parrat, and to water.
fol. 89
               The flatterers tongue maintaineth ſin, and robs a man of the truth.
fol. 90
               Flatterers do hold reſemblance with dumb dogs: And with cookes,
that dreſſe meats according to their maſters appetites. fol. 91
               The flatterer is worſe then a tyrant. ibid.
               The flatterer is compared to a looking glaſſe: To a harlot: And to
our breath iſſuing from our mouthes. fol. 92
               The flatterer is likened to a Mother and her yong Son: And to them
that builded the infamous tower of Babell. fol. 94
               Flattery is the occaſion of Idolatry. fol. 95
               Faithfull dealing among men, how commendable it is. fol. 104
               Force or power of wine, women, and the king, and which is ſaide to
be the ſtrongeſt. fol. 107
               Foundation of the hypocrite and the iuſt man, how different they
are. fol. 191
               Foundation giuen by god to man, and to his Church. fol. 192
               Fearce as a rauenous beaſt is the hypocrite. fol. 195
               Fathers of the Cleargie, the great burthen impoſed on them, and the
duties required at their hands. fol. 243
               Fortreſſes placed on the confines of a land, are ſaid to be the keys of
the kingdome. fol. 145
               
                  
God commanded in the Leuiticall lawe, that ſuch as were appointed
for the ſeruice of his maieſty, ſhould be 
                     •
                  rayned vp from their
very childhood, in the diuine worſhip of him. fol. 18
               Gods eſpeciall grace it is, that his deare ſo children, not maſtring men
by ſpeech, do yet by ſilence come neer vnto himſelf. fol. 26
               Gods wonderfull workmanſhip in forming the tongue, and an excellent
obſeruation made therof. fol. 27
               Gods ſeat is ſaid to be the iuſtmans ſoule. fol. 28
               God is moſt iealous of his ſecrets, & a great obſeruer of 
                     〈◊〉
                   fol. 43
               God is ſo ſparing of ſpeech, that it is ſaid he ſpake but once or twiſe
onely. ibid.
               God ſpeaketh to vs by his creatures. fol. 44
               In god there is nothing defectiue, but all things in act. fol. 46
               God diſpoſeth the ſoule according to the rule of a kingdom. fol. 57
               Whatſoeuer god willeth, is iuſt. ibid.
               Guard of reaſon is beſt for the way of will. ibid.
               
                  Gualterns Teutonicus, Regent of the ſtudies at Vercellis, his worthy
hiſtory. fol. 68
               Gods word, and the ſweetneſſe thereof, declared by the example of
Saul among the Prophets. fol. 70
               Gods word compared to a ſword or weapon. fol. 74
               God did forbid the eating of Swans fleſh: and the wearing of a garment-made
of wollen and linnen. fol. 87
               God is ſaid (in ſome ſort) to diſpence with theft, but not with lying.
fol. 102
               Good men, when they are contemned by the bad, are therein the
more highly honored. fol. 143
               Great hurt and danger enſueth by murmurers. fol. 148
               Great reſemblance and ſimilitude haue murmurers with the frogs
of AEgypt. fol. 159
               God ſendeth his Angels of the vtmoſt Hierarchy only vpon important
negotiations. fol. 159
               God only hath the knowledge of mens thoughts. fol. 160
               God iudgeth with great deliberation, for our enſtruction. fol. 154
               Glory, tearmed vain-glory, the occaſion of much euill. fol. 184
               Gods glory we ought to ſeek for in all our actions. fol. 187
               Glory for our ſelues conſiſteth not outwardly, but in the heart.
fol. 195
               Great is the ſin of bl
                     •
                  ſphemy, exceeding euery other ſin, & therfore
the puniſhment therof is anſwerable to the fault. &c. fol. 201
               
                  
God his three ſeuerall kingdoms, of three ſeueral languages. fol. 210
               God liſtens more to the tongue of the hart, then to that of the voice.
fol. 220
               Good men are compared to goodly faire hounds; and to a richly
furniſhed table. fol. 223
               God ſpeaking with Ieremie, made him like vnto a child that could
not ſpeak, and the reaſon therof. fol. 230
               God talking to Moyſes, cauſed him to ſtammer: To Ieremie, made
him not know how to ſpeak: To Daniell, made him dumb, and
why. fol. 231
               Greatneſſe of the ſubiect, or perſon ſpoken too, may daunt the beſt
Oratour, and diſtract his memory. fol. 233
               Talking with god, we learne to be ſilent, and talking with men, we
learne nothing but vaine babbling. fol. 237
               Grace of wiſedom, ariſing from Chriſt the fountaine of wiſedom, is
tearmed Dauids key. fol. 243
               God keepe
                     •
                  h the key of the iuſt mans mouth. ibid.
               God delighteth that we ſhold make our requeſts vnto him. fol. 253
               God ſpeaketh to the harts of iuſt mē, and enſtructeth them to ſpeak
becauſe they ſhall not erre in ſpeaking. fol. 260
               
                  Gilbertus Porretanus his ſaying concerning ſilence. fol. 258
               God ſendeth his bleſſed Angels, to inſpire our ſoules with what we
haue to ſay or doo. fol. 261
            
            
               H
               He may be as guilty of death that ſpeaketh not in time conuenient,
as he that is ouer talkatiue, and ſpeaks too much. fol. 4
               He that is a foole, cannot ſit ſilent. fol. 5
               He that ſpeaks without premeditation, many times repents himſelfe,
of that he hath ſpoken. fol. 8
               How difficult a thing it is to ſpeak well, without erring. fol. 9
               How and in what place the mouth ought to be opened. fol. 10
               He that heares attentiuely, & ſpeaketh little, if he be not more then
robd of reaſon, cannot fayle, and may ſo much the better diſcerne
truth from falſehood. ibid.
               He cannot but commit many errors, that takes delight in ouermuch
talking. fol. 11
               How many euills the fathers of families may be the cauſe of, only by
their bad examples. fol. 15
               He that in his hart thinketh the truth, and with his mouth ſpeaks it,
is ſaid to be like vnto god. fol. 18
               
                  
He that is talkatiue, offendeth many eares: But he that receiues example
of others murmuring, may take the leſſe occaſion of ſinning.
fol. 25
               How all the diſcourſings which god had with the Prophets and Patriarchs,
is tearmed but one ſpeaking only, &c. fol. 45
               How there be foure principall wayes for the tongue to walke by: all
which doo require eſpeciall regard, for auoiding of errour.
fol. 55
               How Cain was the firſt heretique that euer was in the world, and
the hereſie he ſpake. fol. 56
               How vnſeemly indiſcretion in ſpeeches is in a learned man, & that
many haue bin noated very learned in the Doctors chaire, but very
fools being foorth of the Schooles, &c. fol. 82
               Hatred begotten of Trueth. fol. 98
               How many trauailes Chriſt ſuffered in the world for the truths ſake.
fol. 99
               How deteſtable the lying man is, is approoued by a very ſingular diſcourſe.
fol. 102
               Hell hurteth none but the wicked only, but the lying man is more
offenſiue to god. fol. 111
               
                  Holofernes beſieged Bethulia, and tooke 
                     •
                  way the water. fol. 120
               How our bones are ſaid to ſignifie vertue. fol. 130
               How whatſoeuer the wicked man ſees, is ſin. fo. 138
               How great their perill is, that keep company with detractors: And
how fearefull the penalty of detraction is, declared at large in two
excellent examples. fol. 145
               How offenſiue to god the ſin of murmuring is. fol. 147
               How infectious the ſin of murmuring is. fol. 148
               Honor is more to be valued then li
                     •
                  e. fol. 1
                     •
                  1
               Hypocrites are not ſoone to be diſcouered. fol. 166
               Hypocriſie what it is. fol. 167
               The hypocrit giues his gloue only, & not his hand to chriſt. fol. 167
               Hypocrits are diſcerned by their deeds & diſſembling tōgues. ibid.
               The hypocrit is hatefull to god, to men, and to the diuell. ibid.
               Hypocrits beſt reſembled in Comedians or Stage-players. fol. 169
               Hypocryts are in heauen and on earth at one inſtant. fol. 171
               The hypocrite is compared to the Greyho
                     •
                  nd to the Bee: to vapors
attracted vp by the Sun, which ſeem to be falling ſtars: to king Saul
to Goliah: to Holofernes: to the glow-worme: to Ch
                        •••
                     cra: to the ſtatue
of Nebuchadnezzer. fol. 173
               
                  
The hypocrit hath many faces: goes forth of his confines: is compared
to the dropſie: to the weeuell: to a horſe ſhod backward. f. 179
               How falling into euill, is ſaid to be falling into hel, or hel fire. f. 172
               Hypocriſie is likened to the worme that eateth the corne: to a theef:
to Iacob when he beguiled his Father: to Tantalus: to ſeueral fruits
grafted vpon one ſtock: and to the mercenary hireling. fol. 182
               How perillous it is for a man, to commit his own praiſe into another
mans power. fol. 178
               How grapes are ſaid to be gathered on thornes. fol. 184
               Hypocrites, that haue nothing but good words only, are compared
to a poore man, that ſeeks to get a rich wife where himſelfe is not
known: to builders: to Pi
                     •
                  ates: to a Painter: to the Sichemites: to
ſcar-crowes, to Ioſephs cloake: to the Hauke: to Adams garment:
to the dolphin: to the Prophet Ezechiels white wal: to empty ſhips:
to banquerout merchants: and empty Cannons. fol. 190
               How cōtrary the buildings of the hipocrit & the iuſt men are. f. 192
               Hypocriſie is a ſin againſt nature. fol. 199
               Homicide is a greater ſin then blaſphemy, as concerning the effect,
but is much leſſe, in regard of the obiect. fol. 205
               How the quality of the ſoule is beſt known by our talke. fol. 210
               How difficult the cuſtody of the tongue is. fol. 221
               How he that is borne deafe, it is neceſſary for him to be dumb alſo.
fol. 227
               How the word hymne and ſilence agree together. fol. 232
               How much the knowledge increaſeth in vs, ſo much the leſſe ſhall
we find our ſelues fit for worldly cauſes. fol. 236
               How they that talke with god; doe either learne to be ſilent, or elſe
do ſpeak otherwiſe then they did before. ibid.
               How the iuſt man firſt expelleth his own ſpirit, and then the Lord
filleth him with his heauenly ſpirit. fol. 254
               How by brotherly correction we become like vnto god. fol. 262
               How important the precept of brotherly correction is. fol. 267
               How many times we ought to forgiue our brother. fol. 270
            
            
               I
               Idiots, to ſeem wiſe, will declare themſelues ſilent. fol. 5
               
                  Iſoc
                        •
                     ates the Philoſopher and Oratour, demanded double wages of
a talkatiue Scholler, to teache him ſilence, or how to ſpeak well.
fol. 12
               Iewes in their crying to Pilate, to crucifie chriſt, were more guiltie
then they that crucified him. fol. 24
               
                  
                  Iob was a true louer of ſilence. fol. 26
               
                  Iob ſpake but once and repented him of it. fol. 36
               In ſo much a man is ſaid to ſpeak truth, by how much he is partaker
of the firſt truth, god himſelfe. fol. 49
               In heauen and in earth, who were the firſt breakers of ſilence.
fol. 52
               Iraſcible power, is one of the wayes which a man ought to keepe
carefully, leaſt he erre in his tongue. fol. 57
               If the vnderſtanding erre not, the tongue cannot fayle. ibid.
               Iraſcible way, how it is to be cleanſed. fol. 58
               Infamous iniuries are compared to poyſon. fol. 59
               Ire or anger is not good for any vertuous thing. ibid.
               Ire orarger is good, according to Ariſtotles opinion. ibid.
               Ire accounted to be a good ſouldier. ibid.
               Infamy equalled with the ſinne of murder. fol. 66
               
                  Iordanus ſecond maſter of the generall Preachers, how ſweete he
was in ſpeaking, and excellent in preaching. fol. 68
               Ieſus Chriſt, how powerfull he was in preaching. fol. 69
               
                  Iohn the diuine Apoſtle, and his viſion in the Ile of Pathmos. fol. 72
               
                  Iuuenall very excellently deſcribeth a flatterer. fol. 86
               Infelicitie belonging to Princes, that very rare or ſeldome come to
knowledge of the truth, or correction of vices, onely thorow the
wicked and ſubtile tongues of flatterers. fol. 89
               
                  Ieroboam made golden calues, and honoured them as gods. fol 95
               
                  Ionathas the ſon of Gedeon murthered becauſe he iuſtly reprooued
Abimelech. fol. 98
               
                  Iohn Baptiſt beheaded for reproouing ſin. ibid.
               
                  Iacob & Laban, in ſteed of authēticall writings, layd a heap of ſtones
togither. fol. 104
               
                  Iacomo da Voragine, of the Preachers order, and Archbiſhop of Genoa.
fol. 113
               In what manner one Angell ſpeaketh to another, without the knowledge
of any of the other Angelles. fol. 115
               Intelligence abideth in the vnderſtanding after three manners.
ibid.
               Illumination is a kind of the Angells conference. fo. 116
               In ſcripture what is ſig
                     •
                  ified by the bones wexing old. fol. 130
               Ieſus came into the world to take away ſin, not ſinners. fol. 131
               In confeſſing our ſins to god, we muſt vtterly condemne our ſelues,
and that moſt of all diſmayeth the diuell. fol. 132
               
                  
Ieſus wold not be praiſed of the diuel, & the reaſon therof. fol. 134
               Iſraell, what the word ſignifieth. fol. 132
               India yeeldeth a certaine kind of people, that haue no mouthes, but
do liue by the ſmelling of ſweet odours only. fol. 135
               Iudgement of man how fallacious it is, and the ſame is approued by
diuers examples out of holy Scripture. fol. 153
               Iudge no man, till firſt we ſee how his actions paſſe. ibid,
               Inſtinct naturally of the mind, in noble and generous perſons. fo. 157
               In Aegypt the Enchaunters had no power to free themſelues from
the plague of Frogs. fol. 159
               Infamous words proceeding from bad againſt good men, is to bee
held as a great bleſſing of god. fol. 160
               
                  Ierome the reuerend doctor of the Church, gaue greate thankes to
god, that he had made him worthy of the worlds hatred. fol. 163
               In hypocrites it is eſpecially to be obſerued, that their colorable deceipts
are of ſmall continuance. fol. 166
               
                  Ioab ſlew Abner; feining himſelfe to be his louing friend: and the
like did the Prince Amaſa. fol▪ 168
               Ire or anger hath this property, that ſuddenly it breaketh foorth into
his owne effect. ibid.
               Imitation is the principall part of an Oratour. fol. 170
               Iuſt men haue each of them but one face only, but hypocrites ſhew
themſelues to haue many. fol. 176
               
                  Iohn Chriſoſtom, Iohn Climacus & Petrus Chryſologus deliuered each
of them excellent ſentences againſt hypocrites. fol. 178
               
                  Ioſua, Gedcon, Moyſes, Alexander & Caeſar, were alwayes themſelues
the formoſt in the fight. fol. 179
               Interpretation very excellently made on the parable of the ten virgins.
fol. 184
               Infirmity and weakneſſe of the body, is oftentimes much better then
health. fol. 217
               Iuſt men are compared to fiſh ſhels on the Sea ſhoares, wherein are
found pearles and pretious ſtones. fo. 254
               
                  Ierome his aduice, that before a man doth ſpeak, he ſhould bring his
words to the touch or file, to try whether they be woorthy of deliuery
or no. fol. 259
               In correction of our brother, what charitable courſe is to be obſerued,
and a manner or forme (withall) ſet down, for euery Chriſtians
better direction. fol. 272
               
                  
Knowledge, what it is, and how to be obtained. fol. 256
               Keyes, caried by ſome at their girdles, others in their pockets: others
about their necks: and others vpon their ſhoulders: and all theſe are
ſeuerally applied. fol. 241
               Key of the houſe of Dauid, and the meaning thereof. fol. 243
            
            
               L
               Life and death are in the power of the tongue. fol. 4
               Loquacity (according to Apollonius) is ful of errour, and ſilence moſt
ſecure. fol. 12
               Loquacity in young men, is a mighty diſgrace. ibid.
               Laude and prayſe of god, is the firſt leſſon that Parentes ought to
teache their children. fol. 13
               Liberty muſt not be giuen to the tongue, but it muſt be carefully reſtrained,
if we will be like vnto god. fol. 18
               Life and death iſſue forth of the gate of the mouth. fol. 19
               
                  Lucifers proude words threw him down into hell. fol. 21
               Lips of the ſanctified ſoule, is likened to a hairelace. fol. 23
               
                  Lydians rather then they would be bound to ſilence, choſe condemnation
to the gallies. fol. 35
               Laude or commendation of men, is better after death, then in their
life time. fol. 37
               Lye greater in Eue, then in Lucifer. fol. 38
               Lie of Eue and of the diuel, were the occaſion of al other lies. fol 39
               Lyers all men are. fol. 47
               
                  Lycurgus an enemy to vaine eloquence. fol. 77
               
                  Lentulus ſpat in Catoes face. fol. 60
               
                  Lydians ſentenced them with death, that by their tongues robd men
of their good repute, euen as if they had bin murderers. fol. 66
               
                  Lacedemonians no louers of curious ſpeaking. fol. 77
               Lips, and the reaſon of their ſo calling. fol. 84
               Laude or praiſe of trueth. fol. 99
               Lying is a ſin againſt nature. fol. 101
               Lying is the greateſt ſin that oppoſeth it ſelfe againſt god. ibid.
               Lying defined by Tullie. ibid.
               Lyers are all the diuels children. fol. 102
               Lying is a ſin ſo infamous, as the diuell durſt not vſe it in his owne
proper ſhape. ibid.
               Lying is odious to the lyer himſelfe. ibid.
               Lying god doeth diſpenſe withall, as hee hath doone with theft.
ibid.
               
                  
Lying man only called by Chriſt Son of the diuell. ibid.
               Lying, how hatefull a ſin it is, and of how many euils it onely hath
bin the occaſion. fo. 103
               Lying is an vniuerſall merchandiſe through the world. ibid.
               The lyer at one ſtroke offendeth three perſons. ibid.
               
                  Laban and Iacob ſet vp an heap of ſtones, inſtead of a writing drawn
by a Scriuener. fol. 104
               Law of God, wherfore it was written. ibid.
               Lyers are ſhunned of all men. fol. 106
               A ly hath ſhort legs. fol. 110
               The lyer is worſe then hell. fol. 111
               Laude or praiſe iſſuing from an euill tongue, is infamy. fol. 143
               Laude or commendation of the good and vertuous, is onely to be
eſteemed, according to Cicero. ibid.
               Luxury is a ſin moſt odious in any age, but moſt eſpecially in an old
man it is horrible. fol. 207
               
                  Lewes king of France commanded a blaſphemers tongue to be cut
out of his head. fol. 213
               Loquacity in an Oratour is tearmed a full tide of ſpeech, and not accounted
any part of eloquence. fol. 256
            
            
               M
               Man is knowne by his ſpeech to be wiſe or fooliſh. fol. 4
               More are the defects committed by liberall talking, then by ſilence
ibid.
               Many haue repented themſelues of their raſh ſpeaking, but few or
none of holding their peace. fol. 5
               
                  Marie the bleſſed virgin did very conſideratly ponder in her mind,
before ſhe anſwered the angell Gabriell. fol. 8
               Men indiſcreet, firſt ſpeak, and conſider afterward. ibid.
               Mothers, that are too nice and fond of their children, with kiſſes do
kill them, and with ſweet meats poyſon them. fol. 18
               Many ſins had the builders of Babell Tower, but none like to their
preſumptuous tongues. fol. 24
               Men vertuous, are like goodly horſes with coſtly bridles: but the
wicked doe reſemble Iades with halters on their heades.
fol. 28
               Men of many words are ſlenderly credited. ibid.
               Men wiſe ſpeak ſeldom, and little. ibid.
               Men grounded in learning, do ſauour the more of ſilence. fol. 30
               
                  Mydas had ears like an Aſſe, & none knew thereof, but his Barber:

yet could not he refraine from blabbing it. fol. 35
               Men that are wiſe, can eaſily keep ſilence. fol. 36
               
                  Mimas the Philoſopher ſaid, that the tongue was the Ambaſſadour
of the hart. fol. 41
               Much better is it not to know the ſecrets of a friend, then to know
them and diſcloſe them. fol. 42
               Men are all lyers. fol. 47
               Men may be ſaid to ſpeak truth, in partaking of the cheef truth god
himſelfe. fol. 49
               Man of himſelfe hath nothing at all. ibid.
               Man knowes more by negation, then by affirmation. ibid.
               Men that cleanſe not the wayes of the tongue, called iraſcible and
concupiſcible, do fall into many errors.
               Mouth of the angry man compared to a pot ſeething ouer. fol. 57
               Men that are wiſe are capable of no diſdaine. fol. 59
               Many haue bin chaſtiſed by ſweet and mild ſpeeches. fol. 67
               Men ought to reſemble cleare fountaines, or tranſparent glaſſes, to
tranſforme themſelues into all good obiects. fol. 79
               Men that deſire to liue long, and ſee good dayes, muſt keepe their
tongues from euill ſpeaking. ibid.
               Men of wiſedom muſt haue their tongues like to the Crocodils. ibi.
               Man endures more labour for refraining his tongue, then for the
amendment of his life. fol. 81
               Man whether he be good or bad, is beſt known by his works: but
whether he be fooliſh or wiſe, is diſcerned by his talk. ibid.
               Men learned, whence it enſueth, that in the Doctors chair they ſeem
wiſe, and yet in familiar diſcourſe are fools. fol. 82
               Martyrs executed by Tyrants, for confeſſing the truth. fol. 98
               Merchants vſing lying, become therby impoueriſhed, and therfore
were caſt out of the Temple by Chriſt. fol. 103
               Monſter with three tongues and what he is. fol. 112
               Mute or dumb was the diuell called, and the ſame is approoued by
many ſingular diſcourſes. fol. 113
               Man only, and no creature elſe ſpeaketh. fol. 118
               Many are in hell, by preſuming ouerboldly vpon gods mercy. f. 126
               Mercy, and wherof the word is ſaid to be deriued. ibid.
               Men on the mountaines of Iurea, do laugh when they ſee other men
not miſſhapen like themſelues. fol. 145
               Murmurers, how offenſiue to god they are. fol. 147
               
                  Myriam the ſiſter of Moyſes, by her murmuring became a leaper. ib.
               
                  
Murmuring, what it is, whereof it ariſeth, and compariſons therof.
fol. 149
               Mercenaries or hirelings labour for worldly glory, and not for the
benefit of their flock. fol. 183
               Mercenaries haue two voyces: one of doctrin, another of profit, the
one is Chriſts voyce, the other their owne. ibid.
               Many that haue bin innocent of their hands, haue yet condemned
themſelues by their tongues: and many more haue bin infamous by
their ſpeeches, then by their deeds. fol. 219
               Melancholie perſons are tardy of their ſpeech. fol. 228
               
                  Moyſes talking with god, grew to haue a defect in his ſpeeche, and
the reaſon thereof. fol. 229
               Many haue ſharp ſwords in ſtead of teeth. fol. 258
            
            
               N
               No man can be ſaid▪ to be truly free, but he that by his vertues reſiſteth
all vices whatſoeuer. fol. 16
               No man is a ſpeaker of truth: but all men are lyers. fol. 46
               No man ſpeaketh well, but when God ſpeaketh by him. ibid.
               No man breaks ſilence, when he ſpeaketh truly. fol. 49
               No better guardian for the tōgue, then wiſedom: wherupon are deliuered
many notable noates. fol. 61
               No man, or very few, is willing to be reprooued: wheron ariſeth the
maine ground of flattery. fol. 96
               Nothing is more acceptable to god, then truth. fol. 97
               No ſinner is more hatefull, or more oppoſeth himſelfe againſt god,
then the lyer doth. fol. 101
               Nothing is more to be abhorred, then lying. ibid.
               Notaries or Scriueners, whence it aroſe, that they became to be
thought neceſſary euils in the world. fol. 104
               Notaries were not thought fit men in the firſt times, nor their writings
made any reckoning of. ibid.
               No greater beaſt, and more to be abhorred of the world, then is the
diuell. fol. 119
               Nothing is more pleaſing to the diuel, then when he can lock vp the
lips of a ſinner, and hinder him from confeſſing his ſins vnto god.
fol. 121
               No good ſigne is it, when a ſinner comes to confer with god, to ſtād
proudly on his owne good deeds, and neuer acknowledge the horror
of his own ſins. fol. 129
               No accounr ought to be made of the murmurings of detractors, becauſe

their praiſes are rather diſpraiſes. fol. 143
               No diſſimilitude between the diuels and detractors. fol. 144
               Neceſſary are bitter enimies, for our vprightneſſe in life, as kindeſt
friends, for the one part will alwayes moſt be feared. ibid.
               Nothing in the world is more pretious then true honor. fol. 155
               No greater labour is there, then to traffique with bad men, and no
greater comfort, then to deale with good men. fol. 156
               
                  Nolite fieri, ſicut hypocritae, triſtes, what is ſignified therby: And whether
it were not better to: Nolite facere, ſicut hypocritae. fol. 177
               No pain is to be ſpared in labouring for the conqueſt of heauens glory,
not ſo much in regard of the matter it ſelf, but in reſpect of our
loue, to praiſe and glorifie god. fol. 187
               No cauſe at all is there to mooue a man to blaſpheme god, and therfore
blaſphemy is the deadlier ſin. fol. 206
               No puniſhment laſteth longer, then that allotted to the blaſphemer,
and ſomtimes it beginneth heer in this life. fol. 208
               No beaſt abuſeth god, but ingratefull man only. fol. 212
               No benefit is truly known, but by the loſſe therof. fol. 217
               No member of man is harder to be bridled, and more apt to ſin, then
the tongue is. fol. 219
               Neceſſity requires it, that he who is borne deaffe, ſhould be dumbe
alſo. fol. 227
               No eloquence at all, without wiſedom. fol. 233
               No wiſe mans hart can be capable of iniuries, according to the opinion
of the Stoicks. fol. 257
               No man neerer to god, then the innocent man. ibid.
               None daring to reproue Princes errors, do cauſe the greater euil. 259
               
                  Noahs name, what is ſignified therby. fol. 270
               Number of brotherly corrections. fol. 278
            
            
               O
               Of all men, the yong man ought to ſpeak leaſt, and ſhould not ſpeak
at all, except he be therto required. fol. 12
               
                  Omulus the Philoſopher highly commended ſilence. fol. 25
               Obſeruation is to be had, in ſpeaking little, and hearing: approoued
by an excellent example. fol. 29
               Oratour of the Abderites, ſcorned by Agis king of the Lacedemonians,
for his tedious diſcourſing. fol. 32
               
                  Ouid ſaid: What labour is leſſe then to hold our peace? fol. 33
               
                  Ouid alſo ſaid: It is a great vertue, to know how to be ſilent. fol. 41
               Obſeruations for a perfect Oratour. fol. 61
               
                  
                  Orpheus and his hiſtory. fol. 68
               Oratours of the Church, haue no need of vain and Rhetoricall ornament
in their ſpeaking. fol. 75
               Ornament curious and fine in gods affaires, hath bin the occaſion of
much euill to hearers. fol. 76
               Odours only maintaine the life of ſome people in India. fol. 135
               Obſeruation for the receit of things, wherein Aristotles opinion is
held: Vnumquodque recipitur per modum recipientis. fol. 138
               Orators ought to be good imitatours, becauſe imitation is the principall
part of Oratory. fol. 170
               Our works cannot be good, if they want the true intention. ibid.
               Order obſerued by inſēſible creatures, for helping one another. f. 263
            
            
               P
               Prouerb ancient, that deeds are men, and words women. fol. 2
               Prouerb, The word of a king.
               
                  Plato 
                  
                     •
                  aid, that men are ſooneſt approoued by their ſound, like vnto
glaſſes or veſſels. fol. 6
               
                  Pythagoras made ſuch reckoning of ſilence, as he held fiſhesin great
veneration, becauſe they were ſilent creatures. ibid.
               
                  Pythagoras taught his ſchollers ſilence, as their firſt leſſon. fol. 7
               
                  Periander the Philoſopher ſaid: Hear much, and ſpeak little. fol. 20
               
                  Pittacus, the Mitylenian, commended ſilence greatly. fol. 12
               Prating and babbling how pernitious it is. fol▪ 13
               Parents firſt precept to their children, ought to be enſtruction how
to ſpeak honeſtly, and vertuouſly: and the ſame is confirmed by
many worthy examples. ibid.
               Parents that take care to leaue their children great riches, & no vertuous
preſidents, reſemble them that take care for a cloſe neat
ſhooe, and regard not how much it paineth the foot. fol. 15
               Parents reprehended by Crates the philoſopher. ibid.
               
                  Plutarch reprooueth Fathers of families, for their great negligence
toward their children. fol. 16
               Parents that ſtudy how to leaue their children goods of Fortune, and
nothing elſe, doe bring them vp like dogges, Goates, &c.
ibid.
               
                  Philip of Macedon thanked the Gods, that his ſon Alexander was
born in Ariſtotles time, to whom he made him ſcholler. ibid.
               Parents ſhold reſemble a Nurſes dealing with a weake child. fol. 17
               Parents ought not only to giue example to their children of not ſinning,
but of good, honeſt and laudable action. ibid.
               
                  
Parents that are nice in correcting their children, reſemble a mother
who ſeeing her ſonne in the water, and being fearefull to catch
him by the locks of hayr to ſaue him, ſuffers him to be drowned.
They are like to Dauid, who not reproouing Amnon, was the occaſion
of his many diſorders: compared are they likewiſe to Heli
the prieſt. &c. ibid.
               Perill of mans life is only in his tongue. fol. 19
               Pardon is a peculiar vertue, belonging to god only. fol. 20
               Pain of the rich glutton, for his wicked tongue. fol. 21
               
                  Plutarch ſaith, That of ſilence, god only is the maſter, but of talking
man is maſter. fol. 27
               
                  Pitheus by ouer liberall talking, obſcured his many victories. fol. 28
               
                  Phormio the philoſopher, liued in the woods, becauſe he would not
be offended by mens vaine talking. fol. 29
               
                  Philippides the poet humbly deſired of prince Lyſimachus, that he
would not acquaint him with any of his ſecrets. fol. 34
               Plague of a wicked tongue, breaketh the bones, which a whip cānot
doo, and therfore is held to be much worſe. fol. 41
               
                  Pambus the Abbot, concerning the beſt leſſon that euer he learned.
fol. 36
               
                  Plato ſaid, That a man cannot be wiſe, except he be able to retaine a
ſecret. fol. 42
               Prophecy of Ca
                        •
                     phas, not vnderſtood of himſelfe. fol. 51
               Preachers are Coffins or Trunkes of the word of god, according to
the words of S. Auguſtine. fol. 70
               Property of the Bear, when ſhe bringeth foorth her yong ones, to be
obſerued of vs men. fol. 78
               Prudence is the fitteſt for gouernment, & the praiſe therof. fol. 78
               
                  Pyrrhus king of Epyre ſayd: He ſhall be my ſucceſſor, that hath his
ſword keeneſt. ibid.
               
                  Philopoemenes gaue ſentence againſt a Trumpeter taken in the war,
that he ſhould die. fol. 94
               
                  Pythagoras ſayd, that truth makes men like vnto god. fol. 100
               Probleme of the three yong men, in the court of king Darius, what
thing in the world was ſtrongeſt. fol. 107
               Preachers are like watchful dogs, careful of keping their flocks. f▪ 122
               Phariſie in the Temple as he prayed, both cried out, and yet was ſilent
too at the ſame inſtant. fol. 130
               Phariſies and their vniuſt murmuring againſt Chriſt. fol. 138
               
                  Pliſtoaxax gaue an excellent ſentence againſt bad men. fol. 140
               
                  
Puniſhment inflicted by god vpon a religious man for his euil tōgue
fol. 145
               Puniſhment muſt be anſwerable to the offence. fol. 161
               Paine impoſed vpon detractors. ibid.
               Phariſies preached the law of Moyſes for their own benefite, but
made no obſeruation thereof. fol. 183
               Prouinces of the world, are three, and no more. fol. 210
               Priuation or lack of ſpeech, begetteth the quiet and ſecurity of the
mind. fol. 218
               Port or gate of heauē, of paradiſe, of figures, of the Prophets mouths,
and of Gods maruailes, were all faſt ſhut vp before the comming
of Chriſt. But afterward, Chriſts ſide was no ſooner opened, but
they all were opened. fol. 246
               
                  Perillus had fifty talents giuen him by Alexander, toward the mariage
of his daughter. fol. 250
               
                  Peter the Apoſtle, at his firſt Sermon, cōuerted three thouſand ſouls.
fol. 255
               Princes are compared to Bees. fol. 268
               Precepts, of how many kinds they be. fol. 269
            
            
               Q
               
                  Quintilian wrote, That there is no vertue more painfull to be followed,
then ſilence. fol. 35
               Quality of the ſoule is beſt known by our ſpeech. fol. 210
               Queen of Saba, ſeeing the greatneſſe of Salomon, loſt her ſpirit with
amazement. fol. 233
            
            
               R
               Rich glutton was giuen to many ſins, and therefore deſerued many
chaſtiſements: neuertheleſſe, the goſpell makes mention of no puniſhment,
but of that he ſuffered in his tongue, & the reaſon therof.
fol. 21
               Reaſon is that which rectifies the will. fol. 57
               Reaſon was giuen to man for an aide to his ſoule. fol. 58
               Reprehenſion is not pleaſing to the world. ibid.
               Reproofe that god wil giue to thoſe hypocrits, that haue nothing but
good words only. fol. 199
               Reaſoning or diſcourſing, declares of what nation a man is, & therby
the blaſphemer is noated to be of hells kingdom. fol. 210
               Reaſoning or ſpeaking is of two kinds, as the lips are two. fol. 220
               Requeſts made vnto god, ought to be great, anſwerable to the greatneſſe
of his Maieſty. fol. 249
               
                  
Requeſt made by Perillus to Alexander.
               
               Receiuers and giuers ought to open their hand. fol. 253
               Reprehenſion of princes, how it ought to be done. fol. 267
               Reprehenſion muſt be gilded ouer like pils. fol. 268
               Reprehenſion and brotherly correction, how, and after what kind.
fol. 274
               Reprehenders muſt imitate hunters. ibid.
               Reprehenſion for great ſins. fol. 279
               Reprehenſion brotherly made, confounds the diuell. ibid.
               Reprehenſion muſt be vſed after the Cocks quality. ibid.
            
            
               S
               
                  Solon ſaid, That words are the image of deeds, and the liuely figure
of a mans life. fol. 2
               
                  Socrates to vnderſtand the nature of a yong man, commanded him to
ſpeak to him. ibid.
               
                  Solon, a man greatly giuen to ſilence, ſaid to Periander king of Corinth,
A fooliſh man cannot be ſilent. fol. 5
               Schollers of Pythagoras, for their firſt leſſon, learned ſilence. fol. 7
               Schollers that will learne knowledge, muſt firſt beleeue. fol. 8
               Silence ſomtimes may be the occaſion of many inconueniences. ibid.
               
                  Salomon the wiſeſt man of the world, ſaid, That it was and is a very
difficult thing to ſpeak well. fol. 9
               
                  Saſiades the philoſopher, ſaid: That the tongue ought not to ſpeake,
vntill the mind haue firſt forethought what is to be ſpoken. fol. 12
               Silence commended by Iſocrates, for to teach well ſpeaking. ibid.
               Silence is to be praiſed in all men: but eſpecially in young men is a
moſt goodly ornament. ibid▪
               
               
                  Seneca ſaith, That ſilence renders moſt commodious quiet to the
mind. fol. 13
               Sentence of Plutarch, againſt ſuch fathers, as did not inſtruct their
children in actions of vertuous life. fol. 16
               Similitude of fathers of families, that reprooue not their children.
fol. 17
               Silence maketh a man neer, and like vnto god. fol. 18
               Silence in time beſeeming it, is more commendable then a choiſely
deckt Oration. fol. 25
               Silence is the gard of the conſciēce, a bridle for inſolence, the beauty
of innocence, the badge of wiſedom: and this is approoued by
many ſingular reaſons. fol. 27
               Silence is compared to the wall of a city. ibid.
               
                  
Silence preſerueth men from offending god & our neighbor. fo. 29
               
                  Socrates wrote a book in praiſe of ſilence. fol. 38
               Silence, and the commendation therof. fol. 37
               Schools for inſtruction of ſilence were very conuenient. ibid.
               Silence helpeth both the wiſe man and the foole. ibid.
               Sum of al that Seneca wrote to Lucullus, was: To be ſlow in ſpeaking
ibid.
               Secrets of a friend, it is not good to know them. fol. 42
               Silence eternally man ought to keep. fol. 44
               
                  S. Stephen in diſputation ouercame many nations. fol. 51
               Silence breakers, the firſt in heauen was Lucifer, and on earth it was
our grandmother Eue. fol. 52
               
                  Seneca ſaid, That anger was not good for any vertuous thing.
fol. 59
               
                  Seneca would not ſmite his ſeruant in his anger. fol. 60
               Silence is the only remedy againſt anger. ibid.
               
                  Senacherib ſlaine by his two ſons, and his Armie ſlaine by the Angel
of the Lord, only for blaſphemy, & ſuch was the ſlaughter, that in
one night there periſhed 185. thouſand ſouldiers. fol. 64
               
                  Saul the king among the Prophets. fol. 71
               
                  Sampſon and his miſhap, by ſpeaking improuidently. fol. 86
               
                  Sigiſmond the Emperour gaue a flatterer a blow on the eare, demanding
why he bit him? fol. 93
               Sacred ſcriptures, why they were written in marble, and the law not
rather giuen without writing. fol. 104
               Sin, why it is called a lance ſharpned on both ſides. fol. 133
               
                  Socrates, ſeeing a youngman comming forth of an harlots houſe, gaue
him a witty reprehenſion. fol. 123
               
                  Sede, tac
                        •
                     , intra tenebras, and the ſame explaned. fol. 134
               Sinners haue more need of tears then of talking. fol. 135
               Scriptures read of many: by abuſing them, the heretique ſucks out
falſe opinions, and the true Chriſtian gathers nothing but ſound
doctrin, and whence this variety enſueth. fol. 139
               
                  Seneca his learned ſaying againſt euill tongues. fol. 142
               
                  Sichemites circumciſed themſelues, only to inherit the Iſraelits goods
and poſſeſſions. fol. 193
               Sin in ſeuerall kinds, do pretend ſome excuſe for themſelues▪ but
the ſin of blaſphemy can pretend none at all. fol. 207
               Silence is begotten of the hymne. fol. 232
               Sanctified ſpirit or holy ghoſt, and the reaſon wherefore it is called

in 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
            
            
               T
               There belongs as much blame to vnproportionable ſilence, as to
vaine and careleſſe talking. fol. 4
               The precept diuine, as it commands obedience in the Sonne to his
Father, ſo doth it alſo bind the Father, to bring vp his ſon in vertuous
education. fol. 15
               To keep ſilence is the nobleſt Philoſophie in man. fol.26
               To keep ſilence is an eſpeciall gift of god. ibid.
               
                  Thomas Aquinas, was tearmed by his maſter Albertus Magnus, the
Oxe, for the loue he bare to ſilence. ibid.
               
                  Theodauas and Agatonus, two woorthie louers of ſilence. ibid.
               
                  Tiberius teaching a talkatiue Senatour ſilence, cauſed him to vſe very
abſurd and antiquelike behauiours. fol. 35
               Thoſe things that God commandeth, are moſt iuſt. fol. 57
               Three kinds of ſpeaking, and three kinds of tongues. fo. 112
               Three things ought euery penitent ſoule to do, in ſeeking pardon for
her tranſgreſſions. fol. 134
               The whole powers and faculties of the ſoule, do ſtep foorth, for ſake
and leaue the ſlanderer. fol. 150
               The 
                     •••
                  gue of man is as a touchſtone, wherby to try him. fol. 2
               The tongue giuen to man for a reward. fol. 3
               The rich gluttons tongue was more puniſhed, then any other part
of his body. fol. 21
               The tongue without a bridle, is compared to a city without a wall,
or any guard or defence. fol. 22
               Tongues firſt, before hands, did crucifie Chriſt. fol. 24
               The tongue of man is like a City or Caſtle, builded in a moſt artificiall
manner. fol. 27
               The tongue being the occaſion of ſo many euils, wherfore it was by
God beſtowed vpon man. fol. 39
               The tongue compared to riches. ibid.
               The tongue compared by Dauid, to a ſword, and to a pen. fol. 40.
               The tongue is the beſt and worſt thing in a man. ibid.
               The wicked tongue is worſe then hell. fol. 41
               The tongue is the Embaſſadour of the hart. ibid.
               The tongue hath foure wayes to walke by, all which do neceſſarilye
require great care and circumſpection. fol. 55
               The tongue ought to haue fiue conditions, needefull for well ſpeaking. fol. 66
               
                  
The tongue bewraies the health or ſicKneſſe of the ſoule. fol. 71
               The tongue of man ought to haue the properties of a dogs tongue.
fol. 77
               The reaſon why God did ſhut vp the tongue between teeth & lips.
fol. 79
               The tongue hath two veines, one anſwerable to the hart, and the other
agreeable to the braine. fo. 85
               The ſerpents tongue is alwayes black, and the reaſon thereof.
fol. 136
               The reaſon, why God permitted the diuell to binde vp the dumbe
mans tongue. ibid.
               The Bulles in India haue their tongues ſo long, that they reache
foorth vnto their eares. fo. 155
               The hypocrites tongue, how hurtfull it is. fol. 182
               Teſtimony of the conſcience, what it is. fol. 186
               Three ſeuerall wayes we may derogate from Gods goodneſſe.
fol. 202
               Three ſeuerall kingdomes made by God, and each of them hath his
particular language, and phraſe of ſpeaking. fol. 210
               The wicked mans mouth is an open ſepulcher. fol. 241
               Three ſeuerall kinds of precepts. fol. 269
               Time, place and manner, ought to be obſerued, in brotherly correction.
fol. 270
            
            
               V
               Vertue firſt of all to be learned, is to gouerne the tongue. fol. 18
               Veſſels that be open, and haue no couering faſtned vpon them▪ by
Gods lawe were held to be vncleane. fol. 26
               Vnderſtanding apprehendeth the knowledge of things. fol. 50
               Vnderſtanding diuine is the cauſe and meaſure of things. ibid.
               Vnderſtanding of man, is a lyer, without God the onely truth. fol. 51
               Variable ought our diſcourſings to be, according to the variety of
the obiect and ſubiect whereof we ſpeake. fol. 77
               Verity ſeldome knowne of Princes, in regard of their flatterers.
fol. 89
               Vanity of flatterers, very liuely deſcribed. fol. 90
               Variable names of the flatterer, and all ſignificant. fol. 86
               Verity, like vnto Honie. fol. 97
               Verity beloued of lyers themſelues. ibid.
               Verity is hated, and thence ariſeth flattery: approoued by many notable
places of Scripture. fol. 98
               
                  
Verity ſo beloued of Chriſt, as for it only he came into the world.
fol. 99
               Verity contendeth with eternity. fol. 109
               Virgin defloured in the field, cleared from puniſhment by the olde
lawe, but being diſhonoured in the City, the lawe commaunded
all the people to ſtone her: Quia non clamauit. &c. fol. 127
               Vice of detraction, how great and odious it is. fol. 144
               Vertue conſiſteth not in the verbe, but in the aduerbe. fol. 167
               Virgins in the Parable, Mat. 25. notably expounded. fol. 184
            
            
               W
               Way of wiſedome for a guide to the tongue, fol. 65
               Will is one of the tongues ways, wherto there needeth a very good
guardian. fol. 56
               Will commandeth all the powers of the ſoule. ibid.
               Word of God how ſweet it is, and able to conuert men. fol. 68
               Word of God compared to a ploughſhare. fol. 75
               Whence it enſueth, that one and the ſelfe ſame earth produceth diuers
and ſundry fruits, and grafts diuers vpon one ſtock. fol. 139
               VVorks good and vertuous, in what daunger of loſſe they are, onely
by vaine glory. foll. 185
               VVorks of good life, in dooing them, we ought to reſemble the Iſraelites,
in 
                     •
                  eedifying of the holy Temple, in one hand to hold a
ſword, and to worke with the other. fol. 189
               VVorkes of man cannot be good, if they want Gedeons example.
fol. 187
               VVhence it enſueth, that the deaffe borne, are dumb alſo. fol. 127
               VVhence it enſueth, that ſome ſtammer, and others are eloquent.
fol. 228
               Whence it proceeded, that ſome holy Saints talking with God, became
ſtammerers and dumb. fol. 229
               When we aske any thing of God, we ought to craue things correſpondent
to his diuine maieſty, and no matters of meane moment.
fol. 249
               VVhence it ariſeth, that man being ſo noble, is yet more defectiue
then all the other creatures. fol. 264
               We ought not ſearche into other mens ſins, thereby to win occaſion
for reproouing them: whereon is diſcourſed very learnedly.
fol. 276
               We ought not to reprooue thoſe falts in oth
                     ••
                  s, wherwith we know
our ſelues to be ſtained. ibid.
            
            
               
               X
               
                  Xenocrates the Chalcedonian Philoſopher, neuer repented himſelfe
for ſilence, but many times for talking. fol. 29
               
                  Xenocrates by his ſweetneſſe of diſcourſe, altred the baſe behauiour
of a luxurious yong man. fol. 68
               
                  Xenocrates, Alexanders Trumpetter neuer ſounded his Trumpet, but
ſtill Alexander drew foorth his ſword. fol. 95
            
            
               Y
               Yong men ought not to ſpeake, till they be thereto requeſted.
fol. 12
               Yong damoſelles in elder times, obſerued it as a cuſtome, to bind vp
their locks with a crimſon hayre-lace, wherof they made a wiſe
and morall ſignification. fol. 23
               
                  Zeno the Philoſopher, he only among gueſts at a ſolemne banquet,
ſate ſilent. fol. 5
               
                  Zeno bit foorth his tongue with his teeth, and ſpat it in the Tyrants
face, becauſe he would not diſcouer his friends, true louers of their
country. fol. 10
               
                  Zeno Elateus deliuereth the reaſon, wherfore nature gaue a man two
eares, and but one tongue. ibid.
               
                  Zoilus the detractor could ſpeake well of no man. fol. 142
               
                  Zephirus ſends his kindly blaſts abroade in the moneth Marche.
fol. 256
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   